

THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS
- AUSTRALIA;
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S., London,
Lecturer on Mining in the University of Melbourne ;
Late Lecturer on Geology as applied to Mining,
Bendigo School of Mines ;
Consulting Mining Engineer, &c.
WITH ILLUSTEATIONS,
A SERIES OF ARTICLES, ESPECIALLY. RELATING TO THE
BENDIGO GOLD FIELD, VICTORIA, REPRINTED FROM
THE LONDON “ MINING JOURNAL.”
LONDON;
PRINTED AT “THE MINING JOURNAL” OFFICES,
18, FINCH LANE, and 3, DORSET BUILDINGS,
SALISBURY SQUARE, E.C.




THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS
OF
AUSTRALIA;
BY
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S., London,
Lecturer on Mining in the University of Melbourne ;
Late Lecturer on Geology as applied to Mining,
Bendigo School of Mines;
Consulting Mining Engineer, &c.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS.




THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS
OF
AUSTRALIA;
BY
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S., London,
Lecturer on Mining in the University of Melbourne ;
Late Lecturer on Geology as applied to Mining,
Bendigo School of Mines;
Consulting Mining Engineer, &c.
WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
(A SERIES OF ARTICLES, ESPECIALLY RELATING TO THE
BENDIGO GOLD FIELD, VICTORIA, REPRINTED FROM
THE LONDON “MINING JOURNAL”).
LONDON;
PRINTED AT “THE MINING JOURNAL” OFFICES.
18, FINCH LANE, and 3, DORSET BUILDINGS,
SALISBURY SQUARE, E.C.




I LLUSTRATI ONS.
Paeagkaph.
1. Hustler’s Reef, Longitudinal Section showing Crown
Formation and Dip (or Pitch) of Saddle Reefs ... 19
2 to 14. Carden Gully Reef, with Sections representing
Saddle Reefs, Faults, Denudation, Lava Dyke,
Incipient Reefs ... ... ••• 27
15 and 16. Garden Gully Reef Cross Sections
17. Sections (cross) of Garden Gully Reef showing
Slate and Incipient Quartz Reef ... ... 34
18. Section (cross) of Garden Gully Reef showing
“Horse,” or Enclosure of Sandstone by Quartz
Reef cut through by a Lava Dyke ... ••• 34
19 and 20. Section representing a Saddle of the Garden
Gully Reef Faulted, and a Lava Dyke in the Slide
or Line of Fault, Horse of Sandstone, &c. ... 34
21. Garden Gully Reef, Cross Section representing
Lava Dyke split into three Streams in Hanging
Wall of Reef ... ... ... 34
22. Transverse Section across the Garden Golly and
Hustler’s Reef, Anticlinals, and intervening Syn-
clinal, and exhibiting the probability of the Saddle
Reefs in each occurring in the same Beds ... 36
23. Form of Saddle Reefs, Theory of illustrated
24. Illustrating Double Wedge Shaped Reefs in a broken
Anticlinal, Garden Gully Reef ... 47
25, Garden Gully Reef, Cross Section showing one Leg
Parallel with the Strata, and the other short one
intersecting the Strata ... ... 47
26. Garden Gully Reef (Johnson's portion), representing
Strike Faults cutting Reef into Three Parts ... 53
27, Transverse Section of Eagle and Specimen Hill
portion of the Garden Gully Reef, exhibiting
Saddle Reef and Legs of one (Saddle of which is
removed by Denudation) Dropping Spurs,&c. ... 53


■
Paragraph
Introductory Letter and Remarks
... ...
1—4
Victoria—
„ Belts of Quartz Reefs
6-7
„ Bendigo Gold Field
8; 63
„ „ Prospecting
9
„ „ Outcrops of Reefs
10—13
„ Geology
14
,, „ Hustler’s Saddle Reefs
15—17
„ ,, ,, Corrugation of Strata
18
„ ,, ,, Dips of Shoots of Quartz
19
„ „ Lava Dykes
21—22
,, „ „ Minerals
23
,, ,, ,, Gold...
24
„ ,, Garden Gully Reef
26
„ „ „ Strata ...
27
; 36-37
„ „ Reefs ...
28—31
; 33-34
„ „ Deep Mining
...
32
CONTE NTS.
„ „ ,, Fossils ... ... ... 41
„ „ „ Minerals ... ... 42
„ ,, „ Branch Veins ... ... 44
„ ,, „ Shoots of Quartz, &c. ... 45
,, „ „ Faults or Slides ... ... 46
„ „ ~ Lava Dykes ... ... 35
„ „ „ Form of Reefs ... 38—39; 43
„ „ „ Strata Reefs and Water ... 40
„ „ „ Reefs and Veins ... 47 ; 49 —50
~ „ ~ Barth Tremors ... ... 48
„ ~ ~ Zones of Auriferous Strata ... 51
„ „ „ Windmill Hill ... ... 52—53
~ ~ ~ Johnson’s Reef ... ... 53—55
»» »
Mineral Water ... ... 56
Specimen Hill ... ... 57—62
l» 1
Norway, Gold Fields of ... ... ... 64 —65
Queensland, Gold Fields of
~ Mount Morgan ... ... 66—67; 69—70
Charters Towers ... ... ... 66—67
The Origin of Gold and Quartz Reefs ... ... 71 —72
„ Corrugation of Strata ... ... 73
„ Growth of Reefs ... ... ... 74 —75
~ Classification of Reefs ... ... 76 —77
„ Enclosures of Country Rock ... ... 78—80
„ Natural Precipitants of Gold ... ... 81
„ Experiments ... ... ... 82 —84


Daisy Flat...
65
Deep Mining
30-32—39—50
„ „ Condemned
45
Denudation
10—19, Fig. 1—Fig. 4, 28-57
Department of Mines ...
... 36—37
Desert Sandstone
... 69—70
Dip or Pitch of Shoots
12—19—45—49—50—51
„ „ Eeefs to vast depths...
50
Dividends ...
24—32—55—62
Dast
52
Dykes (see Lava Dykes)
68
Baglehawk...
60
I N DEX.
Paragraph
Amherst
Analyses of Slate
Anticlinals Reefs in
„ Fractured...
„ Great Corrugated
Antimony, Sulphide ...
Arched, Parting Spaces
Areas, Rich Neglected...
Argus Reef and Co,
Arsenical Pyrites
Australian Goldfields ...
23—42
Bedding Planes and Cleavage Lines
„ „ False ...
Beds, Composition of ...
„ Fractures of
~ Rich and Poor
60-61
„ Strain in
„ Transmuted into quartz reef...
Bendigo, Future Prosperity of Assured
Branch Veins
Breaks in Reefs
Calcite
51—62
Caldwell (prospector) ...
Cant or Tip of Strata ...
Cape Clear Reef, Long Gully
Casing of Reefs
Centre Country
Chappie (prospector) ...
Charters Towers Reefs...
... (see “ List
13-55
Clarence Reef
Cleavage ...
Cone within Cone
Congenial Strata
Conglomerate
Contour of Country
„ „ „ Due to Reefs
Contraction of Strata ...
Corrugated Anticlinal, great
Corrugation and its Consequences...
Corrugations of Strata
„ Absence of Reefs in...
„ in Quartz Vein
14—18—27—37—38
„ Slow
„ wider apart near Granite
Crown Formation
18-19—28-34


Incipient Saddle Reefs
28-33—47
Iron Bark Company ...
45
Iron Ore
60
Ironstone Crops
... 13-70
„ Casing
Johnson ( prospector) ...
60
53
Johnson’s Reef
... 26—53
,, „ Mine...
Joints, in Strata
... ... 55
CD
1
1
CO
„ Veins in
46
Junction of Veins, Rich
57
Keam, Mining Manager
30
Ladam’s Reef
... 28-29
Lamince ...
... 45—94
Lansell, George
30-32- 40
Latham and Watson ...
24
Lava Dykes
...21-22-34-35-58
„ „ no effect on Reef
22
„ ,, not Faulted
21
„ „ Guides to Reef
22
Law, and Order
46
Legs of Reefs
19-17-20-28-47—49-57
„ „ East, most persistent
16-17—28-43
,, „ West „ ,,
28
Lewis, J, A., Mining Manager
49
Lines of least adhesion in Strata ...
73
List of Strata and Reefs
17-18-27—28-31—37—43
„ Nautical Phrase...
18
Magdala Mine, Stawell
32
Metamorphic Rock
70
Paragraph,
Eagle Reef... ... ... ... 26—57 —59
Early (prospector) ... ... ... ... 53
Earthquake Tremors ... ... ... ... 47—48
Exchange of information ... ... 1—34 —69—70
Experiments, Gold Precipitation ... ... 82—83—84
Faults ... ... 21-22—27—34—35—36—46—53
„ JBendigo small... ... ... ... 36
„ in Lava Dyke, one doubtful ... ... 21
Fissures open improbable ... ... 73 —74 —75
Fossils ... ... ... ... (see Graptolites)
Galena ... ... ... ... 23—42—54
Garden Gully Reef ... ... ... 26-31—37
~ ~ length of ... ... ... 62
„ „ Mine
Geological Survey
„ Sections ...
Gold
29—30—31—32
36—37
36—37
„ Origin of
„ Precipitation of ...
„ in Slate (black) ...
81—82—83—84
.59—81—82—83—84
„ Alternation in Yield of (in Quantity) . . ... 53
Granite (and Granitic) Recks ... ... 8—14—68
Graptolites... ... ... ... ... 41—59
„ indicate Gold ... ... ... 59
“Grasp,” Miners ... ... ... ... 40
Groove in groove (Quartz) ... ... ... 45
Guerin Marco, M.E. ... ... ... ... 49
Harris and Hustler (prospectors)... ... ... 15
Horses of Rock enclosed ... ... ... 34
Hustler (prospector) ... ... ... ... 15
nuoiioi j ••• ••• •••
Hustler’s Reef ... 15-16-17 to 24—26—27—28 -36


McNair (prospector)
Minerals ...
Miners, Grasp
„ Instruction of Young
„ New Chum
Mining, Deep
„ Department
~ Economic
„ Terms
„ Statistics
Moon Reef...
Mount Alexander
Mount Morgan, Queensland
Murdoch (prospector)...
Neglected, Rich Areas...
Norway, Strata in
Nugget of Gold in Reef
„ „ „ Theories
Origin of Reefs
Original Prospectors ...
Outcrops of Reefs, Big and Last One
Paddy’s Gully Reef
Paper Model Illustrations
Perseverance Reef
Prospectors
Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh
Pyrites
„ Decomposing
Quartz, Corrugated
„ Outcrops large
„ Rich
„ Vitrified
~ Shrinkage of
„ Splintery
Quartzopolis
Reefs, Breaks in
conform to Strata
Dead and Alive
Deep
forms of, at greater depths
Growth of
in Norway
Outcrops large
Rich and Poor
Saddle
~ „ (3 great) in same Beds
* „ Incipient
„ „ Pitch or Dip of (Fig. 1),
„ „ Parallel with a Crossing Strata
„ „ Raptured
„ „ West of New Chum Reef
~ „ Why Absent
„ „ Wedge Shaped
„ ~ Transmuted Slate Beds
„ Zonesof
Regions Disturbed
Rolls of Quartz
Ruptured Strata and Reefs
Paragraph,
23-42
1-40-45
30-32-89—45—50
86-37
40—45
19—40
26-62
8—25
66—69—70
64 65
27-33—34—38—44—46-47—48
26-49
9-15-53
23—42
36-53-54
51—62
12-15-38—43—46—47
32-39 -50
38—43
27—47—54
64—65
...12—15—17—29—47
36—37
28—33


Slides (Faults)
...27-35-38-53-54
Sliding or Fracture Lines
... ... 73
Spaces, Arched parting
43
Specimen Hill Reef ...
57
„ „ Mine
62
„ „ West
58
Strain in Strata
43
„ Reefs, Splintery Quartz...
Strata, Differences in ...
29
43
„ Fractured and Adjusted ...
27
not so closely Corrugated near Granite ... 14
„ Prevailing dip of
37
„ Slowly Corrugating
27
Slipping of, on lines of least Adhesion ... 73
91 •> »
„ Spaces in Arched Parting...
... 43
43
„ Rich and Poor...
37
,, Ruptured
22
Striations ...
34—43—45
Paragraph
Rashes, Gold (of prospectors! ... ... ...8—9—65
Sandstone ... ... ... 21
Sections, Geological ... ... ... ... 37
Selwyn, Alfred R.C. ... ... ... ... 21
Shafts West of “ Centre ” Country Due to List ... 28
~ Deep ... ••• 32
Shoots of Quartz ... ... ... 45
Slate, Analysis of ... ... ... 55
„ Auriferous ... ... ... ... 65
~ Casing, Auriferous ... ... ... 13—55
„ Enclosures of, in Reef ... ... 34—49 —6l
~ Black Carbonaceous ... 23—28 —31—41—42 —50 —55
Slickensides
~ Not Polished
Stockwerk Veins
Surveys of Bendigo Geological
Synclinals ...
„ Reefs
Terms, Mining
Theories
Thomas, Caleb, Surveyor
Thorpe (prospector) ...
Tracks of Reefs (or “Backs”)
Tyson’s Reef
Veins, Branch
Vital Parts of a Reef
Walker, Arthur F., Surveyor
Water Circulation in Reefs
Mineral „ „
~ Level „ „
„ Sap in Rocks ...
„ Under Pressure
Watson, J. B. (prospector)
Wedge Shaped Veins ...
Windmill Hill Reef ...
36-37
18—36-43
19—40—52
36-37—40-47—62—65
28-35
28-34
40
28
40—47—56
56
61
51—52—53
Zinc Blende
Zones, Auriferous
„ Disturbed and Undisturbed deep
„ of Strata, Pitch of
„ of Unbroken and Broken Beefs
23—42


THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS
AUSTRALIA:
WILLIAM NICHOLAS, F.G.S., London.
A SERIES OF ARTICLES ESPECIALLY RELATING TO THE
BENDIGO GOLD FIELDS, VICTORIA.
(1.) IE, —In giving the information about our quartz reefs I do so in the
hope that other men (gold miners) will also be enlisted to give
their experience of auriferous veins, through your widely-circulated
Journal. By thus aiding one another with our varied practical knowledge,
gathered together from different quarters of the globe, we shall quickly collect
a vast amount of useful information for the guidance of each other in our
respective countries. I hope if any persons take up this subject in the same
spirit that they will not occupy too much space with theories, but in the
main confine their attention to well-chosen facts, and indicating to what
theory or theories they lean, so that we may know the tendency of their
observations. I have already published my ideas on this subject sufficiently.
I am not absolutely wedded to them, but seek some better ones or more
corroboration of them from any and every good source. I think it a grave
reflection on mining men that after so many centuries have elapsed during
which this industry has been in existence we miners of the present day
know so little of the laws which govern the existence of veins or lodes. If
we can get together a number of simple descriptions of veins and their
enclosing strata, and other information relating thereto directly or indirectly
given systematically, we shall approach steadily the much desired end above
mentioned. I hope miners as well as managers and engineers will take up
this subject, and especially young miners, for what is particularly required
is trained intelligent observers. In this investigation every miner can and
should engage, and he will find it will add a charm to his otherwise gloomy
vocation, and give him an interest in his work that it does not in other
respects possess. In foreign countries or not, mining is commonly conducted
away from towns possessing pleasant occupations for spare time, and young
miners, &c., could find endless enjoyment in the study of the geology of the
district in which their lot for the time might be cast, together with the
study of the vein formations.
Melbourne, June 11,1884. Wm. Nicholas, F.G S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer.
(2.) [The above are extracts from a private letter from Mr. Nicholas, not
intended by him for publication—in fact, it enclosed that published in last
week’s Mining Journal —but the observations and suggestions appear so
valuable that we have taken the liberty of printing them. —Ed. M, JJ


THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OP AUSTRALTA.--No. 11.
(3.) Sib,-Judging from your Mining Journal a very large amount of British
capital must be invested in gold mines in various parts of the world, I
might have said with sufficient accuracy all parts of the world—Europe,
Asia, Africa, North and South America, and Australasia—l think, therefore,
I may infer that a few descriptive notes on the modes of occurrence of
gold and of quartz reefs, or auiferous lodes, in Australia will not be void
of interest to a considerable number of your readers. I hope also that as
my notes will be the results of my own observations on our gold fields
during the past 25 years, and not vague generalisations, they will prove to
be of practical service to those engaged in gold mining in other parts of
the world, I purpose giving the actual outcome of ‘exploration in quartz
reefs on our gold fields, combined with general geological descriptions of
the several fields I mention.
(4.) Some 25 years ago quartz mining in Australia was in its infancy, but
few shafts had been sunk below 100 feet in depth on any reef ; while at the
present time a large and increasing number have attained from 1000 to
2400 feet. With these few introductory remarks I start my subject, but
must mention the probability of interruptions to the regularity of my
descriptions, as I may be called to visit distant gold fields, and thus
prevented from carrying out my intentions.
(5.) In Victoria probably exist some of the most important quartz reefing
gold fields in the world. These reefs are naturally divided into seven
groups of which two are important and five are of lesser importance. The
two main groups of belts are well defined, have a general direction north
and south, and are in lower Silurian strata. The eastern group of the
main belts embraces (commencing from the northern extremity and going
south) the undermentioned gold fields; —Kamarooka, Ray wood, Sandhurst
(or Bendigo), Marong, Castlemaine, Fryers Creek, Maldon, Newstead,
Yandoit, Taradale, Daylesford, Gordon, Blackwood, Ballan, and Steiglitz.
There are in it nearly 800 distinct quartz reefs actually proved to be
auriferous, and this belt, so far as at present explored, is just 100 miles in
length. At the end of the year 1883 there were 6556 quartz miners
engaged in this belt, which for the sake of convenient reference I shall in
future call the Bendigo belt, after its principal gold field.
(6.) The western main group or belt, which for a like reason I will christen
the Ballarat belt, comprises —Wedderburn, at the northern end, Kingower,
Inglewood, Tarnagulla, Dunolly, Maryborough, Talbot, Clones,
Ballarat, Buningong, Smythesdale, and Bulldog at the southern end. In
this belt there are 543 distinct quartz reefs actually proved to be auriferous,
and so far as now explored it is also 100 miles in length. The quartz
miners engaged in the Ballarat belt at the close of the last year numbered
3644. These two great belts, the Bendigo and Ballarat, are separated on
the map of the colony of Victoria by the 144 9 of longitude, and physically
by a barren and depressed strip of strata, some 15 or more miles in width.
A large portion of this strip is covered by newer volcanic rock, but in the
numerous outcrops of the lower Silurian strata there are no auriferous veins
found. Of the five belts of lesser importance three lie in lower Silurian
strata and two in the upper Silurian.
(7.) In Victoria the quartz reefs run at right angles to the main dividing
range, but parallel with the principal spurs or tributary ranges of the main
divide, and by a study of the map it will be observed that the general direc-
tion of these ranges or spurs on the gold fields is northerly or north-westerly
at about right angles to the main dividing range. It may also be remarked
that several of the belts are more or less separated by low depressed country
in which are the valleys of rivers, another physical proof that the high
lands tend in a northerly and southerly direction. The foregoing brief out-


line of the grouping of quartz reefs must suffice, without my going into
what I think unnecessary details, about the belts of reefs of lesser import-
ance in Victoria, Let me, however, mention that the total number of men
employed in quartz mining at the end of 1883 was 14,078, and that there
were 3779 distinct quartz reefs actually proved to be auriferous. Many of
these quartz reefs outside of the two great belts are short in length on their
strike, and frequently consist of only one or two shoots of quartz.
(8.) Bendigo gold field, now better known as the Sandhurst gold field, after
the large city of Sandhurst, which is situated in the midst of the principal
gold mines, and is the capital of the county of Bendigo. At the close of
the year 1851, and soon after the opening of the Mount Alexander gold field
(now Castlemaine), the diggers in search of new fields passed over the Big
Hill granite range, a spur from Mount Alexander, and dropped down into the
basin of the Bendigo Creek prospecting for gold. This they quickly found,
and an extensive rush set into the new alluvial diggings. The sinking was
comparatively shallow, say, 20 to 30 feet right up to the surface during the
first few years after the field was discovered. Gold was plentiful and panni-
kins were put to a novel use, many miners being able to half or nearly fill
them with gold before breakfast.
(9.) To the pioneer prospectors who first made their way through the forests
to the summit of the Big Hill range, the Bendigo gold field then simply
presented view a wide spreading forest covering undulating country.
Probably their attention might have been attracted to the hill now known
as New Chum, through its being a little more prominent than its neighbours ;
but there could have been little else in the landscape that would catch the
eye, and nothing to mark it as one of, if not, the greatest quartz gold fields
in the universe. For a couple of years little or no mining but alluvial was
carried on. Many thousands of diggers spread over the numerous shallow
gullies reaping rich rewards for very little labour. For miles round Bendigo
had the appearance of an immense camp, white tents occupying all the
available vantage spots midst the forest, consisting for the most part of the
lovely ironbark, with its dark or nearly black bark and compact rich foliage.
I need not depict the rapid change the miners made in the face of Nature
in this region ; of the felling of the handsome forest trees for firewood, &c.,
only those trees being left that gave shade or were likely to cause damage
in their fall if cut. No; what I want to tell about is something quite
different. The diggers delved eagerly in the gullies for gold at the feet of
hills that wore immense white crowns of fantastic forms. Some were pin-
nacle shaped, others more dome like, others wore crests formed like those on
old helmets, others somewhat resembled ruined walls, whilst other hills
were merely capped with loose white fragments, attracting little or no
attention.
(10). Outcrops of Beefs.—After the flood time of the rush was over, and the
restless nomadic diggers had begun to settle down on finding a goodly
supply of auriferous washdirt, the Sabbaths, or days of rest, were more
observed, and also partly utilised by the same diggers in paying visits,
accompanied with hammers, to these white crowned bill tops, where
they yarned, smoked, and broke off piece after piece of these crowns.
Possibly the reader may have guessed what these white crowns consisted of.
They were formed of quartz, bleached white by exposure, and contained
gold. This explains why the diggers remembered to take their hammers,
for with them they managed to get many a handsome specimen, And as
specimens or curios only they were treated for some time. This can be
readily understood, because it was far more easy to wash out free gold
from soft clay and gravel wash than to break it out of hard quartz with
hammers and picks. After this manner did these monuments of the
denudation of the hills gradually disappear before the Anglo-Saxon ; from
Monument Hill, appropriate name in ipore ways than that on it. a huge


pinnacle of quartz shot up towards the sky, New Chum Hill, Specimen Hill,
Tyson’s Hill, Hustlers, Windmill, and many others. Perhaps I need hardly
explain that these said white crowns were the outcrops of reefs, portions
of which existed below the surface, as are now known to a couple of
thousands of feet, and quite likely to very many more thousands still
further down. Not only, however, did they indicate their continuations
downwards, but also to what had existed upwards probably for thousands of
feet also. And the denudation or destruction by Nature’s operations of
those vast upper structures by natural sluicing operations was due the
concentration of gold in the alluvial deposits so easily obtained bv the
miners. _ These great outcrops were parts of those reefs still existing below,
from which the bounding sandstones and slates had been denuded, because
these strata were not so hard and could not, therefore, offer so great a
resistance to the destroying elements as did the hard quartz of the reefs.
fll.) Stripped of their bounding rock, and deprived of their support, these
outcropping white quartz reefs bleached in the sun and atmosphere, had got
weathered into fantastic forms, rarely affording an idea of their original
shapes. One of these outcrops escaped the attention of these, permit me
to call them, vandal diggers until the year 1860. The only reason why it
was so was I presume, because it was too wretchedly poor to waste even
leisure time over. It was, however, of no mean dimensions, although to
a considerable extent over shadowed by the New Chum Hill. For this
last member of its tribe I felt a particular regard, and paid it many a visit,
sometimes climbing to its summit to muse over the past geological history
of the Bendigo basin, a magnificient panoramic view of which, especially
to the south, was spread out at my feet. At this time I doubt if there was
any other person on Bendigo that cared one jot for this solitary momento
of the past, which had been caved out by Nature’s resistless elements.
For myself I felt a great regard for it, and I shall not readily forget my
feelings when passing early one morning I observed a man perched on it
boring a hole preparatory to blasting it down. I enquired why this was
being done of a man at its foot, and he informed me they were employed
by a road contractor who was in want of road metal. It was no use my
protesting, I would only get laughed at even by the then authorities, and
the work of destruction had already .begun of what I looked upon as a
piece of valuable public property: I consequently took myself to an
adjacent hill (west), sat down and determined, at any rate, to preserve a
careful sketch record of the last old Bendigo quartz crown. (August 25,
1862). It was from 18 to 20 feet in height, I feet 6 inches in width, 36 feet in
length, and underlied to the east about 1 foot in 6 feet. And so my old friend
got “ put on the roads ” (a not very complimentary position in those days
when prison labour was mostly so employed.)
(12.) As these outcrops of reefs and the peculiar forms of the hills on this
field are directly connected,! will explain their relation one to the other.
Viewed from the north or south the hills are rounded and almost always
gently sloping, whilst from the east or west they are serrated or saw formed,
but not in a marked degree, because the hills are not sufficiently prominent
to exhibit clearly their profiles. Each hill has a length, the strike of which
is like to that of the reefs, about 20° west of north. The slopes from the
summits to the north are very gentle, whilst those to the south are in com-
parison precipitous. Now, the dips, of the reefs are north where the hills
are of this shape, and in consequence the northern slopes of the hills are
capped with the quartz outcrops of reefs, which being harder than the strata
offer greater resistance to the destroying elements, and thus give form and
contour to the hills. From the tops of the hills to the south the ‘ caps ”of
the reefs are broken through, and the softer strata beneath are left exposed
to disintegration and destruction, and it is due to those circumstances that
they now present the boldest declivities. To more clearly explain the fore-


going I must here mention that the reefs referred to are arches formed in
anticlinals of the corrugated strata, and supposing the strata beneath these
quartz arches, or reefs, to have been excavated we should then have immense
archways or tunnels, having a decline to the north with the dip of the reefs
into the crust of the earth. This dip in the reefs, is as a rule, very gentle,
but the angles vary with the inclinations of the corrugations of the strata
between which the reefs lie.
(13.) Ironstone outcrops.-On those hills where little or no quartz outcropped
there was, however, another indication of their presence beneath —outcrops
of what the miners very appropriately termed ironstone. These sometimes
protruded above the surface as much as 5 and 6 feet, and could be traced
continuously very often for a long distance. Such indications of lodes in
other countries are not uncommon, as miners are well aware. Those lam
referring to were formed after this manner, casing and tracks of reefs
where quartz shoots die or wedge out and the cheeks or walls of the reef
come together, they combined formed what we termed the “ tracks ” of
reefs, which can be followed to pick up new shoots of quartz. Above the
water level the pyrites in reefs decomposes, and the surface water percolat-
ing through the quartz absorbs the iron of the pyrites and deposits some
of it in the strata forming the walls, or, as our miners term them the
casings of the reefs, and transports the balance down into the tracks, which
get saturated from time to time with these ferruginous water, just as the
supplies of water are sustained or not from the surface. Below the water
level the casings and tracks have quite a different character; there the
casings usually consist of black carbonaceous decomposing soft slates,
and the tracks are much the same with more or less thin quartz veins and
pyrites. The casing above the water levels are really formed of clayey
ironstone, in which may be found crystals of carbonate of iron. Having
described the contour of the surface, and the indications of reefs thereon,
I must give a brief description of the geological structure of the gold field,
(14.) Geology.—As I have previously remarked a granite range separates the
Mount Alexander or Gastlemaine gold field from the Bendigo or Sandhurst
field. The former lies to the south of the latter. The principal lines of
reefs on Bendigo are about half-a-dozen miles from the granite and to the
north of it. No other outcrop of granite exists anywhere else near to the
field. The whole of the gold field lies in lower silurian strata, and this for-
mation runs from the granite just spoken of away north for some 30 miles,
where it dips beneath the Murray River tertiaries; to the east some 25 miles,
where it appears to dip beneath a trap range, on the other side of which
lies an extensive area of upper silurian ; and to the west about 100 miles,
the nearest gold fields in that direction being about 25 miles distant in the
Ballarat auriferous belt. The whole of the strata within this field is corru-
gated, and more or less decomposed, The corrugations are closer together,
and the strata more decomposed where the main reefs occur than other-
wise, and especially nearer to the granite. The three main lines of reefs
are distant from each other about mile. The centre one is known as the
Garden Gully and Johnson’s line of reef, and has been worked on con-
tinuously fora distance of about seven miles. The eastern is the Hustler’s
line of reef, which has been wrought, but not without a slight break or two,
for about four miles. The western line of reef is variously known on
different parts as the New Chum, Victoria, Devonshire, Catherine, Star, &c.,
and has been worked continuously for about seven miles. Reefs are found
in continuation of these still further south, whilst to the north for nine miles
they have in several places proved to be of great richness. In addition to
these, both to the west and to the east have rich quartz reefs been found.
That on lesser important gold fields would be considered of very consider-
able value; and, in fact, in themselves would form a gold field equal to
almost any other In Australia.


(15.) Saddle-formed Reefs,—ln beginning the few remarks I propose
making about the structure, &c , of the Bendigo Reefs, I shall confine my
attention to the three main or master lodes or reefs, and commence with the
Hustler’s. The southern extension of this reef passes through the centre
of the city of Sandhurst; many mines have been and are at work in the
central park or recreation reserve, and others possess the rights to mine
beneath the city itself. This reef was one of the first that was attempted
to be worked, dating back to 1853, when opened by Messrs. Harris and
Hustler, the reef being named after the latter, and their claim being
only 12 feet by 12 feet. They obtained rich gold from the surface, the first
crushing yielding 26 ounces of gold to the ton. This reef was saddle or arch-
formed, and of comparatively to those found afterwards small size. The
workings were in those early days visible from the surface, as the reef was
followed down, and extracted in the arched formation. The open cutting
from whence started the arched works was by my measurement only 40 feet
wide, and the reef itself about 20 feet. The roof of the arch where the
“ cap ” of the saddle had been showed the inclination of the dip of the
reef to the north to be about one in four. The number of shallow shafts
sunk on the reef from its outcrop down to the Ironbark Gully gave it
more the appearance of shallow alluvial mining than of vein mining.
And poor old Hustler, who worked hard at the windlass even after he had
lost one arm by a blast, would be considerably astonished if he returned
to this world and saw the scale of operations carried on in mining his
line of reef at the present time. Splendid winding-engines, and crushing
and pumping, shafts 1200 to 1500 feet, boring machines, and all the latest
raining appliances in every department. This top saddle reef like those
found beneath it, occurred in an anticlinal of the strata. In cross-section
it was crescent formed, with the points or horns of the crescent pointing
downwards, tapering out between the beds of the strata at about 50 feet
from the apex or cap of the reef.. These points or horns mentioned in
the above description represent what are termed by the miners as the
east and west “ legs ”of the saddle reef. Seeing the interbedded positions
of the saddle-formed reefs on this field in the early days I could not
but contemplate the possibility of their being of contemporaneous age
with the strata, but I had to give up this idea after extended observa-
tion. The hanging-walls of these reefs generally consist of sandstone
with casings or partition walls of slate separating the sandstone from
the quartz, whilst the footwalls are commonly formed of slate. It is
fortunate for mining purposes that the slate and sandstone beds are not
transposed with regard to the reefs, as the sandstones form firm backs
and slate treacherous ones. In describing the saddle reefs as crescent-
formed I should remark the caps or arches are not perfect segments of
a circle, but incline more to the extended and inverted U (fq) form. This,
I believe, however, depends on the extent of the corrugation of the strata.
(16.) The thickness of this upper reef in the centre of the cap was 12 feet. At
200 feet below this top “ saddle ” reef, and almost vertically beneath it, was
discovered another saddle-formed reef, which averaged fully 20 feet in
thickness in the cap, and about the same across the arch horizontally,
showing this arched reef to be even more compressed in form than the
outcropping one. But the legs of the reef are longer, for the eastern started
from the saddle with a width of 5 feet, and tapered in 200 feet in depth to
about 1 foot: whilst the western, beginning with the same width, reduces
to 1 foot in 70 feet in depth. I may here remark that either the eastern
or the western leg, as the case may be, on all these saddle reefs is the
longer and richer one.
Melbourne , May 20, 1884,
Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer,


THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA—No. 111.
(17.) Sir, —The top saddle first discovered had nearly equal legs, and the
saddle was upright. The second Hustler’s reef had a cant to the east, and the
eastern leg was the most important one. The third reef had a similar
underlie, but the western leg was the principal one.
(18.) Corrugation of Strata.—l must also mention before I proceed further
that corrugated strata are not as a rule corrugated symmetrically; on the
contrary, anticlinals are usually bent over, or have a list to the one side or the
other, and synclinals are similarly affected. Saddle reefs partake of the
lists—to use a nautical phrase—of the strata in which they are enclosed.
Consequently the one leg of such reef may be nearly vertical, whilst the other
may be 50° or 70° from the horizontal. The one leg may be the largest at
one end of a line of reef, and the opposite leg the biggest at the other end,
the circumstances of occurrence having altered. I have just been remarking
on the want of symmetry in the anticlinals and synclinals of the lower
Silurian from the views we get of them in cross sections, but this want of
symmetry is also perceptible if we look at them longitudinally. For instance,
on the third Hustler’s reef there is what miners term a crown formation—
that is, the anticlinal below the top of the Hustler’s Hill to the north dips
north and to the south dips south, and the saddle reef partakes of this
change of dip with the strata,
(19.) Dips (or Pitch), —To prevent any misunderstanding of my mean-
ing, where I use the terms dip and underlie, I may state that I always
use underlie in the same way miners do, meaning the inclination of a reef
or lode at right angles to the strike or bearing, and in this sensei never use
the term dip. In writing on mining subjects when I use dip I always mean
the inclination of a saddle or of a shoot of quartz, &c., in the line of strike or
bearing of a reef or lode. Mining managers are not sufficiently particular
about the terms they use, and this want of care is very confusing sometimes
to those who read their reports with a desire to understand them, and to
learn from them the changes that take place in the lodes and reefs worked
in the mines under their supervision. But to return to the crown formation
of the Hustler’s reef. The mines situated on the crown and to the north of
it on the northerly dip have been very rich, whilst those to the south on the
southerly dip have been very poor. Under the top of the Hustler’s Hill the
cap of the saddle ran nearly horizontal, and the reef pinched or got small,
but it began to dip at first slowly going north and then faster, the saddle
and its legs steadily increasing in size and richness for about 250 yards.
As will be seen by the following sketch section (longitudinally) the con-
tinuation to the south of the top saddle reef has been removed ages since by
denudation, and so also No. 2 reef beneath it. Whether they too had crown
formations as well as No. 3 reef is now beyond our knowledge, but it is quite
likely they would conform to a great extent with those beneath them,
judging by general experience in such matters, in this and other gold mining
districts:—
(20.) Although the above is a longitudinal section of this line of reef for a
short distance, I have endeavoured to show on it the transverse sections of


the reefs one below the other, also by showing the saddles and their east and
west legs roughly, in accordance with their occurrence in the rocks. The
bars arching to the south represent the reefs stoped on the western legs, and
the cross bars arching towards the north represent the extent of sloping
done on the eastern legs of the three-saddle formed reefs. Ido not pretend
that this representation on so small a scale is accurate or complete, but it is
a rough approximation to the work done, and will suffice for the purposes of
this paper, and I hope this sketch will aid to give the reader a more clear
idea than my previous description affords of the mode of occurrence of these
peculiarly-formed auriferous quartz reefs. The single waved horizontal line
represents the profile of the surface as it rises up the hills and falls down
to the gullies.
(21.) Lava Streaks.—As they are locally known to the miners, or at least
were in the early days and up to recent year?, are also now called lava dykes.
They are really basaltic dykes of comparatively recent origin, as may be
judged when I mention that they are not faulted in the slightest degree. Only
in one claim is there, so far as I know, even an apparent indication of a fault
of one of these dykes on Bendigo. They cut through legs of quartz reefs,
through slates and sandstones, through the saddles of quartz reefs, and even
t hrough bodies of quartz ranging from 40 feet up to 70 and 80 feet in thickness
Lava dykes cut through everything underground, and nothing cuts through
them but miners. To the latter they are sometimes of service, because
decomposition has rendered them much softer than the altered sandstones
and slates, and they are availed of to make rapid communication between
levels. In many mines the dykes are composed of dense hard basalt, whilst
in others decomposition has only partly done its work, leaving large and
small rounded nodules of the hard rock, surrounded with the usual concen-
tric envelopes of more or less decomposed basalt. These dykes appear to
belong to the same period as do the older volcanic rocks of Victoria, which
Mr. Alfred R. C. Selwyn, late director of the Geological Survey of Victoria,
believed to indicate the close of the miocene epoch, whilst the newer volcanic
rock marks the end or nearly so of the pliocene epoch, and its eruptions
seem to have been continued in to the most recent post pliocene time.
(22.) Seeing that these dykes cut through rocks and reefs, but remain
intact and undisturbed, we have in them presented to ns good evidence of the
tranquil period that has elapsed, since the strata and quartz reefs were riven
and split open, in order to give vent to the excess of plutonic energy that
was imprisoned far down below. As a rule the basalt of these dykes is
much softer through decomposition at the present time than the slates and
sandstones or reefs which they intersect, and consequently would offer less
resistance than them to motion in their vicinity in at any rate recent times.
Since the close of the miocene epoch then has this upper crust of the
earth where lava streaks occur in Bendigo relapsed into a lengthy period of
restful peace and quiet. Prior, however, to the disturbed period in which
these dykes made their appearance the strata and the quartz reefs have suf-
fered rupture after rupture, and also considerable displacement or faulting.
It was, I consider, undoubtedly due to the fractures in the anticlinals and
subsequent displacements of the strata and reefs that the lava dykes are
found associated with what I will call our main line of reefs. In these lines
of reefs the pent-up lava found the weakest local points of the crust of the
earth, and through them forced its way to the surface. It is consequently
reasonable to infer that lava dykes will be found to accompany what are
locally termed permanent lines of reefs, or reefs that will be found to continue
to great depths, and the operations on which are likely to prove of a perma-
nent character. Lava dykes follow lines of faults or slides as they are
often called, also slip along the hanging and footwalls of reef, and jump
across strata from saddle reef to reef on independent undulating, not slide,
like straight lines. So much was this the case in a vertical oval shaft sunk


on the whole Victoria reef that a section of the course of the lava streak
down it strongly resembled a vertical section of the twist of a cork-screw
for about 130 feet in depth from the surface. Doubtless the shape of the
shaft assisted in giving it this appearance, although its real course was un-
doubtedly almost zigzag. In 1863 I pointed out to Victoria miners that
these lava streaks might be looked on as guides to reefs, and should as such
receive more of their attention than they at that time obtained. They really
are worthy of the title of guides, for experience has since proved they
rarely run far away on a slide line from one saddle reef before they dart
over to another reef in their upward course to the surface. Lava dykes
have had very little or no effect or either the reefs or strata they pass
through, and it would be erroneous to credit them with causing reefs to be
richer or poorer, or having any influence on them whatever, beyond their
intersections. In these general remarks on lava dykes, I have sufficiently
mentioned all points that are of interest, without going into detailed des-
criptions of the Hustlers reef dyke.
(23.) Minerals.—ln the Hustler’s reef the undermentioned minerals occur
in the laminations of the quartz, which lamicas for the most part con-
sist of black carbonaceous clay-slate, in which are embedded arsenical
and iron pyrites, galena, and zinc blende. Gold occurs in association with
galena, zinc blende and pyrites. These minerals and gold also occur in the
solid quartz in lesser quantities than in the laminae. The pyrites yield
when treated in reverberatory furnaces, &c.,from two ounces and upward of
gold to the ton. In certain parts of the reef large bodies of arsenical
pyrites have been found, which proved to contain by assay 10 ounces 17
dwts of silver per ton, and only 11 dwts. 6 grains of gold. '
(24.1 Gold. —In this reef the gold, as a rule, is found to be fine and evenly
distributed, though the laminations of the quartz and also in the solid quartz,
Messrs. Latham and Watson had spent on their mine up to 1871 over
£130,000, but they declined to make public the total amount of gold they
obtained. The profits made were supposed to have been very large. For
some years this mine has been in the hands of a public company. The ad-
joining mine to the south is that owned by the Great Extended Hustler’s
Company, which with its tributes has been exceedingly rich. It has paid
in dividends £557,900 on a called-up capital of £28,000. The reef was
worked in this mine from 40 to 60 feet in width; the whole of that width
was put through the battery, and yielded from one to four ounces of gold
to the ton. This saddle presented quite a dazzling appearance ; gold was
to be seen everywhere, and in places the quartz was thickly studded with
it, whilst in oihers the gold ran in seams through the stone, and for a
couple of years this mine was a real working jeweller’s shop, its walls and
roof and floor glittering with native gold. But I have no intention to
attempt to depict the richness of the reefs in Australia after this manner;
sometimes the impressions left on one by such sights may force me to say a
few words about like deposits. I, however, desire to restrict my few remarks
to the modes of occurrence of gold and of quartz reefs, and phenomena ap-
pertaining thereto. In concluding my notes on the Hustler’s reef I may
mention that H.R.H. Prince Alfred was banquetted in an unusual manner
by Messrs. Latham and Watson in the 400 feet level of their mine. I leave
much untold about this reef that would be interesting, and I must leave
still more about other reefs, if I expect to conclude my notes within rea-
sonable limits. Wm, Nicholas, P.G.S.
Melbourne, ]\l(iy 27. 1884. Consulting Mining Engineer.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA.
(25.) Sib, —Please give me space, as an old resident in the Mount Alexan-
der district, to correct two errors (evidently typographical) in Mr. Nicholas’


letter in last week’s Mining Journal. In writing he must have put it Mt.
(Mount) Alexander, and this has been read Mr. Alexander by the compositor.
I refer to the two mentions of it in the sixth paragraph beginning “ Bendigo
gold field.” You will see that this is borne out by the paragraph in the
second column beginning “ Geology.” This explanation will render plain
that which is now obscure. The Castlemaine gold field was first called
Mount Alexander from its proximity to a mount of that name that is visible
for many miles round. — Seaford, Lewes, July 21, 1884.
Henry Moon, M.B.
THE GOLDEN" QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA.—No. IV.
(26.) Sir,—Garden Gully Reef.—The first mining operations on the out-
crop of this reef, unlike those carried out on the Hustler’s Reef, yielded such
small returns of gold that energetic mining was discouraged, and a couple of
years after its first working the whole line of reef bearing this name was aban-
doned. This was in a measure also partly due to the smallness of the reef cropp-
ing up to the surface, and to the comparative hardness of the bounding rocks.
The reef as left by the first miners, worked up to the surface, was only from
6 to 9 inches in thickness, and not calculated, therefore, to attract much
attention. At this period of inactivity, beginning in 1859, I got down into
these old workings and examined the reef, which did not offer any encourag-
ment to prospectors or investors to give it a new trial, judged from its
appearance as exposed to view at that time. Before I proceed further in
my description of this reef I must mention that in its extension to the north
it is known as the Perseverance, Windmill Hill, Johnson’s, Eagle, and Moon.
These several names were given in the early days when the forest covered
the country, and prevented the pioneers obtaining an unobstructed view
from hill to hill, and of connecting the quartz reefs cropping out on them
as one continuous line.
(27.) Strata.—The Garden Gully Reef occurs in an anticlinal fold of the
strata running approximately parallel to the Hustler’s Reef anticlinal. There
is, however, a considerable difference between these two anticlinals :the latter
is but little disturbed as compared with the former, which is fractured and


faulted in its apex and legs in a marked manner. The Garden Gully anti-
clinal has a tendency to lean over to the west. The numerous faults in it
are almost without exception longitudinal ones, and for the most part exist
through the fracture and displacement of the western portion of the anti-
clinal, the strata on the eastern side not being faulted but merely sliding
one over the other in the line of fault, somewhat in this manner (No. 2). It
is possible that these fault or slide lines in the strata existed before the
reefs were formed. That as the strata were slowly corrugating they
fractured along their weakest lines, and that the faults gradually or more
quickly increased in extent as adjustment became necessary under unequal
pressure. The two operations may have simultaneously progressed—of
faulting and of reef construction. The movement in the strata appears to
have been an upward one of that portion overlying the fault or “ slide,” as
it is more commonly called in Australia, for example (No. 2). No. 3 section
illustrates another fault in the Garden Gully Reef.
(28.) Reefs. —The reefs have usually more of the inverted Y shape than
of crescent or inverted U (jq), although there are examples of the latter.
These broken saddle, or a, reefs occur one beneath the other, quite inde-
pendently of one another (just as do those of the Hustler’s Reef), and in
keeping with the anticlinal of the strata the reefs are found successively
one below the other, the cap or saddle of each from the surface downwards
occuring more and more towards the east. As a rule, on Bendigo the shafts
are vertical, and in consequence of what I have just stated the shafts on
the Garden Gully are proved to be—as greater depth is attained —on the
western side of the “centre country” or anticlinal in which the saddle reefs
occur. Prom the deep shafts cross-cuts are driven to the east to cut and
prospect the “centre country ” for payable auriferous reefs. In the Garden
Gully Reef there is a “ crown formation ” (as well as in the Hustler’s Reef),
the several reefs to the south of which having a gentle dip to the south,
and those to the north of it dipping north. The first claims worked on the
Garden Gully Reef were situated on this “ crown formation,” and, as I have
said, the surface reef was poor, and the reef to the north and south of the
“ crown ” after being prospected was abandoned, and a quarter of a mile of
land to the north, a mile, or rather miles, to the south remained unoccupied ;
this line of reef at the time being considered an outside line,
completely eclipsed by the rich surface reefs on the Hustler’s, New Chum,
and Victoria, and numerous other reefs. Yet in ten years later the whole
of this land was occupied, and the stock of less than 20 public companies
was valued at £1,324,000 The “ crown ” on the Garden Gully Reef happened
to be in a gully, the surface outcrops merely showed the ends of the legs as
they tailed out in depth, the upper portions and the saddle having been
swept away by Nature’s sluicing operations. It can, then, be readily under-
stood why prospecting by sinking on the legs of a reef that were pinching
out did not result in encouragement for further outlay of capital. This top
reef was, judging from surface indications and the legs of the reef left in
situ, of small dimensions, much the same as that here depicted (No. 4,4 a)
beneath the surface line—named Ladam’s Reef, which was discovered and
worked in Ladam’s and Co.’s claim. Ladam’s Reef was found about 100 feet
beneath the surface, was about 10 feet wide across the saddle, and its eastern
leg was payable for 40 feet in depth ; portions of the upper part of this reef
yielding 4 and 5 ounces to the ton of quartz. In the sketch section No. 4 I
have indicated by dotted lines the saddle reef of which there remained only
the thin ends of its eastern and western legs to be worked by man. Where
saddle-formed reefs occur it may be inferred if an eastern underlying reef
is found that to the west of it will in all probability be discovered a western
underlying reef, or, at least, the track of it. Should such east and west legs
or reefs be found, or even their tracks only, the prospecting work is not in
vain, for the centre country is proved, and the position where best to sink


a vertical shaft to find the next saddle reef below is indicated, In many
mines om Bendigo I have seen incipient saddle reefs with legs not more
than 2 or 3 feet in length and the saddles as many inches across. Large
saddle reefs sometimes die out to such dimensions in their continuations
north or south. At the southern end of the Garden Gully Beef, for
instance, the incipient reef beginning thus (No. 5); at 180 feet north it has
increased to (No. 6) ; at 100 feet still further north it is thus (No. 7); and at
180 feet still northwards it is again on the wane like this (No. 8) ; and the
longitudinal section between these last two points is thus (No 9). The
figures 7 and 8 in this section represent the positions of cross sections 7 and
8 above. The horizontal lines in cross section 8 and in the section 9
represent “black slate taking the place of quartz” in the saddle of the
reef. The words in inverted commas are those inserted in the original
section by Mr. Caleb Thomas, mining surveyor, where I have drawn
horizontal lines. Here let me take the opportunity of acknowledging the
assistance I have frequently received from this gentleman’s and Mr. Mining
Surveyor Walker’s admirable plans and sections compiled from their own
surveys. The words I have above quoted almost lead me to remark on
their connection with the growth of quartz reefs ; my views on which sub-
ject yon have, however, published, and I will spare your readers, as far as
I can do so, from theoretical ideas, in what I wish to be pure descriptions
of auriferous quartz reefs, allowing those who read to draw their own con-
clusion from the facts I supply from their several experiences of reefs, veins,
or lodes in other countries. The eastern leg has been the main one worked
at the southern end of this Garden Gully Reef, and the western leg the
most important at the north end ; the opposite legs in each case being
short, and of no consequence. At 400 feet to the north of the section No. 9
this reef occurs in this fashion (No. 10) the whole of the saddle, as shown
by horizontal lines consisting of slate, whilst beneath it occurs, as shown
in the sketch, a saddle-formed branching spur of quartz. This spur even-
tually further north cuts out the slate to balance matters, and as to the
south I have shown the slate cuts out the quartz. Mining men usually
talk of such changes as the one body cutting out the other, and it is clearly
understood what is meant to be conveyed. But I submit that it is possible
this is the boundary of transmutation from slate into quartz, where this
cutting out or transformation takes place. This section is a longitudinal
one (No. 11) beginning to the south at No. 10 cross section, where there
is a saddle of slate which becomes a quartz saddle, 12, at which point
the transverse, or cross section, is like this (No. 12), and at 13 like this
(No. 13). In section No. 11 under the saddle to the north there are certain
curved lines which show the stoping done on the eastern leg ; this stands
good also in the case of section No. 9, and those in the latter curved in
the opposite direction mean stoping done on the western leg. I may also
mention all cross sections are depicted as seen looking north, and that
these remarks will stand good for all sections that may follow unless
otherwise stated.
(29.) Proceeding further north the saddle again undergoes a transforma-
tion, breaking up into slate with quartz saddle, spurs, and then sandstone pre-
dominates. Meantime the eastern leg increases in size and richness, and is
stoped for 170 feet on its underlie, the saddle not paying to stope. Before
going further I should say that the dip of the top of the saddle which is
shown in section 11 as dipping north is exceptional, and only continues a
short distance beyond cross section 13 before it takes the usual southerly
dip on the south side of the “ crown formation.” I have said the saddle did
not pay to stope, and should have added for from 700 to 800 feet in length
to the north, and this remark applies also to the western leg, which however,
becomes payable again to the north, just where the saddlepays to stope. Now,
from the eastern leg dropping spurs branch off into the footwall at nearly


right angles with the leg. The jnnction points of these droppers with the
leg rise upwards as followed to the north, the strata forming the footwall
country of the leg, underlying parallel with the leg. This cross section will
give an idea of the form of the reef (No, 14). Here the saddle for nearly
400 feet has in a great measure been stoped.and thence for 700 feet further
north only a small part induced stoping, and then for over 1500 feet the
whole of the saddle and east leg have been excavated. The eastern leg in
section 14 was stoned for 300 feet in depth below the saddle ; but as it was
followed north it shortened, the saddle again became payable and the
works are overlapped bv mining on the top saddle, or Ladam’s Eeef. Here
Ladam’s Reef for over 500 feet in length merely consisted of a small saddle
without legs, or only apologies for legs, not worthy of notice. The reef we
have thus far followed up from the south is called at this place the Middle
Reef, because it comes in between the top or Ladam’a Reef, and the Pandora
Reef, The relative depths from the surface of each reef is—top reef
(Ladam’s), 131 feet; Middle Reef, 383 feet; and the Pandora Reef about
700 feet. These measurements in each case from surface to the bottom or
under part of the saddle. We have now reached to the southern end of the
rich Garden Gully United Mine, in which for nearly 1900 feet in length the
three reefs have been, and are now, in work with very profitable results,
which I shall refer to under gold. The saddle of the Pandora Reef was
worked at the time of my last visit for 40 feet in width, and opened
for 600 feet in length, the whole of the quartz from all parts of the mine
yielding over 1 ounce of gold to the ton. The quartz in the saddle was
marble white and of a splintery nature, dividing longitudinally with the
course of the reef. It gave me the impression that its splintery character
was due to immense vertical pressure, to which it had a disposition to divide
or split at right angles,
Melbourne, July 24, 1884.
Wm. Nicholas, P.G.S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OP AUSTRALIA.—No. Y.
(30.) Sir,— Reefs.—ln 1869 the Garden Gully United Mine was let to a tri-
bute company for five years at 17| per cent. In the early part of 1871 no gold
had been struck, although vigorous mining had been carried on ; but that
event was not far off, and subsequently in one six months the tribute com-
pany obtained £250,000 worth of gold, the average yield of gold from many
crushings being quite 20 ounces per ton of quartz. Very large profits have
been obtained (as will be seen further on) by the Garden Gully United
Company, but not without careful management, which reflects the greatest
credit on the directors and mining manager (Mr. John Keam). Because
they had a rich mine money had not been squandered as has, unfortunately
too often been the case in other rich quartz mines ; on the contrary, every
item of expenditure has been well considered, and more care and thought
has been bestowed on the judicious laying out of shillings and pence than
is the case in but few unproductive call-making mines. Much of this
desirable state of affairs is no doubt due to the fact that Mr. George
Lansell (our richest quartz gold miner, who is now enjoying a well-earned
rest in England) holds a very large portion of the shares in this mine.
This gentleman has been most successful in his quartz mining enterprises
on Bendigo. He owns extensive private mines and very large interests in
many public companies there, and it is a well-known fact that he may buy
but he rarely, if ever, sells shares. Where his interests are large, the
mines are all worked for legitimate profits and the yields equalised ; the
share market is left out of consideration. Mr. Lansell is the king of
Australian gold miners. The Bendigo gold fields must remain under an


everlasting obligation to him. His faith in the continuance of profitable
quartz reefs at great depths has been tested and proved by his determination
to discover and work them. He erected splendid winding machinery
capable of winding at below 2000 feet, fixed air compressors to sink shafts
with boring machines, and thus infected other investors in mining with the
same confidence that he had himself in the deep ground. Furthermore, he
offered a reward of for the first shaft that reached a vertical depth
of 2000 feet on the Bendigo gold field, and placed the money in a local
bank in trust for a certain period. His shaft on the Victoria reef was the
first to obtain that depth, but he was not without competitors—the Victory
and Pandora, on the Garden Gully Reef, is 1873 feet in depth, and there are
half-a-dozen other shafts below 1500 feet in depth. Mr. Lansell and many
others have had to fight against the faint-hearted sceptics who had no
faith in the deep ground, and these sceptics were in the majority in the
early period of quartz mining in Victoria, and are so now in more than one
colony in Australia. Many of these faint-hearted men are to-day reaping,
and have in the past reaped, rich rewards where they did not sow. I have
only done part justice to Mr. Lansell’s magnificent public spirit—quite
exceptional in the annals of mining—but I shall refer again to his deep
mining operations when I describe the New Chum and Victoria line of reef.
(31.) The main shaft of the Garden Gully United Company is now more
than 1262 feet in depth, and is still sinking. The second reef below the surface
at the south end of the Garden Gully Mine possesses a peculiar saddle and
west leg (No, 15). The latter is nearly wedge-shaped and vertical. The
western portion of the east leg next the saddle yielded up to 50 ounces of
\ NS 15
h
gold to the ton. The hanging wall of this east leg consisted of soft black
carbonaceous slate, with pyrites and quartz veins, and the leg averages
10 feet in thickness. This same reef near the No. 2 shaft, 500 feet north
of the No. 3 shaft, gets into sandstone strata, and the reef is pinched and
irregular, especially in its saddle. The hanging wall consists of a thin
layer of black slate, then a layer of sandstone about 2 feet in thickness
(shown in section No. 16 by vertical bars or lines), then another thin layer of
black slate and the true sandstone wall. The eastern leg of this reef has
been for nearly a mile up to this point the most important leg; but now
these circumstances begin to reverse, the west leg grows in width and
becomes rich in gold, and eventually the only leg of the reef that is
worth working, or, indeed, of size. The eastern leg is only indicated by a
“ track ” line in many cases. We have also approached near to the southern
extremity of the “ lava dyke.” At about 900 feet still further north the
eastern leg of the reef is rather irregular in underlie, and averages over
2 feet in thickness; the western leg is just 2 feet thick at the saddle, it
underlies very regularly to the west at an angle of 66°, whilst the footwall
gradually draws into the hanging-wall, and forms a wedge-shaped leg of
quartz. The average underlie of the eastern leg is about 58°, which angle
indicates that the saddle reefs still have the top list to the west. On the
hanging-wall of the west leg there is nearly 1 foot of soft black slate,
This leg for nearly 100 feet in depth yielded profitable work. Bat we


have got beyond the northern boundary of the Garden Gully United Mine
and I should not pass from it without giving a few particulars of the
results obtained by mining within this property. There are 33 517 shares
in this company, on which 12s. lid. has been called up out of 20s and the
large sum of £824,123 (to August 3, 1884) has been paid in dividends.
Dividends are regularly made every fortnight, ranging from Is. per share
upwards. Such is the outcome of mining a piece of ground on the Garden
Gully line of reef, which, although crossed by the main Korong road to
the principal quartz reefs of Bendigo, and traversed consequently by
thousands of miners, yet for years was not considered worthy of either the
expenditure of much time by miners or money by capitalists to test its
value. I have no doubt there are like areas still on Bendigo neglected this
day that will in another decade or two yield up their millions of pounds
of gold. *
(32). Deep Mining.—ln 1871 I wrote the following;—“ Many thoughtful
men not ten years since believed that the Bendigo reefs were worked out, but
few in 1871 would state that the district has seen its best days. The weight
of evidence is in favour of the future prosperity of this gold field being
better than the past, and the bare possibility of the working out of the
reefs we may safely leave to the consideration of future generations.” In
the early part of this same year I wrote:—“ There is, indeed, far more
reason to suppose that quartz mining will be successfully carried on at
1500 feet than there was for imagining ten years since that we should be
working 600 feet beneath the grass. We have already gone 900 feet in one
instance, and shafts of 600 feet and 700 feet are becoming numerous, and
at this rate we may assume that gold mining will be a national industry
for generations to come.” In September, 1875,1 wrote The same reason-
ing which applied to the above quotation .... that quartz mining will
be successfully carried on at 1500 feet in depth, &c. ,*. , may equally
now be applied to mining at 2000 feet, or even 2500 feet below surface.”
I wrote the latter remarks when the Magdala Company reported the disco-
very at Stawell of an auriferous quartz reef in the bottom of their shaft at
1680 feet in depth. Quartz mining is being conducted profitably at the pre-
sent date (August 4, 1884) on Bendigo at the 1660 and at the 1760 feet
levels in one of Mr. Lansell’s private mines, which I shall refer to in more
detail in future. You might ask where was the necessity to argue and urge
that quartz reefs would be found to exist and to contain gold in remunera-
tive quantities at great depths ? Because it was asserted that auriferous
veins in other countries died out and became poor at shallow depths, and
that such would be the case here likewise. This was stated by persons con-
sidered to be authorities, and they were supported, it is right to say, by a
majority of the principal miners in Victoria of that period, including nearly
all those men who had found and worked rich surface quartz reefs, the
latter class carrying more weight with the public than they were entitled
to. A lucky “ new chum ” miner was often, and may be is still looked up to
as a greater authority on all such mining matters than a man brought up to
vein mining from his youth and having made it his sole study. No doubt
these remarks will be read with interest by those persons who are engaged
in gold raining in other countries, and whose operations have not yet reached
below 200 or 300 feet from the surface. They are decidedly encouraging;
but it should not be overlooked that the deepest mining in Australia is
carried on in the lower Silurian in Victoria, and that the reefs therein are
longer and wider and generally more permanent than is usually the case
with those reefs that occur in the upper silurian strata. The reefs in the
latter I hope to describe in the future, and I may mention that providing
these possess certain characteristics, which I shall particularise, I believe a
great number of the upper silurian reefs will prove permanent in depth and
remunerative to work. The shaft of the Victory and Pandora Company,


next north of the Garden Gaily United Company’s Mine is now below
1873 feet in depth. During the past half-year the Garden Gully United
Company have crashed 7937 tons of quarts, which yielded 7202 ounces of
gold, and they divided amongst the shareholders 11s. per share, or £18,434
in dividends. Up to August 8, 1884, there has been paid to the shareholders
this year £24,299 16s. 6d. During the past 13 years more than 200,000 tons
of quartz have been raised and crushed from the reefs in this mine for a
yield of 265,906 ounces of gold, which realised when sold £1,056,953.
Melbourne, August!, 1884. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.
Consulting Mining Engineer
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA.—No. YI.
(33.) Sm, —Reefs, —The next mine north of the Garden Gully United Com-
pany is the Victory and Pandora, the main shaft in which is the next the
deepest on Bendigo ; but before crossing the boundary line between these
two mines 1 will give one more section in the Garden Gully Company, and
this with a special view to the illustration of the contortion of a bed of
slate under a saddle reef and its likeness in form to the reef depicted in
section No. 16, In this section, No. 17, as usual I have shown the slate in
horizontal lines leaving the quartz as a white space oetween the walls o|
the reef. Under the '• slate ” reef, as I take the liberty of calling it, will
be observed an incipient quartz reef, the continuation of which upwards


passes through the slate reef. On the back of this slate reef is hard sand-
stone, which forms the usual hanging-wall rock of quartz reefs. Now,
with regard to “incipient” reefs, as I call them, these may be looked
on from different points of view in the line of strike of reefs. For
example, at the southern end of the Garden Gully Reef (see section No. 5)
the reef is a mere shadow; on being followed north it increases (see section
No. 6) considerably in size. Suppose, on the contrary, we began mining at
No. 6 section and worked south to No. 5, then miners would tell ns the reef
was dying out or tailing out. Such extremities of reefs as that last men-
tioned I look upon as points where the reefs are growing and extending
themselves longitudinally, and, therefore, I prefer the term " tailing out”
to “ dying out.’’
(34.) At the southern end of the Victory and Pandora Company’s Mine is
found the southern extremity of the lava streak or dyke, and here very appro,
priately we may say the dyke dies out. In the south shaft at 390 feet in
depth there is a small saddle reef with a horse of slate enveloped in or
near to its centre, whilst in the large saddle reef at 630 feet in depth the
quartz in the top and eastern side (hanging-wall) breaks up into tongues or
wedges tailing out into sandstone. The lava dyke cuts clean through the
solid quartz in a very regular manner; further north a short distance a thin
bed of slate passes into the saddle of quartz from the hanging-wall. Still
further north, some 500 feet, there is an enclosure of sandstone thus
(No. 18) in the saddle of quartz which, as well as the quartz, is cut through
by a lava dyke, In the mine last mentioned a cross vein connects the
eastern and western legs beneath the saddle, and from it branch off—
parallel with the strike of the main reef—-veins running to the north. This
is an unusual circumstance ; but this mine is in the “ crown ” formation of
the reefs, from whence the saddles of the reefs dip south and dip north,
and something out of the common might reasonably be looked for within
its area, and so we find a cross vein and the dying out of a lava dyke. In
the next mine north of the Unity—in which No. 18 section is taken —the
most noticeable fact is the faulting or severance of the saddle or top part
of the reef from its leg. But this phenomena is still better illustrated at
about 1000 feet further north in the Kent claim (owned by Mr. J. B.Watson,
another pioneer quartz miner and one of the wealthiest on Bendigo). In
this section (No. 19) the saddle is of a distorted form ; on its western side
is a branch stream from the main lava dyke which runs along the slide or
line of fault, Beneath this main lava and some 50 feet from the lowest
extremity of the quartz saddle lies the western leg underlying to the west.
This leg is slightly faulted and crossed by another branch lava stream.
Above the main lava dyke and over the top of the west leg occur two veins
of quartz which 1 have connected by dotted lines with other two quartz
veins which lie to the west of the main body of quartz or saddle. There
is sufficient reason for so connecting them and indicating that they belong
to a small saddle above, and are in no way to be mixed up with the main
body and its western leg. It might be concluded that the most eastern
vein is the east leg, belonging to the western, shown in the section, but I
do not think this can be the case. The fault here shown amounts to some
50 feet, and its direction upwards (I presume) must have been an angle
of 65°. Had the veins just overlying the top of the western leg been
the eastern leg of this formation, why is it 50 feet away from its saddle
and not attached to it, seeing that it is above the line of fault ? The east-
ern leg might never have existed except as a mere “ track ” and this
condition might have been true as I have previously indicated (prior to
section No. 3) to the simultaneous progression of faulting and reef con-
struction, the motion of faulting being along the line of the eastern leg,
and antagonistic to more than the formation of a track containing only
thinly laminated and striated quartz plates. The eastern ground opposite
O


this western leg should be tested by crosscuts, and no doubt will be. and
these points placed beyond doubt. Certainly the prospects warrant the
expenditure. But there is another interesting subject in this section which
I must direct attention to, and that is the enclosure of what is usually
termed a horse of sandstone in the distorted saddle. This body of sand-
stone is about 40 feet in height and 8 feet in thickness enveloped in quartz,
its length I shall refer to presently. At 50 feet to the south of this section
in this reef the formation is like section No. 20, where the fault and other
circumstances are quite similar in every respect to that shown in section
No. 19, excepting in so far as the sandstone enclosure is concerned. In
section No. 20 the only evidence of the horse is in the wedge, at the top of
the quartz, marked by vertical lines. At 600 feet further north of the
section No. 19 the enclosure of sandstone is quite perfect, but the form of
the horse is different; for instance, it is nearly 30 feet in height and 8 feet
in width. Such large envelopments of sandstone as this—over 600 feet in
length, from 80 to 40 feet in height, and from 3 to 8 feet in thickness entirely
surrounded by solid quartz—form subjects of importance for elucidation in
the study of vein formation. Because of its immense size, however, it
deserves no more attention from those persons disposed to theorise on this
subject than does the microscopic flake of slate enclosed in solid quartz,
examples of which can be got in the “ mullock ” or waste heaps about shafts
at Bendigo, &0., by the ton. Their histories must be identical and their
existence be due to the same cause. Whatever theory will account for the
one must eaually apply to the other. Mv own ideas on this subject have
already been published in The Mining Journal. I think the slates and
sandstones have been changed into quartz, and that these immense horses
and minute scales of sandstone and of slate enveloped by solid quartz are
merely those portions that have resisted the transformation longest, under
more or less unfavourable circumstances to the change. However, it is not
my present object to theorise but rather to supply as many accurate facts
about quartz reefs as may enable others to theorise and use these facts for
their own practical service in vein mining. Your readers’ experiences, Mr.
Editor, will be different to our Australian, and I hope some one or more of
your contributors will in exchange give me and other persons equally inter-
ested in these matters the benefit of their notes and remarks on reefs or
lodes of any kind, situated in other countries. Judging from the space
given in your columns to cognate subjects, I am you see, Mr, Editor,
presuming that you will allot this interesting subject a column or two once
or twice a month if satisfactorily filled. But to my reefs. At, say, 1000
feet to the north of section No. 19 occurs this section (No. 21), in which
will be seen that the main lava dyke splits up into three parts ; one portion
ran up the hanging wall, a second through the centre of the quartz reef to
rejoin the first at the top, and a third poured up a part of the way on the
footwall. Above this section they pursue their way to the surface in three
narrow streams. The small fault in the west leg indicated in section No. 19
is here become considerable.
(35.) Lava Streaks or Dykes,—The lava (basalt) at the top of section No. 21,
where the two streams combine, is 5 feet 7 inches in thickness, and the third
stream just referred to 1 foot 4 inches. Here, again, I most acknowledge
my indebtedness to the before-mentioned surveyor, Mr. Caleb Thomas, who
has constructed for the Mining Department of Victoria most elaborate
plans and sections. The lava dykes on the Garden Gully Reef have, it will
be observed, followed up slides or fault lines, and cut across the slate and
sandstone strata intervening between one saddle reef and another in their
devious rush to find an outlet at the surface for the pent up forces below.
There can be little doubt the dykes have followed old fracture lines in the
anticlinals of the strata, old slide or fault lines, and the walls of reefs;
these places offering the least resistance to the pressure exerted by the
molten lava.


(36.) Strata, —Before proceeding farther with descriptions of the reefs on
the Garden Gully line, I wish to make a few additional remarks about the
strata. I have stated that the Hustler’s reefs occur in an anticlinal of the
strata, and also the Garden Gully Reefs in an anticlinal, but I have not
mentioned that there is only one synclinal or depression of the strata
between these two anticlinals. Such is the case, and it is quite possible
that the saddle reefs on the Hustler’s line may occur in the same beds as
those saddle reefs on the Garden Gully line. Judging from a rough exam-
ination of the outcrops of the strata between these two lines of reefs
which I made, I am inclined to think these reefs do exist in the same beds.
The faults on Bendigo, so far as I have observed them, are not extensive,
and not likely, therefore, to cause much error in a geological section
of this kind. It is possible, too, that reversed saddle-formed reefs
might occur in the synclinal trough; but I fear there is not much hope
of this, as no indication of any such a formed reef, on an extensive scale,
has, so far as I am aware, yet been found on Bendigo. There was a
small reef found in a synclinal fold of the strata, which I observed
on the Sophia Reef (North of Hustler’s) in the early quartz reefing
days, which ran parallel with the corrugations of the strata, and
dipped with the strata to the north. To the east of the Garden
Gully Reef lies the Paddy’s Gully Reef; whether this is the tailing out of the
eastern leg of one of the upper saddle reefs of the Garden Gully
line of reef or the continuation of a synclinal reef I cannot say. I
will, however, give a sketch section (No. 22) of what I have just been
referring to, so as to make more clear my views on this important subject.
This section No. 22 extends for about half a mile from the Hustler’s to the
Garden Gully Reefs. Such a section as this could be most usefully ex-
tended from the Hustler’s east to the Tyson’s Reef, a mile or more, and from
the Garden Gully west across the New Chum and other reefs to the Cape
Clear Reef at the head of Long Gully. It is very many years since that I
recommended the then head of our local mining department (Mr. R. Brough
Smyth) to have this and two other like sections further north made of this
Bendigo Gold Field. I also recommended longitudinal sections of the reefs
should be compiled. After several years elapsed the longitudinal sections of
the reefs and their cross sections were begun, and so far as this work has pro-
gressed it has been well done, and should be most useful to the mining man-
agers and other persons interested. But the geological transverse sections yet
remain to be made, and these will, I believe, throw even more light on the
resources of the Bendigo Reefs than the longitudinal sections and be more
valuable to the mining industry than the latter, as they would unfold more
knowledge of the structure of this grand gold field and of its contained
reefs, and prove an invaluable guide to the miner, capitalist, and prospector.
Should, for example, the Hustler’s and Garden Gully Reefs prove to be in
the same bed or between the same strata then v/herever to the east or to the
west that same bed or those strata occurred in an anticlinal there rich gold-
bearing quartz reefs might be sought for with reasonable expectations of
success. So far as my observations have been conducted, I find that to the
west of Garden Gully there is an anticlinal before the New Chum Reef
anticlinal is reached, and about midway between these two great master
reefs. To the west of the New Chum Reef there is one well-defined anti-
clinal with a saddle-formed reef in it, and very probably another between
it and the Cape Clear Reef at the head of Long Gully. It will thus be seen
what valuable information is withheld from the mining public of this gold
field until the geological transverse sections I have referred to are con-
structed. The present heads of the Mining Department will, no doubt,
soon grant the Bendigo miners this great boon.
Melbourne, August 21,1884. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.
Consulting Mining Engineer.


THE GOLDEN QUARTZ BEEFS OF AUSTKALIA.—No. VII.
(37.) SlE,—Strata.—The accurately surveyed transverse geological sec-
tions of the Bendigo gold field would decide whether or not the quartz
reefs are in a lower Silurian basin of corrugated and fractured strata, the
eastern edge of which lies to the east of the Hustler’s line of reefs, and
the western edge to the west of the New Chum and Victoria line of reefs.
Possibly the whole of the strata with its corrugations and contortions is
dipping continuously to the west, and the beds in which the auriferous
reefs occur, have to the west of the three great lines of reefs, gone down
to great depths far below the surface. To the west very little mining has
been done, and only the shallow ground tried, so that it is quite an open
question what may there exist. The general dip of the strata (I am now
using this word dip in a broad geological sense, what miners call underlie)
may be in the opposite direction to the east, and this view might be sup-
ported by the proximity of the granite range on the west. Or the whole
of the strata on this gold field may form a great corrugated anticlinal—
and not a basin—the apex of which may prove to extend from the Hustler’s
to the New Chum and Victoria Reefs, the strata having a general dip to
the east and to the west of the last-named lines of reef. A careful
geological section would do away with the necessity for such hypothesis in
order to provide some reasonable explanation for the existence of rich and
poor parallel quartz reefs in close proximity to each other. With the
facts at present available we may assume that the three great master reefs
of Bendigo occur in the same beds; that is to say, the same beds that con-
tain rich quartz reefs in the Garden Gully line also contain rich reefs in the
Hustler’s and New Chum and Victoria lines. Believing, as I do, that a
thorough survey and record of the modes of occurrence of quartz reefs on
Bendigo will make clear many points of great importance to the economic
mining of quartz reefs in other gold fields of Australia and in other
countries I am, and have been, for a great many years most anxious that
such information shall be placed in the hands of the Bendigo and
be made available to all those persons interested in the development of
quartz reefs in other parts of the world.
(38.) Form of Reefs.—The pioneer quartz miners of Bendigo will recol-
lect that the out-cropping saddle-formed reefs had the crescent form, and
that they were parallel with the strata, above and below them. To the
miners of the present time operating on reefs at 1000 feet or more below
the surface this statement may appear doubtful, because the reefs now in
work are of the inverted V (a) form. A little thoughtful consideration of
this subject will, I think, however, convince them that such must have
been the case. And that the or fractured reefs must necessarily
exist under the crescent formed reefs. For example, in this figure (No 23)
I have marked on a vertical line nine points at equal distances apart; at
the sixth from the top I have made five similar points to the left and five
to the right, and then sketched lines connecting the several points on the
vertical and horizontal lines, and produced these curved lines to a level


4
with the ninth point. Now, let us assume that the spaces between these
lines represent beds of slate and sandstone, and counting them from
the top we have five beds produced ; but we now find on the bottom line
in the centre only space for one more bed, whereas there are three beds or
layers of slate and sandstone to be crushed into the space of one. This
being impossible, the natural consequence of such corrugation of the strata
was they were fractured and dislocated or faulted. Slide lines were formed
aad portions of the strata thrust upward toward the surface, where the
pressure would be least. Under these circumstances the broken strata
came together in the inverted Y (a) shape. And as the reefs grew in the
form of the crescent where the strata were undisturbed near the surface
so did they assume the shape in accordance with the form of the broken
strata in which they are found at deep levels. There cannot be any doubt
the quartz reefs have in shape very often conformed to that of the bound-
ing strata in which they occur, whatever may have been the mode or
manner of their origin and construction. To do so in very many cases they
have made a hard struggle under evidently disadvantageous circumstances,
and have not succeeded, although the evidence of the attempt is frequently
visible in their margins or walls.
(39.) To make a forecast of the form of the reefs at greater depths
than have yet been attained in Bendigo is a pure piece of speculation; but
if we take the strata for our guide, then it may be assumed that the strata
will gradually get less fractured and the reefs be formed with greater
uniformity in shape and probably of less and less acute forms. But as
I have just said this is a subject of pure speculation as to what forms the
reefs will assume below 4000, 5000, or 6000 feet in depth, and there is not
much instruction to be derived by dwelling on it at further length. My
object in referring to this subject is simply to broach the idea of the
existence of quartz reefs at such depths, and to familiarise the subject to
men’s minds. I have little doubt that undisturbed zones like those in
which the perfect crescent-formed saddle reefs occur, will be found to
overlie disturbed zones in which inverted Y (jJ shaped reefs exist, and that
the latter will overlie in turn other undisturbed zones, and that these zones
of broken and unbroken reefs will merge vertically one into the other more
or less abruptly—the existence of the one kind of zone being a necessary
sequence to those of a different kind over and under lying it.
(40.) Strata, Reefs, and Water.—ln the last two paragraphs I have
curtly dealt with “ strata and forms of reefs,” and shown how much the latter
depends on the former. They are indisolubly combined in every way, and
the sooner miners grasp this view, the better will it be for themselves and
for those persons who invest their capital in mining. It would not be more
absurd for medical students to attempt to study the ramifications and
phenomena of human veins without regard to the human body than for
miners to try and study the veins running through the strata and rocks
without regard to the strata and rocks. They are as inseparably connected,
and there is a closer relationship between these two systems of veins than
generally supposed. In the one circulates blood, in the other mineral and
acid waters. Some few years since in one of my lectures at the Bendigo
School of Mines I ventured to show the similarity between these two
systems somewhat in detail, and stated that so surely as you killed a man
by draining his veins of blood, so would you as certainly kill a quartz reef
by draining it of its mineral waters, and that decomposition of their vital
parts would in each case immediately begin. Miners’ technical language
leads one to think they have been obliged to connect the two ideas. For
example, you will frequently hear miners speak of “bleeding” a reef when
they strike a small vein : and of a still smaller vein (capillaries I call them)
“weeping” when cut. 'l have also heard “jugular” used; but as it was
only on one occasion, and then for my particular benefit, I cannot fairly


inclnde this term yet in a glossary, After the course of lectures just men-
tioned, I happened to visit a mine where evidently some of the miners had
carried away one idea, at any rate, for on my way back to the shaft I passed
a drive where I saw a man’s figure bent over a winze, and heard him calling
to his mate below very distinctly—“ Have’e cut the juglar yet, you.”*, We
were, I believe, both pleased at the remark. Between each of the three
great master reefs of Bendigo it is probable there exist two or more circu-
lating belts of reefs quite independent of one another. The cross, i.e., east
and west, joints or fractures do not, as a rule continue any very great dis-
tance ; sufficient, for example, to connect drainage systems or belts of cir-
culation, and cause an interchange of waters between reefs distant over
300 yards from each other. And there are no cross reefs or veins intersect-
ing the reefs and strata. There are in some cases very indirect connections
between belts of reefs, as is proved by the pumping operations on one reef
gradually reducing or lowering the water in another running parallel to it.
Yet the water in one reef will stand many hundreds of feet higher in that
reef than in another, although only a few hundreds of feet of strata
separates them from one another. Some time since Mr. Lansell cut a drain-
age belt in an eastern cross-cut from his deep shaft on the New Chum line
of reef, and the pressure of water was so great as to flood the whole of the
mines on this reef for a considerable distance. A dam was built in this
cross-cut and the water was kept back—this not being an isolated case,
although the effects are rarely so disastrous as in this example. Cross-cuts
carried out far to the east or west of any of the deep shafts are very likely
to cut water in considerable volume, and under great pressure.
(41.) Fossils. —Although I never found any graptolites on the Garden
Gully Reef, I did find graptolites on the (didymographens) fruticosus in
the mullock or waste heaps of the Paddy’s Gully Reef in its vicinity. I
have also found these same kind of graptolites on the Hustler’s Reef ex-
tension to the north, and I now remember finding them on the Specimen
Hill, Eagle Reef, which is believed to be the continuation of the Garden
Gully Reef, three miles to the north of the Garden Gully Company’s Mine
In each case I found the fossils in the waste heaps of the old shafts first
sunk on the reefs. Below the water level it is rarely that such fossils are
ever found. Above that level the black slate beds in which they commonly
occur are more or less decomposed, even in some cases to a greyish white
or pipe-clay colour, in which the graptolites can only be seen by placing
them in certain favourable lights, when they are visible through their
silvery micaceous reflection. In the lesser decomposed black slates they
usually retain their black colour longer than the' clay slate, and, con-
sequently, are easily discovered through the strong contrast between them
and the lighter background of the clay slates.
(42.) Minerals.—The richest deposits of gold have been found to occur
in conjunction with soft black carbonaceous slates in this reef. Iron
pyrites occurs in the slate bounding rocks and in the quartz. The pyrites
saved by the Garden Gully Company has yielded from 2 up to 6 ounces
and more per ton. They usually treat about 400 tons of pyrites per annum.
Calcite also occurs in this reef and galena, but not in such quantities as
pyrites (iron and arsenical) or zinc blende. Pyrites is the most abundant
mineral in the reef, and of it they obtain on an average about 1 ton
from 80 tons of quartz crushed. Galena may be seen imbedded in arsenical
pyrites as well as gold. Gold is also visible in association with the pyrites,
zinc blende and galena. In the legs the quartz is laminated by black
polished (slickenside) carbonaceous clay slate in very many places. In the
lamin* occur arsenical pyrites, zinc blende, gold and rarely acriular crystals
of stibnite. 'These mineral and gold are also found scattered in patches
through the solid stone and in small cavities. Thin veins of calcite some-
times traverses the laminse and the quartz of the reef, these thin veins being
often about | inch in thickness. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.i®
Melbourne, August 28,1884. Consulting Mining Engineer,


THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OP AUSTRALIA.—No. VIII.
(43.) Sir, —Form of Reefs.—The intimate connection between the shapes
of reefs and the strata can be farther illustrated if your readers will take
a piece of white notepaper and cat with a penknife a line in the form of a
saddle-reef. Then take the two pieces place them together (in their
original positions) on a dark wooden table, or any other dark object with a
smooth surface, keep the top piece fixed, and slightly withdraw from it the
lower piece, when it will be observed that the dark space between the two
pieces of paper presents the facsimile of a saddle-formed reef. If the right
side or cat is flatter, or underlies faster than the left, then the leg on that
side will be thicker and longer than the opposite one, or vice versa. On the
Hustler’s and Garden Gully the anticlinals in the strata in certain places
which I have mentioned have a tendency to lean over to the west, and,
where not modified by faults or slides, the eastern (or flat) legs are the most
persistent and important. Take 2 or 3 inches in thickness of thin paper
and corrugate it closely the paper sheets will be found to lie closest together
just above and below a horizontal line drawn through the centre of the
corrugations, and showing that there exists the greatest pressure, and so it
is for the most part in the strata. The strata, as I have previously men-
tioned, in this gold field consists of alternating beds of slate and sandstone,
composition of which differ very much. The slate consists mainly of minute
particles of silica (quartz), mica, with clay (alumina), oxide of iron,magnesia,
soda, and lime, and the sandstone, of coarse, and fine grains of quartz, mica,
and more or less clay. Not only do these beds of sandstone and slate differ
much in composition from each other, but each particular bed of sandstone
and slate differs from the next above or below it. And not only do beds of
sandstone differ from each other, but each sandstone bed differs in consti-
tution within itself, or, in other words, no two parts of’any stratum are con-
stituted precisely alike. The sand grains vary in coarseness or fineness, and
the amount of clay increases or decreases. Bach particular bed is con-
stantly increasing or decreasing in thickness, and this circumstance also has
to be taken into consideration when we contemplate the corrugation of un-
equal strata and its results. If unequal substances are bent the effects will
be unequal, some will yield to the force, the atoms of which they are formed
changing position, the flat atoms arranging themselves in accordance with
the carves of the strata, whilst other substances not being formed of such
accommodating constituents will crack across the apex or top of the bend
as often as the strain overpowers its resistance, and others again will
splinter, split, or divide lengthways along the bedding planes.® The strain
in the strata has been greatest in the anticlinal and synclinals, and in the
former they most frequently yielded, because there the least resistance ex-
isted in consequence of the proximity of the overlying surface or atmos-
phere. Now, where the pressure was resisted, such as in the horizontal
centres of corrugations, and in synclinals we rarely find quartz reefs unless
accompanied by fracture lines or dislocations. As the strata differ in con-
stitution and thickness, they would when cooling contract unequally, and in
so doing separate more or less from each other in places in accordance with
the amount of diversity between them. The effect of contraction of the
corrugated strata in the anticlinals is illustrated by the paper cut in the
form of a saddle-reef, before referred to, but these arched parting spaces
between the strata were also partly due to corrugation and unequal
slipping of strata over or under one another, as manifested in striated faces,
1 have just been directing attention to the effects of contraction in the
thicknesses of strata ; but by far the greatest results from contraction of
the strata would be manifested in the vertical and horizontal lengths of the
sandstones and slates. Here in place of a few feet in thickness we have
thousands of feet in continuation of the strata to yield to the same cop-”


tracting influences. The effects, however, in these thousands of feet are
split up or divided by the occurrence of natural joints or divisions in the
strata. These joints may be observed in the walls of reefs, in open cuttings
on reef, or stockwerk veins, dividing up the sandstones and slates into large
or small blocks. The joints running nearly horizontal have a slight dip
usual in the same direction as that of the reef, and may be accepted as a
hint to the dip of the reef where the exploration is not extensive. As the
nearly vertical joints generally make about the same angles with the hori-
zontal ones in sandstone, where the latter joint lines are absent, these give
the hint nearly as well. The same remarks apply to slate, but the angles
made by the joints in slate more nearly approach those of the rhomboid than
those of sandstone, which are more rectangular. The joints in the sand-
stones are larger than those in the slates, and they often yield large quan-
tities of water, sometimes forced with considerable pressure into cross cuts,
drives, and shafts.
(44.) Branch Veins. —These joint lines appear to have originated in many
cases the branching quartz veins which make off from reefs into one or both
walls. The horizontal joints and branch veins have similar dips to the
north or south as have the reefs, showing a general uniformity in the dips
of the strata, reefs, and branch veins, and that the reefs and veins have
formed in accordance with those laws of Nature which govern the changes
that take place in strata, The vertical joints and branch veins usually
indicate the dip of the reefs or shoots of quartz ; in the reverse way thus,
if the vertical branch vein underlies south then the shoot of quartz in the
reef dips north or vice versa. Such phenomena as I have just described
relates to reef and strata that have not been fractured or much distorted. It
is not to be expected that such uniformity will be found to reign where the
strata have been broken and dislocated; in these disturbed regions there
appears to be an absence of law in the formation of reefs and veins ; but
appearances are deceptive and a patient investigation will prove that what
at first appeared to be a region of confusion can really be reconciled into
law and order.
(45.) Shoots of Quartz, of Gold Rolls, and Striations.—The direction of a
shoot is usually spoken of as the dip of the reef to the north or the south in
the line of the strike. As the shoot of gold generally conforms with the
shoot of quartz, it is very desirable that every indication in the strata, or in
the reefs, or branch veins that will aid the miner in quickly deciding in what
direction the latter dip should be known. Such knowledge will greatly aid
the economic management of mining operations, and conduce to the success-
ful or remunerative outlay of capital in mines. I have observed that if the
reef distinctly increases or decreases in width and abruptly that the direc-
tion of this “ roll,” or bench, as it dips to the north or south conforms to
the dip of the shoot of quartz. I have also noticed that the shoot of quartz
is invariably at nearly right angles to the lines of striation in a reef.
These striated lines may be observed in the walls of reefs or in the
laminations of reefs. In the latter case it is not uncommon to find the
quartz divided over considerable areas into thin laminae—often not
thicker than a sheet of blotting paper—and the grooved lines are per-
fectly parallel and exquisitely planed, but though smooth they are not
polished. Bach of the three great master lodes or reefs of the Bendigo
gold field contain the striated faces, and not in one or two places only, but
in nearly every portion of them. In certain parts of each reef they are
more noticeable or more strongly marked than in others ; but in very nearly
every part they are to be found if looked for by anyone accustomed to such
observations underground. Although I have only just mentioned the three
great reefs as containing them, striated faces are by no means confined to
these reefs on Bendigo, for I have found them equally well marked in out-
side or parallel reefs. But lam confining my remarks to these great lodes


oh Bendigo as far as possible. On other gold fields striated faces also
occur, and I shall no doubt often refer to them again. In a mine on the
northern extension of the Hustler’s line of reef there occurs a reef which
for a considerable length was formed of corrugated laminated quartz
having much the character of sheets of corrugated iron laid one upon
another, groove in groove, only the material being different. The quartz
separated or divided with the laminae, but in small corrugated pieces,
just as very brittle corrugated iron might be supposed to do. The surfaces
of the corrugations of quartz were striated, and the corrugations were
nearly as well defined as those in the ordinary sheets of iron, and of about
the same size. These corrugations or flutirgs had an underlie to the south,
and the dips of the shoots of quartz, where the reef increased in thickness,
was northerly at nearly right angles to the flutings. I might mention this
reef was named the Williamson’s, and was situated in one of the claims
owned by the Iron Bark Quartz Mining Company—the first large public
company on Bendigo—and of which I was the general manager. In
assisting my brother, who was the first mining surveyor on Bendi&o, I had
opportunities of visiting and examining all the claims on the gold field, so
that my early experiences of mining (at shallow depths) the auriferous
reefs on this gold field were unusually extensive. I did not profit as much
as I should have done with my opportunities; but I was young, quartz
mining was younger, the excitement of gold finding and spending was
rife, study was at a discount. I was supposed to have a slate loose because
I chose to bestow a good bit of time in examining the mullock or waste
heaps for fossils and minerals. In those times quartz reefs were said by
the great majority not to be worth working below the water level, or (say)
from 30 or 40 feet in the gullies to 150 feet below the surface of the hills ;
and, in fact, many claims were abandoned then which have since yielded
from f ton and upwards of gold from below the water level/ What are
and have been the feelings of these ciaimholders possessing so little faith
in the permanence of their reefs or the persistence of them in depth
can be better imagined than described. Nearly all those men that did
stick to their rich claims of the good old times, through bad and good
repute, have become wealthy, and 1 count many friends amongst them,
I am glad to say ; but I have no less friendship for the unfortunate
or less lucky, one of whom, once very rich, now poor, I had the nleasure of
meeting this day. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.,
Melbourne, September 4, 1884. Consulting Mining Engineer.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA—No, IX.
(46 ) Sir, —Since forwarding my last contribution on the above subject the
Garden Gully United Quartz Mining Company has declared a dividend (the
246th) of Is. per share. The slides or faults in the Garden Gully reefs con-
form in their dip north with that of the saddles of the reefs, and the saddles
of the reefs, whether broken or of the true crescent form, with the dip of
the corrugation of the strata in which they exist: and as I have previously
stated, the branch veins run parallel with the north dipping, nearly hori-
zontal joints in the strata or parallel with the nearly vertical joints, in both
of which kinds of joints these branch veins appear to have formed. Here,
then, there is more uniformity or law and order in the structure of these
reefs and veins than the disciples of the “ Where it is there it is ” school are
willing to admit the existence of in the lodes and veins traversing the
strata or rocks beneath the surface of the earth. Law and order may pre-
vail in every other part of the universe , but these men draw the line at
lodes and veins. 'Lodes and veins exist in disorder, and chance reigns in
them supreme, these disciples would have us believe, yet they recognise the


great Creator, “ who saw everything that he had made, and behold it was
very good,”
(47.) Reefs and Veins.-At the north end of the Garden Gaily reef, in a cross
cut and winze at nearly 1000 feet in depth, occur veins of which I give the
following instructive section (No. 24), which illustrates how quartz veins
have formed in a broken anticlinal of the strata, which consisted of hard
dark blue slate. I might ask how did these quartz veins, formed like a
series of doable wedges, manage to insinuate themselves in this manner
between the slate, and also supposing, like Topsy, they grew there, might
they not in the fulness of time have formed one extended inverted V
(A saddle reef), with proportional east and west legs to the size of the
saddle 1 But Ido not ask these questions, I merely suggest them, I will,
however, remark that there is exhibited in these veins a marked degree of
uniformity in their mode of occurrence, which chimes in appropriately with
what I have said at the beginning of this chapter. These five veins of quartz
are isolated from each other by hard blue slate, not unlike roofing slate,
which it is well known water cannot readily penetrate, nor could there be
any other water connection between them than that due to the limited “ sap ”
water in the rock, excepting through the thin joints, and possibly the break
in the apex of the strata. Under thesecircumstances the five isolated veins
in hard rock cannot be said to exist under those very congenial conditions
requisite for rapid growth or extension. Had their career not been cut
short by man they might have had to wait a long time before a convenient
earth tremor or quake would grant them additional space, or a fracture or
slide to afford them improved water connection with their more favourably
situated neighbours.
(48.) Tasmania to the south of ns has been for the last six or more months
in a constant state of tremor and shake. The inhabitants of that favoured
region do not appear to appreciate the full benefits; such a gentle shaking
up of the rocks of their island may be conferring on the growing gold and
tin lodes imprisoned in hard uncongenial rocks far below the surface. Such
words may be read with a smile, yet I dare to say that no one will deny
that earthquakes, big or small, serve some good purposes in the operations
of Nature. I conceive that all quakes, big and small, are necessary (evils
if you so like to call them) adjuncts to the production of metallic veins in
abundance. No doubt they occur in their proper seasons, and our time
has not yet arrived on the mainland of Australia for more than an occasional
tremor. But in the past all East and South-Eastern Australia must have
been shaken up very severely at more than one period, as our trap and basalt
rocks of different ages indicate beyond doubt. Tasmania, too, has been thus
patronised in the past, and is now receiving more than her fair share of
earthquake attentions.
(49.) Proceeding still farther north on the Garden Gully line of reef we
arrive at a point where the name of the reef changes, and becomes known


as the Perseverance and then the Windmill Hill. The Koch’s Pioneer Com-
pany is situated where the overlap of the Perseverance and Garden Gaily
takes place. This company possesses a crashing plant which comprised
96 stamp heads, 70 of which are for the most engaged in crushing for the
public. The main shaft in this mine has attained 1450 feet in depth, but
the Garden Gully reefs about here have not been prolific of gold. 'At the
present time the principal operations are confined to works at shallow depths.
The lava dyke, however, is proved to continue to the greatest depths, and in
certain parts I have examined the quartz in the reef quite close to where the
lava has cut through it, and the quartz certainly presented the appearance
of an approach to vitrification. One of my old students spent 12 months
at this mine obtaining practical mining experience under the then manager,
Mr, J. A. Lewis. At my request the former gave me a description of the
character of the reefs in this mine, obtained from his own observations and
notes, and I now quote a few of his (Mr. Marco Guerin’s, C. and M.E.)
remarks, and give his illustration. This reef (Fig. No. 25) occurs at about
350 feet below the surface. As shown in the diagram, one leg, the western,
runs approximately parallel to the stratification of the country, while the
other cuts across it, the footwall showing the ends of the strata in a series
of roughly defined steps, which contrast rather markedly with the more
regular footwall of the western leg. . . . All saddle-formed reefs agree
in the regularity of their hanging walls, and in the increasing regularity
and parallelism, as a rule, of their laminations as we sink from the “cap”
upon either leg. In the “ cap ”or saddle the dark quartz and slaty laminse
are nearly as irregular as the veins in marble, while in the legs they run
parallel to the regular hanging wall. There is considerable discrepancy as
to magnitude between the two legs of a saddle-formed reef, as shown in the
figure. The west leg is better developed than the eastern, which pinches
out pretty rapidly. The legs occasionally vary greatly as to the value of
their gold contents. . . . The “ cap ”of a saddle-formed reef usually has
a well-defined dip; one in ten is approximately that of the Garden Gully
reef in the northern part of its course.
(50.) From what I have stated and from the diagrams it must be evident that
as we proceed further north the saddle-formed reefs have been left behind
so far as actual work in them is concerned. The continuations of them
have no doubt with their northerly dip gone down in that direction to vast
depths. Their existence downwards will in a great measure, however,
depend on the continuance in that direction of the same congenial strata
as those with which they were associated in the rich mines to the south,
which I have already more or less described. Should the beds of black
slate thin out or gradually change into gritty slate, and then into coarse-
grained sandstone, and this latter rock be found to generally prevail, then
probably the reefs will be found to have undergone a change also into large
barren reefs, or into what are usually termed irregular vein formations.
It is just as possible, however, that the black slate beds and general char-
acter of the whole of the strata might improve in those qualities requisite
for the production of auriferous reefs.
(61.) In our progress north we pass from one zone of strata into another as
each one successively dips below the surface. Between the Windmill Hill
and the Garden Gully reefs proper there exists no continuous link of quartz
reef connection. What mining has been done is mostly on what is called
the Perseverance reef, which is off the true line to the west of the Garden
Gully reef, yet it must be included in this anticlinal formation. Several
private mines hereabouts have yielded a considerable quantity of gold : but
no mining works have so far been carried out on an extensive scale, and
it is only when the top of the Windmill Hill is reached that we appear once
more to have got again into an auriferous zone of a magnitude worthy of
place and notice on this great line of quartz reefs.


(52.) The Windmill Hill presents the usual bold declivity to the south as
compared with its fall to the north, which is characteristic of the whole of
the prominent hills on each line of reef, as is illustrated in the first diagram
supplied in connection with these notes of mine on quartz reefs. In the
pioneer times on this hill Scotchmen were prominent claimholders, and all
of them and men of other nationalities who were interested in claims on
the northern slope of this hill made their fortunes, or to use diggers’ phrase-
ol°gy their “piles.’ The miners of Windmill Hill could count among them
some of the biggest men on Bendigo, and their hearts were in full propor-
tion to their bodies. They held a central position as regards the quartz
mines of Bendigo, and they were worthy of the pivot. From their eleva-
tion on this high ground they could see the greater part of this gold field
spread out around them. At first the scene was a monotonous one of tree
tops, like a dark sea surrounding them on all sides, but gradually that
forest was swept off the land for 20 miles around, to supply the ever-
increasing demands of householders and mines and miners. At the present
time there are no less than 260 steam engines, of 6426 horse power,
engaged in connection with mining alone, and 1391 stamp-heads reduce the
bodies and limbs of the quartz reefs rapidly to dust. The contour of the
whole of the country is laid too bare to the gaze of man and the blaze of
the sun. As all vegetation was swept away the dust fiend took almost daily
possession of the land, and enveloped the land and the inhabitants in its
folds. The sun on a clear day would be obscured, and those persons whose
occupation necessitated their moving around the gold field must have had
indelibly fixed in their memories the peculiar sensations of being engulfed
in a dense and mighty whirling pillar of coffee-coloured dust, Ido not
think it will require a very great stretch of the imagination to understand
the feelings of a clean white man, got up in light attire suitable for a hot
summers day, after he has emerged into broad daylight from the dusty
embraces of one of these foul monsters, a dry mud besmirched choking
wretch, with eyes full, ears full, nostrils full, hair and beard, and mous-
tache, and mouth, and throat and pockets, &c,, full of dust. Diggers are
not averse to dust of the right sort, but under these circumstances a lone
man may survey the visible portion of himself through grit tear-filled eyes
amidst impulsive and perhaps harsh language, with some excuse. The boot
is on the other leg, and he might choke with laughter, could he open his
eyes for a minutes inspection of a mate’s begrimed face. The hot north
wind brick fielders and the whirlwinds of dust are not now nearly so bad
as they were. The field is nearly surrounded by cultivated land, and the
city of Sandhurst streets are lined with scores of miles of beautiful trees
and the dust storms are somewhat modified ; but in many parts of the
goldfield the gullies or valleys are being rapidly filled up by immense
mounds of quartz tailings, and on a windy day the sand from these is
blown in clouds across the country. All such tailings heaps should be run
into the excavations made in the mines below the surface, where it makes
the best of “ filling,” and is prevented from becoming a nuisance to the
inhabitants, and from covering up valuable land. When this is done there
will not be any need to christen the city of Sandhurst the citv of “ Sand-
„ Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.,
Melbourne, September 18, 1884. Consulting Mining Engineer.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ BEEPS OP AUSTRALIA,—No. X.
(53.) Sib,— Garden Gully Beef, Windmill Hill Continuation.—The top of
this hill consisted for the most part of a network of quartz veins, with large


blocks of quartz interspersed. The richest gold-bearing stone was picked
out and crushed with a hand-dolly, two miners obtaining for a period
15 ounces of gold in this way per week, and thus enabling their mates to
carry on prospecting. The claim on the top of the hill was opened to the
surface for 40 feet in width, 180 feet in length, to a depth of 30 feet; the
whole of the stuff extracted yielded an average of 1 ounce of gold to the
ton. But below this—say, from 50 feet to 190 feet in depth—the width of
crushing stuff taken was 70 feet, and id yielded an average of
25 dwts. per ton. But this was by no means the richest claim in the early
days on this hill; on the contrary, it was considered rather a poor claim.
One claim yielded nearly 500 ounces of gold to a ton, and 54 tons gave an
average yield of 75 ounces to the ton. Other claims yielded from 40 to 50
ounce stone, and others from 20 to 40 ounces. All these claims have long
since been absorbed into public companies, and many of them have from
time to time yielded fair returns. The Windmill Hill continuation of reefs
to the north merges into the Johnson’s Beef. This latter name obtains from
the foot of the Windmill Hill northwards, over the crown of the next hill.
The gully running between the two hills is named California Gully, and it
contained very rich alluvial deposits. The original claimholders Johnson,
Early, Thorpe, Chappie, Murdoch, &c„ raised large quantities of quartz that
yielded rich returns of gold. I remember glancing over some of their rich
heaps of quartz. It was judicious to look, but not to touch; not that the
owners objected, but when so much gold was visible a natural feeling kept
one from handling any of the specimens. Some of the quartz yielded up to
150 ounces to the ton, and the ground was opened out in places 50 feet in
width, where quartz spurs occurred. Fig. 26 shows the mode of occurrence
of the Johnson’s Reef in the next claim north of Johnson’s. It begins at
120 feet in depth and runs down to 340 feet. At about 150 feet in depth a
slide cuts through the reef and faults it, or throws it 60 feet from its con-
tinuation, which underlies west like to the prevailing direction of the upper
portion of the reef. The reef below this fault runs down west for 33 feet,
when it is again cut off by another slide. Both this and the upper slide are
accompanied by a lava dyke. This fault, like the top one, is 60 feet from
cue part of the broken reef to the other. The slide, however, is in this case
more vertical, and it will consequently join the other one and thus form a
wedge pointing to the surface in a western direction. It will be observed
that frequently slides which occur not far away from one another converge


Slaty matter, silicate of alumina
Carbon
Metallic iron
Oxygen, moisture, loss
ioo-oo
upwards—that is, the wedge formed by them in the strata has its apex
pointing towards the surface, and the enclosed reef and strata are faulted
or moved from their original situations in the direction of the apex of the
wecige, s whether up or down. The thick end of the wedge in this case is
downwards, and is capable of receiving pressure from a considerable area,
which will have a tendency to force the wedge upwards towards
the surface. It is quite evident that here too, as wellC as in other
places on the Garden Gully line of reef previously referred to, the
throw has been an upward one. The reef depicted in No. 26 is divided or
faulted in three parts—the top portion is known as No. 1 reef, the next
below and between the two slides as No. 2 reef, and the next deeper as No. 3
reef. The shallow part of the No. 1 reef only yielded about 10 dwts. to the
ton, but the deeper part yielded as much as 20 ounces of gold per ton, and
it was rich in iron pyrites and galena. In the upper portion of the reef
these minerals had been decomposed, and were absent. The cavities in the
quartz previously occupied by them were filled with ferruginous clay, and
the quartz was much stained by the oxides of iron, a brown or light brown
colour. The No, 2 reef was formed of white quartz, containing large quan-
ties of iron pyrites and galena, and its average produce of gold was 6 ounces
to the ton. The quartz of the No. 3 reef was very similar in character to
that in No. 2, but the yield was only 2 ounces per ton. Between the bottom
of No. 1 reef and the bottom of No. 2 is a dislocated spur, in the vicinity of
which the strata were very much disturbed and twisted.
(54.) It will be noticed that this occurs in almost a direct line with the
lower slide, which, probably, materially aided in the distortion of the strata
and the subsequent growth of the quartz spurs. This broken and twisted
spur yielded some of the richest quartz ever found on Bendigo. The upper
portion or first limb yielded only 6 dwts. per ton, and the second portion
20 ounces per ton, and ton yielded 300 ounces of gold. As usual, the rich
quartz contained iron pyrites and galena. The two slides hitherto men-
tioned underlie to the east, but there is a third, and that makes off from
the second just above where the top of the No. 3 reef begins. It underlies
west parallel with the No. 3 reef, and is accompanied by a lava dyke, as are
the other slides. The average thickness of No. 1 reef was 1 foot, of No. 2
2 feet, and of No. 3 about 3 feet.
(65.) The Johnson’s Reef Gold Mines Company holds a large area of
ground, the result of purchase from original claimholders. This mine has
paid over £130,000 in dividends, and other adjoining companies have paid
£70,000 to £45,000, and smaller sums, but at the present time the results
about here, and for some distance to the north, are small. A considerable
amount of sinking and cross-cutting and driving is going on in search of
more golden quartz. The anticlinal in the strata further north is well
marked, but in the shallower ground sandstone is the predominant rock,
and the reefs are small and poor, and the country is what miners term
“ hungry” looking—hard dark grey sandstone. The dip of the shoots still
continue north, at a small angle from the horizontal. It will no doubt be
interesting to know of what constituents lower Silurian slate on the Vic-
torian gold fields consists. The following is the analysis of a black slate
casing of a reef;—
This casing was got from a reef at Stawell, and the following sample came
from Sandhurst or Bendigo. This slate was dense in texture, of a dark blue


colour, and was traversed by a thin
vein of quartz containing auriferous
pyrites:—
Water
Silica
Alumina
Protoxide of iron
Lime
Magnesia
1-24
Alkalies by loss
10000
(56.) The examinations of the water from the reefs in the lower Silurian
rocks proves it to be highly charged with saline matters—chlorides of sodium
and magnesium, aud sulphates of soda and magnesia preponderating, while
the spring waters flowing from the same age rocks at a distance from the
quartz reefs, as a rule, contain only small quantities of these salts, and
large quantities of the carbonates of iron, lime, and magnesia.
(57.) As we go on north the reef bears the name of the Eagle or Speci-
men Hill. Here this line (Garden Gully) was very rich, and in all proba-
bility is still at considerable depths. The original claimholders did
remarkably well for a long distance north of Specimen Hill. The anti-
clinal of the strata on the hill was, and is, well defined as was the saddle-
formed reef, although it was not so strong as some of those at the centre
and southern end of the field. The saddle being only 1 foot 6 inches in
thickness at a point about 160 yards north of the old Eagle Mining Com-
pany’s shaft. The reef was opened in September, 1853, and was worked
by parties of miners holding small claims varying from 12 feet to 40 feet
in length along the line of reef. In the latter part of 1859 McNair, Cald-
well and Co., who held two of the original claims on the top of the hill
purchased all the adjoining claims and prior to this period the reefs had
yielded 12,500 ounces of gold, then other 12,000 ounces were obtained,
making 24,500 ounces. I have no particulars of their output of gold
during the last ten years, during which time they have, however, been pro-
specting the deep ground. Sketch section No. 27 shows the saddle reef or
formation-pf the Specimen Hill Reef, with branching spurs from the
western to the eastern leg. It also shows a spur dropping into the eastern
leg through its hanging wall. The eastern reef underlying'east is the
Eagle Reef, and it is apparently the continuation of a large saddle-formed
reef which overlapped the Specimen Reef. The other veins underlying
west were small, but in places rich. A cross-cut put out east from the
Eagle Reef cut two parallel veins close together, which will have probably
in tercepted these western underlying spurs should they continue downwards.
Where the spurs joined the Specimen Reef they greatly increased its
thickness, but where this junction did not take place no change in the rich-
ness of the reef was perceptible. As much as 24 ounces of gold have been
taken out of a small windlass bucket of quartz taken from a junction of
spur and reef, and at one time even double this amount was got. At one
place in the cap or saddle of the reef 1 pound weight of gold was taken
from a bucket of picked stuff, and the balance crushed in a horse stamping
machine of three stamp-heads crushing dry yielded ounces of gold to
the ton. This was in October, 1854.
(58.) Where the spurs joined the West Specimen Hill reef down to 50
feet on the underlie the yield of gold ran up to 40 ounces to the ton.
Some of these spurs did not pass through the hanging-wall, but merely
abutted on to it. Below this depth the character of this reef changed; it
oecame broken up and poor. A lava dyke cut through the East Specimen
Hill reef, and was in places 3 feet in thickness. The shallower portion of
the eastern leg yielded an average of 17 ounces to the ton, and it was


2£ feet in width. Below the lava dyke it yielded 1 ounce to the ton, and
then reduced to 18 inches in width and 7 pennyweights to the ton, and
gradually the reef thinned to from 3 to 4 inches in width, carrying with it,
however, a layer of black carbonaceous slate, which contained a very large
quantity of cubical iron pyrites.
(59.) The Eagle reef averaged 2 feet in width down to 516 feet in depth
on the underlie. To the west of the Specimen Hill reef no quartz reefs
showed on the surface for some 80 yards. In the waste heaps round the
old shafts, I found many very perfect specimens containing graptolites
(didymograpsus) fruticosus, the most common graptolite found in the
Bendigo slates (either black slates or decomposing, and, therefore, lighter
coloured). These black slates I found would precipitate gold from its solu-
tion, and this property is no doubt partly due to the graptolites so com-
monly found in them. I regard graptolite-bearing slates near to or
adjoining a quartz reef as a good indication of its proving auriferous.
Melbourne November 18, 1884. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OF AUSTRALIA—No. XI.
(60.) Sib,— Garden Gully Line of Reef, Specimen Hill, Eaglehawk.—
During a visit to the Eagle Company’s Mine, on this hill, on September 19,
1867, 1 made a sketch in my note-book of the reef, as it occurred in the top
of the stope, at 170 feet in depth on the underlie, showing enclosures of
slate in the reef. The quartz reef (Eagle) underlies east 4 feet 6 inches in
6 feet, and was 4 feet in width at the thickest part embraced in my sketch,
of which Fig, 28 is a fae simile. It takes in about 10 feet in height of the
Fig. 28.
reef. The footwall marginal line of the reef consisted of what our miners
call “ironstone casingi.e., slate altered into a clayey ironstone by fer-
ruginous water saturating it, which water had percolated from the surface
through the quartz reef, absorbing iron from the decomposing pyrites during
its passage to the water level in the reef. The parallel lines further into
the footwall represent layers of slightly different coloured slates that run
parallel to the casing. The ironstone casing of the banging wall is also
formed in the same manner. It varied from 4 inches in thickness at the


top of the sketch to 3 inches in the lower portion ; overlying it were two
layers of slate, their bedding planes lying parallel with the casing, and they
were each 3 inches in width. Then came sandstone, which usually forms
the permanent hanging wall of reefs on this Bendigo gold field. The lines
at nearly right angles to the walls of the reef indicate the direction in which
the quartz divides into blocks when it shrinks through the water level fall-
ing. These horizontal lines, and those—in a lesser degree—at nearly right
angles to them, are commonly more or less filled with clay or with deposits
of limonite (brown iron ore).
(61.) Some of these joints in the upper parts of many reefs contain this
ore 1 inch or more in thickness, which form a coating on the blocks of
quartz, to which it adheres very strongly. The reduction of the water level
in reefs above mentioned is due to the water flowing in the creeks and
gulleys cutting deeper into their beds (like water saws), and thus draining
the reefs, gradually but persistently, to greater depth, and causing the
quartz to slowly dry and divide whilst shrinking into more or less rectangular
blocks of varying sizes. Many quartz reefs, through the phenomenon just
described, present near the surface a remarkable resemblance to an arti-
ficially built stone wall, the clay and ironstone representing mortar. The
stones obtained from a reef of this description require to be broken in
order to discover whether they are or are not auriferous. When such stones
are fractured an observer can trace very frequently the evidence of the
original banded or laminated character of the reef by means of the cavities
left through the decomposition and washing out of the clay slates and sul-
phides that once lodged therein, when this portion of the reef existed
beneath the water level in the reef. I use this word existed advisedly, for,
as I have probably said before, I can only look on those portions of reefs,
or lodes, or veins that lie above the naturally permanent level of water in
them, as dead, decomposing, and undergoing permanent destruction. But
to return to my section, No. 28, it was observed that the reef was richest
where the slate accompanied it along the stope, at that time open for 100
feet in length. With regard to the two large enclosures of slate in the reef
and on its footwall side, I paid particular attention to the direction of the
bedding planes in them, and found them to be almost identical with those
of the bedding planes of the main body of slate in the footwall. You will
observe my original sketch was made 17 years since, and I have examined
innumerable specimens and reefs since then, containing enclosures of slate,
and I have invariably found the enclosed slate had bedding planes parallel
with the nearest wall. A good specimen from a reef should have attached
to it a portion of at least one wall. The bedding planes are most perceptible
and distinct in slate from above the water level as that from below is
pretty much all one colour, and the cleavage lines are deceptive. Care in
making such observations must also be taken that the ferruginous water
stains spreading out from the reef, above the water level in beautiful
parallelism, are not mistaken for bedding planes, which to the superficial
observer they so strongly resemble, as to apparently render careful exa-
mination unnecessary. The lines shown in the footwall of the reef (Fig. 28)
and in the enclosed pieces of slate in the reef represent the bedding planes
of the slate.
(62.) The last report from the Specimen Hill United Mine reports opera-
tions being carried on at several levels down to the 520 feet crosscut, and
that during the past fortnight 90 tons of quartz have been crushed for a
yield of 228 ounces 8 dwts. of gold, and they declared a dividend of
£IOOO. Proceeding still further north on this line of reef up to the Argus
Company’s mine a considerable quantity of gold has been raised from time
to time. The shareholders in the latter mine received in dividends some
14 years since more than the capital of the company—£2o,ooo—on a very
small amount called up. Just after the 31st dividend was declared at the
D


beginning of the month of Jane, 1870, a large specimen or nugget of gold
was discovered at 320 feet in depth, which weighed in the gross 288 ounces
of which 108 ounces consisted of quartz, pyrites, and a little galena, and
the balance, or 180 ounces was gold. The line of reef about here is famed
for yielding rich specimens ; but this is the biggest—6 inches by 4 inches,
and the most valuable yet found. Many nuggets, however, larger than this
one have been found at considerable depths in quartz reefs in Victoria
from time to time, which I shall probably refer to in their proper places in
future remarks on quartz reefs in other gold fields. Sufficient nuggets have
thus been found to render it unnecessary that anyone should further waste
time and labour over theories for the formation of large gold nuggets in
alluvial deposits. The line of reef as it runs north of the Argus merges
into the Clarence, also rich, and then into the Moon Reef, which runs away
n orth for a long distance, mine after mine, some of which have given fair
yields of gold, but none of them exceptionally rich. The quartz occurs in
large reefs about 60 feet wide and less. At length I have reached the
northern extremity of this greatline of reef—so far as developed to any
noticeable extent at the present time. Reefs have been, and are, in work
for a long distance beyond, and apparently in the line of this great reef,
but they are not continuous or of sufficient importance to be worthy of
notice now. I have given a few descriptive notes of the most important
mines on this reef for a length of about seven miles, throughout the whole
of which distance auriferous reefs have been worked with only two breaks
or spots of very short lengths, which have not yet been proved gold bearing.
This may probably be explained by these blanks lying just under the top for-
mations of quartz, and in the thinning out of the next, and not being deep
enough to catch the third reefs. I have lopped off about three miles on
the continuation of this Great Garden Gully Reef line as not at present
worthy of note. Seven miles of it I have, however, referred to at perhaps
too great a length and too much in detail for the patience of your readers,
Mr. Editor, and I must ask their pardons. The subject, I know, runs away
with me sometimes, and gets the better of my judgment of what not to
say. I take leave of this reef by remarking that the deepest shaft on it at
present is that owned by the Victory and Pandora Company, which is now
1907 feet deep, and being sunk at the rate of seven feet a week,
(63.) The past history of this Great Bendigo gold field, since quartz
mining became important, has been characterised bv one of the three
great lines of reefs, completely overshadowing the others for a term of
years. First, it is the Victoria and New Chum, or western line of reefs, that
yields up its treasure in such quantities as to eclipse the others; then after
a dull time comes the Hustler’s, or eastern line, with a rush, and then im-
mediately follows the Garden Gully or central line of reef. The Hustler’s
becoming more and more lost in the shade, but deeper mining being still
persisted in will no doubt be rewarded richly in good time in the future.
The Garden Gully has been following suit for some time, and it is steadily
dropping into the shade, whilst just as surely has the Great Western line
of reef been for the past four or five years again emerging into the broad
sunshine of prosperity and riches. It is best that such should be the case,
as it prevents the wild excitement of these great reef lines producing aii
abundance of wealth at any one time or period, to be followed by the ex-
treme of dulness and call paying after a surfeit of dividends and extrava-
gances. More than one whirlwind of prosperity has been witnessed on
Bendigo or Quartzopolis, as it has at such times been christened, but the
inevitable collapse followed, and the effect has been injurious to the mines,
the residents, and the city,
Melbourne , November 24, 1884,
Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer.


AUSTRALIAN QUARTZ REEFS—THE GOLD FIELDS OP
NORWAY.
(64.) Sib, —In The Mining Journal of August 30 I observed a letter
signed “ Joe Baddeley,” headed the “ Gold Fields of Norway,” asking that
I would give the old names of claims as well as the new in my “ Golden
Quartz Reefs of Australia,” so that the several points may be identified by
“ old chums ” who worked on the gold fields here in the early days of gold
mining, and left Australia soon after. I will try and satisfy Mr. Baddeley
on these and other matters that he refers to in my future papers on the
above subject. May I, in turn, ask Mr, Baddeley to oblige me, and, no
doubt, many others of your readers, to give a concise description of the
modes of occurrence of auriferous quartz veins in the part of Norway in
which he resides, and say whether the slate and other rocks in the foot-
wall and hanging-wall of the veins or reefs run parallel with the reefs, and
if the reefs enclose pieces of the walls, and which wall; also what each
wall is formed of— i.e. which rock, and the relative hardness of these rocks,
angle of underlie of the reefs, &c. ? Any other information, such as
mineral contents of the reefs and rocks, &c., will be interesting.
(65.) The lower Silurian strata of Norway resemble in many respects
those in Victoria, judging from the description of several geologists who
visited Norway long since, and this similarity I directed attention to in one
of my public lectures delivered at the School of Mines, Bendigo, on
August 5, 1881. In both countries the strata lie in granite basins, and they
have— i.e., the strata—been altered into crystalline rocks. One point more
of some importance I should like to get some information about, and that
is whether or not the lower silurian strata in Norway are corrugated, and if
so, to what extent. For instance, say in two miles across the strike or
bearing of the strata, how often does the strata form an anticlinal or arch
at the surface. I noted some time since remarks in your Journal, Sir, stating
that the slate in the Oscar Mining Company was considerably auriferous.
This, I need not say, considerably interested me, as this is frequently the
case in Australia in both upper and lower silurian. Only last week, whilst
I was at the Union Company’s Mine at Amherst (old Daisy flat and hill)
Mr. 8,, the manager, told me he frequently saw rich gold quite 6 inches
away from the reef, and in black slate, rather hard. As this shoot of gold
in this mine is rich and peculiar I hope to give a short description of it in
your Journal, Mr. Editor, in the future. The mine is on the Church Hill
reef, but possibly a church did not exist when Mr. Baddeley was at the
Daisy Plat rush. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.
Melbourne, November 24,1884.
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OP AUSTRALIA.—No. XH.
(66.) Sib, —With your permission I will resume my notes on quartz reefs,
which were abruptly put a stop to by a continued travelling in various mining
districts of Australia. Immediately after despatching No. XI. I started for the
rather notorious Mount Morgan Gold Mine, near Rockhampton, Queensland.
At that time it was simply known to be a rich gold mine, surrounded by a
certain interest almost exceptional on this continent, because of the
Government geologist of Queensland having after a full and careful exa-
mination, reported that the mine was on the site of an extinct geyser spring.
And he further stated that gold did not appear to have been deposited to
any extent beyond the limits of the geyser basin. My object was to
examine certain leases lying to the north-west of the Mount for Sydney
and Queensland speculators, and in both cases I had to prepare discouraging
reports. Consequently, my observations, so far as the gold was concerned,
corroborated the Government geologists view. And, as the Mount Morgan
D 2


mine property folly surrounded the “ basin ” for a considerable distance on
all sides; outside proprietors of leases appeared to have but a very poor pros-
pect. 1 can only say the dish prospects I obtained were of a particularly
shadowy kind on the north and west. The latter having somewhat an
advantage of the former, just sufficient, seeing the great value of the ad-
joining property, to encourage a little expenditure of money in further
prospecting. To the south-west of the Mount “ basin ” are situated several
large quartz lodes, reaching to as much as 50 or 60 feet in thickness ; and,
judging by their strike, where visibly outcropping, it seemed not at all un-
likely that they would intersect somewhere near the top of the Mount.
The underlies of two situated slightly to the south of west of the Mount
were south and south-east. Another large one was north-east; mundic reef,
very large, is south south-east, and striking so far as visible straight for the
Mount, and three others lying still further to the south were running from
a little north of east tonorth east. As these large quartz lodes contain
more or less pyrites (iron) even at their outcrops, it may safely be assumed
that they will contain more in depth. Mundic reef itself is really a master
lode over 60 feet in thickness, according to my pacing, for it extended fur-
ther, but the thick undergrowth stopped my seeing its southern bounding
wall. This lode outcrops in the mundic creek, and there are nearly solid
seams of mundic (iron pyrites) within it as much as 5 feet in thickness, and
some a few inches only. But they are sufficiently numerous to prove this
lode to be of a laminated character like the most established or most per-
manent auriferous quartz reefs in Australia. Under the circumstances
existing at the time of my visit I hardly thought it worth while to go into
an elaborate geyser theory to explain the surroundings and apparently
peculiarities of the auriferous deposit of Mount Morgan, It occurred to me
as possible that the deposits were simply due to the intersection of large
pyrites bearing reefs, the upper portions of which at the top of the Mount
especially had decomposed to a considerable depth and through this decom-
position of the pyrites the gold had been set free. I also concluded that
the Mount would from, if I may so call it, a pyrites point of view, actually
represent a cone within cone. The inner or pyrites one being flatter than
the outer one capping it, or to put it another way, that the whole, or nearly
all the pyrites might be decomposed to say, 100 feet or more in depth at
the top of the Mount, and tapering off down its sides to nothing at its foot.
That something like what I have just described is actually the case has been
proved by subsequent explorations in the Mount so I am informed—this is
as regards the existing occurrence of the nyrites. Whether or not the
Mount has turned out to be an extinct geyser spring with a pipe I am not
aware, but I am quite sure it would have been safer to wait for mining de-
velopment works to further advance before suggesting such a theory. I
have seen not very dissimilar outcrops of quartz reefs on a smaller scale in
many parts of Australia. Apart from the interest attaching to this Mount
Morgan gold deposit, it has attracted a considerable amount of public atten-
tion through the leasehold portions of the mine being “ jumped” and the
consequent legal proceedings and appeal to the Privy Council of Britain.
The decision of the latter is, I need hardly say, being anxiously awaited by
those interested in the case, and its outcome in this part of the world.
Some time since I was certainly surprised to find that a Mount Morgan
“Jump” company had been floated, so as to provide the cash, I
suppose, for the law expenses, and to provide a fresh field for specu-
lation. So that it is not difficult to imagine that a very large number
of persons are interested in Mount Morgan on this side, “Jump”
shares are, however, at a discount, I understand, at the present time.
Whilst I was at Charters Towers I was again surprised, and this
time by a telegram in a newspaper announcing the floating of the
Mount Morgan West Cold Mining Company, with a capital of £200,000,


which was subscribed for twice over. A few days after I met a miner
who had just arrived from the Mount, and I asked him where this West
Mount Morgan was situated, and he told me that no one seemed to know,
and he was unable on the spot to find out, although he made enauiries.
It, therefore, appears that Mount Morgan, one way and another, will be
notorious and interesting to many English people, as well as Colonials. I
think I must be well within the mark when I say that hundreds of mining
properties from Australia are and will be placed under offer to English
capitalists. Amongst them are many undoubtedly first class mining pro-
perties ; more second class, yet good for investment; still more third rate
and doubtful and bad. A great many of the latter would be dear at a gift
to anyone, and I again reiterate what I stated some few years since in The
Mining Journal that it is only taking a businesslike precaution to employ
an independent person (competent, of course) to report on mining proper-
ties before completing their purchase, A special report should in nearly
all cases be obtained by the buyer as well as the seller. The man who
reports for the seller will in spite of himself lean to the sanguine view of
the property, whereas the other man reporting for the proposed buyer will
to protect his employer very likely have a tendency to undervalue the
property and its prospects. Between the two reports a fair idea may be
gathered of the real value as far as can be then ascertained with the data
available. I have examined and reported on many properties recently for
(I believe) the English market, and nothing would give me greater pleasure
than to find that a competent man was appointed to re-examine and report
on any one or all of those mines for possible purchasers. The great
majority of Australians only desire to see English capital invested in real
good Australian mines and at a reasonable figure, so that the capital may
be repaid with good interest in a fair term of time. There is an important
minority of persons in this country, as well as is in all others I suppose, who
have but one object in life, and perhaps the less said about that the better.
I have certainly wandered from my notes on quartz reefs, and must
apologise, as I have not now time, nor you, Sir, I expect, space to give
me for a few remarks on the Charters Towers Quartz Reefs. I
must, however, now say that I was very favourably impressed with the
capabilities and possibilites of quartz mining on this young and only
partly-developed field in the immediate present and distant future. I
am glad that English capital has been attracted to this field, because the
mines are young, not deep, and the gold is regular in its yield from the
quartz, no extremes of very rich quartz and then very poor. The average
yield of gold is a good one, and should yield good profit to the owners,
The reefs are not as a rule wide, and their underlie is exceptionally flat,
and it is due to the latter circumstance that the Towers possesses advan-
tages over other gold fields, inasmuch as a 1000 feet vertical shaft might
be so placed as to intersect and work several reefs, one underlying the
other. By so doing the mining operations would have a tendency to even
still further equalise the yields from mines, for it is not likely that the
reefs would all get rich and poor about the same time ; for even in the
Towers there are blank places in the reefs. A disadvantage connected with
this flat underlie, is that the reefs are liable to run out of one mining pro-
perty into another. This is not of much consequence where there are
several parallel fairly rich reefs, but it behoves investors to try and get as
large areas as possible, both on the underlie as well as on the line of reefs. I
think the Day Dawn and Wyndham Company did a very wise thing in
purchasing more property in the direction of the underlie of the main reef.
I do not enter into the subject of whether they purchased at a cheap or a
dear rate. But, even on Charters Towers, it is possible, good field as it
actually is, to pay too much money for a gold mine. In the interests of
the shareholders and of the miners of this field, I must make one more


remark, and that is—many of the Charters Towers mines are the hottest
and worst ventilated mines in Australia, The former is a consequence of
the latter. Altogether, too little attention is paid to ventilation, not only
is it a serious injury to the workmen, but the owners suffer too, for the
men cannot do as much work by one-third as they could do, with less ex-
ertion and strain to themselves, had they been supplied with good air.
This state of affairs should be put an end to at once. Mining men can
easily imagine the condition of the atmosphere below, when they are in-
formed that the shafts are either sunk on the underlie undivided right
away from the surface outcrop of the reefs, or vertical shafts are sunk to
cut the reefs at say 100 or more or less feet and divided; but as soon as
these shafts are sunk on the underlie of the reefs, as is the rule, then the
shafts are not divided. And as most of the mines on the Towers possess
only one shaft, the atmosphere to one accustomed to well ventilated mines
is simply unbearable, and so long as such want of ventilation exists it is
a grave reflection on the management of the mines, and an evident piece
of false economy. I spoke to the Inspector of Mines about it and I have
no doubt that matters on this subject are improving, and most certainly
not before it was wanted.
Melbourne, April 14, 1887. Wm. Nicholas, F.G.S.
Consulting Mining Engineer,
(67.) P.S. —I observe that I have omitted to say that the Mount is formed
of metamorphic clayey sandstone traversed by dykes of Rhyolite, which
have a general direction to the north-west, and they, like the quartz reefs,
are also situated on the south-western side of the Mount, although they
extend further. Whether these dykes will cut through the reefs or not
is an open question, because the junction points are hidden from, view
by the detritus from the higher parts of the Mount, and blocks of all
sizes of brown ironstone from the outcrop of the lode. To the south,
south-east and south-west, at a distance of, say, half a mile from the top
of the Mount occurs granitic rock, whilst to the north-west of the Mount,
and at the same distance from it the metamorphic is capped with horizon-
tal, or nearly so,'deposits of the desert sandstone, reaching an elevation
of 280 feet above Mount Morgan, and being in one ridge (Rising Sun)
over 200 feet in thickness. From the top of this sandstone spur, 1500
feet above sea level (for that is all that remains of it now, excepting
across the valleys to the west, south and east) a magnificent view of
the surrounding country for a great distance is obtainable, interesting
from an artistic and geological point of view. W.N,
THE GOLDEN QUARTZ REEFS OP AUSTRALIA.—No. XIII.
(68.) Sib, —In my No.'III paper (published in The Mining Journal of
2nd August, 1884). I said—“ln giving the information about our quartz
reefs I do so in the hope that other men (gold miners) will also be enlisted
to give their experience of auriferous veins through your widely circulated
journal. By thus aiding one another with our varied practical knowledge
gathered together from different quarters of the globe we shall quickly
collect a vast amount of useful information for the guidance of each other
in our respective countries.’ I cannot say that my hope has been fulfilled;
in fact, much to my disappointment, my desire to give and to receive in
exchange information through the medium of your journal has met with
little or no response. Surely it cannot mean that the mining men of the
present, old and young, are content to remain in continuous ignorance of
the laws that govern the existence of veins or lodes. Are we for ever to
remain content with the “ Where it is, there it is ” of our forefathers ? I
simply asked for an exchange of simple descriptions of veins, and their
enclosing strata or rock and other information relating directly or in-


directly thereto; not scientific dissertation or theoretical exposition, those
would be more suitable for the pages of a scientific society’s journal than
for the columns of The Mining Journal. There is a pleasure in giving as
well as receiving, and the few individuals that I hoped to enlist in ex-
changing information would have benefited many of your numerous
readers—and perhaps more especially young miners commencing their
career in life. Thirty years ago and more, when serving my apprenticeship
to mining at “ home,” as we Australians fondly call Old England, I was an
ardent student of the columns, of your Journal, that were specially devoted
to the elucidation of veins or lodes. I remember one of your old and
regular contributors was a Mr. Henwood, not William Jory Henwood with
whom I carried on a correspondence after my arrival in Australia for many
years. I have forgotten whether it was George Henwood or not, who
wrote “ Photographs of Mining” (?), perhaps if of interest to any of your
old readers they might set me right. Of one thing lam very certain, he
wrote a great deal for (I am of the opinion) the instruction of the young
miners of those days, and I, for one, received great assistance from his
contributions to your Journal on mining and geology, as the combination
of these subjects infused the business of mining with an interest beyond
that which I should otherwise have had.
(69.) Perhaps you will hardly believe, that when I sat down to write No.
XIII. I had no intention of writing the foregoing remarks. But reflection
sent ray mind back to the ideas that first induced me to write these articles
and the results I have reaped from the written observations of other
persons in return for my own, and I certainly felt somewhat discouraged.
As this is said to be an essentially money-making age miners cannot spare
the time demanded for such unremunerative work. Possibly this may explain
t heir silence, or perhaps my papers were too technical, dry and uninteresting.
Be that as it may 1 will try to be a little more diffusive in my remarks,
restricting them less to the dry modes of occurrence of quartz reefs, &c.,
and embrace general remarks on mines and mining operations in future.
As a considerable amount of British capital is now invested in gold mines
in Australia this modification will be more in keeping with the change of
circumstances. In my last article—No. XII. —I referred to my having
examined Mount Morgan and the country lying adjacent to it on the north
and west. With regard to the ground now owned by the Mount Morgan
West Co., which I was then in doubt whether I had examined or no, I am
now aware by the secretary’s letter of the 28th February last, which
appeared in your Journal of the sth March, that I did examine both the
leases now held by this company—Nos. 78 and 82—which at that time
belonged to the Great Mount Morgan Extended Company, with just the
result that I mentioned in my last. With regard to the other property to
the north which I examined, and which had also a like title—Mount Mor-
gan Extended Gold Mining Company, but better known locally as the
New North Clur.es. From its want of similiarity to either the Mount
Morgan or New North Clones, both of which mines I have examined, it
might have received equally well either name—as possibly this ground
too might be again placed or attempted to be placed on the market a few
remarks about it may be worth communicating. This property was offered
to a Sydney and Melbourne syndicate at a certain price, which they under-
took to give if satisfactorily reported on by myself ; meantime they would
pav for the mining being done, &c. After examining the several lease-
blocks I reported there were no indications of any permanent deposits or
auriferous stone visible on the surface, nor in the tunnels or excavations
beneath it in any of the leases. The deposits from which gold was said
to have been obtained in the most considerable quantities was merely a
conglomerate bed (containing quartz boulders) of irregular character
which lies at the base of the Desert sandstone (cretaceous) resting on the


metamorphic rock. The samples obtained from this deposit, tested in my
presence and under my personal supervision, gave very unsatisfactory
results, and this, in fact, was the identical outcome of all test samples
obtained from the reputed richest parts of the property. I gave three
days to my examination, each successive day corroborated my first
impressions—that the property was an indifferent one, and of little
or no value whatever. The third day I considered it was desirable for
me to bestow, in order that it should not be said that I had not thoroughly
examined or given the property that amount of examination that was its
due, and also that I might give the local shareholders every opportunity of
showing me any and every part of the ground that they might believe to
be auriferous. I allowed the shareholders to pick out samples themselves
from those places supposed to be auriferous, and I tested them in their pre-
sence. As I have said, the results in every case tried under my immediate
supervision were most unsatisfactory. Good prospects were obtained from
several dishes, but these were not got under my personal supervision, and I
did not consider them satisfactory. There was a very small vein opened up
in one of the opencast?, but in my tests from it I could not get a “colour”
of gold. I reported that I could not recommend the syndicate to spend
another penny on or in connection with this property. Now this is a case
in point illustrating what I have previously urged, that capitalists before
purchasing mining properties should have an independent inspection made,
and not take the vendors’ words to be absolutely correct. A vendor and
those he employs will, as a rule, look on the bright side of their property to
be sold, and of all the surroundings. They will forget to look at the other
side and to make proper allowances for contingencies not favourable to
their calculation. It is for the purchaser to check such statements and cal-
culations. There are, no doubt, men that will write reports to order, and
that will “salt” samples or mines, at a price, and such men can be found
all the world over I do not doubt.
(70.) In the vicinity of the Mount the metamorphic rock is more or less
saturated with iron or stained by it. In fact, it is frequently doubtful and
for a time, especially for a stranger, difficult to distinguish what is purely
coloured rock and what lode stone. Very large quantities of ironstone
occur in the Mount Morgan West property on the surface, which have come
from the outcrop of a pyrites lode in the vicinity, whether auriferous or
not. Local knowledge of reefs and rocks, and men, and of the past history
of reefs, as regards man’s work in connection with them is not easily
picked op by a stranger, and consequently he is severely handicapped.
Whilst testing the samples of boulder quartz got from the bottom bed of
the Desert sandstone I had a double interest in the work, for had it proved
to have been auriferous it would have given ns an Insight as to the aurifer-
ous character of reefs that existed in the neighbourhood prior to the period
of deposit of the earliest bed of the Desert sandstone, and had the gold
existed in payable quantities there was in all probability an immense area
of this conglomerate in the immediate neighbourhood extremely favour-
ably situated for economical mining. But no such luck. The conglomerate
bed was completely denuded of its overlying deposits in the special spots
selected for trial, and I was at first certainly puzzled to find such
a peculiar occurrence of singular looking broken quartz as was
prepared for my inspection on the top of a range somewhat
higher than Mount Morgan itself. It presented in a degree the outcrop of
a lode, but more close examination showed a cemented conglomeritic ap-
pearance, and this idea soon set me off to examine the lowest bed of the
nearest remnant of the Desert sandstone, the characteristic appearance of
which soon settled all the doubts in my mind as to the origin of the quartz
boulder cement. Whether the local owners thought the geyser theory had.
thrown such a veil of mystery over the whole of the vicinity and its peculi-


aritiea as to make it likely that the supposed singular looking outcrops of
quartz might pass muster as ieef crops lam not in a position to say. Any
way this time the veil, Ac., was too thin, and even as a bed deposit the gold
was absent as a natural component part.
Melbourne , June 24, 1887. Wm. Nicholas, P.G.S.,
Consulting Mining Engineer,
THE ORIGIN OP GOLD AND QUARTZ REEFS —No. I.
By Mr, William Nicholas, P.O S, Geological Lecturer at the Melbourne
University and at the Sandhurst School of Mines.*
(71.) Before entering into the consideration of the details of the subject
of this paper, I desire to make a few preliminary remarks. Quartz mining
in Victoria has now been carried on during a period of about 25 years,
numerous theories respecting the origin and modes of occurrence of quartz
reef and of gold have been from time to time submitted to the public. I
shall not occupy your time in recapitulating any of the theories, but will
simply mention that I think there has been too much attention bestowed
on theorising in the study and arm chair, and too little given to the obser-
vation of Nature and to the recording of important facts which have been
developed broadcast by the miners’ operations in the mines. Believing
this to be the case, I have for many years set myself to gathering such
facts as I conceived would aid the miner and scientific man in his
study or laboratory, I have taken up this line of observation because I
feel assured that if mining managers, miners, and others who are practi-
cally associated with mining will also note and publish the facts which are
daily being developed in the particular reefs within their range of obser-
vation, we shall quickly have gathered much valuable information that
must be of great service to the mining industry, and that will limit the
field of theory within reasonable bounds. Such facts as I shall place before
you have been collected from actual observations in quartz mines ; my re-
marks and experiments are founded on those observations,and I venture to
hope they will prove to possess some practical value. I may say I did not
purpose reading this paper until I had accumulated more information ; but
as my notes, &c., may be of assistance to other observers, and may also be
the means of enlisting additional labourers in the same sphere of work, I
have now decided to give such of my notes and experiments as I conceive
will be useful, and will supplement them at a future date.
(72.) In undertaking such a difficult task as the removal of the thick veil
of mystery which has enveloped the origin and growth of quartz veins and of
gold, the observer should be influenced as little as possible by preconceived
theories or ideas, so that his mind may be open for the reception of ideas
that commend themselves to his judgment, and his eyes open for the ob-
servation of facts that may destroy or support them. To a certain extent
the observer must content himself with being mechanical, and note occur-
ences which may possibly be important, although he cannot at the
time comprehend what relevancy they have to the subject of his
investigation. Reason must be partly dormant until a favourable con-
catenation of circumstances force it into activity. Under such impressions
as those mentioned I have worked. Numerous facts in the study of quartz
veins must, in the present state of our knowledge, simply be accepted as
such, without our understanding the why or wherefore. For example, that
auriferous and non-auriferons quartz reefs exists in certain belts of rocks,
which are to all appearances of an identical character, that certain parts
* “ The Origin and Growth of Gold and Quartz Reefs or Veins in the Lower
Silurian Rocks of Victoria,” being a paper read at the meeting of the Royal Society
in Melbourne on August 14.


of a quartz reef are poor—which possess more or equally favourable
appearances to those parts that are rich in gold; that within auriferous
belts of country there are very poor as well as very rich quartz veins. No
reasonable man, will, however, doubt that such phenomena are capable of ex-
planation, and that they carry with them, or contain their own history,
which simply require intelligent and patient observation, and the addition
of fact to fact —properly classified —to be eventually read and understood. We
cannot rest satisfied in this progressive age with the “ where it is, there it is ”
of the ancient miners, and we must find out 4 ' why it is, and why it is not.”
No thoughtful man thinks that any of Nature’s operations are the effect
of chance. He believes they are guided by natural laws. The more closely
Nature is studied, the more decidedly is it proved that to assign the works
of Nature to chance or accident is only to confess our own ignorance of
cause and effect. We now know that law and order prevail throughout
Nature on the surface of this earth, and in the movements and structure of
the various systems of planets and stars that surround it. Then why should
disorder, chances, and accident reign below the surface, where compara-
tively stupendous systems of veins ramify the older rocks of the earth’s
crusts.
(73.) I believe that the Silurian strata in Victoria, from the time of their
deposit as sedimentary rocks contained the germs and necessary materials
for the birth and growth of quartz reefs, whenever the circumstances, or
the altered position of the strata, and the changes contingent on the
passage of time were suitable. This time arrived when the Lower Silurian
began to be corrugated. For it is impossible to bend or corrugate solid
horizontal strata, such as sandstone and slate, without those strata slip-
ping over each other in the lines of least adhesion. Those lines of least
adhesion in the strata were undoubtedly, for the most part, between the
beds of slate and sandstone, or within the slates where the bedding planes
are well defined. We know the strata were originally deposited, and are
now of unequal thickness, therefore the lines of space were forming when
corrugation and sliding were taking place. In those situations where the
strata were very adhesive, and not pliant, and corrugations still steadily,
but very slowly, progressed, fracture lines crossed the strata at points where
the strain was greatest, or the resistance was least. The most favourable
points for such fracture lines would be in anticlinals especially ; and also
in synclinals. Now in these sliding lines, or in the fracture lines, however
fine they might be, would lodge water, and that water would naturally
originate a system of circulation, and that circulation originate quartz reefs.
The mineral waters thus accumulated and accumulating in the slow pro-
gress of corrugation were at work decomposing the slates and sandstone, in
or between which they had gathered, and changing especially the slate into
quartz reefs and veins, Ido not think it necessary, nor do I think it possi-
ble, that these sliding or fracture lines should open, or did open, so as to
provide our reefs or veins with space in which to form. Then, too, it has
been very generally presumed that all laminated lodes or veins have been
formed by successive openings of veins or lodes, and that, too, as a rule very
conveniently in their central lines,
(74 ) At times, however, if the circumstances seem to require a different
explanation, one of the side laminations is supposed to have opened. But,
perhaps, I had better quote from Von Cotta’s “ Treatise on Ore Deposits,”
where at page 10, under a chapter headed “ The Texture of the Ores and Vein
Stones,’’occurs the following remarks“ 5. Combed or Banded; The separate
ingredients or combinations of two or three of them form layers of equal
or unequal thickness.” “ This variety of texture is particularly common in
metallic veins, the layers are then parallel to the fissure; the first or oldest
comb («) was deposited on both sides of the clefts, on the second ( 'b ), and
so on (c*, d ), until the whole fissure was filled. In this manner the same, or


at least very similar bands are symmetrically deposited from the sides to
the middle.” Now, to a mmer or anyone acquainted with the devices which
men are obliged to adopt mj as to keep the walls of a reef open, and who
are well aware that in the majority of cases in Victoria filling or “ mul-
loking-up ” must keep pace with sloping on the excavation of the reef:
such successive openings of quartz reefs are, at any rate, impossible at the
present day. It must not be forgotten either that our reefs extend fre-
quently J mile or more in length, and this theory requires fissures or
clefts in the rocks of such great lengths and proportionate depths to be
kept open for indefinite periods, whilst the veins are growing on each wall
to fill them up. Then, too, we must acknowledge that these said open fis-
sures were necessarily filled with water or gasses, either of which would
assist in the destruction and collapse of the wall rocks of these fissures.
(75.) As I just now observed, it is impossible to keep open such immense
fissures in the strata —through which our quartz reefs run—at the present
time. And we have no reason for assuming that these strata are less firm
or hard than at any time in the past. On the contrary, we have good rea-
son for believing they are now more indurated than they were. But if we
grant the strata now to be equally hard to what they were in the past, then we
have an inseparable reason why our quartz reefs could not have been formed
in accordance with the open fissure theory. By this theory, too, you will
have noticed that the “ oldest ” bands are against the walls, and that in the
centre are the most recently formed. Now, I believe on the contrary,
that the centre bands are the oldest, and the bands next the walls the
youngest; my opinion is that our quartz reefs grew in width and length by
small successive enclosures of part o? the boundary wall rocks, and in
width especially on the footwalls. This is the general rule, although some
of the enclosures are very large. The manner in which the reefs grew,
judging from their structure, and from an extended study of them in situ ,
must have been somewhat in this fashion—Water under pressure softened
and saturated the rocks, insinuated itself along the bedding and the cleav-
age plains, and frequently crossed them obliquely in soft weak places. The
change from slate to quartz, or clayey sandstone to quartz, followed more
or less quickly on the advance of the water, according to the varying
nature of the rocks, sometimes tiny veins of calcite preceded the quartz.
THE ORIGIN OF GOLD AND QUARTZ REEFS.—No. 11.
By Mr. William Nicholas, P.G-.5,. Geological Lecturer at the Melbourne
University and at the Sandhurst School of Mines.*
(76.) Many of these veins branching off into the walls, composed of
both quartz and calcite, can now be seen in numerous quartz reefs (and in
many of the specimens submitted to you to-night.) These small veins,
enclosed and surrounded, lenticular shaped pieces of the rocks, like islands
in the sea, and then the change from rock to quartz set in on all sides of
them. I should mention that lam particularly describing the mode of
formation of what I classify as true reefs, or Class I. — i,e., laminated quartz
reefs. This class comprises the richest and most important reefs in Vic-
toria, and very properly these have engaged most of my attention, and to
the origin and formation of these am I now especially directing your atten-
tion. In order to proceed to investigate quartz reefs in a business like way,
from a physical point of view, I deemed it desirable to classify them. You
will see at a glance the great advantage of so doing, and, however imper-
fectly it may be done, it is, nevertheless, an endeavour to investigate the
physical character of quartz reefs and |veins in accordance with the great
* "The Origin and Growth of Gold and Quartz Reefs or Veins in the Lower
Silurian Rocks of Victoria,” being a paper read at the meeting of the Royal Society
in Melbourne on August 14.


divisions into which Nature herself has arranged them. To deal with auri-
ferous quartz reefs or veins of all kinds in Victoria as a whole would end
in failure, to bring out satisfactory results. They have been treated as a
whole in the past, and we know that much progress in our knowledge of
quartz reefs or veins has not yet resulted. But even the classification of
them enables one to grasp the great unsolved problem in a more confident
manner than he could otherwise possibly do. To me it seemed like getting
in the thin end of the “ wedge of enquiry,” and that it only needed the
persevering intelligent application of observers to force open this great
problem, piece by piece to view,
(77.) The order in which I have classified reefs and veins agrees with
their relative order, also as regards their richness in gold, 1, —Regular or
true reefs, formed mainly in lower Silurian strata; which strike in a north
and south direction, possess regular underlies, and are more or less lami-
nated in structure.* This class may be sub-divided into two parts—A. Reefs
underlying parallel with the enclosing strata ; and B. Reefs underlying at
an angle with the enclosing strata, and of lesser importance than A. To
render the next class more simple I have also sub-divided it. 2 A. —Irregular
quartz vein formations—quartz blows; having a north and south strike.
B.—Stockwerke or network of quartz veins, general direction north and
south. Both A and B occur in Lower and Upper Silurian. 3.—Quartz
veins which occur in dioritic dykes, in Upper Silurian. 4.—Cross reefs or
veins that strike more nearly east and west than north and south. 5. Quartz
veins which occur in granite or granitic dykes. As a rule class 1 A have
sandstone hanging walls and slate footwalls ; between the sandstone and
the quartz there is generally a soft black decomposing slate “ casing.” On
the footwall, too, there is frequently a similar “ casing.” In these
“casings,” and especially those in the footwalls, will be found tiny veins
of quartz, or calcite, the forerunners and ingatherers of decomposing rock,
for alteration into quartz (see specimens Nos. 4,10, and 11). Sometimes they
enclosed long thin pieces, at others thicker pieces; and parts of these now
remaining together with their enclosed pyrites and other minerals form the
laminations in reefs. Of reefs in the first stages of growth, let me point
you to the “ tracks” of reefs (specimen No. 1). These can be found from
the incipient sliding, or birth lines, graduating up to the true laminated
quartz reef stage by stage. No doubt contraction in the rocks, conse-
quent on their cooling has, aided in the more rapid growth of the reefs,
by thus assisting and facilitating the insiduous attacks of water, through
granting it continually more space in which to insinuate and work.
(78.) Nature has not been niggardly in time since the corrugation of the
Lower Silurian strata, in which the changes that I have thus far, or may
further refer to, had to operate in. It is not an extraordinary circumstance
to find large “ horses,” or enclosures of slate or of sandstone in reefs. A
careful examination of these will show that the bedding or cleavage planes
of them as a rule exactly agree in parallelism with those of the nearest
bounding wall. But large horses or enclosures are comparatively very rare,
whilst small enclosures of slate, of all shapes (but generally inclined to be
lenticular) are very common, and these latter are also characterised by the
same parallelism of bedding or cleavage planes to the nearest wall, and,
moreover, they are found scattered throughout the reefs from hanging-walls
to footwalls. These enclosures are never rounded, but always have sharp
angles, be they thin or thick, large or small. In such cases the outline of
the enclosures are sharply defined ; but it is not an uncommon thing to see
the two rocks, slate and quartz, gradually merge into one another through
such a gradation as chrysoprase. (See specimen No. 11.) The boundary
lines of the latter are toned down and not well defined.
(79.) With regard to these angular enclosures of slate in the quartz, such
exhibited in specimens Nos. 10,11,12, and 13 on this table, I desire


again to call yonr attention to Von Cotta’s remarks about “Brecciated
lodes ”Brecciated: The metallic deposits frequently contain fragments
of the rock enclosing them (wallwork), or those which come from still older
formations of ore. When these fragments are numerous the texture is
brecciated. (This diagram is from an ideal sketch.) As the shading lines
of the enclosures in this diagram are at different angles it may be presumed
that they represent the deposit lines. Occasionally such like enclosures
occur in our reefs, with deposit lines at different angles to those in the walls ;
but, if you carefully examine specimen No. 1, and observe how the decom-
posing black slate is twisted about between the walls, then you will readily
understand that when such pieces are enclosed by quartz the lines in the
enclosures and in the walls must differ in detailed twists, but not in their
general direction. Since writing the foregoing, I have discovered two speci-
mens of quartz, with slate enclosures, which will, I think, go far to satisfy
anyone that my forecasts of the origin and growth of quartz reefs are
correct. These specimens, Nos. 12 and 13, contain, as you may see,
numerous angular enclosures of slate. By carefully examining these en-
closures you can observe that the bedding planes or cleavage lines—which-
ever they may be—within them run parallel with the walls of the reef,
parts of which walls are attached to the specimens. Yon may also see with the
naked eye, but much more clearly, of course, with a lens or miscroscope,
that the boundary lines of each enclosed bit of slate are not perfectly un-
broken lines. These lines which, at a careless glance, may be assumed to
be perfect, are really very like the edge a black comb would present if
placed on a sheet of white paper.
(80 ) The black teeth of the comb, representing the slate, and the surround-
ing white paper the quartz. In some parts of the specimens, too, you will
find delicate patches of these lines perfectly isolated from each other by
tiny bands of quartz. All these lines are parallel to each other, and to
the main wall, and also to all other lines of slate in the enclosures. To be
very precise, perhaps, I should say they are all either parallel, or very
nearly so. Such being the facts, I would like to ask, how can these
minute hair-like lines of slate have got embedded in the mass of compact
hard quartz: and how could they retain that perfect individual and gene-
ral parallelism to other lines and patches of slate, and to the walls of the
reef, excepting by changing the slate into quartz ? Further, let me remark,
these minute hair-like lines under the microscope, when magnified, simply re-
present in minature an ordinary very closely laminated quartz reef —like
specimen No. 2. The two specimens which I have just especially described
came from New Chum Reef, Sandhurst. In this specimen No. 12 you will
recognise a marked resemblance in the forms of the enclosures to those
depicted in Von Cotta’s ideal sketch of a brecciated lode, with fragments
of the country rock.
(81.) Being deeply impressed with the idea that the quartz reefs in class
1 are, for the most part, simply transmuted slate beds, I next looked for
an explanation of the presence of gold in these reefs. In connection with
this subject I need hardly say that Mr. Newbery’s researches, which have
been published in your Transactions and the Progress Reports of the
Geological Survey of Victoria, have thrown much light and they may be
looked on as standard investigations for reference. He has obtained gold
from the incrustations of steam boilers fed with mine water, and he said
that the late Mr. Daintree found gold in mine water. It was therefore
quite evident that mine water was also the source of the gold in quartz
reefs. Mr. Newbery remarked organic matter has long been known as an
agent for precipitating gold in the metallic state from its solutions, and the
conclusion I came to was that the organic matter in the soft black carbon-
aceous slate, when this slate was decomposing and changing into quartz,
became both the precipitant and nucleus for the extraction of gold from


the mineral waters that circulated in the tracts and reefs. I think the black
slate however contained gold originally apart altogether from the mineral
waters, for it is well known that “casing’’ slate is frequently very rich in
gold, and that, too, sometimes in very little altered or firm slate rock.
(82.) “ Casing ” slate is now, as a rule, sent to the batteries to be crashed
with the quartz from the reefs, I communicated my ideas on the origin of
quartz reefs and gold to Mr. Mica Smith, B.Sc., of Sandhurst, who very
kindly offered to make gold solutions for me with which to test the
value of my ideas by experiments ; and the following are the results of
those experiments up to date : —No. 1, (Strength of solution li grain of
metallic gold to 1 ounce). Quantity of solution 2 ounces of distilled water.
In this solution I placed a cube of galena and some soft black carbonaceous
slate which I obtained from the Garibaldi Mine, New Chum Reef, Sand-
hurst. Within 24 hours gold was precipitated on the top edge of the cube
of galena, and most plentifully on the black slate, and the next day I ob-
served the whole side of the cube was covered with gold. On the black
slate also gold particles were visible, and just beneath its surface a thin
layer of gold had begun to accumulate. I noticed, too, that action had
apparently been to a great extent transferred from the galena to the slate.
This experiment was begun on May 19, and I may mention that it was
carried out in a glass stoppered bottle from which the stopper had not been
removed. Farther, so as to assimulate my experiment as closely as possi-
ble to Nature’s conditions, 1 placed the bottle in the dark. On June 11 a
white spot made its appearance, through its lifting up some of the slate and
gold. On the 16th no change was visible excepting the enlargement of the
white substance which swelled upwards and spread outwards. The body of
the mass of slate also appeared to be showing a disposition to become white.
This white substance proved to be quartz, A doubt, however, existed
whether this quartz was not enveloped in the slate put into the bottle; and
must be verified by other experiments before this production of quartz can
be announced. —No. 2. This solution was identical with that of No. 1, with
the exception that I added to it 2 ounces of mine water, thus reducing its
strength by one-half. In this solution I placed two bits of hard black slate
taken from the same sample of slate as that used in No. 1. This experi-
ment was begun on May 27. It was then placed in the dark, and I found
on my next looking at it on June 3 the both pieces of slate were covered
with bright gold. On June 10 this gold coating became of a dull brown
colour, but bright gold was still visible. On this date I placed two pieces
of hard sandstone in the same solution. On the 24th the condition of the
slate remained unaltered, and the sandstone had deposited on them a few
tiny brown spots and what appeared to be pin points of shining gold-
doubtful. I also noticed two tiny white spots on one sandstone and one on
the other.
(83.) No. 3.—Having £ drachm of the solution of gold left I placed this
quantity in a bottle with 2 ounces of mine water on May 27, and added to it
a little fine black slate, I did not observe any change in the experiment
until June 24, four weeks after, when the slate which was lying on one
side of the bottle was swelling upwards and gold was precipitated on its
surface, No. 4 solution same as No. 1, excepting by addition of mine water,
fine black slate was placed in the bottle sufficient to cover the whole of the
bottom to a depth of inch. In a fortnight a flocculent white substance
had formed in the solution and settled round the sides of the bottle in white
flakes; the whole of the surface of the slates was covered by a brown de-
posit in which gold can be seen. It is also visible in the overlying brownish
white flakey deposit, In cavities formed by one or two bits of slate resting
against the side of the bottle gold can be seen attached to the black slate.
No. 5 solution same as No. 4. In this I placed sufficient large and small
bits of calcite (carbonate of lime) to cover or nearly so, the bottom of the


bottle, which consisted of crystals of calcite got from Victoria Reef, Sand-
hurst ; the mine water used in No. 4 and 5 came from the City of Sandhurst
Mine, Hustler’s Reef, Sandhurst; a disposition in the bits of calcite to turn
purple is manifest. The solution still retains its bright yellow colour and
a light brown deposit has settled on the calcite.
(84.) No. 6. —A cube of galena was placed in this which has turned to a
black brown colour, and to its edges are attached floating dark brown den-
dritic forms. Solution colourless. No, 7.—ln this were placed three pieces
of arsenical pyrites got from the Hustler’s Reef, Sandhurst. Decomposition
set in strongly ; nearly all the yellow colour had left the solution, and brown
shadow-like deposits had formed, the specimens were coated with gold, and
a few dark dendritic forms floated attached to their angles. Gold adhered
to the glass near the specimens, and the shadows continued to increase in
a ray or star-like form. No. B.—ln this was placed finely powdered black
slate, carefully examined to prevent any bits of quartz being placed in the
bottle. In three days ail the gold was precipitated, and the solution was
colourless.
(85 ) However little insight this paper may give as to the origin of lami-
nated or banded lodes in other countries, I trust I have at least produced
sufficient facts to warrant me in concluding that Victorian auriferous lami-
nated quartz reefs are simply altered auriferous carbonaceous slates or
clayey sandstones, and that through this transformation some of the gold
in reefs was obtained by precipitation from the pervading mineral waters.
Thus quartz and gold were formed by one operation in Nature.


'Tficfp
MUP
fill IQ
f\) 1




■ > ■'
