

ONE PENNY
No. 2.
The
British Govt.
Why it Collapsed
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1915.


RECONSTRUCTION:
Changes in the British Government.
The news that a reconstruction of the
British Ministry is now in progress should
be hailed with the greatest satisfaction by
everyone who is anxious that the war should
be carried to a successful termination. The
Empire has indeed but little to be thankful
for to the Asquith Ministry, except for the
fact of its existence at the time of the
outbreak of war, for otherwise, we may be
sure, that the whole body of its pacifists
and pro-Germans would have shown the
same disloyalty to the Empire as was shown
by so many of them during the Boer war.
As it is, the war having been declared by
a Liberal Government, the country has been
united, except for that insignificantly small
band of disloyalists led by Ramsay Mac-
donald and Keir Hardie. Yet, though it
was well for the Empire that a Liberal
Ministry was in existence when the war
broke out, it is not to be forgotten that a
sufficient number of its members were s®
pacifist or so as to deal Eng-
land just prior to the declaration of war
and immediately after it two blows from
which she has never y<?t recovered, and
which have caused the sacrifice of thousands
of lives of British soldiers and sailors. In
the first place, the Little-England party,


led by the Chancellor of the Exchequer
(Mr. Lloyd George), the Secretary for the
Colonies (Mr. Lewis Harcourt), the Attor-
ney-General (Sir John Simon), (and the
Lord High Chancellor (Viscount Haldane),
by thwarting the patriotic party, led by Sir
Edward Grey and Mr. Winston Churchill,
succeeded in delaying the declaration of war
for no less than three days, with the result
that the German fleet, which, when Ger-
many declared war against Russia, was off
the coast of Norway, was enabled to get
back into safety in Kiel. Of the majority
of the Cabinet who were so shortsighted as
to effect that gigantic and irreparable blun-
der, only two, Viscount Morley and Mr.
John Burns, had the manliness to resign
when the Ministry decided that war was
inevitable. Those two showed themselves
to be, though misguided, thoroughly honest
men; the others branded themselves mere
office-seekers. They remained in the Minis-
try, and preceded to do yet more damage
to the British cause by cutting down from
six divisions to four the expeditionary force
which it was decided to send to the relief
of Belgium. This constituted nothing less
than a gross breach of faith with both
France and Belgium. It had been an un-
derstanding that, if Germany wantonly at-
tacked France or deliberately violated Bel-
gian territory, an army of 160,000 British
soldiers would be sent over for the defence
of those l '.countries; but, to the: eternal dis-
grace of the British Cabinet be it said, that
undertaking iwas not observed; the force
sent- over being about one-fourth what it
should have been, owing, doubtless, mainly
RECONSTRUCTION:


to the fact that, as a result of the short-
sighted policy of the Government, there
was not equipment for any greater number
of men. Had the British Government been
an honourable government, it would have
made sure that it was capable of fulfilling
its obligations. Had it been in the position
to do so, and had it done so, there would
have been no disastrous retreat from Mons,
and Germany would not to-day be holding
so tremendous a slice of France and Belgium
as is now in her grasp.
However, the reconstruction of the Gov-
ernment has been brought about, not by
reason of these past deficiencies, nor by rea-
son of the fact that the failure of the Min-
istry to make England ready for war helped
to bring war about, nor the further fact
that the strong pacifist and pro-German
attitude adopted by the wire-pullers of the
party convinced Germany that nothing
would induce Great Britain to go to war,
and that if she did go to war she would
certainly never venture to attack Ger-
many, but by reason of more recent
derelictions of duty. The attempt is made
to represent the trouble that has arisen as
the outcome of a quarrel between Lord
Fisher and Mr. Winston Churchill, in re-
gard to the conduct of the affairs of the
Admiralty. Ho doubt, that has helped, but
it is by no means the chief of several
causes. There are four which may be
mentioned, any one of which has had
much more to do with the sudden col-
lapse of the Ministry. Firstly, de-
spite all efforts of the Government to con-
ceal the fact, there can be no doubt that
Changes in the British Government.


the recruiting effort has not been crowned
with success, largely owing to the Govern-
ment’s own stupidity in leading the public
to believe that everything was going as well
as could be wished. It has, therefore, be-
come increasingly evident that conscription
will have to he resorted to; hut the Govern-
ment has hesitated to adopt a principle so
opposed to all Liberal ideas, and, weakly
fearing that, by so doing, it would lose much
Liberal support, it has preferred to make
the decision a non-party matter. Little less
disastrous for the Government has been the
growing feeling that that same corrupt spirit
which led to the silver scandal and the Mar-
coni disgrace has been at work in the Cabi-
net, even at so vital a time as the present.
It is to be remarked that the worst critics
of the Government have been members of
its own party. Mr. Handel Booth, for in-
stance, wrote as follows to the First Com-
missioner of Works, Lord Emmott, in regard
to the charges brought against the Govern-
ment in connection with the appointment of
Mr. Montague Meyer (a significant name)
as agent on commission for the purchase of
timber for war office purposes:—“The pro-
mise of facilities made to Parliament; has
not been kept, and I also point out that
your denial of expert help—which I was
prepared to pay for—has made my task
long and laborious . . . Further, the Office
of Works tried to prevent my attending Mr.
Meyer’s office in the city, where the books
are kept. I have been refused also any in-
formation of Mr. Meyer’s private dealings
in timber whilst buying for the Government,
also any details of Mr. Meyer’s sales to the
RECON STB UCTION :


War Office, also any opportunity to speak
confidentially with any of the four Civil
Servants engaged in entering and checking
the transactions I was invited to see. After
responding in good faith as a member of
Parliament to your offer, I resent the steps
taken to thwart my efforts.”
Even more damaging than either of these
two circumstances has been the revelation
regarding the failure to keep up the supply
of munitions of war, this being to a much
greater extent than is generally known a
direct outcome of Government incapacity.
Not only has the supply been inadequate, but
members of the Government, the Prime
Minister among them, have resorted to abso-
lute misstatements in regard to the subject.
But most of all has the position of the Gov-
ernment been affected by the outbreak of
rioting in Great Britain that followed on
the sinking of the “Lusitania.” The Gov-
ernment, which had always refused to intern
Germans resident in Great Britain, was
forced at last by public action to do what
it ought to have done on its own initiative.
This was a confession of weakness and of
incompetence from which it could not easily
recover.. But, even then, when very tardily
it proceeded to order the internment of Ger-
mans and Austrians resident in the country,
most sinister hints were made in Parliament
by members of the Government’s own party
as to the favouritism shown, it being very
broadly hinted that the Government’s own
wealthy supporters of German extraction
were being shielded. In these circumstances,
the Government probably decided that the
best thing to be done was to form a national
Changes in the British Government.


ministry which could, without fear of politi-
cal retaliation, intern the big Anglo-German
bankers and financiers (who have almost to
a man supported the Liberal Government,
which has not unwarrantably been regarded
by them as much more pro-German than
the Unionist Party). It is a shocking thing
to say, but there can be little doubt that, to
an extent of which the public has no con-
ception, these wealthy Anglo-Germans have
dictated the policy of the Government, and,
therefore, the policy of the country. We
may, for example, see their hand, as we have
previously pointed out, in the failure of the
Government to deal with the metals ques-
tion.
One may hope, now that reconstruction
is on the board, to see those members who
are tainted with suspicion of Germanism
(such as Viscount Haldane and Mr. Har-
court) thrown over. Mr. McKenna, the
Home Secretary, has been notorious for
weakness in his treatment of Germans resi-
dent in Great Britain, and should be one of
the first to be got rid of, but it is to be feared
that his services will be retained. The Prime
Minister himself is a sorry figure, but a
great figurehead, and he is worth retaining
as a sonorous speaker. Mr. Churchill,
though he was, not so very long ago, one
of the extremes! of the advocates for the
cutting down of the JSTavy, has, since he be-
came First Lord of the Admiralty, somer-
saulted, with that readiness peculiar to him,
into the utter negation of what he was be-
fore, and for his energy and promptness at
the time of the declaration of war, the
country owes him a debt of gratitude, so
RECONSTRUCT ION:


that, even if his retention at the Admiralty
be impossible, it would be a pity to lose his
services. Sir .Edward Grey and Mr. Lloyd
George are certainties. The latter, however
greatly England may have reason, to curse
him for his shortsighted folly previous to
the declaration of war, has, since that not-
able event, earned nothing but praise. Mr.
Birrell, as the weakest and most incom-
petent Chief Secretary for Ireland who has
ever been a member of a British Ministry,
Lord Emmott, Mr. Samuel, and Mr. Mon-
tagu (whose connection with the silver
scandal may be remembered) can all be well
spared, and one would like to think too
that Sir John Simon would be another to
go, but his undoubted ability will probably
keep him where he is. Lord Kitchener
should not be disturbed, and the Marquess
of Crewe is very unlikely to be got rid of.
The other members of the Ministry are
nonentities, whose services can easily be
dispensed with.
The men to come in will certainly include
Mr. A. J. Balfour, Mr. Bonar Law, Mr.
Austen Chamberlain, Lord Lansdowne, and
Mr. Arthur Henderson, and the claims of
Mr. F. E. Smith, Lord Curzon, Earl Grey,
Lord Derby, Sir Edward Carson, Sir Ro-
bert Finlay, Mr. W. H. Long, Lord Read-
ing, and Lord Fisher, will also have to be
considered. We had hoped that Lord
Fisher would have been given in regard
to the Admiralty the same power as Lord
Kitchener has been given in the War De-
partment, but the indications are that that
course will not be followed. In that case,
if the intention to have the parties repre-
Changes in the British Government.


sented in the Government proportionately to
their.strength be adhered to, the Cabinet will
have to he either enlarged to 21 or cut down
to 19. Assuming that the former course be
pursued, and that a new Department of In-
dustry will be created, the new Cabinet will
probably he composed as follows:—Mr. As-
quith, the Marquess of Crewe, Sir Edward
Grey, Mr. Lloyd George, Mr. McKenna,
Sir John Simon, Mr. Churchill, Mr. Samuel
(or Lord Emmott), Mr. M’Kinnon Wood,
Earl Kitchener, Lord Lansdowne, Mr. Bonar
Law, Mr. Balfour, Mr. Chamberlain, Sir
Edward Carson, Lord Ourzon, Lord Derby,
Mr. F. E. Smith, Mr. Long, Sir Robert
Finlay, and Mr. Henderson. If the number
of Cabinet Ministers be reduced to 19, Mr.
Wood, while retaining the Secretaryship for
Scotland, will probably drop out of the
Cabinet, and, as Sir Robert Finlay will al-
most certainly be given the Lord Chancellor-
ship, if, as is anticipated, Sir John Simon
refuse to accept it, the Unionist to drop out
will be either Mr. Smith or (more prob-
ably) Lord Derby. If the Ministry be con-
stituted as anticipated here, the one name
whose omission may be regretted is that of
Earl Grey, who, on ability, should be one
of the first men to be chosen. One man
who, it is to be hoped, will not be brought
in is Lord Reading, who, ‘as Sir Rufus
Isaacs, won in company with Mr. Lloyd
George so much unpleasant notoriety an
connection with the Marconi scandals. The
new Government should, as far as possible,
be one that the whole country can honour
and trust in a supreme crisis.
RECONSTRUCTION:


Present Holder.
Portfolio.
Previous Holder.
Mr. Asquith (L.) . . . .
First Lord of Treasury . .
Mr. Asquith
Sir S.O.Buckmaster (L)
Lord Chancellor . . . . .
Viscount Haldane
Marquess of Crewe (L.)
President of Council . . .
Lord Beauchamp
Lord Curzon (U.) . . .
Lord Privy Seal
Marquess of Crewe
Sir J. Simon (L.) . .
Home Office
Mr. B. McKenna
Sir E. Grey (L.) . . .
Foreign Affairs
Sir E. Grey
Mr. Bonar Law (U.) .
Colonial Office
Mr. L. Harcourt
Lord Kitchener (U.) .
W ar Office
Earl Kitchener
Mr. A.Chamberlain (U)
India Office
Marquess of Crewe
Mr. Lloyd George (L.)
Munitions
The changes in the Cabinet are shown in the following table: —
THE NEW CABINET AND THE OLD.
Changes in the British Government.


Present Holder.
Portfolio.
Previous Holder.
Mr. R. McKenna (L.)
Chancellor of Exchequer .
Air. Lloyd George
Mr. A. J. Balfour (U.) .
Admiralty ....
Air. W. Churchill
Mr.McKinninWood(L)
Scotland
Air. McKinnon Wood
Mr. W. Runciman (L.)
Board of Trade
Mr. W. Runciman
Mr. W. Long (U.) . .
Local Government ....
Air. H. Samuel
Lord Selborne (TJ.) .
Agriculture ....
Lord Lucas
Mr. A.Henderson (Lab.)
Education
Mr. J. A. Pease
Mr. W. Churchill (L.)
Chancellor of Duchy . . .
Mr. E. S. Alontagu
Mr. A. Birrell (L.) . .
Ireland
Mr. A. Birrell
Mr. L. Harcourt (L.).
Works
Lord Emmott
Sir E. Carson (U.) . .
Attorney-General
Sir J. Simon
Lord Lansdowne (IT.) .
Minister Without Portfolio
Post Office
Air. C. E. Hobhouse
RECON STB UCTION:


LORD HALDANE’S SECRET.
Under this title the “Morning Post” of April
2 had the following very stinging leader upon the
report of certain statements made by Lord Hal-
dane, the British Lord Chancellor, in an’interview
he granted to the representative of an American
newspaper: —
When Germany came to know that this coun-
try meant war there was a general expectation
among Germans that Lord Haldane would resign.
And when it was discovered that our Lord Chan-
cellor had no such intention, an exceeding bitter
cry went up from the Fatherland. Lord Hal-
dane had betrayed them; he was false to Ger-
many; his portrait at Gottingen University was
wreathed in crape, and only one Professor of all
his former friends dared to continue to believe
in him. This lonely survival based his con-
tinued trust on the theory that Lord Haldane had
remained in the Cabinet in order to be in a posi-
tion to help Germany when the time came. As
month after month passed by and Lord Haldane
only spoke to abuse his former admirers, even
this last lingering ray of hope dissipated in the
ewigkeit, and a German organ of opinion after
discussing Lord Haldane’s character with true
German thoroughness came to the conclusion that
he was after all neither friend nor foe, but a
blundering fool, a simulacrum, an imposing empti-
ness. So ended the German dream of Lord Hal-
dane, as many dreams end, both of love and war,
in bitter disillusionment. And now Lord Hal-
dane, as usual, has the last word—in an interview
with a Chicago journalist which we publish in an-
other column. “If the Germans ever misunder-
stood me,” said Lord Haldane, “they have only
themselves to thank.” And again: “I disabused
their minds, if unmistakable language could do it,
of all doubts as to what would be England’s atti-
tude to a violation of Belgian neutrality.” Thus
the Germans have no right to look upon Lord
Haldane as one who had misled them. To the
Germans he was blunt, straightforward, outspoken;
he told them we should fight if they invaded Bel-
gium; it was all discussed. The Germans asked
Changes in the British Government.


Lord Haldane for a guarantee of the neutrality
of this country in the event of a German inva-
sion of France through Belgium, and Lord Hal-
dane told them in his blunt, honest way that
Great Britain would fight if such a course was at-
tempted.
The enemy, then, has no grievance against Lord
Haldane. But has this country any grievance
against him? Have our Allies any grievance
against our Lord Chancellor? These are ques-
tions worth examining. Lord Haldane was asked
by the interviewer when he first became fearful
that Germany intended to break the peace of
Europe. He replied that the whole of the past de-
cade had been rather critical, but that he found
particular grounds for fear in the course of his
visit to Berlin in February, 1912: “I came away
feeling uneasy, ’ ’ he said ; ‘ ‘ Germany was piling
up armaments. She showed no disposition to re-
strict her naval development.” And, of course,
there was reason for fear, above all, in the re-
quest by Gerihany for a pledge of our uncondi-
tional neutrality in the event of an attack by her
on Belgium and France. Such a proposal was
manifestly enough to make Lord Haldane’s hair
stand on end. To say that he came away feel-
ing uneasy is a mild way of putting it. He
must have felt, in fact, a sense of outraged trust
and honour such as a virtuous woman feels when,
in the course of a Platonic conversation, she is
suddenly affronted by ‘ ‘ infamous proposals. ’ ’
Therefore Lord Haldane must have returned from
Berlin burning with a sense of the danger in
which Europe lay from this brutal Teutonic men-
ace. In these circumstances, what did Lord Hal-
dane do? What did Lord Haldane say? Nothing.
In vain we look through his speeches subsequent
to that date for any hint of the danger with
which Europe was . menaced. When he spoke at
Leeds on February 17, 1912, he might have given
the country a hint of the need for military pre-
paration. On the contrary, he there told the
British public that he had discussed the affairs of
the world with German statesmen “in the spirit
of Plato. ” “ I think, ’’ he went on, ‘ ‘ that there
was not much that we omitted, and pervading the
whole was the spirit of these big men—and they
RECONSTRUCTION:


from something higher, from a point of view
wider than that of mere controversy between
nations, and who sought to realise the standpoint
of humanity.” These big men —these very big
men —proposed, as we now know, that in the event
of an attack through Belgium on France, England
should stand aside. Was this the spirit of Plato?
Was this to realise the standpoint of humanity?
Or was not Lord Haldane deliberately deceiving
his countrymen, and lulling them to sleep when
he should have been awakening them to danger?
Then what did Lord Haldane say about our under-
standing with France and Russia, which, he must
then have.known, would mean a military alliance
should this threat by Germany materialise? Two
months later he said in the House of Lords: ‘ ‘ The
friendships which were more the order of the day
than they used to be, such as those with France
and Russia, had nothing to do with military mat-
ters, but were simply friendships between the two
nations. ’ ’ Think of the effect of all this upon
France. Lord Haldane goes to Germany, comes
back with rosy accounts of diplomatic discussions
from which nothing was omitted, and treats the
Entente as something merely Platonic, something
rather less important than the new friendship with
Germany. Did Lord Haldane warn France of
Germany’s infamous proposals? If he did in pri-
vate, there is no sign of it in public. All that our
Ally could gather from his attitude was that he
was or seemed zealously pro-German and markedly
lukewarm to F’rance. Then, on June 28, we find
Lord Haldane hob-nobbing with those “very big
men/’ who had made him infamous proposals, at
the Savoy Hotel, and telling them there that “in
the last few years Germany and England had be-
come much more like each other than they used to
be.” No doubt the German Ambassador and the
other German statesmen who were gathered round
the board interpreted this remark in the sense
that after all they had not insulted the coy one so
very grossly. If they thought so, they had only
themselves to thank.
But what did Lord Haldane do? Did he make
any effort to induce his colleagues to prepare for
the danger that threatened this country? We
look through his speches for the year 1912, and
Changes in the British Government.


we find that they are mainly taken up with re-
plies to the warning speeches of Lord Roberts.
When Lord Roberts asked the nation to prepare,
Lord Haldane replied that there was no need.
“The rifles and uniforms and everything were
ready,’’ he told Glasgow at the beginning of the
year. Some years before he had boasted that he
had cut off nine battalions of the Regular Army.
And again he had said: “The first step to doing
anything effective for developing the national
basis of the Army was to cut something off the
Regular forces. ” Did he do anything in 1912
to atone for these errors? Did he use his influ-
ence in the country to add to the strength of our
military forces or to the plan for turning out
munitions of war? We know that he insisted
on reducing the establishment at Woolwich Ar-
senal in spite of all protests. Sir Robert Had-
field, a prominent North Country Liberal, recently
told a meeting at Sheffield how ne had pleaded
and pleaded in vain with the Government to be
given the means to keep in existence a magnificent
plant for making shrapnel, which would now have
been priceless. And he asked this bitter ques-
tion: “Why did not Lord Haldane find out and
obtain information with the many means at his
disposal about army equipment?” We now
know that Lord Haldane knew both Germany’s
resources and Germany’s plans, yet he took no
such steps. Instead he encouraged a country to
believe that it could fulfil its obligations with an
army to be trained after war broke out. At
what cost of blood, of young and generous lives,
this country has been beguiled and hoodwinks! by
the man who was frank only at Berlin, it would
be a vain and heartbreaking sum to estimate.
Lord Haldane kept his secret well, both from his
countrymen and, from his Allies. He tells us now
that as a result of this war “secret diplomacy
will disappear. ” We-hope at least that the secret
diplomacy, which he has practised, which is frank
only to the enemy and deceives this country to its
imminent danger, wall at least disappear, for it is
too like treachery to be tolerated, even by a nation
always, been tolerant of humbugs and
meddlers.
RECONSTRUCTION:
