

ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA
Queensland Branch
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE
SUGAR INDUSTRY
ITS DEVELOPMENT IN QUEENSLAND
W. B. 0& CO.
A LECTURE DELIVERED
ON 17th JUNE, 1936


The Queensland Sugar Industry
LECTURE BEFORE THE QUEENSLAND BRANCH
OF THE ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA.
Mr. W. G. Gibson, Managing Director of Messrs.
Gibson and Howes Ltd., was invited by the Royal Geo-
graphical Society to deliver a lecture before the members
of that Society, dealing with the Development of the
Queensland Sugar Industry. As, however, circumstances
arose which precluded Mr. Gibson being in Brisbane on
the date fixed, he suggested that Mr. F. C. P, Curlewis,
General Secretary of the Australian Sugar Producers’
Association, should be the lecturer for the occasion. The
following notes were accordingly prepared by Mr. Cur-
lewis, but on the eve of the lecture he was called sud-
denly to Melbourne, and the duty of delivering the lecture
from the notes was taken up by Mr, C. H. O’Brien. Be-
tween fifty and sixty members of the Society and friends
attended at the Society’s rooms in Turbot Street, Bris-
bane, on the evening of the 17th ultimo, and the lecture
was illustrated by lantern slides, many of which de-
picted phases in the development of the Queensland
Sugar Industry which are now of historic interest. A
list of the slides is given at the end of the notes, and the
figures appearing in parentheses throughout the text
relate to this list. Many of the slides were made special-
ly for this occasion, and these were supplemented by
others from the A.S.P.A. collection.
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE QUEENSLAND
SUGAR INDUSTRY.
The particular branch of our Industry with which
I propose to chiefly deal to-night is that covering its
development from an historical and geographical point of
view. I will not altogether be able to avoid the econ-
omic factor, but as I have a constant reminder of that
in my daily life, you may rest assured that I will regard
it to-night as purely incidental.
I have mentioned development from a geographical
point of view, because the early history and settlement


of Australia has of itself created the development of the
Sugar Industry geographically from south to north (1).
Before I bring you to the consideration of our In-
dustry, I think it would be of interest to the members of
the Society to be informed that so far as is known sugar
cane was first referred to in India by Charaka, an Indian
writer in the 6th century B.C. (contemporary with
Buddha) who referred to the properties of several pro-
ducts made from sugar cane which varied according to
the degree of their purification. Probably some of these
were similar to gur—a native form of sugar which is
to-day produced in India to the extent of about four
million tons per annum. In 327 B.C. the first European
reference to it as “a reed which produced honey without
the aid of bees” was made by Nearchus, an Admiral of
Alexander the Great. Prom there its production went
through Persia, Arabia, and Egypt, and thence it
spread per medium of the Crusaders, to Spain and Por-
tugal,
With the discovery of the West Indies more suitable
conditions were found for the cultivation of such pro-
ducts, and it was not long before the Spaniards intro-
duced sugar cane into those Islands, and from there its
commercial production generally spread through other
tropical countries (2) and (3).
The first actual historical record of sugar cane in
Australia occurs in a reference to the First Fleet in 1787,
wherein mention is made of “large quantities of young
fresh trees, including figs, apple and quince, some grape
vines, strawberry plants and sugar canes” being ship-
ped at the Cape of Good Hope.
In 1823 it is recorded that Mr. Thomas Scott was
growing sugar cane at Port Macquarie in N.S.W., and
actually manufactured 70 tons of sugar and some rum.
(4.) However, it was found that the locality was too
far south for any hopes of the development of the Indus-
try, and its production was abandoned in favour of the
more Northern Rivers of N.S.W.
The first record for what was afterwards the Colony
of Queensland was in 1836, when we hear of an East
Indies planter named Mayo planting, near Brisbane, a
few acres of cane that he had obtained from Mauritius.
It was not until the ’sixties though that any authen-
tic reports exist as to the actual manufacture of sugar
from cane, though cane was being grown in small plots
TH B AIT ST KALIAN CANE SUGAR IN© U STET


around Brisbane, and an attempt had been made by one,
Thos. Bowden, to manufacture sugar.
In the year 1862 the manufacture of sugar from
cane produced in the Colony was actually achieved, and
this was the work of John Buhot, who is said to have
gained his experience in Mauritius. Even so, the cane
supply must have been very limited, as the area from
which it was drawn was that planted in the Botanic
Gardens, and the available appliances crude indeed.
Nevertheless, a Parliamentary Committee recommended
that Mr. Buhot should receive a grant of 500 acres of
land as a reward for his services. In the following year,
Captain the Honourable Louis Hope had 20 acres under
cane at Ormiston, near Cleveland. It was there that
the first sugar mill was built and operated, (5.) During
the visit of the International Society of Sugar Cane Tech-
nologists, in September last year, Captain Hope’s title
to be regarded as the father of the Sugar Industry in
Queensland was recognised in a formal dedication of a
monument to him on the site of the old mill. (6.)
In this connection it is worthy of note that in 1862
the then Registrar-General, Mr. F. O. Darvall, made the
following comment in his annual report:—
“The first appearance of twenty acres of sugar
cane is also worthy of notice as the germ of an in-
dustry which will very probably become hereafter
of great importance to the colony.”
Sugar cane for planting is said to have been im-
ported in those early days from both Java and Mauritius;
and the Queensland Acclimatisation Society introduced
a large number of varieties under the inspiration of its
honorary secretary, the late L. A. Bernays, at that time
Clerk of the Legislative Assembly. At a much later
date Mr. Henry Tryon, an officer of the Queensland
Government, visited New Guinea and brought back a
collection of cane from the native gardens. One of these
varieties (Badila) has since played an important part in
many of our cane fields. (7.)
The Queensland Government, recognising the im-
portance of affording every encouragement to tropical
agriculture, issued regulations making land for such
purposes available on specially favourable terms, and as
a result of the attitude adopted by the Government, a
small boom set in. By 1865 nearly 2,000 acres had been
taken up under what were known as the Sugar and
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


Coffee Regulations. Many of those embarking in the
new enterprise were quite ignorant of the needs of the
sugar crop; and some it is said even tried it out on the
Darling Downs and in other quite impossible locations.
So great was the demand for sticks of sugar cane for
planting that an actual scarcity arose, though apparent-
ly it was not until 1867 that the manufacture of sugar
was actually commenced as a commercial enterprise.
At that date six small mills were operating. How
small these mills were is evidenced by the fact that)
the total output of sugar from the whole of them was’
less than two hundred tons. Their capacity therefore
was quite below the available cane supplies. So great
was the competition amongst farmers that cane was
bought by the mill owners at the nominal price of four
shillings per ton. Before the close of the ’sixties, how-
ever, cane-growing became established at many points
along the Brisbane River. A mill had been built in the
vicinity of what is now Sherwood, and another near the
mouth of Oxley Creek. The Sherwood mill was after-
wards removed lower down the river about where Chel-
mer railway station now is. The milling plant was of
a decidedly primitive character, and for the most part of
local manufacture. At first it was common for the cane
to be crushed between vertical rollers of hardwood, with
horses as the motive power (8), (9). In view of the
fact that in our day, four sets of triplicate steel rollers,
each set developing a pressure of about 400 tons, are
deemed necessary to recover all the saccharine juices,
these early mills must have left as much sugar in the
refuse as they extracted. One experiment of those early
days, picturesque rather than practical, was that of
mounting a small manufacturing plant upon the deck of
a stern wheel steamer (10). The steamer plied up and
down the Brisbane River, taking cane from the farms
along the way. This venture was comparatively short-
lived, as was to have been expected. The most im-
portant sugar mill and plantation in the vicinity of the
Brisbane River was Clydesdale (11), (12), which was
started by the Messrs. Gibson, whose family are still
conspicuously associated with the Industry in the Bin-
gera plantations and factory near Bundaberg.
By 1870 no fewer than 28 mills were operating in
Queensland and others were in course of erection (13)
(14). Most of these were in the Albert and Logan dis-
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


tricts, the Moreton area, and around the Mary and Wide
Bay districts; but the Industry had gradually spread
northward, reaching first Bundaberg, Mackay, and Ing-
ham, and subsequently the Johnstone River, Cairns, and
Mossman in the late ’seventies and early ’eighties (14)
(15), As a rule, latitudes to the south of degrees
have proved too liable to frosts for the successful cultiva-
tion of the sugar cane, and a succession of three severe
winters practically put an end to the Sugar Industry on
the Brisbane River. Still three important centres on
the Tweed, Richmond, and Clarence Rivers, where a
large number of farmers are supplying cane to the C.S.R.
Company’s mills, are probably the oldest in Australia.
About this time also the Queensland Government grew
sugar cane with penal labour on the island of St. Helena,
in Moreton Bay. The horse-driven mill supplied to them
by a Brisbane foundry, capable of turning out half-a-ton
of sugar per day, cost £120; but it is not to be supposed
that any of the 28 mills already referred to were any-
thing like so simple as this. Cane-growing on the island
had to be abandoned owing, it is stated, to the facility
afforded for prisoners to hide amongst the dense growth
with a view to escaping.
However, it was emphatically an era of small fac-
tories, and the planters differed as. to whether it paid
better to sell their cane to neighbouring millsi or to estab-
lish their own mills. In the Bundaberg and Marybor-
ough districts there were a number of crushing mills
from which the juice, having been heavily limed to pre-
vent fermentation, was pumped through long lines of
piping and conveyed to the regular mills, there to com-
plete the process of sugar making.
By 1880, as many as 83 mills had been established,
most of them in Mackay and the further southern dis-
tricts. The output could not have been more than 58,000
tons of sugar at that time, whereas at the present titne
over 600,000 tons of sugar is made in about 30 mills (17).
The greatest number of mills operating at the one
time was 166 in 1888, with an output of 59,000 tons pf
sugar. Of these only 22 were established in the Northern
districts—that is, from the Burdekin district to Mossman
—because as the Industry developed in the Northern
areas, the policy of larger mills with cane farms rather
than plantations as the source of supply, was being
recognised as a sprer method of opening up and populate
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


ing North Queensland on the same principles of the de-
velopment of agriculture that were being followed in the
Southern colonies of Australia.
The advent of the fanner in place of the plantation
owner was the first step in the next important develop-
ment in the history of the Sugar Industry. This marked
the growth of the co-operative control and eventual
ownership of the mills by the farmers themselves. Co-
incident with this development was the question of open-
ing up the employment branch of the Industry to Euro-
pean labour rather than to Chinese and Kanaka labour
(18), (19), (20). This question in its latter stages was
embraced in the Australia-wide issue of a “White
Australia.”
During the early ’eighties, a strong public feeling
was aroused against the employment of Pacific Island
labour in the cane fields, due largely to the exposure of
serious abuses in connection with recruiting the Kanakas
in their native islands. These people were brought to
Queensland under agreements for a term of three years.
Sailing schooners were employed in this business, and a
Government agent accompanied each vessel to see that
laws designed in this country for the protection of the
islanders were observed (21). On arrival here they were
still subject to the protection of this specially designed
legislation; but in spite of all, the system was open to
many well-grounded objections, apart even from the un-
due competition with civilised workers, as witnessed in
every country where the two classes come into conflict
(22), (23).
The late Sir Samuel Griffith, who first took office
as Premier in 1883, was strongly opposed to all forms
of coloured labour, and his views on this subject greatly
strengthened the hands of those who, about this time,
were advocating the establishment of central mills in
order that the manufacturing side of the industry might
be placed in the hands of the canegrowers, because so
far they had been for the main part simply in the position
of dependence upon the mill-owners for the purchase of
their crops. It was in 1885 that a petition was presented
to Parliament for Government assistance in the estab-
lishment of Central Mills, one of the claims at that time
being that only through the agency of farmer-owned
manufacturing plants would it be possible to make cane-
growing a white man’s industry. As an outcome of this
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


Boiling Cane Julee in a Primitive Open Battery.
Early Horse-driven Mill at Pimpama, about 1870


Another Mill in the Pimpama District, about 1870.
The Clydesdale Mill, Doughboy Creek.


movement, a sum of £50,000 was made available under
Act of Parliament for groups of farmers at North Eton
and Racecourse, in the Mackay district, for the erection
of sugar mills in those areas. Provision was made for
the gradual repayment of the sum so advanced, and one
of the conditions was that only cane grown by white
labour should be crushed at these mills. It was soon
found that with things as they were at the time this could
not be rigidly adhered to. Various difficulties arose at
an early date in the practical working of these mills. The
financial responsibilities of the growers had been ar-
ranged by tire farmers agreeing to take up shares, but
it was soon complained that non-shareholders were re-
ceiving more for their cane than shareholders, and it was
more than doubtful that the promoters of the scheme
were able to achieve one of their objectives in securing
a higher price in return for their labour than had been
available whilst dependent on privately owned mills.
No doubt, however, there were many indirect benefits.
Incidentally North Eton and Racecourse were the pro-
genitors of a system which in modified form became
widespread throughout the sugar-growing areas. Also
it greatly encouraged the small farmers and the breaking
up of large canegrowing concerns.
In 1893 the Sugar Works Guarantee Act was passed
by the Queensland Parliament, and under its terms Cen-
tral Mills were built in eleven centres scattered along
the coast from Nerang to Mossman. After many vicissi-
tudes the whole of these, with the exception of Nerang
are still working. Half a million sterling was at that
time advanced by the Government as loans to the farmers
in respective districts: the farmers lodged their deeds as
security for repayment of principal and interest, the loans
to extend over a period of fifteen years. In the event of
default the State Treasurer was entitled to enter into
possession of the sugar works as well as of all lands mort-
gaged, and to fix the price of cane. Adverse circum-
stances shortly afterwards arose, whilst embarrassing
increase of production had already arisen, in 1894. The
farmer-owned mills were in serious trouble through in-
ability to meet their obligations to the Treasurer, and,
with their title deeds in the hands of the Government,
it became a matter of extreme anxiety as to what would
be their fate. Official inquiry into the position of five of
the mills, chiefly in the Southern Districts, revealed that
T H 13,! ADS T KALIAN’ CANE BUGA 11 IND 0 S Til T


some of them had been built in the wrong locations, the
management was not as efficient as it might have been,
and above all deficient rainfall had resulted in shortage
of crops in four of the mills under examination. Certain
recommendations were made, and it may suffice here to
state that with sympathetic treatment by the Govern-
ment confidence was re-established, and the re-arranged
responsibilities of farmer-owned mills have been pro-
gressively met.
The Farmers’ Co-operative Mills system received a
greater impetus in the Mackay District than elsewhere,
and prior to the Federation of the Colonies, Mossman
(1897), Mulgrave (1896) and Proserpine (1898) were
the only Central Mills established north of Mackay (24).
The main reason for this was, of course, the fact that con-
ditions of living were, in those early years, less attractive
to permanent settlers than those obtaining in Mackay
and Bundaberg. Later on, when new sugar districts were
required, they were all opened up north of Mackay and
Co-operative Central Mills were established at Babinda,
south of Cairns, and at South Johnstone and Tully, south
of Innisfail (25).
At this stage it might be as well to break off chrono-
logically in order to follow out the development of this
original movement for the encouragement of farmer-
owned mills.
It has resulted first of all in the present establish-
ment of 16 co-operative mills, the output of which repre-
sents about half the production of cane in Queensland
grown by about half the farmers of Queensland. These
farmers have what financial advantages accrue both
as mill-owners and farmers, though as a matter ofi
fact, whilst they are only the prospective owners of the
mill and have to meet all their commitments for interest
and redemption, repairs, replacements and contingencies,
the price they receive for their cane is not much higher—
and in some cases less—than that which has to be paid
under statutory enactment by the proprietary mill-
owners. But the effects of the co-operative system of
ownership were much wider than mere financial advan-
tages to the particular growers. It is, in the opinion of
many, the foundation of that general community spirit
which is such a feature of the Industry and which has
been to a great extent responsible for the Industry having
8


reached, in the face of what have been regarded as “un-
natural difficulties,” the position it now occupies in the
economics of this State.
There is one phase of this community life that is of
particular importance to our national welfare, and that
is the creation of self-contained townships surrounding
the various mills (both co-operative and proprietary).
Townships such as Gordonvale, Babinda, Mourilyan, and
Tully in North Queensland, Home Hill in the Burdekin
area, and Sarina in the Mackay district, are examples that
occur to me (26); and all concerned, both mill-owners
and growers, and employers and employees, have grown
up with the mill and the district, and whilst keenly pro-
tecting their individual interests, have evinced a very
genuine flair for community welfare.
This is a very definite indication that the right kind
of settlement is taking place—An a form of decentralisa-
tion in even the already-decentralised provinces of
Queensland.
The Tully district is an outstanding example of the
point I have been endeavouring to make.
In 1921 the Tully district was a cattle run and the
population, at the time of the 1921 census, of the Card-
well Shire was 370. In 1926 the Tully Co-operative Mill
had been built and the district settled with three hundred
farmers. According to the 1933 census the population of
the Shire of Cardwell, adjacent to the Tully Mill, was
4,412, and there has grown a well-laid-out self-contained
township with good roads, electric light, and, of course,
picture shows, motor garages, and other conveniences of
a city. There is also a very definite community spirit
throughout the whole district.
This community spirit has also manifested itself in
the associations formed for the protection of the mill-
owners and canegrowers. These interests are concen-
trated into only two organisations established in Brisbane
for the protection of their economic interests, and it is
generally conceded that the fact that these two organisa-
tions work in conjunction in all important matters is
responsible for the Industry’s representations being re-,
ceived in a considerate spirit by Governments represent-
ing in many other matters, opposing schools of thought.
I have dealt at some length upon the co-operative spirit
—at is really co-ordination rather than co-operation—be


cause it is a favorite theme of mine, and one which my
Association most definitely supports and wishes to en-
courage.
After this digression I will return to history. We
had reached the middle ’nineties with the encouragement
of the central mills idea and the early aspirations for
white labour. By this time the Federation of the Colon-
ies was on the horizon, and it was realised that the ques-
tion of a “White Australia” which was being made an
issue in certain quarters, would most vitally affect
Queensland through the Sugar Industry.
Just prior to Federation there were about 79,000
acres of cane being harvested for manufacture into sugar,
and the 58 mills then operating produced about 123,000
tons of sugar. For the first ten years after Federation
from 80,000 to 99,000 acres of cane land were harvested
annually, and the tonnage of sugar produced varied be-
tween 132,000 tons and 207,000 tons.
Eventually, as is well known, Federation was accom-
plished and a White Australia having become accepted
as a definite policy, adequate protection was promised to
the Sugar Industry. It was made quite plain that the
Kanakas were to be deported and European labour only
utilised. A duty was imposed by the Commonwealth
Government on imported sugar, and an excise duty on
sugar manufactured in Australia; from this excise a re-
bate was paid on all cane produced by white labour. By
1907 most of the Kanakas had disappeared (27), (28),
and from then on the Industry, under white labour con-
ditions, was faced with regulations and awards in re-
spect to wages and the general conditions of the employ-
ment and accommodation of the workers—the first award
by an Industrial Court being made in 1914 (29), (30).
Incidentally, of course, there were strikes of a more or
less serious nature, but viewing the subject as a whole,
it may be said that whilst the wages awarded by the
Court appeared to be unduly high, yet they eventually
attracted a class of labour that has contributed not only
to the efficiency of the Industry, but also to the satis-
factory type of settler and settlement that has spread
through the north-eastern littoral of Australia (31).
With the employees protected by awards and regu-
lations as above-noted, it was not long before the grow-
ers supplying both proprietary mills and central mills
put in a claim for some method of determining, under
10


The "waleus." a Floating Sugar Mill.
Interior View of an Early Mill.


Javanese Harvesting and Loading Cane.
Kanaka Women Hoeing Cane.


statutory authority, the value of their cane. For this
purpose the Regulation of Sugar Cane Prices Act was
passed by the State Parliament in 1915, and under its
provisions a tribunal was created with final authority
to allocate to each mill the lands from which it should
draw its supply of cane, and to determine the value of
the cane delivered to each such mill. This tribunal,
known as the Central Cane Prices Board, consisted of a
Judge of the Supreme Court, one representative of the
mill-owners and one representative of the canegrowers,
and it is the final Board of Appeal from the decision of
Local Boards that primarily determine values in respect
to the cane delivered to each mill. The system then in-
augurated has been in force since 1915 and on the whole
it can be said to have been satisfactory, though very
naturally there was, in its initial stages, definite opposi-
tion to it from a certain section of the mill-owners.
With the outbreak of war in 1914 the economic posi-
tion of the Industry naturally changed with the generally
uncertain conditions of the period. As sugar was one of
the first of the commodities that would be likely to show
an unnatural increase in the world’s market, the Com-
monwealth Government immediately placed an embargo
on the export of sugar from Australia. Simultaneously,
the State Government, through their price-fixing author-
ities, endeavoured to keep the price of Australian con-
sumption down to a normal price. The result was that
the Sugar Industry did not share in the high world prices
that fell to the lot of the established exporting industries.
Australia was not then producing enough sugar for its
own requirements, and importations had to be made at
values that, as a result of the war, reached £9O per ton
and averaged over £4O per ton, whilst the Australian raw
sugar was made available at £2l per ton. What labour
there was in the country at the time was costly and un-
reliable, and prices of capital and consumption goods
were high, consequently by the end of 1919 the Sugar
Industry was in a really bad way. Due to the necessity
for importing sugar, the Commonwealth Government
had taken complete control of the Industry so far as dis-
tribution and fixation of prices were concerned, and
strong representations were then made as to the serious
position to which the Industry had fallen. As a matter
of fact, the acreage under cultivation in this year was the
lowest since 1913. The result Was that in 1920 the Cora-
THE AUSTHALIA.V CANE SDGAH INDUSTRY


monwealth Government agreed to place an embargo on
the importation of sugar and increase the price of sugar
over a period of three years to such a figure as would en-
able the Industry to get on a sound footing again. This
was of particular benefit to many of the mills, especially
the co-operatively owned ones which had no reserves and
insufficient provision for depreciation, and had been
forced to neglect the proper maintenance of their plant
and machinery.
This increased price gave a definite fillip to the In-
dustry, and the revival that followed was maintained
when, at the expiry of the first agreement, it was renewed
as regards conditions, though the price of raw sugar was
reduced by about 11 per cent. About this time the Com-
monwealth Government relinquished direct control of
the Industry and all its subsequent economic conditions
have been regulated under an agreement between the
Government of the Commonwealth and the Government
of the State of Queensland, whereby the Commonwealth
on the one hand agrees to impose an embargo on the
importation of sugar, whilst the State Government agrees
to provide sugar at such a price as will enable the con-
sumer to obtain it at a definite price over a term of years.
These agreements have been renewed from time to time
and the price to the consumer remained at per lb. for
many years, but a reduction to 4d per lb. was secured
by an amended agreement in 1933. Recently this agree-
ment was renewed until the crop of the season 1940 is
disposed of. Furthermore, by the provisions of the agree-
ments entered into since 1931, the Sugar Industry has
been called upon to provide out of its revenue an annual
grant to assist the preserving branch of the fruit indus-
try. In addition to that, manufacturers of preserves and
jams have, since the initiation of Government control,
been able to obtain sugar for their exported goods at
world parity values, and for their Australian-consumed
goods at a substantial discount. The total amount of
these concessions was over £300,000 per annum, but it
has- been proportionately reduced with the general reduc-
tion in the price of sugar.
After the renewal of the third series of these agree-
ments, about 1925 or 1926, it was realised that great de-
velopments' were taking place in many sugar districts,
and that it was necessary that consideration be given to
the interests of the Industry as a whole. Production had
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


overtaken consumption and a surplus was likely to be
produced every year—thus necessitating the securing of
an export market. This special market was almost co-
incidentally created by the policy adopted by Great Brit-
ain of granting preferential treatment in import duties
to Dominion products. Hence the Industry entered upon
an export trade at low values, but With the definite
knowledge that it would have to be limited, first by the
reduction created in the average value of the Australian
crop, and secondly by the preferential requirements of
Great Britain. This knowledge has been haunting the
leaders of the Industry for many years, and steps have
been taken to control production, with the result that
under present conditions any increase is due chiefly to
favourable seasonal conditions, though extra efficiency in
production, both in field and mill, is responsible for some-
of the present output of sugar. The increased produc-
tion has* of course, added to the employing capacity of
the Industry, and consequently there has been a natural
reluctance to create any more unemployment by unneces-
sarily reducing production. But whilst the grower and
miller have been realising lower values for their product,
sugar workers’ wages have not been reduced except by
variations of the basic wage, and one slight modification
in seasonal allowances, nor has their scope for employ-
ment been reduced, other than by the general improve-
ment in mechanical appliances.
So far I have, as far as possible, endeavoured to pre-
sent an external picture of the Industry, but before con-
cluding, I should like to make brief reference to some of
the special features of its internal organisation.
As has been indicated earlier, the Industry was initi-
ated on a proper commercial scale on the same system
as was generally followed in other canegrowing countries
—that is, by the plantation owner, who also established
what was at the time a more or less efficient mill, The
fieW labour and unskilled mill labour was Kanaka or
Chinese and wages were low. In almost all the areas
cane was planted on heavily timbered scrub land (32)
and prior to actual eradication of the stumps, all the
work was done with axe and saw for falling the scrub,
and with mattock and hoe for planting and cultivating
(33), (34). This system persisted up to the period 1 915-
1923, when the South Johnstone, Babinda and Tully dis-
tricts of heavy scrubs were brought into production. In
the meantime in the older areas the plough and cultiva-
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


tors came into gradual use from about the ’eighties, and
ordinary methods and implements of cultivation were
introduced. But, when in 1916 wages began to assume a
heavy item in production costs, an impetus was given
to the development of labour-saving devices, such as
weeding machines and cane planters, etc,, and with the
introduction of tractors the use of heavier field machinery
was made possible. Now, on the larger farms it is usual
to find two and three disc ploughs, grubbers, and double
row cultivators. The very latest machine introduced is
the Gyrotiller (35), which, for all practical purposes,
takes the place of a plough, roller and harrow in turning
over and pulverising the soil in a single operation in pre-
paring for the planting. Machines for harvesting cane
have been the subject of much study for many years and
three types of machine have been constructed during the
past ten years, and have been put on preliminary trials.
They have not yet reached practical application, though
the latest—the Howard Harvester —is quite within the
bounds of being a possibility (36).
Transport is a very important factor in the com-
plete picture of cane harvesting. Cane is a bulky com-
modity and transport to the mill, or even to railway
lines, by wagons and drays, was found to be definitely un-
economic (37). Consequently, there has developed a
regular transport system whereunder the mill-owners
purchased their own locomotives and laid down perman-
ent railways, reaching out to the main sources of supply,
using their own locomotives and rolling stock (38). In
many mill areas there may be from 30-50 miles of per-
manent line and from four to eight locomotives are in use
with a haulage capacity of up to 150 tons of cane (39).
As an adjunct to this system the cane is hauled from the
fields to the main line on portable line which is, in some
cases, provided by the mill and in others by the indi-
vidual grower himself. It would take from 30 to 40 miles
of portable lines to satisfy requirements in some areas.
The transport of the sugar is in most cases carried out
by Government railway to the shipping ports and thence
by Targe or small steamers to its destination as the case
may be.
Before leaving the general conditions of production,
I would like-to say a few words on the development of
the practice of irrigation of the canefields. The district
where this has become almost universal on account of
low rainfall, is the Lower Burdekin, south of Towns-
THE AUSTRALIAN, CANE SOSA R INDUS TK Y


Kanakas Hoeing Cane.
Kanakas in Cairns Court House Yard A waiting Repatriation.


Typiral Group of Kanakas.
Types of Early While Ct.
Kanakas on S.S. “Montoro"
returning to their Islands.


ville (40). In the last few years much has also been done
in the Bundaberg district, but most of the development
here has taken place on the large plantations (41), (42),
(43).
In sugar mill machinery the Industry has kept well
abreast of the times (44), (45), and, apart from the gen-
eral desire for efficiency, contributing factors have been
the high wages and the conditions of employment as well
as the necessity, particularly in later years, for reducing
working costs in order to meet the low average price
received for sugar due to the large proportion of the out-
put that has to be exported.
But high-grade machinery is not everything in a
sugar mill. In fact, it would be wasted if the technical
staff were not on the qui vive to manufacture the largest
possible percentage of the sugar existing in the cane. In
this respect the Australian Industry has reached a very
high standard, though a definitely contributing factor is
the naturally high quality of the cane grown here. Some
comparisons showing the conditions of efficiency in the
early days with those of the present may be of interest.
A friend who has had long experience gave me the
following details of performance of a plant with which
he was associated twenty-five years ago compared with
the performance of the same plant to-day. I might add
that this factory has throughout its history been kept
fully up-to-date, and is on a par with the best of the(
Queensland mills.
About 1910: 1935:
2 crushing mills in train 4 crushing mills in train
rollers 54in. x 26in. rollers 72in. x 34in.
Tons of cane crushed per Tons of cane crushed per
hour 18 hour . 78
Per cent, of sugar in cane Per cent, of sugar in cane
recovered in bag 76 to recovered in bag .. 88
78
Output of sugar—approxi- Output of sugar—approxi-
mately 7,000 tons. mately 35,000 tons.
Average say 3 or 4 lb. This
firewood is used in start-
ing the furnaces. Under
actual operation condi-
tions the woody residue
after the juice has been
Firewood required to make pressed out affords a
a ton of sugar .. Jr ton sufficient supply of fuel.
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


Next in importance is the organisation of technologi-
cal research. This particular study was probably initi-
ated, and certainly very successfully developed, by the
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Ltd. Its milling work
was closely followed by the technical men at other mills,
and in field work research the Company’s officers were
in the earlier years of this century practically the only
ones who were in a position to make intensive study on
account of the fact that they had as a basis of observa-
tions and comparisons properties throughout all the prin-
cipal canegrowing areas of Queensland, New South
Wales, and Fiji. Whilst the Queensland Government
assisted the Industry by despatching Departmental
Officers to New Guinea in search of new varieties of
cane and by a general supervision as regards entomology
and pathology, it was not until 1898 that a laboratory
was erected at the Mackay State Nursery for the purpose
of testing the qualities of cane under cultivation, with
the idea also at a later period of analysing soils, man-
ures, and mill products.
This was the genesis of the present Bureau of Sugar
Experimental Stations which was established by an Act
of Parliament passed in 1900. The funds for the adminis-
tration of this Act are raised by a levy on the Industry
of, at the present time, one penny per ton of cane crushed
at each mill, the miller and grower each paying an equal
part of such levy. The Government originally subsidised
this fund by a contribution equal to the amount levied
on the Industry, but in recent years its contribution is
limited to £7,000 per annum. The Bureau is therefore
now supported by the Industry to the extent of substan-
tially more than half of its total revenue.
For many years after its establishment the work ac-
complished by the Bureau did not appear to be giving
much result or even satisfaction to the Industry, chiefly
because as the then Director, the late, H. T. Easterby,
pointed out, great difficulty was experienced in securing
sufficient trained men to concentrate on the various
branches of research required in this connection. It was
then realised by the Director that the Sugar Industry
would have to train its own men, and eventually three
three-year travelling scholarships were provided, open
to University graduates. The three graduates who were
selected were Mr. H. W. Kerr, Mr. A. F. Bell, and Mr.
N Bennett. They specialised in separate branches—
THE AUSTRALIAN CANE SUGAR INDUSTRY


Mr. Kerr in soils, Mr. Bell in plant pathology, and Mr
Bennett in sugar mill technology. In due course they re-
turned to Queensland, and under the direction of the late
Mr. Easterby, did most valuable work both in further
research and in assisting the Industry in its practical and
technical problems. That the original selection of these
gentlemen was a step in the right direction is evidenced
by the fact that Dr. Kerr is now Director of the Bureau
of Sugar Experiment Stations, Mr. A. F. Bell is Assistant
Director, and Mr. Bennett is Manager of the Racecourse
Central Mill, Mackay, The work of the Bureau is being
carried on with the utmost efficiency and keenness, and
it has played a most important part in those practical
affairs of the Industry that often affect its economics.
From the point of view of to-night’s lecture perhaps
the most interesting illustration of the work of the
Bureau is a “Breeding Chart” showing how by inter-
breeding of different varieties with a view to eliminating
faulty characteristics and developing favourable ones, a
variety may be produced that is suited to the conditions
of growth and manufacture that are found to be most
satisfactory in Queensland (46).
Notwithstanding machinery and other aids to effici-
ent and economic production, the worker and his labour
is still the most important consideration, and, in fact,
it is economically a subject in itself. The Sugar Industry
is particularly interested because it is a large employer
of labour, both permanent and seasonal. However, from
a national point of view it is satisfactory to note that as
the Industry has developed the nomad worker has de-
creased and that many of the seasonal workers and their
families are making their homes in the sugar districts
(47), (48). I have already referred to the community
spirit that exists in the country towns and in this regard
the workers and their families, some of whom have grown
up with the district, have played no small part. All this
is a very definite contribution to the settlement of the
tropics, _ as the fact of the workers and their families en-
tering into permanent residence contributes to the de-
velopment of all those supernumerary industries that go
to make up the small townships, which are the nucleus
of the spread of further settlement.
The refining of the raw sugar is the final process be-
fore the product is placed on the market for consumers.
There are two refineries in Queensland —one at Bunda-
17


berg and the other at Brisbane: the latter is owned by
the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, which also has
refineries in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Fre-
mantle (49),
Briefly, this is the present position of the Industry,
and in conclusion I would like to make some interesting
comparisons, which clearly show how the Sugar Indus-
try has accomplished what those with faith and fore-
sight have at all times maintained it was destined to do:
that is, develop and populate North Queensland, provided
reasonable treatment were accorded it. My authority is
the official census.
In 1901 the total population of Douglas Shire, Cairns
Town, Cairns Shire, Johnstone Shire, Cardwell Shire
and Hinchinbrook Shire, was 14,665, In 1911 it had only
increased to 17,191. In 1921 in the same area the popu-
lation was 25,954, and at the 1933 census in the same area
the population was 52,659. This was an increase of over
100 per cent, in 12 years. The sugar districts south of
Townsville have also increased, but not to the same ex-
tent. In the same period—that is, between 1921 and
1933—the population of Queensland increased by 25 per
cent,, and that of the whole Commonwealth by 21.94 per
cent., so it must be admitted that the Sugar Industry is
making no small contribution to the factors of develop-
ment and employment (50).
LIST OF SLIDES REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT.
(1) Map showing the distribution of sugar areas in
Queensland and New South Wales; (2) and (3) wood-
cuts of old Brazilian mills of the seventeenth century;
(4) Scott’s grave in Gosford Cemetery; (5) Ormiston
Mill; (6) cairn erected in commemoration of the pioneers
on the site of the Ormiston Mill; (7) crop of Badila
cane; (8) early horse-driven mill at Pimpama, about
1870; (9) another mill in the same district of about the
same date; (10) The Walrus, a floating sugar mill; (11)
and (12) two views of the Clydesdale Mill; (13) and
(14) interior views in early mills; (15) and (16) mills
in the Mary district; (17) example of modern mill, Mul-
grave; (18) Kanaka labourers, the raw material; (19)
Javanese harvesting on Victoria Estate; (20) Kanaka
women hoeing cane; (21) The Rio Loge, one of the
vessels employed in the recruiting trade; (22) Kanakas
cutting cane; (23) typical group of Kanakas; (24) Ham-
18


bledon Mill, 1895; (25) Tully Mill; (26) Tully and Bab-
inda townships; (27) Kanakas in Cairns Court House
yard awaiting repatriation; (28) Kanakas on s.s. Mon-
toro returning to their islands; (29) and (30) types of
early white cutters; (31) group of present-day cutters;
(32) Northern scrub scene (rain forest); (33) planting
cane amongst the stumps; (34) type of settler’s first
home; (35) Gyrotiller; (36) Howard harvester; (37)
cane transport by punt; (38) cane transport on tramway
by locomotive; (39) view in Hambledon mill yard; (40)
irrigating in the Burdekin district; (41) Bingera weir
under construction; (42) Bingera weir completed; (43)
Bingera Mill, aerial view; (44) crushing plant of a mod-
ern mill (Hambledon); (45) boiling plant of a modern
mill (South Johnstone); (46) cane breeding chart show-
ing the genetics of 5.J.878; (47) group of school children,
Logan district, 1873; (48) recent group of school child-
ren; (49) stack of raw sugar in New Farm refinery;
(50) scenic view of the cane fields in the Barron Valley,
N.Q.
THE ILLUSTRATIONS.
The illustrations depict phases in the early history
of sugar production in this State which are gradually
passing beyond the ken of living memory. The first pic-
ture shows the boiling of the cane juice in a primitive
open battery. The relative sizes of the firewood stack
and the receptacle for the final concentrated juice will
interest those familiar with modern practice. The thick-
ened juice, on cooling, became a mass of sugar crystals
and molasses, and when transferred to a shallow wooden
box with a perforated bottom, the excess molasses
drained away, leaving a mass of moist and sticky brown
sugar. The second picture shows one of several horse-
driven mills which were operated between Beenleigh
and Pimpama about 1870- No. 3 shows another of the
early mills which evidently was of a more pretentious
character. It is believed to have stood at Orraeau. No. 4
is a reproduction of an original pencil drawing of the
Clydesdale Mill, which stood on Doughboy Creek. This
property was owned by Wm, Gibson and Sons, the de-
scendants of whom are now well known in association
with the fine modern mill and plantations at Bingera,
Bundaberg. No. 5 represents a floating mill—the Walrus
—which for a few years operated on the Brisbane River,
19


This unique vessel travelled up and down the River,
tying up and operating adjacent to the cane fields as re-
quired. No. 6 is believed to be the interior of the mill
shown in No. 3. It is of interest in showing a Wetzel
pan in operation, an apparatus which was highly regarded
before vacuum evaporation came into general use.
No. 7 shows Javanese labourers engaged in harvest-
ing and loading cane. No. 8 shows a group of Kanaka
women hoeing cane. In No. 9is seen a group of
Kanaka “boys” similarly engaged. No. 10 depicts a
group of Kanakas in the Cairns Court House yard await-
ing embarkation to return to their islands. The Kanaka
love of finery to make a good appearance on special oc-
casions is plainly to be seen, and the bicycle, upon which
the owner doubtless intended to astonish his unsophisti-
cated brethren in the islands, is a point of interest. His
“bokis” too was likely to have contained a wide selection
of goods designed for the same purpose, perhaps even
an old-fashioned musket if he could evade the watchful
eye of the Government Agent. The ferocious group
shown in No. 11 was actually taken at Hambledon, near
Cairns, and perhaps may be not inaptly described as
Kanaka raw material. No. 12 illustrates a closing phase
ip the old Kanaka days. It shows a group of “boys” on
the Montoro leaving Cairns in course of repatriation.
The last picture is a photograph of two white cane cut-
ters taken about the time of the last deportation of Kan-
akas. This is emblematic of the disappearance of col-
oured labour and the initiation of that unique experiment
of conducting a vast tropical industry without the use of
coloured labour—an experiment which 30 years’ experi-
ence has fully justified.
20
