

The Paralysis
of a Nation
A Candid Indictment of the
Policy, the Methods, and the
Morale of the Labour-Socialist
Party in Australia.
By The Honorable
BRUCE SMITH, K.C., M.P.
Liberal Association of New South Wales.
Federal and State,
1914.
SYDNEY:
BOYLAN & CO., PRINTERS, 528 KENT STREET.




THE PARALYSIS
OF A NATION
A Candid Indictment of the policy,
the Methods, and the Morale of the
Labour-Socialist Party of Australia.
By
The Honorable BRUCE SMITH K.C. M.P
The Liberal Association of New South Wales,
Federal and State.
1914.




THE PARALYSIS OF A
NATION.


ABUSE OF ENGLISH TRADE UNION
POWERS.
“We see the spectacle, the new, the
“strange, and the portentious spectacle of
“a single organisation, acting within its
“legal powers, practically threatening
“to paralyse and, in a large measure,
“actually paralysing, the whole trade and
“manufacture of a community, which lives
“on trade and manufacture.’’
(Speech by the Right Hon. Arthur Bal-
four in the House of Commons, on The
Minimum Wage Bill, March 21, 1912.)


CONTENTS.
Chapter. Page.
I. Australia’s Early History and
Fair Prospects. - - 1
11. The Germs of National Disease 10
111. Some Characteristics of the
Disease - - 16
IV. National Decadence - - 24
V. A Summarised Indictment * 30
VI. The Outlook 41


By the same Author.
“LIBERTY AND LIBERALISM,” 1887.
(A Protest against undue interference by
the State ■with individual liberty, private
enterprise and the rights of property).
Longmans, Green & Co,, London.
Jas. Robertson & Co., Melbourne and
Sj'dney.
“OUR COMMONWEALTH,” 1904.
Edwards Dunlop & Co,, Sydney,
“HONOUR TO WHOM HONOUR IS
DUE—A FEDERAL RETROSPECT,”
1899.
McCarron Stewart & Co., Sydney.
“FREE TRADE ASSOCIATIONS.”


PREFACE.
This brochure has been written in the
hope of drawing the serious attention of a
busy and pleasure-loving people to the
origin, growth and steady development of
a political disease that has come to Aus-
tralia from the revolutionary hotbeds of
Europe, and which, if not treated promptly
and drastically, as we treat leprosy, small-
pox, and other foul diseases in the human
body, will in a short time overwhelm the
body-politic of our otherwise fair lend, and
end in veritable revolution. There are class-
embittered men engaged in the spread of
this disease, who, whilst decrying wealth
and commercial progress, are secretly lining
their own pockets, and inducing others to
join them, by direct and indirect promises
of n share in the political plunder.
The writer is breaking no new' ground :■
for as far back as 1887 he saw the approach
of this socialistic curse, and publicly pre-
dicted the dire condition of things in which
Australia now r finds herself, as outlined in
the following pages.
B. S.
Sydney, Aug. 1, 1914.




CHAPTER I.
AUSTRALIA’S EARLY HISTORY AND
FAIR PROSPECTS.
It is, generally acknowledged by students
of history, as a deduction from the world’s
experience in the art of government, that
the law of the “survival of the fittest”
applies, to nations, as well as to other and
simpler forms of animate nature. The
world has witnessed uncountable experi-
ments in nation-making, almost endless in
their variety and circumstances; and it is
an admittedly sound conclusion, from those
experiments, that the British people—up to
a late stage in their history—afford the
most splendid example of successful politi-
cal government that the world has ever
known. And that estimate was not merely
the opinion of the British themselves, or
of other English-speaking peoples, but has
been endorsed by many of their most com-
petent foreign critics in historical literature
and journalism.
If this deduction be correct, then the
Australasian people are an offshoot of a
race, the members of which long since
proved themselves the most notable nation-
builders in the world’s history; and it is
now nearly one hundred and thirty years,
since the first migration from the mother-
country to the antipodes entered upon the
experiment of colonisation.


The earliest history of Australia as a
Crown Colony witnessed a form of govern-
ment that was of a direct character, through
official heads, in the selection of which the
citizens had little, if any, choice or re-
sponsibility ; but the real history of
Australia, in regard to the art of self-gov-
ernment, dates approximately from the
middle of the nineteenth century, about
which time —generally speaking—the divi-
sion of the Australian people into six
national groups may be said to have taken
place; and the granting of representative
government then threw upon those groups,
few the first time, the task of responsible
self-support and self-regulation.
The colonists of Australia had been
largely, if not almost exclusively, of British
origin; and they brought with them to their
adopted home the keys of a transplanted
national greatness, equal to that of the
mother-land, in the form of a body of deep-
rooted and abiding British traditions,
British national ideals, British social cus-
toms, British laws, and a British law-
abiding disposition; for it has been long
since laid down by the highest British legal
authorities that “settlers from the mother-
country carry with them such portions of
the Common and Statute laws as are ap-
plicable to their new situation,’’ and that
“they also enjoy the rights and immunities
of British subjects.”
2
THE PARALYSIS OF A NATION.


The Australian people, then, brought
with them to their adopted home two great
and valuable characteristics —the pride and
privilege of having sprung from the greatest
and most successful governing power in the
world’s history, and the responsibility of
having inherited the most liberty-loving in-
stincts of all the world’s peoples. More-
over, they still carry this responsibility in
the estimation of the outside world.
The Australian people, in the main, have
ever shown a just pride in their inherited
national flag, and its fine associated tradi-
tions, as well as in the splendid prowess
and prestige, of which it has become the
world-wide symbol. They have been equally
proud of the national characteristics and
the universally—, if secretly-envied, racial
ideals, so long associated with Great
Britain's history; and, further, they have,
in the past, entertained the deepest rever-
ence for certain first principles of govern-
ment, which have' constituted the basis, if
not the very tap-root, of their racial civilisa-
tion and national success, of which charac-
teristics and ideals the following are the
most important;—
Unquestioned respect for the principle
of individual liberty, of thought, of
action, of speech, of religion, and of
enterprise, which have ever been re-
garded as the inalienable rights of
every British citizen, subject to their
enjoyment being compatible with the


equal liberty of each arid every of his
fellow citizens.
Unqualified recognition of the national
advantage of the individual enterprise
of citizens, in the exercise of those
rights and liberties.
Universal regard for the rights of private
property, which has been acquired in
accordance with the laws of the coun-
try.
The personal characteristics which lie at
the root of these general principles of Gov-
ernment have been equally widely ac-
knowledged and respected—i.e.
The love of individual freedom.
The spirit of self-help, of self-reliance,
and of self-respect.
The recognition of the equal rights of
one’s fellow citizens.
All these standards of national well-being
came in the atmosphere, as it were, from
the mother-country with her early colonists;
and all who subsequently came as pioneers
found these national characteristics pre-
sent, and respected them as inherent in the
people, as well as indispensable to their
continuous national success.
In the courtly and picturesque language
of one of the greatest and most eloquent
champions of liberty—Edmund Burke—
“ Our freedom has its pedigree and its
illustrous ancestors; it has its bearings and
its ensigns armorial; it has its gallery of


portraits, its monumental inscriptions, its
records, evidences and titles.”
The freedom of the British people long
since reached the distinction and dignity of
proverb; and its emulation has become the
noblest aspiration of enlightened monarchs
of other countries, ambitious for the good
government of their own people, and suffi-
ciently statesmanlike to realise its splendid
civilsing and uplifting influence in the
evolution of a race. Nor is this racial heri-
tage an ephemeral asset of the British
people; for, as Professor Hearne said, in
his “Government of England,” nearly
half a century ago: ‘ ‘While the mechanical
contrivances of political inventors have
crumbled away in the hands of the pro-
jectors, the goodly tree of British freedom,
selecting from the kindly soil, and assim-
ilating its fit nutriment, still increases its
stately bulk t and still extends its un-
equalled development. Outliving the storms
and the vicissitudes of centuries, deeply
rooted in the habits and the affections of
the people, it spreads far and wide its
hospitable shade, and, like that typical
mustard tree, in whose over-shadowing
branches the fowls of the air find shelter,
it affords in the evil days, to many a weary
whig, and many a scared and fluttering
guest, a secure asylum and an inviolable
home.”
It would be an incomplete sketch of the
history of British freedom, which the Aus


traliau people brought with them as a
heritage from the mother land, were it not
acknowledged that, at the root of it all, lay
the splendid spirit of Christian teaching,
out of which had grown that fine sense ot
fair play, that generous impulse of “give
ajnd take” and “live and let liye”—dn
short, that world-conquering principle of
good will, that underlies all religions and all
philosophies—to “do unto our neighbours
as we would they should do unto us.”
But, as with all human blessings that
we have long enjoyed, there is a tendency
to lose count of the value of liberty, and
of its cost to those from whom it has come
down to us as a heritage. As De Lolme, the
French historian, said, in his work on the
“British Constitution,” written over a cen-
tury ago: “The English, having their eyes
open upon their liberty from their first en-
trance into life x are perhaps too much
familiar with its enjoyment to enquire with
real concern into its causes. They are like
a man who, having always had a beautiful
and extensive scene before his eyes, con-
tinues for ever to view it with indifference.”
Such are the advantages and the bless-
ings which the Australia".! people inherited
and carried away out of the history of their
progenitors. But our obligations to the
mother country did not, and do not, end
there. True to her own and her peoples’
traditions, to her spirit of generosity, and
to her live-and-let-live policy, the mother
6
THE PARALYSIS OF A NATION.


country presented to her Australian colo-
nists the whole of the Crown lands of a
continent as great as Europe, the value
of which has been estimated in many hun-
dreds of millions sterling; she floated over
Australian territory her now almost sacred
national flag, and thus guaranteed the
national safety of her antipodean colonists
for over one hundred and twenty years —-
free of cost 1 By that guarantee, she en-
abled the Australian people to borrow, for
public purposes, upwards of two hundred
millions of money, at rates of interest lower
than can be obtained by many European
countries, and so aided them in opening
up and making accessible to her people the
remotest portions of her extensive territory,
as well as in developing her marvellous
resources.
Thus, by the generosity of the mother
land, a comparatively small fragment of the
British people were placed in possession of
a magnificent continent, fruitful in soil,
rich and varied in climate, and made in-
violate by land and by sea.
Until the year 1890, the Australian people
remained so favoured; their mother-land
traditions were gloried in, their national
ideals were cherished, and their once univer-
sal customs were tenaciously observed and
respected. Meanwhile, the broad and gener-
ous principles of the common laws ot
Broat Britain were revered and emulated
iu Australian local legislatures, and the


national characteristics which had been
brought from the mother land were jeal-
ously maintained, and even elevated into
the sphere of racial traditions. Why? Be-
cause the widespread fame of those tradi-
tional traits had made the people of Britain
respected everywhere, as one of the finest
examples of civilisation —not a cold-blooded,
calculated civilisation, but one of an
humanitarian character, in the best sense
of that term, as springing from a voluntary
and spontaneous national altruism; be-
cause, also, wherever she conquered she
carried her civilisation, her freedom, and
her love of liberty, as well as the spirit
and abiding principles of Christianity.
In these circumstances all necessary Aus-
tralian “statute” laws were without ques-
tion, framed in the spirit of true liberalism;
and the common laws of England, based as
they are on the principle of fair dealing
between man and man, were willingly al-
lowed to operate in Australian courts, with
as few- as possible of local statutory innova-
tions. Emigrants came to our shores from
all quarters of the world, without under-
going the embargo of local insular prejudice;
population increased by leaps and bounds;
commerce advanced with rapid and length-
ening strides; industries multiplied in vari-
ety and magnitude; each year’s record of im-
ports and exports belittled its predecessor;
unlimited money for developmental purposes
flow r ed freely to our shores from the mother


land, at moderate rates of interest; and the
whole world was clamouring for our ex-
panding trade; so that the fair land of Aus-
tralia was on the high road to become a
second United States, in regard to both her
national growth and her material and social
progress.
Such were the inherited traditions, the
recognised and cherished political principles,
and the flourishing prospects of the Aus-
tralian people as an off-shoot of the British
race up to the year 1890, when the seeds
of a political blight, and the germs ot
national paralysis, traceable to European
sources, settled upon our fair continent.


CHAPTER II.
THE GERMS OF NATIONAL DISEASE.
I have spoken of the magnificent heritage
that came to the Australian people at the
beginning of their national history, as a
result of the generosity of the mother land,
and of the magnanimous spirit that has
ever been associated with her traditional
liberty, and with her people’s sympathy
for every form of honourable pioneering
enterprise. The magnificent donation of
a whole continent, as large as Europe, to a
mere handful of her people, and the equally
splendid gift of a body of traditions and
constitutional principles, which the mother-
land had tested at her own vital cost, and
built up over centuries of troubled and, in
some cases, bloody history —following re-
actively on her own former conquest and
subjection by a foreign power—served to
launch Australia, as a baby nation, on a
\ eritable flood of prosperity. For over a
century the more material gift of landed
estate, and the placing at her disposal of
practically unlimited capital, supplied her
with a fund, out of which to people and
give easy access to her unexplored territory,
as fast as it could be utilised; and the
political and constitutional gilt of a
knowledge of the art of government aSorded
her guides and precedents for the social
regulation of an enterprising and rapidly


increasing population. So deeply rooted
were these transmitted standards of good
and successful government that they served
for half a century as finger posts to every
legislature of the several colonies into
which the Australian continent was
divided.
This progressive state of things continued,
with only intermittent and comparatively
unimportant lapses, till the year 1890; and,
under the influence of this regime, the
national expanse of Australia had been
almost phenomenal. The country, as a
field for energetic and enterprising men and
women, had become so attractive that the
population from within and without multi-
plied in a striding ratio; national wealth in-
creased with geometrical progress; the
volume of the country’s exports of the
results of her people’s energy and enter-
prise grew amazingly; the country’s im-
ports, as an index to the people’s purchas-
ing capabilities, mounted up in equally
expanding proportions; the inward and out-
ward shipping of the Australian ports, as
an indjex to the country’s commercial
virility, showed rapidly-increasing tonnage
results; the employment of willing workers
of every occupation was full, continuous
and highly remunerative; the prices of the
necessaries of life were normal and reason-
able; the relationship of employers and
workmen, and of the various classes of
society, towards one another, were mutually
friendly, tolerant, trustful, and considerate;
11
THE OEEMB OF NATIONAL DISEASE.


and the legislation which was passed
through the several Parliaments was al-
most invariably conceived and framed in
the interests of the whole people, free from
any observable class bias.
Such was the favourable condition of the
Australian branch of the British people,
when, in the year 1890, there was sown upon
the fair land of Australia the seeds of a
fell disease; a veritable social and political
malady, which has spread from year to
year like an orchard pest, sapping the
peoples’ traditional love of freedom, under-
mining their reverence for the high con-
ceptions of peace, order, and good govern-
ment, which had grown up and prevailed
among their progenitors for a thousand
years, and striking at the root of the mutual
good-will, that had hitherto existed between
the various classes that go to make every
truly progressive community.
Springing out of the new historical ship-
ping strike of 1890, a body of men, incensed
at their own class failure to secure an
unjust and arrogant control over the in-
dustrial activities of the colony of New
South Wales, and to dominate the manage-
ment of the industrial property of their
employers, for their own class ends, suc-
ceeded in working up a heated appeal to
the less responsible manhood of the colony,
and were elected as representatives 01
“Labour,” to sit in its Parliament. They
were not pioneers or the sons of pioneers,
12
THE PARALYSIS OF A NATION.


who might be supposed to be labouring
unjustly under some well-grounded griev-
ances against the Government of the day,
in regard to class, wrongs, but, in a large
measure, a body of newcomers to the coun-
try, who had brought with them, and
already widely scattered, the seeds of un-
rest and discontent, bred of an European,
continental impatience with the social con-
tent and law-abiding instincts of the British
people; a body of men absolutely inexperi-
enced in commerce, finance, industrial ad-
ministration, and the many other complex
activities by which national progress and
the peoples’ well-being are created and
maintained.
These men entered the New South
Wales legislature; and, although forming
a small minority of the Parliament, they
immediately assumed the attitude and the
arrogant air of victors, and embarked upon
a scheme for slowly undermining the recog-
nised principles and methods of responsible
government; for striking at the democratic
root of majority rule; for converting Parlia-
mentary procedure into a system of political
barter and political party bribery; and for
stripping the representatives of the people
°f their rights as free members of a free
community, as well as entangling them by
•low degrees in a web of party thraldom,
destructive alike of their manhood and their
They forthwith set up a dis-
honest party-objective, in openly and blat-
antly espousing the policy of favouring


their own class, regardless of its reflex
cSeots upon their own and their fellow
citizen’s respect for and sense of fair deal-
ing. They offered, with insolent and
shameless candour, to barter their Parlia-
mentary support for a sufficient considera-
tion; boasting that they were “up for sale
to the highest bidder,” and ready to
exchange “support for legislative conces-
sions.” They avowed their intention of
securing control of the country’s legislative
powers, not to be used for the welfare of
“the whole people,” but in the special in-
terests of their own class—in short, “for
labour”! They resented, and aggressively
expressed revengeful class feelings in re-
gard to, the just and equal operation of the
law in prohibiting and punishing intimida-
tion and violence by members of their
organisations, who had refused to work for
the current industrial wage, and claimed
the right to forcibly and brutally prevent
those who wished to do so from exercising
their personal freedom in the earning of a
livelihood.
From 1890, onwards, the Labour move-
ment gradually drifted towards the prin-
ciples of Continental Socialism, and away
from the long recognised British principle,
that a strong nation must be made up ol
strong individual citizens, who maintain an
individual independence, and scorn to re-
gard, or be regarded, by their fellow
citizens, as leaning posts for all and sundry,
including those who prefer to shirk life’s


duties and responsibilities. By the year 1901
or ’2, the paralysing policy of socialism had
become the party’s openly-accepted and, in
some eases boasted, creed; and the party has
since spread its baneful influence over a
wider and wider field, by the gradual
demoralisation of all those to whom they
have communicated their infectious moral
malady. By a system of consumate and
crafty organisation, devised and worked by
innumerable well-paid, soft-handed and
politicaliy-ambitious officials, who skilfully
bleed the workers of substantial contribu-
tions out of the earnings, they have suc-
ceeded in enveloping all who seek, or are
forced into, membership, in a veritable
cobweb of pledges and obligations to sup-
port a programme of social revolution,
which is beyond the control or modifying
influence of otherwise moderate men, who
have themselves been encompassed in its
intricacies, and whose individuality has
been literally crushed out of existence by
the juggernaut tyranny of this organisation.
Three out of six States, and for a time
the Commonwealth itself, have been
captured in the toils of this political
octopus; and every individual who volun-
teers, or is industrially forced, within reach
°f Ha fateful tentacles, is caught up and
drawn into its capacious stomach, or
threatened to be vomited forth from the
party, because of his possessing too much
individuality, or too strong a love of freedom
to admit of easy digestion,


CHAPTER III.
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
DISEASE.
The principle of individual liberty, as the
thinking world understands that term, is
as absolutely foreign to the Labour-Social-
ist party as if the members of it had been
born and reared in the official atmosphere
of Eussia, in the most despotic period of her
history. All those who, in the exercise of
their individual freedom, do not choose to
throw in their lot with, and submit to the
tyranny of the political trades-union of their
particular industrial calling, are stigmatised,
in blackguard phraseology as “scabs” and
“blacklegs,” publicly pronounced to be
“disentitled to a Christian burial,” and
personally treated in a manner in keeping
with such brutal sentiments. So litt'e
respect is show or left for the liberty of
workers generally, that the iron hand of the
legislature has been invoked to give a
statutory preference—a legislative favourit-
ism—to those who docilely fall in line and
put on the handcuffs of their political trade
organisations; and the effect of this das-
tardly injustice is, either to compel free men
to submit to political trades-union thral-
dom or, in some cases, to be ostracised by
a legislatively-dominated court of law, as
being disentitled to exercise his civic free-
16
THE PARALYSIS OF A XATION.


dom in taking work and earning a liveli-
hood from those who are willing to employ
them. To such an extent has this reckless
and selfish disregard for the rights and liber-
ties of civilised persons been carried, that the
children of Pacific Island labourers —
brought into the community for its own
commercial purposes—-who had been born
and schooled amid our civilised conditions,
educated and Christianised in our public
schools, and nurtured in the manners and
customs of our British conventions, have
been ruthlessly forced to leave their homes
and the country of their birth, and submit
to be carried, against their will, back to
the islands of their savage ancestors, and
there be left to the brutal conditions and
surroundings of a barbarous people, prob-
ably to be gradually dragged down to the
uncivilised, heathenish, and immoral level
°f the native islanders. This, too, by a
party which ostentatiously boasts of its
policy as “humanitarian,” and as being
in keeping, if not identical, with the sub-
lime teachings of the author of the “Sermon
on the Mount,” and, on that account, en-
titled to be endorsed and supported by the
Christian churches of Australia! Such
fiendish conduct, performed in the name of
s ° sublime a teacher, merits universal and
unconditional condemnation, as the rankest
form of blasphemy. It requires only to be
considered, side by side with the civilising
traditions of the mother land, whose altru


istic citizens spend, annually, millions of
their substance in endeavouring to rescue
savage races from their heathenish and
barbarous conditions, to emphasise its cold-
blooded inhumanity. Even in regard to
their own moral well-being and sense of
self-support, the members of this political
party seem to have utterly abandoned the
commonest spirit of personal freedom, of
thought and action; for they—at first
hesitatingly, and now blatantly—make sub-
mission to intellectual and moral bondage
an indispensible requisite of entering their
ranks as Parliamentary candidates, and
subsequently bind themselves to espouse,
in and out of Parliament, a programme of
political measures framed by socialists and
revolutionary zealots, many of whom are
neither amenable to Parliament nor respon-
sible to the people for the disastrous indi-
vidual and class results which may follow
from their sinister ideas and lop-sided social
schemes. And a further step in this pro-
cess of moral declivity—involving the
degradation of our Parliamentary institu-
tions —is the absolutely undemocratic
practice of deciding questions out of Parlia-
ment, before public deliberation, and after-
wards voting, not according to their own
honest opinions, but according to the de-
cision of their own party’s majority, arrived
at in secret caucus; thus,, in many cases,
leading to a final Parliamentary settlement
of questions, affecting the welfare of the


people, by a minority vote of “the peoples’
representatives.”
It has become a commonplace in the
pages of Labour journals, and in the inflated
and irresponsible utterances of Labour
politicians, even ol those who plume them-
selves on holding balanced and respectable
opinions, to openly stigmatise different
forms of wealth as “robbery,” and success-
ful and affluent citizens as “thieves” and
“boodlers, ” and to speak, generally and
habitually, of legally-acquired wealth as
having been “filched from the toilers;” yet
a large proportion of the different forms of
property, so characterised, has in Australia,
been acquired by colonists who at one time
were among the most strenuous “workers”
of the community; whose alleged crime
consists of having singled themselves out
from the rank and file of their fellows and
risen to independence by uncomplaining
exertion over long hours, by sileut earnest-
ness of purpose, steady perseverance, self-
denying providence in expenditure, and
practical administrative business ability.
The irony of all this contemptible and
hypocritical scurrility by members of the
Labour- Socialist party lies in the fact that
many members in their own ranks are
themselves men of considerable means, who
would be accounted “rich and vulgar,” by
Labour critics, if they happend to be
ranged on the Liberal side; and many
others are as eager for a profitable specu


lation; as keen in their business dealings,
and as parsimonious in their eagerness to
accumulate the “filthy lucre’’ said to be
“filched from the toilers,” as are the most
sordid classes in the community.
Well-known members of the party have,
almost in the same breath as that in which
they abused wealth and people of substau-
trial means, when addressing meetings,
assembled to gloat over their vulgar dia-
tribes, openly, even within the walls of
Parliament, displayed as keen an aptitude
for syndicate making, “ground floor”
speculations, and company-mongering, as
the most sordid stock jobber.
And, in regard to the party as a whole;
none have been more keen than they in re-
gard to the increased Parliamentary pay and
its immediate appropriation; nor is any of
them less in l ent on accumulating what they
cun, and so becoming affluent out of the
comparatively handsome remuneration
which they receive for serving their
“down trodden” and “oppressed” fellow
“toilers.” No Labour member has yet re-
vealed himself, who has publicly recognised
the inconsistency of a representative social-
ist accepting £6OO per annum, or £l2 each
week, from the public Treasury for less
than six months’ Parliamentary work;
while so many of his alleged "oppressed”
and “starving” fellow citizens are com-
pelled to work all the year round for total
earnings equal to about one-tenth part of
his Labour representative’s aggregate!


The truth is that the Labour-Socialist
party, as a party, recognises absolutely no
code of morality in regard to the operations
of legislation. Whatever can be done by
an act of Parliament, whether by a direct
majority’ of a temporary character, or in-
directly by a system of party barter and
bargaining, in order to place an act on the
Statute book as a political placard for their
followers, is considered absolutely legiti-
mate, irrespective of its blighting and dis-
honest consequences to private citizens, or
classes of citizens; and they are, as a party,
ready to take the most conveniently elastic
view of the law itself, when, by doing so,
some party advantage or popularity seems
likely to result. All this, points to and
emphasises the sickening hypocrisy of
such “mumble-jumble” as is indulged
in when before their supporters, whilst
they are positively guffawing behind
their constituents’ backs at their sim-
plicity and gullability. And the pity
Is that these same deluded sup-
porters do not come to know the real men
they seek to elevate, because they are un-
able to strip off the thin veneer of affected
sympathy and hypocritical concern which is
professed in their presence and to their
faces, and thus expose the commonplace
deal” of their representative’s real nature
which lies underneath that thin veneer.
The spirit of self-help is a lost attribute
k 1 the Labour party's vocabulary; except in


the sense in which its members are dis-
posed to help themselves, as a party, by
legislation, to the civil rights and privileges
ol others, in accordance with their party
programme! The grinding tyranny of their
political unionism, when set in motion, is
calculated to gradually crush out the last
unexpired spark of individuality, self-re-
spect, and true' brotherhood from their
members; and if one considers the personal
helplessness ol a citizen who joins a politi-
cal union, or who refuses to join one; who
becomes a candidate for Labour representa-
tion, or who wishes to become one; who
has to enter a caucus and yet retain a rem-
nant of his own individual opinions, varying
from his party programme; who enters a
Labour Government, and yet wishes to
differ from the caucus from which he has
to take his orders; one is forced to the same
ghastly conclusion, that the spirit of self-help,
and the spirit of self-respect, have become
atrophied beyond revival, if not positively
dead, in every Labour representative, so
far as his political conscience is concerned.
It may be said that each Labour represen-
tative has left to him his moral qualities,
so far as they are exercised in regard to his
private life; and that may be technically
true; but what sort of moral sense can be
left in a man of moderate or average ability
and individuality, after years of that
hypocrisy and positive blasphemy, which
is involved in trying to persuade himself


and others —as has been attempted—that
there is any sort of parallel between the
legislative brigandage and lop-sided moral
sense of the Labour-Socialist policy, and
the tender, self-denying altruism of the
teachings of Christ! Surely the conscious-
ness of participating in the systematic
doctrine of class selfishness, that is involved
in every aspect of the Labour policy, must,
in a very short time, have dulled every
sense of decency and fair-mindedness in a
naan’s political or even personal outlook.


CHAPTER IV.
NATIONAL DECADENCE.
1 have said that, beneath the fine tradi-
tions of the British people, under which the
greatness of our race was built up and long
maintained, there were developed certain
splendid personal characteristics —a fine
love of freedom, a wholesome spirit of self-
help, a manly pride in the sense of self-
reliance and self-respect, and, above all,
a genuinely-honest consciousness of the
obligation of fair dealing between man and
man. And, first, as to the love of freedom.
Consider the actions and the policy of the
Labour-Socialist party in regard to the har-
monious working of capital and labour. The
members of the party literally clamoured,
for years for some statutory method of com-
pulsory settlement of industrial disputes;
professing to be shocked at the “brutality
of strikes’’; and they ultimately secured
such a method, because they were believed
to be honest, and genuine in the reasons
upon which, they based their advocacy. The
professed object of this judicial contrivance
■was to prevent the more cruel and primi-
tive method. How have the Labour party
shown their genuine abhorrence for indus-
trial strikes, or any genuine respect for
those tribunals by which they were to be
prevented? Trades unionists have first


tried those tribunals by systematically de-
manding twice what they were willing to
accept, in the hope and expectation that
the judge would “split the difference.”
When the decision has been given in their
favour, they have been unable to find words
of too great or fulsome praise, in which to
describe the wisdom and justice of the
judge; but, when the decision has been in
favour of the employer; then the judge has
been characterised by the same party as
“biased,” “incompetent,” “unfit”; and a
demand has been made for “more capable”
judges, who would be more “sympathetic”
towards unionism! Trade unionists have
struck again and again, either in the teeth
of the courts or, instead of referring their
disputes to them; and they have struck again
and again in the face of judicial decisions,
which they did not approve. And this has
taken place in all the States where courts
of abritration were established. They have,
again and again, expressed and shown con-
tempt lor the orders of the courts, and
absolutely trampled on the decisions that
they had originally invoked the court to de-
liver but which, being parties to a dispute,
they did not find to their liking. The act
has everywhere been a farce; and, in some
oases, its results, so far as the “Labour”
People are concerned, have been a scandal
a nd a reproach. All this has been the work
of the trades-unionists themselves; but
what of their representatives, who noisily


clamoured for and agitated till they secured
the legislation under which these courts
were established ? They have known the
nature and purpose of these tribunals, and
recognised their futility unless their deci-
sions are respected. Yet, at no time in the
several years’ history of compulsory arbi-
tration in Australia, has any one of these
representatives, who were so eager to pre-
vent strikes by legislation, exercised the
freedom, and displayed the common British
courage, to stand up like men before men,
and condemn the strikers for their flagrant
disregard of the court’s judgments and of
the laws, as admisintered by them. And the
leaders of the party have carried this
cowardly attitude so far, that Ministers ol
the Crown, members of the Executive in a
Labour Government—the King’s Ministers
of State ! —have actually paraded the streets,
check by jowl with the law-breaking strikers
themselves, who had refused to submit
their “dispute” to the court; even contri-
buting ostentatiously to “strike” funds,
and so defying the Statute law of the coun-
try, Could moral cowardice go further, or
men in high positions stoop to a more de-
graded and degrading level than this!
And, further, as to the love of freedom.
The practice of intimidation, which lias been
manifested towards free labourers, is on a
level with the conduct of barbarous peoples,
if not ol savage races, and has rendered the
act of law-making seem truly ludicrous.
26
THE PARALYSIS OF A NATION.


The “Labour” party hag always been eager
for legislation, even in regard to the veriest
detail of human conduct, provided they
could enforce it in their own class interests,
and against those of the classes who are not
co-operating with them; yet they have
miserably and contemptibly failed to openly
and honestly condemn, or even to speak
in terms of moderate disapproval, of the
brutal and criminal intimidation that has
been frequently resorted to by unionists to-
wards free labourers or non-unionists. The
true anarchistic spirit —anarchism for their
own side only—was displayed, when, almost
on the instant of a Labour Ministry taking
office, men were released from gaol who
had been condemned for the serious break-
ing of the law 1 and another saved from a
just capital sentence, whose conduct was
beneath that of the worst type of the
brute creation that men unhesitatingly
shoot at sight.
Britain was made great in commerce, in
industry, in shipping, in exploration, in in-
vention, and in the art of mercantile
economy and administration, by the passive
encouragement accorded to the enterprise
of her citizens, and by the almost preroga-
tive freedom studiously conceded to all who
engage in these varied activities; and the
“wealth of a nation, ” which was made the
key-note of the teachings of the world’s
greatest economist, has, for over a century,
been acknowledged to be one of the chief
27
NATIONAL DECADENCE.


guarantees of national safety, and one of
ilia aims of successful statesmanship, as a
means of materially benefiting, by increas-
ing the comforts of, all classes in a com-
munity. All this world-wide teaching has
been thrown to the winds by the Australian
Labour-Socialist party, who have en-
deavoured at every turn to hamper and
restrict each and all of those economic
activities. They have, by their bartered
influence, woven a very labyrinth of condi-
tions and regulations round the feet and
hands of almost every industrial enterprise
in our midst, and ever seek to handicap the
efforts of many of them still further, by
entering into unfair state competition with
them at the expense of the people, and in the
face of the universal experience that state
enterprise is invariably more costly and
more wasteful than that of private enter-
prise. They propose, as portion of their
policy, to stifle and, if possible, kill private
enterprise, and so destroy the incentive of
self-interest, by gradually converting many
going concerns of the community into
state-run ventures; they have branded
every great and flourishing enterprise, which
is too big and too complex for their own
understanding, as a menace to the commu-
nity, and attempted to constitute each of
them, not as the result of a decision of a
competent court of law, but by a majority
party-vote of politicians, in Parliament, a
“monopoly”; so as to create a colourable


justification for converting it into a state-
run venture. And in this category of
activities, which they are unable, by
reason of jealousy or class antagonism,
to rightly understand, as affording con-
venience to the people, are specially
included: Financial institutions, invest-
ing capitalists, owners of great landed
estates, shipping companies, coal com-
panies, and a variety of other great con-
cerns which have survived the struggle of
the world’s competition, and so proved
their popular need and their economic
soundness and stability within the
limits allowed by the law.
Towards these great amt successful in-
terests, a bitter and vindictive spirit is openly
exhibited and actually sought to be practised,
either genuinely but ignorantly, in regard
to their public advantages, or hypocritically
because contributory to the great conspiracy
of social upheaval, which has been inspired
by continental and international ideals,
based on class hatred, and the selfish and
jealous spirit of its advocates.
29
NATIONAL DECADENCE.


CHAPTER V.
A SUMMARISED INDICTMENT.
I came now to summarise the public con-
duct of the Australian Labour-Socialistic
Party, considered as a corporate body or
band of political disturbers, conspiring to
produce a “step-by-step” social upheaval.
Leaving individuals to themselves and their
consciences, and treating the wide-spread
organization as a whole, on account of its
members either ruthlessly championing, or
sanctioning, without rebuke, the socially-
dostructive utterances of their fellows;
I charge them with ignorant or blatantly-
purposeful disloyalty to the British Empire,
and with the basest ingratitude to the
mother country, to which we owe our natio-
nal start in life, and our safety for more
than a, century of progress.
I charge them with ingratitude to the
mother country, and with ignoring Austra-
lia’s Imperial obligation, by refusing in
1903 to contribute a miserable pittance of
£200,000 a year to the up-keep of the Bri-
tish Navy; and with refusing to equip Aus-
tralia to assist in the defence of the whole
Empire, upon which the safety of Austra-
lia depends, until constrained to do so,
later, on political grounds, by the force of
loyal public opinion.
30
THE PARAtYSIS OF A NATION.


I charge the Labour Party of Australia
with a wicked and reckless indifference to
the time-honoured principles of civilised
citizenship, and with a defiant and irre-
sponsible disrespect for the political in-
tegrity of their own adopted country, in
endeavouring to break up the Federal
national partnership of Australia —deliber-
ately and solemnly entered into fourteen
years ago, after sixty years of deliberation
—and to substitute for it a hybrid form of
Unitary Government which they, with
limited knowledge of history, think likely
to prove favourable to their own class.
I charge them with a reckless disregard
of the common principles of honesty, in
their legislative schemes and proposals for
dealing with the time-honored rights of pro-
perty, acquired in accordance with the laws
of the country; and with secretly entertain-
ing, and unwittingly exhibiting, simul-
taneously, all the fervour for personal and
individual acquisition for themselves, which
they blatantly condemn in others as
"greed” and as the "wealth curse.”
I charge them with a hypocritical and
blasphemous attempt to play upon the
humanitarian side of churchmen, who
stand at the head of Christian congrega-
tions, by impudently claiming—with their
tongue in their cheek —a parallel between
their own selfish policy of social disruption
and hypocritical class-grasping, and the
gentle altruism and self-sacrificing ad


monitions of the great Master; by daring
in that connection, to drag into political
controversy —. for party purposes the
sacred names of “Jesus” and “Calvary.”
I charge the Party with hypocrisy ot
another land —in professing to desire the
representation of working men by working
men, whilst in fact creating a sort of La-
bour aristocracy, largely composed of men
who have followed occupations wholly un-
connected in any direct sense with the
workers, or (in the language of Mr. Hodge,
the British Labour representative) “alien-
ated from the workers by birth and train-
ing;” and I charge them with choosing this
bogus type of Labour representative be-
cause of their platform fluency, and seem-
ing skill to co-operate in the great Inter-
national European conspiracy of social
upheaval which lies at the root of the
Labour-Socialist movement in Australia,
thus excluding bona fide working-class
representatives, who are in close, intimate
and sympathetic touch with the genuine
workers of the country.
I charge the Party with having, in every-
way in their power, perverted the demo-
cratic purpose of Parliament, as a means of
preserving the peoples’ liberties and safe-
guarding them from the tyranny and op-
pression of their fellows; and, contrary to
that ideal, of using it to the advantage of
themselves and their own class, as an
engine of tyrannical and oppressive restric


tion and injustice to all those productive
activities of the people which are essential
to full commercial and industrial advance-
ment, economic progress, and the har-
monious working of all the social forces of
the Community.
I charge the Labour Party with a spirit
of disloyalty to Empire, in openly refusing
for years, until compelled by political con-
siderations, to take a part in Empire-Day
celebrations; and not only countenancing,
but co-operating, politically and sym-
pathetically, with another section of the
people, that has similarly ignored such
demonstrations, and encouraged the grow-
ing generation, among their school chil-
dren, to do so, thus sowing the seeds of
Imperial disunion.
I charge them with hypocritically pro-
fessing “democracy,” and yet, transgressing
its essential principles on every possible
occasion, and in every possible form, where
the honest practice of its beliefs would in-
terfere with their own selfish class ends.
I charge them with professing to respect
the law, and yet, unprotestingly, allowing
their Ministers, as servants of the Crown,
to break the spirit and letter of their oats
of allegiance, in flouting the authority of
the Crown, by subscribing to the funds of
law-breakers, and joining in their proces-
sions, in glorification of such breaches.
I charge them with professing a desire
to establish and maintain liberty of citizen-
33
A SUMMARISED INDICTMENT.


ship, and yet, denying the right of equal
freedom to all those who, in the exercise of
their equal freedom, decline to join their
socialistic and liberty-destroying organisa-
tions.
I charge them with boasting of their
belief in “the equality of all,’’ whilst ap-
proving, or knowingly failing to disapprove,
of sentiments of criminal and brutal
cruelty to all who attempted to compete
with them in earning an honest livelihood,
outside the arbitrary and socialistic
organisations of unionists.
I charge them with having systematically
agitated lor the legal regulation of indus-
trial relationships between employer and
employees, by which all disputes were to
be amicably settled, and all wasteful con-
flict avoided; and yet, whilst holding the
employer amenable to such laws, them-
selves ignoring the decisions of the statu-
tory tribunal, whenever not favourable to
their own selfish class aims: thus plunging
the community into endless strife, incon-
venience, cost and bitterness, for their own
lawless, selfish and reckless ends.
I charge them with professing to recog-
nise the supremacy of the law and the in-
stitution of responsible government; and
yet, flouting that institution, by defying
the authorities, and endeavouring to re-
duce the communities of which they are
citizens, to a state of anarchy.


I charge them with professing to recog-
nise the moral basis of civilised society—
obedience to the law —and yet, openly and
blatantly ignoring every honourable prin-
ciple, in order to gain their own ends, even
at the risk of social disruption.
I charge them with professing a belief
in the benefits of civilization as applied to
human communities, and yet, for their own
selfish ends, striking at the very tap-root of
civil organization, by" ignoring the estab-
lished tribunals of the country, and, by the
practice of partisanship to their own class,
remitting the penalties imposed by the
law.
I charge them with misusing the politi-
cal machinery of the community, in order
to reach their socialistic objective, by brib-
ing a large section of the people to co-
operate with them in the Parliamentary
elections, and offering them in return
immunity from land taxation unequally
and unjustly imposed upon the larger
landed classes.
I charge them with endeavouring to sub-
vert the fundamental principles of political
economy, by attempting to increase their
own class share in monetary industrial re-
sults, and at the same time seeking to use
the legislature to prevent the employing
class from participating in the natural con-
sequences of such an economic dislocation;
that is to say, by, on the one hand, artifici-
ally raising the cost of production, and on
35
A SUMMARISED INDICTMENT.


the other hand threatening and endeavour-
ing to cut down the right to increase the
selling price of those productions.
I charge thorn with professing to disap-
prove and with openly denouncing, as
“theft and robbery,’’ the universal prac-
tice of citizens in accumulating individual
wealth against future needs, whilst secretly
endeavouring to lay up for themselves all
that they can obtain, and actually growing
rich at the expense of the people whom
they so mislead.
I charge them with allowing no oppor-
tunity to pass of appropriating to them-
selves and their class, by public appoint-
ments, all available public monies that can
be so diverted, without bringing themselves
within the meshes of the law.
I charge them with professing to de-
nounce the old Tory abuse of “privilege”
and “preference”; and, yet, openly practis-
ing those abuses in every conceivable form,
to benefit themselves as a section of the
community.
I charge them with openly introducing
into Australia, from the United States the
principles of “Tammany” corruption, in
the form of distributing highly-paid officej
upon those who favour their socialistic
principles; and with overriding the legisla-
tive enactments, designed to prevent such
abuses, and to make the public service
independent of all such political patron-
age.


I charge them with dishonestly ignoring
the process of the law A by neglecting the
executive duty to carry out the sentences
of the court, and by remitting fines im-
posed by the duly authorised judicial
officers of the monarch, to whom they have
sworn allegiance.
I charge them with loudly professing to
espouse the cause of “majority rule’’ in
Parliamentary institutions, and yet, ignor-
ing the principle in every detail, in the
treatment of legislation within their party
conclave, and in the ascertainment of
public opinion through the peoples’ repre-
sentatives.
I charge them with professing to respect
and be guided by public opinion as ex-
pressed in the response to Parliamentary
appeals to the people, and yet, utterly
ignoring the public verdict when appealed
to by Eeferenda for an endorsement of their
party’s policy.
I charge them with loudly proclaiming
and professing to honestly believe in the
principle of “one vote, one value,” and
yet, resorting to various forms of “gerry-
mandering” the constituencies, in order to
secure the voting conditions of accidental
growth and shrinkage of the electorates,
and by moving bodies of workmen, favour-
able to their policy, to different parts of the
country, in order to utilise their voting
power in by-elections.


I charge them with ignoring the Refe-
renda results of 1910, which negatived
their appjeal to the people for greater
legislative power, by a quarter of a million
votes; and, after such a damning verdict
had been pronounced by the people, using
the inequitably obtained majority of repre-
sentatives, to place upon the Statute Book
numerous measures, designed to favour
their own class, and to ignore the general
welfare of the people,
I charge them with persistently
threatening citizens with nationalization,
in order to please certain of their more
reckless followers; and yet, never attempt-
ing to put that impracticable principle into
practice.
I charge them with endeavouring to
frighten the people, by asserting that
dangerous and corrupt industrial Trusts
and Combines existed in Australia by which
the people were being plundered; and yet,
alter years of ministerial office, having
failed to establish in a court of law, the
existence of one single instance.
I charge them with loudly proclaiming
certain industries to be injurious Trusts
and Combines, operating to the detriment
of the people; and yet, maintaining a
suspicious and significant silence in regard
to others, closely associated with the United
States methods, even though frequently
urged to put their alleged principles to
practical tost.


I charge them with openly flouting the
f'onstitution, in regard to the obligation of
the Commonwealth Authorities to aid the
States, where legally called upon to do so,
in order to prevent the extension of civil
disturbances.
I charge them with professing to favour,
and to consider essential to the national
welfare, the Compulsory Drill and dis-
cipline of the youth of the country; yet ex-
hibiting a cowardly neglect to enforce the
laws they have boasted of placing on the
Statute Book, and at the last moment of
seeking_ to escape from their duty, by en-
deavouring to throw the expense of the
drilling hours upon the employers.
Lastly, I charge them generally with
ignoring the spirit of honour, of fair deal-
ing, and of common honesty in all their
political activities, where the result seemed
likely to afford their party a chance of some
political advantage.
And the most pathetic of ail those con-
siderations which are prompted by dwelling
on the subtle schemes and selfish methods
of the Labour Party is that so many keen,
fluent, and in some respects capable men,
who might with increased historical know-
ledge, with less class prejudice, and by
being released from their moral handcuffs,
have been of service to their country,
should have succumbed to the temptation
to enter Parliament by the easy, but ab-
ject means, which the party discipline pro


vides; and, as the price of doing so should
have so far forfeited their individuality,
personal freedom and self respect, as Bri-
tish citizens.
If, as a result of a long course of Labour-
Socialist rule, with all its destructive
effects, it should happen that the liberty-
loving and self-respecting portion of the
Australian people and their belongings are
reduced to a condition of decadence, by
reason of their own indifference in the past:
then that Labour Socialist conspiracy will
have the melancholy satisfaction of wit-
nessing the remains of a once prosperous
country, from which, the beginnings of
another sadder, hut wiser community, will
doubtless arise.


CHAPTER VI.
THE OUTLOOK.
The greatest thinker of the 19th century
—Herbert ' Spencer—(in correspondence
with the present writer) said of Australia,
a few years ago, that in his. opinion “The
Wave of Socialism was so high and so
strong, that nothing but bitter experience
to be suffered hereafter, could produce a
reaction in public opinion;” and there is
good reason to believe that this serious
national prediction by that great political
physician has to some extent, and will, in
the future, be still further verified.
Australia has recently been, and is in a
lesser degree still on the crest of a wave
of prosperity, almost unparalleled in her
history ; because her soil and her climate,
in the good years which she is enjoying,
coupled with the energies of her virile
population, render it well nigh impossible to
retard the ratio of her progress according to
her population; but there can be little
doubt that if, during the period that has
elapsed since the blight of the Labour
Party fell upon her political institutions,
she had enjoyed the conditions of Tree
Government which preceded that party’s
advent, her population would now have
been greater by many millions, Instead of
having stood practically at a standstill.


Her economic productiveness would have
been enormously augmented; and both the
industrial condition and the social well-
being of her people would have been not
only greatly improved but established on a
sound, economic basis, resting on a spirit
of goodwill between all classes, instead of
dangerously artificial and class-conflicting
foundations. As a consequence, her repu-
tation in the world as a country governed
on sound recognised principles, would have
attracted unlimited wealth for her fullest
development in every department of human
industry: and her considerable untold re-
sources, now only being scratched, would
have been opened up on a scale scarcely
conceivable under present restricted condi-
tions. And, as a further result, her poten-
tialities for all classes of her rapidly-grow-
ing population, would have been such as
she has never known. Instead of enjoying
this solid reputation, and reaping the
national rewards, wo find the surplus
wealth of the world; that is seeking for
investment, flowing to other countries,
even in preference to our own, and in pro-
portions that have astonished all who are
unable to trace the causes of the diversion ;
because those who control its course in the
world’s channels of finance hesitate to ex-
pose their capital investments to the crude
and threatened confiscatory legislative ex-
periments of a body of men, who imagine
that the world only began to think at the
42
THE PARALYSIS OF A NATION.


date of their own birth, and that the legisla-
tive regulation of human affairs was never-
thought of before they applied their pren-
tice hands to the work at the antipodes.
This is the one true test of the extent of
the injury to Australia by reason of the
Labour-Socialist curse that has fallen on
her people and their affairs; not how
well Australia is faring to-day, in the
midst of f;ne seasons and favourable
markets for her produce abroad; but how,
under her magnificent natural circum-
stances, the present success compares
with that which might have been, if she
had been continuously governed, in accor-
dance with the principles that have ob-
tained without exception in every per-
manently-progressive nation that the
world has witnessed.
Many, who are not acquainted with the
details of Australian history naturally ask
how it is that a country, springing from so
virile and free a race, with a strain of the
Viking in their blood, should have allowed
this Socialistic curse, to settle upon and
spread itself, like an orchard pest, over so
many of its important institutions, and
thus demoralize the younger generations of
its people. The answer is not difficult.
The earlier populations of the Australian
Colonies were so successful, and so fully
occupied in the prosecution of their various
enter-prises, that they never concerned them-
selves with the problems of government.
43
THE OUTLOOK.


There was, up to twenty-five years ago,
a sufficiency of public men, who took part
in their country’s political management, on
patriotic grounds, and without, payment for
their services; and they were, for the most
part, men who had read without prejudice,
and were free from bias, and who under-
stood the world’s history as well as the
principles, upon which all permanently-
successful nations have been built up.
Prom that time forward, politics have be-
come a profession; and, while the classes
who left the management of public affairs
to their patriotic neighbours, have con-
tinued to disregard their civic duty to take
an active interest in the choice of represen-
tatives, the trades-unionists have gradually
converted their “friendly” organisations
into political and socialistic centres, and
“step by step” secured control of the legis-
lative institutions of the colonies, scattering
class promises with a liberal hand, and
using the legislative power, thus acquired,
as a means of bribing the working classes
to increased and increasing co-operation,
support at the polls. In this way
they have spread their selfish “class”
standards of what they call the “public
welfare,” through the minds of the
younger generations, and make the high-
est aim of their representatives, not
what they can do for, the whole people, but
what they can appropriate for their own


class, through the medium of Parliament,
which they control to suit their own ends.
Nothing, now, but a public calamity can
arouse the apathetic classes to a recognition
of the cause of this fatal distemper; and
the advent of such an event is as certain
as the regular rising and setting of the
sun. Already the classes who have allowed
public matters to drift as “none of their
business,’’ are feeling the pinch of dis-
honestly-conceived, because unjust and un-
equal, laws; but it is too late to have its
effect immediately. A time will no doubt
come when the majority of the people, now
largely apathetic, will rise in their might,
and respond to a cry of “Back to the liberties
of our forefathers.’’ Then and then only;
when incalculable damage has been done
to our national credit, to our producing
power, to our commerce, to our industries,
and to the morale of our citizens, will the
thoughtful and balanced portion of our
people be awakened to the causes and the
results of their past neglect of their civic
duties; and then only will a reaction set in
for the old standards of individual freedom,
the rights of legally-acquired property, and
the national advantages of private enter-
prise, as the true “pillars” of a progressive
body-politic.
The obligation to take a keen and just
interest in the affairs of one’s country; to
insist on the establishment and mainten-
ance of honest political methods; to co-
45
THE OUTLOOK.


operate in the suppression of political buc-
caneering ; to assist their fellow citizens in
restoring morality to political life, in all
its channels; and to insist on making the
interests of the whole people, as distin-
guished from those of certain classes the
true democratic basis and test of all legis-
lative institutions as well as of all the
avenues to their membership.
Boylau & Co. Ltd., Printers, 52S Kent Street, Sydnej
