

Price 2s.
The
Hun’s Peace Bludgeon
This Book sets forth the
German scheme to cap-
ture and control the
trade of the World after
the War.
THE INDUSTRIAL AUSTRALIAN
AND MINING STANDARD
376 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.
1919.
Permission of Messrs. Hodder and Stoughton, London.




THE HUN’S
PEACE BLUDGEON
THE GERMAN PLAN TO DOMINATE THE TRADE
OF THE WORLD, DRAWN UP BY S. HERZOG,
ONE OF THEIR LEADING ENGINEERS.
Translated from the Original German by
M. L. TURRENTINE.
With a Special Introduction by
Herbert Hoover, Vernon Kellogg, and Frederic C. Walcott,
the U.S. Food Administration, Washington, D.C.
Reprinted in Australia for Complimentary Circulation only.
THE INDUSTRIAL AUSTRALIAN & Mining Standard.
1919.
Originally published by
DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY,
Garden City, New York.




THE HUN’S PEACE BLUDGEON.




PREFACE.
THROUGH many years of activity as an industrial
expert the author has gained an insight into the
conditions of German industry and into its export
activity. He has had an opportunity to compare
its development and efficiency with those of other
foreign industries. The War has created conditions
and will be followed by circumstances which will
shape and determine Germany’s export trade in the
future. These conditions must be taken into ac-
count and suitable measures adopted in preparation.
New trails will have to be blazed if we are to over-
come the obstacles ahead. An enormous task,
worthy of the German people, is to be performed.
The Author ventures to hope that the present work
may be able to contribute a little toward its accom-
plishment.
The Author.
Zurich, in the late summer of 1915.


GERMAN AUTHOR’S SYNOPSIS.
PAGE
A. Introduction 4
B. Factors Influencing or Controlling Exports 34
1. Adaptability of the Export Industry ... 34
2.. Attitude of Foreign Countries 37
3. Emigration of Domestic Industries ... 50
4. Economic Compensations 96
5. State Protection 106
6. Industrial Protective Unions lib
7. Commercial Treaties 154
8. Ways of Denationalising German
Goods 170
9. Competitive Ability - ... 184
10. Capital 190


CONTENTS.
PAGE
Preface v
Author’s Synopsis vi
Introduction xi
CHAPTER I.
The Grand Strategy of the German Commer-
cial Offensive 4
All Commerce a War—The World a Battlefield—German
System and Organization Preparing for the Campaign—
Industrial Genius, the “Terrible Weapon” of Germany—
The World’s Hatred as a Liability—The Crime of Trans-
planting German Industries —The Suppression of Scien-
tific Intercourse.
CHAPTER 11.
Forging the Thunderbolt 18
Safeguarding Strategic Secrets —The “Shining Success”
of “Unthinkable Authority”—Mobilizing the Scientists—
Inventing Substitutes for Allied Materials —Checkmating
Nature- —“Treaties,” a Temporary Expedient—Meeting
the World’s Prejudice with Guile —Denationalization, a
Commercial Masquerade—Soothing Propaganda—Meet-
ing the American Menace.
CHAPTER HI.
The Camouflage of Commerce 34
1 he Impenetrable Disguise of the Dusseldorf Drummer —
Faking the Appearance of Friendly Business —The High


Art of Imitation—Relentless Retribution Upon Allied
Interference—“Defence Statistics,” the Barometer of
the Battle —Strategic Use of the Boycott and the “Cor-
rective” Embargo.
CHAPTER IV.
“Indispensable Industries”
Imperial Military Control to Insure Exclusive Possession
of Strategic Industries—The German Plan to Eliminate
the Freedom of Science and Property—Potash a Prus-
sian Monopoly—The Inimitable Dyestuffs and Chemicals
—Principles of the Embargo Battle—Some Definitions of
“Indispensable”—The High Road to Technical Super-
iority—An Infallible Price-cutting Device.
CHAPTER V.
The Golden Guarantee and the Discipline of
Labour 66
Ihe Fusion of German Business and the German Army
: —The Benevolence of State Supervision of Industry—
Raw Material, the Tale of Vvailable Ammunition—Sur-
plus Stocks, the “Reserves” of the Trade War—Subsi-
dies and Compensations—Levying Contributions on All
Business—The Guarantee Fund—Cheap Materials—The
Composition of the General Staff—Crushing “Unthink-
able” Labour Disputes—Stopping Leaks to the Blacklist.
CHAPTER VI.
The Chinese Wall of Secrecy 82
Hounding Allied Money Out of Germany!—“Capital
Does Not Exist Independently of the State” —Prods to
Speed Up “Progress”—Compulsory Reports of Dis-
coveries—The Veil of Mystery to Enshroud German In-
ventions—“ Special Priviliges” for “Protective” Indus-
tries—Drafting Labour for Life—Strict Exclusion of
Foreigners from Teuton Enterprises’—The Ban of En-
tente Capital.


CHAPTER VII.
Diplomacy, the Advance Guard of the Export
War 96
Private Advantage and Hidden Rebates, the Basis of
German Business— Obtaining Secret Privileges Abroad-
Confidential Exchange of “Compensations”—A Tempt-
ing Bargain in Rebates and Premiums; The Prize Bait
of the Prussian Ambassador.
CHAPTER VIII.
A Feudal System of Commerce 106
The Panacea of Arbitrary Power The Unquestioned
Command of Supplies —Dispersing Workmen’s Unions
-The Universal Levy on Capital and Labour —State
Ownership of the Individual Jurisdiction Over the
Minds of Scientists.
CHAPTER IX.
Organization of the German Export Army 116
The Army Corps of the Commerical Offensive Indus-
trial Divisions in Action—The Board of Strategy—The
General Staff —Tactics of the Scientific Division —Draft-
ing and Drilling the Inventors; —Assembling the Fruits
of Genius —Capturing Foreign Inventions —The Indus-
trial Division, the Compulsory Information Bureau.
CHAPTER X.
The Export Army in Action 132
The Übiquitous Commercial Division —The Dictator of
the World’s Prices—ln Charge of the War Chest —The
Espionage Headquarters —The Men Behind the Guns
The Supreme Court of Creation Launching Propa-
ganda—The Listening Post of Kultur —The Automatic
Collection Agency—The Money Kings’ Campaign.


CHAPTER XI.
A Study in Scarlet. Ihe Proposed Treaties 154.
Blood and Bombast The Kaiser’s “Minimum De-
mands’’—The Exclusive Favouritism of Germany—Un-
limited Right to Take Allied Materials—German Super-
vision in Allied Countries—Control of the Allied Freight
Rates—Punishment of Hostile Boycotters— Restoring
the Stolen Patents—Allied Guarantees Against “In-
sufferable Discrimination”—A Warm Welcome for the
“Federation.”
CHAPTER XII.
Ihe Denationalization Dodge. An Antidote
to Hatred ....
l7O
Commerce Incognito—The Stratagem of Deceit Out-
witting the Allied Buyers-A Severe Lesson in Customs
i locedure Propaganda Under Cover—A Flank Move-
ment Through Neutral Ground.
CHAPTER XIII.
The Hereditary Workmen of Combined In-
dustries Ig
Ihe Ban on the Small Business Man—“ Permanent” and
Hereditary Labour—The Crime of Incompetence-A
Drastic Remedy for Bargain Sales.
CHAPTER XIV.
The Curb on Capital
The Kaiser’s Complaint The Predatory Allies Violate
Pf Th C pn TO ? erty ! Tl he Evil Influences °f Independence
-T he Blessings of Fmancial Bondage-German Money
tor Germany—Relation of Investments to Invasion.


INTRODUCTION
“lf THERE is anything to be gained by being hon-
est, let us be honest; if it is necessary to deceive, let
us deceive.” Thus wrote Frederick the Great in the
middle of the 18th Century the man who laid
the foundation of Pan-Germanism, which this
world war was- expected to achieve. Not content
with dominion by force of arms, we find Germany
plotting for commercial supremacy, with that in-
solent disregard of the rights of others and that te-
sort to deception that has characterized all hei
policies since Frederick the Great’s reign.
The book of which this is a translation was written
by an eminent German engineer and economist,
and published in 1915, during the second year of
the war. This book presents ingenious plans foi
driving home commercial victories at the expense ot
the trade of other countries. Like all of Germany’s
plans affecting other nations, the entire conception
depends upon deceit and a superselfishness; not one
word touching upon reciprocity, not one word in
recognition of any international obligations.
It was obviously written exclusively for home
consumption, and not intended for those outside the
Iron Circle. It should be a warning to us. We
should study it with care, and keep our eyes and ears


alert for other warnings of this sort, that in peace
we may be prepared to meet this design of, commer-
cial rapine, this crushing of the industries of other
countries.
hor forty years the Germans have been plotting to
lealize their dream of Pan-Germanism—eventual
world conquest and dominion. For two genera-
tions they have been thinking in terms unknown or
little understood by an innocent and unsuspecting
world. Ihe Prussian philosophy that might makes
right, that the State is supreme, has completely
possessed the ruling and upper classes of Germany,
both military and commercial, until deception and
baud form the background of their most important
international relations and undertakings. They have
made Germany an inherently dishonest nation.
Their military plans were successfully concealed
for years, and when their dreams of conquest did
outcrop occasionally, there were few with an inti-
mate enough knowledge of the complete premedi-
tated and systematic degeneration of the German
official character to read the handwriting on the
wall.
Well organized and comprehensive espionage and
insidious German propaganda have been at work
for two generations to plan the success of German
victories. In the early go’s of the last century, the
German Volkschule was organized to teach the
masses absolute subserviency to the upper and gov-
erning classes, whose education diverged from that
of the lower classes at the age of seven or eight.
The education of these two classes has been so di


vergent for thirty years that the effects are now
clearly traceable in the younger men in the Army, as
contrasted with the members of the Landsturm
/\rmy. The Landsturm men are much more hu-
mane, and have a restraining influence in the Army.
They have not been guilty of the excesses that are
chargeable to the younger men. The younger men,
schooled from infancy under the new system to obey
orders in a machine-like way, under Prussian leader-
ship, have become so ruthless, so crpel, that the en-
tire civilized world looks on aghast.
German rule means the breaking-down of all order,
the exchange of personal liberty and national free-
dom for force, of right for might, of justice for the
mailed fist. . ,
The world should have been forewarned. Books
were written, maps constructed, by well known Ger-
man authorities for the enlightenment of the Ger-
man people, and these books reached the outside
world, but civilization, accustomed to the pursuits
of peace, turned a deaf ear, and is now paying the
penalty for refusing to see and hear.
Now another conception comes out of the heart
of Germany, that threatens the commercial interests
of unsuspecting nations —carefully thought out, with
characteristic German thoroughness, openly advo-
cating the breaking down of all business ethics, re-
lying upon trickery and circumvention to gam
their end. This promises to stop at nothing, from
national dumping of goods to crush competition to
false labels and disguise of the origin and the break-
ing of contracts that prove disadvantageous to the
German.


Let the manufacturing and banking interests and
the labouring and professional classes of all nations
be warned in time to devise antidotes and counter
attacks to the Machiavellian devices of a class gone
mad with lust of conquest, deliberately plotting to
fatten itself upon the life blood of other peoples even
after the war. Let us consider in making peace what
protection we can give to the commercial existence
of the freed nations.
HERBERT HOOVER
VERNON KELLOGG
FREDERIC C. WALCOTT
h .S. Food Administration,
Washington, D. C.


NOTE TO THE READER
THE contents and interesting points are summar-
ized in one page preceding each chapter. By this
editorial note it is hoped to help the reader visualize
and more fully realize the significance of the text
written in true Teutonic style.




THE HUN’S PEACE BLUDGEON.




IN THIS chapter the author blandly
admits that after the war the entire
world will regard the Germans with a
hatred so bitter that even the commercial
treaties they expect to dictate and write in
blood will not prevail to open a cordial
channel lor their industrial products.
Notwithstanding this, the Germans still
plan and expect to dominate the trade of the
world. For trade to them is simply another
form of combat to the death. And for this
they are organized and prepared.
Their export trade in its maximum pro=
portions is to be forced down the throats
of America and the Allies. The invincible
weapon is to be the “unsurpassable goods”
produced by “indispensable industries,” —
monopolies conducted under military system,
rigidly confined to German soil, and guarded
by an impenetrable veil of secrecy.


CHAPTER ONE
THE GRAND STRATEGY OF THE GERMAN
COMMERCIAL OFFENSIVE.
All Commerce a War—The World a Battlefield —German
System and Organization Preparing for the Campaign—
Industrial Genius, the “Terrible Weapon” of Germany
Ihe World’s Hatred as a Liability—The Crime of
Transplanting German Industries—The Suppression of
Scientific Intercourse.
A. INTRODUCTION
SUCCESS can only be obtained through sys-
tematic methods and thorough preparation.
The military and economic accomplishments
of Germany form the clearest proof of this assertion.
The necessity for its application is evident wherever
results are to be obtained without waste of energy,
by the shortest route and with the least expenditure
of material, mental, and financial power. Eyes wide
open to the situation, and a mind intent on the
goal are essentials of success. Far-sightedness and
care form its foundations. The more carefully these
virtues are cultivated, the firmer becomes the foun-
dation, and more profitable the whole enterprise.
Nevertheless, the strongest buildings with the
firmest foundations are liable to give way before the
interference of outside forces, whose origin and pres


ence could not be reckoned with during the con-
struction. In such cases the builder adopts the
quickest expedient possible, broadening and strength-
ening the foundations to support the props and
stays which will counteract the outside forces. A
manufacurer is invariably resourceful in perfecting
his own processes, but in the practice of economy he
is not, in spite of the fact that in the latter case as
in the former the same fundamental principles hold
good even if the nature of the expedients within
command is different.
INDUSTRIAL GENIUS, THE “TERRIBLE WEAPON’’ OF
GERMANY
One of the strongest girders which has been
wrought into the fabric of the German Empire,
whose trustworthiness, though suspected by many,
has been recognized by the whole world only through
the fortunes of war, is Germany’s genius in industry.
A nation which was once a leader, but which in the
course of time became backward, even in industry,
thought herself so threatened by the potency of
this economic weapon that she kindled the most
terrible and fearful of all world conflagrations. But
this genius has proven impregnable in the face of all
attacks. Its might and sharpness are now freely
admitted by the enemies who thought to shatter it.
Because the weapon is so terrible, because Geiman
industrial genius is showing itself superior to all
opposition even in military affairs hostile ingenuity
in the future will direct itself before all else toward


undermining this mighty bulwark of the German
pile. After all, we can not blame the enemy so
much for that, but we must make his mole-hill labour
thoroughly unpleasant for him and must prevent his
getting at the bulwark’s foundation. Industrial
exportation, however, forms the most important part
of this foundation. German manufacturing skill,
which surely can not be accused of having lain
dormant in the last four decades, appears to the
world in the terrible times of War like a giant who
suddenly begins to stretch himself with unsuspected
vigour, after a long rest; like a mountain giant who
rends the massive rocks as he lifts himself to his full
height. The foundation must be broad and strong
if it is to permanently and safely carry the new
construction resting upon it. German skill in
industry and manufacture has developed within it-
self unexpected versatility and strength since the
outbreak of the war-new powers ever springing
magically from the old and all built upon the same
foundation I To correspond with such a sudden ex-
pansion that foundation must be broadened and made
firm. Ihe clue to this is offered by the Export Trade !
1 here lies in the air, there lies unexpressed on the
ups, there leaps constantly from mind to mind the
question .II hat of Germany’sindustrial exports after
the War?
THE WORLD’S HATRED AS A LIABILITY
v 01 P eace wifi come, yet hate will remain in the
hearts of those who have conjured up this bloody


struggle and who are inferior therein, morally, physic-
ally, and economically. Hate is the worst of all com-
petitors ; for it can stop all purchasing of supplies by
denying itself even the most indispensable articles,
at least for the time being; and when there is at
length no other alternative, it. will order what it
must have, even perhaps at ruinous prices, from every
other producer, rather than from the German.
“Study your neighbour and you can excuse his
faults” ; that is the watchword for the future. Its
application will be elucidated farther on. To
overlook the self-love of another is always difficult,
for self-love is egoistic; to avoid offending the self-
love of hate, the greatest in the world (for it feeds
forever on a delusion), is a colossal task. Yet it
must and assuredly will be performed; (what must
be done the Germans can do; that is a lesson of this
war). To outline the nature and extent of this one
problem, among many which are to be discussed
farther on, will be a task of these observations.
The sages and historians teach that after the old
Germans made peace and buried their battle-axes,
they also prepared an enduring grave for their
hatred. In this custom as in other respects the
Germans of to-day have remained true to their
forefathers. But other nations feel differently.
Time is indeed the great healer, but German industry
has no time to wait. It must open up for its sud-
denly awakened powers new and greater fields of
activity; it cannot fold its hands in its lap until a
new generation has grown up in the land of its


former opponents, a generation which knows only
from books the horrors and losses of war. For that
is how long it would take ! Well is it said that the
nations of to-day can no longer get on without each
other, that they are interdependent. All the more
difficult will mutual intercourse become, for it will
be dictated by the force of circumstances, and coer-
cion only adds bitterness to the unbearable. He who
reckons without this factor in the future, reckons
amiss. Germany’s export trade must gird itself to
cope with this condition. It must enter hatred as a
liability. In order to balance this entry it must have
at its command the asset of ever increasing material
and mental vigour and foresight. That will be
difficult. But difficulties only add zest to the accom-
plishment.
To the moot question of the future of German in-
dustrial exports, the stock solution offered every-
where is that: “This must be left to the future
treaty of peace and to the commercial treaty then
dictated.” The answer was easy. Nevertheless the
solution is false, even apart from the fact that the
par value of treaties has reached nil and will not im-
mediately recover from its slump—using this word
in both a material and ethical sense. The most
recent past teaches that: “He who would keep
treaties does not need them, he who chances them—
takes his chances.” To be sure, economic questions
will play a great role in the peace negotiations. But
upon the new commercial treaties which will then
come, Germany’s export trade can scarcely base its


sole reliance. Commercial treaties will —perhaps —
open new paths; German industry itself must make
these practicable. Even the most favourable cus-
toms arrangements are of no value if for chauvinistic
or economic reasons the anticipated buyer will take
nothing from his former enemy. He will scarcely
listen to a “Must” !
The experts preach : “International commerce
can not cease permanently; international exchange
of goods must begin again after the war.” It will
probably be thus; yet who will guarantee that in
future Germany’s manufactures will not be elimin-
ated or at least in the main excluded from inter-
national commerce through the passive resistance
T her present enemies, of whom there are, to be
sure, more than is necessary and profitable ? This is
possible, in fact almost probable, wherever it can be
done ! What was not attainable by force of arms
or by an unheard-of, even if vain, starvation policy
—the beating down of the Germans —will be at-
tempted by the slow poison of the unconfessed boy-
cotting of German products. Against that, also,
we must be forearmed, even at the risk of our
preparations proving unnecessary, because things
turn out better than can be anticipated. Optimists
will probably point out that the manufacturing in-
dustry of Germany can do things outside the capa-
city of any other country. As a classical example
in support of this assertion they will cite among
tellers, the case of the German chemical industry,
and the embarrassment in which her enemies found


themselves when no longer able to import certain
chemical products from Germany. In cases of su-
periority like this, measures may perhaps easily be
framed to meet the open or concealed attacks of her
enemies upon her export trade —measures, speaking
unambiguously, which will put the screws on them.
Compulsion can be exercised in war, never in peace,
otherwise it is not peace at all. Commerce which is
supported at the point of the bayonet can not be
maintained permanently; it is in its essence unsound.
Whoever reads a startling article in the leading
English technical magazine, discussing measures to
be used in future against German industry, will be
convinced that only with the making of peace will the
full conflict in the realm of manufacture break forth
—a conflict whose objective is the export trade of
Germany. In that paper, there was proclaimed an
economic warfare, based to a certain extent upon
science—a warfare to gain the mastery over German
industry. No German manufacturer will be dis-
turbed on this account. Rather he will see in it a
spur to increased intellectual activity. Neverthe-
less, this article has warned us to be on our guard,
especially since it centred above all else in a proposal
to transplant the fruits of German industry —in actual
practice —to English soil.' Should this succeed, Ger-
man industrial exports would be severely hit.
THE CRIME OF TRANSPLANTING GERMAN INDUSTRIES.
It is therefore essential for us to get clearly
before us measures which will knock the bottom out


of the scheme of transplanting. It must be admitted
here and now that to transplant an invaluable in-
dustry is possible, that it brings for the moment
great material advantages to employees from the
mother country who promote it, and to those who
place themselves in its service, and that if it. succeeds
it can throttle the mother industry in her influence
upon the market of the country to which it has been
removed. Examples from recent years bring this
fact before us in startling fashion; merely call to
mind the transplanting of the watch, silk, and em-
broidery industries, due for the most part to the sel-
fishness of single individuals. The countries to
which they were removed had formerly supplied
themselves solely 'through importation; but there-
after, to the injury of the mother country from which
these industries came, they not only made them-
selves independent as far as their own needs were
concerned, but even became strenuous competitors
of the mother country. Farther on, we will discuss
ways of meeting such a situation.
1 he idea of economic “compensations” has for the
first time reached practical realization on a large
scale through the war. The neutral powers in par-
ticular resorted to it in order to supply their vital
needs and maintain their economic existence. Com-
pensation has become a weapon in international
economic warfare and will probably remain after
the war in international commerce. It will become
effective to the degree that transplanting of industries
is prevented • for by transplanting compensation is


rendered futile. Farther on we will inquire into the
role which compensations—only those to be sure
whose value can be maintained undiminished for a
long time —will play in the future commercial treaties.
The possibility of their exerting a decisive influence
can scarcely be called in question in the light of
present experiences.
Experience teaches that state control —when it is
exercised as is the German in farsighted and in-
genuous fashion (a lesson we are learning from the
war) —becomes an armour, protecting our domestic
inventions and industrial achievements in such a
way that these acquire a value as compensations.
This state control will be exercised in a manner
adapted to peace times, and without the severity
which war doubtless requires. It will apply to
industries which have not yet been robbed of their
fruits by foreign countries. In this connection
what we are advocating is not a sort of state tutelage
or guardianship. This all too easily resolves into a
hindrance to development. But what is meant is
state protection, which takes care that what has
been sown on domestic soil is also reaped on domestic
soil. The question of primary importance here is
not what protective principle is to be chosen, but
what parties are to be entrusted with establishing it.
Thar these parties must be taken from the industries
in question, is evident, and also that expert and dis-
interested government officials must be associated
with them in order to forestall any selfish policies
which could be harmful to the common welfare.
This protection essential to industry will extend


not only to the materials with which industry works
and to the intelligence which devised its processes,
hut also to the proprietor of the materials, and to
the brain workers or hand labourers. It is clear
also that coercion must be used where benevolent
protection is not sufficient. For the transplanting
of domestic industries, which have been hitherto
beyond the grasp of foreign countries, must be
prevented for the general good, even if private
interests suffer on that account. The damage thus
caused will ordinarily be only a matter of dollars
and cents to private individuals, and without doubt
will remain within easily supportable limits. The
demand for a police-state (the outworn cure-all for
every ill) finds no support nor echo in these dis-
cussions ; that should be especially emphasized.
0
THE SUPPRESSION OF SCIENTIFIC INTERCOURSE
Some one may raise the objection that by measures
of this sort the scientific intercourse which took place
between the nations before the war will be suppressed,
to the detriment of science and progress. Such a
reproach is scarcely justified, for exchange of ideas
of a scientific nature can never be stopped, primarily
—to tell the honest truth —because its universal
source is selfishness, the natural impulse to enrich
oneself, to out-do one’s fellow men, to work ahead
and push upward. The form of international scien-
tific intercourse and exchange may perhaps be
altered, in fact that is even probable; its essential
nature and purpose will remain the same. The


international scientific congresses which lapsed more
and more into festivities will probably be discarded
for a considerable time, at least so far as the holding
of conventions goes. 1 his ought not to be any
cause for regret, for the actual scientific work was
always done long before the congresses and merely
found in them its external evidence. Exchange of
ideas and opinions, though limited and constrained
because of the feelings of the times, will go on. It
may take place only in writing, but such correspon-
dence was conducted in the past anyway, notwith-
standing the verbal intercourse which preceded it.
Where scientific conventions of an international
nature have the unconfessed purpose of prying into
the secrets of others, they must be stamped as dan-
gerous, if there is involved any question of industrial
improvements, whose value as compensations is
clearly evident. The just historian must in any
event record that the breaking of international scien-
tific unity, which unity reached its height and found
outward expression in the scientific academies in
various countries, did not take place through the
Germans. It was earlier believed that science is
elevated above the emotions of the nations. The
immediate past teaches that the emotions are
mightier than science, that they brusquely and
trivially break the bonds which have been joined by
science in the course of centuries (presumably for
eternity). .In the face of such events as this, which
were once thought impossible, mistaken sentimen-
tality is soon silenced. Refinements of feeling be-
tween different countries have a way of vanishing


into thin air, especially where they are forced and
unnatural. Necessity stands above desirability;
maintenance of the value of compensations under
certain circumstances can be a necessity before which
everything else must give way.




TO BE invincible, “the unsurpassable
goods,” by the lack of which Ger=
many is to strangle us into swallow-
ing the whole output of their factories, must
be independent of nature s materials found in
Alabama, New Mexico, Chile, and other
'‘prejudiced” countries. Weil, they ha\e
this planned also, as this chapter shows.
Mobilized and drilled, the scientists of the
Empire will be incorporated into the export
army and under discipline are to produce
Prussian substitutes for all such necessary
raw materials.
The Germans propose to take drastic ac=
tion to meet what they call the menace of
great stores of surplus capital which America
has accumulated through what they term the
regardless and barbarous manufacture of
murderous war supplies. One of the princi-
pal manoeuvres will be the adoption and im-
provement of the American system of stan-
dardizing manufactures.
V 2


CHAPTER TWO
Safeguarding Strategic Secrets—The “Shining Success”
of Unthinkable Authority”—Mobilizing the Scientists
—Inventing Substitutes for Allied Materials—Check-
mating Nature—“Treaties,” a Temporary Expedient—
Meeting the World’s Prejudice with Guile —Denationali-
zation, a Commercial Masquerade—Soothing Propa-
ganda—Meeting the American Menace.
FORGING THE THUNDERBOLT
The protection of compensation values will very
often amount to the protection of manufactur-
ing secrets. It must be confessed that up
to the present time much remains ot be desired in
this respect. Lack of organization is most of all to
blame. As a consequence too many are initiated
into the secrets. Financial shortsightedness is
also a cause. The protection of manufacturing
secrets is the best safeguard against transplanting,
provided of gourse that the possessor of the secrets
of manufacture, whether he be the rightful one or
not, does not wish a transplanting. If the financial
return remain within satisfactory limits the desire
to migrate will not arise; in other cases measures such
as will be discussed farther on are necessary.
The state protection which will eventually become


necessary can be prepared for in an effective way by
the formation of certain associations that will take
protective measures in the interest of their own
members. Such measures will have the purpose
of preventing a transfer of valuable industries to
foreign countries. Upon the degree of protection
afforded by such associations of the industries con-
cerned, will depend whether state protection can
be regarded as superfluous or not, and whether the
association in a certain degree acquires a standing as
an organization representing the State, or is officially
recognized.
THE ‘‘SHINING SUCCESS” OF ‘ ‘UNTHINKABLE AUTHORITY”
War conditions have caused organizations for the
purchase, sale, and distribution of material to spring-
up in our economic life, the possibility of whose for-
mation everyone would have doubted before the
outbreak of war —economic organizations with for-
merly unthinkable authority, and operating, perhaps
for this very reason, with shining success. Smooth
off their rough edges, which are the result of hasty
formation and the exigencies of war —though in
no case, as the present shows, has this crudity been
unbearable —and you can easily imagine similar
bodies in times of peace. Since there will then be
no pressing haste, they can be still better organized,
and designed primarily to certain superior in-
dustries located exclusively in this country . They
may also create and maintain or receive valuable
compensations.


Similar bodies might also be given the duty of
co-operating with the Government in providing
against any possible shortage of certain raw materials.
1 hese could be collected or manufactured directly
by such bodies, or indirectly at their order. Just as
little as foreign countries, notwithstanding all com-
mercial treaties, can be compelled to buy German
products, so little can those which remain entirely
self-supporting be induced to supply German in-
dustries with raw materials which are not procurable
in our own land in the necessary amount and quality.
It must be admitted that Germany’s export trade
—at least in certain products—can be stopped if the
procuring of raw materials be rendered difficult or
cut off entirely. Remembering the rings which in
the past have brought under their thumb the control
of certain raw materials in order to be able to manipu
late prices at will, one can just as easily Imagine rings
able to buy up particluar raw materials because of
their correspondingly strong financial resources
(perhaps even with the concealed support of the
State). They will then bring pressure to bear upon
the industry of another country, to extort certain
concessions which will be detrimental or even fatal
to the latter’s industry or export trade. Where the
weapons of war could accomplish nothing, duplicity
will step in and continue the conflict under the token
of the olive branch of peace. Germany’s export trade
will have to reckon with obstacles altogether beyond
calculation at the present: it must therefore be pre-
pared at every point.


Associations which can effectively oppose foreign
rings of the nature mentioned above must be gotten
well under way in advance. These associations will
be able to do their work all the more vigorously,
in proportion to the firmness of the cement, which,
in future, must bind together all German industries of
whatever kind they may be. A state of commerce
has aways been in a certain sense a state of war —a
peaceful state of war, if one may use the word, which
served peaceful ends as long as peace lasted, but
which always lent itself to warlike designs, whether
there was a war or not. To be prepared means to
have at one’s disposal reserve energies sufficient for
any emergency. German industry must have at its
command invincible powers of resistance if it is
to guide its export trade into safe paths and protect
it against treacherous surprises and assaults. An
assured supply of every kind and amount of raw
material needed from foreign countries is one of the
preliminary necessities for the future development of
Germany’s trade.
MOBILIZING THE SCIENTISTS
Where, however, a buyer finds chauvinism blocking
him when he tries to purchase raw materials, he will
often get the worst of the deal, no matter how great
his capital. Chauvinism is a sort of deluded blind-
ness, and when light is wanting, even a gleam of
gold loses its influence. Where purchasing power
or inducements of other sorts become ineffective;
where stubborn malice, to its own detriment, gets
the better of reason; there German science and


German intellectual resourcefulness must turn the
scales, and, if necessary, bring forth the requisite
materials from nothing at all. (A reminder of the
preparation of fat and saltpetre by Germany in the
present war will suffice to throw light upon this sen-
tence.) The power of the intellect is supreme and
invincible; in comparison with it, the power of money
fades into insignficance. The “Research Com-
panies”—a German invention—and the numerous
research departments and laboratories in individual
companies can be looked upon as guides in forming
associations, the purpose of which will be to furnish
Germany’s export industries with raw material
when commercial treaties and capital fail to bring it
within reach, in spite of abundant supplies. These
associations must develop artificial substitutes for
natural raw materials, when the latter might possibly
be cut off from German industries. They must
use the resources of science to bring about indepen-
dence from foreign materials. This is no Utopian
dream; it is a probability of the immediate future,
and can be brought to pass just as soon as all special
interests are pushed aside and all activity (as at
present) directed toward serving the country —
toward increasing its might and strengthening its
power. Independence from foreign material is, then,
another factor strengthening the export trade. We
will discuss it at greater length farther on.
“treaties,” a temporary expedient
Associations* of the above-mentioned kinds ought
even now to be in process of formation, so that thev
* ml


tf] can perform good, timely service of an economic
jit, nature in the peace negotiations. At the time when
tli future commercial treaties are being drawn up, they
th ( can render invaluable assistance by seeing to it that
211 German industry is placed on an equal footing with
IK that of other countries and by getting obstacles out
iei of the way beforehand, which later will be difficult
j r
m. or altogether impossible to remove.
U The word “treaty” has acquired such a bitter
connotation in the course of the months which have
n | gone by since the outbreak of the war that people no
.longer take much stock in it. Sentimental con-
IS
. siderations, however, have no place in the hard world
of business. Commercial treaties will come again
ea . . # °
. like other international agreements and probably
m will also be broken again. They must be couched
in such terms that they bring advantages to the
export trade as long as they are kept, and do not
j a[ threaten its existence when, for a little variety, they
rf are arbitrarily abrogated. That is to say, a purely
; j a economic (not military) suppression of the export
a trade, through the general “breaking of commercial
must be impossible in the future. German
it industry must build its export trade upon such a
that it can enlarge unimpeded, and that
y interruptions in its work can be suppressed im-
mediately—independently of the outside world.
Commercial treaties can prevent impediments from
arising, if the parties so desire; but not otherwise.
q, Ihe export trade may be embarrassed and im-
jelPeded also by the fact that its goods are of German


origin, and bear the German trademark, and that the
manufacturer is located in Germany and ships from
there.
DENATIONALIZATION, A COMMERCIAL MASQUERADE
* f ■
All these obstacles can perhaps be removed, but
the most difficult are those through which the Ger-
man character of the export product is visibly and
immediately recognized by foreigners in general.
Let there be no misunderstanding on this point,
German goods can never belie their origin to the
expert user, because an ineradicable stamp has been
impressed upon them by their two chief peculiarities
—“care in manufacture,” and “complete fitness,
economically, for the use to which they are to be put.”
This stamp is an automatic result of the manufac-
turing process and sets them well above the products
of foreign competitors in spite of similarity in other
respects. The far-sighted manufacturer does not,
of course, content himself with the advertisement
thus afforded, since it reaches only the man who
already uses the goods. He endeavours to make his
goods known to a broader circle through special
means —propaganda —in order to win more cus-
tomers.
The usual way of accomplishing this is to call at-
tention to the name of the firm, its location, and its
trademark. Such advertising, so far as can be
judged to-day, will have anything but a commenda-
tory effect among the formerly hostile nations, at
least for a considerable time after the conclusion of


peace. The mere fact that the got>ds were shipped
from Germany will be a drawback if it is made
known. We will, of course, cease to give consp.cu-
ousness to the German character of export products;
iudging, however, by various indications in os t e
newspapers, we must reckon upon the use of appar-
ently harmless, but actually malicious tricks, to
discriminate against German goods. For instance .
foreign customs officers may stamp upon them t e
country of their origin, etc. The purpose is easy to
discover. Even if the first man to receive the goods
—for instance, the wholesaler—wishes, for evident
reasons, to conceal the place of origin front his c a
vinistic customers, to do so is to be made difficul
or impossible for him by the marks impressed by the
native customs officials. To meet this it will be
difficult to do anything so long as the goods are
shipped directly from Germany, by a short and
uninterrupted route, to save on freight charges.
In the course of time small unpleasantnesses of this
kind may also disappear on account of their triv-
iality. Should the damage done by them become
unbearable in the long run, then denationalization
of goods, though it will eventually raise the gross
expenses, should not be avoided; for the alternative
expedient—of having the foreign customer take over
these products at the place of manufacture, an
transport them at his cost and risk—would scarce y
obviate the trouble in the final result. What me h
of denationalization will be feasible we shall discu .
farther on.


The objection might be made here that in a certain
sense we are giving opportunity for a game of “Hide
and Seek, which would be incompatible for Ger-
man character. In reality this is not the case be-
cause, for one thing, as has already been said, Ger-
man products bear within them their stamp of origin
which is as clear as day to the experienced user;
then again, because it is not the German exporter
but rather the foreign customer, who must look out
that the place of origin is kept secret, to avoid loss
at the hands of his own countrymen. Undue em-
phasis must not be placed at first upon the fact that
even back in times of peace a great many foreign
products were made in Germany, and that sentimen-
tal considerations can find no place in mercantile life.
The question of trade-marks will be somewhat more
difficult to handle because it involves property rights
which for evident reasons it is not permissible to
conceal. It will be hard to enforce these rights in
formerly hostile countries. Yet even in this case
a way can be found to accomplish whatever is essen-
tial, without much loss. Of this, more later.
SOOTHING PROPAGANDA
in all these cases there arises at once the ques-
tion : What becomes of that absolute essential of
the present day the propaganda on behalf of Ger-
w.an goods?” The answer is: The propaganda is
to be carried out in increased measure even if in a
form different from before, in a form which will not
irritate the feelings of past enemies—a form which


takes these feelings into account in determining fu-
ture activity. We must not forget that, at the
worst, we are only dealing with a period of transition.
After it has passed, “dollars-and-cents” reasoning
will again be superior to the dictates of emotion.
He who allows himself to be guided exclusive y }
his feelings must pay for it dearly and in comparison
with a more hard-headed business man, finds himsell
lift out in the cold. Sad as it is, “dollars-and-cents
policies get the last word after all (as is to be seen
in many cases, even in war—often against the in-
terests of one’s own country—and much more often
in peace). More--will’be said later about ways of
recasting the propaganda hitherto earned on in
foreign countries. . ’
•In looking back over Germany’s export trade
during the last decade, one can discern a decided ten-
dency towards founding branch companies instead
of having some other firm or agent represent the
home concern/ Whether this was, and whether it
still continues to be, the best safeguard for our exporl
trade, are questions which have been much disputed.
The prevailing factor behind this tendency was,
primarily, the effort to, divert the intermediate profits
of the earlier representatives directly into the hands
of the parent firm and secondarily, the centralization
attained by uniting former competitors into one
great firm. This consolidation made it unnecessary
to have a large number of individual representatives.
An influential role was played by the endeavour to
unify and standardize manufacturing processes, and


thereby eliminate the practice of catering to the
buyer’s individual fancies—a practice which had
flourished under the old system of many agents work-
ing independently of each other. In those days
they went farther—they sailed officially under the
flag of foreign countries, and founded “daughter-
companies” under the laws and citizenship of those
countries.
It is well known that since the beginning of the war
legal restraints have been placed upon these - com-
panies, a proof that their loyalty was always looked
upon as specious. Even after the removal of the
restraints the odium of “hostile”, will cling to these
branch companies—provided of course that they
weather the storm of troubles at all—and this odium
will be a burden to their activity even if- it does
not make it impossible. Business, when actually
conducted in foreign countries will, therefore, be
forced to assume other forms —perhaps such as have
been used and discarded in the past. Consciously
to court chauvinistic opposition over and above the
industrial and economic difficulties of competition
would be unthinkable.
Nor must we overlook the fact that industrial
and economic competition after the war ill become
distinctly more gruelling. The eyes of foreign coun-
tries will without doubt have opened to the perfection
and efficiency of the articles and appliances made in
Germany, horeign countries have been shaken
into new life —something which is doubtless to be
welcomed in the interest of mechanical improvement


and invention. They will make every effort, as is
evident from the above-mentioned article in the
English trade-journal, not only to emancipate them-
selves from German industry, but also to overtake it.
Whether they will succeed, may be left for the future
to decide; certain it is that such a thing would be
possible, if the tireless energy of the Germans, who
understand how to combine science and practical
application, should take root in foreign countiies.
However, it takes, time for other peoples to undergo
such a transformation, which is equivalent to a com-
plete alteration of the national character. This
time must be used by German industry,- in the in-
terest of its export trade,- to make -such swift and vi-
gorous progress, tnat in a purely industrial- way no
overtaking. by a- competitor will be possible. In
order to overcome the habit of unnecessarily com-
plicating manufacturing processes and thus of in-
creasing costs, we must pay more attention in certain
respects to American methods. They waste no
energy on the individual hobbies of the consumer,
but teach him to choose from among a few types the
one best suited for him. Eland in hand with increas-
ing scientific progress and invention must go broad
and intelligent standardization.
Economic competition, particularly in the question
of price-superiority, will then shape itself so that
German goods will have clear sailing, and the export
trade can resume its former triumphal progress, full}'
armoured and unafraid. Quality and price com-
bined are two factors which in a short time will ovei


come all opposition—even that of a chauvinistic
nature.
MEETING THE AMERICAN MENACE
We must not conceal the fact that the ability of
Germany to undersell the products of other countries
will not be so easy to maintain in the future, as far
as the American competitor is concerned. For the
enormous profits which the American factories reap
through their unscrupulous production of war ma-
terials enable them to wipe out liabilities in a way
hitherto considered impossible. These profits con-
stitute reserves which they can fall'back upon with
full assurance,, when striving to outbid others. To
meet this situation, organized action will be just as
necessary as was protective action, in the case of
raw materials supplied from other countries. New
rules will have to be. formulated here and brought
into effect—rules which will treat the question not
only from the commercio-political standpoint, but
from the standpoint of industry and industrial
tariffs also. 1 his latter aspect of the question will
therefore demand thorough study. We must like-
wise see whether tariff bills can not be framed so as
to facilitate the rapid growth of the export trade.
It is not improbable that we may even have to dip
into the question of export premiums in this con-
nection.
Especial consideration must be devoted to capital
in its relation, to the export trade. It can give sup-
port both from the outside and from within. In the


last analysis, our domestic capital ought only to go
abroad when we are sure to keep on indefinitely
shipping goods to the country where the capital is
invested, in quantities corresponding to the amount
of that capital. The every-day practice among
capitalists is to impose only the condition that the
level of the so-called “first shipments” be main-
tained. This commonly represents only the capacity
of the plant at the start.
Such demands are shortsighted. The capitalists
at home ought to insure close contact between the
domestic producers with whom they have relations,
and the promoters, especially those in the foreign
countries. The export trade must be backed effec-
tively not only by the State and the unselfish exer-
tions of German industry, but also by capital. And
this capital, it should be noted, ought if possible to
come entirelv from German sources; or at the verv
•/ ' mJ
least, German capital should hold a controlling in-
terest. In so far as it participates in those enter-
prises which advance the interests of our export
trade, German capital should maintain its individ-
uality. It must prepare the ground and then add
strength and support; it must form the foundation
for a new era in the growth of industrial exports.
To enlist capital in this work is a task of prime im-
portance.
The foregoing discussion shows, in brief, that:
The growth and security of the export trade after the
conclusion of peace will he dependent on and influ-
enced hy the following factors


1. Adaptability of the export industry.
2. Attitude of foreign countries.
3. Emigration of domestic industry.
4. Economic compensations.
5. State protection.
6. Industrial protective unions.
7. Commercial treaties.
8. Ways of denationalizing German goods.
9. Competitive ability.
10. Capital.
These factors as a whole will bring about a satis-
factory result only if they are brought into relation-
ship by skilful organization in such a way that they
form a smoothly running mechanism.
Its motive force must be the fixed determination
to raise the export trade to the highest pitch of suc-
cess in spite of all obstacles, and there to maintain
it indefinitely.


THE Germans, as the following chap=
ter shows, expect impenetrable dis=
guise to be a leading feature in re=
newing their oversea business. iheir sales-
men will be trained to correctly imitate the
aspect, intonation, idiom, and “provinciali-
ties” of their customers, and cleverly to copy
their business methods and their style oi
making packages and shipments.
Allied countries that refrain from interfer-
ence (although “hypercritical”), Germany
intends to reward —with her matchless goods.
Those that refuse to be duped are to meet
“relentless retribution.” A General Staff
having determined by means of infallible “de-
fence statistics” that America or some other
culprit is neglecting to take its allotted
German exports, will order the “indispen-
sable industries,” subsidized by “economic
compensations,” to boycott the victim, and it
will seal the command with a “corrective em-
bargo.”


CHAPTER THREE
THE CAMOUFLAGE OF COMMERCE
The Impenetrable Disguise of the Dusseldorf Drummer
Taking the Appearance of Friendly Business—The
High Art of imitation—Relentless Retribution Upon
Allied Interference—"Defence Statistics,” the Barome-
ter of the Battle—Strategic Use of the Boycott and the
“Corrective” Embargo.
B. FACTORS INFLUENCING OR CONTROLLING
EXPORTS
1. ADAPTABILITY OF THE EXPORT INDUSTRY
THE Germans have always made it their busi-
ness to learn the languages of other nations.
In this respect, however, they are surpassed
by the Swiss, who go so far as to master not only the
language itself but also its peculiarities to a point
eliminating every foreign element in their intonation
anti manner smacking of their mother togue. A
German speaks foreign languages correctly, yet in
such a way that his German extraction at once be-
trays itself.
immediate future the presence of anything
“German” among formerly hostile nations will
evoke emotions which are not advantageous for the


advancement of commercial relationships. Of this
there can be no doubt. Germans will certainly be
more careful than ever not to give offense. But in
this they will be successful only if they take as a
pattern Swiss method in linguistics. Men in
manufacture and industry must take care in future
to use foreign languages in the native way. Atten-
tion should also be paid to this subject in the
schools. Hand in hand with increased proficiency
in this direction must go a comprehension of foreign
ways and of foreign nature, in order to obviate as far
as possible all reminders of the past. We need not
fear that Germanism will suffer because of this; in
spite of their perfection in language technique the
Swiss never cease to be good Swiss.
A fundamental requisite for personal intercourse
with customers, in the interest of the export trade, is
the use of foreign languages in the manner and idiom
of the people who speak 'them.
FAKING TFIE APPEARANCES OF FRIENDLY BUSINESS
Correspondence in future is to be carried on in the
foreign tongue, even if the correspondent commands
the German language, in order to insure him from
the very beginning against unpleasantnesses which
might arise with third parties from chauvinistic
reasons.
More than ever there will be necessary a wide-
spread adaptation to foreign methods of book-keeping
and calculation in order to increase exports. Stan-
dardization in industry must not be carried out ex


clusively from the German point of view; an inter-
mediate way, adapted to accounting purposes, must
be found, conforming to domestic and foreign stand-
ards. 1 his will be of a special importance where
for. the same object other units of measure are in
use in a foreign country, and where methods of as-
sembling, packing, and make-up do not harmonize
with German custom. In our ability to conform lies
the secret of success; conformity in the realm of
manufacture without loss of profits is indeed difficult
but not impossible. ,
Adaptation to foreign customs, in business and in-
dustry is a help to the export trade.
THE HIGH ART OF IMITATION
German character and habits must not be altered
in their essence by this procedure, still a foreign
exterior is necessary for purposes of protection, just
as the style and cut of clothing are adjusted to the
taste of the wearer. Stiff-necked observance of old
principles would have a harmful effect.
A complete knowledge of the special requirements
in foreign industries, mutual elimination of which
was well on its way before the outbreak of the war,
is more than ever necessary, for it is to be feared
that an unpleasant interruption will take place for a
considerable time in these efforts toward interna-
tionalization. If we succeed in avoiding disagree-
ments and disputes after goods have been shipped
to the consumer, it will be due to the careful observ-
ance of foreign requirements, which is impossible


without a thorough knowledge of them. For the
present we dare not count upon the healing influence
of time. The common aim of all export activity
must be to make the foreign customer so satisfied in
every respect that, in spite of hatred of Germany,
German manufactures give the best satisfaction.
If everything distasteful or unpleasant to the for-
eign customer is eliminated, then, with time, trade
will grow better and more pleasant for the German
producer also. Every effort must be directed toward
allaying the passive resistance which must be looked
for from our customers. Victory with the means
of peace must follow victory with bloody weapons,
otherwise the latter would be, purposeless. German
efficiency must link itself .with a .conformability not
hitherto exercised everywhere, a conformability
which, meets the new circumstances brought about
by War and Peace. The ultimate purpose is always
the first consideration, and decides the form.
2. Attitude of Foreign Countries
Every hostile move can be arrested by an equiva-
lent counter move and may possibly be prevented
in future. This principle always holds good in war,
not always in commerce. It may be very useful in
war, in commerce it often is the opposite. For these
reasons measures of a hostile nature, or which can be
considered as such, are to be avoided so far as pos-
sible. Since, however, long-suffering is commonly
construed as weakness, it has only conditional and
temporary justification in the struggle. If, for the
sake of our export trade after the war, we resolve


for our part to avoid everything which could possibly
offend the feelings of our former enemies, we must
nevertheless not overlook the fact that in the im-
mediate future it will be absolutely necessary to stand
with weapons at our side in order to give a good
account of ourselves when the necessity arises.
RELENTLESS RETRIBUTION UPON ALLIED
INTERFERENCE
Whatever be the-self-discipline practised, formerly
hostile States with which we are entering into com-
mercial relationship—either by treaties (in which
case they are problematical) or by actual trade- -
must be given clearly to understand that every open
or concealed injury to our export trade will be re-
venged. Either unclouded commercial peace or
none at all. Manufacturers and men of industry will
have to apply all their strength to make good what
the fury of war has destroyed. They will, therefore,
have no time to interrupt the intensive work before
them by petty warfare and by combating annoyances
and chicanery. We are justified in assuming that
even in formerly hostile countries, industrial circles
will again yearn for peace and for the well-ordered
relationships which make success possible, yet it is
more than questionable whether they will be strong
enough to hold their ground against professional
politicians and graftseekers.
In future intercourse of a commercio-political
nature, as in its rehabilitation and regulation
in general, we must observe the fundamental prin


ciple that commercial treaties are not weapons for
strengthening one’s own export trade at the cost of
foreign import trade, but that in these treaties are
to be found ways of opening broad, safe paths for
mutual commerce. This point of view must of
course be shared by both parties.
The attitude of a foreign country toward our ex-
port trade may be either of an official, semi-official,
or private nature, depending upon how frank it is in
reference to the reasons for its attitude. Or the
Government may make common cause with private
individuals, and may systematically avoid revealing
its reasons, so as to give Germany as little basis as
possible on which to frame retaliatory measures.
The nature of the attitude of foreign countries will
determine the course which industry, and the govern-
mental authorities of Germany who protect it, will
have to adopt.
The most favourable case, one which for the time
immediately succeeding the conclusion of peace is
scarcely to be expected, would be one in which
foreign countries endeavour, in the interest of their
own industry, to give a free hand to German export
trade. This is more than the greatest optimist dares
to hope. Anything better than it is certainly out
of the question. Germany, for its part, will of course
do everything in its power to reward such an attitude
on the part of foreign countries, though the latter
are naturally inspired only by the most practical
considerations. In the discussion of commercial
treaties there will be more to be said on this point.


However, since pessimism is a safer policy than
optimism, in mercantile connections, it is well to
consider those cases in which resistance will have to
be reckoned with.
A very simple, though hardly probable case might
be this; that the formerly hostile countries officially
stopped all German exporting business within their
borders by preventing the importation of German
goods. This case need not be taken into account ‘or
the reason that the future treaty of peace will surely
be founded upon economic grounds also, because it
could not be agreed to unless official guarantees of a
free hand for our export trade were given. A jealous
and invidious economic policy on the part of foreign
countries was the cause of the war; it can only be
ended by correcting that policy. The watchword
will have to be : “Hands off German export trade
and an open door to it in every direction.” A com-
plete end must be made of false economy with its
ominous special favouritism clauses when these are
directed against the German export trade.
Safeguards for Germany’s export trade must form
an indispensable part of the treaty of peace. The
latter must eliminate all special favouritism clauses
that could possibly be injurious.
A foreign state can very easily set up obstacles to
our trade in a semi-official way, especially in award-
ing government contracts. By its action in such
cases it of course furnishes private business with a
cue not easilv misunderstood. We can imagine
such a ruling as that no foreign goods at all may be


used in filling government contracts. Technically,
regulations of this sort would present many difficul-
ties and would be scarcely enforceable. Merely
recall among other instances those industries which
have to pay tribute to the German chemical industry
and those which could scarcely have succeeded with-
out Germany’s delicate instruments. Such regula-
tions would be so stringent for the industries of the
countries in question that we are safe in assuming
that the State would wink at their circumvention.
This, however, does not settle the question; Ger-
man industry could not rest content with such a
tacit evasion of foreign laws. Openness was always
a goal of the Germans, one which has made them
great. It must also have effect here. In the interest
of its own industry every state will prescribe that
in state contracts preference must be given to domes-
tic articles in so far as such are at hand, even if foreign
products could be had more cheaply (equal quality
assumed). German industrial circles could not,
however, countenance further restrictions such as
that in manufacturing these articles no raw material
might be used whose origin is to be traced back lo
countries with which the foreign state had been at war.
As a measure of retaliation we might forbid the
exportation of materials which that state found
absolutely indispensable, thus cutting off both its
direct or indirect supply. In this connection it is,
of course, always presumed that a transplanting of
such industries to foreign states will be hindered by
all means at our command (a matter which will be
gone into farther on). It must be admitted that sucn


regulations could cause considerable loss to individual
parties here at home, yet here also the common good
must be given precedence over individual # interest.
Special state indemnities can go far toward making
good such losses, all the more since retaliatory meas-
ures of this kind could scarcely be of long duration
because they would become unbearabe for the hostile
state. ■
Rules of loreign states, forbidding the use of mate-
rial of German origin in state contracts, and aiming
against the German export trade, must be assured a
swift and sudden doom. Effective precautionary meas-
ures for this purpose can not show favour to indivi-
dual interests.
.
“defence statistics,” the barometer of the
BATTLE
*•''ii•‘'* *- v . S / , : ,
It will be necessary to create a special branch
of statistics, which will indicate the comparative
amounts of German products (both natural and
manufactured) exported in normal times. By those
statistics we can tell whether, and in what degree,
the proportionate amounts are being altered by the
open or concealed attacks of foreign countries,
to the detriment of one product or another. These
statistics must show at once, at all times, whether
certain products are being discriminated against bv
foreign countries in favour of other foreign products
(coming from an ally) while, at the same time, no
obstacles are placed in the way of trade in other
German products. By the kind and amounts of


the \arious products listed, it will be easy to decide
from these statistics which German products foreign
countries can not do without, and for which others
they substitute (openly or secretly) the products of
other countries. From such knowledge the possi-
bility readily arises of putting a stop to our exporta-
tion of products or materials which are indispensable
to the foreign country in question and which must,
in the main, be drawn from Germany, until our
other industries, hitherto in certain measure boy-
cotted, are returned to their rights. The export
statistics for the German Empire, always compiled
so exemplarly in the past, must be somewhat ex-
tended according to the proportional system in order
to have ready at all times effective means of defence
for the protection of all branches of our export trade.
The uniting of “defence st compiled accord-
ing to the proportional system, with the export statis-
tics, is a necessary measure for safeguarding the ex-
port trade.
Without going into so broad a question, it may
merely be pointed out that imports also can offer
effective expedients against hostile actions.
By defensive measures, such as embargoes* certain
of our industries which foreign countries have been
compelled by necessity to favour rather than hinder,
may find their foreign trade for a time cut down ;
in other words, they suffer actual and material loss
in order to make possible the free export development
of other industries. It will, therefore, be only just
if the latter, which have been protected at another’s


expense, pay an indemnity to the industry injured
by the embargo, as soon as the normal development
of their export trade to the foreign country in ques-
tion is again restored. (The “defence statistics”
are the means of determining this.) This amount of
the compensation will be determined from the
comparative figures given by the “defence statistics.”
There must accordingly be created a ready co-opera-
tion between individual industries in such a fashion
that, in the case of a depletion of one industry’s
export trade which can be traced back to hostile
measures, the outflow of other manufactured pro-
ducts desired by the same foreign country will be
throttled to the disadvantage of that country until a
state of equilibrium —recognized by means of the
“defence statistics” —is arrived at; the assets (of a
material nature) lost in this way by the throttled
industry must be replaced by the industry which
has been benefited.
The various German industries must be brought into
compulsory co-operation for the purpose of keeping all
kinds of industrial exports on a basis of equality.
Economic and industrial unions are already suffi-
ciently numerous in Germany. Where it has not
already been done, they must be centralized in order
to aid the State in whatever defensive strategy may
prove necessary. 1 his aid can probably, be rendered
most effectively by the independent compilation of
similar “defence statistics,” for which the basic
data might be supplied by the chambers of industry
and commerce. Both kinds of statistics —one .if


which, naturally, will present a more bureaucratic
stamp, the other a more mercantile —will advantage-
ously and automatically complete each other, and
will be suited to prevent uncalled-for action which
could injure the general system of control. Such
action will almost always be traceable to special
interests which can be shown their place only by the
authority of the entire body. To the directing com-
mittee of such a union will be reserved the right of
investigating the justification of complaints, of
formulating and proposing to the Government such
measures as are in the interest of industrv in general,
j o ”
and of deciding the future indemnity quotas which
are to be valid for the industries specially involved--
both those asking protection and those affording it.
From this union there will come a cementing of the
individual industries, which will bind them closer
to one another for the good of the whole export trade,
and which will hold all the more firmly because it
promotes the material interest of every single form
of industry. -At the same time this union can form
the foundation and the centre of the protective
federations to be discussed later.
State and industry must mutually supplement each
other in providing ways to extend and apply the
“defence statistics ’
STRATEGIC USE OF THE BOYCOTT AND THE
CORRECTIVE ” EMBARGO
r lo the union in question still another special
problem will now fall, one which can not and ought


not to be left to the State for solution because it
might give occasion for diplomatic complications in
a sphere in which industry can help itself most
safely and best (it being assumed that industry pro-
ceeds with sincerity and determination and per-
manently places the general good above special
interests.) This problem can and will probably
present itself in some such case as the following :
A foreign government avoids officially and semi-
officially every stand against Germany’s manufactur-
ing export trade (an assumption in no case justified
at present); but the industry of that country takes a
hostile attitude and only orders from Germany what
it absolutely has to, taking everything else from
foreign competitors. Let us now narrow the matter
down to an individual case, such as will always be
easy to find, and simple though it is, it will give a
clue toward handling any complication.
A foreign manufacturer needs in his business two
principal kinds of raw materials : One he can obtain
only from Germany and the other he can get from
other countries, the hypothesis presupposing equal
quality and price. In purchasing the former he
carefully overlooks the German origin; in the latter
he becomes patriotic and rejects every German pro-
duct. It will be the task of the rejected industries
to collect all grounds which can prove such a proce-
dure beyond question. If upon examining these
grounds the officers of the union find that there can
be no doubt about the manufacturer being guilty of
boycotting, he will be prevented by the union from


getting the German materials indispensable to him,
even if he tries indirect ways such as through similar
industries of his own country. Such control is readily
possible, because a sudden increase in the demand
for these indispensable products on the part of a
compatriot manufacturer who is acting as a go-
between gives proof that he is helping his friend.
He would then fall a victim to the same fate, as
would the whole foreign industrial association in
question, the destruction of which in this way would
not be difficult.
1 he same procedure is to be recommended when a
foreign industry which is not dependent upon Ger-
man manufactures persists in boycotting German
goods. In this case a closely allied industry which
supplies it —or is supplied by it, as the case may be—
will have to feel the effects of an embarg'o unless the
closely allied industry makes redress in some internal
way and brings the hostile industry to its senses.
1 he battle will again be fought out according to the
approved German fashion on foreign soil, only with
the difference, nevertheless worthy of notice, that
both contesting parties must be furnished by foreign
countries. Such measures can be more easily carried
out by industrial unions than by the State, because
individual conditions are often met with, which can
be remedied more readily by private parties. The
State’s embargo mentioned above always remains
ready as a powerful reserve for the attack, whenever
petty warfare degenerates into a general conflict.
Foreign manufacturers who persistently reject Ger-
man goods of one sort can under no circumstances he


permitted to get German goods another sort which
are indispensable to them.
The necessary control can perhaps be made
easier if this principle is observed, namely : that all
foreign payment for German goods received must
be made only in German exchanges. This will
probably become an essential stipulation in the im-
mediate future, since the action of the hostile govern-
ments toward German credits will not be forgotten at
once. Manufacturers and banks can here render
each other mutual and effective support.


THE German sets forth in Chapter IV.
by what process he proposes to
blackmail the world with his “Indis-
pensable Industries.” For this purpose he
intends to maintain exclusive control of them
* by a rigid and despotic “state sovereignty”
expressly adopted to limit “the freedom of
the individual, science, and property.”
These strategic industries will embrace
such natural monopolies as potash, such re-
sults of the German system as dyestuffs and
carbolic acid, chemicals, steels of special
value and gelatine, which they believe inimi-
table. Beyond these, such products as they
have or can render irreplaceable, technically
superior and infinitely cheaper, of a nature to
cause great economic suffering by their lack,
and which can be made exclusively of mate-
rials obtainable always in Germany, will be
selected to constitute the “Prussian Guard”
of their industrial invasion, and to be put un-
der the invigorating husbandry of the Mili-
tary Regime.
V3


CHAPTER FOUR
“INDISPENSABLE INDUSTRIES”
Imperial Military Control to Insure Exclusive Possession
of Strategic Industries—The German Plan to Eliminate
the Freedom of Science and Property—Potash a Prus-
sian Monopoly—The Inimitable Dyestuffs and Chemicals
—Principles of the Embargo Battle —Some Definitions
of “Indispensable”—The High Road to Technical Supe-
riority—An Infallible Price-cutting Device.
3. EMIGRATION OF DOMESTIC INDUSTRIES
ALTHOUGH this protection of Germany’s
export trade as a whole can probably be
attained by the methods suggested, and with
honest effort, yet it will be permanent and effectual
only if the weapons of protection remain exclusively
in the possession of German manufacture. This
stipulation is much more difficult to fulfil than ap-
pears at first glance, since in so doing the legal
freedom of the private individual, of science, and of
property, although eventually guaranteed and safe-
guarded, is liable to be compromised, as, likewise, is
the right of capital and trade to move about at will.
In other directions nothing stands in the way of
the fulfilment of this condition provided that the


war-forged watchword “Our country first of all!”
retains, in peace times also, the same importance
and general recognition which it now commands.
When put into practical application this means:
The State must possess the right —even against the
personal and material interest of individuals, com-
panies, and organized businesses —to prevent emi-
gration of those industries whose exclusive continua-
tion at home is necessary in order to remove obstacles
which could oppose the export trade of other German
industries. This right must be established by law.
This law must define the position of the State toward
these industries and its rights and duties toward
them just as precisely as the rights and duties which
these industries have toward the State. This in-
dispensable law must be given a retroactive power
and authority which naturally will extend also to
industries not yet in existence and its fundamental
outlines be worked out now, since they might per-
haps have a guiding influence on the economic terms
of the coming treaty of peace.
The emigration of industries whose continuation at
home exclusively is essential to the security of the ex-
port trade of other industries must he prevented. A
law governing this question is a necessity.
For preventing the transplanting of such industries
to foreign countries the following topics are sugges-
tive :
1. A statement pointing out the distinguishing
peculiarities of those industries which are to be sub-
jected to the State’s rights of special sovereignty.
2. Definition of these rights.


3. Control of the operation of such industries.
4. Their rights of exemption of a technical nature.
5. State guarantees for their manufacturing ne-
cessities (machines and materials), to be eventually
at the expense of other native industries in return
for equivalent services.
6. A law requiring the reporting and registration
of new improvements and inventions.
7. The drawing up of industrial lists in which the
proprietors of such industries, and the mechanics,
foremen, and labourers employed in them, are
named.
8. Measures to be taken in case of the transition
of these industries into other hands or in case of a
change in their business form.
9. A voice in regulating the exports of these in-
dustries.
10. Safeguarding the business and manufacturing-
secrets, from an industrial and economic point of
view.
n. Regulation of wages and conditions of labour.
12. Regulation of the participation of such indus-
tries in foreign industries of the same or related
kinds (industries turning out manufactured or im-
proved articles, and branch offices of German com-
panies).
13. Participation of foreign capital in such indus-
tries and the composition of their controlling bodies.
In stating the characteristics of industries which
must be safeguarded against injurious transplanta-
tion, the following are the principal considerations :
Nature of the manufactured article: Degree to
which other things can be substituted for it; Degree
of its perfection; Possibility of imitation; Degree
of its usefulness and indispensability; Amount manu


factored; Demand for it; Height of selling price;
Dependence upon —or, as the case may be, indepen-
dence —of foreign raw materials; Nature and amount
of foreign competition.
In classifying an article we should notice whether
it is a raw or a finished product ; whether it is used
in agriculture or industry, or in the metal, textile,
chemical, or, particularly, the war industry; whether
it is rapidly worn out or more durable, and whether
it is manufactured in bulk or by the piece.
The raw product may be of animal, vegetable, or
mineral nature. The first sort need scarcely be
taken into consideration. The second sort may,
perhaps, be considered conditionally in cases in
which are involved vegetable materials which form
the foundation of special industries and which are
handled in colonial business.
POTASH A PRUSSIAN MONOPOLY
Among mineral raw r materials, the most important
will be certain salts necessary in agriculture. After
them come certain kinds of iron, bronze, and coal,
in connection with specific countries. The impor-
tance of controlling the latter may perhaps be in-
fluenced by future territorial settlements. Those
raw products which are obtained by the use of
chemicals, however, will be of very special importance.
Thanks to the marvellous development of German
science, they assure a monopoly to German industry
—a monopoly the use of which is of great importance
The experiences of the war, thus far, have given


ill this very connection an incontrovertible proof of
the absolute dependence of the foreign countries upon
Germany. To make this dependency permanent and
certain will be one of the most important problems
connected with the prevention of transplantings.
In protecting our export trade, raw products of
German origin, which are indispensable for the for-
eign countries in question, are to be made use of.
These raw products must be placed under State con-
trol through its rights of special sovereignty.
THE INIMITABLE DYE-STUFFS AND CHEMICALS
The classification of finished products will be
somewhat more difficult, since, with few exceptions,
the dependency of foreign countries upon them is
not always easy to prove. In these exceptions are
included, briefly, certain dye-stuffs and chemicals
of an industrial and pharmaceutical nature; certain
steels of especial value; also some kinds of gelatin.
The dependency of foreign countries can, of course,
be only a conditional one, resting upon their in-
ability to turn out goods of equally high value. This
is especially true in reference to machines and ma-
chine pafts, which enjoy the protection of special
patents, Ihe objection that foreign countries,
in such cases, simply would either not regard the
patent right or else entirely extinguish it, is scarcely
justified, since without doubt recourse would be had
to reprisals in the matter of patent rights, and these
reprisals would, of course, be made where the foreign
industry would suffer in an especially vulnerable spot.


Observe that an embargo on raw products can be
of effect on either an agricultural or an industrial
connection; an embargo on finished products will
generally be of effect only in an industrial connection.
Finished products of German origin are considered
for purposes of protecting the export trade — primarily,
if they are absolutely indispensable for the foreign
country in question; secondarily, if they are partially
indispensable.
PRINCIPLES OF THE EMBARGO BATTLE
What kind of article is to be chosen in arranging
protection for certain exports depends upon the
industry which is the predominant and prevailing
factor in the economic life of the country in question.
Manufactures that wear out rapidly will be less
adapted for protective uses than those of a permanent
nature. An embargo on perishable articles is more
or less equivalent to a sudden crippling of the indus-
try, and like every unforeseen business cessation is
attended with heavy economic sacrifice; and there is
also danger that the embargoed goods, to an amount
corresponding to previous export, will spoil in
default of sale. An embargo on durable articles
will only very rarely be followed by serious economic
loss. Ihe plant can continue operation at full
capacity and its output stored as a surplus, and
the longer the embargo lasts, the greater will be the
demand when it is lifted.
Perishable articles are inferior to durable articles in


respect to their protective value; manufactures in bulk
are superior to piece manufactures.
A presupposition in the case of all raw materials
and articles which are used in protecting exports is
their irreplaceability in a material and qualitative
connection. Chemical and mechanical composition
is an important factor here, as well as physical,
chemical, and mechanical peculiarities, such as their
action when combined with other substances. Up
to a certain limit of effectiveness all raw materials
and manufactured articles can be replaced by others;
the relative height of this limit, from an economic
standpoint, determines the possibility of substitu-
tion. When this limit is ascertained, we have a
clue to the value of the raw material or manufac-
tured article as a means of protection for exports.
But this limit of effectiveness, measured indepen-
dently, is not the determining factor. The principal
element is the item of price. There are substitutes
for the regular materials which are only half as
efficient, but which are Tour times as cheap. Sucli
substitute-materials give the foreign, country suffi-
cient superiority to rob the normal material of its
protective properties. Raw materials and manu-
factured articles, accordingly, are to be considered
as irreplaceable whose physical, chemical, and
mechanical properties —independent of other con-
siderations — can not be rivalled by substitutes at all;
secondly, those which can not "be rivalled in the
matter of price; and finally, those which, when
measured from the standpoint of economics, show a
superiority not to be overtaken.


Protective means for the export trade can only he
raw materials whose degree of effectiveness —absolute
and relative —can not be rivalled substitutes.
SOME DEFINITIONS OF INDISPENSABLE’ *
The degree of excellence can come into question
only in the case of improved raw products —which
in the broader sense of the word, represent manu-
factured articles —and in actual articles of manufac-
ture. At that it is only a relative matter and depends
upon the degree of excellence attained by the
products of the competing foreign country. The
more our products surpass the latter, the greater will
be their protective value. In estimating the degree
of excellence of an article, we consider first, of course,
its good 'qualities. Then we consider the readiness
with which it can be put into service, and finally its
total efficiency. The less the deterioration (in
actual manufactures), the greater the productivity
(in improved raw products), the longer the duration,
the more versatile the application, the higher will be
the degree of excellence which represents the sum
total of these properties. This degree of excellence
determines at the same time the degree of usefulness.
Protective materials for the export trade must show
a superior degree of excellence and usefulness.
Special make, irreplaceability, perfection, and
usefulness of (raw materials or) manufactured arti-
cles are of no avail, if there is a reasonable probability
that, with all these peculiarities, they could be imi-
tated in a comparatively short time. On account


of the constant advance of technical skill and indus-
trial resourcefulness therewith, there is no use talking
about the “impossibility” of practical or equivalent
imitation. Inventions overtake each other more
quickly than they can be perfected. Merely theoreti-
cal imitation of course holds no terrors for us. For
from theoretical imitation to practical performance,
under the conditions of competition, is a far cry,
and demands hardly less time and money than were
required for the development of the original article.
Here also there can accordingly take place only a
relative valuation of our articles for export pro-
tection. The chief criterion will not be of a financial
but of a temporal nature, and the possibility of an
imitation being turned out will always be presup-
posed. This presupposition must be retained and
must influence the selection, even if for the instant
there is no such possibility evident. To deny it
would be to call mechanical improvement an im-
possibility. Capital can always be provided, even
in advance, in case of assured profit. Mechanical
improvement can almost always be obtained where
broad and alluring advantages are offered in return.
When time is short, it must be used up wherever a
minute can be found. The greater the element of
time, the smaller becomes the economic success
of an imitation, and the larger the protective value
of the manufacture which is to be imitated. The
time necessary for imitation assures the original
article an economic and commercial start which puts
it out of subsequent danger. Then too, this respite
can be used in perfecting the original article still


more, further handicapping the imitation in the
economic race.
In determining the protective value of a manufac-
tured article in respect to the possibility of its being
imitated, the deciding factor is the time required for
contriving the imitation.
Raw materials and manufactured articles which
are dispensable under favourable economic circum-
stances are not considered as protective means for
industrial exports. If to do without them causes
economic loss to the country in question, then these
raw materials and manufactured articles are truly
indispensable.
It is self-evident that, as protective means for the
manufacturing export trade, only such raw materials
and manufactured articles can be used, the demand
for which and the corresponding output of which
form a very considerable proportion of the entire
consumption of the foreign country to which they
are shipped.
Here there should be noticed a still further limita-
tion, namely : a large manufacturing output or foreign
demand represents an influential economic factor
only when the selling price of the unit of goods is as
high as it should be, considering the amount of
output. Expressed in other words that means:
The product given by multiplying the output shipped
abroad by the selling price must be a figure which
is larger than a certain percentage of the entire
value of the exports to the foreign country in
question. This deciding percentage will be differ-
ent for each foreign country for it is dependent upon


the other exports. In one case it will have to be
very large before admitting of protective measures
without injury to the rest of the export; in another
case it can be comparatively small. It must always,
however, be adjusted so as to leave such an amount as
will allow other industries which may in time be-
come involved, to be maintained without loss.
Protective value can be attributed only to those raw
materials and articles whose output for foreign coun-
tries and , whose selling price amount to a figure of
considerable importance in the total export statistics
for those countries.
To manufacture certain articles in Germany, we
shall have to have foreign raw materials; for certain
others, we shall not. Manufactures which are de-
pendent upon a supply of foreign raw materials
(German over-seas colonies taken as part of the
mother country), can be considered as means of
protection only in two cases, namely : when the land
of supply is well disposed toward us (a case upon
which we dare not count too strongly, as experience
teaches), or when it is possible to manufacture un-
surpassable products from these raw materials in
Germany alone.
The deciding factors here will be : working methods,
secret processes, and also groups of employees whose
trade is handed down from father to son, and who
are certain not to be transferred to other countries.
The above-mentioned limitations will closely limit
this class of protective articles, and will make it
smaller than that of manufactured articles indepen-
dent of foreign raw materials. The importance of


the latter is evident without further discussion.
The chemical industry and the metal industry will
here stand in the first place. Next to them will
come the manufacture of delicate instruments, a
held where science is continually progressing.
Manufactures independent of foreign raw materials
have a higher productive value than those dependent
upon them.
THE HIGH ROAD TO TECHNICAL SUPERIORITY
Finally, the amount and kind of foreign compe-
tition is a factor determining protective value. The
greatest protective value is afforded by those raw
materials and manufactures which are superior to
the foreign, both in quality and quantity. By su-
periority in quality we are to understand technical su-
periority (good qualities, durability, efficiency,
productivity, etc.) as well as price superiority (cheap-
ness, taken absolutely and also in proportion to
technical superiority). For this reason, all imagin-
able measures are to be taken to increase technical
and price superiority, not only on behalf of manu-
facturers but much more still for the sake of increas-
ing protective value.
Technical superiority finds advancement through
state scientific institutions, schools, research organiz-
ations, prizes offered for perfected articles and im-
provements. It finds it in a larger share of profit
for the inventor in comparison with the head of the
business; reduction of the cost of government tests
in order to bring them within the reach even of in-
dustries weak financially, research work done without


charge when circumstances warrant it, state aid to
private institutions for research and experimental
laboratories under certain restrictions, state encour-
agement of private inventive activity by financial
support, state benefit and support for professional
unions, and through these unions themselves. Spec-
ial value is to be placed upon the continued main-
tenance of vital contact between scientific investigation
and practical application; in other words, scientific
improvements ought to be made accessible to indus-
try as a whole not only through private trade-
literature, but also through literature under state
patronage.
AN INFALLIBLE PRICE-CUTTING DEVICE
'• ' * * •* * ■ ..I ... ’ . ‘ I, ; v : t y ;•I. :. .
Price superiority is increased by safeguarding
general labour conditions with reference to relations
between employer and employee, as well as to raw
materials (pre-manufactures) and machinery. Un-
reasonable advances in the prices of raw materials
(pre-manufactures) due to rings and special interests
must be prevented by state measures, where they
might endanger the protective value of manufactures.
The present times are showing that state interference
of this sort is possible and can be successfully carried
out. The experiences of to-day in this connection,
ought to bear fruit in peace times also. There must
be no hesitation about applying compulsion in cases
where selfish interests of individuals or groups could
injure the German export trade or parts of it. Ac-
cordingly, it is plain that certain raw materials and
pre-manufactures, which are closely related to export


articles having a protective value, must be subject
to state supervision at least so far as price goes.
Many industries and industrial enterprisers fall
behind the times in the matter of price (to a certain
degree often in construction also), because their
monetary financial situation makes it impossible
to procure more efficient machinery. This condition
will be especially annoying in the time immediately
following the making of peace. It might well be a
subject study, whether, with state assistance —no
matter whether this benefited the enterpriser directly,
or the trade association to which he belonged —ways
could not be found to remedy this evil, perhaps
through replacing* the machinery in return for certain
obligations which would be payable in cash or in
output. This assistance will be particularly neces-
sary where effective protective value can not be
gained until the industry in question maintains
a certain minimum efficiency in the amount of output.
Industries, whose products are to have a protective
value which will benefit the German export trade,
must be, and remain, superior to the corresponding
foreign industries in the matter of mechanical con-
struction, price, and capacity.




IN ORDER to strangle any possible com-
petition by the United States and her
Allies in the production of those “un-
surpassable goods” with which she is to
throttle us eventually, the Germans are to in-
corporate all their export industries into a
“union” under military control. And this
union will levy contributions from all its mem-
bers for a “guarantee fund.” The Guaran-
tee Fund will “insure” that these strategic
goods undersell all possible competitors.
For while the State provides the constant sup-
ply of raw materials, below cost, the fund
flows in to reimburse the miner, and finance
the hiatus caused by the “pitiless embargo”
and maintain the surplus stocks for future of-
fensive manoeuvres. Besides, the indispen-
sable industries will never be hampered, as
ours are, by the demands of labour. Strikes,
the writer here says, are “unthinkable” in
this campaign, and will be met by swift and
terrible retribution.


CHAPTER FIVE
THE GOLDEN GUARANTEE AND THE
DISCIPLINE OF LABOUR
The Fusion of German Business and the German Army
—The Benevolence of State Supervision of Industry—
Raw Material, the Tale of Available Ammunition—Sur
plus Stocks, the “Reserves" of the Trade War—Subsi-
dies and Compensations—Levying Contributions on All
Business —The Guarantee Fund—Cheap Materials The
Composition of the General Staff-Crushing “Unthink-
able” Labour Disputes—Stopping Leaks to the Blacklist
IT WILL now be the duty of the state officials in
charge of the welfare of the export trade to
separate the individual German industries, on
the basis of detailed studies and deliberations, into
those with direct protective value, and those with in-
direct piotective value, and to issue for the benefit of
those industries and their service to our export trade
administrative regulations, the guiding lines of
which have been given in the foregoing discussion.
The special industries must recognize that they work
not only on their own account but for the general
good, that their own interest must give way to the
protection of the whole German export trade.


Certain special rights must be given the State by
law to prevent industries of special protective value
from being transplanted into foreign countries,
when such a transfer would impair or destroy their
protective value. These rights can be defined by
law only in a general way; they must furnish the
guiding lines for the decisions to be issued in the
form of rules and regulations. They must on
the other hand be so worded that a gag or check
upon industrial development or upon the indispen-
sable opportunity for free expansion is just as com-
pletely precluded as a “bureaucratizing” in the
damaging sense of the word. In no circumstances
may fetters be upon industry; the state’s rights
of special sovereignty should have the end of promot-
ing industry in greater measure than previously.
Claims to such special help can be made only by
industries which are suited to protect the entire
export trade against outside hostility of every
sort. State surveillance is not to be called upon,
but state protection. The State must have the
right of co-operating with industry, not of interfering
with it. What we need is not a favouring of special
industries but a safeguarding of industry as a whole
against the special interests of individual industries
which could only be satisfied to the detriment of
industry in general and therewith of the whole
export trade.
BENEVOLENCE OF STATE SUPERVISION
According to earlier explanations certain categories
of industries are to be subjected to state protection.


This carries with it a state right of supervision which
should be carefully defined, and which can be en-
larged in certain important cases to give the State
a voice in the industry’s deliberations. At the
same time, however, it assures to the industry in
question special certain privileges which will be dis-
cussed farther on. With the co-operation of com-
petent industrial and technical associations it will
not be difficult to find a middle path, which gives
to the State all the rights necessary for the protection
and profit of industry as a whole, and which gives
to industry that freedom of development without
which it can not continue, and without which an
mcrease in efficiency is unthinkable. The war times
have lent a rejuvenating impulse to an ofttimes
somewhat cumbrous bureaucracy, an impulse origin-
ating from industry ; the latter itself, in co-operating
with government authorities has learned to under-
stand their way of thinking and their good purposes.
A mutual evening-up of opinions has taken place
between officials and practical men of affairs, whose
views could not always be harmonized in the past.
This, as experience teaches, gives promise of splen-
did results. Such an assimilation was necessary, and
was the best imaginable preparation for the coming
work of peace and for the future of industrial exports.
The times are now past when officials on the one side,
and men of industry on the other insisted selfishly
on their prerogatives and were unwilling to listen
to the other side of the question. Under the stress of
circumstances both have learned to understand each
other and have seen that only in tolerant co-operation


can they arrive at what has made Germany so great,
to the terror of her opponents. Two forces, once
divergent, have been welded and transformed into
one unconquerable and ever-increasing power. Its
goal is the enduring security of the country’s future.
Hence there is no ground for the plea that these plans
call for police oppression of industry. Rather do they
call for a firm cementing of two mighty powers.
Industries which have protective value for the ex-
port trade are to he given State protection.
RAW MATERIAL —THE TALE OF AVAILABLE
AMMUNITION
In order that the State may at all times take a
stand against efforts hostile to its export trade, it
should be fully aware of the means at its disposal.
It must accordingly be kept well posted concerning
the regular output of the industries which have pro-
tective value. The within-defined control of amounts
of yield from raw materials, and of amounts of out-
put in the case of improved materials and manufac-
tured articles, will be most easily made possible by
the rendering of periodic production- and manufac-
turing-reports. The State must know what amounts
of a manufacture or of a material it has at its dis-
posal if it is to take its measures quickly. It has
already been indicated that some action against
domestic exploitation might also become necessary.
Price advancing can easily be prevented for the pro-
tection of other industries concerned in export, if
the quantities on hand are exactly known. Measures


against foreign countries will be attended by success
only if the State can count upon assured quantities.
Assurance in all cases presupposes control.
Stale protection places upon industries of protective
value the duty of reporting their amounts of pro-
duction.
SURPLUS STOCKS, THE ‘ * RESERVES M OF THE TRADE
WAR
It has been explained that the size of output can
influence the protective value of the products in
favourable or unfavourable fashion. The mainten-
ance of protective value unimpaired demands a
certain minimum output. Therefore, in times of
strong market, but still more in times of a bad market
we must take care that a certain supply is on hand
which can be thrown into the balance at a given
instant. Out of this consideration arises the ne-
cessity of certain industries maintaining a surplus
stock above the normnl needs of trade. The amount
of surplus required will be determined by the statis-
tics. Since work upon surplus stock is attended by
financial sacrifice for industry at many periods of
time, the State must make a corresponding return
for this. For it does not wish to give up the weapon
represented by the surplus stock, and yet the in-
dustry is to be protected from loss. The industrial
enterpriser will understand how to turn out the sur-
plus stock to the amount demanded by the State
without further directions, if the State gives him the
necessary guarantees of sale, and assists him finan-
cially by granting advances of money, when neces


sary, upon the amount of surplus stock. By these
advances the resources of the State will not be taxed,
for the surplus demanded as a reserve results ; n
safeguarding the trade of other forms of industry
whose export would be impossible without the pro-
tection of the State. The guarantees through
state channels —are therefore to be furnished by
industries given protection, for they form an insur-
ance of these industries. Moreover, they are not
actually paid out. For after the embargo is raised
the industries affording the protection can again dis-
pose of their stock and pay back the advances they
have received. These advances then flow back—again
through state channels —to the protected industries.
\ ,
The State, relying for funds upon the industries
needing protection, ought to set aside a guarantee
fund. The purpose of the latter would he to make
temporary compensation for the loss {for instance
through keeping a stock-surplus ) sustained by indus-
tries which exercise protective influence in the inter-
ests of industries needing protection.
: , ( - , . - \
j.
-** ; t
SUBSIDIES AND COMPENSATIONS
It has been pointed out heretofore that protective
'j
value increases the more the products can compete
in the matter of price, this is especially vital in pre-
venting cheap substitutes at the disposal of foreign
countries from coming into competition. It follows
that the State must take care that a reduction in
price is possible. It would not only have the duty
of stepping in when firms combine to boost the


prices of raw materials in their own interests alone,
but it would also have to attend to the establishment
or the expansion of such concerns as bring about a
cheapening of products having protective value.
Effective measures can here be taken either by the
erection of state plants or by state contributions to
private ones. In either case the outlay should be
gradually refunded, without hindering the prosperity
of the new industry. With such plants it is not a
matter of prime importance that their work be
directly profit-bearing, but rather that they furnish
to the industries having protective value the neces-
sary raw material at prices which enable them to
stand at all times in the forefront so far as price is
concerned. These auxiliary industrial plants must
of course also yield profits. Supposing that they
deliver materials at cost, they will then earn a profit
by a percentage share in the net earnings of their
customers. This share under certain circumstances
may amount to so large a sum that it will be just as
possible (even if a slow process) for these state auxili-
ary plants to pay for themselves as it is for the state
subsidies to private institutions to be paid back.
LEVYING CONTRIBUTIONS ON ALL BUSINESS
Still another way leading to the same goal is
possible. Mention has been made above of a guar-
antee fund which had reference to an individual
industry. There will be as many such guarantee
funds as there are at hand industries of protective
value, or, as the case may be, of industries to be


protected. Since industry ns a whole, and the in-
dividual kinds of industry represent a smoothly
running machine every part of which contributes ti
uninterrupted operation, or, in other words, co-oper-
ates in safeguarding the entire export trade, a
centralization of all the individual guarantee funds
the formation of a general guarantee fund —will be
expedient. The latter in accordance with some
system would have the duty of making up the in-
dividual guarantee fund which would exist only a
a matter of form.
If industries with protective value need the cost
of their raw materials reduced, in order to enable
them to sell at better prices, the general guarantee
fund could take care of that. Even in that worst
case of all, where the auxiliary industries had to
supply materials for this purpose at a loss to them-
selves, they would still be supported by the general
guarantee fund, thus being assured a proper percent-
age of profit. In cases where the auxiliary industries
enjoy a normal profit it could look after the amortiza-
tion, or along with defraying the expense of amorti-
zation could still contribute a supplement to a small
manufacturing profit.
There arise here a large number of combinations
the explanation and discussion of which would lure
us too far. Since those industries which reap the
greatest advantage through its existence, would have
to contribute in largest measure to the guarantee
fund, no industry will be injured at the cost of others.
There will be introduced a constant cycle, which


will complete itself with harm to none but with
profit for all. For this reason it is not to be ex-
pected that opposition will arise against such a
means of safeguarding the export trade, unless it be
through selfish interests, which, for the common
good, would at once be shown the error of their
ways by the power of the state, if need be.
The State, moreover, will take care that all advances
of science and practice be made accessible to such
auxiliary industries without cost. The guarantee
fund would again have to take care of these costs.
It is apparent, therefore, that the State is not called
upon to sacrifice its resources. Its task is only to
exercise its right of special sovereignty so as to regu-
late quotas of contribution in a way satisfactory to
all industries, and to systematize the collection of the
quotas so that the fund proceeds automatically, with-
out constraint or friction.
The price-superiority of industries having protective
value will be brought about through the establishment
of auxiliary industries whose continued operation and
profitableness is assured through the State by means
of a general guarantee fund. All industries will be
called upon to support this fund, because its benefits
to export activity reach every form of industry .
CRUSHING ‘‘UNTHINKABLE” LABOUR DISPUTES
All financial support is useless if production is
interrupted by causes lying in labour conditions.
Here there now arises a delicate question the solution
of which could scarcely give satisfaction to one


party. It must nevertheless be given consideration
for it is essential. Strikes and lock-outs impairing
the work of industries which have one of the above-
mentioned protective values or all of them in general,
or impairing the work of their auxiliary industries,
must under all circumstances be avoided. Such
cases are unthinkable in times of war with industries
which are concerned in military supply, because the
State possesses sufficient means to prevent them —
means which are used impartially against employer
and employee and which experience teaches are
successful. Everything has been settled peacefully.
A command was sufficient. There is no reason,
therefore, why the State in any given case even in
times of peace could not straighten out affairs with-
out the tedious negotiations of contesting parties
which always leave bitter feelings in the hearts of
both. The export trade, because it is a measuring
of strength, domestic and foreign, is a battle even if
within the realm of peace. To wage it successfully,
the combatant must remain free from irritation and
dissension within. It is to the interest of foreign
countries hostile to our export trade to encourage
labour conflicts and in concrete cases they will not
spare the “silver bullets.” Long investigations
about causes would injure industrial development
and therewith the export trade. As in times of war,
so here, the procedure must be cut short —by the
mandate of the State.
State action will prevent further trouble before-
hand by placing the relationship between employer


and employee on a clear basis which will satisfy the
claims of both, as far as possible. For the industries
in question, certain wage standards are to be estab-
lished which serve as guarantees that friction will
be avoided. The war has confirmed the truth of the
Kaiser’s word concerning the elimination of party
antagonisms. All parties have indeed perceived
the advantages which arise when party interests
give place to the interest of the country. The pros-
perity of the export trade is in the common interest
of all, the employer as well as the employee, antagon-
isms which could damage it must therefore be elimin-
ated and remain so. They will in general be only
of a financial nature. A just proportioning of the
profits which come to the employer and to the
employee through the security of the export trade
can unquestionably be reached if good will and recog-
nition of the ultimate purpose are shared by both
sides. Where this is not the case there arise selfish
interests, which should be suppressed by force on
behalf of the general welfare. In given cases the
general guarantee fund can again be appealed to in
smoothing out financial inequalities.
In all industries having protective value as well as
in their auxiliary industries, labour disturbances
which arise through antagonisms between employer
and employee must be suppressed by every means.
\
STOPPING LEAKS TO THE BLACKLIST
in another place we have pointed out that in case
our products have to be placed under a partial or


complete embargo, its effectiveness must not be
destroyed by the consumers receiving a supply -in-
directly. This can be prevented only if the buyers
are known. Therefore there is a special necessity
of keeping a general register of the purchasers of
important law materials and pre-manufacturers.
Of course this must be done in such a way as not to
endanger business secrets. This very difficulty
makes the problem a hard one to solve. We must
nevertheless attempt it.
A useful expedient, perhaps worth considering, is
a Central Sales-Bureau for goods having protective
value to the export trade. The danger that domestic
buyers will circumvent the Sales-Bureau and supply
the outside world in spite of it will be entirely elimin-
ated by a regulation to the effect that, only on
authorization by the Central Sales-Bureau, may
officials of roads crossing our boundaries permit
goods to be shipped out. The advantage of a Central
Sales-Bureau for foreign countries scarcely needs
further discussion. The danger of uneconomic
price regulation is out of the question since the state
will watch over that in the interest of export protec-
tion. Sufficient assurance that the Central Sales-
Bureau will not exercise influence upon purely domes-
tic trade is contained in the stipulation that it will
operate only for foreign countries and confine its
jurisdiction to exports. It is further presumed
that shipments through the Central Sales-Bureau
can be made only by manufacturers and never by
middlemen. To the proper governmental authori-
ties belongs the control of the Central Sales-Bureau


in reference to its foreign customers, prices, and the
right to lay partial or complete embargoes. This
control is most easily to be carried out by granting
the officials a seat and voice in the supreme directing
body. To simplify affairs a certain number of
places in the directorate of the Central Sales-Bureau
and of the general guarantee fund will be filled by
the same individuals, who are to be elected inde-
pendently of each other by industry and the state
authorities.
Ihe Central Sales-Bureau is to be thought of as
organized in a similar fashion to the general guaran-
tee fund. The separate industries of protective value
form branch sales-bureaus, which represent subor-
dinate units of the Central Sales-Bureau. The
directors of these units as of those in the general
guarantee fund must be in close contact, especially
in regard, to the above-mentioned indemnity quotas
which are temporarily placed upon the protected
industries. The Central Sales-Bureau is the execu-
tive organ for the practical carrying out of embar-
goes and boycotts. Ihe co-operation of the general
guarantee fund is necessary to maintain embargoes
and boycotts without economic injury to the domes-
tic industries involved. Its directors would adminis-
ter the financial power.
Ihe Central Sales-Bureau can of course be re-
placed by a purely administrative office to which
must be reported all arrangements with foreign
countries concerning products of protective value.
This administrative office is the court of last appeal
for export permission from the instant when em


barg'O measures are applied. Which of the two forms
of control is preferable will appear from the detailed
studies of the government authorities and the in-
dustrial unions. Both bodies furnish the data fo
the export-control statistics and work out the ruk
and regulations for exports.
Industries having protective value are to
known their foreign customers to a bureau of con
troi. This bureau works hand in hand with th
directors of the general guarantee fund. The diree
tors of both bodies are elected independently of eack
other by industry and by the State.




OBSESSED by the fear that their in-
valuable monopolies, the “shock
troops” of their intended commer-
cial conquests, will be imitated or trans-
planted to America or France or England, the
Germans decree that no alien capital shall
have any interest in any of them. To keep
them at maximum efficiency they propose to
replace all machinery to keep pace with even
the minutest improvement; to compel every
scientist and inventor in the Empire to reveal
his discoveries instantly to the monopolies,
■ * *
and to guard all their plans and processes
with a cordon of bayonets. They are going
to bolster these monstrosities of commerce
with what they plainly call “special privi-
leges”—rebates, tax remissions, premiums,
long working hours, priority orders. And
every employee, from president to water-boy,
is to be enlisted for life —the better to create
an “hereditary personnel” and maintain the
pall of secrecy.
V 4


CHAPTER SIX
THE CHINESE WALL OF SECRECY
Hounding Allied Money Out of Germany!—“Capital
Does Not Exist Independently of the State” —Prods to
Speed Up “Progress”—Compulsory Reports of Dis-
coveries—The Veil of Mystery to Enshroud German In-
ventions —“Special Privileges” for “Protective” Indus-
tries —Drafting Labour for Life—Strict Exclusion of
Foreigners from Teuton Enterprises—The Ban on En-
tente Capital.
THE control of the State over those industries
which, thanks to their protective value, serve
as protection to the export trade, must
reach out also in the direction of capital; first, in
order to strengthen and stiffen their financial back-
bone, and then in order to hinder foreign capital
from gaining an influence over the conduct and
control of these industries. The first purpose is to
be accomplished by a subdivision under the admin-
istration of the general guarantee fund; the second,
by the proper government official (commercial
registrars). Industries with protective value must
never under any circumstances be at a loss for capi-
tal; their securities must be permanently beyond the
range of wild speculation. Their demands for
capital must find satisfaction in the general guarantee


fund, or as the case may be, through its mediation
with related industrial unions. In the case of in-
dustries especially valuable for protecting the export
trade every influence of foreign capital must be
eliminated. A seat and a voice in the directorates
of such industries must be entirely out of the reach
of foreigners.
Wavs and means must be found to hinder the
appointment of dummies in directorates, who are
expected to prevent the formation of a majority
at the important meetings, so as to defeat measures
against foreign countries hostile to our exports. If
the usual expedients here are of no avail, the State
must have the right to annul directorate resolutions
which could impair the protection of the export
trade. That, to be sure, is an infringement of
guaranteed commercial liberties, yet it is necessary
when the State meets opposition in exercising its
duty to protect exports. Capital also must learn
that it does not exist and may not be active primarily
for itself, but that the common welfare comes before
its special interests, even forgetting for the moment
that the latter thrive most when capital is serving
the common good.
The administration and conduct industries
protective value must remain free from the influence
of foreign capital.
PRODS TO SPEED UP “PROGRESS’'
There are a number of industries with especially
high protective value whose progressive development,


which is absolutely essential to the continued main-
tenance of their protective value, is dependent upon
their working equipment. This is especially true
in mining industries. It is in the interest of profit
to put up as long as possible with the equipment on
hand (or, speaking in accounting terms, until it can
be written off the books without any debt
Such a practice is often incompatible with the attain-
ment of the desired maximum efficiency, measuring
this by the latest improvements in science and
practical work. An industry of protective value
must stand in the forefront in every respect, if the
protective value expected of it is to be permanently
at our disposal in its fullest extent.
It must not be overlooked that success from the
standpoint of profits is always assured to these
industries (guarantee fund), if not on their account,
at least in the interest of export protection. The
general welfare demands that these industries be
kept on a sound basis, with natural and satisfactory
profits. Their rare and valuable advantages im-
pose duties, among which is primarily that of con-
tinually perfecting operating equipment, working
methods in use, and finally the organization of the
business.
*
COMPULSORY REPORTS OP' DISCOVERIES
All industries in a technical way are already
subject to state control in respect to their safety
provisions. We ought to welcome rather than con-
demn the addition of state control of manufacturing


processes. Industry would reap only advantages
from this, because it would automatically be advised
of all means for perfecting and increasing its effi-
ciency. In future, at least, we will certainly strive
for this goal. Those who find themselves momen-
tarily advanced in a technical way will combat it
and because of their financial means will always
be in a position to make new advances. They will
see in the general endeavour for this result an injur)'
to their competitive superiority.
Closer examination, however, shows that this
fear is unfounded. If technical improvements
quickly become common property, progressive con-
cerns will be forced to add new improvements
to the old in order to remain superior. Since the
exchange of inventions is mutual, they will likewise
gain advantage from those of others. An unin-
terrupted contest is instituted in which (to the
general advantage) there will alv/ays be a new leader
at the top. Progress which formerly took place
spasmodically will become constant. Improve-
ments which give the owner superiority mislead him
into resting on his oars in stagnant waters until
others catch up. This rest acts like a brake upon
the general progress which is necessary for the main-
tenance and increase of the export trade. A control
of manufacturing processes would be the best imag-
inable encouragement for progress and the simplest
medium of exchange for all individual improve-
ments. To make such a control general will probabl)
take many years, but its foundations can even now
be laid through its introduction into those industries


which have especially high protective value. The
experiences gained in this way will make its general
application easier and will contribute towards banish-
ing individual mistrust.
Whether this control of manufacturing processes
is to be exercised directly through the State or
through the medium of the associations of the various
trades is a question of secondary nature. Here also
the uniting of industrial and state representatives will
probably present the best solution.
Industries with high protective value for the export
trade are to he subjected to a control of manufactur-
ing processes in order to assure an uninterrupted per-
fecting of their technical efficiency .
The body controlling manufacturing processes
must have a system which keeps it informed con-
cerning all improvements of a technical nature
It then has the duty of determining where and to
what extent the practical application of these im-
provements can take place. The sources at its dis-
posal are of a state and private nature. Frequent
reports will be made to the controlling body con-
cerning the scientific and experimental activity oi
state testing institutions, laboratories, and technical
schools. This body will naturally also be in close
association with the patent authorities.
The duty of making reports will new fall to private
experimental institutions and laboratories to which
will be given scientific and practica Isupport in re-
turn. From the mutual exchange of thought and
experience there arises a co-operation of all force


subserving progress. It will be found necessary
to lay down certain rules for commercializing new
inventions in order to protect the maker from loss
when the inventions are made accessible to broader
circles. We dare not diminish his right to a share
in the earnings. The more secure his rights and
interests from the very start, the less becomes his
opposition to a general application of his invention,
For in this way experimental and inventive activity
becomes, from the first, independent of individual
capitalists and of capital in general. This duty
to surrender inventions can extend for the presen
only to those the application of which strengthens
industries having high protective value.
Inventions and other technical progress which can
bring about an improvement in industries having
protective value are subject to the duty of being re-
ported to the body exercising control of manufactur
ing processes. This body will transmit them to the
industries mentioned.
To simplify the matter of compensating the in-
ventors and authors of new improvements, recourse
to the controlling body of the general guarantee fund
again recommends itself. This body will charge a
special sub-department with the estimation of the
royalties, with the elaboration and completion of
utilization agreements (between the inventor and
the industry using the invention), and with the col-
lection of royalties (licenses), and the payment of
these to the inventor, etc.
The financial activity resulting from the compuh


sory handing over of inventions and improvements
is made the duty of the general guarantee fund.
THE VEIL OF MYSTERY •
all inventions and improvements are made
accessible to a central office, a suitable organization
will make it possible to keep these inventions and
improvements out of the reach of foreign countries
hostile to our exports, so far as it appears necessary
for the protection of the export trade. The ways and
means necessary for this purpose are to be invented
and worked out by the body exercising control of
manufacturing processes, and are to be formulated
by it in clearly and sharply defined regulations.
These will not involve work materials alone, but also
the persons engaged upon them.
The idea ought not exactly to get about that a
Chinese wall is being thrown around German in-
ventions and improvements, although the experiences
of the war have taught us that too great scientific
familiarity with foreign countries was rewarded by
ingratitude and injury. It is, however, necessary
to preserve certain inventions and improvements
exclusively for our own industries as long as need
be, in order to maintain their protective value undi-
minished for the sake of strengthening the export
trade. Things like this seem difficult and complicated
at first glance, but where there is a will there is a
way. The will in this case is the command of self-
preservation, and for that reason is assured.
Inventions and improvements which are necessary


for strengthening industries having a protective
value must he withheld from foreign countries hostile
to our exports .
Here, accordingly, arises a further obligation to
compensate experimenters and inventors. This obli-
gation is to be met by the general guarantee fund
which at the same time will make a charge upon
(debit to) the industries making use of these in in-
ventions and improvements.
“special privileges” for protective
INDUSTRIES
In a purelv material connection, industries having
protective value must be granted special privileges
so that they may be provided with raw materials
and indispensable working equipment in advance of
all other industries, for the sake of preventing any
interruption in their activity. For instance, when
raw materials are scarce, the industry having
protective value has the preference. Again, in case
of an interruption in the power current, safety pre-
cautions are to be taken beforehand at the general
power plant to prevent an industry with protective
value from being shut down. In securing coal, oil,
benzine, ores, metals, etc., industries having pro-
tective value enjoy the preference, the same as state
enterprises. As has already been explained prices
are regulated by the general guarantee fund in case
of advances in the market.
Among the prerogatives to be granted to industries
with a protective value are also : freight concessions,


which can be not only of a financial nature but also
such as to expedite industrial processes; the granting
of longer working hours in cases where they are term
porarily necessary; brief tax remissions, and if
need be, tax exemptions; and expropriation rights
when expansion or enlargement over new land is
necessary.
Industries with protective value are to he given
special privileges in ordering raw materials and other
manufacturing necessities, and in reference to freight
and transportation concessions, working hours, tax
and expropriation rights.
~ •
DRAFTING LABOUR FOR LIFE
All peisons who are employed in industries of pro-
tective value must be entered in special lists by the
body controlling manufacturing processes, so as to
safeguard these industries. From the general lists a
special list is to be drawn up which contains the
names of employees in protective industries, who
work wuth manufacturing methods or procedures
over which foreign countries hostile to our exports
have no control. On the part of the State, care
must be taken that special material advantages
(premiums, profit-sharing, pensions), both now and
for the future, be granted to these individuals by
the employer in order to hold them fast to the in-
dustry in question. These persons—whether they
be directors, operating or scientific officers or la-
bourers-must be subject to a state organization
similar to that of the army.


Without permission of this organization no emi-
gration of persons in these lists can take place.
They are subject to especially strict rules for safe-
guarding manufacturing secrets and methods. For-
eigners cannot be permitted to find employment in
concerns of this sort. A- certain limitation of per-
sonal freedom, .it must be confessed, is here involved,
yet an objection against this can scarcely be raised
for there are considerable material advantages in
return. No one, moreover, is compelled to take
employment in these special industries. Whoever
places himself at-their disposal knows what rights
and duties await hint, and must recognize that his
continuation there is necessary in the interests of
the country. There will always be deserters. They
must expect, severe punishment meted, out according
to the amount of responsibility attached, to the post
which they left. On the other hand, freedom of
personal movement within the same or a closely
related industry is to suffer no limitation.
The employees in protective industries must he
prevented from transferring these industries or parts
of them to foreign countries. these industries only
German subjects can be allowed to find employment.
STRICT EXCLUSION OF FOREIGNERS FROM TEUTON
ENTERPRISES.
The exclusive maintenance of such industries for
the Empire demands a further control which ex-
tends to changes in ownership. Since these indus-
tries share the protection of the State in an especially


high degree, the State must be given the right of
consultation in case they pass into new hands.
With an individual owner the state control will limit
itself to ascertaining whether the future owner
exhibits those peculiarities which in a material,
technical and moral connection offer a guarantee
that the industry in question will remain at its former
height and capacity for development, and banish all
possibility of its being transplanted to foreign
countries by the new owner. In the case of indus-
tries with the form of companies, the State will
exercise its rights already mentioned above, in refer-
ence to the appointment of executors and directors.
The exclusion of foreigners, is important in all cases.
Change of ownership in protective industries and
also the appointment of their higher officers' are sub-
ject to the approval of the State, ‘ ' ; 'v. • ;
.4. . * .: , . • • . *\ •; . ? '
No objection will generally be made to industries
of protective value having an interest in similar or
related industries within Germany (first process, or
improving industries), as long as the participation
does not bring about financial weakness or an
undesirable dispersion of energy endangering their
protective value. Participation in similar foreign
industries will only be admissable where there is no
doubt about the security of raw materials or pre-
manufactures, and where financial participation
brings with it no weakening of the main firm or
tendency toward a transplanting of the industry.
Such participation, besides being entirely subject to
approval by the State in all cases of protective in-
dustries, must also take place in such a form that


an undiminishable right to a decisive voice in the
deliberations of the foreign firm is gained by the
industry owning the interest.
In the establishment of foreign branches (the
appointment of representatives) by protective in-
dustries, special care should be taken in all cases
that foreign officials cannot possibly get .an insight
into the manufacturing process. The personnel ol
these officials must be known to our state control.
The participation of protective industries in foreign
industries is subject to the approval of the State,
which is granted under certain pertinent regulations .
Such participation cannot be permitted when it in-
volves the possibility of a protective industry being
transplanted.
THE BAN OF ENTENTE CAPITAL
The participation of foreign capital in protective
industries must be absolutelv debarred. This ex-
elusion can be accomplished by registering the name
of the owner on stock when it. is issued, and by
the stipulation that dividends will be paid only to
citizens of the Empire, who must prove themselves
the owners. With an individual proprietor this
exclusion involves merely the rule that he must be
a citizen of the Empire. The substitution of,dum-
mies can never, of course, be prevented, yet the
injurious influence arising from it will be entirely
avoided by the measures of control mentioned earlier.
The oversight and control of capital in its efforts
to buy an interest in our industries must be con-
ducted with special strictness, because herein lies


the breach through which foreign countries hostile to
our exportation can most easily attack our protective
industry, horeign countries will try to buy such
an interest not only in order to make our industries
of protective value subservient to them and to pre*
pare their transplanting, but also because the protec-
tive industries, thanks to their exceptional position,
will in all probability return sure and satisfactory
profits.
Foreign capital is to be excluded from protective
industries: It cannot he permitted to acquire any
sort of influence over them'.


TO MAINTAIN exclusive and over=
whelming advantages for German
commerce throughout the world,
the German Diplomatic corps will
operate as an Advance Guard of
the Commercial Invasion, working in
secret unison with every agency—to wit,
every German —in Allied lands. The “De=
fence Statistics,” trade conditions, business
methods and markets, and all actions hostile
to Kultur will thus instantly be marshalled
and reported. And the Kaiser presumes that
by dint of offering to trade rebate for rebate,
subsidy for subsidy, and private advantage
for German toleration, some nations can be
translated into the Prussian influence and will
open their doors with privy welcome to Gter=
man goods. Temptation, in the shape of
secret concessions, and incentive, in the shape
of murderous threats, are to be skilfully
manipulated by the Ambassadors from Ber=
lin, constituting the weapons with which the
Allies in succession are to be dragged into
the spider’s web.


CHAPTER SEVEN
DIPLOMACY, THE ADVANCE GUARD OF
THE EXPORT WAR
Private Advantage and Hidden Rebates the Basis of
German Business —Obtaining Secret Privileges Abroad
—Confidential Exchange of “Compensations”—A
Tempting Bargain in Rebates and Premiums —The Prize
Bait of the Prussian Ambassador.
4. ECONOMIC COMPENSATIONS
WE SHOULD make a distinction between
economic compensations as to whether
they are domestic or foreign. Both have
the purpose of assuring advantage to our own coun-
try, the latter through a direct effect upon the do-
mestic industry, the former in the same way or in-
directly through the granting of such concessions to
foreign countries as will benefit our domestic industry
and therewith our export trade.
Economic advantages of a domestic nature have
been treated for the most part in the preceding para-
graphs. The compensations granted within our
country, as appears from earlier explanations, repre-
sent a mutual exchange of strength accomplished


under the direction of the State between the indus-
tries with protective value and the industries to be
protected, with the single purpose of throttling every
attempt to weaken the export trade. The compensa-
tions consist of easily payable indemnities for the
protective industry which embargoes its exports in
order to secure justice for others, and in moral and
material preferments which are given to industries
having a protective value.
OBTAINING SECRET PRIVILEGES ABROAD
In return for the protective services which must
at times be demanded of certain industries and per-
formed by them in the interest of the German export
trade, these industries must also be assured special
privileges and compensations by commercio-political
means in foreign countries. The trade bureaus of
the diplomatic representatives will have the duty
of granting these industries not only especial atten-
tion but also special support in council and action.
'This support will have to go so far that it represents
to a certain degree the very foundation for the activity
of these industries in foreign countries. By this
it is not meant that the other industries are not like-
wise to share the careful support of the foreign repre-
sentatives of the State, but they will have to come
after the industries having a protective value, for
the strengthening of the latter by diplomatic support
represents and immediately induces after it the
strengthening of all other industries shipping to this
foreign country.
Industries with protective value have claims upon


special support and advancement through the diplo-
matic missions.
These claims make it necessary for diplomatic
missions engaged in foreign countries to have not
only representatives who look after the interests of
commerce from a political point of view, but also
those who study commerce from the standpoint of
industry. The latter, whenever possible, must be
chosen right from the ranks of industrial life. The
thought readily suggests itself that these representa-
tives should work hand in hand with the domestic
protective organizations which were mentioned in
earlier explanations and that the latter organizations
should represent the source from which the permanent
assistants of our missions abroad are drawn. It must
not be overlooked that in imposing temporary em-
bargoes on our exports when the need arises, the
deciding factor will be the reports from our foreign
missions. These reports must not only be thoroughly
practical but also expert. This second condition
presupposes an expert staff such as is scarcely imag-
inable without practical training and industrial ex-
perience for years in advance. The experiences
which have, been gained recently in high offices of
state with men who came from the outside world
of affairs give a satisfying assurance that officials
of our missions who come from industrial
circles will perform good service for the export
trade.
For the p rotection of industrial exports there are to
be placed at the disposal of our diplomatic missions in


foreign countries representatives who have had un-
usual experience in many years of industrial activity.
CONFI DEN lIAL EXCHANGE OF “COMPENSATIONS' ’
By placing officials in our foreign missions better
and faster work will be done on statistics, so that
we can have an exact idea of the condition of the
export trade at all times. Every upward and down-
ward movement of exportation in general or of any
individual export will immediately be recognizable
in its full extent and will be subject to regulation
by the proper measures.
Besides the above-mentioned compensations in
which industries with protective value can share
there is still a. larger number, the necessity for which
is conditioned’by current circumstances. It is’ for
instance imaginable that a foreign country may
promote by import measures German industries not
essential to it if other German industrial products
which this country finds necessary are introduced as
cheaply as possible. The degree of cheapness coming
into question here can become so low under certain
circumstances that the industry in question endangers
its profitableness if it wishes to meet the demand.
Since, however, the fulfilment of this demand is in
the interest of other export products a financial
equalization must be made. It can be brought about
either bv recourse to the general guarantee fund or
by granting export premiums through the State
or by combining both means of assistance.
e Another- form of -compensation' consists in allowing


duty-free importation of raw or unfinished materials
needed by industries having protective value, in
order to satisfy the demand in question; in many
cases a temporary exemption from duty, often only a
moderation of duty, will suffice.
*
Besides the support and preferments explained
the previous paragraph which are to he granted to
industries having protective value, compensations
should be devised in the interest of the entire export
trade, in the form of export premiums, duty- reduc-
tions and -exemptions.
A TEMPTING BARGAIN IN PREMIUMS . ,
_ ' V ; . ■ : ■ < • . - .. . - .
It will be the duty of the representatives of in-
dustrial commerce in our foreign embassies to point
out to the agents of foreign concerns that the in-
terests of their own country will be served by placing
certain industries of Germany in a position to
supply their country cheaply. If this hint is well
received, then the next task of the representatives
of industrial commerce will be to inquire into what
kinds of compensation foreign countries grant to Ger-
man industries whose goods they expect to import
at a certain minimum price, and then to induce the
proper authorities in the country in question to grant
these compensations permanently or temporarily.
Such compensations might for instance take the
form of freight rebates upon the transportation
routes which lead to Germany, or the form of foreign
export premiums upon raw materials which the Ger-
man industry in question needs for the sake of cheap


production, and which are produced in the foreign
country itself. These compensations will of course
have reference only to such amounts of raw materials
as correspond to the amounts of finished products
shipped from Germany to the country in ques-
tion . ,
It will be the task of our diplomatic representatives
to secure special inducements from foreign countries
for our industries of protective , whose products
are needed by the foreign countries.
In return for these inducements, Germany will
grant freight rebates to goods passing through her
territory on the way to the foreign countries. The
feasibility of mutual compensations, for the purpose
of making sure that both parties get the raw materials
and manufactured articles they need, is too - self-
evident to require further discussion. If, in the
interest of industrial exports, compensations of such
a nature as to injure one domestic industry while
benefiting another are necessary, recourse will again
be had to the general guarantee fund to indemnify
the former for its loss. It is plain therefore that com-
pensations giving rise to such loss ought only to be
granted with the consent of the highest authorities
in industry. Here again we find that from every
point of view an uninterrupted contact between
government officials and industrial authorities is
necessary. The guiding lines for mutual compensa-
tions are establishedTy commercial treaties.
The export trade can also be encouraged by mu-
tual compensations between the countries


and export, such that both countries will always find
their needs supplied.
THE PRIZE BAIT OF THE PRUSSIAN EMBASSY
Finally we can imagine a case where, on account
of the attitude of some foreign country, the peaceful
growth of Germany’s industrial exports will appear
possible only if we consent to the transplanting of an
especially important industry to that country.
So far as our own industrial circles are concerned--
in other words, so far as concerns the-owner of the
industry to be transplanted —opposition to this
demand-will be met with only in the rarest .cases.
It :is- even. imaginable-T—capital is always ' selfish—
that suggestions leading., a. foreign ..country , to
demand a compensation of-this sort will come by
roundabout the starting point of which, ho.w-
ever, will be found in our own capitalist circles in-
terested in the deal. From earlier explanations it
appears that the most permanent protection for the
entire manufacturing export trade lies in those very
industries, the transplanting of which to foreign
countries must be prevented. It may indeed be
possible that, in carefully weighing the adavntages
and disadvantages, the balance sinks on the side of
permitting the transplantation, but it is not very
probable that the advantages will permanently out-
weigh the disadvantages. There will be greater like-
lihood of the permission being granted if undeniable
proof can be submitted that a considerable number
of other industries not yet transplanted are at hand,


to make up for the loss to the sum total of protective
value incurred by the transplanting of an industry.
Since the number of such especially valuable in-
dustries —valuable in reference to their protection
for industrial exports —is not too large, the question
whether such a proof will be possible must for the
present be passed over. Here also we should repeat
our oft-mentioned admonition not to put much trust
in treaties. No one after all can guarantee that,
after an industry has actually been transplanted
into a foreign country, that country will not find
some excuse or pretext for refusing to perform what
it has guaranteed by treaty in return. It is also
not to be overlooked that an industry transplanted
to one foreign country lessens beforehand the general
protection available against a second foreign country.
For suppose Germany decrees an embargo upon the
products of this very industry as against this second
foreign country, as a protective measure for certain
other exports. The transplanted industry could
scarcely be prevented from supplying that country.
If these possible results are taken into considera-
tion it then appears that the transplanting of
a valuable industry, hitherto only pursued in Ger-
many, to one foreign country is equivalent to trans-
planting it to the whole' outside world without the
possibility of our getting from the world an equiva-
lent service. If, therefore, advantages are gained
from the one foreign country, these are offset by the
immeasurable disadvantages which arise from our
export trade having once and for all unconditionally
resigned a powerful protective weapon against the


rest of the world. Such a procedure could indeed
scarcely be consented to, even if momentarily alluring
advantages should be gained by it. Not momentary
value is of importance but permanent future value.
Compensations in the form of permission to trans-
plant valuable industries to foreign countries are not
allowable.


lIN ORDER to accomplish their pro=
gramme, the commercial war lords of
Essen and Hamburg agree that abso=
lute and dictatorial power shall remain in the
German “State.” It is to retain the
“Divine Right” by which it can forthwith
commandeer those minerals that are the life
blood of industry; to sentence labouring men
for life to any pursuit at any wages, and
hedge them around with jailers; to draft ex=
perts and captains of industry upon service
determined by the General Staff; to decree
tariffs, embargoes, freight rates, rebates,
premiums, and subsidies at will; to levy
“contributions” upon all business and all
workmen alike, disposing thereof as it
chooses, and to direct the personal actions,
aspirations, endeavours, and rewards of all
men of scientific, technical, or financial capa=
city. Not only personal liberty, but the im=
mortal spark of genius is to be chained to the
Imperial chariot wheels.


CHAPTER EIGHT
A FEUDAL SYSTEM OF COMMERCE
The Panacea of Arbitrary Power —The Unquestioned
Command of Supplies, —Dispersing Workmen’s Unions
—The Universal Levy on Capital and Labour —State
Ownership of the Individual—Jurisdiction Over the
Minds of Scientists.
5. STATE PROTECTION
r T“ I HE work of strengthening and safeguarding
I Germany’s export trade will only be accom-
panied by permanent success if those indus-
tries which exhibit special protective value are as-
sured of a proportionate amount of state protection.
This protection will involve : guarding against in-
terruptions in manufacture, such as might arise in
procuring raw materials and machinery, and in
labour troubles. It will make right losses which are
incurred through regulation of the export trade, keep
manufacturing secrets intact and prevent movements
of labour -and capital which endanger these secrets.
State protection will also supplement the work of the
associations which were formed by the various trade
interests for accomplishing these same tasks.
THE UNQUESTIONED COMMAND OF SUPPLIES
It has already often been pointed out that the


starting point of all protective measures lies in mak-
ing secure the supply of raw materials. Through
suitable laws and regulations the State will have to
take care that under all circumstances protective
industries must be supplied from within our own
country with the raw materials and machinery which
they need for the maintenance of their business and
for the production of unsurpassable goods. It will
be the task of the State to see that there are no
interruptions in the connection between raw-material
producers and their customers; that industries of
protective value are supplied before all other buyers;
and that these protective industries be charged only
such prices for their supplies as are compatible with
the price limits which must be imposed upon their
output. Where such moderate charges are im-
possible through the nature of momentary circum-
stances, the difference which is havihg an injurious
effect upon the price at which the protective indus-
tries can manufacture must be made up by the State
in a form which balances inequalities without making
noticeable inroads upon state finances. For this
purpose it will not be absolutely necessary to pay
out cash subsidies. Export premiums, freight re-
bates, etc., in amounts determined by the price
difference to be equalized, will suffice in most cases.
The producer of raw materials can also be induced
to a corresponding moderation in price if the State
assures him in return certain contracts at maximum
prices. For then he can increase the value of such
contracts by postponing the time of fulfilment to
a period of lower market. Encouragements in


other ways may be given to the producer to induce
him to a moderation in price.
The state protection begins with making secure
the sources upon which the manufacturers of
protective industries depend.
DISPERSING WORKMEN'S UNIONS
* - ; • r ' 0 . v .. / ■ _ • ■ < , . $ <
In general it will be easier to safeguard the supply
of raw materials than to safeguard the manufacturing
process itself, the greatest danger to which is to be
found in the relations between employer and em-
ployee. Both put their personal interests foremost.
The former will try to raise the amount of work
required (to take a very bald example) and to lower
wages; the latter will strive for the opposites. It will
be the duty of the State to interpose, and mediate
between them or bring about a reconciliation. Be-
fore all else, however, it ought to take care that
points of friction which could give rise to differences
of opinion are forthwith banished. Work and wages
must be adjusted so that the course of manufacture
may remain unvarying. Every interruption in the
activity and development of a protective industry
has an injurious effect upon the whole manufactur-
ing export trade, because its very protective value, at
least for the time, runs the risk of not being con-
sidered as a factor of importance which can be reck-
oned upon.
The solution of this question is all the more diffi-
cult because here the generally accepted principles
can scarcely be applied. Rather will the regulations


to be issued in this connection have to confine them-
selves to pointing - out the general guiding lines in
accordance with which one must proceed. In every
case mischief-makers who try to advance their per-
sonal interests to the injury of protective value
are to be severely punished. Certain statutory
limits must be placed upon the right of forming com-
binations, whether it be invoked by proprietors or
b}< subordinates, to the injury of a protective indus-
try . It is not a question of the individual, but of
the whole ! More than ever it will be necessary to
give all co-workers in a protective industry a share
in its earnings. If all have a common interest no
one will then attempt an injury to it.
Persons who are listed as employees in the rolls
of protective industries are subject to especially
strict rules in reference to the preservation of manu-
facturing secrets and to safeguarding - the industry
against transplantation. Danger of the latter comes
largely from the higher officers among the em-
ployees, and often from the management itself or
from the capitalists interested in the business.
The regulations will have to provide that the officers
are bonded to a proper amount, and that the stock
of the concern can be requisitioned and called in
when necessary. They must provide that no one
person can ever become possessor of the entire secret
of manufacture wherever such a thing is avoidable,
that the way the manufacture is conducted never
discloses the secret itself, and finally that aliens can
find no employment in such industries.


Industries of protective value can he kept unin-
terrupted operation only by the co-operation of the
State. The State , primarily , has the duty of guard-
ing against transplantation.
THE UNIVERSAL LEVY ON CAPITAL AND LABOUR
If it becomes necessary to place an embargo on the
shipments of certain protective industries to foreign
countries for the benefit of our export trade, the
industries hit by the embargo will be decidedly in-
jured if it leads to a cessation of work. The em-
ployees will also suffer. Since the embargo is
dictated by the State, the latter has the duty of
providing compensation, regardless of whether it
itself pays this or not. If, therefore, the State be
granted by law the right to lay an embargo (the
recognition of this right is required in the interest
of the manufacturing export trade), ways and means
of procuring compensation funds must be made
plain, and the principles which are to govern the
payment of the compensations to the claimant must
be defined.
As has been explained earlier, the parties who
benefit by the embargo, or on behalf of whose exports
the embargo was laid, are to be called upon to furnish
compensation for the embargoed industries and their
workmen. The benefited parties include not only
employers but also the employees in their service;
it seems reasonable that both should be liable to
furnish compensation, in proportion of course to the
amount of profit which has come to them. This


liability becomes oppressive when it must be met
without preparation. The state regulations will
therefore go further and specify in what form and
to what extent the compensation funds are to be
provided beforehand, and in what way the contribu-
tions from all liable parties are to be collected, and
in what manner repayment is to take place after
the embargo is raised.
That repayment is justified has already been
shown; for after the embargo is lifted the industries
which were under it may expect increased manufac-
turing activity and increased sales which will last
until the normal supply of the consumer is reached.
As a matter of principle the repayment ought to
begin with the commencement of this increased
activity and to end when normal conditions are
resumed. Since employers as well as employees of
the embargoed industries share in the benefits of
compensation, both must be called upon for repay-
ment. In all probability deposits to, and with-
drawals from, the compensation fund will represent
an approximately symmetrical wavy line, the first
crest of which is represented by the deposits (pre-
paratory fulfilment of the duty of compensation)
the first trough by the compensation (to the embar-
goed industry and its employees), and the second
crest- by the repayment (made by the industry and
employees after the embargo is lifted), etc. The
only actual loss of money will therefore be through
the necessary interest payments which in justice
ought to be made by all the parties concerned.


State protection must include making good and
regulating all deficits caused hy temporary embar-
goes on protective industries in the interest i / indus-
trial exports.
If embargoed industries are to be able to supply
the increased demand for their- products after the
embargo is lifted, they ought to continue operation
as much as possible during the time their shipping
is prohibited; in other words, they should work
upon a stock-surplus. The claims upon the com-
pensation fund will in this case be higher than if
they shut down, for, should they stop work, the
fund would only be relied upon for profits. When
operations are continued, however, raw materials'
will have to be supplied, and running expenses met,
while at the same time the foreign country affected
by the embargo will perhaps withhold payments.
The compensation fund is to be estimated with these
facts in mind*
The effective carrying out of the embargo, that
is, the prevention of deliveries of embargoed pro-
ducts by indirect routes, is the business of the State.
It therefore has the duty of formulating measures
of control, which will render the embargo effective.
STATE OWNERSHIP OF THE INDIVIDUAL
Capital wi.,11 be hard hit not only by embargo
measures, but still more by the transplanting of the
protective industries being forbidden. These in-
dustries can be endangered by movements of labour,
where skilled workmen are involved. Protection


might without a doubt be had against this danger by
placing the labour lists under state supervision, in
the same way that this was done in certain industries
during the war, with success and to the general
satisfaction—also to that of the employees. This
form of militarizing invaluable industries can scarcely
be avoided in spite of the opposition it will be exposed
to in times of peace. Increased participation in
profits will make this compulsion easier to bear;
favourable provision for old age will considerably
mollify it. Constraint must likewise be put upon
capital, if it shows itself stubborn in pushing throug i
transplantings. Then, too, we must always reckon
with short-sighted and narrow-hearted capital. U
is possible that leading capitalists might resolve to
shut down the protective industry if its transplanting
is prevented, or that they may refuse to grant further
capital for a necessary expansion of this industry.
In such cases the State must step in without fear or
favour; the right of expropriation must be estab-
lished by law for this purpose. If there is danger
that the refractory individuals may find themselves
relieved of their entire capital, then there will scarcely
be damaging resistance from the capitalist side.
The State must be given the right to use coercive
measures in preventing th of workers
and capital from protective industries.
JURISDICTION OVER THE MINDS OF SCIENTISTS
In all these protective measures the State will find
good support in all industrial and technical associa


tions which work in the interest of the entire manu-
ac unng export trade. To prevent damage beiiv
done by the special interests of one kind of industry*
these various associations must be united into a
common body in the supreme control of which the
State is to have a deciding voice. The better these
bodies and the special representatives of the State
co-operate, the more effective becomes the state-
protection of industries and of their export trade !


JUST as every suitable human being in
the Empire was drafted into the army,
so every plant in the Kingdom is to
be conscripted into the German Industrial
Army for the export war. Each industry will
constitute an Army Corps, divided into five
divisions—scientific, industrial, mercantile,
commercial, and financial. Presiding over
each division will be a generalissimo. These
generalissimos, together with a controlling
number of state functionaries, will constitute
the five great Boards of Strategy, whose
heads in turn will be the Great General
Staff, the fountain head and final dictator
of the campaign.
The Scientific Division will draft into ser*
vice all inventors and conduct in carefully
formulated detail the production and appli*
cation of those inventions and discoveries
required by the Industrial Division, which
in turn will marshal them where most needed,
and act as an immense clearing house and
information bureau for all technical improve*
ments.


CHAPTER NINE
ORGANIZATION OF THE GERMAN EXPORT
ARMY
The Army Corps of the Commercial Offensive—Indus-
trial Divisions in Action—The Board of Strategy The
General Staff—Tactics of the Scientific Division—
Drafting - and Drilling' the Inventors—Assembling the
Fruits of Genius—Capturing Foreign Inventions—The
Industrial Division, the Compulsory Information Bureau.
6. INDUSTRIAL PROTECTIVE UNIONS
ASPLiniNG up of state protection is to
be avoided under all circumstances. Each
individual manufacturer is to participate in
it, yet not directly, otherwise the number of negotia-
tions and investigations would become endless,
friction between the individual manufacturers who
persist in putting their own special interests foremost
would be unavoidable, oversight of the justification
of individual demands would be lost, and chaos
would result, bringing severe injury to the export
trade.
INDUSTRIAL DIVISIONS IN ACTION.
The protective power emanating from the State’s
authority must be thought of as the composite result


of the influence exercised by separate federations
which serve scientific, industrial, mercantile, com-
mercio-industrial, and financial purposes, and whose
basis is formed by the individual kinds of industry.
In this way it is impossible, from the very first,
for the selfish interest of a single form of industry
to win the upper hand and injure those of other
industries. Each influence in the composite whole
represents within the bounds of its own federation
another whole, the component parts of which are
to be looked upon as protective influence for the
individual kind of industry. Since each of the
above-named federations exerts part of its influence
upon every kind of industry, the result is that every
kind of industry stands under five different protective
influences (those protecting scientific, industrial,
mercantile, commercio-industrial, and financial in-
terests). These influences thus form a polygon,
whose results is the centralized state protection upon
which the kind of industry in question can reckon.
THE BOARD OF STRATEGY
As long as the influence of each individual kind of
industry is properly balanced (that is, no commercio-
industrial measures, for instance, are carried out at
the expense of .manufacture, or no financial measures
at the expense of commercial industry, etc.), the
resulting whole, in its force and nature, will not be
out of proportion, and the entire- protective system
will therefore be at equilibrium. Consequently,
the vState’s protection attains undiminished uniform


effectiveness; the whole protective system works
smoothly. On the other hand every change in the
combinations of influence will affect the great whole,
and will therefore be immediately detected. Thus
it admits of being removed without delay. In other
words : every selfish measure, which is detrimental
to industrial exports in general, and which is not in
harmony with the whole protective system, can at
once be recognized and stopped.
Stale protection affects the feder .
latter conduct it to the industrial kinds of industry
and through these to the industries.
THE GENERAL STAFF
In this statement aie given the guiding lines for the
construction of the state protective organization for
which it is a matter of indifference whether the feder-
ations are entirely of a governmental nature (state
officials) or entirely of an industrial nature (boards),
or the two combined. From the introductory’
discussion it is to be seen that the mixed system is
given the preference, lor this avoids in equal measure
bureaucratic clumsiness and inflecibility and the
dominating influence ol selfish special interests either
Irom the lesser unions in a federation or from indivi-
duals in general. In the mixed system the state dele-
gates are personally disinterested individuals—
therefore unselfish; the delegates of industry are
personally interested—therefore selfish. The latter
will make demands, the former will bring them
within reasonable limits in the interest of industrial


exports as a whole. Thus the state delegates will
act as a counterpoise.
Such a federation is to be compared to a large
reservoir into which flow the carefully defined pro
tective measures of the State, worked out theoreti-
cally for the time being, and also all the special
interests of industry. Here they mingle, to be
united at last in a quiet and clarified whole, the
pressure (protective effect) of which finds its outlet
through the proper channels.
Protective measures for the export trade are issued
bv a single body which is composed of state and in-
dustrial representatives and which hands down its
instructions to the individual federations.
The federations are elected by industry, perhaps
best by the governors of the sub-associations. They
will include in their membership a state representa-
tive, who will have the duty of making reports to
the state delegates in the supreme body which i»
made up according to the mixed system. Ihe
number and kind of sub-associations are given by
the number and kind of those principal industries
which are concerned in the manufacturing export
trade. It will be advantageous for the separate
sub-associations to organize themselves again into
sections of a scientific, industrial, mercantile,
commercio-industrial, and financial nature. The
chairmen of these five sections constitute the direc-
torate of the sub-associations ande are at the same
time members of the appropriate federation and
reporters for their trade specialty in it (for instance


the chairman of a commercio-industrial section is
a member of the commercio-industrial federation).
TACTICS OF THE SCIENTIFIC DIVISION
1 he duties of the scientific federation will be:
To work out proposals for the practical use of new
scientific improvements in the interest of protection
for industrial exports.
To arrange competitions with prizes for those
who can contrive substitutes for raw materials which
are now supplied by foreign countries hostile to our
exports. In this way our own industries will be made
less dependent.
To gO' over, revise, and make reports on the solu-
tions which have been submitted.
To exert an influence over state and private testing
stations.
To provide the scientific answer to the problems
arising in every-day work.
To watch for and follow up all inventions and im-
provements in foreign countries.
To centralize all scientific research, so far as it
might have an influence upon industrial exports.
To publish a scientific journal for the exclusive
purpose of promoting the export trade, and of
keeping the parties interested in it informed.
Many scientific gains remain forever within the
scholar’s study in which they originated, because of
exaggerated modesty, selfishness, or a lack of practi-
cal knowledge. They must be called forth from
obscurity and be turned over to men of affairs
who, from an industrial standpoint, will separate
the wheat from the chaff. The directors of the


federation must see that justice is do " e ,
scholar’s moral and financial rights, t ™ e
be necessary to create a bureau which will codec
scientific improvements, turn them over to practical
application, and watch over and encourage is
application itself (most easily accomplished by dele-
eating the scientific inventor as its agent.) this
bureau of collection must work hand in hand with a
bureau for testing out scientific improvements,
which has the duty, when necessary, of providing
the necessary financial interest of the inventor.
It is the duty of the scientific federation to put
practical test all scientific improvements connected
with the export trade.
DRAFTING AND DRILLING THE INVENTORS
Foreign countries hostile to our exports can take
an especially effective stand against our mdustna
trade when they have large or exclusive contro
over raw materials which German industry can no
do without. (They ought seldom to have exclusive
control.) The course of the war thus far has taught
us that our enemies know how to use such weapons.
However, it has also shown that German science di
not remain idle. On the contrary it found in this a
new stimulus to produce substitutes for raw materia s
withheld by foreign countries. Since we must reckon
that foreign countries may make profitable use ot
monopolies in raw materials also in the uture, i
will be the duty of the scientific federation not only
to take the path already used by individuals in pro-
Organization of the Export Army


ducing substitutes, but also to broaden it by means
of science and organization. It should make dear
the needs of the situation and should give the in-
struction and suggestions necessary for the manu-
facture of substitutes in sufficient quantities. La-
boratories and testing stations will be called upon
for joint assistance. Udder the guidance of the
federation men trained in theory wfll join wUhAe
men from the ranks of experience in working out the
necessary directions for the application and use of
Ihe substitutes. Through the co-operation of govern-
ment experts, mining operations given up because
ot their poor productivity in comparison with foreign
mines will be given a new and more practical ex-
ploitation. New combinations of electrical and
chemical devices are to be proposed in order to gain
independence of foreign countries in the market for
iaw materials. With the increase of this indepen-
dence, our protective values rise, and the commercio-
industnal weapons which can be used against foreign
countries hostile to our exports become more effective.
assembling the fruits of genius
woHr °nf ler t 0 enl ‘ st even the farthest circles in this
° f P re Paredness the scientific federation will
work out those principles which underlie the problem
of proaucmg substitutes, will list in logical order the
substitutes to be worked out anrt Axn'ii i
ponding offers of m X , make COrres-
i g oners ot prizes. The solutions which are
sent must.be judged primarily from the standpoint
principles which have been paid down, and


secondarily in reference to the possibility of manu-
facturing the proposed substitutes, and using them
profitably in industry. To estimate these, the repre-
sentatives of the proper industries are to be given a
place in the judging bodies. If the solutions in
question are recognized as suitable substitutes the
scientific federation, in common with the industrial
federation to be discussed farther on, has to deter-
mine ways and means to carry out the manufacture
of the substitutes in bulk. They will then be de-
livered to the industries where they are needed
through the commercio-industrial, or, as the case
may be, through the mercantile federation.
It is a further duty of the scientific federation to
produce or provide a way for the production of sub-
stitutes for important raw materials that can be
secured only from foreign countries. Dangerous
weapons against our export t trade can thus be
wrested from the hands of countries which are hostile
to our exports.
CAPTURING FOREIGN INVENTIONS
The scientific federation will create an office foi
collecting all international technical improvements
of a theoretical and practical natuie, will ai range
incoming material according to industries, will make
comparisons with similar or related German im-
provements, and will deduce from ne\\ material the
practical lessons to be applied to German industry.
In order to start the process of application it will
arrange the material according to the various kinds


of industry, after having summarized and united it,
and* will add the theoretical and practical explana-
tions which will make it clear to the man of industry.
The material should then be passed on to the in-
dustrial sections of the proper kinds of industry.
These sections will get in touch with the individual
concerns, so that the proposals of the scientific fed-
eration can be put into actual practice. Not only
theoretical and industrial requirements but also
commercio-industrial, and above all financial con-
siderations will of course play their part in such a
procedure.
We thus can see that uninterrupted co-operation
goes on between the individual federations, their
subdivisions, and sections. By this co-operation, the
consciousness of unity is strengthened, selfish aberra-
tions are avoided, and there is attained a state of
general protection whose results will be favourable
for individual enterprisers and their export trade.
Everything which originates in foreign countries
or is recast by them must be weighed and tested by
this central office in reference to its superiority to
similar German improvements and in reference to
the possibility of its utilization for the profit and
strength of German industrial exports.
Here, as with all other associations, special value
should be laid upon avoiding all complication of
business routine and upon speeding up all protective
activity. Since everything i s destined finally for
use in practical business, it must all be dealt with
in a swift and practical way. In matter-of-fact affairs,


bureaucratic red tape is to be avoided because it
slows things up. We will be in a continual race
with foreign countries for the purpose of overtaking
them, and meanwhile they are hardly going to re-
main idle. The more spiritedly business is dispatched
between the individual protective bodies, the more
easily and surely it will be possible for us to catch
up. All efforts must be directed toward blunting as
quickly as possible every new weapon which foreign
countries forge against the German export trade.
At the same time, however, we must invent new
weapons of defense by which the protection of thai
trade will be increased.
The scientific federation forms an office for collect-
ing all technical improvements abroad, and for
adapting these to the use of the German manufac-
turing export trade.
It appears that the publication of a trade journal
is the simplest means of informing all interested
parties concerning all measures, organizations, re-
searches and their results, tests, in actual work, and
the practical value of innovations, etc. This trade
magazine (whose title might, for instance, be T. he
Industrial Exporter’s Herald) will consist of five
main divisions in accordance with the above-men-
tioned organization, each of which is to be edited by
one of the above-mentioned federations.
The part of the trade magazine to be edited by the
scientific federation will consist largely of a periodic-
ally recurring enumeration of all domestic and foreign
improvements important for the export trade, their


industrial value, reports concerning experiments with
substitutes and new work materials, instructions and
directions, prize competitions and their results.
A journal serving Germany’s manufacturing ex-
port trade shall record the results of the activity of
the five federations and of their associated and sub-
ordinate bodies.
, \
THE COMPULSORY INFORMATION BUREAU
Ihe industrial federation will, in the main, be
associated with the scientific, and will have the duty
of anangmg for the industrial application of the
impiovements of a domestic and foreign nature,
submitted to it by the scientific federation, and of
starting the manufacture of substitutes; or by the
reverse process, it will turn over to the scientific
federation requests for the scientific treatment of
new or still incompleted industrial problems. The
industrial federation will co-operate with that of
commercial industry when it becomes necessary
to put at tides of export on a better competitive
footing so far as price goes, through contriving
more efficient machinery and through better utiliza-
tion ol raw material.
In order to prevent unnecessarily large sums of
money from being squandered in attempts to put
the fruits of scientific research into use, the industrial
federation will establish an experiment division which
can supply all the practical suggestions which will
benefit the export trade. This central office is
necessary in order to keep research work unified and


to convey the experiences which were gained with
the same material by different parties to all who
work with it. The experiment division which will
be conducted by practical men (delegates of the
industries in question), is not to carry out the work
of experimentation itself, and will therefore use no
experimental plants. Its function is to direct the
work in the existing state or private stations, which
by their experience and equipment are placed in a
position to carry out the assigned work in a practical
manner, according to all rules of science. The same
problems will be assigned simultaneously to various
experiment division with the co-operation of the
and opinions may be brought to bear. The various
results and views will then be compared by the
experiment division with the co-operation by the
practical men who evolve them. So, in most
cases, a working programme for the final solution of
the assigned problems will be gained by combining
the best practical details and view-points of the
individual solutions.
It will be the duty of the experiment division to
determine the numerical share of the individual
workers in the practical solution in order to obtain a
scale for their financial compensation. Likewise
it will have the duty of making proposals to the
proper federation concerning the royalties to be
charged for the use of the invention.
'The industrial federation is called upon to put
scientific discoveries into practical use in the interest
of strengthening the export trade.
A second department of the industrial federation


will serve as an office to collect all the demands made
by practical industry upon science. Practical men
are often more keen-eyed, because they are under
the lash of competition. They will comprehend
more quickly the superiority of foreign products
because the latter threaten to supplant their own.
Cases will arise where the industrial enterpriser
can not overtake his competitors in techncal matters
because he lacks certain scientific fundamentals,
and a knowledge of the findings and suggestions of
experts. In such cases he will have recourse to the
collection office of the industrial federation. It will
be found that claims of the same kind are often made
upon this office. They will then be passed on to
the scientific federation to be answered. The
suggestions it makes will be returned to the collection
office by way of the experiment division of the in-
dustrial federation, in a practical form which has
already been proven good by experimentation.
The collection office hands them back to the individ-
uals who originally asked for the information, and
simultaneously makes them known to all the proper
concerns (through the trade journal).
The collection office likewise has work to do,
viz. ; when the manufacturers send in a call for sub-
stitutes for certain raw materials; w T hen the commer-
cio-industrial federation has occasion to point out
that certain raw materials are not sufficiently utilized
in comparison with the methods of foreign competi-
tion ; when domestic industry, takes insufficient
account of certain usable qualities in waste products;
and when it appears that foreign competitors have
in use machinery of superior efficiency, which gives


them an industrial advantage over Germany. Here,
too, we shall find that remarks and suggestions will
be made by various parties on the same subject.
The collection office will unite and sift these and will
pass them on, along with pertinent suggestions in a
unified inclusive form to the scientific federation;
or, as the case may be, it will deliver to the inquirers
the advice they have sought, as it comes back.
The industrial federation has the further task of
collecting the technical suggestions coming from in-
dustrial circles and of giving these a practical test,
order that the superiority of German industry may
be permanently maintained.
y\H occurrences of a technical natuie which are of
interest to industry are brought to general notice
by the industrial federation in the common trade
journal. In these articles hints on the practical
lessons afforded by the occurrences, and their in-
fluence in strengthening the export trade are to be
given prominence.




THE Field Marshals who are to execute
the active manoeuvres of the coming
trade war will operate from the
commercial Division Headquarters. Theirs
the duty to snap out the orders, to hoard up
the potash, hold up the shipping, slap on the
premium and distribute the largess which will
gather in their war chest. Theirs the privi-
lege of enrolling the secret army that will per=
meate every rolling mill and drug store in
Christendom, and of dictating the thunder of
diplomat and war lord when their schemes be-
gin to fail. To the last comma their duties
are defined —how they will outflank the Yan-
kees through neutral territory, eliminate
friction by not tolerating it, establish them-
selves as an inevitable collection agency for
German merchants, and straddle the world
as a court of last resort passing upon all trade
disputes under the sun.


CHAPTER TEN
THE EXPORT ARMY IN ACTION.
The Übiquitous Commercial Division—The Dictator of
the World’s Prices—In Charge of the War Chest—The
Espionage Headquarters—The Men Behind the Guns—
The Supreme Court of Creation—Launching the Propa-
ganda—The Listening Post of Kultur—The Automatic
Collection Agency—The Money Kings’ Campaign.
TO THE commercio-industrial federation be-
long the following duties :
Safeguarding the supply of certain raw materials
which must be shipped from foreign countries, or, as
the case may be, safeguarding the supply of their
substitutes. '
The creation of organizations for the purchase and
distribution of raw materials.
Ihe creation of the various guarantee and com-
pensation funds mentioned above.
The rendering of reports to the other federa-
tions concerning foreign and domestic facts of inter-
est.
Advisory activity in commercio-political affairs
(commercial treaties).
Supporting our embassies abroad in commercio-
industrial matters.


The diffusion of information among German in-
dustrial concerns.
The settlement of difficulties between producer and
customer, should such arise.
Advertising German goods in foreign countries (by
sample displays and exhibits).
The compilation of statistics, from which one can
find out the ratios and amounts of various exports
in case embargo measures are adopted.
Making suggestions to the proper officials con-
cerning embargoes or unrestricted exportation.
The erection of a permanent information bureau
with branches in foreign countries.
Making proposals concerning tariff and premium
inducements.
Mediation between officials and industrial enter-
prisers.
The maintenance of German export products on a
firm competitive footing in the matter of price.
Collaboration on the trade journal.
To safeguard the supply of raw materials which
can not be procured within German territory is
absolutely essential in maintaining the independence
of German industry and at the same time in strength-
ening the German export trade. Difficulties of the
kind such as arose temporarily in the procuring
of raw materials during the early days of the war
must be impossible in future. And the same is
true of manipulation of the prices of raw materials
which German industry not do without—a prac-
tice that borders on usury. A well-conducted divi-
sion of raw materials in connection with the commer-
cio-industrial federation will form the best means of
protection against occurrences of this sort.


THE DICTATOR OF THE WORLD'S PRICES
This division has first of all the task of bringing
about production of these forms of raw material
which were previously obtained from abroad. On
the basis of import statistics are to be ascertained
the yearly amounts of individual raw materials used
in Germany. Supplementary statistics which will
work against usurious price-manipulation, should
show the prices of these raw materials in recent years,
the dependency of prices upon the fluctuations of
the market and the season of the year, and the in-
fluence of combinations in determining prices. These
statistical statements give ground for accurate con-
clusions concerning the dependency of certain
German industries upon foreign countries and upon
the foreign factors influencing the prices of raw
materials. They make it possible to ascertain the
yearly minimum amount of individual raw materials,
which must be absolutely guaranteed by the com-
mercio-industrial federation. It is a matter of minor
importance whether this guarantee is carried out
in the form ol direct purchase or of middle-dealing or
of a priority right of purchase. It is, however, es-
pecially important to provide that the yearly mini-
mum amount is on hand in Germany at all times;
in other words that the impartial filling of all orders
is assured.
If the commercio-industrial federation takes care
ol satisfying the entire demand for raw materials,
speculators will be eliminated from the start. In


any case, at least in Germany, the State should
i
prevent price-manipulation of raw materials which
are essential to the vigour of the export trade. The
middleman can not expect consideration when his
interests conflict with those of German industry. A
central office for supplying raw materials, which
aims not for profit but for the strengthening of
industry, will surely be given helpful assistance by
the State through customs-and freight-concessions.
These concessions are such as will have an advan-
tageous influence upon German export products in
the matter of price.
As a working supply which must always be kepi
filled up on German soil, the
federation must insist at least upon the minimum
yearly amounts of raw materials that have to be or-
dered from other countries.
It can not of course be the duty of the commercio-
indnstrial federation to provide each individual
concern with raw material directly. To simplify
industrial associations the necessary gross amounts,
leaving to them the distribution among the individ-
ual manufacturers. In this way not only will middle-
men be successfully eliminated but embargoes on
manufactures can easily be carried out by cutting
off the allotment of raw material. Other problems
to be solved here will be :
Co-ordination of purchase.
The formation of a purchasing fund of the neces-
sary amount.
Quotas to be contributed to the above by industries
dependent upon this supply of raw materials.


The adjustment of accounts carried by the federa-
tion with individual industrial associations, and by
the latter with manufacturers.
The satisfaction of claims growing out of these
accounts.
,•f v *
Compensation for injurious advances in price by-
remitting a part of the net production cost, thus
enabling the finished articles to compete in price
in the international market assuming that the
rise in prices is caused by combinations of business
interests which are aimed, in the last analysis,
against Germany’s industrial export trade.
The commer do-industrial federation has the duty
of regulating for the benefit of the export trade the
price of raw materials, the height of which is depen-
dent upon the will of foreign countries.
There are two factors which will aid in this regula-
tion ; first, the above-mentioned contributions to a
purchase fund, for which of course all industries are
to be called upon in a direct or an indirect way, if
they profit directly or indirectly in the export trade
through a moderation in the price of certain raw
materials; secondly, lessening of consumption. The
more the consumption of raw materials decreases,
the less becomes the demand for them, and the
lower the price at which they can be procured.
Decrease in consumption can be brought about fun-
damentally by two means : a change in manufactur-
ing methods, and the use of substitute materials.
With the co-operation of the individual industrial
associations the commercio-industrial federation can
determine exactly which forms of industry are work


in g with the raw material in question. By the help
of the scientific and the industrial federation it will
be possible to show certain industries new ways of
manufacture which enable them to do without their
customary raw material completely or to use it in a
smaller degree. In this way it not only is left free
for other industries but probably also becomes
cheaper since the entire consumption of it decreases.
The more oppressing the dependency upon foreign
raw material is found to be, the more will the com-
mercio-industrial federation insist that the proper
technical (scientific and practical) circles do their
best to procure substitute materials which will
shake off this dependency. In most cases it will be
entirely sufficient to obtain substitutes for individual
industries alone, because the entire demand for the
original raw material will thus again be decreased
and an effective breach made in the dependency.
The commercio-industrial federation must push the
work of supplanting foreign raw materials by do-
mestic substitutes.
IN CHARGE OF THE WAR CHEST
Since the commercio-industrial federation is al-
lowed the greatest range ot oversight, it will be its
duty to work out plans for the organization and ad-
ministration of the various compensation- and
guarantee-funds mentioned earlier, and to exercise
supreme control over them. The commercial statis-
tics, which ought always to be kept up to date by
this federation, furnish it with the exact measure for


determining the individual contribution and com-
pensation quotas in question, for appointing the
times for payment and repayment (of which mention
was made above), and for designating the kinds of
industry which are to be called upon to contribute
to the funds, or which are to be compensated. For
in the current statistics of commerce every wave of
market-fluctuation reveals itself to the expert in its
very inception. The beginning of every steadying or
weakening in prices allows itself to be seen, often
indeed to be foreseen.
In these current statistics will lie the means of re-
cognizing all the causes of change and of meeting
them effectively, or in other words of turning them to
advantage. The commercial statistics are the most
delicate barometer for foreign measures friendly
or hostile to our exports and for the strength of the
effect of opposing measures. Upon both of these
kinds of measures depend all changes in the indem-
nity and guarantee funds : by them the other federa-
tions are influenced in their activity, and manufac-
turing and economic measures are evoked, the effect
of which finds expression again in these statistics.
The administration of the funds provided for the
protection of the export trade is left to the commer-
cial federation.
THE ESPIONAGE HEADQUARTERS
Some of the many factors which influence Indus-
m
trial exports are: the opening up of new r finding-
depots for raw materials in foreign countries; the


increase in raw-material consumption in other coun-
tries; the use of raw materials in foreign countries for
other purposes than common heretofore; the replace-
ment of them abroad by substitutes; the introduction
of lucrative manufacturing methods; the practical
adaptation of new scientific inventions in foreign
industry ; the imitation, circumvention, or overtaking
of German inventions which are important for the
export trade; the issuing of special directions for
supplying and using goods (directions for setting up
mechanical appliances); the establishment of certain
minimum technical standards for raw materials and
finished products; regulations concerning packing,
concerning die use of patterns, concerning* changes
in custom arrangements and results of competition
in other branches of exportation, and the causes of
those results, etc.
German industries must, therefore, be constantly
informed about such tacts as these, and speed in
rendering the information will be of great value.
The relationships and means of communication
which must be at the disposal of the commercio-
industrial federation in foreign countries will en-
able it to make these observations early and to
transmit them to the interested parties. It is self-
evident that for this purpose the industrial federa-
tion will not only try to enter into official relation-
ships and those of a semi-official nature, but that ‘t
will devote special care to making sure of private con-
nections which have a deeper insight into the special
conditions of each case. Our foreign representa


tives, travellers abroad, the governors of. foreign
branches of our transportation companies, etc., will
perform good service as sources of information. It
will be the duty of the commercio-industrial federa-
tion to use certain printed forms so as to make the
information service facile, regular, and as far as pos-
sible, automatic. It must collect the incoming re-
ports, and revise and speedily transmit them to the
interested parties. Facts to be gained from our
statistics will help to complete such reports.
All changes in conditions abroad which affect our
industrial exports are to he observed by the -
mer do-industrial federation and brought to the cog-
nizance of the interested parties in a practical and
useful form.
THE MEN BEHIND THE GUNS
By this activity there will be collected in the
archives of the commercio-industrial federation a
rich quantity of material that will bear upon all
questions concerning the export trade. This material
in many cases can form a basis for, and a guide in
commercio-political affairs. Precautions of an en-
tirely practical nature, in the form of commercial
treaties or amendments to them, will be framed upon
the ground of the experiences collected by the com-
mercio-industrial federation, and will make it possible
to assist our state missions abroad with advice and
help in treaty negotiations as well as in doubtful
individual cases. We shall have to consider whether
it would not be advantageous to create a direct*and
permanent connection between the federation and


the commercio-industrial representatives of the state
missions abroad. Both parties, and the export
trade particularly, would be benefited thereby. The
commercio-industrial representatives of our state
missions abroad would by this arrangement gain a
\eiy direct knowledge of the necessities and wishes
of the export dealers. I hese dealers would be en-
couraged in their activity by the consciousness of the
piesence of a support upon which they can always
call foi help. Between export theories and export
practice will be formed a bridge promising mutual
benefits which for the present are still lacking.
Many export industries can be given helpful assist-
ance at the proper moment by a gentle and opportune
political pressure on other countries, if the contact
mentioned above- between theory and practice is per-
manently maintained. The political pressure will be
felt as a favour, if in support of it certain advantages
for foreign countries can be offered, which will al-
ways be feasible through a close connection between
officials and men of business.
The commercio-industrial federation should form a
connecting link between commercial politics and
practical commerce.
THE SUPREME COURT OF CREATION
I he knowledge of all the conditions of exportation
and no less of the strength of its own position, will
enable the commercio-industrial federation to allay
quickly and decisively controversies arising between
domestic and foreign producers and customers. To


avoid tedious litigation the formation of a permanent
court of arbitration for export affairs will recommend
itself. All contracts for supplies to be concluded be-
tween our own country and others are to come before
the court of arbitration of the commercio-industria)
federation as unappealable cases. This court might
be delegated in cases of necessity to the foreign coun-
try in question. To banish as quickly as possible
all points of friction which disturb the export trade
must be a primary duty of the commercio-industrial
federation. The foreign customer must have a feel-
in p- of assurance that in the court of arbitration he
o
will find absolute protection against infringements of
his rights; the domestic manufacturer must know
that it protects him against arbitrary vexations from
abroad. In order to remove all suspicion of favour-
itism from this court, it will be well to include in it
in all individual cases a representative of the proper
foreign industrial association.
Controversies which arise the export trade are to
be settled summarily by a court of arbitration which
forms an integral constituent of the commercio-indus-
trial federation.
LAUNCHING THE PROPAGANDA
Foreign countries should be acquainted as quickly
as possible with the general make-up and efficiency
of every new improvement which finds a place among
our exports. Means of introducing it which will
here perform good service, are the press propaganda
upon which there will be further discussion later, the


opening o t sample displays, and the organization of
mobile exhibitions.
It must be admitted from the very first that the
accomplishment of this task, amid the probably
very strained relations which are to be expected after
the conclusion ol peace, will encounter great diffi-
culties. These, however, must not be permitted to
restrain us from going ahead with the necessary pre-
parations in good time. All the hatred of foreign
countries can not deliver them from their needs and
necessities. This fact can be safely reckoned upon.
Ihe former foreign customer of • German products
m ms own interest will strive as soon as possible 10
make new connections which will restore his business
to a prosperous footing. For its sake he will tempor-
arily forget his hatred to Germany. First of all he
will have to get his bearings after such a long inter-
ruption in business. It therefore seems well to start
sample-displays and mobile trade exhibits for the
present in German or neutral territory. They will
keep the foreign customer posted, and later, when
enmity has sufficiently subsided, they can be contin-
ued abroad.
Industrial goods of the same or related kinds ought
to be united. All ornamentations must give place
to actual merit. The materials and their make-up
must be the inducement. Our present enemies will
probably order from Germany, for the time being,
only such products as they can get in no other wav'
Our plans must be based upon this supposition.
Sample displays and mobile, exhibitions are there


fore, for. the present, to be supplied only by such in-
dustries as can count with assurance upon exports
to foreign countries immediately after the conclusion
of peace. In order to transfer interest by degrees
to other articles of export, it will be advantageous
to ■' include in these displays and exhibitions the
products of related or auxiliary industries, and in
the course of time to extend advertising slowly in
such ways as this until the moment has come to
transfer it directly into foreign countries. In order
to avoid difficulties and friction and not to burden
our state missions unnecessarily with intervention.,
this advertising ought not to be conducted by indi
viduals or by individual industries associations, but
by a body which has the recognition of the govern-
ment and of industry, by a single agency.
For this purpose the commercio-industrial federa-
tion is best suited. The more individual interests
are eliminated in these demonstrations, and purposes
of instruction are given prominence, the more surely
can success be anticipated. The opening up of
commercial connections will come naturally from this
advertising. They will and must be evoked solely
by the command of necessity. The commercio-
industrial federation will take up all the questions
of interested parties, will pass them on to the proper
industrial associations for solution, and will transmit
the answers to the inquirers. In a similar way, for
the time being, orders and deliveries will be handled
by this federation in order, at first, to dispense with
personal contact between former enemies. In the


course of time this contact will come of itself to ap-
pear desirable and the federation will then be relieved
of this burden. The restoration of interrupted com-
mercial relationships requires painstaking tact be-
cause at first one must reckon with an emotional at-
titude which unfortunately is incalculable. Here a
disinterested agency does better service than indi-
viduals who are looking out only for themselves and
not for the general welfare.
The commercio-industrial federation will have
the duly, with the help of sample displays and
mobile trade exhibits, of effecting the
commercial relationships with other countries, and
of making these secure in such a way that they can
later be extended by the individual manufacturers.
THE LISTENING POST OF KULTUR.
The commercio-industrial federation will compile
statistics of the export trade, independent of the
government’s statistics; the guide in drawing them
up will be their immediate practical applicability.
The commercio-industrial federation will gain a bet-
ter insight into the practical business of industiial
exporting than the state officials. It will at all
times observe the up ana down movements of export
quantities in detail and will more quickly comprehend
and recognize the inclinations of foreign customers
and therefore will be soonest in the position to dis-
cover means for throttling dangerous influences at
their very beginning. Ihe application of these means
is the business of the state authorities, and to the
V 6


latter the commercio-industrial federation should
present suitable proposals concerning the nature,
extent, and duration of these means. Since, again*
their effect will be recognized first by this federation
it is possible for it to suggest to the state authorities
the instant at which measures in operation are to be
annulled.
The commercio-industrial federation is to serve as
a jeeler for the state authorities when it comes to
adopting measures to boost the export trade.
As organs of this “feeler”-activity will be used the
branches of the commercio-industrial federation en-
gaged in work abroad. The latter might at the start
be loosely associated with the commercial staff of the
state missions abroad. They could be separated
and made independent representatives, as the healing
of mutual relationships takes place. These repre-
sentatives will of course remain permanently in
touch with the missions, as has already been indi-
cated, and will serve them in the same way as “feel-
ers” and sources of information, just as the federa-
tion does for the proper government officials at home.
These branches also institute and direct the courts of
arbitration, engaged abroad. They form the offices
of the federation for collecting information and the
executive organs for its directions. Similarly they
serve as bureaus of information for our citizens and
foreigners for the latter directly, for the former
indirectly—through the federation to which they are
subject. They furnish mediation and support in
trade between German concerns and their customers


abroad; they give instruction concerning customs and
tariff conditions and price movements. In a word
they are pioneers who have to reopen the commercial
highways destroyed by the war. They will furnish
to the federation periodic reports concerning com-
mercial conditions and the factors influencing these
in the countries in question. Such reports are to be
published in the general trade journal.
The reestablishment and maintenance of commer-
cial relationships will he advantageously cared for
branch establishments of commercio-industrial
federation which should be permanently located
abroad.
THE AUTOMATIC COLLECTION AGENCY
The mercantile federation will have the primary
duty of adapting former business usages to the cir-
cumstances changed by the war. In particular the
modes of accounting, of invoicing goods, and of
payment must be subjected to a thorough-going
renovation. Ihe experiences which have been gained
with outstanding accounts in hostile countries warn
us to be on our guard, and to make a change in mer-
cantile business practice in order to prevent similar
very detrimental occurrences in all the time to come.
The most flourishing export trade becomes worth-
less if collections are even in the least endangered.
We should look into the question as to whether it
might not be advisable for the sake of precaution to
institute a Central Clearing House which will make it
possible to cancel on the books the total amounts
due on exports and on imports in such a way that the


money payments in either direction reach only the
remainder. In terms of business practice, this means ;
I he claims of foreign shippers upon German custom-
ers will be settled by the obligations of foreign cus-
tomers to German shippers being indorsed dirdctlv
over to the Central Clearing House. Unpaid ac-
counts due us from foreign countries will in this way
always be small. The danger of loss from a fall in
the rate of exchange is lessened. The security of
collections is increased. Ihe German exporter is
protected since the payment office is a German one.
He wall be saved losses of interest if foreign claims
upon us and obligations to us are at an equilibrium,
and accordingly can be balanced off immediately by
the Cential Clearing House in the foreign country.
Payment is provided for, since the importer settles
with the Central Clearing Piouse. The mercantile
federation will erect branches abroad for this purpose
which wall be housed in the same quarters with the
branches of the other federations to make intercom-
munication easy.
A problem of the mercantile federation will con-
sist in guaranteeing and lessening outstanding ac-
counts due us from foreign countries. It will be
solved, by cancelling, as far as possible, the claims
of other countries upon us by their obligations to
us. That will be done in the foreign land itself by
clearance, or, in other words, by endorsing over the
bills of exchange.
A more detailed description here of payment
methods would lead us too far. The balancing can
be done directly with the help of the financial federa


tion, or indirectly by foreign customers handing
over to foreign shippers their obligations to pay
(bills of exchange and so forth). Since the value of
such commercial paper depends upon the credit of
the maker, it will be necessary for the mercantile
federation to establish an information office whicn
will be free from the shady features of private in-
formation offices to-day. The mercantile federation
is to protect the German exporter from loss by placing
at his disposal truthful reports concerning the sol-
vency of foreign customers. For its own protection,
the federation will stipulate that it only guarantees
the collection of claims upon foreign customers when
the solvency of the customer was confirmed by u
m/
before the conclusion of the trnnsnction.
In order to bring in a little money so as to balance
its books, the federation by a reverse process wih
furnish to the foreign shipper equally faithful reports
concerning the solvency of German importers, and
in that way will gain the confidence of the foreign
business world. At the same time, it will also make
personal contact largely superfluous a valuable
service in view of the feelings which must be expected.
Absolute and fully warranted confidence must take
the place of the warmer emotions that can scarcely
be looked for in the years immediately ahead. The
mercantile federation will form/the path by which
such confidence can come.
The mercantile federation will serve as an informa-
tion office for the solvency of the business world
connected with the export trade.


In conjunction with the associations of German
merchants, the mercantile federation will work out
business standards which are adapted to the new
conditions and the various branches of commerce,
and which are to be observed in business dealings
with foreign countries.
Some lesser duties of the mercantile federation will
be : representing German firms for the time being in
business abroad; recommending foreigners for em-
ployment as agents; submitting reports of foreign
markets ; representing German firms before foreign
officials in business litigation; maintaining a legal
oureau with a staff of lawyers and business men for
work on foreign cases; collaborating on the general
trade journal.
THE MONEY KINGS'' CAMPAIGN
Ihe financial federation, which likewise will em-
ploy foreign branches in its work, should be as-
signed the following duties of first importance i ;
Transactions in actual money as directed bv the
mercantile federation.
Collection of money from, and payment of money
to, parties concerned with the compensation- and
guarantee-funds, and entitled to suppbrt from them.
Administration of these funds*.
Collection and disbursing of royalties for the use of
inventions, according to earlier explanations.
Entire financial administration of all the federa-
tions.
Creation and support of a special industry fund


which is to be used for temporarily reinforcing weak-
ened industries, in the interest of the export trade.
Financial control of the associations for raw ma-
terial.
Prevention of the exploitation of financially weak
industries by grasping capitalists.
Finally a share in supervising the influence which
foreign capital exercises over important protective
industries, or strives for.
It is readily to be supposed that the financial
federation will perhaps expand by degrees into a
bank for the manufacturing export trade, and that
in it lie the possibilities of a German Export Bank
on a grand scale, which will represent not the special
interests of one industry, but the general interests
of all German industries. Since this bank can find
a sound basis only in the mutual interest of all in-
dustries, it will be able to offer special advantages
and security to all manufacturers who are concerned
in the export trade. Its relation to banks already
in existence is made clear by these considerations.
To the financial federation falls the duty of con-
trolling all financial operations which are necessary
for increasing industrial exports; it forms a founda-
tion for the general German export hank of the future .




PRECEDING the Export War, the
German plan contemplates laying a
monumental foundation for the
siege guns of commerce with the peace
treaties. Blandly stating that they will be die-
tated in Potsdam and written in blood, they
have tabulated their “minimum demands.”
These will impose upon the United States and
all creation the conditions that the Prussians
may select their own properties in our coun=
try and operate them under Imperial jurisdic-
tion ; that their officials be stationed in Allied
territory to punish anyone refusing to buy
their goods; that we give bonds guarantee-
ing their enforced investments and accounts,
and that we purchase from them exactly the
amount of all their exports which they shall
command. And they add that they will “con-
sider whether it is not well to demand exclu-
sive favouritism of Germany in this point or
that, or in all” !


CHAPTER ELEVEN
A STUDY IN SCARLET. THE PROPOSED
TREATIES
Blood and Bombast—The Kaiser’s “Minimum De-
mands"—The Exclusive Favouritism of Germany—Un-
limited Right to Take Allied Materials—German Super-
vision in Allied Countries—Control of the Allied Freight
Rates—Punishment of Hostile Boycotters—Restoring
the “Stolen" Patents—Allied Guarantees Against “In-
sufferable Discrimination”—A Warm Welcome for the
“Federation.”
7. COMMERCIAL TREATIES
INTELLIGENCE, hard work, and organization
have raised Germany’s trade to an elevation
which was followed by her enemies with increasing
envy, and at last with alarm. All means admissible
in peace were brought into play to stop this upward
sweep. Through German resourcefulness and Ger-
man initiative they came to naught. German
technical skill emerged in all respects victorious.
Every new obstacle, in the form of commercial
treaties and their supplements, which was set up
abroad against its victorious progress was overcome
and banished by the increased and successful appli-
cation of mental power. W hen all efforts at re-
pression, in the form of commercial treaties, had


shown themselves vain, they seized the sword and
cleft the commercial treaties, purposing to dictate,
in blood, new ones which should sever the vital
sinews of German exportation. It has turned out a
bit different from what the shrewdest of the shrewd
had planned. In one point they were right. The
future commercial treaties will be written in blood.
German might and German justice will stamp and
seal them.
THE KAISER’S “MINIMUM DEMANDS
The fate and fortune of our industrial exports
hang upon the coming trade agreements. These
will show very plainly whether German industry
has learned the lessons of the war and the years
preceding. The experiences then gained show, as
has already been pointed out, that international
treaties are only partially reliable. To reckon in
future upon the security of treaties, to build upon
loyal observance of them, would be more than im-
' provident. Security, as before, must lie in the
power of German industry. The commercial treaty
in the immediate future must be looked upon only
as an attempt to define, as exactly as may be, the
possibilities and opportunities within the reach ot
exportation —as a standard fot deciding upon means
~of transit through, and trade with countries, or as a
category for all obstructions to development which
are not set up officially by foreign countries against
the German export trade. He who sees more in it
for the present, sees too much.


The foregoing discussion contains in principle all
that we must demand of the future commercial
treaties in the interest of our industrial exports,
namely :
' , ' ' ' ! ' • ' ■
m
Assurance of a supply of indispensable raw ma-
terials at reasonable prices, not jacked up by either
the country consigning the goods or transportin'?
them across its territories. °
Prevention of import or transit duties which
would be oppressive to our exports.
Prevention of tariffs which are onerous in com-
parison with those charged other countries.
Inadmissibility of foreign export-premiums which
are injurious to Germany’s export trade.
Obligation on the part of the foreign country to
suppress every boycott movement against German
products.
Assurance of the inviolability of German inteilee-
tued property and of German trade-marks with a
retroactive guarantee, extending back to the time
oi the origin of the property right.
Admittance of German competitors to official
competitions and to the bidding for government
contracts, when other foreign competitors are
admitted.
Assurance of fair contract awards when German
bids are superior in specifications and price to others.
Granting of all concessions to German manufac-
turers which are given to other foreign concerns.
Protection of German branches and representa-
tives abroad in equal measure with that assured to
other foreign countries.
Official recognition of the five federations named
above, and their branches abroad.
Terms governing compensations and embargoes.


Full equality for German undertakings and
capital engaged abroad, in comparison with those of
other foreign countries, respecting taxation and
other levies.
Inadmissibility of any sort of favouritism of citizens
of former allies, so far as the German export trade
could be injured in this way.
Security of capital invested abroad, and of out-
standing accounts due us.
THE EXCLUSIVE FAVOURITISM OF GERMANY
•, \ c a ‘ i * V * ~
It must be emphasized that the above are only a
selected few from among the points which suggest
themselves in this connection, and that they repie-
sent minimum demands. The representatives en-
trusted with working out the foundations of future
commercial treaties will certainly consider whether *t
would not be well to demand exclusive favouritism
of Germany in this point or that, or in all, consider-
ing the levity with which this bloody war was
forced upon Germany, and the sacrifices she has
had to make.
UNLIMITED RIGHT TO TAKE ALLIED MATERIALS
If the raw-materials division of the commercio-
industrial federation wishes, as was explained earlier,
to remove all uncertainty about the supply of raw
materials which have to be ordered from abroad, it
must be sure that the foreign states it relies upon do
not place in its way obstacles of any sort which
might bring with them injurious advances in price.
Before all else a restriction in quantity must be out


of the question. That will be attempted in the case
of raw materials for the protective industries. Hav-
ing provided against this danger, it must stipulate
also an unlimited opportunity to acquire the sites
needed for winning of raw materials and an unlimited
right to get them out by German enterprises. It
must preclude any further restriction by providing
that these enterprises can not be bound to sell any
amounts of these raw materials in the country where
they have gained them, not to use them there in
manufacture or any other way. The government
of the country in question can be permitted to exer-
cise its right of requisitioning them only with the
consent of the proper German officials. To guaran-
tee the fulfilment of these demands certain pledges
must be given.
The commercial treaty must assure an opportunity
to procure unrestricted quantities of raw materials in
foreign countries, and to export them - without re-
striction to German territory.
GERMAN SUPERVISION IN ALLIED COUNTRIES
The German export trade in the interest of its
j
efficiency must be able to reckon upon full uniformity
in certain respects, with the limits suggested below.
Ihe raw materials which its protective industries
need must always be on hand in sufficient quantities.
Just as, on the one hand, it is inadmissible to exploit
natural resources uneconomically for capitalistic
interests, so on the other hand, the amount of raw
materials turned out can never be permitted to be


decreased artificially because of a selfish desire to
charge a higher price, nor can their quality be re-
duced. Hostile countries have no interest in oppos-
ing such pernicious practices, which would hurt only
our export trade. It is, on the contrary, to be
expected that they will secretly encourage them.
'Therefore it must be made possible for the German
government to interfere without foreign countries
protesting that their sovereignty is violated. The
possibility or probability of friction over this point
must be removed beforehand through the commercial
treaty, by granting to the proper German authorities
the same rights over German concerns abroad as
they have over domestic business. Since these
rights are largely of an industrial nature, no opposi-
tion can very well be made to their establishment by
treaty.
Germany must have the right of supervision over
German plants abroad for supplying raw materials
to her protective industries, at least in reference to
fyheir operating processes and the nature of their
work.
CONTROL OF THE ALLIED FREIGHT RATES
It will not alone suffice to demand unlimited oppor-
tunities to secure raw materials in foreign countries
for our protective industries, for, by the time they
reach Germany, their prices may have been raised
to inadmissible amounts by export- or transit-
charges, freight rates, the refusal of export premiums
which are granted to other foreign businesses of sim-
ilar kind, and by other petty forms of chicanery, the


consequences of which are oppressive: (for instance,
_ \ ■' ' '
a refusal to build connecting railways, or to recognize
the expropriation rights of German enterprises, etc.)
The commercial treaty must place an absolute bar
to such arbitrary advances in the final prices of raw
materials, which would render difficult the work of
German industry and would put the export trade
under a disadvantage in the prices it could charge,
That treaty must likewise be a bar to any discrim-
ination in favour of other foreign industries when
concessions are being granted. The retaliatory
measures to be applied in case of infringement must
be determined upon beforehand with all severity, in
order that every attempt of foreign powers in such
directions may be nipped in the bud, for reprisals
are only successful when their effect is keenly felt.
The commercial treaty must make it impossible
beforehand to damage Grerman business in raw ma-
terials abroad by manipulating prices.
PUNISHMENT OF BOYCOTTERS
In recent years boycotts have been frequently en-
forced against foreign articles and businesses under
the cloak ol nationalism, while governments silently
encouraged or acquiesced in them. Fear of retaliatory
measures will prevent states hostile to our exporta-
tion from officially or even secretly supporting boy-
cott movements of this kind, which are one of the
factors with which the German manufacturing ex-
in the immediate years
to come. We can not, however, be satisfied with a


merely passive attitude on the part of foreign go\ -
ernments, for it does more damage than can be pei
mitted. Provision must be made in advance that
foreign officials employ all the force at their com-
mand against the originators, promoters, and parti-
cipants in boycotting movements which injure our
export trade, and that in such cases the German gov-
ernment have the right to be consulted, and to share
in deciding the measures of opposition.
We can imagine a case where sabotage, silently
acquiesced in on the part of officials, is carried on in
those industries which serve to procure raw materials,
abroad for German protective industries. Again, we
can imagine a case where, under the harmless fiction
of collecting statistics, German goods are labelled
by the officials so that their German origin may be
particularly noticeable, and boycotts or other injury
may thus be incited. We can imagine a case where
the same or similar products of non-German origin
are given the right, or are silently permitted to choose
distinguishing marks which especially emphasize their
non-German origin. vVe can imagine a case where,
under an apparently harmless pretext, non-German
products are granted financial concessions
import premiums, etc.), for the purpose of destroying
the competitive ability, in the matter of price, of
products coming from Germany. the simplest
German measures of retaliation would consist in
granting products threatened in this way export
premiums that are enough to make up the difference.
This means is not to be recommended, out of regard


for the state finances; rather it must be stipulated by
treaty that all foreign concessions which could in-
fluence prices must be granted without exception to
German products also.
The commercial treaty must provide for protective
measures against boycotts of German products and
whatever would put them under a disadvantage in
price.
\ )
RESTORING THE “STOLEN” PATENTS
A striking proof of the kind of motives behind this
bloody war is the action taken by hostile countries
with reference to patent rights—declaring the crea-
tions of German intellect and Grerman science prop-
erty without an owner. Since they could not reach
the heights of German creative ability, thievery of
intellectual property was sanctioned by law. The
remedy was extremely simple and worthy of Ger-
many’s enemies. The results of a half century of
intensive intellectual activity became free robber-
booty. This spoliation, nevertheless, had its good
side, for under its pressure, as German patent litera-
ture shows, undreamed-of improvements and inven-
tions weie brought forth, and numerous important
industrial innovations are in preparation. The fu-
ture commercial treaty will not only see to it that
the stolen rights of ownership are restored to their
foimer owners unimpaired, that full compensation
ma de for the financial loss incurred up to the time
when the property is restored, and that a priority
right in hostile countries is assured to the German
patents awarded during the war; but the treaty must


also make certain that special statutory measures
make occurrences of this sort impossible in future. •
Similar precautions are to be taken in the interest of
German trade-marks.
The commercial treaty must safeguard the intellec-
tual property rights of Crerman industries in greater
measure than previously , the guarantee to extend
backward to the time of their origin.
ALLIED GUARANTEES AGAINST “INSUFFERABLE DIS-
CRIMINATION”
The uninterrupted maintenance of German indus
try during the war, the activity of which in certain
respects actually shows an advance over the times of
peace, is for Germany’s enemies an extremely un-
pleasant surprise. However, in spite of the hostile
attitude of her enemies, it assures her the probability
that, in indispensable products, her industry will be
patronized abroad on account of its intactness and
efficiency, but only in cases where other producers
can not be found who can deliver the same goods
within the same time. In other cases it must be
expected that German technical skill will be excluded
from supplying our present enemies. Such a condi-
tion as this would be insufferable. It must be pre-
vented from arising. The commercial treaty must
stipulate that German shippers be eligible wherever
foreign material and foreign workmanship are pat-
ronized at all. It must be absolutely impossible foi
manufacturers from countries now allied against
Germany to enjoy, under any form or pretext what


soever, a preference in competing for state work.
Protection must go so far that domestic manufactur-
ers of the country in question who order foreign ma-
terial are not permitted to exclude German articles.
But no confidence can be placed in paper conces-
sions alone. On the basis of statistical data, we
must specify the proportion in which German pro-
ducts have to be included in official consignments
from foreign countries, no matter whether the deliv-
ery be made directly, or through the medium of a
domestic dealer. Purchases according to this pro-
portion must be guaranteed by the state which is
a party to the treaty. The objection will then be
maae that such a demand is an attempted intrusion
upon the sovereignty of the state. The patience of
Germany before the war was stretched farther than
was really well; it was exercised only to keep the
peace. We have gained nothing by generously
yielding a point time after time, instead of insistin'
upon our rights.
Equal justice for all !” must here also be the
watchword. But because justice is a term which
can be all too easily bent to suit one’s purposes, as
the most recent past teaches, it must be made a
matter of figures and put down in black and white.
I he duty of the guarantors will be to see to it that
die pledged security goes unforfeited because the
guarantee is fulnlled. After the war also, the Ger-
man export trade must insist upon finding among its
present enemies the market which belongs to it, ac-
cording to the rights of the past, and the degree of its


efficiency. It must insist that it be not discrimim
ated against in favour of other foreign competitors,
that at least its former percentage share in the world
market be guaranteed, and that this share shall be
enlarged in future in proportion to the increase in the
capabilities of German industry. As an integral
constituent of the commercial treaty there must be
an import guarantee given by the foreign power in
figures for each individual kind of German industry
(the figure understood as the percentage of German
goods to all other imported goods of the same ;n-
-----------dustry).
The commercial treaty must demand state guaran-
tees that German goods he accorded as wide a range?
of sale as is justified by statistics and by the increas-
ing efficiency of German industry.
A WARM WELCOME FOR THE ‘ FEDERATION
Without regard to the range of the officially guar-
anteed market, warrants must be given that the
private sales of our industrial exports be not re-
stricted. Such a restriction can be avoided if Ger-
man branches and representatives are not subject to
any sort of exceptions, and if the freedom of move-
ment guaranteed to ail other foreign representatives
and branches holds good for them also.
It is not necessary here to demand special prefer-
ments and concessions; equality in qualification is
entirely sufficient. If it be granted, German dili-
gence and German efficiency will take care that our
industrial exports come to their rights in private


trade also. But there must be an open door !If
this demand is incontestably essential in the case of
foreign branches of private industries, it must hold
good in a still greater degree for the official represen-
tatives of Germany’s technical industry, embodied
in the five federations mentioned above, and in their
foreign branches. The special . protection itself
which is to be granted to them brings great advan-
tage to the foreign country in question, because they
represent instrumentalities of mediation in the best
(moral) sense of the word, because they render effec-
tive service to Germany’s export trade only when
they provide for a smooth settlement of ail business
affairs between domestic and . foreign buyers and
sellers, and because that country after all will be the
gainer from such smoothly running business. It
must also be demanded that these federations, since
they themselves aim at and can gain no profit, remain
free of taxes in foreign countries.
, • > • ■
German branch-establishments and representatives
in foreign countries must not he burdened by being
singled out for special rulings and obligations.
To be always demanding and never giving in re-
turn is repugnant to German nature. It goes with-
out saying that concessions representing valuable
compensations will be granted to foreign countries
which again renew unobjectionable commercial rela-
tions by treaty. In the interest of our own industrial
exports we will not limit ourselves to granting certain
customs- and tariff-reductions; we will go further
and grant import premiums to certain foreign pro


ducts and manufactures, if the trade in them is suited
indirectly to promote our export trade. These con-
cessions are to be defined by treaty, just as the em-
bargo rights.
The lessons of the most recent past make it neces-
sary to demand a special guarantee (with specific
figures) for all capital invested in foreign countries,
and all outstanding accounts, the guarantee being
retroactive to cover amounts already existing.
The liability of foreign countries for German capi-
tal employed in them is to be carefully defined by the
commercial treaty.
A
Every import concession granted by foreign coun-
tries must be effective for exports from Germany
also .




r 0 NEUTRALIZE hostility and allay
I the suspicions of allied cus=
tomers, the advance guard of
the German invasion will offer for
sale only “Denationalized goods.” They
will appear to be “anonymous”—cosmopo!i=
tan. To maintain this disguise, the Teutons
decree that everyone else shall keep their
goods also free from mark or sign. Adver=
tisements and shipments of these products
incognito will appear to come from neutral
countries, and will be spirited into our homes
and our stores by clever actors sedulously
made up to resemble our harmless neighbours.
Even their correspondence, mimeographed
in Berlin in Bostonian English will* bear a
neutral post mark and an impartial signature.


CHAPTER TWELVE
THE DENATIONALIZATION DODGE. AN
ANTIDOTE TO HATRED
Commerce Incognit o Stratagem of Deceit Out-
witting the Allied Buyers —A Severe Lesson in Customs
Procedure —Propaganda Under Cover—A Flank Move-
ment Through Neutral Ground.
8. WAYS OF DENATIONALIZING GERMAN GOODS
GERMAN exporters must expect that, for a
long time after the end of the war, German
manufacturers will be outlawed among our
present enemies. It would be idle to live in the opin-
ion that peace will banish hatred at once. The latter
must be reckoned with the German industry also.
It will be well, therefore, to meet people half way,
avoiding everything that might provoke national
passions which are not yet lulled to rest. Victory in
this conflict will be harder than with the sword, for
the weapons to be wielded here are patience, forbear-
ance, and often also the denial of the individual
“ego” —that natural pride which finds expression
externally in the labelling of goods. Such .mild
tactics are sure to meet with opposition, but they
must nevertheless be adopted, if we listen to calm
reasoning and cold facts. Vanity —fortunately it is


still in its infancy in Germany—must give place when
the goal ahead demands it. What we propose is not
a disgraceful sort of “hide and seek,” but rather due
consideration for conditions where sentiment is
master. In this connection the reader is referred to
the introductory remarks.
THE STRATAGEM OF DECEIT
In the early days of peace the manufacturing
export trade must have as its first commandment
the following: The German “make-up” is to be
avoided wherever at all feasible, without the in-
trinsic quality of German export products being
allowed to suffer. This quality must not only be
maintained, but also increased, for it is the backbone
of the export trade, it is exactly the thing - which is a
thorn in the eye of its enemies. There is indeed the
danger that foreign competition may find easier sail-
ing because of our action, but this competition must
be reckoned as part of the bargain. If competitors
turn out goods of the same intrinsic value, then
German goods simply must be made better. The
strenuous contest which thus results will be alto-
gether good for the German manufacturer, for as the
past teaches he knows no weakening. The intrinsic
quality of exported goods must be typically German ;
their external garb, for better or for worse, will have
to be anonymous—neutral.
Out of regard for the rehabilitation of trade
formerly hostile countries, the German garb of
manufactured articles must be put away.


The “make-up”-—by which term not only the
packing but also often the style are to be understood
—must for the present adapt itself exclusively to the
A / , i
taste of the customer even if a thorough-going change
in the .manufacturing process be thereby involved.
Unfortunately the world judges first of all by the
looks, and “German“ looks in such countries will
militate against the sale of German goods. Dis-
avowal under such circumstances is required, it can
not be avoided. The German products controlling
the world market were recognizable even from the
outside by their make-up; this furnished people in
general with a guarantee of their intrinsic quality.
German inventiveness will certainly not find it
difficult to improvise new make-ups of such a nature
that they quickly make a general impression, and
again become a sign of intrinsic quality without
being at the same time a characteristic German mark.
This mark is inscribed in golden letters upon the
book of history; it must not vaunt itself on' every
wrapping. In the former it illumines vision, in the
latter it so blinds the hostile buyer’s eye that he no
longer sees the inner quality of the article. The loss,
then, falls to the German export trade, the profit
to foreign competition.
OUTWITTING THE ALLIED BUYERS
The German trade-mark formerly performed good
service abroad. Now it will be a token by which to
recognize the former enemy. “Camouflage” m
war is an important strategic method; when oppoi


timely and ingeniously applied, it increases the effec-
tiveness of weapons. The application of this precept
for the commercial struggle is as clear as day. The
German trade-mark does not conceal, on the contrary
it acts like a torch, it illumines —the source ! The
article is recognizedly good, but the origin spoils
the whole effect. Away then with the German
trade-mark where it offends feelings which, though
they are certainly unjustified, must nevertheless be
reckoned with. Away with it where it brings loss
instead of gain. Where the trade-mark is absolutely
necessary to safeguard property rights, a foreign
mark must be used in its stead; the increased expense
incurred in this way is inconsiderable in comparison
with the results achieved.
J ' ' ,
The German trade-mark ought not to he used at
first in export-trade with formerly hostile countries;
the same rule holds good in placing German patent
stamps on the outside of goods.
A SEVERE LESSON IN CUSTOMS PROCEDURE
Too much stress can not be laid upon the fact
that is here fundamentally a question of pre-
cautionary measures exclusively, in order to avoid
injuries to the manufacturing export trade.
If the German manufacturer with great self-efface-
ment makes every requisite effort to banish scources
of irritation, he for his own part has the right to
insist that the government of the hostile country
does not work against him. Officers of foreign states,
.whether they be railroad- or customs-officials, can


under no circumstances be permitted to label goods
so as to disclose the place of origin. Nor can they
be allowed to do this after laying down rules under a
pretense of impartiality, to the effect that all im-
ports are to be labelled in this way without regard
to the particular country from which they come.
It is clear that the indication of origin from a for-
merly allied country represents an official recommen-
dation for the product in question, and that a rule
requiring such a label in all cases has only the pur-
pose of making German goods especially recogniz-
able —to their disadvantage.
It is, however, not sufficient for the German manu-
facturer to gain his point, namely, that the goods
coming from him need not be thus indicated. He
must be inexorable in demanding that no recogniz-
able mark of origin may be used at all on goods,
without regard to the country from which'they come.
For the non-marking of German goods, as a right of
exception granted to them (while other foieign
goods are labelled) amounts in actual practice to giv-
ing away their origin. The path to foreign trade must
not be beset with ambushes of this sort, the poss-
bility of which ought always to be taken into ac-
count, If peace is to be made, it must be a commer-
cial peace also. Secret malicious weapons must be
destroyed before their use —by force, if there is no
other way.
No labelling of goods by the country of their
origin can be 'permitted foreign officials against the
will of the German exporter.
The German exporter alone will have the right


to decide whether the origin of his goods is to be
indicated; his order book will here determine his
decision.
Of importance for the success of efforts toward
denationalizing goods are, further, the skilful use of
propaganda abroad, the proper selection of our
foreign representatives, and taking advantage of
closely related business circles in those countries
which, during the war, have remained neutral
without wavering.
PROPAGANDA UNDER COVER
“Propaganda which is to bring results must be
aimed at the individual.” This sentence stands as
the supreme law of all advertising means and
methods. It is valid in an increased degree where
one must reckon with people’s feelings. In general
the propaganda will strive to transform these feelings
into favourable ones. Here where it is a question
of carrying out propaganda in countiies whose
feelings in the first few years will presumably remain
hostfle to German products, this effort toward trans-
formation must be abandoned because for the present
it is hopeless. Rather we must strive to make the
influence of such feelings secondary, placing in the
foreground a recognition of the quality of German
export products. Methods of propaganda which,
however unintentionally, could possibly offend the
national feeling of the customer must be most care-
fully avoided.
An example may make this point plainer : It is
generally recognized that the impression' produced


by propaganda is strengthened by using tables of
figures which afford an insight into the great output
of the industry. In the case of a hostilely minded
customer such means would be abandoned, for they
give him an unwelcome view of the power of German
industry, and they involuntarily give rise to un-
pleasant conclusions about the strength of his own
country, and evoke the desire to contribute so far
as possible by not himself increasing this quantita-
tive efficiency of Germany —in other words by pur-
chasing nothing. It would be just as undesirable to
adduce the usual figures of comparison with competi-
tors of other countries, if the latter are allies of the
nation to which the customer belongs, for he will see
in such a comparison an attempt to detract from the
worth of his ally.
r Fhe German export propaganda must guard
against offending the national feelings of other
countries; it ought to he content with giving con-
crete and instructive information.
As for propaganda in general, so here, the principle
holds good that all exaggeration and quackery are
to be excluded, and that all efforts must be directed
solely toward convincing the future customer of the
intrinsic value of the goods introduced by the
propaganda. Comparisons with the products of other
firms —German firms included —are to be omitted
absolutely. The consequences of a comparison with
foreign firms have already been mentioned above.
The consequences of a comparison with German
firms eventually have not only an injurious effect
upon them, but also upon our entire export trade.


They give the impression that this trade does not
always draw upon first-class sources. Such damaging
comparisons ought to be severely condemned even if
they were framed for the sake of caution so as to
be read only between the lines.
You never add to your own reputation by running
down others. The foreign propaganda must be
worked out in advance with special care, it must have
a suggestive effect upon the recipient, compelling
him, perhaps unconsciously, to calculate whether
he would gain by purchasing the recommended
articles. If they justify themselves in calculation
then he is sure to become a customer. If the effi-
ciency of the recommended products is recognized,
and their superiority, in comparison with that of
other foreign products (even from an ally), admitted,
then the propaganda has done its sole important
duty; it leads to orders. Emphasizing the origin,
as was said before, is of course to be avoided; the
question is not “where from” but “what.”
The propaganda abroad must have a neutral ,
and must confine itself exclusively to proving the
value of the recommended articles.
We must distinguish between printed, written, and
personal propaganda. The order above gives at
the same time the order of their application in normal
cases. In the time following the war this sequence
must be inverted in the formerly hostile countries,
for it is almost certain that foreigners, embittered
by the events of the war, will at first throw every
communication from Germany into the waste-basket.
Another means must be used to regain attention for
7


these communications. This will be attained only
by degrees, and only by intensive personal influence.
With this matter is bound up the question of the
future organization of foreign branches and represen-
tations which likewise are to be used as means of
neutralization.
A n advantageous path for the future propaganda
abroad can be found by slarting from neutral territory.
A FLANK MOVEMENT THROUGH NEUTRAL GROUND
This compromise is proposed because we are not
justified in assuming that in every individual case a
citizen of the foreign country in question can at once
be found, who is competent to represent German
manufacturers satisfactorily. At least in the be-
ginning foreign experts who are fitted for this work
will shrink from taking a German agency. There
will doubtless be numerous persons abroad who
would be ready to represent our firms, but who will
protest that for the moment they could scarcely be
successful with German manufactures because they
would run the risk of putting themselves in a bad
light before their countrymen. Even the offer of
steady compensation independent of first results
might here not answer the purpose, even apart from
the fact that there would be great danger of its
misuse. A satisfactory compromise can be found
by making the foreigner only indirectly an agent for
his German concern. He would get his immediate
orders through a neutral firm.
It must be admitted that a certain complication
arises here; however, it can scarcely be avoided.


One ought not to surrender himself to the optimistic
opinion that it will be sufficient to erect a branch
establishment in a neutral nation, and that the for-
merly hostile countries will be worked from this point.-
Success by this method seems pretty mueh out of
the question, for foreign countries will investigate
carefully and soon uncover the true state of affairs.
There will be firms which keep trying to reopen
their foreign (at present confiscated) branches after
the war by gathering a staff inclusive of the directing
officers, from the foreign country in question. It is
to be feared that this makeshift will not at first bring
success, any more than the foundation and operation
of apparently independent foreign firms. The best
remedy will always be found through neutral coun-
tries. The decrease in profits resulting from this
use of intermediaries ought not of course to be made
up by raising prices but rather by lessening the cost
of production, since in every case superiority in
prices must be preserved.
The reopening of export relationships with once
hostile countries must take place through neutrals in-
stead of through direct representatives as in the past.
This rule blazes a path to be followed in conducting
propaganda. Again as before, its elaboration and or-
ganization will be left to the German manufacturer
(provided he observe the points mentioned above),
but it will be conducted entirely from neutral terri-
tory. The printed matter destined to promote our
export trade ought accordingly to be worded and
finished up in such a way that neutrals can make
direct use of it. They will have to receive it and


pass it on according to the system evolved by the
German manufacturers. The results of the propa-
ganda, including the negative ones, are to be trans-
mitted by neutrals to the German concerns in order
that the latter may themselves compile the necessary
propaganda statistics, and learn from them the
lessons.
To simplify matters, the epistolary propaganda
will be drawn up in Germany, ready for mailing, and
will be sent to the neutral power for furtherdistri-
bution. The orders coming in-to the latter, when-
ever possible, will be filled directly from the German
production plant, while the invoices fully prepared
for the mails are transmitted to the neutral. The
incoming payments pass through the neutral’s bank-
ing connections to those of the German manufac-
turer. If import difficulties prevent the goods from
being shipped directly, a route must be found
through a neutral country. The neutral country
will doubtless profit by this; this profit may neither
be curtailed nor looked upon invidiously, for the
neutral performs valuable pioneer service for Ger-
many’s industrial exports. He brings business to
our manufacturers which otherwise would be lacking
or at least doubtful. We must respect the rule not
to begrudge another his gain when our own is suffi-
cient. It ought also to be remembered that neutral
countries in a certain sense have had to suffer more
through the war than the belligerents, and that for
the latter they have performed valuable services,
which demand recognition. This recognition can
be evidenced all the more easily if in so doing our


own advantage is served. In this discussion only
those neutrals are meant whose neutrality was above
all doubts, and who in maintaining it looked neither
to the right nor the left.
The profit which neutrals make by acting as inter-
mediaries is entirely justified, since it naturally car-
ries with it profits for our exporters.
The management of advertising in foreign papers
will be carried on through neutrals under the direc-
tion of the German manufacturer. Special attention
should be paid to neutral trade journals which are
issued in various countries. They represent excel-
lent disseminating mediums not only for advertise-
ments, but also for instructive information concern-
ing new inventions and methods of applying them.
Account must be taken of the fact that it will require
a long time for technical journals published in Ger-
many to regain currency and circulation in hostile
countries to that degree which is necessary for pro-
moting our export trade,
Neutral trade journals represent an effective means
for promoting the German manufacturing export trade
If rightly managed, neutral agencies will, more-
over, facilitate the supply of those raw materials
which German industry needs from abroad. Just as
direct trade with formerly hostile countries will meet
with export difficulties, so likewise obstacles will be
placed in the way of securing raw materials. They
ought to be removed whenever possible without state
assistance —which should be the last resort. Foreign
countries will not hesitate to ship raw materials to
neutrals without anv burdensome restrictions, for
VR


what they are concerned with, after all, is a sure
market. If they can secure one without getting
into closer connections with the citizens of a former
enemy, they will certainly welcome this solution of
the problem. If a neutral power is used in eliminat-
ing the troubles of the raw-materials question, we
will profit by the fact that accounts can be mutually
cancelled through it, in the country where we buy
and sell. The remainder due us is therefore all that
f * \ > r r • ' t * . . X • f V
need be transmitted to Germany.
In war we recognize the advantages of domestic
money not only remaining at home, but also circulat-
ing there; in peace times also ..we should try to pre-
serve this condition as far as possible. This can
be done if our exports exceed our imports (an aim
we should keep always before us) so that the pay-
ment for our imports can be made by direct clearance
in the foreign country in question. To facilitate
this, it will be well to establish special neutral clear-
ing offices for balancing (transferring) accounts.
Neutmls will perform good service in the procur-
ing of raw materials , and in making possible an
agreeable financial settlement.


r-i-'i HE German confidence in the outcome
I of his ruthless cut-throat battle for
the markets of the world is ul=
timately based upon a complacent assurance
of their superior genius. They propose to
reinforce this with a really formidable weapon
—high speed and painstaking efficiency. All
small traders and manufacturers are to be
eliminated without pity. Production is to be
mobilised in great Trusts and strictly stan=
dardised. The labour is to be permanent and
hereditary. No man in Germany will be
allowed to conduct a plant unless he adopts
the military regulations defining efficiency.
And incompetence and failure will be marked
down for the wrath and annihilation of the
State. Efficiency is not only to be taught and
studied, but commanded.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
THE HEREDITARY WORKMEN OF COM-
BINED INDUSTRIES
The Ban on the Small Business Man —“Permanent” and
“Hereditary” Labour —The Crime of Incompetence—A
Drastic Remedy for Bargain Sales.
9. COMPETITIVE ABILITY
RAW materials and industrial products can
count upon sale if their usability and effec-
tiveness keep pace with that of others in the
market. They will supplant the latter if they are
superior in quality and if, at the same time, their
selling* price does not exceed the market price.
Considering the obstacles, mentioned earlier,
which can be placed in the way of our export trade
in future, and which must for the most part be ex-
pected, we must under all circumstances avoid han-
dicaps in construction or price that could injure our
sales abroad. All products of German manufacture
destined for export must be able to compete in the
matter of technical workmanship and price.
No special discussion is necessary to show that the
manufactured products of the great German indus-
tries answer in the main these two requirements.
In future, however, our export trade must count on


the lively participation of our middle and smaller
industries. A compromise can perhaps be found by
forming’ for the individual branches of industry,
export associations which will handle orders within
this country, and likewise act as exporteis. Iheir
producers will be the middle and smaller manufac-
turers. By uniting many small industrial forces
under a single hand, an efficient export concern will
be formed which can follow the same paths as the
great individual firms. Only when all forces even
the smallest —co-operate, Avill our export trade reach
a size which corresponds to the efficiency of German
industry.
In this effort, however, it is undoubtedly neces-
sary for the middle and smaller industries to follow in
their work the same principles as the great industries.
‘ ‘ PERMANENT AND “ HEREDITARY ” LABOUR
The middle and smaller industries should confine
themselves to as narrowly limited branches of manu-
facture as possible, and should give up producing
all the necessary parts themselv.es. The greater
the number of these parts, the more mechanical en-
ergy and capital resources are split up and spread
out The principle of a division of labour which
bears such splendid fruit during the war in Germany
ought also to be adhered to in time of peace. The
smaller the number of different parts to be manu-
factured, the easier it will be to train an hereditary,
highly specialized line of workers, and to keep and
employ them permanently.


Since all intellectual and mechanical energy is ap-
plied* to the mastery oi fewer processes, it is to be
expected* that the technical perfection of the pro-
ducts will be as great as possible. The smaller the
number of different parts to be produced, the fewer
will be the kinds of machinery necessary for the work,
and the less, therefore, will be the capital required.
The expense account will have smaller interest pay-
ments to make, for the amount of capital needed is
iaigeiy determined by the floor space and equipment.
Supervision of work becomes a simpler matter, the
organization is easier to control, the precision of the
work can be regulated with fewer instruments, all
in proportion as the range of manufacture is limited.
In place of a great deal of minor work, there will be a
single specialty to which all efforts are devoted. All
these directions are aimed at placing the middle and
smaller industries in a position to produce articles
which cannot be surpassed in technical workman-
ship.
If this direction is followed out, the capacity of the
plants will automatically become very high, and will
increase as the number of different materials and
finished products is cut down. Just as the separate
divisions of the great industries work hand in hand,
and to a certain extent represent within themselves
producer and consumer in mutual co-operation, so
the middle or smaller manufacturer must work. He
must think of himself as the head of a division, en-
gaged exclusively in the production of a certain kind
of goods which are closely related to the products of
other manufacturers (imaginary divisions of indus-
try as a whole).


Superiority in the construction and price of Ger-
man industrial products over those of foreign com-
petitors is a pre-requisite for the prosperity of the ex-
port trade.-
■ . THE CRIME OF INCOMPETENCE
. .. . _ * If . < .
It seems necessary to call attention to an undesir-
able class of individuals who were, only half-
heartedly opposed before the war, but who. now ought
to be ferreted out relentlessly. Manufacturers; who
lack the necessary talent for organization, who give
too little attention to accounting, and who start a
business with insufficient means, really belong in the
category of production costs, which make co-opera-
tion against foreign competition impossible. Worthy
understudies of theirs are to be found in those en-
terprisers who by failing to understand the market
or in the stubborn purpose of creating a favourable
market artificially, increase their output to a degree
that is entirely out of proportion to the demand. To
both sorts of enterprisers comes the instant when
they must dispose of their goods at any price, in or-
der to be able to meet their further obligations, or in
order to get new working materials. Generally
they will not wait for the perilous moment to come,
but will already have planned how to get their pro-
ducts into the hands of the customers. Experi-
ence shows that they get rid of their goods, by price-
cutting, and by offering them far below the market.
A DRASTIC REMEDY FOR BARGAIN SALES
In our future trade with old enemies, such individ-
uals will cause immense loss. As it is essential to the


export trade that we always be strong competitors
in the matter of prices, there is a minimum figure
set by the limit of profitableness, which we can
never allow to be passed, if the continuation of the
industry is not to be endangered. Every transgres-
sion ot this limit brings others after it, and hastens
the coming ruin. Foreign countries become sus-
picious when German articles of the same kind are
offered to them at widely varying prices. They be-
gin with right to exert pressure on prices in general,
in order not only to get cheaper goods but also to
injure German industry, and with it, or through it,
the German industrial trade. As soon as price-
cutting has or threatens to have consequences
which could injure our export trade, the practice
must be stopped by an exercise of state authority;
or by the remedies within the hands of the industrial
associations.
Tile competitive ability of German industrial ex-
ports in the matter of price must be reducible to
the point of slaughter prices.


ASSUMING the role of the supply train,
the bankers and capitalists of Ger-
many will henceforth supply their
golden ammunition to German commercial
units only. The High Command in Potsdam,
perceiving that the Entente has no more
moral regard for property than to seize Ger-
man accounts, has decreed that henceforth
no German money shall be invested except in
German industries, and in those outposts of
the advancing German export trade which
*
directly profit in the commercial war. And
this plan further contemplates two other rigid
limitations upon all banking. That no allied
capital shall ever find its way into the “Indis-
pensable Industries’ ’ of Germany and that for
a German banker to refuse a loan to one of
these “offensive units,” is strictly “ver-
boten.”


CHAPTER FOURTEEN
THE CURB ON CAPITAL
The Kaiser’s Complaint: The Predatory Allies Violate
Private Property ! —The Evil Influences of Independence
—The Blessings of Financial Bondage—German Money
for Germany—Relation of Investments to Invasion.
10. CAPITAL
HE'results of our entering into a state of war
j were very destructive for German capital
engaged in enterprise abroad. It is' to be
hoped that we shall not forget that lesson when peace
is restored. However great the damage may be, it
can be forgotten and repaired if in future the Ger-
man capitalist will constantly bear in, mind the fact
that circumstances may arise where our capital in
foreign countries may be entirely outlawed. The
enemies of Germany who have simply thrown over-
board all traditional conventions and law did not
delay a moment on the way which, to use the mildest
expression, led to violation of private property rights.
Of course we cannot and should not require capital
to be withheld absolutely from-enterprises abroad;
but experience teaches that among foreign en-
terprises we should carefully distinguish between
those under foreign and those under German man


agement, between those advantageous and those
detrimental to German industry, those working for
it or against it, and those which represent its allies,
or its competitors. All German capital which is in-
vested in foreign countries must be sure not only
of being returned to Germany in its cycle, but also
of constantly having a stimulating and beneficial
effect upon German industry.
German capital in future is to be invested only in
work under German directors, and even then not
foreign countries unless it brings benefit and support
to our industrial export trade.
THE EVIL INFLUENCES OF INDEPENDENCE
V » * \ \
Certain financial and banking circles will surely
take a position against this requirement. These
circles are not at all interested in serving the com-
mon welfare first and then the safety of the capitalist,
but rather in reaping the highest profits possible
from their investments. In recent years there has
already been on foot a precautionary movement
against the flow of German capital into foreign coun-
tries; there has as yet, however, been no recourse to
decisive measures. To the expert who understood
financial conditions it was most depressing to see our
own German capital lured abroad by high-sounding-
promises, often when that meant “good-bye for
good,” while at the same time German industry often
had to go into foreign countries in order to get to-
gether the capital it needed —at a heavy sacrifice.
A large number of German undertakings which were


founded in recent years fell through after a compar-
atively short time, the failure in its mildest form lead-
*
ing to a pooling of the capital stock. The reason was
perhaps not so much that their foundations were
rotten, or that the officers in the producing or selling
end of the business lacked expert knowledge, but was
solely that the financial sacrifices which had to he
made beforehand to secure capital abroad were so
heavy that they consumed not only profits but capi-
tal also.
The short-sightedness of many industrial circles in
Germany is really incomprehensible when one con-
siders that any control over capital which has gone
abroad is almost impossible, while control over that
invested in domestic industries at home is at all times
possible. The introduction of foreign capital into
German industrial enterprises represents under some
circumstances a source of danger for them and the
export trade, which could certainly be avoided if we
could get rid of such short-sightedness. Practical
experiences teach us only too well that in many cases
foreign capital is invested in German concerns only
for the purpose of destroying their export trade,
either through the foreigner’s right to a voice in the
business being used to fathom the manufacturing
secrets and methods and to transplant these abroad,
or through unscrupulous directors being appointed
to undermine the strength of the enterprise in com-
peting with foreigners. More than ever, the war is
teaching us that German organization celebrates its
greatest triumphs even along industrial lines, when


foreign influence is kept away; likewise that German
capital would then be at hand in superfluity to back
all German concerns without need of foreign help.
German capital ought not to be put at the service of
foreign industrial undertakings under German lead-
ership until domestic industry no longer needs it.
Support must proceed from within outward, not
from without inward.
Our exp oft trade will he helped if the flow of
German capital into foreign countries is stopped.
THE BLESSINGS OF FINANCIAL BONDAGE
It is primarily the duty of the banks to afford the
guidance and instruction needed in this situation.
We must, however, admit the deplorable fact that in
many cases it is by the banks themselves that the
German manufacturer is denied a just appreciation
of his circumstances. The old proverb —“a prophet
is not without honour save in his own country”
still holds true. Between the manufacturer who is
seeking capital and many German banks there exists
a profound antagonism which expresses itself even
in the first proposals. The banks rightfully demand
a thorough preliminary investigation by an indus-
trial expert, and also an examination from the busi-
ness standpoint. Here they make a mistake by
stipulating that the investigation is to be conducted
by their own employees. The manufacturer opposes
that for two reasons, one of which is certainly jus-
tified, and often the other also (according to the char-
acter of the bank). The manufacturer takes his


stand against the industrial employee, because he is
of the opinion that, as an employee, the latter can
not judge objectively, and because it is possible that
the bank in question stands in closer connection
with another concern of the same kind, so that manu-
facturing secrets and advantages might most easily
be communicated to the latter.
It can not be denied that this opinion has a Certain
justification. A compromise, satisfactory to both
parties, will be found if independent experts from
outside are entrusted with the examination. The manu-
facturer further justly opposes the bank’s wish -o
make a simultaneous business investigation, which
allows it an insight into the most intimate circum-
stances of the undertaking, an insight which consid-
ering the close connection of banks with each other
can become dangerous if the demand for capital ; s
not granted. As a general thing the business investi-
gation ought not to take place until, upon the basis
of the industrial investigation, the bank has de-
clared itself thoroughly in favour of granting the
capital, provided that the business conditions be
sound.
The judgment of German industrial undertakings
by the banks with a view toward financing them
must be kept purely objective in future .
f
RELATION OF INVESTMENTS TO INVASION
German capital, as a matter of principle, ought to
take stock in foreign enterprises only when its in-
fluence upon their management can be permanently


preponderating, for the purpose of promoting our
export trade, or of supplying German industry with
raw material. In certain cases such an interest will
be acquired as a provision for opening up new chan-
nels for German workmanship. If such an invest-
ment in the stock of a foreign concern is made solely
by industrial circles who have a'special interest in the
shipping business which that concern will carry
on, they will be justified in putting up with compara-
tively low dividends, provided that other profits or
benefits result from the shipments, and that Ger-
man industry is assured of receiving- all future deliv-
eries. In no case, however, should our industries
themselves buy the foreign stock; this can be al-
lowed only the capitalist circles related to them.
Industrial concerns should be builders, not bankers;
their funds ought to be applied solely within their
own business. These related capitalists can exercise
sufficient influence over the foreign concern in favour
of our industries.
Capital in the service of our domestic industries
must he absolutely debarred from acquiring an in-
terest in foreign concerns even for the purpose of
saf e guar din g our imported supplies, because such
participation might in a financial way involve a
weakening of domestic efficiency.
Innumerable industrial values have been destroyed
by the war. Their restoration will demand increased
activity from Germany’s industry, which will douot-
less require an abundant supply of capital to accom-
plish the coming tasks. The economic and financial


preparation for supplying this capital needed after
the war ought to be carried out and finished in good
season. Likewise German capital should be made
aware in good season of the advantages which it can
gain from participating in German industrial enter-
prises. Too much illuminative instruction can not
be given in this matter, if the following demand is
to see fulfilment:
German capital for German technical industry.
THE END


When you have read this
- ■ \S^4 - ' •
book ask yourself this Ques-
tion —What is likely to be-
come of the industries of
Australia if they are not
promptly and effectively de-
fended by a genuine Protec-
tionist Tariff?


