

THREEPENCE.
No. 10
THE
IRISH
REBELLION
AND
Australian Opinion
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney.
1916.




The
IRISH REBELLION
And Australian Opinion.
Warning to the British
Government.
MORNING POST, London, March 16, 1916
From motives of patriotism worthy of all
praise, the English papers have refrained for
some time from comments upon the position
in Ireland, hut the situation in that country
is developing with such rapidity and gravity
that silence is no longer possible. Through-
out the South and West a vigorous and
organised campaign against recruiting is
being supported by the dissemination of sedi-
tious and pro-German pamphlets and litera-
ture of various kinds apparently without let
or hindrance on the part of the Irish Execu-
tive. Within the last few months several
persons have been indicted and tried in Dub-
lin for offences under the Defence of the
Realm Act, but in every case they have
been acquitted by the verdict of the jury
and the result received with tumultuous
applause within the Court itself. In all
these abortive prosecutions the trial took


place before a common jury, and one awaits
with impatience the time when the Chief Sec-
retary will utilise the powers under the
existing law to have such cases tried either
before special juries or the Military Tribu-
nals.
A Warning From Cork.
A still more sinister event has just oc-
curred in Cork. A Committee was recently
appointed in that City composed of delegates
from the different religious and political par-
ties, with the view of organising a demon-
stration upon St. Patrick’s Pay, to-morrow.
The military authorities offered to send in
furtherance of the demonstration a large con-
tingent of troops from the Irish Regiments,
but the Committee, largely composed of dele-
gates from the Sinn Fein Volunteers and
other disloyal associations, rejected this offer
by an overwhelming majority, upon the
ground, as one of the delegates expressed it,
that “the British Army was in hostile occu-
pation of Ireland, and that it would be not
as absurd for the Belgians to invite a con-
tingent from the German Army to take part
in a Belgian national demonstration as for
Irishmen to accept the presence of British
soldiers.”
These delegates further announced the in-
tention of the Sinn Fein Volunteers to con-
tribute to the demonstration an armed force
of 2000 men, carrying loaded rifles; but it
seems hardly credible that the Executive will
permit at such a time so flagrant a challenge
on the part of open and avowed enemies of
our country.
THE IRISH REBELLION


The Failure to Recruit.
It is, of course, inevitable that events such
as I have described should imperil, if not
destroy, the chances of further recruiting in
Ireland, and it is not surprising that the re-
sults for some months past should have
proved so unsatisfactory. It is idle and dan-
gerous any longer to ignore the truth or to
pretend to be deceived by the suggestion that
irishmen are only too eager to enlist provided
they are engaged for Home Defence only,
and thereby secure the training and equip-
ment at the public expense of the disloyal and
seditious section of the Irish population.
The Munitions Deputation.
Kor can the failure of recruiting during
these later months be cloaked by deputations
from Ireland of the character of the one
which Mr. Redmond introduced to the Minis-
ter of Munitions on Friday last. Mr. Lloyd
George seems upon that occasion, while pay-
ing a remarkable tribute to the city of Bel-
fast, whose contribution to the work of con-
ducting the war he declared to be second to
none in the United Kingdom, not to have
been greatly impressed either by the ability
or desire of those upon whose behalf this
Dublin deputation professed to speak to con-
tribute materially to the supply of munitions.
Kor was he, apparently, completely con-
vinced by the assurance of a Mr. John
O’jSTeill that he would not be troubled by any
labour difficulties were he to extend the
operations of munition factories in Dublin,
backed up as this assurance apparently was
by the testimony of the Lord Mayor of Dub-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


lin. I do not know by what right or
authority these gentlemen purported to speak
on behalf of the Trade Unions, but it cannot
be forgotten —nor is it likely that Mr, Lloyd
George has forgotten —that in 1912 and 1913
Jim Larkin and his confederates in Liberty
Hall were able, in defiance of the whole Irish
Parliamentary Party and the Corporation of
Dublin, to paralyse the entire trade of the
port and city amidst scenes of lawlessness
and riot almost without a precedent in the
history of industrial strifes.
Irish Opinions in
Australia.
DR. MANNIX’S VIEW.
Melbourne “Argus,” May 1, 1916.
Speaking at tbe opening of a garden fete
held in connection with St. Mary’s Roman
Catholic Church, West Melbourne, on Satur-
day afternoon, Archbishop Mannix referred
to the disturbances in Dublin.
Dr. Mannix said that it was needless for
him to say how deeply pained he was by
what had just happened in Ireland, and how
grieved h© was at the loss of life that had
occurred there. Archbishop Carr had already
spoken on the subject, and he was sure that
Dr. Carr had truly voiced the feelings of
the Catholic body in Melbourne. The Out-
break was truly deplorable, but they must
not lose sight of the facts of the situation.
THE IRISH REBELLION


People must expect to reap what they sowed,
and, knowing as he did what had been going
on in Ireland before and since the outbreak
of the war, he was not altogether surprised
at the lamentable things that had occurred.
They were the natural regrettable sequence
and response, as it were, to the campaign of
armed resistance and civil war which the
Carsonites had been allowed to preach and
prepare for within the past few years. The
Carsonites, of course, had had no opportunity
of coming into collision with the forces of
the Crown. They had got a free hand,
though some of them had boasted that they
were intriguing with the German enemy.
They were assured, on the authority of Mr.
Asquith, that the British army would never
point a gun at them. Their leader, instead
of being sent into prison, was taken into the
British Cabinet. The hot-blooded young men
who had now taken up arms had begun, he
supposed, to ask themselves how Ireland was
to stand when the war in defence of small
nations was over. To truckle with treason
was never safe for any Government. He was
quite clear in his mind that the British
Government, by its failure to deal with the
treason of the Carsonites, and by its shifty
policy in regard to Home Rule, had, unwit-
tingly he supnosed, led up to the result which
they must all deplore. He hoped that the
immediate trouble was already over, or that
it would soon be, and he hoped, too, that
those who were already calling out for execu-
tions would first pause and try to fix the
responsibility for the outbreak. Before con-
demning the misguided leaders of the move-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


■ ■ :r-' w --y-'ri-’ ~ ’f- T : •*.*'
ment to be shot, they should remember that
the leaders of another movement were taken
into the British Cabinet. (Applause.)
ARCHBISHOP KELLY’S VIEW.
1 * * M$ v i ||i $ £ UlI
Melbourne “Herald,” May 3, 1916.
Sydney, Wednesday.
Archbishop M. Kelly, Homan Catholic
Primate of Australia, speaking at the open-
ing of the conference of the Hibernian Aus-
tralian Catholic Benefit Society to-day, urged
that the members of the Sinn Fein Society,
now that the rebellion was crushed, should
be treated leniently.
Amid the applause of the gathering, he
said that they were only following in the
footsteps of Ulster. He hoped that this
would be the last rebellion in Ireland.
“There should be no vindictiveness on the
part of the Government,” Archbishop Kelly
proceeded, amid applause. “Whenever a
disturbance occurs—l do not care where,
even in a family—there is more than one
at fault. Generally, there is a great deal of
misunderstanding. It would be a wrong
thing in a case like this to be hard on any-
one.
“There are three parties concerned. There
is the British Government, the Ulsterites,
and the Sinn Fein members. The Ulsterites
were the first offenders, and until they are
punished the Sinn Feiners have as a pre-
cedent that they were only following in the
footsteps of Ulster. Let there be no Ulsterites
THE IRISH REBELLION


and no Sinn Feiners, and let us have an
Irish Parliament as soon as possible, and let
King George open it on College Green this
year, and take his Ministers from responsible
people in Ireland.”
The present Government, Archbishop
Kelly said, had created a class ascendancy.
Ireland in the past had been injured out-
rageously.
“The rebellion would not have occurred,”
he added, “if we ourselves had been united.
We are to be blamed for our disunion and
weakness. The blame goes all the way
round.”
Archbishop Kelly asked for conciliation.
If there was to be any vindictiveness, let the
Ulsterites be the first to be impeached.
Australian Press Opinions
Melbourne “ AGE,” May 2, 1916,
It is the function of the Churchman to
plead for mercy to sinners, but we cannot
help thinking that Archbishop Mannix ex-
ceeded his priestly office last Saturday and
adopted the role of the political partisan
when he attempted to show that the Sinn
Fein rebels are deserving of specially com-
passionate consideration. He set out by ad-
mitting the outbreak to he a “truly deplor-
able” affair, but he warned his audience not
“to lose sight of the facts of the situation.”
The facts, as Archbishop Mannix views them,
wear a very strange appearance. “The out-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


break,” he declared, “was the natural and
regrettable sequence of the armed resistance
organised by the Oarsonites, who had been
allowed to preach and prepare on certain
lines for the past few years. They were
given a free hand, and did not risk any col-
lision with the armed authority of the
Crown .... and Sir Edward Carson was re-
ceived into the Cabinet. Probably the hot-
blooded young men of Ireland had begun to
ask themselves how Ireland would stand
when the war was over The failure of
the British Government to deal with the Car-
sonites, and its shifty policy regarding
Home Rule had led to the present lamentable
results, which they must all deplore. He
hoped that those who were calling out for
executions would endeavour to fix respon-
sibility for the trouble in the right quarter.
If those are indeed the facts, the
Archbishop’s claim for clemency is proved,
and the Sinn Fein Society does not merit
condign chastisement. But are they the
facts ? Let us cite another local Churchman
on the issue.
Speaking to the peoule of Australia last
week per medium of the “Age,” Archbishop
Carr declared the rebels to be absolutely un-
representative of the great mass of the Irish
people, and equally the foes of the National-
ist party and of the Carson party. He added:
—“When the secret history of this movement
comes to be written it will be found that it is
the result of German intrigue, of support
from some Irish Americans and of the role
assumed by a small knot of desperate irre-
concilables. From every point of view I re-
THE IRISH REBELLION


gard it as an outburst of madness, an ana-
chronism, and a crime.’ 7 In all Arcbbisbop
Carr’s statement there was no reference of
blame to the British Government, nor any
suggestion that the traitors ought to be re-
garded as “hot-blooded young men” whose
lawless actions were merely “the natural and
regrettable sequence” of the Carsonites’ al-
leged misdeeds. But let us go to the fountain
head of authority in Ireland itself—to the
man who leads the Nationalist party, and
who, therefore, above everyone, has the best
title to complain alike of the Carsonites and
of the British Government—if any com-
plaint be justified—and to assign the guilt
of the rebellion to the place where it of right
belongs. Speaking on Saturday in London,
Mr. John Redmond, M.P., used these words:
—“My first feeling on hearing of the Sinn
Fein revolt was one of horror, discourage-
ment and almost despair. In 40 years Ire-
land has emerged from pauperism and
slavery to prosperity and freedom. When
the war came she sided with Liberty and
democracy—any other course would have
been impossible. That same section which
is to-day the catspaw of Germany has
throughout the Home Rule struggle thwarted
and opposed us. This wicked move, which
is their last blow at Home Rule, has been
plotted, organised and paid for by Germany.
.... What can I say of those men in
America who aided the movement while they
remained safe in their remoteness? They
are guilty of treason to the United States,
which gives them q home, and to Ireland,
which is their birthplace.”
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


Last Friday in the House of Commons
Mr. Bedmond and Sir Edward Carson con-
ferred together in open debate, and they
cordially agreed to put their separate forces
at the disposal of the Government to help
suppress the insurrection. Furthermore,
they made a mutual pact to deprecate and
prevent use being made of the rebellion as
a political weapon against any party.
Thereby the National Party publicly con-
fessed that the Carsonites are in no way re-
sponsible for the outbreak, and the Carson
party reciprocally absolved the Nationalists.
On the same day the Prime Minister of
Great Britain definitely charged Germany
with the primary guilt for having organised
and promoted the rebellion. In face of this
overwhelming array of evidence, we have
Archbishop Mannix’s unsupported word that
not Germany is to blame, and not the Sinn
Fein rebels themselves, but the British
Government for its shifty Home Buie policy,
and the Carsonites for having preached and
prepared “on certain lines for the past few
years.” In effect he bids us look upon the
Sinn Fein traitors, not as Germany’s cats-
paws, but as the only true Home Bulers, hot-
blooded young patriots who revolted because
they “had begun to ask themselves where
Ireland would stand when the war was over.”
Yet Mr. Kedmond assures us most positively
that the Sinn Fein has always thwarted and
opposed Home Buie, and he stigmatises the
outbreak as this lawless society’s “last blow
at Home Buie . . . plotted, organised and
paid for by Germany.” No intelligent Aus-
tralian will accept Archbishop Mannix’s ver-
THE IRISH REBELLION


sion against the clear cut testimony of Arch-
bishop Carr, Mr. Eedmond, Sir Edward Car-
son and Mr. Asquith. The truth is much
too plainly manifest to be obscured by any
partisan distortion of the facts. A contro-
versy on such a subject at such a time as
this ought at any cost_t° be avoided. We
leave the matter with the simple remark
that Archbishop Mannix must clearly see
that his statement cannot fail to hurt the
feelings of a great many people both here
and elsewhere who have hitherto studiously
and not ungenerously refrained from intro-
ducing party politics into an incident which
all loyal citizens of our great Empire un-
stintedly and unitedly deplore.
Melbourne “ ARGUS,” May 4, 1916.
The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Syd-
ney is deliberately endeavouring to weaken
the hand of the Imperial Government in
dealing with the Sinn Fein rebels. In rak-
ing up the Ulster trouble of the pre-war
days, which has absolutely no analogy with
the present situation, he is striving to re-
awaken racial and religious feeling. His as-
sertion that it would be wrong for the
authorities to be “hard” on ;|ayone con-
cerned in the Dublin outrages would be sim-
ply ridiculous if it were not for the position
of the speaker, which gives weight to his
words and makes it imposible to treat them
as of no consequence. It would be difficult
to imagine any body of desperadoes with less
claim to the clemency of Government. The
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


clemency of spirit they themselves possessed
may be gauged by the scores of lives they
wantonly took and by the destruction of mil-
lions of pounds’ worth of property for which
they are responsible. Had they succeeded
in their fell design precious little mercy
would have been shown the vanquished.
Moreover (and this is the main point), they
were in arms against the Empire and in
league with its enemies in time of war. They
declared an Irish Republic, and their aim
was to strike a deadly blow at Britain and
her Allies. Every conceivable circum-
stance of aggravation was present in their
crime, and if the authorities took a light
view of it they would simply be placing a
premium on rebellion. That the British
Government, or whatever trbunal it appoints
to deal with these offenders, will act ruth-
lessly no one who understands the spirit and
temper of the nation can for a moment sup-
pose. The rebels will receive fair play and
justice, and no one can decently or loyally
ask for anything more on their behalf.
Dr. Kelly went a good further than say-
ing that in a case like this it would be wrong
to be “hard” on anyone. He as much as
declared that the Government would not be
justified in punishing the Sinn Fein rebels at
all unless it first punished the/ “Ulsterites.”
In this pitiful attempt to confuse a plain
issue by importing an element absolutely
foreign to it, the Archbishop of Sydney is
pursuing the same course as the Coadjutor
Archbishop of Melbourne, but in the case of
Dr. Mannix, whose bias and animus are un-
controllable and generally understood, the
THE IRISH REBELLION


impropriety is not so remarkable. What
happened in Ulster had nothing to do with
the outbreak in Dublin. Mr. Redmond, the
Nationalist leader, and Sir Edward Carson,
the Ulster leader, have been fervid
in condemning the Sinn Fein and all its pro-
ceedings. Mr. Redmond has it
as the deadly enemy of the cause in which
he fought Ulster. Why, the very armed
force it formed—the “Irish Volunteers”—
was established in opposition to the Red-
mondite Nationalist Volunteers, these
latter helped in the work of repressing it.
Archbishop Carr expressed the opinion of
loyal Irishmen everywhere when he repro-
bated the whole rebel movement—its consti-
tution, its methods, its purpose—without
qualification or reservation of any kind.
Both as a prelate and as a man he is too
candid and too patriotic to seek to involve
the proceedings of the Sinn Fein rebels in
time of war with what was done in time of
peace by either party in the Ulster conflict.
Undoubtedly the position in Ulster at one
period seemed as if it might develop into
armed collision between the contending
parties; but there was no menace of general
bloodshed and looting, and immediately the
Empire became involved in war with a for-
eign enemy, Nationalists and Ulstermen put
aside all their sectional grievances and com-
bined against the common foe. There is no
getting away from the plain truth of the per-
fectly simple issue involved in the Sinn Fein
rebellion, and persons in high places, like
Dr. Kelly and Dr. Mannix, who seek to ex-
cuse the rebels by appeals to racial and reli-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


gious prejudice, are not faithful to the Em-
pire.
“AUSTRALIAN STATESMAN AND
MINING STANDARD,” May 4, 1916.
It may seem strange to have a paper
whose loyalty is, we hope, beyond question,
declaring that the news of the Irish/rebel-
lion is the best we have had for many a
day. Yet there are two reasons why it may
be so regarded. In the first place, it is well
because it renders it impossible for the
Government of Great Britain to go on any
longer permitting and, by its permission,
encouraging the spread of disloyalty
throughout Ireland. In the second place,
it is well because it shows the Empire where
it stands, and because it is infinitely better
to have an open enemy than a secret and
treacherous foe. Eor those reasons, we are
glad that the Irish rebels have come out
into the open.
The consternation created in Irish circles
throughout the Commonwealth by the news
of the rebellion is easily comprehensible, be-
cause it must materially affect the chances
of Ireland being conceded such a measure
of Home Rule as that which it had been
previously agreed to bestow upon her.
Hence we have all sorts of statements made
as to the numerical insignificance of the
rebel body. We are told by various in-
terested parties that they do not total five
per cent, of the population, one enthusiast
oven putting them down at one per cent.
THE IRISH REBELLION


These statements will, of course, not hold
water. One cable message, it is to be
noted (and it may be remarked that the
whole tone of these messages has been to
minimise the extent of the trouble) sets
down the number of Sinn Feiners in active
revolt in Dublin alone at “several thou-
sand,” and we may be quite certain that for
every one who actively participated in
the fighting, there were a hundred sym-
pathisers who took good care of their skins
by keeping out of it. So, when we are told
that the active members of the Sinn Fein
body number some 3000, we shall not be
exaggerating if we set down their dupes at
fully a hundred times that number. Lot
us take as an analogy the fact that the ranks
of the Labourites throughout the Common-
wealth may be numbered by the hundred
thousand while the active controllers of the
body do not number a thousand. It is in
truth sheer nonsense to talk of the Irish
rebels as an insignificant minority. They
are nothing of the sort. They have been
ever since the war started gaining at the
expense of the Redmondite party “hand
over fist”; and Mr. Redmond, in order to
meet their attack upon his position, has
gradually come closer and closer into line
with them, till his Nationalist Volunteers
are not to be considered as very much more
loyal than the Irish Volunteers who are the
product of Sinn Fein.
Right here, let us consider into how many
groups the Irish may be divided. First of
all, we have the Ulster Protestants, a dis-
tinct race, quite separate in traditions, in
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


character, and in feeling from the other
peoples of Ireland. They are extremely
loyal and opposed to Home Rule. Next, we
have the Anglo-Irish or Norman-Irish of
“the English Pale,” the men who have
given the Irish gentleman his fine reputa-
tion. These are generally Catholic, Irish
in sentiment, and favourers of Home Rule,
but distinctly loyal. They are Nationalists
rather of the “All-for-Ireland” variety than
of the ordinary type. The rest of the popu-
lation of Ireland consists of the Basque-like
people of the south, the Celts (who are
closely akin to the Scottish Highlanders),
and those predecessors of the Celts who
dwell in the extreme west, and whose
peculiar cast of countenance constitutes
such a boon to American caricaturists.
A small percentage of these people
are Larkinites (that is to say, anti-
clerical republicans), but the great
majority of them are either Sinn
Feiners or Nationalists. The attitude of the
Sinn Feiners is quite clear. The attitude of
the Nationalists is not so clear, and calls for
some remark. We hear a great deal of then-
loyalty ; but it has never been proved. They
raised a large army, but its members, except
an insignificant minority, point-blank de-
clined to enlist. They had the impudence
to demand to be put on the footing of the
fighting soldiery as regards pay, but to be
freed from service at the front. Then-
loyalty is indeed an exceedingly dubious
quantity, and they may be regarded as dif-
ferent from the Sinn Feiners only in policy.
They hold that no steps should be taken to
THE IRISH REBELLION


imperil the establishment of Irish Home
Rule. When that has once been attained,
we are left to infer, their anti-British atti-
tude may be much stronger than it shows
itself to be at present. A sinister light is
perhaps cast on the attitude of this party
by the fact that its organ, the “Freeman/’
of Dublin, suggested in its issue of March
4th, that the Royal Irish Constabulary
should be allowed to go on active service.
Are we to suppose that the “Freeman” was
so blind to the trend of affairs in Ireland
as not to know that this would be playing
straight into the hands of the two directly
disloyal bodies —the Irish Volunteers and
the Citizen Army?
There is one sure way of testing the
loyalty of Ireland. Let us consider the en-
listment figures. Enormous attempts have
been made to mislead the public with regard
to these figures, and Mr. Redmond has not
been the least of these misleaders in the
statements he has put forth from time to
time, when he has claimed as part of Ire-
land’s contribution of men to the war not
only all the Irish professional soldiers who
were in the army before the war began, but
also all men of Irish descent contributed by
other portions of the United Kingdom and
by the Dominions; and there can be little
doubt also that he has included all the rein-
forcements for the Irish regiments which,
to the disgrace of Ireland be it said, have
had to be drawn largely from England,
Scotland, and Wales. How, the true figures,
as given by Lord Wimborne, Lord
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


Lieutenant of Ireland, in his report on re-
cruiting, show that the actual number of
men recruited for the army since the begin-
ning of the war was a little over 86,000,
while the men belonging to the army when
the war began numbered a further 51,000.
Of these 86,000, more than half came from
Ulster, and very nearly the whole of that
half from Protestant Ulster, while the edi-
tor of a Sinn Fein paper stated some time
ago that fifty per cent, of those recruited
in the other portions of Ireland were re-
cruited from the very small Protestant
population. In the face of these figures,
what is the good of loud talk about all that
Ireland has done and about her exceeding
loyalty? Of the loyalty of her troops in
the field there need not be the slightest ques-
tion, They have proved it over and over
again, but let it be rememebred that those
who have enlisted have gone because they
are loyal, and that it is not for the skulkers
and disloyalists who have remained behind
to brag about them, and say that this small
sprinkling of patriots can be regarded as
proving Ireland’s loyalty to the Empire.
The external causes of the outbreak have
been German and Irish-American money
and the gross incompetence .of the British
Government. The internal causes are in-
herent in the Irish character. The Irish
run to politics; and their politicians have
a great tendency to conform to the Tam-
many type, being, in fact, corrupt to the
last degree. But even their greed for money
is perhaps less an actuating motive than
their hatred of Great Britain, Ireland has
TEE IRISH REBELLION


been treated as the spoilt darling of the
United Kingdom, and the country has had
a measure of peasant proprietorship ex-
tended to it which may well be the envy of
the tenant farmers of other portions of the
United Kingdom; but gratitude has never
been a strong point of the Irish character.
They remember wrongs, but forget benefits;
and so we have these Sinn Feiners ignoring
all that has been done to make Ireland pros-
perous and contented, and turning their
faces resolutely, after the manner of Dr.
Mannix, towards the injuries, real or
imagined, of a distant past. Nor do they
seem to regard it as in any degree discredit-
able to go on taking British money while
doing their utmost to bring Great Britain
to ruin. Thus, we have Sir Boger Case-
ment intriguing against the Empire, while
in receipt of a Government pension; and
thus too we have amongst the Sinn Feiu
rebels several men who have been holding
Government appointments. Many of these
were men who were employed in the Dublin
Post Office, where they had almost un-
limited opportunities for the exercise of
their gift for treachery.
But, as it is no use blaming the Germans,
because they are justified in raising a revolt
if they can, it is no use blaming the rebels,
because, after all, they must act in accord-
ance with their nature. The prime blame
for the present position must rest upon the
British Government. The Irish is a nation
that needs a strong and firm hand. Thus
the Irish Nationalist Party never did bet-
ter than it did under Parnell, who treated
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


ali the other members of the party like
dogs, and to whom they were faithful with
the faithfulness of dogs—until he fell
wounded, when they pounced upon him with
the ferocity of wolves. But, instead of a
strong man to control Irish affairs, Mr.
Asquith appointed “a notorious weakling in
the person of Mr. Birrell. To such an ex-
tent was he putty in the hands of the
Nationalists that, when the Coalition Minis-
try was being formed, the Nationalist Party
insisted on his retention of the office of
Chief Secretary for Ireland; and this is the
result. Ever since he became Chief Secre-
tary, the game of Birrelling to the Irish
has gone on merrily; and the climax of his
contemptible policy was reached when he
threw on the military all the blame for the
encounter that took place between some
troops and a force of Nationalist gun-run-
ners just before the outbreak of war. The
latitude he has allowed during the progress
of the war has been absolutely astounding.
So long ago as last December he announced
that the evidence of the disloyalty of the
Irish Volunteers was “voluminous”; but be
did nothing to check it, and allowed them
to go on storing ammunition in Liberty
Hall for use against British troops. Our
contributor, “Philaton,” referred to it in
his notes in our issue of April 6th, but no
other paper in Australia published any
such information. When the rebellion broke
out, the Melbourne “Argus” did indeed pub-
lish a long extract from the “Times” refer-
ring to the way in which disloyalty had
been permitted to grow unchecked; but
THE IRISH REBELLION


neither it nor any other paper published
any such extracts, prior to the event, so as
to let their readers see what was in the wind.
Were they afraid to do so? Were they too
Birrelling to the Irish?
One is very glad to see the instant re-
pudiation of the Irish rebel movement that
has come from Irishmen in Australia, and
one is glad too to see the outspoken con-
demnation of the movement that has come
from Archbishop Carr. Ho one would be
justified in questioning the entire honesty
and straightforwardness of Dr. Carr’s pro-
nouncement ; but the attitude of the
Victorian Coadjutor Archbishop, Dr.
Mannix, is much more open to ques-
tion. Readers of this journal will re-
member that in our issue of February
24th we pointed out how this reverend
gentleman, who is of a markedly inferior
type to his chief, had, while declaring the
loyalty of the Roman Catholics of Victoria,
done his best in an insidious sort of way to
encourage disloyalty. One sees the same
sort of low cunning at work in his remarks
upon the Irish rebellion. He declared the
outbreak to be “deplorable,” but he did not
say from what point of view it was de-
plorable; and almost the whole of his re-
marks on the subject were devoted to ex-
cuses for the rebels. These excuses must have
been made with a tongue in the cheek, for
to excuse this rising against the Empire on
the ground that the Ulster loyalists had
threatened to resist by force an effort to put
them out of the Union is too stupid to ap-
peal to a man with the capacity of Arch-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


bishop Mannix. Presumably he used it
only because he thought it would not be too
stupid to go down amongst his hearers. So,
too, we have Bishop Phelan, of Sale, de-
claring that Sir Edward Carson has been
trying to make political capital out of the
outbreak, a statement which the cabled in-
formation to hand shows to be entirely with-
out warrant, and, indeed, a deliberate falsi-
fication of the facts.
As we have said, we do not in the least
question the good faith of Dr. Carr or of
those bodies which have sent home bitter
denunciations of the Irish rebels; but we
believe firmly that there is another section
of Irish here who, though they may not
choose to say so openly, are really heart and
soul with the rebels. We believe that this
section contains a considerable number of
clergy of a low type, and that these men
have been doing their utmost to discourage
enlistment —a fact which accounts for the
relatively small number of Irish Catholics
who have enlisted in the State of Victoria.
There has been a great deal of talk in
Roman Catholic papers as to the great
number of enlistments made amongst that
bodj’, but we should like to ask whether the
Church is willing to have the figures on the
subject published. Is it not indeed a fact
that it succeeded in preventing the publica-
tion of such figures some time ago? Would
it have done this, it may well be asked, if
it had not been quite sure that those figures
would have been destructive to its claims?
Here, then, is the position with which
THE IRISH REBELLION


the Irish in Australia, and especially the
Irish in Victoria, are faced at the present
moment. They are making loud protesta-
tions of their loyalty to the Empire and of
their disapproval of the Sinn Feiners* re-
volt; but they must expect that the majority
of the public will be more or less dubious of
their good faith. What they can do to
prove it is to bring about a large enlistment
of Irish-Australians; but to do this they
must first kill the influence of that section
of the priesthood whose attitude towards
the war is directly encouraged by Dr. Man-
nix, though not openly professed by him.
What they may be quite sure of is that un-
less they take some such action there will
grow to very serious dimensions an anti-
Irish feeling from which this country has
hitherto been free. They need to realise
that, if in great numbers Irish-Australians
remain behind to grasp the jobs of loyal
men who have gone to the front, they will
permit their cause to be done an incalculable
and an irremediable amount of harm.
From “ Philaton's ” War Notes.
(“Statesman and Mining Standard,” May 4.)
The attempts to minimise the importance
of the rebellion are absurd on the face of
them. When we consider that fighting has
been going on for a week, that during that
period the rebels have held the most impor-
tant part of the chief city of Ireland, that
they were enabled, though three times driven
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


out of the Post Office at the point of the
bayonet, to recapture it three times, and
that the disturbances were not confined to
the capital but were spread over a very
great part of the island, it is obvious that
the rebels have been in very considerable
strength, and it is obvious, too, that, as theii
rebellion was apparently characterised by
the adoption of sound strategic principles,
the conduct of affairs was really in the
hands of Germans, for the Celtic-Irish have
never, as a race, shown any strategical
ability. Brave its people undoubtedly are,
but all the great soldiers of whom it boasts
have been of British descent. The rebel
force in Dublin is reckoned at 12,000 men,
of whom 2000 belonged to Parkin’s Citizen
Army. If those be the figures for Dublin
alone, it is probable that the rising through-
out Ireland was the rising of something like
two or three times that number; and we
may be quite sure that their sympathisers
would be numerous, tens of thousands wait-
ing to see how things would go before they
lent a hand. It is good news that the re-
bellion has at length been crushed.
I think that too little attention has been
paid to the connection of the Larkinites
with this revolt. It is to be noted that it
was a Larkinite, James Connolly, who ap~
parently directed operations. It is to be
noted, too, that it was a republic which was
being set up, and that priests endeavouring
to warn the men of their folly were shot.
The Roman Catholic Church has always
been very intolerant of republics, and we
A/l
THE IRISH REBELLION


may be quite sure, therefore, that this was
not a clerical movement. In fact, the
church had a great deal to lose by the suc-
cess of the rebels, a fact which helps to ac-
count for the prompt action taken by the
Vatican, in face of the fact that the re-
bellion was German-inspired. It is to be
noted, by the way, that in the fighting (in
which apparently it was mainly Irish regi-
ments that were concerned) no quarter was
given. The fact will not help to bring
about any better feeling between the loyal
regiments that are serving and the wretches
who tried to shoot them in the back.
I have only one thing more to say on this
miserable subject. We are told that the
Chief Secretary for Ireland, Mr. Birrell,
was quite cheerful when he stepped ashore
on his very belated visit to the part of the
kingdom he is supposed to administer. He
had little reason to be cheerful, for the blood
that was shed must all of it primarily be
on his head.
The Melbourne “ Age,” in a leader on
the Irish rebellion last Friday, managed to
cram an enormous number of misstatements
into a very small space. It said that the
south of Ireland had “already voluntarily
contributed some 80,000 of her sons to fight
Germany,” predicted that the rebels would
be found to belong almost exclusively to
the Sinn Fein Society, declared that that
society had “existed for many decades,”
scoffed at its influence, and remarked that its
members were “no more representative of
the Irish people than the arch-murderer
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


Deeming was of the good citizens of Vic-
toria.” The figures were ludicrously wrong,
the prediction was wrong (since we now
know that the Citizen Army of Mr. Larkin
has been engaged in the rebellion in con-
junction with the Sinn Demers), and so
far from the Sinn Fein body haying been
in existence for many decades, it is, as Dr.
O’Donnell, President of the United Irish
League of Melbourne, pointed out in a press
interview, only some twelve or fifteen years
old.
There can be little doubt that the Zeppelin
raid on England and the later naval raid
were intended by the German authorities
to distract Great Britain by coming almost
simultaneously with the Irish rebellion.
They both ended in fizzles, but, as usual, the
news supplied to us on the matter was at
first deceptive. It was not only Lowestoft,
ivhich is a mere watering place, which was
attacked, but also Yarmouth, at which there
is reason to believe some considerable
works have been established. It is to be
hoped that no great damage was done. It
may be noted, too, that the Germans are
held to have been at a great advantage by
having a large fleet of Zeppelins to act as
aerial scouts for them. I have always main-
tained that our authorities have been greatly
to blame for having neglected to supply our
navy with this very necessary adjunct.
Once again there is reason to complain of
{he attitude of the British authorities in
keeping news from the British people when
it is widely known in America, and, there-
fore, in Germany. The Irish-American
THE IRISH REBELLION


and German-American papers in New York
were treating the American people to long
accounts of the success of the Irish rebel-
lion before the British public knew that
there was any rebellion at all. That is not
creditable. The British Government is not
secretive in order that it may the better
strike the enemy, but only in order that it
may protect itself from the anger of the
British people. It not only conceals the
truth, it also gives the people absolute and
deliberate falsehoods, as, for instance, when
it announced that the situation was well in
hand at a time when the rebels were in pos-
session of the most important part of Dub-
lin, and no attempt had been made to dis-
lodge them. Such treatment of the public
is absolutely unpardonable.
What will be done with Casement it is
not easy to say. What ought to be done with
him need scarcely be a matter of doubt;
but in England what ought to be done and
what is done are not always one and the same
thing. Thus, the notorious Arthur Lynch,
who was sentenced to death on a charge of
high treason in 1903, had his sentence com-
muted, was subsequently pardoned, and is
now a more or less honoured member of the
House of Commons. Yet he was an un-
doubted traitor, who was fully deserving of
the utmost penalty of the law.
Whether instructions were or were not
given by the German authorities to the
commander of the vessel by which Case-
ment travelled to Ireland that that in-
AND AUSTRALIAN OPINION.


dividual was not to be permitted to
return to Germany may well be doubted.
If suck instructions were given, the object
was probably to embarrass the British Go-
vernment. It is probably realised by Ger-
man statesmen that Mr. Asquith and his
party have been, until quite recently, in
the popular phrase, “in the pocket of” Mr.
Redmond. If the German aim be as I sug-
gest, there is cleverness in it, for we shall
probably find Mr. Redmond and his fol-
lowers doing their utmost to secure lenient
treatment for the rebels, partly because of
sympathy for them and partly to bind them
to tbfe party politically. They will know
that these men will be regarded in Ireland
as heroes and martyrs, and they will not
dare themselves to pretend to regard them
in any other light. Consequently, we are
likely to have them more or less under-
handedly, more or less obliquely, becoming
defenders of and apologists for these trait-
orous murderers of loyal troops.
THE IRISH REBELLION


Wholly Set-up and Printed in Australia by Statesman and
Mining Standard, Pty. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.


THE GERMAN THIEF IN
AUSTRALIA.
The invasion started over twenty years
ago, when the representatives of the Ger-
man Metal Combine arrived here, gradu-
ally the Germans got complete control of
our output. By giving Germans equal rights
with our own people, we deliberately invited
them to take control of our affairs. They
are to be found directing immense trading
concerns in competition with every British
and Australian industry. Electrical plant
has been introduced into all our States
under circumstances that in many cases
want enquiring into. German machinery
has been dumped into all parts of Aus-
tralia. Shipping manipulation hew been
going on to the great detriment of British
and Australian owners; and, above all, the
brutal and blackguardly German has
hundreds of spies and friends throughout
this country.
Stop naturalisation of Germans. Shut
up the German schools. Germans must be
deprived of all public positions of respon-
sibility. Stop German emigration to this
country. German correspondence should
he subjected to censorship for ten years
after the war.
DEMAND THESE THINGS NOW.
The “Statesman and Mining Standard” has
fought for British firms in this country, i.e., those
owned and controlled hy British money, since Aug.
6, 1914. We intend to expose the methods of not
only the shattered German businesses here, but
their agents and friends who hope to re-introduce
German goods after the war. THEY WILL DO
IT, TOO, IE YOU DON’T WAKE UP!
Send ninepence for some of our literature, 376
Flinders-lane, Melbourne.
