





CONDITION OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Never was there a period in the history of the Australian
Colonies at which a searching enquiry into their condition and
their resources was more imperatively demanded than the present;
never did the condition of the people so much depend upon
measures that ought to he adopted for their future government.
The history of these Colonies presents to the world the
saddest picture that the friends of England and of Englishmen
can contemplate. Founded for the employment and discipline of
the penal population of Great Britain, thrown open to adven-
turers generally of greater talent than of capital or experience,
and finally given up, almost without restraint, to the manage-
ment of those who had all the arts of government to learn, it is
not surprising that the career of these young Colonies should he
marked by errors fatal to the character of their Legislators, nor
that their vast resources should be more than balanced by any
expenditure so reckless that four short years have involved them
in almost irremediable bankruptcy.
As it is my object chiefly to confine myself to the Colony of
New South Wales, I will ask the reader who is desirous of under-
standing its real condition very carefully to peruse a paper on
the subject, published in April last, by Mr. W. B. Allen, and a
speech more recently made by Mr. Henry Parkes in the.
Legislative Assembly, and I venture to affirm, that with the
utmost prejudice which the dogmas and crude notions of super-
ficial men may have created, the thoughtful reader will admit,
that all the talent to be found in the colony will be required to
raise it from its prostrate condition. He may very probably be
told at the outset of his enquiry, that the country has been
embarrassed by the over-trading of a few reckless adventmers ;
but that the crisis is past, and that a healthy tone is now restored
to the business of the country. I will answer this very common


assertion, by asking what business can enable this colony to pay
off a debt of six millions of money to the various Banks ; and in
the meantime, to pay half a million a year for the interest of
that sum, and what credit foreigners will be so insane as to give
to a country which in the short period of five years has incurred
such enormous obligations ?
The first step, towards the amendment of a grievance, is to
ascertain its cause, and that in so small a community as New
South Wales, ought not to be a very difficult operation.
Up to the end of 1858, the colony was in an easy if not a
prosperous state, the exports exceeded the imports and there was
no general complaint of want of employment. In the course of
the next five years, ending with 1858, the imports exceeded the
exports by £10,325,962, and with the year 1859 a dreary period
of debt and insolvency commenced. Numbers of men were
tin-own out of employment, and amongst helpless women and
children the most appalling instances of destitution and
profligacy were brought under the notice of the public.
But who is to make the enquiry that is demanded ?
It may safely be predicated of any country that out of every
one hundred of the people governed, ninety-nine are profoundly
ignorant of the principles upon which all legitimate government
ought to be based, and it is difficult to review the public measures
of New South Wales for the last four years without feeling
that the government of the colony has not been conducted by the
very few who are capable of sustaining it. In the meantime
the colony is settling down to the saddest level, the people are
unemployed and a vast population of young persons is calmly
surrendered to profligacy and ruin.
From public enquiry, therefore, nothing can be hoped or looked
for, but the condition of the colony is not the less a subject of
interest to every one who has made it his home. The question is
indeed one of the deepest importance to England and to every
country that contemplates the founding of Colonies, whether for
penal discipline or to provide for the increasing population of the
parent state. - With England colonies have an importance that
can belong to no widely extended home Empire, and in the course
of years they may afford her the only means of averting that
downward tendency to which kingdoms as well as men are
subject.


What constitutes the greatness of England but a concentra-
tion of powers, the most profound talents cannot for ever sustain.
America is fast becoming her rival in manufactures and machinery,
and in all the arts and sciences. France and all the Northern
Countries must evidently pursue the same course ; and when their
object shall have been attained, England will no longer supply
the world with her manufactures, nor receive the contributions
that supply affords her. When this condition shall have been
arrived at by foreign countries, and its insidious approaches are
apparent to every one who carefully observes the exertions made
by all states to supply the wants of their own people, the Colonies
of England can alone sustain that power which it is impossible
even now to contemplate without nervous apprehension. But it
is not by allowing her colonies to brutalize themselves by the
measures of selfish and incompetent rulers, that they can give
back to the parent state even the shadow of her greatness. It is
the true policy of England to control and enlighten her Colonies
at the same time. To make them the homes of her noblemen
and gentlemen, and to pay the greatest attention to their moral
and political character, to apply her vast scientific resources to
the amelioration of the natural disadvantages that will be found
in every new land, and by all means to promote the most friendly
relation between the parent and the child.
It should be one object of the enquiry into the condition of
the Colony, to ascertain the cause as well as the extent of the
idleness and profligacy that have been ascribed to the colonial
youths of both sexes, and through the dreary labyrinth of misery
and pollution to seek the means of stemming the torrent that
appears to have set against the early hopes of the Colonists.
In this enquiry, it may be well to look at the history of a
country : we are too apt to make our model when we surrender
ourselves to a reckless system of speculation and credit.
A few years ago America was much in the condition of New
South Wales. The people unemployed, wretchedness and desti-
tution staring you in the face, and a family the most alarming
incumbrance to which a man could be subject. America found
that her first duty was that Christian one of providing for her
own family, and she established a system of protection under
which her children were rapidly raised from the prostrate condi-
tion to which they had fallen.


Those who desire to inform themselves on this subject, I refer
to the works of Mr. Daniel Webster and Mr. Henry Clay. I
will, however, mention one instance of the application of this
principle to the people of America.
The town of Lowell, in Massachusetts, which in twenty years
had risen from nothing to a population of more than twenty
thousand, had between eleven and twelve millions of dollars
invested in her manufactories, employed upwards of nine
thousand labourers, male and female, and paid for their work one
million eight hundred thousand dollars annually, about fifty per
cent, or one half of which sum those who labored in the factories
were enabled to save, after paying for their board and necessary
expenses. Several of the persons so employed had saved
a sufficient sum to enable them to settle down in life, while others
invested their savings in the Manufactories and became stock-
holders. In one factory those who worked for wages held one
hundred thousand dollars, and in another -sixty thousand dollars of
stock. Even factory girls and women who lived by their
were often found amongst the holders of stock in those and other
institutions. The highly moral character of those who work in
the factories and their regard to cleanliness, are not only a just
subject of national pride to the Americans, but have called from
strangers a universal expression of their admiration. When Miss
Bremer visited the establishment, in 1850, the population of
Lowell had increased to thirty thousand, and the inmates of the
factories still retained their high character. Miss Bremer, adverting
to the good conduct of the young female apprentices, observes,
nevertheless, “one or two elopements I heard spoken of”!
Contrast this statement with the charge of idleness and profligacy
universally levelled against the youths of both sexes in this
colony; contrast it with the melancholy investigations which
daily occupy the Police; contrast it with the reports of those
excellent persons who are labouring to found Institutions for the'
rescue of the hapless victims of an ignorant and savage colonial
policy, a policy that has filled the streets with public houses, that
sneers at the destitution and profligacy of the victims who are
daily added to the great stream of human misery, that rants and
bullies about elective franchise and the advantages of municipali-
ties, and would deprive these unfortunate persons of the slender
religious teaching that might arrest their downward progress.


Why do the daughters of America present so striking a
contrast t'o those of New South Wales ? Surely the most
searching enquiry ought immediately to be commenced. Surely
every parent who would find a home for his children in the
Australian Colonies should anxiously endeavour to ascertain
whether, like that of the corrupt coast of Baioe, the atmosphere of
these Colonies is totally destructive of female chastity. And if it
should be found to be so, if the young people should turn out to
be absolutely and inherently profligate, he would be a degraded
slave indeed who would continue to make it his home, who
would allow his children to claim it for their country. But if
this state of degradation should be found to result from the
measures of those whose most solenm and important duty it is to
provide for the religious and moral training of the rising genera-
tion, and to foster the means of employing and making them
useful members of the community, then their conduct is more
base than that of those Romans, who endeavoured to undermine
the stern virtues of their enemies by debauching the children who
had fallen into their hands.
Machiavelli has told us that the infamy and wickedness of a
people are traceable to the infamy and wickedness of the Govern-
ment, and all history confirms this opinion.
The first enquiry that suggests itself to the intelligent and
unbiased stranger, is into the education of the children and
the occupations in which they have been engaged. What must
be his astonishment on finding that for the great mass no educa-
tion whatever has even been thought of, and that as to employ-
ment —there is none. That the business of the Colony does not
admit of their employment. That it has ever been the policy of
this Colony to import men to tend the herds of sheep and cattle,
to use them up and to exterminate the rising generation as a
drawback to this glorious appendage to the free-trading interests
of England, a policy that has been acted upon to the fullest
possible extent, that has produced the degradation of the colony,
and is fast sapping the foundation of its national character.
The cry of the press and of the would-be political economists,
of the merchant princes and the Legislative Assembly, has ever
been, “Free trade and cheap market.” They have been triumphant,
and it will not be denied by the most uncompromising advocates
of these principles that they have operated upon the colony


without the slightest check, that all who have endeavoured to
point out the real interest of the colony have been denounced as
“ old women, antiquated fools, and people so far behind the time
in which they live as to be fairly entitled to the sneers and
contempt of the great lights of the age.
Let us look at the unchecked operation of these principles,
and observe their effect on the condition of the colony.
Up to the year 1853 the colony, as I have observed, was in a
comparatively safe condition. From that year to the end of 1858
its imports exceeded its exports by nearly ten and a half
millions of money, and so much of that sum as the moral people
of New South Wales do not cheat the exporters out of, must be
paid with added interest. <
Some of the Banks, anxious to aid the glorious principles
contended for by the free traders, advanced a very large part of
this sum, and they, together with other banking institutions, now
claim of New South Wales upwards of six millions of money.
Now I venture to ask how the free traders propose to pay off this
debt ? A further and very large part of the excess of importations
must and will be liquidated through the Insolvent Court; but
while the relief thus afforded is better suited to the pecuniary
interest than the moral character of the free traders, I shall
presently shew that it operates most injuriously to the slandered
young people of the Colony. One beneficial operation however,
of this mode of liquidation must be acknowledged, and that is its
tendency very much to check future importations.
The last five years of uninterupted free trade ought to have
enabled the advocates of that system to show that enormous
profits had placed the colony in the highest state of prosperity ;
but, alas! this result is rebutted by the Banks and the Insolvent
Court, and what is more sad, by the state of business throughout
the colony. I again ask how the debt to the Banks is to be met.
If five years of unrestrained free trade have left the colony in a
state of such dreadful embarrassment who will have the hardihood
to look for the means of discharging present obligations out of
the future trade of the Colony. What future importations
can yield a sufficient profit to pay off the old balances. Are
foreign exporters likely to supply the demand of the free
traders without first receiving the payment already due to
them ; without being paid for all future consignments on


delivery, or receiving secnrites that even the Insolvent Court will
be unable to set aside ?
The embarrassed state of the Colony is not denied by the
stoutest advocates of free trade, but they ask how you can avoid
the natural consequences of the principle they contend for, and
failing to find anything that can relieve them from this dilemma
they first slander the native population and then consign them to
infamy. They ask why they do not go into the country, women
children, and infants, to tend the sheep and cattle ? (Mr. W. G.
Pennington even proposed that Israel Delmir should give to each
of his sons a flock of sheep and send them into the bush! He
should have conferred upon them free pasturage on Hyde Park.
Can drivelling imbicility descend to a lower level ?) Let Adam
Smith answer the question.
“ The annual labour of every nation,” observes Adam Smith,
in his introduction to the Wealth of Nations, “is the fund which
originally supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniences of
life which it annually consumes, and which consists always either
in the immediate produce of that labour, or in what is purchased
with that produce from other nations.” “ According, therefore, as
this produce or what is purchased with it, bears a greater or
smaller proportion to the number of those who are to consume it>
the nation will be better or worse supplied with all the necessaries
and conveniences for which it has occasion.”
Apply this principle to New South Wales, what proportion of
its population is or can be employed in the raising of raw
produce ? Who can be designated her labourers ?
I have in a former paper shewn, that by the Census of 1856,
out of a population of 266,000, eighty thousand persons were
between the ages of seven and twenty-one. A very large number
of these unhappy children, are now amongst the slandered
natives of the colony; too many may have sunk under the
infamous policy that has been directed to their destruction.
I asked in that paper, how these young persons were to be
employed. With the exception of Mr. W. G. Pennington, no
one has ventured to answer the question. It may, perhaps, be
contended that out of the forty thousand young men, five or six
thousand could find employment as shepherds and bullock drivers,
but how dispose of the rest F Even if the whole forty thousand
could find such employment, leaving their wretched homes to


roam the wilderness without a guide, or even the pretence of
religious visitation, what a prospect for an Australian patriot,
what a condition for the descendants of Englishmen, what a
commentary upon the University of Sydney and the Affiliated
Colleges!
The condition of so degraded a population painfully reminds
one of Mr. Help’s description of a slave state. “ What have we
there,” observes he, “ a solid dead weight —a constant quantity,
as the mathematician would say, in regard to mental power.
Whereas in a great free, many-minded state, the current never
sets all one way. Diverse interests, diverse opinions, diverse
temperaments, produce a wholesome vitality. A large mass of
slave population has from year to year the same necessities pro-
vided for it; gives little encouragement, therefore, either to arts
or sciences, and adds nothing by invention to national pleasure
and national wealth.” A fine condition, truly, for a people whom
an effort has lately been made to deprive of the State aid of
Religion. Why, the very felons have religious aid and instruc-
tion provided for them, but who cares for the souls of the forty
thousand stockmen ?
But another question, which I asked in the paper I have
alluded to, remains unanswered. What is to become of their
sisters, the forty thousand young women ? Ho doubt they are
beneath the dignity of the highly moral and enlightened Senators
of Hew South Wales, and could not be noticed in a public news-
paper, that would be soiled by recording even their names.
They are no doubt permitted, “ but without protection/’ to get
up another Lowell. They are permitted, what more would they
have F to lay out half a million of money in the establishment of
Factories. We, the press of Hew South Wales ; we, the Insolvents
of the great free trade system ; we, the Bankers who have lent six
millions of money to keep up the mercantile character of the
colony; we, the public ministers, do not prevent them. I will
show that you do prevent them and that by a course, if possible,
more infamous than free trade. By a course in constant
operation, —that of Bonuses. Bonuses ? yes, bonuses, and that in
favor of free trade against native industry. The Proof? You
shall afford it yourselves. The payment of what part of the
imports of £28,899,327, which arrived in this colony during the
five years ending in 1858 is swept away by insolvencies ?


Certainly a sum far exceeding one million. Even that sum would
give two hundred thousand pounds per annum. Now this amount,
or whatever may be the amount, constitutes a bonus in favor of
importations over native productions. That is, supposing the
exporters to be defrauded out of one twenty-eighth part of all the
exported articles, the case would stand thus, twenty eight yards
of cloth manufactured in this Colony rmist be paid for, but twenty-
seven yards only of the imported twenty eight yards are paid for,
and the twenty eighth yard constitutes a bonus in favor of free
trade over native productions. But * the bonus is much more
extensive than this. Monster sales are daily advertized, and as
money must be had, a very large deduction from the original
cost is submitted to in order to raise the necessary fund, and this
deduction constitutes a bonus in favor of free trade over native
productions. Alas ! for the hopes and employment of the slandered
young people who have had the misfortune to be reared in this
glorious free trading community ! Oh ye Americans, infinitely are
ye wiser than the w'ould-be political economists of the Australian
Colonies. Dr. Lang and many others, who admit that this colony
must eventually become a manufacturing country, object to the
commencement on the ground, only, of the want of denseness of the
population, but they surely confound the operation carried on for
home supply with that intended for the supply of a foreign
market, and I have, I think, shown that the unemployed
population of New South Wales, is amply sufficient to manufacture
for all the Australian Colonies. Assuredly fifteen or twenty
thousand labourers, male and female, would be more than sufficient
to meet the demand. Large as is the population of England,
a very few factories would be sufficient to supply their demand.
It is the supply of foreign markets that keeps so many factories
in constant operation.
Now if colonial manufactures were confined to blankets and'
woollen cloth, what a large importation would be avoided, and
that, with very little diminution of the raw material, as the wool
used in the colonial factories would be the least valuable parts of
the fleece, the abstraction of which would much raise the price of
that which would be left for exportation.
In the making up and fitting the cloth for use, another and
very considerable number of the neglected women and children of
the colony would find the most beneficial employment, and the


payment made to those so employed or who found work in the
factories would without diminution circulate in the Colony.
What I have said of woollen cloth and blankets is equally appli-
cable to the tanneries, the making of shoes and of many other
articles, the importation of which has swelled the amount of our
liabilities.
I have already shewn that the importations into this colony
constitute a system not of free trade but of bonuses in favour of
importation. I now advance a step further, and boldly assert
that if all importations, so far as they consist of articles that could
otherwise be manufactured in the colony were presented as a
voluntary contribution, they would blast the prospects of the
native born. It is the charge of the enemies and the slanderers
of the native born that they are brought up in idleness. What
employment can they meet with ? Even the oppressed shirt-
makers of England have an advantage that is denied to them :
There is not an article of dress of the humblest character that is
not imported. That is not sold at a price that excludes from all
chance of competition the poor female who is anxious to support
herself by the severest toil. Ye great well-fed, self-sufficient men,
when ye stand at the bar of Divine Justice, ye may envy the
fallen daughters of Australia!
What prospect of employment have the forty thousand poor
young women ? If glorious free trade has dressed them for
nothing and their only employment is that of adorning their
persons, how naturally may they be led astray, but if their poverty
is so great that, even in the midst of the vast contributions of
foreigners, they must be naked as well as untaught, against whom
is their ruin chargeable ? Who can contemplate the misery
of the human race, the degradation that admits of no hope that it
can end with this life, without the profoundest feelings of sorrow !
The Umpire of the 21st of June, under the head of “ The fruits
of protection in America,” chuckles at a statement that numbers
of the shoemakers of Massachusetts are out of employment, and
what remedy does the Editor of that paper propose. Why, that
shoes being abundant and unsaleable, the restraint on their
importation should be removed in order that an influx of the same
article should be let in from other countries ! Would it not have
been rather wiser to point out employment in which the shoe-
makers could have been engaged ?


We shall, no doubt, he told that the government is not respon-
sible for the importation into this Colony of articles destructive of
the rights and privileges of the people, and that they can point out
no course by which the evil can be obviated. If those who are
entrusted with power cannot govern the country, let them leave
it to those who can. The resources of all the Australian colonies
are still ample, and well applied would have placed the rising
generation in the most independent condition, would have made
their country the envy of the world. But no wealth, however
great, can be poured forth in a constant stream without exhaustion.
Ho country can afford to condemn three-fifths of all it inhabitants
to idleness without ruin, physical,political, andmoral. If Hew South
Wales had adopted the policy of America by taxing all articles that
could be produced in the Colony, that measure would at once have
checked the extravagant importations that have borne it down to
the dust, and provided employment for at least all those who
desire to get their living by honest means, —might have raised up
in the Australian Colonies not one, but twenty Lowells, and con-
ferred upon the slandered Australians all the benefit America
has derived from that noble institution. The arts and sciences
would then have flourished and the graduates of the University
found other employment than that of tending cattle and sheep.
And not the least advantage would have been that the capital of
the Colony, instead of setting outwards, never to return, would
circulate for ever, without diminution or check. Importations
there would be then, for it has ever been found in America that
the employment of the people in the manufactories has been
followed by great importations, because the people, being placed
in easy circumstances, have at all times been able to apply their
surplus means to the purchase of luxuries that could not con-
veniently be manufactured by themselves. This was, indeed*
remarked by Captain Marryat, who declared that the back settle-
ments of America were better supplied with British goods than
the small towns of England ; and thus a legitimate, instead of a
spurious, trade springs up that will ever belong to nations
approaching the same level in the arts and sciences.
Dr. Lang admits that the Australian Colonies must eventually
become manufacturing countries. Surely their manufactories
must have a commencement, and that commencement must be
fostered and protected.


I cannot better express this opinion than by making a quo-
tation from a speech just delivered by the President of the Corps
Legislatif:—
“Free trade,” he observes, “may, it appears to me, be con-
sidered as the object to which society is tending, but protection
ought to be the means of arriving at it. Suppose free trade,
established in a new and poor country, what will that country
produce ? I do not deny that it may develope some favoured
industry by a natural privileged situation, but foreign competition
would stifle in their bud all those things which it requires in
order to prosper, —capital, skilful workmen, experienced over-
seers, easy communication, and a good market, —in fact, all the
conditions which time alone can give it. A transition, conse-
quently, is indispensable, and to preach free trade to a country
which does not yet enjoy all these advantages, is nearly as
equitable as to propose to a child to contend with a grown man.”
Even Mr. John Stuart Mill acknowledges the claims of
young countries to protection, in the following words :
“ The only case in which, on mere principles of political
economy, protecting duties can be defensible, is when they are
imposed temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in
hopes of naturalizing a foreign industry, in itself perfectly suitable
to the circumstances of the country. The superiority of one
country over another in a branch of production often arises only
from having began sooner • there may be no inherent advantage
on one part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a present
superiority of acquired skill and experience. A country which
has this skill and experience yet to acquire may, in other respects,
be better adapted to the production than those which were earlier
in the field : and, besides, it is a just remark, that nothing has
a greater tendency to promote improvements in any branch of
production than its trial under a new set of conditions.
“ But it cannot be expected that individuals should, at their
own risk, or rather to their certain loss, introduce a new manu-
facture, and bear the burden of carrying it on, until the producers
have been educated up to the level of those with whom the
processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a
reasonable time, will sometimes be the least inconvenient mode
in which the nation can tax itself for the support of such an
experiment. But the protection should be confined to cases in


which there is good ground of assurance that the industry which
it fosters will, after a time, be able to dispense with it; nor
should the domestic producers ever be allowed to expect that it
will be continued to them beyond the time necessary for a fair
trial of what they are capable of accomplishing.”
The early manufacture of cloth in this Colony formerly
employed many persons, and was conducted with such complete
success that a demand sprang up for the Colonial tweeds in both
Scotland and England ; and after the manufacture was totally
borne down by disgraceful importations into the colony, an article
was and still is manufactured in England, and sold under the
designation of Parramatta cloth. I well recollect the exertions
made by Mr. Byrnes to keep his factory open, but, at length, he
was unable in the Sydney market to obtain the cost of the Material.
The shutting up of his factory was one of the sad days of
Parramatta and of the black ones of the Colony.
The true interests of the colony have, for the last twelve or
eighteen months, attracted the attention of many, who, a few years
ago, could only view the subject by the jaundiced light of free trade.
Mr. Gladstone’s speech, has however, driven some of them back to
the orthodox dogma and extorted from them a promise never
again to wander into the forbidden regions of common sense.
Pew persons can entertain greater contempt for these poor
creatures than Mr. Gladstone. He well knows that there is not,
nor ever will be, such a thing as free trade in England; that every
measure of that country is directed with a view to the support of
the enormous power she derives from the supply of her manu-
factured articles to other countries, and to the exclusion of all
others from a participation in her advantages.
But there is another element in the policy of England, that
compels her to consent to measures that might otherwise be
extremely dangerous, and opposed to her real interest, and that
is the necessity she is under of supporting a gigantic mercantile
Marine. It has ever been the policy of England to command a
vast naval armament, and to add to her possessions the unreclaimed
parts of the Globe. By this means she has pressed the supply of
her exquisite manufactures into every part of the world, and, until
America walked in her steps, without a rival. How can the poor
colonies of Australia participate in these advantages ? In what
respect do their shipments of raw produce resemble the exports


by England of her exquisite and costly manufactures, yet the
policy of England is to be urged as a reason for withholding from
the despised children of New South Wales, the privilege of
making a shirt or constructing a pair of shoes, —a reason why
Adam Smith’s estimate of the wealth of nations ought to be rejected
as an old saw.
Pray let us adopt the wisdom as well as the faults of the
Americans, and not despise the observations and reasoning of her
great men; men who will ever be numbered amongst the master-
minds of the world.
The condition of Victoria and Tasmania is, if possible, sadder
than that of New South Wales. The former in the deepest
embarrassment, and the latter settling down to the humblest and
most helpless state. The young people of both colonies are
looking to other countries for employment, and evidently feel that
a blight has fallen upon them.
Australians ! exert yourselves to establish your claim to be
acknowledged amongst the dignified and the virtuous. Shake
off the mildew that has shed its baneful influence upon your early
hopes. Repel the slander that has been levelled at your defence-
less heads, and send into the Councils of your country those who
would not consign you to infamy and ruin.
“ Awake, arise, or be for ever fallen.”
Reading and Wellbank, Steam Machine Printing Office, Bridge-street, Sydney.




