

JLVjv a - 5 • vn i,» 1 ■ L /
/ . j0TM u r r rw%. ' \ Ci5 •
!>>-,. -f." • ■ uJ "V
[ v r^4ll - >
># h
: : ;i. ■ >, "' f-1. ; 'A t-"
5 > . | "■ ; I /V v . ., :,
/§ I gj -
~* f? r j|pv 4, \ ; ' <- £§§
£||S|iP' sjpfi
[ TV'- fa >< ! , ', -/•'-• " M sk;
. f S//
|v $w. . _«?6
By% - # fcw^
!■■■ ■■■KB


WJERCUSON
(iff RATIONAL LIBRARY' J II


Sfc®coeoeoeoooeeeeeeceeeee©e®soeeoseeeeeeeeeeeoe©seoeeoBe»sei||
| Tike Sardaae |
H.M.A.T. "SARDINIA"
Patron— O.C. TROOPS, LIEUT.-COI.ONEL COHEN, C.M.G., D.S.O.
Treasurer— LIEUT. MCCABE, R.A.A. Editor— CORPORAL F. HOLLOWAY, 3RD A.M.T. COY.
Associate —SEßGEANT J. B. DAVIS, 14TH A.D.U.S. Artists —GUNNEß A. J. STEWART and SAPPER G. S. BAXTER.
2 AIM —L. R. EAST. Chief Scrounger —WAßßANT OFFICER FITZMAURICE.
Printer's DeviI —PRIVATE W. FINLAYSON.
No. 6. MELBOURNE. August, 1919.
FOREWORD.
tefe Pijitn/c Tlianlrc fefei The object of this, our " Sardine," is to help
8 1 P§3 brighten our voyage home —to amuse, but not to
I wish to convey to all who generously assisted
me in my efforts to turn out a paper of credit
my most sincere thanks.
To the O.C. Troops and Lieut. McCabe for
help at all times. W.O. Eitzmaurice, whose
assistance was of great help at critical periods.
Sgt. J. B. Davis, who was associated with me,
and did work under most trying conditions of
heat, and many times of extreme discomfort.
The Diggers who contributed black and white
and cover designing, no matter how they may
have been affected by adverse conditions, man-
fully and willingly carried out all requests made
by the Editor. Sgt. Irish and associate camera
enthusiasts for their generous help towards
providing pictures for our paper.
Conditions were not all O.K. by any means,
and only those closely connected with the task
know the many risks that must be taken in a
venture of this kind. So to all subscribers I
crave their kind judgment towards this our final
edition, and not judge too harshly of our attempt
to place on record the closing chapter of our
Great Adventure.
— THE EDITOR.
The object of this, our " Sardine," is to help
brighten our voyage home —to amuse, but not to
annoy —to criticise, but not to hurt. There will
be nothing fishy about it but the name.
To quote from that astute old fellow country-
man of earlier Sardinians, Machiavelli: "We
trust much to your benignity that it may be
acceptable, seeing that it is not possible for us to
make a better gift than to offer you the oppor-
tunity of understanding in the shortest time all
that we have learnt in so many years, and with
so many troubles and dangers, which we have
not embellished with swelling or magnificent
words, nor stuffed with rounded periods."
This is our paper, written and produced by
ourselves for us. The Editor asks your friendly
assistance, and I seek your endorsement of this,
my official blessing. —O.C. TROOPS.
ANNOUNCEMENT.
By publishing a paper aboard this transport
the idea is to have a lasting record of the
happenings during the voyage of the Ninth Quota
to Aussie.
It will be a " Digger " paper, run for Diggers,
in true Digger language. The co-operation of
all aboard is necessary to make the venture a
success.


Between the Editor and contributors a " No
Man's Land " does not exist. The paper will be
named " The Sardine," and to keep the fish fresh
and up-to-date a steady and sure supply of
dinkum oil is necessary, so send over your ideas,
and jokes and stories, with the pin out. We
cannot have too much for a quick start and a
sure kick off.
Brush up your kodaks for the coming photo-
graphic competition.
Send along any idea you think of. Every-
thing means more chance of success.
Contributions can be left at Educational
Office, or Cabin No. 113-114 (past W.O.'sMess).
It is up to us all to have a real good time on
the voyage aboard.
H. M. A. T. "SARDINIA"
BETH ENERNOND
LINY A 0 W V
INYA 0 W V
PSDT L L A
HL L N
I Y C
They Say—
That there are "Hussies" and hussies, but
our Hussey will always do us.
That the Big Eour indignantly deny point
winning Mezzaire-fashion, but IKIN swear to it.
That a SCHIPP HUNT failed to locate a
jerks evader who is an expert in DODGSHUN,
and made his HOPGOOD —when next he misses
we're trying our MAGIC WAND.
That at two Ack emma a digger shrieking
" Adelaide! " woke the troop deck. In his sleep
he gathered in his evenings of the lost cities.
That one usually has to hunt up one's BRAD-
SHAW, but our only rather reversesthis. Watch
out and cover your studies with a yellowback
when he wafts along.
That a digger, gazing at the lecturer's pedal
extremities, was heard to remark " Gee, and yet
they stand for ' Little MARKS.'"
Our Government seems to be making a lot of
promises to our returning Aussie warriors. It
seems as if our land will be another Land of
Promise.
That our late 'Roos have been called the
Rainbows;
Well, goodness only knows what to call the
" Won't-goes-"
Our Aussies have witnessed the biggest drama
ever played, and inoidently took leading parts.
That since seeing Jean d' Arc at the concert
the other night the Diggers are conscientiously
putting their empty bottles in the tub.
Every Digger got bargains while on shore at
Colombo. Pertat.
That the number of Elephants that came on
board at Colombo was enormous.
The different merits of each pair caused several
heated arguments.
Only the Elephants kept their heads.
That Ebony Elephants, about 15 inches high,
weighed almost eight pounds a piece.
They must be ebony because they are black.
EDUCATION.
Educational Staff H.M.A.T. "Sardinia."
Education Officer—Lieut. W. R. Bradshaw, 4th Pioneer Batt.
Chief Instructor—W.O. A. L. Hemley, A.1.8.D.
Librarian—Sgt. D. H. C. Fisher, 4th D.H.Q.
Chief Clerk—Sgt. N. Fearnside, 18th A.D.U.S.
INSTRUCTORS.
Bookkeeping—Cpl. A. R. Tulley.
Shorthand—Capt. Goldrich, W.O. Fitzmaurice.
French—Sgt. J. V. Dolahenty.
Salesmanship—Lieut. Pavy
Motor Mechanics—Sgt. H. R. Bain.
Agriculture—W.O. A. A. L. Hemley, Capt. Reynolds, Lieut.
Wentworth, Major Hyslop
English and Debating—Capt. Biddulph, Padre Johnson,
W.O. Hemley, Sgt. J. V. Dolahenty.
Arithmetic—Sgt. C. A. Irish.
Algebra and Geometry—W.O. Hemley.
Slide Rule—Cpl. A. Staples.
Trigonometry—Capt. Hillman.
Railways—Major Rogers, Lieut. Wand.
Wireless—Sgt. McSkimming.
Marine Engineering—L./Cpl. H. Rogers.
Architecture, Building Construction—Lieut. E. R. Bradshaw.
Natural Philosophy and Chemistry—Lieut. Evans.
20 classes are being held daily, the average
attendance being 330 and 27 Instructors. An
enthusiastic interest is being maintained by the
Staff and Students alike.
Lectures.
A series on "Australia" to cover the voyage
are being delivered as follows:
1. Early Discoveries—Lieut. Bradshaw.
2. First Settlements (a) Penal
(b) Colonist—Padre Johnson
3. Explorations—Lieut. R. N. Marks
4. Political Developments—CapL Biddulph.
5. Geographical considerations
(German Pacific Possessions) —Lieut.-Col. Simmonds.
6. Economic Problems—Lieut.-Col. Cohen, C.M.G., D.S.O.
7. Medical Problems—Lieut.-Col. Simmonds.
8. Educational Problems—Padre Johnson.
9. Productions (a) Minerals—Capt. Hillman
(b) Agriculture { LieubWenfworth
10. Age of Australia by Deduction—Cpl. Holloway


im
Diggerosities
Hi
Can any of the Diggers remember a boat load
of Aussie Light Horsemen, sculling around the
transport looking for familar faces'? At least
two can, I bet.
Digger, looking down on the Boat Party:
"Hey, you Light Horsemen, still here, eh?"
Light Horseman: "Yes."
Digger: " Still looking after the woman in
Cairo ? "
Light Horseman: " Yes. But we are not
taking any home."
Another Digger (to same party) : " Hello,
Light Horse, seen any fighting here."
Light Horse: "Only been cleaning up the
army that hunted you from the Dardenelles."
ije lib Hlf5
Has Anyone Seen a Sergeant-Major ?
A Digger had acted as batman for months,
had missed all parades, so, as a general parade
was ordered, and everyone must be present, he
had a scrounge to equip himself. After much
trouble he got everything except a bayonet, but,
being very handy with a knife, he made a
splendid-looking wooden one.
All went O.K. on parade until " Fix
Bayonets! " was ordered. The Digger stood as
firm as a rock, but no attempt to fix. Down the
line rushed the S.M. "Did you hear the order
to fix ?" he roared. ' Yes, I did, but this is the
anniversary of my brother's death, who was
killed by a German bayonet; and I have vowed
never to fix bayonets on that date."
" Anniversary or not," shouted the S.M.,
" obey orders and fix! "
" Right," said the Digger, " but may the Lord
turn it into a wooden one."
He draws the bayonet and fixes it, and behold,
it is a wooden one.
One stare, an astonished gasp, and the S.M.
fled, and was never seen from that day to this.
A Digger's Night Out.
A Digger on leave was staying at a country
house adjoining the property of a sporting gent.
The latter had invited him to dine one evening,
and, being very dark, the Aussie provided himself
with a large lantern to light his way across the
park. He returned in the wee small hours of
the morning in a well-oiled condition. About
breakfast-time the host of the previous evening
called, carrying a large lantern, " I say, old
chap." he said to the Digger, " would you mind
letting me have the cage and parrot you took by
mistake from the hall. The wife is rather
anxious about the bird." - By H.G.C.
" Some " Sardine.
All's Well.
During the second night out from Colombo
the rain poured down suddenly, and several
Diggers were well-nigh washed overboard out of
their bunks on the well deck. In the midst of
their troubles the ship's bell rang, whereupon
one of the unfortunates remarked, " Oh, I sup-
pose the blighter will report ' All's well!' "
First Digger What's up, Snow. Feelin'
crook ?"
Second Digger: " Yes, got the gutsache."
First Digger: " How's that ? "
Second Digger: " Just bin readin' about a
bloke named Jonah livin' in the belly of a
whale."
First Digger: " Blimey, that's nothing —
there's over a thousand Aussies livin' in the
belly of a sardine 'ere (" Sardinia").


During a change over in the trenches a
William Tell paid a visit and covered every bit
of a digger but his head. His cobber let out a
yell " Stretcher-bearer! " To his surprise, how-
ever, the head sticking out of the hole yelled
" Stretcher-bearer be juggered. Give me my
ruddy tin hat."
Diggers during their early days in Franoe
were often amused by the ways of the Froggies.
Two loaded with point blanks paid a visit to a
farm, with the usual court yard. The dog was
harnessed to the separator. Further on the
moke was doing "Nuts in May" on the tread-
mill thresher. In the next shed the family cow
was turning the water wheel. When they got
out to the kitchen a chicken ran out. One of the
surprised diggers turned immediately to madame
and said " Lor' lummy, mum, can't you give the
chicken a job ? " —By E.O.
How Did Noah Manage ?
Some A.A.V.C. men were one night loading'
horses and mules into railway trucks at Calais.
One of the Diggers was trying in vain to persuade
a mule to enter a truck. However, the mule
had different ideas. The R.T.O. came along,
and after a good stare at the conflict,.asked the
" Angry One " if he could help him in any way.
" Yes," said the Digger, " show me how Noah
got these into the ark ? "
Supposed.
Battle Practice in back area (Belgium) :
A Digger Sub leads his men on to a bridge in
sight of C.O.
C.0.: " Hey, young man, that bridge is
destroyed."
Sub (in astonishment ) : " Destroyed."
C.0.: " Supposed to be destroyed for troop
movements."
Sub (cheerfully) : " Oh, then, sir, my men are
supposed to be swimming."
Wouldn't Keep.
Digger (after vain search through his kit):
" Well I'll be ! some cow has halfinched six
oranges I had camouflaged."
Voice from Hammock : "Well, what can you
expect, you dope ? Did'nt you read the O.C's
notice about oranges not keeping between
decks."
Britannia Rules the Waves.
The evening we left Colombo the cross seas
had a bad effect on some of the boys. One
forlorn Digger, who looked as if he would sell
out cheap, said to his cobber, " Does Britannia
rule the waves" "Of course," replied his
friend. " Then," said the unhappy digger,
" why the h — don't she rule them straight ?"
The Army Egg.
A bachelor was having an egg for breakfast
when he noticed the following inscription on the
shell, " Should this meet the eye of a young
bachelor who is willing to marry a farmer's
daughter, young and good-looking, will he com-
municate with the following address.
Upon reading this the bachelor immediately
wrote to the girl at the address given, offering
her marriage. A few days later he received the
following reply :
" Sorry, too late; married, and have five
children."
An Englishman's Idea of an Australian.
Australian born, Australian bred,
Long in the legs, and thick in the head;
Terribly funny, awfully rude,
Beastly familiar, confoundedly shrewd.
An English Girl's Idea.
Australian born, Australian bred,
Long in the legs—it's the life they have led
Plenty of "common," witty, not rude,
Sociable and, agreed, rather shrewd.
—By La Voila.
Here and There.
What were the doctor's orders to the measles
patient ? Don't be Rash !
Mess Deck —12 noon.
Orderly Officer : " Any complaints ? "
Digger: " Yes, sir ! Spuds bad."
Orderly Officer to Sergeant: " What does he
mean by spuds ? "
Sergeant: " 'ls hignorance, sir, 'a means
taters."
"Some" Strength.
Digger to Sergeant: " Say, Sergeant, this tea
is too weak to fall out."
Sergeant to Digger : " D it, Digger, ours
was so weak we had to push it out."


Scene : A draper's shop.
A lady customer was deliberately tickled in
the ribs by a gentleman.
Lady, furiously angry, calls a constable.
" What is the charge ? " asks Robert.
' He deliberately tickled my ribs," said the
angry woman.
" No crime, madam," says the solemn Robert,
" you see, woman was made from the rib of a
man, so surely he can tickle his own rib."
Jp.oKum
Hard to Beat.
On one occasion in the front line a Digger
was placed to prevent anybody from smoking
in the position. An officer soon approached
smoking a cigar. " You can't smoke here;
it's against orders, sir." The officer at
once threw down the cigar and proceeded
on his way. Returning a little later he
was astonished to see the sentry smoking
away with evident content. ' How is this ?"
asked the officer. " Here you are smoking
against orders after pulling me up for the same
thing. I must report you." "Go easy," said
the Digger, "I am merely keeping this alight as
evidence against you."
While on the Somme, when Fritzie's final
plunge for Amiens was being awaited, we had
charge of seven bridges, from Sailly-le-Sec to
Corbie, "with demolition rations." The stretch
of tow path up to " Sailly " was under observa-
tion, and the front line rations were taken from
Circular Quay at "Vaire " to "Sailly" by means
of three Diggers, a tow boat and a small boat
—very hot work.
Met the towing party at midnight wiping
gallons of perspiration off. In response to the
usual " How are things, Dig. ? " I received "The
heat it doth fatigue me," or words to that effect.
Then a copper-headed Dig., hitching the tow
rope over his shoulders, said : " Say, it's a ruddy
good job we've got a Navy, aint it. ? "
Deferred Pay.
The burning finance queries, apart from the
the ever-present current cash question, that
have troubled the Diggers for many moons
revolved around deferred pay, and now it is
coming, what is the Digger going to do with it.
The long thought-out pet theories of utilizing
it in a start to something good will vanish in
many cases, In some the something good will
not catch the judge's eye first past the post.
The well-war-read Rainbow, wearing unearned
ribbons, will get his mits on to much cash via
Mick 's bar. The Uncle in Fiji person will
gather in a few of the treasury, and the good,
kind people type, who have something to sacrifice
cheap for our heroes a few more. The old
soldier, looking for a £5O partner to start a
Mother Carey chicken farm will rope in a
lot of shrewdies, as will also the tale-teller
who can give points to the Horseferry-road
pavement lug-biters. The three cardinal points
of life will claim lots :
1. The just in point (Births)
2. The all in point (Marriages)
3. The just out point (Wakes)
Some Diggers who find a pocket edition of
themselves when they lob home will go gay for
a while, though there is nothing abnormal in
pocket editions. Other Diggers exist who
consider a lump sum wad should go towards
getting switched up. That's a mean excuse
for spending up their dough. I hope it will cost
them more to get out than it did to get in. But
the Digger who organises a wake or a gorgeous
tombstone to his mother-in-law who petered
out during his absence is a fool for ever. A
woman always has the last say; don't let a
defunct ma-in-law say your deferred pay
because you feel happy about it, Digger. There-
are many hands of welcome waiting for your
cash. If you suspect a tale-teller, see his
discharge papers. If your partner is on any
scheme stunt, fix it up per lawyer—it's cheaper.
If you take Mouquet Farm again in company,
pay only your whack, keep your head and
button up. Above all, if you do "raise,"
"marry," or " bury," don't overdo it. Hang on
to a bit of cash. One never knows, you know
—there may be an aftermath.-—By Pilchard.
WILLIE was inquisitive and went to spy around —
He sees a dud alyin' there upon the ground ;
He gave it a kick just for fun, the dud it started hissin',
Although they've searched around for days, poor Willie
is still missin'.


The Girl at Home.
JUST a sprig of golden wattle
From a girl I left at home
Brings my laughing, sunny country
Gleaming right across the foam.
All her letters, closely written,
How I read them through and through,
And her photo, though it's dusty,
Seems to say "I do love you."
At dusk she comes in vivid visions,
And her hand I fondly hold,
With the wattles 'neath their shadows
Our fond murmurings unfold.
May your golden southern wattle
In your dear eyes ever shine,
Till I land in God's own country,
Which holds you, girl of mine.
—By " Wattle Bird."
Peut-etre.
A FORTNIGHT now, or scarcely more, I wonder where
we'll be?
I'm sure that quite a crowd of us won't be upon the sea.
There may be quite a lot of blokes who'll get so bloomin'
shick,
That they will go and join again to fight the Bolshevick.
There'll be a few who've longed so much to see some
Aussie girls
They'll be completely dazzled by the sunshine in their
curls;
They'll falter out "I love you " and be married ere they
know
The Aussie girl's a Woodbine who's been out a week or so.
There'll be a lot of flash dressed gents awaiting on tho
pier
To sell us shares in something—may be gold mines—
may be beer;
There be a few weak-minded blokes who'll part with their
deferred,
To fit up expeditions to seek out some extinct bird.
There may be some who'll join their ranks and gather in
their pay,
And buy a pub, and shut the door, an' booze themselves
away ;
Or perhaps they'll go to Flemingtou to see the Melbourne
Cup,
And have a "Zae" between them when the bookies wiped
them up.
Some careless coves are sure to get a crack upon the head,
And next day they will stop you for a " diner for a bed."
And there'll be some who are so used to keepin' to the
right,
They'll try to stop tho motor bus, " and pass into the
night."
I don't quite know what awful fate is yet to come to me,
But, all the same, I want to get right off this 'eavin' sea;
Let's hope a loving Gover'ment will give us each a farm,
And pack us up the country where we'll all be safe from
harm. —By Bromwyn.
It's Paid—The Bill's Receipted.
IT'S paid, the bill's receipted, and peace has been declared,
The gains, likewise the losses, of the Allies have been
shared;
The cost has been enormous, but through every hill and
glade
We hear the same prayer uttered, " Thank God, the debt
is paid! "
Slow, but sure, we started unprepared for bloody war,
The call for men was answered, and again the call for
more;
" Their Army was contemptible," the Hun was heard to
say,
But the civil population knew the debt they had to pay.
The Johnnie out of Mayfair said, "They take me for a
fop,"
But, damn it, I'm a Britisher, and so I'll have a pop ;
The coster, he said " Blimey, I must go and have a poke,
Old Liza and the kids 'll have to look to this 'ere moke."
The workman left his work behind, the tradesman left his
shop,
The Johnnie left his West End flat, the housemaid left
her mop.
To make munitions, nurse, and fight, was the motto of
the day,
They owed a debt to Germany—a debt they MEANT to
We've got to thank the mother who so nobly sent her son;
The soldier and the sailor for the work that they have
done;
The wife who saw her husband off and wished him all
God speed,
The girls who made munitions in our greatest hour of
It's paid, the bill's receipted, but what a price it's cost,
The lives, the homes, the happiness the whole wide world
has lost;
The empty chair, the missing face, we never can recall,
But still we have a duty—yes, there's work for one and
Forget the past, I know it's hard, but those who gave
their lives
Just did it for the folks at home, for mothers and for
wives,
Our duty is to carry on, to cheer each aching heart.
Don't mourn for those who can't be found —just mako
another start.
The souls of all our dead are there,
Relentless —unafraid,
And from the sky, I hear them cry,
" Thank God, the debt is paid."
—By No. 6554, Pte. A. B. Reese, A.A.V.C.
Soon Now.
THE breeze sweeps down from the rocky ridges,
And plays with the grasses over the plains,
Bringing the memory of great lone spaces,
Creaking saddles, and swinging reins.
It sighs through the boughs of ragged gum trees,
Like the far-off sound of a dingo's wail;
It's the life of the Western tracks that calls me
Out from the towns on the long, long trail.—By 9.2.


Going Home.
THE cliffs of England drop behind,
We've cleared the harbour's mouth,
Before us lie the long wide seas,
The troopship's heading south.
What care we though skies are dull,
And cold the driving rain,
Our hearts are bright, our spirits high,
We're going home again.
Home, and those who watched and prayed
For all these weary years,
With hearts near breaking, 'cause of us,
And eyes that ached with tears.
And when we land and greet our friends,
Amid the joy and cheers,
There's some who'll miss a well-loved face
And turn to hide their tears.
And when they hear of what we've done,
And how we played our part,
Someone will think of some lone grave
Where lies an Aussie's heart.
The troopship shoulders through the seas,
Her decks are wet with foam ;
What cares have we ? Our hearts are light,
Hurrah ! We're going home. —By 9-2
Safety First.
Two Diggers, short of Oscar Asche, and with
14 days' leave, decided to take advantage of the
Y.M.G.A. " Homes away from Home." They
were given an address, and proceeded to the
house of Lady Dofunny.
On entering the gate a bulldog rushed down
the stone steps, barking furiously, so the diggers
(for the first time in their lives) retreated.
Lady Dofunny, on hearing the dog, came out
on the verandah and said to the hoys,
"Remember the old adage!" What old
adage?" said the Digs. "Oh! 'Barking dogs
don't bite.' You know that, don't you." " Yes,
we know, you know, but does the damn dog
know ? "
ADAM in the Garden of Eden slept.
Up to his side a woman crept;
Baid the Lord to Adam, " This is Eve ! "
Said Adam to the Lord, " I get yer, Steve 1 "
Above the Editor's chair from dawn till dark
cries of gaming table runners are heard. One
patient in hospital beneath had to receive drastic
treatment for " four in the guts." This is a
very severe and infectious complaint. Several
cases have been developed recently, and the
patients are chronic victims of permanent
shorts.
Met a Digger (16th Batt.) last September at
Le Verguier (walking wounded) with a brace of
Fritzie emma g bullets through his arm. After
we got his fag lighted, he said, " Say, Dig., do
you know where the ' Ruddy ' Repair Shop is ?'
(Compree "Repair Shop "—First Aid Post).
Skipper of a Digger Coy., reading out orders
about preparation of soldiers' wills, notices one
taking no interest in the proceedings.
Officer: " Pay attention, there. I'm talking
about your will."
Digger: " That's all right, Skip., the only
will' I'm worryin' about is ' Will I get back ?'
The Batman.
THE batman is a lucky chap.
He's seldom on the rooks,
He lives on Kiwi and Issue Fags
And wears his owner's socks ;
His hair is always nicely oiled,
His boots have a lovely gloss,
He swanks and swaggers free of cost,
But pity help his poor old boss.
A young tommy officer was attached as liason
officer to an Aussie Artillery Outfit. While
perambulating around he struck a Digger clean-
ing harness.
Officer. "Cleaning harness, I see.
Digger. " Yep."
Officer. " Very dirty, is it not ? "
Digger. " Yep."
Officer. " Have you no soap ? "
Digger. "No." _
Officer (annoyed at not being called Sir ).
" No What?"
Digger. "No Soap."
One of the Yanks who had just arrived in
France, and was attached to our unit, had rather
a lot to say about the new gas they had brought
from America, when one of the Diggers said,
" Well, how good is this gas ? " The Yank said
it is that good if it gets in your Pay Book it will
kill your next of kin or stop your allotment.
" Well," said the Digger, " that is nothing.
Have you heard of Big Bertha,' that fires 75
miles into Pari* ? " Sure!' says the Yank.
" Well, that is nothing," says the Digger, we
have a gun that fires 128 miles, and the recoil
brings up the ammunition and takes back the
wounded."


Seen and heard
on the '' promenade
deck' ' before
breakfast."
Ist Digger: "Who
do you think would
get the worst of a
stouch if Aussie
went to war with
America? "
2nd Digger: "Why,
America would chew
us all up."
3rd Digger: "They
would have a h
of a time digest ng
us."
A MORNING SCENE ON BOARD SHIP.
While in U.S.A. recently I overheard the
following between two Yanks :
Eirst Yank : " We have a tree in California
which covers seven acres."
Second Yank : " Say, Guy, that's nothing ;
we have a train in Kansas which is 17 miles
long."
Eirst Yank : " I guess you think I am a Sucker
to believe that."
Second Yank : " Waal, take a few acres off
your tree and I'll take a few miles off my train."
c^o->^=>
Two Diggers were sitting on the promenade
deck passing through the canal. Neither had
seen Egypt before. One said to the other,
" What do you think of this joint, Digger? "
Digger No. 2 replies, "Blimey, if there was a
little more sand it would remind me of my home
in Western Australia."
Our unit had received a draft of reinforce-
ments at about 1 p.m. At about 7 p.m. Eritz
came over on his usual bombing raid, and most
of us were under cover as the bombs started to
come down, when one of the new men asked,
"Is that Eritz bombing V' "Oh, no," replied
a voice from a dug-out "it is only President
Wilson dropping notes."
1 Wonder!
I WONDER what the Red-tabbed Staff will do now war is
done,
I wonder if the Major will give C.B. to his son ;
I wonder what the Bombardier will do without his gun ;
I wonder !
The Sergeant-Major may write out the duties for his wife;
Tne Q.M.S. may fall asleep and slumber all his life;
The Private may forget himself and eat things off his
knife;
I wonder!
The Corporal may lose his job through waiting for
Reveille;
The Pay Clerk's payand exes, may never, never tally ;
The '' Babbling Brook '' may rise at four and wander to
the Galley ;
I wonder !
I wonder if the Captains will sling orders at a mob ?
I wonder if the Lance Jacks will toss pennies for a bob ?
I wonder if I'll come a thud when looking for a job?
I wonder!
The Diggers now of every rank have handles to their
name;
When they get back they'll simply be plain Misters all
the same;
But married life perhaps may make the scraps they've
seen seem tame;
I wonder ! —By Bromwyn.
THERE was a young sister named Goode
Who sewed as much as she could ;
One Sunday on deck she was up to her neck,
And beside her the S.M.O stood.


CHURCH AND CLOTH HALL, YPRES, 1919.
Memories.
THE sun creeps o'er the horizon, where the sea
and the sky hold sway,
With her ruby lips she kissss the deep and
ushers in the day;
As I watch the dancing wavelets so kissed by
the smiling sun,
Sweet music peels forth from the upper deck,
'Tis reveille, the day's begun.
While I gaze on God's work of beauty in an
atmosphere cool and still,
My thoughts roam back to'another scene—a cote
at the foot of a hill;
With the past I hold communion, as the ship
speeds o'er the foam,
And I picture you as you work and sing in your
snug little home.
The curlew's call from the heather, the lark
soaring in the sky,
The lilies bloom 'neath the fir trees tall, where
the Barle flows merrily by ;
The sheep feeding on the meadows, tho young
lambs skipping with glee,
This blend of nature's loveliness, brings memo-
ries sweet of thee.
I see your form in the narrow lane where the
summer breezes glide,
On Kipscoombe Hill where the wortles grow, or
perchance by the water slide ;
Perhaps, maybe, you visit the mines, singing
gaily as you go,
Or if 'tis winter, you're crossing the moor, in a
sheet of blinding snow.
But wherever my mind's eye sees you, 'neath
clouds or in weather fair,
My heart overflows with memories sweet, and
I breathe a little prayer
To our God who sits in mercy, on His throne in
Heaven above—•
That he send you strength in your time of
stress, and bestow on you His love.
In form of a little poem, though not by a
master penned,
A wealth of love and good wishes from the
depths of my heart I send;
May your life be all that's golden, caressed by
joys sublime,
Kept by God's strong arm as you run life's race
down the aisle of time.
And when, from the crest 'mid the heather, the
curlews call, you hear,
Remember tho' the oceans divide us, to me
you are ever near.
As I travel o'er future's highway, supping joy
from life's sacred chalice,
Pond thoughts of you in my heart I keep, my
dearest sister Alice.
—By F. D. K. Gratton.
Poor Norah.
THESE is a young Digger named Gawler,
Who vows that he's going to kill Norah ;
She threw scent and powder on his hair and face
Arid he's now going to stop her from going the pace.


The Passing of the Glory.
Our scribe truly blesseth the vagaries of
fortune, for verily hath he witnessed a sight
such as few men have looked upon since the days
of the glory of Solomon, and in this manner
did he come to witness the Passing of
the Glory. Business and mere chance led
him downwards into the body of this Home of
Industry and Hope. Such a bustling and clatter.
Such a polishing and burnishing, and scrubbing
and speed. And behold, even as he gazed in awe,
a great thing happens. In divers designs and
shapes, upon its tables thereon, layeth the steel
and metal used to stay the wants and carnal
bodily need. As little rays of sunshine played
lovingly upon the glittering weapons and plate,
truly the splendour and glitter of the days of great
kings was rivalled. And at the head of each table
stood two Guardians of the Splendour. Unto him
of the languid look I spoke : "Wherefore all this
show, and the reason thereof." "Truly art
thou to be pitied, 0 Brother, for dost thou not
know it is for the good of the Great One 3.
Tarry yet awhile, I pray thee, and truly thy
time shall be well spent." And so I stayed to
witness this wonder, and I let my mind wander
again in the realms of the past, and wonder and
wonder much thereat: for ever was it so great
men come and go, and great deeds are done, but
still shall pomp and circumstance claim us
always its willing devotees.
And so cometh the Little Man with the Big
Noise, and his cheeks swelled and the body of
him grew as he blew three blasts upon his
trumpet, even as Gabriel should do, to warn us
of the coming of great events, and slowly and
solemnly approacheth the Spectacle. Such a
splendour of colour and glistening ranks, shim-
mering gold, gleaming crowns and glistenining
stars, and at each table they pause and hold con-
verse with each other, and truly I thought great
events must be in the making. Lesser ones
look under the tables by aid of gleaming torches,
and great is the bustle thereof. And so, with
slow step and solemn mutterings, the Glory
passeth onwards. The Little Man and his Big
Noise goeth before, and again he bloweth his
notes of warning that the Splendour approacheth.
Loud and numerous are the sighs of relief as
the Presence disappeareth. " Verily, Brother,"
I said, "it is a sight indeed. Wherefore doth
all this splendour lead to ? " " Brother," saith
the languid one, "even unto Six Brads."
—By Splendatious Osiries.
Competitions
Ist Prize—Best Original Joke.
It was during a " Buck Set " on the Promenade
Deck. A rather " naive " looking little Corporal
was dancing with a " hard-doer " looking Private.
As they swung round the Corp. bumped his
partner against the rail. " Strike me pink,"
burst out the Digger, "be a bit more
careful, —— you. Your forgetting I'm the
lady."
2nd Prize.
Eirst Digger (to his pal who has parted with
his mungie over the side of the ship) : " What,
are you crook, Dig. ? "
Second Digger : " Crook ! Why, do you think
I am doing this for practice ? "
—By Digger 11. M. Miller.
me-mler of tit j\ss
Lakes kis daily instructions
[n phjoe Smckinys


Soy |E SO'V|E ihmii
Ist Digger: "Say, Bill, why is the ocean like
the morning after receiving your deferred pay?"
2nd Digger: "I peak."
Ist Digger: "Because the larger the roll, the
bigger the headache."
Ist Prize. 18069. H. J. Wright
Ist Prize—Best Short Story—Army Life.
"The Hat."
Ever since this infernal deck cleanliness com-
petition was instituted our life has been a misery
and a burden. Talk about discipline in the
A.I.E. Never in all our experience have we
been disciplined as we are at present. Our little
Mess Orderly is the super-tyrant. Should we
dare stand on a seat there is an immediate
disturbance; if we don't rise promptly at
Reveille there's a riot; if a solitary match or a
microscopic scrap piece be discovered on the
deck there's a violent and indignant eruption,
and should any article of clothing be left lying
about —or even visible—he absolutely swells
with rage through his inability to express the
intensity of his emotion with his limited voca-
bulary of profanity.
The other day he discovered a hat marring the
spotless order of his table. With a wild yell he
seized the offending article with both hands,
threw it on the floor, jumped on it, and finally
kicked it from one end of the deck to the other.
During this performance we remained speech-
less and trembling until one of our number
ventured to retrieve the battered " Caedy " with
a view to discovering its owner.
" Say, Wattie," he said, glancing at the
initials inside, "your monogram's A.8.W., ain't
it ? "
" 'Course it is ! " growled the tyrant, not look-
ing up from the all-absorbing task of camou-
flaging a tin dish as a mirror.
(( f-y,, ~ . . 1 J
Then this is your hat."
—By Digger Nicholls, 2478.
2nd Prize.
" Paul Binot.''
Paul Binot, Lieutenant Medecin, of the
Troisieme Chasseurs Pied, came of a moderately
well-to-do Paris bourgeois family, and was of
that studious sensitive type to which all suffering
is personal sorrow, to whose kindly nature no
appeal for help ever comes in vain, and to whom
war with its horrors, sufferings, and miseries is
of all things detestable.
Was it a wonder that his soldiers loved him
when he stuck it with them in a miserable little
hovel of a " maison " on the Albert-Bapaume
road in 1915, tenanted by a brave old Madame
Veuve Chevalier, ex-nurse in the Amiens
Hospital, who refused to leave her shack, but,
mother-like, would not part with her little
adopted daughter Marguerite.
Marguerite lisped " Binot, qu'est-a que tu
fais " whenever she saw him, and he fathered
the little soul when the Eritz 77 mm. screeched
over the heights opposite Courcilette.
One morning Binot got up as usual, reflected
his own personal love of all things living on his
" enfants," as he called his soldiers, kissed
Marguerite "bon jour," breakfasted on cafe
nature and bread, which must have been fresh
seven days ago, and wandered with his stick and
haversack on his daily job at the advanced
dressing station " poste de secours," where his
experiences had led him to write to his parents,
" Such are the dangers of war that I despair of
coming out alive."


—By Sgt. J. V. Dolahenty. 2nd Prize.
.* » / / 'FZs&d/ ,/ " '^' ie Blinkin' Padre."
¥ \ / IIIl/^//! f / * A cer ' a * n P a(^re ' affected with blinking, dropped
lll/lvF^^kf 'into an Estaminet to have dinner, while touring
fijI / TWrn//// Trance. When ordering his meal the Mademoi-
im f/i ! l/ S0^6 asb;e d bbn w ' la t h® w r ould have to drink.
V * f :fj ill/ ft " Lemonade, of course ! " said the padre, and
J/\ \ Vb _ III lit![/. II unconsciously blinked.
j/M ) \\ is-l' \^gWlli/l//^i0. U Mademoiselle returns with whisky.
W / \ (i*y/1 iMll&i ' iui- "Oh, Mademoiselle, I did not order this
(jfl /m \jjJ |J /W \l // f jf' stuff," exclaimed the padre.
fC yKJ I, |jl|0 ff' i/! A/L v /§/'}/// "But, Monsieur, you say 'Lemonade,' and
" —By Digger Bellion.
Best-kept Table. Blighty to Colombo. Prize
4r m - No - 66 Table ' A Coy -
x!h f" ——!? I A Table, A Coy, was specially recom-
/§/, \ M III mended.
Y> ! 1 i % x/fPi / 1 r/y [ \ Owing to difficulties of D Coy. deck, a special
7 ijlfl ' HII& >\ // / fn* prize of £2 was awarded to No. 34 Table,
limb III 1 V_ i/ Consolation Prizes to Mess Orderlies No. 13
Wj£i Jkf \ L \ f Table ' 0 Coy - ; 47 Table ' B Coy ' ; 95 Tabl0 '
gg Sergeants'Mess; 62 Table, A Coy.; 15 Table,
Mentioned for good work —
rt „„„ n <■ , A Coy., Tables 64, 65, 67, 69, 71, 75.
ORPERpf 0PNCER ( DoN-r Yoo eve(? Cef B Coy., Tables 49, 57.
-r-. , } C Coy., Table 4.
I'KED POIMC NOTHlHd,' D Coy., Tables 22, 26.
That day a Fritz 77 mm. had another number
on it as Binot climbed the hills leading out of
Albert.
" Binot est blesse! Binot est blesse ! " —the
words ran down like wild-fire. Old Mme.
Chevalier and the rest of his local connection,
which meant all Albert, and all the inhabitants
of the shacks and dug-outs for miles round, were
immediately out.
But poor Binot had received the splinter
where his cafe nature lay, and, suffering horribly,
he yet had sufficient mastery of himself to forbid
his bearers to allow anyone to see him.
Never was a white cross erected with more
devotion in that " Yalley of Souls."
At least so I thought when the old French
widow sobbed over Binot's photo as she told me
the story three years later.
Ist Prize—Humorous Episode of the War.
It happened one day on the Ypres sector,
when the Huns had been shelling the battery
positions very heavily, and everybody seemed in
a state of great excitement. The B.M. was
endeavouring to muster a few of the fellows
together, when, seeing Gunner Jones rushing
about in a wild manner, shouts out, " I say
there, Jones, what the diggins are you doing out
there ? Come on now, fall in ! " Jones, hear-
ing his name suddenly called, turns around, not
noticing a stray shell hole in his path, and, of
course, falls right into it. As the bewildered
Jones scrambled out, wiping the mud from his
clothes, he hears the S.M. roaring, ''That's not
what I meant, you blithering fool."
—By 24542, Digger H. Williams.
5. M, YES SIR ; pur I iievep
2nd Prize. 4502. Spr. II. TV. Haitsham.
D Coy., Tables 22, 26.
Sergeants' Mess, Tables 83,85, 87, 94, 96, 99, 101
C Coy, No. 2 Troop Deck Competition—
-Ist Prize, £2, No. 13 Table.
2nd Prize, 15/-, No. 4 Table.


Formation of No. 9 Quota
W.O. A. L. HEMLEY.
In January, 1919, when the scheme of the
Department of Repatriation and Demobilisation
first came into operation, it was intended to send
from France to England, via Le Havre, quotas
or drafts of approximately 1,000 all ranks from
each Division in turn. Members of each quota
were to be chosen in order of their position on
Precedence Rolls, i.e., order of priority of enlist-
ment.
The scheme was originally intended to deal
with all units in France through the repre-
sentative Divisions to which members were
attached or to which they originally belonged.
This did not prove practicable, and the demands
of members of Corps Headquarters and units
under control of Australian Section 3rd Echelon
for early repatriation were recognised.
It was decided to form the 9th Quota from
various such units, and subsequently each sixth
quota similarly.
No. 9 Quota was originally intended to be
composed of approximately 200 all ranks from
Corps Headquarters, and 800 all ranks from all
units under Australian Section 3rd Echelon.
These units ineluded several Artillery Brigades
(9), Aust. Corps Signal Coy, Army Brigade
A.F.A., 11.A.8., D.A.C. (3), L.T.M.8., F.G.E.
(3), Aust. Tunnelling Companies, A.L.R.0.C.,
A.8.G.R.0.C., A.A.S.C., Field Bakeries (5),
Field Butcheries (4), D.U.S. (24), Divisional
Trains, A.B.A.F.A.P.A.S. (5), A.M.T. Companies
(5), Machine Gun Battalions, A. A.Y.C., A.8.P.0.,
A.A.P.C., A.A.0.C., A.C. School, D.H.Q., A.C.
Salvage Company, A.C. Headquarters, A.1.8.D.,
Ist A.C.D., and details from various Infantry
units.
The quota was ordered to assemble at the
Base, near Le Havre, and to be accommodated
at Aust. Infantry Base Depot, Rouelles (Camp
21) until embarkation.
During the stay in Rouelles Camp the follow-
ing provisional ship's staff were appointed: —
Major W. Rogers—Commanding Officer
Capt. G. C. Neech —Second in command
Capt. G. Brown —Adjutant.
On the morning of 21st February, 1919, the
quota moved off from Rouelles, proceeding by
route march to Quai de Escalan, Le Havre,
embarking on H.M.T. "Dieppe" about 2 p.m.
Total embarked: 25 Officers, 85 W.O.'s and
Sergeants, and 997 other ranks. Destination :
Heytesbury provisionally.
Perhaps the least said the better about the
route march, with packs, to point of embarka-
tion, a distance of about 10 kilos. Suffice to say
every subsequent quota has been conveyed to
the Quai by lorries.
The destination, R.B. A. A. Camp, Heytesbury,
was reached on 22nd February, 1919, and the
whole quota proceeded on 14 days' furlough on
27th February, 1919.
On return from leave all A.A.P.C. personnel
were transferred to Tidworth, and on 19th
March, 1919, the draft proceeded to No. 3 Group,
Codford (Second Training Brigade), and was
accommodated in 6 and 8 Camps there.
Three days later they proceeded to No. 3 Camp,
where they remained till date of embarkation.
Here the numbers were again depleted, and
all men who applied for " Family Ships," "Non-
Military Employment," " Discharge in U.K.,"
etc., were transferred to Sutton Veny. These
numbers were made up, however, to the ship's
complement on the boat being allotted, and the
ship's staff personnel, etc., allotted.
The Staff now appointed are :
O.C.—Lieut.-Col. Cohen, C.M.G., D.S.O.
Second I/C. —Major Rogers.
Adjutant—Lieut. F. C. Warnock.
S.M.O. —Lieut.-Col. Simmonds.
Q.M. —Captain G. Peters.
Sports' Officer —Lieut. P. E. Wand.
Education Officer—Lieut. S. R. Bradshaw.
Ship's Chaplain—Captain W. H. Johnston.
On 19th April, 1919, the quota, then consist-
ing of 28 officers and 853 other ranks, proceeded
to Devonport, embarking on H.M. A.T. "Sardinia"
about 4 p.m. that day. Here they were joined
by the remainder previously attached to make
up the complement of 67 officers, 5 nurses, and
1,07G other ranks.


"fsay Park 1 vhtrc'% Tubby?
•njal\ 'in7. '? dr'pP ed
Short Summary of Voyage
On the 20th April, 1919, tbe Transport
" Sardinia " weighed anchor, and steamed from
Devonport, bound for Aussie, with the Ninth
Quota aboard. What feelings were aroused in
many hearts, and pleasant thoughts that this
was one of the days we have prayed and yearned
for. After years of absence, spent amid suffer-
ing, toil, and often deadly peril, such was the
depth of feeling at this, the first definite step on
our homeward journey, that realisation was
scarcely possible. Each troop ship is much like
others in the general way, and soon orderly
arrangements were complete; and the Diggers
settled down, as only Diggers can, to get as much
enjoyment and profit as possible in restricted
areas. Freedom from stern rules and regulations,
kits and arms, so necessary in the field, is the
most welcome and lasting change.
UM • "1
orm V OS".
More opportunity of relieving the monotony
of such long voyages are provided than was
possible on the trip across from Aussie.
Education Classes of a most varied nature
were soon formed and in full working order.
Lectures of interest and profit. A debating
Class to teach how to speak; dances, both
arranged and impromptu. A Sports Committee,
providing a programme, caused a welcome break
in the sameness of things. Our Pierrot Party
and Band were also providers of mirth and
melody. The Band have the Quota's best thanks
for the splendid Concerts provided, and the
Conductor and each Member deserve great
credit for the time and thought, given so
generously towards a complete selection of items
and perfect rendering.
Exactly four days after leaving Blighty we
passed the Rock.
While in the Mediterranean we celebrated
Anzac Day in right royal fashion. In the morn-
ing, Church Service, at which Padre Johnson
delivered a touching and powerful address ; also
a Concert by the Quota Band. In the afternoon
a Sports Meeting, and in the evening a Eancy
Dress Ball, at which some effective and original
costumes were worn. Also on this memorable
day the " Sardine " first came aboard, to prove
as we hope, a lasting memento of our last
voyage together, making the end of our Great
Adventure.
Port Said was reached on the morning of Ist
May, 1919, at 8.30 a.m.
The Journey down the Canal was begun at
10 o'clock in the evening of Ist May, 1919, and
Suez was reached on the afternoon of 2nd May,
at 4 p.m.
Once again the anchor was weighed at 5.30
a.m. on the morning of the 3rd May, 1919. The
Red Sea passage, as usual, was very hot and
trying, and after the cooler conditions of France
| and England, the change of temperature was
most marked. On 9th May a battleship and
several submarines were sighted, and presumably
were the craft given to the Commonwealth
\ Government by the Allies, to go towards forming
v an Austral Navy.
A calm and uneventful voyage wa3 ours to
Colombo, which we reached on 15th May, 1919.
The stay at Colombo, lasting 29 hours, was
required for coaling, stores, and water. Members
of the Quota, granted shore leave, spent the
hours io sight-seeing, buying, and the long
looked forward to, shore meal of good things.
The Australian Navy was strongly represented
in the Harbor. The " Australia," " Sydney,"
and " Brisbane," accompanied by four sub-
marines, accounted for the number of blue-
jackets ashore. The adventure of the "Sydney" is
still vividly remembered by the natives, and the
boatmen who rowed me aboard the troopship


w \
could not find language forcible enough to express
their gratitude. However they tried as under
" Australia strong, very strong. God bless
England, God bless Sydney Emden no good,
No rice, Emden damn bad. Sydney shoot.
Sydney sink Emden, plenty rice; God bless
Australia." On Eriday, 16th May, at 2.30 p.m.,
a start was again made, on the last lap of a very
hot, monotonous journey to Aussie. The ship
rolled as her reputation demanded, and the heat
still heated, and the splendid system of turkish
bath was in full swing. On the 17th a few
showers fell, but did little to cool the air. We
crossed the line on Sunday, the 18th, and the
rolling was a genuine sample of what the old
tub could do, and still keep on the surface.
The line was crossed at noon, and the day's
running constituted a record for the journey so
far—299 knots. And so the voyage progressed
towards Home, and nothing happens to mark
one day beyond another. Bird life is almost
nil between ports. Not a solitary albatross is
seen, and very few porpoise or other marine life.
The monotony and the rolling of the ship and
voyage began to tell on the nerves of most of
the boys, and one disgusted Digger passed this
remark to me one day, " If you had a photo of
the damned ship, you could not keep it steady
on the wall." 28th|May, Eremantle, and all
it meant to be again in dear old Aussie. Our
sincere and grateful thanks to the ladies of
Eremantle and Perth, for the kind and generous
treatment of we lads of the Eastern States.
They gave us the glad hand, and the first time
what home and home folk really meant to all
of us. Adelaide was reached on the evening of
3rd June. Again we were welcomed and receiv-
ed a sure and founded welcome to our Homeland.
4th and sth June were passed most pleasantly
in Adelaide, and pleasant drives to out places of
interest. I must take back all I said to the S.A.
boys, because I could not get any birds of a black
plumage to eat. (Oompre.) At 7 o'clock on the
morning of 6th June, once more we started for
Melbourne, and the signs of anxiety among
the Vic.'s began to be noted. Some of them
nearly walked the whole way, to judge by
the tramping round the decks. Our estimable
O.G. was also a little affected at nearing home,
judging by his longing looks across the waves.
Dropped anchor at Portsea at 1.30 a.m. on
Sunday, the Bth June. An examination for
temp.'s and off for Melbourne, where we, the
Gumsuckers, disembarked at 2 p.m. Sunday.
Home once more; friends and all it means after
years of danger, misery, and longing. To all
my Yic. comrades —Good-luck, and long life and
happiness. On the morning of 10th June, at
11 a.m. the final portion of the voyage to
Sydney was begun. At 3.30 p.m. on 12th June,
Sydney Heads was entered, after a pleasant
voyage round the coast. Next morning, at 9 a.m.
the remaining portion of the Quota was dis-
embarked, the New South Wales men being
motored to the Anzac Buffet, Domain, the
Queenslanders going on by special train at
11.25 a.m. to Brisbane. So ended our voyage
to Aussie, and for us individually the end of our
Great Adventure.
The ship's daily runs up to 12th May, 1919
are:—
273 knots
April 25
278 „
295 „
281 „
„ 29
276 „
„ 30
215 „
96 „
69 „
May 1
2
„ 3
„ 4
5
283 „
M 6
277 „
7
270 „
8
271 „
268 „
286
287 „
„ 10
„ 11
„ 12
9
280
286
276
28
27
26


J4m\ . Mwm \ /
/ \
W " t^-f{s»)or«
• ? •-X
Amusements
Fancy Dress Pageant
held in Commemoration of Anzac Day,
25th April.
The scene was quite a spectacular and gay one:
and the costumes were indeed varied and nice,
and altogether the turn-out was a great and
splendid success. Some of those in fancy
costumes were:—
Captain Reynolds, who looked quite charming
as she came out from her bath in her dressing
gown.
Messrs. Butcher and Smitheram were as near
the dinkum aborigines as it were possible to be,
and their "Hoo-La " dance was a success of its
own.
Mrs. Irving (Maid of the Mountains) and Mrs.
Lambert (Negress) ably took their parts.
Pte. Ealla made quite a good Baboon, and he
was so near the real thing thjat someone asked
whether he was imported from Africa for the
occasion. We think not.
Messrs. Upton, Ephgrave, Watters, and
Cannel were a very happy D family, and I
must say that their costumes were original.
The worthy Monks of St. Ignatius ware ably
represented by two of their holiest and best in
Messrs. Bunny Burnside and Clive Collier.
Mileage
: Colombo
Knots
to Sydney.
Lieut. Moxon was a charming Nun, one, two,
three, but it was noticed that she did not mix
with her brother Monks.
May 13, 1919 282
~ 14 „ 287
May 30, 1919 191
„ 31 „ 295
15 „ 257
June 1 ~ 254
„ 2 „ 264
Corp. Keane looked his part as an advertise-
ment for Monte Carlo.
~ 16 ~ Colombo
„ 17 ~ 241
„ 18 „ 299
„ 19 „ 284
„ 3 „ 26G &89
Diggeress Peterson looked very green. Of
course that was quite in order, as she was repre-
senting Ireland.
t Adelaide
O ~ I
„ 20 „ 278
6 ~ 40
To look at Pte. P. H. Leo one would have
thought he really was a stockman, but we are
assured that is not so.
„ 21 „ 269
„ 22 „ 250
„ 23 „ 256
„ 24 „ 267
„ 25 „ 287
„ 26 „ 258
„ 7 „ 288
„ 8 „ 173
Melbourne
Staff Major Chapman was a snice little Jap.
lady, if you did not look at her feet. He has
evidently forgotten that Japanese ladies only
take about ones in shoes.
„ 11 „ 281
„ 12 „ 256
Sydney
27 „ 187
Diggeress Lehman took the part of a Gipsy,
and looked it.
„ 28 „ ) Fre-
,, 29 ~ ) mantle
Diggeress McKenzie was a Tres Chic
Mademosielle Francaise, but the trouble was
that she could not parley the lingo.
As a land mile is
mile 6080 feet, all D
to find out how far
other things.
5280 feet and a nautical
Diggers can do a little sum
you are from Blighty and
L-Corp. Bindoff looked what he was repre-
senting—a French count.


- - ,-. x -
ti
gff^X^Y
l/P*/ {fV-\4X
ti
Major Bowe, as a Bajah, put the Indian
Bajahs in the shade.
Lieut. Warnock looked his part as that of a
Leicester Lounge Lady.
Sgt. Irish looked like a Fritz, and someone is
now enquiring as to which country he was born
in.
Lieut. Marks was the Biggest Baby ever seen,
and I feel sure that his mother must be proud
of her baby-in-arms.
Miss Pearson, as a product of Spain, was Al.
If you don't believe me, ask her if she is not the
daughter of a Spanish Onion.
Lieuts. Windon and Fergie (Twin Babies),
and Lt.-Col. Simmons (Jolly Miller's Daughter)
looked well, but evidently forgot that their voices
should have been more feminate.
Diggeress Yvatson, who took the part of
"Victory, was a victory in herself.
Mrs. Marks must have used all the Aussie
flags on the ship, because I have heard that she
was covered with Bunting and glory.
Miss Hussey, as " Sweet Sixteen and Never
been Kissed," looked as snice as snice can
appear.
Oapt. Peters was the Blackest Thing Going,
and someone suggests that he puts a shine on.
Lieut. Warren was quite a nice little nurse,
and I overheard a Dig. say he would not mind
being in hospital with such a nice girl to tend
his wants.
Last, but not least, comes our O.C. and friend,
who was disguised as Kaiser Bill, but our
reporter was evidently in a dilemma, because he
put the Colonel down as " Handsome Borneo."
A gay dance was held, and it was really funny
to see such a "Cosmopolitan Crowd" mixing
together in the best of spirits. The Editor trusts
that another such event may be held, as it
means joy and frivolity to one and all.
—By Wattle Bird."
L.-Corp. Gibbins pulled off the double-
Standing Jump, and Hop, Skip, and Jump.
" Some Boo."
These sturdy sons of Australia won the Tug-
of-war, and received a handsome prize of £4 10s.
for their pulling power:—Lieut. Spranklin,
Sgt. Mclnerny, Sgt. Ainley, L.-Corp. Volich,
Pte. Drummond, Pte. Fleming, Pte. Bichter,
Pte. McArthur.
The Number Nine's Pierrot Party opened their
season on Thursday morning, 24th April, 1919.
The promenade deck was the scene of
operations, the bunting and flags being master-
fully arranged, while the staging and effects were
" Tres Bon," reflecting great credit on the ship's
officer responsible.
The programme right through was much of a
sameness, lacking variety in a very marked
degree, still we are only young, and we must
not leap before we bound.
The overture by the Quota Orchestra was some
music, and met with rounds of applause from
the Diggers. Congratulations to the leader,
Warrant Officer Thompson.
Individual criticism of the artists will keep
until later on —at present, some good, some
over-ripe.
On the evening of 15th May, 1919, the Quota
Pierrot party gave a performance in the Concert
Hall at Echelon Barracks, Colombo, to a very
large audience, representing the Ceylon Light
Infantry, E.G.A., and our own bluejackets off
the H.M.A.S. " Australia."
Bounds of applause and repeated calls for more
greeted, and were deserved by, every artist.
It was a first-rate show, and in the opinion
of our scribe would take some knocking out.
Secretary A. Y. Soul, of the Y.M.C.A., recipro-
cated by entertaining the troupe at a very dainty
supper, and at this stunt the artists also shone.


The Number Nine Concert Party once more
warbled forth to the Diggers from " God's Own
Country" on the evening of the sth of May, 1919.
The Starboard Deck was once again the scene
of operations.
The lighting and effects were " Tres Bon,"
and the Overture by the Quota Orchestra
received the " Glad Hand."
The programme was tastefully arranged, and
the rendering of the items was a great improve-
ment on previous efforts, excepting the final
monstrosity which spoilt the whole show. It is
acknowledged by the whole world that an Aussie
audience wants a lot for their money, so I
expect that is the reason why Item No. 20
nearly got the " Bird."
We compliment Stage Manager Percy Cannel
on his untiring zeal in producing these " Blow
Outs."
The two Star items on the programme were
the "Musical Number," with the harmonised
chorus by the ' Pish and Chips " party, and the
song and tableau "Jean d' Arc," Darkie Walters
being the Song Bird with Pretty Sister Watkins
representing Jean d' Arc.
The Band, the Pierrot Troupe, and an Im-
promptu Party gave several other concerts, but
notice in detail cannot be given owing to space
considerations.
Anzac Day Sports.
Some of the Prize Winners.
HOP, STEP, AND JUMP —Ist, L.-Corp. Gibbins;
2nd, Pte. Campbell; 3rd, Pte. Wilson.
LONG JUMP —Ist, L.-Corp. Gibbins; 2nd, Pte.
Bobinson ; 3rd, Dvr. Dowdell.
The Y.M.C.A. donated all of the trophies.
Short Circuits.
Be it ever so humble, there is no face like
your own.
Half a loaf is better than a tin of biscuits.
A new broom never sweeps the same tent
twice.
Never count your rations till the Q.M.'s done
with them.
A bomb in time kills nine.
When Greek meets Greek, they start a fish
Si Advertisements fij
DIGGERESS LEHMAN,
H.M.A.T. " Sardinia."
Specialist in Manicuring, etc. etc.
All the Best Powders and Perfumes kept in stock
Free samples thrown away.
Consulting Hours —All fine days.
WANTED.
Cook's Mate, 7 in mess. Must be gentle,
young, good-looking, and of loving disposition.
Apply, with photos and samples of hair oil, to
Senior Cook's Mate, No. 68 Mess.
Lost from No. 68 Mess, A Coyi one cheese'
rainbow color, savage disposition, wearing muzzle
and broken chain when last seen; answers to
name of " Hangoff." Believed to be suffering
from rabies. Beward. Apply to Sanitary Squad.
How WE HOPE TO TRAVEL
TO THE NEXT WAR.
Sixty square feet deck space per man. Daily
wireless of world's events. Deck chairs buck-
shee. Palm oil barred. Special attention given
to other ranks.
Four Course Meals. Wine and Cigars Free.
Smoke Lounges. Electric Fans and Lights,
Stewards. Cabins.
Turkish Baths with all Meals.
THE WAUSTRALIAN NAUTICAL NAVIGATION
COMPANY LTD.
Transport Providers to A.I.F.
Travel by our ships and avoid mal-de-mer.
Bubber Floors for two-up.
Padded and Noise-proof Cells for House Fiends.
Vibration Boom for Boulette. Automatic
Showers and Plunge Baths.
Steam Laundries and Electric Drying Booms.
Travel by our line and you never want to
go Home.
MESSRS. DREAMS, VISIONS, AND ILLUSIONS
Owners.


$/A7A<< Hmk
IK fflfcNIHG QRPER
Memories.
Before you have this record in your hands you
will again be in civil life, happy among your
relations and friends. Old times will be
memories and old scenes and old faces gradually
fade, leaving lingering and, I hope, pleasant
memories. But even among our happy hours,
lest we forget, pause and pay silent homage to
our dear comrades who are peacefully sleeping
over the seas, away from dear ones and home-
land. Until death claimed them, their sorrows
and toil was shared by us, their comrades, and
many were the times they cheered us when
times were hard and toil lay heavy upon the
heart and brain. How much we missed them,
so much we miss them now, and in the great joy
of being home again let us pay deep and silent
reverence to all our good comrades, who by
faithful and brave service, have made it possible
for us to again be home free and victorious.
So let me ask you all to dedicate this, your
page of " Memories.'' To you, one and all, my
sincerest wishes for your future happiness and
prosperity.
—YOUR EDITOR.
The Skipper's Message.
Life on a Transport is anything but a pleasant
experience, especially on a long voyage like the
present.
Accommodation is very limited and all the
little comforts one is used to ashore are missing,
and the only thing left to us is to make the best
of it.
Well, I think you will all agree with me that
on this particular voyage you have made the
best of it, and on the whole, in spite of the many
discomforts inseparable from a voyage like this,
you will look back with many pleasant memories
to your return from The Great Adventure "on
the old " Sardinia."
You are fortunate in your Commanding
Officer, Lieut.-Col. Cohen, C.M.G., D.S.O. It
is mainly owing to his unfailing efforts that the
voyage has been so successful, he has never
spared himself on your behalf.
The manner in which the troop decks have
been kept and the keenness shown in the various
table competitions reflect the greatest credit on
all concerned and helped materially towards the
successful conduct of the voyage.
Now that you are all nearing home, I trust
that you will find everything as you would wish.
You have done a great work and done it well,
and it now remains with you to consolidate that
great ideal you fought so well for.
I wish you all a happy return to your homes
and the best of good luck and prosperity in the
future.
E. G. CADIZ, Commander,
H.M.A.T. " Sardinia."


IBfi
MODERN PRINTING CO. PTY. LTD.
18-32 LEICESTER STREET
MELBOURNE




I
:
|
