

THE STORY
OF THE
LIFE OF THAMAS JONES
A PRISONER
ON
NORFOLK
ISLAND








THE STORY OF THE LIFE OF
THOMAS JONES.


THE CHAPLAIN ON HIS DAILY ROUND.


THE STORY OF THE
LIFE OF THOMAS JONES
An Escaped Norfolk Island Convict.
BY
A PRISON CHAPLAIN.
With Three Portraits and other Illustrations.




INTRODUCTION.
N the year 1834 I was present at a public
BfSrS9 meeting in London. A missionary who
889 Ippl had visited most of the ordinary penal
stations in the Colonies, and who had spent
some time in Van Diemen’s Land, was the principal
speaker.
His account of the moral and physical condition of
the convicts was appalling. The scenes he witnessed
could hardly have been surpassed in wickedness and
cruelty by those made known by the great philanthro-
pist, John Howard, in his letters on the state of prisons,
both English and foreign. The lecturer denounced the


whole convict system as positively atrocious. Moral
and religious instruction, he said, were sometimes
omitted for years, and the wretched convicts were
treated as so much rubbish simply thrown into an
out-of-the-way place, there left to fester and to
become an intolerable nuisance.
As I listened to these miserable stories of oppression
and neglect, a strong desire was awakened in me to
carry the Gospel message of salvation to the convicts
—a desire which filled my heart for years, until, by
the over-ruling providence of God, I became connected
with this very class by being appointed to the office of
prison chaplain.
It was in this way I met Thomas Jones, the subject
of this narrative. In stature he was about five feet
eleven inches, broad-shouldered and well built. In
features he resembled the common pictures of Shakes-
peare ; his eyes were large and deeply sunk. He was
a very intelligent fellow. His education was imperfect,
not, it is true, through any fault of his parents, but
owing to his early evil habits and associations. The
account he gave me of his life was delivered at diffeient
intervals after his trial and sentence to death. I call
it his autobiography, because the words used are
chiefly those uttered by himself, the various descriptions


of places and events being almost precisely in his own
language.
My desire in placing on record in these pages the
story of his remarkable career, is that God may use it
on the one hand as a warning, showing indeed that “the
way of transgressors is hard,” and, on the other, as ex-
hibiting the wonderful grace of God to such as are “ out
of the way ; ” thus proving over and over_ again the
truth of the Lord’s own words when He said—“ Him
that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out,”
F. R.




CONTENTS.
PART I.
CHAPTER I. FACE
THE EARLY HISTORY OF THOMAS JONES II
CHAPTER 11.
SENTENCED TO SEVEN YEARS’ TRANSPORTATION TO VAN
DIEMEN’S LAND 15
CHAPTER 111.
ONCE MORE FREE —HAVING COMPLETED WHOLE TERM OF
SERVITUDE TO THE CROWN 20
CHAPTER IV.
TRANSPORTED FOR LIFE 22
CHAPTER V.
JONES RECEIVES GOOD-CONDUCT PROBATION 33
CHAPTER VI.
JONES WITH FOUR OTHERS AGAIN ATTEMPTS ESCAPE ... 37
CHAPTER VII.
SAFE ARRIVAL IN MELBOURNE 45
CHAPTER VIII.
ARRIVAL IN LONDON, 1852 48


PART 11.
CHAPTER IX. page
THOMAS JONES AWAITING TRIAL ... 50
CHAPTER X.
IS ANYTHING TOO HARD FOR THE LORD? 58
CHAPTER XI.
CONVICTIONS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT AND REPENTANCE ... 65
CHAPTER XII.
CONFESSION AND TRUE CONTRITION 74
CHAPTER XIII.
THOMAS JONES IN THE DOCK 79
CHAPTER XIV.
PEACE AND JOY AND BLESSING 86
CHAPTER XV.
CONQUERORS THROUGH HIM THAT LOVED US 95
CHAPTER XVI.
PEACE LIKE A RIVER 105
CHAPTER XVII.
THE FINAL SCENE ON EARTH lIQ
ILLUSTRATIONS.
I. portrait Frontispiece
11. AN EXCELLENT DEPUTY-GOVERNOR ... To face page 5 2
111. A SCENE IN A PRISON CELL „ „ 58
IV. PORTRAIT „ „ 124


LIFE OF THOMAS JONES.
PART I.
CHAPTER I.
THE EARLY HISTORY OF THOMAS JONES.
HHAD many times visited the subject of
this narrative in his cell before I had
completely won his confidence; but when
I had done so, he would refer, in a quiet,
simple, and unostentatious manner, to his past history,
and I very well remember the occasion when he began
to tell the story of his life in the following manner :
“ I am the son of parents who were once respectable


shopkeepers in Manchester. My father failed in busi-
ness, and was so reduced in circumstances that he was
glad to maintain his family by the performance of odd
jobs. Before I was fourteen years old I got linked with
a gang of young thieves, and began that career which
now ends so disastrously. I then little thought of all
the sorrow and sin that would result from association
with these bad companions. My first theft, or rather
attempt at theft, was from a drawer where my mother
kept some silver spoons, and the action was attended
by a very remarkable fact, which ought to have
deterred me from the dishonest course upon which I
entered so early. When putting my hand into the
drawer,
IT WAS SUDDENLY PARALYSED,
my arm and side being also partially affected, so that
I fell down, overturning a chair, the noise of which
brought my mother to the spot.
“ I was unable to rise, and was carried out of the
room, and a doctor at once sent for. My parents did
not know at the time that I had been trying to rob
them, and treated me with great kindness until my
recovery, which soon took place.


HIS FIRST CONVICTION.
“ I have often wondered that their very care and
love did not lead me to show more gratitude by
leading a better life. But, as a matter of fact, my
return to health was not attended with moral benefit,
nor followed by amendment of conduct. I per-
severed in the evil of my ways, sleeping away from
home, and associating with dishonest lads, until I was,
for the first time, arrested and confined in Wakefield
Gaol.
“ After my release I joined a gang of thieves at
Bradford, where I was taken up for picking pockets,
and sentenced to three months’ confinement again in
Wakefield Prison. On my second committal I was
specially examined with a view to recognition, but
escaped being identified,
“ After my liberation I went to Newcastle, where I
was taken up for a similar crime, but escaped through
lack of evidence against me. I then made my way to
Northallerton, then to Liverpool, where I was engaged
in several petty thefts, burglaries, and highway robberies.
I was in prison there for three months, and afterwards
at Nottingham, where I stabbed a fellow-prisoner, a
fighting man, in the thigh, for which I got ‘fourteen


days’ solitary ’on bread and water. After that I was
in Knutsford Prison, and once more in Manchester
Prison. Then I went to London, and got two months
in Brixton Penitentiary for picking pockets at Epsom
Races. I returned to Sheffield, where I picked a
lady’s pocket of five pounds, was apprehended, and
once more committed to Wakefield Gaol until the
Doncaster Quarter Sessions, when I was transported
for seven years.


CHAPTER II.
SENTENCED TO SEVEN YEARS' TRANSPORTATION
TO VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.
“ WAS removed to York Castle, and then
HI ||pg| to the hulks at Portsmouth, from which
with about 300 other convicts, I was put
on board the convict ship Mangles , Cap-
tain Carr, and conveyed to Van Diemen’s Land. The
voyage lasted more than four months, during which I
was reported for misconduct, and although the charge
w r as unfounded, I was sent, on landing at Hobart Town,
to a punishment gang for sixteen months. There I was
initiated into the ways of convict life in a penal colony,
and soon agreed with a few fellow-prisoners to ‘ take to
the bush ’ —that is, to make our escape into the forests
with which the country was almost surrounded. We


were successful in making our escape, but were soon
compelled to leave our hiding-place, having nothing to
eat but raw mutton, which we got by stealing and
killing sheep by night.
HIS RECAPTURE.
“In about fourteen days we were captured by the
constables who were in search of us, and were sentenced
to twelve months’ hard labour in chains. I served my
time in the quarries at Glenorchy, and at the building of
the new bridge, the longest I had ever seen, across the
Derwent, and when my time was up I was sent to
Hobart Town, and thence to the party at Grass-Tree
Hill, having arrived at that stage of my punishment
which is always considered a most important period
by a convict,
WHEN I BECAME ASSIGNABLE,
that is, eligible to be hired out, or assigned, as a servant
or labourer to the settlers.
“ Soon after, I was engaged by Dr. Embly, a gentle-
man who had a farm at Blackman’s Bay, where I was
chiefly employed in clearing the forest timber which
covered the land. Dr. Embly was a very kind master,
and after being with him for two years, he sent me out as


one of his whaling party, he having first entered into a
bond with the Government for the security of the party.
If I had chosen to be careful this would have very
much altered my position and prospects, for it was a
responsible position I occupied.
AN ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE.
But I was not satisfied with my increased liberty,
and began, in conjunction with two fellow workers, to
secretly build a canoe, in order to make our escape. We
were detected in the act and arrested, but one of my
companions broke away from the constables and
escaped into the Bush. We were taken before Captain
Booth, the Commandant of Port Arthur, who had
immediate jurisdiction over all convicts in Tasman’s or
hoi esters peninsula, and as the authorities look upon
an attempt to escape as a great crime, I got six months’
imprisonment.
“After receiving the sentence, a further charge was
made against us for attempting to steal a ‘drift ’ whale,
the property of the Crown. I may explain that ‘ drift’
whales are those which, when struck in deep waters,
sometimes break away, and if severely wounded retire to
the calving grounds to die. They are frequently found
floating on the shores and bays of Van Diemen’s Band
2


and Norfolk Island. We discovered one of these when
out in Dr. Embly’s whaling boats, and thinking our-
selves entitled to it we tried to secure it ; and this
constituted the attempt to steal it!
“On this second charge we were sent to Hobart
Town, a distance of seventy or eighty miles, and after
spending fourteen days in the lock-up, we were com-
mitted for trial. We remained in gaol six weeks, when,
the night before our trial was to come oft, we were
released, the Attorney-General, who acted as Grand Jury
there, having ignored the bills. This was a very great
surprise to us, as the authorities seemed to be quite
determined that we should not escape a further sentence
if they could help it.
“ From this gaol we were taken to the prisoners’
barracks in Hobart Town, and again sent back to
the chain-gang at Glenorchy to serve out our sentence
for attempting to regain our liberty.
“At the expiration of this punishment I was sent
again to Hobart Town, and was selected as nurse to
the Colonial Hospital. Why I was chosen for this
post I could not understand. There I remained, how-
ever, about eight months, and having served four years
of my sentence as a prisoner of the Crown, I again
became entitled to my ticket-of-leave. On my leaving


the hospital I received my testimonials, which gave me
an excellent character, and was recommended to the
Chief Superintendent of the Police, who took me on
his staff and promised a conditional pardon in six
months if I behaved well, after which I could settle
in any part of Australia, and be in every respect a free
man. I had anxiously looked forward to the time
when I should enjoy complete liberty once more, and
had formed plans in my own mind as to the future.
“ The hard life which I had led, however, began to
have its effect upon my constitution, and my health
began to fail. I was therefore obliged to leave the
police service at the end of the month. I left Spring
Bay, where I was on duty, and returned to Hobart
Town, where I was engaged by a Mr. Wilkinson, a
chemist, for whom I worked quite satisfactorily for
some time
IN DOMESTIC SERVICE.
But Dr. Bedford obtained a place for me at Newtown to
wait on an invalid gentleman, Captain Bell, who had
been in the merchant service. My pay in this capacity
was £4O per annum. Whilst I was. with Captain Bell
my whole sentence expired, and I became free.


CHAPTER III.
ONCE MORE FREE—HAVING COMPLETED WHOLE TERM
OF SERVITUDE TO THE CROWN.
graaMIAVING obtained my papers I soon engaged
as a free man with Messrs. Johnson and
Gardener to go whaling to Blackman’s
~ Bay. The first season I earned A 29,
and, joining a man named Thomas Clark who was
then in Port Philip, we bought a boat, and com-
menced business as ferrymen, renting a cottage near the
wharf. But a quarrel with Clark caused me to sell my
share of the boat, and rent a separate one on my own
account. The next season, however,
I WENT AS COXSWAIN
with a whaling party to Trumpeter’s Bay, Wine Glass


Bay, and Shouter’s Island ; but the season was a very
poor one, only bringing me in £lO.
“On my return to Hobart Town I rented another
boat and worked the ferry. I got on comfortably for
some time, but unfortunately an old shipmate came to
see me, and being led on to drink,
I BEGAN TO GO TO THE BAD,
neglecting my business and attending regattas and
rowing matches, at which I won prizes valued at from
one to twelve pounds. Becoming unsettled, I gave up the
ferry and shipped with a Captain Irvine as steersman in
the Carnarvon; but while waiting for the schooner to sail
my mate and I robbed a man (whom we made drunk)
of £23. He was taken up while drunk by the police,
but was discharged on payment of five shillings. The
man found us out as we were about to embark, and
threatened to have us arrested ; but we at once packed
up our things and started for the north side of Van
Diemen s Land, and reached Launceston safely, which
was 120 miles distant, and here I employed my time in
wood-cutting down the Tamar,


CHAPTER IV.
RETURNS TO ENGLAND , AND RECEIVES SENTENCE
OF TRANSPORTATION FOR LIFE.
having a secret longing for old England,
I left the cutter and shipped on board the
Royal Sovereign , bound for Liverpool,
having as messmate a man named Miller,
who, like myself, had served out his sentence. On
reaching Liverpool I started for Manchester, where I
had lived until I was sixteen years old, and where,
after an absence of twelve years, I found my two sisters.
I learnt from them that
MY FATHER AND MOTHER WERE BOTH DEAD,
and that my two brothers had enlisted as soldiers.


Under these circumstances Manchester had few attrac-
tions for me, and I travelled about the country with
Miller, visiting Hull, Nottingham, and Leicester, pur-
suing my old thievish habits.
“ One night we robbed a gentleman on the road of
four pounds. The next night we were drinking at a
publichouse and when going outside I was seized by
the police, who were on the watch for us. I made a
short resistance, but Miller, hearing the noise, escaped.
I was sent for trial, and, being found guilty, was
sentenced to be
TRANSPORTED FOR LIFE
in the name of Robert Ellam. I was conveyed to
Millbank Prison in London, and shortly after was put
on board the transport ship Agincourt with 219 other
convicts, and was sent to Norfolk Island. This was
in July, 1844, and we reached our destination on
December 9th of the same year.
“ I found several old associates on the island, amongst
them being George Saxton, a man who had already
served a long term of penal servitude, and who was
regarded by the officials with the greatest confidence
because of his general good behaviour. He had,
however, a few years before actually made his escape


from the island in a boat with seven others, and reached
England in safety. He settled down in Liverpool, and
was doing well in a business ; but unfortunately for him
another convict who had completed his term of trans-
portation came to Liverpool and recognised him. Saxton
repeatedly bribed this man to be silent, and when at
length he was unable to supply him with more money
the traitor betrayed him. He was arrested, and on his
trial made a very powerful appeal to the judge, giving
an account of the hardships he had endured at Norfolk
Island and in making his escape. The whole court was
moved with pity for him, but he was again transported.
CONTINUATION OF LIFE OF CRIME.
“ On arriving at Norfolk Island I was a marked man,
After a time my natural disposition began to show itself,
and this, with my character as an old hand, caused me
to be looked up to by my fellow-convicts as a sort of
head of a mob, and many of them would have run a
hundred miles if I had said it ought to be done. I was
put into the boat-crew on ‘ The Settlement,’ having had
considerable experience in that way when I was a
transport in Van Diemen’s Land. I had not been long
in the boat’s crew when I entered into a plot with about
thirty others to seize either a whale-boat or a barge as


we were going off to a ship, and thus make our escape.
We contrived to hide some twelve or fourteen bags of
maize meal instead of taking them to the Commissariat
Department; we also secured some small casks of water.
Some of the men at the mill were concerned in the plot,
as were also many of the Hospital and Engineer’s Office
men. We managed to secure many things required
for a voyage—a small compass, tackle for the boat, tea
and sugar, and potatoes. After the Agincourt had
landed her prisoners on the island, she was engaged
to go to Sydney to bring up a detachment of the 58th
Regiment to relieve the 96th, who were doing the
garrison duty on the island. Having returned with the
s.Bth, she was waiting off Cascade for a wind to take
the 96th away. Lying at this point the ship would be
entirely out of sight of the Settlement station. This
gave us the opportunity we were waiting for. On the
day the large boat was engaged taking off water to the
ship that was to return with the 96th we hastily arranged
our plans, and it was agreed by the few who had time
to speak together that the men in the barge, after leaving
the jetty, should suddenly
SEIZE THE COXSWAIN
and the guard, pull into the mill-pond, take in the


prisoners and the rest of the men who could get there
in time to go on board, and then row off to the north-
north-west to sea, and make for Tongataboo, in the
Fiji Islands. In the barge there were fourteen prisoners
to row, and a sergeant and three soldiers as guard, and
the coxswain, Mr. Thompson, and Stephen (or Steevy)
Smith, the magistrate’s messenger or chief police con-
stable.
“ Only eight of the hands were in the plot when we
left the jetty. A sign had been agreed upon, namely,
to drop an oar overboard as if by accident, and while
the coxswain and soldiers were engaged in picking
it up we planned to lay hold of them. Accord-
ingly, as we came opposite the mill-point, the oar
was let go ; the coxswain was gazing after the floating
oar, and the soldiers laughing, and Steevey Smith
chiding, when they were all seized and pulled down
into the bottom of the boat, the sergeant being de-
prived by me of his pistols. The soldiers made a
vigorous effort to release themselves, and in the scuffle
some of them fell or were thrown overboard. But I
was not privy to any intention of drowning them ; my
object was to keep them on board, and if the whale-
boat was manned to pursue us, then to drop a soldier
overboard, and so gain time while they were picking


him up. We found out afterwards that Aaron Pine, the
sub-overseer of the Engineers’ Department, suspected
something wrong from the excited manner of the lime-
kiln gang who worked near the mill. He therefore kept
his eye on the barge from the time we crossed the jetty
bar. He saw the oar splash as it fell overboard ; he
also saw that one of the soldiers was in the water,
but could not tell at that distance what was going on
in the boat. Seeing us leave the direct course to the
Agincourt and make for the mill-point, and observing
a number of the other men rush for the quarry shouting
and waving their hats, he ran to the garrison and gave
an alarm.
“ The troops were soon under arms, and a party sent
down to the mill-point before we could get in our
prisoners and companions. Seeing the soldiers, we
tried to get out to sea, but before we got a hundred
yards
THEY FIRED UPON US
from the shore. Most of the men threw themselves
down in the bottom of the boat—soldiers and convicts
mixed together, all striving to avoid the bullets. I had
been voted coxswain when Mr. Thompson was seized,
and for more than twenty minutes while we were under
fire I had to stand by the steerage oar to keep the boat


from broaching to. One bullet knocked out a thole pin,
another shattered the blade of an oar, but I was as cool
as if I were eating my breakfast. Indeed, the scene of
that day quite hardened me, and made me ready for
any mad adventure ever after.
“To check the firing from the shore we made Sergeant
Farr stand up, hoping the soldiers from the shore would
recognise him. This, however, only provoked them to
fire the more, as they supposed that the sergeant was
one of the mutineers dressed as a soldier. Farr begged,
for the sake of his wife and children, to be allowed to sit
down, and I assented. All this time I had possession
of his sword and pistols. Our attempt to escape was
now clearly a failure, for six oars were lost when the
men threw themselves down in the boat, and three more
had gone in the attack upon the soldiers, which left only
five out of the fourteen. In this plight some one pro-
posed that we should go on and give up the boat to the
Agincourt. I firmly opposed this, and wanted to pull
out to sea as we were, for the more desperate a thing
was, the more I persisted in it. But I was overruled.
The soldiers on shore had
CEASED FIRING UPON US.
Mr. Thompson was once more allowed to take the helm,


observing as he did so, ‘ I’m going to be king once
more.’ This so annoyed me that 1 was strongly inclined
to throw him overboard.
‘ The whale-boat, having been manned and armed,
was fast approaching us, so we had nothing for it but
to surrender. Before doing so, I went forward and
offered the sergeant his sword and pistols; but he
refused them, saying, ‘You deserve to wear a sword !’
A few minutes after we were in custody. The enraged
soldiers on the shore, thinking their comrades were
drowned, were threatening to
BAYONET THE WHOLE OF US
when we landed ; but a Roman Catholic priest, having
oveiheard them, warned the Commandant, and the
soldiers were ordered into barracks before we reached
the jetty. We were all put in heavy irons and marched
to the old gaol, where, in one cell and arranged in a
row, a long chain was passed between the legs of each
man above his fetters and rove through the window, and
made fast to a block in the yard. We were all thus
what is called in the chain,’ having bare standing or
sitting room, and the latter so narrow that only half of
our number could lie down at a time.
Being brought before the bench, we were all com


mitted to take our trial at the assizes for piracy and for
an attempt to murder the soldiers. We were put on the
chain again for safety, and remained in the same cell
for five months, until the judge sat. When he arrived,
Mr. Naylor, the chaplain, wished that we should have
some assistance in preparing our defence, and obtained
leave for Barber, the attorney who had been transported
with Fletcher for the will forgeries on the Bank of
England, to visit us. I had come out in the Agincourt
with Barber, and being in attendance on the surgeon,
and having it in my power to procure a few extras, in
the shape of a little tea and sugar for him during the
voyage—l had frequently thus added to his comforts by
so doing—Barber very willingly undertook our defence ;
but as the business was generally carried on between
Barber and myself, the other men foolishly supposed
that he only intended to defend me. I overheard them
whispering among themselves to that effect, and being
very
INDIGNANT AT THEIR WANT OF CONFIDENCE
in me, I told Barber on his next visit, before them all,
that he might defend the rest if he liked, but that I
should decline his help altogether. I placed no value
on my life and gave no thought to any hereafter.


Barber, however, for some reason, was forbidden by
the officials to go into court at the trial, and we had a
prisoner named Swainstone, who was very clever with
his pen, to help us in our perilous position. He
defended us splendidly, and indeed adopted such
A CLEVER DEFENCE
for us that it was thought at the trial he must have
received help from elsewhere. But the Crown Prose-
cutor had laid a trap for us. Although, in the first
instance, indicted for piratically seizing a Government
boat—and Swainstone’s defence was prepared to meet
this—yet we were first tried for robbing the mill and
Government stores. Swainstone’s defence was there-
fore useless at this juncture, and he had to take notes
in court as the trial went on, consulting with us at
night in the gaol. I certainly believe that we should
all have been hanged were it not for the fact that the
soldiers had left the island, thus rendering it extremely
difficult to substantiate the graver charges against us.
The result of the trial, however, was that eight of us
RECEIVED SENTENCE OF DEATH,
without any hope of mercy being held out to us. On
referring the matter to the Governor, Sir Eardley


Wilmot, at Hobart Town, as no lives were lost, he
took a favourable view of the whole case. He there-
fore commuted the sentence to a second transportation
for life, with four years’ additional detention at Norfolk
Island. We remained in gaol until August 25th, when
OUR REPRIEVE CAME,
and we were sent out to our gangs again. But from
the quarry gang I was soon appointed to the ‘cook-
house,’ a place which I could accept without losing
caste among my mates ; and in this capacity I served
for many months.


CHAPTER V.
JONES RECEIVES GOOD-CONDUCT PROBATION.
HOMETIME in 1848, an officer’s servant
was accidentally drowned. I was one of
the party engaged in searching for the
body, and I remained in the water so long
that I became dangerously ill, and contracted a disease
of the chest, from which I suffered all my life. After
recovering sufficiently to leave my bed, Mr. Price, the
Commandant of the island, made me go to work for
him , but I worked with such wilful awkwardness that
he soon dismissed me, and sent me off to a station at
Longridge, a mile and a half in the interior of the
island. There I was included by Captain Hamilton,
*■>
v)


R.E., amongst a wood-cutter’s gang; but my health
again failing, I was sent into the hospital, and on
leaving it I was put into the tailor’s shop, and after-
wards transferred to the stonemason’s gang, in which
I remained until I was removed from the island. After
Mr. Price’s arrival in 1846, I memorialised the Colonial
Government for removal, but he kept back my petition
and returned it to me a long time after marked not
approved.’ Captain W. A. Blackford, my superin-
tendent, recommended me to try again later on, the
result of which was that my petition was granted. Yet,
although directed by the Lieutenant-governor to release
me, Mr. Price, from sheer spite, and from a desire he
always manifested in torturing the minds of prisoners,
detained me several months in the island. But at last
my leave was given me, and after serving five years and
three months captivity at that most dreadful of all penal
stations,
I SAILED AWAY FOR VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
in February, 1850. On my arrival at Hobart Town, I
was lodged in the prison barracks, and there I met
William Countryman and John Allen, both Noifolk
Island men. They wanted me to help them to plan an


escape; but this I refused to do, as I wished to expose
Mr. Price to the Government. There would be plenty
of time to escape after that. In a few days our pro-
bation in ‘Tasman’s peninsula’ was fixed for fifteen
months, at the expiration of which I should have to
serve a second probation, in lieu of the remainder of the
time we ought to have served in Norfolk Island, and
which was called ‘ penal probation.’ At the end of the
fifteen months I should have a second probation to pass
through. As the time drew near when these sentences
were to terminate, few can understand the anxiety and
even terror that was manifested amongst the convicts,
myself included, at having it prolonged. Fearing that
my second probation might be a long one, I addressed
myself to the Comptroller-General of Convicts, during
one of his visits of inspection to the peninsula, and
begged him to allow me a short service. This action
seems to have annoyed my superintendent (Captain D..
R.N., the chief officer of Impression Bay, where I was
stationed), and having heard that he might give me a
bad character and thus be the means of prolonging
my detention, I
PROVIDED MYSELF WITH POWDER,
lead, and percussion caps, the lead to make slugs, and


made up my mind to effect an escape, taking a fellow-
convict, named Robert Quick, into my confidence, and
asking him to be my companion in the attempt. My
plan was to secure Constable Noble’s gun, and making
for the head of Norfolk Bay, get over to Forester’s
Peninsula, there seize a boat and row to New South
Wales. I did not stop to consider the danger and
hardships of the task, although my health was so poor.
But when the order arrived from the Comptroller-General
appointing me only six months good conduct probation,
I was so overjoyed that I
THREW MY POWDER INTO THE WATER
in the jetty at Impression Bay, in the presence of Quick,
and resolved to do my time quietly.


CHAPTER VI.
JONES WITH FOUR OTHERS AGAIN ATTEMPTS ESCALE.
BHE six months passed away without any
report against me, and I was once more
‘assignable.’ Soon after, I was hired by
• a gentleman of Waterloo, Swanput, to
go as coxswain in his schooner, which was a small
craft of twenty-five tons. The captain of this vessel
was named Cook, and the crew consisted of four hands,
including myself. We had not been on board long
before we made up our minds to take the schooner and
cross over to New South Wales. The opportunity of
carrying out this design soon presented itself, and we
were successful. Clearing Shouter’s Island, we steered
our vessel north, and after a day’s run we struck on a


reef near Swan Island. For a few moments we
were in a position of extreme danger and our lives
in imminent peril. I was at the helm at the time,
and I saw instantly that our only chance was to let
the vessel go over the reef, and had scarcely done so
when we discovered another vessel was ahead of us.
Observing that by keeping a few points eastward we
could round the reef, I put down the helm, but she had
sprung a leak and was rapidly sinking. The dingy was
at once let down, and one man got into her to be ready
to take the rest of us on board if the schooner settled.
Seeing land at a distance beyond the second reef, I again
altered the helm and ran over it as we had done in the
first case, but in so doing the dingy was capsized and
the man who was in her was drowned. Before she had
overturned I noticed that he looked very frightened, and
I called out, ‘There’s a Robinson Crusoe for you,’ for
the schooner floated longer than we expected and we ran
her upon the shore of Clarke’s Island. W e then seaiched
for food and shelter, and found a hut inhabited by a
man named Allen, one of the survivors of the Governor
Philips , a Government vessel that was wrecked on Cape
Barren Island in October, 1848.
“ One day, when we had been on the island about
three weeks, a small boat came ashore from a neigh


bouring island, belonging to traders whose boats are
called ‘ The Mosquito Fleet.’ I wanted my companions
to join me in a project I had formed, and that was to
SEIZE THIS BOAT,
and to sail in it to some more favourable place, but
they flatly refused to assist in any way. I was greatly
enraged at their cowardice. Allen, however, helped us
to fit up a small boat belonging to the Governor Philips
which had been washed up high and dry upon the beach
for a long time. We caulked the open seams with the
fat of mutton-birds mixed with powdered shell-dust.
When ready for sea we left Captain Cook behind, who,
by the way, had remained with us, on Clarke’s Island
with Allen, and set sail.
“ After being out some days our boat sprung such a
leak that we were compelled to make our way back to
Clarke’s Island. At one time she was so full of water
that we thought we were going to sink. In this pre-
dicament one of my companions proposed that we
should offer up a prayer to God for help, but I said, ‘ I
never prayed in all my life, and I’m not going to pray
now.’
“We succeeded in reaching the island, where we
remained four weeks repairing the boat, and then put


off again to sea, steering for Cape Barren ; but having
no compass, we could only guess the way. After
several days sailing at random we were so enveloped in
mist, that it was quite impossible to tell where we were,
and we had to navigate entirely by chance, indeed the
fog became so thick that we could not see half-a-dozen
yards on any side of us. We kept the boat’s head,
however, to the north as well as we could calculate,
our object being to get to Kent’s Group. The wind
now began to blow freshly, and as there are strong
currents in the straits we were in danger of being
carried .out to sea.
“ One day it struck me that it would be better if I
headed the boat up half a point to the west. I don’t
know why I should have decided to do so, for I had no
guide of any sort ; but this slight alteration saved us, as
although it was dark I soon knew by the motion of the
boat that we were in smooth water. Hearing a sound
like
BREAKERS A HEAD,
I let go the anchor. The fog was still so thick that
we neither could make out the land nor tell where we
were, but we could plainly hear waves breaking on the
shore. The water was also covered with ‘ kelp,’ and
this assured us that we had made for land.


“A short time after the fog suddenly lifted, and we
saw that we were off Hogan’s Group, which lay direct
before us. Going forward to look out I perceived the
bow of the boat was within arm’s length of a
SHARP-POINTED SUNKEN ROCK,
which would surely have cut through our timbers
and sunk us if we had run upon it in the dark, and I
also discovered that we had actually moored at the only
accessible point along the whole front of the island.
Looking back upon these things, I see in them the hand
of God guiding me through these dangers unhurt■ to re-
veal to me afterwards His loving mercy and forgiveness.
After resting a few days at Hogan’s Group, we pushed
off again for the Australian coast, where we arrived four
weeks after our second departure from Clarke’s Island.
We now resolved to make for Melbourne, which took
us six weeks, having between three and four hundred
miles to travel, a good portion of which was uninhabited
forest.
“ Our principal food was mutton-birds, which we
caught asleep in little shallow holes in the sand.
On one occasion we were fully three days without
water, and were so exhausted that we had thrown
ourselves on the ground in despair, and quite felt


that as no relief was possible we must die, for
every moment only added to our miseries. But, while
lying there, one of our party cried out, ‘ There’s a
frog, and where there is a frog there is water! ’ I
got up and, to our intense joy, a little way ahead
I found a small stream. After a day’s march we
came upon a tarpaulin tent, inside of which we saw
a quantity of furniture and some boxes ; it was evi-
dently the abode of some new stockman or squatter.
There was no one about, so we broke open the
tent, and ransacked the place, taking a watch, a £5
note, and some wearing apparel ; we also found some
arrowroot, which we boiled, but could not eat, as it
was mixed with sand.
“We continued our journey, and, when we were
within a hundred miles of Melbourne, we fell in with
a respectable-looking man, a Mr. Bennison, who, very
singular to say, proved to be the owner of the property
we had stolen, and who
RECOGNISED THE CLOTHES
we were wearing as those belonging to him, and which
we had taken from his tent; but, seeing us armed, he
spoke to us kindly, and gave us some food. We returned
his clothes and expressed our sorrow at having been


compelled to take them. I very much regret now the
wanton injury we did to his property, as we let several
bills and cheques blow about with the wind when we
pillaged his tent.
“ We travelled on weary and footsore ; but knowing
we were nearing the end of our long journey we tried
to bear it bravely. A week after, however, we were
again so exhausted from want of food that we almost
gave up all hope ; but later on we came across some
huts. As they were evidently inhabited we were afraid
to attack them, but proposed to defer doing so until
the night. One of my companions, however, showed
the white feather, and I was so angry and annoyed
that I threatened to strip and
TIE HIM TO A TREE,
to prevent him from following and betraying us. I would
have shot him if it had not been for the intervention
of the other two. Feeling almost starved, I volunteered
to go and reconnoitre, telling the others that if I did
not return they were to come and rescue me. I started
towards the huts, but, strange to say, I could not find
them, though I searched for some time. The next
morning I came across them, and they proved to be
‘ a boiling-down station.’ I could see no one about, so


calling my companions, we entered the huts and regaled
ourselves with food and drink. I took a good rifle gun
with me from one of the huts, but unfortunately broke
it afterwards, in killing a snake. So we journeyed on,
meeting with all kinds of adventure, procuring food
and drink where we could, and sleeping in the open
with God’s vast canopy above us.


CHAPTER VII.
SAFE ARRIVAL IN MELBOURNE.
®HEN vve drew near Melbourne we washed
. our shoes and dusted our clothes, to avoid
drawing the attention of any one we in ight
meet to our travel-stained condition, and
separated before entering the town.
“ One of our party, Henry Edwards, soon got work
as a plasterer, earning £i per day, while another,
Richardson, and myself, continued the old life of thiev-
ing. One day we saw a boat in the river without any
one in charge. We got into it, and, rowing down to
‘ William’s Town,’ sold it for £g. We then went on to
a public-house at Sandridge, and as there was no one
in the house when we entered, we began to search about


in the hopes of finding something valuable. But, at
this moment, the master of the house came in and
asked us what we wanted ; we told him we were looking
for some one to serve us with drink, but he did not
notice that I had taken a pistol which I had found on
the table. So we continued our downward career.
Once we
BROKE INTO A ROMAN CATHOLIC CHAPEL,
then into a church, and then into another chapel, and
lest our comrades might discredit our tale as to these
robberies, I carried off a white communion cloth just to
show them that it had been done. Then we stole
from a tent, part of which I now sent to Edwards so
that he might join us as soon as he could.
“ Richardson and Edwards went one night to rob a
hole, and got twenty ounces of gold. They went a
second time, but the man resisted them, and they got
injured with small shot. About six months after I fell ill.
Having in my possession about £lOO, I intended to go
to Geelong, but delayed the journey in order to assist
my comrades in robbing a hole. Ihe owner was
SHOT IN THE FACE
in this attempt, but he was not killed, as I came across


him afterwards by accident. I next stole a horse, and
sold it for £l7 ios. I left the diggings soon after, and
went back to Melbourne and engaged a passage for
Sydney. On going aboard I found a young man who
had 13 lbs. of gold. Watching my opportunity, I
stole it and went ashore, and immediately engaged a
berth on board the Oscillation , bound for Adelaide, and
sailed in her. We were not long at sea before she sprang
a leak and was lost, although all hands were saved by
the boats, and we returned to Melbourne. I then made
my way to the diggings, but had to make my escape
from a police officer for engaging in the illicit sale of
rum. I found my way to Melbourne, but, being recog-
nised by a gentleman from Van Diemen’s Land, I
determined to leave the colony at once, and took a
passage for England in a vessel named the Joshua.
On the voyage I spent my money so freely that when
I landed at Folkestone, in May, 1852, I had only
left beside a gold watch and a gold guard chain that I
had stolen from a friend.


CHAPTER VIII.
ARRIVAL IN LONDON, 1852.
ROM Folkestone I proceeded at once to
London, and thence to Manchester, where
II I spent the time drinking heavily. I then
went to Liverpool, and I pledged the watch
which I had stolen for £s, selling the ticket for 30s.
From Liverpool I travelled to Manchester and Hull,
thieving where I had the chance, and living as before.
My money being all exhausted, I went out one Sunday
night with the idea of relieving somebody of his valu-
ables. I stopped a gentleman who proved to be a
Jewish rabbi, but I did not succeed in gaining anything
from him, as a lady who accompanied him suddenly


SCREAMED SO LOUDLY
that I was compelled to run off. I then made another
attempt, and robbed a gentleman of his watch and
chain. I pledged the watch for four pounds, and sold
the chain, which was broken, to a Jew a day or two
after.
“ A few days later I went into his shop and stole two
watch guards. For this I was apprehended, and being
identified as the man who had stopped the rabbi and the
other gentleman, who turned out to be an architect, I
was convicted for all three offences. For the first I got
twelve months’ imprisonment; for the second, eighteen
months ; and for the third, seven years’ penal servitude
and transportation. After serving eighteen months of
my time at Hull I was sent to Millbank Prison, in
London, where I spent four months without being
recognised as an * old hand ’ —probably on account of
my baldness, my hair having fallen off since I left
Norfolk Island. Had I been identified then I should
most likely have been at once sent abroad again.
From Millbank I was transferred to Portsmouth and
placed on board the Stirling Castle hulks, where I
committed the horrid and deplorable crime for which
the law demands the penalty of my life.”
4


PART II.
CHAPTER IX.
THOMAS JONES AWAITING TRIAL.
E have now to look at this unfortunate
victim of vice and crime from another and
different point of view from that of the
narrative as given by himself in the
previous chapters. He had been often imprisoned in
England before he was transported. He was twice
transported : first for seven years, which sentence he
put in by servitude ; but from his life sentence of
transportation Jones made his escape, as we have seen,
from Van Diemen’s Land. He had been now sentenced
a third time to transportation, and was sent to the hulks


in Portsmouth Harbour, where he was awaiting medical
examination as to his physical condition and eligibility
to undergo transportation to a penal colony. He had
not been identified at the hulks as a previously con-
victed man, or as having been a Norfolk Island convict.
He confessed the fact to me after his trial, and it was
confirmed by my own brother’s testimony after reading
the foregoing statement.
Thomas Jones was committed to the Hants County
Prison for the murder of Dr. Hope, one of the medical
staff on board the hulks at Portsmouth. He had been
for some time on the doctor’s list, and had repeatedly
complained of being neglected by the medical officers,
and having a very vindictive temper, at last resolved to
take vengeance on some of them.
He was employed at work which required a large
and sharp knife. After'an interview with Dr. Hope,
at which the doctor pronounced Jones’s case to be
nothing serious, the prisoner concealed himself outside
the surgery door. It was necessary for Dr. Hope to
stoop when passing through the doorway from the
room ; and as he did so, Jones plunged the knife into
his neck, and divided the jugular veins. The doctor
died in a few minutes. Jones was committed to prison
for this truly dreadful deed on February 10, 1856,


When brought into the reception-room, he was not
only handcuffed, but loaded with heavy leg-irons. Our
excellent Deputy-Governor at once ordered
ALL HIS IRONS TO BE TAKEN OFF.
This, as he afterwards told me, was a great surprise
to Jones, as he had been so accustomed to Norfolk
Island torture from sub-overseers, that he could not
understand the quiet and kind tone of voice in which
he was addressed by the Deputy-Governor, and expected
to hear him order the irons to be replaced again, and
was far from reciprocating the kind treatment shown
to him. When I first visited him, I asked him only a
few necessary questions to fill up my prison forms. He
seemed to think I was trying to extract information
that might be used against him, and hence he refused
to listen to me, and requested me to leave him,
observing in a reckless manner that he defied the
agents of the law to do their worst.” I spoke to him
kindly, but failed to propitiate him. He looked at me
and treated me as if I were a Norfolk Island sub-
overseer, and I saw it was expedient to shorten my
visit. He could not believe in professions of sympathy
unless they were uttered by one of his “ pals.”
As there was no softening cither in manner or in


OUR EXCELLENT DEPUTY-GOVEKNOR.




language, and as our intercourse was materially inter-
rupted by his fits of coughing, I laid my hand on his
arm, and expressed a hope that I should find his cough
better when I came next day, and left him in the same
obdurate mood, and apparently determined not to listen
to anything I might say. I offered him a tract called
“ The Scarlet Line ” before leaving him, and
PROPOSED PRAYER,
and asked him to kneel down, but he indignantly
refused, saying, “ No, no, I can’t! A wretch like me to
take God’s name in my mouth ! No, no.” “ Well,”
I observed, “ I will pray with you ; ” and laying my
hand on his arm, I drew it gently down to his wrist,
and knelt quite close to him. I assumed this position
in prayer that I might feel any offensive movement if
he meant to assault me, and also because I wished him
to see I put some confidence in him. After the short
prayer, I rose and offered him my hand, which he con-
temptuously refused. He spoke of the way convicts’
statements were discredited, while those of men in com-
mand were always thought reliable. He then described
the hulks as a
“FLOATING HELL,”
where, if a man could say a prayer, it would soon be


extinguished ; adding, “ I have often prayed to God,
when lying down at night, to strike me dead before
morning ! ” Then pausing a moment, he said, “ Oh, I
could go back and treat Dr. Bowler and Mr. Williams
as I did Dr. Hope, with greater pleasure than I could
sit down to my supper, and think nothing of it.” I
tried to withdraw his thoughts from the hulks, and
proposed to read a portion of Scripture, when he replied,
in a careless tone, “ I have been trying to read, but
cannot.”
Two days after I saw him again, and seating myself
near him, I asked him to listen while I read the Fifty-
first Psalm. He stood attentively while I explained
the psalm to him ; and when I had finished the reading
I remained silent awhile, so that he might have an
opportunity of speaking if so disposed. Presently he
said in a somewhat subdued tone, “ I hope you were not
offended because I did not kneel down at prayer the
last time you came ? ” I assured him I was not, though
sorry he did not do so. Then he continued, “ I feel
perfectly indifferent to the prospect before me. I could
rise up and go to my death with pleasure. lam quite
unconcerned as to whether I live or die ! ” Pointing to
the Bible he said, “ I feel as the apostle says in that
Book—for I have been reading it. He says there are


two things in us—two persons, as it were; one says one
thing, and another says another. I have been looking
over my life. There is no doubt that I have allowed
the evil genius to sway me; and am I going just now
to No ! ”
The poor fellow uttered the last few words with
bated breath. I saw he had been reading the seventh
chapter of Romans. I opened my Bible at the pages
which deal with the Parable of the Prodigal Son, and
drew a comparison between his wicked life and that of
the prodigal. I dwelt on the loving forgiveness of the
father, who ran out to meet his erring son ; and told
him that God would also forgive his sins, black as they
were, if he would only repent and ask Him. I then
turned back to the Fifty-first Psalm, and read David’s
confession—“ Against Thee only have I sinned,” and
showed how David’s remorse ripened into repentance,
which resulted in his obtaining pardon and peace of
mind. Closing the book, I was about to kneel down,
when he touched my arm, and taking the rug off his bed,
folded it, and placed it for me to kneel upon ! I took
this act of his thoughtfulness as an omen for good, and
it afforded me much encouragement. I did not expect
that Satan would be easily vanquished, and I anticipated
a conflict before a victory could be gained ; but I felt


hopeful, The gentle and respectful way in which he
put the rug to save me from
KNEELING ON THE COLD ASPHALTED FLOOR
was such a contrast with his indignant refusal to join in
prayer the first time I asked him, that I could but thank
God and take courage. It was particularly interesting
to mark the fluctuations of feeling manifested by this
poor fellow, as gleams of light from the perusal of God’s
Word penetrated his mind.
At one time he would speak vauntingly, and in
no gentle terms, of past scenes and actions in his
life as a leader of all evil ; whilst at others he would
show contrition. He frequently spoke of his parents
and their great kindness to him, and this softening
of manner I ascribed in some degree to the kindly
treatment he received from all the prison officials,
who never used a stinging or provoking word to him.
For some weeks he seemed at a loss for an excuse
to “ break out ” and threaten the warders. Our
separate system of discipline and the manner in
which it was administered, with gentle firmness, de-
prived him of the chance of “letting us see what he
could do in self-defence.” Gradually his off-hand, rude
manner was supplanted by a quiet and civil demeanour,


and I noticed that he ceased to speak of his convict life
in the boastful manner which was characteristic of him
when he first came under our care. Then he justified his
crime on the ground of inhuman treatment ; now he
ceased doing so, or if it were necessary for him to
speak on the subject he would do so in a subdued tone.
Once he said, “ I have made an attempt to pray while
lying there (pointing with an ironical sneer to his ham-
mock), “but it is of no use.” While in his former
condition of dogged impertinence I spoke of the awful
consequences of his crime. I told him that I did not
know whether Dr. Hope had been a Christian man ; but
supposing he was not a Christian, or was one of those
who scoff at religion and treat Christ and His Gospel
with contempt or neglect, then I explained his soul was
lost. I begged him to repent, and thus avoid a similar
fate. Poor Jones raised his pallid face, and with ill-
suppressed agony of mind said, “ I wish Dr. Hope was
alive and I was dead,” and then asked me when the
assizes were to be held, and how long an interval was
allowed between the sentence and its execution, adding,
in an interrogative way, “ I suppose they generally give
four-and-twenty hours.” When I told him a fortnight
was usually granted he replied, “ I wish it was to-night.”


CHAPTER X.
IS ANYTHING TOO HARD FOR THE LORD?
there was a change in Jones’s
conduct, it did not amount to more than a
N 7 llln « subsidence of evil passions, and was due, I
think, to the kindness he received from all
the officials of the prison. I took advantage of this
change to show him from God’s Word how all his past
trials and sufferings arose out of the sinfulness of his
nature, and pointed to the text, “ The natural man re-
ceived! not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness unto him,” and marked some corresponding
texts in the cell Bible, urging him to consider
them.


A SCENE IN A PRISON CELL.
“Is anything too hard for the Lord?"




On my next visit, at the close of our conversation
and Scripture reading, I was about to kneel down,
when he again rose quickly, and taking his rug off his
legs and feet, the evening being very cold, he placed it
for me to kneel upon, adding, “ I will kneel down out
oj respect for you." These words struck me as indi-
cating a further progress in the softening of his feelings.
Again I thanked God for this, and left him in a better
frame of mind than previously had been the case.
There was more gentleness in h;s manner, and he now
KNELT AT PRAYER WITHOUT BEING ASKED
to do so. I felt much encouraged by this change in him.
Our next interview was attended with still more hope-
ful signs. He told me he had been trying to read the
Bible and to pray, but added, in a sorrowful tone, “ I
won’t deceive you, I went on my knees to-day, but it
was no use, I have no heart for it.” This was not said
in the old contemptuous way, but rather in a despairing
tone. His condition reminded me of the case of a
gentleman who was tutor to my brother and myself
when we were at college, who afterwards became a
corrector of Greek at a printing establishment, where
he fell into the company of men holding sceptical
opinions, who soon began to influence him. He had


been brought up religiously, his father having been a
Wesleyan minister, and he had previously led a moral
and respectable life. Unfortunately for him he had
not the resolution to retreat from the danger he felt
creeping upon him until it was too late. He began to
drink, and, as might be expected, went from bad to
worse.
When remonstrating with him one day on his peri-
lous course, and urging him to pray for Divine grace to
deliver him from his danger, he told me he did try to
pray sometimes, but was so
HARASSED WITH EVIL THOUGHTS
and convictions of conscience and doubts, that he even
laughed at himself for making the effort. I lost sight
of him for a long time, as he had to leave his situation,
until one day, when returning from the City, I turned
out of Ludgate Hill towards Blackfriars Bridge, and
then, passing a cab-stand, I recognised him in a
deplorable state, acting as waterman to the cab-
drivers !
This story seemed to interest Jones, and before
leaving the cell we knelt in prayer and asked the
Lord to enlighten our minds and incline our hearts
to prayer. As I said “ Good-night,” I offered him my


hand. He looked up with surprise into my face, and
with evident reluctance held out one finger, but made
no movement of reciprocation. Holding his hand firmly,
I asked the Lord to bless him during the coming days,
and then left the cell. There was such a decided change
for the better in his whole conduct at this interview, that
after I had gone a few steps from his cell I returned
and looked through the observation hole ; he was sitting
on his bedside
OVERWHELMED WITH TEARS,
and holding his pocket-handkerchief to his face. As I
left the prison the words arose in my mind, “Is anything
too hard for the Lord ? ”
The scene in the cell inspired me with further hope.
There sat the poor convict lately escaped from Norfolk
Island, Van Diemen’s Land, the fearless, daring
murderer, now softened in spirit. That which “ heavy
chains,” “ the spread eagle,” “ the gag,” the lash, and
other punishments had failed to accomplish, was brought
about by the Word of God , kindly treatment , and
prayer. If this be of God, who can stop it ? “ Love
conquers all things,” “ Not by might nor by power, but
by my Spirit, saith the Lord.” “It is He who sheds
the love of God abroad in the heart ” (Rom. v. 5). Ex


perience, as well as God’s Word, has taught me to
imitate the loving Saviour in dealing with the outcast
sinner, and be gentle and persuasive, and to guard
against arousing evil passions by reproachful language,
lest “the door ajar” might be closed. The emotions
of this evening were not altogether like the morning
cloud and early dew.
On my next visit I found him in a more accessible
state of mind. He responded kindly to my inquiry
about his health, and as soon as we were settled down
I told him I should take as a subject for conversation,
“ God’s patience with sinners, and His wonderful love
in giving His only begotten Son to take our sins upon
Him.” Before the conversation ended Jones said in a
subdued voice, “ I have been considering why my health
seems better, and the conclusion I have come to is that
the Lord has relieved me in one way to enable me to
apply my mind to the consideration of spiritual things.”
“Yes,” I replied, “relief from physical suffering affords
greater probability of dispassionate, patient self-exami-
nation, and clearer perception of a subject, than when
one’s faculties are benumbed by pain.” “ Well,” he
replied, “ I declare I was thinking so this very
day.”
I endeavoured to show him some of the hindrances


to prayer, viz., Satan’s suggestions respecting the Bible,
and the Deity, power, and love of Jesus Christ ; thus
prayer is often hindered, and a hardening mental
process goes on; also doubts as to the nature and
desert of sin ; the enemy of souls will suggest,
“ Oh, your sin is nothing ; you had so many hard-
ships and cruel treatment, that it is no wonder you
lost your temper.” And again, when the sinner
begins to see the sinfulness of his nature, and the
wickedness of his life and conduct, then Satan will
alter his tactics and suggest, “ Oh, it’s no use your
praying now; you have gone on too long in your
wicked ways, and have quenched the Holy Spirit’s
strivings with the conscience. Your sin is unpar-
donable ; you may as well go your own way to the
end! ” Or he will misrepresent God’s character, as
he did to our first parents, and present Him as unre-
lentingly severe, trying thus to terrify the sinner, or
drive him to utter despair.
Our subject for the evening was Second Corin-
thians, second and seventh chapters, in which “ Satan’s
devices” and “ godly sorrow ” are treated of. When I
concluded my reading and exposition of these subjects,
there was a short silence, and then he referred
to a tract which I had lent him called “ The


Contrast,” and also to a small book entitled “The
Life of a Cornish Man,” which he told me had served
to awaken a new and higher train of thought in his
mind.


CHAPTER XI.
CONVICTIONS OF THE HOL V SPIRIT AND REPENTANCE.
FTER the evening alluded to in last chapter,
Jones began to admit the evil of his past
life. He commenced to ask questions on
tM| subjects he did not understand, and when
I spoke of sin as the transgression of God’s law, and
that there could be no sin if there were no law, he
asked for an explanation of the word transgression.
To make the word practically clear to his mind, I
drew a circle and divided it into ten parts, and wrote
one of the ten commandments in each part, and sketched
the figure of a man in the centre of the circle. I then
asked if it were possible to get out of the circle without
stepping over the commandments. I also referred to
5


Eph. ii. 2-10, and to show that stepping over one
put him outside all the ten, turned to Gal. iii. 10, n,
22 to prove the impossibility of being saved or recon-
ciled to God by keeping His law, seeing that would
require perfect obedience from the cradle to the grave,
as well as a sinless nature, to love
THE LAWGIVER AND HIS LAWS,
without which transgression is the rule of the sinner’s
life and conduct, and places him under the penalty—
« Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things
written in the book of the law to do them.” The
prisoner watched and listened attentively, and before
I had quite finished my sketch, he said, as if to save
me from further trouble of explanation, “ I see, I see ! ”
I closed the evening’s conversation by pointing out texts
that denounce the transgressor: “He that despised
Moses’ law (i.e., the law God gave to Moses) died
without mercy" etc., “how much sorer punishment,
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath
trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted
the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified
an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit
of grace” (Heb. x. 28, 29).
Subsequently and repeatedly the Gospel plan of


salvation was opened out and laid before him, and the
door of hope shown him in Christ the sinner’s ransom,
who honoured the law, and bore the penalty on behalf
of the soul that had sinned! Poor Jones’s intelligent
mind quickly perceived the drift of my illustration and
. explanations, but he still showed a restlessness and
irritability which I was careful not to arouse. One of
the most prominent features of his character was im-
patience, and almost in proportion to his growing know-
ledge of himself this still showed itself; but it was only
as the deepening of the darkness that
PRECEDES THE BREAK OF DAY.
He did not comprehend the mode of the Holy Spirit’s
work on the conscience and the heart of the sinner,
and there was a danger lest Satan should so mis-
use the convictions of the Spirit as to excite the old
passions of his nature, and thus obtain an advantage
over him by representing the religion of the Gospel as
something to make men miserable. On former occa-
sions, when I had men awaiting trial and execution,
several Christian friends joined me in a prayer union on
their behalf. I used to communicate with them re-
specting the peculiarities of the prisoners’ tempers, and
other features of their characters. Thus “prayer was


made without ceasing” for the prisoners. I watched
with anxiety every expression or development of feeling
on the part of those cases !
Six weeks had elapsed since Jones was committed,
and as yet there was no reliable or satisfactory evidence
of a work of grace in him. There were certain improve-
ments in his conduct, and the
OFFENSIVE AND PROVOKING WAY
in which he behaved for the first fortnight or more
was gradually disappearing. He became civil to the
warders, and thanked them for their attention ; but
“the strong man armed” had not laid down his weapons
of war yet. “The Lord’s hand, however, is not shortened
that it cannot save.” “He is able to save to the utter-
most.” I urged poor Jones to ask for the Holy Spirit’s
enlightening grace when he told me he knelt dozvn to
pray, but felt no comfort. The cause of this seemed to
me to be, for one thing, that he still clung to some of
the reasons he assigned, in justification of his crime,
when he first came to us—namely, that he did it to call
attention to the condition of the convicts on board the
hulks, and to have their wrongs righted, and their cruel
treatment made public. I dealt plainly with him on
these points, and endeavoured to impress upon his mind


that so long as he tried to palliate his crime by such
excuses he was closing the door of hope against himself.
I repeated the text: “If I regard iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear me ” ; and then reminded him of
another text, in which we are told that, if we confess
and forsake our sins we shall find mercy.
A conversation followed upon the nature of true
prayer, in which I referred him to the parable of the two
men who went up to the Temple to pray, and pointed
out that the publican’s prayer was more acceptable to
God, because it showed that the man who offered it
repented, and was desirous of obtaining God’s forgive-
ness. When I finished my remarks, he referred to his
past life as having been “ all wrong,” and spoke of the
urgency of his case, as he had “ so
BRIEF A TIME TO LIVE.”
I read a short passage on repentance, from a book called
“ The Deep Things of God,” and the possibility of all
manner of sin being forgiven. At the close of this visit,
he said, with apparently deep feeling, “ I have paid great
attention to what you have read, and am very grateful to
you.” It was the most satisfactory hour I had spent
with him. When leaving the cell I reminded him that
the next day would be Sunday, and that, according to


his age, he had spent no fewer than six and three-
quarter years of Sundays. “Oh! ”he cried out, “ and
made a
BAD USE OF THEM ALL.”
The thought of this seemed to deeply affect him, for
on rising from prayer, he stood for some time absorbed
in thought before he could respond to my “ Good-
night.”
After this visit, I observed that he read more of the
Scriptures than of other books, and occasionally in our
interviews he referred to some of them. He spoke of
Psalm cxxxvi. as very remarkable, because the words,
“ For His mercy endureth for ever,” are so often repeated.
On another occasion he said, “ Well, indeed, sir, I seem
as if I was getting light.” I urged him to mark the
passages that brought more light to his mind, or revealed
more of the depravity of human nature, and to learn
them off by heart, and thus to imitate David, who says
in Psalm cxix. n, “ Thy Word have I hid in my heart
that I might not sin against Thee ; ” also to read the
Bible prayerfully, and, as it were, to make a sandwich of
“ Bible reading,” by putting it between two prayers—
one for the light of the Holy Spirit before beginning,
and another, after reading, for the Holy Spirit to fasten


it on his memory and heart. I marked John v. 30,
Isa. i. 18, and xxxiv. 16, for his study. Speaking of
prayer at another time, he said, “ I have been six or
seven times on my knees to-day, but my prayers are
heartless ; but I hope when my trial is over, I may be
able to give my mind to the study of God’s Word.”
As the time drew near for the assizes, he now and
then alluded to a future life. I followed such remarks
by quoting texts upon the reality and certainty of a
future life, and
THE AWFUL DOOM
of unforgiven transgressors. Once he added, “ I feel I
am not prepared for death now, but I hope God will
do what He thinks, good ; indeed, I know He will do
what He likes best.” I interrupted his words by saying,
“ What God likes best is that you should go to Him at
once as a sinner, penitent and broken-hearted, in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, confessing your sin,
and pleading His promises not to reject all those who
approach the throne of grace, believing that ‘ He is the
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him.’ ”
I felt it expedient to dwell frequently upon the
treachery of the unregenerate heart. In order to
impress this upon his mind, I told him the story of


a prisoner who came under my ministrations in Tothill
Field’s prison. It was that of a young woman who
shot a soldier of the Foot Guards as he was going out of
the barracks in St. James’s Park, and towards whom she
cherished most relentless hatred. She was tried and
SENTENCED TO DEATH,
but was respited, and ordered to be kept in penal
servitude for life. She was nearly two years in Tothill
before her removal to a Government prison. One day
she was brought to my room by the female warder, as
being desirous of seeing me. At the interview I was led
to speak on the subject of “ godly sorrow that needeth
not to be repented of”; after awhile she adverted to
her crime, and shed some tears. I felt some doubt
about the sincerity of her profession of sorrow, and
with a view to test its genuineness, I asked if she were
really sorry for the awful crime she had perpetrated.
She replied, rather coldly, “Yes I am.” Pausing for a
moment, I said, “ Now, suppose you had the power to
bring that young man to life again, would you do it ? ”
She hesitated for a moment, got red in the face, and
with an emphatic gesture of her arm, exclaimed, “ No, I
wouldn’t! ” “ Then,” I said, “ your expression of sorrow
is a sham and your prayers are a serious and solemn


MOCKERY TO GOD,
for if you felt as you ought, and as every true penitent
should, you would rejoice to rescue the unfortunate
victim of your jealousy and malice, from the awful
misery to which you may have been the means of sending
him.”
Before Jones had time to offer any remark upon this
case, I alluded to the possibility of self-deception as to
our real spiritual condition in the sight of God, before
whose all-searching eye our most secret thoughts and
feelings are transparent, etc., and quoted the text, “As
(a man) thinketh in his heart so is he.” I then offered
prayer, at the end of which the poor man distinctly
responded, “ Amen ! ”


CHAPTER XII.
CONFESSION AND TRUE CONTRITION.
BB?|SS3||N my next visit to the prisoner, we had a
If’/' very interesting conversation on the fifty-
c^aPter of Isaiah, its representation
Q f s i nn er’s state —“ poor, needy, and
without money.” While speaking on these words, and
pointing out the freeness of the Lord’s offers of salva-
tion, poor Jones could not restrain his feelings, but in a
rather loud voice cried out, “ How very beautiful !” as
if astonished at such mercy and love. The importunity
of the Lord’s invitation, so like the language of St. Paul
to the Corinthians: “As though God did beseech you,
by us we pray you, in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled


to God,” struck him too. Evidently it was the same
Spirit that inspired both Isaiah and Paul, and I felt
very hopeful that He would open this poor sinner’s
heart and mind to accept these glorious invitations.
He then alluded to the change that would take place
in his circumstances after his trial ; for then he
would not be left alone in his cell for a minute. He
observed, “ My mind is now more capable of reading
thoughtfully and with reflection and prayer than it has
been ; but what a restraint it will be to have a warder
always with me. lam beginning to do right, and have
been looking over past circumstances, and can truly say
I am sorry for IT ” (meaning the crime for which he was
to be tried). I expressed satisfaction at this, but he at
once said, “ Yes, but I’m not saying this as some might
think to make a loophole from which to escape. Oh ! I
know what is before me, and
I AM REALLY SORRY.”
Again he alluded to persons who had injured him, and
added, “ I mean to say I can from my heart forgive
every one that has done me an injury.”
This, though a qualified utterance, was a step in the
right direction ; it was an omen for good, and led me to
expect something of that godly sorrow that needeth not


to be repented of, and which makes neither reservations
nor excuses for wrong doing.
When we finished the reading of the fifty-fifth chapter
of Isaiah he showed his need of more light by the
remark he made, “ Well, I really wish that God may
allow me to make my peace with Him;” and looked
surprised when I said, “ That is quite impossible, because
peace has already been made for you by our Lord Jesus
Christ. What you have to do is to
ACCEPT IT UPON HIS OWN TERMS,
which are simple and within your reach, viz., ‘ Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved,’ and,
again, ‘ God so loved the world that He gave His only
begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him shall
not perish, but have everlasting life.’ Surely these are
reasonable and easy terms of pardon and peace.” I
marked Eph. ii. for him to study, especially vers. 12-14.
As I was leaving he returned a book which I had lent
him, entitled, “ The Fulness and Freeness of the Gospel
Salvation,” by Dr. Chalmers, observing as he handed it
to me, “ It is a very splendid sermon.”
I was thankful to find on again visiting him that
he had greatly benefited from the instructions of the
previous conversation ; there was a marked difference


between his former and present state of mind, which,
I believe, was the working in his heart of the Holy
Spirit. There were not any of those vindictive feel-
ings apparent towards those who used him badly in
times past ; in fact, he spoke of the change voluntarily
to me, finishing up as follows: “You may remember
how one day, soon after I came here, I told you
I could go down to the hulks again and murder
certain persons there. Would you believe it, I have
been on my knees to-day praying for the very same
persons
He also referred to a small hymn-book which I had
lent him, and expressed wonder that any one could take
such an interest in a murderer ! He was startled when
I said in reply,
“WE ARE ALL MURDERERS,
for it was our sins which caused the Son of God to
be crucified, and yet it was He who redeemed us by
His death on the Cross ! ” For the first time when
speaking of his crime, he became so overcome that he
could scarcely speak. This change of feeling was the
more wonderful, as he had been meditating an
exposure of the bad management of the hulks when
he was placed in the dock. He made no mention


of such an intention after this, but spoke humbly and
calmly of his trial which was to take place in a few
hours. Before I left him we both knelt in prayer,
Jones, with his hands raised to heaven, responding
heartily his “ Amen ” at the end of the prayer.


CHAPTER XIII.
THOMAS JONES IN THE DOCK—RECEIVES
HIS SENTENCE.
the day of his trial I attended at the
court, and was very thankful that he
seemed calm and quiet. He stood with
IgfgW. hi s head bent down a little, and when
called upon in the usual form to plead by the clerk of
the assizes he simply answered—
“ GUILTY,”
without looking up. There was a dead silence in the
court at the time. The judge remained silent for a
minute or two, looking very earnestly at the prisoner,


and then asked him if he knew that by that plea he
admitted the charge against him, to which Jones replied
“Yes.” The judge then told him that notwithstanding
his plea the trial would proceed, and asked if any
counsel had been engaged for his defence; if not, he
would provide one for him. To this Jones made no
reply, and was removed from the dock at once, the trial
having been fixed for the next morning.
The next day he maintained the same quiet attitude,
and when the jury had returned their verdict he was
asked if he could offer any reason why sentence of death
should not be passed upon him, to which he merely
replied, “ Nothing.” The judge then
ASSUMED THE BLACK CAP,
and in very solemn and earnest terms exhorted him to
seek that mercy from above which could not be ex-
tended to him at a human tribunal !
On the same evening I paid him a long visit. As
soon as I sat down he said, “ Now that the trial is over,
and the sentence passed, my feelings are very different
from what they were some days back ; then I would
have been glad to make a public statement, but now I
can truly say all bad, spiteful feelings, if I may so call
them, are gone from my breast, and my life is a burden


to me.” On asking for an explanation of the cause of
the feeling, he admitted that “it was all owing to his
own wretched course of life,” and then expressed much
thankfulness to God for being enabled to pass through
the events of the day without feeling any anger towards
the witnesses, who all spoke the truth excepting one,
“and who,” said Jones, “must have forgotten himself
when he said the lower deck prisoners were treated the
same as the others, diet excepted.” After a short pause,
he said he had such a feeling in praying the last day
or two as he never had before. He explained it as “ a
softening of mind.” He said he had been so long on
his knees in the morning before going to the court that
he was quite exhausted, and his prayer was that he
might feel neither spite, malice, nor spleen towards any
one, “ and he was confident the Lord had heard his
prayer.” As I was leaving he made the following
request: “Now, sir, as I feel that you are mercifully
disposed towards me, I want to tell you much. For
eighteen months before I got into this trouble I was
LIVING A WRETCHED LIFE.
I spent pounds in that time, which I did not get honestly.
It has been on my mind to tell you about the past. I’ll
think over it as well as I can to-night, and when you
6


come in the morning I’ll tell you all. I’m in hopes that
you’ll not despise me.” He again expressed wonder at
the state of his health, and ascribed it to the mercy of
the Lord, given him to enable him to apply his mind to
things pertaining to his soul’s salvation.
I went early the next morning to his cell after chapel
service, and found he was anxious for me to take down
his history, I thought it might be with the intent to
expose the Norfolk Island prison discipline, etc., as he
knew my brother had been chaplain there, and was
opposed to the whole convict system ; but it turned out
otherwise, and I consented to comply with his request.
It took me some days to complete his narrative as con-
tained in the former part of this book. What a life of
misery, sin, and suffering his was ! What marvellous
escapes from death, both by sea and land ! Well might
he say of them, “ It is as though the Lord were dragging
me through it all to show me mercy at last! ” The
manner in which he related his story convinced me of
its truthfulness, or at all events that there was no inten-
tional deception or falsehood in it—the facts related, and
nearly all the parties mentioned in it, were confirmed by
my brother as correctly and truly given.
His story helped to deepen my interest in the man,
and to remove the fears I had at first about him, owing


to his defiant manner. My interest in him became in-
tensified after hearing his history.
Light from above now began to fall upon him ; the
scales fell from his eyes, his conscience was touched, the
nature and enormity of sin became more distinct and
clear, and he was harassed by the fear lest God would
cast him off. He was quick in apprehending the drift
and meaning of an argument or a discourse, and was
remarkably clear in drawing conclusions or coming to
a decision as to his line of action. After I completed
my work of writing his history he seldom reverted to
it again, except it was with shame and remorse.
As soon as the trial was over I kept up a corre-
spondence with the little band of Christian friends
who united in prayer daily for poor Jones. Some
of their correspondence will appear farther on. To this
united intercession I feel sure that much blessing was
given by a prayer-hearing and prayer-answering God.
When next I entered his cell he turned to me,
when the warder had left, and said, “ Your words
have come true : I have had such an easy night; my
mind is free and comparatively comfortable ; ” and
alluding to his story, he said, “ It is a relief to me that
it is done, but there are hundreds of different crimes
I could not think of when telling you about myself


and which time would not admit of taking
down, but you can judge from all I have told you
what a wretched character I have been.” He took up
Mr. Kingsmill’s tract which I left in his cell, and said,
“ This is a blessed book ; it is beautiful. I never read
such a nice book ; it is just suited to me. Really, sir,
it is the mercy of the Lord I feel as I do ; I feel
more like a child than anything else; ” and then he
expressed wonder that he ever could have brought
himself to tell me all about his past wicked life!
Our subject at this visit was “ the part the Holy Spirit
takes in the salvation of sinners.” I selected chap. xvi.
7— 11 of St. John’s Gospel; also chap. iii. s_s5 _ $ , and
Rom. viii. 26, 27 ; and Gal. v. 22, 26. I asked him if
he understood, to which he replied, !< Oh, yes ; I see
that if it were not for the mercy of God I could not feel
as I now do,” and taking up a prayer-book he opened it
at Psalm cxix., and read from verse 25 to 32, which
led to a conversation on the confession of sin, the sub-
stance of which was, that it is not the genuineness of
repentance that brings peace to the soul, but faith in the
atoning blood of Christ! Repentance and faith must be
combined, and both are provided and bestowed through
the Lord Jesus Christ, who has been exalted a Prince
and a Saviour, to give repentance and forgiveness of


sin, and these are appropriated by faith, and thus the
believer or appropriator is put right with the law, which
he transgressed, and reconciled to God (Rom. vi. 21).
Poor Jones here remarked, “That is taught and clearly
stated in that book you lent me upon ‘ appropriating
faith,’ and which enlightened my mind more than any-
thing I have read,” and he adverted to his previous
ignorance and profligacy, naming some instances of his
doings in Van Diemen’s Land. He recalled how on
one occasion he had said jeeringly to his companions
that “If the Almighty had an elect people neither he
nor they would ever belong to them, but that he did not
care for God or devil,” adding, “ Wasn’t it awful?” He
also told me he had been able to read with comfort that
day, and to read more than usual. We finished with
the seventh chapter of St. Luke’s Gospel, and I left him
with the feeling that he would soon realise the liberty
with which the Lord sets His people free, and that He
would “ loose him and let him go ” free and saved.


CHAPTER XIV.
PEACE AND JOY AND BLESSING.
HE time fixed for his execution was drawing
near very quickly, and it was with inex-
Kil|i [lll pressible thankfulness to God I noticed
th ere was a j so a growing and visible
work of grace in the prisoner’s heart.
For a few days after the last visit he passed through
great mental agony and struggling in prayer for a sense
of pardon and peace, which produced both physical
and mental prostration. He had been by nature one
of the most fearless and daring men I ever met. But as
the eyes of his understanding were being opened he felt
he was on the brink of utter ruin, and, like Saul of
Tarsus in Damascus, he began to pray. Prayer and the


Bible were the means used by the Holy Spirit to lead
him to Christ and inspire his heart and mind with faith
and confidence in the Saviour. While thinking over his
case, I believe this happy change in his experience was
accelerated by the revelation or confession he made to
me of his past evil life. It had laid as a burden on his
conscience, or as a wall between him and God, and
darkened his prospects. God was against him, and he
thought he ought to
CONFESS HIS WICKEDNESS,
having an impression that by relating all he could
recall to mind of his misdeeds it would be a relief to
his mind. Hence his urgency in regard to my taking
down his story. He felt that by not confessing his
wickedness it would be like hiding his sin, or pre-
varicating, and would neutralise all the benefits of
prayer, but that having told me all he would have
nothing on his conscience. “The clearing of himself”
. v
certainly was a relief to his mind. There was no
reserve, and he went so far as to beg that if I saw
anything that looked suspicious or contrary to truth
in anything he told me that I would ask for an
explanation, even if it were on the gallows.
I have seen persons under deep convictions of sin


wrestling like Jacob with the Lord, almost brought to
despair before passing out of darkness into light and
liberty of soul. I have seen others also who, through
the application of a text of Scripture to their hearts and
minds, have entered into peace at once, as if it were
audibly spoken by the Lord. Poor Jones was an
instance of the former —wrestling, pleading, he at last
cast his burden upon the one offering for sin, Christ
Jesus. While passing through this conflict he told me
how he was worried with unbelieving thoughts, but all
these suggestions and doubts were dispelled while study-
ing the scene of Calvary and Gethsemane.
“ Oh,” he said, “ I saw the Lord Jesus actually restoring
the High Priest's servant's ear that Peter had cut off I
The very man that was trying to drag Jesus to be put to
death ! And I seem to hear Him say to the penitent
thief in answer to prayer, ‘ This day shalt thou be with
Me in Paradise ,’ and / just felt myself beside the cruci-
fers, as if I was actually present at the awful scene , and
asked Him to help and bless me also, who was worse
than they were ; and I was enabled to say, £ Yes, He did
die for me, even for me! ’ ” I hardly know how to
describe Jones’ state of mind when telling me all this,
but he certainly seemed deeply in earnest. He showed
deep humiliation, and withal a spirit of the most simple


submission, blended with trust in the “ blood that
cleanseth from all sin,” and he evinced a calmness and
peace above anything before enjoyed.
On the last Sunday evening but one before his death,
I entered his cell and saw that he was in bed. He did
not notice me until I laid my hand upon his shoulder
and called him by name. On looking round I saw
he was in tears and much exhausted. I asked if he
felt ill, and without answering my question he said,
“ Oh, sir, this has been a day to me which I cannot
describe, but I dare say you can guess my feelings
when I tell you that it has been as if God was with
me; and I liked to look at Him.” “God in Christ?”
I said, interrogatively. “ Oh, yes, God in Christ, and I
really believe He has mercy for me, but when I think of
the way I have sinned against Him ” —here his voice
faltered and he was overwhelmed for a few minutes.
When able to proceed he told me he was exhausted, as
he had been
AWAKE SINCE EARLY MORNING
reading, and that for the last few days he had been
enabled to read with pleasure, also that when reading
the Bible passages what he could never understand
before, ‘now came plain to him. “ I see them plainer


and plainer, clearer and clearer,” were his words,
“and the little tracts you leave suit just me, as they
express so simply the love of Christ in coming into
this world.”
I suggested a plan for reading the Bible at stated
times. We read Rev. iii, 14 to the end, and while we
were talking about the Laodicean Church, and Christ
standing at the door, Jones observed, “Oh! the Lord
has been working in me mightily to-day ! I really
thought my heart would have burst in the chapel this
morning. I prayed before I went there, and the Lord
has answered that prayer ; but I know I could not put
one good thought into my mind if it would save my
soul, and I would not say what Ido not feel.” Then he
alluded to the solemn services of the day, and especially
the request for prayer for one under sentence of death,
and mentioned that the services were very helpful to
him.
Something was said about ministers being made
useful to some people. I assented to what he said, but
told him that ministers were only like the bit of pencil
which must be held, used, and guided; and as the pencil
of itself can do nothing, so ministers can neither en-
lighten nor renew a sinner’s heart unless the Lord guides
his mind and clothes his words with the power of the


Holy Spirit ; therefore the praise and glory of the
benefits conveyed to the heart and soul of hearers
belong to the Lord.
Before leaving him he told me that sometimes
CLOUDS OVERWHELMED HIM
when he thought of Dr. Hope. “He seems to come
between me and God at prayer,” was his remark. It
was singular that I had received a letter from both
the chaplain and schoolmaster of the hulks during the
week, in which they informed me that for the two
previous years Dr. Hope had been
KNOWN AS A CHRISTIAN
man. On acquainting Jones with this fact he raised
his voice and uttered a short prayer. “ God grant
that it may be so, and that I may not have sent a soul
to ”He could not finish the sentence. On re-
covering his self-possession he again spoke of his past
life. “My conduct has been reckless and awful. I have
been a murderer a hundred times in heart, but this last
sin is worse than all.”
After prayer I marked a psalm for him to read, and
bade him good-night.
The next morning I spent a considerable time with


him. One of his first remarks was, “ Oh,that psalm you
pointed out last night, it has been blessed to me! When
I got up this morning I felt cold at first and could not
read with comfort, but I knelt down and prayed to the
Lord to apply some portion of His Word to my soul, and
then I read that psalm, and it was blessed to me.”
BURSTING INTO TEARS,
he added emphatically, “He did hear my prayer.”
“Yes,” I said, “when the Lord answers prayer He
makes us conscious of it.”
Again he responded, “ Oh, there can be no doubt of
it. lam sure He has answered mine. Yesterday when
they began to sing in the chapel, ‘ I will arise and go to
my father, and say unto Him, I have sinned against
heaven, and before Thee,’ I was overpowered.” I myself
noticed that he dropped on his knees in his stall as soon
as the service began.
Before I left he corrected one or two mistakes as
to names of persons in his confession. He did so,
fearing that if they were not set right it might mis-
represent certain circumstances after he was gone. He
again mourned over the evil example he had been to
others, expressed astonishment at the wonderful
escapes he had had, which he used to call “ lucky


escapes,” particularly mentioning how they had been
saved from drowning when they left Clarke’s Island
in the leaky old boat, and observing, “ When I look
back at them, I see it was the hand of God.” He also
asked me to let his history be known, that it might
ACT AS A WARNING
to others who were following a similar course of life.
We commenced the reading of the Fifty-first Psalm,
He spoke with much feeling on the third verse, “ My
sin is ever before me” and applied it to his own
case, and Dr. Hope’s. He spoke of my first visit to him,
and reminded me that I had laid my hand on his arm,
which he said made him wonder I was not afraid to
touch a murderer like him. He also referred to his
death and the manner of it, saying, “ I have no conflict-
ing feelings on that point. Death has lost its sting.” He
enjoyed the reading of the psalm, and asked if the word
“rock” in the second verse of Psalm xxxi. did not refer
to our Lord. I might say that the Word was producing a
sanctifying effect upon him, for there was an increasing
love for it as well as a better understanding of it. In
the course of our reading I reminded him that he must
have heard a good deal of Scripture read in prison.
“ Yes,” he replied, “ but I did not even listen to it, and


when personally spoken to about reading the Bible,
which was very seldom the case, it was like bullying me,
and reproaching me ! ” This was a word in season for
myself, and made me feel that if the Word of God is to
produce any spiritual benefit upon prisoners it must be
ministered in the spirit in which our Lord spoke— i.e.,
kindly and affectionately. He always addressed His
hearers as a friend. “ Love conquers all things.”


CHAPTER XV.
CONQUERORS THROUGH HIM THAT LOVED US.
UT the great enemy made many assaults
u P on poor Jones, even after he had been
i HESj “ lifted out of the horrible pit and miry
clay,” and was loth to lose him. One
evening on visiting him I found him lying on his bed
covered over with the rug. On calling him by name,
he removed the rug, which also covered his face, and
with a look of despair, said—
Oh ! Mr. Rogers, the Lord has forsaken me j you
had better go to some other prisoners, and leave me in
my misery. I was staggered for a moment by this
change in his spirit, but after a short silence I repeated
his own words. “The Lord has forsaken you, has He ?


If so, you are the first true penitent He has ever for-
saken. Listen to His promise: ‘ I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee,’ ” and I opened the large Bible on
the table, in a casual way, at the Thirty-fourth Psalm,
and read slowly to the sixth verse, upon which I laid
special emphasis. “ This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.” At
that point Jones threw off the rug, turned round and sat
on the side of the bed, and said,
“SHOW ME THAT VERSE!”
I handed him the open book, and, resting his arms on
the table, he remained lost in study for some minutes,
during which I remained silent. At length he turned
to me and said, “ Oh, I am so glad you did not leave
me! ” We read the psalm and dwelt upon the sweet
and comforting promises and assurances it contained.
He told me the cause of his depression, which com-
menced whilst he was at prayer. He thought Dr.
Hope came and stood between him and God, and made
him feel that he could not pray. Jones had similar
feelings before, and I noticed that they followed times
of refreshing and encouragement. We turned from the
34th to the 103rd Psalm, which was a spiritual tonic to
him, the 17th verse specially appealing to his feelings.


As Jones was acquainted with a seafaring life, I told
him about a hurricane I once passed through when
doubling the Cape of Good Hope in 1838. It began
with thunder and lightning and high winds ; all sails
were taken in except one or two topsails. The pas-
sengers retreated to their cabins and felt much discom-
fort and some fears for several days. But when the
hurricane passed away we were told by the captain
that the wind had been in a favourable direction the
whole time, and that we had made more way than we
had done during the previous week or more ; so we
all felt quite compensated for the discomforts we ex-
perienced during the hurricane. I also referred to St.
Paul having been taken up to the third heaven and
afterwards then having had to endure afflictions. These
references helped to restore his peacefulness, but he did
not fully regain comfort that evening.
On my visit the next day he referred to my story
about the hurricane, and also to my having said, as I was
leaving the cell the previous night,
“LOOK UP!”
When going to bed those two words came to his mind,
and he fell asleep meditating upon them. He was some-
what disturbed by a dream, in which he and another
7


man were being led to execution, but were released on
the gallows, and they both returned at once to their old
wicked ways. He told me that he thought God had
sent the dream to make him examine himself as to
his real condition and fitness to die. It appears that
he awoke from the dream crying, “ Give me a candle
to lead me out of this darkness.” This led to a conver-
sation upon the difference between “ godly sorrow and
the sorrow of the world,” and we read Gal. v. 16 to
the end of the chapter ; and, as I was about to engage
in prayer, he expressed much thankfulness that the visit
had, by God’s blessing, removed his ignorance on the
subjects we had been considering.
On the last Sunday of his life I spent the evening
with him. As I was taking my usual place he said,
“ Knowing this is my last Sunday, I am anxious to
make the most of it, and I have prayed earnestly to
the Lord to make it profitable to me; but somehow I
did not enjoy the morning service until you commenced
your sermon, and just as I was beginning to feel comfort
the bell rang ” (alluding to the signal-bell to let us know
the time was up for service) ; “ but,” he added, “ I have
enjoyed the evening service and sermon on Matt. xi.
22, 23, as much as those of last Sunday.”
I selected for our reading the fifth chapter of the


second Epistle to the Corinthians, verses 14-21, and
noticed how (1) the constraining power of the love of
Christ brings the soul of the believer into fellowship
with Him ; (2) the earnest appeal of verse 20—
Christ’s ambassadors beseeching the Corinthians to be
reconciled to God ; (3) the exchange in the last verse—
Christ made sin for the shiners , and the sinner made the
righteousness of God in Christ. We spoke of the true
believer’s standing: crucified with Christ (Gal. ii. 20);
buried with Christ (Rom. vi. 4) ; risen with Christ
(Col. iii. 1) ; reigning with Christ (2 Tim. ii. 12). I read
a short extract from Abbott’s “ Corner Stone,” on the
practical influence of the Bible in the heart of the be-
liever. Jones then chose the Fifty-first Psalm, and asked
me to read with it the fourteenth chapter of Leviticus,
to the end of verse 32, as illustrative of the cleansing
efficacy of the blood of Christ on the heart, life, and
conduct of the believer, represented by putting the
blood of the sacrifices on the right ear, the right thumb,
and great toe. After prayer he remained on his knees
for some time. On rising he asked to be allowed to
write to Dr. Hope’s friends on Thursday, so as to
leave Good Friday free, and also expressed a desire
to be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper
on that day, to which I assented. He then begged


that no subject not bearing directly on spiritual matters
should be introduced at my visits the remaining portion
of his time, and
ALLUDED TO HIS APPROACHING DEATH,
which would take place during Passion week, with much
feeling. “ Why should I fear,” he said, “for the blood of
Jesus Christ is as fresh this week as it was when shed
on the Cross.” “Yes,” I said, “and its cleansing virtue
as efficacious as a ransom for the lost sinner as ever.”
His mind frequently reverted to some prisoners on
board the hulks. He spoke of one in particular, named
Emmett, with whom he had had a conversation about
some of the convicts who attended the administration
of the Lord’s Supper. “We thought,” said Jones,
“their conduct was inconsistent, though what right
had we to judge them ? Emmett once said, ‘Jones,
there will be three wonders in the next world : one that
some people will be in heaven we never thought would
get there; and some will be sent to hell we thought
would get to heaven ; and, above all, the greatest
wonder will be if we ourselves get there.’ I never
thought about what Emmett said until now, but I
have been thinking much about it to-day.”
I encouraged him to relate various incidents that took


place while he was on board the hulks. They helped me
to form an opinion as to his own mental and spiritual con-
dition when there, and to contrast it with his present state.
In this way, also, he learned to know himself better.
His own conduct and the sentiments he so frequently
expressed upon the subject of religion when there, and
in his convict life at home and abroad, sometimes over-
whelmed him, and made him express astonishment that
God could have borne with his wickedness so long and
ever led him to see it. While speaking on these subjects
one evening, poor Jones mentioned the name of another
convict in the hulks, of whom he now spoke with
respect, as being what he did not then understand, but
which was plain to him now, namely, a Christian. That
man used to read his Bible during the time allowed for
access to the library. “I, too,” said Jones, “ used to get
up an hour before the reading time that I might have
a quiet time for reading. I used to like to see that man
reading the Bible and praying, when others around him,
including myself ' would
CURSE AND SWEAR AWFULLY.
And yet, whether it was through seeing that man pray
or not, I said a prayer now and then, but I soon gave
that up.” Such is the effect of a godly example!


I asked him to tell me what difference there was
between the prayers he said then, and those he offered
now. He replied, “ Oh! I was trying to quiet my
conscience then by balancing my former wicked deeds
against what I believed were some good ones ; but there
was a great difference between those prayers and my
present ones. I used to think that ‘saying a prayer’
was a good thing, and would counterbalance my wicked
deeds. I did not understand the necessity for the
atoning blood and merits of Christ to make prayer
any value or procure pardon for the penitent. I knew
nothing about the Holy Spirit’s work. It is only since
I came here that God has showed me these things ;
all my prayers before were a
MOCKERY OF GOD.”
He spoke again about what occurred on board the
hulks in regard to Dr. Hope, and said, “ I have no
one to blame but myself for all that took place there.
You have heard me say in a vindictive, passionate way,
that I would gladly go down to the ship and repeat
my wicked act ; but now, thank God, I would willingly
go down and wash the feet of the greatest enemy I
had, aye, and that before the whole ship’s company.”
I turned to I Cor. xiii., and dwelt upon the charac


teristics of Christian love, and introduced Eph. hi. 16-21,
as including a prayer for the establishment of the be-
liever in love, which is the fulness of God. Here Jones
interrupted me by saying, “ That is just what I want; it
makes me feel uncomfortable that I do not love Christ
with more of His own love.”
We also read a part of the seventeenth chapter of St.
John’s Gospel, especially noting the 17th and 23rd verses,
the former of which sets forth the Word of God as the
sanctifying means or instrument by which His disciples
were to be made like Him, and work for Him. The
thought of appearing in the presence of Christ after
such a life as Jones had led was overwhelming to him,
and yet the belief in the atoning virtue of His precious
blood, and the persuasion that our Lord meant what
He said when He told His disciples that all manner
of sin was pardonable (except one), helped to sustain
and strengthen his faith. “He won’t forgive me and
then cast me away,” was his way of uttering a Scriptural
truth ; and I am sure it was the poor fellow’s unquestion-
ing faith in the Scriptures as God’s infallible Word, that
caused him to say so often towards the end, that he
wished to “depart-to be with his sin-pardoning Saviour.”
From the day this desire took possession of him, he
sometimes expressed it in such words as these; “He


won’t cast me away ; He won’t shed His precious blood
in vain, I’m sure of it.” If I spoke of the pleasures or
enjoyments of the present life, he showed no lingering
wish to share in them or live longer, even if it were
possible ; he did not even wish for an extension of his
time. What he often wished for was to know and love
the Saviotir more. Alluding to the blessing the Bible
had been to him, he said, “Other books like this” (taking
up the Holy Book) “ help me, but the Bible is my joy
and delight.” When closing my visit with prayer,
I asked the Lord to comfort those who were made
mourners by Jones’s terrible crime ; he was quite over-
come, uttering an earnest “ Amen,” and remaining some
time on his knees in silent prayer.


CHAPTER XVI.
PEACE LIKE A RIPEP.
HgMgjß| VISITED him again in the evening. It
was intensely interesting, but at the
reslni jfjrl same time exhausting to me ; so much
SOj on retiring to my office to make
memoranda of what transpired, I found it hard to
recall the substance of our conversation. Yet, if I
had done so in extenso , it would fail to convey an
adequate idea of the prisoner’s mental and spiritual
condition. There was great calmness, and yet what
I may call a burning anxiety to dwell only on
spiritual subjects. He commenced to tell me of the
peace he enjoyed. “ Oh, sir, I know it is no con-
sequence what man may think of me; some may


imagine I am acting a part; but I wish to put all
confidence in you, and tell you what I think and feel
and speak from my heart, as in the presence of God.
There has indeed been a great change in me ; I have
been comparing my present state with the past, in order
to see if my penitence is really sound.”
He then related things that occurred in Norfolk Island
and Van Diemen’s Land, and also on board the Stirling
Castle hulk, adding, “ When I think of the vile passions
I exhibited there, and the dreadful tortures I endured
and compare it all with my present feelings, lam a
wonder to myself. No human power could have
accomplished it.” In order to test his altered feelings,
he spoke of two men on board the hulks, named
Lawrence and Burns, who, as he said, belonged to a
class that all his sort of people hated, and he said, “ I
HATED THEM BOTH
from my heart. I found out that they were both from
Norfolk Island. They had put in their sentences
there, and returned to England, and, like myself,
had gone back to their old ways. When they were
sent from the island to finish their sentence in the
prison at Sydney, Lawrence was appointed hangman
there, and Bums acted as flogger. They were hated by


the other convicts. On one occasion I took up a knife
and would have seriously injured, if not murdered, one
of them, but was prevented. Now, sir, would you
believe it, I have been down on my knees praying
for both these men, and I can truly say hatred has
been turned into pity and love for them, and all
the poor men there. It is wonderful how my old
hatred is gone, and such different feelings have taken
their place. I tell you these things to show what God
has done for me, such an awful sinner ! I wish not to
speak of such things any more, and to have Friday
(Good Friday) wholly for myself, as a day of humilia-
tion and self-denial. I must now look away from man,
and altogether to Him who died for me, and to Him
only.
HE MUST BE ALL AND IN ALL TO ME.
Blessed be God, I have no fear of death ! I am sus-
tained by what I have learned here about the Lord
Jesus and His Holy Word, in which He speaks to us.”
Many similar remarks were made by him at this visit,
chiefly in reference to the change wrought in him by the
Holy Spirit, in humbling him and subduing his awfully
passionate temper, enabling him to conquer it, both in
feeling and action. We closed the visit by reading


I Cor. xv., and dwelt upon “those who sleep in Jesus,
their resurrection, and the coming again of the Lord
Jesus.” Some conversation followed on the separate
state of the soul after death. I had written to several
clergymen to request prayer for Jones on Sunday. The
thought that he was remembered by so many Christians
in prayer, encouraged and sustained the poor man.
In the evening of the same day, when I visited him,
the subject of writing to the friends of Dr. Hope was
brought up again. Jones deeply regretted his inability
to write, and earnestly requested me to write at his
dictation. Fearing I might suspect he was unable to
read or write, he asked me to hear him read. He did
so well and with feeling, and said, “ There is no
humiliation which I would not gladly submit to if I
could write; I wish to do it, but I feel my ignorance.”
I yielded to his importunity, and wrote as he dictated.
His sorrow and remorse for his wicked deed, and his
prayerful request that those whom he had thrown into
grief and mourning would not withhold their forgive-
ness, was very earnestly uttered.
The dictated letter read as follows :
“ Winchester, March, 1856.
“To the Relatives and Friends of the Late


Dr, Hope, It is quite impossible for me to express the
feelings of deep sorrow and shame with which I reflect
on the wicked deed of mine which has deprived you of
one near and dear to you. I feel I cannot depart this
life without this expression of my sorrow, even though
it may be suspected or spurned, as it deserves to be, but
as it will be too late to ask you when this reaches you
to forgive me, I can only entertain the hope that your
Christian charity would have afforded me that comfort if
there had been an opportunity. May you be found in
the day of judgment amongst those who shall be saved.
“This is written by the Chaplain at my request,
“Thomas Jones.
“ Witnessed by me,
“ Foster Rogers, Chaplain.
“ Hants County Prison.”
This done, we engaged in prayer, after which he
spoke gratefully of his increased comfort, and the
afternoon s trial as having been a blessing in disguise,
for which he thanked God, adding, “Oh! there is a
burden off my mind ; I wish to say all I ought to Dr.
Hope’s friends.” We read a chapter we had previously
considered, Isa. i. to ver. 18. I called his attention to
verse 15, which speaks of some whose hands were


stained with blood, and yet are invited to “ come now
and reason with the Lord.” Then we read the fourth
chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and while speak-
ing on the last two verses, Jones suddenly exclaimed
with great emphasis, “I believe that Jesus Christ came
into the world to save sinners ; He came to save me,
even me!” When reading the last chapter (Rom. iv.)
I asked him if he understood, and if I had made it in-
telligible to him ? He replied, “ Every passage we have
read together has been made plain, and I have under-
stood it all as if I had received a college education.”
The next morning (9 a.m.) he spoke of having
been led to see more of his own heart, and that as his
time shortened, his confidence in his Saviour seemed to
increase. While thinking what chapter I should read,
the 25th verse of the thirty-third chapter of Deuteronomy
came into my mind, and I turned to the chapter and
read it all. I pointed out its prophetic character and
spoke of Moses as a type of Christ. But what im-
pressed him most was the blessing of Asher, and the
promise, “ As thy days, so shall thy strength be.” He
lingered over this and repeated the words again and
again. He told me he had been reading the eleventh
chapter of Hebrews, and wondered at the heroism of
the martyrs recorded there. We spoke of the faithful-


ness of God to His promises as the ground of their hope
“of the life that now is and that which is to come.” I
asked if his confidence resembled that of the holy
martyrs? His answer was: “My confidence in Jesus
increases as I get clearer views of His work on my
behalf, and its suitability to the condition of sinners.”
My visit was closed with prayer, and as I was leaving
his cell I was struck with the words,
“THOU WILT KEEP HIM IN PERFECT PEACE
WHOSE MIND IS STAYED ON THEE.”
In the evening I spent more time than usual with
him and read slowly and as impressively as I could
some passages of Scripture. Owing to some remarks
of his on the subject of answers to prayer, I read Mai.
iii. and iv. as a warrant for asking, and an assurance
that asking in faith will be answered in a way most
suitable to the condition and necessities of the offerer of
prayer, drawing his attention especially to verses 10, 16,
and 17 of chap. iii. and verses 2 and 3 of chap. iv.
When my visit ended, Jones said, “I am almost
ashamed to ask you, but I want you to do me a great
favour,” and taking up a tract I had lent him called
“ The Sinner’s Friend,” which has a number of prayers at
the end, he said, “ this book has been such a comfort to


me that I should so like you to give it to a man on
board the Stirling Castle , named Johnson, who was a
friend of mine. He is an elderly man, and used to be
nurse on the lower deck ; it might do him and others
good. I often pray for the bond and free on board that
ship! ” lat once consented to do as he requested.
On the morning of Good Friday I paid him a visit
before the time of chapel service, and read the following
letter to him from Mr. William Thwaites, the school-
master on board the hulks :
“ 106, High Street, Gosport,
March 20, 1856.
“Dear Jones, —I am sure it will be of comfort to
you to receive this note from me, inasmuch as lam
commissioned by the dearest friend of the late Dr.
Hope to inform you that she, in the name of all his
friends, expresses to you the full and free forgiveness
for your late deed ; but, above all, to tell you how truly
thankful they are to God that you have been brought
through His mercy and love to see that you are a sinner
and to throw yourself upon His mercy in Christ Jesus.
You have all their prayers that when you pass through
the valley of the shadow of death Jesus may be with
you. Now let me say one word to you from myself. I


have often spoken to you with others of the love of God
and the full and free salvation there is for all through
Jesus Christ. On the day that you will receive this, the
Christian Church will be commemorating the dying
love of the Lord Jesus! How it reminds us that the
precious blood of Jesus shed upon the Cross can cleanse
us from all our sin ! I am rejoiced to hear that you
have felt the blessed effects of that cleansing blood, that
you are another brand plucked from the burning. May
I meet you at the right hand of God that day when
all shall stand before His throne. I write to you as a
dying man. You can now have no inducement to
deceive any, and as you know that in a few short hours
you will be summoned before your God, how blessed it
must be for you to feel that through the Lord Jesus
you can stand in that wedding garment! He has pro-
vided for you, even the robe of His righteousness, that
robe which we all alike must obtain before we can meet
the gaze of our God in the eternal world. Good-bye;
may I meet you as I now believe I shall in Heaven.
You have had and shall have the prayers of my family
until the hour of your death.
“ Your well-wisher and Christian friend,
“ William Th waites,
“ Schoolmaster in the Stirling Castle."
8


The generous and free forgiveness contained in this
epistle was indeed a very seasonable comfort to poor
Jones, who, when I read it to him said, “ I cannot
express what I feel, but you can guess.” After my
morning visit I had a few moments’ conversation with
the Deputy-Governor of the prison, who had been
absent from duty for a few days, and who took great
interest in his condemned prisoner. From him I re-
ceived a confirmation of the opinion I had formed of
the seasonableness of Mr. Thwaites’ letter. Shortly
before it arrived Jones had been telling me how his
crime often came across him as a cloud, but this letter
however, was like ointment to a severe wound.
During the evening’s visit, which lasted for an hour
and a half, there were so many remarkable utterances
from the prisoner on various subjects crowded into one
conversation, some of them absolutely sublime, that I
was as much absorbed by them as the prisoner seemed
to be. The realities of the invisible world more espe-
cially were made almost visible to the eye by his remarks.
He told me that early in the morning before going to
chapel (at 10 o’clock Sunday) he felt as if he were
right in heaven, and saw Jesus, who said, “Come here,
poor sinner, and behold these wonders.” Then he spoke
of the love of the Lord Jesus , which led to a conversation


upon the love of the Holy Spirit, whose office it is to take
of the things of Christ and show them to us, and to
open our eyes to see them. We spoke of the love of
God the Father, “who gave His only begotten Son to
taste death for every man.” “Yes,” said Jones, “I was
thinking of that wonder to-day, and felt as if the Lord
Jesus would soon say, * Come here, poor sinner, and look
and understand what you could not comprehend on
earth.’ ”
He referred to the Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper,
which was administered after the morning service, and
thought it so wonderful that those people who were
there would kneel down with him. “ Those people ”
were the members of my own and the Governor’s family,
some of whom shook hands with him as he was leaving
the chapel. Afterwards we took the Twenty-third Psalm
for reading, but before I could commence it he said
he had read it repeatedly that day, and began to read it
again, dwelling upon the first and sixth verses in tears ;
and then of his own accord turning to the Thirty-fourth
Psalm, which I myself have for some time known by the
title, “ Oh, that Psalm,” from the fact that ever since the
evening I found him on the borders of despair, and read
the first six verses which were so blessed to his comfort,
he always called it “ Oh, that Psalm.” As he was read-


ing it I said, “ There is no chance in those verses, Jones.”
“ Oh, chance , sir, there is no chance with me.” On verse
18 he said, “I feel sure of that, and wish all in this
prison felt as I do, and my prayers this day have been
that they may.” He referred to the Lord’s gracious
dealings with him, and spoke of the kindness of the
prison officers to him. I dwelt on the scene that was
to take place in the morning, and I suppose he thought
I was rather unwilling to refer to it, and said, “ Oh,
I long to be gone; I could go this minute with joy; I
feel assured I shall be saved through grace,” and re-
minded me of a conversation we had on Hebrews i. 14,
on the ministry of angels. He also requested me to
express his gratitude to all those who had acted with
such Christian kindness towards him by writing such
letters to him. He spoke of the ministerial work as “ a
privilege to tell sinners of Christ,” and before I left he
said, “ I thought last Sunday a happy day, but this ex-
ceeds all. The Lord has had my way marked out.” He
also gave me
A MESSAGE FOR THE PRISONERS,
“Do tell them that drink , idleness , Sabbath-breaking ,
and a propensity to thieving brought me to this endP
He repeated his wish to send certain tracts and little


books he had read, and over which he had prayed,
that they may be blessed to the men in the hulks,
and mentioned the names of some who would prize
the separate system of this prison—men who used
to pray, but were ridiculed. “ I myself used to ridi-
cule them.” Another singular and evidently heart-felt
sentiment uttered by him, thus : “ This evening I feel
as if heaven were brought down to earth, and I was
in it. I lay here,” pointing to his bed, “ and had
such thoughts and views of it, I wish that one of them
would last twenty years.” He also referred to his filial
ingratitude with remorse. “ Many a time,” he said, “ I
have heard my father crying about me in the night.”
Again he referred to Good Friday morning, when,
reading some tracts that “ came home to him,” he went
to prayer, and told me he “ had such a sense of the
presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, as it were, before
your communion table, it affected my chest for some
time. It was an overwhelming sense of His nearness
to my soul that I consciously realised it.” Indeed, he
could hardly believe it was not a visible presence.
Knowing he was to receive the Lord’s Supper on that
day, he was up very early on that morning, meditating
and praying on the subject. It was a refreshing season
to him ; it was, as it were, holy communion by anticipa-


tion, and in this frame of mind he attended the chapel
service and the Lord’s Supper. He went in expectation
of a blessing, and he was not disappointed. Poor, dear
Jones was calm and perfectly collected and clear in
mind when I left him. Being the last evening we could
be together, it was a very solemn one to us both. The
thought as to whether I had dealt faithfully and plainly
and intelligently with him weighed on my mind. My
aim and desire and prayer were to make him understand
the gospel of the grace of God as set forth in His Word.
“By grace are ye saved through faith,” etc. It was not
a question with Jones as to whether he was a sinner, but
whether his sin had gone beyond the reach of mercy.
From the moment he thoroughly 7 realised his lost
condition the question with him was, “ Does my case
come within the possibility of salvation ? ” and the first
ray of hope that penetrated his mind was when the
substitutional character of the work of the Lord fesus,
who “suffered for sins the just for the unjust that He
might bring us unto God,” was made plain to him ;
and when he heard, as it were, the Lord Himself say,
“ All manner of sin may be forgiven,” he very soon
found peace through the “ blood that cleanseth from all
sin ” —a peace in which there was little fluctuation up
to the last; indeed, it seemed “to flow as a river” as his
end approached.


CHAPTER XVII.
THE FINAL SCENE ON EARTH.
entering his cell on the morning fixed
1 or execut i° n > I found him very busy
RLtoSsTJI reading his Bible. As I approached him
he told me in very warm and grateful
language that he had had another proof this morning
the Lord was with him. “ I have been praying of
late that some of the warders who stay with me might
go on their knees here, but none of them have done
so until this morning, when one did, and I thought
my heart would have jumped out of my mouth.”
He referred to Bishop Ryle’s Hymn Book, and espe-
cially to Hymn No. 28, as having been such a great
solace to him that morning. He had spoken of this
hymn at a former visit as an encouraging one. He


spoke without the least sign of trepidation of the
APPROACHING HOUR OF HIS DEATH,
which was fixed for nine o’clock that morning. On the
contrary, he said, “ I have had but one prayer not yet
answered, and that is that God may be glorified in me
on the scaffold, and I am sure He will be.” We read
the Forty-sixth Psalm, and dwelt on God as the Refuge
in trouble, and on verses 2 and 3 as reminding us
of our Blessed Lord on the Galilean sea, command-
ing the waves to be still, and as being the same Om-
nipotent Saviour still to calm the roughest storm of
trouble. Then we read the One-hundred-and-third
Psalm, as supplying language of praise for mercies
received, after which we turned to the Thirty-fourth
Psalm, and pondered over the sixth verse, which on a
former occasion lifted him out of deep waters for some
time. One of his remarks here was “ The Lord is giving
me a conscious sense of His presence with me, and His
support. He has been saying to me, ‘ Open thy mouth
wide and I will fill it.’ ” We read the fourteenth chapter
of St. John’s Gospel, especially the fourteenth to seven-
teenth verses. I showed him the word “ orphans ”in the
margin as another rendering of “ comfortless,” and he said
“Yes, the Lord is my Father,” and he laid very deep
emphasis on the word Father; it seemed to sustain him.


The time for the morning service in the chapel
(7.15 A.M.) was drawing near, and he asked me to
permit him to remain in his cell during the service,
assigning as his reason, that his presence in the chapel
might restrain me from saying all I might wish to
say to the prisoners, and that my sermon might over-
come him if I spoke about him, and he might disturb
the others. “ I wish, too, if I may be permitted, to
be here alone in close fellowship with my God, and
I will pray that your words and prayers may be made
useful, if only to bring one sinner to his knees ; and,
besides, I do not wish to be knocked up before the
time.” I consented to this request, and we read together
the “ Nunc Dimittis,” St. Luke ii. 29-32 —our last united
Scripture reading —and I spoke upon the same verses
in the chapel. It was a solemn time to me.
I delivered Jones’s message to the prisoners, who
listened most attentively, and all of whom appeared to
be deeply impressed. I also told them how he prayed
for them that they might be led to repent of their evil
ways before it was too late.
Immediately after the service I returned to poor
Jones. I found him sitting calmly by his bedside.
His first words were, “ Oh, it has been a happy time
to me, and now my tears are dried up ; the peace I


enjoy is great. lam sure the Lord would not mock me.
If He wished to cast me into hell, He would have done
it long ago, and not have given me this peace and joy
and then cast me away. No ! no ! ” I referred him to
the first chapter of St. Paul’s Epistle to the Philippians,
verses 5 and 6, when he read the sixth verse he repeated
the words, “ ‘ Confident of this very thing.’ lam sure
of it, I’m confident of it.” We continued conversing on
these topics until twenty minutes to nine o’clock, and
then knelt in prayer, during which there was an entire
absence of excitement or tears, and while we were thus
engaged the
SHERIFF’S OFFICERS KNOCKED
at the door. As they entered, Jones said to me,
“ If you see me getting weak, pray for me !” He
was removed to the room where Calcraft, the exe-
cutioner, was awaiting him. As he sat down to
undergo the process of pinioning, he put out his hand
to me and said, “I am quite strong. The Lord
is very gracious.” On descending the steps to the
forecourt, I asked him if he could go down alone ? and
he replied, “Yes, I am strong.” As we were going up
the tower stairs I reminded him of the promise, “As
thy days, so shall thy strength be; ” and while Calcraft


was completing his duty, I held the Prayer Book open
at the Burial Service, and Jones read in an audible voice,
“ I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that He shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth,” etc. He began
the sentence in a whisper, raised his voice as he proceeded,
and finished it in a distinct and clear tone, so that it was
heard by every one in the room. He then addressed
the Governor of the prison, and spoke of the gracious
manner in which the Lord had dealt with him, and rose
to ascend the last steps to the high platform on the top
of the tower, from whence the city, the cathedral, and
the country around were visible. He stood without
evincing the least agitation or trembling. When placed
on “ the drop,” while Calcraft was adjusting the rope, he
called me, and reminded me of a conversation we had
had several days before on the subject of using his sad
history for the moral and spiritual benefit of men of his
class. “ Say what I wish, as I told you; set Christ alone
before them, as the power of God unto salvation.” As
I moved off the drop and knelt down, he began to pray
in a clear voice, earnestly asking the Lord to receive his
soul, with which words upon his lips, I cherish the
conviction that his prayer was granted, and that “ the
Saviour was glorified in him on the scaffold.”


As I stood under the gateway of the prison in the
morning, before five o’clock, waiting for the porter to
admit me, my thoughts were drawn to the tower over-
head—my humble and constant prayer was, that He
who heard the prayer of the dying malefactor on the
cross, and took him from Calvary to Paradise, would
also sustain and rescue poor Thomas Jones, “ the escaped
Norfolk Island Convict,” and give him a place amongst
those “ who have washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb.” The moon was
shining brilliantly amidst innumerable stars, and an un-
seen lark filled the air with his melodious song, recalling
to my mind the words of Thomas Jones, not eight-and-
forty hours before, on the last verse of the first chapter
of St. Paul s Epistle to the Hebrews, respecting “ the
ministry of angels ” to those who shall be “ heirs of salva-
tion,” when he expressed wonder if “ any of them would
be permitted to conduct one so unworthy as he was
into the Redeemer’s presence.” The notes of the bird,
so sweet and clear, though itself unseen, seemed to me
as the representative of one of those holy beings who are
said to “ rejoice over one sinner that repenteth ; ” and it
touched a chord in my own heart that awakened prayer,
and lent strength to my faith as I proceeded to the
prisoner’s cell, where I was met with the happy saluta-


THE CHAPLAIN AT HOME.




tion already mentioned above, respecting the warder
who knelt in prayer that morning.
*****
At five o’clock in the evening I stood beside the open
grave m which the body of poor Thomas Jones was laid
to await the sound of that trumpet which shall awake
all who sleep in Jesus.” His body was carried to the
grave by four prisoners, and followed by the Deputy-
Governor and myself and one or two other officials.
The evening was serene and bright, and as the coffin
was lowered into the grave the words, “He shall rise
again at the resurrection of the just” arose in my mind.
The prisoners who carried him exhibited more feeling
than the hireling mourners who go about the streets,
and although no funeral dirge was then said or sung by
human tongue as we laid him in the grave, yet I doubt
not “ there was joy in the presence of the angels of God
over this penitent sinner who departed this life in the
true faith of Jesus Christ, the sinner’s Friend.”
So this was the end of an ill-spent life! Jones was a man
sparkling with intelligence, and possessing rare faculties
which, had they been cultivated aright, might have been
the means of making him a valuable member of society.
Instead, however, associations of his early life had led
him along the broad road, and, as invariably happens, if


the traveller does not retrace his steps, it ends in dis-
honour and death. During his convict life in Tasmania
and Norfolk Island he underwent the most severe and
terrible discipline, with little religious instruction, the
benefit of which was neutralised by the manner in which
it was given ; indeed, it was looked upon as a part of
the punitive treatment he had to undergo, and helped to
prejudice his mind against religion. His daring nature
was rendered more ferocious by the tyranny of those
who governed, and who seldom tried more humane
means of reforming the convicts than the lash, the gag,
the spread eagle, or the gallows. Moral and religious
treatment was regarded as a superfluous element in the
Norfolk Island system of discipline. Occasionally when
no religious instructor was in the island, which was often
the case, a few prayers were read by one of the con-
stables, all of whom were selected from the convicts
themselves, and were hated by the whole mass of the
prisoners. It would be absurd to expect any moral
benefit from such services. It is not surprising, there-
fore, that when Thomas Jones came to this prison his
mind was a blank as to the knowledge of Scripture.
But when his prejudices were broken down, and his con-
science and heart touched by the enlightening grace of
the Holy Ghost, he began to drink in words of Divine


truth with avidity. When reading the Bible he never
asked me, as others often have done, “ Is this verse or
passage containing great and precious promises true ? ”
He never expressed a doubt as to the Divine authority
and inspiration of Holy Scripture. From the day when
he really saw what sin is, and the penalty denounced
against it, the effect produced upon him was as if he had
seen a photograph of himself on the sacred page, and
heard a voice saying, “Behold yourself!” He became
alarmed, and cried out, “ What must I do to be saved ? ”
and while in this state of conviction of sin he found
relief in the answer to his question, viz., “ Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved.” This
answer silenced all doubt, if he had any, about the
Divine origin and authority of the Scriptures. Indeed
his confidence in the source and truth of God’s Word
was implicit and strong ; and the influence and effect of
the Word upon his heart and mind was remarkable. It
was as though he found himself at sea in a violent
storm, and the ship sinking, when a lifeboat came along-
side to save him from going down with the wrecked
vessel ; he would not think it necessary to ask who
made the lifeboat or whether it was seaworthy, but
would at once jump into it and escape being drowned ;
and I cherish the hope that in the day when the Lord


comes again this poor escaped Norfolk Island convict
will be found in the company of those who have “ washed
their robes and made them white in the blood of the
Lamb,” and stand in His temple.
“ Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire ? ” (Zech.
iii. 2).
“Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence
of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth ”
(Luke xv. 7).
“ Gloria in excels is Deo."
Joy ! joy 1 joy ! there is joy in heaven with the angels ;
Joy ! joy ! joy 1 for the prodigal’s return !
He has come, he has come to his Father’s house at last.
He was lost; he is found, and the night of gloom is past.
Blessed hour of joy, and communion sweet,
For his heart is full in the love complete;
His Father sees him, and hastes to meet,
And bids him welcome home.
Joy I joy 1 joy ! there is joy in heaven with the angels;
Joy ! joy! joy ! for the prodigal’s return !
Joy ! joy 1 joy ! in the courts of heaven resounding ;
Joy ! joy ! joy ! o’er the prodigal’s return.
Hark ! the song, hark! the song, ’tis a joyful, joyful strain,
Welcome home, welcome home to thy Father’s house again,
While his eye is dim with the falling tears
Of repentant grief o’er the wasted years,
The pardoning voice of his Father cheers,
And bids him welcome home.
Joy I joy ! joy ! in the radiant fields of glory.
Joy ! joy ! joy ! when a wandering soul returns ;
Let us haste, let us haste, while the morning sun is bright
Jesus calls, Jesus calls to a land of love and light.
We will journey on, till our pilgrim feet
Shall be found, be found in the golden street;
Our glorious Saviour will smile to. greet,
And bid us welcome home.
UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, CHILWORTH AND LONDON.








