

2S*>S
.'p
THE COLONY OF QUEENSLAND
AND THE ALLEGED
SLAVE TRADE IN THE SOUTH SEAS.
DEBATE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, JUNE 28, 1869.
WITH
AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
LONDON.
1869.




THE COLONY OE QUEENSLAND
AND THE ALLEGED
SLAVE-TRADE IN THE SOUTH SEAS.
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
In republishing the debate on the traffic in Polynesian Islanders,
which took place in the House of Commons in June last, it
would be unfair to ignore ihe measures which Her Majesty’s
Government have taken to put a stop to the evils which undoubt-
edly exist in connection with that traffic, or to make the Govern-
ment of Queensland responsible for the misdeeds of men who have,
been concerned in the inter-island slave-trade. Mr. Taylor was
careful to distinguish between the so-called immigration to
Queensland and that form of the traffic so justly condemned by
Mr. Monsell, which has given an unhappy notoriety to Samoa
and Fiji; but the Member for Leicester was justified in holding
Queensland responsible for the latter abuses to the extent, at least,
to which they have been perpetrated under the sanction of Commis-
sions granted by the Colonial Government. Indeed, to take a
broader view of the subject, even if the Queensland traffic had
been free from all the evils by which, as there is too much reason
to believe, it has been characterised, a civilized Government might
well have shrunk from imparting legality to a species of commerce
which could not fail to attract to it a class of unscrupulous
adventurers over whose proceedings it would be difficult to
exercise a salutary control.
There is good reason to hope that, so far as Queensland itself is
concerned, this debate, and the very emphatic despatches which
Lord Granville has addressed to the Governor, will be attended
with beneficial results, although there still is, and always must be,
a considerable danger that the importation into the Colony, in any
large numbers, of a necessarily helpless and servile labouring
population will result in the establishment of a quasi system
of slavery, and in the consequent moral and social deterioration


of the dominant race. That the Secretary of State for the Colonies
is not indifferent to those interests of civilization and humanity
which, in connection with this subject, are entrusted to his charge,
will be seen from the following passage in one of his des-
patches :
“ I wish you clearly to remember that the matter is not a mere
Queensland question ; it is a matter affecting foreign, though uncivilized
countries, and the honour of the British name in connection with them. It
is a matter in which Her Majesty’s Government feels the deepest
interest, and in respect of which you, as the Officers, are under the most
serious responsibility. It is for you to take care that the Home Govern-
ment is not misled, but receives accurate and full information respecting
what is going on in Queensland, and to use your utmost influence to
secure that the immigrants receive in other Colonies to which coloured
immigrants (as they are called) proceed, and without which they must
be at the mercy of those about them. I trust to you for giving your
immediate and serious attention to the matter, in order that Her
Majesty’s Government may be in a position to vindicate the character
of the Colony if these abuses do not exist; or to take such steps as may
be necessary for putting a stop to the immigration if they do.
His lordship has directed the Governor of New South Wales to
appoint a Royal Commission for the purpose of investigating all
the circumstances connected with the alleged revival of the slave-
trade in the South Seas. A Committee of the Queensland
Legislature has also been engaged in the same task; but there is
cause for regret that they limited their inquiry to the examination
of certain witnesses (chiefly of the official and employer class) who
presented themselves at Brisbane, and that none of the Pacific
islanders were called upon to give evidence. An inquiry so
restricted in its character can scarcely be deemed satisfactory. It
is, however, worthy of remark that their verdict on the allegations
against the Queensland branch of the traffic is not unqualifiedly
one of “not guilty.” “ The result,” they say, “convinces them
that these allegations are not proved by the evidence placed before
them.” They then go on to recommend, “as a precaution against
possible wrong doing on the part of those who bring these men
from the islands, that the Government should send an agent with
every vessel licensed for this service 5 and further, that efficient
interpreters should be obtained for the purpose of fully explaining
to the men their contracts and duties, as well as, on their behalf,
any complaints they may have against employers or others.”
Mr. Monsell, in his speech, stated, that by the Act of Colonial


Legislature, “ Masters of vessels were required to give security for
the return within three years of such immigrants to be sent back;”
but it appears from the evidence of Mr. M‘Donnell, the Immigra-
tion agent at Brisbane, that, under the law as it stands, “the cancel-
lation of the agreement” at any time during the period to which it
extends “ releases the employer from liability under the bond.”
This is a flaw in the Act, which, it is to be hoped, further legisla-
tion will rectify. Mr. Monsell admitted that “ there were no
regulations as to the introduction into Queensland of a proper
proportion of the two sexes;” a fact which is confirmed by Mr.
McDonnell, who states that only three native women have been
introduced into the island since the immigration began—one before
and two since the Act was passed.
Pending the results of the inquiry which will be held under the
auspices of a Royal Commission, it is not desirable to attach
implicit credit to all the shocking statements which have been
made as to the occurrences that have taken place in the South
Seas. It is sufficient to know that a prima facie case has been
made out, and that the good name of this country will remain
tarnished so long as she labours under the suspicion of being
implicated in any traffic which bears the faintest resemblance to
slavery or the slave-trade.
*** If any persons desirous of obtaining further information on
this subject will apply to the Secretary of the Aborigines’ Pro-
tection Society, 7, Adam Street, Adelphi, London, he will be
happy to forward to them copies of the more recent publications
of the Society.


ALLEGED REVIVAL OF THE SLAVE-TRADE FROM
THE SOUTH-SEA ISLANDS.
House of Commons, Monday, June 28, 1869,
Mr. P. A. Taylor: I rise for the purpose of calling attention to
the manner in which the supply of labour to our great colony of
Queensland is at present furnished through immigration from the
South-Sea Islands. My object is to prevent the idea of Queens-
land being associated with a revival of the slave-trade. To show
that the territory of Queensland is not an unimportant, but, on the
contrary, one of the most extensive of the British colonies, I may
mention that its area is nearly double that of Canada; that it is
one-half larger than England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland and
France added together; and that gold, copper, and coal mines
have been already discovered in several districts of Queensland.
The climate is well fitted for the European constitution. In this
magnificent country there has sprung up within the last seven or
eight years a system of immigration from the neighbouring South-
Sea Islands, to supply the wants of labour in Queensland, The
evils of that system were admitted on all sides, and upon the re-
commendation of the Colonial Office an Act was passed to regulate
that immigration of barbarians. No Act could render that immi-
gration a desirable or a moral one. Under that system of immi-
gration the evils of the middle passage are repeated. I brought
this question before the late Government and the present one, and
the hon. member for the Isle of Wight lately put a question to the
Under Secretary to the Colonies. On this last occasion we were
assured that the serious attention of the Government would be paid
to the matter ; but up to the present, as far as I can understand,
no active steps have been taken to do away with this disgraceful
traffic. I have nothing to say against the Act passed by the Colo-
nial legislature. 1 believe it contains some provisions against
which nothing could be said. Probably it is as good an Act as
could have been passed under the circumstances; but it wants that
specific element by which alone a successful system of emigration
can be realized, namely, the establishment of a Government depot
in these islands, so as to secure the emigrants every information
necessary as regards the country to which they are to be brought,
and as to the nature of the agreement into which they enter. The
Duke of Newcastle, writing in 1861 to Governor Sir G. Bowen,
having stated that the emigrants to the West Indies and the Mauri-
tius were collected in India, under the direction of agents appointed
and paid by the respective colonies, were received into depots at
the port of departure, were subjected before embarkation to a me-
dical examination, were informed where they were going, and made
to understand the nature of the agreement, and, above all, that it


was required that every body of males should be accompanied by
a certain proportion of females, fixed at that time at 25 per cent.,
went on to say : “ Wherever the emigration shall be set on foot, it
will be your first duty to appoint an emigration agent for the
colony at each port from which emigrants are to be obtained.”
Now in the despatch of the Duke of Buckingham to Governor
Sir George Bowen, dated 9th November 1867, suggesting the
principal points for an Act, no mention is made of such a condi-
tion. The only protection in this respect consists in the clause
that the master of the vessel must produce a certificate signed by a
“ Consul, Missionary, or other known person,” or that the agree-
ment shall be overlooked, and that by the Government agent, to
see that the immigrants understand the terms of the contract.
The Bishop of Sydney, at the meeting, February Bth, 1869, read a
letter from Dr. Pattison, the Missionary Bishop of Milenesia, in
which he stated his unqualified opinion, that the natives of the
island were incapable of understanding the nature of a legal
contract. Now, Sir, this trade, as I have shown, wants that first
element which would make it tolerable. I am far from saying,
that even if this element was present the trade would have
been a tolerable one. Notwithstanding the admirable regulations
under which it was managed there were many who doubted whe-
ther it was not a great evil. I will read a memorial signed by '
John Small, Chief Justice of Hong Kong, and the Hon. James
Whittall to Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell, Governor of Hong
Kong. In regard to Coolie emigration it says : “We will give
the Chinese Government credit for thoroughly good intentions,
and we are anxious to admit that the letter of their legislation in
connexion with Coolie emigration is very near perfection. But
we do not require to tell your Excellency that these very regula-
tions, said to be designed to protect the Coolie against fraud and
restraint, are with detestable ingenuity converted into meshes
whereby to entrap him more securely. These regulations are of
no utility whatever; they serve but to cast dust in the eyes of the
world ; they afford no protection to the Coolie. For the reputa-
tion of the colony, therefore, for the sake of example, and for the
honour, in so far as it is given by your Excellency and to our-
selves to uphold the same, of the British flag, we call upon you to
solemnly condemn, by Colonial Legislation, this trade in human
bodies, which, bearing the impress of misery wherever it is carried
on, culminates at our very gates into the hideous form of slavery.”
With respect to these Coolies there is a Government depot at the
place from which and to which they are sent, and yet this is how the
Chief Justice of Hong Kong states that the trade has degenerated,
even under these circumstances. There is another charge I wish to
make against this Bill. By the sixth clause the Government of
Queensland seeks to legalize the traffic in coloured labourers by
private persons, in a manner disallowed by the Home Government
in the tropical dependencies of the empire. That is enacted which
is contrary to what is elsewhere allowed under British dominion ;


the only parallel instance is that in which the Mauritius planter
is allowed to send his agent to recruit Coolies in India, but this is
done under the complete control of the Government authorities both
in India and the Mauritius. Now this is not a new question to us.
We have felt it our duty, as a country, to interfere in more than
one case where our country was obtaining labour for this purpose.
When the French resorted to the system of conveying free black
labourers from Africa to the French colonies, a Government officer
was appointed to superintend the whole transaction, and see that
the people were fairly treated. This was the counterpart of the
Queensland system. Notwithstanding all the precautions of the
French Government, the traffic speedily developed into slavery,
and the Emperor abolished it. There was another system to which
the Queensland system might be compared. Natives of the South-
Sea Islands were transported to the cotton-fields of Peru. The
English and French Governments raised their hands against the
traffic as being a slave-trade. Now, Sir, to what has this traffic
led ? It has led to results which might have been anticipated. I
must trouble the House with a few extracts. Of course it is not
easy to get authentic information, but that accounts such as those
I am about to read can be believed in the colony, is of itself a con-
demnation of the system. “ The accounts,” says th e Sydney Herald
of October 9, 1868, “ we have received, from authority not to be
doubted, of the state of the natives of the South-Sea Islands now in
Queensland is extremely disheartening. We have no wish to
raise fastidious objections against enterprises which promise na-
tional prosperity, but we cannot hesitate, especially in the light of
past events, to declare that the condition of a large proportion of
the coloured people is one of slavery, having no other character-
istics distinct from it but that they have no local domestic ties,
and that at a future period they may perhaps return to their native
country. The evidences are too strong to be resisted, that many
of them are inveigled into their positions by the most false repre-
sentations, and that others are actually stolen from their native
land. When it is considered that from 51. to 11. each are paid by
the planters for islanders brought to the shores of Queensland, and
that the countries from which they are brought are within a short
voyage of the market to which they are transferred, can any one
doubt that improper means are likely to be employed to lure them,
or that they are actually seized and put on board without their own
consent?” And the same article went on: “From the Christian
islands the people are enticed, not commonly stolen. They are
brought by representations of food and wages which are rarely
realized. From the other islands they are mostly brought by a
species of constraint, and totally ignorant of the conditions of ser-
vice. On the arrival of a vessel, if not clandestine, the immigra-
tion agent goes on board. He examines what are called agree-
ments. These have been witnessed by some party more or less
trustworthy—often totally unworthy of credit. The more intelli-
gent find, that instead of being engaged for one year, the agree-


ment shows three. They find, when they are carried up the coun-
try, that the food is utterly insufficient, and that the clothing, from
the nature of their work, is quickly destroyed. Thus many of
them in a state of nudity are seen working on the plantation. If
complaints arise, it is supposed that they are taken to a magistrate.
In reality, on some even of the best estates, coercion is exercised,
by the overseer. Flogging, irons, threats of shooting—such is the
fare.” And there is a particular case which I believe to be au-
thentic. It stands upon authority which will be admitted to be
reliable. Mr. Alfred Davidson, a well-known gentleman, says,
in a letter dated Brisbane, 30th November : “ I visited the pri-
soners last week (South-Sea Islanders) sent from up country to
prison for breach of contract. I found that a contract had been
made through their native chief to work for 10s. a week for one
year. No interpreter was employed in Queensland. The men
knew nothing of a new contract here. They had to put their
marks or names on paper for three years, for 2s. Qd. per week.
The police magistrate did his best for the men, but the local ma-
gistracy overruled his views. Of course, none of them knew of
the island contract, for there was no interpreter, and the men could
not explain.” “ Our correspondent,” says the Colonial Intelli-
gencer, “ humanely interested himself in a girl named Mary, who,
it was alleged, was carried off from the island of Tanna by an
armed crew, as a ransom for her father. The latter was a chief,
and having been made a prisoner by the crew, they refused to re-
lease him except in exchange for another native. ‘ His daughter
was then dragged through the water by men of her father’s tribe,
and thrown naked into the boat. On board she was given as a
wife to one of the boat’s crew, who is, I think, a bad fellow. This
man is from a Christian island, but has been a sailor, and has an-
other wife, to whom he has been married by the Missionary in his
own island, where bigamy is a legal crime.’ ” The captain was
afterwards charged with a criminal assault, of which he was ac-
quitted, but I observe her evidence was rejected as being a hea-
then. I find in the Scotsman of December 1868, the following :
“ The last Australian mail brings news that, there seems no good
reason for doubting. At Mallicolo 21 natives were induced to lay
down their war-clubs, and go below to have a look at the hold.
They were not allowed to come up again. Their canoes were sent
adrift, and the vessel stood out to sea; the wives of the kidnapped
men swimming after her whilst their strength lasted, and, when
they could no longer chase her, still sending wild wails along her
felonious wake. At Matlow a large haul was made, but all ex-
cept two managed to slip ashore in the night. So the ship
cruised about until she had bagged more than 100 islanders. Six,
whom she took out of a canoe, she was compelled to restore, be-
cause, had she not done so, their chief would have rescued them
by force. To punish the islanders who had mustered to prevent
their countrymen from being carried into captivity, for their
heinously presumptuous sin, however, the captain sent an armed


boat along the shore to fire into the huts and sink as many canoes
as it could get hold of. On the voyage to Brisbane there was
much sea and other sickness aboard. When his luckless captives
would not or could not eat, the captain, fearing that the sulks
would deprive him of a considerable percentage of his ‘ imported
cattle,’ would stand over them and threaten to administer a tonic
in the shape of a thick stick.” In last February a meeting was
held at Sydney to protest against this traffic. The Mayor of
Sydney presided, and the bishop moved the first resolution. The
Right Rev. speaker strongly denounced the traffic, and quoted the
testimony of Bishop Pattison, who is now cruising among the
islands, as to the misery it had occasioned. Another phase of the
traffic is, that private individuals are trading in these natives from
one part of the South Seas to another. An English adventurer
establishes a plantation at Samoa or Fiji, and then stocks them
with labourers obtained from neighbouring islands, under the
commission of the Queensland Government. I think it must be
admitted that there is no more excuse for Queensland than there
would be for a man who shot another to say that he only pulled
the trigger, and did not touch either the powder or the ball. When
once, under the licence from Queensland, they get people on board,
they may place them where they wish. The Sydney correspon-
dent of the Times says, writing on the 27th February: “ I believe
I stated in my last something respecting the act of the supercargo
of a vessel bound to Samoa, where that person had just established
a plantation. By arrangement with the captain, sixty men and
twenty or thirty young women were inveigled on board and
forcibly detained at Samoa. A case has just come to the know-
ledge of the authorities here, and compelled them to put the law
in force against the offenders. The captain of the Young Australia,
and one of the crew, stand committed to take their trial for the
murder of three natives of one of the New Hebrides group of
islands. The supercargo, who is also implicated in the affair, has
been caught at Melbourne, and is coming up. Briefly the parti-
culars are as follows :—The vessel mentioned, chartered by a Syd-
ney firm, sailed in September last, or thereabouts, with a cargo for
Fiji. The cargo being discharged (so at present I understand the
case), a raid was proposed among the New Hebrides islands for
“ Niggers,” as the Polynesians are called, to work on the newly-
established plantations at Fiji. The vessel was five weeks
gone, and, when it returned, landed 235 natives, including six
women, something like 120(X having been cleared by the trans-
action. The vessel returned to Sydney. While here, intelligence
was received from Fiji, which was made known to the Govern-
ment. It appears that, during that voyage, off the island of Palma
three natives were forced on board, who, breaking open the hold
in which they were confined, fought for their liberty, and were
shot down and turned overboard, by command of the supercargo,
and under the silent sanction of the captain. The vessel was just
on the point of starting again from Sydney, on another expedition,


when the captain was arrested. I understand that a great many
shippers are engaged in this traffic, which can be carried on re-
spectably, under the endorsement of the Queensland Parliament.
I had almost said of the British Government; but I hope we
have not come yet to that. But it is not to be supposed that this
wretched system does not provoke retaliation.” I take the follow-
ing extract from the correspondent of a New York paper, which
appeared in the Daily News :—“lt seems that some lime ago
Messrs. Stern, Smith, Strickland, Bates, and Pritchard, together
with five white ladies and a child, settled in Tanna, upon some
land which they had innocently purchased from Captain Ross
Lewin. A report has now arrived that all of these unfortunate
people have been massacred. Until, however, it is fully con-
firmed, people are naturally unwilling to give credit to so horrible
a story. But the recent outrages by the Queensland slavers upon
the Tanna native's lend an air of great probability to the report.”
But now for Queensland itself. I have here a report by the
Rev, J. P. Sunderland, who visited Queensland, and gave a re-
port of what he saw and heard. He visited sugar plantations,
where some 3000 or 4000 Polynesian labourers were employed,
who had been taken from their homes by fraud. Ships went to
the New Hebrides to “catch blackbirds,” and they caught them
by utter deceit for three years’ engagements.” He went to some of
the best sugar plantations in Queensland, and remarks, that if there
was anything like slavery that was. The natives were of different
islands and different dialects, and so were isolated in their new
home. They were very scantily dressed. One would have nothing
but a flannel shirt, another only a pair of trowsers, and they had to
dig with bare feet. They said to him, “Missa, we’ve been deceived:
we were told we should have plenty of work, plenty of food, and
at the end of twelve months should go back home. But we
found we had to stop three years.” He asked the planters what
they did when the labourers fell ill. The reply was, “ They often
gammon to be ill, but we take a whip and tickle them up a bit,
and then they soon get well.” Such was the humane process by
which the islanders were to be raised in the scale of morality and
civilization. One planter wrote to another, and said, “What can
you supply me a hundred niggers for?” And no doubt, as long
as it was found that 61. or 71. a head could be got for the natives,
men would do anything to get them. Such is the state of things,
as described by an eye-witness. I will read to the House, with
its permission, a few passages from a letter which comes from the
very spot itself, which describes in an extrermdy graphical manner
one of those transactions. It is a letter addressed by the Rev.
James McNair, a well-known missionary of the Scottish Re-
formed Presbyterian Church, of high character, and it is ad-
dressed to Commander Lambert, of the Australian squadron. (The
letter described the alleged kidnapping of nine Erromangans by
the schooer Latona). The honourable gentleman then proceeded :
—How is all this to be stopped ? I t is said that it is ex-


tremely difficult to prevent it; but 1 do not think there would be
any difficulty in putting a stop to it at all. At the time when I
first put a question to the late Under Secretary, I was called upon
by a gentleman from the colony, one of the first who began the
system of immigration, and he informed me that, in his opinion,
the proposed Act was so stringent that it would put a stop to this
traffic. Now I believe that if the Government insisted upon the
establishment of a depot under Government superintendence at
every place from which the islanders were shipped, and a proper
proportion of women likewise sent, that the expenses attendant
upon these essential preliminaries would be sufficient to put a stop
entirely to this unholy traffic. At the very time when the late
Government was sanctioning this traffic there was issued from the
Board of Admiralty of that Government the most masterly denun-
ciation of the whole affair; and I trust our Colonial Office will
follow the Board of Admiralty of the late Government. I will
read a few extracts from the correspondence between Mr. Romaine
and the Colonial Office. That gentleman, writing from the Ad-
miralty, says :—“ My Lords desire me to refer you to the corre-
spondence which took place between the Colonial Office and this
department in 1863, relative to the kidnapping of Polynesians, to
be employed on cotton plantations and other agricultural opera-
tions in Peru,” and went on to say that *i the trade of procuring
labourers rapidly degenerated into slave-hunting and slave-
trading,” and that it was the belief of their lordships that these
South Sea islanders were “ incapable of understanding the nature
of a written contract with an employer,” and that none of them
would “ knowingly and willingly engage themselves to work far
from their own country at all, or at any place even near their own
home, for more than a few months. My Lords are also thoroughly
impressed with the belief that whatever regulations may be made
for the well-being and liberty of these people, on their being
brought nominally within reach of the laws and tribunals of
Queensland, yet that no proper and efficient control can ever be
exercised over the manner in which these people are obtained and
placed on board ship. The task of their collection and shipment
is, from the nature of the work, likely to fall into the hands of an
unscrupulous and mercenary set, who, under pretence of persuad-
ing the natives into making engagements as labourers for a term
of years, would not hesitate to commit acts of kidnapping, piracy
and murder. Entertaining these views, my Lords are unable to
concur in any recommendation with regard to framing an Act of
the Colonial legislature for the regulation of the introduction of
these people into the colony.” Mr. Romaine wrote again to the
Under Secretary of State, referring to the letter from which I
have just quoted—“ With reference to the letter from this depart-
ment dated the 7th December last, on the subject of the kidnap-
ping of natives from the South Sea Islands by vessels under the
Chilian and Peruvian flags, I am commanded by my Lords Com-
missioners of the Admiralty to acquaint you, for the information


of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, that, looking to the re-
presentations formerly made by this country and France as to the
importaiion of South Sea Islanders into Chili and Peru, and to the
representations made by this country as to the importation of ne-
groes from the west coast of Africa to the West Indies, and look-
ing also to the probability that representation will be made by
France on the deportation of South Sea Islanders to serve as
labourers in Queensland, their Lordships would suggest, that before
the Colonial Office decide upon the question of Colonial legisla-
tion for the regulation of the traffic, the opinion of the Secretary of
State for Foreign Affairs should be taken on the subject.” I wish
the opinion of the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs had not
only been taken, but had been followed. The next thing that
comes in these papers is a remonstrance from the French Govern-
ment, which is put off with a letter from the Colonial Office to the
effect that Her Majesty’s Government had had occasion to con-
sider the mode of repressing such outrages as occurred ; that they
would be glad to be furnished with the details of any cases that
had come to the knowledge of the French Government; conclud-
ing with the words —“ At the same time, his Grace desires to
point out that proceedings of this kind must be distinguished from
an emigration of labourers which appears to be going on to some
extent from some of the islands in the South Seas to Queensland,
and in regard to which regulations for the benefit of immigrants
have been suggested to the Governor of Queensland, in which
colony some of these emigrants have arrived.” I will trouble the
House with but one extract more, from a letter of Mr. Murdock,
of the Emigration Board. He says —“ Whether it is right as a
general principle to permit the introduction of an inferior and un-
civilized race into a British colony, so strongly deprecated in the
Queensland Memorial, is a question which J do not presume to
discuss. As far as the emigrant is concerned it would be useless
to deny that it may be attended with some disadvantages; but
that, on the whole, a race of so low a type as natives of the New
Hebrides must derive great benefit from being brought in contact
with a purer morality and a higher civilization cannot be ques-
tioned.” lam extremely loth to place myself in conflict with so
great and distinguished an authority as this gentleman is. But I
should think that the experience, as well as the theory, of history
is against him. If there was one thing better founded than an-
other with regard to colonization of this kind, it is, that nothing
but demoralization can ensue under such circumstances. There is
one other point in regard to the morality in the islands from which
those savages are taken. A writer quoted in the Colonial Intelligencer
says—speaking of contracts for three years—“ This may be very
well if all we have to consider is the development of Queensland.
But are we to overlook the effect on the islands where civilization
is making such satisfactory progress ? Asa rule, they do not con-
tain a surplus of population. If fifty or sixty natives are abstracted
from these little communities they are the best—the workers ; and


■what are left? Women, children, old men, and good for nothings.
During the absence of these braves, their wives, where there are
any, despairing of their return, become the wives of other men,
and so the family tie is completely broken up. At home, Europe
has taken thought for their religious and secular instruction ; but
this must all be relinquished in Queensland.” I would venture to
impress one other consideration upon the House, and that is this.
We consider ourselves a moral and practical people, and especially
a colonizing people. Now I say we do to our practical tenden-
cies no justice to encourage such a system as this, and we have the
means to make the dependency rich, as well as morally healthy.
We have a surplus population, and pauperism rhing and bubbling
up to our very lips, and we have philanthropists declaring that
our utmost power is unable to grapple with it. Can we not bring
these two things together ? Can we not send our surplus popula-
tion to Queensland ? Can we not do better than demoralize both ?
I call upon the country to put a stop to this most infamous traffic,
which is dangerous to our international relations with foreign
countries; which is sure in the long run to destroy the prosperity
of the colony ; which is ruining the prospects, and turning into
slaves the wretched men who are sent there; and which is frus-
trating all the efforts made by our missionaries for the civilization
of these islands. The hon. gentleman, in conclusion, asked the
Under Secretary of State for the Colonies whether his attention
had been called to the great dissatisfaction prevailing in Queens-
land in regard to the system of importation of South Sea Islanders
into that colony ; whether he was aware that this importation was
described as practically no better than a legalized slave-trade, and
that the natives were, in many cases, inveigled on board under false
pretences ; and whether he would lay on the table any correspon-
dence on the subject.
Mr. Monsell said his hon. friend had rendered a great
public service by bringing forward this subject, for the prevention
of any approach to slavery in the Polynesian Islands was undoubt-
edly “a matter of considerable importance. His hon. friend had
verv properly drawn a distinction between the conveyance of
emigrants to Queensland and the traffic which was carried on
between different Polynesian Islands and Samoa and Fiji. Indeed,
with regard to the latter, he would admit the correctness of his
hon. friend’s statements. In the case of the Young Australian lor
example, the most horrible atrocities had been perpetrated, and
other instances might be adduced in which, to say the least, there
had been a tendency towards the revival of the slave-trade in the
islands of Samoa and Fiji. He would venture, however, to con-
trovert his hon. friend’s assertions with regard to the emigration to
Queensland. According to the law passed by the Legislature of
that colony no one was allowed to go about the Polynesian
Islands for the purpose of procuring emigrants without a licence
from the Governor of Queensland. In the next place, masters of
vessels were required to give security for the return within three


years of such emigrants as desired to be sent back ; and they were
further compelled to bring a certificate from the Consul, Mission-
ary, or other known person, that the emigrants had engaged
themselves voluntarily, and understood the nature of their engage-
ment. Tbe Emigration Agent was required to ascertain that such
a certificate had been procured before he allowed the emigrants
to land. At the same time he admitted that, in two particulars,
these regulations were insufficient, as there were no regulations as
to the introduction into Queensland of a proper proportion of the
two sexes, and the attendance of an emigration agent on board the
vessels before they were allowed to sail. These omissions were,
however, about to be supplied by the Queensland Legislature.
With regard to the case of the Latona , a minute investigation had
been set on foot, and the depositions of the captain and emigrants
taken. From these it appeared that the captain had distinctly
asked the clergyman to come on board, in order that he might
satisfy himself that the emigrants were there of their own free will,
and that the reverend gentleman had declined to do anything of
the sort. The case of the Latona consequently broke down. As
to the treatment of the inhabitants of the Polynesian Islands after
their arrival in Queensland, he would simply refer to the words
of the Governor, who, in a despatch received at the Colonial
Office within the last few days, said they were even better protected
than coolies in the West Indies, and that he had seen them em-
ployed on several plantations working with Europeans, and treated
on an equality with them. The Attorney-General of the colony
likewise stated that no instances of cruelty or anything like slavery
enforced on these labourers had ever been brought under his notice.
Again, the accounts received at the Colonial Office respecting the
condition of the Coolies in the West Indies were totally at variance
with the statements of his lion, friend, as they showed that the
Coolies who returned took with them on the average 24/. or 2 51.
each, exclusive of jewellery and money which they carried about
them. He could assure his hon. friend that the question of
emigration to Queensland was occupying the most serious attention
of the Colonial Department, and that despatches had been for-
warded to the Governor of Queensland on the subject. Every
step which the Government could take in that direction they had
taken, but the House would, he thought, be of opinion that it
would not be proper to adopt the course which his hon. friend
proposed, and entirely to prohibit importation.
Mr. Kinnaird said he was afraid, notwithstanding what had
fallen from the right hon, gentleman, that the disgraceful traffic to
which his hon. friend had called the attention of the House was
carried to quite as great an extent as he had stated. He did not
believe this country would submit to the continuance of the quasi-
slavery to which the unfortunate people in question were subjected,
while he would beg of the Government not to lose sight of the
demoralizing effect which was likely to be produced on the islands
themselves by a system under which they were deprived of the


most active portion of their population. If the case was one of
voluntary emigration, then he had no objection to offer to most of
what had fallen from his right hon. friend; but if it were one of
kidnapping, the most stringent measures ought to be used to put a
stop to the traffic, and he trusted his hon. friend would not lose
sight of the subject.
Mr. R. Fowler read extracts from a letter dated Brisbane,
March 18, 1869, which he thought deserved the attention of the
right hon. gentleman the Under-Secretary for the Colonies and of
the House. The writer (Mr. Alfred Davidson) referring to a trial
which had been held in Sydney for the murder of three Polynesians,
spoke of the legal difficulties in those inquiries as being very great,
adding—
“ The Government officers, including the magistrates, are par-
tially under the control of influential men, some of whom are
employers of coloured labour, and can be seriously affected in their
appointments. The ships carry very few white men, and employ
Polynesian sailors. The magistrates have practically rejected
native evidence. A proof by native evidence only would there-
fore not be a legal proof; and any one could be, I take it,
prosecuted for libel for exposing a crime. The conduct and
expense and responsibility will have to be borne by private
persons; the police and Crown lawyers cannot be obtained with
facility. A strong feeling of hostility exists against those who
advocate the claims of the Polynesian*. My own opinion still is,
that very many come here not of their own free will. I have
formed the opinion, that very often, if not always, it will be found
that natives with many of the qualities of the savage are as-
sociated with the recruiting agent as coxswains in command of
his boats, and, if speaking a little English, acting as interpreters,
and ready to tell any untruth that he requires.’’
Now/ the fact that native evidence was not received in those
cases was, in his opinion, one of great importance, inasmuch as,
in consequence, great difficulty must be experienced in bringing
home any complaint which might be made to the local tri-
bunals. It should also be borne in mind that those natives
were brought from islands of different descriptions, some from
islands whose inhabitants were nearly altogether savage, so
that it was quite clear the importation of such people must be a
great evil to the colony into which they happened to be intro-
duced. He was quite aware that some persons contended that
natives must be imported into the colony because Europeans could
not work, owing to the nature of the climate; but there was, he
believed, abundant evidence to show that as soon as the European
settler became acclimatized he was able to work, while it must be
obvious that the employment of natives must stand very much in
the way of persons who emigrated to Queensland. The subject
was one which well deserved, and he hoped would receive, the
attention of the Colonial Office; and unless a material change were
made in the present state of things—which seemed to be little else


than a revival of the slave-trade—he hoped it would be again
brought under the notice of the House. In conclusion, the old
gentleman said he believed he was justified in applying to the
traffic the words of an illustrious statesman (Mr. Canning) who,
speaking of the African slave-trade, said that “ its infant lips were
stained with blood; and that its whole existence has been a series
of rapacity, cruelty and murder.”
Admiral Erskine quoted from a letter which he had received
a month or two ago from a gentleman who had resided twenty
years in the Fiji Islands, to show that there were apprehensions
entertained of a contest between the white and native populations
of those islands breaking out before long. It was clear from this
letter that there was now arising in the Pacific another difficulty
of the New Zealand character. The white men in the Fiji Islands
would not be driven away without resistance, and 500 men were to
be raised in Sydney as volunteers for service there. They would
be armed and equipped as regular soldiers, and a war would at
once exist between one of our colonies and another island over
which we had no control whatever. A proclamation, he believed,
had been issued at Sydney forbidding enlistment, but there was no
law to prevent the colonists from quitting the colony and going to
these islands. He hoped that this subject would receive the atten-
tion of the Government. As to the traffic which the hon. member
had brought under notice, he thought it admitted of such regulations
as would make it beneficial to the islanders and the colonists, though
the strongest regulations were necessary.
Mr. Adderley said there was a confusion in the statements
which had been made between the kidnapping of the South Sea
Islanders, for service in the Fiji Islands, and the regular immigra-
tion of the South Sea Islanders into Queensland, for the purpose
of cotton cultivation. The outrages committed were in connection
with the former, and he knew of no means of checking the system.
As to the immigration into Queensland, he believed it was properly
conducted, for the Queensland Legislature had passed regulations
stricter even than those made by the Imperial and the Indian
Government for the protection of the coolies sent to the West
Indies. It was unfair, therefore, to the colonists to make these
high-coloured and unfounded statements; and nothing could be
more injurious both to the colonists and the South Sea Islanders
themselves than to raise a general cry against the slave-trade, and,
under cover of, it to stop legitimate immigration. This immigration
was carried on with a civilized country where the natives could be
made use of for labour and might become civilized by their contact
with a civilized race. Half the distress in the West Indies arose
from the check given to legitimate immigration by the blind outcry
against the revival of the slave-trade. This was a matter to be
dealt with by the Queensland Legislature alone. It was true, that
if there was a revival of the slave-trade in any form this w'ould be
a matter of Imperial policy, but there was no shadow of proof that
this was a revival of the slave-trade.


Mr. Denman said, that when the right hon. gentleman denied
that there was any evidence of wrong doing, he must surely have
forgotten the letter quoted by the hon. member for Falmouth,
which, if the statements in it were true, showed a state of things
disgraceful to Queensland, and to this country so far as it was
connected with Queensland.
London: W. M. Watts, 80, Gray's Inn Road.




