

AUTHOR S PROOF.
THE MINERALOGY OF THE BLACK STAR ORE BODY
AND ITS RELATION TO MILLING PRACTICE AT
MOUNT ISA*
Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (Incorporated.)
Subject to Revision.
By G. B. O’MALLEY, B.MET.E. (MELB.) AND
R. R. MCGHIE, B.E. (Q’LAND)
The general structural features and the principal mineral
relationships of the Black Star ore body, Mount Isa,
Queensland, have been described in several previously
published papers. 1 - 2 - 3[?] Particular reference may be made
to the work of Grondijs and Schouten, whose examination
of over 200 polished sections revealed some remark-
able features in the process of ore deposition. The
observations by the present authors are based upon the
study of a smaller set of specimens complementary to
those examined by Grondijs and Schouten, and are intended
to elaborate certain aspects of the mineral relationships,
more particularly those affecting the ore-dressing processes.
The work described applies to the primary sulphide ore
only, and to the present milling practice of fine-grinding
and selective flotation.
Geological Features
The Black Star is one of several economic mineral
concentrations in the Mount Isa series of thinly bedded
carbonaceous shales, which are considered to be of pre-
Cambrian age. The mineralization is apparently connected
*The investigations described in this paper were made in the Metallurgy
Department, University of Melbourne, where the senior author was formerly Senior
Lecturer in Mining and Metallurgy. A report on a section of the work was
submitted by the junior author as a thesis requited by the University of Queensland.
[?]These small figures refer to references collected at the end of the paper.


with post-Cambrian granite and pegmatite intrusions
located within some miles of the ore bodies, and has been
controlled in the main by major folding of the shales and
by a shear system which follows approximately the strike
and dip of the beds. The detailed mineral relationships,
however, are notably subject to the effects of folding and
fracturing on a minor scale. The texture of the ores is
the result of a complex combination of the bedding of the
shales, the folding and fracturing which preceded and
accompanied the introduction of the mineralizing solutions,
and the repetition of mineralization in substantially the
same channels.
The cross-section of the ore body shown in Fig. 44 is
derived from the preliminary workings in No. 3 glory hole
and the Davidson shaft, and from three drill-holes in an
extensive diamond drilling campaign. (The drill holes and
certain of the workings have been projected varying dis-
tances northward to bring them into the plane of the shaft
and crosscuts. The figure shows the extent of development
early in 1935, when the series of samples now described was
collected.) The shales are seen to be dipping at approxi-
mately 60° to the west, and to be dolomitized to varying
extents over a true width exceeding 500 ft. which embraces
several bands relatively rich in lead-zinc-iron sulphides and
copper-iron sulphides, separated by bands devoid of sul-
phides or containing only pyrite. Actually, dolomitization
in some degree is shown over some thousands of feet, and
pyrite is present in important amount throughout the main
economic belt and in the shales for considerable distances
on either side; the pyritized bands represent an earlier
and distinctive mineralization epoch prior to the entry of
the solutions from which the economic sulphides were
deposited. In the shallower sections of the Davidson shaft
workings a dominant feature is the “Pyrite Rib,” a band
several feet thick and composed mostly of pyrite and pyr-
rhotite, with the bedded shale structure distinctly preserved.


The Hanging-wall Lode, Panels Nos. 1, 2 and 3 of the
Foot-wall Lode, and Ore bodies Nos. 4 and 5 have been
designated on account of certain essential similarities in
structures and values, and a number of extraordinarily
persistent marker beds A to 0 have been traced throughout
the formations.
Principal Mineralized Zones
The observations described hereunder were made from
mineragraphic study of about 125 samples supplied by
Mount Isa Mines Ltd. and selected from the surface
workings and openings on levels Nos. 1 to 5, and from a
diamond-drill hole on No. 5 level and the three deep drill-
holes 18, 1C and ID. The samples represent the most
prominent and persistent formations to a maximum depth
of 1,500 ft. and over a true width of approximately 350 ft,,
but the absence of samples from bands up to 100 ft.
wide detracts from the completeness of the picture which
can be drawn of the ore deposition. A further difficulty
arises from an apparent inconsistency of the marker beds
to the east of No. 4 ore body, as designated from the drill
cores. Apart from these qualifications the collection of
samples shows the following main features:
(1) Widespread occurrence of fine grained pyrite varying from
the heavily mineralized “Pyrite Rib” to thin bands in the
shale. The pyritic bands are almost invariably conformable
with the bedding, but have been shown to be restricted to
zones of shearing, indicating metasomatic replacement rather
than sedimentary deposition with the shales. Movement,
folding and fracturing subsequent to pyritization preceded
and accompanied the introduction of the second generation of
mineralizing solutions, contorted and partially replaced
pyritic bands being a common feature in the economic zones.
(2) A zone of copper mineralization in the dolomitized shale beds
on the hanging-wall, the principal sulphides being pyrrhotite,
chalcopyrite, pyrite, marcasite and arsenopyrite. To a depth
of 700 ft. the copper mineralization appears to have been


confined to the west of the “Pyrite Rib” (beds A to C), and
there is some suggestion that the attenuation of the pyritiza-
tion below this depth has allowed the copper-bearing solutions
to penetrate into the beds A to H to the east of the hanging-
wall of the lead-zinc ore bodies. Evidence is insufficient to
establish definitely the relative ages of the copper ore body
and the lead-zinc mineralization, but it should be noted that
the segregation of the copper values is not the familiar
segregation in depth due to order of deposition from a single
ascending solution.
(3) A series of beds mineralized to varying extents by pyrite,
pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite, marcasite, sphalerite, galena, chalco-
pyrite and tetrahedrite. The extent of economic mineraliza-
tion appears to have been influenced firstly by the folding and
Assuring of the sediments, secondly by the degree of silification
and dolomitization preceding and accompanying the deposition
of sulphides, and thirdly by the reinforcing effect of the early
silica and pyrite upon the shale beds.
Details of the Mineralization Periods
The history of the ore bodies, as deduced from the macro-
and micro-structures of the samples examined, is as
follows:
(1) Silification of the shale beds.
(2) Pyritization of the altered shales by a first generation of
sulphides, which possibly represent the end products of the
solutions responsible for the extensive silicification of the
shales. The pyrite is accompanied by very minor amounts
of arsenopyrite and sphalerite.
(3) Further mineralization by a second generation of sulphides,
including pyrite, arsenopyrite, sphalerite, pyrrhotite, marcasite,
galena, chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite. The gangue minerals
are mostly dolomite, ankerite and calcite, with some silica.
There is evidence of interruption of the crystallization and
of the injection of a further supply of solutions.
(4) An independent mineralization of the hanging-wall beds by
solutions which deposited pyrite, arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite,
marcasite and chalcopyrite. Dolomite is the most prominent
gangue mineral.


The principal features of the several mineralization
periods will now be discussed in turn.
(1) Silification
Silification of the shale beds appears to have proceeded
generally but haphazardly over a considerable area. It is
not confined to the economic ore-zone, but extends for some
distance on the hanging-wall side. The specimens within
the ore-zone show the silification to vary from massive or
complete replacement to merely incipient alteration, which
variation exerts an important effect upon the subsequent
mineralization. Hard bands of jasper are occasionally
encountered, notably in the hanging-wall, but as a rule
the silicification is insufficient to destroy the original
bedded structure, and the subsequent mineralization is
correspondingly banded. The latter condition is roughly
characteristic of the lead-zinc mineralization, as compared
with the more massive type of copper ore at the hanging-
wall. Evidently the rigidity of the highly silicified beds
enabled them to resist the subsequent movement to a
considerable extent, and they display little of the crenu-
lation and complicated fracturing so evident in the less
altered shale beds of the lead-zinc areas. The relationship
is in a sense analogous to the general structure of the dis-
trict, in which the folding and fracturing associated with
mineralization are restricted to the more yielding shale
beds, whereas the quartzites on either side are relatively
undisturbed.
(2) First Generation of Sulphides
The first metallic mineralization resulted in the deposition
of pyrite with very small amounts of arsenopyrite and
sphalerite in the more or less silicified shale. The effect
extended over a great width of country and thoroughly
permeated the beds invaded by the later generation of
sulphide solutions. In general, the thinly laminated and


less silicified beds are the more susceptible to replacement,
and the rapid variation in the type of shale produces a
striking banded effect in many of the samples, as in Fig. 1.
Even when replacement of the shale is substantially com-
plete, however, the bedded structure is retained, as in Fig.
2, a circumstance which exercises an important controlling
effect on the crystallization of the minerals in the later
mineralization epochs. Much of the pyrite occurs in
massive, shapeless forms in the matrix, but under favorable
conditions one finds well-formed idiomorphs which reach
a general maximum size of 0-5 mm., as in Fig. 3, Zoning
of idiomorphs is very generally displayed, the successive
layers being distinguishable by slight colour differences
and by etching behaviour.
In general, the idiomorphic feature is displayed by
certain bands parallel to the bedding, but local variations
from formless to idiomorphic pyrite are frequently encoun-
tered. The gradation from the one variety to the other,
as in Fig. 4, is often so striking that recrystallization is
strongly suggested; the repeated occurrence of this effect
in the channels of the second mineralization which inter-
sect the pyritized beds add the further suggestion that the
younger pyrite may be derived in part from its predecessor.
All types of first-generation pyrite crystals have been
subjected to replacement by the younger sulphides of the
second generation, and the pyritized structure is observed
microscopically in many specimens which show no pyrite
upon visual inspection. Bands of apparently massive
sphalerite or pyrrhotite are found to contain minute dis-
persed crystals of the older pyrite showing varying
degrees of replacement. A frequent feature is the occur-
rence of remarkable “atoll” intergrowths related to the
zoning of the crystals; Fig. 11 shows the result in the case
of sphalerite and Figs. 32 and 33 for galena and pyrrhotite.
However, the more massively pyritized bands are often
entirely free from other sulphides, and there appear to have


been at least three strong bands which are well preserved,
namely, the “Pyrite Rib” in the hanging-wall, beds H and
I, and the beds on the foot-wall; a segregation of the prin-
cipal economic zones by these rigid or impervious barriers
may be suggested. The last two bands persist to the
greatest depth explored, but the “Pyrite Rib,” which is
so prominent in the upper levels, apparently peters out
with depth, and the increase in width of the copper ore body
in the hanging-wall country is possibly a result of this
circumstance. (This ore body is confined on the western
flank by a further series of pyritized beds, as indicated by
the diamond-drill cores in ID.)
The occurrence of arsenopyrite is minor and irregular;
the mineral shows the usual strong crystallizing tendency
and appears invariably as idiomorphs which show little or
no replacement by subsequent mineralization, as in Fig. 5.
The inclusion of minute pyrite crystals within the arseno-
pyrite shows the latter to be the younger mineral.
Sphalerite is a further minor constituent of the first
mineralization, minute grains being distributed throughout
some sections of the pyritized areas at sufficient distance
from the abundant sphalerite zones of the second
mineralization to warrant their being conceded a separate
origin. Fig. 5 shows the typical distribution of the sphale-
rite grains (light-grey) with the arsenopyrite (rhomb
sections) throughout the pyritized matrix.
On macroscopical inspection the first generation sulphides
appear in general to be finely dispersed throughout a
matrix of dolomitic shale. Microscopical examination,
however, shows the dolomite to be younger than the sul-
phides, which are actually associated with silica, the
combination appearing to have replaced the shale along the
bedding planes. The heavily pyritized silica veins grade
without definite change into the less pyritized or purely
siliceous bands, suggesting that the extensive silicification
and the widespread pyritization throughout the field have


resulted from a single parent solution. A study of field
conditions as a whole would be necessary to confirm the
suggested identification of the two effects, this being an
instance where unjustified conclusions as to field relations
may be assumed from the very local relationships deter-
mined from isolated hand specimens.
(3) Second Generation of Sulphides
Whereas the first generation of sulphide mineralization
is of great extent, the second generation has been restricted
to fairly definite and limited channels. The introduction of
the solutions was preceded by distortion and fracturing of
the silicified and pyritized shale, and movement continued
on a minor scale throughout the deposition, as shown by
the frequency of fissures, both longitudinal and transverse,
which are filled with pyrrhotite, galena, chalcopyrite and
tetrahedrite. These features are shown by the macro-
graphs of Figs. 6 to 9 and 14 to 17.
Replacement has been most pronounced in the bands free
from the older pyrite and in the less silicified areas, which
show predominant sphalerite with lesser amounts of
pyrite, pyrrhotite, galena and chalcopyrite in a dolomitic
matrix. A banded structure commonly results, showing
parallel zones of pyritized shale and high-grade zinc-lead
ore; the width of the bands is seldom greater than i in.,
and in many cases the original banded structure has been
so distorted by movement that the sphalerite becomes, as
it were, a ground-mass for inclusions of pyrite of both
generations, partly assimilated broken shale and the later
minerals of the second generation. The general preference
of the sphalerite for the dolomitic matrix is shown in Fig.
11, in which the older pyrite originally enclosed by shale
is now surrounded and partially replaced by sphalerite,
forming complex intergrowths.
The principal features of the individual sulphides will
now be discussed briefly.


Pyrite. —The pyrite of the second generation, which is
possibly derived in part from the older pyrite, as suggested
above, appears as idiomorphs up to 1 mm. cube, which
show replacement by sphalerite, as in Fig. 12, and by other
younger materials, more particularly by galena, as in Figs.
30, 31 and 34. There are certain peculiarities of the pyrite
in many of the sections examined; perceptible differences
of colour are observed in ordinary vertical illumination,
and under crossed Nicols some crystals show distinct
anisotropism. No evidence was found of the zoning in
individual crystals which is such a feature of the earlier
pyrite, and “atoll” replacement is absent, the intergrowths
with sphalerite, pyrrhotite and galena being of the more
familiar type characterized by corroded and embayed
crystal faces.
Arsenopyrite. —This mineral is of minor occurrence but
fairly general distribution throughout the economic ore
bodies. It is distinguished by its well preserved idiomor-
phic form, showing little or no replacement by later
sulphides. In respect to age of deposition it appears to
have crystallized over a range of temperature, being later
than the pyrite and overlapping with the crystallization of
the sphalerite and pyrrhotite, which show an unusual inter-
relationship to be discussed later in more detail. The strong
crystallizing tendency of arsenopyrite is evident in many
of the sections, in which it is shown to grow to crystals of
considerable size even within the restrictions of a solid
matrix, as in Fig. 14, where a wedge-shaped section is
disposed transversely across banded pyrite of the first
generation and sphalerite of the second generation. The
microstructure of this crystal in Fig. 19 shows some islands
of sphalerite remaining within the idiomorph. This effect
conforms with that of Fig. 18, in which the idiomorphs of
arsenopyrite are definitely associated with pyrrhotite which
intersects banded pyrite and sphalerite. A common feature


is the crystallization of arsenopyrite within bands of shale
on the fringe of pyrrhotite-rich zones as in Fig. 17.
Sphalerite. —As might be expected from the abundant
development of iron sulphides, the zinc mineral is of the
marmatite variety, containing a considerable proportion
of iron in solid solution,* as is indicated by the brown
streak, the reddish internal reflections, and “ex-solution”
inclusions of pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite of the type in
Fig. 13. The crystallization of the mineral seems to have
proceeded on the grand scale, some areas of dolomitized
shale being completely replaced except for residual older
pyrite crystals which are only partly assimilated and in
many cases were replaced from the centre outwards, giving
the “atoll” intergrowths already mentioned. Replacement
of the younger pyrite idiomorphs proceeds in the usual
manner as shown in Fig. 12. A common feature is the
crystallization of sphalerite as marginal growths in fissures
or in readily replaced bands, with the later pyrrhotite and
galena sandwiched in restricted channels as in Figs. 7, 10
and 28.
Pyrrhotite. —From the study of a large number of sul-
phide ore bodies it has been deduced that the crystallization
of pyrrhotite from hydrothermal solutions normally pre-
cedes the deposition of sphalerite, as stated in the general
paragenesis proposed by Lindgren. 4 Exceptions to this rule
are not uncommon and criticism of the commonly accepted
idea of pyrrhotite as a high-temperature mineral has been
made in recent times. 5 In the Black Star ore the pyrrhotite
displays some very unusual features. The mineral assumes
three distinct forms, exclusive of the important develop-
ment in the copper-rich ore at the hanging-wall. It occurs
in the first place as minute ex-solutions blebs and laths in
sphalerite as in Fig. 13, displaying in common with chalco-
*Blanchard and Hall give a figure of 0 075% isomorphous Fe for
each' 1% Zn. 3


pyrite the familiar cleavage intergrowths with the zinc
sulphide. In the second place, pyrrhotite is found in
extensive longitudinal and transverse intrusions of faulted
bands of first-generation pyrite and second-generation sphal-
erite, as in Figs. 14 to 18, being associated with idiomorphic
pyrite and arsenopyrite and a carbonate gangue mineral
in a resurgence of mineralization resulting from an intro-
duction of fresh solution. Following this major crystalliza-
tion of pyrrhotite, the mineral further appears in a very
intimate intergrowth with galena together with some sphal-
erite, as in Figs. 17, 28 and 29. The association with galena
is particularly remarkable, resembling closely the eutectic
mixtures produced by artificial fusion of the pure sulphides
or by heating selected samples of ores containing the two
minerals. 6 Considering the sphalerite, pyrrhotite and
galena relationships in general, the order of crystallization
has been broadly: sphalerite-pyrrhotite-galena, with some,
overlap between the sphalerite and pyrrhotite, followed by
a period in which pyrrhotite was deposited in large amount
accompanied by only minor amounts of other sulphides,
with subsequent overlapping crystallization of pyrrhotite
and galena, after which the galena continued to be deposited
over a long period. Major development of pyrrhotite as
in Fig. 14 may be explained as a feature of the prolonged
crystallization of the mineral prior to the appearance of
galena; this development appears to be subject to zoning,
being especially pronounced in the hanging-wall beds below
No. 5 level, in the foot-wall beds in the deepest drill hole
and in bed K below No. 5 level within the principal zinc-
lead areas. The pyrrhotite which overlaps with the galena,
however, persists to much shallower depths and is observed
in greatly reduced amount in specimens from No. 2 level.
The parallel behaviour of the two minerals is remarkably
maintained, even to the simultaneous “atoll” replacement
of first-generation pyrite in Fig. 33. These features offer
positive proof of the continuation of crystallization of


pyrrhotite to the low temperatures of deposition of galena,
but criticism of the high temperature theory on the basis
of this evidence needs to be qualified in view of the changed
conditions attendant upon the renewed movement and
resurgence of solution in the concluding stages of crystal-
lization of the sphalerite. The reappearance of pyrite and
arsenopyrite in the new channels implies a local increase
in temperature and a change in composition of the solu-
tion. As already indicated when discussing the occurrence
of arsenopyrite, this mineral commonly occurs in true
idiomorphs in the shale bands contiguous to the pyrrhotite-
rich bands, having displaced the solid matrix by virtue
of its strong crystallizing tendency. Pyrrhotite also
penetrates and replaces the fringes of the shale bands,
but it appears as pseudomorphs after certain silicate con-
stituents of the shale. The same pyrrhotite-arsenopyrite
relationship is found in the copper ore body at the hanging-
wall, and the resemblance is further stressed by the
pyrrhotite-marcasite relationship now to be discussed.
Marcasite. —The occurrence of marcasite is a further
remarkable feature related to the pyrrhotite from which it
is formed. The conversion is of very general incidence,
but varies in extent from barely perceptible alteration of an
occasional grain to complete substitution. Fig. 20 shows
a fairly typical relation in the more massive pyrrhotite
areas; this is common to both lead-zinc and copper ore
bodies. Fig. 21 shows a number of stages of conversion
in a field where crystallization of galena and pyrrhotite
has overlapped, whilst Figs. 22 to 25 show details of areas
completely converted. The lamellar cleavage of the mar-
casite is accentuated by replacement along the planes by
galena and chalcopyrite, and this feature serves to define
the age of the marcasite. The conversion is definitely
hypogene in character and is analogous to the transform-
ation observed in certain of the sulphidic tin ores of Bolivia.
It is quite distinct from the supergene development of


marcasite, a phenomenon which occurs in the shallower
sections of the Black Star ore body.
Galena. —As already stated when discussing the pyrrho-
tite occurrences, galena crystallizes late in the sequence.
It is observed, firstly, as an interstitial matrix for all the
older minerals; secondly, as complex replacement inter-
growths with pyrite of both generations, sphalerite, pyrrho-
tite and marcasite; thirdly, in more massive concentrations
in readily replaced shale areas free from sulphides. Figs.
26, 28, 29 and 36 show the first type; Figs. 30 to 33 and
22 to 25 show the second type, including the “atoll” inter-
growths, and Fig. 27 shows the outskirts of a dolomitic
area subjected to extensive replacement. In addition to
replacement of a chemical nature, the galena is intergrown
in complex fashion with the earlier sulphides through the
infilling of the residual longitudinal fissures, as in Figs. 7
and 10, and the “healing” of transverse fissures which
develop at a late stage in the crystallization, as in Figs.
7 and 8. Apart from these minor “sandwich” effects, the
galena shows little of the banded segration commonly dis-
played by the pyrite, sphalerite and pyrrhotite, each in
turn having been deposited as a dominant form in the
channels or beds most readily replaceable on physical and
chemical grounds. The galena is characteristically dis-
persed interstitially throughout the whole of the formations,
and only occasionally develops into relatively free con-
centrations.
Chalcopyrite and Tetrahedrite. —These two minerals occur
in close association and to minor extents, and are observed
mostly in the galena-rich areas of the shallower unpyritized
dolomitic shale. Occasionally they are developed pro-
minently in the infilling of the late transverse fissures, as
in Figs. 8 and 9; Fig. 35 is a more detailed structure of
the fissure filling of Fig. 9. Tetrahedrite is the only
sulpho-salt of silver-bearing type observed in the Black


Star specimens and presumably accounts for the silver
values in the ore. This feature is in contrast with the
extensive development of a number of sulpho-salts in other
ore bodies of the district. The chalcopyrite associated with
the galena and tetrahedrite is quite distinct from the minute
ex-solution blebs of chalcopyrite throughout the sphalerite,
and furthermore is entirely distinct from the massive
occurrences of chalcopyrite in the copper-rich ore of the
hanging-wall areas.
(U) Copper Mineralization.
As already stated, a copper-rich mineralization occurs in
the silicified and pyritized shale beds on the western side
of the lead-zinc ore bodies, being located to the west of
the “Pyrite Rib” above level No. 5, but extending as far
east as beds H and lin the deepest drill hole ID. As shown
for this drill hole in Fig. 44, copper values occur in economic
amount in cores representing a true width of 200 ft. in the
hanging-wall area, and again over a width of 30 ft. in
the continuation of the No. 4 ore body, which in the
shallower openings is typical lead-zinc concentration. The
great gaps between specimens, both vertically and laterally,
render conclusions difficult as to the origin of the copper
mineralization and its relation to the lead-zinc ore bodies,
but the presence of idiomorphic pyrite and arsenopyrite
establishes the occurrence as a separate generation of
mineralization. Massive dolomite is a typical accompani-
ment of this generation.
The order of crystallization of the minerals has been:
dolomite-pyrite-arsenopyrite-pyrrhotite-marcasite-chalcopy-
rite. When considering the age relations of the ore bodies
one is immediately struck by certain similarities between
the associations in the copper ore body and the pyrrhotite-
rich resurgence of mineralization in the lead-zinc areas.
The grain size and replacement textures of the pyrite,
arsenopyrite, pyrrhotite and marcasite are remarkably


similar, and on these grounds one is tempted to ascribe the
two formations to a single parent solution. This, however,
is found to be untenable when one comes to examine the
later minerals of each generation. Within the lead-zinc
areas the pyrrhotite is succeeded by galena with only a
minor amount of chalcopyrite; on the western side chalco-
pyrite is the dominant younger sulphide and galena is
almost completely absent. A further point of difference
of unknown significance is to be found in the microscopical
appearance and habit of the pyrrhotite. In the eastern
beds the pyrrhotite shows the normal yellow colour and
contains no associated chalcopyrite, whilst in the hanging-
wall areas the mineral displays a pinkish colour similar
to that of the pyrrhotite from Sudbury and Rouyn, The
difference is probably related to variation in the sulphur
content of this variable mineral. Such variation in com-
position of individual minerals might reasonably be expected
in a deposit of the Black Star type where pyrite, pyrrhotite
and marcasite are co-existent. Reference has already been
made to colour variations and anisotropism in the pyrite
crystals of the second generation; it is significant that
these effects are most pronounced where the pyrite is in
contact with pyrrhotite and partly replaced by the younger
sulphide.
Fig. 37 shows the typical macrostructure of the A beds
below No. 4 level, Pyrite, pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite have
penetrated and replaced the distorted and broken pyritized
shale, the extent of alteration varying with the degree of
silicification; in Fig. 37 a band of jaspery silica has suffered
only marginal penetration, whereas the pyritized shale has
been subjected to wholesale replacement. The intergrowths
are very similar in type to those in the lead-zinc bodies,
with some simplification on account of the less complex
mineralogy. Fig. 38 shows a common type of intergrowth
with chalcopyrite replacing pyrite partly from the centres


of clusters of idiomorphs. Fig. 39 shows chalcopyrite
replacing dolomite, which in turn has replaced the older
silica. Replacement in the dolomite is largely controlled by
the cleavage of the carbonate, as in Fig. 40, where both
pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite appear in cleavage inclusions.
The pyrrhotite-marcasite relations are exactly similar to
those of the lead-zinc bodies, with chalcopyrite alone
forming lamellar intergrowths with the marcasite.
Recapitulation of Paragenesis
From the description of the mineralization periods in the
foregoing section, a general statement of the paragenesis
of the ore bodies may be set out as follows:
(1) First sulphide mineralization in which the general order of
deposition was silica-pyrite-arsenopyrite-sphalerite. Pyrite is
the dominant and distinguishing mineral. After a major
interval there followed:
(2) Second mineralization showing the general order: dolomite-
pyrite-arsenopyrite-sphalerite. Sphalerite is the dominant
mineral of this generation, which was incompletely crystallized
before the advent of:
(3) Third mineralization which deposited: carbonate-pyrite-arseno-
pyrite-sphalerite-pyrrhotite-marcasite-chalcopyrite-tetrahedrite-
galena. Pyrrhotite and galena are the dominant minerals.
(4) A separate sulphide mineralization younger than (1) but
undetermined in relation to (2) and (3), and depositing
dolomite-pyrite-arsenopyrite-pyrrhotite-marcasite-chalcopyrite.
Pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite ai’e the dominant minerals.
Of the four generations, (1) is developed to the greatest
extent and forms a background for the three younger
generations. Of the latter, (2) and (3) overlap and might
with some qualification be considered as one generation.
Generation (4) is superimposed on (1) and probably also
upon (2) and (3) in the deeper sections of the lead-zinc
ore bodies.


Asa result of the repeated mineralizations one finds a
number of occurrences of most of the sulphides. Thus,
there are four distinct occurrences of pyrite and arseno-
pyrite, three of sphalerite, two of pyrrhotite, marcasite and
chalcopyrite, and one of galena and tetrahedrite. This
covers only the major crystallizations of each sulphide and
is exclusive of minor occurrences such as the ex-solution
blebs of chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite in sphalerite.
Highly complicated structures result from such repetition
and super-imposition of mineralizations, but the inter-
growths in the ore mined to date are, perhaps, not as
chaotic as the paragenesis would suggest because of certain
saving features:
(1) the segregation of the copper mineralization to the hanging-
wall area outside the main lead-zinc bodies,
(2) the control exercised by the bedded shale in the partial
segregation into bands of the three generations within the
lead-zinc bodies,
(3) the mineralogical similarity of generations (2) and (3).
Nevertheless, the ore structures display a complexity
which is probably without parallel amongst the important
ore bodies of the world, and the ore-dressing problem
presents some extraordinarily difficult features, both
mechanically and metallurgically,
Paragenesis in Relation to Ore Textures
Before considering more particularly the effects of the
complicated history of the Black Star ore body upon the
ore-dressing problem, certain general features of ore
deposition may be considered in relation to the resulting
ore textures and mineral associations.
As explained by Lindgren and other writers, the crystal-
lization of a hydrothermal solution under conditions of
gradually decreasing temperature and pressure, results in
the precipitation of the sulphide minerals in a rather well-


defined order, which appears to be determined mainly by
solubility and follows, on the whole, the Schurmann series
(Hg, Ag, Cu, Pb, Zn, Ni, Cos, Fe). The temperature range,
as deduced from various criteria, is considered to be from
600° to 50°C. In the simplest cases this order of crystal-
lization may be borne out quite closely, but generally speak-
ing there are interruptions and reversals of the order and
a number of complications due to formation of double
sulphides and sulpho-salts. Nevertheless, instances of
lead-zinc-silver ores have been quoted where a good measure
of conformity is shown by the following paragenesis:
pyrite - arsenopyrite - pyrrhotite - sphalerite-galena-chalco-
pyrite-tetrahedrite-silver sulphide and sulpho-salts-tellu-
rides-gold. Exceptions to the rule generally involve real
and apparent reversals due in some measure to overlapping
crystallization and to the formation of certain less common
minerals, but in some unusual ore bodies the paragenesis
only remotely conforms to the order regarded as normal
Sudden changes of temperature or pressure, or injection
of fresh solution, would naturally upset the normal course
of crystallization, and the departure from equilibrium con-
ditions would give rise to all manner of segregation.
Although the cases are by no means strictly comparable,
some understanding of the possibilities of segregation may
be gained from a study of the relatively simple phenomena
of crystallization from metallic alloy melts. These systems,
which lend themselves to laboratory study with all variables
under control, reveal the critical nature of the equilibria
of solidification, and illustrate the complications which may
result from the inability of the liquid-solid system to attain
equilibrium conditions throughout crystallization. This
applies even to the simplest melts, and is accentuated in
many systems by peritectic reactions, allotropic modifica-
tions and changes in solid solubility during cooling to
ordinary temperatures.
Coring or zoning of primary crystals is practically


universal in alloys, and this is found to be the case whether
the primary crystallizing phase is a dilute solid solution
approaching the conception of a “pure” metal, a solid
solution of some range of composition, or an intermetallic
compound. Asa matter of fact, many supposed compounds
have been found in recent years to be really solid solutions
capable of existence over narrow ranges of composition,
but giving the appearance and reaction of true compounds
to the inexact methods of physical and metallurgical
examination which were formerly considered to be adequate.
Chemical analysis, although more exact, could not be in-
voked in most instances because of the difficulty of isolating
unquestionable samples of the compounds. The advent of
X-ray methods and more exact metallographic technique,
together with refinement of chemical analysis, has provoked
a far more critical outlook on metallic systems and has con-
ferred anew conception of “pure” species.
Returning to the mineral systems, in which the number
of major reacting elements is so much greater, and where
the gaseous phase introduces a further complication, one
must be prepared all the more for departures from normal
crystallization, and for variations in composition of
apparently pure mineral species. As yet mineralogy has
benefited little from the advances in kindred sciences, but
there is ample evidence of anomalies in composition and of
changes in compositiion of minerals between their initial
crystallization and the final form in which they are found
in the ores. Zoning in idiomorphic crystals and ex-solution
inclusions of foreign sulphides in a parent sulphide are
two instances of very wide occurrence; variable iron and
sulphur proportions in pyrrhotite from different localities
and of copper, iron and sulphur in bornite are other
instances. The enormous variety of sulphides and sulpho-
salts allows greater opportunity for crystallization from
solutions as distinct species than is possible in metallic
systems, but at the same time the greater number of


elements present increases the chances of formation of
solid-solutions.
In hydrothermal solutions of the type from which lead-
zinc-silver ore bodies are formed, the reacting elements
will include all those which go to make up the silica,
silicates, oxides, carbonates, sulphides, sulpho-salts and
native metals. If crystallization were to occur uniformly
in a free space and under conditions of gradual release of
temperature and pressure, one would expect to find a
uniform structure containing idiomorphic crystals (or
remnants of idiomorphs) of pyrite and arsenopyrite dis-
seminated throughout a matrix of allotriomorphic grains
of the younger sulphides and sulpho-salts, the galena and
the late crystallizing sulpho-salts being interstitially dis-
persed amongst the older minerals. Very slow cooling or
release of pressure would give a coarse-grained texture
generally and would permit any liquid-solid reactions and
any solid-solution decomposition to proceed to completion
with maximum opportunity for diffusion and coagulation
of precipitated compounds.
Even under these conditions the normal sequence of
deposition produces certain features which exercise harm-
ful effects on the ore-dressing processes by impeding
liberation of the minerals by grinding. Some of these
features are unfavourable to an unqualified extent; these
include partial replacement of early iron sulphides by the
economic sulphides, which are conseqently difficult to con-
centrate satisfactorily without undue dilution of the con-
centrates by iron sulphides, and the initial crystallization
of solid-solutions which break down into fine-grained ex-
solution intergrowths, as in the dilution of zinc concentrates
by chalcopyrites and pyrrhotite. However, certain features
in themselves unfavourable may, by a change of method,
be rendered advantageous, as in the intimate association
of gold with sulphide host-minerals which may be con-
centrated into products for more elaborate treatment. In


the same way, the natural association of galena with silver-
bearing sulpho-salts and gold may be turned to advantage
by virtue of the fact that the established lead smelting and
refining processes provide an economical method of recover-
ing precious metal values.
There is considerable simplification of the position if the
development of the early sulphides is of minor' extent, as in
the coarse-grained lead-zinc-silver ore of Broken Hill,
N.S.W. This feature may be due to low iron content of the
solutions, or to extensive replacement of the iron sulphides
by the younger minerals, or to segregation of the minerals
by virtue of their progressive crystallization from the
solution as it travels through fissures or permeable rocks.
The classification of ore bodies as hypothermal, meso-
thermal and epithermal is based upon this last feature.
Conversely, conditions unfavourable for liberation in-
clude “telescoping” of the sulphides within a short distance
and rapid crystallization from the solution in fine-grained
intergrowths.
No consideration has as yet been given to the rocks
within which the solutions crystallize. In open fissures or
in readily soluble rocks the ore bodies may bear little
resemblance to the enclosing rocks, but when the solutions
traverse complicated fracture zones in less soluble rocks,
the resulting ore shows to a marked degree the structure
and physical properties of the country rock. From the
liberation point of view, fine-grained mineralization of
“telescoped” sulphides throughout a wide area of shattered
rock probably represents the worst possible combination
of circumstances normally encountered. It is unfortunate
that the Black Star ore body was formed under such con-
ditions, with the further complication of a repetition of
mineralization within substantially the same channels. To
complete the list of disabilities, the dolomitized carbonaceous
shale introduces chemical and metallurgical difficulties in
the concentration by flotation of the finely-ground ore.


Paragenesis in Relation to Mt. Isa Milling Practice
(a) liberation
From the detailed descriptions of the mineralization
periods and the subsequent discussion of the relation
between paragenesis and ore textures, it will be obvious
that the Black Star ore presents extraordinary difficulties
in liberation of the economic minerals for separation by
flotation. The important features of the paragenesis from
this point of view will now be summarized.
(1) Stratification of Shales. —The persistent nature of
the shale beds has determined to some degree the progress
of the successive introductions of silica, pyrite, dolomite,
sphalerite, pyrrhotite and galena. In the natural state
certain beds are more susceptible to replacement than
others, and there is a tendency for each major constituent
to be segregated in beds not already replaced by its pre-
decessors. The individual beds are of the general order
of 0 01 to 0-25 inches thick, but in some cases groups of
beds up to 3 feet in total thickness may be replaced by the
successively deposited minerals. Thus one finds banded
structures showing parallel bands rich in pyrite, sphalerite,
pyrrhotite and galena, respectively. The concentration of
the mineral in any one band is more apparent than real;
the pyrite-rich bands contain remnants of the shale
structure and sufficient sphalerite and galena to prevent
economic rejection from the mill feed; the zinc-rich bands
are sprinkled with older pyrite and shale remnants and
contain also younger pyrite and important amounts of
pyrrhotite and galena; the pyrrhotite bands also contain
disseminated older pyrite and shale, together with younger
pyrite, arsenopyrite, sphalerite, and galena. The rare band
of apparently high-grade galena almost invariably resolves
itself on micro-examination into an extraordinarily complex
mixture of minerals in a galena matrix, as in Fig. 36.


Generally speaking, the finely bedded nature of the shales
has prevented any massive crystallization of the sphalerite
or galena, and it is only in the crenulated and broken bands
that any lead-silver enrichments occur.
(2) Fine-grained Crystallizatiori. —The unfortunate
effects of “telescoping” and fine-grained crystallization are
amply demonstrated in each generation of mineralization
within the lead-zinc ore bodies. Each generation contains
abundant iron sulphides showing partial replacement by
sphalerite and galena, the recovery of these minerals as
concentrates being limited by the maximum dilution
tolerable in the circumstances.
(3) Superimposition of Mineralizations. —The ore chan-
nels serving the entry of the second and third generations
of sulphide mineralization were located within the area
already mineralized by the older pyrite, and the oppor-
tunities for intergrowths of minerals are multiplied accord-
ingly. The effect is particularly noted in the case of galena,
which replaces three generations of pyrite, is intergrown
with sphalerite, pyrrhotite, marcasite and dolomite and
fills transverse fissures throughout the structure. The
sphalerite likewise replaces pyrite extensively and is inter-
grown with a variety of minerals. The conversion of
pyrrhotite to marcasite in the latter stages of crystalliza-
tion is another unfortunate feature, since the well-defined
cleavage of the marcasite renders it susceptible to lamellar
replacement by galena and chalcopyrite, thereby locking up
a proportion of these minerals in intergrowths from which
recovery by flotation is impossible without sei ious dilution
of the concentrates.
(4) Movement During Crystallization. —The extremely
fine intergrowth of the minerals is accentuated by the move-
ment and Assuring preceding and accompanying the second
and third generations. Longitudinal Assuring adds to the
13


main banded structures a number of minor “sandwich”
foimations, and transverse Assuring in the latter stages is
responsible for the further locking up of lead and silver
values.
(b) FLOTATION PRACTICE
Considei ing now the actual concentration process as
applied to the finely ground product of the grinding section,
there are two further features of chemical and metallurgical
importance.
(5) Cay bonaceous Content of Shales. —Blanchard and
Hall state that most of the shale beds of the district con-
tain determinable amounts of fixed carbon with more or
less volatile hydro-carbons. Grondijs and Schouten located
gi aphite as a rare constituent associated with pyrite, and
observed black rims on pseudomorphs of galena after pyrite
which were considered to be graphite. In actual practice
it is found that a proportion of the fine older pyrite floats
ahead of all other minerals, even in the presence of high
alkalinity and high cyanide concentration. Specific depres-
sants f Ol cai bonaceous gangue have achieved some success
in excluding this pyrite from the froth, and it is deduced
that the floatability of the particles is due to a carbonaceous
derived from the shale. The adsorptive powers of
such material are well known, and its presence in the pulps
possibly contributes to the large reagent consumptions.
(6) Alteration in Mining and Milling. —A problem in-
variably associated with the milling of fine-textured ores
is the unavoidable alteration of mineral surfaces during
grinding. The prolonged exposure caused by the use of
multiple stages of grinding allows great opportunity for
alteration of surfaces by chemical reaction and by slime
coating, with the result that the minerals float reluctantly,
and selectivity is difficult to maintain. In fact, a stage is
reached in the liberation process beyond which nothing is


gained by finer grinding because of the decrease in recovery
and selectivity which accompanies the finer division of the
mineral particles. Another trouble attendant upon flotation
of very fine particles is the large reagent consumption
caused by the continuous production of soluble salts such
as ferrous sulphate and copper sulphate, and by abstraction
of reagents by finely divided mineral particles and gangue
slimes. The trouble is especially marked if, in addition,
the water used for milling is charged with dissolved solids,
as at Mount Isa, where the mine water contains important
amounts of calcium and magnesium sulphates derived from
the dolomite, and iron and copper sulphates as a result of
attack by acid products of oxidation of pyrrhotite and
marcasite in the stopes. Consequently, the use of mine
water is attended with serious difficulties in both collection
of the minerals and frothing in the pulp. In practice,
a mixture of mine water and surface-dam water is
employed, and some measure of control is possible by
adjusting the proportions. The iron and copper sulphates
are particularly upsetting in flotation, and the alteration
of the lead and zinc sulphides by the oxidation products of
pyrrhotite and marcasite is so serious that milling of the
ore must be carried out with a minimum interval between
breaking in the stopes and feeding to the grinding mills.
This circumstance was a factor in the selection of the sub-
level method of mining.
(c) FLOTATION RESULTS
In view of the impossibility of even approaching com-
plete liberation, the flotation practice resolves itself into
a compromise between grinding costs and value of con-
centrates. The lead concentrates are smelted on the mine;
the zinc concentrates are railed 600 miles to Townsville,
from which port they are shipped overseas.. Consequently,
a low-grade lead concentrate is acceptable, especially as the
principal diluent is iron sulphide which provides a fluxing


Tyler
Screen
Aperture
(microns)
% wt.
% Pb
% Zn
% Fe
% S
% Insols.
+200
74
10\
+325
43
30/
31-2
19-3
8-7
—
—
-325
43
96 0
39-6
9-3
13-2
—
—
Total
100-0
39-3
9-6
13-0
24-3
7-4
constituent, whereas in the case of the zinc concentrate
shipping grade is of paramount importance and recovery
is sacrificed to this objective.
With the three-stage grinding now practised, the sizing
is carried to 80 to 85% minus 200 mesh, the sulphide being
considerably finer on account of the intensive selective
grinding resulting from the use of multiple stages and
heavy circulating leads. The following sizing represents
the average flotation feed for August, 1938:
Nominal quartz size (microns)
(Haultain Infra-Sizer) Weight, .%
+ 56 microns 30-0
+ 40 g-8
+ 28 10-0
+ 20 7-2
+ 14 5-6
+ 10 5-2>
The lead concentrate produced at this time showed the
following sizing and analysis:—
Microphotographs of briquetted samples of these
fractions are shown in Figs. 41, 42, 43. From detailed
examination of the briquettes the liberation point is in-
dicated as about 20 microns, 90 per cent, of the particles
which show larger sectional diameters being obvious com-
posites. Apart from the unliberated sphalerite and
pyrrhotite, the dilution of the concentrate is principally


by pyrite. The minus 325 mesh product contains much
free pyrite which owes its floatability to associated car-
bonaceous material, and shale particles containing clusters
of the older pyrite appear in the coarser fractions of the
concentrate. Dilution by the fine grains of pyrite explains
the high iron content of the minus 325 mesh product as
compared with the coarser fractions, in which the dilution
is principally due to sphalerite in composite particles with
galena.
The recoveries of lead and silver are closely parallel and
average 80 to 85% in the lead concentrate.
The corresponding zinc concentrate assayed as follows:
Zn 58-8%
Pb 1-8
Fe 7-2
S 31-3
Insols 4 0
Portion of the iron content of this concentrate is due to
the isomorphous iron of the marmatite; the balance is
mostly included and attached pyrrhotite, with a little pyrite.
Selectivity with respect to pyrrhotite is the keynote of the
zinc flotation section, and from what has been shown of
the association of the minerals, it will be realized that the
production of a 53-8% Zn concentrate is a creditable
achievement. The result is secured, naturally, with con-
siderable sacrifice of recovery, which averages about 50%.
The remarkably intimate associations of the several
minerals in the ore is thus borne out by the metallurgical
results, which afford an unusually striking demonstration
of the connection between paragenesis and the ore-dressing
processes.
Acknowledgments. —The thanks of the authors are due
to the geological staff of Mount Isa Mines Ltd. for supply-
ing the set of specimens described, and to the milling staff
for information on the milling results.


References
1. Hooper, R., “Some Notes on Diamond Drilling Practice at
Mount Isa,” Proc. Aust. Inst. Min. Met., No. 88, 1932.
2. Grondijs, H. F., and Schouten, C., “A Study of the Mount Isa
Ores,” Econ. Geol,, June-July, 1937.
3. Blanchard, R., and Hall, G.,, “Mount Isa Ore Deposition,” Econ,
Geol., December, 1937.
4. Lindgren, W., “Succession of Minerals and Temperatures of
Formation in Ore Deposits of Magmatic Affiliations,” Trans.
Am. Inst. Min. Met. Eng., Vol, 126, 1937,
5. Blanchard, R., “Paragenesis of Pyrrhotite”—Discussion, Econ.
Geol., March-April, 1938.
6. Hewitt, R. L., “Experiments Bearing on the Relation of
Pyrrhotite to Other Sulphides,” Econ. Geol., May. 1938.






FIG. 1
J. 1B. X 2
Showing the variation in the manner and extent of the pyritization of the shale by
the first generation of mineralization, and the relationship of the sphalerite which
dominates the second generation. The centre bands of unaltered shale (black) and
pyrite (white) are flanked to left and right by bands rich in sphalerite (grey), but
still containing much partially replaced older pyrite. The second generation solutions
have also penetrated longitudinal and transverse fissures in the pyritized bands.
FIG. 2
B. 5L. X 2
A sample in close proximity to the "Pyrite Rib” showing almost complete replacement
of the shale by fine-grained pyrite. The pyritized structure has been subjected to
fracturing on a minute scale, followed by penetration by the second and third
generations of solutions. Coarse pyrite, sphalerite, pyrrhotite, marcasite and galena
are deposited in the fissures, the detailed structure of which is shown in Figs. 22
and 23.


FIG. 3
G.1 2L. X 40
Showing the variation in the form of the first-generation pyrite, which is frequently
a massive replacement with minor inclusions of unassimilated shale, but often
develops at the edges of the pyritized bands into well-formed idiomorphs free of
inclusions.
FIG. 4
E. 1B. X 40
An effect similar to that of Fig. 3, but modified by the penetration of dolomite into
the silicifled and pyritized areas, followed by incipient replacement of the larger
idiomorphs by sphalerite. The change in type of pyrite is very generally associated
with dolomite and sulphides of the second generation, the pyrite of which may have
been derived, in part from recrystallization of the earlier crystals.


Fig. 5
Aa. 5L. X 40
A typical band of lightly pyritized shale, containing fine pyrite (white), arseno-
pyrite (rhomb sections) and occasional grains of fine sphalerite (light grey). All
three sulphides, together with the silica matrix, belong to the first generation of
sulphide mineralization.


Fig. 6
G. 1C. X 2
An instance of the distortion, fracturing and partial replacement of the older pyrite
and shale accompanying the second generation of mineralization. In the longi-
tudinal fissure at the left may be seen idiomorphs of the younger pyrite in a matrix
of sphalerite (grey). The anticlinal fissure at the centre has been filled by galena
(white), with minor amounts of chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite together with calcite.
Fig. 7
D2. 5L. X 2.
An example of crenulation in the lightly pyritized shale bands. The shale (black)
and pyrite are partly assimilated by the sphalerite (grey) and galena (white) of
the later mineralization periods. The transverse shale fissures are mostly filled by
galena, which is also segregated to a notable extent at the centres of longitudinal
fissures between sphalerite-rich layers.


Fig. 8
E. 4L. X 2
Fig. 9
G1. 2L. X 2
Further examples of the distortion and fracturing of the pyritized shale, and the
infilling of the fissures by the later minerals. The longitudinal fissures are filled
with sphalerite (grey) containing idiomorphs of the younger pyrite and interstitial
galena and pyrrhotite. The transverse fissures are “healed” by galena (white) with
chalcopyrite, tetrahedrite and calcite, indicating that Assuring continued until late
in the crystallization period. The detailed structure of the transverse fissure of
Fig. 9 is shown in Fig. 35.


FIG. 10
H. 5L. X 40
A local pucker in the pyritized shale (black) of the type shown in the macro-
structure of Fig. 7. The fissure is filled and the shale partly assimilated by
sphalerite (Sp.) and galena (Ga.). As usual, there is segregation of galena to the
transverse fissures and the centres of the longitudinal channels.
FIG. 11
D2. 5L. X 40
Showing the penetration of the sphalerite (Sp.) into the shale, which has been
silicified and pyritized in the first generation and subsequently invaded by dolomite.
The sphalerite replaces the dolomitic matrix (black) in preference to the pyrite
(white), which is partly replaced, giving “atoll” intergrowths by replacement which
proceeds from the centres of the crystals and is evidently connected with the zoning
displayed by the older pyrite.


FIG. 12
G1. 2L. X 40
Detailed structure of the longitudinal band of lead-zinc ore in the macro-structure
of Fig. 9. Idiomorphs of second generation pyrite (Py.) have crystallized close to
the siliceous walls (black), and are partially replaced by sphalerite (Sp.), the
interstices of which are filled by the later galena (Ga.). The embayment of pyrite
crystals is typical of the mode of replacement of this generation, as compared with
the “atoll” replacements of the zoned older pyrite crystals.
FIG. 13
D2. 5L. X 300
Detailed structure of the sphalerite of Fig. 11, showing minute ex-solution inclusions
of pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite (both light grey). The white inclusions in low relief
are interstitial galena: the black areas are remnants of siliceous shale.


FIG. 14
K. 5L. X 2
Typical penetration of the first and second generations by the pyrrhotite-rich
generation, which appears to have resulted from a resurgence of mineralization
before crystallization of the second generation was completed. The bands are
composed as follows: 1, pyritized shale (first generation): 3,5, 7, sphalerite-rich
bands (second generation); 2,4, 6, pyrrhotite-rich bands carrying idiomorphs of
pyrite and arsenopyrite. Arsenopyrite idiomorphs of the type shown at the lower
centre are a frequent feature of the outskirts of the pyrrhotite bands.
FIG. 15
J. 1B. X 2
Another instance of distortion and folding of the pyritized shale and the introduction
of the later minerals. The black bands 1 and 3 are of unaltered shale and the
light-grey conformable bands, 4 and 6, are impregnated with older pyrite. The
dark-grey areas 2 and 5 contain, sphalerite of the second generation intersected and
replaced by the later pyrrhotite.


FIG. 16
K. 1B. X 2
FIG. 17
K. 1C. X 2
Further examples of the displacement and penetration of the first and second
generations by the younger pyrrhotite-rich mineralization. Penetration takes place
in both longitudinal and transverse fissures. In Fig. 17 the bands are composed as
follows: 1, 3, 6, first-generation pyrite and second-generation sphalerite ; 2,4, pyrrho-
tite; 7, pyrrhotite-galena; 5, 8, shale. The idiomorphs within band 7 are pyrite
and arsenopyrite; the white crystals at the junction of bands 6 and 7 are poorly
formed crystals of arsenopyrite.


FIG. 18
K. 1C. x 40
transverse fissure of Fig. 16, showing the banded structure of shale
(black), sphalerite (dark grey) and older pyrite (white disseminated crystals),
intersected by a fissure filled with dolomite (black) and arsenopyrite (white poorly-
formed idiomorphs) in a matrix of pyrrhotite (light grey) which has also penetrated
the earlier structures along longitudinal fissures.
FIG. 19
K. 5L. X 40
Detailed structure of the large idiomorphic section of arsenopyrite in Fig. 14. The
background consists of the usual banded arrangement of shale and dolomite (black)
sphalerite (grey) and older pyrite (white disseminated crystals). The inclusions
within the arsenopyrite consist principally of older pyrite and sphalerite, and the
inference is that the arsenopyrite has crystallized within the solid matrix.


FIG. 20
E. 1B. X 100
The typical conversion of pyrrhotite (Po.) to lamellar marcasite in the pyrrhotite-
rich bands. The white isolated crystals are pyrite (Py.). The cleavage planes of
the marcasite are often replaced by galena and chalcopyrite.
FIG. 21
D2. 5L. X 200
Several stages in the conversion of pyrrhotite to marcasite in an area in which
crystallization of pyrrhotite (Po.) has overlapped with that of galena| (Ga.) within
a matrix of gangue (black) and sphalerite (Sp.). The speckled areas consist ot
remnants of pyrrhotite within marcasite, which begins to show replacement by
galena. The striped grain at the lower centre consists of marcasite with cleavage
inclusions of galena.


FIG. 22
B. 5L. X 40
FIG. 23
B. 5L. X 100
Two detailed micro-structures cf the minute transverse fissures within the pyritized
shale of Fig. 2. The background shows older pyrite (white disseminated crystals)
with remnants of shale (black) penetrated by later silica and dolomite (grey). The
fissure veins are filled with marcasite (Mc.), with remnants of pyrrhotite and
occasional crystals of younger pyrite (Py.). The lamellar cleavage planes of the
marcasite contain inclusions of galena and chalcopyrite.


Fig. 24
D2. 5L. X 40
FIG. 25
D2. 5L. X 100
Details of the sphalerite, pyrrhotite-marcasite and galena relationships. The
sphalerite (Sp.), has crystallized amongst crenulated shale (dark grey), which shows
silicification and dolomitization; the pyrrhotite and galena (Ga.) are later and inter-
stitial. The pyrrhotite in this area has been completely converted to marcasite
(Mc.), and the latter is subjected to cleavage replacement by galena. The replacing
galena is continuous with the interstitial mineral, thus indicating the period of the
conversion to marcasite.


FIG. 26
E. 5L. X 2
An instance of partial replacement of the dolomitic areas by sphalerite, pyrrhotite
and galena. The sphalerite and pyrrhotite (both grey) are disposed longitudinally
with remnants of the bedded shale (black), whilst the galena (white) is mostly
disposed in late transverse fissures and in an intricate lace-like intergrowth with
dolomite.
FIG. 27
D1. 5L. X 2
A specimen from the outskirts of a galena-rich band in dolomitized shale. The
galena has partially assimilated the shale and shows occasional enrichment in
chalcopyrite and tetrahedrite.


FIG. 28
E. 5L. X 40
FIG. 29
H. 5L. X 40
Detailed structures of the centres of the sphalerite-rich areas of specimens similar
to Fig. 7. The sphalerite (Sp.) has crystallized principally along the walls ot the
channels in proximity to the crenulated shale (black); the younger pyrrhotite (Po.)
and galena (Ga.) are mostly disposed towards the centres of these channels but
the late-crystallizing galena frequently invades and replaces the shale walls, as in
Fig. 29.


FIG. 30
G1. 1D. X 40
FIG. 31
Cc. 5L. X 40
Typical replacements by galena (Ga.) of the pyrite (Py.) of the second generation
showing the familiar corrosion and embayment of the idiomorphs. Compare these
structures with those of Figs. 32 and 33 for the first-generation pyrite.


FIG. 32
D2. 5L. X 100
FIG. 33
E. 5L. X 100
Two stages in the replacement of first-generation pyrite (Py.) by galena (Ga.) and
pyrrhotite (Po.), giving “atolls” in Fig. 32 and complete pseudomorphs in Fig. 33.
The structure is associated with zoning in the crystals and does not occur with the
pyrite of the later generations, which shows the usual embayment replacement
typified by Figs. 30 and 31.


FIG. 34
G. 1B. X 200
A further instance of replacement of first-generation pyrite (Py.) by galena (Ga.).
The pyrite is more massive than in the previous figures, but there is the same
tendency for replacement to proceed from the centres of the grains. The ground-mass
is sphalerite (Sp.), with shale remnants (black) and silica (dark grey).
FIG. 35
G1. 2L. X 100
Detailed structure of the transverse fissure of Fig. 9, showing the typical association
of the youngest minerals, galena (Ga.), chalcopyrite (Cp.) and tetrahedrite (T.).
The gangue is calcite (black).


FIG. 36
Sample from a Galena-rich Band in No. 5 Ore Body, No. 7 Level, R. 54 S.
Magnification 100 diameters —mesh spacing 0.074 mm. (200 mesh).
This specimen was taken from a band 30 inches wide of apparently high-grade
lead ore, flanked by bands of similar width rich in pyrite and pyrrhotite respectively.
Micro-examination shows the galena-rich effect to he due to an interstitial matrix
of that mineral, the crystallization of which follows that of pyrite (Py.), sphalerite
(Sp.) and pyrrhotite (Po.). The structure explains the refractory nature of such
ore from the aspect of liberation of minerals for flotation.


FIG. 37
A. 1D. X 2
A specimen from the copper ere body at the hanging-wall. On the right is a field
of shale (dark grey) pyritized by the first generation of mineralization and
subsequently crenulated and replaced by the pyrrhotite-chaleopyrite mineralization
(light grey) The black band, at the left is highly silicified shale and exhibits only
marginal replacement by pyrrhotite and chalcopyrite, in which are included idiomorphs
(white) of pyrite and arsenopyrite.
FIG. 38
A. 1D. X 100
Detailed structure of a copper-rich area from Fig. 37. The clusters of pyrite
crystals (Py.) are replaced by chalcopyrite (Cp.), giving intergrowths akin to the
“atolls” in the lead-zinc ore bodies.


FIG. 39
A. 1C. X 100
Replacement of the dolomite (Do.) by chalcopyrite (Cp.) in the copper ore body.
Replacement begins in the cleavage and twinning planes of the dolomite as shown
by the lines of fine inclusions of chalcopyrite. The darker areas in relief are
remnants of silica partially replaced by the younger dolomite.
FIG. 40
A. 1B. X 40
Showing the manner in which replacement of the dolomite (black) is controlled
by cleavage. The replacing minerals are pyrrhotite (Po.) and chalcopyrite (Cp.).


FIG. 41
Lead Concentrate, + 200 mesh fraction. X 200
FIG. 42
Lead Concentrate, + 325 mesh fraction. X 200


FIG. 43
Lead Concentrate, 325 mesh fraction. X 400
Three size-fractions of the final lead concentrate, which assays approximately:
Pb 39 per cent., Zn 10 per cent., Fe 13 per cent., S 24 per) cent., Insolubles 7 per
cent. The dilution of the 325 mesh fraction is principally by first-generation
pyrite; that of the coarser fractions is due to composite particles of galena with
sphalerite, pyrrhotite and pyrite.


FIG. 44
Black Star Lode, Mount Isa. Section
looking north through Davidson Shaft.
(From Mt. Isa Mines Ltd. B164—2x.)
