

,
■
■
■
■
■
V.VV
The Spirit of the Bush [
i i i - - - s
■
PART ONE |
- .A, v ■ ' • * V*:£*
J s
s
BY ■
ALEXANDER STEWART JOLLY 8
■
■
■
■
■
8
■
f.; 5 Jz -fa
i
■
[COPYRIGHT] ■
!
iiUBHHimicmimmmimmniiiiBiinmniiniiiiil


V
(s*y v


THE SPIRIT OF THE BUSH
111 - - -
PART ONE


Wholly set up and printed in
Australia by William Homer
31 Cunningham St., Sydney
Registered by the Postmaster-
General for transmission
through the Post as a Book.


The Spirit of the Bush
! I I
PART ONE
ALEXANDER STEWART JOLLY
Copyright
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM HOMER
31 CUNNINGHAM STREET




CONTENTS
I. A Visit to the Bush 1
11. Meeting Bush Friends -------5
111. The Giant Tree 10
IV. Planning the Cabin 18
V. King Billy’s Cave 2 3
VI. A Site for the Cabin 3°
VII. A Trip to the Beach 35
VIII. Building the Cabin 4 2
IX. Haven - 4$




The Spirit of the Bush
I I 1
PART ONE
Chapter I.
A Visit to the Bush.
A man was once very tired and weary of the city. His
business had failed and he was reduced to his last few
pounds. This worried him, so he decided to give all the
money he had to his wife and ask her to make it last as long
as possible.
“I will go into the bush and seek for gold, as there is
no work to be had in the city.” So saying good-bye to his
family, he started off next morning at daybreak for the bush.
He thought as he walked along of the many disappoint-
ments in his life and felt that at last he was doing the right
thing in going away.
He walked miles in the warm sunshine until n o’clock,
when he began to feel tired, and, looking round, he saw a
stream running through the rocks singing merrily, as if to
say, “Come and sit by me and rest.” So, taking his boots
and socks off, he rubbed his feet, and, sitting on the bank
of the stream with his back leaning against the trunk of a
tree, he fell asleep; and we can imagine him dreaming of
gold mines.
The sun gradually climbed higher in the sky and left
him exposed to its fierce rays, for the day had grown very
hot. Two kookaburras, noticing the man’s head exposed


to such heat, were very concerned, and one of them said:
“Look, Jack, this seems to be a kind man; let us spread our
wings so that he will be sheltered from the sun.” They were
thus engaged on this kind task, having formed a protecting
shield, when Mr. Tom Spider and his family came along.
“What do you think you are doing?" he asked.
“Oh, we are sheltering a kind man from the sun,” they
replied.
“Is that it!” said Mr. Tom; “I know a better way
than that. We will spin a web for him.” So they set to
work, and in the spiders’ wonderful way, by making a
very thick web, soon had a screen made which sheltered
the man’s head completely.
When he awoke he was astonished to find his head
surrounded by a beautiful web with no sun shining through.
He was wondering at this kind action and as to who could
have been so thoughtful wdien the spiders, noting that he
was awake, asked him where he came from.
“The city,” replied the man. “I have walked a great
number of miles and felt the need of a rest.” The spiders
then told him how they found the kookaburras sheltering
him with their wings and how they had thought of a better
way, by spinning a web.
“How can I thank you?” asked the man.
“That’s alright,” said Mr. Tom Spider; “all my children
belong to the Insects’ ‘One Good Deed a Day’ League, and
it was a great pleasure to have been of assistance to you.
Besides, the web will do to catch our food for the day.” God
had provided them with a wonderful means by which to
catch their food. The kookaburras had flown away, so the
man was not able to thank the birds. However, he asked
the spiders to thank them for him the next time they saw
them. This the spiders promised to do. They then wished


each other good-bye, the man promising that if ever he
were passing again he would call and see his new friends,
who said the place where they lived was called South
Creek.
So he felt very happy as he continued his journey. He
could not help noticing how different the world looked; even
the leaves of the trees seemed to smile at him. “How glad I
am that I came to the bush,” thought he; “and how kind
and happy everything is.” Just at that moment Mr. Kan-
garoo hopped along, looked at him, then asked: “Where are
you going?”
“I am looking for a place in the bush where there is
gold so that I can buy food for my family,” was the reply.
“What is gold?” enquired Mr. Kangaroo.
“Yellow metal that people in the city exchange for
food,” replied the man.
“But,” said Mr. Kangaroo, “I know where you can get
food without gold. We don’t bother about anything like
that, for there is plenty of food, and we just take it as we
want it, I have heard that people waste a lot, but we only
gather enough for each meal. You follow me.” And with
that he hopped along, followed by the man, who felt so well
even his feet seemed to have lost their soreness.
They travelled for a long distance, then came to a
beautiful bay surrounded by thickly wooded hills with giant
palms overhanging the water. “This is Pittwater,” said Mr.
Kangaroo.
“What a glorious spot!” exclaimed the man, his eyes
shining. He caught a glimpse of tiny bays with white sandy
beaches and an island in the distance. It was a wonderful
sight, and nowhere in the world could be found anything
to compare with its natural beauty.
“You will find the beach only one mile from here,”


said the Kangaroo. “It is a lovely spot, and to-morrow I
will show you a palm grove where you will be able to build
a cabin. There are wild yams, berries and other fruit to
eat, while in Careel Bay there are shell fish, oysters and
many other things, so you need not worry about food —
or gold.”
“We will all help you to build your cabin, but you are
tired now” (it had grown very late) “and there is a very
cosy cave nearby which will be a shelter for you to-night.
I will tell all my friends that you arc here and they will
bring you food.”
Away he went, and soon along came a procession of
animals, each laden with something to eat. The bandicoots
had dug up yams, the birds had branches covered with
berries, and others had nuts.
“This is quite a feast,” exclaimed the man. “What a
wonderful place this is, and how I would like to have
my family here.”
All the animals helped to build a shelter of ti-tree in
front of the cave, and soon everything was made very snug
£)r the night. The kangaroo then explained that:
Each day they did a kindly deed,
If only to supply a seed,
To help the one who was in need,
So on his journey he could speed.”
The man lived here for some time and then thought
how nice it would be to have his family with him. Con-
sulting with his friends, they arranged that the kangaroo
should show him the way home.
He reached the city safely and told his family all about
the wonderful new home. Of course, they wanted to go
with him immediately, but father said before going he must
tell everyone about the kindness of the animals and try and
make everyone kind to them.


Chapter II
Meeting Bush Friends.
'C'ather and his family, after making all arrangements foi
the journey to the bush home, said good-bye to their
friends and started out early one bright morning. Everyone
was in great glee. The only sadness was having to leave
Douglas’ cat behind. Poor Douglas pleaded to be allowed
to take his pet, but Father would not consent, as he thought
the cat would not understand their kind friends, and cause
strife by killing some poor creature, smaller than himself,
who had done Father a kindness. So puss was given to
Douglas’ friends, with strict orders to feed him well.
The day was beautiful, with a sun not too warm, so
that one could walk in comfort, and even Douglas soon
forgot all about his puss in his delight at each new flower
and animal they passed.
About 10 o’clock a halt was made, and everyone sank
down into the thick bed of leaves which carpeted the woods
and talked of what they would do when they reached the
bush. Of course, Douglas was going to keep a pet opossum
and Jessie a bear, while Mac was more keen on lizards and
frogs, and kept his Father busy answering questions about
blue tongues and whether their bite was poisonous. Father
explained that their bite was like that of a dog, and they
were not venomous. Everyone chatted away in great spirits.
Just then Mr. Bunny came along crying, but seeing the
strangers, was about to scamper away, when Father noticed
his sad look and inquired into the matter.


“My poor wife has been caught in a trap and can’t get
out,” wailed the bunny. “I love her so much, but the trap’s
spring is too strong for me, and I cannot set her free.”
“Oh, don’t cry,” the children called, “we will come and
help you.” So, springing up, they were soon racing after the
bunny, who went like the wind.
On reaching the spot they could not see Mrs. Bunny,
because a swarm of bees were circling round to protect her.
At the approach of the children the bees hastily flew out
at them, thinking them enemies, for at one time they had
been in a hive and remembered that they had been robbed
of all their honey. So of course they felt that the children
were enemies and were very angry, but the rabbit explained
the object of the visitors. Flying to a near-by tree, the bees
watched Father carefully free Mrs. Bunny from the trap.
Her leg was badly hurt, but no bones were broken, so with
Kathleen’s handkerchief they carefully bandaged the leg
and made Mrs. Bunny as comfortable as possible.
Mr. Bunny thanked them with tears in his eyes. He
said they had only been married six weeks, although they
had been sweethearts for years. Mrs. Bunny’s mother had
objected to the marriage, as Mr. Bunny was very thin and
she thought that he was lazy, and thus could not find good
patches of grass, with the result that his wife might starve.
However, this was not the case at all. As a baby, coming
out of a burrow, the roof had fallen in and had hurt his
back, and it was not cured until wise Dr. Crow had treated
him. This treatment had made him quite well, so they were
married and were very happy indeed.
The bees consulted together, and one was asked to
interview the Queen Bee and see if she would allow the
family to have some honey. “Of course, they can take as
much as they please,” was the answer. Even the drones


worked themselves into a pitch of excitement, fussing
around the boys and girls, showing them the way to their
home.
Father said he had never seen such a wonderful lot of
honey before; each cell was tightly packed with delicious
liquid; and, indeed, the bees could well be proud of such a
store, for they had won the first prize at the local bee show.
Every one of the family had his meal of honey, and they
all carried some away with them to Mrs. Bunny. Then,
saying good-bye, they parted from their friends and con-
tinued their journey.
After lunch Father said he would like to show them
where he had slept on his first journey. He found the
stream, and there were the kind spiders, and weren’t they
delighted when Father took from his pocket a tin of flies
he had caught in the city. The spiders’ webs had all been
blown down during a storm on the previous night. Some
were sick with cold and had not recovered sufficiently to
spin another web. The family did not see the kookaburras,
as the spiders told them they were away working on a new
home for their eldest boy, who was thinking of getting
married.
These birds had found a new ants’ nest and had been
invited to make their home there. It is difficult work pick-
ing a hole in the ants’ cement which forms the ants’ nest,
and it would take them some days to finish it. Father
asked the spiders to remember him to the kookaburras. He
explained that his new home was by a wonderful water,
and begged that they be sure to visit him some day.
So again the family started on their journey, everyone
enjoying the wonder of it all.
Mr. Hawk, flying high up in the clouds, noticed the
man walking along and quickly sent word by a swallow


to tell Mr. Kangaroo that the friends were here; then he
flew down and gave Father all the Pittwater news. There
were three new baby kookaburras, a brood of wild duck-
lings, also Mr. Carpet Snake had awakened after his long
winter sleep and was very excited after hearing the news
that the family intended living with them. He said they
could have his old skin to make into shoes. The amma.s
in the bush were well, and anxious for the man s return.
“Good-bye,” said Mr. Hawk, “I’ll see you later, as I
have yet to catch my tea.” So away he flew, and the
children thought they had never seen a bird fly so fast.
Soon the kangaroo came hopping along, and what an
exciting time there was as he was introduced to Mother,
Mac, Jessie, Lois, Douglas, Kathleen and Mavis.
“We must hurry,” said the kangaroo, “or it will be
dark before we reach home.”
The sun was setting as they topped the last hill.
“Stand a moment,” said the guide, “and look at the
sunset.” The family had never seen a more beautiful sight.
There lay Pittwater ringed around with trees and sandy
beaches, and in the distance, Kuring-gai Chase with a glow
of gold from the sun’s last effort to light up the earth; and
crimson clouds and deep shadows in the valleys all helped
to make a wonderful picture for the boys and girls.
Each bared his head and thanked the Maker of all these
wonderful things, and Father hoped the children would
grow up good boys and girls and be thankful for so won-
derful a world in which to live.


Then Father spoke the following words:
“ Thou noble setting sun, we sec
New life and wealth in watching thee
As proudly sailing to your rest
You know this day you’ve done your best.
As if the parting caused you pain
You shoot your rays to sky again
And tint the clouds with mellow glow;
The tree tops thank you as you go
For warmth that you have given to-day
And ask you can’t you longer stay;
But smiling in your old red mood
You’ll tell that earth has other brood
And would be pained if deed so rare
As never to them shedding light
But leaving all to lasting night.
They do not fear, for in the morn
You’ll usher in a lovely dawn.”
The trees joined them in silent prayer and the majestic
eagle soared the sky like a sentinel watching over all, and
as the shadows deepened the silence was broken by the kan-
garoo, who asked Father who it was who created these
wonderful things. Mac said he knew, but Father suggested
that it be left for another time, when he would tell the
friends all about the wonderful world in which we live.
They went down the hill and saw before them all the
birds and animals of the bush to welcome them. The fish
blew bubbles in the water, and every animal was excited as
they were introduced to the family and were pleased that
they were going to be their neighbours.
The children were tired, but very happy. Father and
Mother soon had them tucked in bed in their cosy cave.
Father then asked the fireflies to put out their lights, and
soon all were in blissful slumber, dreaming of the happen-
ings of the day.


Chapter 111.
The Giant Tree.
At daybreak next morning the children were awakened
by a most wonderful burst of laughter. This was the
kookaburras’ morning call to all life to rise and greet the
dawn. Great choruses filled the air, first on one hill and
then taken up by another party, until the whole air was
filled with their mirth.
Although the children had seen a kookaburra at the
Zoo, it was quite different to hear hundreds of these won-
derful birds all joining in one great laugh.
Father then explained that the kookaburras always
greeted the dawn so, and also in the evening gave note of
the setting sun. If it were fine they laughed for joy for so
lovely a day, and if it were raining they laughed all the
louder because of the extra number of grubs they would find.
Mac was the first to dress. He hurried out of doors,
quickly followed by the whole family. “Good-mornings”
were exchanged, then Father suggested that a dip in the bay
would be a good idea as the first part of the day’s programme.
The whole animal kingdom was now awake, and the
air was filled with the sound of birds singing, wallabies
hopping and bears grunting. All seemed bent on starting
the day with as much noise as possible.
“What is that?” asked Mavis, as a beautiful song was
heard.


“That is a magpie,” said Father, and cried, “Good
morning, Mr. Magpie! Thank you so much for your
song.”
“Good morning,” replied the magpie; “I thought you
would like it. Our singing master said that I was to be
sure and sing my best for you this morning, and he will be
pleased when I tell him you liked it.”
“I see you are bound for a dip. You will find a great
number of us already at our favourite beach. Mr. Eagle
said he would call on you later in the day, as he had such
a busy morning and could not see you earlier. He saw
you admiring the sunset last evening, and said he had never
seen a finer one himself. He is very fond of the great
spaces and seldom comes to visit us. Good-bye for the
present; I will see you soon.”
“Can we swim on the beach with the animals?” asked
Douglas.
“Yes,” said Father; “it’s not far and is a lovely spot.”
So, clambering down the hillside over rocks and across
fallen trees, they were soon at the beach. Then! What a
sight met their eyes! All the animals were gambolling in
the water, birds were twisting on their backs and flapping
their wings, all enjoying the cool water together. The black
swan made a fine picture as he sailed in stately dignity
among the smaller birds. Those of the animals who could
not swim played on the edge of the bay, and you should
have heard the chuckles of the kookaburras as they pushed
each other into the deeper water. The swans sometimes
took the smaller birds on their backs for a sail, and what a
pretty picture it made with the long line of swans all with
smaller birds on their backs. When Father arrived with
his family, the animals all rushed from the water to be intro-
duced to the children. What a time they had! “Good


morning!” sounded from all throats with a heartiness that
was good to hear.
Mrs. Kangaroo was delighted to meet the children, and
congratulated Father and Mother on their handsome family.
She said she had twelve children, most of them now grown
up with families of their own. Little Pat was the youngest
and was quite a baby; she was still in her mother’s pouch.
This amused the children, and when her mother lifted her
out they laughed to see such long legs, for Pat looked very
comical, as all baby kangaroos do. Her mother said she
would grow into a very handsome animal. Mac and
Douglas thought her very ungainly; but they had never seen
a baby kangaroo before, so could not be blamed for their
silent mirth.
The mother kangaroo said she had been very ill, but
was now much better. Her illness was caused through the
loss of her son, Tom, who had been caught by some wicked
men, taken to the Sydney Zoo and shut up within a wire
enclosure. He was such a handsome fellow and loved the
bush so much that his mother thought he would die at the
Zoo. However, Mr. Hawk had flown to the Zoo and
managed to see him and talk with him. Tom sent a mes-
sage to his mother saying: “Do not worry, for they treat
me very well, and I am hoping some day to escape and return
home. I am well fed and looked after, and nearly all the
people who come to see me are very kind. A nasty animal
called a dog tried to bite me, but I was able to kick him
hard and he ran away crying.”
“So now I am feeling much better,” said Mrs. Kan-
garoo, “and feel sure Tom will escape, as he is very clever.”
“The water is lovely this morning,” she continued,
“and makes one feel like staying in all day; but there is too


much to do, and all the children have to be taken to a new
patch of green grass.”
Kathleen begged to nurse Pat, but Mother Kangaroo
said she would send her over to play some day.
“Come, children,” said Father, “or we will be late.”
The animals had by this time nearly finished their swim.
The boys and girls enjoyed themselves frolicking about in
the cool water, and as they could all swim they had swim-
ming races with the animals.
When they left the water they found the bush creatures
had provided them with towels made from ti-tree bark; so
soon all were dried and dressed and ready for breakfast. This
consisted of ground roots for porridge, wild fruit and honey
sent by the bees.
“Now,” said Father, “this cave is not big enough for
us all; we will have to build a cabin. We will have a talk
with the animal architects, who are wonders at construc-
tion; but to-day we will explore the bush and bay.”
Pittwater is about four miles long and enters from
Broken Bay, Lion Island being situated at the entrance.
The bay is surrounded with dense scrub, with numerous
sandy beaches along the shore. The bush was a wonderful
sight, with giant gums, ironbarks, stringy barks, oaks and
a profusion of wild flowers. The children were particu-
larly interested in a giant spotted gum whose every line
and limb breathed strength and vigour; such a fellow he
looked as he smiled at the children and waved his branches
in greeting. He seemed sorry that they could not climb
up and sit on his limbs, and told them that they must have
climbing lessons from Mr. Bear, who was a splendid climber
and would be delighted to teach the children. The gum
then told them that the bear boarded with Mrs. Grey Gum.
She did not charge him anything for his board.


“Sometimes he sleeps in my branches on a stormy
night,” said the Spotted Gum, “but does not like my leaves
as well as Mrs. Grey Gum’s. She grows a special leaf of
which the bear is very fond. Come and play around me
often and learn to climb.
This the children promised to do.
Then Kathleen recited:
“ You great and noble, virile tree,
How straight you stand, so big and free,
The monarch of your forest home,
Like king upon his gilded throne.
“ Your name is right, the Spotted One,
For centuries you’ve seen the sun,
Who helped to mottle your giant trunk,
Which age, like mortals, has not shrunk.
“ What stormy batdes you have fought,
In Heaven’s blasts you’re often caught,
As elements have tried in vain
Your massive limbs to rend in twain.
And then, as if in angry spite,
Have wiped a sapling out of sight.
And then gone off in whirling glee
Some further mischief still to see.
“ See how your root has tapped the ground
To stand the strain that here is found,
And makes you laugh at stormy might
That tries to trip you in the night.
“ And round about in sheltered spots,
Thus shaped by roots and kindly knots,
There moss has clung in thoughtful mood
And formed soft beds for leaves to brood.
But finding that their strength was spent,
They setde down and are content
To help in further building you
And join with rain and sun and dew.


“ And maiden-hair here gendy asks
May she help you in any tasks?
And with wild violets make a home
Where ants and spiders like to roam,
And seem to think as they, like dots,
Walk in and out your weathered spots
They own you, trunk and limbs and all—
Their thoughts are big, if bodies small.
“ But they forget bear has a say,
Who sits and sleeps the livelong day,
And out on tree trunk has his home,
Where he at times wakes up to roam.
The eagle also makes his nest,
But does not always take a rest;
But up he soars in sky so high,
With searching eye for game, if nigh.
“ And what of sparrow and of dove ?
The latter peace appears to love.
And how the magpie warbles song
And thanks you for a home so strong;
You thought not when you were a shrub
You’d end in being bushlands’ hub.
“ So you have stood the stress of time
And reached proportions now sublime,
And so the gende rusding breeze
Bestirs the leaves she loves to tease;
In stately dignity you stand
And love of those around command.”
Near the spotted gum was a sparkling stream running
into the bay. Father said: “This is our present water sup-
ply.” And the stream sang a song of joy as it splashed
over rocks and under ferns.
There was one clear patch of ground where Father
said he would make his garden, for he had brought with


him seeds of flowers, vegetables and fruit. There was a
slope to the water on the banks of the stream. The bandi-
coot said the soil was good, as he had done a lot of digging
there for wild yams.
While they continued to explore, the children were
startled to see an enormous snake on the path, but Father
told them not to be frightened, as it was only Mr. Carpet
Snake having a rest. Just then the snake looked up and,
smiling at the children said: “Good morning, friends! Wel-
come from our family. We have heard of your kindness
to Mr, Bunny. Mr, Eagle saw you all and sent us an account
of your kind actions. I hope we will be great friends.”
Father introduced all the family and thanked Mr. Snake
for the kind offer of his old skin.
“Oh, that’s nothing,” said Mr. Snake. “I grow a new
one every year. I hear you are going to build a cabin. I
will help you all I can when you are ready. Please let me
know how I can assist you. All my friends have their old
skins, which would make lovely well-paper.”
Father was delighted, and told the snake that in the
city they were making the skins of snakes into shoes, bags,
belts and other things, and he thought that to panel the
cabin inside with them would be a very good idea.
“Good-bye,” said their friends. “I will meet you soon
again and have another chat. In the meantime I will collect
the skins for you.”
“Thank you very much,” said Father, and the rest of
the party called out: “Good-bye, kind Mr. Snake.”
“He must be fourteen feet long,” said Father, “and so
friendly. Did you see how he waved his tail to us and how
the rats and mice ran over his back and yet he did not
mind?”


“I like him,” said Mac; “we will be great friends.” For
Mac always liked snakes and lizards, etc.
Mr. Bandicoot then came running up and exclaimed:
“I was digging for roots in a cave and found this stone axe.
It will be useful in building your cabin.”
Mac then grew excited and asked the bandicoot to
show him where the cave was, after which the animal
offered to take them there the next day.


Chapter IV
Planning the Cabin.
On returning to their cave, the party found Mr. Kangaroo
waiting for them, with the good news that, after a
meeting, the animals thought the best way to assist them
was to have a working bee, each of the animals and birds
assisting in the building of the cabin.
Father then said he thought of asking their architects
for advice, as he was not very well acquainted with building
matters. An interview was then arranged with the archi-
tects for that afternoon at three o’clock under the shade of
the spotted gum.
Mr. Kangaroo told Kathleen that she could have Pat
Kangaroo during the afternoon to play with. Then, bidding
her good-bye, he hopped away. Father thought the animals
must worship a God of Love, for they seemed to be always
doing kind actions.
After lunch an hour’s rest was proposed, under the
shade of the trees, and so they were all asleep when along
hopped Jack Kangaroo with Baby Pat on his back. This
awakened the family, and Kathleen was soon nursing her
new little friend. She was such a trick, trying to climb
into Kathleen’s blouse and hair, and altogether such a
loving little animal that Kathleen thought never before had
she seen such a darling. Of course, they had all to have a
nurse, and Jack Kangaroo was much amused at the fuss
made over his little sister. He made great friends with
[lB]


Lois and Douglas, and was soon playing hop, skip and
jump with them. But Doug., who was a big boy, could
not do half as well as Jack, who explained to them that his
tail was of great assistance to him.
“Why haven’t we got tails?” asked Lois.
Father explained that a long time ago we did have
tails and lived in the bush in trees, but our great-grand-
fathers were very bad and the other animals cut off their
tails, with the result that human beings have none.
“And did human beings grow better without their
tails?” asked Jessie.
“No, they grew worse. In the old days threw rocks
at each other, and now they make guns and throw lead,
which kills them.”
Mac said he would never leave the bush, and perhaps
some day he would grow a tail. Some of the family wanted
tails and some did not. Jack Kangaroo roared with laugh-
ter at the argument, then joined in a merry game of
chasings. Jack said his big brother, Bill, would give them
a ride when he came to see them. Then he raced home,
leaving little Baby Pat with Kathleen.
“Now, children, it must be three o'clock. Yes, I see the
architects, so we will hurry oft to the gum tree,” said
Father.
“Oh, here you are again,” cried the gum. “I heard
about the meeting, and was hoping you would hold it under
my shade, as I may have some valuable suggestions to
make.”
In a few minutes the architects arrived, each one being
there exactly on time. The animals always keep appoint-
ments, and are never late. Even the children are punctual
for school.


First came the Magpie, a great designer and builder of
wicker and mud plaster work. Some examples of the Mag-
pies nest-work are in the animal museum and are much
admired.
Next the White Ant, the great tree doctor came; then
Mr. Bandicoot, the excavator; the Bee, wax worker and
planner, whose work in wax excites the admiration of all;
then came Mr. Bark Grub, the decorator. Some of his
decorations on the trees are very beautiful, and Father con-
gratulated him on his designs. The grub said their work
was very slow, but they used a great number of workers,
which helped them to complete their contracts.
Mr. Emu said he would be very handy to them in
carrying pebbles from the beach in his beak, and could
assist in many other ways. He said he was not a very great
designer like the Bark Grub, but could mix cement very
well, as his legs were very powerful.
The Platypus said he was very expert in cellar work,
and if the cabin were built near a stream he would build an
outdoor ice-chest for them. There were numerous others,
each expert in his own particular line.
The White Ant was elected chairman of the meeting,
being recognised as perhaps having the greatest ability in
woodwork.
Father said the human beings hated the white ant, as
he destroyed the wood in their homes, and asked the white
ant to explain to them his interesting work.
“It’s all very well for people to talk that way,” began
the white ant; “but they would leave us to starve.” They
cut down the trees and cart them away, and where are we
to get our food from? We couldn’t eat earth and must
have our proper food. I will explain to you our life work.


“We are sent for, say, by Mr. Spotted Gum here; we
examine him and find, perhaps, he has a lump on his trunk.
This is a disease, and he feels sick. We then send a lot of
workers to eat the lump off, working from the inside.
We have to work away from the light and weather, as we
cannot stand exposure. Soon the tree will get well again.
If the lump were not treated, it would grow bigger and
eventually kill the tree.”
“I know,” broke in the gum, “for I have a family
curing me now, and it is a great relief. I will soon be out
of pain altogether.”
“Then,” continued the ant, “we sometimes find a limb
diseased. We eat through it until it falls to the ground,
making food for grubs and manure for the soil. So here
and there throughout the bush you will see us at work,
curing lumps, sore limbs and root cancer. Then, some of
our poor friends suffer from heart disease. We have to send
our best trained workers to cure those cases. So you see we
have a tremendous work to do. We also build cement huts
on the ground and in the trees; the tree huts we allow the
kookaburras to live in. We always have plenty of workers
ready to help in this great task. It is a labour of love, for
we are very fond of it.”
Mavis said she thought it a very noble work, and Father
and Mother thought the White Ant a very wonderful insect.
“I will now call on the Gum Tree for suggestions,” said
the chairman.
Mr. Gum said he had thought of a plan which should
be nice—a rustic cabin with stone foundations and chimney,
log walls of ironbark and oak, web windows, block floors
and roofed by the birds with nest work treatment of twigs
and mud, finished over with waterproof ant cement.
This was agreed to by everyone. Then each bird and


animal present promised to do his share, the Bee calling out
excitedly: “Leave all the wax polishing to me.” Mr. White
Ant said he would cut out all drain pipes and gutters, and
he thought that there was quite a stock already, as they had
cured so many trees of heart disease who would gladly be a
gutter or a drain pipe. Mr. Ironbark suggested that his
bark be used for tanks to hold water, and the Bees would
make the joints watertight with wax. The Spotted Gum
then explained that quite a number of trees, including him-
self, were rather delicate from birth and could not stand
exposure after being cut down, but would assist in being
furniture.
“Of course, I’m too big to cut down, but you are wel-
come to some of my limbs. It does us good to have our
limbs lopped occasionally, so please help yourselves.”
“Of course,” said the Bandicoot, “I am going to take
Mac to the cave to-morrow for more axes, so we will be able
to make a start almost immediately.”
Father then thanked them for their kindness and in-
vited them for afternoon tea. Some delicacy was provided
for everyone, the children having prepared the meal while
the meeting was in progress.
Mr. and Mrs. Butcher Bird sang a duet, and the Wood-
pecker played on a near-by tree. The Magpie gave a treat
by warbling so beautifully that it brought tears to the eyes
of the listeners.
Everybody was happy and in great spirits. Father
asked the children to take notice of the wonderful co-opera-
tive spirit amongst the bush folk, and to try and cultivate
it themselves.
After the children had had a romp with the animals
the family retired for the night, all tired, but happy, after
a most wonderful day.


Chapter V.
King Billy’s Cave.
The next morning, at 4 o’clock, Father was awakened by
a knock, and, on rising, found that it was the eagle.
“Good morning, Mr. Eagle, and what brings you out
so early to us?”
“I’m sorry to get you up so early, but I think the dawn
this morning will be beautiful, and you should not miss it.
I know how you admired the sunset the other day.”
“I wonder if I should disturb the children,” thought
Father; but they were already crowding behind the door,
and on hearing Father’s remark rushed out to greet the
bird.
“Good-morning, Mr. Eagle,” they chorused.
“You have a fine family,” declared the eagle, when the
introductions were over. “I welcome all to Eagle Lookout.
Come up whenever you feel inclined.”
“Who would like to see the dawn from Eagle Look-
out?” asked Father.
“Me! Me! Me!” from everyone. So hurrying into
their clothes, all were soon on their way.
It was about a mile and a quarter to the place where
the eagles had their home, so in twenty minutes they were
all clambering up the headland and soon reached the Look-
out, a little breathless after their hurry.
The Lookout was situated on the northern headland of
the beach, it being the highest point of this part of the coast.
“You have a wonderful position here,” said Father.
[ 23 ]


“Yes, we have. Many years ago the eagles were very
delicate and were ordered mountain air, and we have grown
very strong and healthy living on the heights.” And indeed
he was a noble bird, measuring ten feet from tip of wing to
tip of wing, and stood as tall as Mac, with such piercing
eyes from looking at long distances.
“There it comes!” as a grey streak appeared in the sky.
Then Mavis said:
“The dawn! It comes with herald’s song,
By all bush life it’s greeted long;
From kookaburras’ laughing mirth
To sprightly peewits’ tiny girth.
They turn their eyes to eastern view
To see the day brought in anew,
And watching from their mountain height
They see a faindy spreading light,
The clouds take shape in forms so bold
Until their base is tipped with gold,
Then spreading glow throughout vast space,
Make moon retire with pale good grace.
“ A wondrous scene is here portrayed.
With mountain peaks so big and staid,
And interspersed with silver grey
They form fantastic shapes to stay
A moment in their changing mood.
The picture then becomes more crude,
With jagged peaks that pierce the sky
As rays shoot up and pass them by,
They tint their edge with crimson glow
As mountain tops with lava flow;
To form like rubies on the shore.
A place for lovers to explore.


“ The pale blue shades entrance the eye
And make the heart of man to sigh,
Who in a lonely mood was caught
And now can see his life was naught
Without this pure true thought of light
To chase all fears away with night.
And noble thoughts course through his mind
As treasures of God’s love unwind.
“ The ocean grows so calm and still,
He seems to wait his store to fill
Of power to tip his horses white
When sun’s hot rays have shown their might,
On widening circle light is spread
And leaves smile up for daily bread,
For sun to them is food to store,
He makes tree trunks expand their bore.
“ Then in the far off gullies deep
The owl sneaks off for daily sleep;
For light to him spells nothing more,
And soon you’ll hear his happy snore,
As dreaming of the mice he’ll catch
When sun has closed his evening latch.
“ And then from out the ocean bed
Old Sol shows up his face in red,
And greeting all with sunny smile
He warms your heart and life’s worth while.
“ We stand and watch the changing scene,
Spellbound as if in wonder dream,
And try to grasp the thought behind
The Architect’s great Master Mind.
“ How great Thou art, the One Divine,
Who mak’st for us this light to shine
In glorious tribute to Thy might,
As turning daylight into night.
And like the steady ocean’s roll,
Thine arms reach out from pole to pole.”


Everything was very peaceful as the sun climbed higher
and higher, spreading his mantle of brightness and happi-
ness over the world. Then Mr. Eagle asked them all to
come and meet Mrs. Eagle and his family.
“I did not disturb them before, as they were saying their
prayers, their usual practice at sunrise,” he said.
There stood all the eagles on another rock, thanking
God for such a wonderful world. Mr. Eagle then beck-
oned to Mrs. Eagle and family, and all were introduced,
the children greatly admiring the young eagles, these in
turn thinking their visitors wonderful too.
Their host pressed them to stay to breakfast, but Father
thought they had better return, as a big day was before
them. So, parting with mutual good wishes and a promise
to meet again soon, the family faced downhill for a swim
and breakfast, but not before each had been given a beauti-
ful tail feather and a promise of many for the new home.
“Now boys and girls,” said Father, “swim-oh!” And
gathering their towels, all were soon at the pool.
“Good morning! Good morning!” from every side
greeted them, and Father, Mother and the family felt it
was good to be alive. The black swan promised to teach
the children the water glide. He looked so handsome sit-
ting on the water and said it was so simple; but the children
could not hope to sit the water with such grace as the swan.
Father was chatting to the kangaroo and asking him if
the eagle often came down to the valley. “No, he loves the
big spaces and soaring through the clouds, but he
always keeps us posted with anything he sees that may be
of interest to us. He is very kind hearted and a great friend
of mine. I often spend the dawn with him.”
After breakfast the bandicoot arrived. He was just on


time, as he had to sharpen his claws, thinking he had better
be ready for a big day’s digging.
Mac and Douglas decided to go with him. Mother
packed their lunches and away they went, clambering over
rocks and through dense brush. The distance was not very
great, but the country was rough and walking a slow job.
“There,” said the bandicoot, “is the cave!” And before
them was a great overhanging rock fully sixty feet deep by
two hundred feet long. Mac rushed forward and was dig-
ging before the others came up, so eager was he to find some
treasures left by the aborigines.
The bandicoot told them that years ago a great king
had lived there with his tribe. “Our lives were never safe
with such people about, and we are glad that they have dis-
appeared. A great number of battles have been fought for
possession of this cave, as it was the finest around, and the
last tribe held it for many years; their king was a great
warrior.”
The floor of the cave was several feet deep with shells
and rubbish, the accumulation of centuries.
Then the excitement began. Mac found a spearhead,
then Douglas a fish hook, whilst fish hooks of a larger type
and flint axes came to light, large and small; such a number
of various weapons were dug up that the boys were wildly
excited.
The bandicoot was then seen tugging at a big stone;
the children helped him until there appeared a slab of stone
with carvings upon it.
“This is a carving of old King Billy,” said Mac, and,
sure enough, cleaning the stone, there was the king him-
self, very roughly carved, but quite distinct. It looked very
old, while, in addition, was a diagram of the cave and a
mark pointing to another rock some distance away. “That


must be where he is buried,” cried Mac. So soon they were
all digging away until Mac, carefully removing some soil,
found the skeleton of King Billy, and they soon had his
bones on the grass, with a collection of nulla nullas, spears
and boomerangs.
This was a wonderful find, and there was more excite-
ment when Mac found the carved battle axe of the old king,
which had notches on the handle showing how many men
he had killed in battle.
The boys decided to try and find a cave near-by and
make it into a museum.
“I’m hungry,” said Douglas.
“Oh, bother dinner,” said Mac; “let’s dig and find more
treasures.” But the bandicoot said he was not used to
missing his meals, so unpacking their hamper they were
soon eating their lunch. Mother had provided roots for
the bandicoot so he did not have to dig for his dinner. He
told the boys that the bandicoots always lived on roots, and
their main work was digging the soil and exposing it to
the sun. They worked every night and some days. It
was much cooler at night, he said, and digging kept the
ground sweeter, which made the grass grow better.
The kangaroos gave prizes for the best patches of grass
where they had been digging, so there was plenty of com-
petition. They enjoyed their work, as it was a labour of
love. The worms assisted them in this great work, but
they were very slow.
“I will collect anything I find during my work, and
also tell all my mates to do the same,” said the friendly
little animal.
Mac and Douglas were covered with dirt from head
to foot, but very happy.


The day was drawing to a close and they had a won-
derful collection to take home, but the difficulty was to carry
such a load. This problem was solved by a number of
kangaroos who had come to help them. So all were soon
homeward bound, the kangaroos with burdens tied to their
backs. The boys wondered if the king had a family and if
he had been killed in battle.
Father and Mother were very delighted at so great a
find and gathered everything together in a pile till a cave
could be found for a store.
The rest of the family were almost asleep, and drowsily
inquired if the boys had found anything.
So another perfect day came to an end.


Chapter VI
A Site for the Cabin.
The following morning everyone was up early and had a
hurried breakfast, as Father wished to inspect the site
for the new home, and the family were to accompany him.
“The kangaroo said he would arrive at 7 o’clock,” said
Father. “Oh, here he is.” And with his great hops he was
soon with the friends to lead them to Palm Grove. He
asked Douglas and Lois if they would like a ride. They
had been longing for one. Billy Kangaroo had accom-
panied his father, so after thanking him Douglas climbed cn
Billy’s back, while Lois climbed on to the larger animal.
The rest of the children were very envious of Douglas and
Lois, but they were happy when told they could have a ride
later in the day.
It was not rough riding the animals; they hopped with
a long low motion. It was very thrilling to the children,
with the cool morning breeze fanning their cheeks, travel-
ling through the bush. There were giant trees, stately palms
and bottle brush; the ground was covered with maiden-hair
fern, wild violets and boronia, making the whole into a
fairy land of great beauty. Mother felt she had never been
so happy before, and when a kookaburra flew down and sat
on her shoulder, she thanked God for this peaceful spot in
which they could live contentedly, away from the city’s
maddening rush.


The old man bear then climbed down from his grey
gum home with slow, dignified walk, gathered a bunch of
flowers and handed them to Mother.
He said the bears were a very contented family. Baby
Bear then poked his nose round a limb, and seeing his
father talking climbed from his perch and joined the party.
Everyone fell in love with baby bear, with the gentle
look in his eyes, and Jessie, picking him up, felt she could
eat him, so soft and furry and cuddlesome he felt. She
wanted to keep him for the day, so father bear excused him-
self for a few minutes to see baby’s mother, and ask if
Jessie might have him for a while. The mother consented.
Great was Jessie’s joy when he came back with the good
news and said he would call before night for baby.
In the meantime Douglas had told Billy Kangaroo that
he would love an opossum to play with. Bill said: “We will
go and see the opossum family.” So hopping for a few
minutes they came to their home in a hollow tree. Bill
introduced Douglas to the mother animal. He explained
that this little boy was anxious to have an opossum for his
friend. The mother said Douglas could take Dick, and
Dick was overjoyed to be chosen for Douglas’ friend. They
had met at the pool the previous morning. Away Doug, rode
with Dick in front of him, clinging to Billy’s neck.
“Where have you been, Douglas?” asked Father. Billy
explained to him and Douglas, holding up his mate, gave
the good news to the rest of the children.
“Now,” said Father, “we must hurry, or we will not be
able to finish our work for the day.”
Soon they were at the Palm Grove. All stood together,
amazed at the beauty of the place. The palms covered
about two acres of ground, such stately fellows with leaves
waving to the breeze.


Here and there were gums and ironbarks where lived
kookaburras in the ants’ nests, and magpies sang to the party
beneath. It was a perfect home for animals and birds.
There was a clear piece of land on the western side,
close to a lovely little stream, and everyone exclaimed to-
gether: “There is the place for the cabin!” And it was a
lovely spot.
There was a giant red gum, with its gnarled limbs and
an enormous spread of branches that came down almost to
the ground. Such a tree to climb! Mac was soon in the
branches, where there were natural seats that one could
sleep in, so broad and flat were they. The red gum said
that he was called the “King of the Red Gums” and he was
very proud of the title. He was very pleased to meet the
city folk, and when he knew they intended to build their
cabin near by he was highly delighted, and said he would
protect them from the storms.
Father had been examining the stream. Here again
Nature had been kind, for the water was pure and sparkled
like diamonds as it sang its song of joy to all.
“You are indeed a wonderful stream,” said Father. “I
have never tasted water so pure before. You will be a life-
giving spring for us. We will commence the cabin straight
away, and during the evenings will be able to chat with
you when we are living here.” The spring then said he
would tell them a great history of Pittwater.
“I love telling stories of the past,” he said.
The spring then told the boys that his mother lived
deep down in the earth, where it was very hot, and she
always boiled him; then he was filtered as he came to the
surface, and that is the reason he was so pure and sparkled
so. He asked the children to be careful not to throw any-
thing into the pool, but keep it clean. “I will introduce you


to Mr. Frog, who looks after my house for me. He is a
great worker and keeps the water pure after I have given
it away.” Mr. Frog then hopped out of the pool on to a
rock and with a loud croak of welcome to the family told
them he was very pleased to see them, and if they lived there
he hoped they would be great friends with him.
“What a size he is,” said Mac; “he must be six inches
long.”
The frog said his family was at work, but would meet
them later. “We are very happy here with our cleaning
work.”
“We will have a wonderful garden of wild flowers,”
said Mavis. “Look at the wild roses waiting to bloom when
their time comes, and Christmas bells.” The flannel flowers
were in bloom, and massed together with the velvety petals,
made a wonderful picture.
The red gum told them how wonderful the spring was.
“I have grown so large because he invited me to send a root
to him, so I can drink on the hottest day, and dry weather has
no terrors for me now. You will be very happy here, for Pitt-
'water is a most beautiful district. The swallows who
travel to other parts of the world, all tell us they have never
seen anything so beautiful during any of their travels.
They have told us that Australia is the finest country in
the world.”
All the children here joined in with: “We know it is,
and love Australia fair.”
It was soon time to return for lunch, so with Mac and
Jessie riding the kangaroos this time, away all hurried. Mac
called to Jessie: “What about a race?” The steeds agreed
that the finishing post should be Clareville gum tree. The
kangaroos hopped great hops, the trees flashed past and
the wind blew in the children’s faces as father and son


strained to be first at the gum. Jessie’s hat blew off, and
Mac could not think of anything but holding on to Bill.
The kookaburras laughed loudly, seeing the race
through the bush, then the crows, magpies, butcher birds,
with lots of other birds of the air, seemed to be flying over-
head. The bears grunted applause from their trees. The
opossums rushed to the path; the bandicoots stopped dig-
ging, and the snakes turned to see the two leaping animals.
Faster and faster went father kangaroo. Bill strained
every muscle to keep up with him, but father reached the
tree half a hop ahead of him. “I’m too good for you, Bill.”
Poor Bill was so winded that he could not reply, and
Mac climbed off his back so that he could lie down for
a while.
“It was glorious, Mac, wasn’t it?” said Jessie, and
Mac agreed.
The rest of the family had to be told all about it when
they arrived.
“Now for lunch.” So climbing the hill to the cave,
Mother and the girls soon had the meal ready.
“We will see the beach this afternoon,” said Father.


Chaffer VII.
A Trip to the Beach.
After lunch Mother insisted on everyone having a rest
for an hour. She would not rest herself, as there were
some sarsaparilla leaves brewing on the fire, from which she
intended to extract a drink which was very healthful for
everyone. The leaves were a present from the bears, who
said there were plenty others growing in the bush.
The oysters had also sent a message from Careel Bay,
stating that they were anxious for the family to come and
help themselves, as they were crowded out and found it
hard to accommodate their young children. It was neces-
sary to have room to grow big and fat. Father said they
would pay them a visit in the morning sometime.
The children raced over the last hundred yards, Mavis
being first to wet her feet in the waves.
The sea was calm and peaceful, with a light breeze
blowing just sufficiently to play with the tiny crests which
curled with the breakers as they rolled on to the beach. The
seagulls were strutting about, and in chatting to the boys
told them how they made their nests on the rocks. There
was a great family of them. Mother said she was very
fond of the seagulls, and asked them to visit her when the
cabin was finished. This they promised to do. They also
pointed out the different kinds of shells to the boys.
1 35 1


They then introduced all to the periwinkles and other
shell-fish. The periwinkles told them not to be afraid to
eat them, as their business in life was to provide food for
their friends. The boys collected some, taking advantage
of the offer. “People,” said the little fish, “are not being
cruel when they boil us. We hope you will enjoy your
meal.”
“There is a whale, children,” exclaimed Father, and
blowing about a quarter of a mile away was a whale resting
on the waves.
“If he would only come nearer,” said Kathleen. “I
have never seen a whale before.” The seagulls overheard
this remark and decided to tell the whale, so flying to him
they asked him if he would not come closer to the shore.
“Yes,” replied the whale, “I would love to see the
family. Are you sure they are kind people? I have been
chased often by men with harpoons, who have tried to kill
me, and I have been very lucky indeed to escape.” (The
whale was very anxious to oblige the seagulls, because, with
other birds, they had often given warning of the approach
of the fierce whalers.) “Years ago,” continued the whale,
“there were no such people, but now it’s very dangerous
to be seen.”
“I will come to the rocks on the north end of the beach,
where the water is deep. I want to scrape some barnacles
off. How these fellows stick to me! But it is their only
home. I don’t like to get rid of them, but too many make it
hard for me to swim fast, and our lives depend on speed
very often. Once a barnacle saved my life, for, as a har-
poon was thrown at me, I was lying on my side, it struck
the barnacle and glanced off my body. I know they mean
well.”


The birds assured the whale that the family were very
kind indeed, and had come to live amongst them for good.
“I am very glad to hear it,” replied the whale. “I don’t
understand these human beings, for, although they can have
all the country in which to live, and plenty of room, they
crowd into places they call cities, and fight for money and
power, which they cannot take away with them. I will come
to the rocks at once.”
He was an enormous sea animal, fully seventy feet
long, and a great age. However, the water was very deep
and he was able to come right up to the rocks.
The family had been told by the seagulls where to stand
and there they were when the whale came alongside. The
children were very frightened at first, but soon became used
to him as Father chatted away.
Whales live to a great age—this one told Father that he
remembered the first ship that came to Port Jackson. “I
swim away to other countries sometimes and have seen
ships before.”
He wanted to know why people cut the trees down, so
Father described the houses in which we live, and explained
how the timber was used for the building of them.
Mr. Whale invited them all to have a ride on his back.
He said he was going on a long journey north next day, so
he would not have another chance of giving them a treat.
The seagulls were sent out to tell a number of the animals
to join the party, as there was so much room to spare. In
about half an hour kookaburras, bandicoots, bears, opossums,
kangaroos, magpies, emus, and cranes were all on the rock.
Father carefully helped Mother and the girls on to the
whale, then the whole of the animals and birds clam-
bered up.
“All ready?” asked Mr. Whale.


“Yes, yes, thank you,” came from the strange crew.
It was a great sight to see the big “ship” slowly leaving
the rocks and gradually increasing the speed, until, like a
giant vessel, it went racing through the waves.
Such a journey! The whale was travelling at about
twenty-five miles an hour, his huge tail lashing the water
into foam.
The whale swam to sea for about two hours, then
turned, and made the return journey in quick time. He
swam close to the rocks again for all to clamber ashore.
Jacky Bear was unfortunate in climbing off, for he
slipped and, with a cry of distress, fell into the water.
Mac immediately plunged in after him, while Father
told them all to be still. The bear was soon grasped by
Mac, who, catching on to Billy Kangaroo’s tail, was hauled
upon the rocks once more.
Jack was wet, but otherwise not hurt. Mac had
scratched his head, which was bleeding, so away flew a
kookaburra to find Dr. Spider, who had a wonderful stock
of webs for stopping a flow of blood.
He brought the doctor back with him in a short time,
and Mac was soon bandaged with the web and feeling much
better.
Father Bear, and, indeed, all the animals, made a hero
of Mac and crowded round him in their excitement.
The whale said it was very smart of Mac, and the eagle,
soaring through the sky, flew down and congratulated him
on his presence of mind.
Thanking the whale for his kindness, the whole party
made for the beach, while their huge friend swam out to
sea, diving, and thrashing the water into foam with his great
tail, making a truly wonderful scene.


“He’s a noble fellow,” said Father; “one can hardly
realise his size, until riding upon him.”
The children gathered shells for the new home, while
Father and Mother watched them.
Mother then told them all to stand round while she
said these words:
“ When God made Sun and Moon and Stars
And thought then of the Planet Mars
The world was not complete to Him;
He made the Earth and placed therein
The masterpiece of this great state
A man, with woman for his mate.
“ It is so great, His wondrous thought,
And children have in school been taught
That coundess years have passed this earth,
Yet we can’t tell you of its birth.
But grope in darkness as of old,
We cannot grasp a scheme so bold.
“ Some like the bush with trees so grand.
And others rocks do understand,
But for sheer pleasure give to me
The wondrous sight of deep blue sea.
For by its side I always dream
Of things in life that might have been.
“ If you have watched the waves roll in
While gentle breezes fan your skin,
Then you will think his spirit tame
Until he plays a stronger game,
And lashes waves to horses white
When you will understand his might.
And ships that have crossed over bars
To steer by heaven’s lonely stars
Are tossed like corks and groan and strain,
The captain longs for port again.
He hopes the storm will lose its strength
And waves return to shorter length.


I love to roam the sandy beach
For shells a sermon to me preach
And lullaby of soothing waves
Gives me new strength, as sand it laves
And pebbles have been worn quite round
With ceaseless rubbing on the ground.
The tiny crabs crawl out of sight,
Some to the left and some the right,
For fear they might be trampled on,
To creep out later when I’ve gone.
And periwinkles are like dots —
The children boil them in their pots.
The seaweed in fantastic shapes
Some, the surfers use for drapes,
And make themselves to fearsome look
Like dragons in a picture book.
They play around with greatest joy,
For who has not been once a boy?
The bold headlands defy the sea,
But as time passes they will be
So gradually removed from sight,
The ocean takes a tiny bite;
But sure as sun, he’ll do the deed
And leave more beaches —it’s decreed.
Then shooting breaker brings its joy,
For old and young may well employ
Themselves in healthy exercise;
You try, and see the great surprise
You’ll get when in a dumper caught,
Your strength by them you’ll know is nought
So old sea waves keep rolling on
And sing to me a lovely song,
Such peace then enters to my soul
My body is made clean and whole.
There resting on the whitened sands
I dream all day of other lands.


Then night falls with its deepening gloom
The Sun has set, to give Moon room,
I sit and wonder where God dwells,
Then putting ear to larger shells
I hear a voice so faindy say
This is the end of perfect day.”
“Yes,” said Father, “this is the end of a perfect day. We
can all say that. It is time to start for home, I feel so well
in spirit and body, that I know there is certainly a health-
giving balm in the bush and the sea.”
“ I ask of God that He will be
Always with us near the sea,
And if we travel off afar
He’ll be our guide and our bright star.”
So all happy and tired, they wended their way home.
“We must be up early again,” said Father, “and make
a start on the cabin.”
On reaching the cave, Mr. White Ant, the architect,
was there to greet them. He said he had made an inspec-
tion of the ants’ work and would like Father to meet him
in the morning, to show him the many logs which had been
cut down for the cabin.
Father thanked him, and said he would be ready at
4 a.m.
Tea was soon over, and all were a little later in bed,
dreaming of whales.


Chapter VIII.
Building the Cabin.
The next morning at 4 o’clock Father, Mac and Douglas
were ready waiting for the White Ant to come.
“The White Ant said he would be here,” said Father,
“and I know he will keep his promise; and there he is,
waiting at the rock with the Kangaroo.” The Kangaroo
had kindly offered to carry him, as he was rather slow at
walking, this not being the season for wings. The White
Ants only fly at certain times.
An inspection was made of many trees. One nice iron-
bark looked so healthy that Father asked what was the
matter with it.
“He is alright now,” said the Ant, “but he has been
cured of a very bad attack of heart disease, and when he is
cut down will make a splendid drain pipe. We have had
to eat four inches from his centre. Very often trees look
healthy, but are not so, and we have hard work with some
of them to allow us to give them our medicine. Often we
have to burrow into the ground before we can reach the
affected spot.”
They had a look at about a dozen trees ready for their
cabin and decided to start cutting them across immediately.
This finished the inspection, as the Ant said they were at
work on the logs for the walls and the Kangaroos would
carry them, with the help of the Emus, to the Palm Grove.
So they returned home for breakfast.
[42]


“What is that noise?” asked Douglas. It sounded as
if the whole bush world were at the cave. And, sure
enough, they were.
“Oh!” exclaimed the Bear, “Here he is.
This was for Mac. They had all gathered to thank him
for his action in saving the Bear yesterday. He was pre-
sented with a beautiful Blue Tongue Lizard. The Lizard
said he had heard that Mac liked his family, so begged to
be presented to him. He said he was very useful and would
love to run messages for Mac, and could sleep at the foot
of his bed.
Mac was delighted. He said he always had been fond
of lizards, and the Blue Tongues were his favourites.
There were too many to ask for breakfast, and, in any
case, the animals had all breakfasted early. Father told
them he would make a start on the cabin about 10 o’clock.
It was then 7 o’clock. All promised to be there. The
Butcher Birds sang a quartet, “For He’s a Jolly Good Fel-
low.” This was much appreciated by the animals and
children.
After the others had left, the bear Mac had saved came
to him and said he had spent the night in a cave and had
found the most beautiful carved boomerang, and would Mac
accept it for his museum ? Mac was very much affected by
this show of gratitude on the part of the bear.
At 10 o’clock the family were at the Palm Grove, as
also were the Emus and Kangaroos, with logs ready for
placing in position. The Kangaroos had lifted the logs on
to the Emus’ backs, the beasts standing abreast, and when
they were fastened with vines, the Emus walked off with
them.
So all day long the work went on. Father laid out the
foundation of the cabin. There was an entrance porch


leading into a large room, 30 feet long, with a large stone
fireplace at the end. On one side was the parents’ room,
the boys’ room and the girls’ room; on the other side there
was a kitchen and bathroom.
The Bears proved themselves great hands at rolling
stones into position. There was plenty of ant cement handy,
and this the Emus mixed with water with their powerful
feet. The Platypus had already made a start on the cellar,
and the Bandicoots proved themselves masters at excavating.
Such a hive of industry the Palm Grove had become! The
spring gave out an extra supply of water and the Red Gum
cheered them all with his funny jokes, which kept the
Kookaburras laughing most of the time. The Magpies
gathered a great pile of sticks with the help of the other
birds. So the day drew merrily on to a close.
“My word,” said Mac, “these ants can work. They have
never stopped for a minute the whole day, and it was the
same with the bees.” They had been busy making a great
stock of wax, thousands of them helping in the work.
Shortly before dusk the Snakes began to arrive, all with
their old skins carefully rolled up. These were placed in
charge of the Red Gum.
“Gee,” said Douglas, “I’m tired.”
And they were all tired. The Kangaroos offered them
all a ride home, but said there would be no racing to-day.
Even Father was glad to have a ride on the giant animal.
It was a wonderful day. Mother had stayed at home
to have a hot dinner ready for them, and she laughed to
see Father astride his animal with his arms round its neck.
It was arranged to work early every morning, then, if
it were hot later in the day, they would shelter in the shade
for a few hours, say, from eleven o’clock until two. The


boys, you may be sure, were ready for their meal, and as
soon as they were finished went straight to bed.
The work of building the cabin went on day after day,
and at the end of a month Father said to Mother: “We will
be ready to move next week.”
So many helpers had made light work. The kangaroos
were as strong as lions and marvels at hoisting logs and
rocks. The boys always laughed at the emus mixing the
cement; sometimes they were so strong that they threw the
cement as far as Mr. Red Gum, who said that if they were
not more careful he would drop a limb on them.
The roof work proved a great success, and Father said
it was a credit to the Magpies. Meanwhile, the ironbark
had been made into tanks to catch rain, as Mother decided
that for washing purposes the water would be much softer
than that of the spring.
Then the day dawned when everything was complete.
Chairs and tables had been made, and beds, also a camp
oven. The cabin was certainly a great credit to everyone.
The spiders glazed the openings for the windows with webs,
and told Mother that every morning she could just break
them down and every evening they would spin new webs.
If the weather were stormy they would spin them several
thicknesses. Their work was marvellous. Such designs
were always admired. The spiders said they would keep a
number of their workers always in the window cracks ready
for work.
The bark grubs were still at work, and said it would
take them another month to finish their designs. What
they had done looked very beautiful.
The platypus had by this time finished the cellar on the
spring’s bank and the boys had been shown how to place a
stone at the entrance, so that it would form a door and any-


one could easily place things inside or take them out. The
bees had filled in all the cracks of the logs. The rooms
looked very cosy with the snake-skin panelling half way up
the walls, where a shelf projected. Stone seats were built in
various spots amongst the palms, and Kathleen’s wish had
been fulfilled—a nice little room had been set apart for a
hospital.
Kathleen was very busy during the building operations,
for many of the workers had the skin knocked off them,
and one kangaroo had his tail badly crushed, but no one
was killed or seriously injured.
Then, when all was ready for occupation, Father asked
all the animals and birds to come to the cabin warming
the next day, as they proposed to move in then.
The last night in the cave was spent by Father and
Mother in a long talk. Mother thought the children had
grown so much and looked so healthy; Father said it was
an object lesson to all to have seen the ants and bees at
work. Their industry was wonderful, and they put their
whole hearts into the labour. They seemed to work simply
for the love of it. There is no jealousy or greed
amongst them; they simply do their work and are happy
at it. They have developed the community spirit to per-
fection.
“Well, mother,” said Father, “this is our last night in
the cave. It has been a wonderful time, and we must thank
God for His goodness. You look ten years younger, and I
feel a boy again.


was just thinking:
“ If a man or woman changed their thought
From greed and power, they’d have a share
Of happiness the ants have caught,
And in this world have not a care.
“ And this is what God’s Book tells us,
It’s plain enough for us to read,
Of trifling things don’t make a fuss
And you will find you’ve sown the seed.
“ It’s true if we continue so
And try to do with all our might,
We’d find the thought begin to grow
And in the end we’d see the light.
“ For on this earth we’re here to live,
Some think to grasp or sneak some gain.
But why should we not like to give
Something that’s in our hand and brain.
“ And leave the world a better place
That noble deeds they’ve in us found;
Then we shall have improved the race
And know for higher plane we’re bound.”


Chapter IX.
Haven.
The great day had arrived at last, when, after ah the
strenuous efforts of building, the family was to move
into the cabin.
Everywhere there was hurry and bustle, as there was a
great deal of cleaning and packing to be done. This kept
them all busy until 8 o’clock, when everything was ready.
Beds of bracken, with all that was of no use, were stacked
in a great heap and burnt. The cave was swept and goods
they intended to take packed.
The family then said a last farewell to the cave, where
they had been so happy. Mother could not help the tears
gathering as she said, “Dear old cave! you have been a safe
shelter for us. We leave you, but will often come and sit
on the stones and rest by your side, and think of the happy
days spent under the shelter of your protecting rock.”
Then off they tramped to their new home. It was a
glorious day. Everyone walked with swinging strides,
anxious to reach the Palm Grove as soon as possible.
“Here we are,” said Lois. “The cabin looks lovely this
morning.” And it was agreed that there had never been a
lovelier home.
On entering, they found that the animals had been
before them, and great branches of boronia, flannel flowers
and gum tips had been placed in jars, giving quite a homely
look to the room. Mother said she was sure the bears had
been at work.
[4B]


Mavis ran off to plot out her garden; Mac went to the
pool to see the frog; Jessie stayed with Mother, and Douglas
accompanied Kathleen to the hospital to fix everything in
readiness, in case someone might be injured. Lois climbed
into the branches of the red gum to talk with an opossum
who had made his home there.
The house warming had been arranged for three o’clock.
The store room was packed with everything that might be
required for tea. Long tables were placed under the shade
of the red gum, and the children set the good things on them,
so everything was in readiness for the party.
The animals, birds, reptiles and insects began to arrive
in small batches. Mother was at the entrance of the cabin
to receive them. First came the rock wallaby, then the
kangaroos, bandicoots, bears, opossums, platypus, snakes,
lizards, porcupines, kookaburras, magpies, emus, lyre birds,
butcher birds, and dozens of other bush cousins.
Such a laughing and talking all at once there was.
As soon as they were all seated at the tables the red gum
asked a blessing for the food and other good things pro-
vided. He beamed on the crowd and said it was a proud
day for him to see so many friends sitting under his branches.
There was great excitement when the bulldog ant got
stuck in the honey. The bees flew to his assistance and soon
made him presentable again. The spiders dropped from the
branches of the trees with long silken threads and spun
beautiful designs, which were greatly admired, above the
tables. The drinks consisted of crushed wild raspberries in
pure spring water and honey water.
After everyone had eaten sufficient, Father rose, and,
addressing the gathering, told them how glad he was that
he had met the kangaroo on his first journey from the city
and had been led to such friends.


“You have been wonderfully good to us and shown
kindness which we cannot repay. You are welcome to the
Palm Grove whenever you feel inclined to visit us. You
will find the cabin always open to you; come as often as
you please. If anyone is sick or gets hurt, come to the hos-
pital, where Kathleen will attend you. We love you and
wish you all joy.”
Loud laughter was heard, and there were the kooka-
burras who had sheltered Father on his first journey to the
bush, and with them the rabbit who had been caught in the
trap and had been released by the children. The eagle
perched on the red gum told the party he had shown them
the right direction to the cabin.
Mr. Rabbit told how the rabbit family had migrated
recently to Australia, and liked Australia much better than
the old land.
Now for the concert! Stools were pushed back, and
everyone sat round in a semi-circle, facing a table, which
was used as a platform.
The first item on the programme was a song by the
magpie, who warbled a most beautiful rendition of the
birds’ bush lay. Then the magpie gave a talking song; the
butcher bird was next called on. Who has not heard the
beautiful notes of this bird ? He sang as he had never sung
before, and the old red gum specially thanked him for his
effort.
An item much appreciated was that of the lyre bird.
He imitated all the birds and animals, greatly delighting
his audience. Then he danced his famous nest dance, and
so gracefully did he execute the steps that Mother asked if
he would teach them to the children. Another item the
children loved was the kangaroo dance, in which tails were
used very effectively.


The bear then recited:
“ Yon old grey gum,
You make my home,
All day bees hum,
Where I do roam.
“ On limbs I keep
Where sun’s hot glare,
Makes me to sleep
After leaf fare.
“ I love your trunk,
Where I can climb
And make my bunk
At any time.”
“Yes,” said the red gum, “you are more fond of the grey
gum than you are of any other tree, but we are not jealous,
as we know that her leaves suit your digestion so well.”
Next item was a recitation by the kangaroo:
“ Oh, joyful sun,
What would we say
If you were one
To stay away?
“ Our food depends
On how you shine,
Please this extend
To us all time.
“ Your bright old rays
In joyful mood
Do fill our days,
So we’ll not brood.”


The bees then gave their famous humming song, some
singing low and some high notes, resulting in a very pleas-
ing effect. Then the white ant recited a little poem:
“ I doctor all the trees
And love my work to do;
I work away from breeze
And darkness suits me too.
“ You may not like my ways,
But I can’t help you there;
It’s very hard these days
To find enough of fare.
“ So to your house I go,
Inviting self right in;
The food that I love so
You’ve stolen: it’s a sin.
“ You think you’re very smart,
The poor white ant to rob,
But I will give you start
And beat you to the job.”
Everyone contributed an item to the programme.
The sun was sinking in the west when the concert
finished.
Mr. Kangaroo thanked the family for the lovely after-
noon. He hoped they would live long and enjoy health
and strength. “It makes a great difference having you living
with us,” he said, “and all the animals love you.”
The guests all rose and sang “For They are Jolly Good
Fellows” with such a hearty swing that it echoed and re-
echoed through the bush.


“Good-bye, everyone,” cried the family, standing in a
little group at the door of the cabin.
“Good-bye, good-bye, good-bye,” came drifting from
every side as the animals large and small disappeared through
the trees.
Father turned to his family and said: “Children, how
truly wonderful is the Spirit of the Bush.”
Alexander Stewart Jolly.
THE END






■ " : V \'* s *‘“
,
*r *Jl .. & tMMS& ft ’ :tr ■
f.'
.. ■ ■
'00 4
