

The "Elizabeth Am Bright" Chronicle
No. L]
THURSDAY, sth JULY, 1860.
hope that both ladies and gentlemen will join in contributing
to its support. I will add my own mite weekly.
I remain, dear Sir, yours obediently,
TO OUR READERS.
Fellow Voyagers, — l am a stranger, anxious to gain your
good will. A sense of pity, together with a strong desire to
do you a service, prompts my visit. Freely, and without re-
turn, I mean to give you what of instruction and entertainment
it is in my power to bestow. I to act no censorious part:
kindness will be the law of'my pages. To cany out my plans,
I have called arohnd me a brave band of pen-men, in whose
effusions law, learning and life will weekly display themselves
to view. My readers will regularly find ample information
concerning the progress of the Elizabeth Ann Bright, furnished
by an “ Ocean Chief,” well known to them all. Look ..again,
and elsewhere you will find cooling draughts from Wells which
ne’er run dry. I also retain a universal observer—quite a
rare Buck; one, who by holding up the mirror to nature, will
dazzle you now .and then by a marvellously powerful pourtrayal
of things seen and unseen. In brief, these pages will be found
ranging over quite an extensive tract, from politics down—
down even to poetry. The former will be liberal in the ex-
treme, and yet conservative to a hitherto unequalled extent:
while the latter will be«sure at least to rhyme. And pow,
gentle readers, that my shallop is launched on the deep, may
she sail safely under prospering breezes —a source of pleasure
to all, giving pain to none—until at length we and it, not one
awanting, ncstlcVsecurely in Hobson’s Bay. Adieu !
JOHN SATARKEY,
Commander.
MEDICAL NOTE.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright jOhronicle.
Sir —l am happy to inform you in this, my first report,
that the health of the passengers, up to the present time,
continues undisturbed by any serious illness. They have now
recovered from the usual amount of sea-sickness, with the
exception of one child, who unhappily died from exhaustion
on the fifth day of our voyage.
1 trust the passengers between decks will endeavour, as
much as possible, to avoid the occasions of illness by daily
cleansing their berths.
I am, Sir, yours, &c., .
J. J. McMULLIN,
Surgeon.
To the Editor of live Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
v
Sir— Now we have passed through the unpleasant ordeal
of sea-sickness, and surmounted the numerous little difflcul- •
ties always incidental to the commencement of a long voyage,
and now that the good ship is fairly launched upon the'
mighty ocean,.in this, our second wcc4c at sea, it may be well
to _ consider how we can best conduce to the amusement of
all on board ; not only with the view of lessening-as much ‘as
possible what must, I fear, be called the tcdjjSs monotony of
our circumscribed position, but likewise, bjpaffording mental „
and, physical occupation, to diffuse a lafge'share of healthy:
happiness and enjoyment amongst our fellow-passengers.'
To ensure the supply of this great desideratum a committee,
representing the several departments of the ship’s company,
has been formed,, and, from the progress already made, there is
every reason to believe that success will attend their laudable
exertions. But, since'unity is strength, I think, Mr.'Editor,
you will agree with me that each one of our community should
endeavour to assist in the cause, and thus perpetuate in the
columns of the “ Chronicle,” published under your influential
auspices, that has mercy and good fellowship so necessary to
be maintained in the Elizabeth Ann Bright, on her voyage
out to Melbourne. i
May it be a prosperous one.
<" I am Sir, your obedient servant,
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Dear Scr —Enclosed is a list of observations for each day,
from the 27th June up to the 4th July. I regret having en-
countered for three days at the beginning of our voyage a
strong south-west gale, together with a high sea. No doublet
will long be remembered by many Of your readers, from the
indelible mannerjn which it was imprinted on the tablets of
their memories. Since parting with the above-mentioned gale
our progress has been as favorable as could have been expected.
I must now call the attention of your readers to a matter
„of a more serious nature. At the usual hour the lights must
be extinguished. I positively forbid an}' one lighting matches
in their berths, or Smoking below; and, I am sure, that the
good sense 'of all will enable them to see the necessity of
strict obedience. I call upon you all to aid me in ‘carrying
out these regulations, for without this all my precautions
will- go for nothing.
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle being now launched
into existence, I wish it all success, and have to express the
C. W. P.
July 3rd, 1860.
POETRY. —SELECTED.
Star of Peace, to wanderers weary ;
Bright the beams that shine on me ;
Cheer the pilot’s vision dreary,
Far, far at sea.
Star of Hope, gleam on the billow !
Bless the soul that sighs for thee ;
| Bless the sailor’s lonely pillow,
Far, Jar at sea.


Star of Faith, when winds are mocking
All his toils, he flies to thee,
Save him, on the billows rocking,
Far, far at sea.
Star Divine, oh ! safely guide him ;
Bring the wanderer home to thee.
Sore temptations long have tried him
Far, far at sea.
TO A LADY.— ORIGINAL.
(Suggested on reading some hues, in a pocket-book.)
Oh, the broad blue sea is the sailor’s home ;
And he loves on its breast to be ;
How many bright visions wall o’er him come
While he sails on the broad blue sea.
And the broad blue, o’er the fathomless deep,
Has borne from their native shore
The loved, and the loving who still may weep
For the friends they may see no more.
Yet the broad blue sea has joys unknown,
When the sky is bright above ;
’Twill raise the heart to its highest tone,
While you witness God’s great love.
On the broad blue sea then trust his care,
And thou wilt have nought to fear •
And may He in mercy thy life still spare,
’Till at home with thy brother dear.
E. R.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
J. P. D;—Not quite up to our mark.
M. D.—Will appear next week.
L. M.—We would strongly advise care and caution ; how-
ever, we believe that if both of you insist upon it, the captain
is empowered"!*) celebrate, marriages on ship board.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Sik—Will you allow an humble member of the community
to say one word about the projected newspaper 1
fWe are four hundred strongj or thereby, I believe. Now wc
have all got friends in the old country who are deeply interested
in us and in our voyage, and we ourselves, although compara-
tive strangers to one another as yet, will no doubt ere we
have done form many close acquaintanceships. Sir, is all this
to end with the voyage 1 Do you not think that some mean's
should be taken of obtaining some durable memorial of our
voyage and companionships ; and at the same time of supply-
ing the friends at home with something which would gratify
them 1.
My object in writing is simply to suggest that one way of
accomplishing this would be to have the newspaper printed at
the end of the voyage. Whether the idea could be carried into
effect or not, you are of course the best judge.
I am yours, &c.,
STEERAGE.
(The idea suggested by “ Steerage ” has been already under
consideration, time will show whether it can be carried into
effect.—Ed. of E. A. B. C.)
BRAYINGS OF AN ASS.
THINGS WE DO NOT LIKE TO SEE.
We do not like to see officers holding Her Majesty’s commis-
sion, ship commanders, and otters who ought to know better,
but evidently do not, engaging in the demoralising pursuit of
the game commonly called “pitch and toss.”
We do not like to see certain inmates of the saloon so far
overcome by the force of the rcminiscenses of their childhood,
as to take refuge in the muscular extension and graceful atti-
tudes displayed in the amusement rejoicing in the sobriquet of
“ leap-frog,” however much we may admire the agility of the
respective parties.
We do not like to see certain parties of our acquaintance
evincing such an utter absence of politeness as to allow the
ladies painfully to toil up the poop ladder, without that mas-
culine assistance which is their peculiar right.
We do not like to see the absence of anything like phi-
losophy, as shown in the voracious expression assumed by the
visages of certain “intermediate” passengers -whenever the
dishes containing the cabin dinner happen, on their way to
their destination, to come into the proximity of their nasal
conformation. Cuddy.
LINES TO FRIENDSHIP.
When, bruised and forsaken, and weary and tom,
On life’s dreary path left to wander forlorn,
The heart turns in sorrow despairing around,
But one gleam of comfort for it can be found.
Oh, Friendship ! thou rock so immovably fixed,
With man’s baser passion found ever unmixed,
Rest with us, thou stay of the toil-worn and weak,
Disappointment aye drives us thy blessings to seek.
Fair twin-sister to Love, but exempt from the taint
That w'ould evermore cause it to die and to faint,
No selfishness cankers thy flowers as they twine,
Festooning our hearts with thy chaplets divine.
Beam then through our lifetime, our path to direct,
With thy Christian tuition our errors correct;
Immortality blooms on thy head evermore —
Oh 1 collect the whole world at our shrine to adore.
W. W. Buck.
LOCAL NEWS.
PUBLIC MEETING.
A large and influential meeting was held on deck -on Mon-
day, 2d July, at three o’clock, p.m.
On the motion of Dr. Boulton, of H.M.S., Captain John
Starkey was called to the chair.
The Chairman, on rising, said : —Ladies and Gentlemen —I
have, at the request of several of the passengers, summoned
the present meeting for a purpose which Mr. Wells will pre-
'sently explain to you. I beg to call upon Mr. Wells.
Mr. Wells, on coming forward, said:—Mr. Chairman, Ladies
and Gentlemen —I have simply to submit to your consideration
the following motion : “ That a committee be appointed to
provide for the entertainment of the ship’s company during the
voyage ; one member to represent the saloon, two the inter-
mediate and steerage, one the crew, and one the soldiers. That
the said committee shall consist of the following gentlemen—
Messrs. Wells, Scrgy, O’Hara, Buck and Mack.”
This motion being duly seconded and put to the meeting,
was carried with acclamation.
Mr. Scott next bespoke the interest of the meeting on behalf
of the E. A. B. Chronicle, to be published on the Thursday
morning of each week.
The meeting then broke up by awarding a vote of thanks
and three cheers to Captain Starkey, for his kindness and cour-
tesy in the chair.
A Sight.— About the beginning of last week the eyes ■ of
the community were gladdened by the sight of a troop of


LOST.
ON leaving Port, a set of GOLD STUDS ■ whoever w-.I
return the same to their owner, Mr. Reeves, Chief
Officer, will be liberally rewarded.
PROGRAMME of Vocal and Instrumental CONCERT.
To begin on Friday next, at seven o’clock in the evening.
Part I.
1. Concertina—“ Cheer, Boys, Cheer.” Mr.. Sergy.
2. Song—“ My Pretty Jane, Private Shaw.
3. Scotch Song by Mr. Cameron.
i. Negro Melodies in concert.
(1st. “ Romping Nell” 2nd. —“ Jim Crack Coin.” Private
King).
5. Violin Solo—“ Tyrolenne Polka.” Mr. L. Kempe.
6, Quartette—“ Beautiful Star.” By Miss Cawthorn,
Messrs. Ainge, Swoatman, and Seagy.
7. Irish Song—“ When I go Rolling Home.” Mr. Doherty.
(Interval of five minutes).
„ Part II.
1. Song—“ Canadian Boat Song.” Sergeant Mack.
2. Song—“ Goody Gay.” Miss Cawthorn.
3. Concertina—“ El Balin.” Mr. Sergy.
4. Song—“ The Fairy Tempter.” Mr. Ainge.
6 Bagpipes.
6. Violin Solo —“ Upper Linder.” Mr. Leopold Kempe.
7. Song—“ Love Not.” Mr. Chamberlain.
8. Negro Melodics —“ I saw her at the Window,” “ Kocoon
Hint.” Private King.
Finale—" God Save the Queen.”
Accommodation for all who wish to attend will be pro-
vided on deck. —James Wells, Secretary to the Committee.
E. A. B., Ch.
PUBLIC WORSHIP will be conducted on deck (weather
permitting) on Sabbath first, at 10 45 iun., and hence-
forth on every Sabbath morning during the voyage.
porpoises sporting in the sea. Many were the remarks of the
bystanders on beholding the sight ; yet our friend from the
Green Isle , as usual, outstepped all competitors, in originality,
by exclaiming—“ Arrah, look at the soy-pigs my boys.”
Distressing Occurrence. —On the evening of Saturday
last, as the wonderful specimen of the canine race in the
ownership of Mr. Reeves, chief officer, was in a staid and de-
mure manner promenading the weather-side of the deck, ap-
parently buried in dog-ish cogitations of an agreeable kind (if
we may accept as presumptive evidence the graceful gyrations
of his caudal appendage), some individuals, whose identity we
were unable distinctly to ascertain, not having politeness, and the
fear of hurting their fellow-creatures before their eyes, did, in a
most violent -manner, run over the petad developments of the
above-mentioned animal, thereby causing him the most excru-
ciating pain, and eliciting the most emphatic protestations
against such unjustifiable treatment. Indeed his anguished
howls filled the surrounding passengers with horror and
dismay. However, we are happy to state that owing to the
prompt interference of the ship’s surgeon, the dangerous symp-
toms are removed; and we are authorised to state, for the
benefit of all concerned, that Jack is quite convalescent.
Stowaways. —As is usual in such ships, two of the above
class have managed to escape detection, and are at sea with us.
Of course the commander endeavours to take passage-money
from them in the shape of hard work.
Notice. —Various articles of value having gone missing
since leaving Liverpool, fears are entertained that all are not
quite so honest as they might be. Clothing ought not to go
astray, which is not actually lost over-board, in such a small
community as ours. We trust that if thieves are on board
they may speedily be brought to justice, {i.e.) to the thief’s
jacket for a fortnight.
40th Regiment. —Our readers do not require to be told
that we have on board a detachment of soldiers belonging to
the above distinguished and gallant regiment. A regiment
which has won laurels for itself and glory for its country in
many a well' fought field in Egypt, at Monte Video, Vittoria,
in the Peninsula, and at Waterloo. The detachment (fifty in
number) is commanded by R. C. Brooks, Esq. and Edward
Toseland, Esq., and are attended by Dr. Boulton, Staff Sur-
geon. We believe that only 180 or so remain at home,
while about 250 are on active duty in New Zealand, the re-
mainder being in Melbourne and its neighbourhood.
The Difference. —In New Zealand, when a marriage
ceremony takes place, it is a very old custom to knock the
heads of the bride and bridegroom together previous to their
union—
In Christian lands it isn’t so,
The bridegroom, and the bride,
To loggerheads but seldom go,
Until the knot is tied.
Statistics. —There are on board the Elizabeth Ann Bright ,
in all, 382 souls ; of this number 62 consist of the officers
and crew of the ship ; the remaining 319 consist of the pas-
sengers, of which number again 11 are Saloon passengers ;
comprising again in all 154 English, 17 Scotch, 130 Irish,
16 German, 1 French, and 1 Italian.
The ship carries also about 2,000 tons "of cargo, besides
stores.
No. 2.
Thursday, July 12, 1860.
Many are the thoughts which spring up in the mind on behold-
ing a throng of people on ship-board, bound for some distant
land ! What a pilgrim host is there 1 The sight we think
(at the risk of being thought profane) is a nobler one than
was seen in the former days, wdien crowds were wont to wend
their way from far realms to Jerusalem, there to traverse
wearily the via dolorosa, the pathway of sorrow—the road along
which the blessed Saviour bore the cross to Calvary. The
latter, in many instances, were actuated by devout and Chris-
tian feelings. But the mission of the former is to carry along
with them, to yet unexplored regions, civilisation and Chris-
tianity ; to spread abroad, in remote lands, the glorious
illumination which makes Europe differ from the other quarters
of the globe. What is to be the result, as regards Australasia,
of those Anglo-Saxon importations 1 And what is to be
their influence on the thickly peopled yet Pagan realms which
lie around it 1 But, to confine ourselves to ship-board. What,
for example, is to be the after-history which will date from
yonder sturdy stripling stepping on the Australian shore 1 He
shall found a family, perhaps, and be long remembered as
the sire of an illustrious progeny—he more illustrious than
them all, as the one who gave the impulse—took the step
which fixed the after-destiny. Doff thy bonnet, then, O
reader, to any such one on ship-board ; he may have a history,
you may have none. Nay, more, he may be thy master yet,
though ho, meanwhile, may occupy an inferior berth. Yes, on
the other side, the plain young man who used to herd in the
forecastle, has often given food and raiment to the gentleman
of the saloon.
3
THE “ ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT ” CHRONICLE.
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


Doff then, thy bonnet, wo say, to such an one, as to
a future master. And what a diversity of feelings possess
our fellow voyagers. Yon frail old man, and that aged
woman, what are their hopes and feelings 1 They have none,
save Urn hope of having their aged eyes closed by cherished
children. There is another, young, buoyant, hopeful, expecting
to carve out for himself both fame and fortune. And here
another dejected, dispirited lad, hurrying evidently from
disappointment to—he knows not what, and what strange
reminiscences of our fellow-travellers could be related ! What
strange hopes and anticipations animate one and all! We
hope to be of some service to such on the voyage, if only by
furnishing them with something at which to sneer.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
Dear Sir —Enclosed is a list of observations for the past
week. I have to regret having experienced such light N.E.
trades. This is rather an unusual circumstance, inasmuch as
these winds are generally found to blow in fresh breezes. As
a description of the cause of these winds may be interesting
to your readers, I give the following brief summary ; —Since
the earth revolves about an axis passing through the poles, the
equatorial portion of its surface has the greatest velocity of
rotation, and all other parts less in proportion of the radii of
the circles of latitude to wdiich they correspond. But as the
air when relatively and apparently at rest on any part of the
earth’s surface, is only so because in reality it participates of
the motion of rotation proper to that part —it follows that,
when a mass of air near the poles is transferred to the region
near the equator by any impulse acting directly towards that
circle in evety point of its progress towards its new situation,
it must be found deficient in rotatory motion, and therefore
unable to keep up with the speed of the new surface over which
it is brought. Hence the currents of air which set in towards
the equator, from the north and south, must, at the same time,
lag or hang back, and drag upon it in the direction opposite to
the earth’s rotation, i.e. from east to west. Thus, the currents
which but for the rotation would be simply northerly and
southerly winds, acquire from this cause a relative direction
towards the west, and assume the character of permanent north
easterly and south easterly winds.
Through the columns of the Chronicle I have to thank the
passengers throughout the ship for their quiet and orderly con-
duct ; and let me hope that a continuance of the same gentle-
manly behaviour and manly forbearance towards the thousand-
and-one little annoyances attendant upon a sea voyage with so
large a number of persons met together for the first time, will
characterise one and all.
I am, dear sir, yours obediently,
JOHN STARKEY
Commander.
THOUGHTS ON A SETTLEMENT IN AUSTRALIA.
When the intending emigrant, having left the port from
wliich liis ship is bound, finds himself on the great open main,
he is the subject of a host of thoughts of very various, yet
generally of the most intense kind. As yet his ideas are
spell-bound to the shores which are fast receding from his view.
In what vivid relief docs his past career flit before ! His mind
is naturally arrested by every stirring scene of his past life ;
and all these having been acted anew, and once more one by
one consigned to oblivion, he is at length led to glance over,
and in some sort to estimate that cai-eer as a whole ; and gene-
rally the process is not a little melancholy.
He is now more easily able to perceive the elements which
were wanting to the perfect success of it. Or if that perfection
were morally unattainable, he is yet pained by the retrospect of
passages which marred his progress to that state—proud and
honorable as, let us hope, it is—which rendered it expedient
for him to seek an arena for the exercise and display of his
energies, vaster and less pre-occupied, and more indulgent,
than the country which, in an intimate sense, is no longer his
own.
By such reflection, then, he is led to concentrate his ideas
on that land of promise on which lattterly he has leaned as
the sphere for the fulfilment of his dearest hopes and resolves.
J.W.
POETRY. —Original.
BY A SLIGO MAN.
Oh ! at last am I launched on the wild rolling deep,
Far, far from poor Erin, my country, my home,
. From the friends who my absence so bitterly weep ;
Constrained by the ruthless oppressor to roam.'
Despite of such treatment, my very sad soul
Shall vehemently cling to my dear native land ;
But when once I have gained the long, long-wished for goal,
How I’ll write of her wrongs on Australia’s rich strand.
On board this good ship, ah ! how many like me— *
Exiled from poor Erin, o’er the wild ocean’s swell;
Oh ! thank Heaven at last, if unhappy, I’m free !
That freedom I’ve purchased by pangs I can’t tell.
Now here, on this high swelling boisterous sea,
May Heaven’s choice blessings safe waft us to shore
In abundance may God pour His blessings on thee—
Brave Starkey —The Ocean Chief— so styled before.
While discharging thy duty, thou’rt gentle, thou’rt kind,
To those who’re consign’d to thy vigilant care j
Such feelings evinced must unboubtedly bind,
The hearts of all parties in unity rare,
. And my dear Mr. Editor, I joyfully greet
You on your first number, calculated so well
The feelings of all in one dear point to meet—
Until next Thursday’s number, good bye, fare thee well.
A WAIL FOR POOR JACK.
BY THE CAT.
Alas ! alas ! lie is gone, never more to gladden my eyes
by his playful frolics, never more to charm my ears with the
music of his bark. Ah ! truly I can scarce realise the stem
fact of a termination having been made to his innocent life.
Woe ! woe ! shall I never recover the shock which my feelings
'have sustained. He with whom I had entered into a com-
pact of eternal friendship, thus to leave this smiling world.
Ah ! me, I scarce command my feelings sufficiently to give free
expression tq my thoughts. When a few mornings ago I was
slowly but joyfully, and full of happy anticipations, wending
my way to the carpenter’s room, where my dear departed
friend used to live, ray vital functions were nearly arrested by
hearing the agonized voice-of my darling lifted up in the most
pitiful and heart-rending supplications .that his existence
might be spared. But oh ! how my very heart turned
pale when I saw a monster in human shape, grasp him by the
neck, and with bitter and cruel sternness depicted in his coun-
tenance, fling him far away into the seething ocean, which as
it hissed and sparkled soon engulphed him for ever. Oh ! the
hours of that fatal morning ! I thought iny senses were about
to quit me for ever. But the honor of the feline race must be
vindicated. Revenge I will have, if ever I catch another rat
on board this ship, may every particular hair of my tail fall
off. Yours, my dear Sir, more in sorrow than in anger
MEW MEW.
4
THE “ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT” CHRONICLE.


THE Captain -will exhibit, for a few days only, a portion of
the North Pole; also, a piece of the rope of which the
line is composed.
Passengers may be supplied with tickets, by applying to the
Head Steward, not later than Friday. Tickets, Is. 6d. each.
LOST. —The Doctor’s Slipper. Whoever returns the same
to its owner may have teeth pulled gratis during the
voyage.
VOCAL AND INSTRUMENTAL CONCERT.—
PROGRAMME.
1. Fishermen’s Chorus—“ Masanillo,” Messrs. Sergy,
Ainge, and Sweatman.
2. Recitation —“ Genevra,” . . Mr. Ainge.
3. Selected Music—Violin, . . . Mr. Kempe.
4. Negro Melodies, in character—“A little
dance to-night, and away she went,” . Private King.
5. Solo —Concertina —“A che la morte,” —
Trouvatore, Mr. Sergy.
6. “ Little Nell,” . ... . Mr. Ainge.
■ 7. Glee—“ See our bars with’feathered spray,” Messrs. Sergy,
Ainge, and Sweatman.
8. “ Italian Image Boy,” .... Mr. Ainge.
9. “ The Harp that once thro’ Tara’s Hall,” Private Shaw.
Part II.
(Interval of five minutes.)
1. Recitation—“ Hodge and the Vicar,” . Mr. Sergy.
2. Song—“ Hard to give the Hand,” . Private Shaw.
3. Selections on Violin, . . . . Mr. Kempe.
4. Recitation—“ William Tell to his Native
Mountains,” . ' . . . . Mr. Ainge.
5. Song—“ Willie we have missed you,” Mr. Sweatman.
6. Negro Melodies—Baltimore, . . . Mr. King.
7. Song—“ Good-bye Sweetheart,” . . Mr. Sergy.
8. Bagpipes.
9. Song—“ Simon the Cellarer,” . . . Mr. Ainge.
10. Solo —Concertina, ..... Mr. Sergy.
11. Solo—Song—“ Hard times no more,” Mr. Sweetman.
12. “ God Save the Queen.”
Concert to commence at 7 o’clock.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Dear Sir.—Allow me to take up a space in your columns
to express the general satisfaction which I think the concert
of last Friday gave. The sentimentalists did their part well;
and the negro melodies surpassed my expectations.
I hope this source of amusement, so well commenced, may
increase and effectually carry out the plans suggested in your
last paper. And though no vocalist myself, I shall be happy
to contribute to your interesting Chronicle.
I am Sir, yours <fec.,
J. R. C.
VARIETIES.
CHARADES.
I—What1 —What all are taught to keep, but cautioned not to break;
What man is taught to love, and never to forsake ;
What little one that in the sun but one short day doth bask;
What all are prone to do, whatever aid they ask;
What schoolboy gay should never play, however hard the task;
My initials seek, with care to them my finals join,
A, compound word will then appear—and may it soon be thine.
2—What passenger’s name on board the E. A. Bright answers
to the following descriptions;—A river in Italy, a vowel, a
liquid, and a heavy weight ?
Advice to a young man going to marry, by means of which
he may save a hundred a year.— Don't Marry.
A French princess being told that the poor in Paris were
dying of starvation, said—“ Why, what silly people ! Before
I’d starve I’d eat brown bread and mutton.”
To place wit before good sense, is to place the superfluous
before the necessary.
LOCAL NEWS.
GRAND CONCERT.
On Friday evening the first of a series of vocal and instru-
mental concerts came off with great eclat. The event evidently
threw the community on board the E. A. Bright into quite a
ferment.
Long beforp beginning, the quarter-deck began to look quite
gay with, crowds of expectant and happy faces, w r hile the
poop was adorned by the presence of the ladies and gentlemen
of the saloon.
About half-past seven the singers, accompanied by the'com-
mittee of management, took their allotted places, and in a few
minutes after Mr. Sergy was discoursing in pleasant strains on
the concertina. He was ably followed up by a largo and select
band of performers, consisting of Miss Cawthorn, Messrs.
Shaw, King, Cameron, Ainge, Sweatman, Chambcrlyne, and
Sergeant Mack; and last, not least, the stirring strains of the
bagpipes lent variety to the whole. Altogether this, the first
concert of the season, gave wide-spread 'satisfaction to all on
board; and the community feel under a debt of gratitude to
Mr. Wells, and his active and energetic committee, for the rich
treat ■which the singers afforded their fellow passengers.
We believe that the second of the scries comes off to-night.
A Shark. —On Friday last, about noon, the community -was
not a little startled by the cry of “ A shark ! a shark ! ” Cap-
tain Starkey was the only one, however, who caught a glimpse
of this terror of seamen. He was a blythc young fellow,
about five feet in length, and when seen was sporting around
a piece of bamboo, picking barnacles therefrom.
A hook was. of course, instantly baited, and thrown overboard,
but all efforts to tempt him to the snare proved ineffectual.
To make up for the disappointment, Mr. Byrom, fourth mate,
next morning caught a' flying fish.
A Comet. —An interesting sight, in the shape of a comet,
was visible for some nights last week in the heavens. It was,
however, a small one, and tame looking, after the magnifi-
cent comet which flamed so long before our eyes. Mrs. Poul-
ton was the first to catch sight of the stranger. __ .
The Weather. —During the past week the weather'"has
been particularly lovely. The evenings were soft and beauti-
ful, although during the day the heat has been urging one and
all to seek the shade.
For a few days past the winds have been peculiarly light,
although favorable. And thus, if we have made no great run,
we have done enough to show that for sailing qualities the
E. A. Bright has few equals afloat. As yet she has distanced
with ease all the vessels she has come across.
No. 3.
Thursday, July 19, 1860.
We have heard it remarked by those who .have sailed
round the world, that nothing could be more monotonous
than life on ship-board. We beg to differ entirely from such
an opinion. On the other hand we think that nowhere else
can the active minded find employment for every moment
and scope for every mood. For example : are the curious at
sea 1 They, at least, may allow the propensity to have scope,
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


for is there not life in the deep 1 Yes ! and love too. What
a volume an imaginative mind might write on the loves of the
fishes—their wooings and their weddings ! Again—does
ambition dwell in fishes 1 Why not as well as in men—at
least some men. Are they touched with vanity 1 Ah, doubt
it not. Think you that leviathan does not swell with conscious
pride, as he sees the lesser fry give place to him, and shake
their scaly sides in humble acknowledgement of inferiority. Or,
if the gazer be inclined to indulge in the melting mood, then
assuredly the dwellers in the deep have their sorrow too.
When, for instance, some great whales may chance to pass
their way, and carry off in their capacious maws rvell nigh a
whole tribe. Ah, then, sorrowing is theirs, such as those feel
who, on shore, survive a pestilence ! Or, if the scientific arc
afloat, they have an ample field spread out before, them in the
sea ; and though their lives should stretch across a century,
yet when they die they will leave behind them stores, all un-
exhausted and untouched. Or, if the devout are on ship-
board, then where shall devotion be nourished if not in such
a place 1 The sea, perchance, lies before such in peace ; yet
all instinct with life and motion, as though preparing itself for
some mighty labour; or they may behold it tossing, toiling,
and turbulent, as though eager to leap beyond its boundaries,
and dash to atoms everything that dares to venture on its
surface ; reminding them while they gaze both of the power
which restrains and the might which arms it with fury. We
have discovered a mine, let pur readers dig for the treasures.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
Dear Sir —Enclosed is a report of our progress during the
past week. I regret that it has not been so favorable as I
could have wished. Many of your readers are no doubt aware
that we are in what is called the “ equatorial doldrums.” It is
a region of rains and calms and baffling winds, and conse-
quently one of the most oppressive and disagreeable places at
sea. Ships bound across this space are often baffled in it for
two or three weeks. No one who has not crossed it can form
any adequate idea of its unpleasant effects. You feel a degree
of lassitude unconquerable, which not even the sea-bathing,
which everywhere else proves so salutary, can dispel. All
persons are apt to suffer more or less here, and I cannot too
strongly recommend cleanliness, for, in many instances where
this has been neglected, in these latitudes, the consequences
have been most fearful. lam yours obediently,
JOHN STARKEY.
THE PRESS.
‘ ‘ The Press is the most noble of our institutions ; it has created
and fostered public opinion in England, and made it racy of the soil.
Chief Baron Wolfe.
Sir —Having had the pleasure of a hasty perusal of your
last number, I venture to intrude on your space for the pur-
pose of congratulating you on the establishment of such a pub-
lication of enlightenment, amusement, and instruction, as that
of the Chronicle. It is a step in the right direction, and clearly
proves that you and your .associates progress with the age and
times we live in.
The Press is a mighty and powerful engine of civilisation ;
but of all people on the earth none are more indebted to it for
all they hold and prize than the subjects of the British Crown.
It is at once the palladium of our liberties, and the key-stone
of the arch on which our freedom has been erected. It is the
basis of our power, the chronicler of our glory; before the might
of its power and influence, the crowned despot trembles
on his throne, and the tyrant quails in his palace. It keeps
society in order, and protects public morals, by holding up to
the public gaze, in all their hideous deformity the acts of the
slanderer, the oppressor, the tyrant, and the profligate. -The
fear of an exposure in the Press will cause the most debased to
pause in the prosecution of his hate or his vengeance. Its pro-
tecting wings are ever expanded to shield the weak and op-
pressed, without reference to_cliine, creed, or country —its motto
being confide recta agens.
In proof of this, I may observe that the existence of the
Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle has tended to promote good
fellowship, even in our small community. A squib in the
Chronicle has more terror than the stoppings of the purser, or
the irons of the captain. But while it has the effect of thus
preserving order, let us hope that it will also tend to enliven
the monotony of our voyage, by diffusing amongst us pleasant
recreations and kindly sentiments; and, by«giving existence to
our thoughts, cultivate the mind, improve the understanding,
and give form and consistency to our feelings, ideas, and judg-
ments.
Before closing these crude remarks, I beg leave tripjirect the
attention of your readers, and the passengers in general, to the
able and scientific paper of our enlightened captain, which
appeared in your last publication. It stamps him at once as
the man of science, and the scholar, as emphatically as we
know him to be the gentleman and the sailor. Happy for us
it is that we are so highly favored by fortune as to be placed
in charge of such an excellent officer. His urbanity and dis-
cretion,. combined with firmness, tinctured with mildness, is
such as has rarely been equalled, never surpassed, by one in,
his position. We are also fortunate in the selection of the
whole of the ship’s officers, particularly in those whyso position
is one of great responsibility, viz., the first and second officers,
Messrs. Reeves and Haughton. They, with their captain, are
certainly the right men in the right places. This feeling is
universal, and has created a confidence in the breasts of all on
board, as satisfactory to themselves as it must be pleasing
and complimentary to the gentlemen in whom such reliance is
placed. So true is it that ability is never tarnished by kind-
ness, neither is the influence of power weakened by conciliation.
In the words of Tennyson—
“ However, it be it seems true,
’Tis only noble to be good;
Kind hearts are more than coronets.
And simple faith than Kerman blood.”
E. D. B.
NOTICES TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Impaired Constitutions.—The correspondent who writes
under the above signature has done everything but the right
thing. We can do nothing without knowing his name, but
yftcr all it is scarcely in our way to look after the provisioning
of the ship.
E. D. B.—Received with thanks; will be happy to hear
from him as he proposes.
J. M.—We are just deluged with bad poetry; pray have us
excused. Why not try your hand at prose ?
P. L.—Can’t undertake to return rejected papers. Yours is
overboard.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Sir —Permit me to make a remark or two on last Thurs-
day’s concert. In the first place, great credit is due to Mr.
Ainge for the very able manner in which he did his part.
Secondly, I think that the committee ought to make better
arrangements, so that those who have several parts to enact
may have a longer interval of rest, instead of being called upon
directly after performing one part.
Having been informed that Mr. Wells will take part in next
Thursday’s entertainment, I, with several others, are looking
forward with the utmost impatience for his appearance—flat


tering ourselves that he will far outstrip all previous performers.
Hoping that if possible you will kindly insert this,
I am, Sir, yours, die.,
J. R. C.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Dear Sir —It has been recently intimated to us that the
performance of next Thursday is not to take place, from some
motive which we cannot at present divine. We can assure
Mr. Wells that for our parts we renounce all further participa-
tion in its execution, solely because we do not wish those
persons who undertake to become performers to be under the
painful necessity of debarring the audience of their anxiously
expected amusement, through the caprice of one, who, we are
sorry to say, should have acted with more steadiness previous
to the Settlement of the said performance.
We have the honor to be, Mr. Editor,
Your obedient servants,
p‘ a ® ARA ’ I Committee.
L. P. Serov, J
DREAMING OF THEE.
LINES BY A FRIEND OF MR. SCOTT’S.
I waken thro’ the long, long night,
Dreaming of thee ;
I rise with the rosy light,
Dreaming of thee.
All through the busy day,
When thy spirit lights my way,
All my cares are thrown away,
Dreaming of thee.
I passed the dreary winter hours
Dreaming of thee;
I wandered thro’ the moonlight bowers,
Dreaming of thee;
I listened to the ocean’s roar,
Breaking o’er the shingly shore,
Breaking with its breakers hoar,
Dreaming of thee.
I am alone when friends are nigh,
Dreaming of thee ;
Of thee I think, for thee I sigh,
Only for thee.
All the happy circle here
I love, but drop the silent tear,
For still I wish that thou wert here,
Dreaming with me.
POETRY—ORIGINAL.
List, list, I’ll sing—our cabin rooms
My merry muse inspires,;
New phase of thought my mind assumes,
And kindles latent fires.
Two “ Brooks ” spread wide with magic spells,
Fresh beauty o’er the scene ;
A gallant “ Scott ” reclines by “ Wells,”
That smile with air serene.
A handsome bargain of the Queen,
Now shining in my verse,
A thousand times has come between
A mistress and her nurse.
A daughter of the land of France
Must “ Pioneer ” the way,
And with her wit and taste entrance
Us all from day to day.
W. W. Buck.
From happiness estranged.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES.
1— Sweetheart (Sabbath —Wife —Ephemera—Ear—Truant).
2 Dr. Boulter.
CHARADES.
1— Why is the E. A. Bright like a pair of scissors 1
2 Why is Mr. Ainge reciting “Tells Address” like a house-
painter.
3 —My first is the glory of all the earth,
The source of gladness and of mirth ;
My second is ever repeating a tale
In which joys and sorrows alternately prevail.
These take the form and blend the rainbow dye,
■- One part in earth, the other lost in sky.
’Tis better to have loved and lost
. Than never to have loved at all.
He who seeks neither love nor friendship is one hundred
times poorer than he who has lost both.
Old Gentleman to little Boy : “ Boy, I see thief marked in
your countenance.”
Little Boy ; “ 0, what a funny old gent, to take my face
for a looking-glass.”
LOCAL NEWS.
Grand Concert. —The second concert of the season was
held on Thursday last, at seven o’clock, p.m. The singing, as
on the former occasion, was well sustained, and did ample
credit to all concerned. The whole was concluded at an
early hour by the assembled company singing in concert
“ God Save the Queen.”
A Hoax. —On Friday, a bit of a hoax was perpetrated on
a large number of passengers. Information was cir-
culated that, in the course of the day, an opportunity
would be had of sending letters by a steamship to England.
Paper, pens, .and ink, were immediately in the greatest
request, and during the whole day parties were busy
penning their various epistles to the “ dear ones at
home.” About twelve o’clock p.m., a brig was sighted;
instantly, some one jocularly called out, “ Here’s the
boat ; get the letters ready!” and, in less time than it
takes us to tell our readers, crowds came scrambling up the
hatchways, letters in hand. But it was of no use ; the poor
unfortunates were under the necessity of wending their ways
to their several berths, letters undisposed of.
Signals, —About ten o’clock on Saturday morning signals
were exchanged with the E. A. Bright and the barque Baltiguer.
The latter t had been at the time twenty-five days out from
London, and was bound to Kurrachee. The E. A. Bright
had, at the same time, been twenty days out from Liverpool
On Tuesday, signals were exchanged between our ship and a
French vessel.
Accidents, —ln the gale, on Wednesday forenoon, the
main-top-gallant-sail was tom right off. We regret that
“ Materia medica,” compresed
Into a parcel small;
Yet size has not his worth expressed—
But still this is not all.
By “ buttercups ” the parents blessed
Come next in order ranged ;
Envied, indeed, by all the rest,
E. H.
THE “ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT” CHRONICLE.


one of our number met with a serious injury on the knee,
during the gale yesterday forenoon.
A Coward. —During the preceding week, it happened that
one evening Our attention was attracted by the pleasing
spectacle which the contention for the “ Breeches Champion-
ship” presented to our jolly comrades. Ah, ah, and so the
captain intended to exhibit part of the North Pole ! He has
been anticipated in the person of the “ old man,” who so
manfully evinced his prowess by making the “ old hag ”
runaway; but, mind how he made her run —he ran away,
and she ran after him. In the heat of the pursuit he com-
pelled her to take a survey of his upper pole—so far, the
captain has failed in his projected exhibition. Again, after
saving distance in the first hc;.t, and turning the pole
placed at the saloon door' in the person of the enlightened
Editor •of the “ Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle,” the
came up with him at the long boat, exclaming, “ may old
Fuzzy gallop down my throat with a harrow at his tail, if I
don’t leather the guts in you.” Accompanying the ejaculation
with a whirling motion of the rope, she laid vigorously around
the shoulders of the old chap, exclaiming a second time, “ now
you old rascal, will you ever attempt, contrary to my inclina-
tions, to pay ls.6d. for a sight of the rope composing the line,
now you have got a sight of it and felt it too 1" We should
think Captain Starkey is much to blame, by patronizing old
chaps to conjure old Holley’s earnings, and apply them to
the useless purpose of visiting a peep-show, thereby filling
his own already overflowing coffers.
The Weather. —During the past week we have made a
fair run. We have had the variable winds usual to these
latitudes. Several times ,\vc have missed a black looking
squall, though once or*-twice,we had quite a fierce visitation
of wind and rain. i ' . ■
Shark. —For the fi .At time (on Sunday last) the whole
community were gratified by the sight of a shark about 6 feet
long. All were in hopes of seeing him hooked in a brief space,
but he was far too wary for his would be-captors.
WRITTEN BECAUSE A LETTER ON A DELICATE SUBJECT
WAS REFUSED INSERTION IN THE COLUMNS OF THE
”ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT CHRONICLE.”
It grieves me much, yet I submit What can a critic write on here—
Without one pang or sigh, That’s what I cannot well di-
You left it out, when ’twas unfit vine—
With writings in your page to I’d tell you all were it not fear
vie. Of righteous laws in yonder
Was that the reason—no ’twas clime.
not— I’m sure you wiser are than me ;
I think you also will agree ; Or else you’ could not well re*
I leave it to you Revd. Scott— fuse j
He will concur I’m sure with When you the letter first did see,
me. You knew it had not much oj
I wrote it well—my heart and news.
soul I’ll leave the former letter dead,
Dictated fast the words I said— And hope you’ll serve me if
A friend’s defence, sure that’s the you can,
whole, By putting these few lines instead
’Gainst modest men, of youth ’Tis thus you’d serve the ‘ Sligo
illbrcd. Man.’
If written in dishonest style, By kindness such we’ll happy be,
Why all my labor was misspent; Through Heaven’s blessings day
Consider well just for a while— and night,
Then answer ‘ yes,’ and I’m Until Australia’s shore we see—
■ content. Then bid farewell to E. A.
Yon say ’twas not—then why Bright.
refuse, There’s happiness in all around,
Your motive liran’t understand, On every face such signs you’ll
At last I’ll tell— but pray ex- view,
cuse— Where else, hind sir, could it be
“ ’Twas penned by criticising found
hand.’’ If not with us—adieu 1 adieu 1
P. P. H.
Thursday, July 26, 1860.
No. 4.]
Since the publication of the last number of our paper we
have performed the .act supposed to constitute us land-lubbers
“ Sons of Neptune that is to say, in plain English, we have
crossed the Line. An account of the ceremonies practised in
French and Dutch ships nearly two hundred years ago (1670)
may, perhaps, amuse some of our readers. We believe that in
English vessels, at the same date, the ceremony as practised
was even less delicate and refined. The following is a French
account; —“The master’s mate dressed himself in a strangesort
of garment, fashioned so as to be ridiculous and burlesque, and
reaching to his heels, with a hat or cap made to match. 'ln
his right hand he held a great clumsy wooden sword, in his
left a pot of ink. His face he had besmeared with soot, while
round his neck he wore an uncouth necklace made of strings of
blocks or pulleys, such as are used in the rigging for ropes to
pass through. Thus accoutred, all the novices knelt down
before him, while he favored the shoulders of each with a smart
slap of the sword, smearing also a great cross upon his brows,
or sometimes over all Iris face, with the ink. Immediately
after the novice was drenched with dozens of buckets of water,
and the ceremony ended by his depositing his offering, as they
call it, of a bottle of brandy, which must be placed in perfect
silence at the foot of the mainmast.’’ The mode of baptism
among the Hollanders was different. They, either insisting
upon a ransom, according to the station of the novice, or hoist-
ing lum to the mainyard, and from thence dropping him into
the sea three several times. If, however, he was hoisted a
fourth time, in the name of the Prince of Orange, or of the
master of the vessel, his honor was reckoned more than ordi-
nary. In case of the ship’s never having crossed the line
(speaking still of the Hollanders) before, the Captain was
bound to give the mariners a small runlet of wine, which if ho
neglected to do, they maintained that they might cut the stem
of the vessel. . In French and Dutch ships the profits w r ere
kept by the master’s mates, and spent, upon the arrival in port,
in a general glorification of all the seamen.
E. C. BROOKE.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
Mk. Editor —Dear Sir, Enclosed is my report for the last
week. Yon will observe that our progress has been greatly
retarded by variable and southerly winds ; I trust, however,
that for the future I shall haye to report more favorably of our
good ship. Since leaving port we have not had one good op-
portunity for testing the sailing qualities of the E. A. Bright,
which I believe is not to be surpassed by any ship afloat.
I remain, yours respectfully,
JOHN STARKEY.
OUR POSITION AND ITS DUTIES.
Be you to others kind .and true
As you would have others be to you,
And neither do nor say to men
What you would not like to hear again.
The following observations are addressed to our community
between decks, and as they are penned in a friendly spirit, we
hope they will be so received and acted on ;
Our situation in many respects is a trying one. The ma-
jority of us have left home for the first time. Oh ! that word
“ home!” What a host of thrilling emotions it conjures up in
the soul! That heart must be more than adamantine which
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


vibrates not to the tender sentiments called up by the remem-
brance of home and early years. Of the joyful days of child-
hood, their pleasures and their pains. Of the parents who
nurtured us ; of the admiring sisters, the manly brothers ; of
the affectionate wife, and the helpless children ; and of the
trusty confidence of the girl of our love. Our absence from
them “ may be for years, it may be for ever but a cherished
remembrance of those loved ones, and of the land where first
our eyes opened to the beauties of Nature and Nature’s God—
of the hills over which we roamed, and of the fields whereon
we sported—will support us in our struggle for independence,
and fire our ambition for distinction. L’homme propose, el
Dim dispose —“ Man proposes, but God disposes.” -
But We must have courage and fortitude. Like Caesar we
have passed the rubicon of our fate. For weal or for woe the'
die is cast; we cannot change it now, if we would. While we
nerve our hearts to achieve success by manfully clearing ob-
structions from our path, we should neglect no means or
opportunity of preserving our health or our lives. The means
of doing so is simple, and rests with ourselves ; it lies in one
word— cleanliness. This is the great secret. Let us have no
distinctions. Let us not act like the lazy carter, who called
on Jupiter to get his cart out, of the mud, but put our own
shoulders to the wheel. At present some are too proud to be
clean, while others are too clean to be proud. The former
should remember that not only their own lives, but the lives of
every human being on board the ship depend on their attention
to this important duty, and that disease or death makes no
distinction. They strike down the peer in his palace equally
with the peasant in his cabin. By promoting cleanliness, we
will ensure comfort, and preserve our health and strength to
combat with the trials of our new home. It will likewise
difiuse sentiments of kindness, and engender an influence which
the French call caractere. It is founded on the lines which
head this paper
Having performed our duties to ourselves, and to each other,
let us submit ourselves to the will of divine Providence. The
issues of things are known to us, but w r e know in whose hands
all things are. Life is a school, events are our lessons : let us
take them so.
’ “ Life is real, life is earnest,
And the grave is not its gaol;
Dust thou art, to dust returnest,
Was not spoken of the soul.”
E. D. B.
MEDICAL NOTE.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright. Chronicle.
Sie—l have much pleasure in stating that the health of the
passengers still continues unimpaired by any serious illness. I
must say that those between decks deserve a great deal of
credit for the excellent manner in which they keep their berths,
and, should they continue these exertions, I have no doubt
that it will be condusive to their health, and will also make
the remainder of the voyage extremely pleasant.
I am, Sir, yours obediently,
J. J. McMULLIN,
Surgeon.
NEARLY A MONTH OUT
And what a truly astonishing number of events have been
crowded into such a short space of time. A nice little review
of human feelings have we on ship board. In the first instance
nearly all of us were overpowered by our feelings, as soon as
the vessel began to move a little in a sea way. Alas ! alas 1
for poor human nature. Any one with an ordinary mind can
recall with great vividness his peculiar sensations (not of bliss
unutterable) to which I allude ; why, a kind of a sort of an all
over alike feeling, far, far better felt than expressed, and some
of its practical results were truly amusing ; for instance, the
horrible facial contortions, -wonderfully demonstrating the flexi-
bility of the human face divine, indulged In by sumo of us
during our bitter throes of agony, while engaged in the pleasant
process of undoing after meals what we did when we sat down
to them. And then when the ladies mistook the gentlemen’s
hats for the wash-hand basins, and gave free vent to their feel-
ings in a most affecting manner!
Well, all that is. pretty well over now, with very few ex-
ceptions. So, as soon as our health and spirits returned, we
began a great many things. Why, some of us got tipsy, and
fought; and, in very truth, the display of science on the
occasion was truly wonderful. Many were the nasal pro-
tuberances that experienced a slight alteration (not for the
better I grieve to say) of their nasal conformation. Many
were the eyes that were adorned by more tints than bene-
ficent nature ever invested them with. But hold ! I forget,
nature somehow always supplies an inexhaustible quantity of
color, which, though latent requires nothing more than a little
encouragement in the form of a vigorous application of the
fist, to spring into life as many hues as the rainbow.
Feelings of a kinder and more amiable mature, next asserted
their supremacy over, our minds. What think you, we did
next ? Why, only think ! We (that is a great number of
us) fell in love—pshaw ! the word is not half strong enough —
jumped right straight into love; and, of course, viewed
everything through the medium of that charming tint, com-
monly called couleur de rose. We say couleur de rose, but some-
times we mount green spectacles in certain phases of the
disease. Yet, as Burns tells us—
“ The wisest man the world ever saw,
He dearly lov’d the lasses oh !”
We must not consider ourselves as very silly after all. In
love ! —Why, we have all experienced Tthe sensation ; and oh,
isn’t it nice ! so nice ! The old song says—
“ Oh ! it is love, it is love, it is love
That makes the world go round.”
And, from my own personal experience, it is certainly true,
if we suppose that the rotatory motion it gives to our
heads is imparted to the world. Why, a schoolboy’s top is
nothing to it. Even the Centrifugal Kail way cannot compete
in point of speed with a human head revolving to the air of
*• The power of love.” Ah, ah ! again I say, isn’t it nice 1
Oh, Ido like it so ! But, never mind, duty before inclina-
W. W. B.
tion; but it is nice for all that.
TO R
Many treasures are seen With no gleam of gladness
Both by land and by sea, To light my path, weary.
But they cannot, I ween, 0n one , soul lingers
Bring such pleasure to me with trembling delight,
As the thought of the love But when time’s leaden fingers
That illumines my way, Bring the mom to my night,
Even lighting above I Bhall fmd that the treasured
My dark soul to its ray. Fond dream of my youth,
As in shade and sadness, In my rapture unmeasured,
Despondent and dreary, Was founded on truth.*
W. W. Buck.
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
Owing to a press of matter several papers have been left
over ’till next week. J. K. —If you furnish your name in full,
we will do what we can to help you.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor,
• Dear Sm—l merely write to express my gratification on
bearing that Mr. Wells had received a very polite note, inti-
mating that his valuable,(!) services could in future be dispensed


■with ; and I hope that he has learned a lesson therefrom, viz.—
not to think that he may disappoint with impunity any body
of people after once raising their expectations. I am, dear Sir,
yours truly, J. R. C.
To the Editor.
Sir—ln reply to the letter which appeared in your number
of last week, and to other communications I have received re-
lating to the same subject, I have merely to state that having
the best reason to be satisfied that my conduct has been ap-
proved of by those ladies and gentlemen whom I had the
honor to represent .in the arrangement preliminary to, and
attendant Upon, the first concert ; and that being desirous of
relinquishing an association that has for some time been very
disagreeable to me, I would assure all your correspondents
that I shall in future be no impediment to the bringing to pass
of any number of concerts for which the ship’s company may
manifest an appetite. But Ido desire, sir, and that is why I
now write, that my name may not be bandied about your
columns so freely as it was last week in connection with the
subject above referred to, or any other of which your columns
may treat. I am, sir, yours obediently,
J. WELLS.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES.
1. Because she is a Clipper. 2. Because he is a Deck-
orator. 3. Sunday.
CHARADES.
1. What words spell the Grecian Archipelago 1
2—A noun there is of plural number,
A foe to peace and tranquil slumber !
Now any other noun you take,
By adding s you plural make ;
But if you add an s to this,
Strange is the metamorphosis ;
Plural is plural now no more,
And sweet what bitter was before.
VARIETIES.
Possible, but not very probable. Horace Walpole prophe-
sied that when Englishmen had all emigrated, and had acci-
dentally re-discovered their own country, they would find it
second in pictorial charms and natural interest to none in the
world.
The life of a true man is the best romance, which, when it
is valiantly conducted, will yield the imagination a higher joy
than any fiction.
LOCAL NEWS.
Struoole for the Stirabout.— We are sorry to be under
tlie painful necessity of informing our readers, that on Monday
morning two hostilely disposed combatants entered the field of
action at the galley door. One of the champions was, as a
matter of course, an Irishman, the other a native of Scotland.
The fight seemed at first pretty well contested, and the issue
might be deemed precarious, were it not that Pat, animated
by the sight of the prize (a pot of stirabout) in the hands of
the cook, and the timely arrival of some countrymen, laid on
most impetuously and with undescribable vigor. The spirit of
the Scot seemed to relax under the superior strength and reani-
mated expression depicted on Pat’s physiognomy. However,
no one saw the issue. The fight was abruptly stopped. And
here we propose that a medal should be presented, or at least a
vote of thanks awarded, to Mr. Buck, since but for that gen-
tleman’s timely mediation the affair would undoubtedly have
ended fatally.-
A.S.M.
Crossing the Line.—We have reached the Line at last.
On Monday, about 4 p.m., this was apparent, as a tub of enor-
mous size was seen rolled to the side of the ship, and thereafter
filled with a strange mixture of tar water. By-and-byc a mag-
nificent procession was seen making slowly for the saloon door,
dragging, on a chariot of state, Neptune and his lyide. On
reaching the front of the poop, Neptune, speaking trumpet in
hand, and hand to mouth, addressed himself to the second
officer, inquiring of him the name of the ship, and where
bound. He next inquired if any of his children were on
board. To which he received for answer—Fes, hundreds. He
thereupon saluted the Captain, who, in turn, invited him to
drink wine. Then came the ceremony of initiation. The
novices had first of all to undergo a close scrutiny by the Doc-
tor, who seemed to be no advocate for infinitesimal doses.
Then they kissed the bride of Neptune; but the embraces, if
wo may judge from the startled looks of her victims, was any-
thing but agreeable. Next they were consigned to the care
of the Barber, who with tar for lather, and a hoop for a razor,
did his part in a grand style. They were then led by a guard
of constables to the tub before mentioned, and were plunged
head foremost into the nauseous preparation. The King and
Queen then, attended by their guard of honor, moved off in
magnificent array.
Concert and General Entertainment.—The third of
the series of entertainments came off on Tuesday evening, at
7 o’clock. The programme was long, varied, and select, and
gave entire satisfaction to a numerous attendance. We hope
that the spirited Committee will continue as they have begun.
Sure, we are, that all on board will endeavour to make their
duties as pleasant as possible.
Thursday, Aug. 2, 1860.
No. 6.
This morning we send forth to our readers the 6th number
of the Chronicle. This fact indicates the progress of time.
We have also reached 23° 19' south latitude; this fact indi-
cates also the progress of our good ship. But there is another
progress which we can now speak of, which has reference to
more than a mere measuring of the deep. All can remember
the appearance which the Elizabeth Ann Bright presented
when they first beheld her lying at rest in the Queen’s Dock,
Liverpool.
The first look was an eager one for the sight had been long
looked forward to—it had been dreamed over, thought over,
spoken over, written over, and read over. But in all proba-
bility most of us at first sight received a shock; for instead of
the sight—trig, trim, and orderly—which the graphic descrip-
tions of hand-bills and great red-lettered posters had led us to
anticipate, what we saw was a vessel of gigantic proportions,
the decks of which were one mass of disorder ; boxes, barrels,
bags, and burdens of every shape and size, and also workmen
in countless throngs, almost sinking under the weights they
bore, met us wherever wo turned. If wc turned one way, an
unceremonious poke, and a gruff voice, admonished us to “ get
out of the way;” if wc turned another, some enraged, de-
corator shouted in our ears, “ Keep off that paint.” Now,
one thing which astonishes one and all after the lapse of
these five weeks, is the wondrous change which has come
over the appearance of the ship. How bright and orderly,
for instance, she looked on the last lovely Sabbath morning.
Not an article out of order—her decks rivalling the snow.
At the outset, again, we had fears, and forebodings many.
How frequently we turned an anxious look on this and that
countenance, of some one who was evidently destined to be
our companion on the voyage. Hope and fear preponderat-
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


ing, as the look was satisfactory, or the reverse. Now, mark
the change—we (the voyagers) are no longer strangers. Each
can greet his or her neighbour of a morning, by .name and
with a smile—as old acquaintances. Small jealousies and
petty trials are the exceptions; general intercourse ar d
hearty 'good-will the rule. But, indeed, how could it navi
"** 7* s.' ‘ -.lry fir f ’iimut :i 11 <0 f !
I'hosf, again, who delight in the beautiful and ■ oMio,
arc now privileged to look, each evening, on the star
I rilliancy of a southern sky, and the sparkling beauty of i
phosphorescent sea. And, as if to prepare us for th
dazzling sight, each evening, as the darkness begins to gather
we. have an unrivalled array of hues—ever shifting— adurninr
the heavens at the horizon. With such changes for the
better—small praise be ours, if we are daily growing better met
and women. And, in fine, if we are ever inclined to forget
those sacred lessons, or lay aside those devout feelings whiei !
were inculcated and brought out in the homes of or *
childhood; then are We nightly reminded of that on wide
centres our Christian hopes, as the masts with their tni
fingers point upwards to the brilliant Southern Cross.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chroni. k.
Dear Sir — l enclose the usual list of observations for- tin;
past week. You will observe that our progress has been
anything but satisfactory. We have, however, been most
highly favoured with lovely weather, which one and all accni
to have enjoyed. Indeed, so highly attractive has the weathei
been, as well as the amusements on board our good ship, thr -
we wei'e favored with flic unexpected arrival of a young Irob on
tie morning of Monday lust. I trust she was highly delight.,'..
the sports' which yesterday welcomed her arrival. iA-nip
information 'derived from our worthy iu'ffina'piedic't. T fin 1
that before the close,of our voyage wc arc likely to hare ovi*
numbers increased by two more pledges of affection ; and i
trust that on the appearance of the lovely strangers, all on
board will endeavor to make their stay agreeable. Before
closing this letter I wish to give a word of advice to a certain
disciple of “ Coke upon Lyttleton,” whom I find in the
illegal habit of making nocturnal visits to a certain window of
the saloon. Such visits I entirely' discountenance; and I can
assure the worthy gentleman that if such visits are not dis-
continued; I shall take legal proceedings against him in the
Court of Neptune, when he may find that he is an entire
stranger to the law proceedings and summary methods of
punishment adopted by that most sublime tribunal. I remain,
sir, yours obediently,
JOHN STARKEY,
Commander.
MEDICAL NOTE.
To the Editor.
Sir —Will you kindly permit me, through the columns of
your paper, to mention to the friends of Mrs. Martin, who was
confined on the 30th ultimo, that both mother and the infant
Elizabeth Ann Bright are now quite convalescent. They may
therefore dismiss from their minds all anxiety and concern. I
am, yours obediently,
J. J. M'MULLIN,
Surgeon.
HINTS TO PASSENGERS.
BY THE PURSER.
Dear Mr. Editor—l beg to trespass on your space for the
insertion of the following observations :
At the commencement of a voyage the passengers generally
feel somewhat uncomfortable on ship-board. Want of space,
and sea-sickness combined, tend to produce this unpleasant
feeling; when to this is added the fact that they are all new to
fe sea, the space allotted to them, however extensive it may
1} seems quite insignificant when compared with the accom-
ipdation they have been used to on shore. Another grievance
tey generally complain of is, their inability to preserve or get
1 « any stores they bring with them. This is entirely owing to
( -ant of foresight on their own parts in not placing those
i iiiugs in small boxes, which would fit without any inconve-
nience under their berths, in place of packing them in large
■ which have to be stowed away with all Other luggage,
tan only be had access to once a month,
from this it will be clearly perceived that such inconve-
nience is not owing to the ship’s accommodation, neither does
the fault become chargeable against her officers.
Whenever passengers do not feel satisfied, with the weight
or measure of any articles delivered to them, they should
report the same to the Purser, before they remove the stores
.from the storeroom. On this head every passenger has been
cautioned. Should such report not be rectified to thcyptisfac-
tiou of the passenger, then he could appeal to the Captain; but
such appeals should not be made on light or trivial grounds;
nor should they be of such a petty kind as to cause the Cap-
tain annoyance, that officer having sufficient to engage his at-
tention in looking after the safety of the ship, in baffling winds
and squally weather, and in studying the comfort and, conve-
nience of ill the passengers.
It is a,general rule or custom in all Government emigration
ships to issue mess tickets to messes of ten and not less than
six adults. Were that rule to be enforced with respect to pas-
sengers on board this ship, in accordance with the regulations,
they would not find themselves half as comfortable as they
now are, as there are messes as small as two and four, and the
largest mess is only eight.
r f the passengers would make themselves acquainted with
!h. act of regulations, they would feel more comfortable, and
lii. mess tickets of no use, only as proof to the Purser of hav-
ing delivered their stores. The contract ticket informs them
what stores they are entitled to, and they have now no trouble
in coming for their mess tickets after the stores are served out.
The general comfort of the passengers will be found to de-
pend chiefly, if not entirely, on their own conduct. They
should promote cleanliness and harmony among themselves.
Their amusements have always been appreciated, and assisted,
as far as possible, by the ship’s company. Every endeavour
has been made to preserve them from annoyance. There are,
however, some to be found in every society who will not make
themselves agreeable. Such people should remember the
maxim, “ That when in Borne, they should do as Borne does.”
Let us, then, while we are crossing the wide seas, strive to be
united and happy. Our being so will afford pleasure to our
Commander and his officers, and gratification to ourselves. It
will be a source of pride to the Captain to act a paternal part
towards such a large and happy family ; and his greatest plea-
sure will consist in promoting their comfort and gratifying
their feelings.
UNION AND FRIENDSHIP.
Did we not believe that there is something grand and noble in
the mind of man, no matter how he -may strive to disguise it
under acerbity of temper, we should despair of creating any
good effect by the following remarks; but believing that a
calm and dispassionate consideration of the evil effects arising
from a continued adherance to a principle which is so disastrous
to all communities, as tending to undermine the vital principles
of society, we are, induced to bring the subject under the
notice of our readers.
Collected together as we are from various parts of the king-
dom which own the benign sway of Victoria, and from foreign


parts, it would scarcely be a matter of surprise that differhee
of feeling, in thought and in principles, should be found tcac-
tuate us ; that little disputes and contentions, inseparable fom
all communities, should arise amongst us during the early jart
of the voyage. But now that we have had time to fnn
intimacies and friendships, as well to become acquainted vlh
each others sentiments, and from a proper estimate of cadi
. others abilities and characters, it is a source of deep regret to
find broils, contention, and strife still continually rampant ; poi-
soning the wells of kindness which flow spontaneously from the
fountains of the human heart.
When we come to analize the sources from which this ill-
feeling springs, how contemptible, how absurd, if not childishly
ridiculous they are. We are treated, for example, to a forensic
display of eloquence worthy of Hungerford market, between'
Cumberland,' Cambria, and Erin, all about the weighty task of
emptying a slop-bucket. Another section, and the most
humorous, are those who, spurning nature’s laws, disdain to
retire to rest at the proper hour, or until “ night’s candles are
put out, and jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty clouded
tops.” Did they keep quiet, and have some respect for the
feelings of others less socially disposed, the inconvenience
would rest with themselves ; but songs, and jokes, and laugh-
ter are sad preventatives of slumber.
We could laugh at this did it not sow the acorn of discord,
which promises, if not rooted out, to grow into an oak, which
like the fabled Upas Tree, will scatter poison and instil Venom
into all who approach. To prevent this venomous plant from
taking root in the soil of our affections, is my excuse for this
letter*
A dread of encroaching on your valuable space compels me to
conclude for the present ; but, with your permission, I shall
return to the subject next week, meanwhile we should re-
member that—
“ When the hours of rest from love or crime
Come like a calm upon the midsea brine, i
It breathes of Him alone who keeps
The vast and helpless city while it sleeps.”
E. D. B.
A SOLILOQUY.
The moon was hastening to her setting ; the sun was sinking
fast; her silvery light was fast paling, and dark clouds were
surrounding her, forming, as it were, a soft couch ready spread
for her repose. Even as I gazed they received her, hiding
from my view her entrancing beauty. Yet, still as I looked,
one long streaming ray shot upward, giving token to the
beauty there enshrined. Still was the night; the quiet was
reigning around all—unbroken save by the rippling splash of
the waters, divided by our prows, and uniting and co-ming-
ling again iu our wake, like, the milky way—flashing with a
phosphorescent lustre. Looking over the taffrail, and watching the
apparent incaiscenc of the ocean, the eye was struck with pleasure
and delight. Here then there glanced gleaming pencils of
argentine-like light circling round, and, as it were, clinging
together. Then, ever and anon the breaking crest of a wave
dispersed and scattered them, shining yet more vividly in their
erratic course, corruscating in the starlight. The sea seemed
emulous of the glorious firmament. Far, far away strayed my
thoughts. I revisited the scenes of my childhood—l reacted
my childish sports. Boyish hopes and fears once more asserted
their sway over my mind. Then came the thoughts—am I
happier now than I was then ? Present to my mind, ringing
in my ears, was the laughter of my little associates. Tiny
Voices rose faintly on the night air—tiny feet danced to and fro
in all the jubilant extravagance of youth. Responsive were the
echoes awakened in my heart—mournfully I gazed around,
when a voice (not at all like a falling star) fell on my ears from
the poop, scattering to the winds all my retrospections. Hoarse
was the voice—dreadful was the sound. “ Lay aft there with
the holystones.” This recalled me to a sense of duty and a
rational state of feeling, being inclined to have a little to say
myself on the subject, T rubbed my eyes and responded-—lay
; forward with your buckets. W. W. Buck.
ORIGINAL-POETRY.
Composed by a Friend of Mb. Scott’s.
Tiikhk U a nook, 1 know it well, ’Tis spring time and the lark is
But where it is I will not tell— singing,
’Tis by the river’s side. Overhead his notes are ringing,
’Tis sacred to me from the hours Piercing the ether blue.
I’ve strayed with one among the The pale spring buds in sunbeam s
flowers, quiver
Watching that river glide. Throwing a halo o er the nver,
Sluggishly that river flows, Brightening its dusky hue.
It does not murmur as it goes Oh ! lor that city’s eye to sec it.
Far from its native home. Oh! for that city s heart to feel it,
’Tis weary, weak, and lifeless The glory of the spring ;
here ’Twonld chasten many a wordlmg
Floating onward to its bier heart,
Beneath the ocean’s foam. ’Twould soothe and still affliction s
And 1 cheer each hopeless thing,
drum, Be still, be still, drop not a tear,
Sounding loud and low. Be thankful for the glory here,
All the sweeter, like a balm, My weary, beating soul.
Descends the soft; the soothing Learn implicit faith and trust
calm, In his -wisdom, great and just,
Under the spreading bough. Who bids the seasons rolL
It speaks of labor vast and free, jj e w j,„ clothes with joy the wood,
Always man’s earthly destiny jg e w ho gives the bird its food
As long as rivers roll; -Will provide for me;
It tells of sorrow vast and deep, pf e gi ve w hate’er is best,
It beats with joy that cauuot -\v) lo i], or storm or whether rest
sleep — To be my destiny.
That quivering city s soul.
E. H.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES.
1. E, G, and C.
2. Cares—Caress.
CHARADES.
1. Why is D like a sailor 1
2. What is it man loves more than life,
Fears more than death or mortal strife ;
The poor man has, the rich requires,
What the contented man desires ;
TJhe miser spends, the spendthrift saves,
And all men carry to their graves t
VARIETIES.
“In short, ladies and gentlemen,”, said an overpowered
orator, “ I can only say—that is I beg leave to add—that I
wish I had a window in my bosom, that you might see the
motions of my heart.” Vulgar boy in the galleiy : “ Wouldn’t
a pane in your stomach do as well.”
A hardy seaman, who had escaped a recent shipwreck on
the coast, being asked by a good lady how he felt when the
waves dashed over him, replied, “ Wet ma’am, very wet.”
Don’t run about-and tell your acquaintances that you have
been unfortunate ; people don’t like unfortunate acquaintances.
LINES TOS
There, take the key of my poor wounded heart,
Examine well, and you’ll find there
Your fohn is graven deep in every part;
Your words, your looks are treasured up with care.
And when convinced how truly I adore,
Oh let the fond return T wish be mine,
Tell me your cold indifference is no more,
Then take, oh take my hand, and you are mine.
J. C. BYRON.


LOCAL NEWS.
Entertainment.—lt is again our pleasing duty to notice
.one of the most agreeable and entertaining of those series of
amusements that have as yet come off on board the Elizabeth
Ann Bright. On Friday last, at 7 o’clock p.m., the Concert
Hall was crowded to excess with both joyous and grave, gay
and melancholy faces. Yet not to hear music, but to dispense
justice, came thither the gathered throng. The first who came
forward on the plaintiffs side, was Mr. Buck, who spoke in a
forebearing yet firm tone, while he endeavoured to prove an
alibi against the culprit at the bar, astonishing all who heard
him by the calm yet irresistable force of his logic. He was
succeeded on the same side by Mr. O’Hare, who, ere his speech
was half done, proved himself to the satisfaction of all present
a lineal descendant of Brian the Bold, or some such antique
sire of old Erin. Fire glanced from his eyes, sarcasm breathed
from his lips, and terror was in every gesture. O’Hare being
done, the pleading for the plaintiff was ended. After him on
the other side came the eloquent and astounding, and awe in-
spiring M. (but we name him not here), whose aim was to
defend the critical and dangerous case of his arraigned client.
And at right good length he did defend it! Were it not that
the display he made of his oratorical powers made such an im-
pression on the Military, the culprit would not certainly have
escaped with the very moderate sentence of transportation for
life from his native land. The farce closed by the welcome
but unexpected appearance of the Rev. Mr. Scott, whose pre-
sence there I have heard was owing to an expected discharge
of duty, in connection with the last moments of a criminal,
prior to bidding the world farewell. Instead however of ad-
ministering ghostly consolation, he came down in a most thril-
ling, earnest, and affecting appeal to the community at large,
to receive once more into a brotherly embrace the supposed
offender. After a very witty and well received address, he sat
down amid the applause of the delighted audience. Wo should
feel happy if like opportunities would often occur, for develop-
ing talent that has laid dormant hitherto on board the Eliza-
belli Ann Bright.-
From a Correspondent.
NOTICE.
The Committee beg to intimate, that a public meeting will
be held this evening at C o’clock, when the prizes for the
games of yesterday will be distributed by Dr. M‘Mullin, um-
pire.
Thursday, August 2nd, 1860.
No. C.
Thursday, Aug. 9, 1860.
We have now accomplished the first half of our journey,
and in so far as time is concerned, the largest half; since, with
average weather, we may hope to traverse what remains in a
much shorter period, and thus we are likely to accomplish the
whole voyage within the average number,of days. Already we
have gone over 7000 miles, of which number at least 6000
have been in the right direction. At the beginning of this
week we made the latitude of the Cape, and now our distance
from Melbourne is about 6600 miles. Up to last week we have
been particularly favoured with fine weather, indeed (with the
exception of this week’s experience) we know, as yet, nothing
of the hardships incident to travelling by sea. Few on ship-
board, however, will forget the first visitation of rough weather
which we had on Sabbath last. All the more memorable will
it be from the fact that few of us expected it. The evening
of Saturday was particularly beautiful; the Southern Cross
shone out of a perfect sea of glory, with more than wonted
splendour. True we had the frequent and sudden gleam of
lightning, but this only tended to enhance the grandeur of
the evening. To the skilful and ever wakeful eye of our
Commander, however - , all this was but the precursor of the
storm. And hence (for this led to an entire shifting of the
.tackling of the ship) to the still beauty of the scene was
superadded the now familiar song of the sailor, as he hauled
and toiled at his numerous sheets. Yet, Sabbath morning
was promising (we speak as landsmen), and all were preparing
to engage in the usual Sabbath-day exercises. By tea o’clock,
however the scene was changed, and what followed was a day
of raw and gusty mood ; so that all, with the exception of a
select few who fluttered about in oilskins, were glad to keep
their berths. The succeeding night was one of tossing, few
being able to get into the arms of tired nature’s sweet re-
storer ; “ balmy sleep ” was a stranger to the eyelids of nearly
all. But on Monday the sea ran higher than ever, and the
wind blew quite a gale. The sight, whether of the tossing
ship, or of the foaming and turbulent sea, which ever and
anon engulph her, was grand to a degree. Many will long re-
member it, at least the writer of this scrall will. Our noble
vessel has, however, done her part well, and has proved herself
to be—from the way in which she breasted the waves—a
right good ship, and one on which we can place entire con-
fidence for the future. Still let our readers bear in mind that
what is gone is but a sample of what is coming. We shall
in future have heavier seas, fiercer squalls, and more stinging
colds, than any we have yet experienced. But let this be our
consolation, that the wilder the blast the sooner we shall
have reached our destination.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER
To the Editor.
Dear Sir—You will see by my enclosed report that our.
progress this week has been more favourable than on any
previous one since we left. I hope to be able to report some
splendid runs for the future, as we are now in the latitudes
where the brave west winds prevail. To a person accustomed
to sea life, nothing can be more magnificent than to watch a
ship careering before one of those gales, at one moment
almost engulphed, and the next, running high, on the crested
billows like a bounding steed. Oh, truly, there is nothing so
gratifying to the seaman as to watch his good ship outstrip-
ping the race-horse in speed, and bounding before those
mighty seas ! He feels, then, that he is in the hands of
his Creator, without whose helping hand all his own puny
efforts are in vain. Many of your readers who are not
accustomed to the inconveniences and annoyances which
we seamen are used to on board ship, will ,feel it very
severely. To such, I say, that I hope they will have re-
course to that manly and forbearing spirit which has
hitherto been so conspicuous in their conduct on board the
E. A. Bright. I remain, yours obediently,
Commander.
JOHN STARKEY,
As we saw, in a former paper, there are amongst us some
who are selfish in feeling, and frivolous in principle, but
such men should be left to find their level, as enunciated by
Mr. Scott, in his humorous and eloquent speech, for—
“ The man of independent mind,
He looks and laughs at a’ that.”
But the great body, in fact all, with those few exceptions,
not only appreciate the advantages of our situation, but feel
grateful for the providential chance of sailing in a ship in
which their comfort and convenience arc so untiringly studied,
both by our commander and all his officers. Who amongst
us, that has not- applauded the fatherly care and kindness of
UNION AND FRIENDSHIP— (Contimied).
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


Captain Starkey 1 We have seen him lay aside authority,
and mingle in our sports, his honest countenance beaming
with pleasure. We have seen him as the commander, active
and skilful in all weathers, directing the progress of our
gallant ship. We have seen him carefully inspecting the
state of our habitations —promoting cleanliness, order, and
regularity, not once, or twice, but continually. We have
seen him ever foremost in promoting harmony, reconciling
differences, and healing contentions. We should, indeed,
be less than human did we not feel grateful for such acts.
In these pleasing duties he has been ably seconded by his
first and second officers, Messrs. Reeves and Haughton, as
next in authority, and by his third officer, Mr. Buck, when
opportunity offered, as was the case in reference to our
concerts, in which that gentleman took an active part.
While on the subject of the concerts, we cannot refrain from
mentioning the services of Mr. Ainge, the second steward,
who contributed, by his vocal powers, to lend variety to the
display of the talent of the passengers, and which tended
so much to sow the seeds of friendship amongst us. Of the
Purser it is only necessary to observe that he has earned for
himself the approbation of every one on board, by his
affability, punctuality, honesty, and considerate feeling. These
are qualities rarely met with in an officer in his position ; and
we cannot be too thankful for the comfort of having such a
man. It is an advantage enjoyed by few ships, and we can-
not be too thankful for it.
Of the ship's doctor, Mr. McMullin, and the rest of the
saloon passengers, in promoting by their purse, and coun-
tenancing by their presence, every species of amusement cal-
culated to enliven the monotony of our voyage, too much
cannot be written or said. We, one and all, feel it, and feel
thankful for it; and, when so much js done for us, let us do
something for ourselves.
Come, join me then, brothers mine;
In disunion and strife live no longer,
A bond of peace and friendship twine,
Than adamantine chains the stronger.
E. D. B.
ACCIDENTS, INCIDENTS, &c.
Ah, well ! let us be thankful that we are still alive, and
able to tell the tale of our sufferings during the recent storm.
It is a long time since any of .us have had anything so well-
fitted to remind us of the days of our cradle-rocking. But
our nurse, on the late occasion, was rather more violent than
was she of our youthful days. With the tragic, however,
there has mingled not a little of the comic.
For instance, who could have stood by on Wednesday night,
and have remained a grave spectator, or, while he witnessed
certain parties suddenly dispersed by a foaming wave 1
But you are inquisitive, and you ask—“ Who were these
certain 1 and, again, what was the subject of their dis-
course 1 And, still further, whither did the waves carry
them 1” Well, sure, I was always known in my own country
as being communicative, especially in matters that did not
concern myself; so. I shall answer the first question by
simply stating that glazed-leggings had no right whatever to
be on the ladder over Biscuit-lane, for the dinner-bell in the
saloon was long since over, and his duties did not necessitate
him to remain there any longer, And, again, parties wishing
to move in a higher sphere, may do so by walking the ladder
near “ Byrornsquare.” Am I understood-!'if so, I shall
enter on the second question. “What was the subject of
their discourse 1” Och, sure ! but the point is a delicate one.
The very thought of it makes a perpetual palpitation seize
my heart. Well, I must conquer my bashful timidity— 1 * :
was love !
How fondly sweet, how dear its name,
How cruel, sad, yet dear to me ;
Though there be cruel jealous pain,
Yet still ’tis love, sweet love for me.
“ Whither did the wave carry them ? ” It carried one of
them right down “ Pickle Market,” and the other to the
farthest end of “ Biscuit-lane,” aye, even as far as “ Rebecca’s
Home.” “ Leather Breeches” escaped, the old saying proving
true, “ love mammy, love daddy, love myself best of any.” Ah,
“ Leather Breeches,” I can well applaud your prudence,
though I cannot applaud your valor, in thus showing your
back to the lifeless foe. What a husband you would make !
My word, but you would leave a clean hearth to wife and
children in any emergency 1
And now a word of advice. I live in No. 46 “ Dum-
plin Hill,” and generally strive to lead a quiet life, disturb-
ing no one (except once on a while), and would dearly love
to be undisturbed myself, and would like no one to bring,
or send, or cause to be sent, a raging element into the
P. C. H.
neighborhood of happy and inoffensive me.
POETRY.
BY THE PURSER.
In the E. A. Bright on the sea we do roam,
Many thousands of miles away from our home,
Bright glances around us the silv’ry foam,
In the sunlight, as onward and onward we roam.
Glorious the prospect seems at sea';
The sun, when sinking in our lee,
Tells us that on the grave’s dark brink,
When life is o’er, so must we sink.
The sky above shines bright and clear,
To waft us on fair winds appear;
With mercy granted to us all,
No tempest yet, or heavy squall.
And when our destined port appears,
With friends to hear our hopes and fears,
Whom we have travelled far to meet,
We’ll leave the new, the old to greet.
Answers to Charades.— lst. Because it follows the C.
2nd. Nothing.
CHARADES.
Ist—ln what respect did the E. A. Bright , when leaving
the Mersey, resemble a bashful young lady 1
2nd—Why does an aching tooth impose silence on the
sufferer 1
3rd—Why is a gunsmith’s shop like a chicken pie 1
VARIETIES.
How to Catch a Widow. —Recife. —Take a walnut,
carefully divide the shell, extract the kernel, and every par-
ticle of husk. Then dissolve a portion of isinglass, sufficient
for the purpose of again adhering the parts of the shell.
When your isinglass is ready, procure a hard crow-quil, out
of which manufacture a finely pointed pen. Then cut from
the best Bath-paper a narrow slip, which, when rolled up, can
be encased within the cavities of the shell. When ready,
indite, with a steady and resolute hand, the lines under-
neath, taking care, when the slip is encased and the shell
closed, to label without —
A NUT TO CRACK.
Leave the woes of widowed life,
Be again a wedded wife;


For he who gives thee this advice
Is longing for the shortest splice.
The above receipo has never been known to fall.
A young lady at school, engaged in the study of grammar,
being asked if kiss was a common or proper noun, after
some little hesitation replied—“ I think it is both common
and proper.”
LOCAL NEWS.
Races, &c.— On Wednesday week we had a very pleasant
afternoon’s enjoyment. We refer our readers to the following
verses for an account of the proceedings :
• The morning was fine, and the heavens were clear,
That greeted the first harvest day ;
The waters were bright, all hearts throbbed with delight,
As they thought on the forthcoming play.
Time waned slowly by, till the hour drew nigh,
Then the jumping in sacks soon began.
Four competitors stood, each to win if he could,
For all thought they could win ere they ran.
They started away, now here came the play,
All but one tumbled over his crown,
All attempted to rise, when they thought of the prize ;
But alas ! fell a second time down.
Yet they got to their feet, and the other did meet,
And rolled him right over his head ;
But his fall was so sore, that he tossed down two more,
And the fourth off as victor was led.
Next to climb the greased pole—its top was the goal,
Three attempted the prize to obtain,
But a sailor lad, won, creating much fun,
By his tricks, when his end he did gain.
Two cocks did crow, and at each other did go,
With spurs more than half a yard long,
The smaller one first gave the other a thrust,
And he rolled like a football along.
After that there was seen, by the children I ween,
A race causing laughter and glee,
Dispensed here and there, they came off everywhere,
In confusion most pleasing to see.
On the very next day, there was bills by the way, • •
To announce that a meeting would be—
Of the large and the small, in the grand Concert Hall,
The distribution of prizes to see.
When the time had drawn near, then you might see appear,
Our kind Doctor the umpire on high,
With money in hand, like a judge he did stand—
Doing justice to all who did try.
Now I venture to say, for the whole of the play,
Mr. Toseland great credit is thine —
That you’ve well done your part, I say from my heart,
Fare thee well, fare thee well for a time.
P. O. H.
Whales. —We have seen several of these leviathans during
the past week. They were'recognisable, however, only from the
streaming jet of water which they sent aloft.
Birds.— Among our regular visitors are a beautiful variety of
sea birds —Molly-hawks, Cape-hens, Mutton-birds, Pigeons, Ac.
Fireßall. —On Tuesday evening, the few who were on
deck about 8 o’clock, were treated to a most unusual sight.
A magnificent fire-ball arose and suddenly illuminated the
whole horizon. It appeared to the eye to be the size of the
fist—its color was a deep blue. It had scarcely appeared how-
ever when it begun to fade away, scattering as it fell into mul-
titudes of fiery nodules.
Casualties,— -As will appear from the Captain’s report for
tins week, the Elizabeth Ann Bright has made a grand run
since our last issue. As was to have been expected, we have
met with a few casualties, but none are of a serious nature.
Thursday, Auo. 16, 1860.
No. 7.]
Well, this is rather strange August weather. Rather un-
usual, when contrasted with our former experiences at home,
and rather unwelcome as coming so soon after our late
scorching at the equator. But we must put up with it, and
make the most of it, since we must needs go through it
ere we can reach the Austral shore. Well, gentle readers, wo
have just donned our top-coat ere taking pen in hand, for we
mean to have a few words with you on a very cold subject.
Ice is our theme. Ice ! ice ! ice ! Ice at sea is usually seen
in two aspects; ice which is the growth of a season, and ice
which is the growth of long centuries. Both abound in the
southern ocean, across which we are meanwhile sailing. This
fact will excuse the following remarks;.and that they may
gain the greater credence, we may state at the onset that, for
the data we are chiefly indebted to our worthy captain. Ice
then, as we have already stated, may be divided into two
classes —sheet-ice and ice-bergs. Sheet ice is met with in
different forms, which, however, are but various conditions of
ice arising from a common origin ; in fact the same ice is
found at different times under all the varied forms of ice-
fields, ice-floes, pack, stream, drift, and brash ice. All these
are the results of one year’s frost. The extent and depth of
sheet-ice depends generally on the intensity of the previous
winter’s cold, and the circumstances connected with the suc-
ceeding season, which regulate the breaking-up of the frozen
surface. When broken-up, those masses have been known to
have an area of one hundred square miles. This is sheet-ice.
When broken into smaller sheets they are termed floes. When
reduced to fragments, crowded together, they form what is
termed pack-ice ; tills, when elongated, is called a stream, and
when further separated is known by the name of drift. Ice is
not to be met with in the southern ocean at a lower latitude
than 58°, and that only in the winter season, from April to
September inclusive. Ice-bergs, however, differ altogether
both in appearance and origin from the above-mentioned kinds
of ice. In height they vary from 100 to 1,000 feet. At one
time they tower aloft like precipices, at another they assume
the appearance of chalk cliffs, while again, at the edge of a
fracture, they exhibit, in the sun, a translucent appearance of
Emerald green. The eye of the mariner again is permitted to
revel among most beautiful mountain scenery—scenery, indeed,
than which Westmoreland, the Trossachs, and Killarney, have
none finer. Among it is some gorgeous capital, which he be-
holds crowded with the finest specimens of architecture and
art : there a broad square, with its cathedrals and its banks—
there a gentle elevation crowded with terraced buildings—
while aloft there is a whole throng of domes, and spires, and
glittering minarets. However, the seaman has usually mon; f,o
do than merely moral at their wondrous beauty. Thcre is
danger in the proximity of an ice-berg. Many of the Austra-
lian clippers have been placed in imminent hazard by their
presence. Let us hope, however, that we maybe permitted
to finish our voyage without danger or loss ; and in truth of
that there is no doubt, under the vigilant care of our experi-
enced commander, since a careful observation of the ther-
mometer will not only indicate the approach of ice, but also the
amount which we may expect to meet with. ■
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
To the Editor.
Dear Sir —You will observe by my enclosed report that our
progress during the past week has been very indifferent for
these latitudes. It seems as if the fates had decreed against
us, for we are now in the latitudes where the brave west winds
predominate. To appreciate the force of these winds it is ne-
‘ cessary that we should run them down south of the parallel of
40°. I have at present before me a beautiful description of
these westerly gales, by a sailor’s bride, while performing a
voyage with her husband. She writes —“ We had some mag-
nificent gales off the Cape, when the colouring of the waves,
the transition from grey to clear brilliant green, with the milky-
white form, struck me as most exquisite ; and then, in rough
weather, the moral picture was so fine; the calmness and
activity required is such an exhibition of the power of the
mind over the element, that I admired the sailors fully as
much as the sea—and of course the sailor in command more
than all. Indeed, a sea voyage more than fulfilled my expec-
tations.” I sincerely hope all on board may realise their
hopes of a sea voyage fully as much as that lady. Truly has the
Psalmist said—“ They that go down to the sea in ships, that
do business in great waters, these see the works of the Lord,
and his wonders in the deep.” How, unless David had been
inspired, could he have written in such a beautiful strain. In
the waves of the narrow seas, on whose shores he dwelt, are
nothing in comparison of the magnificent billows which roll
over the wide waste of waters on the South Atlantic. I remain,
yours obediently,
JOHN STARKEY,
Commander.
ACCIDENTS, INCIDENTS, &c.
THE SELECT PARTY, A TALE. —CHAP. I.
Has it come to this ? Is the deck of the Elizabeth Ann Bright
become the scene of mirth and revelry, of select parties and
joyous gaiety, of agreeable entertainments, and also alas, of
querulous contentions ? It has, the sequel is but too true.
The Elizabeth Ann Bright is no longer herself; she is now
nothing but a floating log of creaking timbers, and moaning
spars, since she has been so deeply and awfully insulted by
the recent transactions of Sunday night. Poor lifeless thing,
how I participate in your undying affliction, your irreparable
injuries !” “ What,” you ask, “is the use of all this stuff
about nothing?” Stuff about nothing! why you sleepy dog,
how have you spent your time since Sunday, when you have
not heard of the doings of that ever memorable night ?” “ Why
I was sick man !” Sick I did you say ? Then well is it for
you that you were not an observer of thftt night’s adventures,
for woe to you if you had been. Well, as you were not there,
inflamed with a kindling zeal to annihilate the kingdom of
ignorance, I will tell you all. Sunday, 12th August, 18G0,
was ushered in with unclouded sky, gentle winds and placid
waters, as if to congratulate that gentlemen of whose birthday
it was the anniversary. The day, however, waned slowly and
heavily by. Something like a sense of melancholy pervaded
our little community. But whether it was in honor of that
day of days, or whether it was that some dreadful omen of
what was shortly to follow oppressed them—l know not. Yet
sure enough the day was respected. About five p.m., we
heard something of the princely liberality of (the aforesaid
gentleman) Mr. Byron—a liberality which does credit to his
name, adds lustre to his character; and which will impart
honor to his posterity through coming generations.
The day passed on, and the shades of night were gathering
fast when my tale begins. A select party of gentlemanly
bearing and ladylike delicacy had congregated at the express
desire of Mr. Byron to celebrate his natal day, in a way be-
coming his wonted kindness, lofty bearing, and aristocratic
family. Well, all had assembled—they were in the enjoyment
of perfect happiness—the punch bowl circulating freely, when
some quarrel about somebody, was somewhat vigorously carried
on by some persons. And in less time than we can describe
it, the gentleman who had invited them was very unmercifully
dealt with; some beast in human shape picked him up, as they
did formerly with poor Jack, and threw him outside his own
apartment. Was that kind treatment, brotherly affection, or
gentlemanly bearing? certainly not. Mr. Byron was shockingly,
horribly, barbarously dealt with.
Well, how did the ladies separate ? Why the world seemed
wagging round, just as philosophers say it always does. Will
the ladies take the coal off my pipe. How the night was
spent 1 can’t say. But—but —why.
Then fill the bowl each jolly soul, Ac.
(To be continued.) A Correspondent.
SAILORS AND THEIR SONGS.
We presume that not a few of our readers, who were unused
to a sea life, were considerably struck with the chanting of the
seamen, while engaged in company at their work. Their
strains by this time, however, are quite familiar to all ears, but
perhaps few are aware of the fact that the words are, to a large
extent, improvised on the spot, and that the passengers’ doings
are frequently the subjects of their song. We give the follow-
ing lines as a specimen. The allusions contained in them re-
quire no explanation. They were kindly furnished to us by
Mr. Reeves, the able first officer of the E. A. Bright
Oh I Mr. Scott my darling, Oh I Doctor, pills and plaster
Handy, my girls, be handy. Handy, Ac.
At sinners don’t be snarling. But kills us all the faster :
Handy, Ac. Handy, Ac.
Oh ! Mr. Wells, your paces But a dose of sugar candy,
Handy, &o. Handy, &c.
Show well in running races, With a little glass of brandy.
Handy, Ac. Handy, Ac.
And falls cause ugly faces. Ac. &c. &c.
Handy, Ac.
Such words, however rude when set down in writing, are,
as we all can testify, quite a treat to hear when sung to some
wild sea air. To the seaman it is of the utmost consequence
to have such a chorus, inasmuch as its conclusion always gives •
the signal for a long pull, a strong pull, and a pull altogether,
at some important sheet.
The following song, it will be seen, is set on a somewhat
more ambitious key .
CYNTHIA (MARITIME CHORUS).
As I walked out one morning, For her trouble there was no re-
Down by the Clarence Dock, lief,
I spied a pretty maiden. And thus I heard her mourn—
A journeying to Papscot.* Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac.
Chorus —Way, way yon Cynthia, Bad luck to the “Joseph AValker,”
My dear honey She tossed me head and heel,
Way for Cynthia, And the dirty “ say boys ” broke
I love her for her money. up my box.
And stole my yellow meal.t
Good morning Mr. Papscot, Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac.
Good morning, Sir, said she ; . > . , ~
■ni y ° SC ‘ -I '. The merits, as ho went along,
Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac. of every ’ son of tal , *”
Oh, yes, my pretty Irish girl, Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac.
I’ve got a ship of fame ; j sailor b
A. m "t' ° k ’ I never groan or sigh
And the Walker is her name. if any body doubts my word
Way, way, you Cynthia, Ac. jjJj, „ c( f a j, oke in / ue eye .
Again I saw this pretty girl, Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac.
That was sent out from Cork- And i{ to old Pall MaU
To the “Bowery Theatre "she was Jußt baU it munber nine,
In the" city of New York. y ° U ’ U th ”° *****
Way, way, yon Cynthia, Ac. love]iest _ sUe
’s mine.
Her bonnet, it had come to grief, Way, way,Won Cynthia, Ac.
Her shawl was badly tom; Ac., Ac., Ac.
* Papscot—Agent for the principal line to New York,
t Yellow meal—viz., Indian com meal, the principal article of
food served out in the above-mentioned ships.


CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle,
My dear Sir —My much desired wish that your valuable
Chronicle should be printed in Melbourne at the expiration
of the voyage being now confirmed beyond a doubt, I hasten
to intimate to my countrymen at homo in old Ireland, through
the columns of your Chronicle (which will yet be read by
those far off friends with pleasure), some trifling yet import-
ant details of certain circumstances in connection with our
voyage.
Hoping that you will be so kind as to give insertion to
the following in some vacant corner of your esteemed journal—■
I have the honor to be, Mr. Editor, your obedient servant,
A SLIGO MAN.
Mv dear Countrymen—Many of you, living, I presume,
in pomp, luxury, and opulence at home, may pass this by
in silent contempt, aye, perhaps, censure even its unfortunate
author. To such I say, content yourselves. Ido not want
to lure you from your stately mansions, and widely ex-
tended domains, from your grand chariots and unbounded
riches. That would be rather an arduous task for an almost
nameless individual to accomplish. I do not, therefore, ad-
dress myself to you, but to the weary laborer, tired of his
existence ; to the patiently resigned son of the ejected hus-
bandman, and to the penniless yet virtuous daughters of
my far off . country, “the Isle of Saints.” To you I
say, should you be constrained by the reverse of fortune to
leave your country, or as I -ought rather to say, should
Heaven so far bless your efforts, that you may, at some future
day accumulate your passage money to Melbourne, beware !
beware ! lest after all that you have suffered, and after all the
trifling impediments which you have so perseveringly sur-
mounted, that you go not in a ship in which you would be
weary of your life, among a crowd of passengers whose tem-
peraments are ever and anon intolerable, and finally, with a
captain whose tyranny is a fac simile of the tyranical influ-
ence exercised by that landlord to whose conduct you have
been long, very long inured. Do you ask—Have I sailed
in such a ship 1 Well, thank Heaven, I have not. The
E. A. Bright I will ever love ; I would recommend her to an
emigrant in preference to the crowded Great Britain. A
great incentive to my giving this advice, I must admit, is my
long familiarity with her every rope and spar; but, were that
my sole recommendation it would be valueless ; but it is not
so ; she is a goodly ship, has proved herself so on various
occasions since leaving port, notwithstanding the fickle winds
and the boisterous seas which she has repeatedly encountered
since leaving Liverpool. Nor is this my sole reason ; there
is another greater and far more important—it has relation to
the promotion of health, happiness, and social comfort of the
banished Irishman while on board. She has a captain to
whose impartial, unbiassed and parental superintendence, I
would willingly consign the scattered remnant of my fallen
country. No matter what your creed or your country may
be, he neither patronises the one nor particularises the other.
All are alike to him ; no disparity was ever known to exist
in his feelings towards Protestant or Catholic; in fine, in that
“ocean chief’ are concentrated every principle of kindness,
virtue, honor, and equity. I say this for him, my country-
men, and I refer you to your sons and daughters on board the
E. A. Bright to corroborate what I have asserted.
Now, should any of you, at some future day, be bound for
those shores which I am now approaching, no matter what
anxiety you may have for a hasty passage, no matter how
detrimental to your happiness a few weeks’ detention on the
soil of your fatherland may seem to be, still I say to you,
Wait, wait for the ship that is commanded by Capt. Starkey.
So now farewell, and believe me to be, dear countrymen,
A SLIGO MAN.
yours over,
Answers to Correspondents. —“M. J.”—Very good;
but you will see that you are anticipated. “P. R.”—Before
trying to be so very critical, would it not be wise for you
to look after your orthography. “F. J.”—We must repeat
it. We cannot interfere in any matters save such as are
literary.
ORIGINAL POETRY—A LETTER FROM SEA.
J.R.C.
TO R
Far, far away from the girl I adore,
I restlessly wander alone,
Our parting I never have ceased to deplore,
My thoughts ever turn to my home.
That home where so often her love I have proved,
Atid enraptured have heard her dear voice,
Assure me that I was most tenderly loved,
And that none but myself was her choice.
Of her lips, I have tasted the nectar divine,
With joy and delight unalloyed,
And the pleasure of clasping her bosom in mine,
Was dearly and fondly enjoyed.
She, dearest remembrance of joys that are past,
Entrancing my soul with its powers,
Will evermore over my sorrow be cast,
Beguiling the gloom of sad hours.
W. W. BUCK.
Answers to Charades. —Ist. Because she shuns the bouys
(boys). 2nd. Because it makes him hold his jaw. 3rd.
Because it contains fowl-iu-pieces.
LOCAL NEWS.
Concert in Honor of Captain Starkey. —On Tuesday
evening, a concert came off in the saloon, in honor of the Cap-
tain : Mr. Toseland, conductor. Nearly all the saloon passen-
gers took part in the evening’s entertainment, but special
notice is due to the captain himself, as also Messrs. Wells and
Ainge, who put forth their best efforts on the occasion. The
captain we all know already, as a skilful seaman, but his
powers in song and recitation have unexpectedly been found
Dear Chum, my pen and ink I take,
With no slight thrill of pleasure,
To say that I am safe and well,
Although not much at leisure.
A sailor’s life for ups and downs,
May vie with half the nation,
With you who seek at cannon’s mouth,
The bubble reputation.
Pray tip me soon another stave,
Keep up the bond of union,
I know your heart cannot resist •
Our brotherly communion.
My blessings on all hands at home,
To you, war’s dearest pleasures,
And thanks to her who kindly sent,'
That store of cupboard treasure.
Your last Icind yarn I welcomed,
When our sliip was in the Mersey,
And gladly I shall hail the next,
When over with my journey.


to bo of a very high order. To Mr. Wells also, no small
praise is due; of Mr. Ainge, we need only say, that he fully
sustained the high reputation which he has already acquired in
the estimation of all classes on ship board. The evening’s
proceedings terminated by Mr. Wells proposing health, pros-
perity, long life, and honor to the much loved commander of
the E. A. Bright, to which Captain Starkey made a feeling
reply.
Thief ! Thief !—Dear Sir— -In the first number of your
valuable Chronicle, I observed an article on dishonesty, and,
I am soriy to say, that the practice still reigns amongst our
small community—a proof of which, I have lately experienced.
It was but a trifle I lost, yet, it was great enough to serve
as a caution to my fellow-passengers. Allow me, then, to
inform them, through your columns, that it is necessary to
have a strict watch kept over all articles which they may hang
out to dry. At the same time, I would warn the culprit
against such mean actions ; for, if not caught here, he will
surely meet with his deserts elsewhere. Honesty is the best
Policy. I am, yours truly, L. P. S.
[We are only sorry that too many such dishonest acts as
the above-mentioned have been repeated to us, and are truly
sorry, that the offenders have not, as yet, met with the punish-
ment they deserve.-
ED. E. A. B. G .
Thursday, Aug. 23, 1860.
No. B.]
Oun readers have been reminded, by the presence of a
large quantity of sea-weed, of the proximity of land. As
will be seen, from the Captain’s letter, we have been in the
neighbourhood of several small islands. The presence of the
sea-weed, however, reminds us of the fact, that, the sea is
not the barren field which we are apt at times to imagine
it. Our readers will thank us, we hope, for intruding to
their notice the following short extract from Schleiden’s
Lectures :
“ The most luxuriant vegetation of a tropical landscape
cannot unfold as great wealth of form, while in the variety
and splendour of color it would stand far behiqfl this garden
landscape, which is strangely composed exclusively of
animals, and not of plants ; for characteristic as the luxuriant
development of vegetation of the temperate zone is of the sea-
bottom—the fulness and multiplicity of the marine fauna is
just as prominent in the regions of the tropics. Whatever is
beautiful, wondrous, or uncommon in the great classes of fish
and echinoderns, jelly-fishes, and polypus, and the molluscs
of all kinds, is crowded into the warm and crystal waters of
the tropical ocean —rests in the white sands, clothes the
rough cliffs, clings where the room is already occupied, like
a parasite upon the first comers, or swims through the shal-
lows and depths of the elements—while the mass of the vege-
tation is of a far inferior magnitude.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
To the Editor.
Sib, —With this I forward my usual weekly report, wherein
you will find that our progress has been about the average.
On Monday morning, about two o’clock a.m., we passed close
to Prince Edward’s Islands, which, however, were not visible,
owing to the clouded state of the atmosphere. These islands
are two in number, and were discovered by Captain Cook in
1776. They are very high, and the largest is thought to be
about 16 leagues in circuit; the body of it being in about
46 deg. 52 min S, and 37 deg. 46 min. E. The lesser island
is a few miles more to the northward. There is a large and
safe channel between them, through which the above-named
circumnavigator.passed. These islands are sometimes visited
"by the Southern fishers in search of seals, or sea elephants ;
but as they appear to be destitute of vegetation, or any harbor
or place of shelter, and the landing being difficult, and the
weather often tempestuous, they present an unfavorable aspect
for commerce. These islands are said to abound with fish,
but as they have never been surveyed, very little is known of
them, and their geographical situation not yet determined.
Yours obediently,
JOHN STARKEY.
PERCEPTIONS UPON NOTHING.
Nothing is a very curious subject hpon which to write, but
much may be •written about it. It is the most comprehensive
word in the English tongue, and possibly in many, other
tongues ; but I shall confine myself to my experience of the
phrase in my own language. I said it was a most compre-
hensive word. Just allow me to adduce a few homely and
most familiar examples—for instance, an affectionate mother
is perhaps upstairs, engaged in her duties as mistress of the
household, or, perhaps, hospitably entertaining her visitors,
and, as a matter of course, dilating, with wondrous eloquence,
upon the theme of all themes—to a fond mamma—the superior
perfections of her eldest born. For the sake of the argument,
we will assume the small individual to be about six years of
age, and richly endowed with all the propensities peculiar to
that interesting period of his existence, when suddenly
mamma’s maternal eloquence is arrested by a sound
most horrible to a housekeeper’s ears. The crash
of crockery from the regions below, followed by another
crash something like the wailing of a lost spirit, but
to madame’s ears bearing a most alarming resemblance to
the voice of the prodigy above-mentioned. Of course mamma,
in a flutter of nervous agitation, begs her guest to excuse her,
for a short period, and trembling with agitation for the fate of
her china, and with natural solicitude for the fate of her dear
little olive branch, she hastens below (perhaps critics would
advise me to have given the child, and not the crockery, the
first place in mamma’s thoughts, but the fact is this, both
fears are so nicely balanced that it is not of the slightest
importance which is mentioned first.) Arrived below, what a
scene meets her eyes —the kitchen floor strewed with the
debris of broken dishes and plates, and the intestines of all the
pics for to-morrow’s dinner scattered hither and thither ; the cat
the while, blessing her fortunate star, and taking a mean advan-
tage of the accident to munch away at the cold joint left from
to-day’s dinner, with eyes gleaming like coals of fire ; and last,
not least, the beloved offspring crouched in a corner, his face
smeared with jam, his eyes streaming with tears, convulsive
sobs shaking his sides. “ Charley, Charley, what have you
been doing i toll me, sir, instantly. Hear young perfection’s
answer “ Nothing, mamma.” “ Oh, indeed —defend us ! do
you call that nothing—five pounds worth of glass and crock-
ery broken, to-morrow’s dinner spoilt, and dear mamma’s
temper mined for the remainder of the evenn-Don’t I
pity her husband, poor man, when ho comes home that night,
especially should he have been expected early, and arrive
rather late. Of course mamma has but one course open to
her. Angry words, and the birch rod are vigorously applied,
and when mamma ascends, and the visitors enquire the
cause of the disturbance, she actually answers, “ Oh, nothing.”
Now, I think that little episode freely bears out my assertion
that much ado may be made out of nothing. Again, another
little instance—Madame returns from market rather before the
usual time, lets herself in, and going into the dining room, she
surprises Ann in the act of turning the key in the sideboard,
and on detection turning scarlet. “ What are you doing in
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


that sideboard; Ann 1” What is the answer this time 1 —
alas, alas for human nature—“ Nothing mam ; there was
some dust in the key, and I got it out, and I was only trying
whether it would turn in the lock or no.” Of epunje this
completely explains the mysterious disappearance of the tea
and sugar, and spirits kept in the house (but mind, the last
mentioned only for medical purposes) for some time past. As
a very natural sequence, Ann gets a month’s notice. Do you
call that nothing 1 - Ha ! ha ! what a nervous twitching it -
causes about the comers of your mouth ; one can scarce
restore his risible faculties. The fact is, whenever one is
caught doing anything that is not right, or in an improper
situation, whenever asked your business, the reply that invo-
luntarily rises to your lips is nothing. However, I have said
quite enough about nothing for the present. More about it in t
next number.
W. W. Buck.
THE SELECT PARTY.—A TALE-CHAPT ER II.
The morning which succeeded the evening spoken of in last
chapter, was rough and stormy, as one might necessarily expect ,
after such disgraceful adventures.' One of the party who
indulged so freely at the soiree on that ever memorable ni'Jic
was slowly walking from the galley towards the saloon, 10-i:
in deep, earnest, and I may add painful meditation.
What the subject of his thoughts was it would be madnesr
to think of divining. For who can read the depth
of our feelings, the sorrow Or joy pf one’s heart, the
very nature of one’s- soul, by a mere glance at a physlog
nomy overcast with a shade of melancholy or animated with a'
smile of complacency 1' However, for the benefit of our readers
we may offer a suggestion. He might have been considering
how he wpuld endeavour to exonerate himself from any im-
putations that might cast a stigma on his name ; or he might
have - been considering what precautions he would adept, in
order to prevent the appearance of his name in the Elizabeth
■ Ann Bright Chronicle ; or in fine, he was, perhaps exerting his
wits to devise some means through which he would be amply
avenged on a certain person, who acted a very charitable pait
in picking up the fallen hero of our tale. He was suddenly
recalled to a sense of his existence by the disagreeable voire
of his inveterate foe, saying “ Soft morning, sir,” but not to
him, ’twas to a friend seated near. Well, what do you think
■was his charitable response (tho’ not addressed) t Why, in a
short, sharp, and decisive tone he replied, ‘ I’d soften your
brain for you .’ Now, I'm sure you’ll coincide in my opinion
that he ought to be exempted from any blame for such a brave,
spirited, and determined reply. Word followed word, til] it
was evident that blow would shortly follow blow, if not sc on
separated.
Through the kind mediation of some unknown person t'da
was accomplished, and so the conflict was suppressed. TJ us
the young Bantam with the black crest was removed fr-m 'lie
field of fight. However, he hastily repaired to his bu] I’s e) e,
to give one more hostile glance at his opponent, while 1 c b it-
self was secured behind the batteries and fortifications o'
mugs and plates. To complete the security of the fortress,
there was a widely-extended morass of stirabout, in which the
besieger would inevitably have perished, if he had attempted
to storm the battery. No fear of provisions running slort
gave our hero the slightest annoyance. He was well supplied
for upwards of six months, against which time the endny
would be weary of the siege, and withdraw in disgrace to some
remote settlement in Australia. But terms of amity we*e
come to, and a treaty of peace was signed, which gave sats-
faction to all. . _ !
While the Hero brave, with beardless chin, 1
Since Sunday last, I’m told,
Appears of late to grow so thin, — j
He’ll surely die of cold.
A CORRESPONDENT
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.
An Admiring Reader. —Many thanks for your good
pishes. Our modesty, however, prevents us making use of
'our paper.
;p. O.—To prevent chilblains Scarcely in our way ; ask
the Doctor, and if he can’t help you, you may just wait for
Warmer weather.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Sir, —Having witnessed tlie very sad occurrence of Tuesday,
by which we lost one of our fellow-passengers, I cannot let it
pass without expressing the satisfaction I (and all of us) feel
towards the Captain and all his officers, for^ their prompt
assistance, —although, alas ! it was of no avail,—to the poor
lad, and I am sure you will agree with me in saying, too much
praise cannot be given to the first Mate (Mr. Reeves), for Ids
heroic conduct for risking his own life, with five of his gi’lant
crow, who braved the dangers of a rough sea, in a frail Xroat,
in search of the poor unfortunate.— l remain, yours, &c.,
THOMES WILLIAM.
In the bosom of. the mountains
Stands a castle grey and Jone •.
O’er it the clouds hang frowningly,
Where the summer sun has shone.
For days—and years—and centuries,
And still its turrets stand
In hoary grandeur, smilingly
O’er all tho fertile land.
The mists creep o’er it lovingly ;
The winds go sweeping bye.
Tho mists may creep—the winds may sweep.
But in stillness it doth lie.
The apple-blossoms in the plain y
The hawthorn in the dell;
But all around the castle lone,
Grey age-marks only dwell.
Woefully, woefully caws the rook,
Of the lordly grandeur gone ;
Woefully, woefully caws the rook,
Of the davs that are wearing, on -
When mountain stream of forest glade
Shall still look up to Heaven,
But each grey, time-worn, mould’ring stone
From its fellows shall be riven.
A FOWLISH MEMORIAL TO THE CAPTAIN
Against certain Ball-parties of certain Passengers.
Good Captain Starkey, pray give ear—
The sea-birds wail; oh ! deign to hear.
Your honor, we would not draw nigh
But that our life is one long sigh ;
Since some on board your ship of late,
In killing us take pleasure great.
And first of these that mischief Toseland,
Is always stretching out his wizand.
Tho’ truth, his firing’s no great matter,
And yet it puts us in a flutter.
Yet sure he may shoot on at leisure ;
It won’t harm - us if it gives him pleasure.
19
THE “ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT ” CHRONICLE.
-j -


But pray do silence Mr. Brooke,
What can urge him to leave his book
And take to maiming the weak wings
Of harmless inoffensive things 1
For thus we fall a prey to fish,
. To fill whose maws is not our wish.
But, oh ! we pray, for pity’s sake, '
That Mr. Wells aside you take,
And with him, pray, do reason thus—
What’s /un to him is death to us.
Why, don’t you see how hard we run
To get beyond reach ' of his gun.
If he resolved on murder be,
Why not commit felo de ae ?
What harm would then the world befall 1
One lawyer less, that would be all.
And so in name, of many a gross,
I sign myself
AN ALBATROSS.
CHARADES.
1. My name divides into syllables two,
Which, known to manv. i« own'd In- four ~
Own’d by one nnwi rarely plann d
For harmless ndnli. or high command,
And, whoe'er the same resolves to me, -
For reword may have a cup ojt led.~
2. Give one word which contains all the vowels 1
VARIETIES.
' A young lady at a party was asked by a serious
>n, if she liked Crabbe’a Taka t —“ No,” she answe:
’1 not know crabs had tails.”
’'Words are often signs of ideas, but quite as "often"'
u .tU of them. ! ’ !
' Temporal Blessings. —Wish for them cautiously ;b
cm submissively; want them contentedly; obtai''
'jnestly; accept them humbly; manage them, pru
'iplciy them lawfully; impart them liberally; estrei’
"ideratelj increase them virtuously; use them! 1 '
'■», _/•, forego them easily ; resign them willingly. ’
LOCAL NEWS.
the evening of Frida last by tl
■ ( vss belonging to F 1 ichment of tne 40th lie *
five o’clock the concef *oom was filled to overflotK,,,., ,■
expectant audience—among whom we witnessed . 1
• I/' nnd iretiOomen off-bp,, lni' |
■ ip/ , ;,li. >.> ! : ii I; ■ ,«.-cnp' ■ \-
evening’s entertainment was commenced by the Glee Cl.tik
singing a full chorus—“ Here’s a Health,”’ which was done
in grand style, and reflected great credit on all the singers.
The programme, which was then gone over, was a large and
attractive one, and both the fun and sentiment were exceed-
ingly well brought out. Sergeant Mack, both as conductor
and solo singer, deserves great credit for the masterly man-
ner in which ho conducted the concert, and, also, for the way
in which he performed his several parts. Private King was
as attractive as usual, although in a different character.
Private Shaw was applauded in all his parts, and especially
in the last. Private Canavan did his pieces ample justice;
and Private Downy was also well received. We must not, how-
ever, omit to mention the efficient help rendered during the
evening by several of the ship’s company. ■ The concert ter-
minated at half-past seven o’clock. On parting, the com-
pany gave rounds of applause, long and rapturous, to‘Mrs.
Brooks and Mrs. Boulton, to Dr, Boulton, Messrs. Brooks and
Toseland, and to Captain Starkey.
The Late Melancholy Occurrence. —On Tuesday,
about half-past one o’clock, the whole community was startled
by that most fearful of all cries which can be heard at sea—
“ A man overboard !” In an instant, captain, officers, and
crew, were at their posts; a life-buoy was thrown over, the
ship hove up in the wind, and a boat hastily lowered. In
the short time, however, that all this was being effected,
the unfortunate youth was left far behind, as the ship
was going at the rate of thirteen or fourteen knots
an hour. Mr. Reeves, our gallant chief, officer, to-
gether with five of his crew, were speedily in the life-boat
out on the ocean. All eyes were strained in watching their
frail skiff, as at one moment it rose on the crest of a raging
billow, and was again lost to sight in the trough of the sea.
Many were the prayers which were offered for their safety
and success; but all their efforts were fruitless—nothing
could save the ill-fated youth. On returning, a hitch in the
gearing imperilled the safety of Mr. Reeves, but the prompt
commands of our dauntless captain (whose sonorous voice
was distinctly heard above the howling noise of the maddened
ocean), brought him speedy relief. Our late fellow-passenger,
by name—Hans M‘Kee, is a native of County Down, Ire-
land ; he was 18 years of age, and has left a widowed
mother to lament his early death. It must be a consolation
fo : her to know that all was done for him which seamanship*
and bravery could accomplish.
The following lines are from the pen of Mr. O’Hara :
He ia gone, he is lost to each dear loving friend ;
To his memory we’ve nothing to offer but sighs ;
Ah I how painful, how sad, and how greivous his end—
Down deep in the ocean, poor youth, he now lies.
There he rises! he sinks 1 now I see him once more,
He breathes forth his last—now he dies ! oh, he dies I
Oh ! Heaven, that sight may I never see more—
Down deep in the ocean, poor youth, he now lies.
Ah ! how sad was his fate, and how lonely his grave;
He drew his last breath under southern skies;
Now o’er his lone bed rolls the wild ocean wave—■
Down deep in the ocean, poor youth, he now lies.
May Heaven hare mercy on him that is gone.
To bind him to earth he had got many ties;
He is lost, and for ever 1 yon billows roll on—
Down deep in the ocean, poor youth, he now lies.
No. 9. Tiiucsday, Am. 30, 1860.
In onr last number we took some notice of the fact, that
tie sea was not the barren field which too many were prone
consider it. In its widely extended domain, there is a
‘a underfill rich variety of natural phenomena. And iii the
following illustrations we propose to give a condensed account
of those deep sea soundings which have already extended our
knowledge so much, and which are also likely soon to open up
Irish fields, the treasures of which are at present hid from the
knowledge of man. Many were the opinions which were pre-
viously held by scientific men concerning the depths of the
eccan, but at best these were only speculations, as indeed on
nany points they still are, and will long continue to be.
‘Therefore the contemplative mariner, as in mid ocean he looks
diwn upon its gentle bosom, continues to experience sensations
a’in to those of the devout astronomer, when, in the stillness
oitho night, he looks out upon the starsand wonders.” (Mauiy.)
Bit this feeling, in the case of the mariner, as in that of the
astonomer, has only stimulated to exertion for the purpose of
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


arriving at conclusions founded on actual observation. After
many experiments as to the best method of making these ob-
servations, the following is the plan which has proved itself
the best. The vessel by which they are to be made is furnished
with a sufficient quantity of sounding twine, carefully marked
at every length of one hundred fathoms—six hundred feet, and
wound on reels of ten thousand fathoms each. It is the duty
of the commander to avail himself of every favorable opportu-
nity to try the depth of the ocean, whenever he may find him-
self out on blue water. For this purpose he uses a cannon
ball of 32 to 68 pounds as plummet. The cannon ball, with
one end of the twine attached to it, is thrown overboard from
a boat, and suffered to take the twine from the reel as fast as
• it can. But two elements came into play in making calcula-
tions about depths. The plummet has an ascertained rate of
descent in still water, it is as follows :
2m. 21s. as the average time of descent, from 400 to 500fath.
3m. 265. „ „ „ „ 1000 to 1100 „
4m. 295. „ „ ~ „ 1800 to 1900 „
But in making calculations about depths, another circum-
stance falls to be taken into account. The fact that there are
sub-marine currents which operate on the sounding-line. A
powerful train of circumstantial evidence goes to prove that
there is in the ocean, as in the air, a system of currents and
under-currents, one above the other, and their influence must
not be overlooked. Now, by means of the ascertained rate of des-
cent, indicated in the above figures, it can be told very nearly,
when the ball ceases to carry out the line, and when it begins
to go out in obedience to the currents ; and for this reason—
the currents sweep out the line at a uniform rate, while, for a
well-known reason, the cannon-ball drags it out .at an ever-
decreasing rate. The discovery of the action of the tun'ents
on the line brought out this other fact—that in many places,
where the ocean was supposed to be fathomless, it was after all
only of a very moderate depth. We give here a short list of
depths at which soundings have been made :
From abstract Log of U. S. Brig Dolphin. Lieutenant
Commanding, Otway H. Berryman.
October 9.—Lat. 41°, 40' N.; long. 50°, 23' W. Got
bottom with 2,600 fathoms line, two 32 lb. shot.
October 11—Lat. 40°, 36' N. ; long. 64°, 18' W. Two
32 lb. shot. Got bottom at 3,450 fathoms.
October 20. —Lat. 41°, 7' ; long. 49°, 23'. Sounded with
small sized line, two 32 lb. shot. Got bottom at 4,580
fathoms.
The above soundings were made in the North Atlantic
Ocean. The greatest depths reached are in the Atlantic, and
the places where it has been fathomed do not show it to be
more than 25,000 feet in depth, although Brooke speaks of
having reached bottom at a depth of. 7,040 fathoms in the
Indian Ocean. Many practical results have already been ob-
tained from these soundings ; the most important, of course,
being the proposed sub-marine telegraph across the Atlantic.
But the depth, and, to some extent, the shape of the occan-bcd
having been in many instances ascertained, the next question
proposed was this : how can the ocean’s bed bo brought to the
surface, that man might scan it at leisure I This question has
been answered by an ingenuous, yet simple, contrivance of the
Amen"can midshipman, Brooke. Much has already bebn re-
vealed, and much more will, e’er long, be brought to light
through this American’s ingenuity. His contrivance can, how-
-ever, be more easily represented than described. The ball used
in it is a perforated one ; through, the perforation passes a rod,
which, as soon as it touches the bottom, detaches itself from
the ball, and through having the barrel of a common quill
attached to it, it brings up particles of the bed of the ocean
where it alights.
THE CAPTAIN’S LETTER.
To the Editor.
Dear Sir —With this I enclose my weekly report, and a copy of
the abstract log of the E, A. Brvjht, which I have no doubt you will
find a necessary appendage to your valuable paper. Those will find
it especially valuable who intend to forward it to their friends at
home. It will give full information regarding the winds, weather,
&0., through which the brave and energetic sons of the British Isles
have passed to gain the famed Australian shore.—l remain, yours
Commander.
JOHN STARKEY,
obediently,
MEDICAL NOTE.
To the Editor.
Dear Sir—l regret to state that since my last report many of the
passengers between decks have been rather seriously indisposed, par-
ticularly since the cold weather set in.
I presume you are already aware that I had one death. Unfortu-
nately, the young man had a very delicate constitution, and could
not, consequently, well resist the sudden and severe attack of diarrhoea
which he had. The others, lam happy to say, are daily gaining
strength ; and among them Mrs. Silico, of whom I had at first en-
tertained a very slight hope, will, I trust, be able to enjoy the few
remaining days of our voyage.
I have a word to say to the passengers between decks. They will
kindly recollect that they will be obliged not only to keep their
berths clean, but themselves also ; as the medical officer at Melbourne
will detain for one week any party who will not pay due attention
to cleanliness. My reason for referring to this matter is simply this,
that I will be held responsible for such offences.
And now, dear Mr. Editor, I trust that this will be my last report,
and that, should I have occasion for another, I will have no occasion
to mention any very serious casualty.—l am, dear Sir, yours very
Surgeon.
J. J. M'MuLLIN,
obediently,
PRACTICAL HINTS TO EMIGRANTS.
BY THE PURSER.
Dear Mr. Editor —Allow me to avail myself of your columns to
insert the following observations. They are grounded on many years
experience, and cannot fail to prove serviceable to intending emi-
grants, as well as to our present passengers, for whom and their
friends at home, who may wish to come to Australia, they are in-
tended.
hi any passengers at the commencement of a voyage make it a prac-
tice to drink with the ship’s company, and particularly with seamen
and cooks ; which practice is often productive of great annoyance oil
shipboard, both to the ship’s officers and to passengers themselves.
In the first place, when a man gets drunk he is unlit for his duty,
and may be the cause of some serious accident or loss to all on board.
Secondly, passengers often complain of attention not being paid to
the cooking of their food, which they erroneously attribute to want
of attention on the part of the ship’s officers. They forget that'they
bring this on themselves, by soinff of them bribing the cooks to give
them extra things, or to get extra cooking performed. “*This practice
is strongly prohibited by the owners of the ship in their instructions
to passengers, and is calculated to cause annoyance to the great body
of the passengers who do not practice it. Those know it is not right,
and suffer the loss of many of their comforts rather than become tale-
bearers. But such, instead of laying the blame on their fellowq.'..s-
sengers, ascribe it to the management of the ship’s passenger depart-
ment, in place of on those men who wrong them by this improper
system of bribery, so injurious in its effects.
Passengers to Australia are always carefully looked after ; and if
they did not practice the system of bribery to cooks, would never
find any difficulties, save those which naturally arise from variable
weather. Those who have once crossed the seas can afford. the best
information on this, and all other subjects, to their friends, respecting'
■ their wants and comforts ; and, therefore, I feel it my duty to afford
them the benefit'of my experience in these “practical hints.”
. In respect of wearing apparel something may be said. As the
passage is attended with heat and cold, they should make the neces-
sary arrangements for light and warm clothing. This, and any other
material which they may require for daily use, should be stowed away
in packages appropriate to their berths , as luggage can only be had
access to once a month, and cleanliness is'always strictly enforced.
Washing of the person, or of clothes, or hanging wet clothes any-
Where between decks, is strongly prohibited. Passengers are not
aware of the danger of indulging in this practice, as it tends to pro-
duce sickness, which is always so serious on ship-board. As yet wo
have had very little ; however, it proved fatal to one friend amongst
us. Many of the passengers believe that it is caused by the diet.
This is a mistaken idea. Why should diet, on which they have lived
for sixty days, cause this sudden change t It is true that doctors
differ and lawyers disagree ; but let them differ as they may, one


thing is certain, that much depends on the passengers themselves as
regards then- health. Cleanliness, exercise in the open air, and a
cheerful disposition, will create an appetite for food, and hunger is
good sauce for food of all kinds.
This is the eleventh time I have passed these latitudes, and
gone further south. I have,- X may state, invariably found
more or less sickness or death. In one instance I have seen as many
as fourteen deaths in one ship, and have heard of as many as seventy
occuring in another, which caused a detention of twenty-five days in
quarantine on her arrival in port. This I believe to be caused by a
want of proper attention to cleanliness, and by the weather, at the
season of the year when dense fogs last two or three weeks. These
causes I think produce sickness in ships as well ns on shore; for it.
is frequent in foreign parts of the world, where those heavy fogs lie
over marshy lauds. A foul pestilential vapour may be created on
ship-board, as well as from a marsh or swamp. For instance, washing
in a close room, and hanging tho cloti.es up to dry in the same room
is very unhealthy, and productive of much danger. Where so many
are breathing the same air in one room close and confined, between
decks, it becomes foggy, foul and pestilential. There is no greater
feeder of illness than damp or wet clothes, in such a place particularly,
as the passages with the doors and hatches arc kept shut against the
inclemency of the weather. They forget that damp clothes are
dangerous, and find fault with the officers for preventing the evil and
keeping proper ventilation.
I would also caution passengers against carrying money on their
persons, or having any valuable articles loose about them, as thieves
find their way on ship-board, as well as honest people, and are quite
as clever there as on shore.
E. WILLIAMS.
LAND HO!
Where away ? Eight a-head, Sir.
A sensation such as words cannot express, passes through the breast
of the weary traveller at the sound of such words as the above. All
eyes are instantly directed towards the point indicated by the man at
the look-out. The unpractised eye of the landsman, however, cannot
see it as soon as the quick eye of a sailor. Show a landsman a fog
hank, and he will mistake it for land, hut the mariner who is accus-
tomed to such sights can easily tell the difference. In a few days
more we hope to see the land, for which well nigh four hundred of us
are bound. What a variety of meetings there will he when brothers
greet sisters, wives husbands, parents children, and lovers the loved
ones, who for long have been separated from them by 14,000 miles of
sea. Old ocean never wafted sweeter chimes across bis aged breast,
than those first words of greeting w'ill be. And again, what Joy
and gladness that will be which all will feel at having passed safely
through the dangers of the deep. Every heart will overflow witli all
good and kind feelings. All animosities will be entirely fol'gottcn in
the Joy of that one moment. Hitherto, the voyage has been a
pleasant one, and the weather all through has been like a stammer
breeze, when contrasted with what I have seen, for which we ought
all to feel most thankful to a kind Providence for his watchful care
over us. Ships which have come this way have often lost passengers
by scores, but up to the present we have had but two deaths, and
one poor lad who went overboard. Let us hope that they arc now
gone to a happier world, where all their troubles are over, and where
their Joy will be greater than ours when we hear the shout of “ land
right a-head.”
THOMES AINGE.
“ Breathes there a man with soul so dead,
As never to himself hath said,
This is ray own, my native land. I”—Scott.
Irishmen and Eetaow Passengers—
In commenting upon tire present unhappy position of our
country, I hope you will coincide in my opinion that nothing
is embodied herein which should bo hurtful to the feelings of
any one, in this our happy community.
In times gone by Ireland could exhibit as brave and warlike
sons as auy nation that ever raised her head freed from the
yoke of thraldom. Now how stands our country 1 Alas ! you
know too well. Sorrow', famine, and oppression have bereft
her of the last remaining prop of her miserable existence, in
the persons of her banished sons, w r ho fled from their friends,
their parents, their children, their homes, and their fatherland,,
to seek a refuge among strangers —aye to seek an asylum of
the foreigner, from the galling yoke of thraldom. But you,
young man, may say, “ does she not nurture in her unfortunate
bosom some as brave as ever trod her soil in the days of her
proudest glory 1” She does, she still can boast a few' as brave
and patriotic hearts as any other land, despite her sufferings ;
yes, tho’ rejected, scorned, condemned, and despised of those
who should blush because of the misery they have effected,
and should shudder to contemplate the shattered remnants of
that mournful ruin. Oh ! Ireland, can it be a consolation to
you to know that you are loved, pitied, and respected by other
lands —your sisters in adversity 1 Alas ! no it only aggravates
your misery. My country, it is true, can still boast a few
honoured sons, but what docs it avail her 1 Unhappy country !
far, far better had it been for her had she been bereft of all.
No painful reminiscences would then arise in her wretched
bosom, no son-owing after her alien sons, no participation in
the sorrows of her remaining children. When all is gone, she
then may sink for ever in oblivion, unnoted and unknown.
But my dear, dear countrymen, when was Ireland a nation,
when happy, when blessed 1 I remember not, nor do you, nor
should we care to remember the time when such sad, painful,
and harrowing feelings are so closely connected with its memory.
But could the spirits of our ancestors arise from their lonely,
dark and bloody graves, they alone might recount such deadly
and inhuman deeds as must necessarily cause the heart to
cease its palpitation, the blood to freeze, and the spirit to
shrink honor stricken and astounded.
Has she any hope now 1 Some of course may suggest she
has ; and why 1 Because you are here, on the rolling ocean,
with the fond expectation of shortly reaching the wealthy
shores of the rich far-off Australia—there to forget, perhaps
for ever, your country and your home. If such there be
among the sons of Erin’s Isle, I say shame upon him. He is
unworthy the esteem, the love, the confidence of his country-
men and fellow-passengers, and unworthy of the name of
Irishman. In the words of the “ Last Minstrel,” he
“ Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
And, doubly dying, shall go down
To the vile dust from whence he sprung,
Unwept, unhonoured, and unsung. ”
Excuse me, countrymen, if I have hurt the feelings of auy
of you. I did not say we had any such on ship board; —I
said perhaps, —and then, perhaps, we have not. If so, I say
to you (in a certain souse of the word) we are truly happy in
having no degenerate son to his fallen country ; no base syco- N
pliant that would sell his friends, his home, his country, for
gold. No vile brother that would hang his head and blush
with shame, when insultingly styled by the noble, the glorious,
the immortal epithet of Irishman .
But the time is fast approaching, my countrymen, when we
shall separate in the land of the stranger ; perhaps never more
to meet again in this world. If such be the case, I would
exhort you to be kindly disposed to the stranger, to assist •
your countrymen in distress, and to persevere in that undying
love of your country known to Irishmen alon'd! And when-
ever your thoughts revert to the many pleasant hours we
have spent in mutual friendship on board tho Elizabeth Ann
Bright, I beseech of you to offer up a fervent prayer for the
eternal happiness of the kind and generous-hearted CT.wtain
Starkey. So now farewell, and should I ever meet again, after
parting in Melbourne, any one here present,--the descendant
of my country, no matter what his creed as an Irishman,—we
will clasp our hands in fervour, imploring Heaven to pity and
forgive the oppressor of our once happy and glorious Isle.—
P. O. H.
Believe me to be, dear Countrymen, yours, Arc.-
ORIGINAL POETRY.—LAMENT.
(By J. B. P. F. and T. M. for their unfortunate friend and com-
panion, who was drowned by falling from the bulwarks of the E, A,
Bright.)
Let the friends of poor Hans, who are far, far away , •
For their ill-fated comrade let fall a sad tear ;
Ah ! they knew not the moment, the hour, or the day
That he died without winding sheet, candle, or bier.


No friends gathered round him, no mother drew nigh
To hear the sad moan of his last dying breath,
Save his three loving comrades, who, with heart-broken sigh,
Will ever lament his premature death.
Oh ! his dearly loved mother, how sad must she be !
To lose in his youth, in his health, in his prime,
Her fondly loved son ; and alas, too, that she
Knew nought of his sad fate, knew nought of the time.
His memory we’ll cherish wherever we go,
His name is engraven on our very heart’s core ;
They are knawed by a canker worm—painfully so ;
Much pleasure or comfort we’ll never know more.
Good-bye dearest comrade—a painful adieu,
You hear us no more, ah ! we know it too well;
0 ! oft in our dream you do haunt us, ’tis true ;
Good-bye dearest comrade—for ever, farewell.
THE BEARDLESS LOVER.
It love’s young dream be over,
Then moustache and beard, adieu ;
Oh, dearest, dearest Sarah
To Buck I must leave you.
And in the stranger clime I’ll roam,
Quite destitute of beard or pluck ;
Tho’ soon I’ll hope to think of shaving,
When you are Mrs. Buck.
But should love and hope be over,
Where, alas, then shall I fly ;
A moustacheless, beardless lover,
I’ll have nought to do but die.
E. S. F. R.
LINES.
’Twas evening on the E. A. Bright , beneath the moon’s bright beam
We saw a sheet of phosphorous light, that glittered on the stream,
And every splash our rudder made was wondrous to behold,
For every bubble of the wave appeared like glittering gold.
J. R. C.
ANSWERS TO CHARADES. — 1 Captain Starkey; 2 Unequivocally.
CHARADES.
1 Why are fowls the most economical things farmers can keep ?
2 I went to the woods, and there I found it,
When I found it sat down to lock for it,
The more I looked for it, the less I liked it,
And I carried it home with me because I could not find it.
3 In which ship and in what capacity do young ladies like to engage
VARIETIES.
The first thing a man takes in his life is milk ; the last is his bieri
A bachelor has left a hoarding-house, in which was a number of
old maids, l)ccause of the miserable Jair set before him.
Whose best works are most trampled upon ? A shoemaker’s—
because good shoes last longer than bad ones.
LOCAL NEWS.
Concert by the Military.— Yesterday evening another grand
concert was given by the Military Glee Class. The entertainment
was an unusually protracted one, and kept a large audience highly
amused for the whole time. The proceedings throughout did infinite
credit to the varied talent of the soldiers on board. We are sure that
.every one present was astonished at the evtensive stock of wit and
humour which seemed to be in possession of the two negroes, privates
King and Ronsel. The other vocalists, Sergeant Mack, privates Shaw,
Canavan, and Somerhayes, together with the two sailors, acquitted
themselves admirably ; and no doubt this, their last entertainment,
will long remain in the recollection of the passengers. The company
separated with the usual rounds of applause ; and when at the con-
clusion it was announced that the 29th of August was the birthday of
Captain Starkey, the announcement seemed to electrify one and all,
and loud and long were the plaudits which rang in the evening air.
Death. —On the morning of Friday, the 24th inst., James Baker,
on board the E. A. Bright.
Thursday, Sept, 6, 1860.
No. 10.]
We are now about to vacate the editorial chair, which, for
ten weeks, we have so unworthily occupied. All we have to
say in extenuation _of many shortcomings is, that we honestly
tried to do our best. However, wo feel not a little gratified
because of the favor which a numerous circle of passengers
extended towards our modest “ Chronicle, ” Let us hope
that when the eyes of those we love at home arc bent upon
its pages, they will not wear an over-critical 100k —for often
were they penned when the commotion above and beneath
sent paper and ink, and tho writer to boot, flying in every
direction. But we are little inclined to be talking in these
last words about our editorial self. We wish to speak with
our readers about our able staff of contributors—those who
were the oracles of our little community—who made and
unmade reputations with a dash of their pens, but all tho
wliile modestly kept themselves in the back ground. We
wish to give thus publicly our thanks to Mr. Buck, whose
spirited pen was ever at our command, and at all times wel-
comed by our readers. Of Mr. O’Hara, again, we must say
that he was to us as a right hand or a right eye. He is an
untamed colt, fresh from the wilds of Connaught, but he has
got true metal in hini; and if the country to which he is
going—willing to work—only knows, as well at we did, how to
take work from him, he will make it his debtor, and do honor
to old Erin, towards which the pulsations of his heart throb so
strongly. To Mr. Bergen, again, we and all our readers are
under a. debt of gratitude for the many able papers which have
come from his practical pen. To the Purser we also give
thanks for his valuable series. But there is a host of others
whose communications have enriched, our pages, to whom we
return, in this our last word with them, our heartiest thanks.
While there are services of yet another kind, for which our
poor, pitiful return is thanks, thanks, thanks. Of the contri-
butions from the Captain’s pen—never once omitted —we do
not speak as we have done of any others, simply because they
are things apart, and, in value, are worth more than all
The carefully drawn up “ abstract,” so full of useful informa-
tion, is his crowning act.
And, now, we bid you, one and all, farewell. May you all
have your hopes fully realised. Eyeiy hour brings you still
nearer to the wished for country. That years long and happy
may be before you all is the last fervent wish of him who will
never again address you as an
AN EDITOR.
OUR VOYAGE AND ITS AMUSEMENTS.
BY THE PURSER.
I find it impossible to let this voyage end without making
a few closing remarks. I have sailed with many thousands of
passengers, In various ships, from time to time, and I can truly
assert that the present passage in the E.. A. Bright is one of
the most comfortable I ever experienced, not only from the
orderly demeanour of the passengers themselves, but from the
care, attention, and ability of our excellent commander. Next
to the captain and his officers, I feel it my duty, as it is my
happiness, to place on record a few of the benefits derived by
us all, from the gentlemen who so ably contributed their time,
and devoted their talents to our service. When all have acted
so nobly, it may seem invidious to particularize, but I cannot
in justice pass over the services of the military officers, who
were incessant in promoting concerts, and amusements of all
lends. But above all, there is one gentleman amongst us, the
Rev. Mr. Scott, whose services in every way have been most
cheerfully rendered, and who is deserving of our lasting thanks.
Not only his own time and talents have been placed at our
disposal for amusement, but they have been most valuable in the
way of instruction. He has ever been found most zealous in
comforting the sick and the healthy by preaching and incul-
cating the precepts of the Gospel, to all who were willing to
benefit by his ministrations. He has ever been found first in
all rational amusements, and in promoting harmony, which has
The Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle .


earned the approbation of us all. In addition, he took in hand,
and most ably carried out, the arduous duty of editing the
E. A. Bright “ Chronicle.” The editorial chair is at all times
a difficult seat to fill, but more so in this case ; where from the
dearth of matter, and the necessity of preventing displeasure,
or causing annoyance by the rejection of the contributions of
his numerous correspondents, it became a source of umvearied
and attentive care and study. His labors have been incessant,
and ho has the proud satisfaction of knowing that they are
fully appreciated.
Next to Mr. Scott, I have to mention the service of one of
our passengers, Mr. O’Hara. All through they were everything
that could be wished, ho stood forth pre-eminent. He has made
himself both active and zealous in any undertaking, whether
trivial or important, in which assistance was requisite, and for
which his talents and general ability so well qualified him. He
caused the Sabbath-day to be observed by all the Roman
Catholics, by attending to read the service of the day for them.
He also instituted evening prayers, and had them regularly
carried out, which reflects great credit on him. He also ren-
dered groat services to the “ Chronicle,” in a literary capacity..
His writings in it will speak for themselves, and are sure to be
appreciated by all who read them.
Of the good wishes and kind feelings of my brother officers,
for these gentlemen, I can speak with confidence, and not only
of the officers, but of the whole ship’s company, who join
with me in wishing that they may live long in health
and prosperity. And I can truly say that all the pas-
sengers on board the E. A. Bright carry with them into
their new home our most sincere regard, respect and
esteem. We have had little trouble with any of them, nor
has anything occurred during the progress of our voyage of a
nature calculated to cause us any annoyance, save some acts of
theft; but, as these may be the act of a few, or even of one
person, it is not of such a nature as to cast a stigma upon
others. Wishing all on board success in their future career,
and length of days to enjoy, I remain, dear Mr. Editor,
yours, &c.,
P. W. W.
OUR FUTURE PROSPECTS.
THE LAND OF OUR ADOPTION AND THAT OF OUR NATIVITY
“ The world shall follow in the track that wC are going ;
The Star of the Empire glitters in the south.”
Being now, by the favor of God, and the steadiness and
ability of our commander and officers, near the close of our
voyage, we venture to intrude on your columns for the last
time.
' That the merits of Captain Starkey are fully appreciated,
the unanimous addresses presented to him by all our passen-
gers of every class, fully prove. They bear incontestable
evidence of the feeling which all entertain for him, and most
deservedly so, for no man could have acted more judiciously,
or performed his duties more ably than he has done. Next to
the captain we arc indebted to our worthy kind-hearted
purser, whose unwearied attention to our comfort, health,
and interest, has never been surpassed by any officer in his
situation. Proof of this will be found, not only in the affable
and zealous manner in which he discharged his duty to us
during the voyage, but likewise in the letters which appeared
in-'the Chronicle, under the head of “ Hints to Emigrants,”
'.All combined, fully deserves the respect and esteem which he
has so justly earned, and in which he is held.
As regards our future prospects in the land of our adoption,
much, if not all, depends on ourselves. The offer of a new'
life is now before us, and almost to all men, and it has the
effect of sobering their judgment, and giving a higher tone to
their views, as respects the world and its relations. Indeed,
such circumstances, the world assumes a totally different
aspect from what it did. It will be no longer a theatre for
mere personal enjoyment, but a stage for the serious and per-
severing discharge of duty. No longer the fleeting painted
vision of the hour, but, as regards ourselves and others, a
grave and weighty place for toil, for either competence or com-
mon existence. All men do not possess strength of character ;
but what they clearly comprehend should not be fully embraced,
but vigorously earned out. Once thoroughly persuaded, and
once resolved, our persuasions should remain, and the resolu-
tions built upon them should not be made to falter. Let us
act on this principle, and with God’s blessing, our future
career in our new home will be successful, and our descendants
rise to rank and honor, in which they may be in the full en-
joyment when, in the words of Macauley ; —“ Some traveller
from New Zealand will stand on the broken arch of London
bridge to sketch the ruins of St. Paul’s.”
When we contemplate our future destiny, and look upon the
many vicissitudes attendant on the ocean before us, I have no
fears for the result. Englishmen, Scotchmen, and Irishmen
have always been proverbial for bravery, honor, and endurance.
The specimen of Englishmen on board the E. A. Bright would
not shame their fathers ; they are of that stamp and mould
that constitute- good colonists, the possession of which enabled
their fathers to colonize every land, make their name respected
on every shore, and their flag to wave in triumph on every sea.
Of the representatives of Scotland it is only necessary to ob-
serve, that they possess all the characteristics which adorn their
countrymen, being active, intelligent, and respectable ; men
who will do honor to their country in any land, as did their
fathers in their own; and no men had better reason to pride
themselves on their prowess. The Roman eagle which soared
in triumph over the world then known, flew screaming and
bleeding from Cromarty, and the valour of the “ Scottish cir-
cle deep,” overcome the proudest chivalry on the field of Ban-
nockburn. They are the men to colonize a country and guard
its rights.
How shall I speak of the sons of old Erin—“ that land
so blessed by God and cursed by man 1” Oppressive laws,
rampant tyranny, and heartless oppression have crushed her
vitals for centuries, until not a spot on which an Irishman can
place his foot on the green hills or valleys of his country,
which has not been watered by the best blood of her sons, shed
in defence of religion and freedom. Yet, her people present
to the admiring gaze of surrounding nations the proud spectacle
of having achieved, by moral force, that independence which she
failed to obtain by arms—full and unqualified emancipation
from the galling chains of seven centuries. Her energies so
long cramped, have now expanded ; her sous have now the
power to emigrate ; and from their hard life of toil, and patient
endurance of hard sorrows, are fit to compete with those of any
other nation. They possess all the qualities necessary for good
colonists ; and it is only necessary to look at those now on
board, to prove my assertion, and as the love of country is very
strong in Irishmen, I feel convinced that the Elizabeth Ann
Bright will land on the Australian shores a body of men who
will be prized by its inhabitants.
Answers to Correspondents.— We are sorry to be under
the necessity of refusing so many excellent papers. The
crowded state of our columns is the only reason for so doing.
CORRESPONDENCE.
-—"Ship Elizabeth Ann Bright, Birdcage Walk, Sep. 6, 1860.
Dear Mr, Editor.—The report of Tuesday evening’s enter-
tainment having been read over to me (for altho’ I speak well,
I am linable to read), I observe you omitted, inadvertently
no doubt, to make any allusion to iny speech on that eventful


night. I shall therefore deem it an especial favor if you will
kindly insert the accompanying abstract in your valuable
Chronicle. I will ever remain, yours affectionately,
POLLY HOPKINGS.
POLLY'S FAREWELL SPEECH.
Kind friends, before I leave the When off my perch I fairly
ship, dropp’d,
Permit mo to express, So loud they called my name.
The grateful feelings of a bird, Qn peepin „ out J thought I
For all your tenderness. spied
Allow poor Polly then, to give, An old familiar face,
Her thanks and blessings to. Whose happy physiognomy
For all the good things she en- I dearly love to trace.
joyed, My friend, upon his legs had got,
Whilst sojourning with you. '|'o try to make a speech,
’Tis true, I sometimes did get But all that he could utter then,
vex’d Was, “ Polly, will you
With those who took delight, screech ?”
To stroke my back, and pull my appeal was out of place,
tail And I had had no feast—
Enough to make me bite . p would not thus be ridiculed —
But, ere I bid you all farewell, . So call’d him “ dirty beast 1”
A story I’ll relate, Adieu, good friends I I must
Of took place the otiier retire
r , Within my narrow range,
In our Saloon of State And hope, some day, to meet
A party met, to celebrate, again,
Our worthy Captain’s fame; Dear Messrs. Roche and Aingo,.
To the Editor of the Elizabeth Ann Bright Chronicle.
Sept. sth, 1860.
Dear Sir, —I beg to congratulate you on the great success
of your valuable Chronicle ; its contents will be pondered
over by the dear ones we have left behind, with great interest.
They will probably be sitting by their own firesides enjoying
both the comfort of the cheerful blaze and the news of your
paper.
I regret that all readers will not ponder over its columns
with delight, though I hope the majority will find in its pages
no cause of regret. I allude to the dreadful accident, and to
the deaths you have had occasion to notice on board our good
ship. Sad must be the feelings of that poor mother whose
son has been cut off in the beginning of his days. Through
your columns, dear Mr. Editor, I would beg to console the
bereaved ones, by the hope that though he is lost in this
world, he may be happy in the next. In conclusion I must
add, that I am anxiously awaiting the printing of your inte-
resting paper, being sure that in that state it will do high
credit to all your labors. I am, Sir, yours truly,
THOMES ROCHE,
LOCAL NEWS.
Address to the Captain.
Tuesday was a day of days. It stands like a bright, glit-
tering jewel in a dark back-ground. About half-past two the
passengers, for the most part in holiday attire, and the soldiers
in review order, assembled on deck to do honor to one, whom
all on board delighted to honor— Captain John Starkey.
The passengers of the saloon were seated in front of tho
poop. Tho military kept guard around them in a circle, and
all on board clustered round. Expectation was on tiptoe,
when Mr. Scott came forward and read the following
Address to
Captain John Starkey,
By the Saloon Passengers on board the
Australian Clipper,
Elizabeth Ann Bright,
During the run of 76 days between the ports of Liverpool
and Melbourne,
la tendering to you, dear Sir, the following address we are
moat anxious that you should not regard it in the light of a
merely formal leave-taking, but that you should consider it as
the genuine utterance of heartfelt appreciation and respect.
We have now, for more than two months enjoyed tho pri-
vilege of close and uninterrupted intercourse with you, and at
the conclusion of our voyage we feel that words can but
feebly express the sentiments which we cherish towards you.
Your kind and courteous demeanour, your manly and honest
bearing, your unswerving integrity, your unceasing desire to
promote the health, happiness, and comfort of all on ship-
board, have called forth, times without number, the approba-
tion and admiration of us all.
The way, also, in which you have discharged the onerous
and highly responsible duties of commander, have proved you
to be just that one under whose guidance those in our circum-
stances would wish to meet the dangers and difficulties which
necessarily surround a long sea voyage.
Your thorough proficiency and experience, your care, your
watchfulness, your attention to duty, your anxiety, never
flagging when danger was imminent; the continual presence,
we say, of these, and such like qualities, gave us, from an early
period in our voyage an assurance of safety which dispelled
everything like fear. On leaving the Mersey we were in good
hopes of making a rapid and comfortable passage. We need
only say that these anticipations have been most amply
verified.
The Elizabeth Ann Bright, by the rapid run which she has
made—for it has been rapid when we take into account the
light and adverse winds she has endured all through—has
proved herself to be one of the swiftest, as she is in build and
model one of the finest of clippers on the Australian line, and
it will only be necessary to repeat such voyages, in order to
place both the ship and its commander in the foremost ranks.
Allow us, then, on leaving you, to express the hope that
every success may await you in that profession which you have
so much at heart, and which you are so eminently fitted to
adorn. And, in fine, may your life be long spared, and may
it be as happy as we are confident it will ever be conscientious,
upright and honorable.
(Signed) James Scott.
C. W. Boulton, M.D., Staff Surgeon.
Mary Poulton.
E. C. Brooke, 40th Eegiment.
Mrs. Brooke.
J. J. M'Mdllin, Medical Officer.
Erancisca Pion.
Edward Toseland, 40th Eegiment.
James Wells, Solicitor.
Mr. Sergy then read the following address by the Inter-
mediate passengers to Captain John Starkey, on board the
Elizabeth Ann Bright, at the end of a 76 days’ voyage to
Melbourne :
Dear Sir —We the undersigned beg to address you, in
order to express our great satisfaction as to the kind and
generous treatment which we have received at your hands;
for tho comfort which has ever reigned amongst us, and for
the strict order and punctuality with which this good ship
has been governed under your most experienced command.
We also beg to express our most sincere thanks for all the
goodness you have shown, and for the faithful and able man-
ner in which you have discharged your highly responsible
duties.—We are, Sir, yours truly,
Louis Prosper Sergy Gresham Evans .
John Eichard Chambers Jane Evans
Wm. E. Chamberlain Lewis Evans
George Beamish Henry Davies
Daniel Tyson Thomas Williams
John Nicholson John Gihaour


Joseph Kendal Hugh Lillico, Jun.
John Robson Hugh Lillico, Sen.
' Andrew Lillico Georgina Lillico
Thomas Rowen Isabella Lillico
' Maths. O’Donnell Helven Lillico
' Mary Ann O’Donnell James Plunkett
Robert Taylor F. Hartman
Morgan Williams James Harper
Lewis Richards John Nicholson, Jun.
Evan Price Thomas Sweatman
Mary Price Walter Rowen
Catherine Price Thomas Roberts
Rees Price Mrs. Ariel and family
Leah Jones Margaret Gaw
Sarah Levis George Gibson
Thomas Lewis James Gaw
Richard Lewis Margaret Sullivan
Lewis Lewis Sarah Jobbin
John Lewis James Stephenson
Joan Levis H. J. Stephenson
Mr. O’Hara then read the following address, by the steer-
age passengers on board the E. A. Bright, to Captain John
Starkey, at the expiration of their voyage from Liverpool to
Melbourne :
Dear Sir —The long-wished for time has at length ar-
rived. Our proximity to the Australian shores reminds us
of the solemn duty that, we may say, is imposed by Heaven
upon us (the undersigned) to be discharged towards you, as
a poor, yet grateful tribute, for what we have experienced at
your hands.
For your gentle benevolence, kind condescension, affable
disposition, and earnest solicitude about our health, happi-
ness, and comfort, accept, as a token of acknowledgment,
the unbounded thanks of about 200 as grateful hearts as ever
beat in man. Further, we positively assure you, that the
zealous affection invariably evinced by you toward us since
first we had the unparallelled happiness of being placed under
your parental care, is kindly, fondly, heartily reciprocated.
From a thorough knowledge of your wonted kindness, we
presume to make an allusion to your First and Second
Officers, Messrs. Reeves and Haughton. . May they long con-
tinue to persevere in the path they have chosen; and we
do not entertain the slightest doubt but they will yet ac-
quire that exalted reputation, for the obtaining of which their
kind and gentlemanly bearing has already sown the fertile
seed.
Before bidding you adieu, we again assure you that your
gentlemanly conduct, incessant kindness, brotherly affection,
and exemplary equity shall be indelibly engraven on the
“ tablet of our memory.”
Signed,
Patrick K. O’Hara Isaac Bentwick
John Doharty Robert Clarke
Henry Gillmour William Milliken
Francis O’Hara Hugh M'Carty
James M'Anuff James Lynch
William Carson Martin Nealon
Michael Brien John Golden
John M'Anuff Randolph Moella
Thomas Knox William Casey
William Moore Henry Cavery
Martin Coumane John Williams
Timothy Murphy Eliza Jane Williams
Margaret Gillmour Philip Murphy
Mrs. Fama Emma Farna
L. Keefe Theodoredo Eugenie Fama
James Kelly E M'Anuff
John H. Stevenson Lames Cahill
Thomas M'Kinty John M'Anuff
John M'Kinty MaryWulsh
William Longmoore Mary Jame Stevenson
Patrick Hamell Ellen Stevenson
William Moorhead Andrew Mair
Eliza Ferns Mary Dempsey
Bridget Martin George Sibley
Maiy Martin Mary Clasbey
Michael Byrne Kichard Connor
John Cameron Maiy Martin
Thomas Cameron Philip Geoghan
John Burgess Martin Dnrak
William Dixon Patrick Martyn
Esther Dixon ‘ James Sexton
H. W. Paul Nathaniel Lett
William Margach Richard Salmon
Alexander Kobertson James Ryder
Timothy Ryan Joseph Bastable
JohnM‘Namara Patrick Daly
John Shaughnessy Ann Elizabeth Cawthom
Martin Hunt Rebecca Lehey
Michael Harrington John Donevan
Janet Paul ' Albert Brassh
M. E. Dixon Sail Swanzuski
James Ross Benjamin Peter
George Johnstone Ciocarlli Batista
Malcolm Macintosh Margaret Allan
William Sullivan Pat Corcoran
William Martyn Fritz Fredericks
Ellen Martyn Louis Fredericks
Robert Fitzhenry Heniy Vorhear
James Kelly August! Knauss
Edward Sweeney William Rook
Joseph Logue Fritz Heineman
Patrick Turley John Boyle
Thomas Musson Garrett Neale
John Blackley John O’Brien
William Bartley Garrett Connor
Martin Morris Timothy Sheehan
Darby Ford Margaret Walsh
Robert Farmer Thomas Mangan
Mrs. Cunningham Catherine Langford
Annie M'Gowan Margaret Maher
Anna Cunningham John Connell
Jane Lemon John Lyons
James Moore David Jackson
James Reid John Doyle
Robert M'Kibbin William M'Kibbin
Andrew Kean James Joyner
Thomas Killoran Eliza Joyner
Thomas Rowen Henry Joyner
Michael Killoran Mary Anne Joyner
Thomas Cloonan Jenettc Joyner
William Ferns Michael Moses
Andrew Crclly John Miller
Julius Alport John Gunn
James Brien William Grcenbank
Robert Stewart Bridget Kelly
Peter Claffy Free Celleier
Julius Kivilecki Thomas Doud
Leopold Kempe Jeremiah Lehy
Samuel Kilchenfeld Peter Kiresk
Sergeant J. Mack then read the the following Address to
Captain John Starkey, ship E. A. Bright, at the expira-
tion of a voyage from Liverpool to Melbourne:—
Sir—We the undersigned Officers, Non-commissioned
Officers and Privates of Detachment 40th Regiment, cannot
separate with one whom we so highly appreciate, without re


turning thanks for the gentlemanly manner with which you
acted towards us during our voyage to Melbourne ; nor yet
must we forget your valuable officers, Messrs. Reeves and
Haughton, whose gentlemanly conduct and bearing have won
for them the good will of all on board the ship E. A. Bright
during the voyage to Melbourne.
It is with gratification and delight we can extol the name
of the Captain, under whose vigilant care we came so long and
tedious a voyage. We hope that God will take you under
his parental care during your travels through this life, is the
fervent prayer of the Detachment of the 40th Regiment.
(Signed)
Joseph Mack Robert Harrison
John Callaghan ' William Jay
Robert Shaw , Michael Kelly
John Keegan' ■ ' William King
William Ambrose Walter King
. John Bailey , . Patrick Lehane
Henry Blake Charles Lindsell
James Brady Edward Linehan
Richard Burnell M. M‘Malion
D. Bell James Murphy
William Coles James M‘Coy
John Heard James Matthews
John Hutchins M. M'Quire
Andrew Coleman M. Muldowney
S. Coombs John Peaton
Henry Canavan William Payne
William Crabb P. Russell
Luke Clarke • W. Rowell
John Downey John Sedley
Thomas Finnegan R. J. Sarlock
K. Fogarty J.Summerhays
Michael Grimes John Trotter
John Hooper ■ James Weal
Bernard Hughes Jamas Walsh
Charles Hayes R. Crundel Brooke, Ens.
James Henry • Edward Toseland, Ens.
Captain Starkey then,came forward and made the following
reply
“Ladies and Gentlemen —It is highly gratifying for me to
know that my conduct during our voyage to Australia has met
with your entire approval; and I consider myself very highly
honored by the valuable testimonials which you have presented
me with.
“ Whatever attention I have paid to my ship, or to the
comfort of my passengers, avas nothing more than the discharge
of my duty, in which I have been ably assisted by my officers;
and I have to thank you in their names, and in my own
behalf, for the public manner which you have chosen to express
your approval of our conduct.
I do not think that in your kind addresses you have in any
way overrated the sailing qualities of the ship I have the
honour of commanding, for hitherto she has proved herself as
noble a vessel as ever crossed the ocean ; but, owing to her
being rather deeply laden, and a succession of light winds in
the first of our voyage, her progress has been considerably
retarded.
Ladies and gentlemen, in conclusion, may you all meet with
true friends, and every success in the land of your adoption.
And to you, soldiers of the 40th, I say may you ever
sustain the character for honor and bravery which lias hitherto
distinguished your gallant regiment in many a well.-fought
field ; and may you never forget those glorious isles that gave
you birth, is the fervent prayer of your obedient servant,
JOHN STARKEY.
SUPPER IN HONOR OF CAPTAIN JOHN STARKEY.
On the evening of Tuesday the passengers of the saloon gave
a supper to Capt. Starkey, in testimony of their high esteem.
Dr. Poulton, staff surgeon, ably discharged the duties of the
chair. The company sat down about 7 o’clock to a repast
which was served in the elegant and substantial style for
which Mr. Roche is so deservedly celebrated on board the
E. A. Bright.
The cloth being removed, the chairman proposed the usual
loyal and patriotic toasts, which were received with all the
honors.
After tliis, the chairman gave the toast of the evening in
the following eloquent and appropriate remarks : —Ladies and
gentlemen—lt is my privilege and pleasing duty to propose
the toast of the evening. It is one which requires no preface,
no words of mine to commend it to your enthusiasm and ap-
plause. Still I cannot allow the present opportunity to pass
without saying a few words, however feebly and inadequately
expressed, in testimony of the sincere regard entertained and
felt by us all towards our highly esteemed and worthy com-
mander, Captain Starkey. We are now drawing near the end
of a long voyage, and should we reach our destination as we
hope to do in the course of a few more days, I think it pi ay
be considered a very successful one, not only for ourselves,
but also for the owners, as well as for the officers of this
magnificent ship. And when we shall be safely landed on
Australia’s shores, what will be the sensations arising in our
breasts ! Will not the heart of one and all swell with grati-
tude and teem with feelings of emotion and delight to him
who, under the guiding and protecting hand of Providence,
has conducted us in safety through the perils of the deep, and
brought us to the haven of our cherished hopes and expec-
tations 1
I am sure you will coincide with me in saying that we have
evciy reason to be thankful in having had the good fortune to
sail under such an experienced, enlightened and able seaman
as Captain John Starkey !
And I say also, without fear of contradiction, that our good
and noble ship, the E. A. Bright , is one of the finest and
swiftest vessels that ever-ploughed the ocean, and that her
qualifications as a sailer are not to be suqiasscd, save only by
the zeal, skill, energy, and ability of her justly proud com-
mander.
All honour and success to Captain Starkey, may his career
be prosperous, his life long and happy, and may the partner of
his choice be long spared to share the blessings which we wish
him to enjoy.
The toast was received with the utmost enthusiasm. Cap-
tain Starkey rose to respond. He said—Mr. Chairman, Ladies
and Gentlemen, allow me to return my sincere thanks for your
kindness. I can assure you Ladies and Gentlemen, that it
affords me great pleasure to know that I have given general
satisfaction to you all. And this I shall always endeavour to
do during your stay on board. Most of the Ladies and
Gentlemen present arc unused to a sea life, and the many
inconveniences attending it; but lam proud to say, that
whenever you have met with any, you have borne them with
a most cheerful and patient spirit, for which I return you my
sincere thanks. Captain Starkey then proceeded to say—
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have a toast to propose this
evening, to which I am sure you will all heartily respond—it
is that of our worthy Chairman, Dr. Poulton, who I am sure
has won from us all, both in his professional and private
character, our highest admiration and esteem.
The toast being given, the Chairman thanked the company
in manner characterised by much feeling. He then called on
Mr. Toseland of the 40th Rcgt.
Mr. Toseland said, Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen,


you are all aware that public speaking is not my vocation, you
will therefore excuse mo if I do not propose my toast with any
lengthened remarks. Not the less heartily, however, do I call
upon you to fill a bumper to the able and amiable officers of
the Elizabeth Ann Bright, Messrs. Reeves and Haughton.
The hearty manner in which this was responded to, showed
how much the above-named officers had gained the good will
of all present.
Mr. Reeves, in reply said, Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gen-
tlemen, I rise to return thanks for the highly flattering manner
in which you have drunk my health, and that of my brother
officer, Mr. Haughton. We also wish to express our sincere
gratitude to you all for the kindness and consideration which
we have received at your hands throughout the passage. And
we also trust that all happiness and prosperity await you all
when you arrive at Melbourne, This is our sincere wish.
Mr. Wells then rose, and in a lengthened discourse related
his professional connection with the military ; and (also the
hope whicli he cherished after having realised his fortune in
Australia, of being united to one whom he had reason to believe
. was related to the military, one of the loveliest, fairest, and
most angelic of beings. Indeed this conquest, achieved in a
remote portion of Her Majesty’s dominions, he considered as
one of the proudest triumphs of which any mortal was capable)
after referring in flattering terms to the soldierly qualities and
gentlemanly bearing of Messrs. Brooke and Toseland, whom he
was proud to call his friends, hc'proposed the toast of “ The
military.” It was drunk 'with all the honors.—Mr. Brooke
responded to the toast of the military.
He said : —Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, I have
to thank you most heartily, in behalf of myself and Mr. Tose-
land, for the manner in which you have drunk the toast I have
the honor of responding to. I will not trespass long on your
patience, as I do not think that public speaking is generally
considered one of the accomplishments of soldiers. I may
say, however, that the British soldier will ever do his duty, in
whatever clime fortune may place him. Before sitting down,
'allow me to propose another toast—one .which is always drunk
with enthusiasm—“ The Ladies.” I am sure that a fitter
proposer than myself might have been found, but I trust no
warmer friend of the fair sex. Mr. Wells responded.
.Captain Starkey next rose, and said :—I have another toast
to propose : “ The health and prosperity of our friend, Mr.
Scott.” He has been the means, we know, of conciliating all
parties on board, and of preventing many disturbances by
his kindly bearing. Indeed I cannot find words to impress
how much I have been indebted to Mr. Scott throughout the
whole of the voyage.
Mr. Scott, in reply, said he felt flattered by the'way in
which Captain Starkey spoke of him. He would not soon
forget the Elizabeth Ann Bright, its worthy commander, its
officers, and many of his fellow passengers. Not a few of his
most valued friendships, he hoped, would date from this
connection. The voyage would be remembered by him as one
of the events of his life.
Before sitting down, Mr. Scott Said—l, too, have a toast to
propose, and I give it not the less sincerely, although I pledge'if
in cold water. No words of mine arc needed to commend to
you one whom all admires, Dr. M'Mullin, the medical officer
of the ship. As a gentleman his amiability and rectitude have
won for him a host of admirers;, and as a professional man his
acquirements are of a very high order. But it is chiefly as the
medical officer of the ship that I have at present to speak of
him. Now, ladies and gentlemen, perhaps I have had better
opportunities than some of you for knowing how he is appre-
ciated in this capacity; and I can say there are few greater
favorites on ship-board than he is. And we do not wonder at
this when we consider his punctuality and unwearied attention
to duty. Many and hearty have been the tributes which I
have heard paid to his skill and kindness by those who %vere
under his care ; and I have heard passengers say, that to him
they -were indebted for their lives.
We all honor the medical profession. I, for one, own to an
appreciation amounting almost to an idolatry of the skilful
practitioner. Through his act the age of miracles is pro-
longed. Under his more than magic touch, the blind are made
to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, and, I may even say,
the dead are raised to life. I am'sorry that Dr. M'Mullin is not
with us, owing to one of those exigencies to which flesh is heir.
In Ids absence on professional duty, I shall take the liberty
of associating with this toast the name of our respected
chairman, Dr. Poulton. He, we all know, was in professional
attendance on the army in the Crimea. How, of all the
brave deeds which that disastrous war called forth, I can
very well remember that nothing called out more heartily
the nation’s gratitude than the heroic and self-sacrificing devo-
tion of the medical staff. I propose the health of Dr.
M'Mullin, coupled with the name of Dr. Poulton.
It was received with all the honors. Dr. Poulton corro-
borated all that Mr. Scott had said. Dr. M'Mullin in all
respects is most amiable and gentlemanly; and as a medical
man, I can candidly bear testimony to Ids acquirements and
zeal.
Various other toasts were then given, including the healths
of Mr. Toseland, Mr. Williams, our allies the French, <fcc., Ac.
The company separated, highly pleased with the eveidng’s
entertainment.
ADDRESS OF THE STEERAGE AND INTERMEDIATE PAS-
SENGERS ON BOARD THE ELIZABETH ANN BRIGHT ,
TO MR. RICHARD WILLIAMS, “PURSER,” AT THE
COMPLETION OF THEIR VOYAGE FROM LIVERPOOL
TO MELBOURNE.
“Sib—We, the undersigned passengers of the Elizabeth Ann
Bright, at the conclusion of our voyage, feel that in duty bound we
arc necessitated to discharge our simple yet feeling debt of lasting
gratitude to you for the righteous and impartial manner in which you
have discharged the various duties in connection with the responsible
office you have held. And we hope that those who may be under the
necessity of following in our track, may have the enviable happiness
of sailing with a “ purser " who will ever attend to their claims with
such kindness, impartiality, gentleness, and honesty.
“ We further hope that those employers who will have the comfort
of their passengers at heart, may secure the invaluable services of so
efficient an officer.
“ It would gratify us much if you would accept this as a poor ac-
knowledgement of our gratitude for the kindness with which you
have ever discharged your duties towards us. ”
Signed by the
Steerage and Intermediate Passengers.
ADDRESS TO MR. WILLIAMS, “Purser” of the ship Elizabeth
Ann Bright, at the expiration of a voyage from Liverpool to Mel-
bourne, by the detachment of the 40th Regiment.
“Sir—The time for separation is nigh at hand, and can we leave
the good ship to which you belong without saying one word to you.
By us you have been respected in all possible manner, and why should
it not be so ? Since our embarking on board the Elizabeth Ann Bright,
we found in you a generous and affectionate officer, honest and up-
right in all your dealings. Ever fond, looking to our comforts and
wants, which, thank God, since wo came aboard this good ship we
have been comfortable, happy, and well contented. We only hope,
should any of our friends and relations be persuaded to come so long
and tedious a voyage, we would all say come in the Elizabeth Ann
Bright, for your cleanliness and comfort will be attended to by Mr.
Williams ; we would say that you arc one designed by Providence to
fulfil the responsible and arduous duties that are to be performed
during so long a voyage.
“ We hope that God will assist you to carry to the end the honor-
able profession your name attains. We also hope that God will be
your guard, guide, and protection through life, is the fervent suppli-
cation of the detachment 40th Regiment.”
1 Signed by the Soldiers of the 40th Detachment.
Ship E. A. Bright, Sept. 7th, 1860.
