

AS d Ce Bo, Fleet $t I
noon, e.c
1 1 «OOT
THE
BARRIER
SILVER AND TIN FIELDS
18 8 8,
WITS! .A.
PRICE-ONE SHILLIN G.
TV: St
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.


3E USE JE 3 SH O * fiS
STEAM
STEAM
WASHING
MACHINE.
WASHING
MACHINE.
PATENT.
This Machine was invented but a few m
has met with an extraordinary demand.
Machine yet introduced. The labour re
old can work it with ease, and the speed
The clothes to be washed by this Machi
over-night, the only preparation necessa
while the fire is being lit and the water
rubbing in the process of washing by thi
last longer than those washed in the ord
To Mr. 8. Hardlky.
Dear Sir.—We have had your Washing Machine,
and have given it a trial, and find that it gives very
great satisfaction.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) E. A. GLANYILLB.
Wright Street, Adelaide, October 5, 1887.
Mr. S Bardlet.
Dear Sir.—The Hardley’s Patent Washing Machine
I purchased from you on your recommendation, has
given complete satisfaction. Mrs. Wright desires me
to say that having given the machine a fair trial, she
believes that it is all you have represented it to be.
The saving of time, labour, and fuel effected, and the
satisfactory manner in which the work is done, should
gain for your -patent an fertehsive sale.
Yours faithfully.
7 /- rrrr:-r;- '(Signed) W. WRIGHT.
North Parade, North Unley. October 11,18 37.
KtissßS. A Simpson_4 Son.
I itrite these few lines to you to let you know that 1
am well pleased with your fiardley Washing Machine,
and that I have done A day’s washing in half a day
for a fortnight’s wash, I have done two day’s washing
with it, and am well pleased with its work.
I remain, yours truly,
(Signed) A. HITCH.
Pinda, November 14, 1887.
months since in New Zealand, where it
d. We believe it is the Best Washing
required is nominal, a child nine years
speed with which it washes is marvellous.
Machine do not require boiling or soaking
necessary being to let them remain in water
3 water boiled in the boiler. As there is no
this Machine, clothes washed by it will
ordinary way.
To Messrs, a. Simpson & Son.
Sirs. The Hardley’s Patent Washing MacMne
that I purchased from you I have given a fair trial,
and am quite satisfied that it wash as the clothes
well, and is a great saving of labour, time, and fuel,
and I have every confidence in recommending it to
the public.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) HARRIET HOLBROOK.
Wilford Vineyard, Underdale, November 22, 1887.
Messes. A. Simpson & Son, Qawler Place.
Dear Sirs.—l have great pleasure in informing
you that the Hardley’s Patent Steam Washing
Machine has met with my entire satisfaction!
After giving it a fait trial I am convinced that it is
the most perfect machine in the market. It is so
simple that a child can work it easily, and get
through a family’s washing in less than half the
usual time, and although it works with great rapi-
dity, it does not tear the clothes The saving ia
time, labour, and fuel, will pay lor the machine in a
few weeks.
You are at liberty to make any use you like of
this.
1 am, dear Sirs,
Yours faithfully,
ALFRED ALBERT BAILEY.
Ackland Street, Adelaide, November 23, 1887.
A. SIMPSON & SON, Makers, Gawler Place, Adelaide.


I
I
;
i
!
i
1
i
» ’
»
J
. i
i
I
l , . : ' • *
i
t
-
x ■ ' '*■ ■
1


l|6c §outl) Amdvafirtii
The largest and best Daily Newspaper in the Colony. Price, Twopence, or
35s. per Annum in advance. Postage, 10s. extra.
Persons desirous of becoming Subscribers to the above paper and securing its regular despatch to
any address should forward with their remittance the annexed order with full address.
To MESSRS. W. K. THOMAS & CO.,
Proprietors “ South Australian Register
Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
Herewith please receive £i ijs .* being one year's Subscription, in advance, to the “ South
Australian Register which please forward until further notice to
* If to be posted direct, add ios. for postage.


jgBBBBilBHaHaaHHH^BiBKaaBPMBHHBasraaisMgiaEBBHaaBBaasaMMi
MOST EXTENSIVE REED ORGAN WORKS ON THE GLOBE.
Twelve Large Factories; Six Hundred Employees; Production, 1,500
Organs per month.
ADDRESS FOR TERMS, &c.,
A* UAWfMAmm *
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
SOLE AGENTS, WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
PIANO DEP6t
For High-class Pianos from all the leading GERMAN AND ENGLISH
MAKERS.
PIANOS SUITABLE FOB COTTAGE!
PIANOS SUITABLE FOB MANSION!
PIANOS SUITABLE FOB CONCEBT HALL!
All built to stand the most severe climate.
PRICES AND TERMS ON APPLICATION.
NOTE OUR ADDRESS—
A. KAUFFMANN & SON,
65, Grenfell at., Adelaide.


FRUIT! FRUIT! FRUIT!
VEGETABLES !
POTATOES!
ONIONS !
Packed fresh and good all the Season round at
WHOLESALE PRICES
Also,
Pl®¥i®i@a®
I l *©!®®©
Either for Local or Export (under bond) Trade, at lowest
market prices.
CHABLICE BROS.,
East-End Market, Adelaide
POR T ADELAIDE.
Price List and Terms forwarded by letter or wire on
application.


Jfamilp anil IPispensing Chemists,
HOMCEOPATHIO ZPIHA.IR.IMrJLCZ'
59, Runale Street (Corner of Gaw/er Place), Adelaide.
IMPORTERS OF
FANCY GOODS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
A Choice and Varied Stock to select from of Articles Useful and Ornamental, suitable
for presentation on Weddings, Birthdays, or any other occasion.
68, BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
APPOINTMENT. APPOINTMENT,
MESSRS, G, P. DOOLETTE & CO,
Desire to call the attention of their numerous Customers and the Public
generally to the
SPLENDID SHOW OF SEASON’S GOODS
which they are now exhibiting, and which are being added to day by day by
steamer arrivals from the ENGLISH and CONTINENTAL MARKETS. The
Show comprises the Newest and most Stylish Woollens for
SUIT i TROUSERS, DRESS AND MORNING SUITS, & OVERCOATS.
The Newest and most Fashionable Styles and Shapes in Gentlemen’s
DRESS tjustid ;r,:ess hats.
A really Magnificent Stock of Scarfs of Choice Designs and all the Leading
Shapes. New makes in Hosiery and Underclothing, and every requisite for the
Gentleman’s Wardrobe and Toilet. Patterns of Woollens and Shirtings can be
had post free on application.
GEO. P. DOOLETTE & CO.,
50, KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.


Bp appointment to their Excellencies
SIR JAMES FERCUSSON, BART.' SIR W. F. 0. JERVOIS, C.C.M.C,, C.8., R.E.
SIR ANTHONY MUSGRAVE, K.C.M.G. SIR W. C. F. ROBINSON, G.C.M.G.
4. I«. iIQISBfiR
(Late H, STEINER).
WATCHMAKER,
JEWELLEB,
106,
BUNDLE ST.
(Opposite the Arcade),
ADELAIDE.
LADIES’ AND GENT’S GOLD AND SILVER WATCHES,
With Latest Improvements, and ot Best Quality.
GOLD CHRONOGRAPH, REPEATING, AND PRESENTATION WATCHES.
Guarantee given with every Watch Sold.
GOLD, SILVER, AND HIGH-CLASS DIAMOND JEWELLERY
Of Latest Design and in Endless Variety.
Novelties in
GOLD LACE BROOCHES, BANGLES, LADIES’ ALBERTS AND FOB CHAINS,
DIAMOND, SINGLE STONE, HALF-HOOP, AND GIPSY RINGS
Of our own manufacture, and at all prices.
CHOICE SELECTION OF ENGAGEMENT AND DRESS RINGS.
STERLING SILVER GOODS.
Racing Trophies, Cups, Tankards, Mugs, Salvers, Tea and Coffee Sets, Afternoon Tea Sets, Spoons,
Forks, Apostle Tea Spoons. Any design made to order.
ISieTiOPMfIS Will,
The Largest and Choicest Selection in South Australia.
Marble and Drawing-room Clocks, Spectacles, Opera, Field*
and Marine Glasses.
ALL GOODS MARKED IN PLAIN FIGURES. v
IS” Mote the Address—
106, PtUNDLE STREET,
mi t itifiiiit


-A..S K FOR
SONTAG FRENGH KID
AND DO NOT BE PERSUADED TO TAKE ANY OTHER.
IF YOU WANT THE LUXURY
OF A
TRUE-FITTING SHIRT
ASK YOUR DRAPER AND CLOTHIER FOR
THE CRITERION
NONE ARE S THE ORIGINAL
GENUINE REGISTERED
\shirt.7
UNLESS BEARING TRADE MARK.
BEWARE OF SPURIOUS IMITATIONS.
USE THE ABC PIPE
WHICH IS NOW THE
Most Favoured Brand in the Market.
ASK FOR
THE NUGGET BRAND
MOLESKIN TROUSERS
WHICH IS NOW THE
LEADING LINE FOR VALUE.


THE AERATED BREAD OOMPAHY,
WAYMOUTH SI. ADELAIDE.
gteam biscuit pamtfadurers*
These magnificent Biscuits are kept in Stock
by all respectable Grocers and Storekeepers
throughout the Colony.
TBLBPHOWB 232.
GOLD MEDAL, LONDON EXHIBITION, 1873.
UNE MENTION HONORABLE, PARIS, 1878.
FIRST PRIZES, SOUTH AUSTRALIA, 1876, 1878, 1881, and 1885.
PRIZE GOLD MEDAL, ADELAIDE INTERNATIONAL
EXHIBITION, 1881.
SILVER MEDAL, CALCUTTA, 1884.
FIRST PRIZE, S.A. CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES, 1884.
HIGHEST HONOURS AT JUBILEE EXHIBITION, 1887.
LARfiE ORDERS FOR PILOT RREAD
Can be carried out with dispatch, as we have
Machinery for turning out
FOUR TONS -A. DAY.


W. KITHER,
aid Retail
HAM AND BACON CURER,
ISi f Snail® 81*
W. K. respectfully calls the attention of
Consumers to the following Goods manu-
factured by him:—
SPICED BEEF
BRAWN
POLONY
SMOKED OX TONGUES
SMOKED SHEEPS TONGUES
PURE BEEF DRIPPING, in kegs
from 50 lbs. upwards
PURE LARD, in bladders, a large
stock
FRlTZ—Kither’s Celebrated
BLACK AND WHITE PUDDING
SAVELOYS
ROUNDS BEEF
CORNED BEEF
In Tierce, Barrels, Kegs, or Bags.
PICKLED PORKI.
In Barrels, Kegs, or Bags.
Comment on the above is needless, as W. Kither’s manufactures have borne the name
for many years of being second to none.
RiLMS AND BACON
HAMS, in seeds or calico, pale or smoked.
BACON, Sides, smoked or pale.
Do. Flitches, smoked or pale.
MUTTON HAMS.
In calling the attention of consumers to my Hams and Bacon I have only to
mention that at the September (1887) Show of the Royal Agricultural Society the
Hams and Bacon shown by me secured the only Two Bronze Medals offered, and
several other First Prizes, which should be a sufficient guarantee of the quality of
the above goods.
ALL GOODS CAREFULLY PACKED AND FORWARDED
TO ALL PARTS OF THE COLONIES.
TELEPHONE NO. 225.


THE ADOPTED
THE VICTORIAN
FURNISHING COMPANY
Is to mark every article of
FURNITURE
Cfetaa, Class-war*,
And all
HOUSEHOLD REQUISITES,
At the
Lowest Nett Cash Price,
PLAIN FIGURES.
The Victorian Furnishiag Company
63, HINDLEY STREET,
Opposite the Coffee Palace, and midway between the
Black Bull and Victoria Hotels.


THE
BARRIER SILVER AND TIN FIELDS
1 S 8 8.
BEING
A SIEIR/lIES OIF 1 LETTEES
WRITTEN BY
A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
‘ SOUTH AUSTRALIAN REGISTER,” “ADELAIDE OBSERVER,”
AND “EVENING JOURNAL,”
AND RE-PRINTED FROM THOSE PAPERS.
ADELAIDE;
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Streets


■
■ r ,
• iii •■'■ -r •■■
. i


PREFACE.
In response to requests from many quarters, the proprietors of the South
Australian Register, Adelaide Observer, and Evening Journal decided to re-print
the letters from their Special Correspondent on the Barrier mines in pamphlet
form; and, in order to increase the usefulness of the information to the
to add a copious index and a sketch plan. The letters, which appeared in the
S. A. Register and the Evening Journal from day to day and were re-printed
in the Observer , the first being published on January 27 last, were written in
the hope, as it is stated at the outset, that a simple statement of facts to be
found in the marvellous mining district would not only interest the general
reader but assist the pioneers in the work of development which is of so
much importance to the common weal.
South Australian interests are deeply connected with the progress of
the Barrier fields, and perhaps equally so in an indirect way. Who can say
that the special experience in silver and tin mining obtained there will not
ead t® a revelation of now unknown mineral resources in our midst that shall
be of more substantial and enduring service to the Colony than even the valued
and valuable Barrier trade present and prospective ]
In the lengthy list of claims given an idea will be obtained of the extent
of the district, and the degree of developement. If Barrier mining is only
now in its infancy, what will it be in the pride of its strength !
Adelaide, March, 1888.


%ht ,Sottth Australian Jlegistcr
(Established 1836),
An eight-page Daily Paper, with frequent Supplements containing the latest
news from all parts of the world by wire and post. Price 2d., or 355. per
annum in advance ; posted,
f iElie QMaxbt (Dbcrrhcr
Is the largest Weekly Newspaper published in the colony. It consists of 48
pages. The Observer is arranged in several distinct departments. The
“ Miscellany” contains reviews of the latest books, essays on popular subjects,
notes on science, incidents of travel, interesting sketches, articles on explora-
tion, chess problems, riddles and puzzles, poetry and witticisms, a column for
ladies containing the latest fashions, a department for children filled with
tales and poetry for the young, and novels by the best authors. No expense
is spared by the Proprietors in obtaining the right to publish stories by the
best English writers. Tales by local writers of ability are also constantly
published. The Farm and Garden Department contains a vast amount of
well-edited information for the benefit of farmers, sheep and cattle owners,
gardeners, and others interested in the tillage of the soil and the growth of
stock. The Sporting columns (which are under the control of a Special
Editor) contain full details of all racing matters, cricket, football, aquatics,
rifle shooting, &c., in the Australian colonies and the old country.
The Observer also contains full British, Foreign, Intercolonial shipping,
commercial, and general news, original articles on political and social subjects,
dramatic and musical criticisms, &c. The columns devoted to “ Echoes
and Re-echoes” contain humorous comments on current events in poetry and
prose.
An early edition of the Observer is printed on Friday morning for the
country mails. Price Sixpence, Six Shillings per quarter in advance, or
jQ 1 2S. per annum in advance (including postage).
€ turning J carnal,
Published every afternoon, contains the principal news of the day. Price,
One Penny.
%ht rScuth A us halian rSummarg
Is published fortnightly for despatch by the English mail. Price Twopence*
or (including English postage) 6s. 6d. per annum.


INDEX.
Adelaide 82
Alberta 50
Albion 72, 86
Albion West 86
Albion North 86
Albion South ... 86
Amalgamated Rockwell 47
Anaconda 48, 59
Annexation 66
Apollyon 52
Badge’s 60
Ballarat 79
Barrier Bischoff 80
Barrier Mining 1 5, 24, 66, 68
Barrier Ranges Association ... 50, 54
Bendigo 86
Big Hill 48
Bismarck { ... 48
Black Prince 58
Black Prince South 58
Block 10 32
Block 14 17, 32
Bobbie Bums 54
Bon Accord ... 51
Bonanza (B. H.) 45
Bonanza (Thackaringa)... 50
Boom—The Mining 65
Botallic 72, 86
Brinkworth 55
Brinkworth Paddock 54
Britannia Extended 58
Britannia Scotia 58
British Broken Hill 17, 35
Broken Hill—
Banking and Business 19, 20
Corporation for ... 22, 62
Churches in 9
Extension of 19
First Impressions ... 6
Future of 66
Hotels 21
Importance of 5
Land 6, 20, 63
Lode ... 15, 17, 39, 43
On Saturday Night ... 7
On Sunday 8
Population 6
Residence at ... 8, 62
Risks of Fire 63
Water Supply 63
Broken Hill Proprietary Company 24, 46
Caloola 70, 80
Caloola King 81
Caloola North 81
Caloola South 81
Cambrian * .. ... 56
Campbell’s Creek 60
Cam Brea 80
Central (B. H.) 16, 27, 32, 39
Champion Lode 55
Chlorides 24, 28
Cobar 70, 83
Colorado 60
Colossus 46
Comstock 50
Comstock Lode 26
Copper 59
Copper Blow 60
Copper Blow (B. H.) 46
Cosgrove 44
Cosmopolitan ... 81
Cosmopolitan Extended 82
Customs Difficulties 24
Cuter Australian 7
Dan O’Connell 51
Dalcoath 84
Day Dawn 55
Day Dream 24, 54
Distribution of Wealth 32
Drawback System 13, 67
Eaglehawk 56
Early Days of the Field 22
Euriowie 75
Euriowie 69, 71, 75
Euriowie Central 78
Euriowie Estate 79
Euriowie Extended 79
Euriowie Lode 78
Euriowie South 78
Excelsior (Euriowie) 78
Excelsior (Nine Mile) 47
Excelsior (Rockwell) 48
Farnell 82
Flats (B. H.) 45
Gem 55
Gipsy Boy 51
Gipsy Girl 50
Gipsy Queen ... 51


Gold ... ... ... ... ... 59
Golden Crest 57, 58, 59
Gorge 46
Grace Darling 80
Granite Springs 85
Great Britain 57
Great Consols 48
Great Northern 55
Green, P 22, 49
Hen and Chickens 54
Hidden Secret 55
Hidden Treasure 46
Homeward Bound 51
Imperial 44
Ironclad 48
Jubilee 79
Junction (B. H.) 17, 43
Kaiser 46
Kaolin 24
Kate 58
Kinchega 43
Labour market 17
Lady Bevys 42
Lady Brassey 50
Lady Carrington 55
Lady Don 70, 82
Lady Sutton 58
Law—Administration of .. ... 21
Lubra 59
Maybell 58
Maybell South 69
Maybell East 59
Mayflower 57
M. C. P. Titles 49, 60
Midnight Ramble 58
Mine Managers '.. 12, 61
Mine Messages 11
Mining Fashions 37
Mining Laws Defective 60
Morning Star 54
Mount Bunchikana 71, 79
Mount Gipps 58
Mount Lake 84
Mount Lake Victory 84
Mount Lake South 84
Mount Robe 57, 58
Mount Robe Extended 58
Mundi Mundi 54, 60
Naming Mines 61
New Year 54
Nickel, Julius 24, 49, 58
Nickleville ... 58
Nine Mile 47
Nine MileJDistrict 46
North (B. H.) 17,44
O’Keefe and Beach 47
Ormond 83
Outward Bound 51
Overworked Officials 10, 13, 20
Parnell . 56
Picton 45
Piesse’s Nob 56
Pine Paddock 72, 85
Pine Paddock Proprietary 86
Pinnacles 24, 41
Pinnacles Junction .. 42
Pinnacles Tribute 42
Pioneer 22, 49
Poolamacca Mines 24
Poolamacca 79
Potosi 46
Protection 13, 66
Prince Charlie 60
Prince of Wales 80
Profitable Field 65
Public Institutions 20, 65
Purnamoota 24, 56
Queen Victoria 67, 80
Railway, S. A 15, 67
Railway from Sydney 19
Rasp, Chas. 24
Red Flag... 60
Redhill 47
Riddel, A 15
Rise and Shine 59
Rising Sun 41'
Rising Sun South 41
Rio Tinto 80
Rockwell Paddock 47
Rockwell, Maiden 47
Rockwell, Melbourne 47
Rockwell, Melbourne South 47
Rockwell, Sydney 47
Rockwell, Sydney South ... ... 47
Rockwell, Wileannia 48
Round Hill 44
Ruby 82
Second to None 47
Sham Shares .. 61
Share Dealing 10, 19
Share Mania 5
Silver Coining 17
Silver Crown 45
Silver Dale 58
Silver Experts 17
Silver Field, Permanency of ... 6, 17
Silver King 57
Silver King East 58
Silverton, Rush to 23
Relationship to Broken Hill 51
Telephone to 64
South (8.H.) 40
South Extended 41
South Extended No. I ... 41


Southern Cross 56
Stephen’s Creek 55
Stokie, J 24, 49
Swindles 11
Sydney Traders 19
Syndicate 37
Telegraphic 10
Terrible Dick 55
Thackaringa 24, 29
Thistle 82
Thomas, Captain 73
Tincroft 80
Tinfield, values of 69
History 70
Geological Features 74
Tin, position of 70
Toogooroo ... 81
Tower Hill ... 54
Trade ] 4,67
Treasure 59
Trident ... 79
Triumph 79
Umberumberka 24, 52
Umberumberka East ... ... ... 53
Umberumberka North 53
Umberumberka West ... , ... 53
Union 72, 86
Victoria 57
Victoria Cross 44
Victory (Euriowie) 69, 77
Victory No. 1 79
Victory No. 2 79
Victory Extended 79
Victory South 79
Victory (Purnamoota) 57
War Dance 57
War Dance Extended 57
Waukaroo Paddock ... 71,83
Waukaroo Proprietary 71, 73, 85
Waukeroo Bischoff 85
Waukeroo Blocks ... ... ... 84
Waukeroo Consolidated. 85
Waukeroo Consols ... 85
Waukeroo Extended 84
Waukeroo North 84
Waukeroo South . ... 85
Weal Byjerkerno 82
Western Fall 83
Western Star 85
White Leadline 40
White Lead Central 41
White Lead Proprietary 41
Wilcannia Comstock 48
Wilkinson, C. S., on Tinfield ... 72, 74, 84


r .~T!'" -i.; • >, t-- —f > — t 7-» 7, »n jr,'',, 'iT^
IL | .■ ■-s ;■
5. Y : i: "I : §::]
-■ / ■ j g;|
Q m£Mmk j
ro ■■ f «■■!?■■ .:B, ,! * i
\ or { ::
i'll i r;.' \ .I ii,' ’, 9;' O ■ iij| 11,;., a ■ ' 1 ,p, t, /, • ", 1 •,, r . - a S
1 / : : . ||| iBB
A iv r i:M 1:..:
i ‘l"- 1 ! 1 't -?9fc- ' Will: : i' fl ii 1
I -c |
g. j £
I I
hlBftiiWfflj
' ■ 1 ' ' < "'' ! ’ ,| * Mp * .. -I
rnMimmmmsm
!• I ' > ' 'l w J ‘ ' Ijl *1
THE BARRIER MINES AND SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The above Sketch Plan has been prepared with a view of showing the relation of
the rich mines in the Barrier District of New South Wales to the Province of South
Australia. The district is about 600 miles in a direct line from Sydney. The distances
by rail to various ports are as follows:
Broken Hill to Port Pirie (South Broken’Hill toJMelhourne (Victoria) 843
Australia) 253 Broken Hill to Sydney (New South
Broken Hill to Adelaide (South Wales) 1,419
Australia) 333


THE BARRIER SILVER FIELD.
No. I.
BROKEN HILL.
As your specially accredited representa-
tive in the great silver-mining district
that geographically belongs to New South
Wales, but commercially to South Aus-
tralia, I left Adelaide for Broken Hill with
a predominating feeling of pleasure.
There is a natural feeling of satisfaction
in seeing the wonderful and beholding
what astonishes the world. And is not
this true of the Broken Hill mines, the
lode of which invites comparison with
the great Comstock of Nevada, and
the fame of which is able to make
Australia better known than any patent
scheme of federation or name-changing
feat of a statesman? The hope that
a simple statement of facts as one
finds them in this marvellous mining
district would not only interest the
general reader, but assist the pioneers in
the work of development, which is of so
much importance to the common weal, was
sufficient to nerve me against the reports
of the trying climate and rough usage
there. Friends with a kindness peculiar to
itself seemed to take a mischievous delight
in dilating to me upon the purgatorial heat,
the oven-baking buildings, the blinding,
suffocating, parching dust, the numerous
tormenting flies, the dangerous water,
the more dangerous spirits, the Bedlam
hotels, and the increasing number of
fatalities from heat and fever at Broken
Hill at this season of the year. Obviously
one whose life ordinarily passes with the
serenity of a stream would be unsettled
at the prospect of plunging in such a
cauldron of discomforts. Sustained,
nevertheless, by the sense of privilege,
I went to prove that the reports were in
all respects exaggerated.
There is something so thoroughly
human about mining that, though one
for perfectly intelligible reasons may
never have had, as in my case, a single
sixpence in mining stock, he cannot, while
subject to common sympathy and humour,
fail to be Interested in the pursuit, whether
seen in the stages of patient prospecting,
laborious delving, or market bulling and
bearing. When, however, it Is responsible
for a profound agitation throughout the
chief Exchanges of Australia, when it is
seen absording a vast share of the capital
of the colonies, when it is the source of a
new and large trade of our own colony,
and when it takes besides tangible ex-
pression in populous towns, where other-
wise the rabbit would reign supreme in its
work of devestation, that interest grows
into enthusiasm. Such is the case with
mining on the Barrier. An enquiry into
its progress and prospects must have a
concern, then, for many besides those
whose unconscious cerebrations are con-
stantly revolving upon such cabalistic
words as “Brokens,” “ Pups,” “ Cen-
trals,” and “Souths.”
THE SHARE MANIA
Of the extraordinary way in which
these expressions have been burned into
the minds of members of all classes there
is scarcely need for illustration; but
aa incident occurred during the
tedious journey to Broken Hill (made
tedious, by the way, through short-
sighted railway management) that
was at least suggestive. A tired traveller,
wishful of pleasantly passing the time,
invited some young men to indulge in a
game of cards, but they declined, because
in effect they said they had lost heart for
playing cards in the passion for dealing in
shares. Amongst the many passengers in
that train for Broken Hill not a few were
determined if possible to make money
rapidly and retire from the field. Can it
be wondered therefore that their talk
was seasoned with the salt of the share
market ? Thanks to the wisdom of land-
ing passengers in Broken Hill at the
ungodly hour of 3 in the morning, I
found myself “ with whispered humble-
ness and bated breath” a suppliant for
admission at a full hotel, and glad to take
a third bed in a room. After a com-
paratively short sleep I was awakened by
my room mates, domiciled as their con-
versation showed in Broken Hill, dis-


cussing the “old old story” of money promise of satisfactory arrangement, it is
making. Well educated gentlemanly men
who had left young families in the city
they revealed themselves to be. Said
one — “I have come to make money. I
intend to make it, and return to my
family.” And the other echoed the senti-
ment as his. Soon they wandered into
the talk of brokers, the familiar terms of
which lulled me to sleep again as if it
had been some cradle song heard often
before.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS.
These frank, genial interesting, keen-
eyed room mates were like many other
birds of passage so far as Broken Hill
was concerned \ they had not come to
stay; they were roughing it, cheerfully
looking forward to leaving the place with
a “ pile;” and everything with them
there was of a temporary character. This
Impression prepared me for the appear-
ance of the town. Busy, far-reaching,
and in the presence of sources of wealth, the
“sardine-tin,” “rag houses,” and “band-
box” buildings were in ill contrast, rough
and temporary. They bespoke haste and
absence of style and stability. But just
as my acquaintances may in the course of
time settle down to a good and steady
business, so the town may change, taking
on a permanent aspect. Indeed, evidences
of that change were not wanting on a
closer examination of that sea of struc-
tures, the white roofs of which, seen from
the Broken Hill top extending for miles
around in the gully and on the hillsides,
glistened like so much foam of the ocean
in ferment. Immediately the vexed ques-
tion of titles to business allotments is
disposed of the few stone buildings now
existing will be multiplied by hundreds on
the sites of the paltry weatherboard and
galvanized-iron “ shanties,” the tents, and
the bush huts, which not merely give the
settlement such a higgledy-piggledy ap-
pearance, but render it liable to be
swept almost entirely away with the
first fire, and make it a con-
tinuous source of danger to health.
Remembering, however, that this new
and feverish settlement of 6,000 people
has sprung up within about two years,
that nearly all the materials for 1,000
buildings have had to be imported from
long distances, and much carted by slow-
going teams, and the tenements erected as
fast as possible, and that no money could
be lent on permanent improvements until
the mining industry had been firmly
established, and the land question within
even surprising to find so large a number
there and the proportion what it is of
creditable buildings existing among them.
For lining the well-defined wide streets
of this, perhaps, largest amd most
bustling town of its kind in New South
Wales, where quarter-acre blocks range in
price from £2OO to £2,000 each plus the
unlimited liability to the Land Board
assessment for the grant of the freehold,
several substantial stone buildings of one
and two stories have at great expense been
erected, while others are in course of
erection.
PERMANENCY OF THE FIELD.
So far as permanency in a mining town
can be predicted, in the case of Willyama,
the official and unpopular name for
the settlement at Broken Hill, it is
assured. Already the mines in the
neighbourhood employ, it is esti-
mated, 1,500 hands, the Broken
Hill Proprietary Company alone having
900, to say nothing of Block 14
and British Broken Hill Companies.
Then there are the men working
on the mines on the line of the Broken
Hill lode and numbers of other claims
beyond. The Broken Hill mines will,
when active mining begins, employ many
more hands, and the demand for labour in
the surrounding claims must have a
tendency to increase. Within the last
year the population has increased by
2,000, the greater number of the people
being South Australians ; and it is confi-
dently predicted that the population of
the town will be 20,000 within twelve
months. The strength of the feeling as
to the permanent prosperity of the town
is indicated in that everybody in Broken
Hill appears to be satisfied. It is not
merely that the men at the mines earn
good wages—miners £3, labourers £2
10s., and others in proportion—and that
the mines give orders for stores and
sundries, but that a great deal of capital
has been introduced into Broken Hill
through the belief that it furnishes a
means of genuine and profitable invest-
ment. Who could be other than satisfied ?
Men gat good wages and capitalists large
returns (some speak of 30 per cent, as a
minimum interest), besides which all
are on the road to fortunes. All sorts
and conditions of men and boys speculate;
professional men with University educa-
tion, labourers who can scarcely write
their own names, and boys who know all
about the stock market and nothing about


their catechisms—all talk shares, all are population, and of the prosperity and
ready to buy and sell. activity of the town. Mv first Saturday
“ THE CUTER AUSTRALIAN.”
Broken Hill is not only important as
the visible sign of a new era in silver-
mining in Australia, but is interesting in
that it indicates a change which is cer-
tainly taking place in the tone of Austra-
lians. The profitable working of silver
mines is bringing about something more
than an addition to the material wealth of
the colonies generally, and particularly to
that of South Australia, it having an effect
more profound than the conversion of
blacksmiths, carpenters, miners, and
labourers into sharebrokers, jobbers,
land agents, and business men, and of
transforming knockabout hands and
parsons into silver kings; it is unques-
tionably altering the character of the
people. One cannot be in Broken Hill
long without perceiving how the race
for riches quickens the mental powers.
The thirst for information of any kind,
scientific and commercial, which will serve
the end in view is no less marvellous than
the development in all classes, educated
and uneducated, of the faculty for assimi-
lating knowledge, and applying it to per-
sonal advantage. Whether in the great
temptation that exists to cross the borders
of genuine enterprise to share-gambling
there is a great danger to undermine the
moral nature so as to completely out-
balance the value of the increased mental
activity is a question that shall be decided
by others ; but the fact that a change is
going on as described is one which cannot
be denied by the observant student of
human nature, not only in the growing
town of Broken Hill, but in the estab-
lished cities of Australia. Looking at the
extraordinary progress of this continent,
and the fact that the development of its
resources is still in a state of Infancy, is it
straining the probabilities of the case to
say that in the no very distant future the
world will add to the phrase of “ the cute
American” another—“the cuter Austra-
lian r
No. 11.
BROKEN HILL ON A SATURDAY
NIGHT.
The visitor to Broken Hill should not,
if he can help it, miss Saturday night in
the streets, and if he can possibly do so
should choose seeing the town on the
alternate Saturday when the “ big mine”
hands are paid. He will then get some
idea of the numbers and nature of the
activity of the town. My first Saturday
night in Broken Hill was on the quiet
day of the fortnight, but still it was
sufficiently lively to remind me of
Rundle-atreet on the evening before
Sunday. Let me describe it simply as I
saw it. The principal street of the town,
Argent-street, is the centre of traffic,
and it is crowded with energetic good-
humoured people, mostly men and
boys, moving up and down where the
numerous tradesmen display their wares
in shops large and small, mostly small, as
brilliantly illuminated as the best kero-
sine lamps will permit, or else congre-
gating under hotel verandahs discussing
various topics, the uppermost, of course,
being mines and shares. Under the
balcony of the City Hotel men are
assembled in excited knots, constituting
an open-air Share Exchange. The buyers
and sellers are evidently miners who
believe they have the “ right tips.” A
short, thiek-set fellow dressed—it is not
safe to say in his Sunday-go-meetings, for
it is the exception and not the rule for
miners to go to Church at Broken Hill—
but dressed at all events in his best
suit, is heard calling out from a ring of
shrewd speculators of his own station that
he will sell a half share in some Saltbush
Syndicate for £2O, while another sandy-
bearded shrill-voiced devotee of Fortune
announces from the steps that he is a
buyer or seller of “ Pussies on the Flat.”
In the tobacconists’ shops brokers may be
found formulating Syndicates, to be after-
wards floated into Companies, provided
the public are wise enough to accept
the intelligently framed prospectuses as
gospels in silver-mining; and in the
windows and on the counters of
business premises are to be seen
samples of ore averaging in one case,
it was stated, 19,000 oz. to the ton, and in
others, it is to be feared, very much less.
Even the wives of residents waiting at the
counters are posted in the details, and
can discuss oxides, carbonates, and
chlorides, as well as the number of share-
holders and the prospects of success in
the different ventures. The leisured
class amongst Broken Hill women,
who number about 900 out of a
population of 6,000, is very small; but
though they work very hard—and the
surroundings of life here are very rough
for both women and children—they appear
in the streets to-night in comparatively
large numbers and with cheerful faces.
There are many married men on the


field but the majority have left their doea this remark apply merely to those
families behind, mostly in South Aus- who do naught else but buy and sell
tralia, and he is a fortunate man who is
able to have his family here and house
them comfortably. Those who cannot offer
their wives and children nothing better
than galvanized iron, canvas, or bush
shanties should consider the risks they
run before taking them to Broken Hill.
There have recently been several deaths
from heat and typhoid, aggravated by the
heat, which fatalities, a medical man
assures me, mieht have been avoided had
the victims been housed in buildings
adapted to resist ordinary summer weather,
and had they been circumstanced with
proper sanitary arrangements and a safe
water supply. However, the necessities
of some cases require the presence of the
family where the breadwinner is located,
and how frequently will not wives and
daughters rather rejoice in discomfort if
only assured that their self-sacrifice is
productive of pleasure to the objects of
their affections. It is a cheering
sight to see this prosperous crowd
of busy workers in Argent - street
preserving admirable order without the
help of policemen. In the hotels a few
toilers in the bowels of the earth are so
elated with the change of air and scenes
that they are demonstratively merry,
while some others have drunk so deeply
at the cool fountain of pleasure after the
heat and burden of the week that they
have passed into a profound sleep, and
are enjoying the sweets of their paradise,
while their forms are outstretched in the
ankle-deep red dust on the footpaths.
And so until a late hour the surging
sanguine crowd of dust-stained fortune-
wooing, hardy, determined pioneers of
the coming city of Broken Hill pass
and repass, cluster and part, wind and
unwind as in some quaint dance, mean-
while exchanging courtesies and trans-
acting business. The hum of conversa-
tion is varied by the enticing cries of the
oyster-vendors at their stalls in the street,
while the visitor is constantly reminded
by the lights on the hill, the lurid
illuminations from the furnaces, and the
smoke from the stacks of the explanation
of this human beehive with its stirring
scenes and sounds.
“ THE ETERNAL GRIND.”
If the institution of the day of rest was
ever needed in any place it is at Broken
Hill, where the mind is feverishly em-
ployed from waking hour to sombre
dream in exciting sharedealing. Nor
stock, but to the working classes, who
appear well versed in the subtleties of
mining speculation as market-riggers
themselves. If the traditions of our
race and the force of religious opinion
did not compel the formal observance
of Sunday it would be a positive
calamity for a community like this. With
all the hedges which conventionality have
erected for the preservation of the day
that the wasted energies of the week may
be recruited it is impossible for this en-
grossing lucre topic to be dropped. At
breakfast, dinner, and tea somehow some-
body will bring up the latest news from the
mines and the market, and the table will
be in spite of itself interested in the
absorbing theme. One cannot walk
through the streets without overhearing
men speak of chances missed and not to
be missed, and fortunes lost, made, or
making ; and though the sermon may for
a moment turn the current of thought,
yet before the worshippers have returned
from Church the current has asserted
itself again. For all that Sunday is a
break in the otherwise maddening chase
of wealth, and even those who find it
hardest to escape from the allurements of
the goddess are frank in their expressions
of gratitude that an interval has been
imposed.
To Adelaideans unaccustomed to any
other scenes in the streets than the City
of Churches presents on Sundays the sights
furnished at Broken Hill have no common
interest. At any hour during the week-
day a large number of working men may be
found standing, sitting, and lolling under
the verandahs of two or three of the
principal hotels, and, as they seem to be
the same men throughout, the question
arises, How do they get their livelihood
and where do they reside ? They do not
desert their posts on Sunday, for with
commendable loyalty they are there to
supply one of the features of the town.
Most of the shops in the town are closed,
but the news agents open for an hour
in the morning that subscribers to
the Adelaide papers may obtain
Saturday’s issue. Though it does not
furnish a large reading community,
there is perhaps more newspaper-reading
done in Willyama on Sunday than during
the whole of the week, for if the weather
should be too hot to venture out there 1s
very little other literature present if it
were in demand to occupy the time. It
must be remembered that that inseparable


sign of a South Australian township—the minors, is in charge of the Church. The
Institute—is conspicuous by its absence.
There is, therefore, no circulating library
providing for leisure the strong meat of
standard authors. It will, perhaps, be
conceded, however, that the conditions of
country life are generally recognised by
Australian iournalists, wlio furnish for
country readers varied and excellent
matter suitable to all classes of the
community and all days of the week.
If, however, the weather should be
agreeable every horse and buggy and
vehicle in the place is called Into ser-
vice, the country being scoured for
miles by keen observers, and many who
have not the fortune to ride take long
walks. Some visit friends in distant
camps and townships. Stern moralists
cannot condemn people who sacrifice the
daylight for flickering candle rays in the
tunnels of the earth, or who spend days
of drudgery in unfenced, ill-conditioned,
ungardened shanties, for seeking to get a
breath of the fresh mountain air. Nature
demands compensation. And if in the
course of their travels wearied Willy-
amaites come, as they cannot help coming,
upon the great objects of interest in the
Barrier mines, what wonder that out of
the abundance of the heart the tongue
should speak in the old familiar language
of prospects and profits ?
CHURCHGOERS.
Only a minority in the town are Church-
goers. There is accommodation for less
than 1,500 worshippers, and the Churches
are not all full. Five Churches are
erected, and a sixth is going up. Taking
the Protestant bodies first, the Methodist
people have three representatives. The
Bible Christians, Rev. G. J. Sampson
minister, have a Church seating 400.
They were the first on the field, Mr.
Sampson, who has had charge of the
cause for over two years, having been
initiated into the pioneer work by the
Revs. Messrs. Thorne and Paynter.
The Church, which was opened in May,
1886, is a galvanized-iron structure,
with matchboard lining, costing about
£560, and the average attendance on
Sunday nights is from 170 to 200.
There is a well-supported Sunday-school
in connection with the cause, which
is in a good financial position. The
Primitive Methodists have an iron un-
lined building 40 x 30 feet, with seating
accommodation for 250 and an attendance
of 230 or 240. The Rev. J. Burrows,
who is an effective preacher to the Cornish
Wesleyan cause, which is entrusted to
the Rev. A. J. Fry, formerly of Port
Adelaide, has a Church capable of
seating over 200, but the large con-
gregations are forcing upon the office-
bearers the necessity of building a larger
Church. The Congregationalists, under
the temporary but energetic and able
leadership of the Rev. K. Mackay, of
Warrnambool, have erected a galvanized-
iron structure with seats for 300, at a cost,
including land £2OO, of over £6OO. Mr.
Mackay, who has been preaching in a
shooting-gallery, has had crowded atten-
dances. The Baptists have accepted
tenders for a building to seat 220. The
Rev. W. Coller, of Mitcham, who is in
temporary charge, is holding services in
a private verandah. The Roman Catholics
have a nice Church seating 250 persons.
Father Black is in charge, but the atten-
dance is not very large. In addition the
Salvation Army present a bold front to
the “ enemy.” On Sunday afternoon
they were pelted with rotten eggs, but as
the supply of these missiles ran short not
much damage was done. In the evening
the familiar “strains of music” are heard
from the “lads and lassies,” headed by
the band, of which the drum is a solemn
factor. Large crowds gather round them,
and in the margin interesting theological
discussions may be heard, started by
miners, who, objecting to dogmas, are
nevertheless dogmatic.
THE COOL EVENING AIR.
As on Saturday so on Sunday night,
the people in the streets may be counted
not in paltry hundreds, but in thousands.
On the hillside the mines are lit up as
usual, the curling waves from the stacks
passing over the hilltop with the easterly
wind sweeping the town, and fiery balls
shooting from the smelters in rapid suc-
cession, to be finally lost in the darkness,
like meteors spent on a black night. Up
and down Argent-street and the other
streets with mineral names (Oxide, Galena,
Chloride, &c.) the well-dressed people
fill the footpaths and darken the road-
ways. A few shops are open, amongst
them being tobacconists, fruiterers, and
hotels, but with the exception of the last
kind business does not seem brisk. The
Salvation Army occupy a street corner,
while here and there knots of men are
gathered discussing what for monotony of
repetition shall not be said. Each Satur-
day and Sunday night shows that the
number of the fair sex in the town is in-


creasing. As they pass to and from
Church and in buggies their dress be-
tokens very distinctly the general pro-
sperity of the place. Provision, too, has
been made in the legion of drapers’ shops
for an enormous addition to the purchases
of those sweet and mystic articles of ap-
parel which make the ladies so dear to men.
Though the very sermons preached in
Broken Hill are permeated with an allow-
ance of wealth-seeking—right motives and
means of course granted—the Willyamaite
does not adopt the aphorism as to obtaining
riches by retiring to rest and rising
early. He is apt to watch the awful
hour u when churchyards yawn,” if one
may judge by the noise which interrupts
the sleep of the visitor; but it is perhaps
scarcely fair to judge the town by this
test. Owing to the enjoyment which may
be obtained from spending the cool of the
evening in the open air, the streets are
not cleared at the early hour which is the
characteristic of most South Australian
towns. But in this matter, as in many
others of note respecting the town now,
it must never be forgotten that the place
is in a state of ferment like new wine,
which cannot be held in old bottles.
Every day will see new customs springing
up as it sees new buildings arise, enlarg-
ing, altering, and improving its character.
No. 111.
SHAREDEALING AT BROKEN HILL.
Every man has his humours and every
town its peculiarities. To this rule
Broken Hill is at present an exception, in
that it seems to have but one peculiarity
—the mining mania, so fully developed as
to hide and absorb any and everything
else. If I seem to lay undue stress upon
this matter it is simply because I am full
of the subject from the continuous assaults
made upon my ears. But I did not intend
to refer to It just now except to introduce
a reference to some features in the mode
of transacting share and mining business.
The first thing that struck me with surprise
was that the local market Is of no value
as indicating the opinion entertained by
the residents as to the merits of the
mines. It is perhaps nearer the mark to
say that there is no real local market, for
most business is transacted with the
capitalists by telegraph. The nature of
the transactions may be gathered by the
statement which I have heard frequently
made (that shares are commonly bought
and sold not with any regard to the
genuineness of the mines, but upon some
secondary consideration as to the reputa-
tion of the Directors, the movements of
the largest shareholders, and sundry foreign
circumstances. It is oftentimes difficult
to trace what trifling event has led to
activity in certain stock, or what machina-
tions have brought about drooping in
other more intrinsically valuable lines.
No doubt in the long run with honest
management the merits of a mine will
tell; but the management being as liable
to fall away with all the eccentricity of a
lode itself, speculators find themselves
like a flock of sheep, jumping or not
jumping with the multitude who “follow
my leader.”
A DISGRACE TO THE SYDNEY
GOVERNMENT.
The markets which rule Broken Hill
are Melbourne and Adelaide. Sydney
appears to be out of it. Every speculator
has his own broker in the capitals, who
sends daily u wires” of quotations. As
showing the enormous business done by
the Telegraph Department in this direc-
tion, it may be here mentioned that the
business of the local office is about £l5O a
week, and the bulk of it is in regard to
the share market. It may be added, by-
the-way, that the telegraph-office is a
perfect disgrace to the Sydney Govern-
ment. The building is small and the
staff insufficient. It makes one wax
warm with indignation to see the Govern-
ment of a rich province like the
mother colony, in the year of her cen-
tennial celebrations, making handsome
revenue at the cost of the life-blood of
her officials. One cannot look at the
cadaverous faces, with sunken eyes, of
those operators without seeing how shame-
fully they are overworked. The expense
of the office must be under £2O a week,
the rest being scooped by the inconsiderate
Government. Unquestionably the public
suffer great inconvenience and even loss.
It is impossible, for instance, I am told,
for a business man, if he lodges a tele-
gram in the morning, to expect a reply
from Adelaide the same day; and I have
had related to me examples of delays in
the dispatch and delivery of telegrams
which seem to be incredible. Yet no one
here blames the officials, for it is generally
recognised that within their ability they
are patient, hardworking, and badly used
members of the service. Did such a
grievance exist in South Australia the
Government would get no rest night or
day until it had been attended to by the
employment in a suitable office of a first-
class staff.


MESSAGES FROM THE MINES.
It ia astonishing to find that in a place
so close to the mines by which it is sup-
ported so little late and trustworthy in-
formation should be generally obtainable.
Indeed, It is a difficult matter sometimes
to get information even by going to the
mines. No one may inspect the under-
ground workings without permission of
the captain, and it is no common expe-
rience, after travelling for miles to the
claims, to find him away on business. In
his absence no one is permitted to give
information or show the mine. However,
there are agents in the township who
make it a part of their business to establish
means of communication with the mines
by which they are able to immediately
advise their clients in Adelaide and else-
where any important alterations that have
taken place likely to affect the price of
shares. It is a fact, nevertheless, that
Adelaide and Melbourne are frequently
more quickly supplied with the latest
intelligence from the mines than Broken
Hill itself; and this accounts somewhat for
business taking its cue from those cities.
AN ERRATIC MARKET.
Concentration upon one idea seems to
be a feature of Australian life. In mining
all attention seems to be now absorbed in
silver, and in silver oftan the attention is
devoted to one or two lines at a time,
which are run up to a high price, a reac-
tion, sometimes temporary, sometimes
permanent, following. It is unfortunate,
no doubt, for buyers at the top of the
market to be thus left stranded, with no
certain prospect of another flood to float
them again, but it is on account of this
risk that speculators in mining here need
perpetual watchfulness and good judg-
ment. As the moon has a star to com-
panion it, the lion its jackal, and the
shark its pilot-fish, so the jobber is re-
ported to have his spy, middleman, or
runner, whose vocation it ia in a quiet
way to find out intending buyers and
sellers, ascertain their prices, and close
where he can make a bargain.
MINING SWINDLES.
There are three principles which should
guide a man as to mining speculation. He
should wait before putting his money into
shares until he has acquired some ex-
perience in the mining world ; he should
not engage in such speculations until he
can afford to lose the amount for which he
is liable; and he should have reasonable
grounds for believing the concern to be
genuine. Perhaps there is no other
sphere in which there is so much trickery
possible and actual as in the mining—
how often one hears of salted mines,
fraudulent assays, and nursed properties.
The early days of Silver ton furnished
some painful experiences. Even practical
men were “ got at.” To give a single
example, it was a common thing for
miners to travel “on the slug.” A man
would walk into a mining township, pro-
duce to the storekeeper a slug of very
rich silver, and on the strength of having
discovered a good claim get anything be
wanted in the way of stores for
himself and camp for weeks. Nothing
else was found. Travelling “on the slug”
does not obtain now. It is notorious, too,
that unreliable assays were furnished, and
quaint stories are still told in this connec-
tion of silver found in powdered bricks
while the metal was undiscovered in ore.
Now, however, competition for assaying
by good men, including several young
Australians from the Ballarat School of
Mines, has furnished effective checks. But
it is difficult to provide any self-acting
regulator for honest management. The
proper safeguard is a critical oversight by
shareholders, but as in Mining Companies
the personnel so frequently changes that it
is next to impossible for any one member
—even if he had the time, ability, and
disposition—to create a sufficiently strong
public opinion in the body as to keep fear
continually before the Directors. In two
ways may a property be nursed. By
wilful mismanagement it may be forced
into the market at a low figure and be
snapped up by a few capitalists. Another
mode is that when an important dis-
covery is made as to the lode the
fact is kept a secret save to a favoured
few, who at once “bear” the market and
then buy up largely at low rates. Then
the discovery is published with a flourish
of trumpets or revealed in more insidious
ways, with the result that the shares are
run upon and enormous profits are made
by the swindlers. It is, therefore, a
significant circumstance as to the tone of
the mining world when the merits of a
property are considered of less importance
for the purposes of speculation than the
reputation of those responsible for the
management, because it unfortunately
implies an uneasy feeling in respect to the
general honesty.
There is one healthy sign here, and
that is a feeling that there could be no
more popular institution established here
than a branch of the celebrated School of


Mines of Ballarat, for the classes would
be eagerly attended, and the information
would be put to practical use in the
development of the mineral resources of
the continent.
MINING MANAGERS.
It would not be fair to close this article
without reference to a very useful com-
bination amongst Mining Managers. The
Mining Manager has a very responsible
position. It is his duty to develop the
property with the skill of an expert and
the straightforwardness of an honest man,
and it is possible that in the performance
of his duty he may clash with his Board
of Directors. There is only one honour-
able course in the event of his being
blocked, and that is to resign, for he holds
the balance between the Board and the
public. He is in the service of the public
dealing in the scrip of the Company as
much as he is in the service of the Direc-
tors. This is the view entertained by the
Mining Managers’ Association of Austra-
lasia, which has a branch at the Barrier
Ranges presided over by Captain Morrish,
of the Broken Hill Central Company. The
objects are set out to be : —“ To main-
tain the rights and privileges pertaining
to the position of Mining Manager ; to
assist each other in the development of
the mineral resources of the colony;
to protect and forward the inte-
rest of the mining investor and the
mining community in general; and to use
every legitimate means to induce the
Government of the colony to fully re-
cognise and effectively legislate for the
mining industry ; to secure salaries com-
mensurate with the onerous duties incum-
bent upon the position of Mining
Managers generally; also to assist each
other in cases of sickness or accident.”
To show that the Association is not one
of those Societies full of “ sound and fury
signifying nothing,” it may be stated
that a case of misconduct was not long
ago decisively dealt with in the interest
of the general public. A prospectus
had been put forth, and on the strength
of an opinion given thereon by a Mining
Manager as to “ known lodes” existing on
the property it was floated. The matter
was brought before the Association, who
called upon the captain to furnish any
evidence in his possession leading him to
express that opinion, and a committee was
appointed to examine the property with
him to point out any indications. The
following rule of the Association enabled
them to deal with the case :—“ Members
of this Association shall work their mines
for the best interest of the mining in-
vestor, and shall in no case whatever
become directly or indirectly parties to
any unfair or untruthful report as to the
prospects of the mines under their charge,
or in the event of any valuable new dis-
covery being made in any mine under
the charge of any member of this
Association, such member shall im-
mediately report the same through the
legal Manager. Any infringement of this
rule will be followed by the summary
expulsion from the Association of the
member so offending.” To make a long
story short, the charge against the member
was sustained, and the penalty under the
rule passed. There are fifty members in
the Barrier branch, and the faithful per-
formance of its duties must materially aid
the progress of silver-mining there. There
are Mining Managers on the field whose
word is regarded by those who have
seen them tried as their bond, and it
is remarkable what an effect they have
in sustaining the confidence of the public
in the properties in which they are con-
cerned. It is to be regretted that insti-
tutions similar to the Mining Managers’
Association do not exist in South Australia
for the benefit of Mining Managers and
the protection of mining investors.
No. IV.
TRADING OBSTRUCTIONS.
The masterly policy of inactivity, alias
blundering and plundering, that dis-
tinguishes the Sydney Government at the
Barrier is in danger of being imitated by
the Adelaide Government. It is difficult
to say who are here the more unpopular,
the phlegmatic Sydney Government or
the short-sighted Adelaide Administra-
tion. Certainly the Sydney Government
have been greater sinners by grabbing a
handsome revenue from Broken Hill
(worth now about a quarter of a million
sterling) and blinding their eyes to the
absolutely necessary work of the town-
ship ; but then they have never pro-
fessed friendship for the place—it is
said to be even a question In Sydney
where the Barrier is—and they have
never been guilty of desiring to advance
its progress. On the other hand, the
Adelaide Government have given the field
a railway, their people have furnished it
with a population, their capitalists have
sent it money, and their traders goods,
while the authorities have meanwhile
been extravagant in their professions of
sincere friendship. Though the Adelaide


Government have been guilty of Customs with a protective tariff, which is playing
bungling and railway mismanagement
only, yet these are unpardonable offences
as springing from sheer stupidity, and as
leading to an unnecessary diversion of
the trade to Sydney. The New South
Wales authorities are in the position of
the man who, not knowing the will,
escaped with a few stripes; but their
Adelaide contemporaries must take the
situation of him who, knowing the will,
refused to do it, and deserved to be
beaten with many stripes.
EVERYTHING IN OUR FAVOUR.
It is generally conceded that the South
Australian trade with Broken Hill is
worth having, getting, and keeping.
Broken Hill represents a prosperous and
permanent mining district of 10,000
people, exclusive of the Silverton popula-
tion, with the prospect of the number
being quadrupled in a year ; it has in
Willyama the site of a city of perhaps
2,000 buildings yet to be erected within
the next three or four years ; and it is a
locality where hundreds of thousands of
pounds of capital will be spent on
reproductive works, in addition to
the distribution of thousands of
pounds weekly in wages and mining
dividends and profits. Commercially it
belongs to South Australia, with Adelaide
by a long distance the nearest city, and
Port Pirie its nearest port. The great
majority of the people are South Aus-
tralians, with families and friends in
South Australia, and every desire to trade
with and benefit (other things being equal)
South Australia; and as much of the
capital expended In the district is South
Australian there are other claims to the
trade for South Australia. The Govern-
ment have given the people railway com-
munication, and they acknowledge the
enterprise with gratitude. Everything is
therefore on our side, and nothing remains
but that the trade shall be left un-
obstructed. No facilities are really wanted;
all that is necessary is that the trade shall
be allowed to take a perfectly natural and
uninterrupted course.
THE ONE THING NEEDFUL.
If only our Government had had the
energy to free this trade there would not
have been the grievance under which South
Australian traders are smarting, and which
will necessitate their establishing houses in
Sydney. It is our misfortune that at the
very time of the development of the
Barrier fields we should be experimenting
the trade into the hands of Sydney. No
doubt it is true that within certain limits
the Government try to assist the Adelaide
merchants by means of drawbacks. It is
justly said that no one can have an idea
of the magnificence of the Broken Hill
mines until he traverses the tunnels in the
enormous areas of rich and varied ores ;
and it is equally true that no one can
have an appreciation of tariff torture until
be has had a practical experience in the
winding courses, the endless red-tape, the
volumes of official documents, and the
unceasing bother of the drawback system.
In speaking thus strongly one does not in
the least blame the courteous Customs
officials, who try to expedite matters, but
the obstruction to trade through the con-
tinual application of the system is enough
to make a liverless man bilious. Take a
case. A storekeeper in South Australia
receives an order for an assortment of
goods from drapery to tinned fish. If he
is to get the rebate on the articles on
which duty has been paid on entering the
colony, he must pay a Customs officer 3s. an
hour to see the goods packed, make out
several sets of detailed invoices, make a
declaration that the goods paid duty on
entering the colony, and provide bonds
for the truthfulness of his statements.
His troubles are not yet ended. The case
has been bound in red-tape, and the
Customs seal affixed in melted wax. On
arrival at Broken Hill entries have to be
passed for their admission into New South
Wales, and duties paid under the Sydney
tariff. Still the drawback is not payable.
The signatures of the South Australian
Customs officer, who resides at Silverton
instead of Broken Hill, has to be obtained
to the certificate that the goods have been
properly received in New Sooth Wales.
The money is not payable yet. That
certificate has to go to Port Adelaide, and
after two or three days the Port agent of
the exporter may receive the sum. Think
of the trouble, time, expense, labour, and
annoyance involved in these cumbersome
operations.
It is absurd that a trade the very
existence of which now depends upon its
freedom from pettifogging municipal
government interference should be sub-
ject to three distinct Customs operations.
One of them we cannot help, namely, the
collection of duties by the New South
Wales officers, who, by-the-way, are, like
the other employes of the Sydney Govern-
ment in the town, overworked, and cannot
at all times keep pace with the require*


ments. To say, however, that the draw-
back system cannot be simplified is to
speak in antediluvian language. It can
and must be greatly modified. But before
considering suggestions under that head
one thing ought to be done, and that is to
allow the full amount of duty in all cases
as rebate. Why it is I cannot understand,
but 1 am informed that a percentage on ad
valorem lines is retained by the Customs,
and not on the rated. Just recently I
was discussing the matter with two of our
large Adelaide traders, who say positively
that our drawback system is killing our
trade in such lines as furniture and iron-
mongery.
SIMPLIFYING CUSTOMS OPERATIONS.
Several schemes have been suggested
for simplifying the drawback system. One
is that the South Australian Government
should collect duties under their tariff on
all goods sent to the Barrier and pay the
New South Wales Government in
monthly or quarterly payments the sums
due on the imports under their tariff.
As, however, the South Australian tariff
is higher than the New South Wales
tariff the former would make a handsome
profit by the transaction, and that too at
the expense of the South Australian
trader j and this proposal would involve a
complicated scale of export bounties in
respect to the Barrier trade. So far as
exporting goods from bonded stores in
bond, it seems unnecessary to put them
in sealed cases when the packages can be
put in railway trucks to be considered
bonded stores during transit. This sug-
gestion would, if carried out, greatly help
the Adelaide merchants. There is, how-
ever, a large trade done in goods ex-
ported from inland towns on which goods
the duty has been paid. For these
traders something must be done. It is
difficult to see why one of the two
Customs operations performed for South
Australia cannot be omitted. Where
is the real necessity for seeing the
goods packed if one of our officers saw
them unpacked at the time that the
goods must be dealt with for the
purpose of the Sydney tariff? Let the
application for drawback be made at
Broken Hill, let the claim to it be exa-
mined there, and let the payment of the
drawback too be made there. The only
guarantee which the Customs now have
that the goods have paid duty is the
declaration of the exporter, and that can
be sent to Broken Hill with the appli-
cation for drawback. It must be remem-
bered that most of our houses have branch
houses or agencies there now, and the
concentration of the business there with
the omission of the most expensive opera-
tion will be a distinct advance. This
proposal will, no doubt, strike terror into
the hearts of red tape, but the weal of
the community should rise superior to any
such disaster. It may be said that it
would occasion expense in keeping a staff
of officials at JBroken Hill to attend to the
large business the change would involve,
but is it not worth a little expenre ? How
much would it pay South Australia to
give New South Wales for the cession
of the Barrier Ranges to our province ?
Besides, it would not be necessary to
examine every case any more than it is
necessary to take the contents of every
package imported into the colony. It
would be sufficient to take a case here and
there to verify each importer’s claim,
providing stiff penalties for any attempt
to defraud.
DIVERSION OF TRADE TO SYDNEY.
That trade is being diverted to Sydney
Is absolutely certain. In coming up to
Broken Hill I was in conversation with
one of our South Australian traders, and
he told me that in consequence of the
handicapping of trade through the pro-
tective tariff and the drawback system
his firm had decided to establish a house
in Sydney, and send thence in bond via
Port Pirie. To-day in talking with
another trader he told me a similar story.
South Australia is to be reduced to com-
mon carriers instead of suppliers to the
Barrier, and all through a want of states-
manship and administrative capacity to
seize a golden opportunity. Once the
trade goes it will never be regained.
ANOTHER TARIFF TORTURE.
Another tariff trouble is the double-
barrelled railway tariff from Adelaide to
Broken Hill. It is of course necessary
that merchants should be in a position to
calculate the charges on goods in order
to fix the lowest possible selling rate.
Only that it is unkind to send more
patients to the Parkside Asylum one
might ask tor a solution of the problem
as to which is more difficult to interpret
—Playford’s or Pendleton’s tariff puzzle.
Supposing, however, that the merchant
has worked out the amount of drawback
and New South Wales duty he has to
enter into abstruse calculations as to what
freight he urnst pay under the political
railway tariff. Then he adds according to


another classification what he must pay
under the commercial tariff of the Silver-
ton Tramway Company ; and when he
has sent the goods away he probably finds
his conclusions all wrong by a reasoning
which converts everything to the produc-
tion of the greatest revenue.
RAILWAY MISMANAGEMENT.
Only one other matter here. The
railway management is on the same illiberal
scale as the drawback system—penny-wise
and pound-foolish. Can anything more
idiotic be imagined than landing fifty or sixty
passengers, including women and children,
between 3 and 4 o’clock in the morning
in a town where hardly an hotel has a
bed to spare. But I am wanting in per-
ception. I am reminded that it is an
ingenious device to give visitors a fitting
introduction to roughing it at Broken
Hill. Certainly they do have to rough
it. This morning a large number of the
passengers stood knocking, knocking,
knocking at the hotel doors, only to be
denied admission or granted leave
after pitiful pleading to sleep in the
balcony or in crowded bedrooms. Surely
the passengers are grateful to the South
Australian Government for the oppor-
tunity of cheerfully paying half a crown
to get half a dozen winks in the nice
cool open air of an hotel balcony. Then,
again, it is an ingenious device to keep the
hotelkeepers employed at night as well as
by day. If they want a night’s rest like
other mortals, then they ought not to be
hotelkeepers in Broken Hill Besides
which it has the advantage of preserving
by night those charming sounds of vehicle
traffic that weary Willyamaites may be
awakened to bless Mr. Commissioner Catt.
Why, with a large and growing traffic, a
train could not start from Adelaide and
Broken Hill at a quarter to 5 in the even-
ing, travel all night, and land the passen-
gers in Adelaide and Broken Hill for
breakfast, only Mr. Traffic-Manager
Pendleton can tell us. He is pleased
to obstruct the development of this best-
paying line in South Australia because it
would involve travelling at nighttime and
the line is unfenced for the narrow-gauge
portion of the route. I was going to say
“ Bosh !” but withdraw it. The train
travels at present on the same part all
night from Broken Bill and up to 3 a. m.
from Adelaide. Then he urges that it
would necessitate the employment of a
second shift of men. Well, what of that
when the traffic warrants it 1 In ten
days 1,500 persons travelled on the
line, and if the alteration were made I
am assured by residents that they would
frequently go to Adelaide, where under
the present table the time taken by the
journey prohibits it. The last loophole is
that more rolling-stock would be required
for the change. Unless the Manager ex-
pects an enormous addition to the pas-
senger traffic it is difficult to see what
extra rolling-stock has to do with the
question when the same number of trains
only are required. The advantage of the
proposed alteration can be seen by an
illustration. A business man could leave
Adelaide on Monday evening, and arrive
fresh the next morning at Broken Hill.
He could spend Tuesday in doing business
in the town or in inspecting the mines,
catch the evening train for Adelaide, and
arrive in time for Wednesday morning’s
business. The same would apply to
people from Broken Hill.
No. y.
THE BROKEN HILL LODE.
As a geologist Mr, A. Riddel, J.P., of
Thackaringa, is considered an authority
on the Broken Hill lode. Before intro-
ducing his opinion which he gave me at
Broken Hill it may be interesting to
state some of the remarkable facts of his
life. As a young man he was connected
with Dr. Livingstone’s Mission in Central
Africa, where, by the force of his
character, Mr. Riddel ruled the rude chiefs
for 500 miles round, preserving order and
prohibiting slavery. Repeated attacks of
malarial fever sent him home, and he
came to Australia with shattered health.
For four years he has been on the Barrier
Ranges. He started, in conjunction with
Messrs. Schooner and Finlay, the Broken
Hill Times , of which he was the Editor
until he sold his interest in April of last
year to Mr. B. J. Stephens. Being in
Sydney on business he heard of the White
Rock, and having inspected the property
was convinced that it was a good one. He
secured a twentieth interest in it and took
up leases of adjoining claims, which will,
according to the estimated value, set him
a long way on the road to a millionaire.
It was his opinion, however, as a prac-
tical man who had had exceptional oppor-
tunities of studying Broken Hill that
concerned me most. He said : —" The
country around is chiefly micaceous schist,
with dykes of syenite and diorite. Both on
the east and west of this Broken Hill line
of country there is a defined bar of
gneiss, verging into micaceous schist


as it goes nearer the lode, and getting
more crystallized the further away from
the lode. The trend of this rock is very
marked, both on the east and west side,
having a rapid underlay to the west, so
that should the ore body be directed in
its course, as it seems probable, by the
enclosing walls, the underlay blocks on
the line are bound to get the lode at a
reasonable depth. The continuity of
the ore body, forming as it does an
immense bonanza 2 miles in extent —
namely, from the South under the Central
to the north boundary of the Junction —is
in harmony with this theory. We have
also the additional fact that in no case
has the ore been found to run across the
strata. This is of great importance in
determining the value of all blocks on
the line, since they have traced the ore-
bearing portion both north and south such
a distance ; and the occasional bunches
found below, such as in the Rising Sun on
the south and the Cosgrove on the north,
seem to promise well for the intervening
blocks. It is, of course, too early to
predict with certainty the comparative
richness of any one block. This can be
proved only by an expenditure of capital
and labour.
THE PERMANENCY OF THE LODE.
“ Taking into account the fact that in
McCulloch’s Shaft in the Proprietary
Company’s property they have reached
sulphurate ores, and have found the lode
persisting in a strong body upwards of 20
feet in thickness in the seam which they
have cut, with the walls well de-
fined, there need be no immediate
anxiety regarding its permanence at a
depth, and very little regarding its
payable nature. Of course in the matter
of treatment the deep-level ores will be
required to be dealt with in a different
manner to that obtaining for the carbo-
nate ores near the surface ; but with a
man of Mr, Patton’s experience and the
wealthy Company over whose operations
he presides no difficulty need arise
in adapting the machinery to the
requirements of the ore, both as
regards the quantity to be treated
and the cost of doing so. If this
business of treating the deep-level ores be
commenced before the carbonate ores
become scarce, and a sufficient reserve of
capital is put aside to meet any addi-
tional expenditure in the erection of
special machinery, the dividends payable
may go on increasing while the mine is
being developed both in deep levels and
being worked in the present drives and
atopes. This, I believe, is the present
study of the Directors and of Mr.
Patton, the General Manager. A large
concentrating plant has been ordered
from America, and no doubt other machi-
nery will be found as occasion requires.
In addition to supplying the wants of the
mine, the experiments and successes of
this mine will be a valuable education
for the silver-mining community of Aus-
tralia.
“The output from the Proprietary
Company’s mine has not in any degree
lessened the quantity of ore obtainable,
as most of the ore hitherto used has
come from developmental works such as
shafts, drives, and tunnels, the great
body of ore exposed being still left in
blocks between various shafts and along
the various levels of the mine. The new
plant, the three 80-ton furnaces lately
added, as well as the five 30-ton furnaces
at present running, can be easily supplied
by commencing in one of the stopes ready
for work ; and if required the output can
be eastly quadrupled without incon-
veniencing the Mining Manager. This
fact taken in connection with the com-
pletion of the railway to the foot of the
hill, with the cheapening of timber and
carriage of coke brought to the mine, and
of the carriage of bullion away, will of
itself be an additional dividend to the
fortunate shareholders by the lessening
of expense as compared with that of the
previous time.
IMPORTANCE OF THE “CENTRAL’
DISCOVERY.
“ The discovery of native silver in the
Central of unexampled richness and in
enormous quantity has something to do
with the present boom in silver stocks.
I believe that a considerable amount
of capital has been set aside for invest-
vestment in these securities of late, but
it was chiefly the discovery in the Broken
Hill Central which led to the phenomenal
figures reached by the ‘ Brokena ’ within
a fortnight after the opening of the market
this year. The Manager of the Central
estimates that he can send away 100 tons
per week, averaging 100 oz. of silver, and
from the appearance of his mine it need
not be doubted. This will be a welcome
addition to the ore-producing mines of the
Barrier, as the faith of shareholders in so
many unproductive stocks was beginning
to be severely shaken, and it used to be a
byword to ask ‘How many of your
Barrier mines are paying dividends or


producing ores at all 1* The answer was
quite as hackneyed, ( Only the Hill.’
THE JUNCTION.
“The Junction is also an ore-producing
mine, although the unfortunate position
of the shafts at the end of tAe footwall
did not render the raising of ore there as
easy as it might have been had the shafts
been more westerly placed on the mines.
The erection of a concentrating plant on
this mine by the Barrier Ranges Concen-
trating Company will make the large
bodies of ore marketable, and by taking
out the gangue and silicious matter the
quality of the ore dispatched to market
will be of a high grade, thus lessening the
cost of carriage of useless material and in
every way saving expense.
BROKEN HILL NORTH.
“The Broken Hill North has lately been
furnished with efficient machinery, and
the Manager is confident that he can make
the mine dividend-paying on the com-
pletion of his arrangements.
BLOCK 14 COMPANY.
On Block 14 the machinery will be soon
completed, and with the energy charac-
teristic of its Manager, who is also
Manager of the British Broken Hill Com-
pany (Mr. S. R. Wilson) great things may
be expected as soon as the smelters begin
to pour forth their products.
BRITISH BROKEN HILL COMPANY.
“ With reference to the British Broken
Hill Company, the strictures of certain
members of the London Stock Exchange
will receive a rude rebuff very shortly. Mr.
Wilson has his shafts and drives extended
a little further, and he has to ask the
Directors for some appliances for reducing
the ore which he will be finding by the
hundred thousand tons. There is no
doubt but that the shareholders in the
British Broken Hill Company, who are
accustomed to per cent, interest on
their money, or perhaps even less, will in
time duly appreciate the proportion which
the dividends will bear to the sum of
their investment, and as soon as that is
ascertained by the British investing public
a boom in these stocks is bound to ensue,
which will have a reflex action on the
value of other stocks on the line, inas-
much as their introduction to the Euro-
pean market will be an absolute certainty.
Already the mining journals of the world
are becoming aware of the good things we
have found about the Hill, and the selec*
tlon of Mr. Patton from the boss silver-
mine of America to fill the post of
Manager on the Hill was a gigantic
advertisement which in itself is bound to
bear fruit.
THE NEED FOR EXPERTS.
“Australia will presently be drawing
upon America for a few more of its
experts, as throughout the whole of New
South Wales and parts of South Australia
silver is being discovered in highly pay-
able quantities, and the inexperience of
the community engaged in silver-mining
in South Australia renders the stock of
efficient experts to cope with the various
classes of ore exceedingly scarce. But no
doubt we shall presently be producing a
class of native-born Australians who will
be equal to the occasion in all lines of the
art of silver extraction and reduction.
A QUESTION FOR AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENTS.
“ Why do not the Australian Govern-
ments get a charter to coin silver in the
colonies and sell it to the East ? They
could make rupees for India, dollars for
Japan, and money for China. The alloy
that is mixed with silver is sufficient to
give the Government a handsome profit. ”
So ended my interview with the new
Australian mining king.
No. YI.
THE LABOUR MARKET.
Scenes change rapidly in Broken Hill,
each successive week witnessing marked
alterations in the appearance and con-
ditions of the town. No factor has been
so patent as the opening of the railway
from Adelaide in rendering possible the
transformations which the development
of the mines and the energy of the people
justify and demand. A year ago the town
passed through a period of depression
because it was then by no means clear
to the majority that there would
be dividend • paying concerns be-
sides the Proprietary mine, but when
it was considered certain that there would
be payable properties for miles around the
township, capital was freely employed in
the purchase of land and the erection of
buildings. And the assurance is deepen-
ing by current events, accounting for the
large number of men engaged in and
about the township. The marvellous
growth of the district —the population
being three and a half times more than it
was a year ago—is due to the conviction


of capitalists that the permanency of an
extensive silver field is a question beyond
dispute.
In all large settlements which spring up
rapidly wages and profits are high, attract-
ing in course of time large numbers of
labourers and business people to share in
the phenomenal prosperity. Obviously
the competition must ultimately reduce
both wages and profits to an ordinary
level. This is the process now obtaining
at Broken Hill, and it may be said to
have been fairly initiated with the com-
pletion of railroad communication.
Whereas a few weeks ago there was
a scarcity of labour in the
district, to-day, owing to the large
numbers brought to the town by rapid
and cheap travelling, the labour market is
overstocked with miners, clerks, and
mechanics (particularly the two latter),
though not to the alarming extent re-
ported in Adelaide, and business is over-
done. If, however, the flow of immi-
gration should cease for a short period,
the demand would overtake the supply.
The condition of the workman here may
be summed up in the statement that it is
considered that wages are generally 20
per cent, higher than in Adelaide, and
living expenses 50 per cent, dearer; but
he has an advantage in permanent em-
ployment. As to the tradesman, owing to
competition, he looks for advantage not
so much to his ordinary business as to the
opportunities preferred for remunerative
speculations in land, buildings, and
shares.
At the meeting of the Adelaide Trades
and Labour Council on Friday evening a
startling statement was made that there
were 2,000 men out of work at Broken
Hill, including miners, masons, and
labourers of all classes. If a nought were
dropped the figures would be more nearly
correct. Having made enquiries on the
spot from different sources, I find that
500 would be an outside number of the
unemployed, and these for the most part
represent new comers. It is difficult
to understand how even that number can
be unemployed, while it would be impos-
sible for a large body of men to be long in
want of work without the fact becoming
generally recognised.
The wages ot good miners are £3 a week,
of labourers £2 Bs., of carpenters lls. to
12s. a day, and other tradesmen in pro-
portion. There is no doubt but that the
influx of men beyond the requirements of
the place is likely to lead to a minimum
wage. A short time ago the carpenters
agitated for a uniform pay of 13s. a day,
but became contented with 12a. Several
establishments now give only lls., and one
firm will next week reduce it to 10s. for
all but the best class of workmen supplied
with tools. When the conditions of life
are rendered more agreeable, and men
bring their families, and living ex-
penses come down, as they will
in time, the tendency towards the
equalization of wages here and in
Adelaide will become more pronounced.
The water in two reservoirs in similar
circumstances tapped and connected will
be found preserving a uniform level.
Adelaide and Broken Hill are reservoirs
to the labour market, and the railway is
the communication the effect of which is
already in view.
While it is necessary to point out the
unnatural gloom in the picture presented
to the Trades and Labour Council, there
is reason to deprecate a rush to the
Barrier. For exceptional men with
talent, experience, energy, and capital,
who will work early and late, seize every
opportunity to rise, be equal to all
occasions for money-making ; men, too,
with good constitutions and decision of
character, there is a splendid opening in
Broken Hill, which is undoubtedly des-
tined to be a city fed by numerous large-
sized towns clustering about leading
mines for 50 miles around. Of such men,
it is not going beyond the case to say,
there is a fair sample—men in the prime
of life, above the average in business
ability, with fixity of purpose, and a
vested interest in success. But common-
place characters, clerks, shopmen, me-
chanics, and labourers, who have
no ambition or ability to rise,
had better remain away. There
are no easy-going billets to be
had. For some time to come life at
Broken Hill must be hard and rough.
The work is the work of pioneers with
will and nerve and muscle. Moreover,
the insanitary state of the town and the
difficulty as to house accommodation must
be additional reasons for advising people
to pause ere coming here to settle.
That there will be no diminution in
the present demand for labour seems
sure. Should the silver boom pass
away a number of small claims
worked now with a view to being
floated on the market will cease to
employ labour, some mines prove
duffers, stocks be low again, and the de-
pression in share-dealing find several
plungers, brokers, and spies with their


occupation gone; yet the big mines must
go on, the dividend-paying concerns be
multiplied, the amount of the pay-
sheets increased, and the building of the
city uninterrupted. The extension of
settlement is proceeding with great
rapidity. Last week a southern wing
was pegged out near to the Broken Hill
Central mine, while north and south resi-
dences are being erected a mile-and-a-half
distant from the post-office, and it must be
remembered that a condition of holding a
block is personal residence. This per-
petual expansion is unrelated to a tem-
porary population. Only those who have
business in the district or employment of
some kind can afford to comply with the
personal residence clause. Notwith-
standing the daily addition to the places
of residence rents are still high, a four-
roomed cottage being advertised as cheap
at £1 a week. Central sites fetch what
seem to be extravagant prices, £2,000
being a moderate demand for a quarter-
acre block in the main street. If all the
married men in the district sent for their
families the addition would be 50 per
cent, to the population. It should
not be forgotten, as previously mentioned,
that the city has te be almost entirely
rebuilt. The builders of the town have
therefore no doubt but that the trade will
continue as brisk as it is now for a con-
siderable time.
BUSINESS AT BROKEN HILL.
The reason that no complaint is heard,
except by accident, as to business being
overdone is that most tradesmen are en-
grossed in making money in the mining
world. The extent to which sharemon-
gering is carried on has been referred to
before, but I have since obtained from a
competent authority an estimate of the
share transactions in this town.
He puts the amount down at
not less than £70,000 a week.
The modus operandi of share-dealing
appears to be that a broker buys from
an Adelaide, Melbourne, or Sydney con-
temporary who draws upon his Broken
Hill client, and as the latter draws upon
his agent elsewhere very little actual cash
passes. It might be thought that the
Broken Hill tradesmen are running
close to the wind in contending against
severe competition and incurring the
risks of mining speculation. In their
behalf it should be said that the
mining boom is not created in the
town, for the people are too longheaded.
They know fully well that the market
value is not the intrinsic value of the
stock, and they simply buy and iell
quickly, keeping well within their limits.
While there must be about £lO,OOO a
week distributed in wages every week, a
large amount is drafted away to mining
townships in South Australia for the
sustenance of the families of men here ;
and it can be at once seen that if the
families remove here, which will probably
take place at no distant date, there will
be a noticeable improvement in trade. A
man who earns £l2 a month will remit £7
to his family, retaining £5 for himself. If
he lives in a tent, his board will
cost about 10s. a week, and the remainder
will be devoted to clothes, luxuries, and
speculations. The source of wages paid
here may be traced to mining capital,
sales of ore and dividends, to other im-
ported capital for large buildings as
hotels, and to savings from wages for
minor improvements.
As to the nature of ordinary business,
it is said to be decidedly healthy. But in
discussing this point just now with a
Sydney traveller who is canvassing
the town with a view to establishing
a branch house, he pronounced an
entirely opposite opinion. He affirmed
that it was not good enough for Sydney
people, though they could deliver goods at
Port Pirie duty paid for the price charged
in Adelaide duty to pay, to enter into the
trade, because of the extent that the
credit system has been carried to. I am,
however, disposed to think that the ex-
tent of the credit system was magnified,
and real difficulty in the way was
the fact that better prices may be ob-
tained within 300 miles of Sydney than in
Broken Hill owing to the competition of
South Australian merchants, who having
emerged from a cloud of depression are
content with small profits. It was re-
freshing to see our Sydney friend in
Broken Hill—a town so thoroughly filled
with South Australians that but for
Governmental neglect it would be difficult
to find any reminder of New South
Wales. He was strong in the conviction
that within a year the Ministry of his
colony would make a light line from Hay
or Bourke to the Barrier, and work it at
a nominal freight in order to block South
Australian trade; but here again I find
myself forced to differ from him, for cui
hono, when Sydney may have the trade on
better terms by using the Port Pirie line
and trusting to the South Australian
Governments predeliction for hampering
trade?


But I hare digressed somewhat. I
have it from several sources that the
credit system is limited in Broken Hill.
Yery few accounts go unpaid beyond a
month, while the majority are cash trans-
actions. It is natural to believe this is
so, where, while the body of the people
are South Australians, they are for the
most number entire strangers in business.
Besides, other circumstances of business
are special, demanding prompt payments.
BANKING.
There are five Banks, and it is rumoured
that a sixth will shortly be represented in
Broken Hill. The Town and Country
Bank was the pioneer financial establish-
ment, but on that institution merging into
the Commercial Bank of Australia the
branch was closed. It has since been re-
opened, but meanwhile the Bank of Aus-
tralasia had gathered up the leading
business, and does perhaps more than
all the others put together. How-
ever, the remaining customers are
divided between the Commercial
of Australia, Union, Bank of South Aus-
tralia, and National. The London and
Chartered Bank is reported to be the new-
comer. With regard to banking business,
it is very much hampered by the want of
security under the Land Act. There are
only about two titles worth looking at in
the township, the rest being held under
business licences on condition of personal
residence.
The conclusion of my enquiries is that
though the labour market is overstocked
it is not through any check in the progress
of the district, but the desire of too many
to share in its prosperity; and that,
though business is overdone, there is no
sign of nnhealthiness in trade, the cause
of the plethora here again being not the
fewness of the plums, but the host of
plum-seekers. The law of the survival of
the fittest is scarcely likely to make
Broken Hill an exception.
NO. YII.
SOME PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.
The public institutions of Broken Hill
are a positive disgrace to any colonial
Government. Whether it be the
telegraph or the post - office, the
Police or the Customs Department,
the officials are over - worked, with
consequent loss and annoyance to the
community. The only thing that the
central authorities seem able to do well is
to receive the handsome revenues from
the district.
Probably the most patent grievance is
connected with the post - office, the
business of which is enormous. There is
one big mail a day, the mail from Ade-
laide which arrives in the town at 3 o’clock
in the morning, but the letters from which
are not available for the public until 9
o’clock. A few private letter-boxes are
provided for subscribers, but the
number is so miserably inadequate
that the right to a partial use of a letter-
box is reported to be worth £2 10s. If a
Willyamaite is obliged to trust to the
tender mercies of the postal delivery, he
may get his letters and papers some time
during the day, but It is not safe to depend
upon their receipt during the forenoon.
But should the unlucky resident be
beyond the limited range of postal delivery
or have his letters addressed to the post-
office, he will get such a taste of vexatious
postal arrangements as will well nigh drive
him mad. From 9 in the morning till 6
in the evening the little pigeon-hole
window of the wooden shanty is crowded
with twenty, thirty, and sometimes more
miners, clerks, boys, women, and nonde-
scripts, all huddled together so as not to
miss a chance of asking the steady-going
official whether there is a communication
for him or her. It is a common thing
for one to wait two or three hours
for his turn to watch the young
man go through all the letters in the
alphabetical bundle appropriate to his
name. Imagine the discomfort of stand-
ing in the scorching sun against a heat-
reflecting building wasting precious hours,
unable to leave without the valuable
packet containing a remittance or matter
of great import. How the patient people
have borne so meekly the monstrous
insult to the town and trade passes ordi-
nary comprehension. But for the newness
of the settlement and consquent want of
unity amongst the people, and the fact
that most of them are South Australians
who have passed into New South Wales
like children into an unkind stepmother’s
care, they would have risen as one man
to put an end to such neglect. Of what
use is it to ask the Sydney Govern-
ment for anything is the feeling
at the bottom. It is impossible to under-
stand why the postal officials of Sydney
should not in their own interest attend to
the complaints. For instance, it is out of
the question to buy stamps at the post-
office, for the only officer who can be
spared of the numerically feeble staff to
attend to the public is engaged in handing
out the letters at the pigeon-hole. One


cannot help pityingthe young officials who,
working sixteen hours a day in an office
unfit for the requirements of the large
business, can never give the public
satisfaction nor keep pace with the
routine work. Yet it is said with grue-
some satisfaction that the accommodation
is palatial to what it was, and the facilities
an enormous advance upon what they
were ! Except that one had experienced
some of the annoyances he would scarcely
credit the defective character of the postal
arrangements.
A message could be sent to Adelaide in
less time by train than by telegraph. That
is the repeated experience at Broken Hill.
I have already referred to the volume of
business ard the inability of the staff to
cope with it. To put the beat face on
things let me, like Mark Tapley, say that
I have heard of cases of remarkably rapid
transmission of telegrams between Ade-
laide and Broken Hill. The record has
been broken by only twelve hours being
occupied. Besides which there is some
satisfaction in contemplating that if a man
loses £l,OOO through telegraphic delays he
can spend £lOO in making the Govern-
ment smart to the extent of £5.
In South Australia if a screw falls out
at a public well, memorials, deputations,
and indignation meetings follow in quick
succession, but in Broken Hill the
magnitude of its intolerable burden of
injustice is still insufficient to provoke an
indignation meeting. When it does
come let the Premier, though
he be now merry, tremble, for the
fires of wrath are silently gathering, I
was just now reminded by some Victorian
visitors that such maladministration would
not be tolerated in their colony. The
retort was that New South Wales stepped
with the measured caution of matured
wisdom, while Victoria moved with
the excessive energy of youth. It
is possible that the Sydney Govern-
ment, behind a cloud of neglect, in
wisdom hide a kindly intention. They
do not propose to give Broken Hill any
good thing until by repeated requests it
furnishes a proof of an ability to appre-
ciate it. This possibility is mentioned
because it is only fair to find every apology
for the Sydney people, and this is the
most plausible yet discovered.
CHAINING PRISONERS LIKE DOGS.
Sergeant Saunders, the intelligent
officer in charge of the police, was for
five years at Mount Browne, and left with
the relief camels sent by South Australia.
He has also been two years in Wilcannia.
His experience in Broken Hill extends
back about fifteen months. One by one
he has slowly gathered together for the
protection of over 6,000 people a force of
four men. He has as a lockup a galva-
nized-iron building, lined with match-
board, measuring 12 feet by 10 feet by
10 feet, in which hole prisoners are
chained to the joists like dogs. There are
two ringbolts through the floor, and the
untried prisoners are manacled by the leg.
The police do not because they cannot
strictly administer the law. If they
attempted to do their duty there are
many occasions when they would come
in conflict with a crowd 300 or 400
strong of excited men, and of what use
are five policemen among so many ] The
guardians of the peace have, therefore, to
wink at fights, and summons the offenders
afterwards. Of the twenty-six hotels
there are some of an inferior character,
but an improved class is now going
up, stone, iron, and wood, with from
thirty to fifty rooms each, and the
Licensing Bench has decided not to grant
licences except to houses of superior con-
struction. In connection with the num-
ber of the hotels, it should be remembered
that many serve the purpose of boarding-
houses, which are in greater demand than
usual through the number here of single
men and of married men without their
families. The town is fairly supplied with
Magistrates. There are three or four
local Justices, but the Police Magistrate is
resident at Silverton, and only comes once
a week. Mr. Warden Wyman Brown, S.M.,
is thoroughly conversant with both
branches of his work, and is spoken of in
the town with the greatest respect. The
Police Court or Court of Petty
Sessions sits daily, and the Small
Debts Court once a fortnight. Judge
Backhouse holds a District Court
twice a year, and Quarter Sessions
for all but capital offences, the nearest
place for which would be Hay, about 480
miles distant.
The police force should certainly be
doubled ; and it is no argument against
it to say that with the exception of a
somewhat high per centage of drunken-
ness, a predilection for fighting, and a
tendency to the unstinted use of sulphur-
ous language amongst certain classes in
the streets, the people are as a whole very
law-abiding. Already overworked, the
staff is unable to act in regard to offences
daily committed, and is certainly unable
to meet an emergency.


SANITARY MATTERS.
The police, who have the only power
in the town to touch sanitary matters,
possess very little control over them.
They act under the Police Act, which has
a novel procedure. A nuisance is found
existing on a man’s premises dangerous to
health. The police cannot give him notice
to abate it, but must lay an information
against him. It takes three days before
the summons can be heard. Supposing
the case to be proved, all the Magistrates
can do is to order the nuisance to be
abated within seven days ; so that by Act
of Parliament a dangerous nuisance is
allowed to continue unabated for ten days.
It is very absurd in a place exposed to so
many risks of typhoid fever like this is.
But the peculiarity of the law does not
end here. If the order is not obeyed
there is no penalty provided. The only
course open is to issue another summons
for disobeying the order, for which offence
the penalty is £lO. Without a doubt
the town ought to be incorporated at once,
as a municipality could make stringent
by-laws with reference to sanitation, but
the chief difficulty in the way is the ques-
tion whether the mines should be included
in the assessment. The chief nuisances
are in regard to cesspits. A hole is sunk
in the ground 3 or 4 feet deep, and in a
great many instances the enclosure is only
bagging, the top being quite open. It is
not to be wondered at that there is a bad
stench in the air. There is no system of
cleaning out. Sergeant Saunders has been
insisting upon the excavation of holes to a
depth of 10 to 12 feet. Rubbish covers the
roadway, and beer barrels and merchan-
dise at frequent intervals adorn the foot-
paths. An enterprising resident has
started scavenging upon the guarantee of
several tradesmen, but any such arrange-
ment is at best only a poor substitute for
efficient municipal work.
[No. YIIL]
THE EARLY DAYS.
On my making application to a gentle-
man who was on the field in the early
days for information respecting those in-
teresting times he courteously offered to
write a sketch for your readers. The
following is his account:—
“ Controversy has been engendered
concerning the actual father of this field,
but I am convinced that no man can more
justly claim the title than the late ‘Paddy
Green.’ This man many years ago delved
upon the Barrier. Men ip their wisdoqi
laughed at him. Others more compas-
sionate but equally incredulous said he
had a silver mania engendered by mis-
fortunes upon the great Victorian gold-
fields. But Green went on his way un-
heeding all, and firmly convinced in his
own mind that he was on the eve of a
great discovery. He knew nothing of
chlorides or oxides, and sulphides were to
him an unknown quantity; but he did
know galena pure and simple when he saw
it, and Thackaringa is wonderfully prolific
in this precious metal. I believe that the
first mtne ever worked here was the
‘ Pioneer. ’ Green fossicked out from the
surface several hundred tons of good ore
from this rightly-named claim. But in
all his delving he never went 30 feet
below the surface. He simply rooted out
the rich layers or bands of silver ore.
From this district he sent away several
lota of ore, some of which never reached
its destination. One parcel was jettisoned,
several others miscarried through various
causes, and I understand that poor Green
never lived to see the fulfilment of his
splendid dreams. He died in 1880, just
as men were beginning to believe that the
desolate arid Barrier Ranges contained
precious metals worth risking life and
health to win. Prior to this
period the surrounding country lying
midway between Wilcannia and Terowie
had an unsavoury name. It was
generally looked upon as the haunt
of the ‘cattle-duffers,’ as the notorious
cattle thieves were called, and more than
one bushranger is supposed to have
passed a portion of his career hereabout.
I have often conversed with old hands,
who invariably told the same story. Only
a few of them are alive now.
THE RUSH TO THE FIELD.
“ When silver was found at Umber-
umberka Australasia began to grow
uneasy. Thousands of men looked eagerly
for fresh news. Hundreds came in small
parties and scattered themselves over the
field. But it was not until 1880 that
people began to throng to the new
Eldorado. Then a steady stream set in,
which has never stopped. In 1883 a tre-
mendous rush set in. Terowie, then the
terminus of the South Australian railway
line in this direction, was the scene of ex-
citement. Crowds of eager men thronged
the streets in strange apparel. Vehicles
of every conceivable description passed
daily, nay hourly, through its dusty
streets. Hill & Co.’s coaches were
crowded to excess. Teams full of


diggers’ swags pushed on for the
great silver fields. Crowds of men placed
their ‘ blueys’ upon their backs and
tramped off determined to reach the pro-
mised land or perish in the effort. From
Terowie to Silverton was a fearful sight
when the winter set in. Teams were
bogged all along the track, and there
were sometimes twenty and thirty at one
bad patch commonly called a gluepot.
Gluepots were wonderfully plentiful on
that track. Sometimes as many as fifty
horses would be hitched on to a wagon,
whips would be at work, plied by brawny
arms well up in the business, blasphemy
as hot as lava would follow the whips,
and shovels and spades would be going on
in front of the wheels digging out the
loam. Sometimes the wagon would come
out, and sometimes it would come in
sections, torn asunder by the fearful strain.
Then the mail coaches would come creep-
ing along piloted by those princes of the
Australian road Nicholas and Wilkinson.
Sometimes it would take them nearly a fort-
night to get through, and it was a liv-
ing wonder how they ever gob along at all.
No man who does not know the back
blocks can appreciate the determined
pluck and marvellous skill of our mail
coach drivers. A drive on a pitch black
night through Stephen’s Creek, with the
flood a banker, a couple of half-broken
brutes in the team, and Billy White for a
pilot will do more to convince a person
than the longest eulogy every written.
SILVERTON.
“ On foot or in the saddle, by coach or
by team, the diggers reached Silverton at
last. Coming, as I did, along the old
Umberumberka road a dash is made for
the top of the hill. This reached Sil-
verton lay before us as a mass of canvas,
stretching in all directions. Iron shanties,
looking like big sardine tins, dotted the
whole valley. A mighty throng of rest-
less moving humanity of all nations, all
colours and all creeds, bustled about—
some laughing, some sorrowing, and many
cursing, all busy, and each intent on
making money somehow. Here was a
crowd of Irishmen wanting to ‘ shout’
for everybody or to fight with anybody ;
there a patient, cute-looking Chinaman
or two —soft, insinuating, and progres-
sive, interfering with no one, and
scoffed at by all. Behold a group
of Germans, fair-faced, half-mad with
excitement, talking and gesticulating
in the most frantic manner as if they had
$ world of business to do and no time to
do It in. Englishmen were everywhere
strong, resolute, surly, determined, and
arrogant; Scotchmen keen, eager, and
silent, looking after the main chance, and
dealing in everything ; and Australians
bold, pushing, boastful, generous, and
aggressive, keen as razors and hardy as
Arabs. Jews were there peddling every-
thing under the sun, and vowing that they
lost money over all they sold or bought.
Afghans in many coloured raiments lolled
about, apparently doing nothing except to
smoke. Italians screamed at the top of
their voices, and Frenchmen flew about
like men distraught, while Brother
Jonathan ‘guessed,’ ‘cussed,’ and ex-
pectorated with characteristic energy, and
was ready to wager that things wouldn’t
be allowed to get so tarnation mixed if
‘ Uncle Sara’ bossed the show. Every
one talked at once, and in his own lan-
guage. Nearly every man wore a
coloured shirt, and very few a coat of any
description. Beards went unshorn, hair
unkempt, and amidst all the hurly-burly I
scarcely ever saw a woman. When one
did put in an appearance hundreds of
eyes were fixed upon her, and ribald
tongue grew still. I never knew a
woman insulted in the early days. The
man who had been foolhardy enough to
have done so would have met with a bit
of extreme hard luck at the hands
of the moleskin crowd with leathern
waist straps and long sheathknife
attached. Dogs of every breed
known to Australasia roamed around
—greyhounds, sheepdogs, mongrels,
terriers, in fact every sort of canine
that knew how to follow a cart and
worry a sheep. This was Silverton,
the capital of the Barrier t in those days.
Afterwards men settled down a little.
The prospectors spread out over the
surrounding country, and the business
people built themselves habitations, and
hotels sprang up like magic, Chapels
followed. Stores were numerous—
drapers, grocers, and general dealers,
carpenters, and blacksmiths, assayers,
chemists, bakers, and butchers established
themselves. Then the fever came along,
and finding the place ripe for its purpose
carried off the flower of the people.
It was a wonderful thing, but not one
drunkard went down with the scourge.
The victims were all fine strong, steady,
young men, and Silverton Cemetery is
full of their remains. This was a time
which none who were present will ever
forget. Day by day miners and mothers,
sweethearts and sisters, arrived by coach


to see some loved one, only to find, in
most cases, that he had been consigned to
the grave. Let Broken Hill take warn-
ing, for the sanitary conditions of the
place are in a disgraceful condition.
MINING BONANZAS.
“The Pinnacles Mines were in those days
spoken of as a wonderful thing, which
would soon employ men enough to form a
large township, but that dream has not
yet been realized. Then the Apollyon
claimed for awhile public favour, but this
property disappeared from the front rank.
Then the mighty Day Dream nearly drove
men mad, and a good-sized township
sprung into existence, only to fade away
like a spring flo wer. The Poolamacca Mines
also claimed to be able to support a sepa-
rate and independent township. But what
is it to-day 1 Then came the Broken Hill
which in size and importance overshadows
all the rest combined. Here the visitor
sees the promise of an inland city.
ONE OF THE WONDERS OF THE
WORLD.
“Taking it for all in all, it is perhaps the
most remarkable field ever opened in the
whole of Australasia. Hundreds of men
have made immense fortunes upon it.
Thousands of others have enriched them-
selves, and many are doing so this
present day. The field has had its draw-
backs. It has been the cause of ruin
morally to many scores of young fellows.
Lives have been blighted, characters lost,
prospects damned for ever. Drinking,
gambling, and debauchery will find a
home on every field where men struggle
and strain after wealth forgetting all else :
and man is not so many removes from the
savage in this century when far from pure
home influences.”
No. IX.
For years and years the land of the
setting sun, as the Barrier Ranges country
is termed in New South, Wales, had been
known to squatters, but only as a country
for raising cattle for the Ade-
laide and Melbourne markets, and
producing wool for English auctions.
To-day it is the scene of many thriving,
growing townships, clustering where the
roar of furnaces continues day and night,
and miners are descending into and
ascending out of the wealth-hiding bowels
of the earth. It seems to be a disputed
point as to who was the first to call atten-
tion to the mineral richness of the Barrier
Ranges, which have in the infancy of
their development made the haunts of
cattle - duffers homes for honest
toilers, and converted humble shep-
herds into influential silver kings.
“ Paddy Green” is canonised in this con-
nection by some, and others hold in
reverence Julius Nickel, who twelve years
ago found small veins of galena while
sinking a well at Thackaringa for Messrs.
Elder, Smith, & Co. It is stated that
Nickel, failing to induce his mates to join
him, pegged out the ground constituting
some of the leading claims now at
Thackaringa, and went to Adelaide for
capital, predicting to Mr. Smith
that the Barrier would be the
biggest field in Australia. Meeting with
no sympathy, and discouraged by his
specimens returning a low percentage,
he abandoned silver-mining for a time.
John Stokie, a Thackaringa publican,
associated with Patrick Green and Louis
Garrot, succeeded in raising and shipping
79 tons of galena for England, but it was
jettisoned on the voyage, the firm recover-
ing £270 under an insurance policy. Mr.
Green, the sleeping partner, died about
this time, and work was practically sus-
pended. In 1876 Stokie discovered the
tJmberumberka. On September 4, 1883,
Broken Hill was pegged out by Rasp and
party. The Purnamoota silver and the
Poolamacca tinfields were started in
June, 1884 In October of the same year
a sensation was caused by the discovery of
chlorides at Broken Hill, which led to the
pegging-out of claims to the north and
south, all considered, of course, to be on
the line of lode.
The Barrier Silver-field brought to
light amongst other things the value of
chlorides. From the Apollyon, where
they were first found, a consignment of
ore was shipped to London in 1883, and
the consignees refused for months to take
delivery of it. It was thickly im-
pregnated with chlorides, and on the
value becoming known it realized over
£330 per ton. In the Broken Hill Mine
the occurrence of kaolin carrying silver
under the conditions found there is one
of several interesting geological facta
furnished in the district. Indeed the
conditions of the field are in many
respects so new that mining in certain
phases may be considered to be yet some-
what of an experimental nature.
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY
COMPANY.
In September, 1883, Mr. Charles Rasp,


of Medindie. then a boundary
rider on Mount Gipps station, was
mustering sheep near Broken Hill, one
of the peaks of the Barrier, and was
struck by its suggestive formation. The
southern portion of the hill, which runs
north-east and south-west for between 1
and 2 miles, presents the appearance of a
very jagged razor, so fine seems the
edge, and so peculiar the indica-
tions. From the bluff which marks
the southern boundary of Block 14 to
a similar bluff overlooking Block 16 in the
flat and the Junction mine on an eminence
to the left, the hill is still rugged though
much less so than on the northern portion.
Mr, Rasp discussed with Mr, George
McCulloch, manager and part owner of the
station, the promising look of the hill for
prospecting, and it was decided to peg it
out in the possibility of discovering a tin
lode. Wilyu-wilyu-yong, the aboriginal
name for Broken Hill, was there-
upon ap plied jj* for in the names of
Messrs. George McCulloch, G. A. Lind,
and George Urquhart, seven blocks, or a
total of 2 miles being secured on the line
of lode. A Syndicate was then formed,
Messrs. G. McCulloch, Phillip Charley,
Lind, David James, G. Urquhart, C.
Rasp, and James Poole holding shares
in equal proportions in the Broken
Hill Mining Company. Prospect-
ing was carried on for several
months, but the success appears to have
been so doubtful that Messrs. Lind and
Urquhart, storekeeper and overseer on
Mount Gipps Station, sold out. The
Syndicate was merged into a Company on
August 12, 1883, under the title of the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company,
Limited, the capital consisting of 16,000
shares, 2,000 being issued to the
public at £9 each, paid up to £l9,
while the remaining 14,000, also
paid up to £l9, were retained by
fourteen proprietors, namely : —Messrs.
W. Jamieson, W. Daglish, Solomon
Wiseman, 0. Rasp, K. E. Brodribb,
Bowes Kelly, E. Thomson, David James,
W. R. Wilson, James Poole, A. W. Cox,
G. McCulloch, and P. Charley.
Innumerable are the stories told of
golden opportunities missed of buying a
fourteenth or lesser interest in the great
mine for what is now regarded as a mere
song, but was then considered to be
an exorbitant price for an unproved pro-
perty. How far all of these anecdotes
are correct it is impossible to say, for a
man likes, next to being considered rich,
to be thought of as one who could have
been rich if he had chosen. It is evident,
however, from the sales that were made,
and the low percentage of ore at first
obtained, that the majority did not suspect
that hill to be one of the richest caskets of
silver to be found in the world. But under
the able management of Mr. S. R. Wilson,
Mr. Patton’s predecessor, the hidden
wealth was revealed in such abundance
that it was found necessary to adopt a
policy of segregating certain blocks be-
cause they could not be all advantageously
worked by one Company during the
currency of the 20 years lease. Block 14
has been made the subject of a Company,
each of the 16,000 shareholders in the
Proprietary Company being allotted 6 in
the new Company which retained 4,000.
The total 100,000 shares at £5 each, gave
the value put upon the property as
£600,000; but as the shares are now
being sold at nearly treble their nomi-
nal sum, the value set upon it
in the market is not far short
of £1,500,000. Blocks 15 and 16 have
been, as is well known, floated in the
London Market under the title of the
British Broken Hill Company, the value
a&xed to the property being £1,200,000.
Each shareholder in the Proprietary re-
ceived five fully paid-up £5 shares in the
British and a cash bonus of which £lO
has been paid, and 160,000 shares were
offered to the public. The shares are
quoted at a slight premium. Proprie-
tary shares have gone above £4OO,
but taking that amount as the market
value Blocks 13 to 10 are held to
be worth £6,400,000, and the whole
the blocks therefore at over £9,000,000.
A little more than three years ago Mr.
McCulloch, the Manager of the Mount
Gipp’s Station, played Mr. Cox, an employe
on the station, a game of euchre to decide
whether the latter should give the former
£l5O or £l2O for a fourteenth share in the
Broken Hill Mines then being prospected.
Mr. Cox won. The fourteenth of
£9,000,000 is over £640,000. With what
strange emotions would the game have
been played had either known the value
of the stake !
No doubt some mistakes have been
made in the past, but considering the
entirely new circumstances and special
difficulties which have had to be met, the
development of the Broken Hill mine is a
thing to be proud of. The Government
Geologist of New South Wales (Mr.
Wilkinson) said in a lecture in Adelaide
in September last:—“ The enterprise of
the Broken Hill Company cannot be too


highly commended, not only with regard
to the introduction of efficient smelting
appliances, but in the appointment of
experienced and competent men as general
and mining managers and metallurgists.
Such judicious management must ensure
success where success is to be attained.
I here make allusion to it, for not only
upon this field but also throughout this
and other colonies, will it serve as an
example for mining, enterprise, especially
where the development of new classes of
mining is concerned.” Tq be fully sensible
of the enterprise of the Company one
needs to inspect the mine, for the visitor
is there not only impressed that it is a
magnificent property but that in manage-
ment it has claims to be considered a
model mine.
Broken Hill has not yet attained to
many things. It has not a single poli-
tician, or a prominent philanthropist;
has no institute or Savings Bank ; no
public buildings worthy of the name,
or requisites such as gas, water-
works, street - fountains, telephones,
decent postal and telegraph service,
and adequate police protection ; and
no local government, or sufficiently
strong public opinion to correct abuses.
But these are matters which time will
rectify, for Broken Hill has resources.
They commence with the scrubby slope of
the broken, dark ironstone-capped hill,
where now the furnaces never cease to
glow and the thud of the machinery is
ever heard, but their full extent it is not
possible to see now so early in the dawn
of the prosperity of the Barrier Silver-
field.
[No. X.]
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY
COMPANY (Continued).
The Township of Willyaraa is laid out
in wide streets at right angles to the four
compass points, as in Adelaide. The
main mile thoroughfare, Argent-street, is
therefore not quite parallel with Broken
Hill, which flanks it a few hundred yards
to the south. Standing in the balcony of
Elliott’s Hotel, which is halfway down
Argent-street, the visitor faces the mine.
Right opposite is Block 13, on which is
the old smelting plant, with it slag heap
running down the slope of the hill. To
the right and lower down the slope are
the Company’s offices, and higher up still,
looking to the right or in a southerly
direction, are the shafts of Block 12, and
a little lower the new smelting plant is
being erected. Beyond this and below
Block 11 is the diamond-drill of the
Underlay Company, as to the work of
which very little Is generally known.
From Block 10 the hill descends to a
point which seems to be in a straight line
with the railway. The point conceals
from view the road to the Broken Hill
Central mine, where the Broken Hill lode
has been found to be of a rich character.
Coming back and now looking slightly to
the left is a prominent peak, on the
north side of which is the boundary of
Block 14. Near by is Block 14 Com-
pany’s offices, and in the dip of the
hill the engine - shaft, while on the
other side commanding an extensive flat
is the smelting machinery with the stack
rising high above the top of the hill.
Further to the left, or in the northerly
direction, is the undulating form of the
hill in Block 15. Block 16 is hidden in
the flat beyond, the Junction poppets
standing out on the bluff in the distance
to the left of it. Looking up Argent-
street is the Round Hill, at the other side
of which is the township of that name,
older than Willyama, and having a
population of 300. The sides of Broken
Hill are covered with mulga scrub and a
strong undergrowth, and the top capped
with manganic ironstone.
The public have frequently heard of
the untold wealth represented in the Pro-
prietary Company’s property, and of the
beauty and richness of the ores as they
may be seen in the subterranean passages,
but it is only given to those privileged to
wander in the internal mazes of the mine
to be struck with amazement and admira-
tion of the so far matchless argenti-
ferous Broken Hill lode. The General
Manager (Mr. Patton) —than whom there
is none better able—asked to compare it
with the Comstock lode of Nevada, said
—“ The Comstock is a vein which runs
from 300 to 600 feet in width, and the ore
is in bodies, and not in what here would
be called shoots. By bodies I mean that
the ore lies in veins like raisins in a
pudding, occurring accidentally, and with
no particular rule to find them. Lying in
bodies in that way, when one body is
worked out, you cannot depend upon
finding another to keep up the supply of
ore. Here the ore appears to lie in shoots
or streaks, which you can follow. It is
not so bunchy as at Comstock. The
Broken Hill mines have been so recently
opened that we have not had time
to go down very deep, for the supplies of
ore near the surface are 'so enormous that
there is no necessity to do so. At the


Comstock there was ore on the surface in
the croppings, but down to a depth of
2,000 feet it increased in value as we went
down. The ores, too, were of a different
character to the Broken Hill ores. These
contain no gold and required a different
treatment.”
The most important feature of late in
connection with the Company’s property
is the discovery of rich ore in the Broken
Hill Central Mine, as it bears upon the
value of the southern blocks 11 and 10.
From the latter block it receives the lode,
which evidently passes through the next
three blocks of the South Company, for it
has been found in the South Extended, a
mile further to the south of Block 10.
There has been so much work going on in
putting up new machinery at the Pro-
prietary Company’s Blocks 12 and 13 that
the General Manager has not had time to
go into the question of developing 10 and
11. On the slope of the hill facing
the township, Mr. Patton is erecting con-
centrating or ore-dressing machinery.
The plant is on the way from America.
Briefly, it may be described as follows :
The ore is separated into different sizes,
the silica or quartz, which is detrimental
to smelting, is dressed out and passes
away as tailings. The new smelter will be
started some time this month. Nearly 900
men and boys altogether are employed on
the mine. About 150 of these are en-
gaged in handpicking ores, which work
will be done by the new ore-dressing
machinery.
Coming to the underground operations,
six shafts are being worked, but nothing
is being done below water level. There
is not any too much water, although suffi-
cient is obtained to answer present
requirements. It is expected that more
will be obtained as the sinking progresses.
For this purpose the 6-inch pumping
plant at Jamieson’s shaft is being changed
for a 9-inch with a longer stroke. There
are 600 hands in the mining department.
Of that number about 260 are under-
ground. Owing to the easy nature of the
ground the mine takes more timber men
and less miners than it otherwise would.
About twenty-five timber men are em-
ployed in securing the ground.
All the work done to date has been
practically prospecting, though it is un-
usual for a mine to pay its expenses and
dividends in that stage of its development
as the Broken Hill has done. When all
the smelters are in operation a fresh de-
parture in its history will be taken, as
active mining may then be said to begin.
In Brodribb’s Shaft the iron ore giving
place to carbonate of lead points to the
permanency of the lode.
A large portion of the expenditure now
is in developmental works and permanent
improvements. In a short time the ore
will be turned into bullion at a less cost
per ton than is now being done. A
survey of a line has been made to connect
the mines with the Broken Hill Tramway,
the expenses being equitably divided be-
tween the three Companies.
An immense amount of machinery for
the Company is being constructed in the
colonies instead of being imported from
England and America. Plans and speci-
fications of what is wanted are submitted
to colonial manufacturers before any order
is sent out, because it is the desire of the
Company to spend their money here.
Of course there are some patented articles
needed which cannot be made here with-
out the right to do so.
The management is entrusted to Mr.
Patton, who arrived a few months ago
with the highest reputation from the pre-
mier mine on the Comstock lode. During
his charge at Broken Hill he has effected
several improvements, and is held in the
greatest respect in the district, no less for
his amiability and unassuming manner
than for his undoubted ability.
Captain Piper, the Mining Manager, was
associated with the mine before it paid
dividends, and the testimony to his un-
remitting care for the property is to be
seen in the able way in which the under-
ground operations have been carried out.
Of Mr. Schlapp, the metallurgist, there is
only one opinion as to the great value of
his services to the Company. To Mr.
Thomas, the underground boss, visitors
are indebted for the entertaining explana-
tions he furnishes of the scenes below.
UNDERGROUND WORKS.
Patterson’s shaft.
Although one of the last opened Patter-
son’s Shaft is one of the principal shafts
of the mine owing to its capacity through
its central position for drainage purposes.
It is situated on Block 12, and sunk on
the east side of the vein in the footwall
ceuntry. Thirteen feet long, 5 feet wide
in the clear, it is down to 170 feet. The
ground is favourable for sinking, nine
men being equal to displacing 12 to 14
feet per week. It is close timbered with
substantial hardwood, centred and
divided with ladder-road, fixed at an easy
angle. Recently at the 132-feet level a
donkey-engine has been fixed for the con-


venience of the shift men. Sinking has
been again resumed, and will be carried
on even faster than previously. Pumping
and winding machinery will be soon on
the ground and put into position.
The surface outcrop near the shaft is of
great height and width, and yielding
immense bodies of sillcious iron ore, some
of which assays up to 70 oz of silver to
the ton. There are splendid bands run-
ning through this outcrop which gives
iron flux of a superior character. Thou-
sands of tons of ore has been removed
from this part, and thousands still
remain in sight.
MCCULLOCH’S SHAFT.
Turning to the north on Block 13 one
finds the second important shaft, McCul-
loch’s, named after one of the original
fourteen shareholders, who was then
manager of Mount Gipps Station. Its
importance is derived from the value of
the 216-feet level, which was formerly
the main tunnel, the output of lead ore
equalling 100 tons a day. The shaft was
sunk in the hanging-wall of the country,
and touched the lode 20 feet above the
216-feet level. A crosscut was put into
the east through the lode, which proved
to be about 120 feet wide. Of this 100
feet was of a highly payable character,
yielding carbonate of lead and chloride of
silver. Like fingers of the hand spread
out three drives open to the south, No, 1
extending about 500 feet, No. 2, 700 feet,
and No. 3, 200 feet, and at distances of
about 79 feet apart cross drives were made
to test the width and quality of the lode,
which is thereby cut up into square blocks.
Here the lode, which averages fully 80
feet in width, producing ore of over 30 oz.
to the ton and carbonate of lead going 40
per cent., presents spectacular effects that
seize upon the imagination of visitors.
There are drives at the 150-feet level
north and south. The south drive passes
through iron gossan of a very friable
nature, producing silver in payable
quantities. Indeed some of it went
between 200 and 300 oz. The fine stuff
is being treated, but large quantities are
being slacked for treatment by the new
ore-dressing machinery. Some short dis-
tance from the shaft north the lead shoot
comes on. From this large quantities of
lead have been raised. At convenient
distances winzes and passes have been
sunk for the perfect ventilation of the mine.
Owing to the heavy loose character of
the matter large quantities of massive
timber are fixed to keep the levels open
and the lode stuff in position.
hasp’s shaft.
Rasp’s Shaft was not only the first
sunk, but the one which gave the public
an idea of the wealth of the mine, for
even the proprietors had some doubt as
to its value until they struck the rich ore
at the 212-feet level about two years ago.
The shaft is also on Block 13, sunk
278 feet. The most important level, how-
ever, is the 212-feet, extending north and
south. The latter is connected with
McCulloch’s Shaft. In this drive rich
ore has been obtained, consisting of car-
bonate of lead and iron ore, which carries
a high percentage of silver. Stoping has
been proceeded with in the level. Three
winzes have been sunk to a depth of
about 60 feet, and in one extraordinarily
rich ore was got, some of which assayed
up to 1,500 oz. per ton. Here
again are found some pretty effects—
chlorides of silver in masses like coral or
filigree work, and lead crystals pure and
white, contrasting with the earthy gossan
intermixing with it and the clorides,
while some ironstone stuff has the lustre
and rainbow tints of shot silk.
At the 150-feet level the ground has
been blocked out and timbered into posi-
tion preparatory to begin stoping. When
the dressing plant is in working order
large quantities of lead and iron ore will
be extracted.
brodribb’s shaft.
This shaft has some interesting features.
It is sunk on Block 12, the southernmost
block opened up, on what is known as the
iron ore shoot, which is situated where
Mr. Jamieson’s blackboy, Harry Camp-
bell, found the first chlorides in the iron-
stone, and where shortly after a rich
patch, assaying up to 1,000 oz. per ton,
was discovered. Campbell, who Is now
an identity of the township, was told
what the chloride was, and he found
it. He has also the distinction
of finding chlorides at the Bonanza two
years ago. He is regarded by his tribe
as a superior being, and he appears
willing to well play the part of one to
them.
The shaft is sunk to the 208-feet level.
There is a double-caged road fixed and a
winding plant at work. There are three
levels in the shaft—66-feet, 132-feet, and
208-feet. From the 66-feet is got the
fluxing ore, which is principally manganic
iron carrying silver in sufficient quantities
to pay for the working of the same. At
the 132-feet it changes into silicious iron
ore, carrying a larger quantity of silica
with silver freely distributed. Some of


this ore assayed 200 ounces to the ton.
At the 208-feet level the iron ore gives
place to carbonate of lead, which is now
being worked, and proves to be of a
highly payable character.
The principal features of the shaft, apart
from its historical interest, relate to the
serviceable flux, the rich silicious ore
which helps to maintain the weekly
yields, and a remarkable circumstance
which will be watched with considerable
interest, namely, the iron ore giving place
to carbonate of lead, which points to the
permanency of the lode.
As the water is approached the ore
shows signs of changing into the sulphide
form. The change is so gradual that one
can scarcely tell where the one begins or
the other ends. A boulder of ore has
been preserved as a rare specimen showing
a shell of sulphides filled with a kernel of
green carbonate of copper and carbonate
of lead crystals, and the whole surrounded
by carbonate of lead.
jamieson’s shaft.
Jamieson’s Shaft, which is named after
the first general manager of the Company,
is sunk on Block 12 to a depth of 40 feet
below the 208-feet level. The shaft is
divided into three compartments, two for
winding and one for pumping. A 6-inoh
Cornish pump is at work, but it is found
to be inadequate to contend with the flow
of water. A more powerful pump is now
on the ground, and it will be put into
position shortly, which will facilitate the
sinking of the shaft. It is being sunk in
the lode which is yielding silicious ore
assaying 80 oz. of silver to the ton.
The levels, namely, 208, 142, and 76
have been extended through highly pay-
able ground, and are connected with
Knox’s, which is the southernmost
shaft.
KNOx’s SHAFT.
In the vicinity of this southernmost
shaft most of the rich kaolin ore is found
from the surface to the 208-feet level. In
this shaft the lode is at one part 190 feet
in width, the ore occurring in rich streaks
or bodies running through the vein
material. The peculiarity in this shaft is
the exposure of kaolin and ironstone.
When the kaolin was first seen it was
suggested that it was a dyke running
across the lode, but it was found to be a
portion of the lode as it was enclosed by
the same wallrock as other portions of the
vein. The occurrence of kaolin carrying
silver under these conditions is an in-
teresting geological fact.
[No. XL]
THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY
COMPANY (Continued).
Blocks 10 and 11.
Beyond Knox’s Shaft the Company
have two 40-acre blocks, which may be as
valuable as those already described.
There is the same outcrop of manganese
iron running through No. 11 and partly
through No. 10, and the discovery of
the rich ore in the Central, which joins
No. 10 on the east, would indicate the
continuance of the ore to the more southern
portion of the Company’s property. In
the event of another Company being
formed to work Blocks 10 and 11, it is
probable that the northern half of Block
11 will be retained by the Proprietary
Company for the ironstone in it for flux.
THE METALLURGICAL DEPART-
MENT.
ASSAYING.
In custom smelting the ore is paid for
on the assay value, and all the ores are
then mixed together. Where the mine
is smelting its own ore, as here, it is not
so important to get the exact value. It
is sufficient to get a general idea Samples
are taken from the storage bins of the
mines as the ore is taken to the
smelting floors. These samples are
assayed every morning. Then another
sample is taken on the smelting floors as
the ore is weighed out to the smelter,
which is also assayed every morning, and
recorded. This is done to give a general
idea as to the proportions to be used in
smelting, and of course only with a view
to determine the value of the ore for
silver and lead. For making up the
charges of the furnace the department
must know what else the ore contains,
and this is done by wet analysis, A
chemical analysis is made of whatever ore
is used. As, however, the smelting relates
to only the one mine, after the analyses
have been made for a while it is known
what the ore will run without analysing
it. Every morning a sample of the slag
is taken for analysis, and another sample
for assay for lead and silver. The
analysis tells the chemical composition of
the slag, and if it needs any change it is
made. There are a great many difficulties
in working the furnaces to the best advan-
tage, and the composition of the slag
gives a certain criterion to go by. The
assay staff does the work for the assaying
and smelting departments. In the office
there are three assayers and two boys.


smelting. three months, and then they were
Starting up the furnaces, a wood fire is turned over to the Company, and
put in for twelve hours to warm up the
bricks. When it gets hot bullion is melted
down in sufficient quantity to fill up the
crucible. After that more wood is put in,
above it coke and slag, and on the top of
that the charge, consisting of one layer of
ore, a second of coke, a third of ore again,
and so on until the furnace is full. Then
the blast is turned on. The furnace from
this time is kept filled. As the charge
melts, and the valuable product settles
down and is drawn off at the bottom,
the furnace is filled by feeding it in
proper order with layers of ore and coke.
That goes on night and day without in-
terruption for from three months to two
years with good clean ore. If the com-
position of the slag is correct, all the
silver and lead contained in the ore
will be reduced to a melted state
and form a base bullion. That
being heavier than the slag settles
to the bottom, and is drawn off at a lower
level than the opening at which the slag
is drawn off. Some slag is used over
again. Even if perfectly clean it makes
the furnace run evener, and really does
not cost anything to smelt, except for
rehandling. The only thing which has to
be bought is limestone, the iron flux being
on the mine.
BULLION.
The bullion is cast into pigs weighing
about 90 lb. Each bar of that bullion is
chipped by a chisel furnishing samples of
half an ounce each. The chips from 100
bars are melted into a small bar and
assayed, giving the average value of the
100 bars, and each of them is stamped
with a number and shipped in that way.
Of course the buyers resample the bullion.
In England the silver and lead are separated.
It would not pay to do that here, because
the lead has to go to England for a market.
In shipping lead and silver together in
base bullion only a low freight is incurred \
where separated a high freight would be
charged for silver, while the lead would
be but very little cheaper. The increased
freight on silver is on account of the in-
creased risk in carrying it.
THE SMELTING PLANT.
The old plant consists of five 30-ton
furnaces on the waterjacket principle and
the new plant of three 80-ton furnaces.
When Mr. Schlapp, the metallurgist, took
charge in April last there were four fur-
naces erected and the fifth was partly up.
Those furnaces were built by Mr.
Lament originally. They ran two for
Mr. Conway ran them from that time
till Mr. Schlapp took charge. Prior to
his coming the furnaces were never all
run for any length of time, but since
then four have been run part and five
the rest of the time. There was a period
when the management was bothered for
water considerably, and the machinery
was too weak. The machinery in the
old plant will have to be overhauled as
soon as the new furnaces are started,
when some changes will be made, pro-
bably taking six weeks.
The staff includes 1 assistant metal-
lurgist, 6 shift bosses, and about 130
men, with 10 knockabout hands.
THE FUTURE OUTPUT.
With both plants at work the output
should be 100,000 oz. a week. The
average ore will not be so high as now
until the ore-dressing machinery is
running. Then the average value of ore
smelted will be higher because of the
removal of a great deal of the gangue which
has now to be smelted, and of course
make the dressed ore of a higher grade
than the ore from the mine.
NATURE OF THE ORBS.
The ores are similar to the carbonate
ores in the Western States of America—
in fact, they are almost identical with the
carbonate ores of the Leadville district of
Colorado. There is one good feature
about them—that they are almost per-
fectly free from zinc ; there is so little of
it in comparison with the whole that it
plays no part at all. Some ores containing
zinc have been found in the lowest levels,
but there has been no prospecting done to
determine their extent. If they should
be found in quantity it will necessi-
tate no alteration in the machinery, but
the treatment will be more expensive.
LEAH-POISONING.
One thing that the mining department
prides itself upon is the ventilation of the
mine. A few months ago, before it was
thoroughly opened up, the number of
men affected by the fine particles of lead
continually floating about was rather
large, but since then there has been a
gratifying decrease. As the obnoxious
particles can be absorbed through the pores
of the skin as well as inhaled, cleanli-
ness is a virtue of peculiar value
to the miners. It has been observed
that heavy smokers are more susceptible
of lead-poisoning than those who abstain
from it in the mines. In cutting up tobacco
the lead is rubbed into it, and the poison


inhaled with every puff, so that the
weed, commonly so soothing, becomes a
dangerous irritant. Smoking is pro-
hibited during working hours in the
mine. Dr. Seabrook, the medical atten-
dant at the mines, advises as a good pre-
ventive for the poisoning the use of
milk and other fatty substances.
Opportunities for bathing will be
given the men as soon as water is
obtained in sufficient quantities to run it
off cool; the bathing-house is already
erected. To reduce the risks to a
minimum the men are changed fort-
nightly, so that one who works two weeks
in the lead shoot will next take two weeks
in the ironstone or kaolin, where there is
no lead.
Notwithstanding the heat of the
furnaces and the climate there has been
less trouble this summer with the smelting
men than was looked for. Very few men
have gone away on account of the lead
fumes. The fumes affect different con-
stitutions differently.
VALUE OF “ BROKENS.”
What are “ Brokens” worth ? Probably
no answer could be given which would
meet with universal approval. It would
not appear less absurd now to say they
will yet fetch £l,OOO apiece than it would
have appeared a year ago to say that they
would fetch £4OO, and there was a greater
outcry as to the extravagance of giving
£4O a share two or three years ago than of
ten times that amount to-day. Still there
must be some principles to guide the in-
vesting public. It is not merely that “ the
value of a thing is what it will bring” in a
booming market, but what it will return
as an investment. The question of what
is a fair return depends, of course, upon
the nature of the investment. It is ad-
mitted on all hands that there are cer-
tain risks in mining investments which
justify a higher rate of interest than
might be looked for from other sources.
There seems to be a concensus of opinion
that ordinarily the minimum return in
mining should be 20 per cent., for nowhere
as there does the unexpected more
usually happen. It is therefore as
against the contingency of the mine
or the market giving way or of in-
numerable other accidents, that the
return is required to be large enough to
include what is practically an Insurance
Fund for the possible loss of the capital.
It is, however, urged that the Broken
Hill Mine is not an ordinary case,
owing to the enormous visible
supplies, and that therefore a
12 per cent, return would be a good rate
of interest. There is one feature that may
be mentioned here. The leases from the
Government of New South Wales have
only seventeen years to run, and there is
no certainty as to the terms on which a
renewal may be granted. Strangely
enough there seems to be neither pre-
cedent nor provision in the matter, and
the only guide to help the Company is the
action of the South Australian Govern-
ment in renewing the Moonta leases on
the same terms as before. It is possible
that the Government of New South Wales
may require the payment of a higher
rent and royalty, but the probability is
that the Government will do nothing to
inflict a serious injury on a concern con-
ferring great benefits on the capitalist and
the labourer alike. Assuming 12 per cent,
to be an ample interest, the price
for a share at the present rate of dividend
(£1 10s. a month) is limited to £l5O ; but
in a very short time, when the new and
old smelters are in full work, it is
expected that the dividend will be
doubled, or equivalent to 400 per cent,
on the amount paid on the original
shares. Obviously £3OO will be then the
price ; but it should be remembered that
there are special dividends to come in
respect to the British Blocks and some
shares in the proposed Block 10 Com-
pany, which would go a long way to
bring the price up to £4OO. It is
clear that prices are now speculative,
and in this connection account is taken of
a probable vigorous policy of development
in regard to Block 10, which will further
increase the dividend-paying power of the
Proprietary Company. After all, those
who buy and sell must be their own
judges as to what the shares are worth to
them; but it may be pointed out that
nothing is more inimical to the interests
of judicious management than an extreme
price of shares, because a feverish pres-
sure is applied to work the property for
immediate profits and not for the general
and future good.
There is perhaps no other mine in the
world which has so much ore in sight.
Hitherto no real stoping or quarrying out
of the lode stuff has been done, the
expenses and dividends having been paid
out of the material taken from the tunnels
necessary to begin active mining, and in
this fact the property Is unique. Though
immense quantities of ore have been
taken out the whole is but an insignifi-
cant portion to what remains, and men


speak confidently that the supply will not petty. During the last half-year no less
be exhausted during the lives of our
grandchildren. Certainly there are indi-
cations that the lode is permanent at a
great depth, and that the mine has a long
life before it.
UNCERTAINTIES IN MINING.
The uncertainties in mining receive an
illustration in a dispute as to how far the
lode passes through Block 10. For some
time past it has been generally understood
that it passed halfway through it, and
that the Broken Hill Central Mine only
got a small portion of it; but recently the
Manager of the latter mine has contro-
verted the position, insisting that the
Central block got the major and Block 10
the minor portion. In order to impress
the public with the fact Mr. Thomas,
Mining Surveyor, who, by-the-way, pre-
pared under Captain Piper the plan show-
ing the lode as contended for by
the Proprietary Company, has been
engaged to prepare another plan showing it
as contended for by the Central Company.
I notice by the local paper that the results
of his survey are that the length of the
main chloride lode is 1,125 feet, that of
the eastern lode 1,375 feet, and the wes-
tern lode 1,000 feet upon the Central pro-
perty, while the length of the lode upon
Block 10 is 200 feet. This reduces the
length of lode generally believed to be
indicated on Block 10 by some 300 feet,
and if correct must materially affect the
prospects as to floating a Company to
take over Block 10 at £1,000,0u0. It
may, of course, be urged that the
business of determining the existence of
the lode does not belong to the Surveyor
but to the Mining Manager, who gives
directions as to recording the position of
what he believes to be the lode. Neither
with this nor with the matter of who is in
the right on the main question is any
opinion now expressed, but the purpose is
simply to show by this dispute, which
may prove to be of a serious kind, the
well-known fact that there are uncer-
tainties in mining, even with the best of
properties and the aid of the highest
talent. Perhaps no nearer and more
recent illustration could better enforce the
argument for preserving a margin in all
mining returns as against risks incidental
to all mining properties.
DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH.
The widespread benefits of a good mine
are clearly seen in connection with the
Broken Hill Proprietary Company’s pro-
than ,£53,000 was spent upon wages,
salaries, and contracts at the mine ; while
nearly an equal sum was spent upon coke,
limestone, and sundry smelting expenses.
The other items in the working account
will increase the idea as to the stimulus
given to trade by a large mine : —Railway
freight, cartage, and insurance on bullion'
£26,504 ; firewood, £3,479; mine timber,
£5,029; stores, £6,475; horse feed, £504;
sundry freights and carting, £2,462 ; in-
cidental expenses, £502 ; stationery, print-
ing, and advertising, £244; telegrams
and caolegrams, £221; postages, £73;
duty and commission, £2,009. The
last item suggests with two others
—proportion of royalty exemption £1,500
and rents of leases £236 —that the State
also shares in the advantages. Then we
have the fact that during the same period
£96,000 was distributed in dividends.
The net profit being made is at the rate of
a quarter of a million sterling annually,
and it will shortly be greatly increased if
not quite doubled. Of all this expendi-
ture and profit what proportion benefits
South Australia ? Nearly half the share-
holders claim Adelaide as their capital,
orders for machinery have been
fairly given to our manufacturers, and
the bulk of the wages absorbing trade has
been done with South Australia, while our
forests have supplied quantities of timber
and our railways earned large freights.
Our forests may be called upon to furnish
far greater supplies to carry out Mr.
Patton’s experiment of timbering the
quarried parts of the mine. Altogether
South Australia has nothing to complain
of in connection with the distribution of
the wealth of the mine, and when it is
considered that within three or four years
the present expenditure and profit will, in
all probability, represent no more than a
fourth of that in relation to mines identi-
fied with the great Broken Hill lode, the
prospect must be acknowledged to be ex-
tremely cheering.
No. XII.
BROKEN HILL BLOCK 14 COMPANY.
The policy of the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company in segregating blocks
for the immediate and economical de-
velopment of the whole of the magnificent
property seems to meet with general ap-
proval, as there appears to be no more
reason that reservoirs of wealth should be
knowingly locked up for indefinite periods
than that the management should be
burdened by an unnecessarily exten


sive undertaking. Not only has the policy
been favourably received by the fortunate
shareholders in the parent Company,
but it has not been unpopular with the
public who were admitted to a participa-
tion in the profits of the finest silver mine
of Australia. Block 14 Company re-
presents the first practical adoption of this
policy.
Probably most people know that Block
14 is situated to the north of Blocks 13
and 12, which are being worked by the
Proprietary Company with astonishing
results. There is no doubt whatever that
through Block 14 passes the Broken Hill
lode, which on account of its size
and richness in the adjoining
blocks creates an overpowering im-
pression on those who traverse the
miles of tunnels. Whether that portion
of the lode in Block 14 is as full
in body and rich in substance as that in
Blocks 12 and 13 remains to be proved ;
and though there is unquestionable
evidence of the existence of payable ore,
investors should remember that the ex-
tent of its profitableness is a matter yet
undetermined. A distinct line of demarca-
tion should be drawn between good pro-
perties and good dividend paying ones. A
mine may be good, and yet not good
dividend-paying, simply because it is
weighed with a disproportionate capital,
in which is represented only a small
portion for developmental expenses and
an extravagant sum for promoters’ profits.
It is, however, generally regarded that
this is not the case with Block 14 Mine,
which will pay a good dividend—pro-
bably more than 20 per cent, in respect
to its capital of £500,000 But a mine
of this character may cease to be a re-
munerative investment for those who can
only purchase when the market price of
shares is so high as to reduce the returns
to an inadequate rate of interest. It is
in this way that it may be questioned
whether purchases of Blocks at £ls
apiece can be justified until at least
the property has been further proved.
As a pure speculation, however, there is
nothing to be said as to the matter of
prices, for then the buyer tempts Fortune
to favour or frown on him, as the humour
may take the fickle jade.
After the Company have paid for the
works in progress they will have, with the
shares they hold in reserve, about £20,000
in hand. It is estimated that the cost of
raising the ore will be about 255. per ton,
and of smelting 345. The former price
Includes the cost of timbering, manage-
ment, and every incidental matter. In
order to be within the mark let it be
assumed that 1,500 tons will be smelted
weekly, and that the ore is of a very low
average—24 oz., or nearly half that of the
Proprietary Company’s. The return will
then be—For silver, at 3s. Bd. per ounce,
£5,280 ; and for lead, 300 tons at £4 per
ton net, £1,200, or £6,480. This will be
equal to 86s. 4d. per ton ; and, subtracting
595. per ton for raising and smelting,
leaves 275. 4d. per ton profit, or sufficient
to pay a2O per cent, dividend. A more
sanguine estimate is that a dividend of
2s. per month will begin in about four or
five months’ time.
Thanks to the experienced management
of Mr. S. K. Wilson, a great deal of sub-
stantial work has been ably done during
the five months the operations have been
in active progress. By the end of April
the first-class machinery on the ground
will be in position and mining begun.
The principle of management has been—
accepting the existence of the ore as
beyond all dispute—to make preparations
for mining in order to save a double
handling of ore stuff. Hence Mr. Wilson
has gone to the levels, cut plats, and got
ready for driving; so that immediately
the hoisting gear is ready an abundance
of ore can be brought to the surface
from the opening out of the lode. As in
Blocks 12 and 13, he expects that long
before what is known as active mining is
undertaken the property will pay divi-
dends. With the raising of ore will
cease, it is believed, a large expenditure
which has been going on for plant and
permanent improvements, including
smelters ; but the nature of the ore must
render it necessary to get concentrating or
ore-dressing machinery. Probably 1,200
tons of ore a week will be smelted with
the two 80-ton furnaces, but with ore-
dressing machinery 1,500 tons can be
treated. Considering that the machinery,
which will only cost £3,000, will make a
material difference in results, it is surpris-
ing that it has not been ordered
Every day that the order is delayed must
involve an appreciable diminution in the
dividend-paying power of the property.
In connection with the mining opera-
tions there are two interesting facts.
In sinking the South Shaft a piece of
“ horse” country occurred on the plat
about 9 feet wide and perfectly clear.
The men drove 21 feet to the east, and
31 ft. 6 in. to the west, both in ore, but
in the west there is still no sign of wall.
In going down on the other side of the


hill for foundations for the chimney stack Mining Manager, the Company have an
chlorides were found, and the site had to intelligent and zealous overseer. There are
be removed further to the east.
Arrangements have been made for the
construction of a tramway, which leaving
the railway goes past Jamieson’s Shaft on
Block 12, runs up between the new and
old smelting plants of the Proprietary
Company, switches off to the main shaft on
Block 14, and passes along to the back of
the smelting works on the east of the hill,
the main line continuing on through the
British Proprietary Company’s blocks on
the west side. A bridge is necessary for
the tramway where it must cross a gully
in Block 11 in going up to Jamieson’s
Shaft. Though actually on the Pro-
prietary Company’s property the construc-
tion of the bridge will be borne by all the
Companies, but otherwise each will do
their own work on their own ground.
The total cost will be about £lO,OOO.
The Silverton Tramway Company will
perform the shunting with an engine
to be expressly kept for the purpose.
The laying down of the line, which has
been surveyed by Mr. Woolley and is to be
completed under his supervision, will be
an immense saving in the carriage of
limestone, coke, ironstone, bullion, &c.
Limestone, for instance, costs about 12s.
a ton for bullock haulage, and the railway
will do it for about 3s. The lessening of the
expense of the early days is great. Coke
cost £l3 a ton ; for fifteen months it
averaged £lO. Now it is £6, and shortly
it will be further reduced.
The Directors of the Company are
Messrs. Patterson, McGregor, Brodribb,
Kelly, W. A. Horn, and Mcßride, and
the Secretary is Mr. W. R. Knox, of
Melbourne. Mr Wilson, the Manager,
was in charge of the Broken Hill Proprie-
tary Company’s property until Mr. Patton
arrived to take it. Considering the
unique difficulties that had to be con-
tended with there—the new features of
silver-raining at the Barrier, the cost of
carriage, and the necessarily experi-
mental character of much of the
work—no greater testimony could be
given to Mr. Wilson’s ability than the
general approval Mr. Patton has accorded
to his plans and operations. Although
very much delayed in the erection of the
machinery through various outside
causes, Mr. Wilson has pushed on the
operations on Block 14 with the greatest
possible expedition. Mr. Greenway, the
metallurgist, who has just arrived from
Sheffield, has had a large experience in
treating mixed ores. In Mr. Giles, the
120 men employed including contractors,
and it is estimated that when the mine is
in full work the number will be increased
to nearly 600.
UNDERGROUND WORKS.
From the Company’s tunnel at the back
of the ridge driving has been done to the
extent of 264 feet towards the South Shaft
at the 142-feet level, the plat of which is
in horse country. This shaft is 7 feet by
4 feet, and divided into winding and foot-
way compartments.
About the centre of the block is the
engine-shaft, 13 feet by 5 feet, divided
into three compartments—two windings
and one timber. In this shaft, which is
down 273 feet, a plat has been made at the
200-feet, all in footwall country. Elegant
iron poppet heads distinguish this shaft
from others in the district. The ore is
of precisely the same class as that found in
McCulloch’s Shaft.
The underlay shaft is down 30 feet,
and the footwall has just been struck.
Near by is where in sinking for the flue
chlorides were struck. The site is being
devoted to mining. It is extremely rich
in lead.
The North Shaft is 214 feet deep. It
was opened out at the 114-feet, and a
drive made 30 feet to the east, ore all the
way. The shaft was next sunk 100 feet
deeper, and a temporary plat made. A
drive was taken 25 feet to the west, where
the lode were struck. Then the men were
driven out by the water, which rose from
8 to 9 feet, and could not be kept out
with the appliances at hand. Since then
timbering the shaft has been proceeded
with from the 114-feet level to prepare
for work when the machinery was ready
to cope with the water.
MACHINERY.
The machinery, which is in a forward
state, will consist of a 200-horsepower
engine by Fowler, 169 ditto compound
engine by Hornsby for the blowers, and a
200 ditto ditto by Lindsay, of Port Ade-
laide, for a pumping plant. The pumps
are two 9-inch plungers and a 12-inch
drawing lift made by Fulton & Co.,
of Kilkenny. There are also on the
spot two 80-ton furnaces. Besides,
there is a 40 • horsepower engine
in the middle of the claim for a
somewhat novel purpose. From a wheel
on the shaft of the engine will be taken
6-wire cables which may both
ways. These endless cables will work
three shafts by one way and three by the


other, or more as needed. The man at so. Instead of finding iron flux on the
brace will have brakes to work a face
friction clutch. He just presses that
clutch and the drum revolves, and begins
winding up from the shafts. When he
gets the cage to surface, he frees the brake
and lands it. This application of the
cable system, which will save, in respect to
six shafts, five engines and fifteen men,
has, though novel to mining, been pro-
nounced to be good by several engineers.
Trouble has been experienced through
delays in the transport of machinery and
materials by the South Australian Rail-
way authorities from Adelaide to Broken
Hill, and Mr. Lindsay has had some
difficulty in getting men to complete his
contract. To render the situation more
vexing to the Manager, the flywheel of
the Hornsby engine was dropped from
the slings of the Orizaba in London, and
the engine had to come away without it.
It is, however, expected to arrive in the
Austral due at the end of this month.
Good roads lead up to the property on
both sides of the hill. Near the Manager’s
house on the township or western side is
the office, and near the engine
shaft on the top the assay office,
suitable, convenient, and economical.
Not only are the works compactly con-
structed near the main shaft on terraces
on the footwall side of the hill, but pro-
vision has been made for additions as re-
quired. No requisite seems to have been
omitted. At the foot of the hill is the
furnace reservoir, and about three-
quarters of a mile out on the flat is a large
dam cf 15,000 cubic yards. A well is
being sunk 150 feet close by, and the
water will be conveyed where required by
pipes. The engineering talent displayed
reflects no small credit on the manage-
ment.
It is an easy simple ore which has to be
treated. The vein matter consists of
three characters—carbonate of lead,
gossany material, and quartz above the
water line. Below it it is anticipated that
the oxide ores will be changed to sul-
phides, which will probably consist of
galena, pyrites, and in all probability
blende. It is proposed to eliminate the
quartz from the more silicious ore by con-
centrating or ore-dressing plant in
order to save expense in smelting.
The Manager is putting in all the grades
for a similar plant to that ordered by Mr.
Patton, and building all the retaining
walls, so that the plant can be put into
position on being ordered by the Directors.
§o far they have not seen their way to do
mine as the Proprietary Company find it,
Block 14 Company must buy it, as well as
limestone. The former Company’s iron-
stone carries a little silver, rendering it
still mora profitable.
ASSAYING.
The laboratory is a large and well-
appointed building containing separate
rooms for the assay and analytical
departments under Mr. F. C. Smith, who
received his training under an English
metallurgist, Mr. Makins, the author of
standard works in his profession. Mr.
Smith has also Victorian and New Zealand
experience. Assaying has been carried
on for the Company since November last.
The laboratory also contains a balance-room
with very fine chemical scales and still
finer assay. The latter is so constructed that
it will weigh out such trifles as a signa-
ture’s weight, which, in the writer’s case,
went 0 002 points of a grain. It is inte-
resting to note that this delicate instru-
ment was introduced by Mr. Makins.
Samples from the different faces of the
mine are brought into the assay office,
lake one. It is crushed into a fine
powder, a weighed quantity mixed with a
certain flux and smelted, a button of
bullion resulting. This is put into a
bone-ash cupel, which is put into the fur-
nace and absorbs all the impurities,
leaving only silver and gold, if there
should be any. The product is weighed
and the proportion deduced. On the Pro
prietary Mine the assay office is illumi-
nated with electricity ; but a gas-making
engine on Block 14 supplies the laboratory
with gas.
No. XIII.
BRITISH BROKEN HILL PROPRIE-
TARY COMPANY.
The history of the bold advance in the
policy of segregation of the Proprietary
Company in floating Blocks 15 and 16 on
the London market under the title of the
British Broken Hill Proprietary Company
is too fresh in the minds of the public to
need recapitulation here. Suffice it to
say that it is felt incumbent by the
responsible authorities to so develop the
property as to administer a rebuke to
those members of the first Exchange
in the world who questioned its merits.
If the British investing public had be-
come shy of Australian mining ventures
it can scarcely be said that there was no
reason for it. Projects had been put
before them which, in the interest of
legitimate enterprises in Australia that


stand in need of imported capital, should
not have been introduced to daylight,
The Directors of the Proprietary Com-
pany no doubt honestly believed that they
had a good property to offer, one which
would yield a substantial dividend, and
therefore become of the greatest service to
the Barrier district by its associa-
tion with British capitalists. It is
not to be wondered at that the
financial authorities of London should
narrowly examine the proposal, and it
was only to be regretted that circum-
stances denied them the opportunity of
adding to their investigations a personal
inspection of the property. The success
of the Company must mean the favourable
disposition of the English market towards
other properties from the Barrier district.
Already the value of the property has
been appreciated by the Australian
markets, the shares now standing at a
premium.
There does not seem to be any doubt
with experts that Block 15 is as good a
block, so far as indications go, as any of
the Broken Hill blocks; but it is only
fair to say that opinions are not as unani-
mous respecting the worth of Block 16,
which gives signs of disturbed ground,
fractured lode, and possible disappoint-
ment to the more sanguine minds. If it
should, however, turn out that only Block
15 is as good for ore-producing as Blocks
12 or 13 of the Proprietary Company, it
will not be contended for one moment
that the value set upon the two blocks
(£1,200,000) is excessive, since at the
present market value of the shares in the
Proprietary Company either of the blocks
named is worth more than that sum,
while, tested in the same way,
the market value of Block 14 is
£1,500,000. Of course in these com-
parisons something must be allowed for
permanent improvements and relation-
ship to dividend paying; but on the
other hand it is considered absolutely
certain that at least a portion, if not the
whole of the lode, has some place in
Block 16, which must give it a consider-
able value in any event. Indeed, two
years ago at the northernmost point in
the workings on Block 16 the Pro-
prietary Company made an opening of
26 feet, and discovered the lode, and
there are mining men ready to affirm
their belief that Block 16 will prove as
valuable as any block. The lode,
however, found in the Junction
Shaft sunk on a bluff to the west
of the line of reef on the hill would
point to its having heaved here, only the
el now being found on Block 16. Yet
there are clear indications of lode stuff
running through the block to the west,
and it is asserted that there are at least
four lodes on this particular property.
Altogether there is sufficient to make the
results of opening up the ground the
subject of great interest.
Plans are being got out for three 80-
ton furnaces with the right of taking two
more, and several steam stamps have been
ordered from America for a 300- ton per
day concentrating or ore-dressing plant.
Tenders are about to be called for a 200-
horsepower winding-engine and a similar
pumping plant to that on Block 14 and
the Proprietary Companies. It is there-
fore clear that a policy of energetic
development will distinguish the Board
of Directors, who have a good working
capital at their disposal.
At the present time the Com-
pany have a 16-horsepower engine,
which will be probably worked on
the North Shaft of Block 15,
This shaft was formerly 6 by 3 feet, but
it is now being cut down to 9 ft. x 4 ft. It
is altogether in ore, and already sunk to
a depth of 140 feet. Immediately it is
cut down to this depth as stated an im-
mense quantity of ore will be got out
straightaway, and the Manager is confident
that this shaft will bring the mine promi-
nently to the front in a very short time.
On Block 16 two shafts are being sunk.
One of them will go down to a depth of
114 feet; already it is 108 feet down. It
is proposed to crosscut for the lode, and
as it is in good country it may soon be
looked for.
The local Directors are Messrs. Arthur
Blackwood (Messrs. Dalgety, Blackwood,
and Co.), W. P. McGregor, and W. R Wil-
son, The Secretary is Mr. W. R. Knox,
of Melbourne, who went to England and
floated the Company, and the Manager is
Mr. S. R. Wilson, also Manager of Block
14 Company. There are sixty-four men
employed, all under contract. When
active mining is undertaken—which, of
course, will be some time yet—the Com-
pany will probably employ 1,000 men.
The Company will begin breaking ore
in two months, though as to what will be
done with it is not yet decided.
In the way of mining only prospecting
is being done on Block 15, which more
than lakes in the remainder of the hill to
the north of Block 14. Several shafts
have been sunk. Starting from Block 14,
No. 3 Shaft is down to a depth of 84 feet,


showing a seam of lode and iron. No. lis no conclusive evidence. There is, how-
Shaft touches the lode, which is 35 feet
wide and about 50 feet from the surface,
where it outcrops. The total depth of the
sinking is 91 feet, and the bottom is in
clean country, the lode being left in the
tunnel underlaying to the west. The last
shaft on the hill is on the Bluff, sunk a
year ago by the Proprietary Company. It
is being cut down from 6 by 4 feet to
9 by 4 feet and timbered in three
compartments. The cutting down has
reached 80 feet, and it is proposed to
continue it to 88 feet, which will suit the
levels in the main shaft at 100 feet. It is
reported that the Proprietary Company
found good chlorides in this shaft. No. 4
Shaft in the flat finds the ground much
divided. It is proposed to sink 100 feet
and drive to the west to see what can be
struck. No. 5 Shaft is down to 115 feet,
the last 20 feet being in clean country.
At a depth of 120 feet driving will be
commenced for the lode. Owing to the
depression in the ground the 120-feet
level will just meet the 200-feet level in
the main shaft on the hill. Everything
here is dipping to the eastward. The
last shaft is on the boundary of the
Junction property, but there is nothing of
importance in connection with it.
No. XIV.
MINING FASHIONS.
Fickle fashion which mighty man sneers
at in weak woman dominates in the
unlikely sphere of the miner, no less than
in the circle of the share jobber. Going
no further than the Barrier for examples,
observers will record how at one time men
would look at nothing but bright galena.
Next, the rage was in horn silver, and
then came the day of the tomahawk slug,
an ironstone crystal. What is the fashion
now 1 Chlorides, and perhaps a big lode.
It does not matter what other qualities it
has so long as it is a big lode
and the surface stones are saturated
with lead and traces of silver. There
are fashions, too, in the share market.
Different metals and different fields have
their day. Now is the time of silver and
the opportunity of the Barrier.
It has passed into a proverb amongst
dealers that every stock has its
turn. To-day there will be a run on this
and to-morrow on that scrip. How it is
nobody knows. “It is the fashion.”
Who supplies the genius to make it is as
much a mystery as the Man in the Iron
Mask. There are many guesses, but there
ever, one fashion in share-dealing that is
capable of more than usual explanation,
and that is the Syndicate. Every
Adelaidean, who is on the high way as he
thinks to be a silver king, is in a
Syndicate, and every Adelaidean who
wants to be on the same highway is on
the lookout for a Syndicate in which
there are all prizes and no blanks. The
fashion is spreading until mines in which
prospects are more or less proved seem in
danger of being set aside for blocks of land
as to which even the prospects have only
a paper existence.
LEGION OF SYNDICATES.
It will not be claimed by any enthu-
siastic Barrierite that the language of
Broken Hill takes that same elegant and
diplomatic form that it does where
a jubilee of refining influences has been cele
brated. When, therefore, it is here said
that those who entered certain Syndicates
do so in order to be “ the first robbers in a
swindle” it is without doubt an inartistic
expression. In a classical city the idea
would be interpreted by a proposition as
to the originators of a laudable effort to
develop the mineral resources of the
country being entitled to the sum a
grateful public is willing to pay to secure
the benefit of their knowledge and co-
operation. It is significant, too, that the
law of demand and supply is wonderfully
true in reference to Syndicates So soon
as metropolitan clients discover that in
them is the path of wealth, so soon
springs up a supply capable of meeting
the wants of double the number of cities
to be catered for. In the course of events
the very number may become an embar-
rassment in so far as the ulterior object is
concerned.
LEGITIMATE BUSINESS.
Perhaps the most legitimate mining
speculation usually done in Broken Hill
is in connection with Syndicates. From
what has preceded it will not be supposed
by this that every Syndicate coming from
Broken Hill is to be taken per se as above
question. Such an impression would be
more than erroneous ; it would certainly
be mischievous. Still it seems to be that
Syndicate transactions are generally based
in a special way upon either actual know-
ledge or what is believed to be reliable
informatiop as to the genuineness of the
properties. As a rule Syndicates cost
little to enter into, and there is not much


to lose, while there are chances of great
gain. The Syndicate market, however,
being usually local, and intending buyers
having for the most part either a personal
acquaintance with the claim or friends
who have, the merits of the venture are
looked at in the light of a practical mining
experience. To every rule there is an
exception, and in spite of this tendency it
does sometimes happen that a Syndicate
Is floated on the strength of certain names
being able to influence the public mind
favourably. Of course, it is not fair
to assume that all the properties which
do not turn out to be highly pay-
able are intrinsically bad or neces-
sarily doubtful in origin, because it
may happen that at a critical moment in
the development of a mine the capital
required to take the flood to fortune is
wanting through some accidental circum-
stances of the share or money market.
The object of forming a Syndicate is in
most cases to work a property up
for a public Company, to which a grate-
ful and intelligent public shall be
admitted on condition of remunerating the
original shareholders to a degree worthy
oftheir’ sagacity and enterprise ; and as
the chances of that remuneration being
cheerfully given are ordinarily enhanced
as the evidences are stronger that the
property is valuable, the nature of the
indications and the character and extent of
the lode where one has been found, and
the surroundings of the case are gene-
rally enquired into and discussed. Fre-
quently, too, long walks and drives are
taken to Inspect the property personally,
and if there is anything questionable in
the project the risk of its becoming known
amongst a small and loquacious com-
munity is great. This is as it should be.
How far Syndicate business is being pro-
perly conducted can easily be told' by
whether men make these investigations or
not. When, on the other hand, the local
public are content to take a share in the
hope of a rise in the market, when
Syndicates are floated because there is a
probability that with merely market
engineering they will boom elsewhere, and
when the shareholders are feverish to sell
their interest to a metropolitan public
there is something unnatural and unhealthy.
Recently, business in ordinary stocks being
hampered by telegraphic delays, the Broken
Hill people have found ample time to
take up Syndicate business with zest.
Sometimes one and sometimes two and
three Companies a day are put upon the
market.
FLOATING SYNDICATES.
The modus operandi of floating a Syndi-
cate is simple, and yet requires skill.
Supposing that likely looking ground
has been found and an application
made in due form for a mineral lease,
nothing remains but to get the requisite
number of shareholders. In some cases
before a Syndicate is formed a prospector,
with or without the aid of his friends,
will test the ground, and only when
further capital is required will appeal to
the public, but in other instances prac-
tically nothing is done on the ground
before forming a Syndicate. To get the
shares taken up the prime mover canvasses
his business acquaintances, and when the
list is filled a meeting is called to adopt
articles of association. The other day a
miner was seen with a knot of his fellows
round him, whose names he was scribbling
down on a scrap of paper. He was forming
a Syndicate, taking £1 each, with a promise
of a payment of £9 on Saturday night.
In this case there was no prospectus, nor
indeed, says my informant, any docu-
ment in connection with the matter save
the scrap of paper, but it will probably be
put right at the first meeting of share-
holders. It is understood that there is a
good deal of laxity at times as to the con-
duct of the business of Syndicates, the
legal existence of many of which is
believed to be involved in doubt. At the
meeting of shareholders articles of asso-
ciation, which are sometimes taken as
read, are adopted, and arrangements
made for carrying on work. Of the scores
of Syndicates how many attain to public
Companies, and of those that do how
many become dividend-paying ?
SOME COMMON SAYINGS.
Proverbial sayings are outcrops in the
field of human nature. The character of
a people is indicated by their maxims. It
is therefore interesting to note some of
the terse statements in the mining world.
The uncertainty of the share market is
revealed in the advice “ Never buy to
hold” and “Be satisfied with a profit.”
How soon men change in their fancies is
affirmed in “Every stock has its day.”
Of the risks of speculation one is informed
in that “You cannot make a big
fortune till you have lost a little one.”
Evidently success is built on failure;
and experience is precious because
dearly bought. Heroics about boldness
are represented in “plunge.” For all
that the plunger is often a man who does
not hesitate and is yet lost. The


shrewdest speculators sometimes miss the
mark, for “ great gains are never without
the companionship of losses.” How
share dealing may easily become a passion
is commonly meant by its frequent com-
parison to seductive gambling. The san-
guine temperament which Is so disastrous
in ordinary business is regarded as essen-
tial to arduous prospecting ; hence it is
said, “A good prospector is always
sanguine. ”
No. XV.
THE BROKEN HILL LODE.
A prominent feature at the foot of the
township side of the hill is the diamond-
drill which is being employed by Mr.
Logan’s Brisbane Company, with a view
of tapping the lode at a depth. It was
first proposed to begin boring from the
bottom of a shaft which was sunk 100 feet
for the purpose, but it was afterwards
decided to drive from the surface close to
the border of the Proprietary Company’s
blocks.
If the lode should be struck at a
reasonable depth the Company could
scarcely fail to reap a rich reward for the
enterprise, having three parallel blocks to
the Proprietary Company’s, in all 80 acres.
Before entering upon the venture some of
the best experts obtainable were con-
sulted, but time 4 alone can prove how far
their opinions were correct. The bore is
down about 285 feet as, the result of five
months’ operations. This rate of progress
does not seem very startling, and it has
been asked whether a shaft could not have
been sunk to a greater depth in the time.
There is, however, a considerable saving
in expense in drilling as against sinking ;
and it should be noted that the drill has
had to pass through some very hard
ground, the weekly record varying from
9 to 40 feet. There appears to be no
conclusive evidence as to whether the lode
is vertical,(or to what extent it is under-
lying below the present workings, and
therefore it is purely a matter of specula-
tion whether the laudable enterprise will
succeed in [finding it under 1,000 feet or
5,000 feet or at all. At 285 feet the drill
struck a seam of rich ore and a shaft is to
be sunk upon it. In consequence the
shares bounded from 10s. to 785., though
they have since^receded somewhat. The
Broken Hill Underlay Company, who have
alsojblocks adjoining the Proprietary Com-
pany’s, intend to await the result of the
diamond-drill work by the Blocks Company.
THE SOUTH LINE OF LODE.
There is no doubt but that the Broken
Hill lode passes through a portion of one
block of the Broken Hill Central Company,
and through the Broken Hill South Com-
pany’s property, while it has been proved
in the next blocks in line belonging to the
South Extended, where a patch of chloride
ore was found on December 21 last. The
southern boundary of the last-named
claim is 2|- miles from Block No. 10, the
southern boundary of the Proprietary
Company, In the White Lead line, which
takes its name from a big quartz blow on
the course of the lode, it is customary
to begin with the South Extended, the
list following with South No. 1,
Rising Sun, Rising Sun South,
White Lead Central, and White Lead
Proprietary. For 8 miles south of the
Proprietary Company’s claim the ground
is pegged out on the line of lode, while
the work of extension is going on. Strong
ironstone formations show in places, as
also quartz blows, indicating the line of
lode. It is considered to be no small
recommendation of a claim to say it is on
the line of the Broken Hill lode, so much
so that frequently the greatest ingenuity
is displayed to find reasons for affirming
that properties are on the line ; but it
should be remembered that the lode is not
at all parts so great and rich, or even
necessarily payable, at a distance from the
immense Bonanza at the Hill. To the
westward is the Pinnacle line, which is
by some considered to be connected with
the Broken Hill lode; but while carbo-
nates of lead are obtained down to the
Rising Sun they are not found to be so
frequent in the Pinnacle, where silicious
galena is a characteristic.
THE BROKEN HILL CENTRAL COM-
PANY.
Between two and three years ago a
Sydney Syndicate bought from Messrs.
Nutt & Co. four blocks, constituting the
Elizabeth Claim, on which is to be found
now one of the most important mines on
the Barrier, the Central Mine. Of the
four Elizabeth blocks overlapping the
Blocks then belonging to the Proprietary
Company, three were on the flat to the
east of the hill, while one, the south,
took in the cap of the ridge. It is on
this fourth block that work has been
done by the subsequently formed Com-
pany, the result being gratifying in the
direction of finding the Broken Hill
lode in a condition of great richness. The
lode admittedly passes from Block 10 into


the Central property, but at what precise pany, the scrip of which Is sometimes
point is a subject of dispute. According
to a recent survey made for the Central
Company there is 1,125 feet of chloride
lode in the block. There are two other
lodes, the eastern being 1,375 feet, and
the western 1,000 feet long. The Central
lode is vertical and about 50 feet wide,
the eastern underlays west 2 in 10, and is
14 feet wide, and the western underlays
east 2 in 10, and is about 30 feet wide..
The eastern and central lodes are almost
at a junction now at the 200-feet
level. The value of the eastern and
western lodes is yet undetermined. Chlo-
ride was struck in the central lode at the
200-feet level, where the crosscut is over
40 feet. Since Jamieson’s Shaft in the
Proprietary Mine has been kept dry the
water in the Central’s shaft has disap-
peared. The Company have spent about
£5,000, and though they have had no re-
turns as yet there is reason to believe that it
will be one of the earliest Broken Hill divi-
dend-paying mines. The capital of the
Company is 75,000 £1 shares, and sales
have been made at a high figure, though
they have since receded in nrice.
The shaft, which is situated 350 feet
north of the south boundary, is down 20G
feet. There is a No. 2 Shaft, and the
staff, numbering thirty-two men, are
driving to cut the two shafts, the distance
between them being 190 feet. The ad-
vantage of this connection will be in the
ventilation and filling up of the mine. All
the buildings are of stone, and the
timbering looks very substantial. There
is a horizontal engine of 28-horsepower,
with boiler, feedpump, and other acces-
sories of the newest type. The buildings
and machinery are new, and very credit-
able to Captain Morrish, the Manager.
The lode stuff comprises a very good
proportion of native silver and sulphides
and lead in very small quantities, the
large percentage being chlorides of silver.
Assays have reached high figures, and
though the Dry Creek return of 80 oz. of
silver to the ton recently was less than
some expected would be given, it must be
acknowledged that it was a most satisfac-
tory average. Before long the output
per week will be increased to 200 tons,
and though the expenses must be
greatly increased accordingly, yet if
the average return is maintained at even
something less than 80 oz the mine ought
to pay handsomely.
The Central Company have only two of
the four blocks referred to above, the
other two having been floated into a Com-
called "pups.” There has, so far as can
be learned, been no discovery made on
the ground.
BROKEN HILL SOUTH COMPANY.
This Company have four 40-acre blocks
running for a mile south of the Central
Mine, and indications show three or more
lines of lode on the total length of the
three northern blocks, on which eight
shafts have been sunk at varying depths.
No. 8, the deepest shaft, gave a big
quartzite lode which never assayed very
much. Attention is being confined now
to a machinery shaft to strike the lode at
probably 300 feet deep. The shaft is
down more than 200 feet, and the
machinery, which includes an 18-inch
cylinder engine, Is in course of
erection. The eastern and western
lodes in the adjoining mine have been
identified by Captain Boughtman (who has
been in charge during the last few months)
in two shafts, and recently it has been
reported that the central lode has been
cut. The Company, which consists of
100,000 £1 shares, half being fully paid up
or capitalized and the other to 14s , have
spent about £12,000 in prospecting and
developing the mine. Quite recently the
selling value of the mine exceeded a million
and a half sterling, because no property
could be better situated, but the market fell
to something over a third of the amount
stated. It however went up again to £l5
a share on the report of cutting the main
lode and receded. The quotation on
March 2 was £lolos. Shareholders having
a property through which passes a lode
found to be rich in chlorides to the north
and to have chlorides to the south of their
boundary, may be excused from taking a
gloomy view of the situation, and urged to
pursue a vigorous policy of development.
No. XVI.
THE WHITE LEAD LINE.
Mention has been made of the meaning
and extent of the White Lead Line. It
may be stated as an interesting fact that
though the flat to the south of the Broken
Hill is about 60 feet lower than the flat
to the north it has no water, although the
sinking is to a depth of 150 feet, while
in the north flat water is ob-
tained at a depth of 70 feet. This
is probably due to the presence in the
south flat of diorite dykes and the hard
casing of the lode. With regard to the
properties on the White Lead Line, the
Broken Hill South Extended Mine has


attracted attention through the discovery
of the lode and a patch of chlorides. The
South Extended No, 1 Company is about
to begin active operations. At the Bising
Son the Manager was hourly expecting to
cut the main lode. The Rising Sun
South, which has a north and south lode,
has been favourably reported upon, and
will be probably worked very shortly by a
Company. There is no work of impor-
tance being done upon the White Lead
Central, but the prospects of the White
Lead Proprietary Company are being
proved. The claims on the White Lead
Line extend over 12 miles from Broken
Hill, and pegging out continues.
BROKEN HILL SOUTH EXTENDED COMPANY.
This Melbourne Company, formed in
October last and now employing six men
under Captain Thompson, have four 40-
acre blocks a mile in length adjoining the
Broken Hill South, and the work done is
chiefly represented by two shafts, one 26
feet deep and the other 141 feet. A patch
of chloride ore found on December 21 last
brought the mine into prominent notice,
but nothing has since been found of a
sensational character. The chloride ore
was struck to the west of the shaft at a
depth of 121 feet, the lode being 2 ft.
6 in. wide and 18 inches in from the shaft,
and the bulk assay gave a return varying
from 23 to 75 oz. Underneath at the 126-
feet level is a 7-feet lode which was cut
by driving in 10 feet. It is, however,
poor, carrying but 3 or 4 oz. silver to the
ton. The 26-feet shaft, which was sunk
by the prospectors, has a lode of good
ironstone formation. The capital of the
Company is 100,000 £1 shares, 15s.
paid up or capitalized, and the selling
price on February 11 was £1 3s.
SOUTH EXTENDED NO. 1 COMPANY.
This Company, which was recently
floated in Melbourne, have two blocks
(which belonged to Mr. Sylvester Brown,
a well-known Director in the Junction
Company) between the South Extended
and the Rising Sun properties. Some
trenches have been cut on the ground of
South Extended No. 1, but recently the
Directors were on the spot selecting the
scene of future operations. At present
the ground has not been really proved,
but in the meantime some idea of the
prospects of the Company may be gathered
from the nature of the success attending
the operations of the adjoining north and
south claims.
THE RISING SUN COMPANY.
Still going south is found the Rising
Sun Mine, which, at the time of my visit,
was in favour with the share market,
owing to the prospect of immediately
cutting the main lode. It has since been
cut. The ore is of the Pinnacles character.
The property, which adjoins the South Ex-
tended Company, is 2f miles from Block
10 of the Proprietary Company, and com-
prises 160 acres, 80 acres being on the line
of lode. The main shaft is sunk to a
depth of 151 feet, and a crosscut Is put in
at a depth of 141 feet, driving east about
40 feet, cutting the vertical lode, which
goes north-north-east and south-south-
west. Captain Layland, the Manager, at
39 ft, cut a 6-inch vertical seam of quartz,
mixed with galena. An easterly lode of
gossany formation dipping 1 in 9 has been
struck by the South Shaft, which is in it
from 23 feet; and a seam of carbonate of
lead, which increased from to 2 inches to
23 inches in 20 feet of sinking, is still
widening. The capital of the Company is
90,000 £1 shares, 12s. 9d. paid or capita-
lized, and the selling price was £1 3s. on
February 11.
OTHER CLAIMS.
The Rising Sun South claim adjoins
the Rising Sun, and has a north and
south lode running through it with a
40-feet shaft upon it. Captain Dunstan
has favourably reported upon the ground,
and a Company will probably be formed
to work it.
The White Lead Central Syndicate
have a claim close to the preceding, upon
which no work of importance has been
done.
The White Lead Proprietary Company
have a shaft 67 feet deep on a strong lode
underlaying west, which shows on the
surface to be 18 feet wide with signs of
galena. There are three other shafts, two
being vertical and cutting the lode.
Captain Creer has the management of the
property.
For 8 miles south of this the ground is
all pegged out on the line of lode, and
the work of extension is going on with
talk of Companies to develop the claims.
THE PINNACLES.
The three “ isolated steeple-like peaks
running to a height of several hundreds of
feet” on the ranges, about 9 miles to the
south-west of Broken Hill and 15 miles
from Silverton, furnish the name for the
next line of lode, the Pinnacles. It is a
disputed point whether the line is con-
nected with the Broken Hill lode, but the
character of the ore obtained would tend
to show that it is not. Geographically
the Middle Pinnacles Group comes first,


the Pinnacles Tribute and South Pinnacles
following. Offing to the silica in the lode
stuff, concentrating or ore-dressing plant
is a necessity, and it is in the attempt
made to provide this requisite that the
Pinnacles has acquired an unfortunate
reputation. The Pinnacles Tribute Com-
pany’s concentrating plant is called the
white elephant of the district. It is
regarded as a pitiful sight that a good
mine and valuable machinery should be
idle through bad designing. The Pinnacles
Group might be made the support of a
large township, but at present the popu-
lation is diminishing. Captain Lawrence
has just taken charge of the Pinnacles
Tribute with the purpose of remedying
the defects in the erection of the machi-
nery. He is a tall, young-looking man,
with energy and experience, and it is to
be hoped that his efforts will be crowned
with success. At the South Pinnacles
nothing is doing, but encouraging results
are being obtained from the work at the
Middle Pinnacle mines.
THE MIDDLE PINNACLE MINE.
At the Lady Bevys Mine a vertical
shaft has been sunk to a depth of 100
feet, and a large body of silicious galena
met with in the bottom. A crosscut has
been put in to the west for a distance of
120 feet, two lodes being struck. One is
40 feet wide, and the width of the other,
which is being driven upon, is unde-
termined. The lode formation con-
sists of iron, copper, and chalco-
pyrites, blende and hornblende,
and silicious and cubical galena:
and it has greatly improved in the
quantity of lead—from 4 per cent, at the
surface to 25 per cent, at 100 feet deep.
An air shaft has been sunk and con-
nected with the other shaft to the
crosscut. The Company have the ad-
vantage of the experienced manage-
ment of Captain N. Hawke. There
are three lodes on the property, all run-
ning into the centre of the Pinnacle. This
mineralized belt goes through to the Lady
Bevys Extended and North Pinnacle,
both of which claims have been opened
up with fair results so far as they have
gone. Tne capital of the Lady Bevys
Company is 60,000 £1 shares, the amount
paid or capitalized being 20,000 contribu-
tors 11s. 6d., 40,000 promoters £l. The
selling price of shares was contributors’
12s. 6d. on February 18, promoters’ £1
on February 17. The capital of the
Lady Bevys Extended Company is 40,000
£1 shares, one half (promoters’) being
fully paid up or capitalized, and the
other half (contributors’) being liable for
ss. a share. The latest sales are—Pro-
moters’, 4s. 6d. and contributors’ 3s. 9d.
on February 18.
The Pinnacles Junction Mine, which
adjoins the Lady Bevys on the south, and
comprises 80 acres, has just been started.
A shaft, which is 30 feet deep, is working
on lode stuff. The lode is 22 feet wide at
the south part of the property, where the
site of the main shaft has been fixed, and
where sinking will be commenced imme-
diately. Captain Hogan, the Manager,
has four men under him. The Company’s
capital is 48,000 ss. shares, on which there
is no liability. Sales were made at Bs. 6d.
on February 18.
PINNACLES TRIBUTE COMPANY.
The principal facta connected with this
Company have been so recently before the
public that a brief reference to the mine
only will be necessary. There are two
lodes running through the property, the
Minnie Moore in a north and south direc-
tion, and the Charlotte Greenway in a
north-east and south-west, a junction
being made near the smelters. The whole
of the work has been done in the Minnie
Moore Lode, which is the champion lode,
17 feet wide, and carrying a good per-
centage of lead throughout. After leaving
the Pinnacles the lode has been sought for
on the South Pinnacles property, but
nothing has been done there for some time.
It seems to be generally admitted that
the Tribute Company has a good mine.
The main shaft is 197 feet deep, and
there is a drive for a distance of 152 feet
on the course of the lode, which appears
to widen as it deepens, and to give an
even-grade ore. It is difficult to limit
the quantity which could be raised, but it
is safe to say that there is a supply suffi-
cient to keep a concentrator going for
years. The character is silicious galena,
and a ton of concentrated ore would go
about 60 oz. to the ton and 60 per
cent, of lead. With a 50-ton plant at
work the mine should pay a generous
dividend. So far as the history ot the
mine is concerned a smelting plant with
refinery was erected three years ago, and
as concentrating machinery was needed
on account of the silica in the ore
the Tribute Company was formed. A
year ago the Company erected a common
jigger, and then put up the present ore-
dressing plant, which was designed by
Mr. Fitzgerald Moore, one of the original
promoters. The plant, which was pur-
chased from Messrs. Parke \& Lacey, has
proved anything but a success. One


cause may be found in the inadequacy of adjoins Blocks 15 and 16 on their western
the foundations. As an instance, the
stonebreaker, which is very heavy, is
placed at such a height and on such
slender supports that the immense jaws
have been broken in two like small
pieces of brittle road metal. It
would seem absurd to say that
there is any lack of engineering talent
to enable the Company to put up proper
machinery, and, though this is recorded
as the third misfortune experienced in
connection with machinery for the mine,
it is sincerely hoped that it will be the
last. Captain Lawrence has been engaged
to endeavour to apply remedies. His
scheme, which is favourably spoken of,
will cost £7OO. The capital, £BO,OOO, has
been enlarged by £20,000.
The Kinchega is a new Company adjoin-
ing the Pinnacles Tribute property, and
work has been started with a view
to find and prove the Charlotte Greenway
lode.
No. XVII.
THE BROKEN HILL LODE.
Taking the Broken Hill lode to have
been traced for 4 miles south of Block 10
and something near that distance to the
north of Block 16, there is an extent of
nearly 10 miles of lode, the proprietary’s
original claim being 2 miles long; while
the branches to the east and west might
cover an additional 7 miles. It is quite
clear that the full extent of the lode is not
yet known, and in this connection the pro
gross of mining in its neighbourhood will
always have interesting features. The
man who first said the Broken Hill lode
went to the Bonanza was almost hooted,
as might be, for instance, the bold
theorist who should now openly declare
the Broken Hill lode to be a saddle-
back with really two lodes underneath.
Such a theory is to be met with at Broken
Hill, though expressed with “ bated
breath,” for it does not accord with the
popular idea, nor probably with the facts
at hand. To return, however, to the un-
discussed courses of the lode, after it
leaves Block 16 it makes an elbow into
the Junction and returns to the North,
passes on to the Victoria Cross, Imperial,
and Cosgrove properties, and it is believed
it will be found beyond in the Round Hill
and Broken Hill Flats claims. An eastern
branch goes through the Bonanza, Silver
Crown, Picton, and probably the eastern
portion of the Broken Hill Flats. The
West Lead Company, whose property
bound&ry, and the Junction on the south,
lay claim to having the western leg
of the lode. The Copper Blow lode,
which passes through the Potosi, the
Gorge, and a portion of the Round Hill
claims to the west of the Round Hill it-
self, is supposed to be a branch of the
Junction lode through the Imperial.
There is a mineralized belt of country up
to Piesse’s Nob. With one or two excep-
tions but little more than prospecting has
been done on the claims, but there is a
fair prospect of many proving payable
properties, employing much labour, and
returning satisfactory dividends. It is
when considering the extent of the promis-
ing mineral country and seeing but a few
holes sunk here and there upon it that
one recognises the force of the statement
that the development of the Barrier is
only in its infancy. Within two or three
years it is confidently estimated that eight
mines alone on the Broken Hill lode will
employ 5,000 hands, or four times more
than they do at present.
THE NORTHERN LINE.
THE JUNCTION MINE.
Until the discovery of the very rich ore
in the Central Mine it was a question
whether the Junction or the Central
would be the first on the line to pay divi-
dends ; but though the Central may win
in this cheering rivalry, there is every
reason to believe that the J unction will
make a close second. On the western
summit of the bluff which overlooks
Block 16 on the flat the poppet-heads
and machinery-shed of the Junction call
attention to the importance of the mine.
The outcrop, which is lost in the flat to
the eastward, appears on the Junction
Peak, and the Company have found the
main lode beneath. It is very large,
makes an elbow halfway through the
block, and will give considerable quanti-
ties of payable stuff, consisting of chlo-
rides, copper-stained ore, carbonates of
lead and zinc, and sulphides. The first
parcel sold was 110 tons, which was put
through at Dry Creek, and it gave an
average of 97 oz. of silver to the ton, and
at the time of visiting there was 60 to 70
tons bagged, which it was expected would
go between 60 and 70 oz. of silver to the
ton. Though the mine is not properly
opened up yet ore is being raised all the
time. The lode has been proved in
several places to be from 40 to 50 feet
wide. The Manager has driven on the
course of it for nearly 300 feet, the


average width being about 30 the Acting Manager was absent; but I
feet. In the bottom crosscut the
men had driven for 80 feet and
not touched the wall. The lode there
was mostly sulphide and zinc blende,
which would average from 20 to 25 oz. of
silver to the ton; but Mr. Dickinson, the
Manager of the Barrier Concentrating
Company, who are erecting a plant on the
Junction ground, hopes to make the
dressed ore go from 50 to 60 oz.
The plant referred to will be a 100-ton
concentrating machinery, which will
probably be ready for work by the end of
this month. There is plenty of water in
the mine to keep it going, and it is
believed that there is sufficient ore
as well. For the use of the site the
Concentrating Company will give the
Junction Company the first claim to the
employment of the plant. Though there
was no means of ascertaining the quantity
of ore in sight or the average richness of
the whole, an inspection of the lode
showed that the Company had a very
valuable property, while the erection of
the concentrating plant on the ground
must necessarily improve the prospects as
to dividends. Some mistakes were made
in the initiatory stages, shafts being sunk
too far away from the lode and orders for
machinery being delayed j but now the
mine will soon be fairly opened up with
appliances for working it to the greatest
advantage. There is a 25-h.p. engine
for service at the main shaft. This shaft,
which is named after Mr. Penglase, the
original owner of the claim, is sunk
to a depth of 210 feet, and the
Manager is going down another
100 feet. There are other shafts to the
north and south, but nothing is being
done in them at present. Screens and
bins are used for systematically classifying
the ore. There are several buildings on
the ground, captain’s residence, assay
office, workshop, &c. Captain Hebbard,
who was previously engaged in the Broken
Hill Mine, has been the Manager for the
past twelve months. It is a Melbourne
Company, and the capital is 100,000
£1 shares paid up or capitalized to 16s.
Only one sixpenny call has been made.
Shares were sold on February 18 as high
as £6 7s.
THE NORTH MINE.
Adjoining Block 16 on its northern
boundary the Broken Hill North Mine is
found on a claim covering 100 acres of
hilly country. It was my misfortune to
call when the Manager (Captain Lane)
had gone to Melbourne for machinery and
learnt that the prospects were regarded as
encouraging, though underground work
was stopped through the water rising.
The necessary pumping gear was shortly
expected, and upon the water being kept
down the lode would be proved from shaft
to shaft.
At about 250 feet from the boundary
of Block 16 the South Shaft had been
sunk 155 feet, and at about 150 feet a
long drive put in on the course of the
lode, which comprised manganese, iron-
stone, and carbonate of lead. Little
more than 3 chains to the north of this
shaft, and in the centre of the block, is
the main pumping and winding shaft, to
which the south will minister as an air
and auxiliary shaft. About 140 feet
from the northern boundary, a crosscut
put in 62 feet east from the bottom of
a shaft 150 feet deep, showed the lode to
be 33 feet wide, and its substance to
include galena, grey ore, and carbonate
of lead. There are well-timbered shafts
on the mine, and good buildings. The
mine was under offer to a Syndicate for
three months at £BO,OOO, and it is under-
stood that the purchase has been con-
cluded of what will probably prove a
remunerative property.
THE VICTORIA CROSS
The Victoria Cross is the next claim,
and on this property three shafts have
been sunk. In the deepest, 200 feet down,
chlorides were found near the surface.
There is another shaft to the westward,
50 feet deep in country. I could not
learn that the lode had been cut. The
claim is being worked by a Sydney Com-
pany, with Mr. Kirby as Manager. The
capital is 100,000 £l-shares, 15s. paid or
capitalized, and the selling price on Feb-
ruary 10 was £1 Is.
THE IMPERIAL.
A Victorian Company has just been
floated to work this promising claim,
which comprises 154 acres, and is situated
between the Victoria Cross and the Cos-
grove claims. No permanent work has
been done, but sufficient prospecting,
according to Captain Lane, to prove that
the main Broken Hill lode, seemingly of
great size, passes through the property.
The Company will provide pumping and
other machinery in order to sink the
shafts, which it is proposed to put down
to from 100 to 300 feet. The capital of
the Company is 100,000 £l-shares, of
which 60,000 are issued paid up to 10s.
COSGROVE.
Between the Imperial and the southern


boundary of the Round Hill claim the the bottom the men are at present driv-
Cosgrove Company J. have three'blocks of
120 acres, on which four shafts have been
sunk. In No. 1, which is down 65 feet,
the lead formation is from 8 to 9 feet at
the bottom. The Manager has begun
driving on the lode. In No. 2 Shaft,
which is down 27 feet, are several classes
of good ore. The width of the lode is
about 6 feet. No. 3 Shaft, which is about
120 feet from No. 2, struck nothing, but
the miners are just getting on to a shute
of ore. No. 4, which is 380 feet from No.
3 Shaft, is down to 72 feet, getting a lode
14 feet wide. In this shaft water came in
at the rate of 400 gallons an hour, and it
is proposed to erect powerful pumping
plant. About £4,000 has been spent
upon the property upon which the father
of the present Manager, Mr. Cosgrove,
was the first prospector. Fourteen men
are employed, and rich ore is being
broken for shipment. It is a Sydney
Company in 100,000 £5-shares, £4 2s.
being paid up or capitalized on 10,000,
and £5 on 90,000. The last sales were at
£1 on February 11.
ROUND HILL.
A portion of the Round Hill Company’s
claim is between Cosgrove’s and the
Broken Hill Flats. A shaft has been sunk
adjoining Cosgrove’s claim to a depth of
70 feet at the water level, and a crosscut
is being driven to cut the lode formation,
which appears to be about 20 feet wide on
the surface or bed rock. The country is
highly mineralized with kindly appearance.
The main property of this Company con-
sists of ten 40-acre blocks, on which there
are several lodes running through, particu-
larly the main Broken Hill lode and
the Copper Blow lode. It may be con-
venient to mention here the work
done by the Company on those blocks
not connected with the Broken Hill lode.
Captain W. H. Matthews, the Manager,
informs me that No. 1 Shaft is sunk 100
feet, and a crosscut driven 85 feet through
lode formation containing veins of galena.
No. 2 Shaft is sunk 200 feet to water
level, and a crosscut driven through the
lode for 58 feet, being 91 feet from the
shaft. Portions of the lode are composed
of strong bands of galena, similar to Pin-
nacle ore. The Manager will continue to
crosscut until the western wall is reached
as he anticipates then to get far better
class ore. No. 3 Shaft is sunk 200 feet
underlie on the western wall. At the
100-feet level some good ore was met
with, assaying over 100 oz. of silver to the
ton, also ore containing chlorides. At
ing a crosscut, which is 49 feet from the
shaft, through lode formation which gets
wider as depth is attained. This crosscut
will be continued until the eastern wall is
struck. Then probably drives will be
started north and south. There is con-
siderable surface prospecting, and there
are several shafts sunk in addition to
those mentioned. The capital of the
Round Hill Company is 16,000 520-
shares, paid up or capitalized to £l9 3s.
Sales reached £6 2s. 6d. on February 13.
BROKEN HILL FLATS.
This is the name of the adjoining
claim on the northern line of lode, and it
is frequently known as “Boyces’s,” Mr.
Boyce being the prospector and Manager.
The property comprises three blocks on
the line of lode, and a shaft has been
sunk to a depth of 73 feet. Water is
coming in from the east, which is regarded
as a good sign for the near presence of the
lode. This claim includes a fourth block
to the eastward, on which prospecting is
being done to find the easterly branch of
the Broken Hill lode coming down through
the Bonanza, Silver King, and Picton.
THE EASTERN LINE.
The Bonanza line is an easterly Dranch
of the Broken Hill lode. On the Bonanza
Company’s claim, known as Faucett’s
Blow, efforts are being concentrated at
the shaft sunk to a depth of 50 feet, where
chloride ore was met with. Captain
Tresize, the Manager, has gone through a
lode formation of over 30 feet, composed
of silicious galena, carrying quantities of
hornblende, an indication as to the per-
manence of the lode. The capital of the
Company is 80,000 £l-shares paid up or
capitalized to 155., and sales were made
on February 13 up to £1 ss.
On the Silver Crown, the adjoining
claim, there is a shaft 125 feet, and the
men are driving 120 feet west to cut the
lode.
The Picton, which is the next property,
comprises 120 acres. There is a shaft 23
feet down, and at the bottom copper-
stained ore, ironstone, kaolin, and gossan
are found. These are promising indica-
tions. Mr. Phillips, the prospector, is
the manager. The claim has recently
been floated into a Syndicate of 200 shares
£25 each, £l2 10s. being paid up or
capitalized. Sales were made on January
31 at £6O.
The Broken Hill Flats Syndicate have
a block beyond the Picton, and prospect-
ing is being carried on to find the lode.


THE COPPER BLOW LINE.
About 2 miles west of Broken Hill is
the Copper Blow claim, under the manage-
ment of Mr. Punterveid, a concentrating
expert of Frieberg. There are three lodes
which pass through to the Potosi. The
western is silicious galena, and there is a
shaft on it 90 feet deep, and still going
down. Then there is the copper lode,
which outcrops on the surface; the copper
ore is being broken, sorted, and sent
away. A vertical shaft has been sunk
between the two lodes, and the Manager
is cross-cutting east and west to connect
them. A shaft has been sunk on the
northern portion of the claim on a
strong iron lode. This is a promis-
ing property. It is an Adelaide
Company with Mr. J. S, Reid as Chair-
man of Directors. The capital is 80,000
£l-shares, 40,000 being paid up or capita-
lized to 11s., and 40,000 to £l. The
sales were ss. and 12s. 6d. on February 7
and February 14 respectively.
The Potosi, which was floated into a
Company six months ago, recently started
to work with eight men, under the
management of Mr. O’Rorke. There is a
large lode of copper-stained ore and
carbonates of lead, and a shaft is down 30
feet upon it. This is also an Adelaide
Company. The capital is 60,000 £l-
- paid up or capitalized to 155., and
the last sales were Bs. on February 8.
At the Gorge two men are working for
a Syndicate. The prospects are similar to
the above. A portion of the Round Hill
property is on the Copper Blow line as
previously stated.
NO. XVIII.
OUTSIDE DISTRICTS.
There is not perhaps so much known of
the Barrier anywhere as in South Aus-
tralia, and yet there are many people
there who have ideas which naturally
seem peculiar to those on the field of the
extent of ground occupied by the mines.
A speculator having a friend at Broken
Hill writes requesting him to spend a few
minutes to visit one or two mines and give
him the latest information as to their pros-
pects, and naming as a cheerful little walk
before breakfast the Pinnacles, Big Hil),
Hidden Seeret, and Gipsy Girl. The
South Australian correspondent feels
somewhat astonished to learn by return
post that it would take a pair of good
bush horses and a long day of hard
driving to perform that slight act of
friendship, but when he reflects he thinks
it ia juat as well that the field is some-
thing bigger than the Adelaide Park
Lands. The extent of the silver and tin
bearing country which has been prospected
is about 1,000 square miles, and yet Mr.
Wilkinson, the Government Geologist
of New South Wales, said only a
few months ago : “ The Silverton
field will, no doubt, be greatly ex-
tended by new discoveries, for the
silver-bearing formations, talcose, and
gneissoid schists, with intrusions of
granitic and dioritic rocks, cover a much
larger area than has yet been prospected,
and in this area rich gold, as well as
silver, lead, bismuth, and tin deposits are
likely to be found.”
Brief references which will serve as a
guide of the locality and the estimate
held of the prospects will be given of
some of the principal claims in the dis-
tricts outside of the Broken Hill lode—
districts which, after all, have been only
prospected, and are therefore only on the
threshold of development.
THE NINE-MILE DISTRICT.
This district, which was one of the
earliest worked in the Barrier, is situated
about 4 or 5 miles from Broken Hill, in
a north-westerly direction. The outcrop
is a kind of stained carbonate of lead, and
it seems that the large lodes improve in
depth, carrying a much better grade of
ore. It is likely to become a big lead-
producing district. Concentrating ma-
chinery will be required.
The Hidden Treasure has a shaft down
about 30 feet, and a contract has been let
to sink to 100 feet, at which depth a cross-
cut will be put in to cut the lode. The
outcrop is large. Captain N. Hawke, of
the Lady Bevys Mine, is the Manager.
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company’s
blocks represent the first claim pegged
out by Mr. Charles Rasp, who afterwards
pegged out the Broken Hill. Two shafts
have been recently put down. A large
lode formation on the top of the hill
warrants full prospecting.
The Colossus is owned by an Adelaide
Syndicate, and work has lately been
started under a Barrier pioneer, Mr.
Howden. It is on the same line of lode
as the Broken Hill Blocks and the Kaiser.
There are several costeenlng pits showing
lode formations of considerable size carry-
ing lead.
On the Kaiser there are three shafts,
and a very large formation 20 feet wide.
A trench has been put through it, show-
ing carbonate of lead, said to contain a


payable quantity of silver. The claim
was recently floated into a Melbourne
Company, with a capital of 80,000 £l-
- 15s. being paid up, or capitalized.
At the Second-to-None the men are
sinking on a new lode. Some fair ore has
been obtained from this property, but not
in sufficient quantity to pay. The bag-
ging of ore is still proceeding. The claim
is by some held in great favour.
Messrs. O’Keefe and Beach have three
blocks adjoining the Second-to-None.
There is a very large formation running
right through showing carbonates of lead
freely. They have according to indica-
tions two parallel lodes.
At the Nine-Mile Company’s ground
there are two shafts sunk. At the main
one fair galena ore was recently struck at
90 feet. There was a very large formation
of silicious galena, but it seems as if the
silica is dying out at depth, giving place
to cubical galena. There is a large
quantity of low-grade ore in sight. The
lode formation generally consists of
cubical and silicious galena, blende,
and mundic. This mine has the
reputation of being the moat energetically
worked one in the district. Mr. J.
Stevens is the Manager. The capital of
the Company is 80,009 £I-shares, 15s.
being paid up or capitalized. Sales were
made on February 11 at ss. 7Jd.
The Excelsior, known as the Barrier
Pioneer, is in the hands of a small Syndi-
cate. There is a 19-feet lode formation
of even grade silicious galena. The holders
are miners, who have had occasionally to
go away to work in order to get funds for
developing what is regarded as one of the
best shows in the district.
THE ROCKWELL PADDOCK.
This large paddock is a recent addition
to the list of promising places on the
Barrier, furnishing one of several
parallel lines of reefs with Broken Hill
and carrying very large iron lodes which
make galena in patches. It is situated
about 8 miles east from Broken Hill.
Driving past the foot of the
Central mine, there is a road
branching off to the paddock. About
2 miles before reaching the Sydney
Rockwell the silver-bearing belt appears.
There are several claims pegged out. As
to some the lessees have a suspension
order exempting from work, while as to
others the applicants are not obliged to
work. The fact is that development is
delayed for the want of capital. One
claim under suspension is said to have a
very large quantity of rich stuff on the
surface, going as high as 50 per cent, of
lead and 18 oz. of silver. No doubt the
necessary capital will be forthcoming with
the proofs of the merits of the claims;
but the investing public cannot too
strongly insist upon the production of
such proofs in regard to any raining
speculations.
The Sydney Rockwell has a vertical
shaft sunk to a depth of about 80 feet,
and the foot wall has just been struck of a
very large silicious lode 27 feet wide.
Chlorides in small quantities were found
on the footwall. The prospector sunk
another shaft till he was driven out by
water at a depth of 50 feet. Mr. Parker,
late Manager of the Barrier Ranges Asso-
ciation, is Manager of the property. A
large quantity of concentrating ore will
probably be obtained from this, which
seems to be the main lode, and running
for 2 miles.
Adjoining this claim, and on the same
line, is the South Sydney Rockwell, a
new Company. A shaft has just been
started.
The Amalgamated Rockwell, a"* Mel-
bourne Company, with three blocks, is
on the same line, and the shaft is down
20 feet. A nice bunch of galena has been
nut with.
The South Melbourne Rockwell, also
comprising three blocks, is about half a
mile from the Sydney Rockwell. It is
under the management of Mr. Dugan,
who has a shaft 86 feet deep, and is
driving from the bottom in the hope of
cutting at a distance of 40 feet the western
lode. It is an iron lode with manganese,
quartz, and small pieces of galena.
Next comes the Rockwell Company, of
Melbourne, with|Mr. Bennett as Manager,
who has a vertical shaft 150 feet deep.
It went through the lode at 90 feet, and
the rest was sunk in dead ground. He is
driving east and west for it. There is
another shaft on the lode about 30 feet
deep, and some very good ore is being
obtained near the surface.
The Marden Rockwell is also a Mel-
bourne Company, holding three blocks.
Three shafts are being sunk on the pro-
perty on which there is a big dam for
water supply. The Company are starting
off fairly ana deserve success. They have
two large lode formations, both lead-
bearing.
The Redhill is sometimes called the
Devil’s Gap Gorge. The top of the hill
is like a crater, and the strata appears in
rings. From the mineralized character


and peculiar formation of the hill the and T. Low. The Secretary is Mr.
property deserves thoughtful attention.
A shaft has been sunk 50 feet, and a
crosscut driven on a large lode formation
with copper and lead. There is a lot of
asbestos on the claim.
The Great Consols is on the line of the
Devil’s Gap, having some good lead ore
and kaolin.
Further on in the same line is the
Bismarck, which belongs to a Syndicate
who have two blocks. They are sinking
a shaft on contract. Chloride ore is being
bagged. This property is about 4 miles
from the Marden Rockwell.
On the Excelsior, also a Syndicate,
there is a good-sized ironstone lode,
carrying a little silver and a quantity
of calespar, highly suitable for fluxing
purposes. A parcel is being broken for
Block 14. The shaft is down 50 feet.
The Wilcannia Comstock has been
recently formed into a Syndicate, who
are working the claim, which was one of
the first pegged out in the paddock. It
has a big lode formation, with lead in
places, and has also the only spring of
water yet found in the Rockwell.
The Wilcannia Rockwell has recently
been floated into a larger Syndicate, under
the name of the Rockwell Consolidated.
The shaft is down 70 feet on a big lode
formation, and they are crosscutting for
the hanging-wall. Mr. John Lewis has just
taken charge of the mine under the new
Syndicate.
Next to this claim is the Ironclad,
under the management of Captain Lane,
of Broken Hill North Mine. There is a
big ironstone copper-stained formation,
and fluxes are being raised.
The Anaconda is a very large copper
show. Captain Dunstan, late Manager of
the Great Cobar Copper Mine, has under-
taken the management. Work is going
on satisfactorily, and copper will be
shipped in a very short time. The ore
will fairly go 25 per cent.
THE BIG HILL MINE.
Fourteen miles from Broken Hill in a
south-westerly direction, and about 8
miles from Silverton, the Big Hill forms
a leading landmark for miles around. It
was pegged out by Messrs. Hoffman and
Penny, who for twelve months worked
the claim, comprising seven 40 and one
20 acre blocks, and it was formed into a
Company in Adelaide in November, 1886.
The Directors are the Hons. T. Playford,
M.P. (Chairman), and J. G. Ram-
say, M.L 0., and Messrs. White,
J. H. Gurr, and the Manager, Mr.
Pemberthy, of Fullarton, who has a good
reputation and a mining experience of
thirty years, has been in charge for five
months. There is a tunnel 740 feet
long in the hill, in a north-westerly direc-
tion, cutting in its course five lodes.
The widest, which is 22 feet, is being
driven upon. A shaft was sunk 41 feet on
the hill and a tunnel driven to join that
made; and the union was happily effected,
reflecting great credit upon the Manager.
There is another shaft sunk on a higher
point of the hill, and it is 104 feet deep,
with 50 feet of ground between it and the
tunnel. A winze has been sunk in the
tunnel; it is 8 feet deep and being
timbered. The fact of so many lodes
being found with a tendency to fall
together as they go down is considered to
be a promising indication. All the easterly
lodes underlay more or less west, but the
main lode goes down, if not quite, nearly
vertical. The vendors of the claim sent
away ore to the Pinnicles smelter, which
assayed 18 oz. of silver to the ton. It has
been observed as a fault that there is no
lead, and that it cannot be looked for
In the porons ironstone obtained; but,
on the other hand, it is stated that
lead was found on the top of the hill. It
is, however, agreed that at a depth a rich
sulphide lode may be found ; and in view
of this possibility, it would have been
cheaper to have sunk a deep shaft rather
than to have driven a long tunnel. Still
the tunnel will furnish special facilities for
now going down to a depth. As some
recent assays have given only 8 oz of
silver to the ton, the Directors have
deemed it prudent to get an expert’s
opinion as to future operations. Both he
and the captain agree that at about 100
feet in depth from the present level
several of the lesser lodes, especially the
2 ft. 6 in. pyrites, gold and silver bearing
lode, and the main lode will come
together; that at waterline, or
probably sooner, rich ore will be
met with in considerable quantity ;
that very large shoots of ore exist in the
main lode at and above the present level;
that by continuing the present drive
north, large quantities of higher grade
ore probably payable will be met with,
and that it is advisable to continue the
present shaft to waterline, but not to
leave the lode, and to sink a shaft from
the surface about 400 feet north of the
tunnel on the cap of the lode (which is
360 feet wide), near to and in a line with


the ironstone cave, which is proved to be
all silver-bearing, and is exactly similar
to parts of the cap of the Broken
Hill lode. This work would neces-
sitate the employment of about sixteen
to twenty men, at an estimated
cost of about £2OO per month, and a
threepenny call would raise more than
double the amount. At present only four
men are employed. In the matter of the
Directors concentrating their efforts on an
energetic policy of deep-sinking there
seems to be no second opinion, while there
is not wanting some ground for believing
that the property will before long prove a
valuable one. The capital of the Com-
pany is 82,087 £l-shares, 32,087 being
paid up or capitalized to 12s. 9d., and
50,000 to 15s. Sales were reported at 3s.
and ss. 6d. on February 10 and 11 respec-
tively.
The Big Hill South claim adjoins the
above property, and is in the lands of a
Silverton Syndicate. It is on the same
line of lode, and a vertical shaft has been
sunk 124 feet deep, but there has been no
discovery made of great importance.
No. XIX.
THACKARINGA.
Thackaringa, from which at a few miles
distance can be seen South Australia, has
a special interest to us, as the trade must
be a perquisite of Cockburn, which is the
nearest town. Silverton is 15 miles further
on from Thackaringa. It is encouraging
to know that mining at Thackaringa is in
a more healthy state than it has ever
been. The promise is of considerable
prosperity in the near future.
Thackaringa is a historical spot in the
Barrier. It was there that indications of
silver in the Barrier district were first
discovered. While Julius Nickel was
digging a well on Thackaringa Station
in 1875 he noticed some small
veins of galena, and pegged out
400 acres of ground, on which is to
be found now some leading claims. Dis-
couraged in his application in Adelaide
for capital and in the low percentage the
ore returned, Nickel retired from the
scene ; and Stokie, who kept a small
public-house on the settlement, induced
Green and Garrot to join him in raising
silver. An insured shipment was sent to
England, but was jettisoned on the voyage.
In 1876 Stokie went to Umberumberka
and made fresh discoveries there. The
appropriately named Pioneer was the first
worked claim, and several hundreds of
tons of bright galena was taken out close
to the surface.
The silver lodes in the district cover
an extent of ground 4 miles long by 2
wide, and there are several good mines.
The number might be greatly multiplied
but for the unfortunate introduction of
the M. C. P. titles on a large scale, in the
Thackaringa district particularly. The
difference between an ordinary mineral
lease for twenty years with obligations
to employ a given amount of labour and a
mineral conditional purchase, which is
practically a freehold of the claim, is
most marked in relation to its develop-
ment. If the M.C.P. system meant no
more than the purchase of a block for
£2 an acre after an expenditure of £2
an acre upon it, it would not be
so unpopular in the district as it is; but
it is in the release of the holders from
working the ground that objectionable
features arise. Two-thirds of Thackaringa
is locked through this system of mineral
freeholds. It is satisfactory to learn,
however, that though late in the day the
Sydney Government, recognising the evils
of the system, have resolved to limit as
far as possible its operation, but it is still
open to question whether special
legislation is not necessary to abolish
it. By way of example, reference
might be made to the claim known as
Devillin’s, having one of the best
shows in the district. There is a strong
lode formation showing large quantities of
lead ; but the claim is not being worked,
and need not be, because it is a M.O.P.
title. The Goat Hill Claim, for which a
good deal of lead has been taken, is
another of many similar instances in
point.
The residents of Thackaringa look with
pride upon the Pioneer and Gipsy Girl
Mines, regarding them in the rank of
ore-producers next to such a property
as the Broken Hill Central. Concen-
trating machinery is about to be erected
on the Gipsy Girl property, which will
be of great service to the district.
The township is prettily situated in
hilly country, with the mines clustering
close to the settlement, and the popula-
tion, which is between 200 and 300, mostly
miners, is increasing. Architecturally
the township belongs, like all the town-
ships on the Barrier, to the Iron Age, the
structures being erected of the friend of
hurriedly built settlements—galvanized
iron.
THE PIONEER.
This claim, consisting of two 40-acre


blocks, adjoining the Gipsy Girl, and
nearly in the town, was first worked by
f: Paddy Green,” and it is reported that
only three years ago over 3,000 tons of
ore was sent away, while the deepest hole
on the ground was less than 30 feet in
depth. The property was taken up by a
Company on September last, and Mr. R.
Gibson was appointed Manager. Owing
to the way the ground had been scratched
about for surface ore he lost much time
in getting things straight, but so satisfac-
tory has been his progress that from 80 to
100 tons of ore is being sent away monthly.
The 6 over 6 Block seems to have-
a rich entanglement of lodes winding and
unwinding in extraordinary fashion. The
main lode, the serpentine coursing of
which the captain was as familiar with as
a pilot is with a tortuous channel, varies
from a foot to 4 feet in width, and varies,
too, in its richness, being bunchy in its
nature. In addition to the quantities of
ore shipped a large stack is being accu-
mulated, to be dressed by the local con-
centrating machinery about to be erected
by the Barrier Concentrating Company.
No. 1 shaft is sunk to a depth of 82 feet.
The lode at the bottom, 3 feet wide, is com-
posed principally of ironstone with little car-
bonateofleadhavingatendency to improve.
No. 2 Shaft is 73 feet deep, and No. 3 82
feet, and each is serving a useful purpose
in opening up the mine. Assays of ore
taken from it have given 71 per cent, of
lead and over 40 oz. of silver to the ton,
but portions go as high as 960 oz. The
class of ore raised is chiefly steel-grey
galena and copper-stained carbonates of
lead going well in silver. Sometimes
bunches of chlorides are met with in these
carbonates. A shaft has been sunk on
8 over 6 Block to a depth of 16 feet
on a seam showing capital prospects.
About thirty men are employed. The
outlook for the mine appears to be de-
cidedly cheering. The capital of this
Melbourne Company is 100,000 £1 shares,
paid up or capitalized to 15s, Sales were
made on February 11 at 11s. 3d.
GIPSY GIRL.
This dividend-paying Company is an
offshoot from the Barrier Ranges Associa-
tion. This claim has been worked for
about five years, and three years by the
Company. About 3,000 tons of galena
ore has been sent away during the former
period. The property, which adjoins the
Pioneer, has four shafts. The main
shaft is sunk to a depth of 120 feet, and a
drive east and west made from 250 feet.
A winge is in from the bottom level about
15 feet. There is a big body of ore, in-
cluding about 2 feet of solid cubical
galena. The other two shafts are con
nected with the main one. A water shaft,
about 400 feet deep, is sunk, 400 gallons
per hour flowing ; and a 175 feet crosscut
is being driven south from the lode, which
runs east and west, the cutting of which
it is expected will create a big rush of
water. The object of getting the water
is to supply the ore-dressing machinery
which the Barrier Ranges Concentrating
Company are about to erect close by, and
which must prove of great value to the
district. While there are surface indica-
tions of galena scattered about, work has
been confined to one rich lode, 100 tons of
ore being shipped monthly. The mine
has paid a threepenny dividend for two
months running, and the prospects are
that better dividends will be payable.
There is 2,000 tons of seconds awaiting
treatment by the concentrating machinery.
At present the mining is being done in
hard ground, but it is expected to get out
of it directly, so that the same amount of
ore will pay better dividends. Splendid
working ground is found in the crosscut
in the water shaft. Mr. Folkingthorne is
the Manager. The capital of the Com-
pany is 32,000 £l-shares, 15s. lid. being
paid up or capitalized. Sales on February
11 were made at 18s.
THE LADY BEASSEY.
Previous to the formation of the Com-
pany Messrs. Hawson Brothers shipped a
lot of lead away from the claim, which
has two lodes. The underlay shaft is
down 87 feet. In driving on the lode the
water became so strong that a vertical
shaft was sunk and pumps were fixed.
This shaft is down to a depth of 100 feet,
and there are poppet-legs and a portable
engine. The men are cross-cutting for
one lode, and there is a shaft on the wes-
terly one, showing good lead with a fair
percentage of silver up to 40 oz.
BARRIER RANGES ASSOCIATION CLAIMS.
Two men are working on the Comstock,
about a mile from the township, in a
northerly direction. There is a shaft
over 100 feet deep, and a considerable
quantity of stuff has been sent away
from it. Very good lode of ironstone
and galena.
Half a mile to the north-west from the
Comstock is the Bonanza, on which two
men are employed sinking on the lode,
chiefly ironstone with bunches of ore in
it. It is from a foot to 18 inches wide.
The prospects of the Alberta, a 40-acre
claim* are considered to be very good.


There is a large lode formation which has
given as much as 50 tons of galena in one
patch. The ore cuts out entirely and
another patch has to be found. At pre-
sent the men have just picked up the lode
again in the vertical shaft and are driving
upon it. It is looking very well.
The Homeward Bound adjoins the Out-
ward Bound and has a distinct lode of the
same character. A large quantity of ore
has been sent away at different times.
Men are driving from a 50-feet vertical
shaft along the lode.
OTHER COMPANIES.
To the south is the Gipsy Boy, a
recently floated offshoot of the Barrier
Ranges Association. Two men, who are
down 75 feet, are driving on the lode,
which is 18 inches to 2 feet wide. They
have sent away some ore, which is of the
same class as the Gipsy Girl, to the Dry
Creek Smelting Works. It is a promising
property.
Four or five claims have just been
amalgamated and recently floated in Mel-
bourne under a powerful Directorate, the
Company being known as the Gipsy
Queen. The property includes the
Hercules. Work will be started at once.
Two miles from Thackaringa is the Out-
ward Bound, belonging to a Melbourne
Company. In the early days there was a
large quantity of ore dispatched from a
good lode, but the shoot has been lost.
The Company cannot, however, do much,
owing to the water difficulty, and they are
awaiting other developments at the Lady
Brassey, which is the adjoining ground.
The Dan O’Connell and King William
leases, lately the property of the Barrier
Ranges Association, have been floated in
Melbourne into a Company under the
title of Dan O’Connell. On each of these
claims there is a shaft, and ore has been
raised and sent away. This property,
which is to the east of the Alberta, two
blocks intervening, promises well.
The Bon Accord belonged originally to
the Barrier Ranges Association, but has
been recently floated into a Broken Hill
Syndicate. There is a vertical and an
underlay shaft, but no work has been
done in the latter for five or six months.
The former is 37 ft. 6 in. deep, and it is
expected to cut the lode at 50 feet. No
ore has been sent away for some time.
No. XX.
RELATIONSHIP OF SILVERTON TO
BROKEN HILL,
How refreshing and soothing is peace-
ful Silverton after the noise and bustle of
Broken Hill! It comes like a Sabbath
rest after a week’s toil. As I rode into
the pleasantly situated town, a range of
hills gracefully skirting it, through its
wide, clean streets with cosy cottages
(stone, weatherboard, and painted iron)
and occasional gardens, and passed up
its main and macadamized street on one
Wednesday half-holiday, I could not fail
to like Silverton any more than could one
who had been tossed upon an excited sea,
with irritating and annoying rush and
roar, fail to enjoy being transported to
some landscape threaded stream, moving
with the gentle good humour of the poetic
brook.
While trying to benefit by the Silverton
sedative after the too-powerful Willyama
stimulant, I met a gentleman who, though
he had been there but two or three years,
had*passed the portal to the silver palace.
It was my misfortune to ask him, in
sympathetic accents, “ What is to become
of poor Silverton 1 Is it to be a sanatorium
or residential refuge for Broken Hill ? or
is it to be snuffed out ?” To my astonish-
ment, for at Broken Hill I was taught
that the alternatives had been recognised
at Silverton, he grew indignant, and
replied with such eloquence that it would
have repaid the employment of steno-
graphy. I should not have been surprised
if he had told me that Silverton has a peren-
nial source of prosperity hidden in yonder
azure-sheathed mountains, and that though
Broken Hills may come and go Silverton
would continue unmoved for ever. But
he went further. He said that Silverton
was the centre of mineral wealth that
would outbid the contributions to Broken
Hill; that the mines belonging to Silver-
ton would in the aggregate mean more
trade than those that belonged to Broken
Hill; and more, that it was impossible to
limit the new developments in favour of
Silverton ; that Silverton had a good
part of the Barrier trade, which none
could take away. I saw with new force
as my acquaintance proceeded, but I
trembled for him. The citizens would be
so proud of the enthusiastic believer in
their fortunes, and electors so appreciate
his prophetic gift, that his fate seemed
sealed—he would be tempted to adorn the
Council Chamber or the Senatorial Hall.
Silverton feeling is not so exactly
“How charming would either be if t’
other were away,” but “ how unfortunate
is the situation !” Rivalry there is none.
Broken Hill is unquestionably the capita
of the Barrier. But though the question


of the capital had apparently settled itself freely, and this is not, as a rale, the
by natural events, and men had made
arrangements accordingly, it is still an
occasion for regret that by the mere
accident of circumstances they have to be
upset. Yet it is a happy accident. No
Silvertonian would, if he could, omit
Broken Hill. It improves Silverton. If the
silver-lamp of the firmament command sole
attention till the sun rise in overpowering
majesty, its lustre is not dimmed but in-
tensified through the altered relationship.
So Silverton must borrow of Broken Hill.
This is already proved. Business at
Silverton has been healthier during the
last few months than usual. Properties
which could not be put upon the market
have no difficulty in obtaining notice
through the favourable disposition towards
the Barrier owing to the merits of Broken
Hill. Claims which had been neglected
for want of capital are being worked, and
so things generally have conspired to im-
prove trade. Yet so far as one can
see Silverton must take a secondary
place on the Barrier. The exodus to
Broken Hill has already been considerable,
and that amongst business men. No-
body wishes to live at the “Dustholia”
of the Barrier at present, however accom-
modating the conditions of residence
may ultimately become there. Business
compels. Even the local Age, a most
loyal Silvertonian, must go. But when
full account has been taken of this exodus
and the altered surroundings, there are
mines—and their number may yet be
legion—in the neighbourhood to make
Silverton a very large town. The popu-
lation is now about 1,700. At present
the Warden and his staff are located in
it, and a contract has been let for con-
siderable public buildings. Trade con-
nections have been established which
cannot easily be severed, and Broken Hill
itself will become a source of profit to
these.
Many of the mines in the districts
remaining to be now treated of will draw
the supplies from Silverton, and as it will
be noticed that these are not few, and
many not insignificant, it can be under-
stood how it is that in Silverton the fear
of Broken Hill has not a paralyzing but a
stimulating effect. When one learns that
there are no empty houses in the town,
and that every one appears to be doing
well, one is liable to be infected with en-
thusiasm for the future of Silverton. In
the evenings, when the victories of the
share market are related in the spacious
saloons of the hotels, champagne flows
popular beverage in a town with basinesi
on the “down grade.”
UMBERUMBERKA MINES.
About a mile and a half down the
Silverton line in the direction of Cock-
burn is the historic and compact Umber-
umberka Mine. It was pegged out in the
early days of the field by Mr. John
Stokie, whose name is indelibly written
upon the Barrier records, and who ob-
tained a quantity of ore from the claim.
An Adelaide Company was formed to buy
it, giving the discoverer £250 cash and
4,000 paid-up £l-shares, and since No-
vember, 1882, they have opened the mine
up, added other freehold claims to it, at a
cost of £2,500, spent £7,000 on perma-
nent improvements, and paid three divi-
dends, equal to nearly half the subscribed
capital. Why the shares should sell for
so much less than those of mines with less
merit it is difficult to say. The only
reason stated is that the shares are con-
fined to few hands, it being affirmed that
seven-eights are held by the Directors.
There are two lodes in the property.
The main lode runs the whole length of
it, and there is a cross lode which junc-
tions in the Umberumberka Block 16,
and then goes to the Umberumberka
North. This was cut in the railway
cutting, and was 10 feet wide, showing
chlorides assaying over 2,000 oz. of silver
to the ton. The bulk, however, only gave
18 oz., but it comprised very suitable stuff
for fluxing. A vertical shaft was sunk
130 feet, and a crosscut driven into this
chloride lode at another part, and steel
galena was obtained. The main lode
runs through four blocks, and the
Company have recently bought the
Umberumberka Extended, which also
takes it. The main vertical shaft
is 400 feet deep. At the 60-feet
level there is a drive of 150 feet, at the
132-feet level of 290 feet east and 180 feet
west, at the 192-feet level of 480 feet east
and 130 feet west, at the 254-feet level of
500 feet east and 40 feet west, at the
300-feet level of 750 feet east and 350 feet
west, and at the 360 feet level of 250 feet
east and 50 feet west. There are four
other shafts. The lode formation varies
from 4 feet to 50 feet, while the shoots of
ore range from 4 inches to 3 feet in
width. One rich shoot now being worked
upon is 150 feet in length, and another
from 300 to 400 feet. Up to the end of
last year 7,634 tons of ore was sent away,
which was mostly sold in London, and


realized an average of £2O a ton, and
since then 50 tons a week has been
shipped, averaging 100 oz. of silver to the
ton. There is 2,500 tons on the surface
of second-class stuff awaiting treatment.
The mine is supplied with a concentrator
and crusher by May Brothers, of Gawler,
which cost £2,000. The water supply is
deficient. About 4,000 gallons a week is
obtained in the mine, just enough to keep
the boiler going. Reservoirs have been
constructed, but the scarcity of the supply
prevents the concentrating plant from
being employed at full time. A22-h.p.
Robey engine, one 6 ft. 6 in. boiler,
tramlines, and railway siding are among
the many other means at the mine for
carrying on the work to the greatest
advantage. About £7,000 has been
spent upon permanent improvements
and £2,500 upon purchases of claims.
The mine has paid three sixpenny and
one shilling dividends, equal to nearly
half the capital subscribed. Mr. E. P.
Evans, the first Manager, had less than
£4OO placed at his disposal, and for three
years he made the claims self-supporting,
payable ore being found a month after
the Company started. Captain C. H.
Wilson is the Manager, and Mr. J.
Thomas, assayer. One hundred men are
employed. The capital is 20,000 £l-
- 6s. being paid up or capitalized on
16,000, and £1 on 4,000. Sales were made
of the former on February 16 at £1 6s.
The Umberumberka East adjoins the
Umberumberka. There is a shaft down
125 feet on a copper lode which makes
ironstone with silver lead. A drive has
been put in 50 feet west carrying ore all
the way in the 100 feet level, and the
owner is driving 60 feet east at the same
level with good ore the full length of
the drive. Men are stoping and there is
35 tons of ore at grass Mr. E. J. Elder is
the proprietor.
The Umberumberka North has after
two years’ idleness, owing to some dis-
pute about the ground, begun work again.
Some good ore was sent to England as the
result of the previous workings. The
chloride lode from the Umberumberka
passes into this claim.
The Umberumberka West had a shaft
down 160 to 170 feet, and just got fairly
to work, when operations were stopped.
The claim, which belongs to an Adelaide
Company, has been idle for six months.
They have a continuation of the Umber-
umberka main lode, but so far no payable
ore has been found, though the indica-
tions are good,
LAKES CAMP.
Though the township supported by the
Day Dream and neighbouring mines is
officially named Wilson, it Is commonly
called the Day Dream. Some five years
ago Meech & Sinclair took up the Lakes
Camp Mine, now known as the Apollyon,
and after dissolving partnership Meech
discovered the Day Dream, which was for
some time termed Meech’s Blow. About
10 miles from Silverton, in a north-east
direction, is the now shrunken township
of the Day Dream, which a few brief
years ago was a busy settlement. There
was a continuous stream of bullock teams
upon the dusty bush road, and the
prosperity of the place seemed all but
assured. Now one may frequently travel
from Silverton to the Day Dream without
meeting a person on the forsaken track,
while at the township the loquacious
prospector who has seen better times bears
testimony in the solitary public-house to
the glory that has departed. To the right
are seen the smokeless rust-accumulating
smelters, which in an unhappy hour the
Barrier Ranges Association erected, and
round and about are the sites of houses
which have been carried off probably to
witness to some other mushroom town.
But it is quite within the range of pos-
sibilities that a permanent thriving town-
ship will yet be found at the Day Dream,
for if the efforts to prove the mines at a
depth are successful there will soon be a
steady increase in the labour employed.
The Apollyon, which formerly belonged
to the Barrier Ranges Association, has
been floated into a separate Company,
though it is still under the management
of Captain Dick. The shareholders are
the same, but there is a distinct scrip.
This mine had the richest ore found on
the field near the surface, and lower
down it had been followed to over 200
feet in depth. The closing of the smelt-
ing works and a general depression
caused the work to be suspended, but it
was not stopped through any want of
appreciation of the merits of the property.
The Manager is prospecting in the bottom
levels, and has a very nice show of silver
at the 97-feet level. This mine has a
special interest in that it was the first in
which chlorides were found. Of how
little was known of their value is
attested by the fact that a shipment of
42 cwt. of the ore lay upon a London
wharf for some months because the con-
signees did not think it worth the wharf-
age. Ultimately it brought in the
astonishing sum of £7OO.


At the Day Dream, which has given the Morning Star claim, having a copper
some magnificent returns in the past, very
little is doing. “ The mighty Day
Dream,” says one, (t drove men mad, and
a good* sized township sprang into exis-
tence only to fade like a spring flower.”
The reason that the first assays took such
a hold on the public attention was that
whereas the highest returns previously
had been 70 oz. of silver to the ton from
as likely looking ore, that from the Day
Dream gave 200 oz. Then the excite-
ment of that period was increased by the
Bobbie Burns sending samples which were
valued at 14,000 oz. of silver to the ton ;
unfortunately expectations became too
high-pitched, as events followed. Though
like many of its contemporaries the Day
Dream has of late fallen into the shade,
the mine has been well opened up, and it
has yielded rich ore in generous fashion.
Pinched out now, other rich portions may
possibly be found capable of bringing the
Day Dream again into notice.
The Barrier Ranges Association was
formed in the early days of the field to
take over mines, work them, put up
smelters, and otherwise develop the field.
Mention has been already made of
several of their Thackaringa claims. The
Association about three years ago erected
large smelting works at the Day Dream,
and smelted a large quantity of ore, but
there was not sufficient produce to
keep them at work. There is, it
is melancholy to add, no pro-
bability of getting sufficient stuff
to restart the costly machinery,
which comprises a 25-ton and a
40-ton water-jacket furnace. Captain
Dick is the general manager of the
Association’s mines, including those
named below.
At the Hen and Chickens (8.R.A.) a
large amount of work has been done in
the way of mining, a great deal of ore
having been raised. The surface ore
having run out, the Manager is trying to
develop the lower levels.
A more important mine than the former
is the New Year (8.R.A.), which has re-
turned some very good silver at the 50-feet
level. The shaft is being sunk below that
level. At present it is down to a depth of
70 feet, and as there is a heavy body of
water a level is being opened out at the
depth. In the shaft there is ironstone
carrying good silver in the lead and good
lead ore.
MORNING STAR CLAIM.
Five miles from Silverton in a gully is
lode and a silioious lode carrying shoots of
galena. It has been formed into a Mel-
bourne Company. Mr. William Masey
has been appointed Manager.
No. XXI.
TOWER HILL.
The road from Silverton to Tower Hill
has several interesting features. It passes
through picturesque and undulating
country in sight of rugged ranges. Its
name has a tragic association—Lake’s
Grave-road, and about 5 miles out, the
grave is found on the road enclosed by a
picket fence, while close by, at the turn
of a deep gorge to the right, is the
unfinished atone house of the deceased, fast
falling to rains. Mr. Lake, a station
owner, some years ago was returning from
Umberumberka, and fell off his horse.
Twice he was assisted into the
saddle again, but his third fall found
him dead on the ground, and there
he was buried. A little further on
to the left is a conical-shaped peak,
slightly bent at the summit, standing
severely isolated in the cloudless sky as
if it were some Titanic fortress. It was
called Lake’s Nob, but now more appro-
priately Tower Hill. It is singularly cut
off from communication with the sur-
rounding country by two creeks. The
hill has more than outward charms to
attract, for it is highly mineralized with
carbonates of all kinds, copper, silver, and
lead, and chlorides have been found in it.
The claim (160 acres) belongs to a Sydney
Company, who are driving a tunnel
through the hill to discover the lode, the
indications of which show that it is very
large. It is good ground for lead bearing,
and recently the Company took up another
lease known as the Jane Armour.
BRINKWORTH PADDOCK.
At the Mundi Mundi Station, belonging
to Dr. Stirling, is the Brinkworth Pad-
dock. It is 12 miles from Silverton, in a
straight north-east line. There is not
enough work done to say much as to the
character of the country, but this portion
of the field has been very much neglected.
It is, however, likely to turn out well.
Tin and copper, as well as silver, have been
found in the neighbourhood of the station.
There are some very large copper shows.
The Occidental has a vertical shaft sunk
60 feet in very hard ground, and a cross-cut
to cut the lode, which shows on the surface
12 feet in width. Good assays of silver and


lead have been obtained. It is a promising a large stack of ore on the surface.
property belonging to a Syndicate. Messrs. Wilkinson and Murray, two of
The Brinkworth is owned by Messrs, the Directors, were visiting the mine.
__ 1 ... 1 . . 1 .1 . .1 ° , . 7
Harrold Brothers, of Adelaide, and has
an excellent show. They shipped 7 tons
of surface ore, which went 50 per cent,
of lead and 80 oz. of silver. They have
just let a contract to sink a 50-feet shaft.
The lode is 8 feet wide, with carbonate
ore.
To the north is the Day Dawn. A
Company has been formed in Sydney to
work it. The former proprietors sent
away a quantity of ore, which realized
£36 per ton net. The galena assayed very
high infsilver.
The Great Northern and Jubilee Syndi-
cates have claims in Mundi Mundi with
good surface lodes, but no work has been
done. Assays of stone from the former
have been obtained, giving 60 oz. of
silver to the ton and 40 per cent, of lead.
TERRIBLE DICK.
About 15 miles from Silverton, on the
Lake’s Grave-road, is the Terrible Dick, a
Sydney mine. It is named after a well-
known character in the district, Richard
Tonkin. About two and a half years ago he
sold the claim, consisting ot two 40-acre
blocks, to the Sydney Company, who have
spent £26,000 in developing it, without,
so far, any returns. There is a large 12
by 6 feet shaft, 50 feet deep to the first
level, 107 feet to the second, and 21 feet
below that, and it is proposed to sink
still deeper. The drives are—ln the
50-feet level, 132 feet south : and in the
107 feet, 147 feet south and 130 feet north.
There is a crosscut going west 142 feet to
cut a lode showing on the hill, and at a
further distance of 80 feet to intercept the
western lode, anticipated to be a large one.
A rise has been made to the surface from
the 50-feet level, and there is a winze
which takes to the bottom level. There
is a 12 h.p. engine, winding gear, iron
poppet heads and plunger, and draw lift
pumps. The water is increasing from all
the faces in the low level. Though a few
tons of ore is being raised, the object now
is to open out the mine until the smelter
is erected. The new smelter, which will
be before long at work, includes a 25-ton
and a 35-ton Nonpariel round furnace,
designed to save from 10 to 15 per cent,
in coke. The main lode, which is of a
mixed character, is between 4 and 6 feet
wide. The formation is plumbic schist.
In the eastern shaft, which appears to
have been overlooked, the Manager had
discovered a show of galena. There was
and stated that they were deter-
mined to push on the work as
fast as possible, and that with the
exception of 500 the shares were held by
five persons. From thirty-five to forty
men are being employed. Captain S. C.
Iveson has recently succeeded Captain
Hocking. The capital is 12,500 £2O
shares, £l9 being paid up or capitalized.
Sales were made on December 1 at £2l,
and in Sydney on February 16, at £6 10s.
LADY CARRINGTON CLAIM.
The Lady Carrington claim is situated
about a mile and a half on the ranges
from the Terrible Dick Mine. Two
shafts have been sunk cn an ironstone for-
mation, carrying galena. It is an Adelaide
company, and Mr. Parkes is the Manager.
The capital is 50,000 £1 shares, 20,000
being paid up or capitalized to 2s. 6d.,
and 30,000 to 15s. 6d. Sales of con-
tributors were made on February 11 at
3s. 9d.
STEPHEN’S CREEK.
Stephen’s Creek, with its interminable
windings marked by large umbrageous
gums, is one of the most refreshing charac-
teristics of the Barrier scenery. Though
it seemed a barbarism to cut down those
trees, the only trees of any size to be met
with, the demand for timber in connec-
tion with the mines was so great that in
spite of more than sentiment the axe
was often heard ringing by the dry
soft bed of the creek until the Warden
proclaimed it a reserve. Even now an
occasional member of this valuable line is
taken by the daring contractor, who runs
a risk of Police Court prosecution and fine.
The creek does more than nourish the
trees that please the eye and furnish
shade from the fierce summer sun; it
gives in the soakage a valuable water
supply. It may not at all times be so
sweet and pure as could be wished for,
but in a district where a drink for a horse
costs 4d., it is difficult to estimate the
great value of the creek soakage. Much
of the ground in the locality of the creek
is of a highly mineralized character, and
it has the reputation of being the cheapest
to develop on the Barrier.
The Hidden Secret, which is situated
13 miles in a north-east direction from
Silverton, is a claim comprised in a 40-
acre block next to the Gem. It was
floated into a Company in December last,


and Mr. T, Rowe, formerly of Yorke’s
Peninsula, is the Manager. No. 1
vertical shaft is sunk to a depth of
51 feet, striking the lode at 30 feet. The
underlay shaft is 60 feet, and connects
with the vertical. The men have sunk
through the lode 21 feet, driven in the
footwall side for 6 feet, but are not
through it. The character of the lode
is cubical galena, ironstone, and grey ore,
assaying very high. There are two other
lodes, and No. 2 vertical or main shaft is
being sunk with a view of reaching the
three lodes. Fifty bags of ore was ready
for shipment to the Dry Creek Smelting
Works. It is a Melbourne Company, Mr.
R. Cane being the legal Manager. Nine
men are employed.
Adjoining is the Gem, comprising 34,
36, and 40 acre blocks. The three Hidden
Secret lodes pass through it, and shafts
have been sunk 110, 30, and 20 feet re-
spectively. One lode is a galena, another
a chloride, and the third a mixture.
Two tons of ore was sent away to prove
the quality, and it assayed 70 per cent, of
lead and 32 oz. of silver to the ton.
Vigorous work will be undertaken directly.
There is a large outcrop on the
Champion Lode property, consisting of 60
acres to the north, and a vertical shaft,
which is 48 feet deep, has struck the lode,
which is about 2 miles in length, going
right through the hills. It runs through
the Southern Cross claim. A sample
stone went 65 oz. of silver to the ton.
On the upper part is one of the best
properties on the creek. The Southern
Cross, which is held by a Port Pirie Com-
pany, who recently struck a new lode in
Randall’s Shaft. It is a big strong
silicious galena lode, showing about 20
oz. to the ton and 40 per cent, of lead,
and the quantity seems apparently un-
limited. In Fitzpatrick Shaft, which is
70 feet deep, they are driving on
the lode, A lot of stoping has
been done, and 90 tons of ore
was sent away recently There is abont
2 feet of lode formation in the face
showing galena. The manager intends to
drive ahead for fully 50 feet before com-
mencing stoping operations. The Spald-
ing Shaft is down about 50 feet, on a very
large lode formation. There are three
lodes on this property, which consists of
three blocks. About twenty-five men are
employed under Captain Horan. The
capital is 40,000 £1 shares, 3s. 6d. being
paid up or capitalized on 34,000, and £1
on 6,000. Sales of contributors were
made on February II at 6s.
Adjoining the Southern Cross is the
Parnell. There are two shafts and three
lodes. It has just been formed into a
Company in Melbourne, and work will be
started soon.
Up near Lindsay’s Crossing and Piesse’s
Nob, 9 miles from Broken Hill, is the
Eaglehawk, named after an eaglehawk’s
nest on the bill. There are five shafts on
the ground, and a fine lode formation and
regular walls. About 37 tons of first-class
ore was sent away during last year. A
vertical shaft is being sunk to cut the lode
at a depth of 100 feet. The water has
prevented them hitherto from sinking on
the lode, but it is expected that when the
vertical shaft is down it will be tapped.
Machinery will be erected and good pro-
gress looked for. The lode formation
fully warrants sinking, and the chances
are that a great improvement will take
place below water level, such rich ore
having been obtained near the surface.
Captain James Eddy is the Manager. The
capital is 50,000 10s. shares, 2s. 6d. being
paid up or capitalized on 30,000 and 10s.
on 20,000.
At Piesse’s Nob an Adelaide Syndicate,
the Cambrian, have two shafts down 80
feet, with a drive at the bottom, showing
a small branch of galena of fair quality.
The west shaft, which is 60 feet deep,
contains kaolin ore, with very fair chlorides.
The prospects warrant an expenditure for
development. The capital is 100 £2O
shares, and sales were made on January
30 at £3O.
No. XXII.
PURNAMOOTA.
Purnamoota, which is one of the oldest
districts on the Barrier, is about 12 miles
east from Waukaroo, 18 miles north-east
from Silverton, and 22 north-west from
Broken Hill. It was a thriving township
before the halcyon days of Silverton, some
very rich ore having been found in the
district, and in point of historic interest
is second only to Thackaringa. It has
suffered neglect—a neglect which dates
back to the time when the fortunes of the
Barrier seemed to be hanging in the
balances. Had not Broken Hill turned
the scale it is possible that the cheerful
face of things presented to-day at
Purnamoota would not exist. No doubt
the field would have progressed, but so
gradually that it is not too much
to say that Purnamoota might still have
been under the shade. However, the dis-
trict is now receiving a large share of the
notice it deserves, and attention is being


paid to galena ores, a number of claims
being worked, while others will shortly be
employing labour. One of the chief
recommendations of the district is the
easy character of the ground, the forma-
tions being of laminated schist. The
population, which is growing in numbers,
in and about the township is 380. A find
of new country about 12 miles north of
the settlement has led to many new
claims being taken up. Leases have been
applied for the ground, which is between
the Silver King and Mount Robe, and as
soon as the applications are granted they
will be worked. There is a large iron-
stone outcrop. Mr. Butter worth, of
Silverton, has reason to believe that an
English Company will take up the Atlas
claim in Purnamoota and develop it.
Mr. Wilkinson, the Government Geolo-
gist of New South Wales, who not long
since visited Purnamoota, said, after
speaking of the War Dance and Victory
lodes :—“ It is probable that many other
similar silver-bearing lodes will be dis-
covered in this district, and though they
may be too small to support smelting
works at each mine, yet from them collec-
tively will no doubt be raised considerable
quantities that could be forwarded for sale
or treatment at some central public reduc-
tion works.”
The only gold mine at present on the
field, the Golden Crest, is in Purnamoota.
The Victory, which is one of the lead-
ing claims at Purnamoota, is about 4J
miles from the township in an easterly
direction. It has been worked for three
and a half years, and a good quantity of
ore has been shipped, Including one parcel
of 15 tons and another of 10. The bulk
assays in Adelaide gave—silver 40 oz. to
the ton, and lead 70 per cent. There are
three known lodes running on the
property, which consists of five
blocks of land (one being a water
reserve) measuring 181 acres. One lode
runs in Block 16 and two in Block 60 to
the east. The ground is easily worked,
and the lode formation is principally
schist with shoots of galena in it, and
nodules of the same ore interspersed. On
Block 16 there are two shafts, one 20
feet vertical, and an underlay connecting
it. From the bottom of the vertical
shaft there is an underlay shaft, and the
contractors are down 36 feet of the 50
feet contracted for. There is a forma-
tion there of 4 feet, carrying shoots of
galena ore, which makes splices on the
foot and hanging-walls. The stuff is
sometimes found in 5 or 6 cwt. lumps.
The ore is mostly taken from that lode,
which carries a little grey ore now and
then. On Block 16 the vertical shaft is
down 40 feet and the underlay 40 feet.
The lode formation, which is 3 feet thick,
is ironstone with micaceous schist. A
shaft was sunk to cut a lode showing at
about 70 feet, but when 40 feet down the
men found chlorides and the branch was
followed up by an underlay shaft. About
£1,500 has been spent upon the property,
and the Syndicate has formed a Company
in order to get capital to sink main shafts
and erect concentrating machinery. The
ore being very suitable for dressing, the
ground for cheap development, the claim,
considering the number ®f lodes upon it
and the probability of the ore improving
at a depth should, with careful manage-
ment, show good results.
The Victoria adjoins the Victory on the
south-west, and a good deal of work in
the way of prospecting has been done upon
it, there being five different shafts. A
lode can be traced from the surface down
for 24 feet, being the greatest depth sunk.
The Mayflower, in the same neighbour-
hood, has been held for a little over two
and a half years, but not been worked
for two years. A fresh start has been
recently made by a Sydney Syndicate.
To the original 20-acre block a 40-acre
has been added. The shaft is down
85 feet, and the men are sinking on the
underlay. The width of the lode forma-
tion is about 2 feet, and about 4 inches of
nice ore has just been cut.
The claim formerly known as the Cale-
donian is now the Great Britain. Thirty
tons of ore has been sent away. There is
a shaft down 43 feet upon ironstone quartz
formation, with occasional silicious galena,
but it is proposed to sink a vertical shaft
to cut the lodes on the property at a
depth and thoroughly prospect them. Mr.
Hicks is the Manager.
The War Dance is a mile from Purna-
moota. There are five parallel lodes, and
two shafts are being sunk. From an
underlay shaft down 76 feet close to the
War Dance Extended some promising
stones were taken out at a spot not far
from where the vertical shaft of that
claim will meet the lode. No. 2 Shaft,
which is down 105 feet through quartz,
has cut water. About twenty-six bags of
ore was shipped one week, the character
being carbonate of copper, yielding
chloride of silver and grey ore intermixed.
The lodes, though small, carry rich ore
and appear to be permanent. Mr, Ellis is
the captain.


On the Black Prince, which belongs to The smoke of the smelters can be seen
a Melbourne Company, there are three
shafts, two of which are still going down.
More than 100 tons of good ore has been
sent away. The ground is very hard.
Mr. Reynoldaon is the Manager. The
capital is 80,000 £l-shares, 13s. paid or
capitalized, and sales were made on
February 11 at 4s.
The Black Prince South is also a Mel-
bourne Company. A shaft was sunk 70
feet, and the men are driving a crosscut
to cut the lode. The capital is 60,000 £l-
- 12s. 6d. paid or capitalized, and
sales were made at 2a. 4d. on October 11
last.
North of this is the Silver King East,
and the Lady Sutton, at present in the
market.
Mount Robe, Mount Robe Extended,
Midnight Ramble, and other claims, have
big nodules of galena, which are found
scattered all over the country. Work
will soon be started upon the properties.
The Golden Crest, which is the only
gold mine on the Barrier, though gold
licences have by way of precaution been
taken out in respect to a few properties,
is near Mount Robe. Three tons of stone
from the claim, which was crushed at the
Woodside battery, yielded oz. to the
ton. A Company has been formed for
vigorous work.
MOUNT GIPPS DISTRICT.
Near Mount Gipps Station, about 9
miles north from Broken Hill, is the
Britannia Scotia annexed by a Port Pirie
Company. This mine has sent away
about 200 tons of very good ore. There
is a shaft down over 90 feet, but the
influx of water demanded machinery
which is being erected. A winding plant
has been finished by May Brothers, of
Gawler. The mine has been idle for six
months, but good returns may be looked
for shortly. The lode formation is 4 feet,
yielding horn silver. There are indica-
tions right through the Company’s two
blocks. The Manager is Mr. Stratton,
The capital is 36,000 £lO-shares, ss. 6d.
being paid up or capitalized on 24,000,
and £1 on 12,000. Sales were made on
October 25 last, at 2s. 6d. and ss. 6d.
The Britannia Extended, a Melbourne
Company, is 5 miles away from the Bri-
tannia Scotia. There are two shafts, a
vertical 60 feet and a connecting underlay
shaft. It is in connection with this claim
that a standing joke of the Barrier is told.
The Manager reported having “ driven
4 feet in the direction of Broken Hill.”
from a hill near the shaft 9 miles distant.
At the time of visiting the claim the drive
had been extended to 52 feet in the same
direction. The shaft has furnished a little
galena intermixed with micaceous schist.
The Silver Dale is 2 miles distant in a
northerly direction from the Britannia
Extended. An underlay shaft has given
some promising stuff. A few tons of grey
galena and chloride ore is being raised
monthly. A vertical shaft is to be sunk.
The well-defined nice lode formation
warrants deep sinking. The property,
which is a promising one, belongs to a
Silverton Company.
NICKLEVILLE.
About 13 miles from Broken Hill,
leaving Mount Gipps Station 4 miles
behind, is the diminutive township of
Nickleville, called after Julius Nickle,
pioneer prospector at Thackaringa. It is
somewhat strange that the names of the
pioneer prospectors have not been more
used in the nomenclature of settlements,
for it would not only serve to call atten-
tion to the merits of these hardy toilers,
but would maintain an interest in the
origin and progress of mining in the
Barrier. Over the hill, rising in front of
the public-house, are the Kate and May-
bell claims, and a mile or so to the right
the Rise and Shine Mine.
The Kate, comprising 100 acres, which
belongs to an Adelaide Company, has fur-
nished from time to time very rich ore,
but it is patchy and occasionally difficult
to pick up. There are several leaders
which point to the presence of a good
lode in the locality. Eight men and two
boys are employed, and the Company
have paid one dividend of 3d. There are
five shafts on the ground, and some good
grey ore with chloride in it is now being
found. Captain Norton, who has been
in charge for nine months and is about to
give place to Mr. Peters, recently took
up a block under a gold-mining lease for
the Company, having found gold in stones
on it. About £l,OOO has been spent on
the mine. The capital is 40,000 £l-
- 15s. 6d. being paid up or capi-
talized, and sales were made on Feb-
ruary 9 at 2s. 6d.
The Maybell properties belong to Ade-
laide, and were until recently in charge
of Captain Foster. The North Maybell
claim comprises three 40-acre blocks, and
there are seven shafts, the deepest vertical
being sunk to a depth of 93 feet, and the
deepest underlay to 260 feet. About


£2,300 has been paid in dividends, and there are signs of intervening lodes.
only one call made. The character of the
ore is similar to that in the Kate. The
average output is about 22 tons per
month. The capital is 40,000 £l-shares,
16s. paid up or capitalized. Sales were
made on February 10 at Is. 6d.
In the Maybell South the men are
driving along the water level. There is a
big lode, but it is not just now payable on
account of the low class ores. About
£5,000 has been paid in dividends. The
capital is 40,000 £l-shares, 15s. paid up
or capitalized, and the last sales quoted
were 9d.
Nothing is being done at East Maybell.
There is a quantity of rich ore, but not
enough to pay. It is suggested that the
Kate and Maybell claims should be amal-
gamated with a view to more economical
working.
RISE AND SHINE MINE.
This Adelaide - owned property is
pleasantly situated close to the border of
the tin country. It is about 15 miles
from Broken Hill, in a north-easterly
direction. There is a vertical pump shaft
66 feet deep, and a special universal
steampump, with a capacity for 12,000
gallons an hour. The shaft struck the
lode about 15 feet from the surface, and
it continued with slight underlay to the
north-west. It varies from 8 to 10 feet
in width, and the formation is iron
gossan, carbonate, mundic, specular iron,
blende, and hornblende. Several tons of
ore is ready for shipment. The pros-
pects are promising, though the stuff is
at present of too low a grade to be re-
munerative. As the ground is hard the
Manager, Captain Tregoweth, late of
Woodside, deems it advisable to get down
deeper before driving on the lode, espe-
cially as the pump is not adapted for
hard ground. The lode in the bottom of
the shaft appears to have a regular forma-
tion with well-defined walls, and should,
in developing, open out shoots of payable
ore. Recently the Company secured the
claims on the other side on the course of
the lode, so that the property now con-
sists of 140 acres; and if the policy of
deep sinking should succeed it will
make the claim very valuable. No. 2
Shaft, 120 feet distant from No. 1, is on
the lode. There is a second lode to the
south-east, which seems to be going
parallel with and to be in character like
the other, and in deep sinking one object
would be to command both lodes. In so
doing other discoveries may be made, as
The lodes run north-east and south-west,
and as none in this particular locality
have been tapped there is no special ex-
perience to guide in the operations.
Samples from the bottom of the shaft
recently gave—Galena, 44 per cent, of
lead and 10 oz. of silver to the ton ; and
carbonates 49 per cent, of lead and 19 oz.
of silver. The expenditure during the
last five months, including purchase of
plant, has been only £l,OOO, and the
Company is in a good financial position.
It may be advisable to enlarge the Com-
pany in order to carry out the vigorous
policy justified hy the presence of strong
lodes so well mineralized. The capital of
the Company is 7,400 £l-shares, £1 paid
or capitalized, and sales were made at 14s.
on February 9.
No. XXIII.
The Lubra is also in the Purnamoota
District. It was owned by Mr. Thomas
Crisp, of Crystal Brook, who raised large
quantities of very rich stuff. The lode at
a depth turned into ironstone, but upon
getting into hard ground made a little
galena and grey ore. It is now owned by
a Sydney Company, who are sinking a
vertical shaft to cut the lode.
The Treasure adjoins the Lubra. The
claim, which has just lately been floated
into a Company, was known as Morris’s
Blow. It has been held four years by the
late proprietors, who got some very good
ore from it. Some very large slugs of
grey ore were found on the surface.
GOLD.
Though principally a silver and lead
district the Barrier is rich in tin, and
there is a plentiful supply of copper.
Gold claims have been taken up in Purna-
moota, and it is quite likely that the field
may yet be found to be rich in the
precious metal.
The only gold mine being actually
worked is the Golden Crest at Purna-
moota, near Mount Robe, though re-
cently claims in the vicinity have been
floated, and will no doubt be shortly
worked. Three tons of stone from the
Golden Crest crushed at the Woodside
Battery yielded 1| oz. to the ton.
COPPER.
Amongst the most promising copper
mines on the Barrier are Pattle’s Anna
Conda. There are several claims between
the Acacia Dam and the Day Dream, the


more likely looking including the Prince year that it takes eighteen months to
j t>-j > • n. _ i mi •. . .
Charlie, Colorado, Red Flag, and Badge’s.
AtMundi Mundi fourteen claims have been
recently taken up for copper on Camp-
bell’s Creek, and they have very large
lodes there. Captain James Dunstan,
late Manager of the Great Cobar Copper
Mine, has reported favourably on them
and taken up leases himself. At the
Copper Blow, which is 6 miles north of
the recent discovery at the Great Northern,
and 12 miles from Mundi Mundi, twelve
claims have been pegged out.
The peculiarity of the copper lodes in
the district is that they turn into silver at
a depth.
DEFECTIVE MINING LAWS.
As so much outside capital has been
furnished for the development of the field
the state of the mineral laws has more
than a local interest. It is to the advan-
tage of the whole district that the ground
should as far as possible be simultaneously
worked, because there Is economy in the
largeness of operations, and an equitable
contribution to the increased values in
fair work. To lock up mineral lands,
therefore, is detrimental to the common
interests and unfair to individual pro-
prietors, to say nothing of the wrong
inflicted on the colony, who parted with
the right to the minerals in the belief that
the claim would be worked for the imme-
diate and general good. Mention has been
made in connection with the Thackaringa
mines of the way in which a great
portion of the land stands idle through
the operation of the Mineral Conditional
Purchase titles which are practically free-
holds, and it is to be hoped that the
Sydney Government will do what is
necessary to prevent the further issue of
these titles, at any rate without the addi-
tion of such conditions as will conserve
the public Interests. If the evil in con-
nection with the titles already issued be
as great as represented it might be
worth considering whether a tax should
not be imposed in regard to un-
worked claims which are being improved
in value by the expenditure on adjoining
properties, but which M.o.P’s. are con-
tributing nothing to the general rise in
values, nor anything to the public revenue,
through the employment of labour pro-
fitable to the State.
There is a good deal of shepherding
going on in the district. On a claim being
pegged out application is made for a
lease, and such is the expedition of the
Sydney authorities in the centennial
issue the lease. The lease contains con-
ditions for the employment of an in-
creasing quantity of labour, but until
the lease is issued no labour need be
employed. That gives eighteen months
clear of expenditure. But an ingenious
device is used to avoid an evasion of the
conditions and yet to retain the claim
without the employment of labour—that
is, to shepherd it without the authorities
being able to prove shepherding. The
application for a lease is made by a mem-
ber of a party or Syndicate in his own
name, who, when the lease is issued,
allows it to be forfeited for non-payment
of rent, meanwhile taking care that a
second member has pegged it out and
put in a proper application for lease.
As it takes another eighteen months for
the issue of the lease, the claim is held
three years without any expenditure on
labour, and at the end of the three years
the process may be repeated by a third
member. I came across the other day
the following pertinent paragraph in the
Silver Age of January 11:—Between
Acacia Dam and the Day Dream there are
several good copper lodes, and some most
flagrant violations of the labour conditions
can be noticed. One claim in particular has
been shepherded by the same people for
four years. They have allowed one lease
to lapse, then another of the same party
took it up again, and during the time no
work has been done. The Minister for
Mines promised last year that he would
bring in a Bill that would meet such
cases and compel owners either to work or
abandon the ground. The present system
of leases has greatly retarded the general
progress of the district, and it cannot be
altered too soon for the future welfare of
the Barrier. Two-thirds of the country
is absolutely locked up from legitimate
prospecting. ”
MISLEADING THE PUBLIC.
Genuine mining needs no angel to re-
commend it, for obviously it pays to take
the public into confidence. The shrewdest
Barrier Rangers see this. Undoubtedly
there are some who for a miserable mess
of pottage would sell the public, but only
to learn on subsequent reflection that
there is wealth and wisdom In preserving
a good name. The farseeing men of the
Barrier will tell you that the progress of
the field is profoundly related to frank
dealings with the public. So long as
everything is straightforward there will
be generous contributions for the de


velopment of the field ; but if the public
should find that they have been led by
misrepresentations into worthless claims,
or into a waste of money, there will be a
reaction, in which none will suffer more
than the Barrier people themselves.
The object in connection with claims is
to improve their selling value, and as the
test of properties is the dividend-paying
power, means are taken to make the
public believe that they have it largely,
though undeveloped. The channels of
information are the mine and the markets,
and it has become quite an art to charge
those channels skilfully. As to the mine
itself, it is of great consequence to con-
nect the locality with some magic-working
name. The Broken Hill lode is now
the spell to conjure by, and like
a man suddenly made rich, it is
astonishing the number of connections
there are. But in the matter of
naming the mines the Warden ought to
have some discretionary power. Not
only are names repeated, so that con-
fusion arises, but the names of paying or
promising properties are used with the
addition of the word “ extended,” “ west,”
and so on, misleading the public. In one
case on the Barrier the extended claim is
9 miles from the original, and in others
there is not the remotest connection in a
mineral sense. Where there is a well-de-
fined and known line of lode no claim
should be called by it unless there is a
proof of its relationship to it. Claim
proprietors should be obliged to
register the name, and the Warden
should have the right to veto any
proposal calculated to mislead the public.
Attention has been called to the ille-
gality of Syndicates consisting of more
than twenty shareholders, and to the peril
of sham paid up shares. The latter is an
attempt to mislead the market. Some-
thing might be said as to the way in
which claims are handicapped before they
are proved by the large sums paid to the
proprietors, for though every thing being
above board the shareholders have no
right to complain, the practice is injurious
to the district. When a Company,
whose shares are seven-eighths paid
up or capitalized, has out of
a capital of £70,000 to £BO,OOO only
£2,000 or £3,000 to start developmental
works with, it is obvious that justice is
not being done to the average claim. But
the object of this sham paid-up shares
custom is to conceal the true condition of
the Company. The promoters practically
say, and mostly before the claim has been
proved, it is worth all that is represented
by the nominally subscribed capital, and
in order to make the public believe so
they will render it as difficult as possible
to find out what is really paid on
the shares. There are many claims on the
Barrier that promise to pay handsomely
on money expended in honest skilful
development, but will never pay on the
fictitious values and nominal capitals. To
a member of the public who has expected
to see on a £70,000 or £BO,OOO capital claim
a mine it is a slight shock on visiting it
to find that, notwithstanding the com-
paratively small amount which can be
called up, there is one waterhole, one
windlass, and a rope !
MINING MANAGERS.
The Manager of a mine is commonly
called captain like the master of a ship,
and there are many points of resemblance
between them. Both are entrusted with
life and property, both are often at a dis-
tance from the managing owners, and
both have opportunities of doing great
mischief through incompetency or mis-
conduct. But the master of a vessel, if it
is an insignificant wood craft crawling
round the coast, must be certificated as
to his fitness for the office, and
the manager of a mine, though
charged with hundreds of men
and property worth millions, need
have no testimony to his competency or
integrity. Usually he has; but the
testimony of competency is not given
by any recognised authority. Now it is
suggested with much force of reason that
managers, like surveyors, should be re-
quired to pass an examination as to pro-
fessional fitness, and produce testi-
monials as to personal integrity from a
duly constituted Board, and that there
should be grades of certificates. Ob-
viously the Manager of a small claim
where there is no machinery does not re-
quire to be so proficient as the Manager
of a mine where the operations
are conducted on an extensive scale.
It is a distinct advantage, and should be
recognised as a necessary qualification
that a Manager should be able to assay.
In the earlier history of a claim it is
desirable that the captain should save the
expense of consulting an assayer as to
every new sample that is met with ; while
without usurping the functions of the
assayer there are times when it is ex-
tremely inconvenient to send samples to
assayers, and when it is highly important
to check the assays of others.


The corallary to the acceptance of a
certificate of competency is a liability
to its suspension or cancelling on proof
of a charge of in competency or miscon-
duct, and the advantage to the public
interest from this aspect of the matter
would not be small. It cannot be over-
looked how absolutely the Manager must
be trusted, because not merely of the
general unfitness of Directors to manage
the mines, but because of the distance
from the scene of operations and their
slight knowledge of the local circum-
stances.
On the Barrier there are two classes of
Managers. Foremost is that of the
veterans of many fields, the world-tra-
velled men, and the miners on time-
honoured lines. They renew on the
Ranges friendships made in Cornwall and
California, New Zealand, Tasmania, and
other parts of Australasia. Just now the
“.’Merican expert” is the prominent man.
The second class comprises the young
Australians with energy and ambition,
who are fast stepping into the charge of
important claims.
The salaries of Managers range from
£2OO to £6OO a year, but the
perquisites are sometimes very
considerable. A Manager in the
vicinity of Broken Hill or Silverton can
make much money by speculations, but
if his name is one to charm the public
with in prospectuses he can do well by re-
porting upon claims, each report covering
a fee of £25. A happy few have during the
present boom been swelling their salaries
by at least £lOO a week, while the result
of their timely speculations are told in five
figures.
NO. XXIV.
IMPROVING THE CONDITIONS OF
RESIDENCE AT BROKEN HILL.
Enthusiastic Willyamaites speak of the
nearness of the time when Broken Hill
will be a city, the population being
counted in tens of thousands. As a proof
of their earnestness it would not be too
much to ask them to show a little more
energy ir the direction of improving the
conditions of residence for the multitude
of precious lives worthy of the coming
rival of Ballarat. Some little attention
is being given to public matters, but they
mostly relate to the pockets and not the
personal comfort of the people. Urgent as
undoubtedly are the complaints as to
telegraph and postal business, equally
deserving of spirited treatment, are the
abuses arising out of the absence of
municipal institutions.
A CORPORATION WANTED.
The most immediate want of Broken
Hill is a Corporation, not merely to make
roads, supervise the building of the town,
and attend to the sanitation, but to culti-
vate a public' spirit and give expression to
common interests. If there is one thing
more than another that distinguishes the
Victorian it is the interest he exhibits in
public matters, and the provision made
in respect to municipal institutions
are in this connection significant.
The whole of the colony is divided
into Shire Councils, towns of a cer-
tain population constituting Boroughs or
Corporations; and one recommendation
of the machinery for the establishment of
new Boroughs is that it is automatic.
Immediately the population of a town-
ship attains to the stated minimum
number, without any wearisome applica-
tions to the Government or . tedious
delays, it becomes a Borough. Now
Broken Hill belongs to no Shire Council
and cannot get a Corporation granted.
The Government would probably have
given the people, ere this, the necessary
measure of local control but for the
difficulty of settling the boundaries.
It has been previously mentioned that
the proprietors of the mines object to
them being included in a municipal area,
from the natural dislike to pay taxes ; but
it does not seem altogether fair that they
should participate in the general benefits
and contribute nothing to the
common burden. They will share in
the advantages of good roads, and
will it be contended that they will not
profit by the improvements made in the
condition of residence ? These will tend
to attract more and better labour to the
district, to conserve the energy, and raise
the tone of their employes, and generally
to reduce the cost of production. It may
be said, and with truth, that the site of the
town is too near to the mines, and that
the danger of fixing it so close to stacks
pouring forth leaden and arsenical fumes
was pointed out before it was
surveyed. Broken Hill, which is now
situated in a hollow, would have been
better built on the plain to the south of
the railway line, or on the higher ground
to the west of its present position, but the
authorities allowed the people to have
their wish to settle as close as possible to
the Broken Hill Mine. Though the argu-
ment of the mine’s representatives may be


powerful aa against their being unduly is obvious that there is now a need for a
taxed or severely dealt with through the
proximity of the smelting operations to
the town, it can scarcely prevent the
Government from including the properties
from the municipal area, which as is the
case at Silverton, usually covers about 50
square miles.
RISKS OF FIRE.
Excellent roads could be made at
Broken Hill, slag being plentiful for
foundations and metal for crowns ; and
there is no reason why lines ot trees
should not shade asphalt footpaths there
abating considerably the nuisance of dust-
storms. A gas plant has been ordered by
a Company, and soon the streets may be
expected to be lit up at night. Sanitary
matters have been discussed in a previous
letter. Something will, however, have to
be done as to the erection of buildings in
the town in view of the risk of fire.
Insurance offices are charging now as
high as 70s. percent,, occasionally 100s.,
while there are some risks they
will not accept at all. If a fire
took hold of the eastern side
of Argent-street, near the telegraph-office,
a dozen buildings to the south would
almost certainly be in a half-hour de-
stroyed, with nothing but charcoal as the
remains of most of them. Where, in the
absence of a large supply of water and
of means to use to the best advantage
what water is available, a fire would stop
it is impossible to say.
WATER SUPPLY.
The water supply is a question of vital im-
port. Though it costs Is. 3d. for the luxury
of a shower-bath with brackish water, yet no
greater inconvenience is just now being felt
as to a supply for domestic purposes than
is experienced in many country townships.
Certainly water is an expensive item in
the housekeeping bill, and a tank of good
water is worthy of a padlock being affixed,
but it is now cheaply and easily obtained.
There have been three good seasons. The
soakage water, which is obtained from
Stephen’s Creek, is not so clear and
wholesome as the abused water through
the Adelaide pipes ; and for the stranger
to drink much of it is sure to be pro-
ductive of profit to the medicine man.
Still it is good water for the bush. Rain-
water is mostly used in the houses for
drinking purposes, but, with the leaden
fumes from the mine stacks sweeping over
the roofs with every easterly wind that
blows, it is not altogether attractive. It
pure water supply, but how much more
urgent will the need be when the dis-
trict has to pass through a drought?
The evidences of the last period
of distress, extending over three
years, are still to be seen in the
skeletons, distributed in the ranges, of
animals who perished in it. By that
time, too, Broken Hill will probably be a
large city, and a water famine would be
a terrible trial. Railway communication
might modify its worst forms, but the
thought of the suffering that would be
inflicted should urge the people to
speedily adopt a wise water scheme.
Several proposals have been made, the
two principal being the construction of a
dam in Stephen’s Creek, about 8 miles
distant, which would be comparatively
speaking, a very inexpensive plan; and
the conveyance of water from the river
about 70 miles distant, or from one of the
nearest lakes. The latter scheme is not
fully formulated, yet, but it will
find warm advocates if the elevations do
not render it too expensive to work. Mr.
Stewart, a wellsinker of twenty years’ ex-
perience, with a considerable reputation
in the district for his discoveries, believes
that a good and sufficient supply can be
had by sinking within 4 miles of the
township.
LAND TITLES.
Not until the land question has neen
more satisfactorily settled can it be ex-
pected that comfortable residences will be
erected. Being over a thousand feet above
the sea, Broken Hill has a climate which,
while trying in the summer, has points in
its favour. For nine months of the
year the air is keen and bracing.
During the other quarter it is
intensely hot during the day, but
with scarcely an exception cool at night.
More rain falls in summer than in winter,
and the tropical storms have charms for
those fond of weird effects in thunder,
lightning, and rain. It can be easily seen
that for protection against cold in winter
and heat in summer, good houses are re-
quired, but good houses are rare, and will
continue so until people are in a position
to get monetary assistance to build them
with. The present titles are of too con-
ditional a nature to warrant either Banks
or Building Societies advancing money for
the erection of permanent improvements.
It is said that the Banks in Victoria have
recognized the titles, but probably there
was some difference of circumstances.


It must not be understood that the by the Land Board have not been made in
question of titles is as unsatisfactory as it
was a few months ago. The course is for
a man to take out a business licence, for
which he pays £1 a year, and to peg out
his quarter-acre business block in the
township, or acre residence block in the
suburbs. On complying with the mining
regulations as to personal residence, he
can apply to the Land Board to assess
the value. The Board having stated the
purchase-money, the amount is paid over
to the Government, and a receipt given.
It takes the Land Office two years
to issue the title. In the case
of Broken Hill, after a number
of persons had lawfully pegged out
blocks and erected buildings thereon, a
proclamation was issued on August 6,
1885, declaring the land in question to be
a Government reserve. Evidently some
one had blundered. On September 23
last the proclamation was revoked. The
coming into operation of the cancellation
order was watched by some astute persons,
who immediately repegged and jumped
the blocks plus the buildings. Judge
Backhouse, upholding the Warden’s judg-
ment, decided in favour of the original
holders, seeing that they were tenants at
will of the Crown while the lands were a
reserve, and that the tenancy could only
be terminated by a notice, which had
not been given. This Portia-like judgment
brought dismay to the Shylock jumpers.
Where a man is evading the spirit of the
Act there is virtue in “ jumping.” Just
now, for instance, there is room for
healthy jumping upon some of the idle
claims; but what would be thought of
taking away the ground belonging to a
Church because in the process of putting
on it a better building, which was on the
spot, the old structure was taken off and
the land was then left for a time un-
occupied ? Yet that is the kind of thing
which occurs in Broken Hill, and the
jumper usually employs force to substan-
tiate his claim for the time being. Scenes
solemn, grotesque, comic, and painful
have been witnessed in the town through
jumping, and consequent sieges, quarrels,
fights, and litigation.
From one point of view it is a good
thing that there is so much trouble and
delay in getting a title. Mining town-
ships spring up with such rapidity, and
men are so intensely sanguine that if the
titles were immediately issued, costly
buildings would be erected before the
permanance of the place was assured.
That more than two or three assessments
Broken Hill to-day is not the fault of the
New South Wales authorities for applica-
tions can be made at any time, and
the Board holds monthly meetings. A
year ago the outlook on the Barrier was
not as cheerful as it is now, and holders
postponed the applications. Since the
boom has prevailed all spare money has
been used to dabble In stocks. Besides
that, there has been no difficulty in
selling land without the title, and those
who have had land for sale have
seen no necessity to outlay money,
while those have bought have
not left themselves filled coffers
to replenish the public treasury with.
The Government are in no hurry to assess
the land, because the longer the applica-
tions are postponed the larger will be the
assessment. Still the Broken Hill people
appear to be making a mistake in post-
poning their applications. The highest
price that Silverton land was valued at
was about £95 a block, but a Broken Hill
block some two or three months ago was
assessed at £250, and it is quite likely
that for the best blocks the holders will
now be required to pay as high as £4OO.
GOVERNMENT EXAMPLE.
As a preliminary movement in the
direction of improving the conditions of
residence at Broken Hill it should be in-
sisted upon that the Government of New
South Wales set a good example in the
erection of suitable premises for the trans-
action of public business, in the provision
of adequate staffs to do the work, and in
the supply of the means essential to
make good and intelligent citizens. At
present it would be hard to find any
business where the premises are more
wretchedly unsuitable, any staff where
from the Stipendiary Magistrate to the
cadet the members are mode ill-consider-
ately overworked, and any town of its
value to a Government which has been
more neglected than Broken Hill.
Silverton has latterly been attended to,
but it has the same grievances under the
two first heads. Recently the Sydney
authorities have promised amendment
as to the Telegraph and Post-
Offices, but they still seem to have but
little idea of the actual requirements.
South Australia will no doubt facilitate
the telegraph business by the erection of
another wire to Cockburn. It is a wonder
that Silvertonians have not agitated for
telephonic communication between Broken
Hill and their town. It would lessen the


telegraphic pressure and Increase the district for the last three or
business of their town. It might tend to
make it a place of suburban residence to
Broken Hill. At present it is hardly
likely to become so, owing to the fact
that a good deal of share business is done
at Broken Hill in the evenings, but if the
telephone could be used for that pur
pose a number of business men
whose families are not yet on the
Barrier would take them to Silverton.
It is gratifying to know that the educa-
tional facilities provided at the public
school, one of the masters of Prince
Alfred College, Mr. Evans, is about to
add those of a high-class establishment,
but something should be also done in the
direction of giving the town an Institute,
School of Mines, and Savings Bank.
NO. XXV.
A PROFITABLE FIELD.
It may be gathered from the account
given of the more important claims what
is the extent of the field. Including the
tin district 2,800 applications have been
made for leases of blocks of usually 40
acres. There is a good deal of shepherding
no doubt, but on a very large number of
claims work is being carried on. The
expenditure for labour on them is possibly
at the rate of over half a million sterling
per annum, while it cannot be much less
than that amount for machinery, stores,
and other lines. It is, of course, impos-
sible to make any but a rough estimate on
the matter, and yet it is only by this
means that some idea can be conveyed of
the position of Barrier mining.
During 1887 the imports into the
district was £526,152, and the exports
(excluding live stock in transitu from
other colonies) £684,594. Of this amount
£522,455 was in respect of minerals, made
up as follows:—Argentiferous lead,
£462,442 ; copper ore, £l7O ; gold ore,
£3O; silver ore and galena, £59,472; and
tin ore, £341. Remembering that the
number of claims which have passed
beyond the prospecting stage into
active mining may be counted on
the fingers, and that, therefore,
the bulk 'of the expenditure is on per-
manent improvements, the figures may be
considered as eminently satisfactory. A
returm of 50 per cent, on the capital
while it is being spent on developmental
works will be acknowledged by most to
be decidedly encouraging. In view,
however, of the fact that an importation
of capital has been taking place into the
four years, it may be objected
that this is too sanguine a statement as to
the situation. On the other hand it must
not be forgotten that it is only quite
recently that money has been freely
poured into the Barrier. Pioneer pros-
pectors can tell pathetic stories of the
extreme hardship suffered in the early
days, when the Rangers who believed in its
great future were regarded with sus-
picion as having crossed the border of
allowable enthusiasm, and who were
therefore not to be trusted with the
capital they sought. Contending
with poverty, drought, scarcity of
provisions through the state of the
country, and working from dawn to dark,
sustained by a faith in the future of the
place, they command our respect, and it is
gratifying to now meet them enjoying
success. Even later on, as Mr. Elliott, of
Broken Hill (who, by-the-way, has had an
extraordinary experience in accidents,
travel, and adventure) wrote :—“ Many
have left the held in disgust, but it is no
use for feather-bed pioneers to come
up to Silverton. The field wants
hardy bushmen, who are not afraid
of the pick and shovel, can live
on mutton and damper, and sleep
the sleep of the just on a round log or a
soldier’s antbed.” It is only recently, be
it it repeated, that capital has been freely
sent to the Barrier, but meanwhile the
output has been steadily advancing, so
that after every allowance has been made
it must be found that in the initiatory
stages of the Barrier field it has made a
generous return on the money employed
to develop it.
Though during the present boom it
may seem to cautious natures that if too
much money is not being sent to the
Barrier, money is being obtained too
easily for ventures there, it is right to
bear in mind the estimate which Mr.
Warden Brown has made of the exports
during the present year. He fully antici-
pates the shipment of silver-lead and tin
at £1,000,000. Such a production, which
must be accompanied by a great increase
in population and expansion of trade,
will still give a handsome return notwith-
standing the increased capital employed.
HOW LONG WILL THE BOOM LAST ?
Daily the question is asked—sometimes
out of curiosity, but oftensr with trem-
bling interest—“ How long will the boom
last?” The share mania has become so
general that it would be as hard to find a


man In Adelaide without scrip as it is to upon the state of the Australian money
meet one on the Barrier uninterested in a
Syndicate. When, as I learn on my re-
turn to Adelaide, Bank Managers visit
the Pirie - street Corner to discover
who amongst their customers with
overdrafts are “plunging,” and to en-
gage in judicious speculation themselves;
when storekeepers are found opposite a
certain “ mother Church” to catch their
debtors who use the grocery money for
shares ; when wives cannot get their house-
keeping portions through the passion for
fortune-making in scrip; when men buy
according to the market and without any
proper idea of the mines, and when
publicans and paperhangers, engineers and
labourers. Customs and land agents, sea
captains and cocks, and indeed almost all
sorts and conditions of men turn jobbers
and brokers, it can be easily understood
that it is an all-important question as to
how long the boom will last. Without
indulging in any attempt at prophecy in
the matter, there seems to be one or two
serviceable inferences from what has been
already said.
It can be observed that the Barrier
field has been sufficiently proved, and has
such a hold on the public mind that more
or less the boom will be permanent. There
are many mines in the district which
cannot fail to gradually improve in value,
notwithstanding that the market
may ebb and flow from day
to day in respect to the stocks.
With the progress of events these mines
will become known to the more intelligent
speculators, who to a knowledge of the
market, adding through the facilities
offered for personal inspection, a know-
ledge of the mines, will carefully weed
out from their holdings indifferent stocks.
In regard to these the boom will not last
long, and perhaps many may suffer loss
and mortification. To what degree the
boom will be sustained as to the in-
trinsically valuable properties must,
of course, depend upon outside cir-
cumstances, the condition of the money
market being probably the most
important. If, as it is believed
to be the case at present, capital con-
tinues to come from England, America,
and elsewhere for judicious investment in
Barrier stocks, there will be an increasing
mo\ ement in the direction of high prices.
Though the harvest-money of South Aus-
tralia may have something to do with
local investments it cannot affect to the
extent that some believe of it the Ade-
laide sharebroking, which largely depends
and share markets generally.
THE FUTURE OF THE BARRIER.
Though only in the infancy of its de-
velopment the silver-field is undoubtedly
established. The tinfield is not quite so
amply assured, but there is reason to
believe that it will hold its own. It may
even prove more remunerative in propor-
tion to the capital expended upon it than
a similar extent of the silver-field.
There will be before long a respectable
number of dividend-paying mines, and
meanwhile and subsequently great activity
will take place in securing and working
new claims. With the improvement in
the conditions of residence on the Barrier
which the energy of an enterprising
people will, notwithstanding apathetic and
shortsighted Governments, speedily bring
about skilled labour will become cheaper ;
and with the enlargement of the market
for merchandise prices will be brought to
a minimum, so that the dividend-
paying power of all the mines will be
increased.
In two or three years that portion of
the Broken Hill lode which has so far been
traced will probably support a city of 20,000
to 30,000 people, while the outside mines
will help to make Broken Kill a capital
of considerable importance as to
size, population, wealth, and trade.
It will be the centre of the Barrier
trade. It is amongst the possibilities
that it will be connected with the New
South Wales railway system, and its
incidental association with the river will
make Broken Hill an object with our
river traders. At any rate, Broken Hill
will be the head-quarters of the financial
business of the district—there will be its
market; there its depots and distributing
agencies; there its manufacturers and
importers; and there its means
of intelligence and channels of
enterprise The share market of
Broken Hill will grow more and more
independent of Melbourne and Adelaide,
and the importing business be less and less
done by outsiders, large houses being
established to order direct from the
world’s markets.
Though the Barrier people now see,
except as to the protective tariff
of South Australia, nothing' but
advantage to arise to them from
annexation to that colony, yet while
continuing friendly, they will gradually be
weaned away from the idea at first by
the difficulties in the way of carrying it


out, and then by the more attractive and the goods packed ? With just as much
effective cry of separation with the view
to the constitution o£ another colony.
The feeling that they have nothing in
common with Sydney and distinct in-
terests to those of Adelaide will
render them more and more self-
reliant municipally and daring politically.
How far they may look for success it is
impossible to say, for, besides the ordinary
difficulties, legion is their number in the
way the capitalists whose money has
developed the district may introduce
special complications. The cry may,
however, be effective, and in the end the
New South Wales Government be aroused
to perform the duties which, had they
risen to the occasion, would have been
seen from the first as privileges.
OUR TRADE.
Some one perhaps is asking, “What
about our trade 1 You have soundly
rated the Government for obstructing it
and diverting it to Sydney, and now you
speak of an ultimate and permanent
diversion from both Adelaide and
Sydney.”
Yes. Emphasize the word “ultimately.”
And that seems to be the general im-
pression. It also seems natural. Mark,
that “ ultimately” may mean years, and
is not the trade for an indefinite period of
years worth the abolition of redtape 1 Since
my earlier letters on the subject (though
prior to then the idea had existence in the
official mind) the Customs authorities have
transferred the Sub-Collector from Silver-
ton to Terowie in order to expedite the
payment of drawbacks. It appears that
owing to the irritating and expensive break
of gauge at Terowie goods cannot be sent
under bond to the Barrier in sealed rail-
way trucks from Adelaide, because the
goods have to be transhipped into
other and smaller trucks at Terowie.
Hence the officer has been stationed there
to seal the trucks with drawback goods.
Immediately he forwards the drawback
papers in connection with the goods therein
for the payment of the rebates. Though this
is an improvement it has not met the case
effectively. I have heard complaints that
our merchants are not receiving the con-
sideration from the Government that the
special circumstances warrant. Though
Customs regulations contemplate repay-
ment in full of ad valorem duty, mer-
chants complain of losing two or three
per cent, by drawbacks. Why, further,
should the Customs charge the exporter
for the time of the officer employed to see
reason an importer should be required to
pay for the time of the landing waiter who
examines his invoices and inspects hia
goods; while for the remission of the
impost there is certainly a greater argu-
ment from expediency for a pro-
tective Government to assist our mer-
chants in a time of depression to
increase the trade of the colony.
It would certainly facilitate business if
the Adelaide Government would not copy
the notoriously bad example of the Sydney
authorities in overworking the Customs
representative. In a galvanized—oven, I
was going to say, for such it is in summer—
building 20 feet long, 12 feet wide, and 8
feet high, Mr. Mooney, the New South
Wales Sub-Collector, who was at old
Thackaringa in the early days, slaves away,
minus coat and waistcoat and regardless of
official hours, to avoid delay ; and Mr.
Harvey, the Sub-Collector for South Aus-
tralia, shared his office and apparently his
fate at Silverton, having to work from 6
in the morning till 11 at night.
The railway authorities have shown a
desire to help the district, having agreed
to the suggestion as to a through night-
train. Though the facilities as to the
goods traffic are better than they were
locally expected to be, the system is re-
garded as too cumbersome, and yet it is
admitted that the department is quick in
finding out mistakes. The freight tariff
works badly. Owing to the anomalies
under the division of goods into classes it
costs £2 a ton more to bring certain mer-
chandise by railway now than it did to
convey it by bullock teams in the old
days. A simple weight or measurement
tariff would meet the wishes of the Barrier
traders and be to the advantage of our
commerce.
Returning to the discussion about the
ultimate deviation of trade its date may
be postponed by the Adelaide people
acting with wise judgment, and it may on
the other hand be hastened by an ill-
considered action. In any event, is it not
better that our merchants should be
helped to get a footing there, for then
they may establish branch houses on the
Barrier, which, while importing direct,
may reserve a share of the profits for the
principals in South Australia 1
CONCLUSION.
The Queen Victoria tin claim ends in a
granite gorge. On one of the steep faces
is an inscription, as to which it is hard
to say how it came there or what


It means. Amongst the representations understand that each has a distinctive
are those of a leaf and the sun.
How was the face reached, and with what
tools did the cunning workmen of old in-
scribe the 50 or 60 yards occupied by the
hieroglyphics 1 Equally difficult would it
be to say “ what smiths and in what
furnace rolled copper and iron lead and
gold” in such rare combinations as are found
at the Barrier. At first the phenomena
were as little understood as are now the
hieroglyphics referred to. Indeed there
are now more facts concealed than revealed
to us in the rocky symbols above and
below the surface; enough it is that men
can read the promise of a full sun of
prosperity,
A shrewd, observant friend of mine,
who has made repeated visits to the Bar-
rier field, says that each time he goes
there he discovers afresh how little he
knew about it. The geologist and mine-
ralogist will find it a perennial source of
information, but he who comes must be
prepared to learn anew. When the
mining experts went there first in
the pride of their extensive experience
they were completely at fault. Did not
one, nay several, weigh Broken Hill itself
in the balances of their mature wisdom,
and find it wanting in mineral wealth 1
All previous experience seemed but to
mislead. In the early days men would
not look at copper-stained stone, but
when the despised metal was found to
keep company with silver its verdant
tints became as popular as those of spring-
time are refreshing.
It is unnecessary to refer again to the
finding of chlorides of silver and argenti-
ferous kaolin, but there is one circum-
stance worth mentioning here. In the
silver-bearing districts of America, I
class of ore, but the feature of the Barrier
is in what may be termed the cosmo-
politan character of the vein material.
Those who have patiently read the
particulars given of the mines
must have observed how that all classes
of argentiferous formation appear to be
found in rich profusion in the field. It
would seem as if there was some pro-
vidential arrangement in the fact that the
pioneer silver-field of Australia should be
one to furnish not only wealth itself but
in a liberal education in a wide range of
silver mining, the means of wealth in other
parts of the continent. For probably
one of the greatest advantages which
South Australia will, for instance, enjoy
from the development of this interesting
field, will be in the training of men who
shall reveal to us in the earth’s veins in
our territory such riches as shall give,
without artificial aids, large population,
cities, markets, manufactures, and abound-
ing prosperity. Already we know that
South Australia is a silver-bearing
country. From Blinman in the Far
North and Mount Victoria in the north-
east to Rapid Bay in the south and
Franklin Harbour in the west indications
of argentiferous lodes have been found.
Yet during the years of our depression we
have left untried these sources of labour
and profit for want of knowledge. The
Barrier field will grow and its trade in-
crease ; we may keep it or may lose it ;
but if we are enabled by the experience
gained there to convert South Australia
into a series of extensive silver-fields the
Barrier experience will be of greater
value to us than the Barrier trade,
though its value may be estimated in
millions.


xjvoelaioe
THE LARGEST WEEKLY NEWSPAPER
PUBLISHED IN THE COLONY
(containing 48 Pages), Published Weekly,
Annum, in advance (including postage).
, Price 6d. per Copy, or £ 1 2s. per
Persons desirous of becoming Subscribers to
regular dispatch to any address should
annexed Order signed with full address.
the above Paper and securing its
forward, with their remittance, the
W. K. THOMAS & CO.
Messrs. W. K. Thomas & Co.,
Proprietors of “ The Adelaide Observer
Grenfell Street , Adelaide.
Herewith please receive £P 2s. Od. , being One
Year’s Subscription , in Advance, to “ The
Adelaide Observer , which please forward until further notice to


{
i
I
:: . ; •
• ' ‘ i


THE BARRIER TIN FIELD
No. I.
COMPARATIVE VALUE OF THE FIELD.
Events move rapidly on the Barrier,
and the unexpected appears to happen
there with more regularity than else-
where. Hence the philosophic indifference
to change which the Barrier resident
acquires, an indifference that equals the
equanimity of the ebony witness in the
celebrated Tichborne case, who, to Sir
John Coleridge’s famous question
“Would you be surprised to hear, Ac.,”
replied “I should not, Sir John, be sur-
prised at anything.” Nothing astonishes
the case-hardened Barrier Ranger. He
has seen the rising of Silverton like a
foaming sea in a storm, and marked its
subsidence into a quiet respectable hum-
drum town ; he has seen townships spring
up in the vigour of a new and robust
life, and watch them wither and die
like sheep in a drought, and he
has witnessed the growth of Broken
Hill, appearing first like a little
cloud “ no bigger than a man’s hand”
and then overspreading the country and
raining its wealth into distant parts. It
seems impossible that anything stranger
than what has been can be; and, calcu-
lating on the uncertainties of mundane
things, he plays the game of life with a
presence of mind begotten only of rare
experience.
If therefore what some enthusiasts say
should prove true as to the Barrier tin-
field becoming of greater value than the
Barrier silver-field, it would not surprise
him. It would interest him, for he would
not be true to his instincts and his repu-
tation if he did not make money out of it.
Still he would not be astonished. That
the last should be first and the least
greatest is not, as previously intimated, a
new experience at the Barrier. Nor
would he be affected by the fact that it
did not seem probable. With him the
only real test is time, and that proves
all things. He is therefore not much con-
cerned with enthusiasts so long as they do
not affect the market, but immediately
they do he turns upon them his keen
faculties with the professional inquisitive-
ness of a surgeon at an autopsy.
PERMANENT AND PROFITABLE
CLAIMS.
Great Britain, we are told, became early
famous for tin and oysters. The Barrier
has become famous for silver, but whether
it will secure an equal reputation for tin
remains to be seen. “ The tin-bearing
rocks have,” says Mr. Wilkinson, “been
proved over an extent of country about
28 miles long in a north-north-west direc-
tion and 3 miles wide, but it is likely to
be found over a much wider area, for the
same formations are seen thoughout the
greater part of the Barrier Ranges, as far
south as Thackaringa.” It can scarcely be
doubted but that in this field of some 84
square miles will be found several perma-
nent and profitable claims when worked
on a sufficiently large and economical
scale, but it is too early to pro-
nounce as to the payableness or
otherwise of some others. Certainly
the recent discovery af water at a mode-
rate depth on the Euriowie property is
distinctly in their favour, as it may be
said to dispose of what was considered to
be a great drawback of the field. The
success of the Euriowie machinery will
have an important bearing on its future,
and, judging by the great engineering
ability of Captain Black, to which there
are numerous testimonies, there seems to
be no reason to believe that the machinery
will be other than successful. Should,
however, an accident occur to render it
less serviceable than intended to be, a
cheek will no doubt be given to the
development of the field, but it will only
be temporary, because the Victory Com-
pany, who have a fine property, which is
being well opened up by Captain Oats, will
erect machinery, profiting no doubt by
the experience of the Euriowie Company.
Then the development of the adjoining
silver-field has a beneficial effect. Not
only is public attention drawn to them
conjointly and capital liberally furnished,
but the cost of production is largely
reduced. Skilled labour is attracted, and


stores are supplied at moderate rates,
while the charges for freight on machinery
and shipments are materially lessened.
The Poolamacca mines are nearly 50 miles
from the Silverton and Broken Hill
tramway, but are still in an infinitely
better position than before South Aus-
tralia gave to the Barrier the railway com-
munication. It is now proposed to ex-
tend the tramway from Broken Hill to
Euriowie, and this will be another
distinct advantage. As some might
ask, why extend it from Broken
Hill and not from Silverton? it may
be mentioned that the points in
favour of the former are that there
are no engineering difficulties, the
road being practically level, that an ex-
tension is preferable as regards working
to a junction, and that Broken Hill is the
centre of the Barrier trade. For Silverton
it might be urged that a branch line would
save a few miles, but it is pointed out on
the other hand that that would be more
than counterbalanced by the engineering
difficulties to be surmounted in the
shortest route. Taking all the circum-
stances into account it is safe to say that
before long there will be a permanent and
profitable tinfield on the Barrier.
THE POSITION OF TIN.
The prospect of the Barrier tinfield
being profitable is made better by the
condition of the tin market, which now
wears a most cheerful aspect. It is not
merely that the price (£166155. a ton) is satis-
factory, but that there is ground to think
it has somewhat of a permanent character.
It is found that with a constantly increas-
ing demand, which has been rapidly over-
taking the supply, the tin districts are
almost as limited as they were a generation
ago. The world’s supply is practically
obtained from Cornwall, Straits Settle-
ments, and Australasia. Considering—as
it has been pointed out —that the richest
portions of the field have been most per-
sistently worked, and the output forced to
the outside limit during periods of in-
flation, the total quantity which may be
expected from Cornwall, even when en-
couraged by the present high prices,
cannot materially affect the market. In
the Straits Settlements the output from
the alluvial workings has, we are told,
increased nearly 400 per cent, during the
past ten years, but the question of the
continuance of these supplies is very
problematic, and the existence of lodes,
which alone gives reliable hope of per-
manency, has not yet been demonstrated
from actual explorations. The third main
source—namely, Australasia—shows more
signs of readiness to respond to the in-
creased demand than either of the two
preceding. It is just over a quarter of a
century since any considerable quantity of
tin was raised in Australasia, although the
existence of the metal here had been
known since 1853, when it was discovered
by some Cornish miners whilst searching
for gold. It was not, however, until 1870
that proper prospecting was made for it.
Signs of comparative exhaustion may, it
is said, be now found in connection with
the productive alluvial deposits of New
England, and in Queensland and Tasmania,
but with a diminishing supply from the
alluvial there is an increased activity in
the development of tin lode in those same
districts. In the course of a few years
the Northern Territory will furnish a good
tinfield; but meanwhile there is an op-
portunity for the Barrier to take ad-
vantage of a market calculated to en-
courage the speculative public to thorough) y
develop the field.
HISTORY OF THE FIELD.
“It is (writes aßarrier Ranger) upwards
of three years since discoveries of tin
were made in the Barrier Ranges, at the
northern end of the argentiferous zone ;
but very little attention was paid to the
matter, partly because the silver dis-
coveries of the same region were so sensa-
tionally rich and extensive, and partly
because the new tinfield was considered to
be so far from a market for the ore that
it was impossible to make it pay. The
absence of water in the district was a
serious obstacle to the progress of the
Poolamacca tinfield, and the absence of
any machinery within reach kept the lodes
unworked for upwards of two years after
their discovery. When, however, the
leases began to issue to the applicants,
and it became necessary to fulfil the
labour conditions on the mineral areas, a
few prospectors set to work to give the
lodes a trial. Among those who thus
early made an attempt to make the mines
pay were the brothers Pearson, who had
an experience in tin-mining in New Eng-
land, and Messrs. Murray and Sinclair,
who sank a shaft on the Cobar Company’s
ground. The Messrs. Pearson carried
down a shaft on the lode in what is now
the Caloola Company’s lease a depth of
40 feet, and very rich ore was obtained,
some of which was rudely dressed and
sent to Launceston, where the ore was
sold at about 15s. per unit. After this


trial they applied for suspension of labour
for six months, in order that the cost
of carriage might be cheapened in the in-
terval by the approach of the railway.
The Melbourne Silver-mining Company,
under the management of Mr. Greenwood,
made an attempt to work their blocks at
the extreme north end of the field a short
time after the Messrs. Pearson, but the
absence of water compelled them to aban-
don the field for a time. A second
Manager was, after some months, sent to
resume operations, and on this occasion
experiments were made in calcining the
ore, with satisfactory results. The large
tin crystals contained in the greisen
matrix, after being heated to redness,
tumbled out and were collected for
bagging. This Manager also erected a
dolly and treated a quantity of the richer
ore in that manner; but when the first
shoot of ore disappeared, about 10 feet
from the surface, the Directors gave
orders to stop the work. The deepest
shaft on their ground was about 30 feet.
Thus far their efforts acted as a deter-
rent against any more tin-mining in that
district.
“But the present activity commenced
about fifteen months ago, when Mr. John-
stone began to work the leases now com-
prising the Lady Don. This pioneer re-
solved to make the enterprise pay, so he
applied the drill and the blast to the
stanniferous dykes, and was rewarded by
finding rich seams of nearly pure oxide of
tin, distributed irregularly through a for-
mation about 14 feet thick. So confident
were numbers of mining men of the ulti-
mate value of the discovery that they
formed a Syndicate to purchase the pro-
perty, and this Syndicate was shortly
afterwards transformed into the Lady Don
Company. It was not long after this, and
just over a year ago, that the Cosmo-
politan Company was floated to work the
claim of the original prospector Brooks,
near the north end of the field. At this
time there were thirty-eight leases of 40
acres each applied for on this tinfield, and
almost all these are now more or less
noted for their richness. The Mount
Euriowie blocks had been but slightly
prospected, and the Mount Bunchikana
had been quite recently pegged, but there
were not a dozen men on the whole field.
“It is a matter of history that a few
months before this epoch a well-known
character on Barrier, being in Sydney on
business, made an effort to sell the Mount
Euriowie blocks for £6OO, and in order to
accomplish such a feat he had taken the
precaution to provide himself with the
customary slug on which to travel. He
went from one broker’s office to another
in company with a Sydney agent, but was
quickly shown the door in every case
almost as soon as the slug of tin oxide was
produced. They had seen too much of
that sort of thing, they said. Those same
blocks are now valued, as per daily share
quotations, at £286,000.
“ Notwithstanding these comparative
failures, the field was visited by Mr. J. S.
Reid, then proprietor of the Silver Age ,
who took Mr. Sinclair’s blocks in hand,
purchasing from him what is now the
ground of the Mount Euriowie Company.
He then proceeded to Adelaide, where he
had become well known through his news-
paper as a firm believer in the value of
the Broken Hill mine. He had correctly
prophesied the steady rise in the price of
this stock to the present phenomenal
figures, and the Adelaide mining investors
argued from this that Mr. Reid must be a
knowing one whose opinion must be worth
having upon mining matters on the
Barrier. Accordingly, when he offered a
fraction of his interest in the big tin mine
in forming a Company of 16,000 shares,
the whole were allotted in about three
hours after the list opened at £2 10s. per
share. Shortly after the Euriowie was
floated, the Victory mine was discovered
by Messrs. Porter and West.
“In the beginning of August of the
present year a rabbitter named Keough,
having seen some of the tin ore from
Poolamacca, thought he recognised a
similar mineral in a dyke of greisen in the
Waukaroo Paddock of Mount Gipps Run,
about 30 miles north of Broken Hill, and
about 16 miles nearer than the Euriowie
field. He had the sample tested, and on
finding that it was tin oxide of a high
quality he, along with his mates, pegged
six blocks of 40 acres each, went into
Silverton, and succeeded in getting a
number of influential people to join him
in paying for the lease for an interest in
the concern. The proprietors at once
formed themselves into a Syndicate,
framed Articles of Association, had scrip
issued, and men at work inside of two
weeks from the day when Keough put his
pegs in the ground. This Syndicate is
the Waukaroo Tin Proprietary Company.
Shares in it were speedily in demand, and
rose rapidly from £5O to £6OO per
share. This rapid rise was largely owing
to the magnificent sample of tin obtained
from the first hole sunk on the lode when
the ore was first discovered. Nearly half


a ton, assaying about 20 per cent, of tin, 1
was sent to Adelaide, and exhibited in ■
King William-street.
“The result of the discovery was (
similar to that produced by an alluvial
gold find. Silverton sallied forth to a
man and pegged ground in all directions
north and south, and then did the
prospecting after the ground was pegged.
Broken Hill was slower in grasping the
situation, but on realizing the value of the
new field the Hill people went into the
matter with great energy, some of the
best mines falling into their hands,
notably the Albion, the Albion South,
the Botallick, the Union, and the Pine
Paddock Proprietary Company. Mr.
Campbell, the prospector of the Albion,
had been known in mining circles on the
Barrier since the discovery of the field,
but his luck had never been in flood
before. Hence, when he offered 96th
shares in his new tin venture at a
ridiculously low price he had seme diffi-
culty in allotting the required number to
raise a small working capital and pay the
expenses incurred. When, however, he
began sinking on the shoot of ore, and
the wonderful richness of the mine
became apparent, 96th shares became
scarce at £l2O. All this took place in
about three weeks from the date of dis-
covery. Meanwhile the prospectors had
been running along the line of dykes
and pegging the whole of the country
between a grantite range that marks
the western boundary of the stanni-
ferous belt and a large quartzite
dyke that runs along its eastern
side, the width of the belt being about
2 miles. The country is by no means
rugged, the hills being low slate ranges,
with flat plains along the eastern side
covered with saltbush. In the hills there
is a little mulga scrub, but the vegetation
is not sufficient to in any way hide the
stratification of the rocks. One very
strong dyke is bounded on either side by
slate walls that rise above the level of the
surrounding country, showing their jagged
edges so plainly that a prospector could
mark their course while passing along the
foot of the range. No trees grew on this
large dyke, but a yellow weed seemed to
take kindly to the granite soil; hence the
colour of the flowers, combined with the
contrast presented by the surrounding
country, made it possible for a man on
horseback to track the course of the lode
without going nearer to it than a couple
of miles. Thus the whole country for 9
miles north and south by 2 miles east and
west was pegged and lease notices posted
at the corners of the blocks within two
weeks from the date of discovery. Of
course, all this ground will not turn out
to be valuable, but prospectors were
willing to incur the expense of leasing on
the chance of discovering payable ore by
deliberate examination of the ground
after having secured it, and the value of
the prize, should they discover payable
tin, was great enough to warrant the ex-
penditure in trying to find it.
“During this time the events of the
early days of the Barrier were enacted
over again. Men came into town with a
sample of tin, obtained no one knew
where, and having been secured by a
milldleman shares in the unleased ground
were retailed at high prices, and prices
rose without any reason except that the
man who could ‘ blow’ the about
the value of his show could obtain the
best price for his stock. Jast as the early
Barrier Ranger used to travel on his
‘slug’ of silver-lead or horn-silver, and
retail shares in the best-looking hills that
were to be found in the ranges, so the
middlemen or prospectors could sell shares
in saltbush flats to eager buyers in Silver-
ton, Broken Hill, Adelaide, and elsewhere.
The result of this indiscriminate absorp-
tion of all tin properties offered soon pro-
duced the inevitable result, and it quickly
became as difficult to deal with tin leases
as it had a few weeks before been easy.
“The sudden acquisition of money and
valuable mining interests by numbers of
prospectors who had been unsuccessful up
to that time produced the usual hilarity
and indulgence on the part of the lucky
ones. These identities would suddenly
appear marching along the main street of
Silverton or Broken Hill, dressed a
new tweed suit, with the creases of its
folds still plainly visible along their longi-
tude, their hats at a rake, and withal an
air of importance that betokened some
sudden change of fortune. The various
‘ pubs’ would be visited in turn, and
‘ shouting’ for all hands became the order
of the day. Some, more cautious than
their fellows, recollecting how hard a
i struggle they had endured, patronized
i some of the Banks, and took their success
i in a more sane and subdued manner, not
s a few taking to themselves wives,
r “ While various opinions were being
! freely expressed regarding the comparative
j and intrinsic value of the different pro-
s perties, the Government Geologist (Mr.
) 0. S. Wilkinson) paid a visit to the field
I and prepared a report, which was sub-


mitted to the Minister for Mines and pub- Nothing, however, has been taken or
lished in the daily papers of Sydney and
Adelaide. As this report was anxiously
awaited by numerous investors, especially
in Adelaide, its effect was very singular.
The general result was a depression in all
tin stocks, Waukaroo Proprietary shares
falling as low as £lOO, and Granite
Springs falling from £lOO to below £5O.
The curious thing about the report was
that nobody seemed to know whether it
was intended to speak highly of or to de-
preciate the discovery. The public were
anxious to know whether the geological
formation of the country was favourable
or otherwise for the occurrence or perma-
nence of rich tin lodes, or whether the
rocks were of the same kind as those in
which tin occurs in other parts of the
world. Those very important questions
remained unanswered, and after a few
weeks nobody paid any attention to the
report.”
No. 11.
CAPTAIN THOMAS’S REPORT.
The history of the field would be want-
ing in an important particular without a
statement as to the part played by Captain
Thomas. The family of this gentleman
has long been associated with the manage-
ment of the famous Dolcoath Tin Mine in
Cornwall, and Captain Thomas is himself
an eminent tin miner. The Minister for
Mines in New South Wales, through Mr.
Snowball, of Silverton, requested Captain
Thomas to inspect the tinfielda of Camp-
bell’s Creek, Mount Euriowie, and
Byjerkerno Creek about five months ago.
In the course of his report he said :
“ I would prefer to treat them as a
whole rather than three distinct districts
as really they belong to the same for-
mation, and contain for the whole distance
lodes, the contents of which are so
similar that I question if any other tin
district in the world shows any parallel,
broken only by porphyritic and felspathic
dykes, and in one instance a tremendous
outburst of quartzite and blue spar—
occurring in the southern part of the
field. This formation can be traced for
miles but shows itself more prominently
nearly opposite the township of Euriowie ;
here this kind of formation shows itself
in an abrupt mass, as if it had no con-
tinuation, whilst at the northern end of
the district it would seem as if a huge
slice had been scooped out, making a
complete division of the formation, and
leaving immense cliffs on either side.
washed away in either case, but is, owing
to a subsidence of that portion, now
showing the low ground. In these places
it would appear as if the lodes had dis-
appeared. It is not so, however, as the
lodes there are equally as continuous, but
covered over by a sedimentary wash,
brought down from the mountains and
deposited on them. The quartzite forma-
tion has a direction about the same as all
the lodes on the field, whilst the por-
phyritic dykes invaribly cross them at
right angles or thereabouts.
These dykes are always looked on with
favour by the miner, as it is generally
found as they come in contact with the
lode the quality of the atone is much im-
proved. Mount Bischoff, Tasmania, is an
instance of this, as is Dolcoath, Cornwall.
Yet without great care these dykes may
become an element of danger to a whole
district. The cross courses are channels
(extending for miles) collecting in their
course a vast quantity of water, and it
sometimes happens that several mines on
the same course of the lode break into
several of these, and cut such a supply of
water that although a mine may be very
rich, it may not be rich enough to pay the
pumping and other expenses incidental
thereto. In the parish of Gwennap,
Cornwall, is a case in point, where mine
after mine had been allowed to break into
each other’s workings, the result has been
that a whole district is lying idle, yet
having three as good mines in it as Mount
Bischoff or Dolcoath. The principle
adopted now is to have the natural bar-
riers broken as little as possible, and
where they do not exist, to create a
barrier of some 30 feet between each
mine.
I have been asked since I have been
here if I ever knew any tin mine to pay
in slay slate. I would here say that
Mount Bischoff is in precisely similar
formation. The richest tin mine Corn-
wall ever had—Wheal Yor—the same;
Dolcoath the first 190 fathoms the same;
much of the Herberton district, as also
much of the ode formation of the Straits
Settlements.
The lodes are said to be too small to
pay. In Cornwall I have never seen a
lode cropping up at surface; in fact,
Dolcoath, now about half a mile deep in
many places, has scarcely the vestige of a
lode for the first 70 feet. The lode at the
bottom is from 30 to 70 feet wide. By
sinking there can be no doubt the lodes
in this district will widen, except in


singular instances where the strata are
very hard and the lode comes in contact
with the quartzite.
The lodes are composed, without excep-
tion, of felspar, mica, talc, quartz, and
blue spar. These occur in each place
opened on, but more of one and less of
the other in different places, the general
appearance of the whole being small
ridges of granite thrown up in the midst
of clay slate ranges. The granitic appear-
ance will, however, disappear as depth is
attained. Much of the mica will be
thrown out and displaced by chlorite, as is
the case In the parish of Wendron, Corn-
wall, and also at Cream Creek, Tasmania,
where the lodes are precisely the same. In
these two instances, as the mica and talc
dropped off or became smaller in particles,
the tin also is in finer crystals.' Whilst
going over some of the ranges in this
place my attention was called to the fact
that the mica had disappeared and the tin
with it, but on pulverizing and washing it
it was found to contain about 20 per cent,
of tin, though to the inexperienced eye
none was visible. In conclusion, I would
say this tinfield will be a factor to regu-
late the tin market of the world, although,
like all other fields, it will have its periods
of successes and reverses, but of its ulti-
mate endurance I have no doubt.”
GEOLOGICAL FEATURES.
Speaking of the tin-bearing rocks near
Poolamacca, Mr. Wilkinson, the Govern-
ment geologist of New South Wales, in
his celebrated report, dated October 24
last, said : “ These formations consist
of metamorphosed clay slates, and mica
schists intersected by dykes of granite and
quartz reefs. The tin ore, cassiterite,
occurs in these granite dykes, not as
veins, but in black crystals in size from a
mere speck or grain hardly visible to the
naked eye, up to about 3 inches in
diameter. It is unevenly disseminated
through the granite, but is distributed
more or less in patches with a little ore
scattered between them. In fact the
cassiterite appears crystallised like the
minerals composing the rock—the quartz,
felspar, Jand mica, which also often occurs,
separately or together, in coarsely crystal-
line patches in a fine-grained base of the
same minerals. Sometimes one or more
of these minerals predominate, so that in
places the rock is chiefly composed of
mica in large flakes, or of mica and
quartz, or of mica and felspar, with
crystals of tin ore and black tourmaline
Intermixed. The granite dykes them-
selves are very irregular in thickness and
extent, either in length or depth.”
The tin-bearing country meets the silver
country at the Rise and Shine, as men-
tioned in the reference to that mine, and
it is interesting to know, says the Silver
Age Almanac, “that an immense granite
dyke can be seen, with mica schists, on
the silver side, and argillite on meta-
morphosed clay on the tin side. This rock
is the usual accompaniment of tin-bearing
lodes, and from here to Mount Lake,
about 6 miles, there are tin-bearing ores,
and in places where opened up large
crystals of cassiterite can be seen. The
tin commences again at the western fall
and continues then for 14 miles.”
A very decided boundary (writes a
Barrier Ranger) runs along the eastern
side of the tin-bearing basin in the shape
of a huge quartzite reef, which rises in
places to the magnitude of hills. It has
a reddish appearance, partly the result of
iron stains and partly the colour of the
quartz. No tin has been found beyond
this wall, though the reefs are found close
up to it on the western side. The western
boundary of the field is a granite range,
somewhat similar in character to the
material of which the tin-bearing dykes
are composed, only there is not so much
mica in the rock, and the felspar is ot a
coarser grain. The Intervening country
between these two limits is composed of
mica slates of various ages, containing
some of the oldest fossils. The greisen
dykes, in which the tin oxide occurs, are
sandwiched in between the layers of slate,
the strata having impressed its mould
upon the material during the period of its
upheaval. Consequently we find that
these dykes are very variable in
thickness, having formed large bulges
where the least resistance was offered
by the enclosing strata. Sometimes
a lode runs along for a considerable dis-
tance of almost uniform thickness, then all
at once it forms a “ blow,” some of which
are upwards of 2 chains in width and out-
cropping above the level of the surround-
ing country. In other places the soft
slate rock has been worn away by aqueous
denudation, leaving the harder dyke
standing, with polished walla 4 or 5 feet
higher than the slate. The crystals of tin
can be seen in the rock like plums in a
pudding, and in estimating the percentage
which any lode will carry a person of
average intelligence is just as well quali-
fied to form an opinion as the veriest
geological expert, provided he has taken
the trouble to pulverize and wash a few


samples. The oxide is a very fixed
quantity, containing from 70 to 78 per
cent, of metallic tin, the balance being
oxygen, with minute quantities of iron
and gangue. The Poolamacca tin is re-
markably pure, being free from tungatic
acic or other impurities that sometimes
deteriorate its value. The matrix is very
easily reduced, and this fact is of some
importance in calculating the cost of con-
centrating the ore and making it ready
for market. The oxide having a specific
gravity of 7, while the granite in which it
is contained does not exceed 4, it becomes
a very simple matter to separate them by
water gravitation in any form of jigger,
or by the fine or Frue vanner.
EURIOWIE.
A brand new township is Euriowie, about
48 miles in a north-easterly direction from
Broken Hill and 54 from Silverton. Ex-
cept that in the summer months the heat
of the sun is apt to be oppressive, the
drive from Broken Hill via Waukeroo to
Poolamacca is not uninteresting. The
first stopping-place is Stephen’s Creek,
about 8 miles out, where the waterbags
are filled, and dinner is taken at the
Albion township, 18 miles from Broken
Hill. There are less than half a dozen
buildings in the settlement, a fewer
number than of claims in the locality.
The Waukeroo field, which is some 5 or 6
miles further on, employs about 100 men.
A good bush-road past the “ Paps,” twin
conical hills of considerable height and
rare form, constituting a singularly effi-
cient landmark to travellers, leads to the
Poolamacca Hotel, 35 miles from Broken
Hill and 13 from Euriowie. The bene-
ficent character of late seasons is shown
by the vigorous saltbush, while the
numerous belts of teatree and the frequent
lines of gum give the landscape a cheerful
aspect. From Poolamacca Hotel (a com-
fortable stone building with an affable
intelligent host) the road passes through
picturesque scenery, the charm of which
is somehow detracted from by the pre-
cipitous and corkscrew nature of the
descent from the ranges to the Lady Don
township, about 4 miles from Euriowie.
The return journey can be made on prac-
tically level ground by a good bush road
avoiding the ranges and leading to the
Albion township.
It is less than nine months ago that
Euriowie was pegged out. Having its
raison d’etre in the tinfields, the principal
mines being within a range of 2 or 3
miles, it has now a including
miners in the locality, of 700 persons,
while it boasts of two Banks, three stores,
four hotels, several other places of busi-
ness, and a racecourse, but no Church
building. Every structure is of gal-
vanized iron. In the course of
time, no doubt, substantial stone
buildings will be erected. The town is
rapidly growing. At present there is a
demand for skilled miners in the district.
It is stated that telegraphic communica-
tion will shortly be given, and in the not
far distant future a tramway will connect
the centres of the Barrier silver and tin fields
with the capitals of the colonies. About
4 miles at the foot of the ranges which
divide it from Gainer’s Poolamacca Hotel
is the Lady Don township—a new and
small but increasing settlement, with
several claims being worked in its vicinity.
Other townships will no doubt spring up
as the development of the field proceeds.
More than 800 leases of 40 acres each
have been applied for in it; and, if the
labour conditions are complied with, there
must soon be a large addition to the
present population.
NO. 111.
MOUNT KURIOWIE MINE.
About 2£ miles from the township by
road, and some little distance from the
Mount, is the Mount Euriowie claim in
moderately hilly ground. Though the
propriety of calling it the Broken Hill of
the tinfield may be called into question
by those who admire the Victory lode, its
precedence in point of time, the advanced
and interesting stage of its development
and the public attention bestowed upon
the stock will, it must be admitted on all
hands, entitle it, apart from any com-
parison of merit, to first notice. The
future of the field will, to a certain degree,
be affected by the success of the ore-
dressing machinery, which will be started
in April. The property is valued, accord-
ing to the present state of the money
market, at £286,000, and as this is the
highest estimate put upon any tin claim
on the Barrier it may be considered to
rank highest in public esteem.
When one comes upon the Euriowie
lode, after being accustomed to see tin
lodes measured in inches and stone turned
over to find a tin sample, it is quite ex-
hilarating to trace it outcropping large and
rich throughout the length of the claim.
Even cautious Mr. Wilkinson, the
Government Geologist of New South
Wales, could not contain an official


admiration for it. He said: —“One of
the moat regular lodea yet opened is that
which runs for about half a mile through
the Euriowie North portions. In this lode
the tin is seen to be more evenly distributed
through the granite than is usually the
case. But even this lode or granite dyke,
which it really is, varies in width from
1 to 18 feet, and runs in breaks, thinning
at intervals, and making again within a
few feet of the west side. Nevertheless
the lode appears to be sufficient! y persis-
tent to be workable on a large scale. I
was informed that a parcel of 20 tons of
it, crushed at the Umber umberka
machine, yielded at the rate of 8 per
cent, oxide of tin. The lode strikes
north-west, and has a westerly dip. It
consists of coarsely crystalline granite
with large flakes of mica, and traverses
altered mica schists, which strike north
and south.”
As this matter of the extent and quality
of the lode is of primary importance, it is
only fair to put on record the testimony of
Captain Black, as follows : —“ The lode
traversed the claim in one unbroken line
for a distance of 4,650 feet. Throughout
this distance the lode varied in thickness
from 4 to 14 feet thick—the average
thickness would be from 6 to 8 feet.
The thin portions of the lode would not
make up more than 300 feet throughout
the length of the lode, and were princi-
pally to the south of the No. 2 Gully : but
about 400 feet from the gully the lode
widened out to 14 feet thick. It was
that thickness at the bottom of No. 3
Shaft 62 feet below the surface; and at
No. 2 Shaft in a drive 60 feet below the
surface the lode was 9 feet thick, and is
widening out in the end and floor of the
drive. There was no work done on the
lode during two months until the begin-
ning of the year, when some men were
put on • and in the north end at No. 2
Gully some of the richest stone was
obtained that had been seen in the dis-
trict, and it continues to look splendid.
There was also some very rich stone got
from a face going south, half-way between
No. 2 Gully and the top of the hill.
There were five faces opened out on the
lode to take it out by open cuttings, and
there were from 500 to 600 tons of lode
broken on surface.”
The history of the Company has been
well told in a previous letter by “ Barrier
Banger,” and it will only be necessary to
notice the progress made in development.
The claim compries eight blocks, but a
portion of the land is a water reserve.
The Directors In their last report stated
that recognising the advisability of con-
serving all the water obtainable, and
having a site on the property eminently
suitable for such a purpose, at the earliest
moment after survey let a contract for the
necessary excavations and embankments.
The result is a dam capable of holding
5,000,000 gallons of water. At present
there is not much water in it, but such a
reservoir was regarded as a most impor-
tant auxiliary to the mine, supplying as It
would all the water required for drinking
purposes and for the boilers, as well as
proving a valuable supplement to the
water required for concentrating pur-
poses. In view of an anticipated diffi-
culty in procuring a large water supply a
special ore-dressing plant was obtained by
the Company ; but since the last meeting
of sharholders a large body of water has
been struck in the water shaft, sunk to a
depth of about 100 feet on the southern
portion of the mine, about 478 feet north
of the boundary. This will not only
benefit the mine, but assist the develop-
ment of the tinfield by assuring Directors
of other Companies that water can be
obtained by sinking to a moderate depth.
The machinery is in a forward state as
regards erection. The Directors, per-
ceiving how much depended upon secur-
ing the services of an able Manager, paid
special attention to the selection of a good
man. Mr. George Black, the subject of
their choice, bears a very high reputation
in the district as a mining engineer of
great experience and energy. He was
deputed to go to Melbourne and Sydney,
and on his return reported that he had
purchased such a plant as in his opinion
would be most suitable for effectual treat-
ment of the ores with the least possible
consumption of water. The plant is of
an estimated capacity of 300 tons per
week. The engine and boiler for driving
the dressing machinery are of the follow-
ing size :—Engine, 14£-inch cylinder and
32-inch stroke; boiler, 20 x 6 feet, with
40-lnch flue. The reducing plant con-
sists of one stonebreaker and two Wall’s
patent rolls. The classifying portion of
the work will be done with five trommels
of different gauge screens, and the wash-
ing and concentration of crushed ore
and slimes performed by four three com-
partment jigs and two Frue vanners.
For the class of plant a great height is
required, and some of the framing stood
36 feet above the level of the dressing
floor, the stonebreaking machine being up
that height above floor nad 12 feet above


the level of tramway. An excavation has
been cut in the face of the hill 70 feet by
34 feet by 8 feet deep at the upper end,
equal to 350 yards of reck cutting, and
between the floor and the creek there is
a fall of 16 feet, which will be occupied
with settling tanks, tailing pits, &c.
Immediately above the cutting a strong
stage is erected, which stands 28 feet
above the face of the hill, for the purpose
of carrying a day’s crushing of ore for the
supply of the mill. The floor on the top
of the stage will be 20 feet square, for
containing the ore, which will be brought
up in trucks direct from the different
workings or faces on the lode. The
tresselwork for connecting the tramway to
stage is all erected, and the framework
of stage nearly ready for setting up.
At the water-shaft the machinery consists
of a cylinder engine of 3-feet
stroke and a Cornish boiler 17 feet by 5
feet, fitted with a steam dome, Galloway
tubes and water-bridge. The boiler will
be a good one for generating steam on a
small percentage of fuel. The work to be
performed by the engine is to work a column
of 8-inch pumps in the water-shaft, and
to work acentrifugal pump to raise water
from the top of the column up to the
supply tank of the dressing plant, a height
of say 40 feet. In future the shaft will be
used as a winding shaft for the southern
portion of the mine when the ore is raised
from below after the main shaft is put
down and the lode drained from a lower
level.
Everything appears to be ready for the
starting of the machinery. The necessary
buildings are erected, the lode opened for
quarrying out from the surface, and a
horse-tramway laid. The tramway is laid
parallel with the lode from the No. 2
gully down to the dressing plant, for the
purpose of conveying the ore from the
different faces along the lode down to the
mill. The length of the tramway is 1,230
feet, a section of which 400 feet long is a
double line for self-acting grade. A road-
way for horse was formed up one aide of
line, from No. 2 gully to top of hill, a
distance of 700 feet.
A correspondent in a letter which
appeared in a previous issue compared
the Company with the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Company, and according to his
statement of the case the Euriowie
shareholders should receive with a 300-ton
concentrating plant at work more than
double the dividends paid by the Broken
Hill Company with a 1,500-ton smelting
plant, while there will be four or five tin
blocks available for segregation. Yet the
shrewdest speculators on the Corner give
less than £2O for Euriowie’s and more
than £4OO for Brokens ! In the presence
of such an astonishing fact it
is scarcely safe to speak of the
Company’s prospects. Without, how-
ever, going into the debateable figures in-
troduced, or into the question of whether
there is an unlimited supply of crude tin
ore which can be raised and reduced to a
value of £l2O per ton for £1 a ton, it is
wiser not to be unduly sanguine about
the future, but to accept the belief of the
Directors, which is explicit as to one
result and judiciously vague as to the
details as expressing all the facts will now
warrant, namely, “ that the property will
very soon occupy an honourable position
among the dividend-paying Companies of
the district.”
The capital is 16,000 £5 shares paid or
capitalized to £4 125., and sales were
made on February 18 at £l7 17s. 6d.
THE VICTORY MINE.
One of the best opened up and one of
the most promising mines on the field is
the Victory, which was discovered by
Messrs. Porter and West shortly after
the Euriowie was floated and was formed
into an Adelaide Company about six
months ago. It is about a mile and a-half
in a direct line to the north-west from the
Euriowie and a mile to the west from the
township, but somewhat further by road.
The claim comprises four blocks, taking
in two high hills.
On the same line of strike as the lodes
in the Queen Victoria and Prince of
Wales United Company, towards the
south, other lodes, said Mr. Wilkinson,
crop out through the Victory Company’s
ground. He added, “ Some of these are
being prospected, and a shaft 40 feet
deep has oeen sunk in one 8 ft. 4 in.
wide. This lode strikes N. 10° W., and
consists of coarse crystals of felspar,
mica, and quartz, with tin ore in patches,
which, if worked separately, would pro-
bably yield 30 per cent, of ore.” The
Company sunk this shaft (Porter’s) deeper
and at 50 feet it opened out very wide.
They went down to 80 feet, and found
that the lode had diminished. After that
lava, similar to that met with in gold
reefs, was passed through. Further sink-
ing found the lode to be about 8 feet in
width at a depth of between 90 and 100
feet. The shaft is now down 110 feet,
and ore is coming out of a very good class
and through the lode, which has opened


out to quite 12 feet wide. A tunnel the remainder of the South’s claim.
is being driven in the hill to meet
the shaft at a depth of 150
feet. The length of the tunnel will
be 570 feet. Of this distance 280 feet has
been cut, and as the miners are driving at
the rate of 20 feet a week it will take
about fourteen weeks to make the connec-
tion. On the southers block on the top
of the hill is a shaft 65 feet deep, and it
is intended to go down to 100 feet at
least, probable 150 feet, so as to get into
settled country. This shaft, which began
on the hanging-wall, is in another lode
10 feet wide, with a very great underlay,
which will probably with a third lode be
found to come together at a depth. It is
considered likely that the lodes tapped by
the two shafts will unite before reaching
the tunnel level, but the work is planned
so as to intercept the three. A water
shaft is being sunk on the creek, which is
now 30 feet deep with no supply, but
water is confidently looked for directly.
The Manager, Captain Oates, who has
had considerable experience in tin-mining
in Cornwall, is opening up the mine with
great energy, and his policy is to get con-
siderable ore reserves in sight and ensure
a large water supply before ordering ex-
pensive machinery. He has so laid out the
work that when the time comes to erect
the machinery all the operations will, as
far as possible, be concentrated with a
view to economy in time, labour, and ex-
pense. There is several hundreds of tons
of ore at grass estimated to average 7 per
cent. Seven cases of good samples have
been shipped for display in the Melbourne
Centennial Exhibition. About forty men
are employed on the mine.
At the beginning of the year the Com-
pany had a credit balance of nearly
£5,400. The capital of the Company is
35,000 £2 10s. shares, 5,000 being paid or
capitalized to £2 each, and 30,000 to £2
ss. Sales were made on February 22 at
£4 for promoters, and on February 17 at
£3 11s. 6d. for contributors.
No. IV.
THE EURIOWIE LODE.
As the Euriowie lode passes from the
Company’s south boundary it is believed
to be split into two fractures, one
going into the Euriowie South’s claim
and the other into the Wee Jim. About
half-way down the latter block it is under-
stood to pass to the westward into the
Euriowie South, and join the western
branch, the main lede running through
Emerging at the south-east corner into
the Wee Jim’s southern block it is
described as making an elbow into
the Mount Euriowie Extended pro-
perty, and passing through a corner
of a block to the south-west into
the Trident and Sceptre, whence it trends
away to the west in the direction of the
Cam Brea. It is, however, contended
that the lode passes from Mount Euriowie
South into the Triumph, and thence into
the Trident. To the north Mount
Euriowie Estate is supposed to get two
lodes, but they have done nothing to
prove them. One lode passes into the
Jubilee Claim.
THE SOUTH EXTENSION.
The Mount Euriowie South Claim, with
a very flat surface, comprising one 60-acre
block, pegged out by Messrs. Dickes and
Hilton, gets the lode, which was picked
up about fifty yards inside of the northern
boundary and traced throughout the
length of the property. A shaft was
started, which is now sinking in the
northern section, and it is down 40 feet,
with as much water as can be conve-
niently dealt with without a steampump.
It passed through the lode at 24 feet, and
after a little more sinking a crosscut will
be driven westward to prove the lode. In
No. 2 Shaft, which is nearly 30 feet
deep, there is a good show of tin and a
well-defined big lode. No. 3 shaft
is also sunk on the lode. From the
situation of the claim, observations as to
heaves in the lode, and other indications,
this property is regarded by experts as
fully worthy of further development, and
the Syndicate are considering means of
raising more capital to undertake it. The
capital is fifty shares of £lOO, and a sale
was made on February 14 at £5OO.
The Wee Jim, or, as now called, the
Euriowie Central, which belongs to a
Silverton Syndicate and adjoins the
Euriowie’s south boundary, and the
Euriowie South’s eastern and south-
eastern boundaries, furnished samples of
tin to the Adelaide Exhibition. There are
several lodes in the eastern half of the
ground, where a great deal of work has
been done, and an effort is being made to
find a portion of the main lode to sink
upon. A 50-feet shaft and 21-feet cross-
cut are in the hill, and the men have a
short distance to drive to pick up a lode
showing on the surface. This promising
claim appears to take in besides an eastern
branch of the Euriowie lode from the
Euriowie ground, and a considerable length


of the main Euriowie lode after it leaves
the Euriowie South’s ground.
The Mount Euriowie Extended claim
was recently put before the public. The
block has been known as the Wee Jim
Extended. There are three lodes, and an
underlay shaft has been sunk 16 feet on
the central one, which is said to be a
continuation of the Euriowie lode, and
presents favourable indications.
A shaft, which is down 26 feet, is being
sunk in the Triumph, which lies directly
south of the Euriowie South, on what
appears to be the Euriowie lode. It has
also been opened up in a second place.
The Trident, which comprises two 40-
acre blocks, and adjoins the Mount
Euriowie Extended at its south-west
boundary, belonged to Messrs. Brodribb
and Smith, of Poolamacca Station. It
was floated in Adelaide only a short time
since. Captain Williams, who has had
previous experience in tin in England and
Victoria, has erected machinery for and is
ready to start sluicing. There is a lot of
shed tin on the claim, and per cent,
will pay if a fair supply of water can
be obtained. The Manager’s last re-
port was that water had been obtained.
A shaft has been started on the
lode near the top of the hill with good
prospects. The capital of the Company is
24,000 £l-shares, 10,000 being paid or
capitalized to 10s., and 14,000 to 15s
Sales of promoters were made on February
14 at Bs. 3d.
THE NORTH EXTENSION.
The Mount Euriowie Estate is a Mel-
bourne Company, having seven blocks, six
of 40 acres each and one of 9 acres,
adjoining the Mount Euriowie Mine on
the north. From this point the blocks
are continuous. Captain Morish, in re-
porting on the property, stated that he
found on the two southern blocks two well-
defined strong lodes, in which free oxide of
tin could be seen in payable quantities.
The lodes are about 6 feet wide, and have
a bearing of north 20 degrees west.
The outcrop of the lode can be traced
through the next four northern blocks of
the Mount Euriowie Estate, going under
in Block 74 and reappearing in Block 73
and the Jubilee Tin Company’s ground,
consisting of three blocks. Two shafts
were sunk, but rendered of little use
through an accumulation of carbonic gas.
The surface shows are encouraging.
Some ground has been taken up on the
idea that the lode runs to the east and not
to the west of the Mount. The name of
the claim is the Ballarat, and the pro-
prietors intend to display Victorian energy
in deep sinking.
WESTERN CLAIMS.
Adjoining the Victory Claim is the
Victory South, and parallel to it is the
Victory Extended, and beyond that
Victory No. 1 and Victory No. 2. The
Victory lodes are in considerable favour
in the district, and hence the popularity
of the name.
On the Victory South several men are
working. A split in the lode has occurred,
but they may again come together in
depth. Splits and heaves are usually re-
garded with favour by miners. There is
a third lode showing good indications.
No. 1 lode at a depth of 2 feet is 10 feet
wide, and No. 2 is being also prospected
with encouraging results.
Victory No. 2 appears to have had a
chequered career, first figuring as the Big
Blow, and then as the Pinnacles Tin. A
shaft is down 28 feet, and the lode, which
is 32 feet wide, has a good show. On the
claim, which consists of two blocks, there
is also a galena lode.
Touching the Victory Company’s claim
at the north-east corner is the Poola-
macca, comprising five 40-acre blocks.
One of them is on the line of the
Victory lode. The rest of the blocks
are to the westward, and contain three
parallel lode formations with strong out-
crops. Tunnels are being driven to cut
two lodes. No. 1 Tunnel south is in
20 feet, showing a 6-feet lode carrying
some fine tin. No. 2 Tunnel north is in
12 feet. The lode is 40 feet wide, carry-
ing fine tin also. A new shaft is to be
sunk on the Victory lode on Block 79. A
blacksmith’s shop is being built. Six
men are employed, and six more will be
put on immediately. The capital is 72,000
£l-shares, one-half beingpaidor capitalized
to 15s. 3d. and the other to £l. Sales
were ss. and 7fl. 9d. on February 18 and
17 respectively.
The adjoining claim is the Mount
Bunchikana, and it is also parallel with Vic-
tory No. 1, which is situated to the west.
It is about half a mile north-west of
the Euriowie, and consists of four blocks
of 40 acres, being exactly a mile on
the course of the lodes. Prospecting is
being carried on with good results. The
Manager reports that on Block 40 there is
a shaft 43 feet deep and a lode 5 feet wide
showing splendid tin in the bottom. In
Block 41 there is a large lode. There are
two lodes on Block 42. No, 2 Shaft is
down 24 feet on a large lode, the width of


which has not been proved. It carries which are tin-bearing. No. 1 Western
a fair percentage of tin. The Victory
and Poolamacca lode is over 50 feet wide,
containing some splendid tin. In Block
43 the men are costeening on the course
of the lode. The Manager adds that he
is of opinion that in a short time he will
be able to open up a payable mine. An
attempt was made some few months ago
to float the claim into a Company in
Melbourne. At present the capital is in
eighty £lOO-shares, £77 paid or capitalized,
and a sale is reported on February 9 at
£l5O.
Next to the Bunchikana on the south,
and Victory No. 2on the east, is the Sir
William Don claim, including 160 acres in
four blocks. The ground is three blocks
wide east and west, with a view to take
in extensions of two main lines of lode,
Euriowie and Bunchikana. Two large
lode formations stand boldly out on the
claim. A good deal of prospecting has
been done, excellent shows of tin being
obtained.
Abutting the Sir William Don on the
south-east is the Grace Darling. Several
small lodes and two principal ones are on
the property, on which two shafts have
been sunk with fair prospects.
The Oarn Brea, named after a cele-
brated Cornish mine, is between the
Grace Darling and the Lady Don town-
ship. There is a large lode formation of
such a character as to encourage develop-
ment.
The Tincroft is about a mile westerly
in the ranges from the Victory Tin
Mine. Mr, Kraft is the
There is a shaft sunk on the course of a
good strong lode to a depth of 40 feet.
Having struck a quick supply of water
the proprietors have left off sinking, and
have now three men working in an open
cutting on the course of the lode in which
there is a good show of tin.
The Mount Tincroft, which is about a
mile to the south of the Tincroft, has a
shaft sunk to 37 feet which has been
abandoned through a large flow of fresh
water. The prospects are decidedly en-
couraging.
NORTHERN CLAIMS.
Starting again from the Victory, there
are several claims to the north, including
the Queen Victoria, Barrier Biachoft,
Rio Tinto, Caloolas, Cosmopolitans, and
others.
The Queen Victoria and Prince of
Wales claims, for which Mr. Klotz is
Manager, have six parallel lodes, five of
Lode Shaft is 48 feet deep on a strong
lode. Mr. Klotz intends putting a cross-
cut through this lode at a depth of 50
feet, where he expects to get good stuff.
On No. 2 lode two men are engaged cos-
teening, and have found some very good
stone. They have not yet proved the
width of the lode. The shaft on No. 3
lode is 15 feet deep. The lode
is 10 ft. 6 in. wide, showing tin the
whole depth. On No. 4 lode there Is a
perpendicular shaft 50 feet deep. The
lode is 41 feet wide, with very fair
prospects. At 35 feet they lost the course
of tin, the lode taking a westerly underlay.
No work has been done on No. 6 lode.
In costeening No. 6 lode 16 feet wide of
tin-bearing stone has been discovered.
On the Prince of Wales block a shaft
has been sunk 26 feet, but no tin has
been discovered, but the stone is kindly
looking. This claim is north of the Cos-
mopolitan and adjoins the Caloola North.
The west lode of the Cosmopolitan
traverses the Rio Tinto, and some sinking
has been done on the ground.
To the north of the Queen Victoria and
south of the Caloola is the Barrier Bischoff,
a 40 acre block, which appears to be
rich in lodes both as to number and size.
On No. 1, which is reported to be 60 feet
wide, a shaft is sunk 70 feet. At 65 feet
a large body of tin was struck. The shaft
in No. 2 lode, 22 feet wide, is down 58
feet in tin. No, 3 lode is cut in the tunnel,
which is in 93 feet. A shaft is sunk 30
feet upon No. 4 lode, carrying good tin.
The outcrop of this lode is large. There
are three other lodes on the property,
ranging from 3 feet to 10 feet wide,
according to surface indications. The
claim is being vigorously developed, and
has the promise of proving a good pro-
perty. The capital of the Company is
10,000 £1 10s. shares paid or capitalized
to 155., and sold at £1 on February 14,
and 30,000 £2 ss. shares paid or capitalized
to £2 55., and sold at £2 2s. 6d. on Feb-
ruary 13.
Adjoining the Barrier Bischoff on the
north-western boundary is the Caloola.
At the time of the visit of Mr. Wilkinson,
the Government Geologist, in October
last, a shaft had been sunk following the
'ode to a depth of 75 feet, and showing it
to be much the same character as near
the surface. He added in his report:—
“ Some 8 tons of about 50 per cent, ore
has been raised during the sinking of this
shaft. The lode or granite dyke dips
east 358, at north 755. It is from 1 foot


to 9 feet wide, and outcrops on the sur-
face for about 200 yards. The tin ore
is in patches through it.” At present
driving is being carried on at the 40-feet
level, and when sufficiently far stoping
will be begun on an excellent shoot of ore
showing in the shaft. The southern
drive is also in 17 feet. It is proposed to
sink another 50 feet on the lode, and the
men are sinking a western shaft, which Is
now 86 feet deep. A fourth lode, in
which a little tin is showing, is being
opened up (the shaft is some 47 feet from
grass) near the residence of Captain
W. Williams, who, with an extensive
mining experience, is vigorously working
the claim. The capital is 80,000 £1
shares, 15s. paid or capitalized, and sales
were made on February 18 at 10s.
The Caloola King, recently placed
before the Adelaide public, is a claim
about 2 miles north-west of the township
of Euriowie, and comprising three blocks
of 40 acres, the southern block adjoining
the western side of the Barrier Bischoff.
The next block to the north abuts the
Caloola on the western boundary. Captain
Oats, in reporting on the property, stated
that there were four large and masterly
lodes running through the blocks, besides
several smaller ones, which appeared to
be branches of the main leaders. The
east lode, which passed through the two
northerly blocks, had a fine cropping 8
and 10 feet wide, with tin in places,
having, he added, the same bearing and
being evidently the main lode on the
Barrier Bischoff, and which ran south
into the Queen Victoria and Victory
Mines. There were two other important
lodes, but the fourth lode, which was 56
feet wide, had, according to Captain Oats,
one of the finest surface- shows of oxide of
tin he had seen on the fields. The property
appears to possess other qualifications for
a good mine. No work of any conse-
quence has, however, been done below
the surface.
At Caloola South two dykes of coarse-
grained granite were being prospected
during Mr. Wilkinson’s visit. One was
20 feet across as seen in an open cut 6
feet deep, and the other 70 feet east was
15 feet. Two chains north those dykes
came together. There are 96 shares in
the Syndicate, and a share was sold on
February 14 at £46.
The Toogooroo is to the east of the
Caloola South and the Rio Tinto. To the
north of these are the Caloola North and
Cosmopolitan.
At the Caloola North a shaft is being
sunk, and it is proposed to crosscut at
40 feet if the lode is not met with. The
claim is well situated, but very little tin
appears to have been found. It may be
necessary to go in for deep sinking. A
contract has been let to sink a shaft 50
feet on No. 4 lode. The capital is 60,000
£1 shares, 355. paid or capitalized, and
sales were made at 2s. 6d. on February 18.
At the Cosmopolitan Mr. A. W.
Chapman, who came with the highest
testimonials from Buninyong, Victoria,
recently took charge, and after examining
the property made a report to the Direc-
tors, in which he said ; —“ No. 1 Shaft is
353 feet in a northerly direction from the
corner peg, and sunk on the underlay of
the lode to about 40 feet from the surface.
I am informed that at the bottom the lode
is fully 8 feet wide with well-defined foot-
wall, and contains fully 16 per cent, of
tin, but owing to the appliance not being
sufficient to contend with the water they
were compelled to discontinue further
sinking. No. 2is the main vertical shaft
in a northerly direction from No. 1, and
about 30 feet east of the outcrop of the
lode; size of shaft Bx4, and properly
timbered, and is now 70 feet deep from
surface. This shaft we are pushing on
with all possible speed, and should strike
the lode at about 90 feet. No. 3 Shaft is
about 630 feet further on in a northerly
direction, and is sunk on the lode to the
depth of about 66 feet. The lode is
about 3 feet wide, with well-defined
footwall, and to all appearance it gets
larger as it goes down, oxide of tin freely
seen on either end, and on the surface
very fair tin ore can be got which came
from the shaft. The outcrop of this lode
is clearly traceable from No. 1 to this
shaft, and in places it has been trenched
across loose tin can be seen. I have pul-
verized and washed several stones from this
lode, and find it contains good samples of
tin, although to the eye none could be
seen in the stone, which shows that this
lode contains a percentage of tin not
visible. When it is properly developed
and machinery obtained for requirements
it will rank with the best paying lodes
in the district. On another line of
lode further west, the outcrop of
which is traceable for a considerable dis-
tance, there are two other shafts (noted
as No. 5 and 6), but owing to the foul air
I could not get down to examine the lode.
I am informed they are about 60 feet
deep, which appears to be the water level
on this lode, but from the stone on the
surface which came from them very fair


samples of tin ore can be obtained. Near
the above-mentioned outcrop there is an
area of surface which contains tin, but I
could not estimate the quantity or quality
of the soil at present, but from the tin
seen I have no hesitation in saying that
when water is available it will prove re-
munerative in the meantime.” A contract
was let on December 20 to Messrs. Fulton
and Co. for pumping and winding plant
for £720, the plant to be ready on March
20. About £2,000 has been spent on the
property. The Directors prefer to dis-
pose of the unallotted shares to making
further calls with a view to purchasing
concentrating plant and thoroughly
developing the mine. It is an Adelaide
Company, and the capital is 60,000
£l-shares, half being paid or capitalized
to 13s. 6d., and the other to 15s. Sales
were made at ss. 3d. and 7s. on
February 18 and 16 respectively.
The Cosmopolitan Extended is favour-
ably spoken of, but there is not much
being done there at present.
The Wheal Byjerkerno, which was
formerly known as the Melbourne, belongs
to a Victorian Company, who have a
shaft down 25 feet on a lode
about 4 feet wide and very rich.
They can trace it for about 7 or 8 chains
with a good show of tin.
The Adelaide Tin-mining Syndicate
have several prospecting holes with a good
show of tin. They have sunk on the
course of the lode about 50 feet, and they
are sinking in the country to strike the
lode.
The Thistle, which is an Adelaide
Company, Captain Eddy, Manager, is
one block removed from the Cosmopolitan
to the north. They have several pro-
specting holes, and there is one shaft
40 feet deep with a splendid show of tin
in the lode about feet wide. The
Directors recently received from Messrs.
Parke & Lacy, of Sydney, the result of
their treatment of a parcel of over 3 tons.
It went a trifle over 10 per cent, of tin
ore to the whole bulk submitted. Fifty-
five hundredweight of the above was
taken generally from the bulk of the lode,
and yielded 8 per cent, of oxide of tin,
while 8J cwt. picked and roughly hammer-
dressed, returned 24 per cent. There is
a shaft 97 feet on the lode from 3 to
4 feet wide near the bottom, but they
are crosscutting it, and not yet to the
wall. The men are now engaged in
cutting down the shaft making ready for
pumps, ladders, &c. The capital is
40,000 £l-shares, 6s. paid or capitalized.
and sales were made on February 16
at 6s. J
The Ruby is the next claim, where the
men are driving on the course of the
lode south from a vertical shaft 90 feet
deep. A small lode of iron pyrites has
been cut and several stringers found. It
is intended to begin work on the adjoining
block to the west. The capital is 60,000
£l-shares, 15s. paid or capitalized, and
sales were made on February 18 at Is.
7*d.
The Farnell is a Port Adelaide Syndi-
cate, for whom Mr. G. E. Haddy is
Manager. The claim includes ]6O acres.
There is a 50-feet shaft with prospects
and several costeening pits on the course
of the lode, which in the 50-feet shaft is
3 feet wide. Some lodes prospected on
are 18 to 20 feet wide, but they have not
found any very rich ore. An encouraging
sample of tin has recently been sent to
the Port. The road to the Coroona
Station goes through this claim.
No. Y.
THE LADY DON MINE.
About half a mile from the Lady Don
township, in hilly country, is the Lady
Don Mine to which special interest
attaches as the origin of the present
activity on the tinfield. About fifteen
months ago Mr. Johnstone began to work
the leases, and applying the drill and the
blast to the stanniferous dykes was, as
previously mentioned, rewarded by finding
rich seams of nearly pure oxide of tin
distributed irregularly through a formation
about 14 feet thick. So confident were
numbers of mining men of the ultimate
value of the discovery that they formed a
Syndicate to purchase the property, con-
sisting of 80 acres, and this Syndicate was
shortly afterwards transformed into the
Lady Don Company.
The Company have done some excellent
work, albeit they have not yet been re-
warded with the success they deserve.
About £2,500 has been spent upon the
development of the property, in which
there are two lodes, which are now being
proved at a depth. Eighty-seven feet
down from the crown of the hill, there is
a tunnel the course of which is traversed
by a big lod« ranging from 5 to 15 feet in
width, but there has been a heave at the
end of the tunnel which has thrown her
back into her course. A winze, which
goes down 35 feet below this level, is in
the lode all the way, showing tin more
or less, but nothing very great. The


manager, Mr. Evans, is driving north to
cut the lode. A second tunnel exists at
about 70 feet from the crown of the hill,
and there is a continuation of the winze
in the other tunnel. The higher level
was driven in the early times. It shows
some very good tin in patches. From the
surface of the hill there is an opening
into the western lode, which gave G tons
of rich stuff. Captain Evans has sunk the
main shaft to 87 feet, and is driving to
cut the lodes to the east and west. He
expects that 18 feet will cut the west lode
and 35 feet the east. The water shaft is
down 60 feet, and 70 feet of driving has
been done. Machinery is to be erected
on the hill. It will include a 30-horse-
power winding gear.
The progress of the operations at this
mine will be watched with interest.
There are at least four southern lodes
verging into the hill, where there is a
tremendous big blow. There is a surface
show of splendid tin, but the question is
whether it carries to any depth, or
whether there will be a change. Galena
is obtainable in the water shaft. Pro-
bably the eastern and western lodes will
unite in a large formation lower down;
and tin may then appear. The western
block is being prospected. The capital
is 60,000 £l-shares, half being paid or
capitalized to 10s., and the other to 15s.
Sales were made on February 16 and 17
at 2s. and ss. respectively.
ADJOINING CLAIMS.
The Cobar is on the eastern side of the
Lady Don. The lease was to be declared
forfeited for non-compliance with the con-
ditions.
On the brow of the hill bearing east
from the Lady Don is the Ormond. A
shaft is down 50 feet on a lode showing
tin freely.
There is a number of claims in the
locality held for speculative purposes by
persons who do not intend to work them.
THE WESTERN FALL.
A little over 4 miles from Gainer’s
Po’olamacca Hotel, which is 13 miles from
Euriowie and 35 from Broken Hill, are
the Western Fall Claims, which at one
time attracted a great deal of attention,
but there is no work going on there at
present. Considerable prospecting has
been done, but the results do not appear
to have been such as to bring about that
active development now being witnessed
in other portions of the field.
THE WAUKAROO PADDOCK.
The history of this portion of the field,
which is employing about 100 men at pre-
sent, has been already recited, and it will
be here sufficient to indicate the progress
attained with some of the principal claims.
It may, however, be said in passing that,
while the Waukaroo field has been
severely criticised, there are some really
good claims in it, although it is too early
in the day to speak of their precise value.
In November last the mining reporter of
the Silver Age, who is respected in the
district as a reliable expert, wrote :
“ That there are as many really good tin
claims in the Waukaroo Paddock as in the
Euriowie portion of the field 1 give per-
sonal testimony and stake my professional
reputation. All men practically acquainted
with tin-mining concur in stating that a
yield of from 1 to per cent, of fair
quality of oxide of tin will pay all charges
of getting and dressing, anything beyond
that being profit. Of claims producing
ore of a class much higher than this there
are abundant on these fields.”
There has been some talk of erecting
public crushing machinery on the field to
the north-east of the Proprietary Com-
pany’s claim, a suitable site having been
selected as regards an adequate water
supply. Such an addition would give a
great impetus to the development of the
claims in the paddock, and there are
sufficient, one would imagine, to keep a
large concentrator well employed. Even
now work is suspended on some claims
until ore-dressing machinery is available.
With scarcely an exception the claims
are in the Syndicate stage, which fre-
quently means a limited capital for work-
ing. It is to the credit of the Broken
Hill people that they have supplied most
of the money expended upon this portion
of the field. Under these circumstances
there is no fair opportunity for the merits
of the ground to be proved ; and until by
some means the confidence of the specula-
tive public, which was shaken (whether
justifiably so or not is a question) by the
report of the Government Geologist in
October last, is restored this portion of
the tinfield will be kept back. The capital
which can only be supplied by public
Companies is needed for its development.
The Government Geologist while intend-
ing to be cautious evidently did not con-
template that his report would have the
effect of stopping legitimate work, for in
his concluding paragraph he says : —“ The
slate formation of the district is traversed
by numerous similar granite dykes. As


the lodes are numerous, there can be no Consolidated. It has a good show of
doubt that considerable quantities of tin
ore will, from time to time, be raised in
working the bunchy portions of them.
Timber, for mining purposes, and surface
water are scarce ; but a fair supply of the
latter may be obtained by sinking wells
in the valleys, or by making large tanks
for conserving the rainfall.”
Mount Lake is the northernmost por-
tion of the Waukaroo field, and there
(says Mr. Wilkinson) occurs a dyke mass
of coarse-grained granite, suddenly widen-
ing out in one place to 100 feet with very
small tin crystals appearing here and there
in it. A branch vein up to 6 feet thick, but
pinching out in places, extends V. 30° S.
from it 4 chains, and shows coarse
crystals of tin ore in patches.
“ Within 12 chains to the east are four
other granite dykes with quartz reefs
from 1 foot to 10 feet thick ; they strike
north-north-west, and have not yet been
opened. Some small deposits of stream
tin are likely to be found in the alluvial
flats between these hills, together with
good soakage water. Similar tin-bearing
granite dykes occur to the south in Kali’s
claim, and also beyond in the Mount
Lake South block, where there is one
showing coarse tin in patches, from
which 50 per cent, ore might be picked ;
but the general average of the lode would
not, I think, yield 4 per cent, or ore. It
strikes north 30° E for about 8 chains,
and varies in width up to 15 feet. But
to the south it takes a more southerly
course for about 200 yards, thinning out
in places. There are other smaller lodes
near on either side, and another 8
chains east is very felspathic, varying in
width up to 20 feet for about 130 yards,
with small crystals of tin in patches.
These lodes have only been opened 3 feet
from the surface.”
The Mount Lake claim, comprising 200
acres, is the most northern, being a mile
above the Dalcoath. There was a lot of
tin showing on the surface, and a great
deal of prospecting has been done, there
being six lodes, one a true fissure lode,
10 feet wide, showing coarse tin. A
vertical shaft has been sunk to a depth of
20 feet, with encouraging results. There
are two other shafts—No. 3, which is
sunk 35 feet, giving a noticeable improve-
ment in ore as it goes down. The pro-
perty is favourably situated for obtaining
a large water supply.
The Mount Lake Victory is a small
block of 17| acres, wedged in between the
Mount Lake Junction, Central, and
surface tin.
A vertical shaft has been started in the
Mount Lake South on a very large forma-
tion, which can be traced for three blocks.
It is 10 feet wide, and stands 6 feet out of
the ground.
To the east of Mount Lake south is the
Excelsior, consisting of three 40-acre
blocks. There are three parallel lodes,
about 15 feet apart, which may make into
one as they go down. Sufficient prospect-
ing has been done to furnish a good show
of tin in strong lodes.
East and north-east of the Excelsior is
the Dalcoath, a claim comprising five 40-
acre blocks. On Blocks 18 and 19, which
are to the north of the Waukaroo Ex-
tended, and Block 13, which is to the
east of that claim, a good deal of prospect-
ing has been done. Mr. Wilkinson re-
ported that on the Dalcoath there was a
lode, consisting chiefly of quartz, and
varying in thickness up to 8 feet, which
contained tin ore in patches that sepa-
rately would yield 20 per cent. ore. It
strikes N. 5° W., traversing altered slates.
Twenty yards from it on the east side is
another lode of lenticular bunches of
quartz up to 2 feet thick, containing tin
ore. One shaft has been sunk 50 feet and
and another is going down 100 feet. There
are other lodes to those mentioned in the
ground, and the prospects generally
justify an expenditure on development.
There are 192 shares in the Syndicate, £26
being paid or capitalized, and a sale at £6O
was reported on February 14.
The Waukaroo Blocks claim, comprising
60 acres, is sandwiched between a northern
and a southern block of the Dalcoath,
having also two other of the Dalcoath
blocks to the westward. A good deal of
work has been done. There is a large
lode on the northern block showing tin
freely. Some of the best samples on the
field have been seen in this claim. The
capital is 96 £5O-shares, paid or capitalized
to £5O.
Between the Excelsior and the southern
portion of the Dalcoath is the Waukaroo
Extended, comprising 98| acres. A shaft
is down on a talcose schist formation 4
feet wide, showing tin.
The Waukaroo North is to the east of
the Extended and south of the Dalcoath,
with the Consols and Consolidated on the
eastern boundary. It consists of two
40-acre blocks. Three lodes have been
opened, and a shaft is being sunk upon a
good formation 4 feet wide. The capital
is 100 shares, on which £5 is paid or


capitalized, and a sale has been made at between £5OO and £6OO. There are
£2O.
The Waukaroo Consolidated have three
blocks, making over 113 acres, to the east
of the Dalcoath, Waukaroo North, and
Consols. Oosteening has proved it to
possess strong lodes, with tin in places.
Mr. Wilkinson found a similar slate reef
to one in the Proprietary Company’s
ground with granite veins of irregular
width up to 16 inches, opened to a depth of
6 feet, containing coarse tin in patches.
Twenty feet from it on the east side is a
large quartz reef 3 ft. 6 in. wide and 70
feet long. Further east 100 feet another
granite dyke 3 feet thick would yield tin
ore probably up to 2 per cent., but it
could be sorted to give a higher yield.
The Consolidated is being worked. A
shaft has been put down on the underlay
50 feet and it is to be sunk another 20
feet. The lode for the distance yet tra-
versed is said to show fair oxides of tin.
The Waukaroo Consols, a 40-acre block,
receives the Proprietary lodes from the
south. A shaft has been sunk on the hill
on a strong formation. There are 960
shares, and a sale was reported on Sep-
tember 10 last at £lO.
The Waukaroo Proprietary Company
have six 40-acre blocks, three deep, upon
which a great deal of prospecting has been
done. Eight distinct outcrops have been
seen and five lodes opened up, all running
north and south. The Government
Geologist reported as to the claims in
October last“ Several openings have
been made along a singular outcrop of
talcose schist for about 15 chains. It
contains a little tin in small crystals,
and strikes N 5° W, with lenticular
quartz veins 2 feet wide. Along
its southern extension lenticular veins
of granite as well as of quartz
up to 3 feet thick occur. The patches of
tin ore in the granite if taken out sepa-
rately, would yield from 20 to 30 per
cent, of tin oxide.” There is a shaft
down 80 feet, and the men are driving to
cut the lode. Another shaft, the central,
is down 62 feet, and there is about 25 tons
of ore on the top. The western shaft is
down 30 feet, and there is 8 tons of ore
at grass. It is believed that the smal
lodes are portions of a main lode which
will be found by sinking. Some excellent
tin has been obtained from the claim, and
Mr. Finlay, the Manager, who has had
tin experience in New Eugland and
Queensland, speaks confidently of its
merits. A ninety-sixth interest in the
Company has been sold as high as
96 shares, and a sale was made on Feb-
ruary 14 at £122.
The Waukaroo Bischoff is an adjoining
claim co the Proprietary on the south. It
consists of 80 acres. A shaft is being
sunk on a widening lode through un-
settled country.
The Waukaroo South, comprising an
80 and 40 acre block to the south of the
Bischoff, has, says Mr. Wilkinson, three
lenticular granite dykes striking N. 5°
W., and up to 4 feet thick, show coarse
crystals of tin in patches. The whole, if
taken out, would yield about 2 per cent,
of ore. There are 96 shares in the Syndi-
cate, and a sale was reported on Sep-
ember 28 last at £5O.
A similar tin-bearing lode, adds the
same authority, 4 feet thick, and striking
N. 10° W. traverses the mica slates in the
Western Star Company’s mine. This
claim includes 5 40-acre blocks.
Immediately north of this are the
Granite Springs lodes. Within a diameter
of 3 chains (states the Government
Geologist) are three lenticular granite
dykes up to 4 feet thick, containing a
little tin ore, about 2 per cent. The
strike is E.N.E., N.E., and N.
5 Q E. (same as strata). Three chains
north are talcose slates like those
in the Proprietary Mine, with quartz
blows and fluor spar. Five chains
further north is a lenticular granite lode
5 feet wide showing a little tin, and near
it a quartz reef containing wolfram.
Three other small lodes have also been
prospected near the surface. They con-
tain small quantities of tin ore in patches.
A little stream tin was found near the
head of a gully draining from them.
Seven shafts are now sunk on the claim,
which consists ot four 40-acre blocks.
Active work is going on. There are 100
£5O-shares, £5O being paid or capitalized,
and a sale was reported on February 18 at
£4O.
PINE PADDOCK.
Pine Paddock is the lower portion of
the Waukaroo field. It comprises several
promising claims, but they are “ hanging
fire” for want of capital.
The Botallic comprises two blocks, a
portion of one only being inside the fence.
A shaft is sunk on a lode formation of
30 feet.
The Pine Paddock Proprietary Com-
pany have 100 acres south of the Botallic,
but there is nothing doing there at pre-
sent. A shaft has been sunk on a junction
of two lodes. The Government Geologist


found several tic-bearing dykes of large- wide, with a small patch of tin ore in
grained felspathic granite traversing slate
varying in thickness up to 10 feet, striking
N. 6° W. to N. 20° B. He added —
“ Some are like short, oblong, or boat-
shaped dykes; the tin ore with tourma-
line occurs in patches, and would have to
be sorted to yield 10 or 15 per cent, of
ore.”
The adjoining claim to the south, the
Bendigo, is also idle. Shafts have been
sunk 36 and 17 feet deep. There are
three lodes. Sufficient work has been
done to give the property a promising
appearance.
To the south-west of the Bendigo are
the Albion Claims. The original or
Albion proper was pegged out by Mr.
Campbell, as previously related. “On
the south side of Yancowinna Creek, in
portion 95, is (says Mr. Wilkinson) the
Albion lode, of coarse crystalline granite
in altered slate formation, dipping W
25° IS. at 80°. it would probably
yield 12 to 15 per cent, of tin. A shaft
has been sunk 22 feet deep. A hundred
feet further south a cutting 4 feet deep
has been made, showing the lode 7 feet
centre. Near the south-west corner of
portion 95 is a lode 25 feet wide, showing
a little tin and tourmaline. Within 10
chains east are a few other lodes. One
from 1 foot to 2 feet thick, containing
some tin and brown garnets, has been
opened 3 feet deep. In strikes north 40°
east in chloritic slate.” Further sinking
has shown that the lodes improve in
depth, and other openings have been
made with promising results. Though
the-claim has not advanced beyond the
prospecting stage, several tons of ore has
been shipped away. There are ninety-six
shares in the Syndicate, and a sale was
reported on February 16 at £95.
The West Albion Claim is an 80-acre
block to the west, as the name implies, of
the Albion. It is being worked, and a
good show obtained. The North Albion,
also an 80-acre block, is being prospected.
The Albion South has been idle. There
are ninety six shares in the Syndicate,
and a sale was made on February 18 at
£9O. The Union, which is still further
to the south, is being tried with favour-
able indications.


c. PROUD,
SHAREBROKER, Ac,
2, Pirie Street, Adelaide.
TELEPHONE No. 822.
Member of the Stock Exchange of Adelaide.
In hourly Telegraphic Communication with all the
Share Markets of Australia.
ALL ORDERS RECEIVE PROMPT ATTENTION.
CiT Sales Published in the Daily Press.


Victoria ...
... 6,268 Tons
7,000 h.p.
12th March
Chusan
4,496 “
4,200 “
26 th “
Parramatta
4,771 “
4,500 “
9th April
Carthage ...
5,013 “
5,000 “
23rd “
Oceania
6,600 “
7,000 “
7th May
Britannia ...
6,257 “
7,000 “
21st “
Rosetta
3,525 “
3,500 “
4th June
PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL STEAM NAVIGATION CO.
Under Royal Mail contract the steamers of this Company will be dispatched for
London, calling at King George’s Sound, Colombo, Aden, Brindisi, Malta, and
Gibraltar, as follows:
Passengers booked to above Ports ; also to India, China, and Japan.
Passage-money greatly reduced. Liberal concessions made to families. Return
tickets at low rates. Passage-money from England can be paid at this end.
Passengers bookedjjby Mr. Charles Chapple, the Company’s Agent, at Silverton
and Broken Hill.
ELDER, SMITH, & CO.,
Agents, Adelaide.
Nobel’s Explosives Co„ Limited,
GLASGOW.
Hotel’s Dynamite and Treble Force Detonators.
Hotel’s Gelatine Dynamite and Gelatine Detonators
Hotel’s Blasting Gelatine and Sextuple Detonators
Are to be had from all Ironmongers and Storekeepers.
Gelatine Dynamite used with Gelatine Detonators, and properly fired, is
regarded by numerous scientific mining and engineering authorities as one
of the safest and most perfect of the powerful explosives introduced of
late years. It is entirely free from noxious fumes.
ELDER, SMITH, & CO.,
Adelaide Agents.


He anb
§feam gompam;.
[Extract from News Columns of the London Times, January 18, 1888.]
“ There is no greater proof of the vitality of this veteran Company than the
vigour with which it appears to be entering upon the present year, from which
its new mail contracts to India, China, and Australia date. These contracts
commence in February, and the occasion has been taken advantage of to
remodel all the services. The public nowadays demand greater facilities and
greater comforts for travel than contented them formerly, and this demand
has been met by vast improvements in all directions. The mail services the
Government has decided shall still be carried on by way of Brindisi; and,
the route through the Suez Canal being selected, there will no longer be any
transhipments or railway transit across Egypt, which formerly were so annoying
to travellers, neither will there be a recurrence of the vexatious delays and
inconveniences to which they were at times subjected by the action of the
sanitary authorities in regard to the imposition of quarantine in Egypt. Every
Monday morning the letters from the East will be delivered as heretofore,
and letters for the East will be despatched, as at present, on every Friday
evening. Bnt the conveyance of the mails to India, China, Australia, and
the British possessions in the East is only a portion of the operations carried
by the P. and O. Company; and the directors have not been content to
confine their services to communications with the East from London or
Brindisi, but have also notified extensions from London to Marseilles and
Naples and from Marseilles, Naples, and Brindisi to all ports included in
their Eastern system. They are also opening a service from Brindisi to
Malta, which will bring this station within 87 hours of London.
At the present time the P. and O- Company owns 53 steamers, with an
aggregate registered tonnage of 204,183 tons and 198,500 horsepower, built
at a cost of some £6,000,000. Their largest steamers are of 6,500 tons
register, and the smallest 2,000 tons. In the course of the coming year no
fewer than 200 of their steamers of an aggregate tonnage of nearly 1,000,000
tons, will enter and leave the port of London alone. The steamers traverse
2,500,000 miles iu the course of a year. The Company g/ves employment to
800 officers (commanders, officers, engineers, surgeons, &c.) of the mercantile
marine holding certificates from the Board of Trade, and a large proportion
have Her Majesty’s commission in the Royal Naval Reserve. It has also in
its service an army of nearly 15,000 people afloat and ashore. Great as its
resources and operations are, the Company has many competitors, and
although its main operations are directed towards the carriage of mails and
passengers, the competition of the cheap class of cargo steamers with limited
passenger accommodation which have lately been built, has forced the
Company to extend its branches, and of late it has established a network of
encies thronghout the country.”


AUSTRAL
Tonnage,
5,588
H.P, Effective.
7,000
CHIMBORAZO ...
3,847
3,000
CUZCO
3,845
4,000
GARONNE
3,876
3,000
IBERIA ...
4,702
4,200
LIGURIA
4,666
4,200
LUSITANIA ...
3,825
4,000
ORMUZ
6,116
8,500
ORIENT
5,286
6,000
ORIZABA
6,184
7,000
OROYA
6,184
7,000
ORIENT LINE OF ROYAL MAIL STEAMERS
The following Steamers belonging to the ORIENT AND PACIFIC
STEAM NAVIGATION COMPANIES, under Mail Contract with the
Imperial, New South Wales, Victorian, and South Australian Govern-
ments, are dispatched FORTNIGHTLY to LONDON from SYDNEY,
MELBOURNE, and ADELAIDE, via ALBANY, SUEZ CANAL, NAPLES,
GIBRALTAR, and PLYMOUTH.
These Steamships are noted for their quick passages, the “Ormuz” having made
the fastest passage on record outwards, and the “Oroya” homewards.
They are specially constructed and rigged for long ocean voyages, and are renowned
for the comforts and the conveniences they offer to Passengers.
The First and Second Saloon Cabins are provided with every requisite, and the
Tables in both Saloons are supplied with Fresh Meat, Fresh Vegetables. Ice, and
other delicacies.
Saloon Passengers can break their journey
Entire cabins reserved on most liberal terms.
The following are the rates of passage money from Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Sydney to London: ’
First Saloon, £55, £63, and £7O; return £lO5 and £ll5
Second Saloon, £3O, and £37 ; return, £54 and £65
Third Class and Steerage, £l6 (enclosed berths).
Special facilities are afforded for bringing out friends and relatives by prepayment
of passage money in the Colonies, thus saving cost of exchange. V V J
Full particulars on application at any of the Company’s Agents;
LONDON :| » «« (Managers, Penchurch
I ANDERSON, ANDERSON, & CO. / Avenue, E.C.
SYDNEY: G. SKELTON YUILL, General Manager in Australia.
MELBOURNE; GIBES, BRIGHT, & 00., Agents.
ADELAIDE; THOS. E. PUGH, Agent.
March, 1888,


NORD-DEUTSCHER LLOYD
REGULAR MONTHLY LINE of FAST
PASSENGER STEAMERS to ANTWERP
and BREMEN, via COLOMBO, ADEN,
and SUEZ, connecting with Mail and
Passenger Steamer from Alexandria to
Brindisi.
Under Mail Contract with the Imperial German
Government,
CALLING AT GENOA AND SOUTHAMPTON TO
LAND AND EMBANK PASSENGERS.
Leaving Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide regularly
every Four Weeks.
PASSAGES FROM ADELAIDE TO BREMEN, £l2 IDs. TO £6O.
PASSENGER ACCOMMODATION UNSURPASSED,
GREAT REDUCTIONS for Return Passages, available for
Six, Nine, or Twelve Months.
PASSENGERS and CARGO BOOKED through to London
and principal European Ports.
PASSAGES from Europe can be prepaid in the Colonies,
For Freight, Passage, and all other particulars apply to
the Agents for South Australia.
H. MUECKE & CO.,
Adelaide and Port Adelaide,


ADELAIDE SALE S,
Wool,
Stock
Skins, Hides, Bark, &c
Wheat and Flour,
Stations and Land
WOOL AND OTHER PRODUCE SOLD OR SHIPPED.
ELDER'S WOOL Hi PRODUCE COMPANY,
L I HVXtI T ED ,
ADELAIDE, PORT ADELAIDE, BURRA,
BROKEN HILL, & LONDON
CAPITAL -
£200,000.
WOOL SOLD at Port Adelaide or SHIPPED to London on
Most Favourable Terms.
STOCK SALES.—WEEKLY SALES held of Fat and Store Stock, including
Cattle, Sheep, Pigs, Calves, &c., in ADELAIDE; and MONTHLY SALES at the
BURRA. WEEKLY SALES of Fat Stock at BROKEN HILL. Further Sales else-
where as arranged.
Every attention given to Consignments of Stock whilst on the road, and in drafting prior
to Sale.
Trucks engaged and careful Drovers sent to meet Stock when required.
Full advices given to all Customers regarding the Market, and Drovers instructed and
financed for.
SHEEPSKINS, HIDES, KANGAROO-SKINS, RABBIT-SKINS, OPOSSUM-
SKINS, TALLOW, and OTFIER PRODUCE sold regularly at our Adelaide Ware-
houses.
WHEAT, FLOUR, BARK, See., Sold or Shipped.
LAND and STATION SALES conducted.
ACCOUNT SALES promptly rendered, with Cash Settlements.
Liberal Cash Advances Made.
ELDER'S WOOL AID PRODUCE COME LIMITED
OFFICES AND TOWN WAREHOUSES, CURRIE STREET,
ADELAIDE.
WOOL WAREHOUSES, PORT ADELAIDE.


HORN & CO.,
Js'tejtlirotos,
COMSTOCK CHAMBERS,
Eii|g William st.,
ADELAIDE.
idi


1. EMI I CO.,
SHAREBROKERS
AND
MINING AGENTS,
ROYAL EXCHANGE,
KING WILLIAM STREET


W. MITCHELL,
STOCK Ai SHARE BROKER,
&c.,
P 7, GRENFELL ST., ADELAIDE
(Late No. 15, Exchange).
—§Sss£—
All kinds of Shares Bought and Sold
for Cash.
TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY ANSWERED.
RELIABLE QUOTATIONS.
Address—
W. MITCHELL’S EXCHANCE,
No. 7, Grenfell Street,
ADELAIDE.


cso* t*
Share Broker and Licensed land Brier,
ACCOUHTAHT AND FINANCIAL ACENT.
OFFICES :
SSLBolds’ Jfunii glmliings, ditnfdl (Stml.
ADELAIDE.
Telephone No. 304.
Money Lent on Mortgage at Current Rates.
Properties Bought, Sold, Let, and Leased. (Chamber of Commerce Tariff.)
Valuations made in City and Country by Special Arrangement.
All Real Property Act Documents Promptly Prepared. (Licensed Land Broker by
Examination.)
Businesses Bought, Sold, Transferred, and Reported on.
Arbitrator in Partnership and Business Disputes.
Agent for Trustees, Absentees, and Landed Proprietors.
Properties and Estates Managed by Contract or on Commission.
Rents, Interest, Dividends, Accounts, &c., Collected. Prompt Monthly or othe
Time Settlements to suit Clients.
Arrangements made between Debtors and Creditors by Private Deed, or under Part XI.
of the Insolvent Act, 1886.
Government and other Land Sales Attended.
Accountant and Auditor.
Commission Business of every Description relating to Land, Shares, or Merchandise
transacted promptly. Quotations given.
Secretary to the Lady Bevys Mining Company, Limited; The Lady
Bevys Extended Mining Company, Limited; The King’s Bluff Gold
Mining Company, Limited; The Wirrialpa Silver Mining Company,
Limited; The Adelaide and Hyde Park Tramway Company, Limited;
The Wholesale Grocers’ Association, &c.


CHARLES GHEWINGS,
GRENFELL ST., ADELAIDE,
cmb station
SHAREBROKER AND DEALER,
Land, Mining, and Commission Agent.
Member o£ the Stock Exchange of South Australia.
MONEY ADVANCED ON BROKEN HILL SHARES.
Begs to announce that he is prepared to undertake Commissions for either the
purchase or disposal of all kinds of Shares, and also the in Stocks of
any sums remitted to him at best possible advantage. Quotations and information
promptly supplied. Clients when sending instructions are requested to state the
prices they are prepared to buy, or sell at, or “at best,” as by this means the
fluctuations in the market may be taken advantage of. Orders will be considered
in force until cancelled. Clients may depend upon having their interests carefully
watched, and their Stocks disposed of to best advantage. We act as Brokers on
Commission, and Scrip delivered on receipt of cash.
CHARLES CHEWINGS,
temt’s ®Uiu,
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
‘ CAMELS ” Bought, Sold, Exchanged, or Let on Hire.
u LOADING ” taken to any part of Australia with care and expedition.
“CARAVANS,” Exploratory, Survey, and Prospecting, fitted out complete.
“CONTRACTS” for Carting H.M.G. Stores, Station Supplies, and Wool made
a specialty.


JAMES MARTIN & CO., LIMITED,
'UPKocnix
GAWLEE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
AND AT GLADSTONE,
Engineers, Ironfounders, Agricultural Machinists,
ZBOXLE3T2/ XXJLKEXiS,
MANUFACTURERS OF MILLING, MINING, AND
PUMPING MACHINERY,
Contractors to S. A. Government for Locomotives and
General Railway Riant, Bridge work, &c., &c.
ESTIMATES GIVEN FOR ALL KINDS OF MINING AND PUMPING
MACHINERY, CONCENTRATING PLANT AND CRUSHING MILLS.
MULTITUBULAR AND EVERY OTHER CLASS OP BOILERS
MADE OF STEEL PLATE WITH ALL LATEST
IMPROVEMENTS IN FITTINGS.
Samples of work can be seen at the Australian Smelting and Refining
Company’s Work at Dry Creek, S.A. The Furnaces and Machinery were
manufactured and erected by J. Martin & Co., Limited.
Letters or Telegrams addressed to G-awler or G-ladstone, S.A.,
will receive prompt attention.


FRANCIS H, CLARK & C 0„
BLYTH STREET, ADELAIDE,
Engineers anb Jtlachinerg (Merchants
Agents / RICHARD GARRETT & SON'S,
for ( TANG YES LIMITED,
Steam Engines—Portable, Horizontal, and Vertical, Simple
and Compound. Winding Engines .
BOILERS
Mountings.
STEAM
PUMPS;
Special,
Centrifugal
Deep Well,
Ac.
CHERRY'S
HOISTS.
Engineers’
Tools.
HYDRAULIC
JACKS,
Steam Valves,
Lubricators.
Weston Blocks,
Crab Winches,
Galloway
Tubes,
Ac., Ac., Ac.
RICHARD GARRETT X SONS'
STEAM THRESHING MACHINES, STEEL BOILERS with Corrugated
Fire Boxes, SEED DRILLS, &c., &c.
DAVIS & PRIMROSE’S STEAM HAMMERS
CRADOCK & CO.’S STEEL WIRE ROPE, LANG’S PATENT
Warranted to do Fifty per cent, more work than any other make.
HOGARTH A WARREN’S WOOL SCOURERS
WORMALD & CO.’S HEAT-PROOF COMPOSITION
TURNBULL’S PATENT DEAD-WEIGHT SAFETY VALVES
Boring Tools, Patent Metallic Packing, Millwork, Electric Light work, &c., &c.
rsaircss s. ctass * co.
REPAIRS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.


Couplings, Pulleys, Plummer Blocks, &c.
I. COLTON tk CO.
WHOLESALE IRONMONGERS.
AGENTS FOR
RUSTON, PROCTOR, & CO
ST EAM ENGINES,-Vertical, Horizontal, Portable,
Semi-fixed.
ELIZA TINSLEY.—
LATHES, Punching Machines, Drills, &c. Shafting,
STEEL.— DriII and Tool.
Powder (Blasting),
Dynamite,
Detonators, _
Fuse,
IRON.— Bar, Rod, Sheet, Galvanized.
FURNISHING IRONMONGERY.— Beds, Bedding, Spring
Mattresses, &c.
MAKERS of Tents, Hammocks,
Tarpaulins, Canvas Bags,
The Celebrated “Aqua” Filters,
All kinds of Saddles,
Harness, and Strapping.
i ai i >2. O c
— II , Tlc£3ggHß-''f| ii !■
WAREHOUSE AND HEAD OFFICE;
CURRIE ST., ADELAIDE.


Marshall’s Compound Undertype Engines
Marshall’s Traction Engines
Marshall’s Horizontal Stationary Engines [First Award Adelaide
Marshall’s Vertical (with or without boiler) Engines Jubilee txhibition.
Marshall’s Portable (with one or two Cylinders) Engines
Marshall’s Improved Saw Benches
Kirhstall Forge Rolled Shafting and Special Iron. First Award Jubilee Exhibition.
Hal lad ay Windmills from 10 to 22 feet and from | Do 0 0 .
one to five H.P. >
Hett s Centrifugal Pumps, 4 to 12 in. piping, 7 q q q 0
Bends, Footualues, &c., for do. )
Davis Sewing Machines *
Hall’s Blasting and Sporting Powders Ho. uo.
Rhenish Dynamite
Burgon & Balls and M. M. Mining Steel
MINING MATERIAL IN EVERY VARIETY.
Station Requisites, Pumping, Irrigating, and Agricultural Machinery.
McLBAN BROS. & RIGG, LIMITED,
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, London, New York.


G. E. FULTON & CO.,
Consulting and Mechanical Engineers,
AND
IRONFOUNDERS,
Head Office: Peel Street, Adelaide, S.A.
Foundry and Workshops: Kilkenny, S.A.
Notice to Directors & Managers of Mining Companies
The special facilities we have at our large Establishment
at Kilkenny enables us to guarantee the turning out of all
classes of Engineering Work with economy and expedition.
We are also prepared to confer and to receive particulars
on the subject of Plant required, and to get up Working
Drawings and Specifications in accordance therewith, and to
forward estimates on the shortest notice.
Skilled and reliable workmen sent to any part of the Colony
to superintend erection of same.
Any communications addressed to us at Peel Street will
receive prompt attention.


FORWOOD, DOWN, & CO.,
ENGINEERS, FOUNDERS,
jitoikvmakers, JEiUtorights, d moral .Smiths
IVE AKERS OF
Engines, Boilers, Back Woolpresses, Whim Bows, Whip Wheels, Steel Kibbles,
Water Valves, Boring Tools, Pumps, Winepresses, Girders, Columns, Bakers’
Ovenwork, and Mining Machinery.
SPECIAL LlNE—Small Girder Type Horizontal Engines with Vertical
Boilers and Winding Gear, complete.
SOLE AGENTS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA FOR D. NEW & COY.
MACHINE TOOL MAKERS, LONDON.
IN STOCK AT HINDLEY STREET—Engines, Boilers, Lathes, Drilling,
Screwing, Planing, and Shaping Machines, Pumps, Kibbles, &c., &c.
Address—HlNDLEY STREET WEST, ADELAIDE.
CHARLES HART L CO..
ADELAIDE AND PORT ADELAIDE,
Merchants & Jmpjttcrs.
Indents executed on the most favourable terms.
Advances made against Wool, Wheat, and Ores,
consigned to care of our London or Continental
Agents.


McCulloch carrying company, limited
GENERAL CARRIERS,
Custom House and Shipping Agents.
HEAD OFFICE:
COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE.
BRANCH OFFICES;
Currie Street, Adelaide.
Lipson Street, Port Adelaide.
Broken Hill and Silverton,
And in all the principal Towns in the Australian
Colonies.
GOODS AND FURNITURE TAKEN AT THROUGH RATES
TO ALL FARTS.
All Customs Work attended to. Entries Passed; Duty Paid,
and Drawback and Bond Certificates Completed.
Vans meet Trains at Adelaide and Broken Hill Stations
for the Conveyance of Passengers, Luggage, &c»


W, C. YOUNG,
S&ine anb Spirit
GENERAL STOREKEEPER,
11S11 STIIBEY,
SILYERTOIT.
A LARGE AND WELL-ASSORTED STOCK OF
Grocery
Drapery.
Crockery
Clothing
Ironmongery
and
Boots and Shoes. Tinware.
Furniture.
AND ALL
MINING REQUISITES
WHOLESALE .AJSTIO


A. E. A P. TOLLEY,
WINE AND SPIRIT
AND
dn'iirral Jttmliants,
ADELAIDE, S.A..
Tolley & Co., Fremantle, W.A.
Tolley & Co., Limited, South Castle St., Liverpool.
Tolley Freres, Cognac.
HAVE ON SALE
Bass & Co.’s Ale, pints and quarts
E. & J. Burke’s Light Sparkling Ales, pints and quarts
E. & J. Burke’s Guinness’s Stout, pints and quarts
E. & J. Burke’s *** Star Choice Old Irish Whisky
E. & J. Burke’s Vice-Regal Scotch Whisky (the best matured
Whisky in the world)
Bernard & Co.’s Celebrated Encore Whisky
Tolley Freres’ Cognac (obtained First Order of Merit Adelaide Ex-
hibition 1887-1888)
Tolley Bros.’ Old-matured Jamaica Rum
Tolley Bros.’ West Indian Rum
G. H. Mumm & Co.’s Champange, pints and quarts
Heidsieck & Co.’s “Dry Monople,” pints and quarts
Moet & Ghandon, pints and quarts
Wilson & Co.’s Sherries, bulk and case
W. G. Tait & Co.’s Ports, bulk and case
St Raphael Wine (universally recommended by the medical pro-
fession for invalids)
Tea, in boxes and half-chests
Coffee, ground, 7-lb tins
Mikado choice Habana Cigars
Manilla and Swiss Cigars
Tobaccos, Glassware


ASK FOR
“PAOU-
CHUNG”
TEA
USE OZtsTX/Z"
LION
BAKING
POWDER


DR. FOSTER’S
MIRACULOUS MIXTURE
Cures Croup, Bronchitis, Sore Throats.
Testimonials,
Dr. Foster’s Miraculous Mixture I have used in my family as a preventative and
cure for croup, and never found it fail.
„ „ „ , Harry Bickford.
T. E. Fisher, Mallala.
The bottle of Foster’s Miraculous Mixture I had from you has certainly worked a
miraculous cure on three of my family.
J. J. Mitchell, Long Plain.
DR. FOSTER’S
MIRACULOUS PILLS
These Pills are specially prepared to relieve the sufferings incidental to
women. These Pills never fail to relieve.
DR. FOSTER’S
MIRACULOUS LOTION
For the Cure of Wounds, Sores, Boils, Abscesses, Eruptions on the Skin,
Pimples, Scrofulous Discharges, Piles, &c., &c.
Testimonial.
I suffered for months with a swollen leg which caused me intense pain. After using
many liniments, &c., to no effect, I was induced to give Foster’s Miraculous Lotion a
trial. The result was wonderful. Two bottles cured me. I can confidently recom-
mend it to the public.
Mrs. J. Woods, Templars.
DR. FOSTER’S
MIRACULOUS
WHITE ROSE EYE LOTION
Testimonials.
Some time since my daughter and her children were afflicted with had eyes, which
Dr. Foster’s White Rose Eye Lotion (which is painless to use) cured by applying it
according to the directions, and I can safely recommend it as a speedy cure.
W. Hodges, Adelaide Hotel, Adelaide.
Having used Dr. Foster’s White Rose Eye Lotion and found it to be a splendid
cure for inflammation, I have much pleasure in recommending it to the public.
R. Brown, Prince Albert Hotel, Wright Street.
RETAIL-ALL CHEMISTS
WHOLESALE AGENTS-
A. M. BICKFORD & SONS,
WHOLESALE druggists,
OUR/ IR/1 IE S T IR, IB IB T.


PRINTING OF EVERY DESCRIPTION
EXECUTED AT THE
cmb Journal
COMMERCIAL, C3-HOST HER, A.X,,
fAUCT FMIITire omcis
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
Proprietors: "W- K. THOM AS & CO
Balance-sheets, Trade Reports, Invoices, Account Forms, Billheads, Credit Notes,
Statements, Memorandums, Letter Headings, Circulars, Cartnotes, Order Books,
Delivery Notes, Business Cards, &c.
Concert and Entertainment Programmes, Dance and Ball Programmes, Dinner Menus,
Hotel Cartes, Invitation, At Home, and Visiting Cards, In Mem warn and Mour-
ning Cards.
Posters, Placards, and Handbills, all sizes and in all colours.
Ornamental Printing in Gold, Silver, or Colours,
orporatioa and District Council Work.
La«v and Church Work, Institute Catalogues, &c.
Pamphlets, Companies’ Articles of Association, Rules and Regulations of Building and
other Societies, Auctioneers’ Catalogues, &c., Printed on the Shortest Notice.
BOOKBINDING AND MACHINE-RULING.
PRINTING IN GERMAN.
The Extensive Plant of the Establishment includes Founts of German Type, and
all descriptions of German Printing are undertaken.
W. K. THOMAS & CO.,
Grenfell Street, Adelaide.




"W-A-IR/E ’ S
JVBIISE U6IR.
BOTTLED BEER
SEE THAT YOUR BEER IS FREE FROM CHEMICALS OR DISEASED GERMS.”
Make your Brewer or Bottler guarantee the above; if he does not then shun him.
We are prepared to Guarantee all our JUBILEE LAGER BEER, CRYSTAL
ALE, and STOUT absolutely Pure and Free from all Adulterants.
A* W. & T. L. WARE.
Patronise only those who have the courage to make such an assertion.
WE DID NOT OBTAIN
EIGIIT ORDERS OP MERIT
FROM THE JURY AT THE ADELAIDE JUBILEE EXHIBITION FOR AN
IMPURE BEER.
READ THIS LETTER
Professor Rennie. J uly 23#
. Dear Sir—We are in receipt of your Classification-paper. We have about eight
entries in Beers and Bottled Ales and Stout, D, No. 626. We want our exhibits judged
on their merits. If we may offer a suggestion, we should like all these exhibits in this
class analyzed.
We are, &c.,
A. W. & T. L. WARE.
The result of the Juries’ Award was Eight Orders of Merit.
COMMENT IS NEEDLESS.
The JUBILE LAGER is obtainable at all Hotels in the City and Suburbs, or from
the Brewery. ’
No Order received at the Brewery for less than two and a-half dozen.
Our Pure Beers are Bottled under an entirely new process without the aid of anv
chemical. *
Au W. a X, Ir. WARE,
TORRENSIDE BREWERY, HINDMARSH.
WARE’ S
JTJBIUS
<§T These Ales and Stouts are obtainable from all Hotels in
Broken Hill and Silverton.


HALES BROTHERS,
(Members of Stock Exchange of S.A.)
3, MELVIN CHAMBERS, KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE
Immediately Opposite Royal Exchange.
-—^ —
OFFICES OF AND SECRETARIES TO:—
The Town and Country Building Society,
Rockwell Hope Siluer Mining Company,
Telegraph Ruby Mining Company,
Hart Ranges Ruby Mining Company,
Capricorn Ruby Mining Company,
&c., &c., &c.
Telephone 2*76.
MINING, LAND, AND GENERAL AGENCY.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
PRACTICAL PERSONAL EXPERIENCE OF THE BARRIER.
Regular and Reliable Information from the Mines.


FURNISH YOUR HOUSE
HOOPER’S
ESTABLISHED 21 YEARS.
Largest Stock in West
Adelaide
COME AND INSPECT IT.
XmT IWSIKB BXWISBIfI lift.
ALSO, A
Very Large and Varied Stock of PERAMBULATORS
MADE A SPECIALTY OF,
2 Rooms furnished for £l3 and £l4 14s.
3 “ “ 11 £l5 15s. and £l7 10s.
3 “ “ “ £l9 lOs. and upwards.
4 “ « “ £29 10s. and upwards.
IF IN THE COUNTRY
Write for Lists and full particulars will be forwarded. Letters arriving daily'
showing great satisfaction given by our value and packing.
HOOPER’S,
indley Street, comer Leigh Street. Adelaide.


SPECIAL TEA
IN TINS CONTAINING
5 libs.
Tin, 15s.
XO lib
“ 28s.
This Tea is a Blend of the Finest Importations from India
and China.
& CO*,
4, HINDLEY STREET, ADELAIDE.
llltii lifi uti iti.
KING WILLIAM STREET. ADELAIDE.
Opposite the New Exchange.
F. C. ALDRIDGE, Proprietor.
TELEPHONE No. 298.


.—■—
•
cS N M A IP "eb
OF THE • , ,
BARRIER MINING DISTRICT, ) I
! i
X
ry
1
"fe /
-,’% \ ).X
\ 7.% j
# 7r~y aX*
/' OcUpOpXr'* | /pV
f E
\ p^J^'yjolandxj^
! ;pk.%M t Eurioiriv
Tv
j^
y'\ /* iadfMorv
♦
1
— — *-—r- — 1 — l % 1
l i
; ft :
:
Issued by the Proprietors of the Register, Observer, and ; , {
u <
Journal as a Supplement to Pamphlet on / / J
/ i
“ The Barrier Mines,’’ t t ' ;
; 7
■
1 *
t
/ *
1 1
/ :
\ / s
•
, 1 X
1 |jr Sf
, 1 11 \
_^ UI —, 1 \
pi &
i ! x' 1
1
''
'' N •
' V f
\
' « /
»
Scale
i » 7
» • /•
.7
/ -' I
• #
# /
I /
1 /
• /
/
P f 2 5 4 S 6 7
9
/£? // /2 m / /' /
* /
V »
*- <
i
1
*
KJ
X
*
1 l *
1 / i
1 /
* -X /
—1 »
1 »
1 1
1 I
If
1 1
1 1
' /
/ 1
/ /
/ 1
' /
/
77}
\
• Gaintr's hotel
!
#
1 '
» «
. 1
/ i
✓ i
X l
\
V
;
X %
‘ X
- •* x
-'" X
y N
/ \
4 1
i 1
> 4
♦ t
/ 1
#
» \
* %
1
li
Sv
•8
s
.
»
!
/
1 A • ✓
/ / V7 A\ ,'''* \
/ • \ \ 1 \ N ,< <
/ > \ \ j ' < 1
/ ' '
/ '' !
/ / >, * '\
/ ' 7. ■ ' V
; / f j
'■ \ 0t%M»Hoha \ / wr
1 \ \ / . |, 1 JPLake
NLi 7| HedihxLL /V j
/ 7\ V’ • Balooath
J X%7'V ■ /I |/ ##,A
A *w-x ** | I FurnanwoUJJ 0 1 !* ; #i . „
/ •TtyaaJcaroo rrop
•
»
»
*
l
j
/
■ /"’ *
/ V/
/ / :
/ / %,
/ /
XX* •' > ' s -.. *. —v »v% »
.— / x' \ ' "x ,/ • S Springs
y"' \ V / / / #Treasure IVesUrrtSBif f'% j
' > / / J . ttOneh*. ''X \
' '' Pllarirny 1 /$__ 'X
\0=Miindi ’mundi / J /’Fkdcfy's j | 'Jilbian
ir > GippsSta: \
; / \ 01k
tApoltyqrv /'Grace Darling C \ \
' i / (L \
\H>mherumbvrkja Jy •DayBrecmv
/' 'Lake s Graye \\<f 7 '\
/ x- f n.
x , 1
{(y / Vv*
\\ Old.JVft}fypr S&Jxon;
t i
777
— \\ \ _ - — X
Jj*d***a..r s. R .__
1
1
1 ■ .. Siv
-*X__ « 1 _
??a5X- ~\dcacjid- dam-- "
■
!
Cockb
H
$**
/
i
/ /
/ • V
/ X
i / yX
" X<-
U-'/V
/
\
•
I
* v--,, i-^i
! ,, V?nbcfUznherkd
,/' M lu
/J' x
% >/i
v7o°
/
✓
V
.Mims
CUrt > fLdneer, He.
Big hill
4rt&
1 X'/^./fcacux-dgjHrhi^—-'•?“***" \° Tv X
* J5.M.P. <X 9mxi& block/ /
"7
*' '•= x \
y\%. \da£tjf' X:-
t%.StirUng hxUyy \}%\ \ "\
** %. 7® \
,''''’ '"""\
d'^.Vorlk,
. jcL \fxRooltireU Paddock
#
XwA'
V A. B BLACK , DEL.


.
■
'
■
■
‘
■
*
'
i -- m-
*


telephone 406.
reference-
FEDERAL BANK
FRANK A. RUSSELL.
COMSTOCK CHAMBERS,
KING WILLIAM STREET,
ADSL JIIDB.
MEMBER OF THE STOCK EXCHANGE OF S.A.
TELEGRAMS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.


HESTLE’S CONDENSED SWISS MILE
Xs tlie Seat}.
d
o
H
-r-i
-r—l
f-S
flfl
■
Cl
f4
F*
Ph
C/l
-■Hi
■ —i
d
CO
Cl
C/l
f-i
o
AS
Cl
d
■ —l
va
sa
“ PARAGON”
PACKET TEA
AND
COFPEE.
PARAGON PACKET TEA is a Mixture
of PURE TEAS blended after a deal of
labour and expense to suit the Palates
of everybody.
TRY the PARAGON PACKET TEA or
COFFEE, and you will have no other.
REMEMBER THE BRAND—
“PARAGON.”
t
NESTLE’S MILK is prepared only in Switzerland,
and is made from RICHEST CREAM.
