

THE CHURCH AND SCIENCE.
1 i.
, (
THE
"NEMO” LETTER
VERY KEY. I). E. BARRY,
O. S. It.
SjDbmjr:
J. G. O’CONNOR, “NATION” STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
82 and 84 Clarence Street.




THE CHURCH AND SCIENCE.
T 11 E
“ ATT7MfI ” T FTTL’T) C
MIL) LMIUKo
YEEY EEY. I). F. BAEBT,
O. 8. K.
Sjjbneji:
J. G. O’CONNOR, “NATION" STEAM PRINTING WORKS,
82 and 84 Clarence Street.




P R EFACE.
The following letters are given publicity, in pamphlet form, at
the request of those in whose judgment I have more confidence
than I have in my own. The title of this pamphlet is a misnomer.
The subject of the “ Church and Science ” is one of too great a
range to find anything but a most meagre exposition within
the limits of a brochure of a few pages. It reaches to heights to
which the writer has no pretension. Whatever little advantage
education may have given him in the way of ecclesiastical lore,
the boon is still more restricted in regard of science ; and an
extensive knowledge in the walks of learning—ecclesiastic and.
scientific—would be necessary for the adequate treatment of
such a subject as the “ Church and Science.” It may stand in
partial apology that the writer had not the choice of the subject.
The letters were written to meet what seemed a misrepresenta-
tion in matters literary concerning the Catholic Church, and an
effort was made to correct it. The matter elicited a criticism
which the writer had not anticipated, and the correspondence,
consequent, developed topics more or less relevant with the
text of the ground first broken.
The Catholic Church does not encourage controversy. Non
in commotione Deus. The Lord is not a God of wrangling.
Our pulpits, press, and platforms, seldom resound with the
strife of ecclesiastical polemics. Our great duty is to “ teach ”
what we “ have received ” and to defend it, when necessary,
against attack or misrepresentation. If we fail in the latter
we do so through ignorance of the defensive treasures which
the Church, for such purposes, has hoarded in her granaries.
In whatever point this effort fails to meet an attack, it fails
from a like ignorance.
The first four letters are allowed to stand, almost identically
as they appeared, in the Sydney Evening News. The last two
papers are added to remind Protestants, who are so ready to


spring to the attack, that when put upon their defence, their
case does not present a very brilliant aspect, and that they need
their strongest armour against the crushing evidences of their
own partisans.
I am happy to acknowledge the courtesy of the Evening
News in the correspondence, and the generosity of the Nation
in its reproduction of the letters and the communications from
correspondents, incident to the publication.
D. F. BARRY, 0.5.8.
October 20, 1889.


THE CHURCH AND
SCIENCE.
LETTER 1.
S IR > —I n your leader of June 26 you take exception to that
portion of Cardinal Moran’s address at St. John’s College, in
which his Eminence spoke of the Catholic Church as the pro-
moter and encourager of science. In support of your opposition
you instance the treatment of Galileo by the Church, and assert
that “He was compelled to curse and abjure the doctrine of
the movement of the earth, was imprisoned for the remaining
portion of his life, and was denied burial in consecrated
ground.” It is not the first time that this aspect of the matter
has been put in print. You will, lam sure, allow me a little
space in an effort of elucidation.
“To listen to the pathetic recitations and reflections,
repeated in hundreds of productions,” says the Protestant
writer Mallet du Pin —“ how Galileo was sacrificed by the
barbarity of his age, and the enmity of the court of Rome
how tyranny and ignorance united to stifle his science—how
the Inquisition tried to crush a fundamental truth of astronomy
in its birth—all this is more than a thrice told tale. But such
statements,” he continues, “ are mere romance. Galileo was
not condemned as a good astronomer, but as a bad theologian.
He might have made the world turn as he pleased, bad he not
mixed the matter up with the Bible. His discoveries made
him enemies ; his controversies alone raised up his judges,
and his petulance was the source of his annoyance.”
No celebrated man ever yet stood in two shoes who had
not his friends and foes. Now, let us look at Galileo as
we see him reflected from those that he loved. Here is
one Guichardino, ambassador of a grand duke at Rome.
It is clear from the correspondence of Guichardino that
Galileo wanted to establish his system on the Bible, and to
make it not only an article of science, but also an article of
faith. “He ” (Galileo), says his patron, “ insisted in his dis-
patches of March 4, 1616, that the Pope and the Holy Office
should declare that the system of Copernicus was founded on the
Bible. On this point Galileo was persistent, and would yield
nothing to the advice of friends.” But, granted that the Holy
Office did condemn the system of the earth’s movement as
heretical, when was the Inquisition or any particular congre-
gation of the Church regarded as the seat or source of infalli-
bility ? Take an example near home: A prelate was dispatched
a short time since to Ireland by the Holy See to examine and
collect evidence on the Irish question. With what conse-
quence P He returned and placed the matter of his labours
before a congregation, and on the result of its decision the


Holy Father issued a rescript. How was that rescript re-
ceived? Did anyone attach to it any idea of infallibility ? None
at all. The enemies of Ireland welcomed it with applause.
By the friends of Ireland it was received with respectful regret
and unmistakeable disapproval.
What tribunal of men, as men, is not subject to error?
Look at the assemblies that govern the world from pole
to pole. Are they always wise, just? If, then,] the con-
gregation of the Inquisition condemned the system of
Galileo as heretical or contrary to faith, why force the
acceptance of such a decision on the Universal Church ?
She never pronounced upon it. No Pope ever pronounced
ex-cathedra upon the merits or demerits of the system. We
are daily told that “ Science is but in its infancy.” And
a bouncing brat it is. What was the state of science 50 years
ago compared with its triumphs of to-day ? Go back 300 years
and ask the question. To condemn the men of such distant
period for not seeing at once what has become as plain as the
nose on one’s face is to condemn mankind for having passed
through infancy to manhood. That neither Church nor Pope
condemned the system is clear from the action of the prelates
and great orders of the Church, some siding with Galileo,
others against him. If Jesuits and Dominicans condemned
him, Dominicans and Jesuits defended him. From the cloisters
of schools and monasteries, presided over by illustrious pre-
lates and generals, came expositions, defences, etc., of the
system. As to the treatment which the philosopher received at
the hands of Pope and prelate, we had best let Galileo tell
that himself.
“ The Holy Father,” he writes, “ deems me worthy
of his esteem I am lodged in the delightful
Palace of the Trinity on the Mount. When I arrived at the
Holy Office two Dominicans invited me frankly to make my
apology. I was obliged, as a good Catholic, to retract my
opinion. In punishment I was forbidden controversy, and
after five months’ sojourn quitted R me. As the plague was
raging at Florence, I was assigned for residence the palace of
my best of friends, Monsignor Piccolomini, Archbishop of
Sienna, where lam enjoying the utmost tranquillity. At pre-
sent I write this from the Villa Arcestro, where I breathe the
purest air in the confines of my beloved country.” (Letter
of Galileo to his disciple, P. Receneri.)
At the hour when most opposed, in 1624, he was
received, embraced, and pensioned by Pope Urban VIII.
on the sole condition that he should be more circumspect
in the exposition of his system. “ The pension given
by the Pope,” says the illustrious Protestant writer, Sir
David Brewster, in his work on the “ Martyrs of Science,”
“ was not one of those recompenses that Sovereigns sometimes
grant to the services of their subjects. Galileo was a stranger


in Eome ; the Sovereign of the States of the Church owed him
no obligation. Thus we must regard that pension as a gift of
the Pontiff to science itself and as a declaration to the
Christian world that religion was not jealous of philosophy,
and that the Roman Church everywhere respected and cher-
ished human genius.” Such was the decision of a truly great
man after weighing all the pros and cons in the case in
question—a witness beyond all suspicion and thoroughly con-
versant with the subject upon which his genius was being
exercised. His conclusion makes short work of the curses,
condemnations, and refusal of Christian burial with which the
cant of prejudice and the flippancy of twaddle have surrounded
the case of Galileo.
You deem the Cardinal, “ in claiming credit for the Papacy
as a patron of art, was on safer ground.” Think you there is
art without science ? Is there no science in St. Peter’s, West-
minster Abbey, “ The Graces ” of Canova, or the Transfiguration
of Raphael ? Does the Pope curse with one hand the science in
the Canto firmo of the Diesirce, Miserere , and Te Denm, whilst
he blesses with the other the art of music ? It is well to under-
stand terms before rushing to conclusions.
Yours, etc.,
NEMO.


THE CHURCH AND SCIENCE.
LETTER 11.
Sir, —If you will kindly permit me to say it, I think you
have made too much of my concession that the Inquisition
condemned the system of Galileo. If the Inquisition con-
demned what was black, it seems not a logical sequitur to me
that it thereby also condemned what was white. Yet this
appears to me the position you assume from my admission. As
already stated, Galileo’s system was condemned, not because it
was scientificallv sound, but because it was theologically
erroneous. As Mallet du Pin happily put it, it was not his
good science that was condemned, but his bad theology. This
you appear to admit, and conclude that the condemnation of
bad theology involved the condemnation of sound science. Quod
erat demonstrandum.
“ Any way,” you say, “ he suffered ten years’ imprison-
ment for saying the earth went round the sun.” Will you
pardon me if I say that this “ten years’ imprisonment”
was all “ a yarn,” and that the e pur si muove (the earth
does move) scratched on the walls of his prison is a myth.
■“ Whether his offence,” you add, “ was technically described as
bad theology or good science, was, we suspect, as immaterial
to him as it is to us.” But do you not think that anything
bad deserves to be-condemned in proportion to its badness?
Is it sound sense or philosophy that it should be “ immaterial
to us ” whether a thing is bad or good ? Galileo lived in an age
when a man was expected to “ stick to his last.” * Cuique arti
■suck, “ every man to his trade,” was as good common sense in
those days as it is now, only it was acted on more then. It
was in violation of this good principle that Galileo got astray.
Bold man ! he dared to be his own “ cobbler,” and put his foot
in it. The Church, by a little pressure on his “ pet corn,”
made him extract it. This is about the long and short of
Signor Galileo’s case. This is his story : He was of gentle
birth, poor. He was put to medicine. He soon displayed a
genius for mathematics. He wisely followed the bent of his
genius, and threw “ physic to the dogs.” At an early age he
was entrusted with the chair of mathematics in his native
town, Pisa. After five years he proceeded to a similar position
in the University of Padua, and taught there, omnium ap-
plausu, for twenty years. Thousands from all quarters flocked
to his bold and eloquent scientific lectures. His patrons were
many in Church and State. His enemies—the tribute envy
ever pays to worth. During all those years of scientific dis-
play, he was not only not condemned by Rome, without whose
consent he could not have held his diploma a day, but he re-
ceived every encouragement in his studies.


When he eventually resigned his chair, he “ would
write a book,” and soon his troubles began. His
“ Dialogue,” which caused them, was given to the world
in, for the time, charming Italian. In it, putting aside
his “ last,” he went for the omne scihile “ jack-of-all-
trades ” business with the usual result. He would
harmonise the system of the world of Ptolemy and Copernicus
with the inspiration of the Bible. Copernicus was himself a
divine, and avoided the blunder which involved Galileo. It
was said of Lord Brougham that “he would have known
something of everything if he had known a little law !” Galileo
stood in somewhat similar relation in matters theological. He
was amongst the anticipated Buckinghams, “ who, in the
course of one revolving moon,” would be “ poet, statesman,
fiddler and buffoon.” Yet, if there be one branch of know-
ledge, of literature which, like “ Lady Common Law, will admit
only of oue bed-fellow,” that branch is mathematics. Pope
assures us that—
“ One science only will one genius fit,
So vast is art, so narrow human wit.”
Nor did he leave unscathed the “ Jack-of-all-trades ” in letters,
who goes “ fooling ” around the stars, when his fists would be
more appropriately employed grasping a plough-handle.
“ The bookful blockhead ignorantly read.
With loads of learned lumber in his head.”
Alas! for a Pope to lash the “ crams ” of the nineteenth
century, and give us a little digestion ! I should regret,
indeed, if a word I write should be construed as militating
against the noble attainments of Galileo. But he was a
man of “ one genius,” and should have confined himself to “ one
science.” It is true the shores of time are beaconed by a few
universal geniuses—men
“ So varied that ” they “ seemed to be
Not one, but all mankind’s epitome,”
but so rare as to be of humanity, the “ glory and the shame.”
You admit, I presume, that Christ established a
Church. If you can point out to me where that Church
was in the days of Galileo, except as the Church that
had a Pope for supreme pastor, and the congregation
of the Inquisition as a portion of its disciplinary life, I
will take a back seat and give you all the “ cake.” As the
Church of Christ her first commission was docete —“ teach.” It
was the divine imprimatur of her magisterium, and her creden-
tial to the omnes gentes —the nations of the earth—who were to
be her harvest and constitute her “ crown and her joy.” The
matter of her teaching was divine revelation—truth. In
generationem et generationem annuntiabo veritatem tuam ex ore
meo. “ Unto generation and generation I will announce thy
truth from my mouth.” Now, on the principle that corruptio
optimi pessima, the corruption of what is best, is the basest


corruption, and as theology concerns man's supremest welfare,
his immortal portion, it is the office of the Church of God to
guard us on this point, even against an “ angel from heaven.”
Christus instituit ecclesiam suara tanquam hene recteque ordinatam
remjmhlicam —Christ hath established His Church as a wisely
ordained and well regulated state —and Peter is the “ watch-
man on the tower,” qui videat ne quid detrimenti respublica
capiat , to see that the state suffer no detriment.
How wisely and well that state has been governed,
ages have proved. “ There is not,” says Macaulay, “ and
there never was on this earth a work of human policy
so deserving of examination as the Roman Catholic
Church It is impossible to deny that
the policy of the Church of Rome is the very masterpiece
of human wisdom.” It suited Macaulay to regard this “ very
masterpiece of human wisdom” as a “human policy.” We
accept the compliment, but reject the explanation. Its only
satisfactory explanation is the indwelling of the “ Spirit of
Truth” that was given to her to “teach” the Church “all
things,” and “abide with” her “for ever.” Anima qua 1 hoc
corpus vivijicat est Spiritus Sanctus. “ The soul,” says St.
Thomas, “ that vivifies this body is the Holy Ghost.” “ All
power ’’ was given to her. “ Whatsoever thou shalt loose on
earth shall be loosed also in Heaven.” “ Whatsoever thou shalt
bind on earth shall be bound also in Heaven.’’ “As the Father
hath sent me, I send you —go. He that hears you, hears me.”
“ He that will not hear you ” has placed himself without the
pale of salvation. Power doctrinal, power legislative, power
coercive, corrective, was here bestowed. Power to direct by
council, to command by laws, to restrain by judgment, to
punish by salutary correction in infliction, having one supreme
end in view—the amendment of the offender. Penance,
censure, pain, the three degrees of correction.
It is ever in virtue, and in the exercise of such office
that the Church condemns errors and corrects offend-
ers. But the Church punished Galileo. What then r
True, we are living in the nineteenth century,
when we may not shake a rod at an unruly school
brat. 0 Temporal 0 Mores' In the earliest ages of the-
Chrietian Church, was not her discipline most rigorous ? Did
not Peter visit with the extremity of infliction a “ lie ? ” Did
not Paul tell the Corinthians he would “ not spare them if they
sinned ? ” Did he not hand over the “ flesh to Satan ” to correct
the “spirit?” Did not St. Ambrose stand at the door of his
Cathedral and refuse admission to the great Emperor Theo-
dosius till he did public penance for his transgressions? You
deem me rash for instancing the testimony of Sir David Brew-
ster. Pardon me if I deem it conclusively pertinent. You say
that the great writer, “ whilst establishing the kindness of the
Pope’s personal dispositions towards Galileo, explicitly states


that the pension and other favours were conferred to induce
the philosopher to reticence.” Surely you could not have had
the words of the great scientist under your eye when penning
the above ? They enforce almost the very contradiction of
your assertion. “ Thus,” says Sir David, “we must regard that
pension as a gift of the Pope to science itself, and as a declar-
ation to the Christian world that religion was not jealous of
philosophy, and that the Roman Church everywhere respected
and cherished human genius.” Your readers will decide this
point for themselve a .
Your remarks on the “ Utterances of the Vatican Council
of 1870” seem to me too vague to form grounds for any
comment, and I regret that in confirmation of your apprecia-
tion you did not ally yourself to better company than
the perjured monk, Mr. Loyson (Pere Hyacintne), whose
excerpt as given by you, has about as much reference to the
question introduced as the moon has to green cheese. How-
ever, you are not alone in thinking the Church retrogressive in
not putting herself in harmony with what is called “ modern
civilisation.” When Lord Elgin was ambassador at the Court
of Pekin, some missionaries requested him to speak to the Em-
peror, in order to secure freer access in evangelisation. He did so.
“ Sir,” said his Majesty, “ go to your missionaries and tell them
to return to their juntry, and agree amongst themselves what
Christianity is, and then they will have a bitter chance of
propagating it here.” If all jou clever men would only agree
as to what you mean by modern civilisation we might com-
promise, if we could not fuse. Whatever you do mean by this
modem civilisation, judging by its fruits, it seems at least of a
very mixed nature.
Mr. Mill found the age very unproductive of great
men, and grieves over “ the decay of individual energy and
the weakening of the influence of superior minds over the
multitude.” Mr. Lecky pronounces the age “ venal, unheroic,
mercenary. It exhibits a decline in the spirit of self-sacrifice,
and in the appreciation of the more poetical or religious aspect
of man’s nature.” Carlyle thinks “ the great men of this age are
lucky or unlucky gamblers, swollen big.” A great French poet
declares the very air of the age fatal to true greatness — mais
on meurt en votre air. “ One would say,” writes Tocqueville,
“ on looking through the records of our time, that man is
unable to effect anything either on himself or those around
him.” “ Thou Sodom of the centuries!” exclaimed a great
divine in reproach of its want of purity of life in all its social
relations ; and Lord Lytton termed it a century of “ puffs,
powders, patches, bibles and billets-doux .”
Now, if these be some of the fruits of “ modern civiliza-
tion,” and by their fruits you shall know them, do you
think the Church retrogressive, because she does not raise her
right hand in benediction over such results, such abortions? As


Cardinal Moran’s address at St. John’s College was the occasion
of this correspondence, permit me to say, however insignificant
the compliment, that I deem the address excellent, the
very hest given us by his Eminence since he came to the
colony. Many thanks for your kind words and the concession
of your valuable space, which could have been more profit-
ably occupied than by the contributions of
Yours, etc.,
NEMO.


THE CHURCH AND SCIENCE.
LETTER nr.
Sib, —Be good enough to allow me to add, that if I said
nothing of Kepler, it was not because there was nothing to say
—still not much, only this : Kepler was a Proestant, and was
being persecuted by Protestant theologians for maintaining the
Copernican system. Protestants, having no divine church to
fall back upon, having the “ Bible and the Bible only,” deemed
the Copernican theory fatal alike to them and their “ inspired
word.” In his hour of danger, Kepler placed himself under
the protection of the Jesuits, who condemned his “ bad the-
ology,” but admired his “ good science,” though he remained
a stout Lutheran to the end. If to shelter and protect Kepler
was persecution, then was he persecuted by the Church of
Borne.
“ Bruno,” you inform us, “ and 32,000 others were
burnt by the Inquisition.” Balmez declares that “ the Roman
Inquisition has never been known to pronounce the execution
of capital punishment, although the Apostolic See has been
occupied during that time by Popes of extreme rigour and
severity in all that relates to the civil administration.” “ AYe
find in all parts of Europe,” he writes, “ scaffolds prepared to
punish crimes against religion ; scenes which sadden the soul
were everywhere witnessed. Rome is one exception to the
rule ; Rome, which it has been attempted to represent as a
monster of intolerance and cruelty. It is true that the Popes
have not preached, like the Protestants, universal toleration - T
hut the facts show the difference between the Popes and the
Protestants. The Popes, armfd with the tribunal of intoler-
ance, have scarce spilt a drop of blood ; Protestants and phil-
osophers have shed it in torrents.” As you have justly said,
these are matters now of antiquarian research. Perhaps it
will not be amiss to give the result of the most searching and
most analytical mini of Europe when sifting the evidence on
this matter.
“ The Spanish Inquisition,” wrote Ur. (Cardinal) New-
man, “ which really was bloody, is confessed by Pro-
testant authorities, such as Ranke and Guizot, to have been a
political—not an ecclesiastical—institution ; its officials, though
ecclesiastics, were appointed by the Crown, and removable at
its pleasure $ it had indeed been originally authorised by the
Pope (Sixtus IV.), who, at the instance of the civil power,
granted it a bull of establishment 5 but, as soon as it began to
act, its measures so deeply shocked him that he immediately
commenced a series of grave remonstrances against its proceed-
ings (by briefs dated January 29, 1482, and August, 1483), and


bitterly complained that he had been deceived by the Spanish
Government. The Protestant Ranke distinctly maintains, that
it was even set up against the Pope and the Church, ‘ as the
jurisdiction of the Court,’ he says, ‘ rested on the royal
supremacy, so its exercise was made available for the mainte-
nance of the royal authority. It is one of those spoliations of
the ecclesiastical power, by which this Government rose into
strength, ... In its nature and its object, it was a purely
political institute.’ Moreover, the Pope, anxious and displeased
at what was going on, appointed a new functionary to reside on
the spot, with the office of Judge of Appeals from the Inquisi-
tion in favour of the condemned ; and when this expedient
was evaded he appointed special Judges for particular cases ;
and, lastly, when the cruelty of the Spanish Government and
its officials, lay and clerical, defeated his second attempt to
ameliorate the evil, then he encouraged the sufferers to flee to
Rome, where he took them under his own protection. In this
way it is recorded by the unfriendly historian, Florente, that in
one year (1488) he rescued 230 persons and 200 in another
(1498). . . . Moreover, the Pope (Paul 111., in 1546, and
Pius IV,, in 1563) refused to allow the Spanish Government to
introduce their Inquisition into Naples or the Milanese, which
then belonged to Spain, from his disapprobation of its rigor.”
Every monstrosity of Catholic States in ages gone by is
placed by bigotry and ignorance at the door of the Church of
Rome. How ready the heads of those states were to revolt against
the Church when it suited their lusts or ambition we need not go
beyond England to discover —with such examples before us as
a William, a Henry 11, a John, or Henry VIII. To hurl
boulders at your neighbour’s weather-board, whilst your own
glass cottage is just on the opposite side of the street,
is not, generally speaking, regarded as an act of supreme
policy. When interested and partial writers cite indi-
vidual cases against the Holy See, they very seldom, or
never, back up their citations by quotations from the Pope
or the Church. Now let us look at “ Pope Luther ’’ to see what
his principles and teachings were on toleration in general. In
his book, entitled “ The Papacy of Rome instituted by the
Devil,” Luther there lays down his principles of toleration.
“ The Pope is the devil. If I can kill the devil, why not do it
at the peril of my life ? He is a ravenous wolf, against whom
the whole world should take up arms, without waiting for
orders from magistrates ; in this matter there is no place for
regret, except that regret of not being able to at once destroy
him. The Pope once convicted by the Gospel, the whole world
should rush upon him and slay him, with all those that are on
his side, kings, princes, and nobles without distinction. If
we punish robbers by the rope, assassins by the sword, and
heretics by fire, why should we not do the same to the
dangerous preachers of corruption—to popes, cardinals, bishops,


and the whole tribe of the Roman Sodom, who incessantly
poison the Cbnrch of God ? Yes j we should fall upon them
with all sorts of arms, and lave our hands in their blood.
Monarchs, kings, and nobles, who make part of the Roman
Sodom, should be attacked with every manner of weapon. We
must wash our hands in their blood.”—T. XIII, p. 233, sq. Such
is the idea of toleration given us by the first Reformer (?) —the
“ Peter of Protestantism.” The following is the Paul’s—
Calvin’s—“ As to the Jesuits,” says Calvin, “ who oppose us,
we must slay them, or, if that cannot be conveniently done,
we must banish them, or at least crush them by lies and
calumnies ” — Jesuitce vero, qui se nobis maxime opponunt , aut
necandi, aut si hoc commode fieri non potest ejiciendi, aut certe
mendaciis et columniis opprirnendi sunt. The above quotations
would look well framed and hung round the neck of the pastor
of Pitt-street, if the great man will pardon the liberty.
Yours, etc.,
NEMO.


THE CHURCH AND SCIENCE.
LETTER IV.
Sir, —When you kindly opened your pages to my com-
munications I did not anticipate tha,t your generosity would
have been so heavily taxed. However, as your patience seems
not yet exhausted, and as the subject in reference is interesting,
perhaps you will allow me a few words to my would-be critics.
To the gentleman who modestly signs himself “ Truth,” I
have very little indeed to say. Like some of whom Eussell
Lowell, in one of his charming essays, writes : “ The elasticity
of his swallow is so expansive ” that I should fear to bring my
boots and breeches within the circumference of his eddy. In
matter such as here debated, half-educated people, “ like
half-formed insects on the banks of Nile,’’ only go to bathe
when the tide is out, and mistake a mud bath for a plunge in
the briny. We know the consequence of a rub against them—
Regardez metis riy touchez pas. If a good bigot be a good
thing, “ Truth ”is a very fine specimen—a species of North-of-
Ireland petrifaction—or if of native product, then assuredly
from “ Cow Flat.” One may hope to throw a ray of light
across the path of the genus “ Truth.” One should be very
vain to hope for a convert. The task would be about tanta-
mount to the effort to
“ Taich an ould cow paternoster,
Or whistle Moll Roe to a pig.”
Another gentleman, who appears to “ half know everything
from a cedar to a hyssop,’’ is humble enough to hide the light of
his countenance under the mantle of “ Justitia,” and the
combination, or outcome, of “ Truth and Justice,” is a rndis
indigestaque moles, quam dixere chaos. “ Justitia ” has thought
fit to travel over a great deal of historical ground. Unfortu-
nately for him, as for so many of his kind, the soil is almost
entirely ecclesiastical, and from its extent, variety and age,
requires more than a rough ploughing to obtain the harvest
hidden in its bosom, “ A little learning ” here “is a dangerous
thing.”
Now, without following “ Justitia ” through his “ rude
and indigested heap,” let me take one instance which
he himself furnishes, to show the “ little learning, the
dangerous thing ” with which he thrusts himself upon public
attention. He is speaking of the persecution of scientific men
by the Church, and informs us that what especially made this
persecution atrocious was “ the awful constitution of the
Inquisition was such that it deliberated on a man’s life and
liberty in secret. No public prosecutor appeared, no advocate
to defend,’’ and one of the victims of this system of iniquity T


Ave are told, was “ Peter Abelard, 1140.” It is true “ Justitia ”
bad informed us a little earlier that “ the Inquisition was
introduced into France in 1208,” 66 years after Abelard’s death !
But we are, for the moment, in the middle ages, and this is
near enough. Besides, perhaps some priest of the day “ was
paid one hundred pounds ” * to bring him back out of Purgatory ;
and thus Peter Abelard might have been condemned by the
Inquisition.
Born in 1079, Abelard was destined for a career of
arms. But, as he was of timid nature and brilliant intel-
lect, Mars was bowed out by Minerva, and the orrery of
philosophy was emblazoned by a glowing, if transitory, lumin-
osity. At the age of 20 his dialectical skill was sufficiently
cute and cutting to measure itself with the best blades of the
age. At the hour the reputation of William of Champeaux
was at its height in its University career, and Abelard became
a listener, and was tilled with ambition to surpass his master,
to whom “ shoals of students flocked from every coast,” and
whose reputation won for him the proud appellation of
“ Columna Doctorum .” To upset such a fame in the most
renowned school of Europe, in the throng of his admirers, was
worth endeavouring. He essayed and succeeded, and soon
became the “ admired of all admirers.” “It was a proud
moment for Abelard when, by the unanimous voice of intellec-
tual Paris, he was elevated to that distinguished position
which he had so long coveted.” He became the idol of the
great capital. Crowds surrounded Pope in his days to touch
his hand. The students rushed from dinner to see Gray pass
through the quadrangle of the University. “ More attractive to
the Parisians was the fine figure, beautiful countenance, and
distinguished air of tbe brilliant philosopher of the day.”
His teaching was lucid, clear, sparkling—the simple classic
of a Greek in the majestic roll of a Roman—his range
most comprehensive—“ ignorant,” it was said of him, “of
nothing under heaven except himself.” “ One Pope,” remarks
Guizot, “ nineteen cardinals, and more than fifty bishops and
archbishops—French, German, and English—and a much
larger number of those men with whom Popes and bishops and
cardinals have to contend, were his disciples.” Pray, sir, re-
mark how this poor Scientist was persecuted by the “ awful
constitution of the Inquisition,” as his history proceeds. Now
came his fall.
His guilty passion for Ileloise, and the shameful ven-
geance wreaked upon him by her brutal father, Fulbert,
drove him to the abbey of St. Denis, where the voice of the
charmer of the schools was joined with the monks in the plain-
tive psalmody of the cloister. But intellectual contention was
strong within his soul ; the simple monks were too ignorant
for him, and to stop his sarcasm and ridicule they had on one
occasion recourse to the argumenturn ad baculum, and cud-
* See page 41.


gelled him. He abandoned the abbey, and retired to a solitude
near Troyes. But the solitude soon became a thebaid. “ Stu-
dents,” he •writes himself, “ came crowding to me from all
parts, and leaving the towns and cities were content to live in
the wilderness. They set up little tents for themselves, and
put up with wild herbs instead of delicate viands. People
said one to another, ‘ Behold the world has gone after him.’ At
last, as my oratory would not hold them, they enlarged it,
building it of wood and stone.” To this dwelling he gave the
name of Paraclete.
After some forty years of teaching, and producing
such works as Bp Generihus et Be Speciebus, Sir et non ,
and “ Christian Theology,” it is not astonishing that a
meteoric mind like Abelard’s should have fallen into errors in
philosophy and theology. However, he was the “ enfant
gate ” of his day, and minds of his nature take a lot of
spoiling. But his crop had been growing in the minds of the
multitudes of his disciples, and the time arrived when con-
nivance became participation. A monk, William of St. Thierry,
in his quiet cell, was the first to formally gather from
Abelard’s works his various errors, and forwarded them cata-
logued to the great St. Bernard, the Abbot of Clairvaux.
Eventually, a case was drawn up against Abelard by St.
Bernard. “ When he speaks of the Holy Trinity,” says
Bernard, “itis in the style of Arius ; he is a Pelagian when
he speaks of grace, and a second Nestorius when he speaks of
the person of Jesus Christ. His vanity is such that he brags
as if there was nothing in Heaven or on earth that he did
not know 5 and, in truth, he knows a little of everything
except himself.”
The war soon waxed warm. Abelard poured out a
torrent of abuse on Bernard, and the followers of each
took their respective side, in which the saint of the age and
the most brilliant philosopher were the two chief contendents ;
the one armed with authority, the other with rationalism—
authority where reason found her repose, rationalism where
reason had outstripped her confines. As Rome had to be the
final arbiter, “ what Bernard dreaded most was the bias of
those bishops and cardinals who had been disciples of
Abelard, and were now’ in Rome.” A letter containing the
accusations w T as sent by Bernard to Innocent 11., a copy
of which was transmitted to Abelard. After due con-
sideration Abelard begged the Archbishop of Sens to call
a council, promising to appear on the day and meet all
accusations. The Archbishop complied, and summoned a
Provincial Council for the octave day of Pentecost, 1140.
The fame of the coming contest drew a mighty
crowd in due time to the city. The day arrived, and a
striking scene ensued. The great Church of St. Stephen
is thronged. Louis IT. of France is on the prepared


throne Godfrey, Bishop of Chartres, legate of the Holy
See, presides, a man of great prudence and moderation.
On either side range bishops and archbishops, and pre-
lates of high and low degree, university scholars of every
grade, abbots, religious, theologians, men of letters, knights and
barons, and monks of many orders—'twas a grand array t
There is a subdued murmur of conversation as the hum of a hive
in a summer lime tree. How will it end ? Abelard ! yes, we
know him. He has enslaved France by his brilliancy. Too
well many of us know, who ventured a lance with him, how the
moment he got an opening he played with us for an instant, and
gave us our quietus, as were we but a baby or a bauble. None
could hold a lance against him. His all is at stake now, and
he will be wonderful ! But this monk—this Bernard—“ there
was something sadly awful in that noble forehead—in the
classical turn of those sensitive lips, in the flame of those
piercing eyes, and in the movement of that slight frame, wasted
with long vigil, with terrific penance, with burning love for the
House of God, and with the ceaseless friction of a laborious
life.”
At a signal from the ceremoniere Abelard, in his black
Benedictine robe, steps into the place allotted him in the
assembly, preceded by his illustrious disciple, Arnold of Brescia.
He had no sooner done so than Bernard stood forth to confront
him. He held in his hand a scroll containing the heresies of
Abelard, and, in a clear, firm voice, read them out in the hearing
of the assembly. “He then fastened his calm eyes on his
antagonist, and informed him that he bad the choice of three
courses : To defend the propositions, to amend them, or to deny
they were his. There was a moment of pause. In an instant
all eyes were turned on Abelard, and the pulses of that assembly
quickened whilst waiting, though for a moment, for the sounds
of that well-known voice which had rung out the issues of
many a victory in the arena of intellectual strife. Abelard
spoke: ‘I will not answer the Cistercian,’ he exclaimed, ‘I
appeal from the Council to the See of Rome.’ “ The assembly
was speechless with astonishment ; the bishops looked on each
other with blank surprise. And men had hardly recovered
from the shock when they were conscious that Abelard had
turned his back upon king, legates, and bishops, and, followed
by his wondering disciples, had left the church.”
The rest is soon told. The council condemned
the errors which Abelard himself had not the courage
to defend. He was then 60 years of age; his career
was closed. He retired to the Abbey of Cluny, where
Peter the venerable, always his kind friend, made the few
ordinary years of his life the sweetest his life had known.
“ Never did I see,’’ writes the venerable Abbot, “ a man more
humble, whether in gesture, habit, or countenance. He read
continually, prayed often, and kept silence at all times except
19


when forced to speak ; and after his reconciliation with the
Holy See offered the holy sacrifice daily, and occupied himself
only with meditating or teaching the truths of religion and
philosophy.” Such, sir, is the story of Ahelard, who was perse-
cuted by “ the awful constitution of the Inquisition ” sixty-
six years after his death, “ where no prosecutor appeared and
no advocate to defend ” —Ex vino , disce omnes.
Yours, etc.,
N EMO.
20


PROTESTANTISM AND LIBERTY.
The position of Protestantism, during the centuries of its exist-
ence, towards Catholicity has been one of dire antagonism. It
is not a libel on its efforts to say, they have not been brilliantly
successful. The opposition was at first run on theological
grounds. Beaten here, Protestantism changed front and
united, with every opposing power and force, against Catholicity.
All means were allowable to that end. In this respect Pro-
testantism has been most successful, and the combined result
of all has been to make modern history in its relations to the
Catholic Church little better, in the words of de Maistre, than a
“ conspiracy against the truth.” Because she would not allow
so much liberty to everybody, until there was not sufficient
authority to govern anybody, the Catholic Church was declared
the enemy of all liberty, and her intolerance held up to the
nations of the earth as an object of universal scorn.
The eighteenth century may be regarded, from a Catholie
point of view, as the century par excellence of misrepresenta-
tion. It was the century in which Protestantism held most
sway in Europe. In the ages past the axe or sword “ had
done! the nobler deed.” The pen and the press took up the
running in the eighteenth century, and “ a conspiracy against
the truth ” was the culmination. In that century philosophy
was the handmaid of Protestantism against Catholicity, but it
was the philosophy of Bollingbroke, of Hobbes, of Proudhon,
of Spinosa, Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Voltaire, Rousseau, et hoc
genus omne. By erroneous theology and false philosophy the
Catholic Church was not only accused, she was condemned,
immolated. As the enemy of liberty she was struck down :
as the foe of toleration, she was shown none. And she was so
treated by Protestantism, which is supposed to hold aloft the
banner of liberty, enfolding the principle of toleration.
Liberty ! Toleration ! Sacred words, which in their true
significance must be cherished and guarded by the Church of
Christ wherever she is. Liberty, one of the high privileges
which make man a “ little less than the angels.” Man, a
duplex nature, spiritual and temporal. Liberty will follow
his order, his constitution, for in office it has a twofold obliga-
tion—to God and Caesar. This distinction must be maintained,
or liberty will be impaired or lost. It cost the Church of the
first centuries torrents of blood to maintain this necessary all-
important distinction. Not one grain of incense would she
burn in honour of Caesar as Pontifex. The two orders must be
distinct and separate —true liberty demands it. This distinction
has ever been insisted on at all cost by the Catholic Church


throughout her entire history. With what result ? Put aside
all Catholic witnesses in the matter; turn to non-Catholic
sources. Take two of the greatest minds of their age—Guizot
and J. S. Mill. Let them give their evidence.
“ One beneficial consequence which M. Guizot ascribes
to the power of the Church,” says Mill, “is w r orthy of
special notice the separation unknown to antiquity
between temporal and spiritual authority. He, in com-
mon with the best thinkers of our time, attributes to
This fact the happiest influence on European civilisation.
It was the parent, he says, of liberty of conscience.
The separation of temporal and spiritual is founded on
the idea that material force has no right, no hold over the
mind, over conviction, over truth. Enormous as have been the
sins of the Catholic Church, in the way of religious intolerance,
lier assertion of this principle has done more for human
freedom than all the fires she ever kindled have done to destroy
it.”—Mill, Dissertations and Discussions, Yol. 11., p. 243.
Now, what has been the action of Protestantism towards
this separation of the temporal and spiritual—this great
distinction which the best thinkers of our age regard as the
“ parent of liberty of conscience ?” What was it, but the com-
plete surrender of the principle upon which “ liberty of
conscience ”is founded ! We are a British-tongued people.
What took place in England in illustration ?
Did not Protestantism hand over to Henry YIII. authority
spiritual and temporal? Did it not at one blow destroy the
principle for which the Church had so nobly and at such
enormous sacrifice contended for fifteen hundred years ?—the
principle that “ material force has no right, no hold over the
mind, over conviction, over truth.” Was not the action, the
conduct of Henry VIII. worthy that of a Nero or a Commodus,
the moment Protestantism gave him back the power with
which the emperor of Pagan Rome was invested ? And, if
to-day “ the King can do no wrong,” it is because one royal
Protestant head has rolled on a scaffold, and the nation has
snatched from the hands of its monarch the authority with
which Protestantism had so slavishly and so wickedly invested
him. In this matter Parliament has replaced the Catholic
Church ; but the monarch has been degraded in the transition.
He is no longer a king—he is a figure-head ! What has been
the effect of Protestantism on the character of the kings of
England ? Stand forth Protestantism—give up your records and
archives. Where are the kings of England ? If you ask the
■Catholic Church for hers, she points to her Alfreds, her
Edwards, her Richards, her Henrys, her Plantagenets
her armies, “ one half of which could beat the whole of
France while the other half looked on.” Her kings
w’ere the heroes and the inspiration of divine Shakespeare's
«üblimest muse. If kind Providence should ever bless


us with a second Shakespeare, what trait, what character
will he find in the Protestant kings of England to
inspire his verse or engage his genius ? Here is the
first of them painted by the undying words of Macaulay.
“ A king (Henry VIII.) tvhose character may be best
described by saying that he was despotism itself personi-
fied ; unprincipled ministers ; rapacious aristocracy ; a
servile parliament. Such were the instruments by which
England was delivered from the yoke of Rome. The work
which had been begun by Henry, the murderer of his wives,
was continued by Somerset, the murderer of his brother, and
completed by Elizabeth, the murderer of her guest.”—(Macaulay,
Edinburgh Review.') And here is the last of them from the
Greville Memoirs—“ William IV, was such an ass that nobody
does anything but laugh at what he says What
can you expect from a man with a head like a pineapple ? .
He always continued to be something of a blackguard and
something more of a buffoon.”—Greville Memoirs, Vol. 111., pp.
33-410. What have they left to England to challenge the
admiration of the world P “ There are all the coats he (King
George IV.) has ever had for fifty years, 300 whips, canes without
number, every sort of uniform, the costumes of all the orders
of Europe, splendid furs, pelisses, hunting coats and breeches,
and among other things, a dozen pair of corduroy breeches he
-had made to hunt in when Don Miguel was here. His profusion
■in these articles was unbounded, because he never paid for
them, and his memory was so accurate that one of his pages
told me he recollected every article of dress, no matter how old,
and that they were always liable to be called to procure some
particular coat or article of apparel of years gone by. It is
difficult to say whether in great or little things that man was
most odious and contemptible.”—(Greville Memoirs, Vol. 11., p.
23.) The English language, in prose and poetry, has pretty well
exhausted its vocabulary, of opprobrium in application to Eng-
land’s Protestant Kings. Byron summed them up in a line—
“ The fools and oppressors called George.”
Nature finally refused to continue the connection, and
foreigners were called in horresco referens to relink the line of
the Plantagenets ! This was the effect of Protestant liberty
and toleration on the once glorious race of England’s monarchs.
What effect on Protestantism itself had Protestant liberty
and toleration ? It became at ance the creature and slave of the
State. Cranmer was its first Archbishop, and took his “ com-
mission ” from Henry VIII. ; and on the death of Henry he
surrendered his archiepiscopal authority to the infant monarch,
Edward VI., and received it back at his hands as “ the only
source of all manner of temporal and spiritual jurisdiction
within the realm.” “It is plain,” says the Protestant Collier,
“ that the bishops, through the whole course of King Edward’s
reign, were upon their good behaviour for their office and had


the express clause of quamdiu bene gesserint as long as they
shall behave themselves, put in their patent, that the king might
recall their jurisdiction and strike their character dead when he
pleased.” Shades of Lanfranc, Anselm, Langton and Beckett
such base, such treacherous servility must have made your
dry bones rattle in your tombs under the shade of Canterbury
Cathedral ! Had these saintly archbishops cowed beneath the
tyranny of the monarchs of their respective times —the “ fierce
Conqueror,” his son 'William Rufus, the tyrant John, and the
unscrupulous Henry—hapless had been England’s destiny.
“ They ” (the Benedictines), says Sir James Stephen, “ can
boast in Lanfranc another primate to whose farseeing wisdom
in the government of mankind may not obscurely be traced
much of the vital spirit of those remarkable institutions which
are still the glory of the Anglo-Saxon race in our islands and
in the North American continent. How vast is the debt of
gratitude England owes to her great primates, Lanfranc,.
Anselm, Langton, and Becket, or rather to that benign Provi-
dence who raised them up in that barbarous age. Whatever
may have been their motives, whatever their demerits, they,
and they alone, wrestled successfully with the despotism of
the Conqueror, and his descendants to the fourth generation, in
maintainirg amongst us, even in those evil days, the balanced
power, the control of public opinion, and the influence of moral
over physical ; a force which from their times passed on as a
birthright to the Parliament of Henry 111. and his successors ;
and which at this day remains the inheritance of England and
of all the free communities with which she has covered and
is still peopling the globe. Unchecked by the keen wisdom of
the ecclesiastical policy and the Roman sympathies of the
Benedictine Lanfranc, the fierce Conqueror would have ac-
quired and transmitted to his posterity on the English Throne
a power absolute and arbitrary, beneath the withering in-
fluence of which the germ of the future liberties and
greatness of England would have prematurely perished.”
Is it possible to conceive any two conditions more diametric-
ally opposed than the conduct of the Catholic Archbishops of
Canterbury before the “ fierce Conqueror ” and the “ bad, bold
kings ” with whom they had to deal, and the cringing, con-
temptible conduct of the usurpers of their Sees before Henry
Till, and his successors ?
When Pope Urban wanted the weight of England’s
influence againt the anti-Pope Clement, he sent the Pallium
by the Archbishop of York to William Rufus to be bestowed
by the king on his Archbishop of Canterbury. But
Anselm, knowing the wily monarch better than Rome, re-
fused the investment at the hands of the king. The Pallium
was placed on the high altar of the Cathedral, and Anselm
approached and invested himself with the emblem. “Ye be
under us, by God’s calling and ours,” was Henry’s reminder to


Cranmer, “ the most principal minister of our jurisdiction.”
And the degrading position was accepted. Ceesar was again
Pontifex Maximus.
“ Absolute monarchy,” says Guizot, “ triumphed simul-
taneously throughout Europe with the Reformation.” Barlow
told Henry VIII. in 1640, that “if the king’s grace, being
supreme head of the Church of England, should elect any
layman to be bishop, without mention made of any orders,
he should be as good a bishop as the best in England.”
Cranmer was allowed the liberty of recanting six, and Latimer
eight times. “ Good churches,” says Emerson, “ are not built
by bad men.” It is thus Macaulay paints Cranmer : “ Intoler-
ance is always bad, but the sanguinary intolerance of a man
who thus wavered in his creed, creates a loathing to which it
is difficult to give vent without calling foul names. Equally
false to political and religious obligations, he was the fit tool
of Somerset, and then of Northumberland. When the former
wished to put his own brother to death, even without the form
of a trial, he found a ready instrument in Cranmer.” No
wonder that beneath the influence of such men the altar, the
sacrifice, and the priesthood were soon obliterated, and religion
itself became whatever the State liked to make it. Cujus
regio , illius religio, a principle subversive of all liberty of con-
science—the embodiment of intolerance.
The Ritualistic periodicals of the day compare the
leading English Reformers with Marat and Robespierre,
The Church Neivs terms Crammer, Latimer, Ridley, Jewell
and the rest, “apostates, traitors, perjurers, robbers, and
persecutors.” Dr. Littledale, (D.D.) calls them “utterly un-
redeemed villains and Mr, Baring Gould declares the
Reformation to have been “ a miserable apostacy.” If this
be hard language—rough treatment—the Protestants must
settle it amongst themselves—it is all their evidence.
So much for the effects of liberty and toleration on
the Protestant Church. But the end had not yet come—there
was a “ deeper depth” still in store. The source and fountain
of ecclesiastical authority now is the Committee of Privv
Council. Of what does this Committee of Privy Council consist ?
Of twelve members, of which three only are ecclesiastics, the
remaining nine may be Dissenters—in fact, may be anything.
For a Church—for its final judicial court—this would be a mons-
trosity. For an Establishment, probably it is about the proper
thing.
And the nation at large—how fared it beneath the new
liberty diffused by Protestantism F
“ It is an unquestionable and most instructive fact,” writes
Macaulay, “ that the years during which the political power of
the Anglican hierarchy was in the zenith, were precisely the
years during which national virtue was at its lowest point.”
Sacrilegious avarice,” says Camden (Edward VI.) “ ravenously


invaded church, livings, colleges, chauntries, hospitals and
places dedicated to the poor, as things superfluous. Ambition
and emulation among the nobility, presumption and disobedi-
ence among the common people, grew so extravagant that
England seemed to be in a downright frenzy.”—(Camden:
Introduction to the Annals of Queen Elizabeth.) Burnett is
equally forcible: “ This gross and insatiable scramble after
the goods and wealth that had been dedicated to good designs,
without the applying any part of it to promote the good of the
Gospel, the instruction of the poor, made all people conclude
that it was robbery, and not for reformation, that their zeal
made them so active. The professors of the people gave their
enemies great advantage to say that they ran away from con-
fession, penance, fasting and prayer, only to be under no
restraint and to indulge themselves in a licentious and dis-
solute course of life. By these things that were too visible in
some of the most eminent among them, the people were much
alienated from them ; and as much as they were for-
merly against Popery, they grew to have kinder thoughts
of it, and to look on all the changes that had been made
as designs to enrich some vicious characters and to let in an
inundation of vice and wickedness upon the nation.”—(History
of the Reformation.)
“ Churches ran greatly into dilapidation and decay,”
says Stirpe, “ and were nasty and indecent for God’s wor-
ship. Among the laity there was little devotion—the Lord’s
day greatly profaned and little observed ; the common
prayers not frequented. Some lived without any service
of God at all. Many were heathens and atheists j the
Queen’s own court an arbour for epicures and atheists, and
a kind of lawless place; because it stood in no parish.”
The Westminster Review of January, 1870, informs us that
the condition of things in the time of Henry YIII. was of so
atrocious a nature that “ London deserved a thousand times more
plagues than ever fell on Tyre or Sidon or even on Sodom and
Gomorrah.” Let it be remembered that this state of things
was the result of Protestantism in the flush of its vigour. We
expect the purest water at the fount—evidently the stream
was corrupt in its source. Clearly the liberty, the toleration
which Protestantism gave to king, Church and people was a
liberty that quickly degenerated into licence and a toleration
that permitted a condition it could no longer control.
ii Would I could efface from our annals,’’ says the Protestant
Fitz william, “ every trace of the long series of iniquities which
accompanied the Reformation in England—the injustice, the
oppression, the rapine, the murders, the sacrileges there
stamped. Such were the means by which the inexorable and
sanguinary tyrant, the founder of our faith, established his
supremacy in the new church, and all who wished to preserve
the belief of their fathers and adhere to the authority, which


he himself had taught them to revere, were treated as rebels
and soon became his victims.” He was the worthy introducer
of an intolerance that ran through the line of his dynasty for
three hundred years, worthily terminating with the execra-
tion by George IV. of the pen with which his unwilling fingers
signed the Act of Catholic Emancipation—lß29. Through the
whole of those three centuries there was never a measure
introduced into the public consideration of the country that
contemplated the amelioration of the people at large, but was
opposed by the intolerance of the king, the Tory and the
Church. They were the Trinity of opposition to every boon
that was, by its nature, sufficiently extensive to embrace in its
blessings subjects without distinction.
And now, if we want to see intolerance in its most odious
aspect, we have but to cross the channel that separates
England and Ireland. Look at the religious condition of the
latter country from the day Protestantism assumed the
Ascendancy.” Whilst the isle of Erin “ holds a seat on this
distracted globe,” a geographical point under the stars of
heaven, or a record in the annals of time, she is doomed to
stand forth a monument of the most tyrannous persecution
the modern world at least has known. Indeed, Dr. Johnson
and Edmund Burke declare the persecution to have surpassed
in virulence anything revealed by even the worst days of pagan
barbarity. And why F Because Ireland would not accept a
religion at the hands of Henry VIII. and his successors. The
entire province of Ulster was cleared of Roman Catholics and
given to Protestants. The Protestant Archbishop of Armagh
—holy man—got 45,000 acres ; Trinity College, 40,000 ; and
the “ skinners,” tanners,” and “ dry-salters,” London traders,
received 209,000 acres of the richest soil of Ireland. The
rest of the province was divided between Scotch and English
Protestants.
Then came Cromwell, and five million acres were
given to his Protestant followers, with the choice of
•“ hell or Connaught ” for the Catholics. They chose the
latter, thinking “ he might want the former for himself.”
The tale is told in a few words : Catholic Ireland was to be
Protestantised or exterminated, and the most ingenious system
that “ the most perverse ingenuity could invent for the
oppression, impoverishment, the degradation of a people and
abasement of human nature itself,” in the language of Burke,
was put in full force for almost three hundred years, and was
sanctioned in the name of religion. It was the reign of
•• Protestant Ascendancy.” It was a reign of intolerance, and
when it fell, but a few years back, it fell by the indignant
hands of its own people, whose name had been dishonoured by
its baneful history.
“ The Irish Church,” said Robert Lowe (Lord Shere-
brooke), in one of the final debates on the matter, “is


founded on an injustice j it is founded on the dominant
rigirts of the few over the many and shall not stand.
The curse of barrenness is upon it ; it has no leaves, it has no
blossom, it yields no fruit. Cut it down ; why encumhereth
it the ground F” It was such a deformity that Gladstone de-
clared : “ If you take away its abuses, there will be nothing
left.”
It was only in 1745, after the victory of Fontenoy
and invasion of Scotland by Charles Edward, that the
Lord Lieutenant of Ireland (Lord Chesterfield) allowed,
by proclamation, Catholic chapels, known officially as
“ Mass Houses,” to be opened in Dublin. In 1758, the
Lord Chancellor of Dublin, at the trial of Mr, Saul, a
Catholic merchant, laid it down from the Bench “ that
the laws did not presume a Papist to exist in the Kingdom,
nor could they so much as breathe there without the conni-
vance of the government.” Demourier’s victory at Jemeppes,
the general triumph of the French Republic armies, and the
execution of Louis XYL, dictated a policy of concession to
Catholics, and the first Catholic Relief Bill of April 9th, 1793.
was passed. It was external pressure that compelled Catholic
Emancipation in 1829, and the Fenian insurrection that forced
on the disestablishment of the Irish Church.
Sir Henry Parkes, in the course of his- speech at the
Free-trade Conference, on August 31, having occasion to refer
to the Irish Church, said : —“ The crying grievance of that
established Church was enough, one would have thought, to
have shocked the common sense of every person who was
acquainted with its history ; these churches were supported
by the collection of tithes, which, at times, were collected at
the point of the bayonet.” He knew one case “ where the
clergyman went with the soldiery and shot down a widow’s
son in the collection of his tithes.” Sir Henry summed up the
iniquity as a “ monstrous grievance.” And yet this “ monstrous
grievance,” this Church “ founded on injustice, cursed with
barrenness, without leaves, blossom, fruit,” this monument of
“ abuse ” pure and simple, found not only supporters—the cry
of the “ Church in danger ” was rung through the land and
shook it to its centre.
One rev. gentleman, addressing a large meeting, declared :
—“ If they dare to lay unholy hands on the Church, 200.000
Orangemen will tell them it shall not be.” And her Majesty
the Queen was reminded that, if she should sanction disestab-
lishment, there would be danger of her “ crown being kicked
into the Boyne.” Another ecclesiastic, in similar strain, said :
—“ If the Church establishment be destroyed in Ireland,
there cannot, there shall not, there must not be peace in
Ireland.” At a large meeting, presided over by the Duke of
Manchester, at Portadown, Ireland, in May, 18G8, the Rev.
Mr. Ellis said ; —“ We will fight, as men alone can fight who


have the Bible in one hand and the sword in the other our
voices shall be echoed and re-echoed from earth to heaven
and from heaven to earth. No Popery ! No surrender !” The
Rev. Leslie Chanter announced that the “ Orangemen would
not allow Gladstone and his crew to trample on the throne and
the Protestant constitution. Only the Channel rolled between
them, they, the Protestants of the North, would march to
the House of Commons and compel their enemies to be silent
while their representatives were speaking. . . Gladstone and
his co-conspirators might be hanging as high as Hainan.”
It is only fair to the Orangemen to say that all these
choice selections are from their rev. representatives, and were
applauded to the echo. How easy it is to transfer this bigoted
intolerance and disloyal sentiment from England or Ireland,
in 1808, to the Sydney Exhibition Building, July 12, 1889.
And all this from the ministers of the Gospel ! “ Doff it, doff
it for shame, and hang a calfskin on those recreant limbs.”
In conclusion, whenever a Protestant, be he English, Irish
or Scotch, hears the word intolerance, let him think of Ireland
and hang his head. Protestant intolerance in Ireland sinned
not only in excess—it sinned in principle. That a doctrine
which does not rest on authority should overthrow authority
by liberty, and should then destroy liberty by tyranny and
oppression—that is the perfection of intolerance. Such is
Protestant intolerance. Protestantism attacked not only the
religious life of Ireland, it aimed at the destruction of its
civil, social and national life. It was supported in its efforts
by the sympathy and power of the greatest empire the world
has known. All that earthly wealth, status and influence
could do was done for it ; and after three centuries trial, it
was declared to have been “ founded on injustice, cursed with
barrenness, without leaves, without blossom, without fruit—a
monstrous grievance ” —a mass of “ abuses.” There was but
one conclusion “ Cut it down, why incumbereth it the
ground !”


PROTESTANTISM AND LITERATURE.
The domain of letters, since tlxe rise of Protestantism, has
been taken so completely under the wing of the non-Catholic
mind as to constitute a species of Protestant preserve. There
was a thorough opposition on the part of Protestantism to
admit Catholicity to any participation in the advance and
progress of civilisation, as represented by the benign influence
of letters. Indeed, Catholicity was not only refused claim to
any portion of enlightenment, but she was painted as the foe of
all enlightenment and the home of darkness and retrogression.
Two circumstances tended to confirm this—Germany and
England, two of the greatest European powers, had become,
the latter especially, so completely Protestantised, and had
attacked Catholicity in all its works and labours so effectually,
as to leave them little better than a heap of ruins. In years
these ruins themselves were taken as witnesses of the fate
which the works deserved ; and it was thence contended that
Protestantism had to lay, and did successfully lay, the
foundations of all the boons and blessing’s which modern
society regards as its highest privileges—not only laid the
foundation, but erected the superstructure until it now stands,.
in the nineteenth century, a monument of surpassing merit.
This is pretty well the Protestant story of the matter. But
it is not all the story. The ruins, at last, began to be ex-
amined into. Spiritus Domini ferebatur super aquas. A
breath of life was being infused into the “ dry bones.” True
criticism and impartial investigation were brought to bear,
and at the beginning of the present age commenced an era of
exegesis which revived the claims of Catholicity and sup-
ported them in proportion to the breadth and depth of the
researches effected. The ruins were, not “ dead,” they were
but “ asleep,” and when awaked to all their significance, were
found to be full of science, of taste, of intelligence, of
calculation, of force, of wisdom, of reason, of sentiment, of
delicacy, and of that especially which breathed through them
and had been their inspiration, their creation, Christian faith,
Christian hope and Christian charity. They were Christianity
personified—the very principle, the vivifying force which the
ruins were supposed to deny.
Macaulay found them, “ not in decay, not a mere antique,
but full of life and youthful vigour.” Stolberg, Schlegel,
Veith, Molitur, enter the Catholic Church, because they dis-
cover, from the examination of the ruins, “ that all that is
beautiful in art and nature is nowhere to be found except in the
Catholic Church.” The complete temple could be recon-


structed only from the ruins—and while the name of the
Catholic architect is buried in the oblivion of modesty, some
modern Protestant brewer will receive a knighthood for the
expenditure of one hundred thousand pounds in an act
of reparation.* The Protestant could do the stone
work—the design, the creation was Catholic. And when
the temple was restored, what did it proclaim ? The
science, the art, the taste, the refinement, the industry
of ages gone ! Science, in its construction, its statistics,
its mechanism, its optics, its accoustics, its metal-
lurgy, its chemistry ; art, in its paintings, its music, its
statuary, its mosaics—its sanctuary a dream of beauty—the
whole a poem of life—hymning everlastingly to heaven and
earth Gloria in excelsis Deo, ef in terra pax hominibus.
“ Majesty,
Power, Glory, Strength and Beauty all are aisled
In this eternal ark of worship undefiled.”—Byron.
To-day, we study, we admire—we despair ever to rival.
When Protestantism took possession of the land, did she
erect rival temples to show the superiority of her light, her art,
her science ? She robbed, she plundered them, she beat them
flat to the earth, she “ made a desert and she called it peace.’’
Under the shadow of those glorious Catholic piles, letters
found their home. There Anselm wrote his “ Philosophical
Meditations,” which even Descartes could never fathom, and
from which he derived all his worth. There St. Bonaventure
caught the very reflection of the temple, and united in so ad-
mirable a manner the human and the divine, in letters, by his
“ Reductio Artium Liberalium ad Theologio.m ” as to win the title
of “Doctor Seraphicus.” There Gerson or Kempis traced the lines
of a book (“ Imitation ”) —the “ divinest that ever left the
hands of man and there Thomas, the angel of the schools,
built up his sublime “ Summa ” —the indubitable monument
of the greatest mind that ever blessed God’s earth ! In his
“ Stmima Contra Rentes, ” of 400 pages, there is more theological
and philosophical science than in all the pages that ecclesias-
tical Protestantism has ever produced.
And now pass from the temple to the school—the home
and centre of the intellect. Put aside the numerous parochial,
cathedral and monastic schools that covered the land, and look
at the Catholic Universities of Europe, before the birth of Pro-
testantism. Here are some of them, with the dates of their
foundations ; and let it be remembered that they were all the
foundations of Popes, or helped, encouraged and approved by
Popes ;—Oxford, 895 ; Cambridge, 915 ; Padua, 1179 ; Sala-
manca, 1200 ; Aberdeen, 1213 ; Vienna, 1237 ; Montpellier,
1288 ; Perouse, 1305 ; Heidelberg, 1346 ; Prague, 1348 ;
Cologne, 1358 ; Turin, 1405 ; Leipsic, 1408 ; Lorraine, 1425 ;
* Sir A. Guinness, St. Patrick’s, Dublin.


Glasgow, 1453 ; Pisa, 1471 ; Copenhagen, 1498 ; Alcala. 1517.
The renown of those of Paris, Koine, Lisbon, Naples, Florence
and Milan need no detail. There were altogether 03 Catholic
Universities in Europe before the advent of Protestantism,
"Where are the Universities built by Protestantism? Echo
answers, where ? To the Catholic Universities students
crowded from all quarters —literally by tens of thousands—
Oxford at one portion of the 13th Century could boast her
30,000. At Paris, 20,000 was pretty well a common number.
Paris was the “ city of letters,” and drew to itself the intel-
lectual wealth of Christendom.
“ Whatever a nation has that is most precious,” wrote
William of Brittany, author of the Philipide, in honour of
Philip Augustus ; “ whatever a people has most famous—all
the treasures of science, all the riches of the earth, lessons
of wisdom, the glory of letters, nobility of thought, refine-
ment of manners, all this is to be found in Paris.” Petrarch
likened the University of Paris to a “ basket filled with the
rarest fruits of every land,” and described the French as “ gay
of humour, fond of society and pleasant in conversation ;
they mai-e war on care by diversion, singing, laughing, eating
and drinking.” “ The beauty of the city, its light elastic
atmosphere, the grace and gaiety of its inhabitants,
and the society of all that was most choice in art
and learning, rendered it no less fascinating a residence
in the thirteenth century as the capital of learning than it
has since become as the metropolis of fashion.” (Christian
Schools and Scholars.)
During the same era, Naples, with its ten thousand
scholars, under the reign of Frederick 11., was a rival in more
ways than one of Paris. “ Ihe city itself, edging the double
crescent of blue water with perfect sky, sea and air ; then the
luxuriant Campagna to the east, with its villas, buried
amongst branching pines and groves of orange blossom ; then
the stretch of the azure Mediterranean, dotted with gay barges
of pleasance and dark galleys of war, tended to relax the
virility of a religion which teaches that the road to heaven is
the road of prayer, mortification and self-restraint. All
writers of this period describe Naples, with its houses running
up seven stories high, as the most beautiful and the most
wicked city in the world.” The most anything it was, except
the most stupid, dolt, ignorant, dark, dismal, dreary abode, as
it and all its kind have been painted by Protestant history—as
cursing the earth without a point of redemption, before the
rise of the “ blessed Reformation.” “ Frederick 11. represented
the brute force, intellectual license and moral depravity of the
thirteenth century ; his enthusiasm for poetry and letters was
quite as remar able as his ambition and taste for war. He
had been the pupil of three Popes. He spoke Latin, Italian,
German, French, Gree and Arabic. . . . He occupied


many of his leisure hours in his choice library poring l over
rolls of Greek and Arabic manuscripts. ... So great a
sympathy did he entertain for struggling genius, that he sup-
ported two hundred students at the University out of his own
private purse—that they might thus have some tincture of
philosophy. But Frederick was a, thoroughly worldly man-
Learning did not lead him to the practice of Christianity.
. . . His life amongst the infidels in the East appears to
have upset his faith. . . . Some say that, no longer
believing in the reality of a future life, he abandoned himself
to alFthe licenses of sensuality. . . . When in the South,
he slept away his time with all the voluptuousness of a Sultan
in his harems of Puglia and Sicily. His castle Foggia was
built in the Moorish style. At his splendid court were col-
lected together, from Germany, Italy and the East, the highest
that could be found at the day, of courage, eloquence and
learning, the flower of chivalry, the depth of science—kings
and warriors, troubadours and minstrels, wits and beauties—
all that was gayest and brightest, all that was gorgeous and
magnificent. Here were nurtured the grandchildren of
Averroes, the most celebrated of Arabian philosophers. Here
were seen the swarthy Saracens, with their strange costume,
standing guard ; graceful Mamelukes, attentive in their silent
service to every want; astrologers from Bagdad, with their
loose garments and flowing beards ; and Jews, learned and
sedate, the interpreters of wisdom that lay concealed in
precious manuscripts brought over from Arabia.”—(Life of St.
Thomas of Aquin, by Most Rev. R. B. Vaughan, 0.5.8.)
The bold and searching hand of Dr. Vaughan manifests
no desire to conceal the dark spots in Neapolitan life at the
court of the Emperor Frederick 11., in the thirteenth century.
Extremes haunt humanity, much wealth, much poverty, much
virtue, much vice. The dangers that spring from the very
refinement engendered by Christian civilisation can only be
guarded against by Christianity itself. But here there is not
decay, lifelessness, inertness, mental listlessness, infecundity,
night, as Protestants portray the scene. On the contrary, all
is life, vigour, elegance, refinement, pleasure, genius. Why, it
was a condition of things which should stir to admiration the
soul of Matthew Arnold—the handsome eulogiser of the court
and times of Marcus Aurelius—“an epoch akin to our own,” and
held up as a model for the nineteenth century.
“ The Catholic Church,” says one author, Charles de
Villers, “ held the nations of the earth in studied ignorance—
the friend of superstition. Education was rendered almost
inaccessible to the people ; the study of ancient languages
was as a monstrosity, an idolatry— the scriptures were severely
interdicted.” Then comes another Protestant author to assure
the world that all this is miserable sophism. “ All these
rhapsodies about the darkness of those times are so familiar


to us that we are hotter occupied in proving two and two make
five than in denying them. Yet this darkness, this obscurity,
is very easily pierced and torn asunder.” —(Daniel. The
Bible in the middle ages c. 8, p. 3.)
The Church had made such strides in true civilisation at
the advent of Protestantism, that when snatched from Inn-
hand, its forces became means of havoc and destruction. By
what means were Luther and his fellow-reformers able to
assail the Church, except by those which she gave them, it
turned to a perverse use and intention? It was said of Nicholas
de Lyra, a celebrated professor at the Paris University, and of
whose productions Luther availed himself —
•• Si Lyra non lyrasset
Lutherus non saltasset.”
If Nicholas had not lyred, Luther had not danced. It was
turning the cannon against its own citizens, and claiming the
glory of the science because the barbarians knew sufficient to
lay the city in ruins.
However, over the ruins they held two benefits aloft as
the ark in the deluge—the Bible the Bible only and private
judgment. Before the Bible, the Bible only, Catholic civili-
sation went down—its temples were plundered, its altars re-
moved, its sacrifice abolished, its priesthood proscribed ! The
Bible remains ! What will they do with it ? What treat-
ment will it receive at the hands of Luther himself ?
“We do not wish,” wrote the first Reformer, “ to read or to
hear Moses. Leave him to the Jews to serve as mirror to the
Saxons without embarrassment to ourselves. Moses is the
very master of slayers—none surpassed him when there was
a question of striking terror, of torturing, of tyranny.” Of
Ecclesiastes Luther wrote —“ This book is truncated ;it has
neither boots nor spurs ; it mounts in sandals as did I myself
whilst as yet a monk.” Of the Gospels, “ The Gospel of St.
John is the only really tender, the only true Gospel ; the three
others having spoken much more of the works of Christ than
of His words. The Epistles of St. Peter and St. Paul are
above the other three Gospels ; the Epistle of St.
James is a veritable epistle of straw. . . . and as for the
Epistle to the Hebrews of St. Paul himself, we need not
hesitate if we encounter on our way some word, hay, or
stubble. Let everyone regard the Apocalypse as his mind
shall dictate ; for me, my mind rejects it, and that suffices me
to repudiate it.”
The Bible was to be “ guide, philosopher, and friend,”
and such is the treatment it received at the hands of the
arch-reformer. And yet, not long after Luther's time, his
successors taught the inspiration of Scripture to the very
“ Hebrew points and accents.” “ Having set up the Bible as
their sole guide,’ says Dr. Pusey, “in opposition to the
Catholics, to uphold its entire inspiration, in every word and


syllable, became a point, not so much of religion, as of honour
with the party ; and the consequence has been that the
descendants of those very men, who cried up the Bible as
everything, have now succeeded, as we see, in degrading the
Bible as almost nothing.” “ They now,” says another writer,
“reject all supposition of inspiration, and regard the whole of
the Scriptures, from beginning to end, as a sei’ies of venerable,
human, and therefore fallible documents.” If Cocceuis found
Christ everywhere in the Old Testament and Grotius found
Him nowhere, it is but logical that Straus should find Him in
neither New nor Old.
This, certainly, was a logical deduction from the treat-
ment of the Bible by Luther himself. Such was the effect of
the guardianship of the Bible at the hands of Protestant
Germany. In England the Book of Common Prayer, in the
times of James 1., was declared “ to differ from the truth of
the Hebrew in at least two hundred places.” The ministers
of the Lincoln diocese, addressing the King, pronounced the
English translation of the Bible to be “ a translation which
is absurd and senseless, perverting, in many places, the mean-
ing of the Holy Ghost.” Another declared “it perverted the
text of the Old Testament in eight hundred and forty places.”
On the words “ this is My body ” no less than two hundred
different interpretations appeared before the end of the six-
teenth century 5 and “ as many distinctions of the Sacraments
as there were men who disagreed about them.” Such was the
effect of Protestantism on the literature of the Bible.
The Renaisance, or revival of letters, is an orient
especiallyclaimed by Protestantism, and the foundation of
the claim is the reiteration with which it has been put
forward, and the persistent denial of any share in the merit,
by Catholicism. When the matter has been really sifted it is
found that the Renaisance began about a hundred years be-
fore Protestantism arose, to break the Christian unity of;
Europe.
“ Dante and Petrarch,” says Hallam, “ are, as it were, the
morning stars of our modern literature” —the former, termed
the magnus philosophus, mag nun fheologus, et magnus
\>oeta ; philosopher, theologian, poet, and, great in all, was the
great leader in the revival of letters.
The D ivina Gommedia was an outcome of Catholic
teaching and literature ; nor was its profound erudition any
obstacle to its conquest over the minds of the age in which it
was written ; a sure sign that the age was sufficiently
advanced to appreciate its merits. Its first great achieve-
ment was to raise the vernacular in which it was written to
the dignity of a language. Chairs were soon established
throughout the republics of Italy for the expositions of the
power and beauties of the Divine Comedy, and Bocaccio and
Petrarch lent their refinement and polish to the majestic,


strength of soul.” “ The result must he,” says Hallam, “ to
convince us of our great obligations to Italy for her renewal
of classical learning. . . . We have the greatest reason
to doubt whether, without the Italians of those ages, it would
ever have occurred.’ Nor could Hallam overlook the merits
of the Popes in the revival.
“ Letters had no patron so important,” he says as Pope
Nicholas V., 1447, nor has any later occupant of that Chair,
without excepting Leo X., deserved equal praise as an
encourager of learning He founded the Vatican
Library, and left it enriched at his death with live thousand
volumes ; a treasure far exceeding that of any other collection
in Europe. Every scholar who needed maintenance found it
at the court of Rome. . . . Italy, the genial soil, where
massive language that Dante had bequeathed them. Petrarch
was called to Rome—was crowned its Laureate In the Capitol,
Easter Sunday, 1341, and hung up his laurel wreath in the
Basilica of the Apostles. From that hour his whole soul was
devoted to the revival of the classic languages of Greece and
Rome, under the most encouraging patronage of the Vatican.
llis own enthusiasm, and the high honours and rewards that
crowned his success, inflamed the desire of others to imitation
and rivalship, and to such an extent were their labours
carried that a revolution was effected in the studies of Chris-
tendom, and measures even had to he taken against an
element in literature that threatened the extinction of
Christian ideas. And Avhen Petrarch and Bocaccio passed
away, although they left none to inherit their genius, there
came on a race of quiet workers in the same line, a race of
grammarians and critics, searchers and examiners, that con-
tinued successfully to widen and solidify the great founda-
tion upon Avhich the polite literature of a later Europe was
to rest and he built up.
“ It was from Italy,” says Hallam, “ that the light of
philological learning spread over Europe.” Italy may claim,
Avithout division, the whole glory of the revival of letters.
At the very date of Luther’s revolt there sat in the Chair of
Peter, a Pope (Leo X.) of whom Erasmus wrote—“ He has
the genius and virtues of all the Leos Avho have preceded
him, and to perfect goodness of heart, he unites an incredible
the literature of antiquity had been first cultivated, still
retained her superiority in the fine perceptions of its beauties
and in the power of retracing them by spiritual imitation.”
“ Italia, too, Italia looking on thee
Full flashes on the soul the light o±' ages
Still
The fount of which the panting mind assuages
Her thirst of knowledge, quaffing there her till,
Flows from the eternal source of Home’s imperial hill.’
—(Childe Harold, c. hi. c. X.)


As in letters, so in the cultivation of every branch that
tended to the true development of modern civilisation Italy
" the “ light of ages.” “If there he a church,” says San
Priest, t 4 predestined to a social mission which, far from
throwing obstacles in the way of civilisation, has developed
and fostered its germs, in the focus of ardent faith, the
Roman Church must be recognised by these features.
Her true character was always to unite the maintenance of
faith with the exercises of all the human faculties, to regu-
late them ! all without proscribing any of them.
Rome attached to the altars of Christ the imagination itself,
the rebellious slave of reason. 1 When the Church won her
victory over Pagan Rome, “ she cursed the idols,” says San
Priest, “ the temples.”
Thisjias ever been the policy, the action of the Catholic
Church. Whatever of good, the work and progress of human
ingenuity, throughout the whole extent of its multiplied combi-
nations could achieve, was accepted by the Church, Avas by her
blessed. Whatever was bad she condemned ; whatever was
indifferent, she endured. Wherever she found genius, talent,
whether in the beggar boy of the street, like Luther, or in a
Medici, or Mirandolo, royal by mind and nature, she gave them
both the same chance. Out of her coffers she made the street
boy rich as the prince in all that Avas necessary for mental
development; and profound talent was the key that opened
the way to all her emoluments - from the professor’s chair to
the throne of the Popes. If a Leo X. filled the Papal Chair,
so did a Sixtus Quintus. Her whole domain was the pasture
of the mind, and her supreme policy—the survival of the
fittest.
Her monastic schools were the homes of the needy
scholar. But they were the homes of culture and refinement
—of “ plain living and high thought.” “ Any one Benedictine
Monastery,’ says Gibbon, “ has done more for literature than
our two universities of Oxford and Cambridge,” If a monk
here or there disgraced his call, was the parent to be cursed,
because the son, in spite of care, became a scandal ? Blame
not the warmth of the bosom that fed, but the venom of the
snake that turned and stung.
When Protestantism took possession of Europe, how did
she act towards these abodes, these homes of “ plain living
andhigh thought?”—“ anyone of which did more for literature
than Oxford and Cambridge together.” How did it act
towards every such monument of culture, of progress, of
illumination? It acted as the Goth, the Hun, and the Vandal
acted towards the masterpieces of humanity—laid them
waste with fire and sword! Science, art, literature, civili-
sation went down before their vulgar crucifigatur, with a
hatred and extermination worthy the followers of an Aleric
or a Totila! Here is a part of the picture as drawn by the


hand of even a warm partisan of the Reformation: “It must
be-confessed,” says Charles de Fillers,. “ that the Reformation
was for a time the source of retrogression in letters, culture,
and science. How figure to ourselves the indescribable
devastations of which Germany was the theatre—the Avar of
the peasants of Suabia and Franconia, of the Anabaptists, of
Munster, of the league of Smalkalde against Charles V., which
lasted to the treaty of Westphalia, and even after the treaty
to the end of the bitter contest. The Empire was changed
into a vast cemetery —the tomb of two generations. Cities
were reduced to ashes ; schools deserted ; fields abandoned ;
manufactories in flames ; minds embittered, exasperated by
long divisions. Catholics, Lutherans, Calvinists, Anabaptists,
Moravians, accused each other of the bitter plagues of their
country—torn asunder not only by her own children, but
delivered over to bands of Spaniards and Italians, to the
fanatics of Bohemia, to hordes of Turks, French, Swedes and
Banes, who bore everywhere the carnage and desolation of
civil and religious Avar. A long period is necessary to any
country to recoA'er from such a state of commotion and ruin.
It Avas not only on its native soil, where its cause was main-
tained Avith such obstinacy, that the Reformation produced
such cruel disasters. France escaped not ; but the troubles of
this country were not of such long duration as those of
Germany, which Avas in a most deplorable state when France
had already cured her wounds, and had even arrived at the
v r ery apogy of her literary and political glory. The evils to
the Loav Countries Avere on a par with those of the rest of
the Empire. In fine, England saw herself delivered over to
tAVo intestine commotions, resulting from the same Reforma-
tion. It is clear, that, since the out-pouring of the barbarians
from the North upon the Roman Empire, no event provoked
in Europe, ravages so long and so universal, as the war
enkindled on the hearth of the Reformation. In this respect
it is only too true —it retarded the progress of general
culture.”
And all this in the name of religion—reformation ! True,
incontestibly true, the maimers, the morals of the age wanted
reforming. If, for example, the connubial life of the times
wanted reforming, are we to believe that Luther and his
disciples were divinely inspired to such a reform by the per-
mission of two wives to the Landgrave of Hesse Casel, or six to
Henry VIII. —or sixty-six to either of them, for that matter ?
And if the purity of the priesthood had been infringed, was it
from a divine source that Luther was inspired to reform it by
the violation, in his OAvn person, of every vow and obligation
that heaven and earth must regard as sacred F Truly may it
be said of such reforms and reformers
“ Rules for good manners you with earc indite,
Then, show us what is wrong by what you write.”


In what age is there not room for the reformation of manners,
morals? Reform them, by all means. But woe to the monk
or the “ angel of light ” that presumes to reform the Doctrine of
the Church of Christ!
What a contrast the above presents with the evidence given
on behalf of Catholic times by the ablest men of our age. Bv
Guizot, who declares that the “ Catholic Church powerfully
assisted in forming the character and of furthering the develop-
ment of modern civilisation that her schools and monasteries
“were philosophical schools of Christianity;” and that her
monks “ were active and potent at once in the domain of intellect
and in that of reality ; that the human mind, beaten down by
the storm, took refuge in the asylums of churches and monas-
teries.” By Ranke, who declares that “ a alow but sure and un-
broken progress of intellectual culture had been going on
within its (Church’s) bosom for a series of ages—all the vital
and productive energies of human culture were here united and
mingled.” By Lecky—the “ Papal Government has had no
rival and can have no successor ; the Papal power was on the
whole favourable to liberty ; the Catholic Church was the
representative of progress ; Catholicism laid the very founda-
tions of modern civilisation.” Of Mr. S. Laing—“ the Catholic
Church and her establishments were the only asylums in
which the spirit of freedom and of independence of mind . . .
were lodged, kept alive and nursed to their present maturity ;
all that men have of social, political and religious freedom
may be clearly traced in the history of every country to the
working and effects of the independent power of the Church of
Rome.” “It will remain for ever true,” says another, “ that
the genius of invention created the press under the influence of
the old religion ; that the genius of discovery sailed to the
shores of the New World under the shadow of the cross, and
that the sons of the middle ages laid the foundation of our
own progress.”
“ The nineteenth century,” says Professor Tyndall,“ strikes
its roots into the centuries gone by, and draws nutriment from
them.” “ Not a man in Europe now,” wrote Dr. (Cardinal)
Newman, “ who talks bravely against the Church, but owes it
to the Church that he can talk at all.” Macaulay put it thus—
“We often hear that the world is constantly becoming more
and more enlightened, and that this enlightenment must be
favourable to Protestantism and unfavourable to Catholicism.
We wish we could think so. But we see great reason to doubt
whether this be a well-founded expectation. We see that
during the last three hundred and fifty years the human mind
has been in the highest degree active. . . . Yet we see
that Protestantism has made no conquest worth speaking of. . .
A-s far as there has been a change, that change has been in
favour of the Church of Rome. ... At first the chances
seemed to be decidedly in favour of Protestantism, but the


victory remained with the Church of Rome. Nor has Protest-
antism, in the course of two hundred years, been able to
reconquer any portion of what has been lost. . . . During
the nineteenth century, this fallen Church (Catholic) has been
gradually rising from her depressed state and reconquering her
old dominion, . . . Whatever was lost to Catholicism was
lost also to Christianity. Whatever was regained by Chris-
tianitj- . . . was regained also by Catholicism.
We deem it a most remarkable fact that no Christian nation,
which did not adopt the principles of the Reformation before
the end of the sixteenth century, should ever have adopted
them. Catholic communities have since that time become
intldel and become Catholic again, but none has become Pro-
testant.”
Such was the testimony of the brilliant historian, in his
splendid review of Ranke’s “ History of the Popes,” of the effect
of letters and enlightenment on the march of the Catholic
Church. And it is clear as day, that the impetus which she
then received has increased with the progress of her years,
uutil she stands before the world to-day—nor need we go out of
our glorious colony to see it with such signs of victory on her
brow, as entitle her children to believe, that she is swiftly
aud surely marching to the reconquest of more than ever she
lost, by the blow dealt Christian unity, by the Protestantism of
the sixteenth century. But the severance was that of the
branch from the “ Tree of life.” The unity remains—the
unity is the spiraculum vitcv, , the “ breath of life,” breathed by
Christ into His Church —accipite spiritum —it is the meaning of
her power, the guarantee of her victories.
And the branch—Protestantism—if it be but a branch, will
be eventually—when the sap is dry which it drew from the
Tree when falling—infecund from want of unity—discord will
be its history. Need we pass our own shores to see it—whether
in the display over a panel in a reredos or the election of a
Bishop to a See.
But the fatal disunion is still deeper—is incurable. It has
already branded Protestantism, from its own lips, as a “ hundred
sects battling in one church.” When Dr. Moorhouse, the late
Bishop of Melbourne, made an effort to arrest what he truly
termed in his able address “the fatal progress of division,
which is breaking the Protestant Church to pieces,” this was
his experience :
“In the face of such a spirit .... the attempt to
bring the Protestant churches a little nearer to each other.
seemed to be hoplessly in advance of the age. What could be
the value of brotherly advances by one party in the English
Church, if they were to be accompanied by language so
irritating from another party therein. I felt tempted to recall
that picture of brothers, hopelessly estranged, which represents


them as frowning cliffs, split asunder by an earthquake and
severed by the inrushing sea :
‘ A raging sea now rolls between,
But neither, rain, nor frost, nor thunder,
Can wholly do away, I wean.
The marks of that which once hath been.’
The scorn of the original rift appeared to be ineffaceable,
and it seemed that the raging sea must ever whelm, beneath
its bitter waters of pride and prejudice, every vessel which
strove to bear the olive-branch from one of its shores to the
other 5 must ever drown, in the clamours of its stormy passions,
every timid whisper of returning love.”
No wonder he fled from such a “ vessel ” and such a
“ B ea” to a ship and a haven secured—not by the principles of
religion-but by the power, law and emolument of the State.
No wonder Dr. Barry followed his example.
from the contrast of Catholic unity and Protestant dis-
sension there was, there is, but one conclusion. Macaulay saw
it and announced it in language, the beauty and force of
which shall live as long as it deserves to live —for ever.
“ She (Church of Rime) saw the commencement of all the
Governments and of all the Ecclesiastical establishments that
now exist in the world ; and we feel no assurance that she is
not destined to see the end of them all. She was great and
respected before the Saxon set foot in Britain, before the Frank
had passed the Rh ne, when Grecian eloquence still flourished
at Antioch, when idols were still worshipped in the temple of
Mecca. And she may still exist in undiminished vigour when
some traveller from New Zealand shall, in the midst of a vast
solitude, take his stand on the broken arch of London Bridge to
sketch the ruins of St. Paul’s.”
* RELIGIOUS DISPUTE AT B\THURST.—ORANGEMEN v. BO VI AN
CATHOLICS.
(By Telegraph.)
Bathurst, Monday, 15th July.—Regarding the Orange demonstration
here on Friday last, the Rev. C. stead is reported to have said that in this
colony a man, who was a terrible drunkard, a dreadful swearer and a
thorough-paced gambler, died with marvellous suddenness, and “ his poor
wife paid ti 100 to the priests to get him out of Purgatory.” He mentioned
another c se where an infant, three years old, died, and its mother, who
earned a living by sewing, paid £5 to get it out of Purgatory. Mr. John
Meagher has publicly offered that if Mr. Stead proves that the priests
accepted the money alle ed to have been paid in either case he (Mr.
Meagher) will place £5O in the hands of the editor of the Bathurst Thnes
and another £5O in the hands of the lady president of the Poor Relief
Society. —Sydney Daily Telegraph.
[Rev. Mr. Stead failed to take advantage of Mr. Meagher's offer. Ed.]
J. G. O’CONNOB, “Nation ” Steam Printing Works, 82 & 84 Clarence-st.


