

THE
BETTERMENT OF THE MASSES
AND
CHRISTIANISING
THE HEATHEN AT HOME.
AN APPEAL
IN AID OF THE
WORK OF THE CONGREGATION
OF THE
MISSIONERS
OF
St. GREGORY THE GREAT,
BY THE
VERY REV. PRIOR VAUGHAN,
C.S.G.
Sydney:
Batson & Co., Ltd., Printers, 146 Clarence Street,
1895.




THE
BETTERMENT OF THE MASSES
AND
CHRISTIANISING
THE HEATHEN AT HOME.
AN APPEAL
IN AID OF THE
Work of the Congregation
OF THE
MISSIONERS
OF
ST. GREGORY THE GREAT,
BY THE
VERY REV. PRIOR VAUGHAN,
G. S. O.
cSjjiniC}) :
Batson & Co., Ltd., Printers, 146 Clarence Street,
1895.




The Conversion of the Heathen at Home.
JRHE British Empire, of which it is the boast and privilege
X> of this vast continent of Australia to be an honoured
and integral part, is the greatest empire of the world. Never
has there been, either in ancient or modern times, a dominion
that can compare with it, either in extent, or wealth, or
civilizing influence. Under Divine Providence, it has been
the vehicle for spreading Christianity and civilization through-
out the world. In the wide universe, nowhere does the
Catholic and Roman Church (not to mention other religious
bodies), with its two hundred and fifty millions of adherants, its
four English-speaking Cardinals, its 28 English-speaking Arch-
bishops, its more than 265 English-speaking Bishops and
Prelates—nowhere, I say, does it enjoy greater freedom of
speech and action than in those countries and colonies that
live under the benign sceptre of her Imperial Majesty the
Queen. Great Britain, geographically, is but a dot on the
map, consisting, Ireland included, of only 121,115 square
miles, whereas her Empire covers 11,335,806 square miles.
The population of the United Kingdom, as shown by the last
census of 1891, reached nearly thirty-nine millions
(38,900,000), but the Empire comprises more than three
hundred and eighty-one millions (381,371,894) of grateful
subjects (The Statesman’s Year Book , 1894, p. 30). On the
high seas, England’s sway is unmatched, and her merchant-
men are unrivalled. Of the ships that bore 200,000 passengers
last year through the Suez Canal, 75 per cent hoisted the
British flag, and 80 per cent, were plying to and from British
ports. Her carrying power nearly equals that of all other
powers combined, her tonnage in 1888 being close on twenty-
three millions (22,895,000), as against twenty-six millions of
the rest of the world (Dictionary of Statistics, 1892 ; Mulhall,
p. 521). Her language is daily spoken by a hundred millions


of people, and understood by fifty millions more, and bids fair
to become the language of the world. ( Whitaker , p. 321.)
Oh! what honour and glory might this gigantic and world-
wide Empire give to God! What an instrument she might
become for the salvation of mankind. What sovereign
remedies she might put forth to heal the wounds and woes of
suffering humanity.
If, Ladies and Gentlemen, this present world was the
be-all and the end-all of man ; if he had been created
for no higher destiny than the enjoyment of the wealth,
honour, and power of this lower world, we might then rest
satisfied with this glowing picture, so flattering to our national
pride. But this would be to live in a fool’s paradise, to hug a
one-sided picture. For the true greatness of a Christian State
is not to be gauged by its material and temporal prosperity,
by the strength of its batallions, or its actual preeminence
amongst the nations, but rather by the purity of its morals,
the sensitiveness of its public opinion, the righteous principles
that guide and shape its practical politics, and above all by
that lofty and beauteous Christian tone and spirit which
influences the eternal destinies of its people, their future lives
of everlasting happiness or of woe.
To the carnal minded, England, perhaps, at present lies
basking in the zenith of her glory, whilst to the eye of the
snirit, to him who looks beneath the surface and measures the
x /
things of time by the standard of eternity, she presents a
spectacle of the most heartrending and sickening description.
This lamentable spiritual condition into which England is
sunk forms the raison d’etre of the work to which I have
pledged the remaining years of my life and strength, and it is
the nature, scope, and methods of this work which it is my
honour and privilege to unfold this evening before this large,
intelligent, and distinguished audience. Whilst aiming to
arrest your attention for an hour, and win your sympathy, I
would also fain enkindle your well-tested benevolence, and
quicken it into active co-operation on behalf of the apostolic
and glorious mission which I am here permitted to advocate.
That mission or w r ork is, in a nutshell, the spiritual better


merit of the masses in the mother country, and Christianising
the heathen at home. That there is need, a crying need, for
such work you will, I trust, concede before I have reached the
end of this address. To convince you of this cardinal point,
it will suffice to sketch in rapid outline the conditions,
economic, social, moral, and religious, under which the masses
of our teeming population spend their lives, or rather eke out
a wretched existence.
1. First, then, with regard to the economic and, social
condition of the masses in England. In Great Britain, more
emphatically than in any other country, extremes meet. On
the one hand, we have colossal fortunes and a national annual
income calculated at one billion three hundred millions of
sovereigns (Mulhall’s Dictionary ), and on the other hand, at
the very doors of the opulent, we find the most dire poverty
and destitution. The murky pall of pauperism covers the
length and breadth of the land, shutting out happiness and
sunshine from countless lives. No less than 649 workhouses
rear their foreboding towers and stretch forth their huge
wings over every part of the country. On January Ist, 1893
—on which day the census was taken —776,458 paupers
received shelter or outdoor relief throughout the Kingdom, of
whom 107,178 were able-bodied men or women, whom
destitution and starvation had driven to these dreaded
asylums. But for the open doors of these Unions, thousands
of the homeless would die like flies on the high road, or fall
lifeless into the gutters o our city slums. “ Death from
actual hunger,” writes a grave authority, “is more common
than is generally supposed.” (In Darkest England, p. 34.)
But if you would see a specimen of the social and economic
condition of England’s masses, enter the slums of any df our
overgrown cities. Bend your steps, for instance, towards the
East End of London. Thread your way along the miles of
narrow, tortuous streets of this modern Babylon, and there
you will encounter the wild beasts of enbrutalised humanity,
the tattered victims of vice and despair, the wallowers in the
cesspool of incest and sodomy, and drunken herds of the
living damned. Or again, enter into the first tenement you


see, and what meets your gaze ? Probably a small room,
10ft. by 12ft., that has to do service for kitchen, bedroom, and
parlour. A girl in the last stages of consumption lies in one
corner on a bed of rotting rags. The mother stops at home to
mind her little ones. A flaxen-haired boy is staggering at
her side, begging with stammering lips and large tender eyes
for a crust of bread, but there is none to give him. The
father has not yet returned home. He is out hawking to earn
a few precarious shillings to keep the wolf from the door.
The evening meal is thin and scanty. A foul stench rises
from the floor, and in spite of the open door the air is stifling
and unfit to breathe. Night brings some relief with its
sleeping hours of unconsciousness, when the half-famished
family, mother and father and some six children, stretch their
weak and weary limbs upon the ground, mingling indis-
criminately without regard to either ages and sexes. This is
by no means an extreme case. “There are in the slums of
our great cities,” writes a living witness, “ vile dens, fever-
haunted, and stenchful crowded courts, where the return of
summer is dreaded, because it means the unloosing of myriads
of vermin, which render night unbearable, and which, never-
theless, are regarded as havens of rest by their hardworking
occupants.” (In Darkest England, ch. V.).
But we have not yet bottomed the worst. “ There is a
depth below that of the dweller in the slums. It is that of
the dweller in the streets, who has not even a lair in the
slums which he can call his own.” In London, during the
course of a single night, 368 persons were found sleeping in
the open-air along the line of the Thames, between Blackfriars
and Westminster. Mr. Arnold Smith, an enthusiastic student
of the social problem, during one bleak winter counted over
4000 men sleeping out of doors like animals. Nor is this
state of things confined to London. It extends, in a lesser or
greater degree, to all our huge hives of human industry
throughout the country —Newcastle and Leeds, Sheffield and
Liverpool, Manchester and Bolton, Birmingham and Bristol,
and the rest. To conclude my sketch of the economic and
social condition of the masses, it is calculated that 4,500,000
out of our entire population receive poor-relief or charity in


one shape or another during the course of the year. That is
to say, about one-eighth of our people are constantly driven to
seek help from others to keep soul and body together.
(“ Historical Bases of Socialism in England fp. 338. H.
M. Hyndman.) Not to speak of other cities, “in the East-end
of London,” says Mr. Charles Booth, “one half of the
population should be set down as very poor. But, when we
count up the 100,000 individuals, and the 20,000 families who
lead so pinched a life, and remember that there are double
that number who, if not actually pressed by want, have
nothing to spare, we stand aghast from the picture (“ Life and
Labour of the Boor in London ” Vol. 1, p. 178), and cease to
wonder that the roar of the famished multitude threatens the
destruction of the social fabric.
Nevertheless, this picture is bright and cheering as
compared to the moral and religious condition of the masses.
Poverty is in itself no crime. It has been sanctified in the
divine person of the Man of Sorrow, and blessed by His sweet
promise— the poor have the Gospel preached to them—
whereas immorality and irreligion are essentially evil, sapping
the basis of the Christian family, blotting out the image of
God from the soul, and calling down upon the head of the
wilful, the doom of the undying damned.
2. This brings me to the second point, the moral condition
of the people. With reference to this question of paramount
importance, our criminal statistics reveal a conditi m of things
that sends colour to our cheeks. Vice and crime of every
description are committed in open day, and the standard of
morality, even among respectable livers, is of the lowest
order. The habitual violators of the laws of the land constitute
a vast army of marauders, who may be divided into three
classes —the drunkard, the vicious, and the criminal. If to
these we add those destitute and homeless poor, already
described, some of whom are honest and industrious, but who
for the most part are the victims of drink, we have in England
a gigantic multitude as large as the population of Scotland,
the “ Submerged Tenth,” those “ who have gone under,” and
flung law and morality to the four winds. The drink
difficulty, no doubt, is in a great measure responsible for this


appalling state of things. It is calculated that for every man
arrested for drunkenness twenty escape detection. Never-
theless, every year there are 200,000 arrests for drunkenness,
the outcome of the 190,000 gin palaces and beer bars licensed
throughout the United Kingdom. As for the vicious, who
live on vice, their name is legion. What are the number of
ill-fame in the country the Government rightly keeps dark.
The number of known prostitutes and habitually unchaste
women in London alone are computed by some authorities at
over 60,000. Nor is the morality in the rural districts much
better than that of the towns. The miserable dwellings of the
farm labourer, which characterises certain counties, are in a
great measure responsible for this. “ I only wonder,” writes
an Anglican clergyman, “ that our agricultural people are as
moral as they are. Modesty must be an unknown virtue
decency an unimaginable thing where in one small chamber
with the beds lying as thickly as they can be placed, father,
mother, young men, lads, grown-up and growing girls —two
and sometimes three generations —are herded promiscuously
where every operation of the toilette and of nature, dressing
and undressing, births, deaths, is performed by each within the
sight and hearing of all ; where the whole atmosphere is
sensual, and human nature is degraded into something below
the level of swine.” Historical Basis of Socialism in
England p. 322, by H. M. Hyndman.) This condition of
things has, however, been somewhat ameliorated within the
last decade by the erection of model dwellings for the poor.
Much still remains to be done.
As for our criminal classes, who exist by crime, they are
swarming in every large town, and infest every cheap trip,
every crowded assembly, and every racecourse. Criminals
are either casual or professional, and these latter form nine-
tenths of the number, and to them only are we now referring.
Mr. W. R. Greg gives us an insight into their character.
They are, he says, brought up in crime, follow it as a
profession, practise it regularly as a livelihood. It furnishes
their daily bread. It is to them a profession with its regular
steps, in which petty larceny is the lowest grade, and burglary


the culminating honour. Few of the criminal population
become criminals from sheer want, also few comparatively
become thieves in later life. All are juvenile delinquents
before becoming hardened malefactors, and an old thief,
usually when he is in prison, and always when he is out of it,
is training the younger sinners (Political Problems, Chapter
III.). On an average, a young thief carries on his trade with
impunity for six years. Nine-tenths of the crimes committed
escape detection altogether. In 1889 there were 89,046
criminals in gaol on the same day. In the metropolitan
district alone 66,100 arrests are made every year, of whom
some 440 are arrested for trying to commit suicide, so
wretched are their lives and so destitute of those principles of
religion which alone can support and comfort them in the hour
of adversity. As a rule, not one-third of the persons arrested
are convicted. This notwithstanding, “in the year 1887 the
number of convictions for crimes was 163,359. Of these 163
were for murder, 970 for stabbing and shooting, 3952 for
burglary, 878 for attacks on women, 5863 for grave crimes,
47,223 for robbery, 75,873 for assaults, and for other criminal
offences 34,400. This list does not include conviction for
minor offences, which reached the number of 529,435, making
a grand total for one year of 692,814 criminal or semi-criminal
convictions” ( Dictionary of Statistics , 1892; MulhalFs p.
165). These figures will unbosom more clearly than words
the condition of morality amongst the masses.
To most persons this state of things I have been describing
may appear incomprehensible. The Hon. Chief Justice Way,
of Adelaide, assured me the other day that anything like a
criminal class such as exists in England is unknown in
Australasia. Nor indeed could it exist anywhere, except in
communities where the population is dense, and the exigencies
of civilisation complex. What lies at the root of these
multifold evils is the absence of religion. This is the
growing curse of England —and it brings me to our
third point, the religious condition of the masses.
The census of 1891 shows the population of England and
Wales to be something over twenty-nine millions (29,061,045).


Of this number not more than 2,000,000 profess the Catholic
faith. The rest of the population may be divided into two
classes. Firstly : Protestants , under which term are grouped
a host of sects and denominations of various shapes and sizes,
numbering, according to Whitaker , over 300 religious bodies.
Secondly : Non-Christians, a most comprehensive and
predominating class, who live in a state of utter apathy with
regard to all religion, who never set foot in a church from
year’s end to year’s end, who profess no dogmatic creed, who
smile contemptuously at the Incarnation and Atonement, who
question the existence of a personal G-od, and of a future state
of reward and punishment, who disbelieve in the immortality
of their own souls, and, in a word, who are more pagan than
were our Anglo-Saxon forefathers, to whom St. Augustine
brought the glad tidings of the Gospel. Hitherto England has
never by any public act or national apostacy denied the
existence of God or ceased to be a Christian nation. But alas !
she is now drifting into infidelity and gradually becoming
dechristianised. Stripped of the garment of grace and fidelity
which won for her the glorious titles of the Isle of Saints, she
lies grievously sick, panting heavily, and gasping to fill her
lungs with spiritual life in a godless atmosphere. Indifferentism,
scepticism, atheism, materialism, are rampant, and have
infested, like plagues and pests, the club and the stock
exchange, the palaces of the opulent, and the dwellings of the
poor, the factory and the studio, the country villages and the
teeming towns, threatening the stability of order and society,
undermining secretly the foundations of morality and of the
commonwealth, and even of religion itself. To descend to
particulars. Take the rural districts. We are told by the
learned Dr. Lee, Vicar of All Saints’, Lambeth, that less than
16 per cent, of the agricultural population are baptized.
(Church under Elizabeth, v ol. 1., ch. 29.) In other words,
eighty-four out of every hundred are under the ban of original
sin, and debarred from the beatific vision. An immense
section are also in a state of class ignorance with regard to the
most elementary teachings of Christianity. They received no
religious instruction in the secular schools in their youth, and


have had no opportunity of acquiring any since. They live
for the day, and spend their lives, like the brute creation,
without any reference to God or a future life. Consequently
they give the Church a wide berth on a Sunday, unless perchance
they be poked up reluctantly by some mother-bountiful.
Now let us turn to the towns. Let us begin with “ Greater
London,” with its population of nearly six millions. What do
we find there ? A general and profound indifference as to
matters that have reference to the invisible world. Few of
the churches are filled on Sundays. Indeed, if every place
of worship were packed morning and evening throughout the
metropolis and its suburbs, they would not supply accommoda-
tion for half the population. It has been calculated that
only 30 per cent, of the people of London ever set their foot
in any church from one year’s end to the other. In other
words, that two out of every three persons you meet in the
streets are destitute of all practical religion. Other cities
show up even worse. Sheffield yielded only 23 per cent, of
churchgoers, Liverpool 26 per cent. Even these figures, as
Mr. Mulhall remarks, are in excess of the real percentage,
many persons going to church twice. It may be of interest to
note that of the total number of worshippers 37 per cent,
attended the Church of England and 53 per cent, were
Dissenters (Dictionary of Statistics, 1892, p. 513.).
If such be the religious condition of the well-to-do people
in our cities, picture the spiritual degradation of the unre-
generate masses, the miners in our pits, the operatives before
the blast furnaces, the artizans in our workshops, and the
factory hands.
Last year I accosted a respectable and intelligent-looking
man in one of our watering towns near Liverpool. Before
we parted I asked him what religion he followed. With a
smile he replied, “ I belong to one of a large class. Mine is
the cock-and-hen religion.” And what may that be ? “ Why
just this. I scratch away all the week and roost with my wife
on the Sunday.”
The well-known authority, Mr. W. R. Greg, observes .
“ A very large population, probably the majority of the


operative classes in towns, are total unbelievers, and these are
not the reckless and disreputable, but, on the contrary, consist
of the best of the skilled workmen, the most instructed and
thoughtful, as well as the steadiest. The hard-headed, indus-
trious reading engineers and foremen, the members of
mechanics’ institutes, the natural leaders of the artizans, are
sceptics intellectually, not morally.” (Bocks Ahead , p. 130.)
Another writer, referring to the general condition of the
laboring classes in large factory towns, has expressed his
feelings in the following words:—“Their existence has
always presented a painful difficulty to me, for, if there is no
other life, I think they have a very bad time of it here ; and if
there is another life, I think they will all certainly he damned .”
Without endorsing so sweeping an assertion, may we not say
with whitened lips that the condition of the masses of the
English people, economic, social, moral, and religious, is such
as to dim, if it were possible, the very eyes of God with tears
where he sits in glory ?
Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, there is but one
remedy against these crying evils which I have arrayed before
you, there is but one sovereign medicine that can mitigate
their bitterness and dispel their darkness, one power only and
one, and that power is the power of religion.
Religion is in the beginning the learning of God, and true
religion is the blessedness arising from that knowledge.
Without God man is lonely throughout time and eternity.
But if he loves God he is no longer alone with his own spirit
but in companionship with that inborn friend of his
innermost soul, the Everlasting Who will abandon the soul
which he has created as little as it can abandon itself.
Efface God from the heart and you blot sunshine out of life
Introduce the knowledge and love of Jesus Christ and Him
crucified, let that knowledge be clear and definite, and that
love be a burning fire, and you bring comfort to the forlorn
resignation to the destitute, hope to the despairing, sobriety to
the* dnlnkard, chastity to the prostitute, honesty to the
criminal, and to the heathen peace and joy in believinq.


Compare, by way of illustration, the unaided forces oof
human nature with the restraining and transcendant power of
Christianity. A godless man, a man destitute of religion,
when suddenly overwhelmed by some crushing calamity, how
does he too frequently conduct himself ? He either sinks into
the slough of despondency, or lifts the inebriating goblet to
his lips, or even draws the open razor across his jugular vein.
The Christian, on the contrary, seeks comfort in another
direction. He flings himself upon the Crucifix, and relieving
his bursting heart over the pierced feet of his Divine Master,
he sobs aloud, “ Not my will, 0 Lord, but Thine be done.”
He consoles himself with the thought that the Cross is a
pledge of God’s love—that in proportion to his Christian
patience here so shall be his reward hereafter —that not a hair
of his head falls to the ground without the pleasure and per-
mission of an ever-wakeful Providence —and, in fine, that the
light and momentary sufferings of this time are not worthy to
be compared to the weight of glory to come which shall be
revealed in him.
But the “submerged tenth” and the countless heathens in
the ranks of the labouring man and of the mechanic enjoy no
such sources of consolation. For them there is no watchful
Eye above following their every footstep ; no heaven and no
hell; no future state to look forward to wherein the inequalities
and wrongs of the present will be redressed—-where the balance
will be reversed as well as rectified. What is the consequence?
Seeing no prospect of any amelioration of their miserable
condition here and possessing no hope of any compensation
hereafter, they grow daily more and more discontented and
exasperated with their lot, till life at last becomes so utterly
burdensome and hideous as to make existence itself insuffer-
able, maddening, and hellish. • ; kil
Ah! if only the fundamental doctrines of Christianity could
be instilled into the minds and hearts of these pitiable creatures,
and be so brought to bear upon them and driven home, as to
mould and colour and direct their daily lives and actions, there
is assuredly nothing better calculated' than.j these.*, potent
verities, these well-springs of religion, to soften and chasten the


sufferings of the poor, to bring patience and contentment into
the house of the working-man, to solve the problems of labour
and capital, to put an end to the colossal strikes which are
dislocating our trade and ruining our commerce —nothing, in
a word, better qualified to stem the rising tide of socialism,
and quell the distant thunder of anarchy.
Clearly, then, the most potent method of bettering the
economic, moral, and religious condition of the masses, of
Christianising the heathen at home, and of bringing some
sunshine into the hearts of the homeless, the hopeless, and the
helpless, is to indoctrinate the masses with the fundamental
truths of our common Christianity, to carry to them the glad
tidings of the Gospel, to hold up the torch of Faith at their
very doors, to go out into the highways and byways, the
hedges and ditches, and compel them to enter into the
marriage feast and partake of the banquet. Hundreds of
thousands of wandering sheep, friendless and fatherless, are
awaiting our ministrations. From their sin-stained souls
there rises a cry ever and anon for spiritual bread, and there
is nobody to break it unto them. Their hearts are at times
athirst for the refreshing waters of life, but there is no
physician at the well to give them to drink. To grasp the
horny hands of these sons of toil, to fling our arms around
their necks arid conduct them gently to the tender and divine
Shepherd of their souls, to teach them to bear their privations
and hardships with patience and joy—such is the apostolate
whose cause I am here to advocate to-night ; such is the vast
and arduous work which lies before the Gregorian missioner.
If this be the work, you will naturally ask who are the
workers ?
The workers are members of the congregation of the
missioners of St. Gregory the Great, and also devout
laymen who may wish to volunteer in the service.
The missioners are called after the Apostle of England,
because as his heart was burning for the conversion of
our pagan forefathers, so should they be all on fire
in the work of evangelising those millions of home-born
heathens, who are sitting in the darkness of ignorance and the


shadow of death. Unlike the ordinary parochial clergy, their
time, talents and energies, are therefore devoted almost
exclusively to the non-Catholic population. Moreover, they
are religious men, who take simple and perpetual vows of
poverty, chastity and obedience, so that being thus, like Christ
on the cross, stripped of all things, they may the more perfectly
walk in the footsteps of the Good Shepherd, and more easily
win the hearts of the poor. The Gregorian Congregation was
founded some two years ago bv the Cardinal Archbishop of
Westminster to meet the wants of the times. It has made a
start. It has an authorised code tor its internal government. It
has secured a house and property on the outskirts of Manchester
at Charlton-cum-Hardy. To-day it is but a mustard seed, but in
God’s own good time it will grow into a large tree and spread
out its branches far and wide. Its members have a home.
They have security of tenure. They are not liable to be
whipped on a sudden to the other end of the world. Their
vineyard is in England. I hey can settle down to a life s
work, and combine the activity of missionary enterprise
with all the consolations and helps of religious life. Voca-
tions will not be wanting for so glorious an apostolate, nor
will the necessary means fail to sustain and develop the work.
Is it not a reproach and a shame that whilst the heathens of
China and Japan, of New Zealand, and of the Pacific Islands
have their missioners, and teachers and preachers, our own
countrymen and fellow citizens —men and women of the same
race and tongue as ourselves—are neglected and allowed to
remain sunk in the lowest depths of degradation ? Let us
continue our charity by all means to the heathen abroad, but
for God’s sake neglect not the millions of poor heathens at
home.
And what, you will next ask, is the plan of campaign
adopted by the Gregorian Missioner in his warfare against
ignorance and sin? Turn over the early pages of English
history, and there you will find the models which he follows.
When the monk St. Augustine and his benedictine brethren
landed on the pagan shores of Kent, what did they do ? They
raised the standard of Christ crucified on the Cross, unfurled


their painted banners representing the mysteries of our
redemption, made the air resound with their hymns and
psalms, and went in procession to King Ethelbert, and, under
the spreading oak, and with the open Bible, they taught the
illiterate people more clearly by means of pictures than words,
the essential doctrines of Christianity. They did not first
wait to seek out or build cosy dwellings, nor did they remain
sitting quietly near the blazing hearth in the comfortable
chimney corner, until a rap came to the door with a request
from some suffering soul to be received into the fold. Neither
did they retire to their rude churches and wait for our pagan
forefathers to seek them out there. No! They sallied forth
to the people and got into personal contact with them, moved
amongst them, won their and then, with hearts
burning with God’s love —love acquired by stated hours of
prayer and meditation, of study and retirement —they taught
as men having power, won souls to God, and transformed the
face of the land. Whilst taking sufficient nourishment and
relaxation to maintain themselves in health, good spirits, and
bodily vigour, they eschewed superfluities, and shunned all
amusements calculated to impair discipline, or that might
weaken or lower their standard of apostolic life.
Such is the role which the modern missioners of St.
Gregory the Great are invited to play in the new drama
of the reconversion of heathen England to Christianity. Like
the Gregorians of old, they also carry the open Bible to the
masses and instruct them in the principal events ot the life and
passion of our Blessed Lord and this more vividly through the
eye than by words, that is by means of coloured paintings,
oleographs, published not in Rome, but by the Protestant
Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge. Again,
to guard the missioners against exhaustion or spiritual deteri-
oration, the method adopted is the following:—
Given a dozen Gregorian Missioners, six of them would be
away from home, announcing to the people the message ”ot
salvation, teaching the masses that they have souls to save and
how to save them, and assembling them sometimes in the open
air, or perhaps under a spacious tent, or in some large room in


a village, or within the public hall of a country town, as the
case might be. The other six would remain at home, praying
like Moses on the mountain whilst their brethren are fighting
the Philistines on the plain. When the first six are well nigh
exhausted and spent, they would return home for rest and to
recruit, whilst the other six, who in the meantime had been
preparing themselves by study, prayer, and retirement for a
fresh campaign, would sally forth in their turn and do battle
for the Kingdom of God. at v»f? d' ;
Ladies and Gentlemen, this arduous and gigantic mission
which I have sketched in outline, cannot be accomplished in one
lifetime, nor perhaps even within one century. To perpetuate
the work, we must take steps to secure a succession of Mis-
sioners who may carry it on when we are all dead and gone.
To trust to casual volunteers, would be to court failure:
Students will require to be specially educated, and trained to fit
them for the work proposed. Hence the erection of a Mission-
ary College with suitable church attached, together with a
permanent fund for the maintenance of the college is of first
importance.
The next point included in our many-sided scheme is a free
hall for instructive lectures and entertainments for the people.
Again, a working man’s club, as an inducement to keep the
labourer out of the public houses. Finally, a kitchen or hospice
where half-starved children and the unemployed at different
hours could procure a substantial meal for a nominal sum, and
where the fathers and brothers would welcome and wait upon
the forlorn visitors, not in a perfunctory manner, but as upon
the person of Christ himself. Bear also in mind that the
Gregorian missioner is strictly forbidden by rule to take up any
collection when preaching to the masses. Such collections
have a deterrent effect, and in some cases defeat the chief
object the true missioner has in view. Our aim is to ■
save the souls of the people, not to e:enr*pty x their
impoverished pockets. Nevertheless the sinews of war are ’
necessary. Journeys have to be made, and butchers and
bakers paid, even by those who preach the Gospel. For !
as the French proverb has it, ‘‘ One cannot make omelettes


without sg^s* 5 * Hence in aid of these various requirements
three accounts have been opened at the Bank of New South
Wales, namely : 1. A building fund. 2. An educational
fund for training Gregorian students, 3. An active missionary
fund. All three funds are necessary for the full development
of the Gregorian mission, and a person not feeling disposed to
give to one fund may give to another. Finally, that bene-
factors may have the satisfaction of knowing how, when, and
where their money has been spent, the Gregorian account
books will he audited every year, and the report published.
Your Excellency, ladies, and gentlemen, such is the scheme
which I have the honour of laying before your generous con-
sideration. I trust that you will pronounce by acclamation
that it meets with your approval, and that it is deserving of
public support, and is of urgent necessity. No time should be
lost iii pushing it forward. Every year on an average
throughout England and Wales some 600,000 souls are sum-
moned before the judgment seat of God and hear their
irrevocable sentence. Out of this number, it is computed
some 17,000 meet with sudden and violent deaths. In the
year 1886 the number was 17,411. (Mulhall’s Dictionary,
18&2, p. 182.) Take this startling fact into account, and
recall to your minds the state of spiritual degradation of the
masses, and then divine how many souls out of this motley
multitude are saved, how many are condemned and lost. To
be damned once is to be lost for ever.
Ah, my friends, we who are bound together by a common
brotherhood in Christ Jesus, and by the inseparable bond of a
common Christianity —let us to the rescue and snatch the
brand from the burning. No believer in Christ will deny
that any form of Christianity is better than heathenism,
that some religion is preferable to none. Your presence
here to-night is a pledge that your hands of charity are
not fettered and manacled by any narrow or sectarian spiiit.
In the presence of a common enemy we are all prepared
to sink differences and rally round our common
standard, which is Christ in the person of His poor.
When brave hearts rush to man the lifeboat, who then caies


aught for their religious opinions ? Or again, when a hospital
is on fire and the screams of the inmates are heard above the
crackling of the flames and thud of the falling beams, who
questions then the creed of those heroic men who dash into the
smoke and the heat and bear out upon their shoulders into the
open the halt and the blind and the maimed ?
When General Booth visited the colonies some few years
ago, he met, I am told, with a most magnificent and munificent
reception in Sydney. Will then the citizens of Sydney close
their hearts against a similar work, conducted, I will venture to
say, on more economic and rational lines, and where all things
are above board? Will you look upon the meritorious cause
which I am advocating as something strange and foreign,
or rather will you not open your arms wide and embrace it,
and espouse it and make it your own, you who are connected
by so many tender ties with the Mother Country, and who
form so integral and glorious a portion of the British Empire.
Ladies and Gentlemen, the work before us, humanly
speaking, may be the leading of a forlorn hope. But with
God all things are possible. In Him is our trust. His
everlasting arms will support us, and flis grace give efficacy
to faltering words. “ There is no more magnificent work,’’
says the Angel of the Schools, “than to co-operate with God
in the salvation of souls.” It is the surest way of securing
our own salvation, and an unfading crown in eternal bliss.’
“ He who causeth a sinner to be converted from the error of
his ways shall save his soul from death, and cover a
multitude of sins” (St. James, v. 20) ; and, “They that
instruct many to justice shall shine as stars for all
eternity ” (Daniel, xii., 3).


NOTICE.
* “The sinews of war”- are urgently needed for promoting and con-
solidating the work of the Congregation of the Missionaries of St. Gregory the
Great.
Donations may either be given during life or bequeathed after death.
£l,OOO entitles the donor to be regarded and honoured as a Founder.
His name will be inscribed as such on a brass plate, and daily prayers will be
said for his temporal and eternal welfare. £l,OOO constitutes a Bursary for the
education of a Gregorian student.
£5OO entitles the donor to be regarded and honoured as a Promoter.
His name will be inscribed amongst the list of Promoters, and daily prayers
will be said for his temporal and eternal welfare.
£lOO entitles the donor to be regarded and honoured as a Benefactor,
and to be “affiliated” to the congregation as an outside member, and to
participate in the merits of its labors.
£1 and upwards entitles the donor to have his name registered in the
Gregorian Chronicle preserved in the archives -of the Priory. This chronicle
will”be' placed every Sunday at the foot of the altar during the Exposition
of the B. Sacrament, and the persons whose names are therein recorded will,
be publicly prayed for.
7'70;) : ' , 77.77. *77.''' 0177! 777 .'7 ;i 77 77 V, 7 / 7i
Zelators are zealous c and devout persons of either sex who unite in the
work of the Gregorian congregation by collecting subscriptions. They are
invested with a badge, for which they can apply to the Very Rev. Prior
Vaughan, by whom they will be enrolled as Zelators, and receive collectihg
cards duly signed.


Donation Form for the Work of the Gregorian Missioners.
Subscriptions may be sent either to the Very Rev. Prior Vaughan, Australian
Club, Sydney; or to Lady Parley, Quambi, Albert Street, Woollahra,
Sydney.
I beg to enclose towards the
1. Building Fund - £ •
2- Educational Fund - £ :
8- Active Missionary Fund, - £
The Total Amount being £
Fame of Donor
Address
*


