

THE AYLESBURY LEAP;
OVER THE NUTS AND WINE.




The following verses were published originally in ?The
Stable and Kennel,? London, 23rd September, 1899.
Vol. 11. p. 254.
The Aylesbury Leap took place at the Stewards?Ordin-
ary at the White Hart Hotel, after the Aristocratic Stee-
plechases, on the 13th Feb., 1850.
A fine print depicting the performance of this remark-
able feat was published 20th Sep., 1851. See reproduction
in ?The Stable and Kennel,? Vol. I. p. 578.
Although the verses are written in the first person it is
perhaps unnecessary for the writer to state that the in-
cident recorded in them actually took consider-
ably before his time.




THE AYLESBURY LEAP;
OVER THE NUTS AND WINE.
SIR EDWARD MACKENZIE MACKENZIE, BART.




The ?chasers were back in their stable,
Well had they played their part,
The waiters were laying the table
Up at the old White Hart;
?Twas the night of the Aylesbury races,
There had we met to dine;
And to fight o?er again the ?chases,
Over the nuts and wine.


WE TALKED OF SOME MIGHTY LEAPS, AND FALLS I


We talked of some mighty leaps?and falls I
Of Banks?s famous horse, 1
Who ran on the dome of Old St. Paul?s
His wond?rous steeple course I
And of steeds who?d mounted stairs 2 of old, ?
I would the space were mine
To give the various tales we told
Over the nuts and wine.




Now one of our number owned a grey,
The gamest of the game,
A steed that we all resolved, straightway,
Should gain an equal fame;?
On the oaken stair is a stamping sound, ?
Its cause you all divine,?
That steed next moment was gazing round
Over the nuts and wine.




?Twas not enough that he?d climbed the stair.
That good and gallant grey;
?To leap o?er the table,? all declare,
?Will crown a glorious day!?
A rider 3 leaps on the bare-backed grey,?
The mane his hands entwine, ?
?Sic Itur ad Astra 4 ? meant that day
t* Over the nuts and wine!




For up from the polished wooden floor,
Swift as the whirring wing
Of wild-fowl, startled, about to soar,
The horse and rider spring;?
Over the table whose tapers tall
Brightly beneath them shine,?
Over the jingling glasses all,?
Over the nuts and wine I




Such was the famous Aylesbury leap,
A tale that ne?er grows old ;
In lands ?neath the Southern Cross that sleep
E?en there ?tis often told,?
It is one of those old-time glories
Old sportsmen?s hearts enshrine,
And is one of their fav?rite stories
Over the nuts and wine.








NOTES.
?Morocco; one of whose feats was to mount the stee-
ple of St. Paul?s. His shoes were of silver.
2 Numerous instances of horses mounting flights of stairs
are on record.
3 Mr John Leech Maning.
4 Virgil, ALn. ix. 641.




'


