

THE MYSTERY OF A MOTOR CAB


" ! *’ ■‘Li*


Veil's UnMan anb Colonial library
The Mystery of a Motor
Cab


The Mystery
of a
Motor Cab
BY
FERGUS HUME
AUTHOR OF
“The Mystery of a Hansom Cab,"
“The Purple Fern,” &c., &c.
London:
GEORGE BELL & SONS.
MDCCCCVIII.


This Edition is intended for circulation
only in India and the British Colonies.


CONTENTS
CHAP. PAGE
I. WHO KILLED THE CHAUFFEUR? 7
11. ANOTHER DISCOVERY 20
111. BREAKING THE NEWS .... • • 33
IV. AN ACCUSATION 44
V. THE INQUEST 55
VI. A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE 69
VII. WILFRED DARTON 82
VIII. A PRIVATE INQUIRY AGENT 94
IX. A DEFENCE ........ 106
X. A SURPRISE VISIT 118
XI. WHAT ELLEN KNEW 129
XII. THE ETERNAL FEMININE 141
XIII. HONOUR AMONGST THIEVES 153
xiv. a woman's love 165
XV. A FORLORN HOPE 177
XVI. THE TELEGRAM 188
XVII. JEALOUSY 200
XVIII. ANOTHER COMPLICATION 211
XIX. THE MISSING BOY 223
XX. THE NEW CLUE 235
XXI. A GREAT SURPRISE 246
XXII. DR. DARTON'S SECRET 256
xxiii. Arthur’s story 266
XXIV. PADDY O'TOOLE 279
XXV. THE TRUTH 288
XXVI. THE JUSTICE OF THE GODS 301




The Mystery of a Motor
Cab
CHAPTER I.
WHO KILLED THE CHAUFFEUR ?
“ Dead?”
“ Quite dead, Sir.”
“ Impossible! How did he die?”
“ The man has been strangled, Sir.”
“ Strangled? You must be mistaken, officer.”
“ Look for yourself, Sir. It’s a plain case of
murder.”
The ominous word rang loudly through the wintry
air, for the policeman’s voice had unconsciously
leaped an octave towards the conclusion of his sen-
tence. Too startled to move, Mr. Lewis Mendle, of
52, Cade Lane, Cheapside, paused on the steps of the
large building, wherein was his office, and stared
silently at the motor-cab. Behind trembled his old
clerk, as horrified as his master, and the tall con-
stable, who stood on the pavement, examined both
their white faces in the beam from his bull’s-eye. A
dull light filtered through the dingy blind of the office
on the ground-floor, and a brighter radiance spread
from the street-lamps, which illuminated the narrow
lane so that the motor-cab was clearly visible, in spite


of the dense gloom overhead and around. And the
night was extremely dark, even for mid-January, for
heavy clouds obscured moon and stars, and snow fell
incessantly, the gusty wind beating the flakes hither
and thither. The stones of the lane, the roof of the
cab, and the clothes of the three men, grew rapidly
white, as they stood dumb in the presence of an
unexpected and inexplicable tragedy.
As they stared hypnotically at the vehicle, wherein
sat the dead man, with his gloved hands on the
steering-wheel, twelve strokes boomed sullenly from
the bell of St. Paul’s Cathedral. The last vibration
broke the spell of the unseen.
“ I can’t believe it,” muttered Mendle, stepping
towards the cab. “ Why should Embers be
strangled ?” and he peered into the dead face, masked
by the turned-up collar of the fur coat, by the motor-
and by the flat cap tilted well over the fore-
head.
Embers,” echoed the policeman, flashing his
light on the figure of the dead; “is that the poor
chap’s name, Sir?”
Mendle nodded. “ Sir Samuel Embers !”
The constable stepped back a pace, aggressively
surprised. “ Sir Samuel Embers ! A gentleman ?”
“A broken-down gentleman, who owned the cab
and drove the cab.”
“ But what is he doing here at this late hour, sir ?”
“ He came for me,” replied the solicitor, still be-
wildered. “ For more than three months he has
come here, somewhere about midnight, four or five
times a week, to drive me home. Oh, it is
impossible!” he broke out feverishly. “He can’t
have been murdered.”


“ Slip your hand round the neck, sir.”
Mendle did so nervously, and immediately re-
treated with a shudder. He felt some silken stuff
belting the throat tightly, and a thin short stick at the
back which had twisted it into a death-knot. When
the officer was about to flash the bull’s eye directly
on to the swollen, blackened face, he flung up a
prohibitive hand.
“ No, no ! I can’t bear to look upon such a sight.
Poor Embers—what a fate ! Who can have killed
him ?”
‘‘Don’t you know, sir?” asked the policeman
sharply, for to his prejudiced eye this nervous
behaviour looked like guilt. Why should an
innocent man fear to gaze upon the face of the
dead ?
‘‘Know!” echoed the lawyer indignantly. ‘‘l
know nothing. I have been working in my office all
the evening, as my clerk can tell you. Only fifteen
minutes ago, so far as I can recollect, I heard the cab
drive up as usual. That is, to be precise, I heard the
horn. And you, Parley ?”
The clerk descended the steps.
“ I heard both the horn and the sound of the
wheels,” he said in a quavering frightened voice.
“ Sir Samuel must have been alive then.”
‘‘How do you know?” questioned the constable
quickly.
Parley’s meek blue eyes opened widely.
“ He couldn’t have brought the cab here if he had
been dead,” he expostulated.
“ No, no !” murmured the officer, “ of course not.
Well, Mr. Mendle, it’s a queer business, altogether.”
9
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ How do you know my name?” asked the solicitor
starting.
The policeman turned his light on to a brass-plate.
“ Mr. Lewis Mendle, Solicitor, and all the rest of it,
ground floor,” he said judiciously. “ There’s only
one office on the ground floor, and it’s the only office
that is lighted up.”
“ Yes I There’s no one in the building but myself
and Parley.”
“ Your name Parley?” asked the policeman, turn-
ing to the clerk.
“ Yes. Robert Parley. Mr. Mendle and myself
have been working at a case in which Sir Samuel is
the plaintiff.”
Was the plaintiff, you mean,” said the officer
meaningly. “ Humph, and Sir Samuel is dead.
Strange.”
“ Now what do you mean by that?” asked Mendle
hotly.
“ Least said, soonest mended,” retorted the other
with a shrug of his big shoulders. “ Anything you
say—anything either of you say, will be used in
evidence against you. So now you’re both warned.”
“Oh 1” Mendle, a small, dried-up, highly-strung
man, exploded with rage. “ How dare you bring
such an accusation ?”
“ I don’t make any accusation,” said the constable,
stolidly; “ but there’s a dead man, in a motor-cab, at
your door, and you know all about him.”
I don’t know who killed him, you fool.”
Calling names won’t better your case, sir. Cir-
cumstances are highly suspicious. And here comes
my mate in the nick of time. Don’t you try to run
away, sir, or you, Robert Parley.”
10
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ Constable,” said Mendle, in a voice tremulous
with anger, “ the English law presumes a man’s
innocence until he is proved guilty. I know no more
than you do who has murdered the man or why he
should be murdered. I’ll lodge a complaint with
your inspector for this.”
“ He’ll be here soon, sir, and then you can say
what you like. But duty is duty, and mine is to keep
you both under my eye until the mystery of this
death is cleared up.”
Mendle shrugged his spare shoulders and walked
up the steps.
“ You will find me and my clerk in the
office,” he said in an acid tone, “ and both of us are
quite ready to answer questions when asked by the
proper authority. Dogberry must be humoured.”
“ Dogberry !” echoed the policeman, when Mendle
and his clerk retreated within doors. “ Another
person, I expect. There’s three of them in this busi-
ness, and the victim is a baronet or a knight. Bill,
here’s glory and promotion for us both, if we work
the case properly.”
“What are you talking about, Herbert?” said
Bill, now within speaking distance, “ and what are
you doing with that motor-car?”
“ Motor-cab, Bill—motor-cab.”
“It’s only the difference of a letter, Herbert?”
said the newcomer philosophically. “ What’s the
matter with the cab? Broke down? ”
“ The chaffer has, William : he’s broken down
altogether. It’s a case of murder by strangling,
and the coves as know about it are in that office.”
“ Ho ! ” grunted William, not to be moved from


his official calm. “ Did you see them strangling the
chaffer.”
“ No, William Simonds, I didn’t, or I’d have
blown my whistle for assistance. But—what’s the
time ? ”
Simonds drew out a Waterbury, and raised his
lantern. ” Ten minutes after twelve o’clock,” he
said heavily.
“ Then I found this chap dead fifteen minutes ago.
One of the coves in there ” —he jerked his thumb
towards the lighted window—” said that he heard
the cab drive up fifteen minutes before. That would
make it twenty minutes to twelve when the chaffer
was scragged.”
“ No, it wouldn’t,” contradicted William stolidly.
“You must have found him dead when the cab drove
to the door.”
“ Rot! William. How could a dead man drive?
The cove inside meant as he heard the horn fifteen
minutes before I arrived. As I came at five to twelve,
that would make it, with another fifteen minutes
previous, twenty minutes in all—twenty minutes to
twelve, William Simonds.”
Simonds scratched his head, as the figures
bewildered him.
“I’d best go for the Inspector,” he remarked.
“ You stop here, Jennings.”
“ I’m going to, William Simonds. D’ye think I
don’t know my duty? I’ve got to watch this cab
and this corpse, and them two garotters inside that
office.”
William paused in his heavy-footed stride. ” You
always jump before you look, Herbert Jennings,” he
said pityingly. “ How do you know that the two


inside murdered this chaffer, when you didn’t see
them on the job?”
“ Never you mind, Will. There’s a young lady as
we both pays attention to will be pleased when she
finds I’m made a sergeant over this.”
“You ain’t got promotion yet, Jennings; and
from the silly way you talk, you never will get it.”
“Jealous,” said Herbert scornfully, when his
comrade departed to bring assistance, “ and all on
account of Matilda. He’s got no chance—not him !
.Sergeant Jennings is the white boy there.” And,
puffing out his chest, he struck himself a proud blow,
already feeling himself placed in authority over his
rival.
Afterwards, to obtain all necessary evidence for the
Inspector, and, to while away the time, he re-
examined the dead. The chauffeur proved to be a
frail-looking young man, with a weak chin and an
aristocratic nose. He was clean-shaven, save for a
small golden moustache, and his hair was of a some-
what darker shade. Moustache and hair were care-
fully trimmed and brushed and oiled, so Mr.
Jennings guessed that the dead man had been careful
of his appearance when alive. Also from the sable*
lined overcoat, the smart tweed suit underneath, the
clean look of the linen, and the presence of somewhat
expensive jewellery, it would seem that the chauffeur
had been somewhat of a dandy.
“ As a baronet or knight should be,” muttered the
sapient Mr. Jennings; and continued his examination.
He flashed his powerful light through the window
of the cab, and saw that the interior was empty.
Then he examined the front seat, and found on the
floor a large waterproof envelope, brief size, which
13
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


had been closed and sealed with a crest. But the
seals had been broken, and the envelope had been
roughly torn open, evidently by a man in a hurry.
Jennings nodded, and argued to himself. “ There
ain’t anything in this envelope,” he thought, “but
there was some time ago. What was in it was of
value, else why the seals? I see it all now. The
assassin strangled the baronet, or knight, for what
was in this envelope, and tore it open on the cab,
so as to make sure that what he wanted was inside.
In his hurry he ripped the envelope unmercifully,
almost tearing away the seals, and dropped it on the
front floor of the cab when he bolted. But why
should this envelope be waterproof ? That’s what I
want to know.”
He could find no answer to this. The envelope
certainly was waterproof, as the strong linen paper
was lined inside with thin gutta-percha, and consider-
able force must have been exercised to open so tough
a covering. But a man strong enough to strangle
the chauffeur would find no difficulty in tearing the
envelope.
“He must have wanted what was in it, badly,”
commented Mr. Jennings, “and from the reckless
way he tore it must have been in a powerful hurry.
Oh, I daresay. To kill a man in a public cab, and
in the middle of London, with me and my mates on
our beats. What cheek.”
It did not strike Jennings that the very safety of
the assassin lay in the publicity of his act. The City
is not populous at night, although crowded during
t e day. A motor-cab, being now so common an
object, would not attract very much attention. There-
fore if the assassin had been seated by the driver,
14
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


and the driver had worn a silk scarf to keep out the
cold, it would not have been very difficult for the
murderer to have tightened the scarf, before the
victim could utter a cry. He could have choked the
chauffeur into insensibility with strong hands, and
then could have easily completed the job by twisting
in the silk the thin short piece of wood. And if the
chauffeur had been taken unawares —as was certainly
the case—the assassin’s quick act would not have
been seen, had he accomplished his purpose, while
the cab was driving down a dark street —it might be
this very lane. Again, the cab possibly halted,
and the deed might have been done then.
Jennings found that the scarf round the dead man’s
neck—which he was careful not to disturb until the
doctor examined it—was of tri-coloured silk, red,
white, and blue, and that the stick used to tighten it
was an ordinary cedar pencil of no great length.
Sir Samuel did not look like a strong man, as his
body was frail and his face was thin, so the murder
was not so difficult to accomplish, as might have been
imagined. All the same, it was wonderful to think
that a man could have been killed so silently and
expeditiously in the centre of the world-Metropolis.
The assassin must have been a man of nerve and of
strength and of resource. When he had learned all
that he could learn from this examination, Mr.
Jennings began to revise his opinion as to the guilt
of Mendle and his clerk. Neither one of them looked
strong enough, or cool enough, to carry out so
deliberate and calculated a crime.
“He’s pretty chilly,” murmured the policeman,
slipping his hand into the dead man’s breast and
feeling the bare skin over the heart, “ I wonder if


he was murdered before he got to this place ? What
a row there will be over this. Ho ! The Mystery of
a Hansom Cab ! I read a book about that once. It s
a motor-cab this time, and up to date.”
At this moment the Inspector arrived with two
or three policemen, and to him Jennings detailed all
that he had discovered. His superior officer listened
in silence, and examined the cab himself in a. perfunc-
tory manner, since there was no need in the mean-
time to be very punctilious. The first thing to do
was to have the corpse examined by a doctor, and
one was already notified. Inspector Hake directed
that the body should be taken into the office of Mr.
Mendle, and then, after glancing at the waterproof
envelope handed over by Jennings, he waited for a
complete report of the discovery. The constable
cleared his throat importantly.
“ I was on my beat, Sir,” he said, standing to
attention, ” and came up Cade Lane about five
minutes to twelve o’clock, and ”
‘‘From what direction?” interrupted Hake
sharply.
“ Down from Cheapside, Sir.”
“Hum! Didn’t you see the cab drive down
Cheapside? ”
“ No, Sir. And you will see, Sir, that the back
of the cab faces Manners Street, at the bottom of
Cade Lane.”
Hake nodded. “ Quite so; and the lane is too
narrow for the cab to turn. The man must have
driven round by Manners Street.”
“ If he drove at all, Sir,” said Jennings, bursting
to air his theories. “In my opinion, the chaffer was
dead before the cab stopped in front of this office.”
16
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“Go on with your report,” said the Inspector
coldly.
“ I walked up this lane,” said Jennings, rather
abashed, ‘ ‘ and saw the cab at the door. I passed
the time of night to the chaffer, and he didn’t
answer. I mentioned something about his being
sulky, and turned the light on him to see what
sort of a face he had. To do that I came near, Sir,
and then—well, Sir, it came to me in a flash that
he was dead. I found that he had been strangled,
because his poor face was black, as you have seen,
Sir, and then I knocked at the door of this building,
on seeing a light in the ground floor.”
“ Whose office is it? ”
“ A lawyer’s, Sir—Mr. Lewis Mendle. When I
knocked, he came out with his hat and gloves on,
saying that he expected the cab to take him home.
1 hen I said that the chaffer was dead, and Mr.
Mendle got nervous like, saying he could not under-
stand.”
“ Does he know the chauffeur’s name? ” asked the
Inspector. “ Ah, yes, of course he would. But,
no—he might have sent for the cab.”
“ Mr. Mendle does know the chaffer’s name, Sir,
seeing that he drove him home for months. It’s Sir
Samuel Embers.”
“Embers,” Hake repeated, with a start. “Sir
Samuel Embers. Why, I know ” He checked
himself, and walked up the steps into the office.
“ Guard the cab, but don’t touch anything,” he
said to Jennings and the other two officers.
Mendle met the inspector at the inside door,
looking agitated. “ I can’t understand this horrible
thing,” he said in a broken voice.
2


“ Nor can I—as yet,” Hake answered drily. “You
know the chauffeur ? ’ ’
“Yes; Sir Samuel Embers. He is a client of
mine. You may have heard of him, Mr. Inspector.
Hake nodded. “He came into a heap of money
three years ago, and ran through it all. Finally,
when he dropped the lot, he took to driving a motor-
cab.”
“ More out of bravado than for any other reason,
Inspector. I was trying to get some of his money
back for him. On this very night I was employed
with my clerk in looking over some documents. I
heard the cab’s horn, as usual, and put away my
papers. When I was ready to go, I heard a
furious knocking, and went out to find that police-
man, who told me that Sir Samuel was dead.”
“ And you don’t know ”
“ I know nothing,” interrupted Mendle decisively.
“ Have you seen the body? ”
“ On the cab—in the light of that policeman’s
lantern.”
“ Come inside with me, and look again. It is
necessary that you should identify the body.”
“ That is easy,” protested the solicitor. “ Embers,
poor fellow, has driven me to and from Kensington
very often.”
“ Oh, I don’t question the man’s identity,” said
Hake easily; “ but it is, as I say, necessary for you
to give evidence that the corpse is that of Sir Samuel
Embers.”
Mendle shuddered, and only preserved his calm-
ness by a powerful effort.
“I am all nerves,” he declared, shivering. “Of
course, I must look on that dead face in the light:
18
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


but I’ll never be able to forget it again. Ugh I what
an ordeal.”
Hake glanced at his pinched, lean face, and
considered his agitated manner. In both Jennings
had discerned guilt; but the Inspector, wiser from
experience, knew that if this man were guilty, he
would be more self-controlled. His very failure to
appear indifferent proved that he was absolutely
innocent.
The offices of Mr. Mendle were divided into three
rooms. In the front one, looking out into the lane,
sat Parley and two junior clerks, the latter now
absent. The middle room was sparsely furnished
with a dining-room table and several chairs, and
here clients waited for interviews with the solicitor.
The third room—which looked out on to a yard
was the sanctum of Mendle, and was furnished with
a large desk, one or two chairs, a safe, and some law-
books in a dingy case. Here and there were piles
of japanned tin deed-boxes thrust into iron frames.
It was in the middle room, on the dining-room table,
cleared of all books and magazines and papers, that
the corpse of the unfortunate chauffeur had been
laid out. The doctor had completed his examination,
and Hake interrogated him by a look. The medical
man nodded.
“ Murder by strangulation, sure enough,” he said
confidently. It is half-past twelve now. The man
has been dead an hour and a half.”
‘‘Then he was murdered at eleven,” said Hake.
“ Sir Samuel ”
A cry broke from Mendle. “It is not Sir
Samuel!” he shrieked. ‘‘lt is—it is—oh I” He
broke off sobbing, “My poor boy—my poor boy I ”
19
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


CHAPTER II.
ANOTHER DISCOVERY.
It was difficult to startle Inspector Hake, as
experience had inured him to the unexpected; but the
denial of Mendle that the corpse was that of Sir
Samuel Embers, and the grief into which true
recognition of the dead had plunged him, made the
officer stagger. “You told me that Sir Samuel
drove the cab,” he said gruffly.
“ So I did; so I did,” cried Mendle, who was on
his knees by the table, and entirely shaken out of all
self-control. “ Why should I have told you other-
wise? Embers came nightly with the cab; I merely
caught a glimpse of his face in the light of the
bull’s-eye. Embers is also fair, like my boy; and
the cap, the coat, the spectacles—how could I
recognise him until I saw his poor face in the light ? ”
“Who is the dead man, Mr. Mendle? Control
yourself.”
The lawyer arose with a sigh. “It is easy saying
that,” he remarked bitterly; “and me with nerves
which rack me with physical and mental pain I It
was terrible enough when I believed the dead to be
my client—but now—oh! what will Belinda say?”
And he stared fixedly at the discoloured face, at the
bare chest, and at the huddle of clothes which clothed
the nerveless figure on the table. The corpse looked
like a limp doll out of which the saw-dust had run.
“ Who is he? ” repeated Hake impatiently.


“Arthur Gerson,” said Mendle. And the name
seemed to be wrung reluctantly from his tongue.
Belinda’s brother. What will she say? And
Harriet—she loved him so ! ’’
Who is Arthur Gerson?” asked Hake quickly.
The whole scene puzzled him greatly, as he could not
understand why Mendle’s nerve should have given
way so completely.
“My ward, Mr. Inspector. The son of the last
owner of this office, to whom I was articled. He
left me in charge of his children, and now I find
that Arthur is dead.”
“Is murdered,” muttered the doctor.
Yes.” Mendle’s face grew fierce, and he looked
round furiously. “ Who killed him ? Why was the
poor boy done to death ? Parley ! Parley I ” He
rushed into the outer room, where the old clerk was
waiting to go, with his hat and coat on, and his
stick in his hands. “ What do you know of this?
Arthur Gerson is murdered.”
“ Mr. Mendle I” Parley rose in consternation.
“ You have lost your senses, Sir. It is Sir Samuel
Embers who ”
“So 1^ thought—so I thought.” Mendle beat his
breast. “ I have just discovered the truth. Arthur
drove the cab—Arthur has been strangled. Parley,
Parley, did you not see ”
I saw nothing, Sir,” quavered the old man, on
whom the excited demeanour of his master was having
a great effect. “ They brought the body into the
middle room, and made me stop here until the doctor
examined it. But you said that Sir Samuel ”
“ Yes, yes 1 How could I see Arthur’s dead face
m the darkness, with that heavy coat and the cap


and the spectacles? But now I recognise him. It
is my poor boy. Great heavens, why did he drive
the cab ? Where is Embers ? Who killed him ?
Oh ! ” He clutched at his breast and turned white.
“ Belinda will blame me, and—and ” He uttered
a guttural sound and slipped quietly on to the floor
in a dead faint.
“ What do you make of this? ” asked Hake, when
the doctor came from the middle room to kneel beside
the insensible man, “Is it guilt, Morley?’’
Dr. Morley shook his head. “No man would be
such a fool to give himself away in this manner, if
guilty.”
Hake nodded with satisfaction. “So I think. A
man capable of committing so bold and clever a
crime would be thoroughly prepared to face the
music. The dead man is his ward ! Hum 1 I don’t
see what motive the guardian could have, to kill the
boy.”
“ Beg your pardon, Sir,” said Parley humbly,
“ but Mr. Mendle was very patient with Mr. Arthur,
who was—saving your presence—a bad lot.”
“ How do you know? ” asked Hake sharply.
“ I was head clerk to the late Mr. Gerson,” said
Parley, who had a large, mild, white face, like a full
moon, and meek, blue eyes, “ and afterwards I
became clerk to Mr. Mendle, who was articled to
the late Mr. Gerson. T know Miss Belinda and Mr.
Arthur very well. She is a charming young lady;
but Mr. Arthur was wild and ungrateful to Mr.
Mendle, and he was mad at times—quite mad, Sir.”
“ In what way ? ”
“ He twice tried to kill Mr. Mendle, Sir, although
Mr. Mendle was always kind to him. He shot at


him once and wounded him in the arm; and once he
tried to poison him by putting arsenic in the water-
bottle which is in Mr. Mendle’s private room. Mr.
Mendle, Sir, is very highly strung, and very nervous.
He went in fear of his life with Mr. Arthur.”
Hake looked at the sheep-like face of the old man
with a piercing stare. “ Are you trying to supply a
motive for the commission of the crime by Mr.
Mendle?” he asked incisively.
” Me, Sir I no, Sir I ” said Parley, with mild
surprise. “ Mr. Mendle' had no ill-will towards Mr.
Arthur, as he thought that he was not quite
responsible for his acts. Besides, Mr. Mendle is in
love with Miss Belinda, who is Arthur’s sister, and
wants to marry her. If Mr. Mendle had killed Mr.
Arthur that would stop such a marriage.”
“ Hum! ” The Inspector pinched his chin.
‘‘Where was Mr. Mendle all this evening?”
“Is his own room, Sir. For some months past
Mr. Mendle and I have been working overtime.
During this last two weeks we have been searching
through the family papers of Sir Samuel Embers to
see about some money which he may get. On the
way home, Mr. Mendle and Sir Samuel used to talk
of the case. But to-night the policeman told us that
Sir Samuel was dead.”
“ No, he didn’t,” contradicted the doctor sharply.
“ He said that the chaffer was dead, Sir, which
comes to the same thing, you see. I thought it
was Sir Samuel, since the cab belongs to him and
he has come here regularly. But that it should be
Mr. Arthur ”
‘‘Come here.” Hake beckoned Parley into the
middle room, while the doctor revived Mendle with


smelling-salts and brandy. “Is that Mr. Arthur
Gerson ? ’ ’
“ Yes, Sir—yes,” said Parley, looking sadly at the
corpse. “He was always very cruel to me, was
Mr. Arthur. Selfish and wicked, he never thought*
of anyone but himself. I’m sorry that he’s been cut
off in his sin, and ”
“ There, there ! ” interrupted the Inspector, rather
disgusted. ‘‘The man is dead; say no more ill
of him than you can help. Mr. Mendle was within
doors all the evening, you say ? ”
“ From eight o’clock until midnight, when the
policeman knocked.”
‘‘You can swear to that?”
“ Yes, sir. I was working in the outer room.”
Hake walked into the sanctum of the lawyer and
pointed to a door on the left. “ Where does that
lead to ? ” he asked.
“ Into the passage,” said Parley promptly; ‘‘but
Mr. Mendle never went out by that to-night. I
should have heard him, in the first place; and, in the
second, I should have seen him through the front
window, which looks out on to the Lane.”
“Hum!” Inspector Hake caressed his chin
softly. ‘‘ You are fond of Mr. Mendle? ” he asked
keenly.
“ I am, Sir,” said Parley, with dignity. “He has
been a good friend to me and my daughter Ellen.
You seem to think, Sir, that Mr. Mendle is guilty,
and that I am trying to shield him? ”
“ Yes and No, Mr. Parley. But I have to get at the
truth of this case, you know, and must try in every
direction. All possible motives ”


Parley interrupted. “ Mr. Mendle could have
had no motive, Sir. On the contrary, by the death
of Mr. Arthur he loses five thousand a year.”
“ Oh, the deuce 1 ” cried Hake, startled out of his
official composure. “How is that?”
The answer did not come immediately, for from
the middle room entered Mendle, looking ghastly
pale and rather weak. However, he had overcome
his nerves for the time being, and sank into his chair
before the desk with a sigh.
“ I am all broken up,” he said. “ What is to be
done now, Mr. Inspector? ”
Hake signed that Parley should leave the room,
and, after closing the door, he sat down near the
lawyer. “Tell me everything you know,” he said
in a friendly tone. What do you make of all
this ? ”
Mendle passed a thin hand over his brow,
from which the hair had retreated considerably. He
looked like a dwarf of forty, with his worn face and
mean, attenuated figure. Clean-shaven, with a long
Upper lip and a rabbit mouth, he was not handsome,
and dressed in black clothes with a black tie, he
looked somewhat like an undertaker. His lank dark
hair was sparse, and he wore it rather long at the
back. The only good feature he possessed were his
eyes, and these, large, dark, and melancholy, gave
him a foreign look. And, indeed, his skin was as
swart as that of a Spaniard. Not a prepossessing
man by any means, with his dwarfish looks and wizen
face. He had not even that virility which appeals to a
woman very often, in spite of other disqualifications.
Hake caught himself wondering what kind of girl
Belinda Gerson could be to consider so stunted a


suitor. She must be, he thought, less hard to please
than the generality of her sex.
“ I don’t know what to make of it, Mr. Inspector,”
said the little man wearily; “ It is strange to me that
Arthur should have driven that cab. He never did
so before.”
“Could Arthur Gerson drive a motor?” asked
Hake.
“ Oh, yes. He was friendly with Sir Samuel, who
taught him how to drive.”
“ Hum. Then being friendly with Sir Samuel, he
could easily obtain a loan of the motor-cab?”
Mendle shook his head. “ Sir Samuel knew that
Arthur was a reckless driver, and would not have
risked that. It would mean the loss of his license if
there was an accident.”
“ Quite so,” assented Hake, nodding. “ But what
has happened is worse than an accident. Do you
think that Sir Samuel knows anything of this
murder ?”
I can t say,” faltered the lawyer, “ but I would
stake my life that Sir Samuel would not kill a fly.
Besides, Arthur wanted Sir Samuel to marry Belinda,
and, therefore, there could be no motive for Embers
to kill the poor lad.”
“ Hum,” said Hake, looking keenly at the
solicitor. “ Parley tells me that you also wish to
marry Miss Gerson.”
I do,” assented Mendle with great dignity, “ but
that is wholly a private matter, Mr. Inspector.”
Hake nodded. “ Yes, it is,” he remarked with
some dryness, “ but in connection with such a crime
as murder, everything private may have to be made
public.”


“ Does that mean, Mr. Inspector, that you suspect
me ?”
“ Well, no,” drawled Hake, rather taken aback by
this very direct speech, “ but we have to exhaust all
means to get at the truth, you see, Mr. Mendle. Now
a fool ” —Hake laid great emphasis on the word—
“ might think that a sufficient alibi would be provided
by the fact that his clerk was in the outer office and he
in the inner all the evening; not remembering, per-
haps, that the inner room had an extra door.”
Mendle rose. “ Try that door, Mr. Inspector,” he
said quietly.
Hake did so, and found it locked.
“ The key?” he questioned.
Mendle called Parley into the room. “ The
Inspector wants to go out by this door,” he said,
pointing towards the wall.
Parley pulled a key out of his pocket and unlocked
the door. “ Hum I” said Hake, “ you have the key
of that door ?”
“ Yes, sir,” quavered the old clerk. “ The door is
never used. Mr. Mendle always comes through the
outer office.”
“ Quite so. How long have you had that key?”
“ For months—for nine months.”
“ And it was in your pocket all the evening?”
“ Yes, sir; all the evening.”
“ And Mr. Mendle never went out through your
room early in the evening?”
“ No, sir. I told you that Mr. Mendle and myself
were working from eight o’clock until the policeman
knocked.”
“ That will do.” Hake signed that Parley should


go out. “ I beg your pardon, Mr. Mendle. When
did you hear the cab drive up ?”
“ I heard the horn sound fifteen minutes before the
policeman knocked.”
“ Hum I That would be about twenty minutes to
twelve?”
“ I think so, since midnight sounded shortly after
the policeman had spoken a few words.”
“ Hum I And the cab came from the Manners
Street direction. Doctor!”
Morley entered briskly. “ Yes, Inspector. What
is it now ?”
“You say that the man has been dead an hour and
a half ?”
The doctor brought out his watch. “ Longer than
that now,” he said calmly, “ since it is getting near
one. I should say that the man was killed at eleven.”
“ You are certain ?”
“ So far as my medical knowledge extends I am
certain,” said Morley in his driest manner. He did
not like his authority to be questioned.
Thank you. Tell one of the men to bring the
officer on the Manners Street beat here, if you will be
so kind. Now, then, Mr. Mendle,” he added when
Morley departed with a shrug, “ I hear that you lose
five thousand a year by the death of Arthur Gerson.”
“ Who told you that?” asked Mendle quietly.
“ Your clerk, Mr. Parley.”
‘‘ He has no right to speak of my private affairs.”
“ I think it is just as well in this case,” said Hake
pointedly. “ I wish to exonerate you from all com-
plicity in this crime.”
“Ah!” Mendle laughed bitterly, “because I am
unnerved by the sight of Arthur’s dead body you at


once suspect me. And pray, how could I commit the
crime, when I have been in this room all the evening ?
You saw that Parley had the key of that door, and to
go out I should have had to leave by the room he sat
in. You heard what he said. It seems to me, Mr.
Inspector, that you believe that I and old Parley
between us killed that unfortunate boy.”
“No,” said Hake decisively, “ I do not. Were
you guilty, you would not have given yourself away.
But whatever I may believe the public may think
differently when the inquest is held. For your own
sake I wish to place your innocence beyond all
shadow of doubt. Now, will you be frank about
what you call your private affairs?”
Mendle held out his hand, which Hake grasped.
“ I am much obliged to you for the suggestion,” he
said gratefully; “ but it never struck me that anyone
would connect me with this terrible crime. Yes, Ido
lose five thousand a year by Arthur’s death.”
“ In what way ?”
The late Mr. Gerson was a very strange and sus-
picious man,” explained the solicitor; “ and although
he declared that he trusted me, he did not trust me
wholly. Why, I cannot say, as I was always fair
and square with him, as I am, I hope, with everyone.
Mr. Gerson married a certain Mrs. Lane, with one
daughter, Harriet, who is now an actress at the
Piccadilly Theatre.”
“I know,” Hake nodded. “She plays the old
women’s parts.”
“Yes, and she is much older than her half-sister
and her half-brother, Arthur and Belinda. Mr.
Gerson did not leave Harriet any money, but he gave
me a life interest in his property amounting to five


thousand a year, on condition that I looked after
Belinda and Arthur.”
‘‘But why didn’t he leave the property to them
direct ?”
“ Because he knew that Arthur would squander the
money, and if it had been left to Belinda, she was so
fond of her brother that he would have extorted every
penny from her. To save them both from wasting
their fortune, I was given a life interest in the money
on condition that I looked after both thoroughly.
Miss Gerson, as the survivor, will tell you what
moneys I have allowed her and Arthur and how I
have behaved. I don’t think my worst enemy can say
a word against me. But, to make a long story short,
Mr. Inspector, my late master did not wholly trust
me, and in his will it is stated that if either Arthur or
Belinda died, that the whole five thousand a year
should go to the survivor. Since Arthur is now
dead, Belinda takes immediate possession of the
money, and I am left a pauper.”
Hake was just about to open his mouth and com-
ment on this extraordinary will, when a knock came
at the door. When it was opened the Manners Street
policeman, for whom the Inspector had sent, pre-
sented himself and saluted.
“ Cropsley. Ah, yes. You were on duty to-night
in Manners Street?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Did you see a motor-cab pass down the street in
the direction of Cade Lane?”
“ Yes, sir. I was at the corner and happened to
notice it. Motor-cabs are generally in the West-End,
sir.”


“Of course. Trafalgar Square stand. Hum!
What time did you see the motor-cab in question ?”
Cropsley scratched his head. “ Well, sir, I can’t
rightly say, but it was somewhere about half-past
eleven.’’
“ Before or after the half hour?’’
“ I think a few minutes after, sir.”
“ Can you swear to that, Cropsley?”
“ Not to a minute, sir. I can swear that the cab
drove past me somewhere about half-past eleven.”
“ How many people were on the box ?”
“ I didn’t take particular note, sir. Only the
driver, I think.”
“ Anyone inside the cab ?”
“ 1 didn’t notice, sir.”
“ Hum ! Cropsley, you never use your eyes. You
can go.”
Cropsley saluted and departed. Hake turned
again to Mendle and held out his hand. “This
exonerates you entirely, Mr. Mendle,” he said, “ and
I ask your pardon for my suspicions. If the cab
drove up here, as you say, at twenty to twelve, it must
have been the same, which Cropsley saw, passing
down Manners Street some time after the half hour.”
“But he said half-past eleven,” argued Mendle,
pointedly precise.
“ A little after, I think. It may have been five or
eight minutes after the half-hour, which would just
give it time to get here. You need not argue against
your own interests, Mr. Mendle. But now that your
character is cleared, the question arises, who mur-
dered Gerson?”
“ I can’t say, Mr. Inspector,” said Mendle help-
lessly.
31
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ Do you suspect anyone?”
“ No. I cannot say that I do.”
“ What does this waterproof envelope mean ?”
“ I don’t understand that at all, Mr. Inspector.”
“ Hum ! Let us go out and look at the cab.”
The vehicle was standing as it had been before the
office door, and its guardian policemen shuffled their
feet on the pavement to keep warm. Faster and
thicker the snow was falling, and a white mantle was
being spread over the fatal motor-cab. Hake, who
amongst other things knew how to drive a motor, set
the mechanism going and climbed into the chauffeur’s
seat. A turn of the wheel sent the machine forward,
almost its own length. Then to the horror and sur-
prise of everyone, a wild and piercing scream of
agony shrilled from under the cab.


CHAPTER III.
BREAKING THE NEWS.
Inspector Hake gasped, moved by elemental feel-
ings out of his official phlegm. The scream was so
thin, so highly pitched, so charged with the un-
expected, that he fell back a step, quivering with
shaking nerves. “ A woman—a woman under that
damned thing I” he stuttered. “ Here, lend a hand
to get her out.”
Simonds and Jennings dropped on their knees and
fished carefully under the car, which was panting and
purring and vibrating like a live creature. The small
bundle of rags which they brought to light, all
tumbled, torn, and bleeding, showed no sign of life.
It s a boy a boy, cried Mendle, who was peer-
ing over Hake’s shoulder. ” How came a boy here
at this hour and in such a plight?”
“Do you know the lad, sir?”
“ Never set eyes on him. And under the cab, too.
What does it mean ?”
He was hiding, I suppose,” said the inspector,
trying to grasp the strange circumstance, “and did
not expect the cab to move. Doctor I”
The cry had brought out Morley, and already he
was kneeling by the guttersnipe. The policemen
glanced at the still, small form, at each other, and
finally at their puzzled superior. Hake could make
nothing of the new circumstance, much less of the
old. If the death of Gerson was mysterious, the
3
33


presence of the street arab under the cab was still
more so. How had the boy come into the deserted
city at this hour ? Why had he concealed himself ?
What did he know of the corpse of the man who lay
within doors? To these very pertinent questions
Hake could obtain no answers. “ Unless the boy
will speak,” he remarked aloud, following his train
of thought.
Morley rose and dusted the feathery snow from his
knees. “ Not much chance of that, Inspector,” he
remarked with a shrug. “ Some projecting piece of
iron under the cab has knocked in the skull, so far as
I can judge at the moment. The little chap may be
insensible for days. Humph!” murmured Morley,
eyeing the pale face, “ I shouldn’t wonder if this
proved to be a trepanning case.”
“ Then we can’t get any information !”
“ No, Inspector,” said Morley drily. “ Nature is
stronger than the law in this instance. And when
the lad recovers—if he ever does from so nasty a
wound —he may have forgotten everything.”
“ About what? ” questioned the lawyer.
“ About this murder, Mr. Mendle.”
“ But surely, with the wonderful surgical skill at
your command, you will be able to bring back the
l3oy to life and reason. It is quite imperative, Dr.
Morley—quite imperative. Think what it means.
This lad may be able to explain how my poor Arthur
came by his death.”
Morley shrugged again. “ You can’t be sure of
that. What do you think, Hake?” he asked, turning
to the puzzled officer.
“ I agree with Mr. Mendle,” he replied slowly.


“ The bo / holds the key °f the mystery. I expect
he came from the West End.” P
‘‘Surely surely!” chimed in Mendle eagerly.
j IF , muel alwa ys plied for hire in the West End
and only came here at night to take me home.”
yuite so,” argued the doctor, who was some
what contradictory, “but Sir Samuel did not drive
the cab to-night.” e
in the ' e We U st t E h nd'.” done “ in ‘ he evenin «’ and
PerIZTX h ake , n ° dded - “ 1 agree ’ Mr ‘ Mendle -
Perhaps the boy knew that the cab belonged to Sir
Samuel, and seeing a new driver, held on behind to
learn he reason. In that case, he must know who
speak r y ° Ur UnfortUnate ward - »he could only
“ He’ll never speak again in this life, unless you
ove im under shelter,” grumbled the doctor,
buttoning h.s overcoat. “ Put him into the cab, and
take him to the hospital. The sooner a proper
examination is made the better. You drive Hake,
f , in get inside with the poor little devil. It’s
ucky its a brougham cab,” grunted Morley, “the
went icr s enough to kill me, let alone a wounded boy.
suppose your men will take the corpse within to the
mortuary.”
Hake nodded, and bent with a lantern to examine
if i "T?," 16 boy ‘ He would have been a pretty lad
he had been well nourished and well washed' and
warmly clothed. He looked about thirteen or
fourteen years of age, and had a thin, oval face
pearly white, and framed in rough tumbled hair like
spun gold. The colour of his eyes could not be seen,
. ey were closed. From a jagged cut in the head,


where the mechanism of the cab had struck him,
streamed a thin rivulet of blood. He wore merely a
patched pair of knickerbockers and a man s overcoat
much too large for his puny body. The poor
creature’s legs and feet and head were bare; pinched
and blue with cold, as regards the flesh. Hake made
a hasty examination of the pockets, but found no clue
to the lad’s identity. What the men lifted into the
motor-cab was simply a nameless guttersnipe, a dere-
lict of the great city. Yet he held the secret of the
strange death of Arthur Gerson, and could have
revealed the truth—but that God had laid a silencing
finger on his lips. “ It’s the most extraordinary
case,” muttered Hake, and after a few hasty direc-
tions to his underlings, slipped between the steering-
wheel and the seat to drive the machine.
“ One moment, Mr. Inspector,” called out Mendle,
who was shivering in the bitter air; ‘‘can I and
Parley return home?”
“ Yes, but first give your addresses to Constable
Jennings.”
The car, purring like a great cat, jerked forward,
and settled down into a smooth, gliding motion. In
another moment it had vanished behind the veil of
the falling snow towards Cheapside and the hospital.
Mendle beckoned to the policeman who had been the
first to discover the strange tragedy.
“ Well, Constable Jennings,” he said, giving his
card, “ do you still suspect me of murder?”
“ Beg pardon, sir,” said the man, somewhat crest-
fallen, “ I only thought your knowing the man was
suspicious.”
“ In that case, since the man afterwards turned out
to be my ward, you should be still more suspicious.


I had no reason to murder Sir Samuel Embers. I
might have a dozen to kill poor Arthur.”
The sapient Jennings shook his official head and
permitted himself an official smile. “ You wouldn’t
talk that way if you were guilty, Mr. Mendle,” he
remarked, taking the card.
Oh, I don’t know, constable. If I am clever
enough to kill a man in a motor-cab and escape, I am
quite capable of acting a part in order to deceive you
and Inspector Hake. However, if you have any
remaining doubts I daresay they will be cleared up
at the inquest. Meanwhile, as you have my address,
I II go home and do my best to recover from this
terrible shock. The poor fellow’s body ugh ! I
have a good mind to stop,” added Mendle thought-
fully. “ I can look after it.”
We 11 do that, sir,” said Jennings, fingering
half-a-crown which the lawyer slipped into his hand.
“ An ambulance has been sent for, and we shall take
the corpse to the Dead-house. Your clerk can wait
and lock up the office.”
Mendle handed over a key, which he took from a
bunch, produced from his pocket. “ You can do that
yourself, and stop in the office all night, if you have
a mind to.”
There will be no need, Sir. Can we get you a
cab, Sir ? ”
"I am afraid you will find it difficult to procure
one in this neighbourhood at so early an hour of the
morning. And the Underground Railway must
have stopped running also. I’ll walk to Fleet Street
and pick up a hansom there.”
Or a motor-cab, Sir, said Jennings, making a
weak joke.


Mendle shuddered and cast a glance through the
door, where a stiff form lay on the dining-room table,
covered with an old tartan rug. “ I feel as though
I shall never drive in a motor-cab again,” he said,
with a deep sigh. “ Parley, give your address to
the constable. And remain here as long as he wants
you.”
“ Miss Belinda, Sir ? ” said the old clerk, following
his master to the outer door. “ What about her and
Miss Harriet, Sir?”
“ I’ll break the news of the death to them to-
night,” said Mendle; “it will be better than to let
them learn it from the papers.”
‘‘But the papers haven’t got hold of the news yet,
Sir.”
“ They will before dawn. Your modern reporter
is like a vulture for scenting a murdered body.
Poor Arthur ! and poor me too, Parley ! Think how
1 have lost five thousand a year I Well, well, I must
bear my fate. But if I could find the man who
murdered Arthur I would hang him as high as
Haman.”
‘‘ Your scarf, Sir,” said Parley, offering a woollen
wrap.
Mendle took it mechanically, and put it on. ‘‘ But
what’s the use? ”he muttered fretfully. ‘‘ I may as
well catch pneumonia and die, since 1 am completely
ruined.”
‘‘No, no, Mr. Mendle! lam sure Miss Belinda
will do the right thing.”
‘‘And marry me, Parley?” asked the solicitor,
smiling bitterly. ‘‘ I fear not. I am scarcely so
young or well-favoured as Darton. “ Good-night,


Parley; good-night, constable.” And Mendle
hurried away.
” Who is Barton ? ” asked Jennings when the door
was closed.
Parley passed a thin hand wearily over his wrinkled
brow. Dr. Wilfred Barton—a young medical
man, who admires Miss Belinda Gerson, the sister
of Mr. Arthur.”
“ Hoes she admire him, Mr. Parley ?”
\ es. I am afraid there’s no chance for poor
Mr. Mendle. And now that the money belongs to
Miss Belinda, she’ll marry the doctor.”
“ Hard lines,” commented Jennings sympathetic-
ally, “to lose both a girl and a fortune. Pm sorry
I thought that he was guilty. Now my theory
legaiding the murder is this ” —and Jennings pro-
ceeded to detail his crude views at great length, while
the hours wore on to dawn, and under the tartan rug
the stark, stiff body of Arthur Gerson lay grimly, as
though already six feet under earth.
Meanwhile Mendle, all broken up with the events
of the night, and aching with nervous pains from
head to foot, was driving towards Kensington in a
hansom which he had picked up in Fleet Street. His
brain was so weary that he did not attempt to think
of his own ruin, on of the crime. Huddled up in a
corner of the cab he closed his tired eyes and tried
vainly to make his mind a blank. Stray thoughts
dealing with what had taken place since eleven o’clock
drifted through his mind, but he could not think
continuously or coherently. As the vehicle—it was
an old one—rattled and shook, the worn-out man
dropped into a dazed condition, and finally slept.


The stirring events of the night had dulled the
mechanism of the brain, and even as a man—so it
has been said—will drop asleep when tortured
physically, so did Mendle, mentally helpless, become
unconscious. But all through his scattered thoughts
ran one which was more or less insistent. How
would Belinda Gerson take the terrible news ? Even
in his broken sleep this question dominated his
brain.
The sudden stoppage of the cab woke him up with
a jerk, and the gruff voice of the driver, peering
through the square in the roof, informed him that
Clement Street was reached. This was where his
wards dwelt, and his own rooms were in Rutland
Square, not very far away. Bemused with sleep,
Mendle stumbled out of the cab, and gave the driver
what he asked for in the way of fare. When the
gleaming lights of the vehicle disappeared, Mendle
stood still for a moment and tried to pull his scattered
wits together. For half a minute he was minded to
let the ill news stand over until the morning; but
reflecting that Harriet and Belinda might learn it
unexpectedly, and so receive a terrible shock, he
dragged himself to the door and rang the bell. His
fatigue was so great that he had to lean up against the
railings.
For some minutes there was no response. Then
he heard the rattle of the chain, and a deep female
voice asked who was without. The lawyer gave his
name, and almost immediately the door was flung
open by an astonished woman. But Harriet Lane—
for it was she—scarcely displayed so much astonish-
ment as Mendle, when he beheld her at this early
hour of a winter’s morning dressed to go out.


“What does this mean?” asked the solicitor,
staggering into the hall.
“ I ask that of you, Lewis,” said Miss Lane
sharply; “ but have I need to when I see that you are
drunk.”
“lam perfectly sober,” protested Mendle, sinking
into a hall-chair. “But why are you not in bed?
Why are you dressed to go out? ”
“I came in late from the theatre,” hesitated
Harriet, turning aside her head, “and did not take
off my things. Belinda is ill. I thought of going
for medicine to the chemist.”
Before Mendle could express his alarm at Miss
Gerson’s illness, the electrics at the head of the stairs
unexpectedly radiated powerful light. Mendle
glanced at the candle in Harriet’s hand, which sud-
denly paled in the vivid illumination, and looked up
the stairs. Fo his surprise, Belinda, also dressed to
go out, was descending. Seeing her half-sister and
a man’s figure seated in a chair, she paused half-
way and called out, “Is it Wilfred, Harriet? ”
Mendle’s strength came back with a rush when he
heard his rival’s name. For the moment his tired-
ness vanished as by magic, and he stood up, strong,
clear-brained, and alert. “Wilfred,” he repeated,
and his hitherto low voice rang out loudly. “ Darton.
Wilfred Darton. What do you mean, Belinda, by
expecting that man here at this hour ? ”
“ Lewis,” murmured Miss Gerson under her
breath, and turned as though to fly upstairs again.
“ Are you ill ? ” cried out Mendle.
“ 111 ? No,” she rejoined, turning in her surprise.
“ Harriet, you have lied,” said the lawyer fiercely.
“ Both you and Belinda are dressed to go out—and
41
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


at nearly three in the morning. What does this
mean? I insist upon knowing.”
‘‘lt is easily explained,” said Belinda, and came
hurriedly down the stairs. “ There is no need to be
angry, Lewis. I was at the theatre with Harriet.
We did not get home until after twelve o’clock. We
waited up for Arthur. As he did not come, Harriet
and 1 were coming round to see you about Arthur’s
absence, and ”
‘‘ I don’t believe that,” interrupted Mendle, his
pale face flushing. “ You know how dissipated
Arthur is. He has been out before, night after
night, and yet you never behaved like this. Then
you expected Darton. Don’t deny it, Belinda. I
heard you ask Harriet. How dare you, when you
know that I have forbidden the man this house? ”
Belinda, who was small, dainty, golden-haired,
and apparently timid, shrank before the wrath which
flashed from the lawyer’s eyes. Mendle rarely gave
way to passion, as he paid too much in loss of nerve-
power to indulge in anger; but when he did lose
his temper (and the thought of Wilfred Darton in-
variably made him do so) he terrified the girl, who,
from long habit, submitted to be dominated by him.
But Harriet was bolder, and took her half-sister's
part.
“ Belinda is not a child, that you should speak to
her in that way,” she observed quietly; “ nor is this
the time to converse. I see that you are sober, but
I must confess my surprise that you should come
here at this hour.”
“ had I not done so Belinda would have eloped with
that Darton man.”


1( The g irl ’s nostrils dilated and her face flushed.
How dare you ! ” she cried, with a stamp. “If I
love Wilfred, and he loves me, that has nothing to
do with you, Lewis.”
“ Nothing?”—his voice sank and became implor-
ing.
Belinda cast an angry look at him, and turned
towards the stairs. “I am going to bed,” she said
curtly.
“ D on’t you want to hear about Arthur? ” asked
Mendle, with a sneer.
She wheeled. “ Arthur? ”
\V hat is it, Lewis ? questioned Harriet—and
both the women looked with pale faces at the scarcely
less pale countenance of their guardian. From his
looks and from his late visit they drew inferences of
evil news. Still secretly angered at the mystery of
theii proceedings, Mendle did not spare them.
“Arthur is dead! Arthur is murdered!” he
said sharply.
Harriet dropped the candle : Belinda clung to the
banisters : neither woman spoke. Then their eyes
met.
You knew I” cried Mendle, suddenly enlight-
ened; “you knew, even before I spoke!”


CHAPTER IV.
AN ACCUSATION.
As Mendle’s income—at least that outside his
business—was dependent upon the existence of the
Gerson brother and sister, he had always been a
careful man. For four years he had handled the five
thousand a year of the late Mr. Gerson, and while
allowing his wards ample money for their needs, he
had contrived to save a certain amount of cash.
To do so, he had scraped and screwed and denied
himself many things, since at any time his
guardianship might cease by death of either ward
from violence, or from natural causes. The expected
had happened after all, and Mendle congratulated
himself that he had saved something from the wreck
of his fortunes.
Before leaving the half-sisters on the previous
night—or rather early in the morning—he had done
his best to discover if they really knew of the death
before he announced the same. But Belinda had
been seized with sudden faintness—which certainly
appeared to be genuine, and very natural considering
the tragic circumstances—so he had been unable to
get at the truth. Harriet might have told him if
legally cross-examined, for being in love with him,
she yielded greatly to his influence. But Miss Lane
had been compelled to attend to her half-sister, and
therefore Mendle had been forced to leave, unsatisfied.
He departed the more readily, since the temporary


strength which had come with anger was exhausted
very much sooner than he expected. On reaching
his rooms some time after three in the morning, he
had thrown himself half-dressed on to his bed, and
had lost consciousness in deep slumber.
It was eleven when he awoke, and after a cold
bath and a good breakfast, he felt better. He, how-
ever, suffered from three distinct shocks—the terrible
death of Arthur, the loss of five thousand a year, and
the mysterious behaviour of Belinda.
However, an examination of his banking-book and
various scrip and stock comforted him a trifle. Out
of the Gerson estate he had saved ten thousand
pounds, for which he would not have to account,
since the will only arranged that the survivor of the
brother and sister should take the income then accru-
ing, without reference to what had been spent.
Mendle had acted very generously towards his wards
by allowing them nearly three thousand a year out
of the five, so he thought himself justified in securing
the balance in his own name and for his own use.
The Gersons and their half-sister, Miss Lane, had
an entire house to themselves in Clement Street; but
Mendle, always saving, had contented himself with
two rooms in a Rutland Square mansion. These were
furnished in the gruesome manner -of the Albert
period, and would have driven anyone possessed of
the artistic temperament insane with their lavish
decoration of grotesque patterns and violent colours,
pointedly ill-matched.
The sitting-room was particularly hideous, with
bright-red flock-patterned wall-paper, and magenta
hanging, and mahogany furniture upholstered in
green rep.


What the bedroom might be, no visitor ever knew,
since Mendle closed the door when anyone called.
Suddenly there was a knock at the door, and
Mendle closed the bedroom door before he admitted
his visitor to the sitting-room. In reply to his invita-
tion, a young man entered with a rush—an exces-
sively modern young man, smartly dressed, and
much the same in looks as Arthur Gerson. His
clothes were good, but his taste was somewhat
flamboyant, and although he looked like a gentleman,
and even like an aristocrat, there was about him the
hint of a fallen society angel—that is, he suggested a
bounder with a dash of good breeding. He was
deadly pale, and fiddled nervously with a cigarette.
“You have heard the sad news, Sir Samuel?”
said Mendle, rising again to close the outer door,
which the baronet had left open.
Embers dropped with slack muscles into the
nearest armchair. “ Goo’ Chris’fer I ” said Embers,
using his favourite expression, which had been in-
vented by himself, so that he might not swear too
picturesquely in civilised society. “ I should jolly
well think I have, Hake, y’know Inspector Hake—
goo’ fell’r Hake, old pal o’ mine—well, Hake routed
me up four hours ago, t’ tell me Arthur had kicked the
bucket in my cab. Jolly shame, I call it: low-down
trick to play a fell’r who has his confounded livin’ t’
make. Who’ll hire my nutty cab now, Mendle, I ask
y’, when it’s been made a blessed shambles of with
blood an’ sudden death, like a blessed slaughter-
house. Goo’ Chris’fer 1 Eh? What?”
“ Poor Arthur was strangled,” said Mendle, when
this long speech was finished. “ There was no
blood.”


“ Oh, but there was, Mendle. That kid, y’ know-
poor little devil of Mrs. O’Toole’s. Eh? What?
Paddy O’Toole. Hang it, y’know, I’m not a lop-
sided saint nohow, but a poor little fell’r like Paddy
O’Toole t’ be smashed up like a jelly—oh my ! Goo’
Chris’fer. Nice reputation my cab ’ull have.
What?”
“Is the boy’s name Paddy ? Do you know him ?”
Embers nodded. “ ’Should think so, Mendle.
Jolly little chap : used t’ hang round th’ Piccadilly
Theatre an’ get me fares. Hake, y’ know Inspector
Hake—goo’ chap. Hake—waltzed roun’ t’ take me t’
the hospital. I rec’g’n’zed th’ little beast, one
second.”
“Is he better? Can he speak? ”
“ H o ’s got back his senses; but there’s somethin’
wrong with th’ brain in a queer way. Paddy can’t
remember his own name, or anythin’ else. A mighty
bad job, Mendle, ’cause he’ll not be able to spot the
blighter who finished off poor Arthur.”
Mendle frowned and tapped his teeth with a pen-
holder. “ But surely the boy will recover his memory
sooner or later,” he remarked.
“That’s questionable, Mendle. Some part of the
cab gave him a nasty knock on the head, an’ for th’
time bein’, poor little beast’s mem’ry is entirely
gone.”
“ But Dr. Morley mentioned somethin’ about
trepanning, and ”
No go.” .Sir Samuel shook his closely cropped
head wisely. “He only made a shot at what was to
be done, when he looked at Paddy’s head, at time of
accident. Now, he says, and hospital surgeon says,
no trepannin’ will bring back the memory. Th’ knock


an’ the shock has wiped out Paddy’s past. He
starts life again with a mem’ry datin’ from th’ bed
he lies in. Hake’s questioned him no end, and so
have the doctors, but Paddy only says he doesn’t
know anythin’ —not even who he is.”
“ That is vexing, Sir Samuel. If the boy could
remember, he might be able to say who strangled
my poor ward.”
“ There’s no chance o’ that, Mendle, unless Mother
Nature performs a miracle. Paddy might get back
his mem’ry again, and then he might not. It’s a
toss-up. Goo’ Chris’fer, what a state for a fell’r t’
be in. Wouldn’t be bad for me though,” ended the
baronet reflectively. “ Might help me to forget the
Johnnies I owe cash to.”
“ How did the boy come to Cade Lane?” asked
the lawyer.
“ Hung on behind I ’pose, Mendle. ’T any rate,
I saw him hangin’ round th’ Piccadilly Theatre early
in th’ evenin’. I brought a young married couple t’
th’ play ’bout eight o’clock, an’ Paddy opened th’
door for them. Boy said nothin’ of goin’ t’ Cade
Lane then ? ”
“ No. I expect his journey there was unpre-
meditated,” said the lawyer idly. “By the way, how
did Arthur get hold of your cab ? ”
Embers relighted his cigarette, which had gone out,
and explained the circumstance in his own peculiar
phraseology, as he had already—so he said—ex-
plained it to Inspector Hake. It seemed that at a
quarter past nine o’clock on the previous night
Arthur Gerson came to Embers, when the motor-cab
was waiting for a fare on the Trafalgar Square stand.
Gerson wanted to go to a public-house in the


Edgware Road, and had engaged the cab. The two
drove to the hotel—it was called The Green Man—
and there Gerson went into a tobacconist’s shop next
oor to the public-house, where there was a pretty
fn l t S Tu ng f Sai . d Embers ‘ Afterward, Gerson had
nvited his friend in to have a drink, and the cab was
left unattended. Somewhere about ten o’clock—
mbers could not be quite certain to a minute—
Gerson excused himself, and went out of the bar
presumably to see the girl again. As he did not
return Embers followed to see what was the matter.
e found that the motor cab was gone, together with
| IS a u°f and motor -goggles— “ And Arthur
already had on a motor-cap,” ended the baronet.
What became of the cab ? ” asked Mendle, who
ad followed this recital with keen interest.
I never knew until Hake looked me up this
mornin , protested Sir Samuel. “ Goo’ Chris’fer
how should I, Mendle? Arthur cleared out with the
niachme, put on my goggles and coat and vanished.
, hat he did between ten—it was about ten when
he left—and twelve, when you an’ the police spotted
him in Cade Lane, f don’t know.”
office 0 /” he 537 anything about callin g on ™e at the
<< 1 d ° n t thmk he mentioned your name.”
do? When you found the cab gone, what did you
I sailed into the tobacconist’s and saw the girl.
She said that Arthur had not been in again. He
on y paid her the one visit before we went to have
™ ks * 1 1 asked some Wafers, and they told me that
Arthur had come out and bolted with the cab ”
“Why didn’t they stop him?”
4
49
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“Goo’ Chris’fer ! ” ejaculated Embers. “Why
should they have done that, Mendle ? Of course
they thought he was the chauffeur of th’ cab. Arthur
can’t drive much, but he can handle a machine in a
more or less rotten way. At any rate, he annexed my
cab and left me high and dry for th’ night. Very
dry,’’ finished Sir Samuel truthfully, “ for I went
back to the pub and filled up with whisky.’’
“Why didn’t you inform the police?” asked
Mendle testily.
“ Now I do like that,” cried Sir Samuel in an
injured tone. “ I couldn’t go t’ th’ police an’ say
that a pal o’ mine—and Arthur was a pal, as y’ know
—was a thief. ’Sides, I fancied Arthur would turn up
again. That was why I waited in the pub. But
they turned me out at twelve,” said Embers plaint-
ively, “ and as I had a skinful I waltzed home t’ m’
rooms, Bloomsbury way. This mornin’ early Hake
looked me up, and pitched the yarn of the murder.
Afterwards he took me t’ see Paddy. That’s all.”
“ You know nothing more? ”
“ No, hang you,” retorted the baronet sulkily. “ I
didn’t strangle th’ poor devil, if that’s what you
mean ? ”
“ I never hinted that you did, Sir Samuel,” said
Mendle drily; “but tell me if you know anything
about this tobacconist girl ? ”
“ No, I never set eyes on her before.”
“ What is her name ? ”
I don’t know. Goo’ Chris’fer, why should I
know ? ”
“ Arthur might have spoken to you about her.”
“ Well then he didn't. Arthur was always failin’


spoonfn’!" d 1 nCVer pretended to keep track of all his
K s kn h ow nam B u f t ; he :° baCC ° nist? ”
Green Man, Edgwafe Road , d °° r The
girl, if y’ like, liut y’ won ’M,- Caa h , ok U P th ’
Arthur—so she said , Gdl n . an y tllln ’> Mendle.
with a parcel of cigarettes.”* m and walked out
you au>' reason^to^th'ink 6 that'Yrth" 6l^* ' “ The "
cab to drive up and see ts gt, f ! h,red *«>«
h*o. He told me t’ drivp t’
Maybe the tobacconist was an after d Gl T' en lVan '
simply went in to buy the cigarettes ° r he
most reasonable thing ' think®* ’ dl ' S the
- Was Arthur in ? „
m ers skr ugged his shoulders sulkily “ w
,n f ra £ e over something-, and said tht h He WaS
to bring someone to his bearin’s.” " g ° ing
<< /I 10 , was the P er son he meant? ”
asked.”° n t nOW ‘ He never toJd m e, and I never
hand?” thlb water proof envelope in his
he never broughf wli ad I ** hiS P ° cket ’ but
fac’ ” rriVd p u When he was with me. j n
don’t I n nS,ng and restive ”
oon t know why he mi j , ebllv e, I
and after Bakers badgerin ' e ’ him ’
badgered by you. Goo' Chris’fer I °tl ‘ Want ‘° be
what?” "S ier I rather not. Eh,
.. Al U ‘ tl,ink ’'’ Ur^ecl lhe solicitor earnestly
*• a tfi&nzsr*** *
51


Sir Samuel walked restlessly round the room with
his hands in his pockets and shaking his head. He
did say that someone wanted t’ get him out of th
way.’ ”
“ Wanted to kill him, in fact? ”
“Well,” drawled Embers doubtfully, “ y’ might
put it that way.”
Mendle became quite excited. ” Why, you might
be able to bring home the crime to the criminal, m
spite of the accident to Paddy O’Toole.”
“ 1 might,” said the baronet unexpectedly, “ but I
ain’t goin’ to.”
“ But you must, if you know the person Arthur
meant—the person who wished him ill. Hid he
mention the name ? ”
“ Yes, he did,” said Embers reluctantly.
“ And the name ? ”
Sir Samuel closed his lips obstinately and tugged
nervously at his yellow moustache. Mendle insisted
on an explanation, but the baronet refused to open
his mouth. “ An’ if y’ tell Hake what I’ve told
snapped the young man, “I’ll deny everythin .
See?” . , . .
“ Embers, you know the truth,” said Mendle, look-
ing at him directly.
“ Perhaps I do, an’ perhaps I don’t. I may be a
rotter, Mendle—one of the worst y’ know spendm
money an’ sellin’ th’ estates. But there’s things that
even a rotter can’t go, if he wants t’ sleep well.”
“What chivalry I ” mocked the lawyer, much
vexed.
“ Chivalry ? ”
“ Towards a woman.’


the barreTst i r d ply n . ythin ’ “ W ° ma "’” retorted
a woI h an Wh v e to " e ° f 3 T refl ' Sal f ° s P eak hints at
a woman. You are too selfish to shield a man unless
WaS m , ade worth your while. I know of ’no one
connected with Arthur who would pay you to hold
your tongue so ” y y a
palseiThisT ' ” EmberS clenched his first and
passed Ins tongue over a pair of white, dry li ps
Don ty’ go too far, Mendle. You’re my lawye '
and not my master.” 7 y ’
“ As your lawyer, I ought to know everything.”
Vou shan’t know this.” S
‘lt is a'woman, then ?” insisted Mendle.
Sir Samuel Embers crammed his hat on his head
and made for the door, as if he had not heard the
question. I say,” he remarked pausing, “ Arthur
l°ld me the terms of his father’s will. This unex-
pected death brings you t’ th’ ground ”
nodded coolly. ” I lose five thousand a
‘ And Miss Gerson gets it.”
“ She does. I put her into possession of the
property whenever the inquest is over, and Arthur
poor boy, is buried.” Arthur,
‘‘Five thousand a year,” mused Embers, his eyes
lighting up “ I say,” he added slowly, “ I Noose
you know that I love Miss Gerson, and hat Arthur
wanted me t’ marry her ? ” nur
Mendle’s face grew even paler than it was “ I
Itoow, he said, almost inaudibly, “but I love her
JV S . amU . el ’ SeCUre in ,he knowledge of his
smirched title and flamboyant good looks, stared


insultingly at the bent, worn lawyer. “ She’ll never
marry you,” he said scornfully.
A ou can’t be sure of that, until I get her answer,”
retorted Mendle, stung to the quick by the implied
slight.
“ Oh, she’ll say ‘ No ’ t’ you, as she’ll say ‘ Yes ’
to me.”
“ 1 think she’ll say ‘ No ’ to us both,” breathed the
solicitor.
Why t me?” asked Embers, glancing in a
near mirror complacently.
“ Because of Darton.”
Sir Samuel snapped his fingers. “ I don’t care
that for Darton,” he said truculently. “ I can force
her to marry me.”
Ah,” cried Mendle, suddenly enlightened, “ then
it was Belinda who threatened to kill Arthur? ”
Embers shuffled, and finally nodded. “She did
kill him,” he said.


CHAPTER V.
THE INQUEST.
Me A J: y t Z the
Gerson as the murderess aC f USatlon of Belinda
«id very a „d bl br ° ther ’ Embers had
that he had said so mud,' extremel y sorr y
since, believing the girl to wl( hout reason,
force her to mfrry^,s°^
To impart his guilty knowledge to MenZ I I " "°‘
as the baronet knew a rival ’ who was,
weapon in that rival’s hand ’ H * ,0 . P '° Ce a
sudden mention of th! d ‘ How ever, Mendle’s
surprise and 1 ' " ame had taken Embers by
out what he beZledTo & beZhZZZt? T b,U » ed
being aware of his foolish frankness W ' th ° Ut
m spite of his pretended magnanimitv R ’
prepared to betnv * b ,n unity. He was not
was not above usinn tl S ° declared » yet he
hi his handto force g her !nt W o ea a P m n had .P'«*d
disliked. With snm P i marna £ e which she
from the young man the re'sr klendle extracted
accusation, and learned thatp" Z b ?" glng such an
solely upon the ,W a r based his belief
at The Green Man that R , to ' d him ’ when
murder him because he Arthur' 1 , thr€atened to
’ was determined to


disgrace Dr. Wilfred Darton. In what way Arthur
had proposed to do this last Embers could not say;
but he was certain that Belinda had uttered her wild
threat. Bui, of course, as Mendle pointed out, it
was ridiculous to accuse the girl upon such slight
evidence, especially as she was greatly attached to
her brother. But Sir Samuel insisted that Belinda,
having been at the Piccadilly Theatre on the night in
question, could easily have secured the cab driven by
her brother, and when seated beside him on the box-
seat —which, knowing him, she could manage—might
have strangled him. And in any case, as Embers
asserted, Belinda probably was one of the last people,
if not the very last, to see her brother alive. However,
Mendle pooh-poohed the whole theory, since Sir
Samuel had no very strong facts to go upon, save
that contained in the observation made by Arthur,
that his sister had threatened murder.
But, as the lawyer had explained, Belinda was a
nervous, hot-tempered girl, who said far more than
she meant. It was quite probable that in a moment
of passion she had made such a threat, but without
any intention of carrying it out, and even without
thinking of what she was saying. Moreover, to
execute such a crime would need great skill and
strength and cunning, none of which qualities the
girl possessed to any extent. Finally, Mendle, after
laughing at Embers’s theory, had advised him to
hold his tongue, since to tell such a cock-and-bull
story to the police would only result in his being
covered with ridicule. Sir Samuel had therefore
departed with the fullest intention of following the
advice of his legal adviser. All the same, he quite
intended to try the effect of the accusation on Belinda


when proposing. And shortly he intended to ask
ier to be Lady Embers, if only for the sake of the
nve thousand a year.
Mendle also made up his mind to take the same
road He was well aware that Belinda was guiltless
as she was not clever enough to invent and execute
so dexterous a crime. Nevertheless, if she refused
o become Mrs. Mendle, he hoped to terrify her into
surrender. This he could do, as he believed, by
repeating Arthur’s observation, and by recalling to
her memory the strange fact that she had been up and
dressed to go out early on the morning when her
brother had been murdered. Also she had been at
the Piccadilly Theatre, and could easily have got into
the cab, as Embers had conjectured. In fact, as the
lawyer thought, he could build up a very fair case
against the timid and ignorant girl. That the case
would be mainly composed of moonshine did not
matter, so long as she accepted his hand. Mendle
did not consider himself to be a bad man, but he did
not see why he should lose five thousand a year
because he did not possess sufficient youthful and
manly grace to fascinate a woman.
The inquest was held in a small hotel near the City
Morgue, and after inspecting the body the jury moved
into a large room to hear the evidence. Inspector
Hake was present along with Mendle and Robert
arley. Also the doctor from the hospital came with
r ‘ * ,7 as hls evidence was required to prove
that Paddy O'Toole was not able to be a witness
hen Embers took a seat in the body of the room, to
describe how the deceased became possessed of the
motor-cab, and Simond and Jennings were also
present to give evidence


“Have you learned anything new?” asked
Mendle, when seating himself behind Hake.
“ No,” said the Inspector, rather despondently.
“ I can’t make head or tail of this case. Who killed
the man, or why he was killed, I can’t say. It’s a
profound mystery.”
“ What about that girl in the Edgware Road
tobacconist’s ? ”
“How do you know about her?” asked Hake,
abruptly.
“ Sir Samuel told me everything. There was no
reason why he should not. I am his legal adviser,
remember.”
“ Oh, there’s no harm done,” said Hake hastily.
“ Only I wondered if you had found out anything on
your own account.”
“ I have discovered nothing, Mr. Inspector. I
don’t know in which direction to look. Yet, after
hearing what Embers had to say, I fancied that this
girl might know of something, and looked her up.
.She is called Ellen Parley.”
Mendle started with genuine surprise.
“ Ellen Parley I ” he repeated.
Hake nodded. “ Yes. The daughter of your
clerk. The similarity of the names struck me, and
I learned about the relationship. But Miss Parley
says that Gerson came in hastily on that night, only
to buy a packet of cigarettes, and made no very
pertinent remarks.”
“ Did she know him ? ”
“ She confessed that she did. You see, Gerson
frequented the bar of The Green Man, and often
bought goods from Miss Parley. In some way he


learned her name, and then it came about that she
found out who he was. You understand.”
“Oh, it’s quite easy; quite easy,” said Mendle
mechanically. ‘Of course, the name would suggest
that of my clerk, and Arthur, on learning that he
was the girl’s father, would say that he was my ward.
But are you quite sure that this Ellen knows
nothing ? ”
Hake turned on the lawyer squarely. “ What
should she know ? ”
Mendle mused. She might know nothing; on
the other hand, she might know a great deal. Arthur
was a loose talker about his private affairs, and in
conversing with her, might have said something
likely to show who hated him sufficiently vehemently
to go the length of murder.”
“ He said nothing on the night in question, at all
events,” said Hake in a sharp tone, for he did not
like to be advised about his business in this way.
But I must add,” he remarked, pondering, “ that
Miss Parley seemed considerably upset over the
death. Perhaps she was in love with the deceased.
He wasn’t a bad-looking fellow.”
“ Or a very scrupulous fellow either,” said Mendle
drily. “ Well, then, if you don’t question Ellen
Parley, I’ll do so myself, and I’ll question her father
also. I must learn who killed Arthur and avenge
his death.”
That is rather a bitter sentiment,” said Hake
absently, for the Coroner was getting ready to speak.
It is a true one, although I had little reason to
love Arthur. He hated me, although I gave him no
cause. And also,” added Mendle earnestly, “ I wish
to clear my own character from suspicion.”


The Inspector turned again and fairly laughed.
“ I asure you there is no need,” he said, surveying
the nervous face of the lawyer. ”No one can say
that you had a hand in this.”
“ The very hint that I had would drive me mad,
Mr. Inspector.”
Hake laughed again. “ You are all nerves,” said
he lightly. “ However, I daresay by the time the
inquest is ended you will be fully exonerated. Hush !
the coroner is about to address the jury.”
Even as he spoke, the coroner raised his voice and
made a plain, bald statement of the case to the twelve
good and lawful men. What he said was to the
point and unadorned by any flowers of eloquence, but
the mystery of the murder was so deep that everyone
listened intently to every word. The conclusion of
the opening address left the jury where they were—
that is, in a state of complete ignorance.
Inspector Hake then followed with an account of
how the crime had been discovered, and gave a list of
the witnesses he proposed to call, ending with an
expression of regret that the one witness who could
in all human probability solve the problem was lying
dangerously ill in a near hospital. He also placed
before the jury the empty waterproof envelope which
had been found on the box-seat of the motor-cab, and
the tri-coloured scarf with which deceased had been
strangled. The cedar pencil used to twist the scarf
was also produced.
Constable Jennings then detailed how he had dis-
covered the motor-cab and the body, and had knocked
up Lewis Mendle because of the light in the office.
The lawyer himself repeated the same story that he
had related to Hake on the night of the murder, but
60
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


neither witness threw any light on the darkness.
Mendle was closely questioned as to Ids relations
with the deceased, and frankly confessed that they
were not of the best since Arthur Gerson had twice
tried to kill him. “And without reason,” ended
witness. Mendle displayed considerable agitation,
and twice stated that he feared to be accused, seeing
what the circumstances of the case were, and that the
crime had been committed, so to speak, before his
ofhce. But no one hinted that Mendle was connected
in any way with the tragedy, especially when it came
to light that he had lost five thousand a year by the
death. Also, Robert Parley stepped into the box to
prove an alibi on the part of his master.
Dr. Morley stated that deceased had been killed by
strangulation, somewhere about eleven o’clock, and
being a delicate man, must have died very easily.
Indeed, the heart, as witness pointed out, was
affected, which would bring about the death very
rapidly. there could scarcely have been any
struggle. J
Ate you certain that deceased was murdered at
eleven ?” asked a juryman suspiciously.
Witness : “ Perfectly sure.”
Juryman : “ Constable Jennings said that he found
the dead body in the cab at five minutes to twelve.
Are we, then, to believe, that the cab was standing
before Mr. Mendle’s office all that time?”
Coroner, referring to his notes: “Constable
Jennings also said that he walked down Cade Lane
about twenty minutes past eleven and saw no cab
there.”
“ And Constable Cropsley saw the cab coming,”
said Hake. 6
61
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


Cropsley was called, and declared that he had seen
the cab pass down Manners Street somewhere about
half-past eleven, only he could not be sure to a
minute.
The Juryman : “ Then we are to believe that a dead
man drove the cab.”
Coroner : “ There is no need to make a jest of so
solemn a subject.”
The Juryman : “ I want to know how the cab came
to be at Mr. Mendle’s office-door when the deceased
had been killed nearly an hour previous.”
Coroner: ‘‘Perhaps witness saw who was
driving.”
Constable Cropsley said he had taken no particular
notice of the motor-cab, and that it passed him very
swiftly. So far as he remembered only one man was
driving.”
Coroner : “ Was a boy hanging on behind?”
Cropsley : “I did not notice that, sir.”
The jury expressed themselves somewhat confused,
and this confusion was shared by everyone else. But
no cross-questioning could extract from any witness
more than had been said. The deceased had certainly
been murdered at eleven, so it was presumed that his
murderer had driven the cab to Cade Lane.
“ To implicate me,” called out Mendle at this
point.
The Coroner pointed out that Mr. Mendle was not
implicated in any way, but it was certainly strange
that the murderer—who, presumably, had driven the
cab to Cade Lane, should have known that the cab
was bound to be there at midnight. Could Mr.
Mendle say who knew that the cab was to be there at
that hour.


“ S \\ Samuel Embers, to whom the cab belonged,
knew, said Mendle, rising to give point to his
speech; “also Miss Gerson and Miss Lane and
deceased knew. Sir Samuel had driven me for some
months to and from the City at midnight. But surely
Constable Cropsley must have seen the murderer
driving ’longside his victim.”
Constable Cropsley swore again that he only saw
one man. But then, added Cropsley for the third
time, “ I did not take particular notice of the cab.”
A Juryman : “ Perhaps the injured boy drove it?”
ibis suggestion was received with a laugh. A
street arab could not possibly have the knowledge to
drive a motor-cab. “ Then Constable Cropsley must
have seen him hanging on behind.”
I did not, sir,” declared Cropsley.
” Perhaps the boy was inside the cab,” suggested
the Coroner, and as the discussion seemed futile
called Sir Samuel Embers.
Ihe baronet told exactly the same story as he
had 1 elated to Hake and Mendle, but suppressed the
fact—with a sly glance at the lawyer—of Arthur’s
observation regarding Belinda’s threat. The witness
declared that Gerson gave no hint that he expected to
be murdered, and showed no signs of wishing to use
the cab. He saw nothing of a waterproof envelope.
Belinda Gerson, who was dressed in deep mourn-
ing, and who looked terribly grief-stricken, gave
evidence that she had seen her brother on the night
of his death. The last time she had set eyes on him
was at ten minutes to eight o’clock, when he escorted
her to the Piccadilly Theatre. There he left her, and
she expected to come home with her half-sister, Miss
Lane, who was acting.


“ Did you go home with Miss Lane ?” asked the
Coroner.
“No,” said the witness; ‘‘l could not hnd my
sister, and so took a hansom and went home. I
expected to find my brother at home, but he was not
there. I waited up for him. Miss Lane came home
later, and we both waited.”
Coroner : “ Was deceased usually home early?”
Witness (hesitating) : “ No; he often stopped out
all night.”
Coroner: ‘‘Then why did you wait up on this
especial night?”
Witness (hesitating again): ‘‘My brother was
angry with Dr. Wilfred Darton, to whom I am
engaged, and threatened to do him an injury unless
the marriage was broken off. I waited up, to ask my
brother if he had seen Dr. Darton on that night.”
A juryman : “ And had he?”
There was some laughter at this, until witness
answered:, ‘‘No! I asked Dr. Darton, and he said
that he had gone home straight from the theatre.”
Coroner: “ Was Dr. Darton at the theatre also?”
Witness : ‘‘Yes, he was with me in the stalls.
Coroner : “ If he was engaged to you, Miss Ger-
son, why did he not see you home, instead of letting
you go alone ?”
Witness : ‘‘Dr. Darton left me, after placing me in
a cab, as he had to see a patient. He told me that he
went home, calling on his patient on the way.”
A Juryman : ‘‘You said that he went straight
home!”
Witness: ‘‘So he did, but he called on his
patient.”


oroner : In that case he did not go straight
home. Do you know the name of the patient?”
Witness : “ No; Dr. Darton did not tell me.”
: “ Was ‘he P-tient your
Witness : “ No. My brother was in perfect health.
Moreover, he disliked Dr. Darton on my account too
much to be his patient. My brother did not approve
of my engagement to Dr. Darton.”
Many other questions were put to witness, but
nothing further of any importance could be learned,
t so happened that Darton was in the court, as he
had come there with Miss Gerson. He was quite
ready to give his evidence, and merely stated that he
had put Miss Gerson into a cab, and then had called
on his patient. Afterwards he had gone home. His
rooms were in Bloomsbury. He knew that deceased
is iked him because he did not approve of a possible
marriage with his sister, but witness declared that he
never took any notice of deceased’s wild speeches.
<4 „ Was a hi £ hl y neurotic man,” said the doctor.
He threatened me, and he also threatened Mr.
I endle * I do not believe that he intended to
harm either of us.”
certainly tried twice to harm me,” said
Mendle grimly.
The hospital doctor was then called, and proved
that Paddy O’Toole could not leave his bed, as he
hnd been much shaken by the shock, and was weak
from the loss of blood. He said that the boy’s
memory was quite gone, and that he could recollect
nothing of his past, not even his own name. Either
the blow on the head, or the shock itself, might
have occasioned the loss of memory.


Coroner : “ Will he recover his memory again ?”
Witness : “It is impossible to say. He may, or
he may not. It quite depends upon his constitution.
He seems weak, and may possibly die. His body is
very ill nourished. In time he might recover his
memory, but I would not be prepared to swear that
he would.”
A Juryman : “ Do you think that the boy knows
the truth of the murder?”
Witness (stiffly) : ” I am quite in the dark on that
point.”
On the whole, as the daily papers afterwards
declared, the proceedings at the inquest were most
unsatisfactory. There was much cry and little wool,
said the reporters, since no evidence was forthcoming,
likely to show who had murdered the deceased. Not
even a feasible notion had been suggested, although
it was hinted that the empty waterproof envelope had
contained papers, for the sake of which the crime had
been committed. The coroner and several of the
jurymen asked all manner of questions, and three or
four of the witnesses were recalled. But at the
end of two hours, and when every available point had
been threshed out, the jury brought in the usual
commonplace verdict of “ Wilful murder against
some person or persons unknown.”
” It is disgraceful,” said Mendle, when leaving the
court. “ What is the use of the police if we are not
to be protected ?”
“ Even the police cannot perform miracles,” said
Parley timidly.
“ Your daughter should have been called,”
snapped the lawyer.


I don’t see, sir, what my daughter could have
sa *7 retorted Parley, with more spirit than usual.
\ou never told me that she served in a
tobacconnist’s, Parley.’
‘‘There was no need to, sir,” rejoined the other,
coldly. ’
“ And y° u never Hked Arthur,” remarked Mendle
a ruptly. It really seemed as though he wished to
take the old clerk unawares.
No, sir, I did not,” said Parley decisively. “ All
the came, I am sorry that he met with so unexpected
and terrible a death.”
t( y° u disliked him, why are you sorry?”
“He was not prepared to die,” said the other
solemnly; then asked questions in his turn, possibly
to prevent further cross-examination by his employer.
I suppose Miss Belinda will get the money now?”
Every penny of it. To-morrow I hand over the
property; and she’ll make ducks-and-drakes of it
unless she has someone to restrain her impetuositv ”
“ Hr. Wilfred Darton ?”
Mendle’s face grew black. “ He’s a good-looking
001, but clever enough to manage, to his own advan-
tage, mind you, a soft-hearted, inexperienced girl like
Belinda Gerson.”
Ah I” Parley’s wrinkled face flushed. “You
think Miss Belinda is soft-hearted, Mr. Mendle?”
~ PY° U k , n ° W her as weil as 1 do >” snapped Mendle.
Why ask ?”
Parley hesitated, and his colour grew still deeper,
e was on the point of making an observation, but,
restraining himself with an obvious effort, he walked
away with a muttered apology for his abrupt depar-


Mendle looked after him, somewhat puzzled.
“ Does he want to get money out of Belinda?” the
lawyer asked himself. “If he does, for what reason
does he wish to get it?” He paused and shook his
head. “ Ellen Parley knows something. She cer-
tainly should have been called as a witness.”


CHAPTER VI.
A PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE.
The drawing-room of the Clement Street house was
much more artistically and expensively furnished
than Mr. Mendle’s apartments. Harriet Lane, who
looked after the place in the intervals of her pro-
fessional engagements, had an eye for the judicious
blending of colours, and was capable of arranging
furniture to the best advantage. Thanks to Mendle’s
open-handed administration of the estate, there was
plenty of money, and Belinda, who was fond of
beauty, although incapable of creating it, allowed
Harriet to spend what she liked. Ihe result was very
satisfactory, as Mr. Mendle acknowledged, when he
entered the drawing-room, after the burial of his
unfortunate ward. But he falsely ascribed the sur-
lounding elegance to Belinda. It seemed impossible
that so plain-looking a woman as Miss Lane could
bring into being a home of such beauty and charm.
It was three o clock in the afternoon when the
lawyer called, and the two ladies, advised of his visit
beforehand, were waiting to receive him. Both of
them were arrayed in the most pronounced mourning,
which accentuated the bright, delicate beauty of
Belinda and rendered the homely looks of Harriet still
more apparent. The contrast between the half-sisters
was most marked.
Harriet was a tall, grey-faced, spare woman of
thirty-four, with a severe and somewhat puritanic


face. On the stage she played the mother-in-law of
farcical comedy and the duenna in poetic drama with
equal success, since her stiffness and angularity were
suitable to such characters. She was not a great
actress, but a reliable and painstaking one, very
popular with the public, who appreciated her sober
industry. Having such a reputation, she was rarely
out of an engagement, which was just as well, since
her stepfather had not left her a single penny, and
her dead mother had always been a pauper ever since
she could remember. Moreover, Miss Lane was
proud, and had no notion of living on her prettier and
richer half-sister. Belinda was fond of Harriet, and
readily allowed her to dominate the house, so the two
got on very well together. In fact they assimilated
from sheer contrast of character, for Harriet was the
working bee and Belinda the glittering butterfly, who
did nothing but flutter gaily in the sunshine of life.
And she was an extremely pretty butterfly, with a
pleasant disposition, which came from sheer weakness
ot character. At least Mr. Mendle thought so, and
he certainly should have known, considering he had
known Belinda almost from infancy. For years he
had loved her fondly, and notwithstanding his plain
looks and his age, he hoped that she would accept his
hand. He certainly had been somewhat startled
when she announced at the inquest that she was
engaged to Hr. Harton, as he had never dreamed that
the love ot the two had progressed so far. But he
knew that Belinda was somewhat afraid of him, and,
hom experience, believed that her character was a
yielding one; therefore he fancied that an hour’s con-
versation would alter circumstances. As he fished in
Ins black hag lor necessary papers he stole sly looks
70
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


at her charming face, which looked as though it were
delicately carved from ivory; at the crown of her
feathery golden hair, at her large blue eyes and dainty
figure, and felt his heart burn within him. Come
what may, he swore to possess this loveliness, and the
five thousand a year, which rendered the acquisition
of SLlch beauty still more desirable. But in justice to
Mr. Mendle it must be acknowledged that he was
sufficiently lured by the girl’s grace to take her with-
out the money. Such romance was somewhat
ridiculous in a dry-as-dust lawyer of middle age.
Hairiet Lane, who loved him and who matched him
better in age and looks, was more suited to be Mrs.
Mendle; but the solicitor, blinded by love, could not
take so common-sense a view.
“ You did not come to the funeral,” said Mendle,
looking for a reply to Belinda.
Harriet answered for her half-sister. “ She was
not fit to go. The ceremony would have upset her.
I thought it best that she should remain at home
along with me. It is all over, I suppose?”
“ 1 should not be here, else,” rejoined Mendle
tartly, for he did not wish Miss Lane to conduct the
conversation. “ Poor Arthur is buried in the Bromp-
ton Cemetery, and has passed out of our lives for
ever.”
1 hat depends upon our intentions regarding the
murderer,” said Harriet.
Mendle shrugged his shoulders. “Of course,
Belinda can offer a reward for the apprehension of the
murderer, he said, in a cold, official tone; “and a
good one may stimulate the police into searching
everywhere. But it will be like looking for a needle
in a haystack.”
71


“ Do you think that the murderer will ever be dis-
covered ?” asked Belinda, fixing her blue eyes on the
solicitor anxiously.
Retried hard to fathom her exact meaning, but the
eyes bafiled him, and he took refuge in another shrug.
“ ff Paddy O’Toole recovers his memory, I certainly
think that the criminal will be brought to the
gallows,” he remarked judicially.
“ Will the boy recover his memory?”
“ No one seems to know—the doctors least of all.
But if he does not, I fail to see who else can solve the
mystery. Of course, a reward—a good reward ”
” I shall not offer a reward,” said Belinda un-
expectedly.
“ Oh, you should, Belinda,” chimed in Harriet
quickly.
“Why?” asked the girl bitterly.” In order that
Arthur’s shady doings may be raked up for publi-
cation in the papers?”
” I thought that you were devoted to Arthur,” said
Mendle quietly.
Belinda’s fair cheeks coloured deeply. ” I was
fond of Arthur, and I proved my fondness in every
way. He spent his own money—squandered it, I
may say, and I always helped him, when I could.”
“ That is true,” chimed in Miss Lane again. ” But
for me Arthur would have had every sixpence out of
Belinda.”
” And did his extravagance turn you against
him?” asked Mendle bluntly.
Belinda shook her head. “ No. But he persist-
ently set himself against my happiness, and tor-
mented me by insisting that I should marry Sir
Samuel Embers. Arthur proved himself to be so


selfish and callous, and wanting in common affection,
that my love for him passed away.”
“ You grew to hate him, in fact?”
” No,” she replied sharply, “ you use too strong a
word, Lewis. I despised him rather. You had more
cause to hate him, considering that he wanted you to
die, and twice attempted your life.”
Mendle nodded in his turn. 11 I bore no grudge
against Aithur for that, he said coolly. 1 ' He was a
neurotic lunatic, who acted on the mad impulse of the
moment. I can’t say that I felt very comfortable
when he was alive, as I am a nervous man, and did
not like to go in fear of my life.”
‘A man should never know fear,” said Belinda
contemptuously.
‘‘Perhaps not,” said Mendle drily, although a
sudden red in his cheek showed that her scorn had
moved him, ” but fear is a physical affair of flesh
and blood and unsteady nerves. It is no credit to a
healthy man that he should be brave. I am not
healthy, therefore it is no discredit to me that I
tiemble at every shadow. T hese emotions are beyond
the control of the will.”
“ You speak as a materialist,” said the girl, still
scornful.
“ I speak as a lawyer now,” rejoined Mendle, good-
humouredly, “so we can dismiss ethics for the
moment. To-day my guardianship ceases, Belinda,
and these papers place you in possession of five
thousand a year, the capital of which is well in-
vested.”
‘‘Thanks I” Belinda stretched out her hand for
the papers.
‘‘ And I trust,” added Mendle, surrendering them,
73
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ that you have no cause to be offended with my
guardianship.”
‘‘You have been very kind,” said Belinda coldly.
‘‘Kind?” echoed Miss Lane, and a flush made
beautiful her wan cheeks. ‘‘ Oh, Belinda, that is a
weak word to employ. Lewis has been both kind
and honest. He had full control of your property —”
‘‘ Thanks to my father’s mad will,” interpolated
Miss Gerson.
“ Mad or not, the will placed everything in Lewis’s
hand,” went on Harriet vehemently, ‘‘and he has
behaved as only one man in a thousand would have
behaved. He could have squandered the money; he
could have refused to give you and Arthur enough to
live on. He could ”
‘‘ I know all that,” interrupted her half-sister
calmly. ‘‘ Lewis has acted as an honest man. I
never expected him to act in any other way.”
‘‘ Then you might thank him.”
‘‘ I have thanked him,” said Belinda, unemotion-
ally.
Mendle was puzzled. For years he had been accus-
tomed to regard the girl as a lump of clay, easy of
manipulation, and capable of being dominated by a
stronger mind. Now she seemed suddenly to acquire
strength of character and a calm self-control which
astonished him considerably. He tried to get at her
unexpressed sentiments by artful remarks. “If you
are pleased with my stewardship,” he said quietly,
but keeping his eyes on her face, ‘‘ perhaps you will
give me a tangible proof of your pleasure by agreeing
to leave your affairs in my hands; for I don’t deny,
Belinda, that the loss of business involving five


thousand a year means much to me, especially now
when I am left a pauper.”
Belinda met his gaze squarely, and smiled oddly.
I am sorry to hear that you are a pauper, Lewis,”
she said, so pointedly that the man felt convinced that
she knew of his savings, “ and if I can help you in
any way I shall do so. But I am not yet prepared
to say if you can continue to be my legal adviser.”
“ Why?” asked Mendle, turning pale and feeling
savage. That this worm should turn both amazed
and angered him.
” We can discuss that later.”
“ Belinda !” burst out Harriet, who rushed into the
breach to defend the man she adored, ‘‘ how can you
speak so—how can you act so ! Lewis has behaved
wonderfully considering the power your father’s will
gave him.”
“ I admit that, Harriet; but my father should never
have made such a will. However, lam now in pos-
session of my rightful property, so there is no more
to be said.”
Mendle chuckled and closed his black bag with a
click. There was a good deal more to be said, and
he intended to say it as soon as he could get Harriet
out of the room. Meanwhile, he made the first obser-
vation which came into his head, but not without
intention : “ I am sorry to hear that you will not offer
a reward,” he remarked pointedly.
‘‘lam not going to have Arthur’s past life dragged
into the light of day,” said Belinda sharply. “ You
know what he was, Lewis, and how he squandered his
money on disreputable companions, and ”
“ You should know nothing of these things,” said
Miss Lane, dismayed.
75
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


Belinda turned on her indignantly. “ Why ? Be-
cause I am only a girl, I suppose. Do you think,
Harriet, and you, Lewis, that I am blind to what goes
on in the world? I loved Arthur with more than a
sister’s love, and he treated me so badly, so selfishly,
that 1 grew to be indifferent to him. But I know—
it matters not how—that he lived a very bad life and
with very bad people. I don’t want to say anything
against the dead ”
You are saying it,” remarked Mendle caustically.
“ Then 1 say no more,” she continued in a softer
tone, ” save that I believe Arthur was killed by one
of the disreputable companions who dragged him
down. I do not offer a reward because I fear what
may come to light.
Harriet rose indignantly. “ I scarcely know you,
Belinda,” she said in a hard tone; ‘‘you are quite
changed by the acquisition of this money, and are not
the gentle, loving sister I knew. If you ” —here a
knock came at the door, and Harriet opened it to
listen to a request from the parlour-maid that she
would come to the kitchen. With a nod she dis-
missed the girl, and turned again. “ I have to attend
to some domestic duties,” she said quietly; ‘‘but I
shall return soon, to express my feelings.”
When Mendle was alone with Belinda a silence
prevailed. He broke it after a curious glance or two
at her changed face. The hard look in her eyes
struck him as extraordinary, and he began to wonder
if she really deserved the suspicions of Embers. “ I
am sorry that you will not leave the business in my
hands,” he said hesitatingly.
“ I have not yet decided to take it away.”
“ But you said ”


“ I know what I said, and I know why I said it. I
may or may not keep you aS my legal adviser. I’ll
let you know in a week. Meanwhile ” She
stood up to intimate that the interview was ended.
But Mendle did not intend to be dismissed, as he
wanted to put his fortunes to the test. “ One
moment,” he said with a beating heart and an un-
usual colour in his cheeks. “ I want to ask you a
question.”
Belinda was sufficiently feminine to guess what the
question would be. “ Better say nothing, Lewis,”
she remarked gently.
“ I must—l shall 1” he cried excitedly. “ You
know that I love you I”
“ So you have hinted before.”
“ And you—and you M
“ I am engaged to Wilfred Darton.”
“ Never, never, never I” he panted, and grew pale
with anger and dismay.
Belinda made an imperious gesture. “ Listen to
me,” she said composedly. “ Before Arthur died, I
was in your power, as I had no money, and Wilfred
is too poor to marry me as a pauper. Therefore, I
yielded to you in every way, as I felf myself to be
entirely in your hands. You took an unfair advan-
tage of my dependence, and refused to allow Wilfred
to visit this house. I loved him, and you thought to
make me change my love by keeping him away, so
that you might ask me to be your wife. Such an
action shows how little you understand women. I
am my own mistress now, and this house is mine. I
am rich and independent so I intend to marry
Wilfred within six month’s. He is poor, but I have
now plenty of money. As to your proposal, I decline


it. I wish to be your friend—at a distance. Closer
companionship is impossible, for you took advantage
of my father’s mad will to render me a slave.”
Belinda !” Mendle recoiled in his astonishment.
Oh, I know what you think,” she went on scorn-
fully, “ that I am a puppet to dance while you pull
the strings. I did, when I could not help myself, and
you and Harriet and Arthur all thought me devoid of
will. So I was; but now, as lam rich and free, I can
assert myself.”
“ You refuse to marry me?”
” Absolutely. But lam willing to be your friend,
if you will let me.”
To be my sister, after the cant way a woman
talks to a man she refuses,” sneered Mendle, livid
with rage. ” Ah, this is indeed a change. You defy
me, do you ? We shall see. I believe Embers now.’
What does he say ?” asked Belinda, and he saw
that she was strangely moved, although she faced
him unflinchingly.
” That you threatened to kill Arthur. Yes; Arthur
told Embers that you threatened to kill him.”
It is quite true,” rejoined Belinda, colouring
shamefacedly. “ I lost my temper with Arthur when
he said that he would disgrace Wilfred, and I said
that I would kill him first. I was ashamed of myself
the moment afterwards for saying so ridiculous a
thing. And Arthur took advantage of my apology—
which he considered weakness—to insist that I should
marry Sir Samuel. I refused him, as I refuse you.
Wilfred is the man I love, and Wilfred is the man I
marry.”
“ If you are not arrested, meanwhile, for murder,”
said Mendle harshly.


“ You dare ”
If I do not dare, Embers will. He wants to marry
you. I don’t know if you have refused him ”
“ Not personally, but I have through Arthur.
Well?”
Embers will propose, then, and if you refuse he
will go to the police and say that you threatened to
kill your brother.”
Belinda looked at him scornfully. “Of course no
one will believe so mad a charge. ou do not believe
it yourself?” she ended abruptly.
“No,” said Mendle, somewhat unexpectedly, “I
do not. A remark which you made just now has
caused me to change my mind.”
Belinda’s eyes flickered, and she draw a breath.
“ What remark ?”
“ You hinted that Arthur declared that he could
disgrace Darton.”
“ 1 m ore than hinted. I said it plainly.”
Ah I Mendle chuckled, “you were more cautious
at the inquest.”
“ There is no need for me to tell Arthur’s ravings
to the world,” said Miss Gerson coldly and disdain-
fully.
u “ Were the 7 ravings,” asked Mendle significantly,
“ or did Arthur explain how he proposed to disgrace
Darton ?”
“He did not,” she replied restlessly, and sorry
that she had said so much, “nor would I have listened
had he explained. But he certainly made the threat,
and then I broke into that foolish speech, out of which
you wish to make capital, because I have refused to
marry you.”
Oh, I don t intend to make capital out of your


loose words,” said Mendle carelessly, but keeping a
keen eye on her expressive face, “ but Sir Samuel will
be less scrupulous.”
“ I am quite able to deal with Sir Samuel,” she
informed him.
“Is Dr. Darton prepared to deal with him?
Apparently, Arthur did know of something to the
Doctor’s discredit, and could have made it hot for
him. There may be a page in Darton’s life-book
which ”
“ I believe nothing against Wilfred,” said Belinda,
wetting her dry lips, and recoiling like an animal at
bay.
He observed her inward fear and grew strong as
she weakened. ” I do,” he declared firmly. “ What
the disgraceful thing may be I don’t know—but I’ll
find out.”
Indeed!” she strove to keep her voice steady,
“ and how ?”
By getting of those papers that were stolen from
the waterproof envelope.”
Belinda set her teeth. “ What papers?” she asked
hoarsely.
The papers containing the secret of Darton, and
for which he murdered the boy.”
I lie girl uttered a cry of terror and indignation.
“ You have no right to assume— ”
1 don’t assume. I am certain. At the inquest
yesterday it was said openly that the crime was com-
mitted tor the sake of certain papers contained in the
waterproof envelope. ’ ’
It is a lie.” Belinda turned pale. “ Wilfred is
innocent.”
Let him say so to the jury I”
80
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ Lewis, you would not ”
I believe that Darton stole those papers, and ”
“ No, I tell you ! ”
“ And murdered your brother.”
She stared at him wildly, and tried to speak, but
failed. A moment later she was lying in a faint on
the floor.
81
81
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


CHAPTER VII.
WILFRED DARTON.
Mendle cast a glance at the insensible girl, and was
perfectly certain that she feared lest Dr. Darton
should be accused of the crime. The next thing for
him to do was obviously to interview the doctor and
learn what defence he could make. While thus
thinking he heard the sound of Harriet returning, and
snatching up his hat and bag, passed swiftly down
the stairs. In the hall he met with Miss Lane.
“ Well?” she demanded inquiringly.
“ Your sister has fainted,” replied Mendle curtly,
and opened the door.
‘‘What have you been saying to her?” asked
Harriet, starting.
“ Ask her rather what she has been saying to me !”
rejoined the lawyer, and disappeared into the street.
Harriet, much amazed at his hasty exit, would have
followed him and insisted upon an explanation. But
a recollection of Belinda’s need for assistance sent her
up the stairs.
Just as Mendle turned the corner into Rutland
Square, he heard the horn of a motor-cab, and looked
up, to see Embers slipping past in his vehicle. On
hailing him, the baronet stopped, and asked in rather
a surly tone what was wanted. “ Are you going to
see Miss Gerson ?” demanded the lawyer hurriedly.
‘‘What’s that to you, if I am?” snapped Sir
Samuel.


Because if you are, you will not see her. She is
JJJ M °
“ What caused her illness?”
1 hat’s a long story.”
Embers looked at him hard. “ Get up here with
me,” he said, after a pause, “ and tell me all about
it.”
“ I thought you were going to see Miss Gerson.”
“ There’s not much good in doing that if she is ill.
When I propose to a girl I wants her to be quite fit.
Goo’ Chris’fer, I should hope so ! Eh ! what?”
“ You may save yourself the trouble of proposing.
At the inquest, if you remember, she stated definitely
that she was engaged.”
lo that medical blighter! W ell, the engage-
ment will have to be broken, or I’ll know the reason
why.”
ou can know the reason now,” said Mendle
coolly. “ The reason that the engagement will not
be broken is that Belinda is perfectly innocent of
harming her brother. I wonder that you entertained
so ridiculous an idea.”
” It’s worth trying, at all events, so as to get her to
marry me.”
“ More chivalry,” sneered the lawyer. “ Let me
get in ! he hoisted himself alongside the baronet.
“Now drive me to 20, Kingswell Street, Blooms-
bury.”
“ I want to see Miss Gerson,” said the obstinate
baronet, who did not like his plans disarranged.
“ You won’t then ! I have just left her in a faint.
And if you intend to threaten, you need not. She
will only laugh at you.”
Embers swung the cab slowly round in the direc


tion of Kensington High Street. “She’s a braver
girl than I take her for, then,” said he.
Mendle looked at him sideways. “ I rather think
that you will be surprised to see what kind of a girl
she has become now that the five thousand a year is
in her hands.’’
“ A leopard can’t change his spots,” growled the
baronet.
“ This leopard can. Women are wonderfully
adaptable, you know. Miss Gerson is quite capable
of facing you, or me, or aftyone else, to save her
lover.”
“ Who is the lover? You? ”
“ Oh, I have been refused, the same as you will
be.”
“ But when I tell her what Arthur said ”
“ I tried that game.”
“ Oh, hang it, did you? Well, I call that shabby.”
Mendle shrugged. “At all events, I save you
from the scene which I have gone through. She
simply laughed at me; but before I left, she fainted.
She is not afraid for herself, but for Darton.”
“ What has he been doing? ”
“ Well,” said Mendle, looking straight before
him, “ I am on my way to ask him that question.”
Embers made no reply for the moment, as he was
guiding the cab among some rather crowded traffic.
When he won clear and was whizzing along by the
Park, he looked at the lawyer. “ Why won’t you be
plain with me, Mendle? ”
“ What do you mean ? ”
“ I take it that Miss Gerson is afraid lest Darton
should be accused of the murder.”
“ I never said that,” rejoined the solicitor quickly.


Oh, it’s easy to read between words. You hinted
that she was afraid for her lover. You’re out of it,
an d as you say, so am I. That leaves Darton
alone in the field. As she fainted, and you are on
the way to ask questions, I guess that he is
implicated.”
“ 1 can ’t say for certain until I see him.”
” But you have your suspicions,” insisted the
baronet.
“ 1 have - Miss Gerson would not faint for
nothing.”
“ Well, I don’t know. She’s a timid little thing.”
“She was,” remarked Mendle drily, “but she is
not timid now. And, what is more, she will stick
like grim death to Darton, unless ”
“ Unless what ? ”
“ Unless I clear him out of the way.”
“ How do you intend to do that? ”
I am not forced to tell you all my business,”
snarled the lawyer.
See here,” growled Embers unpleasantly, “you
want to get rid of Darton in order to marry the
girl. Now I want to have a look in, as I love Miss
Gerson, and want her money. . If you play low
down, I shall side with Darton, and help.”
“Help?” interrogated Mendle doubtfully.
” Help him to escape your trap.”
“ T am not Hying a trap, Sir Samuel. If Darton
can clear himself he can marry the girl. I say, don’t
drive so hard; you’ll be run in.”
Embers, indeed, had need of the warning. He
was racing the cab up Park Lane at top speed, as
if to relieve his feelings. But words had to come
also. “ I’d like to smash up the cab and you too,”


said he between his teeth. “ You have played me a
shabby trick, Mendle.”
“ Well, you were going to play it on Miss
Gerson.”
“ Then you have behaved shabbily both to me
and to her.” He paused as the vehicle swung
somewhat slowly into Oxford Street. “ I don’t
believe that Darton has anything to do with the
matter. You might have murdered Arthur yourself,
for all I know.”
“What?” inquired Mendle derisively, “do you
think I am such a fool as to lose five thousand a year
and place my neck in a noose.”
“ You hated Arthur. He told me so.”
“ He was wrong, I did not hate him; but I admit
that I feared him. I dare say you will think me a
brute, Embers, but I confess to a certain amount
of relief now that he is dead. Nevertheless, I miss
the money, and if I can regain it by marrying Miss
Gerson, I shall do so.”
“ I don’t think that you have any chance,
Mendle. Darton on the one hand can give Miss
Gerson his good looks, and a manly nature which
you don’t possess. I can offer her a title. Goo’
Chris’fer, you’ve got nothing to recommend you :
neither looks, nor strength, nor money, nor position,
nor ”
“ Thanks,” interrupted Mendle, very white in the
face, “ you need not go on with your list of my
disqualifications. We'll agree that I am out of the
running.”
“ Oh, no, we won't,” snapped the baronet. “ I
must have your promise that we are to work
together ”


“ For your ultimate benefit.”
“Well,” said Embers insolently, “you’ll get
pickings out of the estate as my solicitor, when I am
Miss Gerson’s husband. Do you agree?”
“ Yes 1 ” assented Mendle, after a pause.
“ Well then, I’ll tell you how I intend to work,”
went on Sir Samuel easily. “To learn who killed
Arthur I intend to look after Paddy O’Toole day
and night. The boy knows the truth.”
“ Very probably. But he is in hospital.”
“He can’t remain there for ever, and when he
gets out he’ll be handed over to old Peggy, his
grandmother. She will help me to keep the boy
under my eye, as I have helped her at times with
money.”
“ But,” argued Mendle with a shrug, “ when you
do learn who killed Arthur I do not see how it will
help you to marry Miss Gerson.”
“ Oh, she’ll accept my hand out of gratitude for
bringing the murderer to the scaffold. You leave me
to run my show, Mendle, and you run yours with the
doctor. Here we are.’ Embers pulled up the car
before a grim-looking house in Elder Square, which
had a bright brass plate on the ancient door.
“ Start your campaign and report progress to me.
I’m at my old digs. Make a nutty job of it, if you
can. ’Day!” and the cab spun down the street
droning like a bumble-bee. It was only then,
strangely enough, that Mendle recollected how
Arthur had been found dead on the very seat he had
lately occupied with Sir Samuel. He wondered that
Embers cared to drive so haunted a cab, and shud-
dered at the recollection of the tragedy. Almost he
could imagine that the dead man was seated beside


the chauffeur. By reason of a supersensitive nervous
system, the unseen was very real and near to Mendle;
but Sir Samuel, being a beefy Philistine, would
have laughed such fantasies to scorn.
Mendle went slowly up the steps of the doctor’s
house, between the ancient torch-extinguishers,
which had not been used since link boys attended the
rank and fashion of Georgian days, when the plebeian
square was aristocratic. As he rang the bell, he
considered the baronet’s insolent attitude, and smiled
uneasily. “He wants to make me the cat to pull
the chestnuts out of the fire,” ran his reflections. “ I
certainly won’t do that; but I must keep on good
terms with him all the same, lest he should spoil my
dealings with Barton. Humph ! He takes charge
of Paddy O’Toole, does he? That might argue a
fear of the boy’s mentioning Embers’ name as the
assassin, presuming his memory returns. “Oh! ”
as the door opened—“ is Dr. Barton within ? ”
“Yes, Sir!” The neat maid-servant permitted
Mendle to enter, took his card, and ushered him into
a dreary, conventional waiting-room. It was empty,
as the doctor’s practice was by no means large, as
yet. Mendle with his hands behind his long back,
stared absently out of the dingy window, considering
how he should begin the interview. Before he could
formulate a plan the servant returned, to intimate
that her master would see him. Mendle shortly
found himself in a smaller room, very plainly
furnished, and facing an extremely handsome young
man, who did not appear pleased to see him,
“lam rather surprised that you should call on me,
Mr. Mendle,” said the doctor stiffly. “ Your atti-
tude towards me has always been unfriendly.”


“ Ask yourself if there are not reasons,” retorted
the lawyer.
“ 1 don’t require to ask myself that,” rejoined the
other promptly. “ I love Miss Gerson, and she loves
me. There are no reasons why we should not marry.
Your reasons for forbidding me the house I can
guess.” He cast a disdainful look at the shabby,
restless solicitor.
You mean that Belinda explained my reason to
you ? ”
” She did. And I forbid you to call her by her
Christian name.”
“° n what grounds ? By what authority ? ”
“I am her promised husband.”
“There is many a slip betwixt cup and lip,”
quoted Mendle coolly.
“ What do you mean by that stale proverb? ”
Mendle did not reply immediately. Between half-
closed eyelids he gazed at the man who had won
Belinda Gerson’s heart, and he admitted, mentally
and reluctantly, that she was justified in loving him.
Wilfred Darton was tall and slim, with a somewhat
military stiffness of bearing. Military also looked
his trim black moustache and his closely-cropped
black hair. He was as dark as a Spaniard, with
a smooth olive complexion and imperious black eyes
filled with fire. When Mendle thought of his own
physical deficiencies, he bitterly resented the splendid
appearance of his rival, yet he could not blame
Belinda for her choice of a lover. Woman-like, she
had been caught by the animal beauty of the man.
So Mendle thought, not aware that the girl loved
Darton quite as much for his kindly heart and


passionate wooing. But the doctor was pressing for
an answer.
“Go on, Sir. Why do you quote that proverb? ”
“ I have seen Belinda.”
“ How dare you disregard my warning to call her
Miss Gerson ? ”
“ Isn’t that rather paltry on your part, Doctor? I
have known Miss Gerson, if you will have it so, since
she was a baby; and I have been her guardian for
some time. I have a right ”
“ I won’t allow you to exercise that right, Mr.
Mendle. Were you kindly disposed towards me I
should not dictate to you in this way; but I am
perfectly well aware that you hate me, and so ” —he
made a gesture of insistence—“ you shall call my
promised wife Miss Gerson, if you please,” he ended
quietly.
Mendle shrugged his spare shoulders. ”Itis a
matter of indifference to me, Doctor. Miss Gerson,
if you will. I have seen her.”
“ Well? ”
“ And I left her in a faint.”
“ You ! ” Darton drew himself up angrily and
advanced a step. “ What did you say to make her
faint? ”
Mendle, huddled up in his chair, felt the young
man dominate him with his bold eyes and imperious
bearing. ‘‘l said nothing,” he protested; “it was
fear for you that made her faint.”
Darton’s hands fell in sheer astonishment. “ Fear
of me ? ”
” Fear for you, I said, Doctor. She doesn’t want
to see you hanged.”
The young man recoiled a step, and his dark face


turned white. “ Are you out of your senses,” he
muttered.
“ I hope you are in yours,” said Mendle com-
posedly, “ since I wish you to answer me certain
questions.”
“ I answer nothing,” cried the Doctor violently.
“Ah ! ” —Mendle smiled in a wry manner—“ that
looks like guilt.”
Darton flung himself forward and raised his hand.
“ If you dare to speak further I’ll strangle you.”
“Strangle!” quavered the lawyer, who was
terribly frightened by the angry looks of his rival.
“ Will you have two murders on your soul ? ”
“ What? Two murders. In heaven’s name! ”
he gasped and retreated.
“You would strangle me as you strangled
Arthur.”
“ Augh I ” Mendle quite expected to be struck,
and put out a pair of shaking hands. But Darton
took no notice of him. As pale as any corpse, he
was leaning against the escritoire, grasping at his
collar as though it choked him. All the fire seemed
to have died out of him on hearing the hideous
accusation, and he turned a ghastly face toward his
visitor. Hardly could his white lips form words. It
seemed as though in one moment he had realised his
peril; realised also that he would receive no mercy
from the man before him. “ On—on what grounds
do you—do you—base this charge?”
“ If you are innocent ”
“ Innocent? Of course lam innocent. I defy you
to prove me otherwise. I know that you hate me;
I know that you wish to marry Belinda; I know that
you will do your best to weave a rope to hang me;
91
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


but I swear ” —he raised his hand solemnly—“ I
swear that I never harmed Arthur.”
“Yet you hated him,” asserted Mendle, watching
the young face.
“ I did,” declared Darton promptly. “ Arthur
Gerson was a degenerate of the worst type. He
had no faith, no honour, no decency, almost no
humanity. He was a scoundrel and a blackmailer,
and ”
“Ah 1 ” Mendle sprang from his seat. “ Then
you admit that he tried to blackmail you ? ”
“ I admit nothing,” said Darton fiercely. “ I
explain nothing.”
“ Then I shall explain,” said Mendle deter-
minedly, yet keeping well beyond the reach of
Darton’s arm. “ According to Hake, it seems that
the murder was committed to secure certain papers
concealed in that water-proof envelope which was
found. Belinda—l shall call her by what name
I choose—Belinda threatened to kill her brother
because he threatened to disgrace you. She will not
offer a reward for the apprehension of the assassin.
And why ? Because ” —Mendle sank his voice to a
venomous whisper—“ because she fears lest the
reward should place you on the gallows.”
“ You are raving—raving,” gasped Darton, and
turned even whiter.
“lam speaking the truth, and you know it. You
used the word ‘ blackmail.’ I know why. The
papers in the envelope concerned you, and to hide
the secret they contained, you murdered Arthur, who
would have used them against you to stop your
marriage with Belinda.”
Wilfred clenched his hands, and drew a deep


breath, which seemed to calm him. Then he went
to a small mirror over the fireplace, which was near
at hand, and arranged his tie, which had become
undone by his vehement grasping at his neck.
Mendle surveyed him in much astonishment, but said
nothing. He had shot his bolt, and now waited to
see what the accused man would do. It was quite
two minutes before Darton turned, and then he was
perfectly composed and icily calm. “At the inquest,”
he said slowly, “ I detailed my movements on the
night of the murder, and so proved an alibi. There
is no truth in the accusation your malice prompts
you to bring against me.”
“You used the word ‘blackmail’ and the
papers ”
“ I can explain my use of the word to the proper
authorities, if necessary, not to you. Have you any
more to say ? ’ ’
“ This,” Mendle moved towards the door and
opened it ready for flight in case of violence, “ that
I believe you to be guilty.”
“ Prove my guilt, then,” said Darton, deathly
pale but quite calm. “ Meanwhile, leave my house,
lest I throw you out of it.”
”I go now,” said Mendle theatrically. “ I return
with the police.”


CHAPTER VIII.
A PRIVATE INQUIRY AGENT.
It was one thing to threaten Darton with the
police : it was another to carry such a threat into
execution. Mendle would willingly have done so, to
further his plans for regaining the money by ridding
himself of the young doctor’s rivalry. But he had
no tangible evidence to place before Hake. Belinda
had refused to offer a reward; Belinda had fainted,
but Mendle himself, as he knew very well, had sug-
gested the reason for both the refusal and the sick-
ness. The reason was purely theoretical. By in-
advertently using the word “blackmail ’’ in connec-
tion with the dead man, Darton had certainly
strengthened the supposition. But in the face of his
alibi—proved at the inquest—and his blank denial of
everything, Mendle could not see how he could
utilise his own private suspicions so as to secure
arrest.
The sole thing which he could do—and this he
intended to do—was to have Darton watched, in the
hope that a false step might precipitate him into an
abyss of disgrace and criminality. In his own mind
the lawyer felt certain that the doctor had something
to do with the death and with the theft of the papers;
felt also, from what Belinda had said, and from what
Darton had admitted, that there was some secret in
the young man’s life which Arthur Gerson had
intended to use to prevent the marriage with Belinda.


If it were true that Darton was guilty, he must have
secured the incriminating papers, and his secret for
the time being was safe, always presuming that he
had been wise enough to destroy the papers. If he
had not, they might be found, and a reading of their
contents would probably afford a sufficient reason
for Gerson s murder. To get the papers—if still in
existence and to trap Darton necessitated watching.
For this purpose Mendle cast about to find a spy.
Luckily, this was not difficult. Mendle was not a
shady solicitor, and acted very squarely towards his
clients. But on occasions—notably in the case of
Sir Samuel Embers—it had been necessary to have
certain people watched. For this purpose Mendle
had long since made the acquaintance of a private
inquiry agent, who conducted delicate negotiations
of this kind when well paid. Embers had been
watched by this person, with the result that Mendle
had been able to thwart several shady transactions
of the baronet, who had tried to get the better of
him. But Sir Samuel’s affairs were now more or
less in order, and he had no reason at the present
moment for secret villainy; so it was quite easy to
place the spy on the track of Dr. Wilfred Darton.
Mendle, therefore, mindful of the proverb about
striking when the iron is hot, took his way to Golden
Square, Soho, immediately after his fiery interview
with his rival, and went up a dark staircase to the
second floor of a shabby house. Here, on a door
he found the name of “ Milady,” and entered without
knocking. A tall, starved-looking boy intimated, in
response to Mendle’s inquiry, that Milady was
within. He then vanished into an inner room, and
returned immediately with an invitation to enter.
95


The solicitor left the bare outer office and stepped
into a charming little apartment which showed every-
where the hand and influence of a woman. It might
have been the boudoir of a fashionable beauty, so
daintily was it decorated and furnished. The
presence of many flowers—and flowers were not
cheap in mid-January—revealed luxury, and refine-
ment, and feminine taste.
Milady, who was responsible for it all, did not give
Mendle the impression that she was a private inquiry
agent, who moved in shady ways and executed shady
business. As he had known her for some years he
should have been accustomed by this time to the
incongruity between her appearance and her employ-
ment. But every time he saw her he was struck afresh
with wonder that so clever a woman, with such refined
tastes and such charm of manner, should lend herself
to the business of doing Society’s dirty work. Yet
he might have seen the answer in her face, which
was resolute and firm, and rather masculine in
contour. Such a woman would never have found
tame feminine employments suited to her personality.
“ How do you do, Lady Cobbin,” said Mendle,
seating himself.
The owner of the boudoir office frowned, and
surveyed him severely through an eyeglass.
“ Milady, if you please. Mr. Mendle.”
“ Ah, I forgot; Milady, of course. You took the
name from the heroine of Dumas’ ‘ Three
Musketeers.’ ”
Lady Cobbin smiled. ‘‘ She was in the same line
of business.”
“ But you are not so wicked as she was,” said
Mendle politely.


e >” joined the
nature as ! ffi" 8 the worst side ° f human
ature as 1 do would deteriorate a saint.”
And you never were one,” sniggled the lawyer
Cigarette - r nlH° PPed her eye ' glass and lighted a
character nr ,° d C ° me here tC> tell me m Y
f, ’or to give me a job ? ” she asked. *
himself”’ And 7 " , WO " darin Bi’’’ sa icl Mendle, half to
or how little d h dC u d WaS wonderin g how much
how little he should confide to the somewhat
n"|" U h PU ° US Woman before him. If she knew too
did nn h t er SerV n eS WoUld be of "° use ’ and the lawyer
businessmen T P ? h ing g °° d money for bad
smess. On the other hand if she learned too
much she might be dangerous. Lady Cobbin alias
Milady, was not a bad woman, but she always had
an eye to number one, and to get what she wanted
which was chiefly moneyed heshaL at v ~
little. Mendle, therefore, felt that he must
cautious; and, before committing himself to con-
e ences, examined her stealthily, much in the same
manner as he had examined Dr. Wilfred Darton"
since she'“ S* beS ‘ ‘° give her the official name
”1"“ i ' ° ffiCe in 3 bUSiness opacity-
great hei4t b, ? f WOman ’- Ver g'' ng °" f ° rty ’ ° f no
* g t but of a very imposing presence Sbp
he?ma^etc ngUiShed - loOking in as'
thirl- a I , f ? WaS very P ale - her eyebrows very
plentiful Sh V'| d , l ' er ha ‘ r P rematurel y white and
plentiful. She had the nose of a Ca»sir -,„a „
7
97


and brushed back, was surmounted by a brown
Homburg hat, round which a blue veil was carelessly
tied. Seated at the desk, with a loose tweed cloak
over her shoulders, with a neat collar and tie, with
her somewhat masculine head, with her darkened lip
and eye-glass, the whole completed by a cigarette,
she looked very much like a man. No one could
have called her a beautiful woman, but she certainly
looked extremely capable and workmanlike.
Mendle knew her history from the day she had
married Lord Geoffrey Cobbin—a broken-down,
racing younger son of an impecunious Duke. He
had taken her from the musical comedy stage, on
which she played grotesque parts; but who her
parents were and where she came from, to appear
before the footlights, no one knew. After six months
of a miserable married life Lord Geoffrey had been
killed in a steeplechase, and as the ducal family
refused to have anything to do with the plebeian wife,
Lady Cobbin—so she called herself, although her true
appellation was Lady Geoffrey Cobbin —was forced
to look for a means of livelihood. She did not wish
to return to the stage, as her masculine sense told
her that it was silly, and she drifted from one em-
ployment into another, until she found a wide field
for the exercise of her cleverness in working as a
diver under the stormy ocean of London Society.
The reputation she gained and the money she made
justified her sticking to her somewhat unsavoury
profession, and she behaved as straightly as could
be expected under the circumstances. For the rest,
she lived at Hampstead with a dismal, grumbling old
woman, whom she declared was her grandmother,
and acted like a man-about-town.
98
TJie Mystery of a Motor Cah.


Her success in business was owing to her attention
to detail, to her intuition, and last, but not least, to
her wonderful charm of manner, which enabled her
to secure confessions from the most unlikely people.
nginally soft-hearted and trusting, circumstances
had made her hard and sceptical, so that she moved
through the world like a female Ishmael, her hand
being against every man, and woman also. In
Society— and she had a certain social standing of a
suburban sort-she called herself, wrongfully as to
t e title, Lady Cobbin ; in business her clients
addressed her as Milady, after Dumas’ famous she-
devil, who certainly must have come from the nether-
most pit.
Milady smoked through half a cigarette before the
lawyer made up his mind to speak, but it was
characteristic of her cleverness that she never asked
him to hurry up. A woman would have done so,
i filad} prided herself upon being more masculine
than feminine. Also she knew that it is more
difficult to make people hold their tongues than to
speak out. Mendle, crafty as he was, apparently
appeared anxious to confide in her, so she waited
very patiently. “ It’s about this murder,” said the
lawyer, at last, making up his mind to be wholly
trank. J
“So I thought,” said Milady briefly, and began
to draw figures on her pink blotting-paper. ‘‘ Go
on, I am listening.”
“ Do you know anything about the case? ” asked
Mendle cautiously.
Milady nodded, and still drew caricatures. ‘‘ I
have looked into it.”


The solicitor sat up suddenly. “ Who is employ-
ing you ? ”
“ You are.”
“ Why I have only just come ”
“ To engage me as a detective.”
“ Yes ! ” Mendle was more and more astonished.
“ But how did you guess ? I might have come about
those other matters you have in hand.”
“So you might,” assented Lady Cobbin drily;
“ but as you are connected closely with this murder,
it occurred to me that you would secure my services
sooner or later.”
“ Still, I don’t see how you guessed my errand so
rapidly.”
‘‘To tell you that would mean a lecture on
feminine intuition. I jumped to conclusions, I
suppose, as every woman does, and, like the majority
of women, I have landed on my feet. Also I have
read the papers, Mr. Mendle.”
“ I daresay. Still I don’t see ”
“ You said that before, and the repeated remark
does not do credit to your brain-power. See here !”
she leaned across the table with her monocle glittering
in her eye. “ I learned from the papers that the
dead man was your ward, and was found dead in
front of your office. Also that you lose five thousand
a year, which goes to the girl you love. You natur-
ally wish to get back the money, and propose to do
so by marriage. Miss Gerson loved her brother,
and has consented to be your wife on condition that
you discover the man who murdered your ward. You
find that the police are useless, as I guessed you
would. Therefore, having employed me before, you


come to me. It is perfectly simple, Mr. Mendle, as
you see. ’
Mendle, for the moment, ignored all that this long
speech contained, save one piece of information
ow do you know that I am in love with Belinda
Gerson ? he asked nervously.
Arthur told me, said Milady imperturbably.
Ihe solicitor pushed back his chair and rose in
astonishment. “You—you knew the boy?”
Oh, yes,” replied the woman easily, “ and a nice
rascal he was Do you know a storyia sea-story-
called Shanghaied,’ Mr. Mendle? ”
No., What is it about—what does the name
mean r
r Z Y better get the book and read,” advised
udy Cobbm. “I he word is Americanese for
kidnapping. Arthur Gerson read the book, and,
thinking that I would do anything for money—he
knew that I worked for you, you know-he came and
■ uggested that I should arrange for your kidnapping.
° be strictly American, you were to be shanghaied
on the Thames river, and afterwards put out of the
way.
Mendle turned perfectly white and his nerves
jumped. “ Why—oh, why ? ”
Lady Cobbin raised her thick eyebrows “ I
understood from Arthur Gerson that he had twice
theTealon ?°T et ° f Y ° u Can
That damned will I ” muttered the lawyer
wiping his forehead. ’
Quite so. Your influence with the late Mr
Gerson—so I understood from his son-was sufficient
to secure you the life interest in the estate, but not
101


strong enough to give you the whole of the money
without reserve. Your death meant Arthur and his
sister getting the money; and, being desperately in
want of cash, he proposed murder. I declined the
risk,” ended Milady, selecting a new cigarette.
“Why didn’t you tell the police?” stuttered
Mendle, greatly agitated.
“To what end? Arthur would have denied every-
thing, and could only have been bound over to keep
the peace. Your experience of his desperation on
two occasions gave you the chance of having his
hands tied in that manner. As you passed over his
attempts at murder, why should I not ignore his
proposal to get rid of you ? ”
“ You should have told me.”
11 No. As I declined to injure you, there was no
need. However, Arthur said that you wanted to marry
his sister, and that he was determined to marry her
to Sir Samuel Embers—another beauty, by the way.
But, as things have turned out, Arthur is dead, and
you are free to recover your lost interest in the
Gerson money by working on the feelings of the
girl.”
Mendle winced. There was a certain amount of
contempt in Lady Cobbin’s voice, and he was by
no means thick-skinned. She eyed him grimly,
dropped her eye-glass, and continued smoothly.
‘‘ I suppose you mean to work on the lines I
indicated ? ”
“ I don’t think that you could have read the
account of the proceedings at the inquest very care-
fully,” said Mendle drily, “ else you would have seen
that Miss Gerson announced her engagement to Dr.
Darton, whom I dislike as much as Arthur did.


Arthur seems to have had many dislikes,” re-
turned Lady Cobbin complacently. “ I did notice the
statement of Miss Gerson, but I made every allow-
ance for your cleverness. It occurred to me that you
would cajole her into breaking the engagement with
the doctor, to be your wife, on condition that you
learned who killed her dearly loved brother.”
Dearly loved ! ” sneered Mendle. “ Arthur told
you that.”
“ yes. He was very frank. According to
Arthur, his sister adored him.”
I hen he told a lie,” said the lawyer bluntly;
“a lie with a grain of truth ”
” Like most lies,” murmured Milady.
“ Belinda did love him, until he set himself to
work to prevent her marriage with Darton. Then
she ”
I see. Ihe love for her brother changed into
love for this young doctor. Humph I So like a
woman. Well, then, Mr. Mendle, it seems that with
all my cleverness, I am mistaken. You have not
come to ask me to learn who killed Arthur Gerson.”
“ Yes, I have. You are right so far,” said Mendle
gloomily.
But why —Lady Cobbin raised her expressive
eyebrows again—‘‘why, when you do not benefit?
1 he discovery of the murderer will not help you to
recover the money, and, on your own admission, it
will not break off the marriage with this doctor. You
are too clever to work on purely philanthropic lines.”
“ I am not a villain.”
“ Nor am I personal,” said Lady Cobbin politely.
Mendle twiddled his thumbs nervously, and looked
at the pale winter sunshine filtering through the lace


curtains. It would be necessary to trust Lady Cob-
bin wholly, especially as she had been looking into
the case, and already—if he could read between the
lines—had gathered some information. With this
idea in his mind, he plunged into the middle of
things. “ The making of that will was Mr. Gerson’s
own idea,” he said bluntly. “He trusted nobody,
being always a suspicious man. Arthur and Belinda
he considered fools; me, he thought clever, and for
that reason gave me the life-interest on condition
that I allowed the two ample means, which I did.
But Mr. Gerson, being suspicious, as I said, trusted
me as little as he trusted anyone else, and so put in
the saving clause that I was to lose the money if
Arthur or Belinda died. Perhaps he expected that
1 would murder them, as Richard did the Princes in
the Tower. It seems to me that Mr. Gerson should
have rather protected me from Arthur, than Arthur
from me. However, the boy—lunatic that he was—
is dead, and the money is lost. I want to get it
again. I admit that. But I really do love Belinda,
and want, apart from the money, to marry her. She
loves Darton, and refused me when I asked her to be
my wife. I am not vindictive. All the same, every
man has a right to play for his own hand. There-
fore, I have come to ask you to prevent this
marriage.”
“ How can I do that?”
“By proving that Wilfred Darton murdered
Arthur.”
Calm as she invariably was, Milady was startled
by this last speech, and rose to her feet to lean across
to Mendle with her hands on the desk. “ What!”
she gasped; “ do you mean to say ”


I shall leave you to judge for yourself,” said
Mendle, and rapidly related what had taken place in
his interviews with Belinda and with her lover. “ I
believe Darton to be guilty,” he finished, decisively.
t< s theory,” said Milady, after a pause.
You are trying to build up something out of
nothing. Your love for Miss Gerson, and your
hatred of Darton, blinds you to the truth.”
“ What truth ?”
1 hat, on the face of it, Dr. Darton is innocent.”
” Innocent I Then who is guilty?”
Mendle expected Lady Cobbin to be nonplussed.
But she was not.
“Harriet Lane is guilty,” said Lady Cobbin
quietly.


CHAPTER IX.
A DEFENCE.
This time it was Mendle’s turn to be astonished,
and he, in turn, rose to his feet as Lady Cobbin sat
down. “ Harriet Lane,” he breathed, with a blank
stare, “ you are quite mad.”
“ There is method in my madness,” she informed
him.
“ But on what grounds ”
Milady interrupted him. “ Listen while I
explain,” she said, raising her hand to enforce
silence. “ After reading the report of the inquest, I
believed—for the reasons already given—that you
would seek my assistance. Therefore, to be ready
for you, I arranged to look into the case beforehand.
It struck me that Arthur Gerson drove back to the
Piccadilly Theatre on leaving the Edgware Road
public house.”
“ Why did it strike you ?”
“ Sir Samuel Embers—of whom I know much
more than is good for him—confessed in his evidence
that the boy Paddy O’Toole opened the door of the
cab for the young married couple he drove to the
theatre at eight o’clock. As Paddy O’Toole was
found in Cade Lane, under the cab, he must have
reached the City by hanging on behind, since he
could have got there in no other way. This argued
that Paddy O’Toole must have got on behind the
cab, when it left the Piccadilly Theatre; since, as that


was the boy s haunt to pick up stray coppers for tout-
ing for cabs, it was unlikely that he left before the
playgoers came out. On this assumption I deter-
mined to go to the Piccadilly Theatre, and ask ques-
tions on the half-chance of gaining a clue.”
What sort of a clue?” asked Mendle bluntly.
1 he clue of Paddy O’ 1 oole, who knows every
thing about the murder, I am certain. If the boy’s
memory would come back, the mystery of Gerson’s
death would be solved. Of course, it was somewhat
of a wild-goose chase,” said Lady Cobbin apolo-
getically; ” still, on the argument that I have stated,
I resolved to risk the search. Three nights ago I
went to the play, and came out between the acts.
A boy offered to get a cab for me. I asked him
about Paddy O’Toole, and he stated that he and
Paddy and half-a-dozen other boys were employed
by 1 addy s mother to make money by getting cabs
and opening doors and all the rest of it. Mrs.
O’l oole, it seems, was usually on the spot to see if
the boys did their duty Then she took their earn-
ings, and gave them board and lodging in some
Adel phi slum. I saw the old woman.”
“ What is she like ?”
A gaunt, raw-boned Irish giantess, with a
hungry eye and a grasping hand. She admitted—
on receipt of half-a-sovereign—that she knew Sir
Samuel Embers well, since he had frequently given
her money.”
“Quite so,” assented the solicitor, recollecting
what Embers had said about keeping an eye on the
boy through the offices of the mother. “ Well?”
“Knowing Sir Samuel, Mrs. O’Toole naturally
knew his cab—the colour and number and make.


On the night of the murder, some time after ten
o clock, Mrs. O’Toole was at her post watching her
boys outside the theatre, and Paddy was with her.
She saw Embers’ cab arrive, and went to beg a
copper. In spite of the fur-coat and cap and goggles
and the falling snow, she recognised Arthur Gerson,
whom she had frequently seen in her patron’s com-
pany. She knew his voice, I fancy. At any rate,
she began to talk; and, to shut her up and send her
away, Arthur Gerson gave her half-a-crown. But
Mrs. O’Toole thought that his driving the cab was
so strange, seeing that Sir Samuel had been driving
earlier in the evening, that she directed Paddy to
stick to the cab and learn what it all meant. You
see now how the boy got to the City. He obeyed
his mother’s instructions and hung on behind.”
I see. But what has all this to do with Miss
Lane ?”
“I am coming to that,” said Milady. “Miss
Lane, it seems, was only on the stage during
the first two acts of the comedy. She came
out of the theatre at twenty minutes past ten
0 clock, and just then Paddy had been set
to watch. Mrs. O’Toole, knowing her by
sight, and having secured her a cab before,
asked her if she wanted one. Miss Lane asked for
Sir Samuel s cab, and Airs. O’ Foole pointed it out
to her.”
Did Mrs. O’loole show Miss Lane into the
cab ?”
“ No ' h was standing across the street, some-
what in the shadow. Some man came and asked the
Irishwoman to get him a hansom, so Miss Lane gave
108
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


Mrs. O Toole a shilling and crossed to the cab. She
told the chauffeur to drive to the City.”
Did she know that the chauffeur was Arthur, and
not Sir Samuel I”
“ 1 can>t be sure of that until I ask Miss Lane her-
self. But she told him to drive to the City.”
Did Mrs. O’Toole tell you that?”
No, said Lady Cobbin impatiently, “ but, as
the boy hanging on behind was found in the City,
the City must have been the destination of the cab!
Miss Lane entered the cab, and it went off I”
“ In what direction ?”
“ Down to the Embankment: you know that is the
least crowded way to the City. That is all.”
Oh I” said Mendle sarcastically, “and you
accuse Miss Lane, on these premises, of beine- a
murderess?” &
‘‘lt seems to be pretty good evidence,” said Lady
Cobbin drily. “At nearly twenty-five past ten
o clock, she entered a vehicle in which her half-
brother was strangled at eleven.”
But she was inside and not on the box-seat.
How could she ”
Lady Cobbin shrugged and lighted a fourth
cigaiette. I really can’t build up a case for you,
Mr. Mendle. As a lawyer, that is your business,
I will simply state that those motor-broughams,
as they really are—those cabs, I mean—have win-
dows at the back of the chauffeur. It would be quite
easy for Miss Lane to pull down the window or throw
it up I don t know how they act—on some pretence
and strangle the man. Her position would make it
very easy for her to do so, seeing that she was at his


back, and could easily have twisted the pencil into
the silk scarf.”
“ But what motive?’
‘‘Perhaps you can suggest one?”
Mendle thought for a moment. ‘‘ On the contrary,
I can suggest a very strong one why she should not
have killed Arthur. By his death she knew that I
would be robbed of the money, and it so happens that
Miss Lane is in love with me.”
‘‘With you?” Milady gave an odd little laugh
and ran her eye-glass disdainfully over the meagre
form of the lawyer. ‘‘ That settles the possibility of
her having murdered her half-brother, certainly. But
suppose she mistook Gerson for Embers. What
then?”
“ She might have done so, and yet she is too clever
a woman to make such a mistake. If Mrs. O’Toole
recognised Arthur, Miss Lane certainly would not
fail to do so, seeing that she knew him much more
intimately than did this old beggar-woman. More-
over, she had no reason to kill Sir Samuel. I really
don’t see how you can fix the guilt on her.”
“ I never fix the guilt on anyone until I am sure,”
said the other tartly.
“ But you accused Harriet in so many words?”
“ I daresay I did. Still, remember, please, that I
am groping in the dark and am liable to make mis-
takes. Also, I accused Miss Lane as I did in order
to hear what you would say.”
“ She is innocent,” said Mendle firmly. “ Harriet
is too kind a woman to commit such a crime. Be-
sides, she hasn’t the strength.”
“ I don’t agree with you there, Mr. Mendle. Re-
member, I have seen her on the stage. Miss Lane
110
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


seems to me to be a very strong woman of the wiry
type. However, she may be innocent, although to
my mind her position hints at guilt. Gerson was
murdered on the cab, and Miss Lane was in the cab.
You can make what you like out of it.”
Well,” said Mendle, after a pause, and biting
his fingers, “you blame Harriet. I accuse Dar-
ton ”
“Ah I You are biassed in that direction. How-
ever, what I want to know is whether I am to take uo
the case?” 1
“ Yes I Take it up at once—on the old terms.”
“No,” contradicted Lady Cobbin, firmly; “ if you
get this thousand a year—l mean, this five thousand
—you must give me more. However, we can settle
that later, as I am quite satisfied that you cannot do
without me. Good ” —she rose and settled her
collar—” I am now definitely engaged to hunt down
the murderer of Arthur Gerson. I shall follow up
my clue. Meanwhile, leave Dr. Darton alone; you’ll
only muddle things.”
Oh, I am quite willing to leave the case in your
hands. Only I think it right to tell you that Embers
is also hunting for the murderer. He hopes to marry
Belinda by finding him.”
. There seem to me to be a good many cooks,”
said Lady Cobbin coolly; ” but I shan’t let them spoil
my broth. Give me a card to Miss Lane.”
What for? asked Mendle, astonished.
I want to ask her questions.”
“ She won’t answer them.”
“ If she doesn’t, I’ll go to Scotland Yard and tell
what I know. A warrant of arrest will make her
speak. The card, please.”


Mendle shuffled. “ I don’t like to introduce you
to Miss Lane as a ”
“ A spy, you would say,” finished the woman
coolly, ” perhaps not. But to save your feelings I
shall go as your friend and client, Lady Cobbin, and
shall not resort to arrest until all other measures have
failed. You understand, I want the card, or I’ll
throw over the case.”
Mendle gave her the required pasteboard. “ But
you should call yourself Lady Geoffrey Cobbin. I
told you that before.”
“ I’ll call myself what I like,” retorted Milady
quietly, and turned to the mirror to tilt her Homburg
hat at a more becoming angle. “ Good day, Mr.
Mendle.”
“ But I want to discuss the case further,” pro-
tested the lawyer.
“ I shouldn’t were I you,” retorted Milady, filling
her silver cigarette-case, “it will only cost you
money. You’ve paid out a guinea as it is, along
with the ten shillings I gave Mrs. O’Toole.”
‘‘l never agreed to that I” snapped Mendle
angrily, “ you take too much for granted.”
‘‘ln fees, I take everything I can get. However,
if you want to relieve your mind we can talk out
another twenty shillings.”
Mendle snatched up his bag and hat and flew
precipitately to the door. He knew Lady Cobbin too
well to think that she did not mean what she said.
As he passed out the inquiry agent laughed. “ What
a miser you are, Mr. Mendle!” she flung after him.
But Mendle was already beyond hearing. Even the
calling of unpleasant names might cost him another
shilling. Also he would not have been pleased had
112
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


he heard Milady’s comment when entering the case
Iffair” °°H S ’| “, lhere will be pickings out of this
attarr said she determinedly, from which speech it
can e gathered that the inquiry-agent intended to
,/m r?,T; ej 35 She conveniently could out
of Mr. Mendle s difficulties.
Having locked up her papers and lighted a
rfhh ette . an f assumed a P air of dogskin gloves, Lady
Cobbm took a silver-headed cane and walked into
the outer office, looking a thorough gentleman. A
ern word or two to the overgrown, underfed office-
y isposed of him, and his mistress—it would be
more correct to say his master-descended the dingy
stairs. At the door she found Mendle ”
US ‘ *° me ”~ Said he ’ when **
tal'k. T Goon U ” Want an °‘ her five - shill ings’-worth of
her pleasantr y- as ike matter he wished
to speak about was very important. “ You mieht
see Ellen Parley,” he suggested.
Hold? 6 W^ ar / ey ’ ‘r hC tobacconist g irl in Edgware
Koad i What am Ito say to her ?”
I leave, that to your cleverness. But she should
ave been called as a witness. She knew Arthur.”
As a casual customer.”
cunninnlv "A SO SUre ° f . that> ” said Mendle
clerk " '° U S 6e ’ 516 ' S the daughter of my
Lady Cobbin flung away her half-smoked cigarette
and ooked thoughtful. “I, sounds like
draTred'h 0 "’- musing . “ But we mustn’t
draw red herrings across the scent, Mr. Mendle. One
thing at a time. I’m off to see Miss Lane.”
8
113


“ But Ellen Parley?”
“I’ll look her up later. Hi! There’s a motor-
cab. What is it doing in this square at the back-of-
beyond?” and she waved her cane.
“ Perhaps it is Sir Samuel’s cab,” suggested
Mendle, as the cab moved towards them.
“ Perhaps it is the great Panjarum’s chariot,” said
Lady Cobbin good-humouredly. “ You want every-
thing to fit in like a detective story. I wish this was
one with all my heart. Then I might see the end,
which I certainly do not at the present moment.”
When the cab was moving down Piccadilly in the
direction of Kensington, Lady Cobbin rather con-
gratulated herself upon the accident which had led
her into occupying a vehicle connected with the affair
she had in hand. It was a brougham-cab also,
which was all the better, as she was enabled to see
how Harriet Lane could have slipped down the
window and murdered the chauffeur. It was quite
easy, given a strong and determined woman, and a
man taken by surprise, especially a weakling such as
Lady Cobbin knew Arthur Gerson to be. He had
worn—according to the evidence—a silk scarf doubled
twice round his lean throat, on account of the chills
of the night. If Miss Lane had slipped down the
window to ask a question, the space would give her
room to work. All she had to do was to lean for-
ward and grip the scarf firmly, and the driver would
not have been able to utter a cry. Nor, indeed, could
he struggle very much. But, of course, there was
the moving cab to be considered, unless something
had gone wrong with the gear to induce a stoppage,
or unless a stoppage had been ordered by the fare;
and then—in the former case, at all events—the


chauffeur would have got down to see what was
wrong. Lady Cobbm thought of the methods of
mur er rom inside the cab from every point of view,
hadsdh t SS h “ P uzzled - Also, the question
ad stil to be decided as to whether the assassin-
cither Miss Lane or another person-had intended to
strangle Sir Samuel or his unlucky friend. By the
time the cab arrived in Clement Street Lady Cobbin
had rather bewildered herself over the mystery.
On sending in her card, along with that given to
her by the lawyer, Lady Cobbin was shown up to the
drawing-room, which was on the first floor. Harriet
Lane was not yet visible, and the visitor tried
gam information as to the lady’s character by
examining the room. Mendle had hinted how Miss
Lane commanded the household. “Artistic,” mur-
mured Lady Cobbin to herself, “ fond of colour and
of beauty in which latter case I wonder how she can
love that ugly lawyer. Artistic natures are usually
impulsive and passionate. Yet from what I saw of
Miss Lane on the stage she does not look like a
woman of that kind. Here she is. Humph! What
a grey ghost!”
Harriet Lane did indeed look grey when she
cnteied. Her tall, spare form appeared to be more
gaunt than ever, and there was a nervous look in her
brown eyes. She appeared composed, but the eyes
el rayed her, as did the room. Lady Cobbin, utter-
ing conventional phrases, found herself wondering if
his woman really had the iron will she was reported
so had S M S ‘ ,p er . SOn had told her Miss Lane, and
so had Mendle, but it seemed to the visitor that both
had judged her within the limitations of the male sex.
d y Lobbin summed her up differently.
115
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ Romantic, weak-willed, but self-controlled,” con-
sidered the visitor, “ and only strong because she
had not met with violent opposition. Being the
elder, and having a severe face, she has been cockered
up into being a tyrant.”
While Lady Cobbin’s thoughts ran thus, she was
talking in an entirely different way, and condoling
with Miss Lane on her loss. “Of course, I really
should not have called so soon after the death of your
dear brother,” said Lady Cobbin glibly, “ but Mr.
Mendle is such an old friend of mine that I really
thought that I might take the liberty. And, indeed,
as the card will show, Mr. Mendle suggested that I
should call in order to see what could be done in the
way of comfort.”
This somewhat patronising and decidedly insolent
speech coming from a stranger was resented by Miss
Lane, for her colour rose and her eyes flashed. This
was exactly the effect which the inquiry agent wished
to produce. If Miss Lane lost her temper, there
would be a very much better chance of getting at the
truth, as she would be less on her guard. On the
impulsiveness of the artistic temperament, Lady
Cobbin desired to act.
“ It is good of Mr. Mendle to suggest your coming
to comfort myself and my sister,” said Harriet
quietly, and still with the frightened look in her eyes;
“ but I think he has made a mistake. We need no
comfort from strangers.”
“I am sorry,” said Lady Cobbin coolly; “per-
haps I had better withdraw.”
“If you have discharged the real errand upon
which you came.’’
The other woman looked straightly into the brown


eyes before her, and saw in them a look which gave
fort ” C !h e ' k YoU , Seeni to doub( erra "d of com-
fort, she observed quietly.
I should think that your business left you small
sr 1 those in sorrow ''’ saM Miss l -"
‘‘My business?” Lady Cobbin wondered if she
had given the right card.
T ndv r'i K And P arc^on me — am Ito address you as
Lady Cobbin or as Milady? That is, are you here
m a private or a business capacity?”
“In both capacities,” said the other secretlv
found oul ‘, h denthy Ure <? r rca WOman
Men die has spokenTme to you ” ‘
spoke of youT’ 35 ” ,y brolher - m y half-brother who
Ah ! Lady Cobbin drew a long breath “ Did
he tel, you how he became acquainted officially w^h
. * "° n6ed t 0 answer that question. And I
should hke to know why you have come here so in-
opportunely?” n
now o6 ” 3 !"' 7 ’” Sai f MMady ’ for she was Mi l a dy
t, , t ' W ? ‘° know how y° u managed to kill
your half-brother from the inside of the cab.”


CHAPTER X.
A SURPRISE VISIT.
If Harriet Lane was grey to look at before, she was
doubly grey after Lady Cobbin made her quiet little
speech. She made no outcry; she did not move from
where she was standing—indignation at her visitor’s
assurance had prevented her taking a seat —but stood
as still as any stone. Yet from the quiver which
passed over her, from the amazed and terrified look
in her eyes, Milady became more certain than ever
that she had to deal with a weak woman. And she
was correct in her surmise. Hitherto, Harriet, not
having met with pronounced opposition, had been
accustomed to laying down the law without contra-
diction. Thus she had gained a reputation for being
clever and strong. In reality, she was but a lath
painted to resemble iron, and the lath bent when
strongly grasped. Nevertheless, she made a fight
for her mask.
“ I don’t understand what you mean,” she said
quietly ; but her eyes avoided those of the visitor, and
she trembled as with cold.
“ I think you do,” rejoined Lady Cobbin quite as
quietly, and put up her eye-glass to quell any attempt
at evasion.
“ My half-brother was murdered by some person
or persons unknown.”
“So the jury said at the inquest. I don’t agree
with the use of the plural, since the cab was the


stage upon which the tragedy was enacted and
Ar C fh? a r y lm,^ d aS t 0 Space - ° ne P ers °n killed
broke off erS r and * at person ” Cobbin
boke off wuh a smile. “Will you not sit down,
Lane . We can talk more comfortably.”
1 do not intend to talk at all,” said Harriet, striv-
ing ° regan! her f ormer courage and composure.
W hat right have you to ”
Ihe right of Mr. Mendle’s agent. He has
engaged me to learn who killed that unfortunate boy,
and I have come to you to ask questions.”
Miss Lane clenched her hands indignantly. “ Does
Mr. Mendle suspect me?”
“On the contrary,” said Milady soothingly, ” he
defended you when I made the accusation.”
1 hen you have discussed me?” cried Harriet
Still indignant. ’
Fhoroughly in connection with the crime. And
must a mit that I first brought your name into the
discussion. Also I insisted that Mr. Mendle should
give me a card of introduction to you. He did so
very unwillingly, as he has a true regard for your
sterling character.”
of me n ° WlSh t 0 h6ar What Mr * Mendle thinks
My dear, ’ said the other insolently, “ you had
better tell that to a man-to the man himself; if you
cioo.se. But to think that a woman can be deceived
—oh, my dear Miss Lane.”
the house 1”° mean ? H ° W dare you? Leave
YanL” bb ' n r ° Se ' “ Ccrtainly-for Scotland
Harriet’s trembling legs refused to sustain her any


longer, and she sank into the nearest seat. “ For
what purpose?” she gasped.
“ To get out a warrant for your arrest.”
“ I have done nothing to make you even hint at
such a thing,” cried Harriet desperately.
“ I think otherwise.’
“ Upon what grounds?”
“ Upon the very excellent grounds that you drove
to the City on the night of the murder in Sir Samuel
Embers’s cab. Whether or no you knew that your
brother was driving, 1 cannot say. Probably you
did.”
I did not,” said Miss Lane, off her guard, and
Lady Cobbin pounced on the admission conveyed in
the speech.
“ Then you confess to having driven in the cab on
that night ?”
“ I confess to nothing. I refuse to speak.”
“ Very good. Then the police ” Milady
moved toward the door.
Harriet rose with sudden strength and ran after
her. “ For heaven’s sake, no 1” she said, in a chok-
ing voice, and laid hold of the departing woman’s
dress. “ Sit down—let us talk. If you are here to
arrest me—if you ”
“ No, no,” purred Lady Cobbin, leading the terri-
fied creature to a seat and patting her hand, “ I have
no warrant for your arrest, and I very much doubt if
I could obtain one.”
“Then you believe me to be innocent?” said
Harriet hoarsely.
Lady Cobbin shrugged her shoulders. “ That will
entirely depend upon what you tell me,” said she;


but, mind, I must hear the truth, as I am very
quick in seeing attempted deception.”
“ But on what grounds do you question me?”
” My dear Miss Lane, I have presented my creden-
tials. I am simply an inquiry agent, engaged by
Mr. Mendle to search for the assassin of Mr. Arthur
Gerson.”
I understand all that ” —Harriet clutched at her
smooth brown hair. 14 You do not see what I mean.
On what grounds do you suspect me? ”
41 You left the Piccadilly Theatre on the night of
the murder some time after ten o’clock, and entered
the cab in question to drive to the City. Am I
right?”
44 If I admit it, what then?”
Your admission will go a long way towards
proving your innocence, Miss Lane, since a guilty
person would deny everything. Well?”
44 I was in the cab,” murmured Harriet, with a
drooping head, 44 but I do not understand how you
came to know.”
Lady Cobbin nodded good-humouredly, pleased at
having scored a point, as she assuredly had, by gain-
ing such an admission. 44 I asked Mrs. O’Toole, to
whom you spoke.”
44 What made you question Mrs. O’Toole?”
44 I did so for several reasons, but the only one
which it is needful for you to know is, that I am
aware that she is the mother of the boy, who knows
the truth.”
44 You mean Paddy?”
44 Yes. Do you know him? ”
Harriet nodded. 44 I have given him money at
times for getting me a cab when returning from the


theatre. I know Mrs. O’Toole also. She pointed
out Sir Samuel’s cab to me on the night you
mention.”
“So she told me. Then you crossed over and
entered it, telling the chauffeur to drive to the City.”
“Why do you say the chauffeur?” asked Miss
Lane irrelevantly.
“ Because I can’t say if you spoke to Sir Samuel
or to your brother.”
“ I spoke to my brother, thinking that he was Sir
Samuel.”
“You can swear to that?” asked Lady Cobbin
with a piercing look.
Harriet’s eyes met those of the inquiry-agent
frankly. “I am telling you the truth,” she said,
now more composed; “you have learned so much
that I must, tell you everything. And I confess that
my journey to the City in the cab is likely to be mis-
construed, if the police come to know of it.”
“ That is all right,” said Milady, patting Miss
Lane’s hand again; “ the police can only know of it
through me, and I shall say nothing.”
“ Then you believe me to be innocent,” said
Harriet, once more.
“ I shall tell you what I believe, if you will confess
that you love Mr. Mendle,” parried Lady Cobbin,
skilfully.
Harriet looked down nervously. “ I do love him.”
“In that case, I am quite sure that you are
innocent.”
“Why?”
“ Because of the absence of any motive to commit
the crime. You would not kill your half-brother to
make the man you love lose money.”


“How do you know?” said Miss Lane unexpec-
tedly. “ I might be of a jealous nature.”
“ Are you jealous?”
“Very. Lewis—that is, Mr. Mendle—loves
Belinda, my half-sister, and is indifferent to me. Out
of jealousy, I might have killed Arthur to punish the
man I love.”
Humph I ’ said Lady Cobbin, more to herself
than to her auditor. “ Now lam absolutely certain
that you are innocent. The guilty person does not
supply motives for his villainy, as a rule.”
“ There is an exception to every rule,” said Miss
Lane quickly.
Milady looked at Miss Lane rather puzzled. “ You
are a stronger woman than I took you to be,” she
said, scrutinising the grey face before her.
Harriet flushed indignantly. “ I am considered
to be very strong in my will-power.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. “ I quite understand, be-
cause you have never crossed swords with a really
strong-willed person.”
“ I have with Arthur.”
“ Pooh I he was merely a selfish, obstinate rat.
Besides, his sister was always on your side, and
union is strength. And Mr. Mendle deferred to
you because you influenced your half-sister, and
loving him, you would always influence her to Mr.
Mendle’s benefit. No; you are not strong, but you
have been made to believe that you are strong. Still,
you have more strength than I gave you credit for.”
Harriet was amazed at Lady Cobbin’s rapid read-
ing of her character, and could not help putting her
amazement into words. “ How did you gather all
this? Has Lewis -”


Mr. Mendle said nothing. It is my business to
read character, so as to know how to deal with people.
But time is passing, and I have yet to learn why you
went to the City. What did you want at Mr.
Mendle’s office on that night?”
“ How do you know that I went there? ”
Oh, I don’t say that you arrived there; but you
certainly intended to go there, else you would not
have told Embers—as you thought him to be—to £0
to the City.”
“ 1 reall 7 di d believe Arthur to be Sir Samuel.”
protested Harriet. “ They were not unlike, and with
the coat, the cap, the glasses ”
“ Yes > 7 es interrupted Milady impatiently. “ I
understand how you made the mistake. But why
did you go to the City?”
“ To se e Lewis on particular business.”
Would it not have waited until the morning?
Mr. Mendle lives near here, I know.”
Lewis was in his office, working late,” explained
Harriet, “and I wished to relieve my mind as soon
as possible. Sir Samuel usually came to the Picca-
dilly Theatre to take me or Belinda home, for Belinda
goes frequently there. I knew also that Sir Samuel
was driving Lewis back and forward to the office;
therefore, I asked Mrs. O’Toole to find me the cab,
so that I might, so to speak, kill two birds with one
stone that is, I could drive to the office, pick up
Lewis, and talk to him while we drove to Kensing-
ton.” 5
“ What did you wish to talk about?” asked Lady
Cobbin abruptly.
“ Ab out Arthur,” hesitated Miss Lane.
“ What about him?”


“ Must I tell you what it is?” murmured Harriet,
much distressed.
I think that I am showing myself a very good
friend, said Milady drily, “ and I fancy that you
have confidence in me. If I am to learn who killed
tne boy, I must know everything,”
Harriet twisted in her seat. “We have a six
o clock dinner,” she said again irrelevantly, as it
seemed, since Igo to the theatre early. Arthur
came home very much excited over something he had
tound out about Dr. Darton- ”
~ 9/ 1 1 , sa ' c * Lad y Cobbin, remembering what
Mendle had said. “ What had he learned about Dr.
Darton ?”
" 1 Ca u n '[ sa y- He refused to tell me or Belinda,
although she was very anxious to know. But Arthur
said that he would make it hot for Dr. Darton—l use
his own words, of course—and that Belinda would
never marry him. She left the room in a rage, and
afterwards Arthur hinted that he would leave Darton
alone if he got money through me, from Lewis, who
held the purse. He wanted me to use my influence
with Lewis, as he and Lewis never got on well to-
gether. I refused.”
“ I wonder at your doing that,” said Milady pen-
sively, since it was to your interest to get Belinda
married to Dr. Darton, and thus allow yourself a
chance of marrying Mr. Mendle, whom you love.”
I thought of that,” cried Harriet nervously; “ to
my shame, I admit that I thought of that. But the
purpose for which Arthur wanted the money? I
knew, if I told Lewis the purpose, that he would
refuse to give one penny. And, after all, Lewis


allowed Arthur one thousand a year, which he
squandered.”
“ He would have exhausted the Bank of England,
would that young scoundrel!” said Lady Cobbin
grimly. ‘‘And the purpose?”
“ I’ll tell you that later. Meanwhile, 1 admit that
I went to the City in a cab.”
‘‘What happened during the drive? Be careful,
if you please.”
‘‘ I am both careful and truthful,” said Harriet
tartly; “ the cab went along all right until it reached
one of those lanes leading down to the Thames
River.”
“ What is the name of the lane ?” Out came Lady
Cobbin’s notebook.
“ I cannot tell you. I did not observe. But the
cab broke down, and Sir Samuel—as I thought—
muttered something about not being able to drive me
further.”
‘‘Humph! I tell you one thing, Miss Lane. If
you did not recognise your half-brother, he certainly
recognised you, and made the breakdown an excuse
to get rid of you. He hired the cab, or rather ran
away with it, for some villainy, with which your
presence might have interfered. Don’t you agree
with me ?”
“ I suppose it must be so,” muttered Harriet, look-
ing puzzled. ‘‘ However, I left the cab at the top of
the lane, and walked to the Mansion House Metro-
politan Station. There I caught a late train, and
came home to High Street, Kensington. I walked
here.”
“ Then you did not go to the office after all ?”
“ No. The snow was falling very thickly and it


was bitterly cold. Also I had on thin shoes, and not
eing able to get another cab, I did not want to get
my death of cold by walking to Cade Lane. I de-
cided to go home and wait up for Arthur, and insist
that he should come with me the next morning to see
Lewis at Rutland Square.”
“ What about ?”
Something that I had found out about Arthur;
something that would have made Lewis very angry!
As I said, I’ll tell you about it later.”
“ Why not now ?”
, lr . 1 ™ ant to tell the stor y in a regular fashion.
When I came home I found Belinda sitting up, also
waiting for Arthur.”
“For what reason ?”
“ He had taken her to the theatre, and on the way
had renewed his threats against Dr. Darton. Belinda
feared lest he should meet Dr. Darton and there
should be a quarrel, for, to be plain, Lady Cobbin,
Arthur was rather excited with liquor. Belinda
cou d not go to bed until she knew if a meeting had
taken place. We waited until quite early in the
morning, and then Lewis arrived with the dreadful
news. I really thought that he was drunk also, as
he was so excited.”
“ And small wonder. But do you mean to tell me
that you did not recognise your half-brother when
the cab broke down?” asked Milady.
I really did not,” said Harriet deliberately and
earnestly. ”He spoke softly, and the place where
the cab stopped was dark. The snow was falling
heavily as he lay down to look at the damage that
was done.”
“ I don’t believe that there was any damage,” said


Lady Cobbin contemptuously. “He didn’t wish to
be known. I shouldn’t be surprised to learn that he
had gone to murder someone, and so had been mur-
dered himself. Quite a case of the biter bit.”
“ Do you think that he met with Dr. Darton,”
suggested Harriet timidly, “ and that a quarrel ”
She got no further for the time being, as the door
opened with a swing, and Belinda literally rushed
into the room, her eyes wide open with astonishment.
Behind her crept, rather than walked, a slender, pale
girl, dressed in a shabby black frock, which had once
been new and fashionably made. She became red
and pale by turns as Belinda spoke.
“Harriet,” cried Miss Gerson, “fancy—this is
Ellen Parley!”
“ The tobacconist girl,” murmured Lady Cobbin.
“ The wife of Arthur Gerson, if you please,” cried
the shabby new-comer.


CHAPTER XI.
WHAT ELLEN KNEW.
fhe^lrT ° T at the
p-rev t\J - g L Her face was drawn and
sapped her streng,?"' sh™ W , ith Mi,ad y had
emotion left, and™ prepared to ba^
frozen edlyher
frozen looks, plucked at her dress. 7
wife? Th fr°e y ?'. hear Say that she is Arthur's
with’cWWish temper a ' lSWered for herself,
yon think that I would come
■ , *“' f! ad e worth your while you would »L t
Belinda "in P ° mted f ° the sti]l astonished
7. " allows me an income.”
inqu^g e „r ' ,ere ‘° ° btai "’’' fiais, ’ ed ‘he
is bound to look after me!" W,dow - she
« Harriet" “'I Ar , tllu , r ’ s widow .” said Belinda coldly
9
129


“ Perfectly true,” replied Harriet calmly, and
turned towards Lady Cobbin. “This is what I
wished to see Lewis about on the night my half-
brother was killed. Arthur told me, after Belinda
left the room, that he was married. He asked me
to break the news to Lewis and demand money to
set up an establishment.” ~ ,
“ Harriet,” cried Belinda reproachfully, why
did you not tell me?”
“There was no need, dear. You have enough
troubles on your shoulders without being burdened
with those of Arthur.”
“But you knew that Arthur hated Wilfred, cried
Belinda angrily. “ I suppose he intended to get
money from Wilfred, if Lewis did not allow him a
larger income.”
“ I think he did. Unless Dr. Darton paid him
well, and consented to give you up, Arthur would
not have returned the papers.”
“ What papers ? ”
“ Those which were stolen from the water-proot
envelope,” said Milady, at a ventuie.
Belinda started and her colour faded. “ The water-
proof envelope,” she whimpered, “ why, that was—
that was ” ~
“ Found at the feet of the dead. Exactly.
The girl looked at her with a terrified gaze. Mrs.
Gerson had seated herself in a somewhat sulky
manner, and Harriet also had sunk into a chair.
Only Lady Cobbin and Belinda were standing.
“ Who are you? ” asked the latter suddenly.
“ I am an inquiry agent.” n
“An inquiry agent? What do you mean?
“ She is a detective,” faltered Harriet, who was


as ! h T h in pain-
or *" ppi "« “» ■—
at Lady Cobbin S ™^ h ' men «». and stared dully
.< T , ’ 1 offered no reward ”
smooth M *“* informed »er
“Itis a trick ” • 1 n P f ys all m 7 expenses.”
cis a trick, cried Belinda hoarselv “r
wants to hunt him down, and ” 7 ‘ LeWIS
and sharply^ 0 d ° Wn ? aSked Udy Cobbin quickly
tJmucl rl as d ste n lfn n i S v W o r ' had Said
of this sleuth-hoLd o? L P r Ce ' Ved - In the P resenc e
careful. Miladv saw . Was necessa ry to be
herself to speak “Wh t 1 ’ nda could not trust
authoritatively d ° y ° U know ? "she asked
“ You 1 do 1 oJOlned the S id doggedly.
nartot’ ****
ooto-od
glittering 3 bestirs P ’ “7 f UShed a " d her eyes
she cried, u P L
right to speak in this wav n n Y ,° U have no
to do with this matter. ' He is iimocenT”
swiftly r t he o defe C „ U sTve him yet ’” “ id Cobb -,
Beim T dtfaci„g° t he n Lm "T him ° f ’” Ported
ti on .. • g , worT) an with astonishing resol,,
' ApParen "y y° u have seen Lewisfand he'


has engaged you to be a spy. You have come here,
thinking that I am a weak fool, likely to be coerced
into telling you things which I intend that you shall
not know. But lam strong - ,
“ Dr. Darton’s peril gives you strength, inter-
polated Milady pointedly.
“He is in no peril.”
“ Belinda,” cried Harriet faintly, “ you know
what Arthur said, and ”
“Hold your tongue,” cried Belinda, turning to
her half-sister like a small fury. “ Arthur was a
fool, as you are. What he said was private, and
there is no need to allow strangers to know too much
of our affairs.” ~
“ Better let a stranger know than the police,
warned Lady Cobbin.
“You can tell the police nothing,” said Belinda,
undauntedly, “ for you know nothing. If your busi-
ness is finished here, you must go.’
“It is not finished, and I shall not go.
“ You shall ! ”
The two women faced one another resolutely, and
a duel of wills ensued. Lady Cobbin had understood
from the dead man that Belinda was as weak as
Harriet was strong. He had been wrong in both
cases. Already the weakness of Miss Lane had been
made manifest by her enforced confession of matters
which she would rather have kept secret. Now
Belinda, the timid girl, the inexperienced, the
emotional, was proving herself to be possessed of that
real strength which was required to defend her lover.
It would not be an easy matter to make her speak
out. The masks of the two half-sisters had been
torn off by circumstances, and their true characters


were a reversal of those with which they had been
credited.
Lady Cobbin was extremely annoyed. She was
accustomed to having her own way, and so far had
secured it with Harriet. But Belinda, she saw,
would prove a hard nut to crack. She was like a
peach, soft to look at, but containing the kernel of a
dominating nature. Hitherto, from being dependent
upon Lewis Mendle for money, Belinda had been
more or less of a slave. But in studying to serve
she had learned how to rule; and having come into
her kingdom of money and love, she was bent upon
being a despot. The inquiry agent—another despot
set herself to work the downfall of her rival in
obstinacy. She would have begun the campaign at
once, but that a plaintive voice made itself heard
from the corner where Mrs. Gerson was seated.
“ You don’t seem to take any notice of me,” com-
plained the widow in a tearful manner, “ and I’m
sure I deserve some little attention, seeing that
Arthur is dead, and that I have not a penny,”
Belinda, with her blue eyes as hard as those of
a cat, whirled round and looked at the shrinking
figure in the shabby black gown. “I see that
Arthur treated you like the brute he was,” said
Belinda.
“Why do you say that?” asked Mrs. Gerson,
startled.
Belinda pointed to the shabby dress. “Arthur
was allowed a thousand a year by Lewis, yet he
could dress you no better than that.”
“ This frock was made by a very good dress-
maker.”
“ During the honeymoon, no doubt. But Arthur’s


love lasted only for a time, and after he grew tired
of you he did not give you either money or love.”
“ How do you know? ” Mrs. Gerson’s pale eyes
opened widely.
“ Oh, it is easy to see, from that dress, from
your miserable looks, and to judge it from the fact
that, as late as the night of Arthur’s terrible death,
he allowed you to serve in that Edgware Road shop.
And I learned to know my brother’s selfish nature
well before he died. To gain his own ends, he was
prepared to sacrifice me and ”
“ And Dr. Darton,” put in Lady Cobbin
pointedly.
“What do you mean by that?” demanded
Belinda imperiously.
“ I think you can guess.”
“ Perhaps I can; but you needn’t think that I am
to be trapped into admitting what you want to
know.”
“Ah I Then there is something that I should
know.”
“ There isn’t,” cried Miss Gerson, with true
feminine contrariness. “It may be that I have some
doubts, but these I shall not explain to you, what-
ever your name may be.”
“ My name is Lady Cobbin.”
“It is Milady. I remember now. Arthur said
something about going to you in order to see if you
could help him to get money out of ”
“ How do you know that? ”
“ Oh, you look astonished,” said Belinda scorn-
fully, “but Arthur was always a fool, and told me
everything.”
“ Apparently, he did not tell you that his real


reason for seeking my assistance was to ask my help
to have Mr. Mendle kidnapped, and afterwards killed
so that he and you might get the money.”
“Oh, impossible! impossible!” wailed Harriet,
wringing her hands.
“It is not impossible,” said Belinda tersely. “If
you had known Arthur as well as I did, Harriet, you
would have seen that to get money for his horrid
pleasures he would hesitate at nothing. Did he really
marry you ? ” she asked, turning to the widow. “It
is not like him to act so honourably.”
“Arthur loved me, and I loved Arthur,” wept
Mrs. Gerson. “He first met me in the shop; and
afterwards, when I learned that he was the ward of
Mr. Mendle, to whom my father was clerk, I asked
him home. He came, and my father liked him.”
“ Arthur could make himself agreeable if he liked,”
muttered Belinda contemptuously, ‘‘and between
your father and yourself you brought him to consent
to a secret marriage.”
, “ Yes,” whimpered Mrs. Gerson, shrinking from
Belinda’s scorn, ‘‘we were married six months ago
m St. Edwald’s Church, in Marylebone. Arthur
wanted the marriage kept quiet, because ”
because he knew that Lewis would stop his
thousand a year if the marriage became known. I
understand.”
“Considering the terms of the will,” observed
Lady Cobbin at this moment, “ Mr. Mendle had no
right to stop the allowance.”
“Lewis had complete control of the money,
Milady, and could give it or withhold it at his
pleasure. He behaved very well to Arthur on the
whole, and my brother ungratefully tried to murder


him twice. He also attempted murder for a third
time indirectly through you. Poor Lewis went in
danger of his life, and for such a nervous man, that
was a terrible existence to lead. And another thing,”
added Belinda, warming to her subject, “ if you knew
the will made by my father, you would understand
that Lewis was compelled to prevent Arthur from
marrying, by depriving him of his money.”
“ 1 never knew that,” said Lady Cobbin, while
Ellen uttered a faint cry like that of a trapped animal.
“ You don’t know everything,” said Belinda
coolly ; ” ask Harriet if what I say is not true.”
“ Yes,” said Miss Lane, when thus appealed to.
“My step-father saw what Arthur was: neurotic,
unprincipled, and selfish. He knew that he would
make any woman miserable ”
“ As he has done,” said Belinda, indicating the
shrinking Ellen.
“ And moreover held strong views as to people
marrying when mentally or physically unfit. In the
will he said that neither Arthur nor Belinda were
to marry. If they did, they were not to receive any
money until Lewis died.”
” And were you to receive it—the survivor—if
either one of them died,” muttered Lady Cobbin,
somewhat bewildered. ‘‘A strange will, truly.
I hen, I take it that if Mr. Mendle had learned of
this marriage, he would have cut off Mr. Gerson’s
income ? ”
“ Yes,” said Ellen timidly, “ my father had read
the will, and told Arthur so. That was why we kept
the marriage secret.”
“ And Arthur let slip the fact of his marriage
when you left the table on that night, Belinda,” said


Harriet, wiping her eyes. “ He asked me to intercede
with Lewis. I was going to the office from the
theatre on that very night.”
“ Did you see Lewis? ” asked Belinda, astonished
by this revelation.
No. Ihe cab broke down, and I came home to
hnd you waiting up for Arthur. As you know, Lewis
came to tell us of his death.”
Ellen was crying quietly. Arthur had treated her
vilely, but apparently she considered that his death
cancelled all resentment. “ f only saw him that
very afternoon,” she wailed, “and he was much
kinder than usual. He said that he was going to
make our fortunes.”
“Jn what way?” asked Lady Cobbin, before
Belinda could speak.
Mrs. Gerson explained very simply, as her brain
was shallow and she was of an unsuspicious nature.
Arthur treated me very badly,” she said in a soft
tones and rather helplessly. “We had the greatest
difficulty in living, as he would not give me any
money. I lived with my father and still served in
the shop, so as to make both ends meet. Arthur
always said that he had spent his thousand pounds
tor the year and would not get any more for months.
On account of the marriage, he was afraid of losing
his income. My father grew to hate him, because
he treated me so badly.”
“What did he do to you?” asked Belinda
sympathetically.
Ellen hid her thin face in her hands. “Oh he
was dreadful,” she wailed. “At times I think that
he was mad. He bullied me, and once he struck me.
But father struck him back, and he never tried to


strike me again. But on the afternoon when I saw
him last, he was quite kind. He said that Dr.
Darton would give him money for certain
papers ”
“ Ah,” said Lady Cobbin, drawing a long breath,
“ did you see the papers? ”
“No,” said Ellen simply; ‘‘that is, he never
showed them to me or told me what they contained.
But he had them in a blue envelope.”
“ A blue envelope. Ah, and that envelope was
found at his feet.”
Ellen nodded and glanced at Belinda, whose face
was pearly white. “ They said at the inquest that
Arthur was murdered because of those papers.”
‘‘lt is not true—it is not true,” cried Belinda
fiercely.
‘‘lt is true,” said Lady Cobbin forcibly. “ The
envelope was torn, and the papers had been removed.
If the murder was not committed for the sake of the
papers, why should the envelope have been taken
from the dead man’s pocket? ”
“ From his breast-pocket,” cried Mrs. Gerson.
“He placed it there. I saw him place it there when
he left the house. It was when I came home to
dinner, and just before I returned to the shop.”
“ One moment,” said Lady Cobbin, who had been
thinking. ‘‘You told us that you last saw your
husband in the afternoon. Yet the evidence of Sir
Samuel Embers goes to prove that Arthur Gerson
called to see you somewhere about ten o’clock in the
evening.”
Ellen looked confused. “ Yes, he did,” she ad-
mitted, “ but only as a stranger. There was another
customer in the shop, and Arthur only asked for a


packet of Nestor cigarettes. He always treated me
as if he didn’t know me when in the presence of
anyone else.”
Did he produce the blue envelope then ? ”
“ No - But he carried his cigarette-case in his vest-
pocket, and when he took it out to fill it from the
packet I saw the blue envelope sticking up inside his
breast-pocket. It was a long envelope.”
Lady bobbin tried to remember the description of
the envelope which had been given at the inquest.
” 1 understood that it was a brief-sized envelope,”
she said pointedly. ” Such a one would not go into
a man’s breast-pocket.”
(< Arthur doubled it lengthways,” said Ellen quickly.
He said that the papers meant money, and that he
would have to take care of them. I caught a glimpse
of the envelope in his inside pocket, and then he
went out, and I never saw him again ” ; and she wept
bitterly. F
Lady Cobbin turned to Belinda. ‘‘Mr. Mendle
told me that you were waiting up to see Dr. Darton.”
I was not,” said Belinda, firm but pale. “ I
waited up to see Arthur, as he said all manner of
foolish things.”
“ Threatened Dr. Darton, in fact.”
T es, admitted Belinda reluctantly.
1 hen I take it that your brother intended to see
Dr. Darton on the night of his death, and return
these papers, on payment of money.”
“ I don’t believe that he saw him,” cried Belinda
in despair.
\ es, he did, said the inquiry-agent imperiously,
and Dr. Darton got the papers. Apparently he
did not pay the money.”


Belinda rose suddenly, and advanced with
clenched fists. “ You shall not accuse Wilfred in
this way,” she declared; ‘‘from what you say, one
would imagine that he had murdered Arthur.”
‘‘ Mr. Gerson was to meet Dr. Darton, according
to his wife’s story,” said Lady Cobbin, arguing
calmly, ‘‘ and about money for the papers. Those
were in a blue envelope. That was found open and
the contents gone. The man who had possessed the
envelope was dead. What do you make of that, Miss
Gerson ? ’ ’
‘‘ It can be explained,” she muttered, twisting her
hands in agony.
“ What do you think, Miss Lane? ”
Harriet shivered. “ Don’t ask me,” she mur-
mured.
‘‘ Mrs. Gerson ”
‘‘ If you say one word,” cried Belinda, turning
fiercely on the girl, ‘‘ I won’t help you with a
penny ! ”
Lady Cobbin rose, smiling triumphantly. ‘‘ It only
remains to question Dr. Darton,” she said decisively,
and walked out, leaving three pale, startled, terrified
women.


CHAPTER XII.
THE ETERNAL FEMININE.
Lady Cobbin had lost no time in seeking the half-
sisters, when engaged by Mendle to look after the
Gerson Case. She had struck when the iron was
hot, and so far had found it extremely malleable and
capable of being twisted into a weapon to serve her
purpose. That Ellen should have come to reveal
the secret of her marriage, and to substantiate the
fact that her young husband had held certain in-
criminating papers connected with Wilfred Darton,
made the next few steps to be taken surprisingly
easy—too easy, in fact, and for that reason Milady
did not take them immediately. She had some other
business to attend to, and, reflecting that Dr. Darton
would not run away, she postponed her interview
with him until the morrow. Yet she might have
reflected that Darton’s conversation with Mendle
might have frightened him into possible flight.
No, decided Lady Cobbin, after considering
this point, he is in love with Belinda Gerson, and
knows that she will defend him. Also, he has no
money, and marriage with her means five thousand a
year. I think with these things to gain—a home and
a wife, he will brave the matter out, and dare us
to do our worst.”
It will be seen that Lady Cobbin was quite certain
of the Doctor’s guilt, and on the face of it she
w r as justified in so thinking. The dead man had
certainly possessed papers which Darton desired to


obtain, and these—according to Ellen —had been
placed in a blue brief-size envelope, which had been
doubled up in Gerson’s pocket. Arthur had inti-
mated to his wife, to Belinda, and to Elarriet, that he
intended to meet Darton on the night of his death,
and for this purpose, apparently, had stolen the cab
from Embers. As Arthur had been found dead on
the cab, with the envelope, robbed of its contents, at
his feet, it was only reasonable to consider that
Darton had killed him. At least Lady Cobbin
thought so, and it was in her mind to see Mendle and
advise him, on the evidence she had collected, to get
out a warrant of arrest by informing Hake of the
young man’s guilt. But on second thoughts the
inquiry-agent decided to personally interview the
doctor before proceeding further. She was woman
enough to desire a sight of the man whom Belinda
defended so furiously.
Lady Cobbin therefore returned to her office and
attended to some other business. But the Gerson
case fascinated her, and after office hours she did
violence to her feelings by still continuing to exist as
Milady. As a rule, when the office was closed, she
became Lady Cobbin, and returned to Hampstead;
but on this occasion she took her evening meal at
Gatti’s, and somewhere between seven and eight
went to Rodger Street, near the Haymarket, where
the Piccadilly Theatre was situated. Although the
night was cold and raw with sleet and high winds, it
was characteristic that Lady Cobbin took no cab.
She invariably walked, and especially enjoyed doing
so at night, since in the dark hours she was always
coming across people who were useful to her. She
was as ardent a devotee of London as Dickens him


self an d m a loosely-hanging, fur-lined overcoat,
which clothed her down to the heels of her stout boots
strode along in defiance of wind and rain. With her
masculine hat and cigarette and cane, and with the
coat hiding her petticoats, she might have been taken
tor a man, as she swung masterfully along.
It was close upon eight o’clock, and cab and motor-
car and four-wheeler and brougham discharged their
ares and owners at the brilliantly lighted door of the
t re. At the corner of the narrow dark street
which led down to the stage door, Lady Cobbin saw
ieggy O Toole standing, gaunt and Amazonian,
watching her boys gathering their nightly harvest
o coppers, as they opened—when permitted by a
dignified commissionaire—the doors of the various
vehicles. It was Peggy whom Lady Cobbin wished
to see, and she marched up to her forthwith.
Mrs. O’Toole wore a shapeless sou’-wester, and a
thick pilot jacket, adorned smartly with brass buttons
In this dress, and with her hard, grim red face, she
looked as manly as did Lady Cobbin. But when the
agent ranged alongside her, Peggy’s face lost its
grimness on recognising the person who addressed
her. Mrs. O I oole was a very venal old woman, and
knew that Lady Cobbin would give her money
before their conversation was ended. Also, she had
aw olesome fear of the inquiry-agent, regarding
her as an unofficial agent of the law. Mrs. O’Toole’s
conscience was not entirely clear, and she kept in
with those m power on the off-chance that she mieht
some day need a friend, which, considering her shady
character, was extremely likely. J
“Ah, me lady, and ’tis yersilf,” said she with a
curtsey.
143


“ Call me Milady. I have told you to do so
before,” said the other.
“ An’ sure ain’t I adoin’ av it, me lady? ”
“ No. It’s a French way of saying it. Milady—
you understand.”
“Me lady. That’s it. Ah, now, and how can ye
expect me to get me tongue round such a divil av a
langwidge ? Sure, an’ I hate them furrein bastes.
One av thim came wid a parcel av dirthy little
colleens to spile me business with the boys. But I
laid him out, bad luck to the black-faced spy,” and
Mrs. O’Toole shook her brawny arm.
“ That’s enough,” said Lady Cobbin sharply.
“ Tell me about Paddy.”
“ And phwat shud I tell ye, me lady? Sure, the
poor boy’s lying in the hospital with divil a worrd
to say for himself.”
“ How long will he stay in the hospital ? ”
“ Another week, no less, me lady. Thim black-
guard docthers say he can come home thin, and be a
comfort to his mammy.”
“ Don’t the police want to keep an eye on him? ”
“ Oh, they’ll do that, divil doubt them, the dirthy
rag-a-bags,” said Mrs. O’Toole grimly; “ they know
me home, an’ me name, and that Hake baste—may
the Father av Lies fly away wid his sowl—tould me
to make the boy talk if I cud. But sure I promised
that same to Sir Samuel long since, the hivens be his
bed, for a good gintleman.”
‘‘You know Sir Samuel ? ”
“ Ah, now don’t I ! Many a drop av drink he’s
given me an’ money foreby, like the open-handed
lord he is. He’s sorry for Paddy avick, and tells me
he’ll kape the boy in food until he can worruk again.”


Lady Cobbin nodded. She was aware from what
lendle had told her that Sir Samuel was playing
his own hand to win the game, and the stake, which
was marriage with Belinda Gerson. But she was glad
to hear indirectly that Embers had his eye on Paddy.
He was taking the most direct way to learn the truth,
since, if Paddy recovered his memory, he would
certainly be able to tell the name of the assassin.
Satisfied that Paddy would be well looked after, and
knowing Mrs. O’Toole’s address, which was neces-
sary in case she should wish to look up the boy
herself, Lady Cobbin handed over a shilling and
moved away.
one moment >” she said, interrupting Mrs.
O Toole s blessings. “Do you think that the boy
will recover his memory? ”
Ihe gaunt Irishwoman looked shrewdly at the
speaker and winked. “An’ how wud it be if the
boy had niver lost that same? ”
“What?” Lady Cobbin started. “Do you
mean to say that Paddy is clever enough to deceive
the doctors? Impossible.”
“ An’ for why ? ” demanded Mrs. O’Toole aggres-
sively. ‘ Isn’t Paddy me own son, wid a divil
of a father that’s gone to glory wid the drink. Sure’s
he s lying low, for the gossoon winked at me whin
the docther hadn’t his eye on him.
“But his reason?” asked the inquiry-agent.
Mrs. O’Toole seemed to regret that she had said
so much. “Ah, it’s foolishness I’m talking,
alannah, she said coaxmgly. “ Maybe me eye
wasn t straight wid gin when I saw the boy.”
Lady Cobbin looked at her straightly, and saw
that, Mrs. O’Toole’s cunning having taken alarm,
10


she was prepared to lie like a trooper in order to cover
her too open confession. She temporised. “ Per-
haps your eye wasn’t straight, as you say,” she
observed drily, “ but when Paddy comes home to
that wretched cellar of yours tell me, and I ’ll make
it worth your while. I must question him. Good-
night.”
As Lady Cobbin moved away, Mrs. O’Toole bit
the shilling to see if it was sterling coin, and looked
after the retreating figure. “ Oh, divil doubt but
you’ll ask questions,” she said derisively, “ but
Paddy won’t answer until I give him the office.
There’s lashin’s av money to be got out av phwat
Patrick knows.”
Lady Cobbin was thinking much on the same
lines. She knew Mrs. O’Toole of old, and knew
also that Paddy was as cunning an urchin as could
be found in the London streets, where most of the
brats are rendered clever by their struggle for life.
Yet it seemed incredible to her that Paddy should be
able to deceive the doctors. Still, having regard to
his precociousness and his up-bringing and his fear of
Mrs. O’ Toole, it might be that, knowing the truth,
he was keeping it back until he found a good market
for it. That is, Paddy would never tell what he
knew until he was paid for his information. Embers
would, doubtless, offer a sufficient bribe, but Lady
Cobbin intended to be beforehand with Sir Samuel.
However, nothing could be done until Paddy was
beyond the reach of the hospital authorities, and he
would certainly play possum until discharged.
1 herefore, Lady Cobbin went home to Hampstead
and her grumbling grandmother, with the intention
of seeing Darton the next day.


It was improbable that the Doctor knew her, since
there was no reason why her name should be brought
to his notice either officially or as that of a private
individual. She therefore wrote a note in the third
person saying that “Lady Cobbin ” would call at
three o’clock the next afternoon to seek medical
advice, and posted this before she caught the ’bus
to Baker Street on her way to Hampstead. It had
annoyed her greatly that Harriet had known who she
was, as it had resulted, so to speak, in her hand being
forced. However, being unknown to Darton, she
could approach him as a private person, and thus
might catch him off his guard. Of course, Lady
Cobbin was too clever to think that the man would
confess his guilt, but she hoped by artful questions
to lure him into a trap. Then she would throw off
the mask, and, appearing as Milady, would threaten
him with Scotland Yard unless he told her the whole
not ’ lere was always Paddy
O loole to fall back upon. Taking everything into
consideration, Lady Cobbin started the next morning
lor Elder Square in a very satisfied state of mind.
She could not see how she could fail to win the
game, seeing what excellent cards she had in her
hand.
To her surprise, she found that the Doctor was
absent, and, aping the great lady, expressed her
angei that he should have so disregarded her note.
But perhaps the Doctor did not get it,’’ she
suggested.
I don t know, Ma’am, said the neat servant-
maid. “ Dr. Darton received his letters as usual
this morning.”
“ When will he be back? ”
147


“ About six o’clock, Ma’am. He had to go out
to attend a case.”
“ Thank you. I shall call again.”
Lady Cobbin descended the steps with a sense of
irritation. She liked the red carpets laid down when
she came abroad, and expected all men to be at her
beck and call. It seemed strange that Dr. Darton, a
struggling practitioner, should neglect a titled
patient, when such a one would help him greatly in
his profession. The inquiry-agent did not intend to
go away from the square, and yet, after some reflec-
tion, it struck her that Darton might have gone to
Clement Street to see Belinda. After the stormy
interview of yesterday, it was probable that she
would ask her lover to call so that she might be able
to place him on his guard. Lady Cobbin guessed
very plainly that Miss Gerson believed the doctor
to be guilty, but guessed also that the girl’s love
was capable of defending him to the utmost. If
then the doctor had gone to Kensington, he would
know who she was, and why she called, before she
opened her mouth. She would have to work as
Milady and not as the titled woman of society.
However, Lady Cobbin, always philosophical,
made the best of things. In the square there was a
tea-shop of an artistic kind, whither old ladies came
to eat and gossip. The inquiry-agent entered this
resting-place, and found that from the window—
which was curtained with Indian beadwork—she could
obtain a view of Darton’s front door. She therefore
ordered tea, and set herself to watch with the calm-
ness of a cat at a mouse-hole. And she was resolved
not to leave her post until the mouse was in the trap
of his own house.


For two long hours she sat at the marble-topped
table, eating for the first twenty minutes and reading
for the rest of the time, with occasional glances out
of the window. Her patience was rewarded sooner
than she expected, for she saw her man walk past the
tea-shop and cross the square in the direction of the
house. Mendle had given her a description of his
rival, and on the chance that this swarthy-looking
gentleman might be her mouse, Lady Cobbin hurried
out. She had already paid her account, so there
was nothing to delay her. While the stranger was
fitting a key into the door—and then she was certain
that he was her man—Lady Cobbin came up the
steps hurriedly.
“Dr. Darton—l am sure it is Dr. Darton I ” she
said in a gracious manner, and very much taken
aback by the good looks of the man. “lam so glad
you are here. T sent a note saying that I would
call at three o’clock—but perhaps you never got it.
I am Lady Cobbin, and ’’
“ Lady Cobbin ? ” said the young man coldly, and
with a frown. “Yes, I think T received your note,
but I was forced to go out on business.”
“ Better late than never,” said the woman
pleasantly. You will give me a few moments of
your valuable time now I hope? ”
“Tam afraid that I am engaged,” said the doctor,
with an effort.
Lady Cobbin saw that he was nervous, that he
wished to terminate the interview, and was more
certain than ever that Belinda had placed him on his
guard. At all events, with characteristic daring she
dashed into the breach. ‘‘l am sorry that Miss
Gerson does not like me.”


Dr. Darton started, and his breath came and went
hurriedly. “ I don’t understand, Lady Cobbin.”
“ Why not call me Milady. You must have read
Dumas’ story, and ”
“ Madam, I am sorry that I cannot give you
medical advice. There are other doctors in this
square.”
Probably there were, but none—as the woman
assured herself—could possibly be so good-looking
as this nervous young man, who was trying his best
to act a part and failing miserably. “ I have not
come for medical advice,” she said quietly. “ I do
not ask your help. On the contrary, I have come to
help you.”
“ You speak in riddles.” Darton grew painfully
confused.
“ I think you are clever enough to guess my
riddles,” she said drily, and keeping her bright eyes
admiringly on his handsome face; ‘‘and I may
suggest—as a female detective, you know—that the
doorstep is not a good place upon which to talk
secrets.”
“ I have no secrets,” said the doctor loudly.
Nevertheless, he opened the door, and beckoned that
she should enter.
“ Of course not,” said Lady Cobbin easily; “ only
rascals have secrets. And you are an honest man,
I am sure.”
“ You judge by externals,” said Darton gruffly.
“ Oh, dear me, no,” she answered, following him
into the same bare room in which he had granted
Mendle an interview. ‘‘ I judge by the devotion of
Miss Gerson. A clever girl like that would never
love a bad man.”
150
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ Be pleased to leave Miss Gerson’s name out of
this conversation,” said Darton resolutely, and
closed the door of the consulting-room. “ Now lam
at your service. What is it you wish to say ? ”
His visitor looked at him, and grew more and
more to admire him. Never, she assured herself, had
she seen so handsome a man, or one with so fascinat-
ing a manner, although it must be confessed that the
young doctor was trying hard to be thoroughly rude.
Lady Cobbin was not a susceptible woman, as she
possessed a masculine strain which kept her level-
headed, and, moreover, had suffered too much
during her short married life to care particularly
for the sterner sex. But the appearance and
personality of Wilfred Darton took her reason captive
in a way which annoyed her. Hitherto she had
been sufficient unto herself, but now the law of sex
had come inopportunely into action, and she was
rapidly growing as love-sick as any green girl. Yet
she fought against the feeling and tried to be
business-like.
I fear that I shall be obliged to introduce Miss
Gerson’s name.”
“ 1 really don’t understand you,” said Darton
coldly; “be more explicit, if you please, Lady
Cobbin.”
She shrugged her shoulders, and to gain more
command over herself, stuck her glass in her eye,
and tried to be as manly as possible. “ I credited
you with more discernment, Dr. Darton. But to be
plain, you are in a very dangerous position. There
is every chance that you will be accused of having
murdered Arthur Gerson.”
It is a lie—a lie ! ” cried the unfortunate young
151
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


man savagely; but the perspiration beaded his fore-
head. “ I know nothing.”
“ 1 think you know a great deal, Doctor, and I
wish you to be plain with me. Confess you know
that I am acting for Mr. Mendle? ”
“ Yes,” said Darton reluctantly, “ I was told so.”
“ By Miss Gerson ? ”
“Don’t mention her name! don’t mention her
name! ” and Darton began to stride up and down
the narrow room, much agitated.
I must, said Lady Cobbin firmly, “ both for
her sake and for your own. I know all about the
matter, and I want to discuss it, so that you may be
saved from arrest.”
“ I don’t care if I am arrested.”
Don’t be foolish. You must bear up and defend
yourself, if only for the sake of that sweet girl
who loves you.”
“ Loves me ! loves me ! ” Darton raised both his
arms with a groan. “ Why Belinda has refused to
marry me. We have parted for ever.”


CHAPTER XIII.
HONOUR AMONGST THIEVES.
of Lady Cobbin ’ s ««e of
nd that she felt a sudden sensation of delight on
tearing Darton’s despairing speech. An hour
previous and she would have scoffed at the idea that
so strong-minded a woman as herself could fall in
ve. ut the unexpected is particularly liable to
happen with the emotions, and we have Marlow’s
dictum as to the actuality of love at first sight. It
ZtroTle a d ln h y d°. W the J nc l uil T-agent. She was as
,i,i i y desire for this man as any raw girl, and
as Tonah’s 6 '“T"’ had not grown c l u ‘ t e as rapidly
as Jonah s gourd, yet she felt that the root of this
unexpected feeling was firmly fixed in her heart.
f . oVer , e . ess ’ sfle 1 rea t«l the matter outwardly as
though it concerned her very little. It would
not do she rapidly decided, to spread her net too
captu a 7 W ' thln si g ht of the bird she desired to
f S “ relyyou are mistaken,” she exclaimed; “ only
v“i[y!” SaW MiSS GerSOn ; a " d defended yo^
DartonT4 h rny. S m 6 f ° be g uilty ’” said
“ I cannot credit that,” replied Lady Cobbin
marvelling a t the weakness of Belinda’s love.
* aac i it from her own lips.”
“ Then you have seen her ? ”


“ Last night. She sent for me and told me that
we must part.”
“ Did she accuse you of this crime?”
“Not in so many words; but I saw what she
meant. I tried vainly to get her to explain, but she
was so overwrought and ill that she declined to speak
openly. All I could gather from her was that she
could never marry me, and that we must never meet
again. What can that mean, but that she believes
me to be guilty ? ”
“ I shouldn’t jump to that conclusion,” said Lady
Cobbin slowly. “It might be that she declines to
marry you in the hope of saving you from arrest,
and perhaps from the gallows.”
Darton dropped into the chair before his escritoire.
“ What do you mean by that? ” he asked blankly.
“ Mr. Mendle loves her.”
“ Well? ”
“ Mr. Mendle has engaged me to search for the
assassin of Arthur Gerson, and it may be that if he
learns Miss Gerson’s determination not to become
your wife, he will arrange to dispense with my
services. ’ ’
Darton looked at her. “ You mean that Belinda
will become Mendle’s wife and sacrifice herself to
save me.”
“ Something like that.”
“ I refuse to accept such a sacrifice, cried t e
young doctor with despairing vigour. “ Belinda has
no right to believe that I killed her brother. If s e
loved" me she would not credit me with so base a
crime.” . .
“ Yet love is sacrifice,” said Lady Cobbin impres-
sively.


Darton shook his head, and again began to walk
up and down the room, greatly agitated. Presently
he became calmer, and stopped short before the
inquiry-agent. It struck him that he was too frank
with this strange woman. “ I don’t kno\v why you
come here and mix yourself up with my private
affairs,” he said, much annoyed; “ and, having taken
me by surprise, you have betrayed me into speaking
about things which do not concern you in the least.
Be good enough to forget what I have said, and let
me advise you medically on your case.”
Milady smiled calmly. “ I am quite well,” she
said promptly. “ I have nothing the matter with
me.”
“ Then why are you here? ”
“ I have come professionally.”
I expected that you would,” said Darton
bitterly. “ Belinda told me last night how you went
to question Miss Lane, and warned me that I would
be the next to be examined. When I received your
note this morning I purposely went out to avoid
you.”
“So I thought. But you see that we have met
after all.”
“ Thanks to your pertinacity.”
I should not be a proper agent were I not
pertinacious,” said Lady Cobbin coolly. “ After
all, I am an honest woman, and cannot accept Mr.
Mendle’s money unless I earn it by doing his will.”
“ Which is to hang me? ”
“ He believes you to be guilty.”
“ On what grounds? ”
“ That is a long story. Would you like to hear
it? ”


“ No,” said the doctor decisively. “ I am perfectly
innocent, and refuse to be placed in the witness-
box.”
“ Better that than to stand in the dock.”
“You dare to hint that I killed Arthur Gerson ? ”
‘‘lf I do not dare, Mr. Mendle will. You will
have to explain yourself to him or to me. As I am
your friend, don’t you think that it would be better
to be frank at this present moment? ”
‘‘Why are you my friend?” asked Darton
unexpectedly.
To Lady Cobbin’s annoyance and surprise, she
felt her cheeks grow hot and red, and her eyes
dropped. A woman would have guessed what was
in her mind without further evidence, but Darton
being a man, and not an intuitive reader of character,
persisted in his question. She was forced to answer.
“ I don’t think that you are guilty,” she said weakly,
and glanced at him for one swift second. Then her
eyes fell again, and she moved uneasily.
“ Mendle thinks that I am guilty,” said Darton
sharply. “ I should like to know upon what grounds.
You think that I am innocent; for what reason, if
you please?” Lady Cobbin made no answer, and
he continued : ‘‘ln either case there is no evidence.
I firmly believe that. I have nothing to do with the
matter. I stand apart from it, and I refuse to be
dragged into an affair which has nothing to do with
me.”
‘‘Are you sure of that?” asked the woman
significantly.
“ So sure that I must ask you to go.
Milady rose meekly, looking very much the yield-
ing woman. She admired Darton for his unflinching


defence of his position, and felt that here was a
strong man, whom she could love and obey. “ I
shall go at once, since you ask me.”
Dr. Darton opened the door of the consulting-
room politely. “ I wish you a very good day,” he
said in his stiffest manner.
Lady Cobbin moved towards the door, but,
wishing to stay in his presence, made one attempt
to prolong the conversation. “Of course, if Mr.
Mendle dispenses with my services and tells what he
knows to inspector Hake, you must be prepared to
face the worst.”
This remark made Darton quiver. “ Will he dare
to go to the police? ”
” Why not? He believes you to be guilty.”
“ And you ? ”
“ I honestly confess that I came here prepared to
take Mr. Mendle’s view,” she said frankly, and
raised her eyes steadily to look into those of the
young man; ” but, since seeing you, I have changed
my opinion. I believe you to be innocent. I said
so before. It seems to me that we talk in a circle.
I had better go.”
Darton stopped her by closing the door. Now
that she wanted to end the conversation he wished to
continue it. After all, as he rapidly considered, it
would be better to confide in a friend than in an
enemy, and that this strange-looking woman was
anxious to befriend him he saw very plainly, although
he could not guess the reason. “ Before you go,” he
said coldly, ” I should like to hear upon what
grounds Mr. Mendle credits me with the death of his
ward.”
Lady Cobbin sat down, secretly exulting that she


had obtained the satisfaction of remaining in his
presence. “ You were at the Piccadilly Theatre on
the night when the crime was committed?”
“ Certainly I was, but the Piccadilly Theatre is
very far from the place where the murder took place.
I went to the theatre—why should I conceal it now ?
—to meet Miss Gerson. Mr. Mendle, then being her
guardian, would not allow me to enter the house in
Clement Street, so with the connivance of Miss Lane,
we enjoyed stolen meetings in the stalls of the
theatre.”
11 Where did you go after the theatre? ”
“ I explained when unexpectedly called upon to
give evidence at the inquest. 1 left about half-past
ten o’clock, and before the play ended. Miss Lane
was acting in the earlier part of the play and was
expected to return home at that hour. Miss Gerson
wanted to go with her. However, when we came
out, we could not find Miss Lane.”
“ She had gone on to the City in the cab driven
by her half-brother.”
“ So Miss Gerson told me last night,” said Darton
quickly. “ Well, as Miss Lane was away, I placed
Miss Gerson in a hansom and told the driver to take
her to Clement Street. Then I saw a patient, and
afterwards returned home.”
“ At what time did you return home ? ”
“ I was in this room at ten minutes past eleven.
Therefore, Lady Cobbin, you will understand that,
as Arthur Gerson, according to the medical evidence,
was murdered at eleven, I could not have reached
Bloomsbury from the City in so short a time.”
“ No,” murmured Milady, wondering if he was
telling the exact truth or lying to save the situation.
158
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


1 hen I take it that your patient’s house was on the
way to Bloomsbury ? In fact, that you came straight
here,-save for a short visit to your patient? ”
Yes. Darton wiped his face, and an expression
° It; hef passed across it. “My patient is a trades-
man in Charing Cross Road, who lives over his shop.
I came by that way, which leads, as you know, to
Elder Square, almost in a straight line.”
If necessary, you can give me the name of the
patient, I suppose? ”
“Certainly. But I should think that my word
was sufficient, without your questioning my patient.
Such a course would not do me any good.”
“I take your word for it,” said Lady Cobbin
quickly, and not wishing to press the young man
too hard. “ But, of course, should the police inter-
vene, your patient must prove the time of your visit.”
Darton looked at her straightly. “ I count upon
you to prevent the interference of the police,” he said
quietly. “ For me to be mixed up in a murder case
would rum me professionally, and Heaven knows I
have worked hard to get together the small practice
which I possess.”
Quite so, ’ said Milady, nodding. “ I daresav
Mr. Mendle will be satisfied that he is mistaken when
he hears that you can prove an alibi. I shall do my
best to serve you.”
lhank you,” said Darton simply, and wondering
again, as he had wondered before, why she was so
willing to help him. Yet, from the almost tender
tone in wffiich she made the last remark, he might
have guessed the reason for the great interest which
she displayed is his w r ell-being. However, he did
not, and continued—unnecessarily, as Lady Cobbin
159


thought—to defend himself. “And, of course, I
had no reason to kill that wretched boy.”
“Ah, Mr. Mendle thinks otherwise. You know,
I presume, that Arthur Gerson was married?”
“ Yes. Miss Gerson told me last night.”
“ Did she tell you what young Mrs. Gerson said
about certain papers ? ’
Wilfred turned pale. “No,” he stuttered, pain-
fully embarrassed. “ She was not entirely frank
with me. In fact, she rushed out of the room in the
middle of our conversation, so I had to leave the
house. All I knew was that we had parted for
ever.”
“ Well,” said Lady Cobbin, who quite understood
Belinda’s reluctance to give her lover details, which
would mean plain accusation. “ Mrs Gerson stated
that her husband had some papers in a blue envelope
which he said belonged to you. He wished to sell
them to you, in fact, and she understood that he was
to meet you on the night of the murder in order to
return them on payment of a sum of money.”
Darton laughed artificially. “ How ridiculous,’
he said faintly. “ How could a struggling medical
man like myself pay money for any papers, however
important ? ”
“ Did Arthur Gerson have papers that belonged
to you ? ’ ’
“Yes,” Darton admitted reluctantly. “Arthur
Gerson was a thief.”
“ A thief? ”
Darton nodded firmly. “He came into this room
one day when I was absent to speak to me about this
marriage with his sister, as he was very much
against it. Having heard from me that I possessed
160
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


certain family papers, which dealt with a possible
inheritance, he broke open this desk ” Wilfred
tapped the escritoire —“ and stole them. He after-
wards proposed to give them back to me for money.
Of course I could not pay the large sum he asked,
i he matter remained there.”
“Yet the papers were in the blue envelope, and
that was found torn at the feet of the dead man,”
said Lady Cobbin, looking at him in a piercing
manner; also, for some reason, the envelope was a
waterproof one. Can you explain that? ”
I can explain nothing more,” said the young
man rising. “I think I have answered enough
questions. Will you please to go to your employer,
Lady Cobbin, and state the reasons I have given you,
which prove my innocence. Should he invite the
interference of the police, I am quite able to defend
myself.”
“ I think you are,” said Milady, although she was
privately certain that Darton dreaded the authority
of the law. ” And Miss Gerson ? ”
“ We have parted for ever,” said Wilfred, for the
third time.
Perhaps not,” replied the woman consolingly,
although she wished for nothing better. “ You will
allow me to come and see you again? ”
“Certainly. It is extremely kind of you to inte-
rest yourself on my behalf. I shall repay you some
day, if I can.”
“I want no repayment from you,” said Lady
bobbin, as they stood at the door, and her tone was
so unmistakable that Darton coloured like a boy. He
opened the outer door hurriedly.
“Good-day! Good-day! ” he said quickly, and
11


still flushing. Then he closed the door, and Lady
Cobbin found herself shut out from Paradise.
On her way to see Mendle in the City she trod on
air, for, true to her health convictions, Lady Cobbin
walked there along Holborn, and across the Viaduct.
It seemed to her that with Belinda out of the way,
and with Darton dependent upon herself to prove his
innocence, she could not fail to gain him. Deprived
of Belinda’s love, he would naturally turn for con-
solation to some other woman, and why not to one
who was able to save him from arrest, if not from
death? Lady Cobbin was not so blinded by love as
to overlook the flaws in Darton’s defence. He had
plainly stated that Arthur had possessed important
papers, belonging to him, for which the young
scoundrel wanted money; but he had shirked
acknowledging that a meeting had been appointed on
the night of the murder between himself and Gerson
for the delivery of the blue envelope. If Mendle
knew of this omission he would certainly put Hake
on Darton’s track. But Lady Cobbin was firmly
resolved to defend the man she loved, and considered
what she should say to Mendle when she interviewed
him. But, after a time, and long before she reached
Cade Lane, she forgot her profession in her newly-
found passion, and began to dream of a possible
future with Wilfred Darton as her husband. And
yet, before the meeting, no one would have laughed
so loudly as Lady Cobbin at the idea of a woman
falling in love on the instant. To act so impulsively,
she would have decided, would have been due to the
emotional temperament of a fool. Yet she was the
fool, and, strange to say, she enjoyed the sensation
of being one.


Mendle was in his office, as Parley informed the
inquiry-agent. Lady Cobbin looked rather curiously
at the meek, white-haired clerk, who was the father-
in-law of the dead man, and recalled how Ellen had
stated that he had struck her husband for beating
ier. Robert Parley did not look as though he would
harm a fly, and it was strange that so old and
obviously feeble a man should have displayed such
boldness. But the weakest of animals will fight for
eir } onng, and apparently Parley was so wrapped
up m the commonplace pretty girl who had married
is master s ward that he was capable of positive
heroism. However, she had not much time to read
Farley s character in his sheep-like face, for Mendle
appeared at the door of his room and asked her to
step inside. The man looked more lean and haggard
and nervous than ever. Dressed in his rusty black,
with his sickly looks and his small figure, Lady
,° in > who had an eye for a fine man, wondered
that he had the courage to hope that Belinda Gerson,
with five thousand a year, would accept him. But
men are vainer than women, in spite of the generally
held opinion to the contrary.
Well,” said Mendle, closing the office door and
placing a chair for the new-comer,” and what have
you learned ? ”
A great deal,” she answered, pulling off her
r;: 6S - " 1 am thmkin g how much, or how little, I
shall tell you.”
“ a Y °t U mUSt tell me alI »” sna PPed the lawyer.
Am I not your employer ? As I pay the piper, I
call the tune.” F p ’
Lady Cobbin looked at him absently, as though
she had not heard him, and, indeed, she had paid


small attention, being taken up with her own
thoughts. “You want to marry Belinda?” she
said abruptly.
“Yes. I love her, and she has five thousand a
year.”
“ Which you love also. Well, then, I’ll help you
to marry Belinda on one condition.”
“What is that?” Mendle looked surprised at
her tone.
“ That you drop persecuting Dr. Darton.”
“But if he is guilty?”
“ Guilty or not guilty, you must leave him alone.”
“ Then he will marry Belinda, and I’ll be left out
in the cold.”
“ No,” insisted Lady Cobbin ; “ if you follow my
directions, you will marry Belinda Gerson, and Dr.
Darton ” She hesitated, and coloured.
“Well? well? well?” said Mendle impatiently
and suspiciously.
“ He will marry me,” she finished, with an effort.


CHAPTER XIV.
A WOMAN’S LOVE.
Mendle, who liad hitherto been standing, gasped
and collapsed into his seat. Without speaking he
stated at Lady Cobbin, quite bewildered by her
sudden and extraordinary announcement. Of all
the things he expected her to say he least anticipated
this remark. Under his gaze Lady Cobbin moved
uneasily, colouring with a woman’s acute modesty,
and paling with nervous fear. Yet she was the last
person in the world to display nervousness. But
then, with the advent of Darton, the circumstances of
her particular world had changed. As Mendle still
continued to stare as though hypnotised, she broke
the silence.
“ You seem surprised,” she observed, with a
conscious laugh.
1 am thunderstruck,” replied the law r yer, and
then began to smile.
1 his irritated her more than his silence had done.
“ Why do you laugh? Why are you thunder-
struck? she demanded crossly. ” I have not horns
growing out of my head, have I ? ”
“ But to marry Darton is ”
“ Madness,” finished the other tartly. “ Perhaps
it is, according to your standard. Marriage should
mean beauty, and I have none; it should include
money, and he is penniless. 1 am mad to think of
marrying him. I quite agree with you. Neverthe-
less, I intend that he shall become my husband.”


“Have you asked him yet?” demanded Mendle
dryly.
“No! ” She flushed again, and again became
pale. “It is early days yet.”
“ Very early days. I never knew that you were
acquainted with him.”
“ I saw him for the first time this afternoon.”
“ Good Lord I ” Mendle stared harder than ever.
“It is strange, is it not?” said Lady Cobbin,
trying desperately to defend her proposed action.
“ I am an elderly woman, by no means good looking,
and I have hitherto been credited with more sense
than is usually allowed to our sex. Yet here have
I fallen in love like a young girl devoted to penny
novels. I have been subjugated by the looks of a
man, and I am prepared to take him for my husband
without learning if his mind corresponds to his
appearance. You are quite right to laugh, Mr.
Mendle. I should laugh also, were Ito see someone
else in such a quandary. As it is, I suffer.”
“You suffer? Why?”
“Can you ask?” she exclaimed vehemently. I
am neither handsome nor attractive, nor have I any
position, let alone wealth. What have Ito offer
Wilfred Darton ? ”
“ Common sense, which he sadly needs.”
“ I think you are mistaken there. Dr. Darton is
clever, and knows how to deal with the dilemma
in which he finds himself. As to my giving him
common sense, I have none, else I would not let my
business be biassed by my personal feelings.”
“ That means treachery on your part.”
“What do you mean?” asked Lady Cobbin
indignantly.


“ To save him you will sacrifice me.”
“ I don’t understand.”
“ Yes you do. I want to marry Belinda. It is
necessary to obtain her good-will by bringing the
assassin of her brother to the gallows. Obviously,
Darton is the man. Yet, to marry him, you are
prepared to save his neck and, I presume, his
reputation.”
I am. But I offer you a price for him. You
shall marry Belinda if I marry Wilfred.”
Oh,” sneered Mendle, “it has come to
‘ Wilfred ’ I ”
“Don’t laugh,” said Milady pathetically. “I
can’t help my feelings.”
“ But look at yourself in the glass, my good
woman.”
.Mendle had gone too far, and knew it, for he
shrank before the look on her face. “You mean
hound ! ” cried Lady Cobbin, rising to pour out her
wrath on him. “You dare to speak to me like that!
What a beast you are ! Don’t I know my own
imperfections too well. Why should you point them
out? Look at home, Mr. Lewis Mendle; look into
the glass yourself. What have you to offer a pretty,
wealthy girl like Belinda Gerson ? You have no
money, or very little. As to your appearance, you
must be blind not to see yourself as I see you, and
doubtless as Miss Gerson herself beholds you. But
that I needed you, I should leave you this instant
and never speak to you again. Yet, before I go, I
must have your promise to leave Wilfred Darton
alone.”
I shall not,” snarled Mendle, cowering before
her.


Lady Cobbin caught him by his lean shoulders,
and shook him with a fierceness of which he did not
think her capable. “ I’ll shake the breath out of
your body if you don’t do as I tell you,” she said
savagely. ” I tell you that lam in earnest over this
man. Guilty or not, he goes free to marry me.
Will you obey? Will you? will you? will you?”
And, pushing him chair and all against the wall, she
knocked his head with every repetition against the
panelling.
“Oh, Lord! ” gasped the lawyer, “leave me
alone. Yes ! yes ! Only let me go. You’ll kill me.
Ow ! ow ! ” And he gasped as Lady Cobbin gave
him a final knock, and a pretty hard one.
“ You were always a coward,” she said, stepping
back and wiping her hands on her handkerchief, as
though she had been touching an unclean thing;
“ were you a man you would have twisted my neck
before I set hands on you. Well, now that you have
agreed ”
I don’t know that I have. Keep back ! ” He
started to his feet and flung out a pair of quivering
hands. “ I’ll give you in charge for assault. My
clerks are outside. I’ll call them.”
Lady Cobbin contemptuously pushed a small
hand-bell on to the blotting-paper. “ There you
are,” she said scornfully, “ ring them in. Why
don’t you?” seeing him hesitate. “I have no
reputation to lose. lam quite willing to face a
police-court.”
“You are a fury,” grumbled Mendle, but, never-
theless, he sat down without attempting to execute
his threat.
Then don’t rouse the worst that is in me.”


“ Let us talk,” he said, in a businesslike tone.
“ Losing our tempers doesn’t forward matters.”
“ f quite agree with you,” said Lady Cobbin
tartly, ” but you provoked me. Keep a civil tongue
in your head.”
“I discharge you! I discharge you!” said
Mendle, in a white heat of passion at the contempt
of her tone. “Go away at once.”
When 1 am ready,” she retorted, seating herself.
“ Come,” —she struck a sharp blow on the table—
” We will resume our relations—our business rela-
tions. I have come to make my report. I don’t
mind telling you all that I have learned, as you can’t
move without me, and, moreover, between Wilfred
and you, I stand to defend him, and to thwart
you—if you take any steps.”
“ That would seem as though Wilfred, as you call
him, were guilty.”
“ Circumstances look black against him,” admitted
Lady Cobbin reluctantly, “ but they have looked
black before against equally innocent men. Justice
is blind.”
And so is love,” snapped the lawyer. “ Both
Cupid and Themis wear a bandage, and both carry
weapons, and ”
“ Oh, the deuce take your classical allusions,”
interrupted Lady Cobbin, who was very much the
woman at the moment, “ this isn’t business. Will
you hear my report? ”
“Yes,” said Mendle sullenly, but submitting to
the influence of her stronger will. “Go on. I am
listening.”
Milady—for she became Milady the moment her
recital began—related all that had taken place from


the moment she had left Mendle in Golden Square
to go to Clement Street. The lawyer, making im-
pressions on his blotting-paper with a pencil-point,
listened in silence and without raising his eyes.
When she had finished he threw down the pencil
and looked at her squarely.
“ All that you have told me goes to prove that
Darton is guilty.”
“ I said that things looked black against him,” she
confessed.
“ Undoubtedly he met Arthur on that night and
strangled him to gain possession of those papers.”
“ You can’t prove that.”
“ Why, Arthur told Belinda, and ”
“ That is second-hand evidence. You will have to
get a confession from Wilfred himself that he met
Arthur Gerson. And he won’t make it; I won’t allow
him to make it.”
‘‘You would obstruct the law?”
“ I would ruin the whole world to save Wilfred.”
“ Ah, then, you admit that it is needful to save
him? ”
“ I have admitted it—to you. But I admit it to no
one else.”
“ But suppose I act on this information?”
“ Then I’ll ruin you,” said Lady Cobbin, looking
at him desperately.
“ You can’t.”
‘‘Can’t I? That remains to be seen. At all events
I’ll prevent your marriage with Belinda.”
“ How can you do that?” demanded Mendle, chuck-
ling. ‘‘ You know nothing against me. I am not
afraid of you.”
“ I daresay,” she rejoined contemptuously, ‘‘you
170
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


have always done your dirty work with great secrecy.”
“ Oh, no! I left my dirty work to you on all
occasions.”
“ Do you want your head banged again?” asked
Lady Cobbin in a threatening tone. “ Because you
will have it, if you don’t mind.”
“ How can you prevent my marriage with
Belinda?” asked the lawyer irrelevantly,
”By bringing her and Wilfred together again.
They have parted.”
“No!” Mendle looked delighted. ‘‘Then she
thinks ”
‘‘ 1 don’t know what she thinks, and I don’t care.
As things stand, 1 am glad they have parted, because
I love and wish to marry the man. But if you intend
to hurt him, I’ll sacrifice myself to save him—that is,
I’ll see Miss Gerson and get her to marry Darton.”
‘‘Humph! He may spend his honeymoon in
prison.”
Possibly, but you will lose your chance of getting
live thousand a year, besides the girl you profess to
love. Well ” —she paused, and as Mendle made no
reply, went on—“ I take it that you are prepared to
work along with me.”
‘‘What do you propose to do?” asked Mendle
sulkily.
“ I propose to marry Wilfred and to make Belinda
marry you.”
But what about the discovery of the assassin ?”
I’ll think of what is best to be done,” said Lady
Cobbin, rising. “ I may tell you that, in spite of
circumstantial evidence, I don’t believe that Wilfred
murdered Arthur Gerson.”
“ Why don’t you believe it?”


“ He is not that sort of man,” she replied hesita-
tingly.
“ Love is blind,” chuckled Mendle again. “ 1
could astonish you ”
“In what way ?” she demanded swiftly.
“In the way you least expect,”
“Ah ! You have some evidence against Wilfred ?”
“ Perhaps. But at present 1 sha’n’t tell you any-
thing about it.”
“ Why not?”
“ Because Belinda comes here in half an hour.
When I have seen her I may tell you what I have
discovered.”
“ I see; you know enough to force her to accept
you?”
“Yes, 1 do. She leaves this office as my promised
wife, or ”
“ Or you make things unpleasant for Wilfred. I
understand.”
“ No, you don’t. I have acknowledged nothing.”
“ Pooh !” said Lady Cobbin, pulling on her gloves
and going to the door with a shrug. “ You daren’t
move without me. I have your promise to leave
Wilfred alone.”
“Yes,” said Mendle promptly, “we must work
together to bring about what we want.”
“ The marriages?”
“ The marriages, of course,” said Mendle, smiling
confidentially, and Lady Cobbin went out. She was
quite sure that Mendle required her services to fulfil
his wishes, and therefore had no fear that he would
move in any hostile way against Wilfred.
Mendle sat for a long time at his desk after she
retired, leaning his head on his hands and thinking


deeply. So far he was extremely pleased at the way
in which events were shaping. But he was not sur-
prised, as he had long foreseen what would happen,.
Darton was certainly in a difficult position. Belinda
apparently believed him to be guilty, and Lady
Cobbin had set her heart on marrying him. Owing to
circumstances, he would assuredly be forced to act as
both Mendle and Lady Cobbin wished. If he rebelled,
he would run a very good chance of being arrested,
and, once in gaol, it would not be easy for him to
prove his innocence. Things being thus, Belinda,
bereft of her lover, would fall an easy prey to the man
who held that lover’s fate in his hands. And Mendle,
supported by Lady Cobbin’s cleverness, felt that he
was the man.
When the time came for Belinda to appear in the
dingy old office, Mendle made a sort of perfunctory
toilette. He washed his hands and touched up his
spare hair, and settled his black tie, and brushed his
untidy clothes. He really did love the girl, apart
from the fact that she now possessed the money he had
lost, and wished to appear at his best in her eyes. But
on looking—according to Lady Cobbin’s advice—in
the small mirror, which dangled over the office wash-
stand, he was obliged to confess that he was not
handsome. However, he hoped that power and brains
would serve in place of mere good looks, whereby he
could secure his ends.
Shortly after the appointed hour Miss Gerson
arrived. She was arrayed in expensive furs, and
looked as dainty as though she had stepped out of a
Christmas card. Certainly her face was extremely
pale, and her eyes showed the traces of tears, but the
resigned look she wore suited her pensive face, and


etherealised her beauty. The thought passed through
Mendle’s restless mind that no one could possibly be
as holy as Belinda Gerson looked.
“ I was surprised to get your wire,” he said gently,
and when she was seated in a comfortable chair; “it
is not usual for me to receive ladies in this dull office.
Why did you not call on me in Rutland-square ?”
“ I could not wait,” confessed the girl, with a weary
sigh, “ you left your rooms early, and so I sent that
wire saying I would come here this afternoon. I
have much to say.”
“About pleasant things, I trust,” said Mendle
politely.
Belinda looked at him sadly. “There are no
pleasant things in my life now,” she said in almost a
tearful tone. Then she braced herself up. “I have
come to talk to you about Wilfred.”
“ Yes,” said Mendle cautiously, and waited.
“You have engaged that woman ——”
“ Lady Cobbin ?”
“ Milady, the inquiry-agent,” said Belinda coldly.
“ Why not give her the professional name she uses?
Well, you have engaged her, and she called yesterday.
Ellen Parley also called, saying that she was Arthur’s
wife. Are you astonished ?”
“ Oh, dear me, no,” replied Mendle easily. “ Lady
Cobbin, or Milady, if you will, has just been here to
tell me everything.”
“ Did she tell you that she suspected Wilfred?”
asked Belinda suddenly, and looked piercingly at her
former guardian.
“ She did, and on very good grounds. They
are ”
“ I don’t want to hear them,” interrupted the girl,
174
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


much moved “ I know that things looked black
against Wilfred ’’—she unconsciously used the very
words of the inquiry agent —“ and now it is thought
that he met Arthur on that night, about ”
“ He did meet him,” said Mendle, slipping his
hand into a drawer of the desk. “ You know that Mrs.
Gerson lives with her father, Parley, my clerk. Well,
then, Arthur stopped there also at times, although he
kept his marriage secret lest I should be obliged to
exercise the provision of the will, which forbade him to
marry. He there received a letter from Dr. Darton.”
“ A letter! ” breathed Belinda, almost fainting.
“ Yes. Parley found it in the waste-paper basket—
a portion of it only. Here is the torn scrap.” Mendle
produced it. “ You will see that Dr. Darton writes
that he will meet Arthur, according to appointment, at
the top of Shore Lane at half-past eleven o’clock. The
explanation for the reason of the meeting is torn off.
as is the signature. But you can recognise the
writing.”
“ Yes. Still, that letter, while showing that Wil-
fred went to meet Arthur, also shows that he is
innocent. Arthur was murdered at eleven.”
Mendle smiled, and put away the precious scrap of
paper with care. “ I remember that, at the inquest,
Darton confessed that he had left the theatre early.
After putting you in a cab, he might easily have met
Arthur at eleven instead of half-past. He might easily
have been hanging round the spot. Arthur, on his
way in the cab to me, might have passed Shore Lane
earlier, and on seeing Darton may have stopped to
speak to him.”
“You forget that Harriet was in the cab,” said
Belinda, sharply.


“No. She confessed to me that she left it some time
before the hour of eleven o’clock. The cab broke
down at the top of Shore Lane ’’
“ Arthur stopped it you mean, and made the excuse
of a breakage to get rid of Harriet.”
“ I daresay,” chuckled Mendle. “ And that proves
my contention as regards the murder having been com-
mitted by Darton. However, there is no need for
you and Ito worry. I can hand this to the police ”
he touched the drawer containing the torn letter —
“ they can deal with it.”
“ No! No!” cried Belinda, wildly, “ it might hang
Wilfred.”
“ I am quite certain it will,” said Mendle un-
pleasantly.
“ Destroy it,” she gasped, “ destroy it, and ”
“ And what?”
“ And I’ll marry you.”


CHAPTER XV.
A FORLORN HOPE.
So Belinda had surrendered, after all, and in a most
unexpected way. Mendle had long; foreseen that he
would bring her to this point, but he had anticipated
that she would make a fight for it. Without doubt,
she believed that her lover was guilty, else she would
have made an effort to repel her new wooer and retain
the old one. But the production of that incriminat-
ing letter making the appointment between the dead
man and his supposed murderer had clinched the
matter. It was with open joy that Mendle received
the promise of marriage.
You will become my wife?” he said, starting to
his feet.
eS ’ sa Belinda, W ith a weary sigh, “to save
Wilfred.”
Does my love count for nothing?” said Mendle,
disappointed and therefore exacting in his demands. ’
Oh, for heaven’s sake, do not let us talk of love I”
cried the girl restlessly, and looked at him in anything
but an amiable way. ”To save Wilfred I pay your
price. That is enough.”
<< T OU talk as thou g h w e were making a bargain.”
t • n< l are We n ° t? f S there an 7 t hing about you,
Lewis, that I should desire you as my husband?”
‘ I have been your true friend and faithful
guardian,”
“ I do not deny that,” replied Belinda generously.
12
177


<■ Seeing that you had full control of the money, you
have behaved very well. I always admitted that and
always defended you when Arthur abused you. Also,
when you lost the money, you paid it over without a
murmur.” .
“ I did,” said Mendle, quite moved by his honesty.
“ Yet it would have been easy for me to have invested
the capital in foreign stock and to have left England.
I have been scrupulously straight with the money,
therefore I deserve some reward.’
“You are getting what you desire,” she repne
scornfully; “ my hand and my fortune.”
“ I also wish for your heart.
“ That belongs to Wilfred.”
“ What! to a criminal?”
Belinda clenched her hands and gasped,
have no right to say that he is a criminal. ”
Mendle laughed bitterly. “ Were he not you would
refuse to become my wife. It is because you believe
him to be guilty that you are so ready to accept my
terms.” , . .
“ So long as I have accepted them there is no need
to discuss my reasons,” declared Belinda with great
dignity.
Mendle should have been warned by her manner no
to probe too deeply; but the unsatisfied hunger of his
heart prompted him to persist in demanding c
impossible. “ I want love,” he said plaintively;
want your love.”
“ Love I” cried Belinda indignantly, ‘‘ you do not
know the meaning of the Lewis, lo you lo\C
means possession, to me it reads sacrifice. If > ou
really and truly loved me you would be prepared to
surrender my hand and to help Wilfred without
178
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


hesitation. But your love is simply a selfish emotion
winch moves you to gain your own ends, irrespective
o the pain you may cause to me, whom you say that
you love. I don’t want to marry you, but lam willing
to do so in order to save Wilfred. I have said so twice
before, and yet you still hold me to my promise.”
;; Because I adore you,” he pleaded.
, " You adore no on e save yourself,” she retorted.
You are a Shylock of love. Well ”—she flung out
her hands ” here is your pound of flesh, my good
Jew. lake it, and with it a broken-hearted woman.”
“ You speak wildly.”
“ I speak from my heart. And let me remind you,
it you insist upon sober conversation, (hat you have
not yet agreed to my proposal.”
“ What proposal ?”
That letter must be destroyed at once.”
Pardon me; when we are married.”
“ Ah,” she exclaimed scornfully and bitterly, “ VO u
do not trust me.” J 3
“] d ° not : Wh y sh ™ ld I, when you confess to
still loving that man ?”
" Wh J sh ° uld 1 not love him ?Heis in difficulties,
and needs a friend to help him. In only one way can
d °*°’ a f d that 15 b y averting suspicion from him.”
out if he is guilty ?”
eIS n< * S uilt y- 1 swear that he is not guilty.”
1 hen why do you act as though he were?”
Mendle not unnaturally asked, struck by her
vehemence. 3
Belinda leaned her head wearily on her hand, and
e ,ow on the desk . as she answered. “ I admit
that the circumstantial evidence is strong against
him, she said in a low voice. “ I cannot help seeing


that. It is my heart that will not allow me to accuse
him. The man I love can never be guilty of a vile
murder.”
“ Will you tell me precisely what are the circum-
stances to which you allude ? asked Mendle, seating
himself, and speaking coldly.
“ I think you know them, else you would not have
engaged Milady to hunt down Wilfred. On the night
of die murder, when Arthur—wretched boy—was at
dinner, he declared, being excited with drink, that he
was going to disgrace Wilfred.”
“ In what way ?”
“ I cannot tell you that,” said Miss Gerson rapidly.
“ I implored him all the way to the theatre to tell me
exactly what he meant. But he was more sober then,
and refused to speak even as freely as he had done.
All I could gather was that he had appointed to meet
Wilfred on that night in order to come to some agree-
ment with him. If Wilfred did not agree, Arthur
said that he would disgrace him, and so stop my
marriage. He left me at the theatre, an
there Wilfred joined me in the stalls,
told him what my brother had said, and he
merely laughed, saying that Arthur could not
hurt him, and was only trying to frighten me into
marriage with Sir Samuel Embers. Wilfred confessed
that he was to meet Arthur on that night, and said that
if any quarrel took place he would come and tell me at
Clement Street, however late the hour. That was why
I waited up, and why, on seeing you with Harriet,
asked if it was Wilfred. I mistook you for him.
“ I understand. And then?”
“ You accused both Harriet and myself of knowing
about the murder. We did not. But remembering
180
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


how Arthur had boasted, and what Wilfred had said
about a possible quarrel, I saw in a flash that Wilfred
might be accused,”
“ In fact, you guessed that Darton was guilty?”
“I did, heaven forgive me!” cried Belinda
vehemently; “ I did believe that for one moment —but,
on reflection, I could not believe that he had committed
a crime. Nor do I believe it now. I fainted when
you mentioned those papers, and said that you would
tell the police, for Arthur had also mentioned the
papers.”
“ Did he say what was set forth in them ?”
“ N°- I tell you he said very little. You accused
me of committing the crime ”
Pardon me,” interrupted the solicitor swiftly, “ I
did not accuse you myself. I simply reported Embers’
accusation.”
” On the strength of my foolish speech to Arthur,”
said Belinda in a scornful tone. “ I spoke wildly, as
I confessed, but I don’t think, Lewis, that you ever
believed me to be guilty.”
“ No, I did not ”
“ But you were willing to believe,” she cried, start-
ing up with her face crimson and her eyes flashing.
“You hoped by threatening me to bring about this
wretched marriage. Had I been the weak girl that
you thought I was —the girl I was forced by my help-
less position to feign to be—you would have
accomplished your object. But as I defied you, more
or less, you cast about for another way of gaining your
ends, and so set Milady on Wilfred’s track. Well,
this time you have been successful. He is innocent,
but you can hang him through sheer circumstantial
evidence. \ou shall not; and to prevent you I have


consented to sacrifice myself. Last night I dismissed
Wilfred out of my life; to-day I bring you into it, as
my husband. But if you move one step in the
direction which will bring harm to the man I love, I
break my promise. Now you know.” She buttoned
her fur coat slowly and pulled down her veil. ‘ 1 There
is no more to be said.”
“ You have certainly spoken very plainly,” said
Mendle, biting his white lips, “ and have made me out
to be quite a villain.”
“ I don’t call you that,” said Belinda, pausing at
the door; “ but I think that you are a hard man, else
you would not insist upon my becoming your wife.”
“ Am I so objectionable?” he asked wrathfully.
“To me you are —as a husband, but not in any
other way. But lam helpless in the grip of circum-
stances, as Wilfred is. You can arrange about the
marriage when you like and where you like. But
before the ceremony takes place you will burn that
incriminating letter before my eyes.”
“ After the ceremony,” insisted the would-be
husband.
“ Before it,” said Belinda firmly, “ else I shall not
marry you.”
Mendle hesitated. He was astonished at her firm-
ness, and, since she was so willing to sacrifice herself,
he agreed to do what she wanted. If, indeed, she
played him false at the eleventh hour, and after the
letter was destroyed, he might be able in some way to
bring disaster on the dismissed lover. It will be seen
that Mendle quite forgot his agreement with Lady
Cobbin, and for the moment he forgot everything else,
including the disgrace of this wooing by threats. The
sight of Belinda’s pale face and beautiful eyes, and the


knowledge that he had loved her hopelessly for years,
sent him mad. Now that he had gained what he had
long wished for, he desired her to show that love
which she was far from feeling.
“ I agree to destroy the letter before the ceremony,”
he said, walking to where she stood at the door, and
speaking hoarsely, “ but as I am so willing to do what
you want, surely—surely ” he paused.
“ Surely what?” asked Belinda, not guessing what
he meant.
“ Surely you will kiss me.” Then, as she started
back with a look of absolute repulsion on her face, his
long-repressed passion got the better of him, and he
essayed to fling his arms round her. Belinda pushed
him back fiercely and with a cry of horror.
If you dare to kiss me Til kill you where you
stand.”
You spoke like that to Arthur,” he said between
his teeth.
” And I say it to you,” she rejoined determinedly;
” we will be husband and wife in name only, since you
want my money. But if you ever dare to behave as
you have done, I’ll—Til——” She panted and glared
in a way which frightened him. And Mendle, as has
been seen, was a terrible coward. With a tittering
laugh to cover his confusion, he tried to be poetical.
“ Your lips ”
“ Are sacred to Wilfred Barton’s kiss,” she said
clearly and coldly, and the next moment she was gone,
leaving the lawyer raging but impotent. He could do
nothing with this girl.
” By heaven, Til have that man hanged I” he cried
childishly.
But saner counsels prevailed when he remembered


the agreement made with Lady Cobbin and the reck-
less character of that person. Still with a keen desire
to inflict hurt upon the Doctor, he sat down there and
then to write a letter, saying that he was going to
marry Miss Gerson in February, and hoped that
Darton would be at the wedding. The lawyer knew
that hanging itself would be less painful to the young
man. In this way, and by inflicting vicarious l pain,
did Mendle punish Belinda for the scorn she had
displayed.
Mendle would have been more than satisfied had he
seen the Doctor’s face next morning when the letter
came to hand. Darton could scarcely believe his eyes
when he read the; insulting missive. But he was
forced to think that his rival wrote truly, as the whole
behaviour of Belinda gave colour to the cruel state-
ment. But Darton did not rave under the blow, as
Mendle had done when angered. His face grew
paler and he ate no breakfast. After a cup of strong
coffee, he sat down to consider what was best to be
done, and finally decided to send a telegram to the
address of Milady in Golden Square, which she had
given him. He felt that her sympathy would be of
help to him at this crisis. Also he wished to ask her
what chance there was of rescuing Belinda from the
clutches of the persistent lawyer, who had so easily
obtained his own way.
Certainly when the wire was sent Darton felt a trifle
nervous as to the visit. Lady Cobbin had looked at
him in a very peculiar way when they had last parted.
Wilfred, being handsome and attractive, was used to
the reckless love-making of women, and was not with-
out experience in putting them off when their
attentions became too pressing. But he knew that


Lady Cobbin was clever, and knew also that she was
much stronger-willed than the average members of her
sex. It would not be so easy to thwart her desire to
make love, since she had a virile dash in her character,
which rendered her domineering and persistent.
Darton was strong, but Lady Cobbin, as he thought,
might be stronger. For the moment he was tempted
to adopt his tactics of the previous day and go out.
Then he resolved to stay and face whatever difficulties
the coming interview might hold. Finally and
immediately before Lady Cobbin arrived, he laughed
at himself for being a conceited ass. The woman,
he hoped and trusted and tried to make himself believe,
might mean nothing serious. A mere flirtation might
satisfy her, although Darton did not feel disposed in
his present unhappy state to go even so far as platonic
philandering.
Lady Cobbin was much fluttered when she received
the wire asking her to call at mid-day, and wondered
what it might mean. Darton was in trouble, as she
readily surmised; but since Mendle had promised to
make no move, the trouble could not be connected with
the exercise of the law.
It never occurred to Lady Cobbin that Belinda had
so easily accepted Mendle, and still less did it cross her
mind that, to inflict pain, the lawyer had so rapidly
communicated his triumph to his rival. She put all
other business aside and came post haste to Elder
Square with her heart on fire. Poor woman, what
with her fears and hopes and doubts, and a certain
amount of shame that she had allowed her emotions to
master her, she felt as nervous and timid as a young
girl.
Dr. Darton received her in his bare consulting-room


with a perfectly pale and unemotional face. His
nature was a strong one, but it needed all his will-
power to restrain himself. Alter a chilly greeting,
which tormented the unruly heart of the elderly
woman, he handed her the letter in silence. Lady
Cobbin fixed in her eye-glass to read it, and after
doing so returned the epistle to him.
“Well?” asked Darton interrogatively.
“It is strange,” gasped out Milady, looking
anywhere but into his anxious face. She could not
say more from sheer emotion. That Mendle should
have gained his ends so quickly, and that he should
have communicated them to Darton on the instant,
forced her to come to an understanding with the
Doctor earlier than she judged it wise. It had been
her intention to play the part of a sympathising friend,
and to place her brains at his disposal to rescue him
from the position he was in, before venturing on the
dangerous ground of love. But Mendle’s action
forced her hand. Unless she struck quickly and hard,
Darton, in despair at losing Belinda, might go
elsewhere for consolation. And Lady Cobbin’s
experience of the world led her to see that a handsome
young doctor would not need to go far for a female
sympathiser. If that especial one happened to be rich
and beautiful, then she—Lady Cobbin—would be left
out in the cold. Taking these unexpected circum-
stances into consideration, the woman decided to put
her fortunes to the test.
Darton looked at her coldly when she gasped out her
reply. “I do not think that it is strange at all,” he
remarked. “ Belinda evidently thinks that lam
guilty, and to save Mendle from bringing the police
on me, is foolishly sacrificing herself.”


“ She could not give a greater proof of love,”
protested Lady Cobbin, and protested reluctantly,
since she had no wish to cry up her rival.
Darton shrugged his shoulders and put away the
letter. “ What is to be done ?” he asked despairingly.
“ Your character must be cleared.”
‘‘ln what way ?”
“ Tell me everything that you know, and I’ll help
you.”
“ You are very kind,” said Darton in a low tone,
and leaning his head on his hand.
“ Who would not be kind to you ?” she asked softly.
Darton looked up, and his face grew crimson. “ I
do not understand,” he said rashly, and thus brought
Lady Cobbin to the point.
“ I am a fool,” she said abruptly.
‘‘ I hope not,” said Darton with emphasis, and
feeling himself a prig.
“ I quite believe that,” she answered, quite
cool and composed, for despair made her master her
feelings. It was ticklish work playing this fish
“ But, after all, I can help you.”
‘‘ It may not be necessary,” said Darton hopefully.
“ It is very necessary,” said the woman earnestly.
“ Mendle is very cunning, and he hates you. In one
way or another he may accomplish your ruin. I can
save you. If I do, will you—will you—” She paused.
Darton rose, feeling the strain of the situation.
“ We can talk of this another time,” he said quickly.
“ No; I can’t wait. I am a fool, and—and—oh,
what must you think of me ? But I want to —I want to
—oh, Wilfred, will you marry me?”


CHAPTER XVI.
THE TELEGRAM.
Dr. Darton did not laugh, as Mendle had done, nor
did he even look confused. This was creditable,
considering the circumstances, for it is rarely that a
woman summons up courage to propose. The moment
the fatal words were said Lady Cobbin turned violently
crimson, and covered her shameful face with her
hands. It was painful to see the strong, self-rehant
woman reduced to such a condition. But the Doctor,
from experience of the sex, was unmoved, and to set
her at ease, if possible, he assumed that the offer of
marriage which she had just made him was quite an
everyday occurrence.
“ I am sorry that I cannot, Lady Cobbin,” he said
in a kind tone, “ as all my love has been given for the
past two years to Belinda. You would not like me to
marry you without love?”
“ No,” assented Lady Cobbin, without removing
her hands. “ And I had no right to speak as I have
done. What must you think of me ?”
“ I think that you are a good woman,” said Darton
promptly.
Milady let her hands drop, and looked at him in
astonishment. ‘‘Good I” she echoed faintly, ‘‘and
when I have behaved so selfishly.”
“ Have you behaved selfishly 7”
“ I think so. Here am I, an elderly woman, with
neither beauty nor wealth nor position, proposing to
you.”


“ And what am I ?-a young man «ho to Ws way
to make in the world. 1 take your proposal as aco
Plimfnt; although,” added Darton. trying to conceal
a smile “ it was somewhat sudden. .
‘ And extremely foolish,” sard Lady Cobbr .
searching in vain from the expression of his face to
learn what he truly thought of her mad act - Doctor
“We cannot always be wise, parne
bk La U dy Cobbin reflected for a moment. “Are you
„ot amazed that a woman such as I am, should behave
S °TdmO think that you have behaved wrongly
Let us say that your proposal is unusual, since
nrrvrvinp - is usually left to the man.
are you not amazed she persisted, so angry
with herself that she wanted to feel P a '"‘ A
man she loved so suddenly, and so ardently asjfl
believed —could easily inflict pain by cu g P
and cold looks. She received neither.
” I am not so amazed as an ordinary person would
be, Lady Cobbin.”
“ Xo'answer you exhaustively would mean an
exposition of my beliefs, Lady Cobbin. But I can
answer your question in a way by stating
was still in the dark as to his
ItaUeve in karma,” continued Darton, reciting
his creed as it were, “ and consider ‘hat the circum-
stances of our present life are made by the acts of a
previous existence. It may be that we were together
in a former life—we may have crossed each others
189
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


path —and feelings may have been engendered which
brought about your late speech.”
“ Mutually engendered ?” she asked, timidly.
Darton suppressed another smile. “ 1 think not —
at least not in the way you mean. But my feelings
towards you are capable of being those of a comrade.
“ Of a friend, you mean ?”
“ Comradeship means more than friendship. 1
should not ask a friend to help me in any strait, as I
dislike being under an obligation even to my best
friend. But ” —he paused to emphasise the words —
“ I would come to you for help. In fact 1 come now.”
Lady Cobbin smiled faintly and began to feel less
ashamed of her outburst, which had been made against
her better judgment. But now, thanks to the skilful
management of the Doctor, her emotions were well
under control, and she was able to look him in the
face. “ I think that you are a good man,” she said
fervently.
“ I try to be, but I frequently fail,” he replied with
a sigh. “ I can return the compliment more truthfully
by saying that you are a good woman, lam certain
of that.”
‘‘You said that I was a good woman some moments
ago,” observed Lady Cobbin, finding this man to be
somewhat of an enigma. “ How do you know i And
yet, if you knew what I ” She stopped, biting
her lip.
Darton hastened to prevent a painful confession by
anticipation. “ I say that you are a good woman, ’’ he
remarked, “ because you have not taken advantage of
my position. Were you bad, you would only have
accepted my refusal with the intention of ruining me
because you could not get the moon you cried for.”


“ But I did make conditions,” she urged, resolved
to abase herself to the very dust in her humility.
“ Very kind ones, Lady Cobbin. You offered o
help me if I married you, but you did not threaten rum
if I refused.”
Milady bit her lip again. She knew that such a base
thought had been in her mind and that Darton guessed
as much. But the clever way in which he was saving
her pride and acquitting her of bad motives made the
position, which she had brought about herself, much
easier. It was in her mind to tell how mean she had
intended to be, but a glance at the man’s kindly face
prevented the shame of such a confession. After all,
he might not have guessed to what lengths she had
been prepared to go to gain his name, and she did not
wish to fall lower in his opinion. “We cannot help
our feelings,” she said, in apology.
“ I agree with you,” he said quickly. “ But now
that we understand one another better, shall we be
comrades ?”
Lady Cobbin placed her hand on her heart and tried
to control herself. “But I love you,” she remon-
strated weakly.
“ I know. I feel honoured by your preference.
But love, I take it, wishes well to the object it loves.”
“ I don’t call you an object,” said Lady Cobbin,
trying to laugh.
Wilfred did laugh. “My fatal beauty, I suppose,”
he said coolly. “ Oh, Lady Cobbin, I should have
thought you to be a stronger woman than to be
influenced by external signs.”
“ But I have been right in so doing ; you are good.”
“ Don’t flatter me,” he said, still laughing in order
to save the very awkward fact that she was trenching


on dangerous ground again. “ I assure you that lam
no better than my neighbours. As to your love, I
accept it, if ” —he looked at her keenly—“ if you will
prove that it is more than a word.”
“ I’ll prove it in any way you like.”
“ Then ” —he looked at her again—“ help me to
marry Belinda.”
“Oh I” Lady Cobbin turned pale, and her hand-
kerchief went to her lips. “ You set me a hard task,”
“ The harder the task that is done by love, the truer
is that love.”
“ You are a very terrible man,” she said, smiling
wanly, “ and very drastic in your methods.”
“ My dear lady, it is best to grasp a nettle strongly.
To a weaker woman I should not talk in this way.
But you are strong, and can turn a selfish love into
something altruistic. I want a friend, as you know,
and very badly. Will you be that friend?”
She longed to accept, and yet the tyrannous passion
which possessed her, and against her will, forced
excuses to her lips. “ How can I ” Darton
stopped her. “ Believe me, I am placing you on a
very high level indeed,” he said impressively.
“ Many women can love, but few are capable of true
comradeship. I ask for much, but lam certain that
your nature is a sufficiently strong one to give me what
I ask.”
“ And that is ?”
“ True, staunch comradeship, as I have been saying
for the last ten minutes. I would not ask another
woman, but I ask you. And why? Because I see in
you the stuff of which great rulers are made: I see in
you a soul which aspires.”
“ You talk in a very extraordinary manner.”
192
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ I do, because I believe differently to most people.
However, I think that we have discussed our feelings
and the position sufficiently. lam waiting: to hear
how you can help me to marry Belinda.”
“ Oh, how can I —how can I ?”
“ By being worthy of the heart you possess.”
“ My heart,” she cried, pressing her hands against
her breast and becoming all the woman, “ I am
supposed to have none. I married when young, and
my husband broke my heart with his cruelty. His
family do not recognise my existence. I am poor :
I have to engage in a shady business to keep the roof
over my head. Ask anyone, and you will be told
that lam a wicked woman —a hard woman—a
“ You are neither wicked nor hard; you are my
friend, my comrade,” and Darton grasped her hand
warmly.
Lady Cobbin was conquered, although her passion
still continued unabated. But this man had roused
her will, had awakened the better part of her nature,
and she then and there turned the lower instinct into
high aspiration; she purified her love, and it became
more noble, more unselfish, more sacrificing. Virtue
was its own reward, as usual, and she felt elevated by
the victory. Without a word she grasped the kind
hand placed within her own, and silently the two
completed their bond of friendly union.
After a pause, while the situation adjusted itself,
Lady Cobbin spoke in her business-like way. “ Will
you answer me a question ?”
“ A dozen if you like,” said Darton, as officially.
“ Did you meet Arthur Gerson on that night?”
“ I had an appointment to do so at half-past eleven,
but when I went to the place at that hour he was not
13


there. I waited till twelve and after; then I came
home.”
“Ah,” Lady Cobbin smiled, somewhat wearily.
“You said when we last spoke that you were in this
room at ten minutes past eleven.”
“ The instinct of self-protection,” said Wilfred
coolly; ‘‘then I was speaking to an inquiry-agent;
now I confess to my friend.”
“ To your comrade,” corrected Milady quickly, and
she began to find the bond of help between them very
sweet. “ But why did Arthur Gerson wish to see
you ?”
‘‘You have already guessed. He possessed certain
papers, which he desired to sell to me at a price too
large for my purse. I told you this before.”
“Yes,” she replied significantly, “ but you did not
tell me what was contained in the papers.”
Darton looked at the carpet. “ I have every wish
to be frank with you,” he said in a low voice, flushing
crimson, “ and I trust you thoroughly. But I must
ask you to let me keep the secret of the papers for a
few days. Then you shall know all.”
Lady Cobbin proved the strength of her comrade-
ship by not even asking him the reason for this
strange retention of evidence. “ Certainly, Dr.
Darton. You shall tell me when and where you like.
But have you the papers now ?”
“ No. They were in that blue envelope which you
described—in the torn envelope which was found in
the cab. From that I judge that the assassin must
now possess them.”
“ Do you know of anyone who wanted them ?”
Ido not. They were of importance only to me.


I cannot believe that the unfortunate boy was
murdered for the sake of those papers.”
‘‘Yet they were taken out of the envelope,” said
Lady Cobbin, perplexed.
“ I know that, and I cannot explain.”
‘‘You will not ?”
“ I cannot. Believe me, I am telling you every-
thing with the utmost frankness. It is my most ardent
desire that the assassin should be found, so that my
character may be cleared.”
“ And when it is cleared ?”
“ I shall be able to prevent Belinda sacrificing
herself in this absurd way to Mendle, who hates me.”
Lady Cobbin heaved a sigh on hearing that this
would be the termination of her labours to save him;
but, loyal to her new bond, she suppressed further
signs of emotion. “Of course, if you knew who
wanted the papers, that would go a long way towards
identifying the assassin.”
“I am sure it would. But Ido not know of anyone
who even knew about the papers, save Arlhur
Gerson.”
“ He may have shown them to someone.”
“ Even then, what they contained would not have
made one man murder another for their possession.”
“ Would the production of the papers—say, to
Belinda, have prevented your marriage?”
Darton rose and swayed to and fro on his toes, again
flushing. “ I have asked myself that question again
and again, but without having been able to obtain
a plausible answer,” he said, with emotion. “I am
sorry now that I did not show them to Belinda.
Perhaps she would have understood.”
“ Understood what?”
195
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ Ah, now you want to know my secret,” he said,
with a forced smile.
“No! no!” she disclaimed hurriedly; “but, of
course, my ignorance of what you call your secret
places me at a disadvantage in dealing with the case.
If Arthur was murdered for those papers, the contents
might hint at the assassin.”
“ Believe me, no. lam acquainted with the con-
tents of the stolen papers, and cannot guess why they
were stolen, still less why Arthur should have been
murdered for their possession. I don’t believe he
was,” ended Darton firmly.
“ Well,” said Lady Cobbin, surrendering the point
with a smile, “ let me ask another question. Where
were you to meet Arthur Gerson ?”
“ In a very strange place,” said Darton, looking
puzzled; “ at the top of Shore Lane, in the City —you
know, one of those lanes which lead in a sloping
direction to the Thames.”
Lady Cobbin started. “ And at half-past eleven ?”
“ Yes. Why do you start ?”
“ Miss Lane,” said Lady Cobbin, wrinkling her
brow and putting in her eye-glass to see him the more
clearly, “ told me that the cab stopped at the top of a
lane leading down to the river. It was there that she
left the cab. Whether she knew Arthur or not I
cannot say. She declares that she took him to be
Embers. But it was strange that the cab should stop
there before the appointed time.”
“ I agree with you,” said the doctor promptly,
“as strange as that Arthur should appoint such a
meeting-place. He could have called on me here to
deliver the papers.”
196
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“Yes, he could. Were you prepared to buy
them ? ”
“No. He asked two thousand pounds, and 1 have
as many pence. I went to meet him in the hope of
getting him to give them up, since they were of no
value to him.”
“ Then why did he steal them ?”
“ Because he hoped by their aid to stop my marriage
with Belinda. They were of value to him so far, but
I meant that they were not valuable to him: in a
pecuniary sense. I intended to point that out to him,
in the hope that he would see reason and give them
up.”
“ And you did not see him on that night i ”
“ I did not, although I waited from half-past eleven
until some minutes after twelve. \he night was
bitterly cold, and so I came home, weary of waiting in
the snow.”
“ Did you see anyone lurking about the meeting-
place?”
“No one, save a policeman or two. So as not to
attract suspicion, I moved about and walked up and
down the lane. It ends in a wharf piled with deal
boxes.”
“ And you were to meet him at the top of Shore
Lane?”
“At the entrance from the street. Why he should
choose such a meeting-place is beyond my under-
standing. But I said that before.”
Lady Cobbin rose. “It seems to me that we have
thrashed out the subject thoroughly, so far as your
knowledge goes, save as regards the papers.”
“You shall know about them in two days.”
She nodded and moved towards the door. “ I shall


have a look at Shore Lane. It is strange to choose
such a place, and it is stranger still that he should
have taken Embers’ cab.”
“Yes. I have always been puzzled by that; and
also I cannot understand why the blue envelope
should have been waterproof.”
“ The wharf is at the bottom of the lane.”
“ What has the wharf to do with the envelope or
the cab ? ”
Lady Cobbin passed her hand perplexedly over
her brow. “I am more puzzled than ever,” she said
wearily. “ I must think over matters, and go to
Shore Lane. Also I must call upon Mrs. O’Toole,
and see if Paddy is home. That boy can explain
everything.”
“ I wish he would,” said Darton gloomily as he
accompanied her to the outer door. “It would bring
Belinda and myself together. Good-day.”
Lady Cobbin choked down a sigh and shook hands.
“ Good-day, comrade.”
So it was all over. He would never be her husband.
That was terrible to think of, since it condemned her
to loneliness. But only loneliness of a kind. She
had lost a husband, but she had gained a friend, and
no doubt time would enable her to accept the new
relationship. At all events she felt a strange joy in
working for Darton, even though Belinda was to reap
the results of her labours. Lady Cobbin was very
philosophic, and having failed to obtain the moon,
mastered her desires, or, rather, reduced them
to lower aspirations.
On returning to her office she was met by the under-
fed boy with a telegram. It had come immediately
after she departed to seek Dr. Darton. Milady sighed


again, as she reflected on all that had taken place in
the interval, and she opened the telegram wearily. But
the signature and the message made her cheeks grow
red and her eyes brighten with excitement. It was
from Harriet Lane.
“ Come to me at once,” ran the wire. “ I know
who is guilty.”


CHAPTER XVII.
JEALOUSY.
In the artistic drawing-room of the Clements Street
house Miss Lane waited for Lady Cobbin. But not
quietly. Her excitement impelled her to prowl up
and down the room like a tigress. And, in-
deed, she was one at the moment, and had
been since Belinda returned from the City to
announce her engagement to Mendle. A stormy
interview had taken place between the half-
sisters, in which Harriet had accused Belinda of rob-
bing her of Mendle’s love. Belinda had retorted by
giving her opinion of Mendle, and then, woman-like,
Harriet had defended him. The duologue had ended
with the retreat of the elder before the cold determina-
tion of her stronger half-sister. The hitherto ruler
had tried the old tactics of domination, only to find
that the girl she had always believed so weak was
stronger than her former tyrant. It was when beaten
thus, that Miss Lane had turned in despair to Lady
Cobbin. To stop Belinda’s marriage with Mendle
she was prepared to wreck worlds.
Lady Cobbin was quite startled by the change in
Harriet’s looks when she entered the room. Miss
Lane had never been pretty, and had always been lean
and anxious-looking. Still she had invariably been
careful of her appearance, and having a graceful figure
and great taste in dress, had contrived to tone down
considerably her physical disadvantages. But now


she was carelessly dressed in an old frock, and looked
extremely untidy. Her eyes were red, her com-
plexion, never very good, was worse than ever, and
she looked years older than she really was. In her
grief she was almost tragic, and acted at the moment
better than she had ever done on the stage. But
then, poor soul, it was not acting, but a bitterly truth-
ful display of her real feelings, hitherto kept under
lock and key.
“My dear Miss Lane”- —Lady Cobbin, entering
bright and businesslike, paused on the threshold in
sheer amazement —“ Whatever is the matter ? ”
Harriet smiled in a wan manner and with an effort.
“ I am not very well,” she murmured, conducting her
visitor to a seat near the fire. “I feel this cold
weather more than most people.”
“Dear me!” said Lady Cobbin, fixing her eye-
glass, “did you ask me here to talk about the
weather ? ’ ’
“ I did,” replied Miss Lane, equal for once to the
occasion; “my telegram must have told you as
much.”
“ It certainly told me a great deal,” retorted Milady,
nettled.
“ In what way ? ”
“In the way of love and jealousy.”
“Oh!” Harriet winced and glanced over her
shoulder to see that the door was closed. Lady Cobbin
looked also.
“You fear lest your sister should come in,” said
Lady Cobbin, ironically.
“ No. She has gone to walk in the Park with—
with Mr. Mendle.”
“Why don’t you call him Lewis?” asked the


other woman; and then, without waiting for a reply,
continued, “ I forgot; you have not the right to call
him by his Christian name.”
“ What makes you think that ? ”
“ Your telegram implies it. I have learned from
Dr. Darton that Miss Gerson has declined to marry
him so that she can become the wife of our mutual
friend in Cade Lane. You love Mendle, and there-
fore you are furious that he should throw you over.
You hate him, you hate Belinda, and you are willing
to injure both. Come now, tell me truly, who is
guilty ? Belinda or Lewis Mendle ?’ ’
Harriet sat with open mouth, looking more grey
and more unlovely than ever. Her somewhat slow
brain could not understand how Lady Cobbin had
come to guess so accurately what was in her mind.
“ I don’t hate Belinda,” she said weakly, though
we did quarrel. But I do know that she has been
forced to engage herself to Lewis.”
“ Did she tell you her reason ? ”
“ No.” Harriet passed her thin hand across her
yellow forehead. I can’t understand Belinda,” she
said wearily; “she used to be a timid girl, sweet-
tempered and easily led. But since she has come
into this money she will have her own way, and flies
out at me on the least provocation.”
“ You must make allowance for the trying situation
in which she is placed,” said Lady Cobbin consol-
ingly. “ She loves Dr. Darton, and yet to save him
she is compelled to marry a man she dislikes.”
Harriet sat up. “Is that the reason ? ” she asked
sharply.
“ Yes, I wonder Belinda did not explain.”
“ Perhaps she would have done so had I been easier


with her. But I flew into a passion when she came,
and told her she had robbed me of Lewis’s love.”
“I am quite sure that she never did that, Miss
Lane. She will be quite willing to hand over Mr.
Mendle and his love to you, so long as his claws are
cut.”
‘‘His claws?”
“ Yes. Mr. Mendle accuses Dr. Darton of having
murdered your half-brother.”
“It is not true.” Miss Lane rose with a vivid
spot of colour burning on each cheek. “He knows
that such an accusation is untrue.”
Lady Cobbin looked at her keenly. “ Does he
know the truth ? ”
“ Yes, and so do I. Hitherto I have kept silence
in order to shield him. But he has acted so badly
that I am justified in speaking out.”
“ Ah! ” said the inquiry-agent significantly. “ I
thought you were not quite frank with me when we
last spoke ”
What I said was wholly true,” protested Harriet
sullenly.
“ It was part of the truth; now I want to hear the
whole of it. If you wish to prevent the marriage
of Mr. Mendle to your half-sister you must speak
out. By your doing so Dr. Darton will be saved, and
there will no longer be any need for a sacrifice on
the part of Belinda. They can marry, and you ”
Lady Cobbin hesitated—“ I suppose, even to punish
Mendle, you don’t want to ruin him.”
“ I would do anything to prevent his marriage,”
said Harriet defiantly.
“ I fi ar e say; but, to prevent it, you must accuse
him.”


“ Accuse him? ” Miss Lane jumped up with an
angry look. <l I don't accuse him of committing the
crime.”
Lady Cobbin looked puzzled. “ Who then ? ”
“ Embers. Sir Samuel Embers.”
This was the last name Milady expected to hear.
“ You must be mistaken,” she said amazed. “ Sir
Samuel remained in the bar of the Green Man in
Edgware Road.”
“ So he said,” retorted Harriet significantly; “ but
the police never thought of examining into the truth
of his statement.”
“ Why should they? After all, what motive had
Sir Samuel to murder his bosom friend? ”
“ He wanted to marry Belinda.”
“ Quite so, and Arthur was agreeable.”
Miss Lane sat down, and, resting her elbows on
her Knees and clasping her hands together, stared into
the fire. “Of course, I can’t be sure of the exact
truth,” she said, frowning, “ but I know that Arthur
possessed some papers connected with a secret in Dr.
Darton’s life. He arranged, on the night when the
crime was committed, to meet Dr. Darton and sell
back the papers to him. Now I believe, although I
have not any strong proof, that Sir Samuel did not
want those papers given back, as then the marriage
could not be prevented. He might have quarrelled
with Arthur on that account, and to secure the papers
himself and make use of them, he might have mur-
dered Arthur.”
“ H’m 1 ” Lady Cobbin thought, ” it might be so.
Yet, what evidence ”
“ This evidence,” interrupted Harriet, sitting up


straightly, “ I saw Sir Samuel at the top of the lane
when the cab broke down.”
“Oh, impossible! How could he have got there
from the Edgware Road? How could he know that
the cab would break down ? ’ ’
“ I don’t believe that the cab did break down,” said
Harriet quickly. “It seems to me that Arthur pre-
tended a break-down to get rid of me in order to see
Dr. Darton.”
“ The meeting-place was certainly at the top of
Shore Lane,” said Lady Cobbin musingly ,“ and Sir
Samuel may have learned that. “ But it occurs to
me,” she added, looking sharply at Harriet, “ that
you must have recognised your half-brother as the
chauffeur, after all.”
“ I did. But not until I saw the cab break down.
I got out, and Sir Samuel was standing under the
lamp-post. He accused Arthur of stealing his cab.
As I did not want to be involved in a quarrel, I went
away at once and came home, as I stated, by the
Metropolitan from the Mansion House.”
“ Leaving your half-brother with Sir Samuel.”
“ Yes.”
“ They were quarrelling? ”
“ Yes. And Sir Samuel was excited with drink.
Arthur was quite sober? ”
“ What time was that ? ”
“ Shortly before eleven. I cannot be certain.”
“ Then you believe that Sir Samuel murdered
Arthur to get the papers, so that they might be used
to stop the marriage with Belinda?”
“Yes, I do,” said Harriet firmly; “also Sir
Samuel knew that if Arthur died, Belinda would come


into the money at once. He therefore, so to speak,
killed two birds with one stone.”
“He certainly killed one bird,” chuckled Lady
Cobbin, grimly.
“ Sir Samuel was desperately in want of money,”
explained Harriet. “ I know, because Lewis told me
so. Don’t you think that the motive to commit the
murder is a strong one ? ”
‘‘l do. But it will be necessary to prove how Sir
Samuel came from the Edgware Road to Shore
Lane.”
“ That is easy. Arthur left him there at ten o’clock
when he took the cab. Sir Samuel must have known
of the appointment to meet Dr. Darton at the top of
Shore Lane, and so could jump into a hansom, or get
another motor-cab, and drive there in plenty of time
to be beforehand. He was waiting under the lamp
at the place, remember.”
“You saw him ? ”
“ Yes,” said Harriet, hesitating; and then, after a
moment’s pause, came out some extraordinary in-
formation. “ Lewis saw him also.”
Lady Cobbin jumped up. If she had been
astonished before, she was doubly astonished now.
“ Mr. Mendle ! But it was clearly proved, and by the
evidence of Robert Parley, that he remained in his
office all the evening. Why, that policeman saw him
come out of his office ”
“ Nearly an hour after the murder,” said Harriet;
then added hastily, “ of course I don’t mean for one
moment that Lewis murdered Arthur. Lie would not
have had the courage, and, besides, it meant his losing
the money if Arthur died. But Lewis certainly saw
Sir Samuel at the top of Shore Lane with Arthur. If,


according to the medical evidence, Arthur was killed
at eleven o’clock, Lewis must have seen the murder
committed. Afterwards I believe that Sir Samuel
placed the body of Arthur on the box, and drove him-
self to Cade Lane.”
Why should he do that ? ’ ’
“To implicate Lewis, should suspicion fall upon
himself,” said Harriet promptly.
” But one policeman, Cropsley, declared that he
only saw one man on the box-seat of the cab.”
“I can’t understand that,” admitted Miss Lane
frankly, “ but as a dead man could not drive, the
murderer must have done so.”
Sir Samuel Embers,” said Lady Cobbin thought-
fully.
“Sol believe. What do you think yourself ? ”
” I cannot say. The theory seems to be all right,
and yet, after all, it is mere theory.”
“Supported by strong circumstantial evidence,”
Harriet reminded her.
Quite so,” assented the inquiry-agent; “ why did
you not tell this story at the inquest ? ”
“ I thought that it might harm Lewis,” said Harriet
nervously, and he asked me to hold my tongue. I
did so out of love, but now that he has thrown me over
for Belinda, I want him to suffer. All the same,”
she added hastily, “remember that I do not accuse
him of murder.”
“ He is an accomplice after the fact, you would
say, remarked Lady Cobbin drily. “By the wav
Embe e rsT” he? Wai ‘ ing " * he a ‘ ong wi *
cab”°'” Harriet hesitated again. “He was in the


‘‘ In the cab ? How do you mean ? ”
“ When I entered the cab in front of the Piccadilly
Theatre, I found that there was a man half under the
seat and half exposed on the floor. I would have
given the alarm, as I guessed that the man could be
there for no good purpose. But immediately 1 heard
the voice of Lewis asking me to be silent.”
“ How did he recognise you? ”
“ He must have seen me through the window, by
cautiously lifting up his head when I spoke to Arthur.
Of course I believed Arthur at that time to be Sir
Samuel, and directed him to drive me to Cade Lane.
Apart from seeing me, Lewis probably recognised my
voice. At all events, he told me to be silent, and to
allow the cab to be driven back to the City.”
“ Then Arthur must have known that Mr. Mendle
was concealed in the cab.”
“ Yes, I suppose so.”
“ Consequently Mr. Mendle must have known that
the chauffeur was his ward, and not Sir Samuel ?
“ I suppose so.”
“ You suppose so—you suppose so, ” said Lady
Cobbin irritably, for the perplexity of the case was
getting on her nerves, strong as they were. ‘ Didn t
Mr. Mendle tell you for certain ? ”
“ No. He refused to tell me much. All he said
was that he had entered the cab, thinking that Dr.
Darton and Belinda would hire it to get back to
Clement Street. You know either lor Belinda always
hired Sir Samuel’s cab to drive back from the theatre,
and after taking me or Belinda home, and sometimes
both of us, he usually drove to the City to pick up
Lewis.”
“ But what made Mr. Mendle hide in the cab?


“ Jealousy,” cried Harriet bitterly. “He knew
that Belinda often met Wilfred at the Piccadilly
Theatre, and intended, when they attempted to enter
the cab, to step out. After sending Dr. Darton
away, he told me that he would have driven back to
Clement Street with ”
“ I understand —I understand,” said Lady Cobbin
hurriedly. “It seems to me that Mr. Mendle must
certainly know the truth. Why did you not insist
upon an explanation? ”
“ I love him. You know what a woman is who
loves. I obeyed his slightest command, and, so long
as I knew that he was not guilty, I was quite willing
to remain in ignorance.”
“ But surely he explained ? ”
“ He explained nothing,” said Harriet tersely.
Lady Cobbin looked at her, astonished. She could
not understand that any woman should be so weak,
even with a man she loved. Yet her late experience
with Wilfred Darton should have enlightened her,
since she herself was willing to place her heart and
her will at his feet.
“ Mr. Mendle shall explain to me,” she said de-
terminedly. “For all we know, he may have mur-
dered his ward himself.”
“ No, no,” said Harriet eagerly. “He had no
motive. In fact, it was to his interest that Arthur
should live.”
“ I see that,” said Lady Cobbin, puzzled. Then
she relapsed into silence, as did Harriet. Both women
remained for a long time without speaking, each one
busily thinking. Harriet was wondering if her con-
fession to Lady Cobbin would ruin Lewis Mendle, and
if her revenge on a faithless lover was worth the
14
209
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


reason; while Lady Cobbin reflected upon the prob-
able guilt of Sir Samuel. She exonerated Mendle, as
it seemed too ridiculous that he should kill the goose
with the golden eggs, setting aside his manifest
timidity.
It was at this propitious moment that Mr. Mendle
arrived with Belinda at the street door.
210
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


CHAPTER XVIII.
ANOTHER COMPLICATION.
When Mr. Mendle entered the drawing-room, he
was alone, and explained that Belinda had gone to
remove her furs. He said that he had been invited
to afternoon tea.
“ It is rather late for that,” said Lady Cobbin drily,
and glancing at the clock on the mantelpiece, which
had just struck six,
“It is never too late, when one loves,” said the
lawyer sentimentally, and Harriet, looking more
miserable than ever, winced at the words. ‘‘You
are here, Lady Cobbin,” asked Mendle, taking a seat.
“ As you see,” she replied, putting up her eye-
glass. ‘‘ You are surprised to see me, no doubt.”
“ Considering what took place at our last inter-
view, I am. Then it was arranged that matters
should be left as they were. This being the case, it
is no longer needful for you to continue the investiga-
tion. As a visitor ”
‘‘You don’t want me to come here,” said Lady
Cobbin equably. “ I quite understand. Milady,
the inquiry agent, is not fit company for the girl you
are to marry. ‘‘Yet ’’—she pointed to Harriet—“ the
girl asked me to come here. I received a wire at two
o’clock. I came here at five.”
“ The girl.” Mendle shrugged as he looked at the
drooping figure of Miss Lane. “ That is not Belinda,
who is to be my wife.”
211


“ Pardon me. You imply that lam making a mis-
take,” said Lady Cobbin grimly, and anxious to
avenge the slight he had put upon her; “ but Miss
Lane is to be your wife.”
“ What do you mean by saying that ? ” demanded
the lawyer, growing red and looking decidedly angry.
“ You know well enough that Belinda and I have
decided to become man and wife.”
“ I think that Belinda has very little say in the
matter,” said the woman with great coolness, and
eyed Mendle so deliberately that he shivered. Her
gaze hinted at coming trouble.
And, as if to clinch the statement of Lady Cobbin,
the maid entered at this moment with a message from
Belinda saying that she was too unwell to come down
to afternoon tea. When the servant departed the
inquiry-agent laughed. “That shows how much
Belinda’s heart is set upon the marriage,” she said
significantly.
“ Miss Gerson, if you please,” retorted Mendle,
white with rage, “ and you will understand that you
are dismissed. I shall no longer allow you to continue
the investigation. In fact, I mean to drop looking
into the matter. Belinda desires it.”
“ Because she has sold herself to save Dr. Darton,”
snapped Lady Cobbin sharply. “ All the better for
you. I quite understand that you do not desire to
proceed in this case.”
“ I stay proceedings merely because Belinda wishes
it. What other reason can I have ? ”
“You are afraid.”
“ Afraid?” Mendle’s face twitched. “Of what?
—of whom ?’ ’


“You fear lest an inquiry into the case should
implicate you.”
Mendle shrugged. “ That is simply absurd,” he
declared in an even voice. “ Had I been afraid on
that score I certainly should not have engaged you
to look into the matter.”
“ Oh yes, you would —in order to ruin Dr. Darton.”
“ Thinking him guilty, as I do,” said the lawyer,
rising with great dignity, “ I was right to do what I
could to forward the ends of justice. But Belinda
asked me to let things remain as they are. To oblige
her lam willing to do so. This being the case, there
is no need for you to trouble your head further,
Milady. I shall send a cheque for that you have
already done, and meanwhile will take my leave,” and
he moved towards the door.
Hitherto Harriet, while listening intently, had sat
perfectly still before the fire, looking into the heart of
the blaze. But when the solicitor moved towards the
door, she rose swiftly and placed herself directly in his
path. “You go without taking leave of me,” she
said in a cold, hard voice, and her eyes glittered.
“ I ask your pardon,” replied Mendle hurriedly.
“ In the interest of my conversation with Milady here,
I forgot that you were present. I wish you good-day,
and apologise for my oversight.”
“ Stop where you are! ” commanded Harriet, as he
opened the door, “You and I must come to an under-
standing.”
“Harriet I” Mendle cast a significant look to-
wards Lady Cobbin, and spoke in a warning tone.
Harriet laughed bitterly. “ You need not hint
secrecy in that way.”
“Certainly not,” chimed in the inquiry agent.


“ Miss Lane and myself have been talking about you,
Mr. Mendle.”
The lawyer looked from one to the other and drew
his own conclusions very rapidly. At once he closed
the door and returned to his seat, avoiding Harriet as
though she were a snake. “ I understand. Miss
Lane has told you.”
‘‘Told me what?” asked Lady Cobbin, wilfully
dense.
“ I am not bound to incriminate myself,” he re-
torted heatedly.
r ‘ Ah ! Then you are afraid, after all ? ”
“ Afraid? ” Mendle cast a look of hatred at Miss
Lane. ‘‘Yes, I am. When one ha sto do with a
jealous woman who will stick at nothing to revenge
herself, and who ”
‘‘Stop!” It was Harriet who spoke, and she
moved swiftly towards the mean creature who spoke,
facing him with cold scorn. “ Who are you to talk
like this ? Have you not harmed me sufficiently as it
is, that you should seek to make me out worse than I
am ? Who was it promised to marry me when Belinda
married ? ”
“ When Belinda married Sir Samuel Embers,”
snapped the lawyer. “ But, as she is to marry me,
that alters the case.”
“ It does not alter your character,” cried Harriet,
clenching her hands fiercely. “ Have you no heart?
Have you no honour, that you talk like this ? I have
been your cat’s-paw for years. For you have I
remained here to manage this house and to look after
Arthur and his sister. I have been your spy to report
everything; I have been your friend to guide Belinda
in the way you wanted.”


“ And you failed ? ”
“ I failed with Belinda. I failed with Arthur. Both
of them were too strong for me. I could not induce
Belinda to marry Sir Samuel ”
“ I never told you to do that,” said Mendle quickly.
“ No,” she replied with great scorn, “ because you
wished to marry her yourself. When I saw that, I
made up my mind to side with my half-sister. I did
all I could to bring about the marriage with Wilfred
Darton. I arranged the meetings at the Piccadilly
Theatre, and ”
“ And betrayed me all round,” scowled the lawyer.
“ Well, you have your reward. I marry Belinda and
her money.”
‘‘You shall not do that,” said Lady Cobbin calmly.
He turned on her with a snarl. “ What business
is it of yours ? ”
“ This much : Dr. Darton is to marry Belinda.”
Mendle jumped up with an amazed expression from
his seat. ‘‘ Why, I understood that you loved him 1”
A faint colour crept into Lady Cobbin’s face. ‘‘ I
love him as a friend —as a comrade,” she said de-
fiantly. ‘‘You misunderstood me.”
“ No, I didn’t. You wanted to marry him, and
when I agreed to leave him alone you promised to
help me to marry Belinda. I did that without your
assistance.”
‘‘ Quite so; and you communicated the fact to Dr.
Darton, so as to break his heart. There you made a
mistake, Mr. Mendle. He sent for me, and we had a
talk. Now we understand one another. lam his
comrade, and I intend to help him against you.”
“ Oh, do you ? ” Mendle’s face displayed both fear
and defiance. T ‘ And what can you do, may I ask ? ”


“ Stop this marriage, for one thing.’'
“ Indeed. And for another ? ”
“ Force you to marry Miss Lane.”
“ Marry me?” cried Harriet, flinging up her head.
“ I would not marry Lewis for all the world. I loved
him dearly, but he has changed my love to hatred.”
“Ah,” murmured Lady Cobbin, “being an
actress, you have probably studied Congreve’s
plays.”
“ And what have Congreve’s plays to do with
this?” asked Harriet furiously.
“ Two lines have a great deal to do with your
present attitude,” and Lady Cobbin quoted with
point—
“ Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turned,
Nor Hell a fury like a woman scorned.”
“ Right I right 1 ” cried Harriet, and burst into un-
pleasant laughter, “do you hear that, Lewis? Con-
greve was a prophet —a prophet! ” She flung up her
hands and clutched her head. “ Oh, you fool, you
fool; you were in my power, and you dared to rouse
the worst passions of my nature. Lady Cobbin knows
all—do you hear—she knows everything.”
Mendle looked at her with a sneer. “Be good
enough to remember you are not on the stage,” he
said in a hard tone. “As to your treachery, I was
prepared all along for that.”
“ And have provided a defence,” said Lady Cobbin
markedly.
Mendle turned on her quickly. “ I have no need
to defend myself,” he exclaimed. “ Harriet told you,
no doubt, that I was in the cab—that she drove with
me to the City on that night. I admit to you, to her,
216
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


and I am ready to admit it to the whole world, if you
like.”
“ If so, why did you not admit it before? ” asked
Milady bluntly.
“ Why? You ask me that, knowing the position
in which I was placed.”
“ But if you are innocent ? ”
“ Innocent! ” His voice leaped an octave, and he
stamped. “ Were I not innocent, would I not deny
the evidence of this woman ? It is my word against
hers. What can she prove unless I confess my
presence in the cab on that night ? Nothing. But so
innocent am I that I admit freely the truth of the story
she has told you.”
“ Even to being guilty of murder? ” asked Milady.
Mendle’s rage fell as quickly as it had risen. “ That
is absolutely untrue,” he said calmly, and turned to
Harriet. “ I dare you to look me in the eyes and
accuse me.”
“ I do not accuse you,” she answered with deliberate
contempt. “ I never did accuse you.”
“ There I ” Mendle swung round to face Lady
Cobbin. “ What do you say? ”
“ Nothing—at present. I simply remark that I
have not yet heard your story.”
” Then I tell it —yes, I tell it without hearing the
lies she has told during my absence. Then you can
see if I speak truly. Not a word, if you please. lam
on my defence. The witness is in the witness-box.”
He turned an armchair and leaned over the back.
“ Now then, Lady Cobbin, or Milady, or whatever
you like to call yourself, I speak in my own defence.
Listen. I speak the truth, the whole truth, and can
add an oath if you choose.”


“ I am willing to take your word,” she replied.
“ Go on, please.”
Mendle knelt on the seat of the chair and addressed
himself to both women, speaking as though he were
in a pulpit. “ I love Belinda,” he said defiantly.
“ Even had she not a penny, I should love her. If
Harriet loved me, that is her fault. I could not return
her passion in any way. lam as nature made me—
the lover of Belinda. I hated Darton because he
dared to raise his eyes to her. Belinda defied me,
and, as her guardian, I ordered Darton out of the
house. Harriet betrayed the trust I had in her, and
connived at secret meetings between Belinda and
Darton at the Piccadilly Theatre. I learned of them
through Sir Samuel Embers, who, also wishing to
marry Belinda, was jealous of Darton. I spoke to
Belinda; she denied the truth, so I made up my mind
to prove her treachery.”
“ Not treachery,” murmured Lady Cobbin.
“ Yes. I say treachery. I loved her, and she was
ready to meet secretly a man I detested. More, she
did meet him. On that night I( came, also secretly,
from Cade Lane, intending to face both when they
came out of the theatre, and ”
‘‘One moment,” said Lady Cobbin. ‘‘You say
secretly. Yet Robert Parley must have known of
your absence.”
“He did. But Robert Parley told me that Arthur
had married his daughter. I had power to stop
Arthur’s allowance. Parley said he would be silent
about my absence if I continued the allowance. I
agreed to do that, as I did not wish my absence to be
known.”
“ Why? ” asked Lady Cobbinj bluntly.
218
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ You shall hear later. But when I came to the
theatre about ten o’clock or a little after, I saw
Embers’ cab, and —as I thought, Embers on the seat.
I went to speak to him, and found that Arthur was
driving. He said that he was waiting for Darton,
who was in the theatre.”
“ Wait! wait! ” cried Lady Cobbin. “ Arthur had
an appointment with Dr. Darton at the top of Shore
Lane at half-past eleven. How then ”
“ I know that now. I did not know that then.
Arthur told me that he hoped to drive Darton to the
city. He did not say what for, and I had no oppor-
tunity of learning, for at that moment we saw Harriet
come out and speak to Mrs. O’Toole, who indicated
the cab. I told Arthur to say nothing, and slipped
into the cab to hide under the seat ”
“ Could vou do that ? ”
“ I managed to suppress myself in a way at all
events,” said Mendle quickly. “ Harriet entered the
cab, and I told her to be silent. She wanted to
see me, and was coming to the City. I told her that
Arthur could drive to the City office and see Darton
later.”
“ Then you knew that the chauffeur was Arthur,”
said Lady Cobbin, glancing at Harriet.
“ Yes,” she said sullenly; “ but I denied the truth
because of Lewis. He drove with me to the City
and ”
“ Wait! wait! ” cried Mendle, gesticulating. “So
far my story corresponds to Harriet’s. Is it not so?”
“ Yes,” replied the inquiry agent.
“ Well and good. At the top of Shore Lane, the
cab broke down and Harriet stepped out. I remained
inside ”


“ Did you see Sir Samuel ? ”
(i Oh I ” Mendle looked at Harriet. “ You told
her that, did you ? Yes, I saw Embers under the lamp-
post. He had too much to drink. Harriet held her
peace about me, and then went away home. I waited
where I was, while Arthur examined the machinery.
Embers talked about some papers that would disgrace
Darton if published, and wanted them back. Arthur,
in spite of knowing that I was within earshot, de-
clared that he intended to meet Darton at that very
spot in half an hour, more or less, and sell them to
him. Then he was coming on to fetch me. I heard
so much, then, anxious to prevent my being seen by
Embers, since he was dfunk and would make trouble,
I slipped out on the offside while they were in earnest
conversation, and got away in the snow and the dark-
ness to my office. I did nbt then tell Parley to deny
that I had been out, for there was no reason. But
when the policeman knocked me up, and I found that
Arthur was dead, I then saw in what a dangerous
position I was placed, and warned Parley in a word.
For the sake of his daughter’s getting an allowance as
Arthur’s widow he held his tongue and bamboozled
the police.”
“ Buf Parley knew that with the death of Arthur
you lost the money ?”
“ Quite so; but I had saved some thousands, and
Parley knew that I could pay Ellen Gerson’s allowance
out of what I Had saved. And now ” —he got down
from his chair—“you can understand Eady Cobbin,
why I was so terrified and unnerved on that night, I
knew that my actions, if known, would lend colour to
the suspicion that I had killed Arthur, and so I
dreaded lest they should be discovered. No wonder


I was afraid; no wonder I fainted; a nervous man,
such as I am. But things went as I wished, and
everything was kept quiet, until Harriet here, out of
revenge, chose to tell you the truth. Well, then
he flung out his arms —“you know the truth now.
Make what use of it you like. Go to the police —go to
Inspector Hake, and tell what I have said.”
“ You are afraid,” said Lady Cobbin tersely.
“Yes, lam afraid,” he declared defiantly. “ I
know how easy it is for a nervous man to be
incriminated when examined. I may make no end of
mistakes: the very fact that I suppressed what I have
told you makes it look bad for me. I will be suspected.
I know that. On the same evidence, I should suspect
anyone else.”
“ Even Dr. Darton ?”
“ He is the guilty person,” said Mendle decisively,
“or Sir Samuel Embers —I don’t know which; but
one of them is guilty. I left Sir Samuel with Arthur
wanting the papers and too drunk to argue for their
possession without temper. Darton was to meet
Arthur on the same spot in half an hour, and he may
have lost his temper. I know nothing more.”
“ But the murder was committed at eleven, and
Darton did not ”
“ Meet Arthur until half-past.”
“ He did not meet him at all.”
“ Then Sir Samuel must be guilty. Oh, how I wish
I could learn the truth,” cried Mendle, waving his
arms. “I am beside myself with nervous fear.”
“ Be a man,” said Harriet scornfully.
“ I never was a man,” cried the lawyer pitifully.
“ I am a mass of nerves—a miserable creature who
should never have been born. My life was hard, but


you with jealousy have made it harder. But now I
shall not drop the investigation : for my own sake, I
shall not. Lady Cobbin, how can we learn the truth ?”
“ There is only one way of learning it. Paddy
O’Toole must ”
“ Paddy O’Toole.” Mendle burst into scornful
laughter. “He has gone. He has left the hospital
and vanished.”


CHAPTER XIX.
THE MISSING BOY.
Lady Cobbin wrinkled her brows as Mendle made
this startling statement, for that it was, seeing how
much depended upon the evidence of the boy. Harriet
indifferent to everything since she had lost the lawyer,
and had definitely surrendered him, left the room
with the muttered excuse that she intended to lie down
for recuperation before going to the theatre. The
inquiry agent and the solicitor were thus left alone.
Mendle was still excited, but Lady Cobbin remained
calm, determined to get to the bottom of the mystery,
not only for Carton’s sake, but also because it piqued
her. The further she searched into his case, the more
complex it grew, and therefore, out of official pride,
she was the more resolved to learn the truth.
“ How do you know that Paddy has left the
hospital?” she inquired.
“ I went there to-day,” he answered, throwing him-
self into a chair with an air of lassitude. “ Oh, how I
suffer. Nerves I Nerves 1 I feel as though I had been
beaten black and blue.”
“ Don’t go before you tell me how Paddy left the
hospital,” she urged impatiently. “ I should have
thought that the police would have prevented his
going until he spoke.”
r ‘The doctors declared that he would not speak,”
answered Mendle, crouching over the fire. “He
refused to reply to every question, and would not even
answer to his own name.”


“ Humph 1” Lady Cobbin thought for a moment.
“ Mrs. O’Toole hinted that the boy was acting a part.”
“ Oh, absurd!” cried Mendle, starting to his feet
and beginning to walk up and down the room, a
boy like that could not deceive trained doctors.”
“I am not so sure of that, Mr. Mendle. A London
street-arab is usually very sharp, and Paddy was one
of the cleverest of the lot.”
“ But his reason ?”
“ Ah, we must learn that. I shall ask old Peggy.”
“ You won’t find her,” said Mendle, stopping and
looking at Lady Cobbin with a haggard expression.
“ I learned that she had been to the hospital and had
taken Paddy away. Knowing from Embers where
she lived, I went to the Adelphi cellar and discovered
that both Mrs. O’Toole and her son had vanished.
After they left the hospital they never came home.”
“ That looks as though it was to someone’s interest
that the boy should be smuggled out of the way,” said
Lady Cobbin, bending her formidable brows.
“ Evidently the boy acted a part. Who could have
got him to do that ?”
“ Who?” said Mendle, with a sarcastic laugh.
“ Why, you don’t know the A B C of your profession,
Milady. The assassin of Arthur got him out of the
way, and told him to hold his tongue.”
“But who is the assassin? I am sure Dr.
Darton ”
‘‘Oh, Darton, Darton!” interrupted the lawyer
impatiently. ‘‘You seem to be crazy about him. I
believe that either he or Embers is guilty.”
“ Dr.' Darton is innocent,” declared Lady Cobbin
firmly. “He never met Arthur on that night.
Remember that the crime took place at eleven, or a


few minutes later, and Darton’s appointment was not
until the half-hour.”
“He may have come earlier,” said Mendle
gloomily.
“He did not. I learned from him that he went
straight from the theatre to visit a patient in Charing
Cross Road—a tradesman. I went there to-day, and
found that Dr. Darton really did call, as he had stated
to me. He left, according to the patient’s wife, at
eleven, which would just give him half an hour to get
to Shore Lane. Now, this being so, he cannot be
guilty.”
“ No,” admitted Mendle reluctantly, “ it looks like
innocence. Then he did not go to the meeting-place
after all?”
“ Yes, he did —at half-past eleven, the appointed
time. But Arthur was not there, nor was the cab.
Dr, Darton walked up and down the lane, and then
came home about midnight. He learned of the
murder next morning. lam sure he is innocent.”
“ Well,” said the solicitor, with a shrug, ‘‘ I have
no desire to find him guilty, if he really is innocent.
All I wanted was to break the engagement with
Belinda. As she has done that and has bound herself
to me, Darton can go free, for all I care.”
Lady Cobbin nodded absently. “ There is one
thing amongst others which puzzles me greatly,” she
said: “Why should Arthur have waited near the
theatre for Dr. Darton when he had appointed the
late meeting at the top of Shore Lane ?”
“ I can’t explain, no more than I can understand
why, instead of waiting, he drove off with Harriet.”
“ And with you,” said Lady Cobbin quickly.
“Oh I” Mendle shrugged his shoulders. “ I had
16
225
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


nothing to do with the matter. Whatever Arthur
intended to do on that night had connection with
Embers or Darton. He never gave a thought to me.”
“ But why,” asked the inquiry-agent shrewdly,
“ why should he have borrowed Sir Samuel’s cab with
the intention of calling at your office ?”
“ Pardon me,” said Mendle, frowning, ” we do not
know if he had intended to so call. He apparently
did not, since he made an excuse to get rid of Harriet.
Where he intended to go after that I can’t say.”
“ I believe,” said Lady Cobbin, after a moment’s
thought, “that he arranged to remain at the top of
Shore Lane until Dr. Darton arrived, and then he
intended to bargain for the papers. You left him
there, did you not?”
“ Yes, but I can’t say whether the cab really broke
down.”
“You should know : you have driven a motor.”
Mendle shrugged his shoulders again. “ Sir Samuel
gave me a few lessons, as he wanted me to buy a car
and hoped to get the commission on the sale. He
suggested that I could drive myself to and from the
office. But a nervous man like me ? Pooh ! It was
ridiculous. I really learned very little from Sir
Samuel, and certainly not sufficient to say if the cab
really went wrong when it stopped. But the point is
this,” added Mendle, beginning again to walk. “If
Darton is innocent —and I confess that, from what you
say, it looks as though he were—Embers, whom I left
with Arthur quarrelling over the papers, must be
guilty.”
” Why should you say that?” asked Lady Cobbin
sharply.
“Why?” Mendle turned on her surprised.


“ Can’t you see ? Sir Samuel wanted to marry Belinda
for the money, and determined to get the papers so as
to stop the marriage with Darton. By killing Arthur,
he not only got the papers, but placed Belinda in
possession of the fortune which he wanted. Then,
again,” added Mendle, warming to his theme, “ Sir
Samuel is a much stronger man than poor Arthur ever
was, and could easily have strangled Arthur and lifted
him into the seat. Then, being an expert motorist,
he could have manipulated the steering-wheel from
the inside of the cab.”
“ In what way ?”
“ Very easily, I think. He could kneel on the
inside cushion, and by stretching his arms under those
of the corpse, could have driven the cab to Cade Lane
so as to implicate me if suspicion was directed towards
him. He then could slip out of the cab and get away
in the direction of Cheapside. I would rather Darton
were accused than Embers, as I fear lest Belinda
should break our engagement; but as matters stand I
must admit that the onus lies on Sir Samuel.”
“ Humph!” said Lady Cobbin again. ”By the
way, did you not say that Sir Samuel was to look after
Paddy?”
“ Yes. He told me so on the day I first came to see
you about this case. I see what you mean. You
think ”
” That Sir Samuel got Paddy out of the way,
because he knows the truth about the crime,” ended
Lady Cobbin, rising. ” Yes, I think that. However,
I’ll interview Sir Samuel and see what I can learn.”
” Were I you,” said Mendle thoughtfully, “ I
should take up another and much neglected clue.”
“ What is that ?”
227
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


“ The scarf with which Arthur was strangled.”
“ Well!” Lady Cobbin walked to the window.
“ I presume that the scarf belonged to Arthur, and that
he put it on because the night was cold.”
‘‘You ought to make certain that the scarf belonged
to him.”
Lady Cobbin wheeled, and her face looked derisive.
” Are you going to say that he did not wear the
scarf?” WHy, Mr. Mendle, if that were the case, he
could not have been strangled. The assassin evidently
noted that the scarf of tough silk was doubled twice
round his throat, and so could be used as a bow-string.
Arthur was weak in physique I grant you, but he
certainly would not have waited until his murderer
adjusted the bowstring round his neck. He would
have made an outcry, and there were policemen about,
remember. However, it will be just as well to be
certain that the scarf did belong to the unfortunate
young man. He lived here, did he not ?”
‘‘ Yes. But lately he lived with his wife at her
father’s.”
‘‘Do you know the address?” Out came Lady
Cobbin’s notebook.
Mendle nodded. ‘‘ Parley had rooms in the Mary-
lebone Road. I suppose he had them there, so that
Ellen—whom he adores —might be near the Edgware
Road shop wherein she was employed. No. 43X,
Marylebone Road,” finished Mr. Mendle neatly.
“ Humph,” said Lady Cobbin, noting this down.
” Parley did not like his son-in-law?”
” No. He told Hake so, and expressed himself very
bitterly.” Mendle stopped and looked at the inquiry
agent. ‘‘ You don’t mean to say that you suspect
Parley of ?”


“ No I Nol All the same, I shall call on Mrs. Gerson
and learn if her husband wore the scarf on that night.”
“Belinda will know,” said Mendle, touching the
button of the bell; “ she was one of the last persons to
see Arthur. Tell Miss Gerson that she is wanted,” he
said, when the maid entered.
“ But she is lying down, Sir 1”
“ She will not be detained a minute. Ask her to
oblige me and come down. I should have said
oblige you,” added Mendle, when the door closed.
“ Belinda is not so fond of me as to be obedient.”
“ She has no very great love for me either,” said
Lady Cobbin drily. “ Well, I shall see young Mrs.
Gerson, and then Sir Samuel Embers.”
“ Embers will say nothing if guilty.”
“ He may say a great deal if innocent,” rejoined
Lady Cobbin. “ 1 look black against him, I
admit. But then they looked black against Dr.
Darton, and he is innocent.”
“ If the police knew all that I have said to you and
Harriet,” said the lawyer, “ they would consider that
things looked black against me.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. “ A most mysterious case,”
she said sympathetically. “ However, we’ll get at the
truth in some way.”
“ I hope so,” answered Mendle, with a nervous
gesture. “ I assure you I turn cold when I think of
my position. All that I wished to be kept secret has
come out through the jealousy of Harriet.”
“You have not treated her well, and ”
Belinda entered, looking wan and red-eyed, before
she could complete the sentence. “ What is it ?” asked
Miss Gerson, casting no friendly glance at the pair.


“ Lady Cobbin wishes to know if Arthur wore a
tricoloured scarf on the night he was murdered.”
“The scarf which Harriet gave him?” asked
Belinda.
” Was it Miss Lane’s gift?” questioned Lady
Cobbin,
“ Yes. Harriet wore it in a gipsy play, and Arthur
took a fancy to it, since he was always fond of gaudy
colours. Harriet made him a present of it some weeks
ago.”
“ Did he wear it when he drove with you to the
theatre ?”
Belinda reflected. “ No,” she said at length. ‘‘ I
cannot remember if he did. He had on a tweed suit
and an ordinary overcoat, so there was no need for
him to wear a scarf. I don’t think he wore it.”
‘‘You are not sure,” persisted Lady Cobbin.-
“ No,” said Miss Gerson coldly, “ I am not sure.
Is that all you wish me to say ?”
“ That is all, thank you.”
Belinda left the room again without a glance at
Mendle. He winced at her open contempt, and turned
to Lady Cobbin. “ Well ?”
“ I shall question Mrs. Gerson,” said she, button-
ing her coat. “And you?”
Mendle reflected. ‘‘ I shall see what has become of
Mrs. O’ Foole and Paddy. The boy must be found,
so that this mystery may be cleared up.”
So the division of labour was made in this way, and
the two left Clement Street Lady Cobbin warned
Mendle not to seek an interview with Sir Samuel, lest
that young gentleman should be placed on his guard.
The inquiry agent desired to take him by surprise


On second thoughts, and because she was anxious to
continue the portentous conversation, Lady Cobbin
drove with Mendle to the Strand and assisted him in
his search for Mrs. O’Toole. She, as well as the
lawyer, knew where the Irishwoman’s abode was to be
found.
After leaving the Strand, the two plunged into a
network of alleys, more or less dirty and desolate.
The rain was falling fast and it was extremely cold.
They came upon several shivering urchins, dressed in
rags and looking almost frozen to death, but not one
of them belonged to the gang employed by Mrs.
O’Toole. Finally, when they descended a flight of
slimy steps, which led to the wretched home of the
woman, they found a trembling boy crouched at the
foot, trying to get warm on the cold stones. The
promise of a shilling soon opened his mouth, and he
explained that Mrs. O’Toole had gone on the previous
day to the City Hospital to get Paddy, and had not
returned since. Her boys had presented themselves
as usual: at the Piccadilly Theatre, only to find that
their employer was conspicuous by her absence. The
boy could not tell where Mrs. O’Toole had gone, or
if she intended to come back.
“The murderer,” said Lady Cobbin, when they
left the slums, “ must have watched for the coming
of Mrs. O’Toole and the boy when they emerged from
the hospital, and then have bribed them to go into
hiding.”
“ Well,” said Mendle, removing his hat, in spite of
the falling rain, “ don’t you think it will be wise for
us to go to Trafalgar Square and look up Sir Samuel ?
He may know of something.”
“ He may, but if he does, he certainly will say very


little,” was Lady Cobbin’s grim reply; “ however, we
are close to the square, so we may as well walk there.”
But Sir Samuel’s cab was not on the stand. The
other motor-cab drivers informed the couple that Sir
Samuel had not been there since the previous morn-
ing. This looked as though the baronet had em-
ployed his time in removing Mrs. O’Toole and the
too-well-informed Paddy to some hiding-place.
‘‘What do you think?” asked Mendle, wearily, for
the long search was wearing out his unruly nerves.
“ I think that you had better return home,” said
Lady Cobbin, with a side-glance at his grey, drawn
face. “ You look like a corpse. I’ll walk to Edg-
ware Road and see Mrs, Gerson.”
“ Why not drive ?”
“ I prefer to walk.”
“ Ellen may not be in the shop.”
“ Oh, yes. A shop like that is open until all hours.
Unless she has given up the business.”
“ No,” said Mendle quickly. “ I promised that
her father and she should have a small income, if
Parley held his tongue, and then, of course, Belinda
promised to help. But nothing is arranged yet, and
Ellen still serves behind the counter.”
‘‘Well,” said Lady Cobbin, after a pause, ‘‘it
seems to me that you may not have to pay the income
after all—to the father I mean.”
“ I don’t understand.”
“ I am beginning to think that Robert Parley was
absent from the office as well as you,” said Lady
Cobbin decisively; ‘‘now don’t let us argue any
longer. You are worn out. Go home. I’ll report
progress.”
V


Mendle started to walk away, but came back.
“ One thing,” he said in a hesitating voice, “ don’t
tell Belinda that Darton is innocent.”
“Ah! you think that she will throw you over,”
said Lady Cobbin in a most unemotional voice.
“ Well, I dare say she will, and I hope so with all
my heart.”
“ But if she throws me over, you will lose Darton,”
said Mendle with a kind of whine like a flogged beast.
“ Not as a comrade,” said Lady Cobbin, her eyes
very bright and her voice very strong. “ I have
given up the idea of marrying him.”
“ Why ?” asked Mendle, biting his nails angrily.
“You would not understand,” she replied con-
temptuously. “ There are some feelings unknown
to you, Mr. Mendle, or you would not force this girl
into a reluctant marriage.”
I intend that she shall become my wife.”
“ And I intend that she shall marry Dr. Darton.”
“ Then you will work against me?”
“ No. I shall work in your interests, in the in-
terests of those two lovers, and in the interests of
justice. In one way or another I intend to learn the
truth about this murder.”
“You’ll never do that unless you find Paddy
O’Toole.”
“ Then I’ll find him.”
“ I hope you will, so that I may be exonerated,”
said Mendle, with his eyes on the ground, “and
then again I hope you won’t, as, if Darton is innocent,
I lose Belinda.”
“ And her money,” taunted Lady Cobbin, turning
away. Mendle stood where he was, looking after her.
Then he began to walk away.


“ I’ll defend Embers and prosecute Darton, if only
to bring about the marriage,” he thought. But he
reckoned without Lady Cobbin.
234
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


CHAPTER XX.
THE NEW CLUE.
The tobacconist’s shop in Edgware Road wherein
Ellen Gerson served was a mere hole in the wall, a
kind of doll’s house, furnished with nothing but a
counter and shelves and two chairs and the usual
goods. It possessed no back premises, and one could
scarcely turn in its narrow confines. When Lady
Cobbin entered, ostensibly to purchase cigarettes, she
found Ellen selling tobacco with a fictitious air of
gaiety to a callow youth. The poor girl’s common-
place prettiness had dwindled greatly under the strain
of the past weeks. Her complexion—always her
strongest point —was now a chalky white, and her
eyes were red-rimmed with constant weeping. How-
ever, her private griefs having nothing to do with
business, she forced the usual smile for customers
while her heart was breaking.
In a few minutes the callow youth, robbed of an
intended flirtation by the unexpected entrance of Lady
Cobbin, departed with a scowl of annoyance. Ellen,
who had recognised her new customer, waited list-
lessly for her to say what she wanted. Milady placed
a florin on the top of the glass case covering the
counter.
“ Give me a packet of good cigarettes, please,” she
asked, and Ellen supplied her in silence. “ I’ll smoke
one here and rest,” added Lady Cobbin, anxious to
invite a conversation. “ You don’t mind?”


“ Oh, no,” replied young Mrs. Gerson indiffer-
ently. “ There is a chair, and here is a match.”
Lady Cobbin nodded and lighted up. While
filling her silver case, she glanced keenly towards the
girl, who had taken her usual seat behind the counter.
‘‘You know who I am, do you not?” she asked, after
a short pause.
“ Yes, you are the inquiry agent whom I met at
Arthur’s place.”
“ At his sister’s house,” corrected the other.
Ellen flushed. ‘‘ No. Arthur, as the man, owned
the house. It ought to be mine now.”
“Well,” drawled Lady Cobbin slowly, “your
sister-in-law will probably make some provision for
you as her brother’s widow.”
“ I don’t want her to. I hate her. Besides, Mr.
Mendle has agreed to allow my father a pension for
his long services. lam leaving the shop next week,
and with father I go to Margate.”
“ Are you not going to make any effort to discover
who killed your husband?” asked Lady Cobbin
sharply.
“ Why should I ? Arthur was always cruel to me.
He behaved very badly almost before our honeymoon
ended. He was unkind both to father and to me.
We both detested him, and I ” —Ellen drew a long
breath—“ lam glad that he is dead. I was a fool to
marry him. He was always ashamed of me, or he
would have told everyone that I was his wife.”
“ But you forget, Mrs. Gerson. Had he done that
he would have been nothing but a pauper. Mr.
Mendle would have stopped his allowance.”
What if he had ? Even when Arthur had the
allowance he never gave me any money. A few


dresses, one or two ornaments —nothing more. I had
to stop on here earning money, as father’s salary was
too small to pay the rent and keep us in food. Arthur
lived on us, and never helped in the slightest. But
it’s all over ” —Ellen made a gesture of relief —“ and
I am glad, very glad. Father and I will go to Margate
and try to forget all about him.”
Lady Cobbin nodded absently. She was trying to
think how she could manage to gain information
about the scarf, without rousing the suspicions of the
girl. Ellen frankly declared that botH she and
her father had hated Gerson, and, apparently, the
girl, if not Parley, was glad that the young man had
died, even in so terrible a manner. Lady Cobbin re-
called the dim suspicions she had entertained of
Parley, and wondered if they were correct. Now
they were certainly taking shape, and perhaps the clue
of the scarf would lead to the old clerk’s door-step.
But, if he were guilty, Ellen would probably know of
his guilt, and so would be on her guard to say as little
as possible. The inquiry agent therefore skirted
round the subject. “Do you know Miss Lane?” she
asked cautiously.
“ Arthur’s half-sister? Yes. I like her better than
the other.”
** Well, I have just seen her, and she requested me
to ask you to return a red-white-and-blue scarf which
belongs to her.”
Ellen showed no signs of confusion, and answered
readily enough: “Oh, that scarf —the silk one. I
thought that it belonged to Arthur.”
“ He took it from Clement Street by mistake,” said
Lady Cobbin artfully, “ but it really is the property
of Miss Lane. Can you give it to me, Mrs. Gerson ?”


“No. I don’t know where it is now.”
Lady Cobbin drew a long breath. Apparently
Ellen had quite forgotten that Arthur had worn the
scarf and had been strangled with it.
“Try and think,” she urged. “ Miss Lane is
much attached to that scarf, and wants it back as soon
as possible. When did you see it last?”
“ Let me think. Oh!”—she shuddered—“ I re-
member now. On the night when Arthur left it to go
to his doom.”
Lady Cobbin passed over the rather grandiloquent
phrase. “You mean that he wore it when he came in
here, to see you.”
“ No. He did not wear it at all.” Lady Cobbin
had much ado to keep herself from jumping when she
heard this. “ Arthur left it at home when he went
away in the afternoon. And, now I come to think of
it, father put it round his throat at seven when he went
to the office to work overtime.”
“Your father wore it?” gasped Lady Cobbin,
astonished by this frankness. She could not under-
stand why the girl should calmly incriminate her
father, whom she professed to love so fondly.
But Mrs. Gerson evidently had quite forgotten the
sinister meaning that was attached by the murder to
the scarf. She replied innocently and rather impa-
tiently. “Yes, I remember quite well that father
wore it, as the night was cold. I daresay he’ll give it
to you, if you ask him for it.”
“Oh, that’s all right,” said Lady Cobbin, trying
to pull herself together, for she was—as the slang
phrase goes—rather “ knocked out of time ” by this
plain-speaking, “ And when are you and Mr. Parley
going away from London?”


“ Next week. Father will have his pension, and
also told me that he expected to get a large sum of
ready money.”
“ From whom ?”
But in asking this question Lady Cobbin had gone
too far. Ellen drew herself up, and looked suspici-
ously at the flustered face of Milady.
“ I really don’t see what business that is of yours,”
she said coldly.
‘‘ Oh, of' course it isn’t,” said the other rapidly;
“ but, you see, Miss Gerson has been speaking to me
about allowing you some money as her brother’s
widow. Of course, with your father’s pension and a
large sum of ready money ” —Lady Cobbin empha-
sised the words —“there will be no need for Miss
Gerson to allow you anything.”
“ I don’t want anything from her,” cried Ellen, her
face flushing, “as she has not been kind to me. But
father says that I ought to have some of Arthur’s
money, and L intend to ask for some later. Then I
shall go with father to Australia, and forget all my
horrible married life with Arthur.”
“ It certainly would be better,” said Lady Cobbin,
not knowing if she were awake or asleep, since the
girl was supplying reason after reason for the guilt of
her father. “ Well, here is my address, Mrs.
Gerson.” She handed over a card. “If I can be
of any assistance to you, write to me there. Good-
day.”
Ellen simply nodded, and sat down looking the
picture of misery as Lady Cobbin passed out of the
tiny shop. But when a new customer entered, she
again assumed the artificial smile needful for the busi-
ness. Lady Cobbin caught a glimpse of that weary


smile when going away, and from the bottom of her
warm heart she pitied the girl.
All the same, she was startled to learn that Parley
was so intimately connected with the case. The pos-
session of the scarf alone would point to the fact that
he was the criminal. Then, again, he had stated to
Hake that he hated Arthur for his treatment of Ellen,
and was glad, as the injured wife was, of the young
man’s death. Again, Parley had been alone in the
office all the evening, and might have slipped out,
when Mendle was away, to execute his wicked deed.
But, no,” Lady Cobbin said to herself when she
reached this point of her meditations. “ Mendle de-
clared that he returned to the office, leaving 1 Embers
and Arthur together. If Parley is guilty, he would
have been absent from the office when his master re-
turned. In that case, Mendle would know of his
guilt. But it might be that Parley, knowing of
Mendle’s presence in the cab, threatened to de-
nounce him unless he held his tongue. So to speak,
each man was in the hands of the other. Parley may
be brave, but I know that Mendle is a coward and is
terrified of his own shadow. It would be easy for
Parley to silence him.”
Then again, as Lady Cobbin reflected, Parley could
not drive a motor-cab, and that the assassin must have
done, seeing that the cab had been found with the
dead man before the door of Mendle’s office. Unless,
of course, the cab arrived, and Parley, while his
master was working in the inner office, had slipped
out with the scarf to strangle his son-in-law. But
then, again, if the dead man had been murdered at
eleven, or even some time later, it was known that the
cab had not arrived at Cade Lane until nearly twelve


o’clock. Arthur must have been strangled, on that
assumption, before the cab arrived, in which case, as
the old clerk could not drive a motor, he must be
exonerated. “Or else,” finished Lady Cobbin, with
a desperate effort to solve the riddle, “ there is a third
person concerned in the murder who can drive. Is
that third person Sir Samuel Embers?”
But this question she could not answer. The scarf
pointed to the guilt of Parley; the anxiety of Embers
to look after Paddy, who had now vanished, indicated
that the baronet was afraid lest the boy should bring
him into the matter. Darton was innocent; so was
Belinda, who had been momentarily suspected.
Harriet Lane, of course, could not have killed Arthur,
since her story was clear enough. Mendle, by losing
five thousand a year, proved his innocence beyond all
question. There remained only Parley and Embers:
one of these two was guilty, and Paddy O’Toole was
the sole person who could indicate which one had
committed the deed. But he had vanished, and Lady
Cobbin found herself hesitating, from sheer per-
plexity, to take another step. Never before in her
career had she met with so irritating a case, or one
so mysterious.
“ I have a good mind to throw it over,” she thought
crossly, for her head ached with the effort to solve
what was clearly beyond solution.
But the very mystery of the matter made her only
the more determined to get at the truth. Remaining
in town on that evening she tramped to the Piccadilly
Theatre in search of Mrs. O’Toole, and to the Trafal-
gar Square stand to see if Sir Samuel was engaged on
his usual business. In both cases she was disap-
pointed. Neither old Peggy nor Embers appeared;
16


and until she saw them and questioned them, the in-
quiry agent could not see what was to be done.
About ten o’clock, however, the unexpected hap-
pened. Returning to Golden Square, Lady Cobbin
caught sight of Sir Samuel driving his cab down
Regent Street. He drew up at Nichols’ Cafe, and
apparently was waiting for someone. At once Lady
Cobbin stepped forward. He started when he saw
her, but did not look afraid. But then, as she re-
flected, he was a man of great self-control.
“Where is Paddy O’Toole?” she asked point
blank.
“ I wish I knew,” growled the baronet, fiddling
with his wheel.
“ Don’t you know?” she demanded, wondering if
he was lying.
“ No. I went to the hospital yesterday, and found
that old Peggy had taken him away. I called at the
Adelphi cellar, but she had not turned up. Where
she is I want to know. I was coming to you in the
morning to ask.”
“ How should I know?” demanded Lady Cobbin
promptly.
“ Well, you have this Gerson case in hand. Mendle
told me all about your dealings in the matter. I
expect you hold the threads.”
“ I hold one, at all events,” said Lady Cobbin
significantly. “ You have got Paddy out of the
way.”
“ I?” Embers stared. “ Why should I?”
“ Perhaps because you did not want Paddy, who
was hanging on behind the cab at the top of Shore
Lane, to know that you were talking there with
Arthur Gerson.”


Embers started, grew confused, and flushed a brick
red. “ I don’t know what you are chattering about,”
he declared so loudly that one or two passers-by
looked round. ” I haven’t set eyes on Paddy since I
saw him in the hospital. As to meeting Arthur,
I ”
“ Don’t deny it; you did.”
“ Who can prove* that?”
“ Miss Harriet Lane.”
Embers’ face fell. “Well, yes, 1 was there,” he
acknowledged gruffly.
“ Why didn’t you say so at the inquest?”
“ What, and incriminate myself? No, thank you.
1 should have denied it now, but that I know Miss
Lane can prove my presence.”
“ What were you doing there?”
“ What was I doing?” cried Embers, lashing him-
self into a rage. “ I came after my cab. Arthur stole
it from the Edgware Road ”
“ And you remained until midnight in the Green
Man bar ?”
“ I said that at the inquest to save being asked
questions. But I really went to Shore Lane. Arthur
told me that he had to meet that Darton chap there,
so I went into the City on the chance. I went by
’bus, if you want to know.”
“ What happened?”
“ I had a row with him over the cab ”
“ And over Darton’s papers, which ”
Sir Samuel interrupted Lady Cobbin rudely. “ I
know nothing about any papers. Arthur explained
that he wanted the cab ”
“ Why?”
“ Because he—oh, I don’t know, but I—that
243
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


is ” Embers stuttered and stumbled, and finally
uttered an ejaculation of relief as his fare came out of
the cafe. “ Jump in, Sir ! ” and the cab was whirling
down the street before Lady Cobbin could remon-
strate.
Not that she wanted to, doubtful as she was of
Embers and his confession. There was no need to
make a public scandal, and she had not sufficient
grounds to go upon, to beckon to the nearest police-
man, let alone the fact that no warrant was out for
the Baronet’s arrest. Lady Cobbin turned into
Golden Square with the determination that if Embers
did not come and see her in the morning she would
go and see him. His confusion, his pretended ignor-
ance, his denial of knowing Paddy’s whereabouts all
pointed to the fact that if not himself guilty of the
murder, he knew who had strangled the unfortunate
man. Lady Cobbin’s suspicions began to waver con-
cerning Parley, and she reached her office almost con-
vinced that Sir Samuel was the long-wanted assassin.
Then she met with a surprise. As she ascended the
stairs she met Dr. Darton coming down. “ I have
been here twice,” said the Doctor, who looked
excited, “ and was just going away again.”
“ What is it?” she asked anxiously.
“ I have something to tell you which may solve the
whole of this mystery,” said Darton eagerly, as they
mounted the stairs again. ” I could not wait until
the morning, although I only received the letter by
the six o’clock post.”
“ What letter?” asked Lady Cobbin, passing into
the inner room of her office and unlocking her desk.
“ Have you a match ?”
“ Yes.” Darton lighted the gas, which flared up


brilliantly. While the owner of the office drew the
curtains he went on talking: “I have received an
anonymous letter saying that for five hundred pounds
the papers will be restored to me.”
“What papers?” asked Milady, forgetting for
the moment.
“ Why, the papers which were stolen from the dead
man.”


CHAPTER XXL
A GREAT SURPRISE.
Lady Cobbin made no immediate reply. She stood
quite still for one minute with a look of startled sur-
prise on her strong face, and then began mechanically
to move about the office, changing the position of the
many vases which held flowers. Dr. Darton was
somewhat annoyed by her evident indifference. No
one likes to have sensational news received without
comment.
“You do not seem to think much of my intelli-
gence,” he remarked in a vexed tone, and threw him-
self into an armchair petulantly.
“ I think a very great deal of it,” she answered,
seating herself before the desk, “ only I am wondering
if the letter is a hoax.”
Darton sat up, gripping the arms of his chair.
“ Why should it be ?”
“ Well I” Lady Cobbin, leaning her elbows on the
blotting-papers, placed her finger tips together, medi-
tatively. “ Common-sense tells us that Arthur
Gerson was murdered for the sake of those papers.”
“ No.” Darton flung up a protesting hand, “we
discussed that the last time we met. I can see no
reason why anyone should murder for the sake of
papers which are of no value.”
“You forget,” said Lady Cobbin dryly, “the
value, according to the anonymous letter, is five hun-
dred pounds.”


“ Would not a man value his life at a higher sum ?”
“ Yes, that is what makes me doubt the honesty of
the communication, Doctor. Let us presume for the
sake of argument that the assassin murdered Arthur
to get the papers. Would he place himself in your
hands for he sake of five hundred pounds.”
“Well, yes,” Darton hesitated, “I think so.
You see the assassin, knowing what the papers con-
tain, counts upon my silence about his crime as the
price about his silence of my secret.”
“ It must be a very terrible secret,” said Lady
Cobbin, curiously. Darton took a cigarette from the
box on the desk, and shrugged. ‘‘lt is not so
terrible, as disgraceful,” he said in a low voice.
‘‘Disgraceful? No.” Lady Cobbin looked at
him very directly. “ I can never believe that a man
who spoke as you did the other day would be guilty
of anything disgraceful.”
‘‘You are a very staunch comrade,” replied
Darton, with a gratified look, “ and you are right to
believe that lam decent. The secret concerns those
before me, and afterwards me also. The best plan
will be to let you read the papers for yourself.”
“Oh ” Lady Cobbin sat up alertly, “ then you
intend to pay this five hundred pounds.”
“ Yes, because I not only wish to £et back the
papers, but also I wish to learn the name of Arthur’s
assassin, so that Belinda may not be sacrificed to
Mendle. And I have come to you,” went on Darton
rapidly, “ to ask if you can obtain for me the money.”
“ Humph 1” Lady Cobbin slowly selected a cigar-
ette, “ you have not the amount, I presume.”
‘‘No. I have very little ready money. I don’t say
but what I could not get the money by selling out


stock, but I do not wish to do so, unless I am obliged.
If you can get me a loan of the five hundred pounds
at a moderate percentage for two or three years, I am
willing to give the stock for security. Then I can pay
off the loan and interest by hard work, and thus keep
my savings intact.”
“ But why do you come to me Doctor?”
‘ Because I think you,, who know everything, are
likely to know who would lend the money. Also I
come because you are interested in this mysterious
case, and finally I ask you, for the simple reason that
we are comrades. The test of our friendship, if you
remember, was to be that you should help me to marry
Belinda.”
Lady Cobbin nodded, and was secretly pleased to
find that she could nod without wincing. The
fermentation of passion had evidently passed, leaving
behind the strong, pure wine of friendship. “ Let us
presume that I can arrange to let you have the
money,” she said, “ what then ?”
Darton produced an envelope from his pocket-book.
This will explain in detail,” he observed, passing
along a letter which he took from the envelope in
question.
Milady adjusted her eye-glass, and read a few
printed lines on a sheet of common white paper with
blue lines, apparently torn from a school exercise-
book. The communication read as follows :
The important papers lost by you some time ago
will be returned to you on payment of five hundred
pounds in gold. If you agree, advertise in the
ai y Telegraph, stating time and place during the
next three days. Should you bring the police into


the matter, the woman you love is lost. Also, the
contents of the papers will be revealed.”
“ Humph I” Lady Cobbin placed the paper on the
desk. “ Someone else accuses Belinda, it would
seem.”
“No,” replied Darton decisively; ‘‘that is bluff.
Belinda cannot possibly have anything to do with the
matter. The papers are in the possession of the
assassin, and he wants five hundred for them. The
real threat to prevent official interference lies in the
statement that the contents of the papers may be made
public. The hint about Belinda is only, so to speak,
a second string to the assassin’s bow.”
“It might be so. Well,” she turned briskly,
“ what do you intend to do?”
“ Advertise that if the anonymous writer will call at
eleven o’clock on the day after to-morrow, I shall hand
over five hundred pounds, and keep silence.”
Milady nodded, and yet looked puzzled. “‘ That
will be your best plan,” she said thoughtfully, “ and
yet I cannot believe that the assassin would be so
foolish as to entrust himself with you.”
“ But he has made himself safe.”
‘‘ In a way. All the same ” —she broke off quickly.
‘‘ I see 1 The assassin will not come himself, but will
send someone else.”
“ That would be just as dangerous, in the event ctf
my asking the police to interfere.”
“ No. The assassin may have arranged for the
third person to send him the five hundred, less a com-
mission, and the third person may not know the name
of the assassin or where he is to be found.”
Dr. Darton rose and began to pace the office. “ Oh,
that is entirely impossible,” he declared brusquely;


“ no individual would undertake a dangerous missio
ike that without being in league with the man wh
committed the murder. If a third person is sent, the
t lat third person shares the plunder with the crimina
though Pm puzzled to know why the demand shoul
e for so comparatively small sum of money, conside
mg the danger to both. And then—why, what is th
matter ? he asked, seeing Lady Cobbin suddenly ris
and clap her hands.
Eureka I” she cried, in excited tones; “ I believ
that I see light.”
“ I’m hanged if I do.”
“ Paddy O’Toole,” said Lady Cobbin rapidly; “ he
has disappeared with his mother, and cannot be found
1 thought that the assassin had got rid of him to close
his mouth.”
But, from what I heard and read in the papers, the
oy as forgotten all that took place, and the injury—”
Poohl” interrupted Lady Cobbin contemp-
tuously, “ the boy is as cunning as Satan. He made
use of that injury to pretend that he had lost his
memory. Mrs. O Toole hinted as much. I see now.
She took Paddy out of the hospital, and to a secret
place, so that the police should not find the boy in the
Adelphi cellar. Peggy has made him tell the truth,
an as gone to the assassin. From him she procured
the papers to sell to you. Hence the smallness of the
sum emanded. Five hundred pounds is immense
wealth to Peggy. Mark my words, Dr. Darton, Mrs.
oo e will be the person who will come with the
papers. If you will take my advice you will have
Hake and a constable in hiding to arrest
No, said Darton, buttoning up his coat, “ that


won’t do. I can’t set a trap like that. You get me
the five hundred pounds at once, and I’ll appoint
eleven o’clock on the day after to-morrow for the
meeting at my office. I have drawn out the adver-
tisement, and am now going to the newspaper office to
put it in. But I shall want you to be present, if you
please.”
“And why?”
“ Because I want you to receive the papers, and
read them. I have no secrets from you.”
‘‘Thank you,” replied Lady Cobbin, her face
brightening.
‘‘And the five hundred?” he inquired.
‘‘ I’ll have it brought to your rooms from the bank.”
“ Then will you see my lawyer to-morrow —I’ll take
you to him—and you can receive the security.”
Lady Cobbin laughed. ‘‘ I’ll trust you, for the
time being.”
Darton laughed also. ‘‘You are a true comrade,”
he said, shaking hands; ‘‘ but I would rather you took
the security.”
‘‘Very well,” she replied in a business-like way,
‘‘ Good-night!”
When the Doctor disappeared Lady Cobbin put her
papers away and locked up her desk. She lingered
for a few minutes over the anonymous letter, which
she had retained, and wondered who had sent it.
There was no knowledge to be gained from the printed
lines or from the stationery, or from the Post-office
stamp. The letter had been posted in Central London,
and the paper was extremely common. These facts
led Lady Cobbin to believe that the letter came from
Mrs. O’Toole, but then she recollected that the
ignorant Irishwoman could not write. The printing


was very neatly done, and showed a trained hand, so if
the letter had come from old Peggy she must have
en g a g ed someone to compose and write it.
\\ hile Lady Cobbin was thinking thus, a knock
came to the outer door. She hastily put the letter in
hei< safe and went to see who was calling. Scarcely
had she opened the door when Sir Samuel Embers
entered in an angry mood. His face was red and his
eyes were flashing. He seemed to control his temper
—what was left of it—with difficulty, and could
scarcely speak intelligibly.
Is it true that that Mendle is engaged to
Belinda?” he asked hurriedly.
" Who told you ?” demanded Lady Cobbin.
Miss Lane. After seeing you I drove to Clement
Street and asked her why she had given me away.”
How did she give you away ?”
t “ She told yOU that 1 was at the to P of Sh ore Lane.
1 did not want that to be known.”
“ Ah I you are afraid.”
“ No, lam not,” protested Embers heatedly. “ I
have nothing to do with the murder. Arthur said
that he wanted the cab in order to drive Mendle home
and have a talk with him. So I went away, and he
promised, after he had taken Mendle home to Ken-
sington, to drive the cab home to the garage. I left
rt ur with the cab at the top of Shore Lane.”
-ad [y Cobbin looked at Him sharply, but it was so
dark that she could not see his face very plainly. They
were still standing at the outer door, and she asked
him to come inside. He refused to come.
“ You’ll only ask a lot of silly questions,” he said
impatiently. ‘ ‘Goo’ Chris’ferl D’y think I’ve time


to talk ? What I want to know is, if that beastly
Mendle is to marry Belinda.”
“ Yes,” said Lady Cobbin promptly. “ And I want
to know ”
“ If I killed Arthur,” burst out Embers rudely. “ I
didn’t. I had nothing to do with the matter. Paddy
knows.”
“ And you know where Paddy is to be found.”
”I ? Who says that ?”
“ Mr. Mendle suggests ”
“ Oh, hang him and his suggestion !” cried Embers
with great anger. “ I expect he’s trying to hang me
for Arthur’s murder. As if I knew anything about
it!”
” But if you took Paddy away and ”
“ I didn’t take him away. And I’m going to hunt
him up, if I have to take a lifetime in doing so. He
knows who killed Arthur, and I want to learn the
truth.”
“ Why do you?”
” Because Belinda will perhaps marry me if I do.”
Lady Cobbin laughed. “ I don’t think that she
cared so much for her selfish brother as to do that. If
she marries anyone, she will become the wife of Dr.
Darton. But, if you are innocent ”
Innocent? Of course I am! I never heard such
rubbish in asking me such a silly question. Goo’
Chris’fer, what bosh I It seems to me that I’ll have to
find Paddy O’Toole for my own sake, as well as for
that of Miss Gerson. And I’m going to marry her.
She’s a pretty girl, and she has money.”
“How unselfish,” said Milady ironically. “But
Mendle ”
“ Oh, the deuce take Mendle! He’s a beastly little
253
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


shrimp. Goo’ niV’ He stepped down the stairs, and
called back, “ When you next see me, that boy will be
with me, and then the truth will be told.”
Lady Cobbin came out on to the landing to detain
him if possible, but he rushed away in a hurry, still
bubbling over with anger at the thought that Belinda
Gerson and her fortune were slipping out of his
hands. Milady returned to her office, locked it up, and
went away home, wondering all the way if he were
really guilty. She began to think that he was not,
seeing how anxious he was to produce the boy who
knew the whole truth. Certainly the excuse he had
given about lending the cab to the dead man was
weak. Arthur could easily have engaged Embers to
drive the cab, and could have sat inside with Mendle
to talk over business. There seemed to be some-
thing wholly wrong about the matter. But Lady
Cobbin s head was aching by this time, as the more
she thought the more confused she grew. All she
held on to was the thought that within forty-eight
hours, more or less, the truth might be revealed in
Darton’s consulting-room.
Next day the advertisement duly appeared in the
Daily 7 elegraph, and late in the afternoon the Doctor
received a wire which intimated that the sender of the
letter would be at the appointed place. This wire was
also sent from Central London, and Lady Cobbin
passed the rest of the day and the whole of the night
in wondering who had sent it. Embers was apparently
innocent, as he was not sufficiently clever to hide the
truth, presuming that he was the guilty person. Mrs.
O Toole certainly might have done so, but that was
quite uncertain, Mendle was innocent, and so was
Belinda and her half-sister, while the wire having


come to Darton himself put him out of the category of
possible culprits. There only remained Parley, and,
on the authority of the tri-coloured scarf, Lady
Cobbin began to believe that the old clerk was the
assassin. But she said nothing of this to anyone, as
she was quite tired of advancing theories. They all
seemed to prove futile.
At a quarter to eleven next morning Lady Cobbin
went to Elder Square and presented herself before the
Doctor. After a short conversation, she suggested that
she should be hidden behind the folding doors which
parted the consulting-room from the waiting-room;
but this Darton did not approve of.
“ I don’t like doing underhand things,” he said.
“ But you must be wise,” she urged. “ Whoever
is coming with a knowledge of the assassin’s name
will probably know me, as 1 have been so mixed up in
the matter. This person will not speak freely if 1 am
in the room. Better let me hide behind those curtains,
and when it is necessary I can appear.”
Finally, Darton gave way and opened the folding
doors slightly. These were draped with heavy rep
curtains, so Lady Cobbin concealed herself behind
these, seated on a chair, and could both hear and see
what was going on. Also she obtained from her
hiding-place on excellent view of the door.
Just as eleven struck, a ring came to the outer door.
Shortly the maid-servant showed in the visitor. The
door of the consulting-room opened, and then both
Lady Cobbin and the Doctor were amazed.
On the threshold stood Belinda Gerson.


CHAPTER XXII.
DR. DARTON’S SECRET.
“You are surprised to see me,” said Belinda,
entering the room, as the maid closed the door behind
her. She looked extremely pale and was dressed in
mourning for her brother.
Considering that you have broken your engage-
ment with me to marry Mr. Mendle, I am,” said the
Doctor bitterly.
“I can explain that. Meanwhile ”
“Meanwhile,” broke in Darton coldly, ‘‘l must
ask you to postpone your explanation, as I am expect-
ing a visitor.”
“In answer to your advertisement in the Daily
Telegraph ?”
1 he Doctor took a step forward, both startled and
amazed. “Do you know about that?” he gasped,
staring at her.
“Yes I Because”— she hesitated—”! am the
visitor.”
“ Belinda!” he stared harder than ever. “ Did you
write that letter?”
seemec * to be well aware of what he referred to.
No!” she said curtly.
“ Then if you did not ”
Belinda stopped him. ‘‘ I know who wrote the
letter, and I have come here in place of the writer.”
Do you mean to say that you know who murdered
your brother, cried Darton indignantly, ‘‘and are
trying to shield him ?”


“ I say nothing, because I have promised to hold
my tongue.”
“ But this man ”
“ I did not say that the writer was a man.”
“ A woman?” asked the Doctor; then as she did
not reply, he continued hastily, “ I understand. It is
Harriet Lane, who ”
“ I said nothing about Harriet.”
“ I infer from your hint that the assassin is a
woman ; that ’
Belinda interposed again. “ Pardon me, I never
said that the assassin was a woman. I say nothing.
I deny your right to ask me any questions. All I have
to do is to give you certain papers in return for five
hundred pounds, and- ”
“You have read the papers,” interrupted Darton,
hastily.
“ No,” she replied proudly. “ I have not read
them, as I understand from the person referred to,
that they contained private matters which you did not
wish known.”
“ I have no wish to keep them secret, now,” said
the Doctor in a low voice. “You can read them if
you choose.”
“ I have not the right—now.”
“Why not?”
“ I am engaged to Lewis.”
It was not Darton who replied to this remark.
“ And you are shielding Mr. Mendle,” said Lady
Cobbin, and appeared from behind the curtain.
“You!” Belinda’s eyes grew angry, and after a
disdainful look at the inquiry agent, she turned to
look reproachfully at the Doctor. “ So you are willing
to set a spy on me,” she said, with emotion.
17


“ That is not true,” he rejoined spiritedly. “ I did
not know that you were coming to see me. Lady
Cobbin ”
“ Milady, the spy,” said Belinda, cruelly.
“ Quite right,” struck in the older woman,
although her cheeks flushed at the pointed contempt,
“lam here in my official capacity. Dr. Darton has
en £ a £> e d me > since Mr. Mendle has given me my dis-
charge.”
“ And why?” demanded Belinda, still disdainfully.
“You ask that? Can you not guess? Don’t you
understand that this man,” Lady Cobbin indicated
the Doctor, “ still loves you, and is not prepared to
accept your sacrifice ? He wishes me to discover the
truth about this murder, so that you may be saved
from a marriage with Mr. Mendle. When the anony-
mous letter came he asked me to come here; but it was
my suggestion that I should hide. Had anyone save
yourself, Miss Gerson, appeared, I should have re-
mained in hiding so as to learn the truth. But, for
my own sake, for the sake of Dr. Darton, I have
revealed my presence. You are prejudiced against
me because of my calling. But am I worse than you,
Miss Gerson, who believe the man who loves you to
be a murderer?”
“ I do not believe it,” flashed out Belinda furiously.
“ Then why did you engage yourself to Mr.
Mendle ?”
“ Because Lewis swore that Wilfred was guilty,
and threatened to denounce him. I hate Lewis,
because he has tricked me into an engagement, and I
love Wilfred still.”
Belinda, you really love me?” cried the Doctor.
“ What further proof do you require?” sfle asked


furiously. “Am I not content to marry a man I
detest because I can save you in no other way? Oh,
Wilfred, how badly you have treated me! Had you
only shown me those papers which Arthur stole, and
which caused his death, there would have been no
crime committed.”
“ Perhaps not,” answered Darton gloomily. “But
I was ashamed to show you the papers.”
“ Why should you be? There is nothing in those
papers, or irt the world, which would make me turn
my back on you. Trust me all in all, or not at all.
If you can be saved, in spite of Lewis, I am willing to
come back to you. I am quite within my rights to
break an engagement with Lewis, if he has tricked
m _ > >
me.
“ And he has tricked you,” cried Lady Cobbin
earnestly. “ Dr. Darton is perfectly innocent,
and ”
n I don’t need you to assure me of that,” cried
Belinda proudly, ” all through these dreadful weeks
I have believed in Wilfred’s innocence, but I agreed
to marry Lewis, because I could see no other way in
which to save the man I loved.”
“ The man you loved ?”
“ The man I still love. Only prove to me that
Lewis can do him no harm and ” Belinda flung
out her arms.
In another second Darton had folded her to his
breast. “I am safe from Mendle,” he said rapidly;
“ his malice cannot hurt me in any way. There is no
need that you should sacrifice yourself for me. But I
now see how much you love me. But I thought that
you believed me to be guilty ”
“ I never did —I never did.”


I know that, now, and so I ask you to come back
to me.”
Belinda smiled through her tears. “It seems to
me that I have come back.”
“ You will never leave me again ?”
“ Never! Never! Never,” and she clung to him as
a chdd to its mother. Wilfred raised her face and
pressed a long kiss on her lips. Lady Cobbin did
wince at that, in spite of her valiant renunciation.
The sight of these two clinging together made her
feel the loneliness of her life to a painful extent.
However, she had made up her mind to accept the
inevitable, and advanced with a wry smile on her lips.
~ * And 1 ho P e > Mi ss Gerson,” she said quietly,
that you will accept me as a friend, as you have
accepted Dr. Darton as a husband.”
Belinda disengaged herself and looked irresolutely
at t}ie woman’s strong calm face. “You seem to be
good,” she faltered.
She is good,” cried Darton heartily, “she is a
true friend to us both, Belinda. And in her hands
lies the chance of proving my innocence to the world
by discovering the assassin of Arthur.”
But I know that you are innocent,” Belinda
assured him.
“So does Mendle. All the same, he will do his
est to prove that I am guilty, unless the true mur-
derer can be found.”
“ Then there is still danger?”
“No,” broke in Lady Cobbin resolutely. “Dr.
arton can prove an alibi. He was attending to a
patient in Charing Cross Road when your brother was
murdered in the City. Even Mr. Mendle’s malice
cannot prove that Dr. Darton is guilty.”
260
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ Then I need not marry Lewis.”
“You shall marry me,” whispered Darton fer-
vently, ‘‘and Lady Cobbin will rob Mendle of his
sting.”
“ If Miss Gerson will accept me as a friend,” said
the inquiry agent.
Belinda came impulsively towards her and took her
hand. ‘‘ I do! I do! I really do!” she said quickly;
“ and you must forgive me that I feared you. But
I thought that Lewis had engaged you to discover the
truth, and I fancied that you were Wilfred’s enemy.”
“ She is my best friend,” said the Doctor.
Lady Cobbin looked at him gratefully. “ I shall
try and prove myself to be so,” was her reply,
delivered with emotion. “ And you, Miss Gerson, I
believe in you. I trust you. lam your friend also.”
“ In that case we may as well get to business.
These papers ”
Belinda took a packet out of her pocket and handed
it to her lover. “ There they are,” she said. “As
to the five hundred ”
‘‘Who wants that money?” demanded Lady
Cobbin.
Belinda hesitated. “ I promised not to tell.”
‘‘You must tell. The person who owns those
papers killed Arthur.”
“ I can’t believe that.”
“ Then how did the person become possessed of
them?”
“ He did not explain.”
“ Ah.” Lady Cobbin looked triumphant. “ Then
it is a man.”
“ Oh, don’t ask me—don’t ask me, now.” Belinda
looked distressed.


Later will do,” said Darton, humouring her.
Belinda’s face brightened. “ I believed that Lew
could harm you,” she said rapidly, “ and so I wa
prepare to marry him. Later a person came to m
came to the house to see Harriet, who—why do yo
s art she asked as Lady Cobbin rose from her chair
Nothing! nothing, answered the inquiry agen
quickly. She was really recalling how Sir Samue
bad gone to Clement Street to reproach Harriet for
betraying him, and wondered if he had given the
papers to Belinda.
.. i!^ 6 glrl cast a look of wonder at her and continued.
Ihe person I can’t tell you his name, as yet-
cxp aine to me that he had become possessed of
cer am papers which were wanted by the police, as
emg connected with the murder. They belonged to
you, ilfred, he said, and he declared that he had
written saying that they would be returned for five
undred pounds. As the person was afraid to keep
the appointment himself lest the police should be here,
asked me to come and get the money. I accepted
6 P . eTSOn told me that if 1 did not, you,
i re , wou d be arrested on his information, as
having murdered Arthur. I had sacrificed myself
ore to save >ou, so I did so again by bringing these
papers to you. Oh, Wilfred I” she threw her arms
h °!j im a sorrow , “give me the five
n re pounds and let me give them to the person
who trusted me. If I tell you his name, or fail to
bring the money, he will go to Inspector Hake.”
Let him go, said Milady, now aware that the
person was masculine.
‘ Hoi No I I cannot be sure that Wilfred is safe.”


“ But he is,” insisted the inquiry agent, “ admitting
that the papers caused the crime ”
“ They did not,” broke in Darton impatiently. “ I
have said that before and say it again.” He rapidly
began to untie the string which bound up the papers.
“ Belinda, you shall hear my secret, which concerns
no one but you and me. Lady Cobbin, you shall
hear also, and then you can judge if it was worth
anyone’s while to commit a murder to steal them.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. She would have preferred
to have gone on questioning Belinda in the hope of
learning the name of the man who had used her as
a tool, but feminine curiosity prevailed. She half
guessed that Belinda’s unknown accomplice was Sir
Samuel Embers, therefore could wait until the name
was spoken. But the secret of the doctor had always
piqued her curiosity, so she was anxiousl to learn it.
“ Will you read the papers? ” she asked.
“ It is not worth while,” said Wilfred, pausing, as
the knot was hard to untie. “ I can explain in a few
words, and then you and Belinda here can read the
proofs for yourself.” He hesitated, then turned to
the girl. “ I told you that I was the heir to a
baronetcy.”
“ Yes,” she nodded wonderingly; “ you explained
that your elder and only brother was sickly, and that
when he died you would inherit.”
“ Quite so. Well, then, I heard that he was ill, and
went to see him. A distant cousin was there —a man
who has always hated me. Failing me, he inherits the
baronetcy and six thousand a year. From him I
learned ” —Darton hesitated again and grew red —“ I
learned that I was illegitimate.”


Belinda opened her eyes wide. " Then this is your
secret?” J
Yes. Can you wonder that I desired to conceal
my disgrace from the world ? This cousin learned the
truth from an old nurse. My mother ran away with—
but there, the whole miserable story is in these
papeis he laid his hand on the packet. “ I denied
the truth, but my cousin brought out these papers and
proved that I had no right to the title of my father, or
to his money. My brother died, and then, as I could
do nothing, my cousin succeeded. I kept the papers
by me, intending td destroy them. But one day, in
talking to Arthur, I was foolish enough to let drop a
hint of my failure to inherit and the existence of the
papers. Arthur came here when I was absent and
broke open yonder desk. He intended to show you
the papers, so that the marriage might be stopped. I
implored him not to, and he said that he would sell
back the papers. He appointed a meeting place at the
top of Shore Lane at half-past eleven. Why in that
place and at that hour I cannot say. I went there at
the time appointed, and he did not appear, so I came
home. So you can see that no one would benefit by
stealing the papers. They were of no value to anyone
save to me. I only wanted them because they betrayed
a disgraceful secret to— —”
„ ellnda rose and placed her arms round his neck.
ou foolish, foolish boy,” she said, and her eyes
were filled with tears. “ Did you think that a silly
thing hke that would make any difference to my love
for you ? You should have told Arthur to show me
the papers. They would not have stopped our mar-
riage.”


“ But I am a nameless person, Belinda,” said the
Doctor humbly.
“ You are the man I love,” she cried, kissing him.
“ And my friend,” said Lady Cobbin, grasping his
hand. ‘‘Pooh, pooh! who ever heard of anyone
bothering over such a thing? You are very lucky to
be illegitimate, as it does away with any trouble with
relatives. I must say, Doctor, that lam astonished at
your fears regarding this family secret becoming
known.”
‘‘ But the disgrace ”
“ There is no disgrace,” interrupted Miss Gerson
vehemently. ‘‘You need not trouble any more. I love
you more than ever, you silly boy,” and again she
kissed him. “ Oh, Wilfred, Wilfred, if you had only
believed in my love you would have defied Arthur,
and this crime would never have been committed.”
Darton shook his head. “ I don’t know; but lam
sure that Arthur was never murdered for the posses-
sion of these papers.”
Yes, he was,” burst out Lady Cobbin, who could
no longer restrain her curiosity. “ Arthur stole the
papers because he thought that if Belinda knew that
you were illegitimate she would not marry you. The
man who murdered him believed the same, and when
Arthur was about to sell the papers back to you he got
them so as to bring about his own marriage.”
‘‘His own marriage!” Belinda started. ‘‘Of
whom are you talking?”
Of the assassin—of the man who gave vou the
papers. Sir Samuel ”
“ No, no! You are quite wrong. I received the
papers from Robert Parley.”


CHAPTER XXIII.
ARTHUR’S STORY
A silence ensued when Belinda pronounced the
name of the old clerk. It was the name which Lady
Cobbin half expected to hear, in spite of her sus-
picions regarding the baronet. Nevertheless she ex-
pressed her surprise, as she could not understand why
Parley should have used Belinda as a messenger,
unless ”
“ Parley must be the guilty person,” she said, after
a pause.
“ No, no I” cried Belinda, “ that is impossible.”
“ Did he tell you where he got the papers?”
“No; I never asked him. To tell you the truth,”
added Belinda, putting her hand to her head, “ I was
so confused and so anxious for the safety of Wilfred
that it never occurred to me that the person who pos-
sessed the papers had murdered Arthur.”
“Yet you heard what was said at the inquest ?”
“ Yes, but I fancied it was merely a theory; and,
according to what Wilfred says, the papers were use-
less to everyone save himself.”
“ Well,” said Lady Cobbin slowly, “ we will grant
that the boy was not murdered for the sake of the
papers; but the assassin found them on him, and kept
them beside him, so as to make use of them later.”
“ I can’t believe that Robert Parley is guilty,” said
Belinda, frowning. “ After all, what reason had he
to kill Arthur?”


“ A very good one,” said Lady Cobbin grimly.
“ He hated Arthur because he treated Ellen so badly.
The poor girl had a most unhappy life.”
“ But if Parley was in the office all the evening—”
“ Ah, we don’t know if he was. Mr. Mendle re-
mained out for a considerable time. During his
absence Parley might have been out also.”
“ Yes; but when Mr. Mendle came back he would
have discovered Parley’s absence,” urged Dr. Darton
with an air of fatigue.
” Mr. Mendle had every reason to hold his tongue,”
replied the inquiry-agent, quickly, “ indeed, he said
that he had bribed Parley with the promise of a small
income to hold his tongue.”
“ That rather goes to prove Parley’s innocence,”
argued the Doctor. “ If he were guilty, Mendle could
have made him hold his tongue by threatening to
report his absence to the police.”
“Humph!” Lady Cobbin fiddled with her eye-
glass. “ I really don’t know how much of Mr.
Mendle’s story is true. Then again, I have seen
young Mrs. Gerson and she told me that, besides the
income from Mr. Mendle, her father expected to get a
large sum of money. She would not tell me from
whom, or in what way. But you, Miss Gerson, supply
the answer. Parley referred to the five hundred which
was to come from the sale of these papers to Dr.
Darton. I have the money in the next room in gold.
I had it brought from the bank by a special messenger.
But there is nothing to be done now, save to take back
the money to the bank, and ”
“ And then Parley will denounce Wilfred,” cried
Belinda, terrified.
“ Parley will have enough to do to look after him


self, said Lady Cobbin, dryly. “ Luring the pro-
gress of this strange case, I have suspected many
people) wrongfully; but now I really believe that we
have learned the truth. Parley is the murderer.”
“ How can you prove that ?”
By the scarf. \ou remember, Miss Gerson, how
I asked you about the scarf ? Arthur did not wear it
on the night.”
“ But if he was strangled with it ”
Precisely. He was strangled with it, and by
Parley. Mrs. Gerson told me that Arthur left it
behind. Her father, when going to the office, to work
overtime, put it on. She did not know what such an
admission meant to her father. But lam sure that it
will be sufficient to hang him.”
But if Arthur was murdered at eleven ” began
Larton, argumentatively.
Lady Cobbin interposed. ” The medical evidence
said that ; but the murder may have taken place later.
Let us leave a margin, and say between eleven and
half-past. Parley must have slipped out and have
murdered the boy because he hated him for ill-
treating Ellen, which he certainly did.”
Arthur was always half-mad,” lamented Belinda.
Still, how could Parley have known that Arthur
would be at Shore Lane ?”
Arthur may have told him, or Ellen, and have
boasted at the sum of money he intended to get from
Dr. Darton. In fact, if you remember what Ellen said
at your house, Miss Gerson, you will recall that
Arthur hinted about the papers being worth money.
Oh, in one or two ways Parley may have learned
of Arthur’s movements on that night. When Mr.
Mendle escaped from the cab, leaving Sir Samuel and


Arthur together, Parley probably arrived, and when
Sir Samuel went, he may have strangled his son-in-
law.”
“ No,” said Darton, “ in that case Parley could not
have brought the cab to the office. He cannot drive a
motor.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. “I am with you there,” she
said. “The case is certainly most perplexing.
Unless,” she continued after a pause, “ Parley mur-
dered Arthur, and then Sir Samuel drove the cab to
the office, while Parley walked. He would be able to
slip into the outer room while Sir Samuel—leaving
the cab-—escaped towards Cheapside.”
“AM theory—all theory!” cried the Doctor, rous-
ing himself, and he began to untie the knot of the
string. “ The best thing to do is to see Parley and
hear what he has to say. Meanwhile, lam safe, and
Belinda is willing to marry me. The rest matters little.
Confound this knot!” he threw aside the packet, and
rose. Lady Cobbin, you can examine the papers
while I speak with Belinda. We have not had a con-
fidential talk for a long time.”
I.ady Cobbin nodded, and took up the packet “ I’ll
f° into the next room,” she said, smiling, and moved
towards the folding doors.
Belinda looked at her gratefully, as she had quite
f adv'r £k- d !r S,lke *.° the "’ onlan ’ and reco Sfmscd that
Cobbin desired to be a true friend. The inquire
agent closed the doors after her, and Dr. Darton found
himself alone with the girl whom he loved. ”At
T, sa ’ d ’ ® nd framing Belinda’s flushed face in
h.s wo hands, he kissed her. Thev were verv happy
fo the next ten minutes. Seated side by side on the
sofa, they held each other’s hands and looked into


each other s eyes, and forgot the hours of misery. The
sky, which had been so overcast, was now clear, and
the sunshine of love made the earth radiant with de-
light.
Oh I * sighed Belinda, her cheek against that of
her lover, “ I never thought to be happy again.’*
And you are happy, dearest?” he murmured
fondly, gathering her in his arms against the heart
which had so ached for this blissful moment.
With you—l am always happy with you, dajr-
ling. Oh, Wilfred, what a miserable time we have
had I”
All the more reason that we should enjoy the pre-
sent. After all, my own, if we had not endured trouble
we should not understand one another so well. I know
now that you are a good, true woman, who will believe
nothing against me and who will marry me in spite of
the blot on my escutcheon.”
As if that mattered,” said Belinda, clinging to
him. And now we can go away round the world. I
have plenty of money.”
People will say that I marrv you for that,” said
Wilfred bitterly.
Dear, what does it matter? Our true wealth lies
in love, and we have that for evermore. Living here
all alone, you have grown wretched, and this trouble
has made you morbid. Let us marry as soon as pos-
sible, and then take a tour round the world. We can
return in three or four years and settle somewhere
down the country. You need not practice unless you
wish to.”
My dear,” said Darton firmly, "I am not the
man to live upon my wife. But London has grown
objectionable to me, as I have had such a miserable


time in it. We shall travel, as you suggest, and then
go to live in the country. But I’ll buy a practice some-
where in the wilds of Yorkshire, where we can live
alone—you and I, in the desert with a bottle of wine
and a loaf of bread like old Omar.”
“ Oh!” Belinda sighed with delight at the picture.
” Let us put the past behind us as soon as possible.
When we are married we will never talk of our
misery.”
“ We shall marry in three months.”
” Why so late?” she asked quickly.
“ Your brother’s death ”
Wilfred, I owe nothing to Arthur. He made my
life miserable and treated you vilely. Ido not see
why we should consider him.”
Dear. He touched her cheek lightly in a caress-
ing way. “ Although poor Arthur sinned, he has paid
for his sin. Who are we to blame him ? Let us for-
give as well as forget. Moreover, it will be as well to
learn who murdered him before we marry, so that
everything may end before we begin our new life.”
“ ) Vilfred! ” She kissed him. “ I believe that you
are the best man in the world.”
~W O^T ld ’ if lam the stan dard of goodness,”
sa.d Wilfred with a laugh. “ You think too well of
me, my own 7”
..If 1 " 01 no 1” She kissed him at each word.
Who but a good man like you would forgive
_ rthur, seeing how he threatened you, and brought
this misery upon us?” g
■■ nonh ih a T our own faults ’” Said Darto " quietly,
n t think me a png, my dearest, but ”
f 7?. e g °! n ° further - A di screet knocking came to the
oldmg-doors, and immediately Lady Cobbin’s voice,


much excited, was heard. Wilfred hastened to open
the doors, and she entered the consulting-room, with
a sheaf of loose sheets in her hands.
n These are not the papers which deal with your
business,” she said, “although they were in the
packet also. I have left those on the table in the wait-
ing-room.”
“ Then I must get them,” said Dr. Darton
hurriedly, and slipped through the doors, while
Belinda stared at Lady Cobbin’s excitement.
“What are these other papers?” she asked
hurriedly.
“ They are written by your brother.”
“ By Arthur?”
“ Yes. And they contain his reason for taking the
cab, and for appointing the meeting at the top of
Shore Lane. My dear”—she addressed Belinda
seriously—“ your brother was quite mad —quite.
These,” she tapped the loose papers, “contain a
description of how he intended to murder Lewis
Mendle.”
“ But why should he write that out?” asked Dar-
ton, who had returned with his own especial papers in
his breast-coat pocket. “ A man would not be such a
fool as to incriminate himself I”
“ He expected to be drowned.”
“Oh I” cried Belinda, suddenly enlightened.
“ The waterproof envelope I”
“ Exactly,” said Lady Cobbin, seating herself.
“ But you can only understand, when I read the
papers.”
'Tell me shortly what they contain,” cried
Belinda, restlessly. “ Arthur’s writing is so difficult
to read that you will take hours.”


“ I have only taken a few minutes, said Lady
Cobbin with a smile. “ However, 111 tell you as
briefly as I can. Listen."
Wilfred sat down again on the sofa and Beiinda
nestled beside him, while Lady Cobbin. standing by
the table like a barrister about to address the court —
she had risen to emphasise her speech—took up the
papers. Refreshing her memory with these, she de-
tailed the extraordinary mad scheme bv which young
Gerson had hoped to revenge himself on Lewis
Mendle, whom he hated.
“Your brother,” said Lady Cobbin, looking par-
ticularly at Belinda, “ had such a hatred for Mr.
Mendle that he was willing to sacrifice his own life in
order to kill him.”
“ That does not sound like Arthur,” said Belinda;
“he was always a coward. He tried to kill Lewis
twice, but never himself.”
My dear, the boy was neurotic, and when a mans
nerves get the upper hand, he goes, what the Norse-
men call, berserk. To injure Mr. Mendle, vour
brother overcame his fear of death so far as to risk it.
He certainly hoped to save himself, but wrote out his
confession, that it might be found, were he drowned
along with his victim.”
“ T r he water proof envelope,” said Belinda again.
es. He placed the papers dealing with Dr. Lar-
on s secret, and also this confession, in a waterproof
remain uninjured ■■■■'■*"
Was to give him the chance of drowning Mr.
18


Mendle. But I had better explain more regularly.
Listen,” said Lady Cobbin again.
After a time she proceeded. “ Arthur says that he
tried to kill Mr. Mendle twice before, as he wanted the
money for himself and you, Miss Gerson ”
“ So that he might extort it from me,” said Belinda
bitterly.
“ Very probably. However, Arthur found that the
will of his father was too good in law for him to upset,
and so nothing remained but to get rid of Mr. Mendle.
Having failed twice, he took a very drastic way of
dealing with our friend. He knew that Embers drove
every night to the City to bring Mr. Mendle home.
Arthur stole the cab, so that he might drive to the
City, and when Mr. Mendle entered, he intended to
drive him down Shore Lane into the water. Being
inside the cab, Mr. Mendle would naturally be
drowned, but Arthur hoped to save himself. How-
ever, such was his hatred of Mr. Mendle that he ran
the risk of being drowned himself. Knowing that he
might die also, he wrote out this statement, as I said,
and placed it in a waterproof envelope, so that it might
not be injured.”
“ But why should he take all that trouble? ”
Lady Cobbin shrugged her shoulders. “Could I
explain that, I should be able to lecture on crimin-
ology. You, Dr. Darton, should know better than I
what impels criminals to betray themselves. Look
how many have written out confessions which have
hanged them; remember, also, how many have re-
turned to the place where their crime was committed.
A detective story-teller would certainly provide a more
reasonable criminal, since readers would find it hard
to believe that a man would behave apparently so aim


lessly. But this is real life, and Arthur Gerson,
cowardly and foolish, was willing to risk death him-
self to get rid of his enemy. More, he was willing
that his infamy should be revealed to the world by this
confession.”
“ It is beyond me,” said Dr. Darton, sighing.
11 And beyond all sane people,” said Lady Cobbin.
‘‘But this poor boy was certainly not responsible tor
his actions. He was mad.”
“ There was method in his madness,” said Wilfred,
pausing. “ But this does not explain the reason why
Shore Lane was chosen.”
“ It leads down to a wharf over which Arthur hoped
to drive the cab with Mr. Mendle within.”
‘‘Yes, I can see that; but why should it have
stopped at Shore Lane before going to the office?”
“ There was no need for it to go to the office,” said
Lady Cobbin quickly. “ Remember that Mr. Mendle
was inside the cab.”
“ But he escaped by the off-side.”
Exactly ! ’ Lady Cobbin reflected. “ It is difficult
to piece things together,” she said, after a pause, “ as
no sane person can follow the workings of a mad-
man’s mind. But, so far as I can see, it is in this way
that Arthur acted.” She paused again, wrinkling her
brow.
“ Go on,” urged Belinda, who was very pale and ill
at ease.
“ Well, Arthur decoyed Sir Samuel to the Green
Man in Edgware Road and stole the cab, intending to
drive to the City office and trap his victim. Mr.
Mendle, not thinking that Arthur was driving, would
undoubtedly have entered the cab and so have been
driven to his death. Probably Arthur intended to


arrive at Cade Lane at midnight —the usual time for
Embers to call —and therefore made the appointment
at Shore Lane to meet you, Doctor, so that he might
return the papers and get the money at half-past
eleven. This would just give him time, after a short
conversation with you, to get to Cade Lane.”
‘‘But why select such a meeting-place?” asked
Darton, perplexed.
“ Well,” said Lady Cobbin again, ‘‘ Arthur might
have desired to see if the lane was clear for his deed,
since there were policemen about. A meeting with
you, Doctor, would supply him with a motive to stop
the cab at such a point, and any passing policeman
would think nothing of seeing two gentlemen talking
together.”
“ At that hour and in such an awkward place!”
ejaculated Darton, “ I rather think a policeman would
have stopped to ask questions.”
‘‘ln that case Arthur would have excused himself
by explaining that he was meeting you on business.
Of course this is all theory,” explained Lady Cobbin
apologetically. “ I expect that the precise truth will
never be known, seeing that Arthur is dead.”
‘‘ Well, go on,” said Belinda, who began to be
weary.
Lady Cobbin glanced again at the papers. ‘‘ As
Arthur had run away with the cab from the Edgware
Road too early for the appointment, he went to the
Piccadilly Theatre to fill up time.”
‘‘ Why not to meet Harriet or me ?” asked Belinda.
“ Certainly, knowing that you would be out early,
he might have come for that purpose. But at all
events, we know that Mendle was hanging about the
theatre, out of jealousy, and entered the cab. Arthur


could have driven him off safely to Shore Lane, and,
after a chat with you, Doctor, could have rushed down
the incline into the river. What upset his plans was
the appearance of Harriet. Apparently she recognised
him, in spite of her denial; so, to prevent her making
any remark, he drove her to the City with Mendle.
He stopped, earlier than he intended, at the top of
Shore Lane —which was on the way to the office—in
order to get rid of her, and so pretended a breakdown.
She went away, leaving Mr. Mendle inside the cab,
and then Arthur intended, after he had risen from
examining the pretended breakdown, to get into the
cab and drive down the lane.”
“Without waiting for me?” asked Darton.
“ Yes. Having Mendle in his power, he could not
lose time. Then, again, Arthur was stopped by Sir
Samuel. To him, knowing that Mendle was within,
he talked about the papers belonging to you, Doctor,
hoping to detain Mendle by rousing his curiosity.”
“ Why should he think that Mr. Mendle would go
away?” asked Darton.
Lady Cobbin laughed. “ When a cab is driven by a
man who has twice attempted the life of his passenger,
it is wise for that passenger to escape if he can. Mr.
Mendle evidently thought so, and while Arthur was
talking to Sir .Samuel, he slipped out from the off-side
of the cab, which was in shadow, and escaped back to
his office. Then ”
“Then what?” asked Belinda, seeing that she
halted, confused.
Ladv Cobbin made a gesture of despair. “ T can’t
say, and even what I have said is all imagination on
mv part. Onlv Arthur could tell the exact truth of
what happened, and Arthur is dead. ATr. Mendle


certainly went back to the office, and Sir Samuel
swears that he departed, leaving Arthur with the cab,
on receiving his promise—which he never intended
to keep —that the cab would be taken to the garage
later. When alone, Arthur might have looked into
the cab and have found his victim flown. Then
Parley may have come behind and strangled him. Of
course, there remains the problem as to how the cab
was driven to Cade Lane. Sir Samuel may have re-
turned and have ”
“ No. T can’t see how Sir Samuel can be impli-
cated in the case,” said Darton. “ I believe that
Parley is guilty.”
Lady Cobbin folded up the papers in despair. “ I
am afraid to say who is guilty,” she said. “ I have
been wrong every time I have guessed.”
After that there was no more to be said.


CHAPTER XXIV.
PADDY O’TOOLE.
When Lady Cobbin returned to her office, she
ordered the boy to say that she was engaged, then sat
down to consider all that had taken place. T o say
that she was puzzled, is to speak weakly, for the
whole affair was incomprehensible to her. Even
with the aid of tobacco she could see no clue to lead
her out of the labyrinth.
After much thought, it struck her how impossible it
was to fathom the depths of the case, since the whole
of it rose from a madman’s brain. Undoubtedly
Arthur Gerson was quite insane. His wild life, his
two attempts to murder Mendle, and his resolve to
sacrifice his own life rather than allow his victim to
escape—these things pointed to a weak brain. The
boy had been born hysterical and neurotic, and, never
having been trained to control himself, had allowed
his passions to run riot. From all that Lady Cobbin
knew, the lawyer had not been an unkind guardian.
He had allowed the boy one thousand a year, and
had never grudged him extra money. Granting that
the fortune belonged to Arthur and his sister, the will
certainly had given Mendle entire power over the
property. Had he chosen, he could have refused to
give the children of his late master more than a small
yearly sum, and would still have been within his
rights. Regarding the terms of the will, Lady Cob-
bin began to think that old Gerson had been right in


so limiting his children and placing them, although
over age, in a state of pupilage. Belinda had never
developed strength until the money came into her
possession, and Arthur’s looks alone showed that he
was the last person in the world to make a good use
of wealth.
But why had Arthur not accepted the situation?
There was some reason in Belinda’s not doing so,
since Mendle was interfering with her love affairs.
But Arthur had a good income, and Mendle was dis-
posed to treat him kindly, even to permitting a wrong-
ful marriage to take place. Yet Arthur had striven
to kill him twice, possessed by a blind hatred, for
which no just cause could be shown. Lady Cobbin
found herself pitying Mendle, although she had no
reason to like him. It seemed terrible that a weak
little creature like the lawyer should be subjected to
the persecution of an irresponsible man. Had Mendle
been wise, he would have surrendered all the pro-
perty, if only to end the persecution to which he was
subjected. But even then the hatred of Arthur might
have continued. He had been one of these degene-
rates who resemble Anarchists. In his blind rage he
was ready to kill anyone and anything—-to kill even
himself—so long as he attained his wicked ends.
Madness was scarcely a strong enough w r ord to apply
to a human animal possessed of such a blood-lust.
Then, again, the execution of the crime, if clear in
Arthur’s mind, was certainly confused when detailed
in his confession. His intention had been to drown
Mendle, and possibly himself, by means of rushing
the motor-cab down Shore Lane and off the wharf.
The idea was undoubtedly ingenious, and had not
Mendle recognised Arthur, and remembered his
280
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


former attempts against his life, the new scheme might
have been successful. As it was, the appearance of
Mendle in the crowd before the Piccadilly 1 heatre had
upset the design. Arthur, then, had changed his
mind, and would have driven off at once to Shore
Lane with his victim, had not Harriet appeared. W hy
he should have consented to take her to the City was
not clear, since all he had to do was to tell her that
Mendle, whom she desired to see, was in the cab. Of
course, Lady Cobbin had conjectured that Harriet,
recognising Arthur, might have made an outcry, but
on consideration there seemed to be no reason why she
should. Harriet had no reason to suspect Arthur of
intending to murder Mendle, and until she entered the
cab, had not known that he was in the vehicle. She
believed that he was working as usual in the office,
and told Arthur to drive there. The boy did so at
once, and then got rid of her at Shore Lane by pre-
tending a breakdown. This would certainly leave the
coast clear for him to murder Mendle; but then a
second hindrance appeared in the person of Sir
Samuel. When he was got rid of, Arthur then found
that his intended victim had taken the alarm and had
escaped. So far, Lady Cobbin reasoned out the case,
although she was by no means satisfied with her
deductions. But then, as she said again to herself, it
was impossible to follow the vagaries of a lunatic.
The question was ; what had occurred when Embers
left the place and when Arthur found that Mendle had
vanished? The most natural thing for him to have
done would have been to abandon the enterprise, since
a visit to the office —where Mendle presumably had
returned—would not induce him to enter the cab a
second time with such a chauffeur. Possibly Arthur


intended to leave the chance of murdering his guar-
dian to another occasion, and meanwhile remained to
meet Darton. But Darton had arrived at the
appointed time—say, half-past eleven—only to find
the cab gone. When next heard of, it was standing
before the office in Cade Lane, with the dead man on
the seat. Also, Cropsley, the policeman, had seen it
travelling down Manners Street. Yet —and this was
a point the nearest way to the office was from Cheap-
side.
There was only one thing to be concluded from all
this—that Parley had secretly left the office to kill
Arthur. He would learn from Ellen about the meet-
ing with Darton, and so knew that he would find
Arthur at the top of Shore Lane with the cab.
Possibly Parley went there wearing the scarf, and
taking Arthur by surprise, had strangled him. But
then arose the question—how had the cab been taken
to the office ? Parley could not drive a motor, but Sir
Samuel could, so it would seem that Embers had
returned again to Shore Lane, to speak with Arthur.
There he had found him dead, or might not be aware
that Parley was the assassin. Anxious to put the
blame on Mendle, so as to secure his. help to marry
Belinda, the Baronet probably had driven the cab to
Cade Lane, so that the murder might—literally—lie
at Mendle’s door.
But what was Paddy O’Toole doing all this time?
According to Mrs. O’Toole, the boy had hung on
behind the vehicle, and; must have seen all that had
taken place; since, when the cab arrived at Cade
Lane, he had slipped under it for the sake of conceal-
ment. Naturally, he should have given the alarm,
but, in place of doing so, he had remained concealed.


Then, again, he had shammed a loss of memory at the
hospital with a cleverness quite beyond his years.
Apparently he had been discovered by the assassin,
and had been promised a large sum of money if he
held his tongue. Parley could not promise him this,
as he was not wealthy, unless—and here Lady C obbin
thought that she had found a clue —the five hundred
pounds obtained from Darton was to be the price of
Paddy’s silence. It was all confusing and difficult to
understand; but one thing was certain only Paddy
could reveal the truth. And Paddy was lost.
Finding that it was useless to try and solve the
mystery with what evidence she had before her, Lady
Cobbin went home, and strove to forget her business.
She was now quite resigned to having Darton as a
friend, although she privately considered that she
would never be able to be free and frank with him
after his marriage. Belinda was a somewhat difficult
person to deal with, and inclined to jealousy. And,
after all, it was only reasonable that she should have
her handsome husband to herself. Lady Cobbin
began to think that her experiment in platonic friend-
ship would prove a failure. However, she loyally
held to the bargain she had made with Darton, and
resolved to do her best to throw light on the darkness.
Perhaps, if she did so, Belinda might approve. And
Lady Cobbin, looking into a mirror, acknowledged to
herself, somewhat bitterly, that Belinda certainly had
no reason to be jealous of so elderly and unattractive
a woman.
However, these things could be postponed until the
case was settled, so next day Milady—quite the
business woman, after her excursion into the rea ms
of romance—went to her office. She expected that


Belinda or Darton would appear to renew the conver-
sation of the previous day, and thresh out the subject
e\en more thoroughly; but the lovers did not put in
an appearance. Lady Cobbin therefore attended to
other matters which had fallen behind, owing to her
attention to the motor-cab mystery. At twelve o’clock
she heard the ringing of the telephone and went to
attend to it. To her surprise she heard Mendle
speaking, and she was still more surprised when she
learned why he had called her up.
“ I want you to come to the office as soon as
possible, he said, in the far-away voice of the
instrument.
“ What is the matter now?” asked Lady Cobbin.
“ I have found Paddy O’Toole.”
The inquiry-agent’s heart beat wildly. It seemed
almost too good to be true. “ Where did you find
him?” she inquired.
“ Come round here and I’ll tell you.”
Lady Cobbin lost no time. She switched off the
communication and went out at once. There was a
hansom in Golden .Square, but she wanted a motor-
cab. In Regent Street she found one, and found also
that the chauffeur was well acquainted with Sir
Samuel Embers. 1 hat gentleman was a well-known
character in town owing to his profligacy and his
means of livelihood, so strange in a man of good
birth. Lady C obbin got on to the box seat, beside
the chauffeur, and ordered him to drive to the City.
She did this because he told her that Embers was
ill.
“ What is the matter ? ” asked Lady Cobbin, while
the cab felt its way through the crowded traffic of
Piccadilly Circus.


“ Well, ma’am,” said the chauffeur, who was a
commonplace, common-speaking man, “ Sir Sam,”
—so he spoke of the baronet —“ went down White-
chapel way last night, and got into a row.”
Lady Cobbin immediately guessed that Sir Samuel
had been hunting for Paddy. “ What sort of a row ?”
“ I can’t tell you that, ma’am,” replied the driver,
“ but he’s laid upi to-day with a sprained ankle. A
friend of his is driving the cab to-day, and it’s on the
stand at Trafalgar Square, as usual. I expect Sir
Sam got drunk, and made trouble with the
hooligans.”
“H’m!” said Lady Cobbin, then added aloud,
“ after you leave me in Cade Lane, drive back to
Trafalgar Square and tell the chauffeur to go home
and see Sir Samuel. He is wanted at Mr, Lewis
Mendle’s office. He knows where it is. Here are ten
shillings if you do this.”
The chauffeur willingly promised to perform this
commission, and gave his opinion of Sir Samuel
freely as he drove to Cade Lane. It was not a very
high one, and he painted Embers as a very dark horse
indeed. Lady Cobbin said nothing, but gathered in
everything, and by the time she was deposited at
Mendle’s office felt pretty sure that, if not guilty him-
self, Sir Samuel certainly knew who was. And who
else could have murdered Arthur Gerson save Robert
Parley ? However, as the sole chance of learning the
truth lay in bringing the two men face to face with
Paddy O’Toole, Lady Cobbin again impressed upon
the friendly chauffeur that Sir Samuel was to come to
Cade Lane.
Robert Parley looked both anxious and haggard.


His face was white, his usually smooth hair in dis-
order, and his eyes were like those of a man who had
been up all the night. The two young clerks seemed
inclined to make fun of the old man, and hinted
jocularly that he had been “on the bust.” Had they
known the truth their fun might have dried up. Lady
Cobbin, not wishing to startle Parley by showing
that she knew too much, asked very quietly if Mr.
Mendle was within, and was shown into the middle
room, where clients usually waited. Parley told his
master that the inquiry-agent was present, and then
went back quietly to his work and to the gibes of his
fellow-clerks. Presently Mendle, looking smaller
and more wizen than ever, crept out, like a hermit
crab emerging cautiously from his shell.
“Oh, how very dreadful all this is!” he said,
squeezing Lady Cobbin’s hand and looking more
dismal than ever.
She snatched her hand away. “ What is it ?”
“ I know the truth.”
“At last. Well, and who murdered Arthur Ger-
son?”
“ Come in here and learn.”
He took her into the inner office, and there on two
chairs sat Mrs. O.’Toole and Paddy, side by side.
The Irishwoman appeared aggressive, and the boy
very much afraid. Also, he looked pale and thin after
his recent illness. Lady Cobbin lost no time, as her
curiosity was great.
“ Well, boy, ” she said bluffly, “ and who murdered
Mr. Gerson?”
Paddy began to cry, and looked at his mother. She


gave him a dig in the ribs which nearly knocked him
off the chair, and scowled.
“Sir Samuel Embers murdered him, please,”
whimpered Paddy, and looked very much inclined
to run away.
287
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


CHAPTER XXV.
THE TRUTH.
“ How do you know?” asked the inquiry agent.
At this question, Paddy whimpered again, and
Mrs. O’Toole took upon herself to reply with marked
anger. “ Sure, and the boy’s tellin’ th’ truth, me
Lady. Didn’t I say he was to hang behoind the cab,
no less, and didn’t he hang, the Saints bless him?
And wasn’t ”
“That is enough, Mrs. O’Toole!” snapped Lady
Cobbin, whose temper by this time was none of the
best, “ I did not ask him if he spoke truly, but how
he came to know what he calls the truth.”
This time Mendle interposed. “ Surely, Lady
Cobbin, you don’t doubt what Paddy tells you/”
She shrugged her shoulders. “ I have heard so
many accusations that I don’t know which to believe.”
“ But this boy was an eye-witness,” urged Mendle.
“ Quite so, and I am asking him for evidence,” said
the other tartly. “Go on, Paddy. Tell me what you
saw.”
'* I saw Sir Samuel Embers strangle Mr. Gerson
at the top of Shore Lane, please,” murmured Paddy,
dropping his eyes before his questioner’s very direct
gaze.
“You were hidden behind the cab?”
“ Yes, please.”
” Well, go on. Explain exactly what occurred.”
But Paddy’s vocabulary was unequal to the task.


Mrs. O’Toole would have spoken, but that the lawyer
silenced her. “It will be better for me to explain,”
he said quietly, “ and you can ask Paddy if my story
is a true one. I shall only repeat what he told me.”
Lady Cobbin produced her note-book. “Go on,”
she commanded curtly. Then the lawyer detailed
what the boy had seen. It appeared that Paddy hung
on behind the cab until he came to Shore Lane. When
the vehicle stopped he dropped on the ground to ease
the strain of his muscles. He confirmed the tale of
Harriet Lane, and repeated how the lawyer had
escaped from the off-side of the cab. Then came the
critical point. Paddy—interpreted through Mendle
—asserted that Embers and Arthur quarrelled over
certain papers, which the first wanted, and which the
latter refused to give up. Finally Embers sprang on
his friend, when Arthur was kneeling to see what was
wrong with the gear of the cab, and strangled
him ”
“ With what?” asked Lady Cobbin at this point.
Paddy replied for himself. “ With a silk scarf
which was round Mr. Gerson’s throat.”
“Oh!” she said coldly, ‘‘and what happened
then ?”
“ Permit me,” said Mendle, as the boy faltered
again in his speech. “ I can report what happened,
as Paddy told me. Embers lifted Arthur into the
driver’s seat, and placed him before the steering-
wheel. Then he crouched between his legs ”
“ Sir Samuel couldn’t do that,” said Lady Cobbin,
“ he is too big.”
“ He managed to do so, at all events, if Paddy
is to be believed.”
19
289
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ If he is to be believed,” repeated the inquiry
agent calmly and significantly—“ quite so.”
Mendle was nettled. “ I don’t see what use it is
for me to find the boy, if you won’t believe him. He
is an eye-witness, remember.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. “Go on,” she said to
Paddy again, and again the lawyer spoke.
“ Paddy suffers still from the wound in his head,”
he said, “ and is not able to talk much.”
Lady Cobbin looked at Mrs. O’Toole. “ You
hinted that Paddy had hot lost his memory—that his
pretended illness was a sham.”
“ No, me lady, I didn’t,” cried the Irishwoman
indignantly. “ Patrick was ill, sure enough, and is
now like a kitten for weakness, poor boy. He didn’t
forget what he saw, but his tongue couldn’t twist
itsilf round the words. But he’s tould Mr. Mendle,
here, and ”
“ All right. Go on, Mr. Mendle. Tell me exactly
how Sir Samuel drove the cab to the office.”
“ I am only repeating what Paddy told me,” said
Mendle, with a shrug; “he can corroborate what I
say, since it is his own story. Embers, I understand,
sat between the legs of the corpse on the edge of the
seat, and wrapped the coat —the fur coat, mind you —
round him.”
“ Oh, I understand that. The fur coat is a
voluminous garment,”
Mendle nodded. “ Well, then, you can see how
Embers, wrapped up in that way, was enabled to drive
the cab, and yet make it 1 appear as though only one
person—perhaps a stout one—was on the box-seat.”
“ I see, and, of course, the night being dark and
snowy, and the cab passing swiftly, Cropsley could


not be sure if he saw two persons or one person on
the seat.”
“He could only see one,” insisted the lawyer,
“ since Embers was so hidden by the fur-coat and his
crouching attitude. However, be this as it may, he
drove the cab to the door of this office and then, after
sounding the horn, went away up Cade Lane in the
direction of Cheapside. Paddy at once concealed
himself under the cab, and waited to see what would
happen. He heard all that took place between my-
self and the police, and then the moving of the cab
stunned him.”
“ Why did he not give the alarm ?”
“He was frightened of the police. I daresay if he
had been found unhurt under the cab he coujd have
been made to speak; but, as it was, the wound in his
head confused him, and when he recovered his senses
in the hospital he held his tongue.”
“But you remembered all that had taken place?”
said Lady Cobbin, turning quickly on the boy.
He started violently. “ Yuss, Mum, I did, but I
wanted to see Mammy afore saying anything. I was
afraid.”
“ Afraid that you would not get money, I expect,”
said the inquiry agent contemptuously, and glanced
at Mrs. O’Toole, who coloured. “ Well, and why
did you disappear from the hospital?”
“ I took the boy away,” said Mendle. “Yes, I
instructed Mrs. O’Toole to call for him, and then
they went into hiding at my request.”
“ Why?” asked Lady Cobbin sharply.
“ Because Embers called on Mrs. O’Toole and
offered her a large sum of money not to let Paddy
speak. She came and told me, and, to thwart Embers


I removed the boy out of his way. Last night Embers
found out, through one of the boys at the Adelphi
cellar, that Mrs. O’Toole and Paddy were hiding in
Whitechapel, and came down, f here was a row, and
Embers was knocked down. I believe that he went
home with a sprained ankle. Ihen Mrs. O’Toole
told me of Embers’ attempt, and I thought it best to
ask her and Paddy here and send for you. That is
the whole story.”
“ It seems reasonable enough,” said Lady Cobbin
pensively. But she had her own thoughts about the
matter. “ What is to be done now ?”
“ I suppose it will be best to send for Inspector
Hake, and let the boy repeat the story to him,” said
Mendle.
“In that case you will not be able to prove that Dr.
Darton is guilty, Mr. Mendle she said meaningly.
“ I have no wish to,” he replied frankly. “ I made
a mistake in suspecting Dr. Darton, and I shall ask
his pardon.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. This seemed to be fair
enough, as she had suspected the Doctor herself, so
strong had been the circumstantial evidence against
him. “ And, of course,” she added, “ you will lose
Belinda.”
Mendle’s pale face grew an angry crimson. “ No,”
he declared, much annoyed. “ She is engaged to
me ”
“ Because that was the only way in which she could
prevent you having her lover arrested. But now that
she knows Dr. Darton is safe, and innocent, she will
undoubtedly go back to him.”
“ I don’t believe that. Belinda gave me her
promise.”


“ It was an extorted promise,” said the other coolly,
“ and so is not binding. At least, she does not con-
sider it to be so. I may as well tell you that Belinda
and Dr. Darton came together yesterday, and have
arranged to marry whenever it is possible.”
Mendle turned livid with rage, and the look in his
deep-set eyes was malignant in the extreme. ” She
Ras deceived me,” he gasped.
“ And why not? You deceived her in the first
instance.”
“ I did not. I really believed Darton to be guilty.
You believed that yourself.” He vociferated and
stamped about the office, looking like the ugly troll
of Norwegian folk-lore. “ But I shall not lose her —
I shan’t. She must marry me.”
‘‘There is no chance of that now,” mocked Lady
Cobbin. “ Darton is beyond your reach to injure,
and you cannot stop the marriage.”
‘‘ But if Belinda knew what I know about him,
she ”
“Ah 1” Lady Cobbin pounced like a panther.
“ So Parley showed you those papers.”
“ What papers?” asked Mendle, taken aback.
‘‘ Those which w r ere contained in the blue enve-
lope—which were taken from the dead man.”
“ Did Parley have them?” stammered the lawyer,
utterly confounded.
‘‘Yes, and tried to sell them to Dr. Darton,
through Belinda, for the sum of five hundred
pounds.”
“ Then Parley—”
” Quite so.” Lady Cobbin adjusted her eye-glasS
and looked at him keenly. “ I believe that Parley
murdered Arthur Gefson. If not, he could scarcely
293
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


have obtained the papers, since the dead man had
them concealed in his breast-pocket. This boy ”
she indicated Paddy—“ is a liar.”
“ He is not I” shouted Mrs. O’Toole, who had been
listening with all her ears. “He saw that bar’nit
murder, like a thaving villain he is.”
“Did you?” Lady Cobbin pounced again—this
time on Paddy.
“ Y—e—s,” he quavered out, trembling and white.
“You shocking little liar I I suspected the truth of
your story from the very first. You said that Mr.
Gerson was murdered by means of a scarf, which he
wore round his throat.”
“ And so he was,” said Mendle hurriedly. “ The
tri-coloured scarf ”
“ I am aware of the colours,” retorted Lady Cobbin
sharply; “ but Arthur did not wear it on that night.”
“ But,” stammered the lawyer, “ you heard your-
self—Belinda stated that Arthur got that scarf from
Harriet.”
“ He did not wear it on that night,” repeated Lady
Cobbin decidedly. “ That is true, as Mrs. Gerson
told me. Arthur left it at home when he went out to
meet Embers, and he did not have it on when he
entered the tobacco-shop to speak to his wife, about
ten. But Parley wore it. He wrapped it round his
throat when going to your office on that same even-
ing. Parley had the scarf; Parley had the papers;
and, in spite of Paddy’s story, Parley strangled
Arthur.”
“ But why should he ?” Mendle was extremely sur-
prised.
“ Because Arthur had beaten Ellen.”
“ Even then,” stammered the lawyer, perplexed by


this untoward turn of the case, “ even then, how could
he? Parley was in this office all the evening. I left
him there; he was here when I returned.”
“ I daresay; but in the meantime, and while you
were absent, he slipped out with the scarf and mur-
dered Arthur.”
“ How could he know where Arthur was to be
found ?”
“ Ellen may have learned from Arthur about the
spot where he was to meet Darton—at the top of Shore
Lane, that is—and may have told her father. I’ll ask
her.”
‘‘There is no need,” said Mendle, going to the
door; ‘‘we can have first-hand evidence. Parley I
Parley!” he called, opening the door.
One of the junior clerks presented himself. “He
has gone to luncheon, sir, and will be back in half-an-
hour.”
Mendle turned to Lady Cobbin. “ Shall I send for
him ?”
“ No,” she said unexpectedly. “ Close that door,”
then, when the lawyer did so, she continued * “ It will
not do to let Parley think that he is suspected, else he
may run away. We will wait for his return and hear
what reply he can make to my accusation. Meanwhile,
I should like to know why Paddy here told a lie.”
‘‘He hasn’t! ” shouted Mrs. O’Toole again.
“ He has, and therefore he must have been bribed.
Now, then, Paddy, have not you and your mother
been bribed —say, with five hundred pounds—to sup-
press the truth and accuse Sir Samuel Embers?”
Paddy looked at Mendle and at his mother; then
his lips moved almost automatically. “ Y—e —s, ” he
quavered again, and began to sob violently.


“ Sure, you’re killin’ the boy !” cried Mrs. O’Toole,
darting at her son and taking him on her ample lap.
Mendle paid no attention to this action, but looked
at Lady Cobbin. “ Why five hundred pounds?” he
asked.
“ That was the sum Parley asked for the papers,”
she informed him.
“ Then he must be guilty,” declared Mendle.
“ Paddy can tell us.” She turned to the boy. “ Did
you not see an old man with white hair kill Arthur
Gerson ?” she demanded.
Paddy stared at her with widely open blue eyes, and
then his gaze wandered to Mendle. He tried to speak,
but his head fell back on to his mother’s breast and
he quietly fainted away. ‘‘There I” shouted Mrs.
O’Toole, still noisy, ‘‘ you’ve kilt the gossoon, bad
luck to you.”
Lady Cobbin shrugged her shoulders, not at all
alarmed by the boy’s condition. She suspected Paddy
of being extremely artful, and the instrument, as was
his mother, of Robert Parley. He was quite capable
of fainting purposely, so as to gain time. But Lady
Cobbin determined not to leave the room until she had
brought him face to face with his employer. Then
Paddy would have to speak out. Hitherto he had
behaved like a crafty fox, both in and out of the hos-
pital ; but already he had been caught telling a lie,
and his powers of deception would come to an end
when Parley was examined.
While Mrs. O’Toole was bringing the boy round —
or pretending to, for Lady Cobbin suspected that she
was as great a fraud as her precious son —Mendle
talked in low tones to the inquiry agent. He pro-
fessed himself thunderstruck that Parley should be


guilty, and proposed to go out at once and bring
Inspector Hake on the scene. But Lady Cobbin
would not allow this course to be taken.
“We must hear what Parley has to say,” she
declared.
“ Then while we are waiting for him, let me take
you out to luncheon.”
“ No,” she said again. “ I shall not lose sight of
this boy and his mother. There has been too much
trouble in finding them.”
Mendle returned to his desk, and sat there quietly
waiting for the arrival of his clerk. Paddy revived,
and Mrs. O’Toole, scowling at Lady Cobbin, fed him
with cakes and apples—both extremely bad for so
delicate a lad. The slow minutes passed, and the
inquiry agent thought oveh the case. Undoubtedly
Robert Parley was the assassin for whom she had
searched so long, and it only remained tc force him
into confession, and have him arrested. Then Belinda
could marry Darton without fear of Mendle’s malice,
and her promise to help the doctor would be fulfilled.
Afterwards —Lady Cobbin sighed as she thought of
afterwards.
In about half-an-hour there came a knock at the
door. “There is Parley,” said Mendle, rising
briskly.
But it proved to be a junior clerk, who stated that
Sir Samuel Embers' was outside in his cab, and was
coming in. Even as he spoke the baronet limped in
on the arm of his chauffeur friend, and looked ex-
tremely ill and very angry. He came into the inner
room, sent his friend away, and then, when the door
was closed, turned on Lady Cobbin.
“ Why did you send for me?” he asked, snarling.


“ Why are ” —here his eyes for the first time fell on
Paddy—“ the boy 1” he gasped.
“ Yes,” said Lady Cobbin swiftly. “ Mr. Mendle
brought him up from Whitechapel, where you were
last night.”
” I went to get him,” said Sir Samuel, pointing to
Paddy; “but I got into a row, and my ankle was
sprained. It hurts like the devil. Well, now that
Mendle has found the boy, we can learn the truth.”
“ Paddy has told it, sure,” cried Mrs. O’Toole.
” He has told a lie,” corrected Lady Cobbin.
Embers turned from one to another and scowled at
Paddy. “ What does the young whelp mean by
telling lies?” he demanded.
“ He has been bribed.”
“ Who has bribed him ? You? You?” He turned
to Lady Cobbin and to Mendle respectively. “ Why
can’t you speak? I suppose the assassin bribed him
to keep silence. I thought so. And the assassin ”
” Paddy accuses you,” said Lady Cobbin very dis-
tinctly.
In spite of his sprained ankle, the baronet rose from
his chair, as if moved by a spring. It looked as
though he would fling himself on the boy and beat
him. Mrs. O’Toole, with an alarmed cry, spread her
arms over Paddy in terror. “You accuse me, you —
you young devil ?”
“ He declares that he saw you strangle Arthur for
the papers,” said Mendle, who was very pale and very
quiet.
“ Liar I Liar I” gasped Embers, falling back in his
chair. “ How dare he say that? I left Arthur alone
with the cab at the top of Shore Lane. No one was
with him.”


“ The boy was,” cried Mrs. O’Toole. “ Wasn’t he
hanging on behind, and didn’t he see you strangle the
poor young man ? Answer me that now 1”
Sir Samuel clutched at his collar as though he was
being strangled himself. “It is wholly false. Send
for the police, and have that brat arrested. I can
defend myself. Send for the police.”
“ I’ll go,” cried Mendle, snatching up his hat and
making for the door; but when he opened it Parley
stood there.
“ You want me, sir?” asked Parley, entering, and,
removing Mendle’s grip from the handle, he imme-
diately shut the door. This did not look like guilt, as
Lady Cobbin thought.
“Paddy has been bribed, you say,” cried the
baronet, still furious, and paying no attention to the
clerk’s entrance. “Who by?”
“ By Robert Parley?”
“ What’s that?” asked the old clerk, stepping for-
ward. “ Who accuses me of bribing the boy ?”
“ I do,” said Lady Cobbin coolly. “You have
bribed him to say that Sir Samuel Embers murdered
Gerson.”
“It is wholly false,” said Parley quietly. Then he
turned to his master : “ You can prove that, sir,” he
said.
Mendle wiped the perspiration from his livid face.
“ You—you were certainly in the office when I
returned,” he said.
“ And I defended you, sir. I told a lie. Now you
must defend me, or ”
“Or what?” demanded Lady Cobbin quickly,
looking from one to the other.


“ Or I’ll go to the police and give myself up,” said
Parley.
“ As the assassin.”
“ I am no assassin 1”
“You are 1” cried the inquiry agent. ” That scarf,
with which Arthur was strangled, was taken by you
from your home, where he left it. You possessed the
papers, and offered to sell them to Dr. Darton for five
hundred pounds, so that you might bribe this boy and
his mother into accusing Sir Samuel, and ”
“ All that is quite true,” acknowledged Parley, his
breath coming quick and fast, “ but I am innocent.”
“ Who is guilty, then ?”
Parley turned again to his master. “ Defend me,
sir.”
“ I—l cannot,” stammered the lawyer, stealing
nearer to the door. “If you are guilty, you ”
“ Guilty I guilty I You dare to say that, after all I
have done? No, you don’t I”—he grappled unex-
pectedly with the solicitor as he tried to pass—“ you
shall go to jail as the murderer of your ward !”
Lady Cobbin arose in consternation. “ What?”
“ Mendle is guilty. He murdered Arthur!
Paddy?”
‘‘Yes! yes!”—the boy spoke clearly this time —
“ Mr. Mendle murdered him I”
Mendle, taken in a trap, made a bound. Embers
caught him, and threw him on the floor, where he
glared like a wild beast, fighting viciously.


CHAPTER XXVI.
THE JUSTICE OF THE GODS.
Of all the surprises in this most surprising case, the
denouncing of Lewis Mendle was the greatest. Lady
Cobbin, who had been wrong, as she mentally con-
fessed, so many times, could scarcely speak when she
saw the solicitor on the floor, struggling like a fiend
in the grip of the baronet. Notwithstanding Sir
Samuel’s pain, sheer rage at having been accused
made him sufficiently powerful to hold down the twist-
ing, squirming little demon whose crime had come
home to him at last. Rage, fear, despair, horror,
appeared on that livid face, and the whole hidden
nature of the man was upheaved by the terrible emo-
tion of the moment. Undoubtedly this was the true
criminal, and over him Robert Parley, his meek face
firm and defiant for the first time in his weak life,
stood like an avenging angel.
“You tried to betray me, did you?” said Parley
between his teeth. “ And after all I did for you.”
“ Only for money —only for money,” snarled
Mendle, ceasing to twist from sheer exhaustion.
“ You blackmailed me, you beast.”
“ I made you help my daughter,” said Parley
coolly; “ and quite right I was to force you into doing
so, seeing that you killed her husband.”
“ Whom you hated,” cried the lawyer savagely.
“ Not sufficiently to murder him. But to help you,
since I did hate Arthur, I became —so to speak—an


accomplice after the fact. Oh, you played your part
well on that night, Mr. Mendle; even the police were
taken in. You feigned a worse fear than you felt.”
“ I was in hell then: I am in hell now,” muttered
Mendle, and if a look could have slain the old clerk,
he would have dropped dead there and then. “ Oh,
let me up—let me up. You are killing me.”
“ I’ll leave the hangman to do that,” said Embers,
rising, and permitting the little animal to get on his
feet. “Sit there!” —he pushed him into a chair —
“ or I’ll strangle you, as you strangled Gerson.”
Mendle shut his teeth with a click and jumped up,
as though to fling himself across the room on Paddy.
The terrified boy cried weakly at the sight of that
furious face, and clung to his mother. Mrs. O’Toole,
thoroughly frightened herself, spread her arms again
over her offspring. “ I never hurt ye,” she gasped,
“ nor did the boy, poor lamb.”
“You betrayed me,” shouted Mendle, again
pushed back into the chair. Mrs. O’Toole placed her
arms akimbo. And why not, when you’d nivir have
paid the thousand pounds you promised.”
“ Oh ! ” cried Lady Cobbin quickly, “ did he pro-
mise that ?”
“ Yes, me lady.” Mrs. O’Toole turned and dropped
an unnecessary curtsey, so great was her fear for what
she had done. “ That divil knew that Patrick had
seen him at his dirthy work and wint to the hospital
to tell him to hould his tongue. He come to me, too,
and said that I’d have a thousand goulden suvverins
if I made Patrick dumb. An’ I did, an’ the poor boy
nivir spake a worrd. Didn’t I smuggle him off to
Whitechapel to me own sister’s house, bad luck to her
for wanting half the money? An’ didn’t that divil
302
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


come this morning to say that he’d make the money
two thousand, and ship Patrick an’ me to New York
if we brought home the murder to his lordship ?” She
pointed to the baronet, who clenched his hands.
“ Oh, you brute!” he cried to the cowering Mendle,
I d like to give you a thrashing. You were ready
to sell me to save yourself.”
” And ready to sell Dr. Darton to marry Miss Ger-
son. Ready to place Miss Lane on the scaffold so that
he would escape,” cried Lady Cobbin. “He is worse
than Judas.”
“ And he would have hanged me to save himself,”
said Parley, between his teeth, looking quite a
different man to the usually meek clerk. “ And after
I had helped him. Mendle, you have brought all
this on yourself. Had you been true to me, I should
have been true to you. I never suspected you until
the scarf ”
“ Ah!” said Lady Cobbin quickly, “ the scarf.”
Parley turned towards her. “ Yes, Arthur left that
scarf behind, and I put it round my neck, as the night
was cold, when I came to work here. I entered this
room to chat to Mr. Mendle about some papers con-
nected with Sir Samuel’s affairs, and placed the scarf
on a chair along with my hat and coat. Then I went
to work in the outer room, forgetting them. After-
wards Mr. Mendle—at what time I know not —left the
office by that door.” He pointed to the one which
Hake had examined at the beginning of the case. “ I
came in twice to see if he had returned, but he did not
appear until twenty or twenty-five minutes to twelve.”
“ And he then drove up in the motor cab,” sug-
gested the inquiry agent.


“ I can’t drive a motor,” muttered Mendle, with
white lips.
“ You liar I” cried Embers. “ I taught you to drive
myself.”
Parley still addressed Lady Cobbin. “He did
come back in the motor cab,” he said. ‘‘ I heard it
coming, and ”
“ Did he sound the horn ?”
“ No, he did not. Having a dead man on board he
was afraid. I heard the motor coming, and peeped
through the blind. I saw it stop and Mr*. Mendle get
out. He hurried into the office by the side door, and
was taking off his things when I entered. I did not
suspect anything wrong then, as I did not know of the
murder. Mr. Mendle asked me to say that he had beeil
within doors all the evening if anyone asked.”
Lady Cobbin interposed. “ Didn’t that arouse your
suspicions ?”
‘‘Why, no,” said Parley quietly. ‘‘Mr. Mendle
explained that he had been at the Piccadilly Theatre
to prevent a meeting between Dr. Darton and Miss
Belinda. I knew that he hated the Doctor, but, never
thinking that anything was wrong, I agreed to hold
my tongue. Then came the knocking of the police-
man, and Mr. Mendle put on his coat and hat and
gloves to act the comedy. And he did it well,” ended
Parley, with a scathing glance at the sullen little man
seated at his desk,
‘‘ When did you suspect that he had killed
Arthur?”
” When Arthur’s corpse was brought into the
middle room. At first, as we all did, I believed that
the dead man was Sir Samuel, and wondered how he


had come by his death. Then I thought of heart
disease ”
“ I never had that,” cried Embers bluffly, and keep-
ing an eye on the lawyer; “ but Arthur suffered badly
from his heart.”
“That made him easier to kill, no doubt,” said
Lady Cobbin.
“I daresay,” observed the old clerk; “but he
strangled him thoroughly, for the face was quite black
and the eyes protruding. When I saw the scarf round
Arthur’s throat and remembered how I had left it in
this office, I then knew. But I defended Mr. Mendle,
and stated that he had been in all the evening. I even
said that I possessed the key of that door, which Mr.
Mendle passed secretly to me. Inspector Hake seemed
inclined to suspect Mr. Mendle, but my story quite
exonerated him. Next day I had an explanation with
Mr. Mendle, and he promised that if I held my tongue
he would pay Ellen an income. As I hated Arthur,”
confessed Parley, “ I didn’t mind his having been
killed.”
“ Don’t I” said Lady Cobbin, with a look of dis-
gust.” You are almost as bad as Mendle is. You
will be punished for this.”
“ I don’t care,” said Parley recklessly. “So long
as Ellen is safe, it matters little what becomes of me.
I would do anything for her.”
“You certainly would have blackmailed Dr. Dar-
ton, and had not the courage to come to him yourself
with those papers.”
“Yes, the papers!” cried Mendle furiously.
“ Parley stole those and blackmailed me with them.”
“ I did not,” denied Parley sharply. “ I hunted for
those papers, which you were foolish enough to keep,
20
305
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


and when I found them, behind your safe, I went to
Miss Belinda, saying that Dr. Darton could have
them for five hundred pounds. I intended to take
that and go away to America, so that I might leave
the income Mr. Mendle was to pay Ellen intact.”
There was a silence for a moment, and the lawyer
tried to open a drawer in his desk. Embers pounced
upon him. “ I believe that he has got a pistol in
there,” he said.
“He has got poison !” cried Parley. “He told me
that he would never be taken alive.”
“ Well, then, he has been,” said Sir Samuel coolly.
“ Come away from that desk, you hound ! ” —he
dragged the little man to his feet by the scruff of his
neck—“ I’m going to take you, in the very cab in
which you killed Arthur, to the police-station.”
Mendle’s nerve gave way at this, and he dropped on
his knees, like the white-livered coward that he was.
“No I no!” he implored, putting up beseeching
hands, and whimpering like a trapped animal. “ I’ll
give you a cheque for two thousand pounds to let me
go. Dear Embers, oh ! don’t be hard. I daren’t face
—I daren’t go to —to —Oh loh I” He broke down
completely and began to weep.
Embers, still holding on, shook him as a terrier does
a rat. “ Do you confess that you killed Arthur?” he
demanded.
Mendle gathered himself for a spring, and, rising
to his full height, wrenched himself away from the
baronet. The next moment and he was standing
against the far wall—Mrs. O’Toole had swept Paddy
out of the way with a howl—spitting like a cat. “ I
confess nothing,” he snarled venomously; “you can
prove nothing.”


“You forget your confession, ’ said Parley
triumphantly.
Is it written down ?” asked Lady Cobbin swiftly.
“ Yes. After I found the papers, and made up my
mind to go to the States with the money 1 hoped to
get from Dr. Darton, I made Mr. Mendle write out
and sign a confession of his crime, so that I might
hold it if he played false with my darling Ellen’s in-
come. He did what I wanted after some fight, and 1
have carried it on me day and night.”
“ Had I known that,” snapped Mendle with an
ugly look, “ you would have joined Arthur. As it
is ” —he sprang forward again, but Embers hurled
him back, and he lost his nerve, to drop in a huddled
heap near the window. In this way, sometimes fight-
ing and sometimes whimpering, the little lawyer
behaved. He was at the end of his tether, and knew
well that the tether would soon encircle his neck.
He tried to preserve his calm, but when Parley
handed a paper to Lady Cobbin—the confession
which he knew he had signed—he gave way, and
again dropped on to his knees. “ I confess,” he
cried, grey with fright and trembling like a leaf.
“ No need,” said the inquiry agent, glancing at the
signature to the closely written pages. “ This will
hang you.”
“ I won’t be hanged—l won’t. I won’t. I’ll kick
and bite and scratch and howl I” shrieked Mendle,
jumping up again. “ I care nothing for the lot of
you I” He snapped his fingers and grew defiant. “ I
did kill Arthur—yes, I did, and I am glad I killed
him. He tried to murder me, the beast, the ingrate,
the fiend in human form. He deliberately tried to
murder me.”


“Well,” said Embers coolly, “you delit irately
murdered him.”
“ You are a liar I I didn’t. I can explain.”
“ Then do so,” said Lady Cobbin, placing t le con-
fession in her pocket.
“ Ahl” He turned on her with a snarl. “ A fine
inquiry agent you are 1 I bested you, as I bested
others. I diddled you with a false story.”
“ Not entirely false,” she answered composedly.
“ All you told me was true up to the part when you
said that you left the cab at Shore Lane. You did not
leave it: you remained within until Sir Samuel had
gone.”
“Yes, I did,” retorted the lawyer defiantly; “ but
had I known that the boy ” —he glared at Paddy, who
again began to weep, being still ill—“ that the beastly
boy was behind, I should never have risked the crime.
As it was, I acted upon the impulse of the moment.
After Arthur had got rid of Embers, he intended to
drive me down the lane and into the river.”
“You did not know that then ?”
“ No. But I saw from the way in which he looked
at me that he intended to harm me. And then he
spoke of papers which would stop Belinda marrying
Barton. I wanted them. Arthur pretended to be
friendly, and said that he had come to take me home
instead of Embers. But I mistrusted him. I remem-
bered how he had tried to kill me before. When he
was on the ground, after Embers went, looking to see
if everything was right, I ”
“ One moment,” cried Lady Cobbin. “ Did the
cab really break down ?”
“Not exactly,” said Embers quickly. “Arthur
308
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


was ;i a bad driver, and there was something wrong
underneath, but not sufficient to stop the cab. I put
it right for him just before I went away, and told him
to Idak before he started for Cade Lane. Indeed, I
warned him to start while I was there, but he refused.”
‘‘Yes I” snarled Mendle furiously. “Because he
intended to stop and drive me down Shore Lane into
the river. I learned that afterwards, when I took the
blue envelope from his dead body. But I guessed
beforehand that he had some scheme in his head to kill
me. I saw death in his eyes, and determined to save
myself. When he stooped to look at the machinery
under the cab, I sprang on him with the scarf, which I
held ready. I had brought it accidentally from the
office, as the night was so cold; but it came in useful.
Arthur, not expecting my rush, was knocked down,
and then could not struggle very much. Besides,”
added Mendle contemptuously, “he was always a
weakling. He was quite easy to kill. Only when I
saw him lying dead did I realise that I had saved
myself from any further attempts being made on my
life—and had lost five thousand a year. Oh, what a
loss, what a loss! I felt both glad and sorry.”
“ What did you do then ?”
“ I resolved to' drive the cab to the office and pre-
tend that I had been within doors all the evening.”
“ That was unwise and dangerous.”
“ It was wisdom and safety,” retorted the lawyer.
“ Who would think that a murderer would bring his
victim to his own doorstep ? In the daring of the idea
lay its safety. If I had reflected, I might have left the
cab and the corpse where they were ; but I thought out
everything in a flash. I placed the corpse on the seat,


and then, as I described Embers had done, I crouched
between the legs of the corpse, and, with my foot on
the clutch, drove the cab.”
Lady Cobbin nodded. “ I understand now. A
little man like you could crouch easy as you say you
did, and, wrapping the fur coat round you, could
make two people pass as one in the gloom of the
night. But it was difficult to think how a bigger man,
like Sir Samuel ”
“ Yes I Yes!” interrupted Mendle, testily and rest-
lessly. “ Well, that is all, the rest has been told by
Parley. You want to know how I strangled Arthur ?”
he cried, gripping the ends of his black tie. “In this
way.”
With inconceivable swiftness he whipped off the
strongly woven satin tie and had it round his throat.
But before he could tighten it to a death-knot Parley
had dragged down his hands.
“ No,” said the old clerk, “ I want to see you on
the scaffold!”
Mendle howled, and again strove to rush for his
desk, where the poison lay that he kept in readiness
against this moment. Mrs. O’Toole hurled him back
from that hope, and then he dashed for the window,
intending to throw himself through the glass into the
court below. Sir Samuel gripped him, and meanwhile
Lady Cobbin opened the door leading to the middle
room. The two clerks, who had heard strange noises,
entered alive with curiosity, and saw their master, the
respectable Mr. Mendle, struggling like a lunatic.
“ Get a policeman ! ” said Lady Cobbin.
“ No! No! No!” shouted the lawyer, ” I won’t be
arrested. I won’t.”
“ You’ll come with me to the cab and go straight to
310
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


the police-office, you brute,” said Embers between his
teeth; and, together with Parley, dragged Mendle
into the passage. In his fury Sir Samuel quite forgot
that his ankle was sprained. Already Lady Cobbin
had gone out to tell the chauffeur to get the cab ready
to start, and as the lawyer was pulled down the steps
of his office the machine was beginning to hum
loudly. The chauffeur slipped on to his seat, and laid
his hands on the steering-wheel; while Embers, the
two clerks, and Parley tried to force the shouting,
struggling, cursing criminal into the open door of the
vehicle. Already people were collecting to see
what was the matter. Mendle, with the strength of
ten men, managed to twist himself free of the many
hands outstretched to hold him, and bolted up the
middle of the lane towards Cheapside. At once the
chauffeur started the machine and gave chase. The
cab sprang forward with a whir, and Mendle ran
ahead with a livid face, whirling his arms. Those
people in the narrow lane jumped on to the side walks
to prevent themselves being run over by the cab. But
at the far end of the lane appeared two policemen, and
many people attracted by the shouts. Mendle
saw that he would be stopped. Behind was the
cab, before him the outstretched arms of the law. He
suddenly turned, and flung himself deliberately before
the motor cab. It was impossible to put on the brake
or to stop the machine, and the cab passed over the
squirming, writhing body of the man. When Embers
and Lady Cobbin panted up to the scene of the death,
a blood-stained, huddled mass of clothing was being
dragged from under the cruel wheels. But the pre-
sence of the two seemed to bring back Mendle to life.
He opened his eyes, and smiled triumphantly.
311
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


-* I’ve done you I” he gasped brokenly, and died still
smiling.
And in this way was the justice of the gods executed
on the man. The very cab in which he had driven the
dead body of his victim was driven over his prostrate
form, and with terrible pain and agony he passed to
his own place, wherever that might be. When the
police came and learned all, when Mendle’s body was
carried away, Sir Samuel Embers did a strange thing.
Making his friend the chauffeur alight, he stepped
into the driving-seat himself. Then, without a word
of explanation, he drove into Cheapside, and took his
way towards Shore Lane. Down the incline he drove
the fatal cab, and drove it also on to the wharf between
the piles of deal boxes. Lightermen and sailors and
City clerks stared at him and his cab in amazement.
At the very verge of the wharf, Sir Samuel stopped
and got out. Then he touched a lever again, and the
next moment the motor cab dashed into the river, to
disappear for ever.
“ Why did you do that ?” asked the Coroner, when
Embers appeared at the inquest held on the body of
the lawyer.
“ The cab was connected with the death of two
people,” said the baronet bluntly. “ I did not wish
to be the third; therefore I got rid of it. After what
had happened, I could never have driven it again.”
Three months later, Wilfred Darton and Belinda
were married quietly and went to Jersey for their
honeymoon. When they were driving to the station
from the Clement Street house, Wilfred put his arms


around his newly-made wife and asked her if she was
happy.
“ Very, very happy,” said Belinda, who looked
bright and contented. “ I think that all our troubles
are over.”
“ I hope so,” he replied; “ but if they are not, at
least we can share one another’s burdens. But Mendle
is dead and buried, and so is Arthur. You have your
five thousand a year, and we are married. I certainly
think that the trouble which began with the death of
your brother is at an end, thank God 1”
“I’m glad I have made Harriet comfortable,” said
Mrs. Darton thoughtfully. ‘‘Poor Harriet! She
cried very much when she heard of Lewis’s dreadful
death.”
“ His dreadful suicide,” said Darton sadly. “ Poor
man I He will have to pay for that as well as for the
death of his victim. However, Harriet will forget
him, I hope. He was not worthy of her, and she will
be quite comfortable on the five hundred a year you
have allowed her. lam also glad that Parley bolted
to America. He behaved badly, but under great pro-
vocation. Had' he stopped, he would have been im-
prisoned as being an accomplice after the fact.”
“ Ellen has joined him in the States,” said Belinda.
“ I got a letter from her yesterday, and she thanked
me for allowing her the five hundred a year. I could
do no less, since she was Arthur’s widow, and had
such an unhappy married life with him. So you see,
darling, that I have only four thousand a year left.”
“ I should love you if you had nothing,” said her
adoring husband.
“Has Paddy left that Reformatory?” asked Mrs.
Darton, after a caress.
313
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


“ No. He is being; well looked after there. Mrs.
O’Toole has disappeared, as she would have got into
trouble also. But Paddy is a clever little animal. He
certainly managed to diddle the doctors wonderfully.
Fancy his remembering all the time, and being so
clever as to pretend a loss of memory I However, he is
now well on the road to get the wickedness knocked
out of him, so all is right with him.”
“ And Sir Samuel Embers ”
“He has left off driving cabs. Having got rid of
the famous one, he never bought another. He also
has gone to the States, in the hope of picking up an
heiress.”
“ And Lady Cobbin ?”
Darton took Belinda’s hands and looked into her
eyes. “You are not jealous of Lady Cobbin,
darling ? ”
“ No, no! How could you think so? ”
“ Well, I fancied ”
Belinda placed her gloved hand over his mouth.
I hink nothing,” she said earnestly, “and say
nothing. Lady Cobbin and I are the best of friends.
She intended to leave the inquiry agent business, and
start as a lecturer on various) subjects. She told me
how she loved you, and how you were true to me.
Lady Cobbin will always be our friend.”
“ And not Milady?”
“ Milady has gone out of our lives along with Ellen
and her father and Arthur and Lewis, and perhaps
Harriet. You and I are together; I don’t think any-
thing else matters much.”
“ No,” said Darton, kissing her, “ I don’t think it
does, especially as we will be quite alone in our two
years’ trip round the world. I shall dwell in Arcadia
314
The Mystery of a Motor Cab.


for that time, and then return to work hard at my pro-
fession. I don’t want to live on my wife.”
“ So long as you live for your wife,” said Belinda,
“ that is all right. But one thing I should like to ask
you, Wilfred. Why did Lewis kill Arthur? I can’t
understand exactly.
Darton paused. “ Mendle was a man under the
influence of terrible fears both real and unreal. Fear
is the most cruel and the most daring of all the
emotions. A braver man would not have had the
courage to commit a murder, or to commit suicide.
But fear drove Mendle to extremities. We must judge
him leniently, Belinda, for wickedly as the man
behaved, he has been punished. All his life, my dear,
that miserable creature lived in an agony of terror.
Preferring death to suspense, he killed himself, as,
formerly, to do away with the suspense, he murdered
your brother. It is a strange case, and quite out of
the common. But there ” —Wilfred kissed her —“ we
shall soon be at the station, and on our way to peace
and happiness. Let us talk no more of the terrible
past.”
“ I shall never be able to look again at a motor cab
without shuddering,” said Belinda sighing.
“ Then look at me instead, my dearest, and smile.”
Belinda thought that this was good advice, and did.
THE END.
F. WILLMAN, PRINTER, MANSFIELD.
315
The Mystery of a Motor Cah.


The Night Thought Series.
Uniformly printed in post Svo,
142nd Thousand. 3s. 6d. net; postage 3d.
IN TUNE WITH THE INFINITE; or, Fullness
of Peace, Power, and Plenty. By Ralph Waldo Trunk.
“ To point out the great facts and laws underlying the workings of
the interior, spiritual, thought forces, to point them out so simply and
so clearly that all can grasp them, that all can take them and infuse
them into everyday life, so as to mould it in all its details in accordance
with what they would have it, is the author’s purpose. That life car.
be thus moulded by them is not a matter of mere speculation or theory
with him, but a matter of positive knowledge. ” — Author’s Preface.
“ A spirit of bright, healthy, and wise optimism runs through this
book. There are multitudes of people whose lives might be changed
from winter !• spring by taking to heart its teaching.” —The Christian
World.
“It immediately suggests the works of Drummond, but shows a
decided advance upon the ground which he made familiar to mankind. ”
—The Boston Evening Transcript.
This volume has been widely read wherever the English language is
spoken , and translations have been published in French , German,
Spanish, Dutch, Swedish, Hungarian, and Urdu.
A POCKET EDITIONI beautifully printed on Japon paper, with
portrait of the author, specially designed end-paper and delicate
cover la supplied, in thumb case. +*• 6d. net j postage 3d.
Post Bvo. 38. 6d. net; postage 3d.
THIS MYSTICAL LIFE OF OURS. A Book
of Selected Passages of two or three pages each, for each week
through the year, taken from the Works of Ral?h Waldo Thins.
1


NEW IMPORTANT VOLUME BY RALPH WALDO
TRINE.
350 pages. 4s. 6d. net; postage 4d.
IN Jf IE FIRE OF THE HEART; or, the Great
Modern “ People’s Movement ” in Government.
While primarily written for American readers, and dealing with the
problems discussed from their point of view, this volume will be found
to contain much that is of general application, and the English edition
contains a special chapter dealing with problems which are at present
receiving much public attention.
It not only treats in novel and characteristic manner of the economic,
pohtica!, social, and individual conditions of everyday life and their
effed' on the prosperity of the people, but also suggests remedial
measures for the evils in accordance with the true laws of life.
54th Thousand. 3*. 6d. net; postage 3d.
WHAT ALL THE WORLD’S A-SEEKING; or,
The Vital Law of True Life, True Greatness, Power, and
Happiness. By R. W. Trine.
Third English Edition. 4s. 6d. net; postage 3d.
MIND POWER. By Albert B. Olston.
tl ? ls ,T olume is t 0 § ive general public the necessary
cadence of the mind s power over the functions and conditions of the
h,s d mind d ? r the reade f. h , ow t 0 avail himself of the resources of
bis mind which are as yet so little understood or appreciated.
*1 r tainS 9 hapte A s on the Subjective Mind-Telepathy—
ruzszsgzsszr*™"* of ™ s-;»ct.v.
3s. 6d. net postage 3d.
THE WILL TO BE WELL, By Charles Brodie
ai person, Editor of The Arena , and Mind.
3s. 6d. net; postage 3d.
DOMINION AND POWER. Studies in Spiritual
bcicnce. By Charles Brodie Patterson,
ttbe DfCJb XTbOlUjbt % Wits— Continued.


J* <sd. net; postage 3d.
THE COSMIC PROCESSION; or, the Feminine
Principle in Evolution. By Frances Swinev, Author of " The
Awakening of Women. ” " Women among the Nations,” etc.
CONTENTS: The Feminine Principle in Creation-—The
Ultimate of Aim—The Divine Motherhood—The Son, the
World-Fabricator—Phases of Consciousness—Conclusion.
: J he u e * no ot - her writer who presents the basic principles accord-
mg to which, as the poet said, * the eternal womanly leads us on ’ in
such a scholarly and thorough way as Mrs Swiaey.”— The Woman’*
*rtounc (U.0.A.).
3a. 6d. net; postage 3d.
THE CONQUEST OF DEATH. By Helen
Wilmans, Author of "Home Course in Mental Science.”
This remarkable volume, dealing with the subject of most vital in-
terest to all mankind, sets forth a new philosophy of life based upon
the universality of mind, its immediate power and ultimate domination
of so-called matter.
*62 pages. 3s. 6d. net; postage 46.
LIMITLESS MAN. By Helen Wilmans.
In this volume the Author treats of The Action between Brain
and Body—Man One and Indivisible—Man’s Destiny in his
own Hands—The Power of the Life Principle—From Selfish-
ness to Selfhood—Expectation—Doubt— A Conquest of Fire
by the Human Body—Thought as a Force—The Development
of Will—The WTll is the Individual—The Uses of Beauty.
BTC. BTC.
Price 3s. net; postage 3d.
THE NEW ETHICS; or, Flashlights on Human
Progress. By J. Howard Moore. Author of " The Universal
Kinship,” etc.
CONTENTS; The Nature of Opinion—The Thesis of the
New Ethics—The Pluman Attitude Toward Others—Our
Pour-footed Slaves—The Cost of a Skin—What Shall we
® AT ■ —- s M an a Plant-eater ?—The Food, of the Future—The
Peril of Over-population—The Survival of the Strenuous.
3
Übe IfMob XTbOUgbt Sc lies— Continued.


340 pages. 43. fid. net; postage s<t.
THE UNIVERSAL KINSHIP. By J. Howard
Moorb, Instructor in Zoology, Crane Manual Training High
School, Chicago.
A unique volume tracing and expounding for the first time systemati-
cally, from the physical, psychical, and ethical standpoints, the
relationship between the human and subhuman races.
“ He has brought together a mass of scientific information, anecdotes,
and descriptions of the ways of different animals, and seeks to establish
in his readers a sense of their kinship with all things that live—kinship
of a triple character—physical, psychical, and ethical. . . . The book
is written in a clear and interesting fashion.’* —The Daily Telegraph,
“ Mr Moore’s book has the admirable quality of provoking thought.
None who study it can fail to be interested in the point of view. It
deserves to be read by every lover of animals.”— The Evening Standard.
0
is. fid. net; postage ad.
THE LOGIC OF VEGETARIANISM. Essays
and Dialogues. By Henry S. Salt, Author of "Animals
Rights, considered in Relation to Social Progress.”
“An excellent book. . . . The subject is treated in a thoroughly
scientific fashion, and the book is entirely free from the element of
exaggeration which, in the eyes of an outsider, prejudices many
similar publications.” —The Vegetarian Messenger.
it. fid. net; postage 2d.
THE FOOD OF THE FUTURE. A Summary of
Arguments in favour of a Non-Flesh Diet. By C. W. Forward.
“It is one of the best summaries of arguments in favour of a non-
flesh diet, and is thoroughly convincing to all who are not blind
to reason. The preface by Ernest Bell is fine.” —The Worlds
Advance Thought (U. S.A.).
“ A beautiful little book. It is a comprehensive work, written in
lucid style, appealing to the hearts of all sensible men to think what
should be the Food of the Future. It may form one of the best
mediums for propaganda work.”— The Theosophic Gleaner (Bombay).
TTfoe Dtab Übcmgbt Series— Continued.


Other Books by R. W. Trine
Small Bvo. is. each net; postage ij4*
44th Thousand.
THE GREATEST THING EVER KNOWN
“ The moment we ully and vitally realise who and what we are , w
then begin to build our own world even as God builds His.”— Fro?.
Title-page.
It unfolds the secret of our underlying strength, and shows wha
it is that gives us power to fulfil the real and living purposes of oui
being.
32nd Thousand.
EVERY LIVING CREATURE.
“ The tender and humane passion in the human heart Is to<
precious a quality to allow it to be hardened or effaced by practice
such as we so often indulge in.”— From Title-page .
An eloquent appeal and an able argument for justice and mere’
to our dumb fellow-creatures. A good book for those whose character
are being formed, and for all who love justice and right.
39th Thousand.
CHARACTER-BUILDING: thought power
“A thought, good or evil, an act, In time a habit, so runs life’s
law ; what you live in your thought-world, that, sooner or later, yor
will find obiectified in your life. From Title-page.
In “ Character-Building: Thought Power,” Mr Trine demon-
strates the power of mental habits, and shows how by daily effort
we may train ourselves into right ways of thinking and acting. Hi?
teachings are sound, practical, and of priceless worth,
5


The “World Beautiful” Library.
Uniformly Bound. 3s. 6d. each.
NEW VOLUME JUST PUBLISHED.
THE GREATEST TRUTH, and other Discourses
and Interpretations. By Horatio W. Dresser.
I. THE WORLD BEAUTIFUL. By Lilian
Whiting. Seventeenth Edition.
“ I wish to express my sincere and hearty thanks for the book entitled 1 The World
Beautiful.' It is a delight and an inspiration to make its acquaintance. . . . No
one can read it without pleasure, or linger over its pellucid sentences without advan-
tage.”—Rev. Dr John Clifford, M.A.
“ In reading ‘The World Beautiful,’ I have derived more than pleasure, for I
have been quietly translated from the world of worry which surrounds so many of us
into the New Earth,_ which Christ has made possible for His people. This is a noble
kook, which, while it rebukes the follies and sins of our topsy-turvy society, fills the
reader with desires after the heavenly life.”— Rev. Dr Charles A. Berry.
“ Set forth in language so pure and elevated that no right-minded person can fail
to find a genuine attraction on every page."—Frances E. Willard.
“ 1 The World Beautiful’ is a delightful compendium of instructive thought and
reflection. ... It is hardly possible to open it at random without alighting on a
crisply-expressed thought that is worthy of being cherished.” —The Scotsman.
“The headings of chapters indicate little what they contain, for they do hot
disguise mines of intellectual and spiritual ore.” —The Literary World.
11. THE POWER OF SILENCE. By Horatio
W. Dresser. Sixth Edition.
“ The little volume is crowded with fine ideas and ideals deeply devotional and
generally practical." —The Liverpool Poet.
111. VOICES OF HOPE. By Horatio W. Dressbr.
Second Edition.
“ In this volume one finds really beautiful thoughts conveyed in striking and beau-
tiful language.”— The Western Morning; News.
IV. THE PERFECT WHOLE. By Horatio W.
Dresser. Third Edition.
“The book is marked by much beauty in style and language.”— The Bradjord
Observer. \
V. HOME THOUGHTS. By Mrs James Farley
Cox.
“ Simple, sensible, and interesting.” —The Glasgow Herald.
VI. THE GROWTH OF RELIGIOUS IDEALS.
As Illustrated by the Great English Poets. By Rev. H. G.
Roskdale, M.A., D.D.
6


life and Light Books.
Prettily Bound in white covers with coloured designs,
is. net each; postage i£d.
The Greatest Thing Ever Known. By Ralph
Waldo Trine. 44 th Thousand.
Character-Building: Thought Power. By Ralph
Waldo Trine, yjth Thousand. #
Every Living Creature; or, Heart-Training through
the Animal World. By Ralph Waldo Trine. 22nd Thousand,
Fate Mastered—Destiny Fulfilled. By W. J.
Colville, Author of ‘‘The World’s Fair Text-Book of Mental
Therapeutics. ” 4 th Thousand.
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. G. Long’s Translation.
6 th Thousatid.
Epictetus Discourses. G. Long’s Translation, a vols.
(Not sold separately.)
Seneca. A Selection, By Herbert C. Sidley.
Emerson’s Conduct of Life. 3 rd Thousand.
Light from the East. Selections from the Teaching
of the Buddha. By Edith Ward. With Foreword by Annie
Bbsant. 3 rd Thousand.
Mathematical Law in the Spiritual World. By
Eustace Miles.
Better Food for Boys. By Eustace Miles, Author
of “Muscle, Brain, and Diet,”
The Whole World Kin. A Study in Threefold
Evolution. By Howard Moore.
This volume is condensed from the Author’s larger work, “The
Universal Kinship.”
Parables from Nature. A Selection. By Mrs M.
Gatty. First Series. 6th Thousand.
Parables from Nature, Second Series. 3 rd Thousand.
Billy and Hans: My Squirrel Friends. A True History.
By W. J. Stillman. 4 th Thousand.
7


Neptune the Wise: Episodes in his Life. By C. J.
Friends of Mine. A Book for Animal Lovers. By
Mrs M. Corbet Seymour. 2nd Thousand.
Kith and Kin: Poems of Animal Life. Selected by
Henry S. Salt, Author of “Animals’ Rights.”
Legends and Lyrics. By Adelaide A. Procter.
First Series. 139 th Thousand.
Legends and Lyrics. Second Series. 107 th Thousand.
Aurora Leigh. By Mrs Browning. 6 th Thousand.
Tennyson’s “In Memoriara.” 4 th Thousand.
Poems. By Ella Wheeler Wilcox. A Selection.
OTHERS TO FOLLOW.
I« paper cover, 3d.
ANIMALS’ RIGHTS, considered In relation to
Social Progress. By Henry S. Salt.
" ‘Animals’ Rights,’ by Mr Henry Salt, seeks to set the principle of
animals’ rights on a consistent and intelligible footing. Many of Mr
Salt’s pleas for humanity will win universal assent.” —The Times.
“A well-written essay in which Mr H. S. Sak strives to put the
Einciple of animals' rights «fos what he calls sa intelligible foot-
g.”—The Morning Post.
“A curious but cleverly written little book which avowedly seeks to
prove that the coming realization of human rights will inevitably bring
m its train the tardier but not less certain realization erf the rights of the
lower races.” —Tht Speaker.
is. oet; postage ad.
ITALIAN RECIPES FOR FOOD RE-
FORMERS. Containing Soups, Savouries, Egg and Macaroni
Dishes, Salads, Vegetables, and Sweets. Translated and Ar-
ranged by Makia Gironci.
Fourth Edition, za. net; postage ad.
NEW VEGETARIAN DISHES: Soups, Salads,
Savouries, Stews, Souffles, and Sauces. By Mas Bowdich.
LONDON: GEORGE BELL & SONS
York Housb, Portugal Street, Lincoln’s Inn, W.C.
8
%itc anti %\Qht IBooks—Continued.


March, 1908.
BELL'S
INDIAN & COLONIAL LIBRARY.
Issued for Circulation in India and the Colonies only.
Volumes marked with aft asterisk not supplied to Canada.
Paper Covers, R. 1.12 each. Cloth, Rs. 2.4 each.
Additional Volumes are issued at regular intervals.
Abbot (J. H. M.).
Letters from Queer Street.
Albanesi (Madame).
Strongest of All Things (728).
A Young Man from the Country
(666).
Druscilla’s Point of View.
Argyle(HisQrace the Duke of).
V.R.1., Her Life and Empire
(403).
Arnold (Edwin L.).
Lieut. Gullivar Jones (627).
Askew (Alice and Claude).
The Shulamite (557).
Eve—and the Law (597).
The Premier’s Daughter (617).
Jennifer Pontefract (657).
The Etonian (677).
Out of the Running (683).
Lucy Gort (719).
Sword of Peace (740).
The Path of Lies (779).
In an Orchard Close.
Aubrey (Frank).
King of the Dead (485).
Austen (Jane). [trated (280).
Pride and Prejudice. Illus-
Author of ‘ATime of Terror.’
Devil’s Peepshow (732).
Author of the ‘Adventures of
Captain Kettle.’
Four Red Night Caps (363).
Author of ‘Collections and
Recollections.’
A Londoner’s Log Book (464).
Author of * Lady Beatrix and
the Forbidden Man.’
For Which Wife? (658;.
Baker (James).
The Inseparables (634).
Baring Gould (S.).
Perpetua (189),
Barr (Amelia E.).
The Black Shilling (519).
A Song of a Single Note (564)
Barr (Robert).
The Triumphs of Eugene Val-
mont (656).
A Rock in the Baltic (717).
Barrett (Wilson) and Barron
(Elwyn).
In Old New York (306).
Barry (Dr. W.).
The Dayspring (503),
Bazin (Rene).
The Nun.
Becke (Louis).
The Strange Adventure of
James Shervinton &c. (451).
Helen Adair (480).
Chinkie’s F\at, &c. (543).
Under Tropic Skies (588).
Tom Gerrard (610).
Benson (E. F.).
Limitations (141).
Bindloss (Harold).
The Impostor (630).
His Lady’s Pleasure (733).
Bjornson (Bjornstjerne).
Arne, and the Fisher Lassie (6).


Bloundelle-Burton (J.).
A Dead Reckoning (550).
The Land of Bondage (593).
Knighthood’s Flower (684).
A Woman from the Sea (758).
Blyth (James).
Lawful Issue (699).
Boothby (Guy).
A Cabinet Secret (357).
The Childerbridge Mystery
(432).
Uncle Joe’s Legacy, &c. (449).
The League of Twelve (490)
A Queer Affair (515).
The Lady of the Island (530)
An Ocean Secret (534).
A Consummate Scoundrel (549).
A Desperate Conspiracy (581).
A Brighton Tragedy (623).
A Stolen Peer (648).
A Royal Affair, &c. (675).
Bradley (Shelland).
An American Girl in India (713)
Doings of Berengaria (771).
Braddon (M. E.).
The White House (689).
Dead Love has Chains (724).
Her Convict (755).
Brooke-Hunt (Violet).
Lord Roberts, a Biography(4l6).
Brown (Vincent).
Fashionable Christians (759).
Buchan (John).
The Half-hearted (350).
Bullen (F. T.).
A Sack of Shakings (400).
A Son of the Sea (624).
*Frank Brown (682).
*The Call of the Deep (751).
Burchell (Sidney Herbert).
My Lady of the Bass (512).
The Mistress of the Robes
(633).
Burgin (G. B.).
The Land of Silence (542).
Burmester, (F; E.).
Clemency Shafto (671).
Calverley (C. S.).
Verses and Fly-Leaves (14),
Complete Works (472).
Cambridge (Ada).
A Platonic Friendship (642).
A Happy Marriage (686).
The Eternal Feminine (754).
Capes (Bernard).
Joan Brotherhood (345).
A Castle in Spain (474).
The Secret in the Hill (523).
Carr (M. E.).
The Poison of Tongues (653).
Chesterton (Gilbert K.).
The Club of Queer Trades
(599)-
Cleeve (Lucas).
The Man in the Street (47°)’
From Crown to Cross (495-)
Anglo-Americans (501).
Children of Endurance (580).
Confessions of a Widow (723)-
Cobb (Thomas).
The Intriguers (478).
Cobban (J. M.).
The Golden Tooth (377)*
Coke (Desmond).
The Call (729).
Coleridge (Christabel).
The Winds of Cathrigg (414)-
Miss Lucy.
Conrad (Joseph).
Nostromo (582).
Conrad (Joseph) and Hueffer
(Ford Madox).
Romance (521).
Crane (Stephen).
Last Words (433).
Creswick (Paul).
At the Sign of the Cross Keys
(328).
2
BELVS INDIAN AND


Croker (B. M.).
Her Own People (518).
Youngest Miss Mowbray (678).
The Company’s Servant (764).
Crosland (T. W. H).
The Impenitent Jew.
Cullum (Ridgwell).
The Hound from the North
(575).
The Brooding Wild (608).
Cushing (Paul).
God’s Lad (352).
Dawe (W. Carlton).
Her Highness’s Secretary (705).
Plotters of Peking (757).
Dearmer (Mabel).
The Orangery (552).
The Alien Sisters.
Oe la Pasture (Mrs. Henry).
Adam Grigson (290).
Cornelius (482).
Peter’s Mother (598).
The Man from America (638).
Dill (Bessie).
My Lady Nan (704).
Donovan (Dick).
A Knight of Evil (602).
Knutsford Mystery (674).
Shadow of Evil (716).
Douglas (George).
The House with the Green
Shutters (417).
Doyle (Sir A. Conan).
The White Company (20).
Rodney Stone. Ulus. (143).
Uncle Bernac. Ulus. (168).
The Tragedy of the Korosko
(204).
The Green Flag, &c. (313).
The War in S. Africa. (Paper
covers only, 6d.)
*Sir Nigel. Illustrated (692).
the Magic Door.
Cloth only (768).
Du Maurier (Q.).
Trilby. Illustrated (65).
The Martian. Illustrated (180).
Farley (Agnes).
Ashdod (748).
Fenn (Q. ManvlHe).
Coming Home to Roost (558).
A Country Squire (720).
Sir Hilton’s Sin (780).
Finnemore (John).
The Lover Fugitives (427).
Fitchett (W. H.), LL.D.
Deeds that Won the Empire.
Illustrated (198).
Fights for the Flag. Ulus. (248).
How England Saved Europe.
4 vols. Illustrated (323 326).
Wellington’s Men (358).
The Tale of the Great Mutiny
(412).
Nelson and his Captains (467).
Commander of the Hirondelle
(574)-
Fletcher (J. S.).
Bonds of Steel (429).
Mr. Poskitt (735).
The Harvest Moon.
Flowerdew (Herbert).
Maynard’s Wives (706).
Fowler (Edith H.).
For Richer, For Poorer (635).
Francis (M. E.).
North, South, and over the Sea
(447).
Fuller-Maitland (Elia).
Priors Roothing (509).
Furniss (Harry).
Poverty Bay, Ulus. (615).
Qaboriau (Emile).
Monsieur Lecoq (395).
The Widow Lerouge (404).
Gallon (Tom).
Nobody’s Baby (516).
The Golden Thread (589).
Jimmy Quixote (659).
3
colonial Library.


Gallon (Tom).
Fortunes a-begging (693).
Christmas at Poverty Castle.
(770).
Gerard (Morice).
A Gentleman of London,
Qoron (Monsieur).
World of Crime (703).
Graham (W'inifred).
Mayfair (563). [(665).
Emma Hamilton’s Miniature
Grand (Madame sarah).
Emotional Moments.
Gribble (Francis).
Pillar of Cloud (680),
Griffin (E. Aceituna).
Mrs. Vanneck (765).
Griffith (George).
The White Witch of Mayfair
The Lake of Gold (496). [(448).
A Woman Against the World
(SH).
The Stolen Submarine (559).
Men who have Made the Em-
pire (584).
An Island Love Story (592).
His Better Half (622).
His Beautiful Client (650).
Great Weather Syndicate (667).
A Conquest of Fortune (696).
World Peril of 1910 (731).
John Brown, Buccaneer (781).
The Sacred Skull.
Griffiths (Major Arthur).
Ford’s Folly, Ltd. (300).
No. 99, and Blue Blood (401),
Tales of a Government Official
The Wrong Road (502). [(450),
The Silver Spoon (511).
Winnifred’s Way (596).
Agony Terrace (714).
Thrice Captive.
Gunter (A. C.).
Deacon and Actress (425).
1 he Manßehind the Door (570)
Hake (A. Egmont) and Mur-
ray (D. C.)
Eternal Dawn (741).
Hardy (Thomas).
Tess of the D’Urbervilles (3).
Harrad an (Beatrice*.
Ships that Pass in the Night (r).
Harte (Bret).
Trent’s Trust (491).
Hawthorne (Julian).
A Fool of Nature (121).
Hird (Frank).
King Fritz’s A.D.C. (409).
Hobbes (John Oliver).
Love and the Soul Hunters
The Vineyard (544). [(456).
The Flute of Pan (601).
Hocking (Silas K.)
Meadowsweet and Rue (561).
Hope (Anthony).
The Intrusions ot Peggy (457).
Hope (Graham).
My Lord Winchenden (440).
The Gage of Red and White
(545).
Amalia (708).
Hornung (E. W.).
No Hero (483).
Howard (Keble).
Bachelor Girls (736).
Hueffer (Ford Madox).
The Benefactor (636).
The Fifth Queen Crowned.
Hume (Fergus).
The White Room (546).
The Wooden Hand (587)
The Scarlet Bat (613),
The Fatal Song (631),
Jonah’s Luck (697).
Purple Fern (739).
Flies in the Web (773).
The Devil’s Ace.
The Mikado Jewel.
Hunt (Violet).
A Hard Woman (97).
4
BELL'S INDIAN AND


Hyne (C. J. Cutclilfe).
Adventures of Captain Kettle.
Illustrated (244),
Further Adventures of Captain
Kettle (288),
The Little Red Captain (459).
Captain Kettle, K.C.B. (481).
iota.
He for God Only (484).
The Magic of May.
Jacobs (W. W.).
At Sunwich Port (434).
The Lady of the Barge (463).
Odd Craft (517).
Dialstone Lane (578).
Short Cruises (718).
Jane (Fred. T.).
Ever Mohun (389),
Jokai (Maurus).
The Baron's Sons (370)
Manasseh (406).
Joubert (Carl).
The White Hand (651).
The Tyranny of Faith (694).
Kennard (Mrs. E.).
A Son of the Fleet (497).
Kernahan (Coulson).
The Red Peril (777).
Kernahan (Mrs. Coulson).
A Beautiful Savage (556).
The Whisperer (611).
A Village Mystery (632).
Kildare (Owen).
Up from the Slums (572).
Klado (Captain N. L.).
Russian Navy in Russo-
Japanese War (606).
Koebel (W. H.).
The Anchorage (775).
Laver (Frank).
An Australian Cricketer on j
Tour (637). Cloth only.
Le Blond (Mrs ).
Story of an Alpine Winter (767). j
Le Breton (John).
Mis’ess Joy (340).
Le Breton (J. & T.).
The Chronicles of Choisy (488)
The Modern Christian (540).
Lee (Albert).
The Gentleman Pensioner (3:1),
Le Queux (W.),
Scribes and Pharisees (215),
England's Peril (270).
Wiles of the Wicked (307).
The Court of Honour (399).
The Idol of the Town (525).
As We Forgive Them (548).
Sign of the Stranger (568).
Sins of the City (595).
Whatsoever a Man Soweth(6s4).
Mach ray (Robert)
Mystery of the Middle Temple
(782).
Mackie (Pauline Bradford).
The Washingtonians (506).
MacMahon (Ella).
Oxendale (629).
McCarthy (Justin Huntley).
The Proud Prince (524).
The Flower of France (662).
Illustrious O’Hagan (688).
Needles and Pins (727}.
Seraphica (760).
Mai lock (W. H.).
The Individualist (272),
Mann (Mary E.).
Fortune’s Cap (625).
Marriott (Charles).
Women and the West (698).
The Wondrous Wife (7^6).
The Kiss of Helen.
Marsh (Richard).
In Full Cry (279).
The Goddess (334).
Romance of a Maid of Honour
(707).
Marshall (A. H.).
Lord Stirling’s Son (70).
5
COLONIAL LIBRARY.


Martin (D’Arcy).
Gran (614).
Mason (A. E. W.).
The Four Feathers (462).
The Truants (569).
*The Broken Road (762).
Mathers (Helen).
Pigskin and Petticoat (766).
Meade (Mrs. L. T.)
The Witch Maid (510).
A Maid of Mystery (538).
At the Back of the World (565).
Home of Sweet Content (664).
In the Flower of her Youth (679)
Chateau of Mystery (744).
Meade (L. T.) and Halifax
(Clifford).
Where the Shoe Pinches (330).
Meadows (Alice Maud).
Blind Man’s Buff (747).
Merrick (Leonard).
When Love flies out o’ the
Window (436).
Merriman (Henry Seton).
With Edged Tools (15).
The Grey Lady. Ulus. (190).
Millington (Powell).
To Lhassa at Last (604).
Mitford (Bertram).
Dorrien of Cranston (477).
The Sirdar’s Oath (536).
A Frontier Mystery (603).
A Secret of the Lebombo (645).
Moore (George).
The Untilled Field (487).
Confessions of a Young Man
(590-
Moore (Frankfort).
The Other World (585).
Morrison (Arthur).
Green Eye of Goona (577).
Muddock (J. E. Preston-).
Whose was the Hand ? (392).
Liz (528).
The Sunless City (607).
Nisbet (Hume).
The Revenge of Valerie (298).
A Crafty Foe (387).
A Losing Game (407),
A Colonial King (600).
Neish (Rosalie).
Howto ChooseaH usband(4&
Oliphant (Philip Laurance).
Julian Reval (753).
Onions (Oliver).
Pedlar’s Pack.
Oxenham (John).
Bondman Free (493).
Page (Gertrude).
Love in the Wilderness (749).
Pain (Barry)and Blyth(James).
Shadow of the Unseen (745).
Pemberton (Max).
The House underthe Sea (453)*
Pett Ridge (W.).
A Breaker of Laws (347).
Philips (F. C.).
The Dean and his Daughter,
Phillipps-Wolley (C.).
The Chicamon Stone (310).
Phillpotts (Eden).
The Golden Fetich (522).
The Whirlwind (701).
Praed (Mrs. Campbell).
Some Loves and a Life (579)
Prescott (E. Livingston).
Illusion (289).
Price (Eleanor C.).
Angelot (458).
Prichard (K. & Hesketh).
Chronicles of Don Q. (573)'
Pugh (Edwin).
The Purple Head (618).
The Shuttlecock (746)
Quiller-Couch (A. T.).
Hetty Wesley (513).
From a Cornish Window (668).
Sir John Constantine (690).
j Poison Island (715).
6
BELL'S INDIAN AND


Rail! (Constantine).
Wisdom of the Serpent (730}.
Story of Falconer Thring (742).
Julian Steele.
Ranger-Qull (C.).
The Price of Pity (644).
Reynolds (Mrs. Fred).
Hazel of Hazeldean (685,)
House of Rest (709).
Riddell (Mrs. J. H.).
Footfall of Fate (332).
Poor Fellow (468).
‘Rita.’
A Man of No Importance (743).
Roberts (Morley).
A Tramp’s Note Book (571).
The Idlers (640).
Russell (W. Clark).
A Voyage at Anchor (303).
Saunders (Marshall).
Deficient Saints (505).
Savage (R. H.),
House of His Friends
(4 11).
Commander Leigh (473).
Golden Rapids of High Life
(504).
Last Trai tor of Long I sland (576)
A Monte Christo in Khaki (673).
Shiel (M. P).
This Knot of Life.
Simpson (Violet A.).
The Bonnet Conspirators (492).
SladeiT(Douglas)7
Playing the Game (590).
A Sicilian Marriage (649).
Smith (H.).
His Private Life (626).
Somerset (Lady Henry).
Under the Arch of Life (655).
Spender (E.).
The Law-Breakers (486).
St. Aubyn (Alan).
The Ordeal of Sara ($39).
The Senior Tutor (567).
The Harp of Life.
Stevenson (Philip L.).
A Gendarme of the King (616).
A Gallant of Gascony (721).
Summers (Dorothy).
The Plains of Alu (774).
Sutcliffe (Halliwell).
A Bachelor in Arcady (555).
Windover Tales (725).
Swift (Benjamin).
Ludus Amoris (435).
Syrett (Netta).
The Day’s Journey (621).
Child of Promise (722).
Thomas (Annie).
Social Ghosts (508),
Thorne (Quy).
I believe, &c. (710),
Thurston (E. Temple).
Evolution of Katherine (711).
Sally Bishop (778).
Tirebuck (W. E.)>
The White Woman (275).
Tracy (Louis).
The Strange Disappearance of
Lady Delia (398).
The Wooing of Esther Gray
Princess Kate (489). [(452).
The King of Diamonds (553)
A Morganatic Wife (583).
The King’s Messenger (619).
The Winning of Winifred (647).
The Red Year (772).
Tynan (Katharine).
The Honourable Molly (526).
The French Wife (541).
Judy’s Lovers (560).
Fortune’s Favourite (625).
Adventures of Alicia (669).
Story of Bawn (687).
Her Ladyship (750).
Urquhart (M.).
The Wheel (712).
Our Lady of the Mists (769).
Vynne (Nora).
The Priest’s Marriage (305).
7
COLONIAL LIBRARY.


Wakeman (Annie).
The Autobiography of a Char-
woman (344).
Warden (Florence).
A Lowly Lover (297).
Cliff’s End Farm (641).
Warden (Gertrude).
Nut-Browne Mayd (737).
Watts-Dunton (Theodore).
Carniola,
Watson (H. B. Marrlot).
The House Divided (419).
Godfrey Merivale (444).
Watson (Lacon).
The Barony of Brendon (702).
Wells (H. (I.).
When the Sleeper Wakes (273)
Tales of Time and Space (299)
Love and Mr. Lewisham (331).
First Men in the Moon (410).
War in the Air,
Weymss (George).
The Fly-Wheel (393).
Whlshaw (Fred.).
Many Ways of Love (269).
Lovers at Fault (566).
A Grand Duke of Russia (612).
The Great Green God (661).
Whitby (Beatrice).
Whirligig of Time (681).
White (Percy).
Colonel Daveron (726),
White (F. M.).
Tregarthen’s Wife (415).
The Yellow Face (670),
Whiteing (Richard).
AH Moonshine (761).
Wlggin (Kate Douglas).
Penelope s Experiences in Scot-
land (223).
Penelope’s Experiences in Ire-
land (384).
Penelope’s English Experiences
Illustrated (408).
Timothy’s Quest. (Paper
covers only, u.)
The Diary of a Goose Girl
and a Cathedral Courtship
(445).
Rebecca of Sunnybrook Farm
(527).
The Affair at the Inn (586).
Williamson (Mrs. C. N.).
The Turnstile of Night (547),
Winter (John Strange).
The Man I Loved (402).
Uncle Charles (460),
Cherry’s Child (551).
Little Vanities of Mrs. Whit-
taker (562).
The Little Aunt (594).
Dick the Faithful (643).
A Simple Gentleman (660).
Love of Philip Hampden (700).
Miss Dering’s Price (752).
Wodehouse (P. Q.)
Love among the Chickens (676).
Wyllarde (Dolf).
As ye have Sown (691).
Mafoota (763).
Wyndham (Horace).
Reginald Auberon (738).
Zangwill (Edith Ayrton).
The First Mrs. Mollivar (639),
Zangwill (Louis).
An Engagement of Conve-
nience.
8
BELL'S INDIAN AND COLONIAL LIBRARY.


THE YORK LIBRARY
A NEW SERIES OF REPRINTS ON THIN PAPER
with specially designed title-pages , binding, and end-papers.
Fcap. Bw. in cloth, zs. net each volume.
Limp leather , 3/. net.
olavltHn tWW Lib <- ai ’ y ” 'f noti s ea , ble by reason of the wisdom and intelligence dis-
played in the choice ofunnackneyed classics. ... A most attractive series of reprints
. . . The size and style of the volumes are exactly what they should be.’— Bookman.
( Charmingly tasteful.’ —Westminster Gazette.
“ Yo'rk'nw^^T, ou £ te “‘.bin-paper” books none are better done than the admirable
the first of thmr a I s ,V nple . and , attractl l[® blndln g tl] ese volumes stand quite among
value for tL mon k > d- dhe . ,s . tw ° shillings net, and they are exceedingly good
value for the money. —Evening Standard and St. James's Gazette. y
‘ We welcome with delight each succeeding volume of the “ York Library ” and
rarely fail to re-read a portion, if not the whole, in this new and alluring guise. V ’
Notes and Queries ,
The following Volumes are now ready :—
BRONTE (Charlotte) : JANE EYRE.
BURNEY (Fanny): EVELINA.’ Edited, with an Introduction
and Notes, by Annie Raine Ellis.
‘ To their delightful “ York Library ” Messrs. George Bell & Sons have added
r army Burney s Evelina,” with the excellent introduction and notes by Annie
.Kaine Ellis. The type, form, and paper are admirable.’— Manchester Courier.
BURNEY (Fanny): CECILIA. Edited by Annie Raine
Ellis. 12 vols.
BURTON (Sir Richard): PILGRIMAGE TO AL-MADINAH
AND MECCAH. Edited by Lady Burton. With an Introduction by
Stanley Lane-Poole. 2 vols.
BURTON (Robert) : THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY
Edited by the Rev. A. R. Shilleto, M.A., with Introduction by A H
Bullen. 3 vols.
‘A long way in advance, from a critical point of view, of any edition of the
Anatomy yet published.’—Professor Saujtsbuky in the St. James's Gazette.
CERVANTES : DON QUIXOTE. Motteux’s Translation
revised. With Lockhart’s Life and Notes. 2 vols.
CLASSIC TALES : Johnson’s Rasselas, Goldsmith’s Vicar
OF WAKEFIELD, STERNE’S SENTIMENTAL TOURNEY
WALPOLE’S CASTLE OF OTRANTO. With an Introduction by
C. S. Fearenside, M.A. 7
*** This volume will form an excellent introduction to the classical fiction of the
Eighteenth Century, and Mr. Fearenside has increased its value by his sketch of
the rise of the novel, together with bibliographical notes and a table of the chief
novels of the century.
COLERIDGE (S. T.) : AIDS TO REFLECTION, and the
Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit.
‘The great influence of these v/orks of religious philosophy . . . should sead
many readers to this remarkable work. This book makes a most auspicious start
for the new “ York Library.” ’ —Daily News.
9
THE YORK LIBRARY.


COLERIDGE (S. T.) : THE FRIEND. A Series of Essays
on Morals, Politics, and Religion.
‘ This is one of the very wisest books in the wide realms of literature. The man
who reads and masters i wil be the richer for ever as the result.’ —Great Thoughts.
COLERIDGE (S. T.) : TABLE TALK AND OMNIANA,
Arranged and edited by T. Ashe, B.A.
‘ A delightful edition of Coleridge’s “Table Talk.’’ Coleridge was one of the
clearest and most penetrating critics this country has ever produced, and he who
cares for criticism at all cannot afford to neglect the man who on so many
subjects has said the best word that has yet been uttered.’
English Illustrated Magazine.
COLERIDGE (S. T.) : LECTURES AND NOTES ON
SHAKESPEARE AND OTHER ENGLISH POETS. Edited by
T. Ashe.
DRAPER (J. W.) : HISTORY OF THE INTELLECTUAL
DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPE. 2 vols.
1 In this new and cheap form the able and instructive work should reach a very
wide circle of readers.’ —Educational Times,
EBERS (Georg) : AN EGYPTIAN PRINCESS. Translated by
E. S. Buchheim.
ELIOT (George) : ADAM BEDE.
EMERSON (R. W.) : WORKS. A new edition in 5 volumes,
with the Text edited and collated by George Sampson.
‘ No admirer of Emerson should be without this charming edition, for which the
publishers are entitled to no small measure of gratitude.’— lVorld.
FIELDING (HENRY): TOM JONES (2 vols.); AMELIA
(1 vol,) ; JOSEPH ANDREWS (1 vol.).
GASKELL (Mrs.) : SYLVIA’S LOVERS.
GESTA ROMANORUM, or Entertaining Moral Stories invented
by the Monks. Translated from the Latin by the Rev, Charles Swan.
Revised edition, by Wynnard Hooper, M.A.
‘To those whom things ancient delight, the book is a mine of enjoyment. . . .
The_ “ York Library” reprint is ideal. Mr. Hooper’s preface is, in addition,
admirably instructive, and the text is all that can be desired.' —Notes and Quenes.
GOETHE ; FAUST. Translated by Anna Swanwick, LL.D.
Revised edition, with an Introduction and Bibliography by Karl Breul,
Litt.D., Ph.D.
1 Occupying no more than 14 pages of print, Dr. Breul’s introduction to Miss
Swanwick’s well-known translation of Goethe’s “ Faust ” is almost a pattern of what
such introductions should be. Scholarly and suggestive, pithy yet simple, it
presents the great drama in the light of modern research into its sources.’
Morning Post.
GOETHE: AUTOBIOGRAPHY (‘Dichtung und Wahrheit’).
Revised Translation by M. Steele-Smith, Head Lecturer in Modern
Languages at Newnham College, Cambridge. With an Introduction and
Bibliography by Karl Breul, Litt.D., Ph.D. 2 vols.
HAWTHORNE (Nathaniel): TRANSFORMATION [The
Marble Faun]. With a brief life of Hawthorne.
HOOPER (George): WATERLOO. The Downfall of the
First Napoleon. A History of the Campaign of 1815. New edition, with
Maps and Plans.
IRVING (Washington) : BRACEBRIDGE HALL, or The.
Humourists.
10
THE YORK LIBRARY.


IRVING (Washington): THE SKETCH BOOK. With a
short life of Irving.
JAMESON (Mrs.): SHAKESPEARE’S HEROINES.*
Characteristics of Women : Moral, Poetical, and Historical.
LAMB (Charles) ; ESSAYS. Including the Essays of Elia,
Last Essays of Elia, and Eliana.
MARCUS AURELIUS ANTONINUS, THE THOUGHTS
OF. Translated by George Long, M.A. With an Essay on Marcus
Aurelius by Matthew Arnold.
MARRYAT (Cart.) ; MR. MIDSHIPMAN EASY. With 8
Illustrations ; PETER SIMPLE. With 8 Illustrations.
MIGNET’S HISTORY OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION,
from 1789 to 1814.
‘ Mignet’s striking if not wholly impartial history of the Revolution—perhaps
the best short history.’— Atheneeum.
MONTAIGNE : ESSAYS. Cotton’s Translation. Revised by
W. C. Hazlitt. 3 vols.
* A more convenient and agreeable form in which to study Montaigne is not to
be hoped, and we are inclined to regard the work as one of the chief attractions of
a good series.’ — Notes and Queries.
MOTLEY (J. L.) : RISE OF THE DUTCH REPUBLIC.
With a Biographical Introduction by Moncure D. Conway. 3 vols.
‘ This fascinating work in so handy and pleasant a form should secure a wide
success.’— A thenceutn.
PASCAL ; THOUGHTS. Translated from the Text of M.
Auguste Molinier by C. Kegan Paul. Third edition.
PLUTARCH : LIVES. Translated, with Notes and a Life, by
Aubrey Stewart, M.A., and George Long, M.A. 4 vols.
RANKE’S HISTORY OF TPIE POPES. Translated by E.
Foster. New and Revised Edition, with considerable additions. 3 vols.
SWIFT (Jonathan): GULLIVER’S TRAVELS. Edited, with
Introduction and Notes, by G. R. Dennis, with facsimiles of the original
illustrations.
‘ Mr. Dennis is quite justified in his boast of now first giving a complete and
trustworthy text.’ — Manchester Guardian.
SWIFT (Jonathan) : THE JOURNAL TO STELLA. Edited,
with Introduction and Notes, by F. Ryland, M.A.
‘ No more welcome reprint has appeared for some time past than the new
edition, complete and exact so far as it was possible to make it, of Swift's 1 Journal
to Stella." ’ — Morning Post.
TROLLOPE’S BARSETSHIRE NOVELS. The Warden
(I vol.) ; BARCHESTER TOWERS (ivol.); DR. THORNE (x vol.);
FRAMLEY PARSONAGE (i vol.); THE SMALL HOUSE AT
ALDINGTON (2 vols.); THE LAST CHRONICLE OF BARSET( 2 voIs.)
VOLTAIRE ; ZADIG, and other Tales. Translated by R. Bruce
Boswell.
ARTHUR YOUNG’S TRAVELS IN FRANCE, during the
years 1787, 1788, and 1789. Edited, with Introduction and Notes, by M.
Beth am Edwards.
‘ In its present form it makes as good a book of travels as it would be easy to
me.' — Spectator,
11
THE YORK LIBRARY.


BELL’S MINIATURE SERIES
OF PAINTERS.
With 8 Illustrations.
Pott Bvo. is. net each , or in limp leather with Photogravure
Frontispiece, 2s. net.
' They are published in handy form at the price of one shilling each, and are the best
and the cheapest productions of this kind which have ever been offered to the public. In
their way the little volumes are quite perfect.’— Westminster Budget .
ALMA TADEMA , . .By Helen Zimmern.
ROSA BONHEUR ... By Frank Hird.
BOTTICELLI , . . , By K. H. Hobart Cost.
BURNE-JONES . . . .By Malcolm Bell.
CONSTABLE . . . .By Arthur B. Chamberlain.
CORREGGIO . . . - By Leader Scott.
FRA ANGELICO . . . By G. C. Williamson, Litt.D.
GAINSBOROUGH . . .By Mrs. A. G. Bell.
GREUZE By Harold Armitage.
HOGARTH . , . . By G. Elliot Anstruther.
HOLBEIN By A. B. Chamberlain.
HOLMAN HUNT . . . By G. C. Williamson, Litt.D,
LANDSEER . , . .By W. McDougall Scott, M.A.
LEIGHTON . . . . By G. C. Williamson, LittD.
LEONARDO DA VINCI . . By R. H. Hobart Cust.
MICHELANGELO . . . By E. C. Strutt.
MILLAIS By A. L. Baldry.
MILLET By Edgcumbe Staley, B.A.
MURILLO . . . . . By G. C. Williamson, Litt.D.
RAPHAEL By W. McDougall Scott, M.A.
REMBRANDT . , . - By Hope Rea.
REYNOLDS . . . - By Rowley Cleeve.
ROMNEY By Rowley Cleeve.
ROSSETTI By H. C. Marillier.
RUBENS ..... By Hope Rea.
TITIAN By Hope Rea.
TURNER . . . . - By Albinia Wherry.
VAN EYCK . . , . By P. G. Konody.
VELASQUEZ . . . . By G. C. Williamson, LittD.
WATTS . . , . .By Malcolm Bell.
WAPIEAU By Edgcumbe Staley, B.A.
WHISTLER . . . .By Mrs. Arthur Bell,
others to follow. ;
12
BELL'S MINIATURE BIOGRAPHIES.


BELL’S MINIATURE SERIES OF
MUSICIANS.
With 8 Illustrations. Pott Svo. price is. net; or in limp leather , with
Photogravure Frontispiece, 2s. net.
‘They are neatly produced, and likely to lead on to further study, while they reach a
ievei of accuracy which is unusual in publications which aim at being small and 'popular.'
_ Atktnerttm
NOW READY.
BACH By E. H. Thorne.
BEETHOVEN . . . By J. S. Shedlock, B.A.
BRAHMS . - . . .By Herbert Antcliffe.
CHOPIN , . . . By E. J. Oldmeadow.
GOUNOD ; -By Henry Tolhurst.
GRIEG . , . By E. Markham Lee, M.A., Mus.D.
HANDEL .... By William H. Cummings, Mus.D., F.S.A,
MENDELSSOHN . , By Vernon Blackburn.
MOZART . ... By Ebenezer Prout, 8.A., Mus.D.
ROSSINI . . , .By W. A. Bevan.
SCHUMANN . . . By E, J. Oldmeadow.
SULLIVAN . . . By H. Saxe Wvndham.
TCHAIKOVSKI , .By E. Markham Lee, M.A., Mus.D.
VERDI , . . , By A, Visetti.
WAGNER ... .By John F. Runciman.
OTHERS TO FOLLOW.
BELL’S MINIATURE SERIES OF
GREAT WRITERS.
Pott Bvo. illustrated, cloth, is. net; or in limp leather, with Photogravure
Frontispiece, 2 s. net.
‘This charming and artistic little series, the illustrations of which would be well worth
the price asked for each book.’— Academy .
BROWNING . . , , . By Sir Frank T. Marzials, C.B,
CHAUCER By Rev. W. Tuck well.
COLERIDGE By Dr. Garnett, C.B.
DANTE By M. L. Egerton Castle.
DEFOE By A. Wherry,
DE QUINCEY By Henry S. Salt.
DICKENS By W. Teignmouth Shore.
HORACE By Rev. W. Tuckwell.
JOHNSONBy John Dennis,
LAMB By Walter Jerrold.
MILTON By Dr. Williamson
MOLIERE By Sir Frank T. Marzials, C.B
SHAKESPEARE . . . .By Alfred Ewen.
SPENSER By Rev. W. Tuckwell.
OTHERS TO FOLLOW.
13
BELL’S MINIATURE BIOGRAPHIES.


BOOKS FOR COLLECTORS.
HOW TO LOOK AT PICTURES. By R. C. Witt, M.A.
Fifth Edition. With 40 Illustrations. 5-r. net.
1 This book, which we have read with great pleasure, shows that the author
has both wide sympathy and knowledge, and it cannot hut be largely helpful to
those who wish to increase their interest in pictures. A better gift for people who
are dimly “ fond of pictures," but who regret that “ they know nothing about them,’ 1
could not be found.’— Spectator.
HOW TO IDENTIFY OLD CHINA. By Mrs. Wil-
loughby Hodgson, Eighth Thousand. With 40 plates and numerous
reproductions of marks. ss. net.
‘ The information given is precisely what is needed, and is particularly well
arranged, with a preliminary chapter of practical advice.’ —Westminster Gazette.
HOW TO COLLECT CONTINENTAL CHINA. By C.
H. Wylde. With 40 plates and upwards of 600 reproductions of marks.
6s. net.
HOW TO COLLECT OLD FURNITURE. By Frederick
Litchfield, Author of ' Illustrated History of Furniture,’ &c. Third
Edition. With 40 plates and numerous illustrations in the text. 6s. net.
‘ The book is, without question, the most interesting and informing guide that
the modern passion for antique furniture has produced.’ —Pall Mall Gazette.
HOW TO IDENTIFY PORTRAIT MINIATURES. By
G. C. Williamson, Litt.D. With Chapters on Howto Paint Miniatures,
by Alyn Williams, R. 8.A., A.R.C.A. Second Edition. With 4 o
plates illustrating upwards of 70 miniatures. 6s. net.
1 Contains much valuable information for the collector of examples of this form of
art. _ The_ book is finely illustrated, and is enriched with chapters explaining
technicalities and describing the special qualifications of a miniature painter.’—
Morning Post.
HOW TO COLLECT BOOKS. By J. H. Slater, Editor
of ‘ Book Prices Current,’ &c. With numerous illustrations. 6j.net.
Probably no sounder guide could be found to the changes of taste and
fashion in book-collecting.
HOW TO COLLECT POSTAGE STAMPS. By Bertram
T. K. Smith. With 48 Plates, illustrating upwards of 750 Specimens.
Post Bvo 6s. net.
A comprehensive and up-to-date general handbook on Postage Stamps,
written by a well-known collector and expert.
ART AND THE CAMERA. By Anthony Guest. With
49 Illustrations. Post Bvo. 6s. net.
If there be any who still doubt the relationship between art and the camera, Mr.
Ouest s hook should be strong to convince them of their error. . . . The book
cannot be read without realisation of the great possibilities of photography,
should be studied by amateurs and professionals alike.’— Standard.
14
BOOKS FOR COLLECTORS.


THE ENDYMION SERIES.
NEW AND CHEAPER UNIFORM EDITION.
Post Svo. ss. 6d. net each.
‘lt may justly be claimed for the charming Endymion Series that it is the best
illustrated edition of the British poets that has yet appeared.’— Studio.
JUST PUBLISHED.
POEMS BY JOHN KEATS. Illustrated and Deco-
rated by Robert Anning Bell, With an Introduction by Prof.
Walter Raleigh, M.A. Fourth Edition.
POEMS BY ROBERT BROWNING. Illustrated
and Decorated by Byam Shaw. With an Introduction by Richard
Garnett, LL. D., C.B. Third Edition.
POEMS BY PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY. Illus-
trated and Decorated by Robert Anning Bell. With an
Introduction by Prof. Walter Raleigh, M.A.
POEMS BY TENNYSON. Illustrated and Deco-
rated by Eleanor Fortescue Brickdale.
ENGLISH LYRICS, from Spencer to Milton. Illus-
trated and Decorated by R. Anning Bell. With an Introduction
by John Dennis.
THE POEMS OF EDGAR ALLAN POE. Illus-
trated and Decorated by W. Heath Robinson. With an
Introduction by Noel Williams.
THE CHISWICK SHAKESPEARE.
ILLUSTRATED BY BYAM SHAW.
With Introductions and Glossaries by JOHN DENNIS.
In 39 pocket volumes, with nearly 500 Illustrations.
Pott Bvo. cloth Is. net each; or gilt, u. 6d. net; or in limp leather, 2 s. net.
Plays, 37 vols. ; Poems, i vol. ; Sonnets, i vol.
‘ This delightful edition deserves all the popularity which, we believe, it is acquiring.
For cheapness, taste in “manufacture,” and excellence in illustration, these neat little
volumes, each containing a play, are unsurpassed. '—Daily News.
• The most charming of recent pocket editions of Shakespear a.'—Westminster Gazette.
‘The “Chiswick” should easily be first among pocket Shakespeares.’— Pall Mai.
Gazette.
15
the endymion series.


HANDBOOKS OF THE
GREAT MASTERS IN PAINTING
AND SCULPTURE.
Edited by G. C. WILLIAMSON, Litt.D.
CHEAPER REISSUE.
Post Svo. with 40 Illustrations and Photogravure Frontispiece.
3a 6 d. net each.
Now Ready.
BOTTICELLI. By A. Streeter.
BRUNELLESCHI. By Leader Scott.
CARLO CRIVELLI. By G. McNeil
Rushforth, M.A.
CORREGGIO. By Selwyn Brinton,
M.A.
DELLA ROBBIA. By the Marchesa
Burlamacchi.
DEL SARTO. By H. Guinness.
DONATELLO. By Hope Rea.
FRANCIA. By G. C. Williamson,
Litt.D.
GAUDENZIO FERRARI. By Ethel
Halsey.
GERARD DOU. By W. Martin,
Ph.D. Translated by Clara Bell.
GIORGIONE. By Herbert Cook,
M.A.
GIOTTO. By F. Mason Perkins.
FRANS HALS. By G. S. Davies,
M.A,
LEONARDO DA VINCI. By Edward
McCurdy, M.A.
BERNARDINO LUINI. By G. C.
Williamson, Litt.D.
MANTEGNA. By Maud Cruttwell.
MEMLINC. By W. H. James Weale.
MICHAEL ANGELO. By Lord Ron-
ald Sutherland Gower.
PERUGINO. By G. C. Williamson,
Litt.D. 2nd Edition.
PIERO DELLA FRANCESCA. By
W. G. Waters, M.A.
PINTORICCHIO. By Evelyn March
Phillipps.
RAPHAEL. By H. Straciiey.
REMBRANDT. By Malcolm Bell.
RUBENS. By Hope Rea.
SIGNORELLI. By Maud Cruttwell.
SODOMA. By the Contessa Lorenzo
Priuli-Bon.
TINTORETTO. By J. B. Stoughton
Holborn, B.A.
VAN DYCK. By Lionel Cust.M.V.O.
F.S.A.
VELASQUEZ. By R. A. M. Steven
son. 4th Edition.
WATTEAU. By Edgcumbe Staley.
WILKIE. By Lord Ronald Suther
land Gower, M.A., F.S.A.
16
GREAT MASTERS IN PAINTING.






