

THE VATICAN
THE KAISER
AND THE
WORLD WAR
A collection of authoritative evi-
dence, beginning with the papal
concordat or treaty which pre-
luded the assassination of Arch-
duke Francis Ferdinand and
tracing the activities of the Vati-
can in the World War, paying
especial attention to the Gerlach
intrigue and events as late as the
papal plea for condonation of
Kaiserism.
By CHARLES M. LEE
Price Threepence


FOREWORD.
The boasted neutrality of the Vatican in the world war is a
sham to such a pronounced degree that the pope himself must
indeed be put to his wits-end in his endeavour to retain the re-
spect of non-Catholics as well as the confidence of Catholics. The
diabolical schemes hatched in the very walls of the Vatican itself
can be pointed to, in incident after incident, in country after
country, but no one of the arch-conspiracies conducted by the
to-be-pitied victims of this aged system has so startled the civilized
world and so threatened the very foundations of the papacy,as the
uncovering of the Gerlaoh conspiracy. The above statements will
commend themselves to the reader to just the extent that he is
able to place himself in an unprejudiced attitude and digest the
irrefutable facts about to be set forth. The facts are evidence
enough in themselves to convince the most sceptical, and though
the papal system should be opposed, broken up. and banished from
Ihe earth just as truly as should the German militaristic ideal, the
Roman Catholic laity of America, France, England, Italy, Canada,
Russia, Ireland, Austria, Germany, and every other country on the
globe are to be pitied for the disgrace brought upon them by a sys-
tem they have been taught to love and.trust; a system that has
spent its every effort for. centuries instituting ways and means for
enslaving millions upon millions while moulding generation after
generation from infancy to the grave, to fit the peculiar needs of
the institutions necessary to the success of the papacy. That this
huge system, comprehensive in its every detail, should offer its
people a religion as its excuse for existence and that it should
build, upon this pretense, a numerically strong, and closely organ-
ized body is not strange, for man has ever sought religion of one
kind or another and has, according to the religion practiced, done
his best with the light it afforded him.
But the papal system affords no light! It will not permit its
communicants to read certain books and certain papers, most of
which are convincing and able exposures of matters pertaining to
the papal system which Rome fears to let her children read. It
will not allow them to attend any but a priest-controlled and nun-
taught school. It will not allow them to even read the Bible free
to make their own deductions, but the pope professing in the
words of Leo. XIII. “to stand in the place of God, Himself” arro-
gates to himself the sole right of interpreting the scripture for
them, and that interpretation, be it known, is not founded on tin
scripture alone, but is rendered in accordance with tradition
possessed solely by the papal system. *
It is these traditions that account for the many supersti-
tions, doctrines and beliefs found in the church of Rome
that appal those noble Christians who believe the Bible


If* be a sulliclenl guide for any man’s salvation. In the
face of such facts it is clear that the perpetuity of the Romish
system depends upon her ability to shut out the light, to keep
her children from seeing, from realizing, from reasoning, from
even grasping a single truth or ideal not promulgated from
a hierarchal source. It would be unfair then to claim that Roman
Catholics with generations of loyal Romanists behind them should
be condemned simply because their system of government is
such that they db their duty as they see it and as they are taught
to do by popes, cardinals, bishops, priests and nuns. Like the
German people, they, though following a false ideal are doing
their best with,the meager illumination it has afforded them. With
the German people it is war to the death, or until the German ideal
is changed or crippled. With Roman Catholics we have the oppor-
tunity to extend the helping-hand and avert calamity to the un-
born, Catholics- and non-Catholics. It follows then that the pur-
pose of the evidence herewith set forth is not to discredit the-
individual Roman Catholic and is not blasphemy of the Church
of Rome. Blasphemy is impious irreverence, while the object of
this booklet is to point out facts with regard to a system that
pretends piety and practices impiety, and to show those, both
within and wthout the Church of Rome, who do not know and
are willing to see, the base-levels to which the system will stoop;
and, to impress upon the minds of liberty-loving 'Christians that
it is their duty to join in the effort to overthrow the papal despots
in order that their subjects may be free.
“Greater love hath no man than this, that he lay down his
life for his friends.” Gan we not give our life to a work that has
for its purpose the emancipation of a people tyeld in bondage- for
centuries. They can not see that the system controlling them is
a menace to civilization, to democracy and to themselves. They
are forbidden to travel the unrestricted highways of literature,
Biblical and otherwise, or of education that would lead them to
see as do their liberally educated non-Catholic neighbors. It is
natural that under the guidance of prelates, and popes who
strive to maintain their power, that they will resist your efforts no
matter how lovingly administered, but it is your duty and mine to
persist in spreading the light in order that they may be free;
and last but not least, in order that we may in this day labor to
protect our unborn generations from also entering into darkness
as a result of the ever-increasing but mistaken tendency of pub-
lishers, not to print those things which bring protests from Rome
and her following.


CHAPTER I.
THE POPE’S CHAMBERLAIN A SPY.
Monslgnor Qerlach Caught in Three-fold Plots of Intrigue—
Vatican’s Hand in Events Preluding War.
A gfeat shaking off of the remaining confidence that England,
France, and Italy had reposed in the neutrality of the Vatican during
1916 occurred in the spring of this year (1917) when Monsignor
Gerlach, Private Chamberlain to Pope Benedict, was caught red-
handed as the chief conspirator in, and directing head of, three
gigantic plots of intrigue.
With possibly the exception of the now-generally prevalent
knowledge of the kaiser’s intimate relations with the Jesuits and
the pope’s condonation of the Austro-Germans in the much talked
of peace note, this Is without doubt the most significant fact re-
garding Vatican sympathy with the Austro-German alliance in the
whole history of the war.
Rome’s censorship over the American secular press and her
control over foreign news sources which supply the press was so
perfectly organized that it remained for us in America to get our
first inkling of the fact from English and French journals.
The first news of this dastardly crime against the allied nations
was gleaned from an article which appeared under the caption
“Vatican Spy Center” in “The Star,” of London, for March Bth.
This article had also appeared in “The Paris Journal” and was
cited by “The Protestant Alliance Magazine,” published at 430
Strand, London, in the then current issue, as follows:
A special telegram from Home to “The Journal” (Paris) states
that an espionage trial, which is to take place in a few days’ time in
the Italian capital, exceeds In public interest anything that has hap-
pened in Italy since her entry into the war, and it is expected that
the most sensational revelations will be made.
Centers of Intrigue.
The case deals with what Is known as the “Gerlach Confederacy,”
the chief of which is no other than Mgr. von Gerlach, a German pre-
late who. TAKING ADVANTAGE OF THE IMMUNITY WHICH HE
ENJOYED AT THE VATICAN, is alleged to have ORGANIZED A
COMPLETE AND FAR-REACHING NET-WORK OF INTRIGUE.
Organized Sabotage.
One ramification of this organization SPECIALIZED in the difficult
task of INTRODUCING SABOTAGE INTO THE ITALIAN NAVY.
ANOTHER GROUP OF CONSPIRATORS BUSIED THEMSELVES
WITH INDUSTRIAL SABOTAGE, while a third branch was mobilized
for the transport of contraband across Switzerland.
Although the trial will probably take place behind closed doors,
it is thought that Interesting details are sure to leak out. Italy is
rapidly curing herself of the German gangrene from which she has
too long suffered. —Ex. Tel. Co.. “The Star,” March Bth.
Von Gerlach, up to the time his crime was unearthed, which
niade it expedient for the pope to denounce him, was nothing if not
the pope’s right-hand man. Even before the present head of the
papal church ascended the pontifical throne, when the pope was
a cardinal, Von Gerlach was a favourite with him, and was not
only intrusted with important missions but was elevated at every


opportunity until at last, when the cardinal became poutin', Gerlach
was selected as private chamberlain, thus becoming a member of
the Vatican household, and at once .became intimately associated
with the supreme Roman authority. Not only that but in Decem-
ber, 1916, he was the special envoy of the pope bearing the red
hat Irom the pontifical authority to the three newly appointed
French cardinals; by no means a small honor even for the pope’s
private chamberlain, as honors are measured in the papal court.
It is highly probable that the Italian government was, during
all of 1916, very suspicious of Monsignor Gerlach, but it is also
probable that the first real tangible evidence of his connection
with destructive measures being employed in the Italian navy
was obtained soon after the second mysterious blowing up of the
Italian battleships.
That the Italian secret service was hot on the trail of Gerlach
and others not strangers in Vatican circles is shown in an article
that went the rounds of the American press on January Bth
and 9th.
We quote that article verbatim:
Rome (via Paris), Jan, Bth. —-More than forty persons now are
imprisoned as a result of the investigations into the destruction on
September, 1915, and August, 1916, respectively, of the Italian battle-
ships, Benedetto Brin and Leonardo Da Vinci. The latter was blown
up In Tareuto Harbor and 248 men perished. Lieutenant-General Count
Cadorna. chief of staff, came to Rome Thursday to attend a meeting
of the cabinet held for the purpose of deciding upon the disposition
of the prisoners, but the question has become a political one from the
introduction into the case of the name of one of the officials of the
Vatican.
An Italian named Ambrogetti who was among those charged with
being implicated Is the financial agent •of Monsignor Gerlach, Pope
Benedict’s private chamberlain. Monsignor Gerlach is an Austrian, and
according to information here was once a cavalry officer, who became
a priest, and won the favor of the present pope when the latter was
a cardinal. He was the bearer of the red hat from the pope to the
three French cardinals who were appointed at the December consistory.
It has been learned that Monsignor Gerlach, previous to Italy’s entry
into the war. was interested in a pro-Austrian paper at Vittoria of which
' Ambrogetti was manager.
The Italian authorities have learned details of the plot which ended
in the destruction of the two battleships from the Italian author, Archie
Valente, who was arrested some months ago. The suspicion that the
explosions on the ships were due to a conspiracy originated from the
fact that certain naval machinists were aboard the ships at the time
of their destruction, and on each occasion escaped uninjured. They
were followed to Valente’s house in Rome, and were there arrested.
As a result of this high-handed act of intrigue, Gerlach,
because of his financial agent’s implication was under suspicion
and strong influences demanded satisfaction. Gerlach was sub-
sequently liberated from his close personal association with the
pope and residence in the Vatican, but without punishment. That
the Italian government and not the Vatican was responsible for his
removal from Rome is clearly shown in the following dispatch
taken from the April issue of that influential religious paper from
which we first quoted;
The German paper “Germania” learns that the private secretary of
the pope, Monsignor von Gerlach, who is the only German priest at the
Vatican, has been forced to leave Rome. The Allies, through the


ITALIAN GOVERNMENT, DEMANDED HIS REMOVAL.—-Copeuhagen,
* X 'Thp nhovp statement suggests the German influence that prevails
at the vatlcan, and THE REASON OF THE POPE'S SILENCE as to
the Belgian atrocities; and also the Germans, through the private sec
retarv, knew the movements of the allies. . „ ro „
\Vo quite understand the pope has no Influence whatever in the war
of peace councils; he is entirely ignored.
Far more significant is the comment of the same magazine
in that portion of the same issue, dealing with the “Vatican Spy
Center’’ which says;
Lloyd George Ignores Pope.
Monsignor von Gerlach, a German, was the pope's private secretary.
Previous to his arrest, the allies demanded Mgr. von Gerlach s dismissal
from the Vatican prior to their conference in Rome, at which Mr. D.
IZT ,T^ g f,LrZ‘;VA" E ‘SfSSKfe BUSINESS OP THE
CONFERENCE WOULD HAVE BEACHED GERMANY and that tho.
the conference would have been frustrated. IT IS Ql IT L
NIBLE WHY ME D. LLOYD GEORGE DID NOT VISIT THE POPE
AT THE VATICAN.
.Note that in demanding Gerlach’s removal from Home prior
to their conference in that city the Allies clearly indicated that
thev had taken full cognizance of the fact that without his re-
moval the effect of the council would be nullified by Gerlach s
intrigues. But did this remove the ulcerV No! Mr. D. Lloyd
George, the British premier in attendance at the conference clearly
indicated his attitude or recognition of the fact that though Gerlach
had been removed the house of shelter for intriguers still re-
mained as is proven in the last sentence of the foregoing quota-
tion which reads: “It is quite discernible why Mr. D. Lloyd George
did not visit the pope at the Vatican.’’ ■
But though Gerlach had been removed from the Vatican tne
Italian government was not to be deterred from going to the
bottom of things. This is indicated by the manner m which
Italy persisted in her efforts to become master of every detail
and unearth all plots that might have any connection with persons
close to those already involved. • ,
How this was done is best told in a dispatch given rranit
Getty London Correspondent for the United Press, which was
printed in a few of the American dailies almost four weeks after
The Menace in No. 313 had published the first illuminating and
extended charges as to the Vatican’s sympathy for the Austro-
German Alliance and broken the appalling silence of the press on
this most important of all espionage cases uncovered during the
three years of awful carnage. ~ ,
That article as it appeared in “The Indianapolis News for
May 17th, follows:-
TONDON (bv mail), May I.—A tale of German intrigue reaching
into the inner circles of the Vatican, Involving the hasty flight of
Ordinal GeHaoh from Italy, the cracking of a safe In the secret heacL
'Si sirs ?.w«r^ c ,s e
S-SSsf? S&SASTS SS SSSTSSk-ffSJ


On April 0, Vienna dispatches announced the robbery of a house,
adjoining ‘ but having no connection with” the German embassy. A
large sum of money was said to have been obtained by the robbers
who escaped.
The same night, a stir was caused in Rome by the flight of Cardinal
Gerlach across .the Swiss border. Italian secret service agents burst
in the doors of his house two hours after his escape, and found the
proof of a score of pro-German plots. The next day more than 300
arrests resulted in Italy. „
Still Another.
This, for ten days, was all the world knew concerning the work-
ings of the German espionage system. No one connected an insigni-
llcant robbery in the Austrian capital with the cardinal's disappearance
and the wholesale arrests of German agents.
Another Incident which caused little interest at the time, yet which
had a direct bearing on the successful breaking up of the Teuton spy-
nest. was the reported “escape" early in January, of two of Italy’s
most notorious safe-crackers, who had been sent to prison for life
at Rome.
What 1 has never been disclosed until to-day .is the fact that a
warrant for their release was signed by the perfect of Italian police,
and that each of the criminals later received 10,000 dols. from the
Italian government. The service they rendered the government proved
well worth the price.
Ifor more than two years, the Italian secret service, extending its
research over a far greater ground than one realizes even to-dav, had
succeeded in tracing pro-German plots and intrigues In Italy to Vienna,
in the Austrian capital, spies succeeded in narrowing the search down
to a certain house, adjoining “but -having no connection with” the
German embassy.
Had they acted hastily, the spies might have entered the*houses,
robbed the safe, and even laid hands on a sertain set of precious papers
the Italian government was keenly interested in. But that is as far
as they would have got. for attached to the bundle of documents so
highly desired by three governments was an intricate series of wires.
With almost devilish ingenuity the Germans had provided that if the
safe were opened and the papers removed, a cloud of poison gas, deadly
in effect, would envelop the disturber and render the room which con-
tained the safe, uninhabitable. At the same time a cleverly devised
burglar alarm would call sufficient military police to the scene to deal
with any number of Intruders.
On a Dark Night.
When every detail of the hiding place of the papers had been
learned, the. secret service agents x-eported. in detail to Rome. On a
favorable dark night the “escape’ of the famous safe crackers from
the ptTson outside of the Italian capital was arranged and effected. Their
freedom and 10,000 dols. each was promised if thoy succeeded. The
criminals had agreed to undertake the dangerous mission.
How they were smuggled into Vienna no one will ever know. Hut
when they did undertake the robbery of the safe, they were provided
with gas-masks and every tool for safe-opening known to the police or
criminal world. Cracking the safe and evading the certain death of
the alarm signals was a comparatively simple matter for these Jimmy
Valentines of Italy, and the papers which incriminated prominent per-
sons throughout Italy were sotm in the possession of the secret service.
For obvious reasons, they could not instantly communicate their
knowledge to headquarters at Rome, and In the meantime, while an-
nouncing the robbery of a "large sum of money," the Austrians suc-
ceeded, by means of a secret wii'eless, In communicating with Cardinal
Gerlach, who left the papal court uncei’emoniously. With the evidence
in hand, however, the Italian police were able to round up several
hundred of the most dangei’ous German plotters, and to strike into
the heart of a Teutonic element in the highest church circles of Rome.
y The foregoing to be appreciated in its entirety must be con-
sidered with the following facts in mind:


First, the Vatican in its pretended role of neutrality in the
present war, with its absolutely undeniable desire for general
recognition of political sovereignty, is playing a difficult role; for
■with the decline in popularity of divine right rulers the Vatican
suffers proportionately, because its assumed sovereignty is per-
petuated on the most glaringly presumptuous and arrogant claims
to divine rightism ever foisted upon the world. Leaving out all
considerations of the concordat between the Vatican and the
Serbian government which in reality was a prelude to events from
which historians date the war, a student of conditions cannot
fail to note the ground for common sympathy which exists between
the Vatican and the Central powers. These facts assume greater
significance when- we remember that the kaiser nominated the
black pope in 1906 and when we recall that the German Spy
System and the Jesuits in Germany are as inseparable as were
the Siamese twins—a fact that offers the only possible explana-
tion for Germany’s success in promoting intrigues in every country.
It is inconceivable how Germany could maintain such a vast army
of spies unless she had at her command the Jesuits who boast
of 25,000,000 persons through whom they can operate. Is it not
more than probable that through this source Germany gained the
advance information as to our destroyers being sent to aid Eng-
land — a secret that was confined to a very few officials in Wash-
ington and was not even known to those who were sent until the
sealed orders were opened after they reached the open sea?
Then, too, ever since the temporal sovereignty of the pope
was overthrown in 1870 and.the Italian people instituted a govern-
ment independent of the Vatican, each successive pope down
to and including the present pontiff, has been in a state of rebel-
lion against the Italian government as is clearly shown by the
fact that each and all have claimed to be a prisoner in the Vatican
and have refused to leave it, showing that the papacy will not
cease to plead persecution and presumptuously arrogate
v sovereignty in the hope that such action will create a demand for
the restoration of the papal states.
Second, the Italian government with its Catholic king and queen
and its people nominally Catholic recognize that
in the insistent demands of the pope for the restoration of the papal
states is the most sinister and destructive influence with which
it has to contend. The power of the Vatican over Italy’s people
places that government in an extremely delicate position* and
to allow the Vatican too much latitude might mean the over-
throw of the Italian government. *
Says one author;
Rome was never recognized by the Vatican as a legitimate conquest,
the eanltal of the kingdom of Italy. .
The taking of the eternal city by the Italian soldiers, September JO,
IS7O was always considered by the Vatican as a violent and sacrilegious
usurpation ' And the Vatican considered the king of Italy an usurper.
And the Italian people were also considered usurpers by that same
Vati Francis Joseph, rabid Catholic that he was, openly approved the
anti-Italian attitude of the papal government, and with full consciousness
and of set purpose he failed to observe the rules of Oslateo and the duties
imposed on him by the alliance. . . . a ,.. SR i
Such discourtesies and insincerity were aggravated by the assassl


a bigoWhan Ms'uncleTthe* ? era j e 'l 0 - Thls latter, no less
private that he would lnv.d“ Italv with Bted ' la P ubu « and lu
and return it to the Catholic ctm£h ™A> P ° Werful army « take Rome.
temporal power of the popes h ’ and thus re-establish the ancient
that & l ate ™ nt mad e at random but is quoted
the G?eatWar”a volumeThafauthor Entered mto
ISE?S
r n arc,l " duke s assassination occurred on June 28th n„’
£SS«=3-i
aE'EriSSS s “
emperor, Francis Joseph had passed on fn iTe V l6 aged
m°eant a'Tatfblow VtTe
-sa^:sissSr
tents are as follows: “ t * wes ana “S con-
Concordat Between the Holy See and Serbia.
and publicly exerclsed^in'the wiims ’of* °S™rbla! ellglon Shall be free,y
vlnce, coinposcO of
capltal of the realm, and having as Its terrifn™ seats In the
In the limits of Serbia, as It was hofoFe I s comprised
Sfi?3g; SS, « “
'““icL 1 P m p -C I \T,V," L ,r ,Z. t> “
to who,,! respective ecX«ln8 l Ucol"nirt e sfl«fon°b2lo t JI ?lf b ff ~sk" b - of
of Belgrade and "he 'n o B t t?i t< llf t i" Archbishop
ment the person of each candidate In order to kS n I y t wv. Royal Govern-
facts or motives of a political nature In hls rcSd Wh<?ther there
Article V.—The Archbishop of Belgrade nna ,
shall receive from the Roval Government «n Bishop of Uskub
mer of 12,000 dinars, plus an 4nno allowa . nc e, the for-
te a pension at least equal to that of the TmpWesofVhe^tV ll6 right
Rev«end le j^n^r^Hu-.” fflClal •*«.
and the Bishop of e u o a r kub n^ r on ff take 0 an C ont t h\f A fln h Ht Bho ! P of Be 'e rad c
Of a delegate of the Royal Government ?n h the fofio ty . ln the Presence
swear and promise, befo/e HX^sSrobS^and 1


His Maiestv the King of Serbia; I promise not to take part
in any compact, npt to assist in any council, and not to : th
clergy under ray orders or allow them to co-operate in any enterprise
tending to trouble the tranquillity of the State. IT b h
Article VIII.—The Archbishop of Belgrade and Bishop J-
,, 11 |. nv „ c,,11 liberty ir the exercise of the ecclesiastical function, ,
msmmmimm
the exercise of the sEcred , , *
Article IX.—To the Archbishop of Belgrade and Bishop of
srs. ffaa Se SSX2 Td
H' Sss‘ £g , &s. u 'S!&
Haas* arssasif *sst %PWj-
forbid the giving of religious instruction in the state school
chlsm teachers who show themselves unfit for; the £,,{£.i nstruc tlon
to them bv Informing on the matter the Minister or ium Koval
•nsJtzst^s,
The office of parish priest is not Incompatible with that ol the catecm
of instruction in non-ecclesiastlcal subjects; nf niiirri .
\rticle Xll.—The Koyal Government recognizes the validity of i g
•iires between Catholics and of mixed marriages contracted 11 ? b
cnee of the Catholic parish priest, according to the laws of the church-
Article Xlll—Matrimonial causes between Catholics, 'and between
lifirlleß to mixed B.rrtaf b" the
except as far as concerns purely civil effects, snail ne juugeo u-y
Catholic ecclesiastical tribunals. , Aetahiich
. ,i i, viv The Catholic party shall have the right to est.ib
,h,t £ rhSen born of mixed 'marriages, celebrated before the
Catholic priest, shall be brought up In the Catholic religion.
, *• i vv The nraver for the Sovereign, Domine salvun J ac
e B Slav or Latin language,
Artb-le 1 XVl.—The state recognizes that the church, .^ r | B t“*® d a nd
proper e the° capacity of exercising the
riK "
s£ SsSsiissassKia-ss
Ploy trt toil x n tX-The e priests and clerics, secular and regular, can never
be obliged public employment opposed to their sacred min-
istry and to the sacerdotal life.


Article XX.—ln the future, should any difficulty arise about the in-
terpretation of the present articles or about questions which may hap-
pen not to be contemplated in them, the Holy See and the Royal Govern-
ment shall proceed by common accord, to an amicable solution, in har-
mony with the, canon law.
Article XXI. —The present convention shall enter into force imme-
diately after its ratification by His Holiness the Sovereign Pontiff and
His Majesty the King of Serbia.
Article XXII.—The ratification shall be exchanged in Rome with
the least possible delay.
It is perfectly clear that the heir apparent to Austria’s throne
was committed to this-concordat, or treaty affecting Serbia which
would advance Catholicism and thus nullify the constructive free-
dom that patriotic Serbians had been at such pains to maintain
against all comers; and thus was it made plain (fiat Austria’s
declaration of war was merely the outgrowth of the Serbian
patriots’ refusal to submit to a concordat which would bring to
Rome’s church certain pecuniary and other benefits and serve to
bring about an extension of papal favors in the Balkan states as
well as place Serbian destiny in the hands of Anslria-Hungary.
Is it strange then that the Vatican should sympathize strongly
with the Austro-German alliance when an allied victory might mean
the breaking up of Catholic and Monarchical Austria into no less
than three nations, each with a democratic government of its
own ?
Is it not easy to understand how the private chamberlain of
the pope could, under such circumstances, “take advantage" of
certain privileges allowed the Vatican and promote the most gigan-
tic intrigue that the warring governments have uriearthed?
CHAPTER II.
CONVICTED BY ITALIAN GOVERNMENT.
Hierarchal Representatives Try to Claim Gerlach is a Myth, but
His Conviction Sets their Jesuitical Claims at Naught.
Following the uncovering of the intrigue emanating from
Vatican circles (he Italian government took immediate action.
The first step was a speech delivered bn March 7th by Signor
De Felice before the Italian Chamber. In that speech, which
caused an immense sensation in (Rome, charges were proffered
against Gerlach as follows:
Monslgnor Rudolf Gerlach, horn In Germany, in 1885, is charged
with high treason, for having, during the years 1010 and 191(i, corres-
ponded with the enemy through the instrumentality of the diplomatic
representatives of the Central Empires, for having furnished to the
same enemy, news on the military and political situations and for
having paid on account of the enemy, large sums to the directors of
the newspapers and for espionage against the Interest and the security
of the state.
This charge was followed by'preparation for trial, but right
here let us digress for a moment to show how Jesuitical subter-
fuge is employed, in the very face of facts, to deny matters that
reflect on the Roman propaganda.
In the preceding chapter we quoted a dispatch from the
“Indianapolis News" giving an authoritative account of how all the
connecting links and irrefutable evidence regarding these Vatican


intrigues were brought to light. The thoughtful reader has
already surmised that this is a situation from which the Vatican
would doubtless be desirous of freeing itself and that is just
what the Vatican has been employing every means possible to
accomplish. , ,
Nothing is more characteristic of persons caught In detestable
and lawless and treasonable acts than their efforts to convince the
public of their innocence and we would hardly expect the Vatican,
simply because a mass of evidence undeniable in many instances
connected it with intrigues in the interest of the Central powers,
to admit its guilt without a struggle.
An organization so all-powerful, dominated by the Jesuits with
25,000,000 obedient oath-bound servants sworn to implicitly obey
the commands of their superiors, need not surrender so easily,
for with these spies placed in positions where they may do just
the very things that are needed to be done in order to give
other Jesuits an opportunity to attempt vindication of the Vatican,
Rome is possessed of a better means of allaying suspicion than is
any other corporation on earth.
The first glaring Jesuitical attempt made to discredit facts
and keep the American people in ignorance in this country fol-
lowed the publication of the article referred to in “The Indiana-
polis News,” for that article erred in referring to Gerlach by the
title of Cardinal when his rightful title is Monsignor.
That gave political Rome and its Jesuitical priests just the
opportunity they had been seeking ever since The Menace had
shown by irrefutable-evidence that the Vatican was in sympathy
with the Austro-German alliance.
Accordingly one Edmund J. Wirth of St. ©erdnard’s Seminary,
Rochester, N.Y., ventured into print in an attempt to show that
Gerlach is a myth. He did this following the appearance of a story
in the Rochester N.Y. “Union and Advertiser” simultaneous with
and similar to the article we have quoted from “The Indianapolis
News.” In a letter to the editor, for publication, which appeared
under the “Voice of the People” column Priest Wirth said:
Editor Union and Advertiser, . ~
Dear Sir, —In your issue of the l(th, under the heading, Big Plot
involves Cardinal,” you print a sensational story which t. he 'yrher him-
self characterised as “stranger than fiction.” Ihe chief villain of the
story is Cardinal Gerlach. Now, cardinals are. not so numerous nor
so obscure that their existence, at least, cannot be easily verified. A
glance at the official Annurlo Pontiflcio or the Catholic Directory, will
show that Cardinal Gerlach himself Is a fiction. What are we to think
of the reliability of the facts of this piece of inside information when the
chief villain is shown to be non-existent?
Other similar attempts of Jesuitical priests to make the gul-
lible believe the Italian government had been following a phantom
have been in evidence, but the above will suffice to illustrate
the methods hierarclial agents, (priests in particular) will employ
to shield the church when damaging evidence is getting close to
the pope. , „ , '
In bold contrast to denials of the very existence of Gerlach
is the manner in which Italy proceeded in the case.
The May issue of the “Protestant Alliance Magazine” of Eng-
land contained very interesting information as to what was being


done in the way of bringing matters as to a real focus.
Referring to the trial of Gerlach “The Alliance” said;
It is being held in camera, and has already attracted great interest
on account of the high rank of many of the defendants and the wit-
nesses.
Among the accused are persons of all classes of society, and fifty
fresh arrests have been made quite recently. The defendants, it is
charged, are members of the vast organization of spies directed by
Prince Buelow from Lucerne, which has spread its tentacles throughout
Italy.
Monsignors von Gerlach* and Pomarici, and other accused, include
editors, persons connected with Parliament, Anarchists, and others ready,
for any dirty deed. FIVE HUNDRED WITNESSES HAVE BEEN
CALLED: AND VICE-ADMIRAL DELLA CHIESA. BROTHER OF THE
POPE, AND CARDINAL BISLETI will give evidence concerning von
Geriach’s character. CARDINALS VANNUTELLI AND VICO ARE
ALSO AMONG THE WITNESSES.
The climax to the affair came on June 23rd with the, to some,
startling news that Gerlach had been convicted.
The “Kansas City Star” for June 23 is one of the many papers
that carried an inconspicuous notice of this really big and vitally
important piece of news.
Said “The Star”;
‘‘Rome. June 23.—Monsignor Gerlach. a German, formerly an attache
at the Vatican, was to-day found guilty of being head of pro-German
propaganda in the papal court and throughout high circles in Italy and
was sentenced to life imprisonment. Pomarice. an accomplice, was
sentenced to be shot. Both convicted men were fugitives from Italy.”
The conviction of Monsignor Gerlach is the climax of the Italian
secret service’s successful and sensational attempt to run down pro-
German propaganda in the Vatican and in Italy several months ago.
Documents whose contents involved about three hundred residents
of Italy were discovered locked in a safe in a building adjoining the
German embassy at Vienna.
Imagine if you can how such an article would have been played
up in all American papers if the convicted man had been the
private secretary of any one of the executive heads of the allied
nations.
Though no single case affords a hotter illustration of the
control exercised over news affecting the Roman propaganda than
does this case it is not our purpose to deal with censorship of
press herein.
More germane to the ease in hand is the news of the arrest
of Monsignor Gunther, another Vatican luminary. - The informa-
tion comes from a Rome correspondent of the “St. Louis' Post-
Dispatch” and appeared in that paper on August 26, 1917.
• Said the Rome correspondent in that issue:
To say that the Vatican has. pittingly or unwittingly, been pulling
chestnuts out of the fire for Germany and Austria is to understate the
case. Not a week passes but that some fact comes to the cold light
of dav. showing how- ranch the Vatican is involved in German, and
Austrian intrigue.
A few days ago it was the case of Monsignor Gerlach, secret cham-
berlain to the pope, whom the Italian government had to condemn to
life imprisonment for grave offences committeed against Italy while he
en,loved the hospitality of the Vatican and toured Rome at breakneck
speed in a smart automobile given to one of the cardinals by no less
a personage than Kaiser William himself.


He Was Arch Spy.
Tbe case was heard behind closed doors. But murder will out.
M"r Gerlach, with his round, schoolboy face and his tastes for mundane
pleasures, was not only guilty of using the papal pouch for sending
precious Information to Germany and Austria about Italy s mllitarj,
tinanclal and political life, his offenses went further than that.
He paid, urged, and directed the vast array of spies who infest this
country, so that, willy-nilly, the Vatican became a clearing house for
the traitors and the Informers whom Germany drills so well. Mgr.
Gerlach had the sense to flee Italy ere his case was brought up before
the military tribunal of Rome. , , . .... ... .„
The pope was so Incensed at his favorites breach of faith that be
broke the papal rule of 47 years and invited the king s police into
the Vatican to arrest the offender, but lie had lied. Gerlach is now
with Prince Buelow in Lucerne.
Kaiser is Beneficiary.
The prelates had scarcely recovered their breath after hearing the
sentence against the fugitive when another blow fell. Mgr. Gunther,
another Vatican luminary who left Rome with the I russian legation tt
the holy see when Italy Joined the war and settled in Lugano, Switzer-
land. has been arrested on a charge of spying. Gunther has be ®" **}
constant touch with the Vatican. He never failed to meet the papal
courier who leaves Rome for Switzerland at least three times a week,
often four, and is immune from the rigorous frontier search.
Gunther has been put into a Swiss prison, along with leading lignts
of the German and Austrian spying systems that flourish exceedingly
in Switzerland. The Swiss police now charge him with spying in
favour of Germany. His name figures on the charge sheet in company
with Von Luma, reporter of the Hungarian Az Esh, and four other
newspaper men of German and Austrian citizenship, a German woman
who combined the vegetarian cure of Lugano with secret information,
and a Swiss who sold his nationalism to Kaiser William.
Such news as the above must indeed prove very disconcerting
to “his holiness” for one of his chief arguments to show that he
had no knowledge of the Gerlach intrigues was, that the monsignor
has imposed on him by using the Vatican mail pouch unbeknown
to him. This argument hardly tallies with the fact that Gunther
never failed to meet the papal courier (after he went to Switzer-
land), whose mail pouch was free from rigorous frontier search.
It was doubtless this same courier or one occupying a similar
position through whom Monsignor Gerlach' operated; but since
Gerlach had long since left the Vatican when Gunther was arrested,
what member of the Vatican household was keeping in such close
touch with Gunther and his spying activities?
In the pages to follow we direct your attention to Rome s
futile attempt to save the Vatican and the pope from all the
stigma possible and to matters showing the world-wide activity
among Roman Catholics under the direction of the papal system
tending to make against the allied cause.
CHAPTER III.
POPE MAKES A BOLD PLAY AT NEUTRALITY.
Hierarchal Joupnals Declare Papacy Neutral and Show Gerlaoh will
be Unfrocked—Jesuits’ Peace Note Follows with its own
Evidence of Pro-Germanism.
We have, in a measure, shown that ever since the days of
Garabaldi, the consolidation of the kingdom of Italy with Rome
as its capital and the dethronement of the pope as a sovereign


over that part of Italy known as the papal states, the Homan
pontiff has refused to recognize the change in sovereignty and the
right of the Italian people to govern themselves; that he insists
on keeping up the fiction of being a rightful ruler in temporal
affairs, and instead of submitting to the government of Italy styles
himself a prisoner of the Italian government, and in support of
this claim refuses all recognition or jurisdiction of the kingdom
of Italy.
As related, since 1870 no pope has left the Vatican for fear
such absence might be construed as a recognition of the jurisdic-
tion of the Italian government, indeed Pope Pius X. carried this
fictitious claim of being a prisoner to such an extreme that he
refused to leave the Vatican to attend the funeral of his sister.
This attitude plainly shows the Vatican to be in a position
of quasi war against the government of Italy, and consequently an
ally, secretly if not openly, of any power at war with Italy.
Austria styled itself an especial protector of the Roman church
and the Arch-duke Francis Ferdinand whose assassination precipi-
tated the world war as has already been shown, boasted, publicly
and privately, that it was his purpose when he became emperor to
march into Italy with a strong army and reinstate the pope as
sovereign of the papal states. < A
In Germany the Center party by careful manipulation created
extenuating circumstances which influenced the kaiser to yield
to its demands in return for its support of his schemes for the
conquest of the world. What is more natural then than that
the pope should expect that in return for his covert support,
Austria* and Germany at the close of the war, which neither they
or the Vatican then supposed could be otherwise than favorable
to them, should drive the House of Savoy from Home and rein-
state the pope as a temporal ruler.
That this was the position of the Vatican is proven by the
fact that Italy notwithstanding the offer of Austria to cede at the
close of the war the Trentino to Italy went into the war on the
side of the entente powers, not for territorial expansion, but for
the protection of its national integrity against the machinations of
the Vatican, while England and France placed their own represen-
tatives on watch at the Vatican and demanded and secured the
expulsion therefrom of the representatives of the Central powers.
That this was the case no thoughtful reader of the papers during
the past three years will dispute. Foiled in their efforts at an
open conmunication with the Vatican an attempt was made by the
Central powers to maintain secret connection with the sovereign
on the Tiber and the Gerlach conspiracy (in which Monsignor
Gunther doubtless played his part) and its complete exposure
followed.
Instead of the pope’s pretended role of “prince of peace” being
taken seriously the peace maker found himself regarded with
suspicion as a pernicious meddler instrumental in the continu-
ance of war, while the chance of being ydfiognized at the future
great peace council, with the prospect of securing temporal advant-
age for the church looked very dark. Nowhere was this more
keenly felt than in this country where the Catholic church is posing


as Hie supporter of legal authority and pretending .to be Ihe
embodiment of patriotism, even while persistently defying am
breaking the laws of the land as the occasion suits jhem.
exposure of the duplicity at Rome, made certain tact by the
conviction of Gerlach, frenzied/ them and failing to entirely keep
the matter out of the papers and away from the people for which
of course, they blame Tjie Menace, they are forced to get out of
£e trouble as best they can. So now they take up the role of
injured innocence and try to picture the pope as the victim of
intrigue as will be seen by the following from The 1 ablet, the
Catholic weekly of the Brooklyn, N.Y., diocese, issue for August 4.
imilpf that there may be an anti-Catholic plot in the findings
? f\i f rr f’erlaeh the member of the pope’s household who was
against M»r V r eafon against Italy, is held in certain European
Xoes y Theresa a Lidency, il ls claimed, in the Italian government to
H^reTeated *hroffldfii drcTes thatTh^convSbm«”Mgr. Gerl£h was
~ SSFwWJ? S-SK- S&ST&
TXS'Z: £“<• ■ch.roh ot
* i. , * C{W4 t which oddosgs nothing so much ns thG vnticnn
f.Tlte oMIS." fte bl!w dSSt b“ All cowanllly <rc,v of .Sitators
who always clamored most loudly for war, was aimed more at the
sovereign pontiff than at the papal chamberlain. . . . rher ®
Uankaround to the game. The aim was not only to remove and disable
the loyal friend o( the pope who had long been a thorn in the flesh
of the French ambassador^.but also to compromise the Vatican.
•sssn sr. A'^rist
m%ifl^an V “ta C t a "ln war time Either the*‘ former
SS! t th?dSSSn t of martial B topllclty hits the in whose
S^^Sor?^enoSe£ilS he wSvSVXs, the
situation Is serious for the Vatican.
A New Opening.
with the publication of the sentence, the official incentive has been
give? to a new campaign of hatred against the Vatican. Its serous
consequences cannot be foreseen, but they are inevitable. The Italian
people who are quite susceptible to such influences are practical y
directed to raise their lists against St. Peters. You see, “P J*® r ®
the Vatican palace lived an ‘enemy of the country’ who is charged with
having ‘treacherously destroyed many sons of Italy on land and sea,
and this enemy of Italy was harbored by the pope! Iffiis will be said.
To create the compromising situation was the aim of the trial. .. •
"It is painful and incomprehensible to many persons that the
Catholic papers of Italy have not the courage to take a stand against
decision although they well-know what influences are responsible
for it and whither it tends.” (Black type is ours.)
We are surprised that some of the admissions of this article
escaped the attention of the diocesan censor. That “A confidante
of the Holy Father has been torn from the intimate Vatican family,
after claiming that he lived outside the Vatican is an embarrassing
‘confession coming from so zealous a Roman Catholic journal, bu
we are glad to see they own the truth. •
Again “either the Holy Father knew of the guilt attributed
to Qerlach, or he was unaware of it,” or, in other words, the
pope was a party to espionage against the Italian government and


ia communication with Austria as against Italy, or else, the
imbecility and mental atmosphere of the Vatican is so dense that
Benedict did not know what his closest advisers “his loyal friend”
and ‘‘confidante" was doing: is stating the case plainly. The con-
clusion is self-evident, and the leaders of the Catholic church and
their apologists may impale themselves on either horn of the
dilemma they choose. Either conclusion disgraces them and dis-
credits them with the world.
The Vatican become so desperate that a change of any kind
that would lend itself to liberal interpretation was welcome, hence,
we find a slight change in tactics. The astute Benedict has de-
termined to claim that he was imposed upon by his former favorite
prelate, his personal friend and confidante and in a spasm of
pretended horror at the sacrilegious conduct of his erstwhile
private chamberlain, has decided to wash his sacred hands of the
wholf business and turn the unfortunate Gerlach out of the
church, as we suppose not for the crime of being a traitor, but
because he (with the Vatican) was caught red-handed. So we
find the following in the “Washington Post” of August 3, 1917:
Von Gerlach to be Unfrocked—His Crimes Shock Vatican.
Benedict XV. has given orders for the trial at the Vatican of his
former chamberlain, Mgr. von Gerlach, with a view to his being un-
frocked and divested of his ecclesiastical attributes.
It may be recalled that in June last Mgr. von Gerlach, who is a
fugitive from Italian justice, was sentenced by the Italian courts to
imprisonment for life, after having been found guilty not only of
espionage, but also of having played the leading part in the blowing
up, in port, of the Italian battleships, Benedetto Brin and Leonardo
da Vinci, with all on board—that Is to say, with the loss of near two
thousand lives.
Benedict XV. is intensely bitter against Mgr. von Gerlach, and is
determined to unffock him and to inflict upon him all of the penalties at
the disposal of the church for the leading part which he took in the
blowing up of the two Italian battleships above mentioned, regarding
this as an atrocious crime. . . .
The monsignor was formerly an officer of the Bavarian army, and
after that was on the Vienna stock exchange before entering holy
orders. He hails from Hesse, and is a nephew of that Alexander von
Gerlach, who, as a quite young man, was with Emperor Maximilian
of Mexico.
Undoubtedly it was hoped by the papacy that when the pope
had officially declared his innocence (and proved it) by making
Gerlach the scape-goat and ex-communicating him, that all would
be serene along the Tiber and that Benedict XV. would be restored
in the good graces of the Entente powers, while his special agent
might be a conspicuous character in the coming peace council,
and his holiness be proclaimed the peace-maker of the ages, after
the nations quit fighting.
With the Vatican it’s a game of “waiting and watching”; and,
no matter how it ends, If there is anything in it for him, Benedict,
like “Barkis,” is willin’, but the arrest of Gunther in Switzerland
has further complicated the delicate position.
The attempt at changing front on the part of the pope and
the “stakes" reached the highest limit in the papal peace note.
On August 14th, the governments at war were made aware
that the pope was in the act of transmitting to them certain pro-
posals which he hoped would form a basis for peace negotiations.


fc'verv reader or Hie papers is familiar with what these proposals
were' and knows that they have not been seriously considered by
any of the allied governments so there is no necessity for repeat-
ing them here. .
The later dispatches, *those published on the morning 01
August 15th, set forth that no one questioned the good faith
of the pope in making the move for peace, but that was after
Rome’s censors had seen the first reports and had twelve hours
in which to put the Romish Index in operation.
The real attitude and feeling existent among the Entente diplo-
mats was expressed when every official, foreign or otherwise, was
undergoing a fearful grilling at the hands of press correspondents
in an effort to force or coax from someone, an indication of how
the pope’s proposals would be received. American officials refused
to make any statement but representatives of those governments
which have'been longest in the war and know the relations that
have existed betwen their own country and the Vatican were hardly
so reticent. .
This is perfectly clear from the “Associated Press dispatch
as it appeared on August 14, in such afternoon papers, as The
St. Louis Post-Dispatch” and practically all dailies carrying full
“Associated Press” reports. It said;
Within the entente diplomatic circle the opinion was freely and
nrombtlv expressed that the peace proposal was inspired by Germany,
and was hnTttlmpt to split the allies in a conflicting discussion of
their war aims.
From the foregoing it is perfectly clear that our allies have
not forgotten the Gerlach intrigue, nor hav6 they swallowed the
protestations of innocence contained in Rome’s denials of kno -
ledge of this espionage program, for, in fact, the Curia is awar
not only of everything going on in the Vatican but in ah Italy,
and throughout the world as well; and, though these denials
have been accompanied by declarations that Gerlach would e
ex-communicated and even involved the report of ‘\f h angu3 of the
papal secretary of state to show that every opportunity for German
influence had been removed, the whole array of evidence in every
other particular has remained unchanged, and until political
Romanism undergoes a sweeping change in every particular the
Vatican will have little success in its endeavor to gam favor
with the allied nations; as it is striving so hard to do now that
America’s entry into the war has made Austro-German defeat
inevitable. ex . comrnunica tion of Gerlach is empty
pretense nothing more, and that it has not ceased to play with
the Austro-German Alliance with all the cards “face up while
handing the Allies a cold deck”; that the Entente diplomats were
correct in their assumption that the autocratic powers were behm
the peace move and that the Jesuits, Von Buelow and Vatican
folVhavc ever been the closest, of partners in things affecting
\ustro-German interest was never more clearly shown than In the
status of affairs as regards the pope’s peace proposals
document according to evidence from Switzerland originated not
in the Vatican but in a monastery in Einsiedem at a secret council


between the general of the Jesuits (the black pope) and Austro-
German representatives.
Though the original proposal has been supplemented by
another in which the restoration of Belgium is demanded the
fact that the Jesuits and Austro-German sympathizers were the
fathers of the original move makes us the more suspicious -of the
effort. -
Of course, Germany after she knows the pope’s proposal
has fallen flat, does well to assume that it was made as a result
of the powerful influences of the allied government's, but we leave
the decision to the reader.
Here is a dispatch printed in the “Kansas City Times” for
August 20, 1917, under the caption “Who Write Popes Note?”
Herne, Switzerland, August 19. —AVhile the pope’s note is dated from
the Vatican, it is avowed here that it w r as drafted at the Roman Catholic
monastery at Blnsiedein, where Von Bnelow, Herr Erzberger,' Baron
Kitten, the Bavarian minister to the Vatican, Baron Muhlberg, the
Prussian minister to the Vatican, and the father general of the Jesuits,
an Austrian subject, have a council chamber.
Though the pope is nominally responsible for the note, it is be-
lieved that it emanated from Austria and the German Center party,
and dates back to about a month ago when Herr Erzberger was in
Switzerland. It will be recalled that at the time he expressed the
opinion to a representative of the “Neu Zuricher Nachrichten,” the
Swiss organ of the German Center party, that if he could have only a
short conversation with Balfour or Lloyd George peace negotiations
would come about almost immediately.
Peace by Winter or Perish.
That Germany expected the next step is suggested by the fact that
several editors of leading German newspapers arrived in Berne this
week. One of the best known of them in conversation with a Swiss
editor declared frankly that Germany must have peace before winter
or perish.
“If England really means to continue this war until 1 peace can be
dictated by the allies,” he said, “Germany is lost.”
Austrian and German peace plotting is proceeding in Switzerland to
sal incredile extent. All the German-controlled organs are full of articles
dealing with one or another aspect of peace, which is.always repre-
sented as near possible.
There is more than idle talk in the above dispatch; who has
closely followed the news for the past three years but knows
that; when Italy entered the war against Austria Fr. Ledochowski,
governor-general' of the order of Jesuits (the black pope) left
Rome for the monastery at Einsiedein, Switzerland, which has been
the headquarters of the Jesuit order ,and the center of their
intrigues ever since; when Von Buelow and the other Germanic
representatives at the Vatican left Rome, as has been said, at
the instigation of the Entente powers, they, as well as Monsignor
Gunther, went to Switzerland; when Gerlach fled from Rome to
escape arrest he also went to Switzerland, and it develops that
the great peace proposal which 'was supposed to emanate from
the nominal head of the Catholic church was after all the outcome
of a conspiracy between the autocrat of the Jesuits and the re-
presentatives of the Germanic autocracies, given to the world from
Switzerland but heralded as the spontaneous production of the head
of the Roman church. Ledochowski, the head of the Jesuits in
foisting this one-sided proposal for peace in the dual interest of


his country and his church under cover of the personality of
Benedict only carries out the old idea of Austrian domination of
the Catholic church in a manner typically Jesuitical. At the
conclave of cardinals which elected Pius X., the predecessor of the
present Benedict, Cardinal Rampolla received a majority of the
votes and would have been pdpe but for the veto of the Austrian
government Which rejected him on account of his supposed friend-
ship for the French. At this lime Austria, France and Italy held
the right of vetoing any choice of the cardinals as a pope. Ram-
polla being set aside Pius X. was chosen; during his pontificate,
Cardinal Rampolla died very suddenly and many will recall that
some very unpleasant suggestions were made concerning his “re-
moval.” It will doubtless also be remembered that the beginning
of the war found the pope at the Vatican and the head of the
Jesuits. Father Wernz, both aged men, physically frail, and unable
to cope with the situation and that the passing away of both so
soon after the commencement, of war was as mysterious as it was
sudden.
Both were succeeded by friends of Austria. It is not to be
wondered at that in connection with Germanic representatives they
jointly seek to save the countries they are interested in and at
the same time advance what they conceive to be the interests of
their church.
As the well-known former special secret agent of this govern-
ment under Harrison’s administration says;
Like England in the first year of the war, we do not realize the
import of all that is going on about us, but are likely, like her, to
have a rude awakening.
We do not realize that the policy of German diplomacy and intrigue
has followed, and is following, the exact lines of the policy of the
Vatican as laid out by Prince Matternlch of Austria, the dominant Jesuit
diplomat of the years of 1810 to Way back in 1820 at the Secret
Council of Troppau, the plan was laid out, and later was financed by
the church and the Holy Alliance sovereigns in the St. Leopold Founda-
tion. (See “The Great Conspiracy,” page 25.)
England and the United States were the only two Protestant coun-
tries with any power, and against these two the Vatican has waged
her secret war of Intrigue and diplomacy,
England, under George HI., from 1774-1708, was taught a lesson,
changed her colonial policy and government, and is now with her colo-
nies practically a democratice federation, and Anglo-Saxon unity has
become the threat to autocracy and the Vatican. The JesuUs have
worked to estrange, cause misunderstanding, etc., between these two
great Anglo-Saxon nations.
When England’s Foreign Secretary Canning refused to sign the
Verona Treaty and declared her support of the Monroe Doctrine of
1823, she became the foe of autocracy as well as the Vatican.
In the United States distrust of England was a favorite theme in
Catholic, Fenian and other papers Influenced by Jesuits. The Clan-na-
Gael, the successor of the Fenian organization tried and tries to antago-
nize American public opinion against England.
It is the Jesuit propaganda to destroy Anglo-Saxon unity which
both they and autocracy wish to weaken. Here is -where Germany came
into complete agreement with the Vatican, as Anglo-Saxon unity was
also a threat to her world empire plans.


CHAPTER IV.
KAISER’S INTIMATE RELATIONS WITH JESUITS.
How the Kaiser Stands at the Vatican and with the Black Pope
German Spy System and Jesuits Become as Siamese Twins.
Enough authoritative evidence regarding the Vatican’s direct
connection with the Austro-German program has been entertained
m he foregoing to permit us to leave that phase of the question
and proceed to another which so eloquently shows Rome’s hand
m this war that even our misguided Roman Catholic brother can
hardly maintain his faith in the Vatican, and remain loval to his
country at one and the same time.
The Jesuits, their obeying and sympathizing brethren are the
arms through which Rome’s propaganda is promulgated and in
'■ew ol the fact (hat the kaiser has tremendous influence with
that organization it is proper that before we show how Rome’s
sympathy for the Austro-German Alliance has percolated down
through the hierarchy and out into various branches of organized
Romanism throughout the world that we deal with the Jesuits-
for this will aid us in considering the evidence as to the world-
hindrance to the Allies, which is aiding the .kaiser as much as did
the Gerlach intrigues.
Again we quote from the special secret agent mentioned in the
last chapter, but whose name we withhold because two nigh-
succssful attempts on his life have already been perpetrated The
quotation following was contained in an article published in The
Menace for the week of August 11th;
~ u7 h , e G l err V. a ". ide , al i and objective, its in action, its de-
light in duplicity, Intrigue, Indirection, and its total blindness to all
moral concepts, 1.e., “loyalties of the spirit,” brands it as diametrically
opposite to the standards of Christ, and yet it vaunts Itself as Christh n
has a state church labelled Christian, and its emperor declares the
Spirit of God has descended upon him and he is God’s Instrument etc
How are we to understand and how diagnose such blasphemy, such a
spiritual monstrosity?
It is a self-evident axiom that things equal to the same thin" are
equal to each other, and in the ideals and practices of the Jesuits we
hnd the same thing. Spiritually they are as similar as two drops of
water, therefore that they admit they are in alliance need S no
wonderment or doubt. Politically their objective is the same The n
political ideal is feudalism and autocracy. Their practice of the end
justifying the means is Identical. Germany’s Delbruck law of loT
that absolved Germans from their oath of allegiance to foreign goveru-
ments is strict Jesuit practice. It is at one with the Jesuit doctr ne
on allegiance to governments other than their own, which is directed
by the black pope, the general of the Jesuits. cteu
With these points of similarity in mind let us turn our atten-
tion to another observation from the pen of the same writer
The quotation following is taken from his authoritative little book
“Jesuitism in Practice’’:
In 1800. twenty-one years ago. as I write this, I was informed
i' r'fvf" c ori i y - * found later from facts that came to me confimed)
< 1?/.° v 1 * i 111 System in the United States used the German
Catholic Vereln as its headquarters, and was in active co-operation with
T t- i ln vf SJ6 ’i 1 ? vas luf , or , m ® (l that the German Catholic Vereln of St
Louis. Mo., kept a card Index bureau, and flies of “Bordeaus” of in-
tormation as to the characteristics, family history, “family skeletons”
*®d fallings and weaknesses of all the public men and neonle of nmmi
nence. both friendly and unfriendly, to not only the Romnn Cnlh.dlc


nronairanda in the United States, but matter useful to the German Spy
Svstein It was an alien "seditions bureau” of information, tor as a
German Spy is an alien, so is a Romanist whose hrst allegiance is
the pope of Bom® wag clalmedt was a gatherer of information by
lii-ssasH
messenger.
The Siamese Twins.
\he Prussian government enacted four laws that Placed
May, I* limited the authority of the bishops, reduced
limits upon the church, UmU > . d obedience to the
the powers of the m'S 1874 nnule dvil marriage obligatory; that
Kullman, of course, was »a papl»t f « tn ” / direction. Under the
Jesuit orders, %relieious houses were closed, an Immense num-
wf priests were etc., etc.
maS C Cb P o. d !VI>»P». «•* «-*« ot cburcbes
deprived of pastors.” Priests were in exile.
Leo and Kaiser Get Together.
rce Leo XIII. f !«”,V«^"piu B "tTeclS“
of operation. Leo was astu • ‘Kullman had attempted to kill
the German laws null and ™ atoned thl "rough house” policies.
Bismarck, etc., etc but Leo abandoned the ” nuch abated until,
Under Leo's Jesuitical £(l Jame to a tacit understanding
Kaiser William 11. dismissed pt hrln , r t be kaiser "to his heel,
with Leo. but wily Leo * c divine right autocracy, etc., and in his
The kaiser was a fanatic? 01» J s Ca r t f„ llcs in France to support the
encyclical letters L®p ' , what was termed “Americanism,
republic, and committed th • _ kaiser interviewed the pope,
It produced the lst not b e republicanized; threat-
ened Te and the machine
ifssrv&sa * *
policies, in violation papa”* control,’ followed by the forcing
Herzegovina under full Austrian I ■ , that hroucrht on the war of
of Serbia to accept the Papal Concordate that brougnr pri-
-1914. the Great war The Jesuits “rTurthe pro-Oerian
marily responsible for this w . * will b e found largely a German
movement in the its . s jnister and organized strenuous
Catholic propaganda which b> |ts sliusier Sleuth around
Philadelphia, Pa., and you’ll be convinced.
Refnrp giving the most astounding citation concerning me
rss »r«r


party, The Center, succeeded last spring in having the Kulturkampf
laws, mentioned in the foregoing quotation and which had long
remained a dead letter in German law, entirely repealed.
And now, as to the kaiser's intimacy with Rome and his in-
fluence in the Jesuit order which is almost too astounding for the
mind of man to conceive.
The scholarly author we are about to quote is clearly master
of the subject and possesses a thorough grasp of historical facts
as well as a remarkable knowledge of current events.
Further he bears out in a striking manner, emphasizes and
corroborates the amazing and conclusive indictments of political
Romanism already presented and those which will be considered
later.
Writing in “The Witness” an uh-papalised journal of Belfast,
Ireland, our author observes:
If any tourist in the Vatican is curious enough he can see a room
which is set apart for the gifts of the kaiser to the pope.
But the serious aspect of this personal friendship between the civil
and the ecclesiastical chiefs of the Holy Roman Empire is THE CON-
NECTING LINK OF THE JESUITS. The present General of the
Jesuit Order, appointed since the war began, Is a German Pole, one time
citizen of Austria. His predecessor was purely German, and was nomi-
nated by the kaiser in 1900, which nomination was accepted with the
cordial approval of the pope. As is well known, this General of the
Jesuits is called the Black Pope, and it is he who dominates to-day
the whole papal system in Rome and throughout the world. The Jesuit
Society is, of course, secret; but It claims to have subjugated all other
secret societies in the Roman Catholic church, and ‘also asserts that IT
HAS UNDER ITS ABSOLUTE COMMAND NO FEWER THAN
TWENTY-FIVE MILLION PERSONS scattered throughout the Avorld,
every one of whom is secretly bound by a promise of obedience to their
orders.
France has expelled the Jesuit Order from the country. But the
Jesuits of France have found an asylum in England. IRELAND, TOO,
IS SWARMING WITH JESUITS. All these Jesuits are new working
day and night in the Interests of the pope, and the pope Is working
day and night in the interests of the kaiser. The present war has for
Its' immediate object the destruction of the British empire, and that is
an object which exactly suits the Jesuits and the pope. We in Ire-
land have an object-lesson of their pro-German work standing out
before our eyes ever since the war broke 4 out. Amongst them they
have prevented Nationalist Ireland from contributing any appreciable
force for the support of the British empire or for the defeat of Ger-
many. At a critical moment in the war they fomented a rebellion which
aimed at the overthrow of British rule and the handing over of the
country to the invasion of Germany. The same agents of the Vatican
are at work in Ireland still, and have been doing their worst in all
other countries. Every Jesuit is as good as a German spy. In Great
Britain, in the colonies, in the United States, all over the continent of
Europe, the Jesuit Order lias been at work In compact, organized, and
ably directed masses. Is it any wonder that Germany knows all our
operations and that every secret of our strategy is treacherously betrayed
to them?
This is indeed a German war, but it is A GERMAN WAR .TESUI-
TIZED; A GERMAN WAR ANIMATED AND ABETTED BY ALL THE
CHICANERY AND VILLAINY OF A GERMAN BLACK POPE, who
dominates the Vatican, and who boasts that he is blindly obeyed by
twenty-five million persons throughout the world.
We shall measure the strength of our antagonist when we remember
the power of the Roman Curia,’ which directs the policy and enforces the
will of the Vatican. On this point I do not profess to write at first
band, nor from the information of Protestants. I cite the following
sentences from a writer who was a devout Roman Catholic, and who
was shocked by the proceedings of the Ramon Curia that he abandoned


the communion of the papal church in a disgust which bordered on
despair, fiord Robert Montague writes;—
“Was he not a gentle, guileless old man? That may be; but yet he
must do the bidding of the Curia of the Vatican. The Curia is a
cabinet of long standing, great practice, experience, and knowledge of
affairs. It never ‘goes out; by the action of an adverse majority in
a representative chamber. It never suffers change, except as one mem-
ber or another drops off by old age or death. It compasses all the
best intellects of Europe and of the new world. It combines the
astuteness of the Indian, the solidify of the Englishman, the Inventive
genius of the American, the clear subtlety of the Frenchman, the dogged
perseverance and persistance of the German, the duplicity of the Oriental,
and the falsehood of all. All those varied intellects have been carefully
trained for their work, and been experienced In diplomacy; while from
the intimate reports derived from priestly confessors all over the world,
the best and most detailed knowledge of the characters and Intentions
of statesmen, and the passions of the people, are ready to their hand.
The Vatican is the center of all the intelligence and information of the
world; and every bishop has periodically to visit Rome, in order that
his inmost soul may be probed, and his continual reports may be tested.
Such is the cabinet with which Protestant statesmen hope on equal
terms to cope.”
Such, also, is the cabinet, which is to produce our next peace-
maker! Peace! What hast thou to do with peace? Thou mother of
harlots! Thou plotter of strife! Thou friend of the oppressor! Thou
enemy of the people! Thou who are red with the blood of saints and
martyrs! Thou who hast reduced lying to a fine art, and who in
the name of Jesus of Nazareth art drunk with the wine of the fornica-
tion of the nations!'' Peace, indeed! Nulla pax cum Roma aut per
Romani S
We cannot be too thankful that Mr. Asquith, who sent a British
envoy to the Cuxda, and who himself prowled around the purlieus of
the Vatican, has been degraded from the position of prime minister
of England.
Neither can Ulster be too thankful that she has been preserved from
the clutches of such a power. Home Rule without Ulster has been
dung away by the Curia with disgust. Home Rule, with Ulster led to
the sacrifice as a victim, is the only sort of Home Rule the Curia will
welcome.
When the pope enters the arena to pose before mankind as Presi-
sent Wilson has just done, the ten Allied nations will unite in sweeping
him aside as a wmlf in sheep’s clothing, as the aider and abettor of
the kaiser, as the friend and fomentor of the great conspiracy which
fought against liberty and sought to establish that counterfeit of Chris-
tianity known in history as the papacy.
That the kaiser nominated the Black pope in 1906 may ap-
pear rather singular, not to say unbelievable, to those who -have
given little attention to the close relationship the German autocrat
has maintained with the Vatican household ever since the secret
treaty between himself and Leo. XIII. To more deeply impress
the relations of the kaiser with the Vatican let us again turn to
that authoritative. English journal and organ of Protestantism
established in London in 1853, the “Protestant Alliance Magazine.”
Shortly after this war began this magazine published an article
under the caption “Who is Responsible for This Terrible War?”
from which we take the following:
The blow which has fallen on Belgium is for the purpose of find-
ing, through the subjugations of France, a way to humiliate and con-
quer Britain. The kaiser was even more friendly with the pope than
Kruger, who, in 1882, is said to have presented the late Leo XIII. with
a diamond worth about £BO.OOO. The kaiser’s portrait hangs on the
walls of the Vatican, and Is in its albums. The glittering cross worn
on the breast of Leo XIII. was a gift from the German kaiser, to
whom that pontiff often alluded as “My best European friend.”
Constant flattering communications passed between the pontiff and
emperor. When the latter went to Rome in 1903 he visited the pope


m state amid the applause of priests and monks. A Te Deum was
sung in St. Peter’s on his birthday, which mark of approval the kaiser
returned by bestowing decoration on the black pope (general of the
Jesuits) who—by a remarkable coincidence—died last month, almost
at the same time as Pope Pins X.
While the relations of the kaiser, the pope, and the General
of the Jesuits are fresh in the reader’s mind it is well to note that
without doubt Gerlach himself is a Jesuit.
This conclusion is warranted by studying the various positions
to which he has been shifted. At one time he was active in the
Bavarian army, then on the stock exchange, later editor of an
Austrian paper and very close to Benedict when the latter was a
cardinal, then elevated to Monsignor and made a member of the
Vatican household officially serving the pope in the most intimate
capacity.
It is the duty of a Jesuit to be prepared to fill any post to
which the interests of the Jesuits may call him, even if it be the
Protestant ministry. And Gerlach has undoubtedly been from
post to post changing his occupation far more frequently than
successful men, aside from Jesuits, do.
It is a condition with which we are dealing both in Europe
and in America, and with such conditions as we have shown to
exist across the water; in countries that have known popery
throughout the dark ages and since the beginning of mediaeval and
modern times, countries that have repudiated popery and are there-
fore victims of intrigue, will it not behove us, the ally of those
governments, to examine more closely activities that do not square
with the aims of this nation in the world war and those other
activities that run counter to, and war on, our constitutional guar-
antees of freedom of press speech, assembly, and of conscience?
CHAPTER V.
ROME’S CHILDREN AID GERMAN PROPAGANDA.
Activities of Romanists in all Countries and Widespread Movements
Against Allies Prove an Important Aid to the Austro-
Qerman Cause.
If the reader is now fully aware that a preponderating amount
of evidence convicts the Vatican of pro-Germanism to a degree that
if participated in by Roman Catholics in a nation at war with Ger-
many would at least border on treason the revelations to follow
will prove more than sufficient cause for righteous indignation.
Bear in mind, that in dealing with Rome we are dealing with a.
system, not an individual; a system posing as religious, that sur-
rounds its adherents with walls of darkness and forbids them the
opportunity to read, hear, and thereby sec as others see. In that
system alone, and not in the individuals that give it numerical
strength and are taught to blindly trust and obey, lies the key to
menacing problems that confront the people in all lands to-day.
In the trial following the recent riotous demonstration in little
’ltaly (a Roman Catholic district in Chicago) in which a Roman
priest and his parishioners assaulted a Methodist Gospel van and
broke up a meeting, a patrolman testified-that “there are a thous


and kids in that district ready to murder a Methodist, especially
with him singing hymns.” The priest excused this spirit by
saying ‘‘it is the way of my people.”
Friend, the thing that moulds each of those “thousand kids”
into a being ready to murder a Methodist is not an accident of
birth. No thousand people in the whole realm of time were ever
born alike. It is a matter of training and of paying obedience to
the instructions as well .as imbibing the spirit of Rome.
So we find in' the citations to follow, it is not the Roman
Catholic laity who should have the blame (though they should be
shown the errors of the system and taught to do different in a
most convincing manner) it is the system that Greatest the con-,
dition and it: is the .Jesuitical- influence seeping down from the
Vatican and out through the hierarchy that creates the appalling
condition.
In America there are thousands upon thousands of Romanists
opposing this government as truly as is Germany, and the writer
believes the majority at least of the laity would not do so if they
saw it in that light; but Jesuitical persuasion and suggestions from
their superiors directed chiefly against 'our ally, England, has
accomplished what advice to rebel against America might not
have accomplished with the more liberal Romanists.
And now for the illustrations as to how the Vatican has reached
its people everywhere and played into the hand of Germany;
evidence that conclusively refutes all the claims of innocence which
the Vatican has been making about Gerlach as to activities that
are doing far to defeat the allies than Gerlach ever dared
dream of doing.
Few of many similar utterances will more clearly show the
hostility of Rome for England than does an article which appeared
in the March 20th, 1917, issue of the'“Hibernian,” Roston, Mass.,
official organ of the Ancient Order of Hibernians in Massachusetts.
In commenting on the former stand and present attitude of
John Redmond, the Irish'statesman, on home rule legislation for
Ireland this arrogant hierarchal voice declares:
“. . . and if Mr. Redmond be at . length convinced of the number
and enormity of his ‘mistakes’ —to use the mildest expression possible—
and, so convinced, is determined to do better, the outlook for the
future might he put down as improved, so far. at least, as the Irish
party is capable of Improving it. Arrayed in opposition to tjie govern-
ment, Mr. Redmond could block legislation to a large extent, if so
inclined. But he Is not so inclined, for in his manifesto to the Irish
people he still adheres to. and even emphasizes. THE ABSURD PRO-
POSITION THAT ENGLAND IS RIGHT IN THE WAR, and that
this being so she will get the aid of his party as far as possible. In
other words. Mr. Redmond confesses that he is heart and soul with
the ministry IN EVERY MOVE DESIGNATED TO CRUSH GERMANY
AND BRING VICTORY TO IRELAND’S FOE AND OPPRESSOR. , . .
Let Mr Lloyd George bring in a bill to-morrow providing for the
gathering of' 2.000.000 recruits, otherwise than by conscription, Mr.
Redmond will back him up.”
If Rome is not looking upon England as her foe and upon
the defeat of England’s enemies as a catastrophe how can we ac-
count for'such an utterance as the abovef And, by way of fu»-
nishing further food for thought, why did Rome incite a revolu-
fion in favor of home rule to harass England while opposing the


same rule for the Filipinos through her papal congressmen in our
own national assembly? No matter what the object, the papacy
is the man behind the gun.
But this is only an infinitesimal part. England !s being har-
assed on every hand and again we assert it is the Roman Catholic
church, its political arm and props that are the promoters of this
vast propaganda with the full knowledge that it is of German origin.
This is proven conclusively by an article which appeared in
the “New York Times” for July Bth, 1917, and it shows that our
own department of justice is not entirely in the dark as to these
matters. *
• It will be remembered that the Irish rebellion (Rome’s Rebel-
lion) and the execution of Casement were made the occasion for
much denunciation of England—and though Rome’s promotion of
Germany’s propaganda had been vast before this event it has
since assumed startling proportions reaching every available
quarter of the globe.
The article from “The Times” just referred to follows:
Whon more than a year ago agents of the Department of Justice
raided the office of Wolf von Igel, one of the plotters attached to the
German embassy staff, who was afterwards indicted by the Federal
Grand Jury because of his efforts to wage war on behalf of Germany
from American soil, they found documents which, it now appears, not
only disclosed the plots to start Insurrection in India, but also the
German-made plans for an uprising in Ireland. It was the information
obtained when Von Igel’s office was raided that established definitely,
so it is said, Sir Roger Casement’s part in the ill-fated Irish rebellion.'
«
And now to illustrate*to what length the subjects of the pope
will go and how far this anti-Ally, rebellious spirit has spread
in the effort to impair England’s (necessarily the Allies) success
in the war. The following is from an article headed “Quebec
Hints at Revolt” published in the “Kansas City Star” for Friday,
June 20th, 1917:
“La Croix,” a Catholic organ published in Montreal, has led the
followers of a “down with conscription” policy, and has openly suggested
the feasibility of seceding from the rest of the Dominion.
“L’ldeal Catholique,” generally believed to be the semi-official organ
of the Catholic church In Canada, suggests that Quebec form a sepa-
rate republic, and maintain itself by taxes levied on the commerce
which passes up and down the St. Lawrence river.
That more than idle talk is back of the plan to resist conscrip-
tion in the French provinces is apparent to all who follow the dis-
cussion of the matter in the Canadian parliament at Ottawa. The
movement is either so strong that the government is afraid to attack
it directly, or the feeling exists that some way will be found to appease
the French speaking districts by exempting them from the provisions
of the Draft Act.
The English-speaking press in other parts of Canada is angered at
what it terms the treachery of the people of Quebec. The record of
enlistments in the army from Quebec is a vivid illustration of the
feelings of the people there; less than seven thousand having volun-
teered since the war began. The military authorities have found it
Impossible to complete a single battalion drawn from French Canadian
units. ,
This revolt of Rome’s minions came as a climax to the deter-
mination Of the Canadian government to inaugurate conscription
in order that a sufficient force might be raised in Canada to insure


Uio i)i‘u|jei‘ quota (rum that dumiaiuu. But nu, it’s for England
—against Germany and Home revolts.
The best sizing up of the situation in Canada and mention of
Home’s revolt in Austria and elsewhere, in fact the best and most
authoritative resume of the situation that has appeared in the
English language was published as the leading editorial in the
•‘Christian Science Monitor,” of Boston, issue for August 2. After
vividly showing the part the Jesuits are playing in furthering
Rome’s propaganda, the “Monitor" says:
It has Jjeen noticed that wherever the influence of the Koman
Catholic church is the strongest, a tremendous campaign lias been waged
to prevent the recruiting of men in the allied countries for the war.
This has been shown to be the case in Ireland, where the excuse hhs
been that the country did imt enjoy representative government, though
it enjoys not only the same representative government as England,
Scotland, and Wales, but a numerical representation in Westminster
out of all proportion to its population. It has also been shown to be
the case in Australia, where the conscription bill was killed through
the influence of the Labor Unions, after these unions, by the admission
of the Roman Catholic press of the country, hud been captured by the
Koman Catholic members.
Now, the effort to repudiate conscription has come up in the Western
Hemisphere, and is summed up by the Roman Catholic Archbishop of
Quebec in terms which go infinitely further than anything the Bishop
of Killaloe or the Archbishop of Melbourne has ever thought it wise to
advance. It is obvious that conscription cannot be attacked In Canada
on the ground that the country does not enjoy representative govern-
ment. Canada not only enjoys representative government, but the Pro-
vince of Quebec even enjoys a bilingual privilege. Therefore Cardinal
Begin falls back on an almost medieval conception of state and church,
and proposes to make effective in Canada a condition of things which
was shipwrecked in France by the French Revolution, in Italy by the
Red .Shirts of Garibaldi, and which lias not been seriously advanced in
England since the Reformation.
The conscription law, which, it is to be remarked, has been passed
t>y the representatives of an entirely democratic nation, Cardinal Begin
describes as “a menace which causes the Canadian clergy the worst
apprehensions.” Military service, and by military service the cardinal
designates the act of the representatives of a thoroughly democratic
people, to insure the military safety of the country, and the liberties of
the nation, in a tremendous battle with autocracy, this military service
the cardinal describes as “a serious blow to the rights of the church
of Christ, independent in its domain, and whose laws and practice ex-
empt the clergy and that class of society which that name designates
from the service under arms.” In plain English, the cardinal is claim-
ing as exempt from military service not only the regular clergy, who
are exempt in any case without question, everywhere, but all those
divinity students, teachers, and other adherents of the church of Rome,
which that church chooses to embrace under the comprehensive title
of clergy. Not only, therefore, is he reviving the claim that the church
of Romo in all its phases is above the civil law, but he is apparently
prepared to do his utmost to prevent the ordinary civil population from
taking their place in the ranks for the defence of their country. The
defence of the country, It would seem, is to be undertaken by the Pro-
testant provinces, since the Roman Catholics do not voluntarily enlist:
the Province of Quebec is to stand apart, and enjoy the advantages of
the efforts of the other provinces to maintain its laws and freedom
in the present struggle. Such an attitude really places the Roman
Catholic church on the side of the Central Powers. She refuses to let
her children light, not only against the Germans and the Austrians, but
discourages them from doing their part to produce a condition of things
in which Armenian massacres will no longer be a possibility. In order
that there mav be no misconception at all as to the stand which the
Roman Catholic church in Canada is taking, Cardinal Begin frankly
brushes democracy aside, and takes his place as the critic of demo


cratlc Institutions, as typified In the House of Commons in Canada. ‘’lf,”
he declares, “we judge by the very rude knowledge revealed by certain
speeches made in the Commons one may, indeed, fear that some legis-
lators, so little enlightened and maybe, also, somewhat ill-willed, may
not make a choice that we would approve, and here is what legitima-
tizes all the fears.” In plain English, the cardinal places the judgment
of his church above the decision of the House of Commons, and boldly
declares that It is not the will of the nation which should prevail, but
a decision of the church of Koine as to what it may approve.
Finally Cardinal Begin declares that the Roman Catholics of Canada
are assured by treaties of the free practice of their religion. The
Roman Catholics throughout the entire British empire are assured of the
free practice of their religion, and this is true of all Protestant coun-
tries, but when it comes to the attempt to set a church above the state,
the question becomes not a religious one, but a political one, and has
to be decided as such. But though Cardinal Begin declares that the
free exercise of the Roman Catholic religion is protected in Canada, he
goes on to demand that legislation shall not be passed which is un-
pleasing to the Roman Catholic minority, and he expresses this in
something perilously near a threat, when he declares that no one will
dare, on a matter so important and delicate, hurt the sentiments of
the whole Roman Catholic population of the Dominion. In other words,
the Roman Catholic minority in Canada is to determine the policy of
the country, and is to repudiate the acts in parliament of the repre-
sentatives of an entirely democratic country elected on a democratic
franchise. Any failure of the majority to give way to the minority
will, the cardinal Insists, “sow. on this side of the Atlantic, the seed of
the fatal religious discords that have divided the Old World.” To the
average man, it would seem that this is perilously near what the car-
dinal is engaged in doing himself. The Roman Catholic church, in
Canada, is demanding privileges which it may enjoy under the govern-
ments of Austria and of Spain, where it can scarcely be pretended that
there is much liberty of conscience, and which are frankly undemo-
cratic. But Vienna is not Ottawa, nor is Madrid Toronto. If, there-
fore, the democratic government of Canada is not prepared to haul
down its colors to him, it will be interesting to know what Cardinal
Begin proposes to do by way of obedience to the legislature of the
country and of respect for law and order.
What the influence of Cardinal Begin and the Roman prelates
has done by way of arousing their blindly obedient laity to revolt
against the authority of Canadian law since the appearance of the
above article in the “Monitor” is clearly shown in the following
which is taken from the Boston “Journal” for August 16, 1917:
Montreal, August 13.—Those who fear rabid anti-couscriptionists
believe they organized in a secret society along the lines of the Ku-
Klux-Klan, and aim to remove by assassination or otherwise the most
ardent supporters of the draft bill. They were alarmed again to-day
by a new dynamiting attempt, this time at the home of Gedeon Bigras,
in Ste. Scholastique.
Owing to some fault in packing the explosive, however, the house
was not destroyed, though it was considerably damaged, and Bigras
escaped injury.
Bigras is considered an active supporter of conscription, and the
attempt on his life follows closely that on Lord Athoistans.
An incident of perhaps greater significance has just been revealed
through a military Investigation, though every effort has been made
to keep it from the public. It Is nothing less than a serious disturbance
in a Catholic church at North Hatley, another small Quebec town, preci-
pitated by a sharp rebuke administered In the midst of the service a
week ago last Sunday, to the parish priest, who was preaching a ser-
mon vigorously condemning the military service act and urging his
people to resist Its enforcement by every means in their power. He
declared that the English-speaking people were aiming by the act to
send all the Prench-Canadlans to France to be killed, in order that
they, the English, might usurp the power and take over the reins of
government.


The foregoing is an excellent example of trusting the subjects
of a foreign sovereignty too far, for if it does not indicate that
‘Rome is teaching the superiority-of papal sovereignty when the
law of the land runs counter to the desires of the church then we
fail to grasp the meaning of the language.
While discussing matters so recent as the Canadian event and
the spread of Rome’s rebellion, by way of the Vatican, through
such as Gunther and Gerlach, it is fitting that we again turn
to America
Here we have the spectacle of such ardent papists as Jere-
miah O’Leary giving wide publicity to matters that seem to indicate
a fondness for things German.
Mr. O’Leary is not without influence among his own ilk for
he is president of “The Catholic Truth Society,” a Roman Catholic
organization of some considerable membership the purposes of
which are of a sundry character and approved by the hierarchy.
The work of the organization is to send out lecturers and other-
wise circulate their peculiar propaganda.
One of the society’s publications is called “Truth,” another
is called “Bull.” In the August number of “Bull” Mr. O’Leary
publishes an article which the “Washington (D.G.) Host” for
July 24th re-published in part with pertinent interpolations exactly
as follows:
“Unmoved and immovable, confident and victorious, stand the armies
of the Teutons everywhere'. The president practically admits this in
his Flag Day speech.”
Mr. O’Leary continues:
“It is amusing to go hack through the files of our newspapers now
to read over their boastful prophecies; The march to Berlin began on
Vugust 4th 1914, via Russia and France, but the marchers, pshed back,
are now grimly defending their own capitals. The march to Berlin
What an unfortunate pretention! What lives have been sacrificed.
What money has been squandered! It was a dream that could never
come true.”
Mr. O’Leary further says;
•T am one of those unfortunate creatures who never could see or
understand the remotest chance of an allied victory.
“.Toffre. marshal of France, has asked the United States, to send
\merican troops to France to save her from defeat. Roumanla Is
crushed The British empire is on the verge of dissolution, and all the
entente ’nations are threatened with starvation through the depredations
of the submarine warfare upon their marine tra.de. Germany must-be
encouraged as their commissions cry out for ships, money and men.
And again:
“The opinions of financiers are valueless, of the newspapers worse,
of British war partisans ridiculous. It Is doubtful if. any other man
than Woodrow Wilson—if for instance Champ Clark. Claude Kitchln, or
.Tames R. Mann would have led the nation across the rubicon into an
European war,”
The selective draft law is attacked circumspectly. Here is a sample
paragraph:
“Conscription for defence against invasion is vital, but to send our
manhood to foreign lands is folly.”
It is probably publications like the “Bull” (recently sup-
pressed; but the' Catholic Truth Society still lives) and the
“Hibernian” of Boston that inspire meetings such as those con


ducted by “Friends of Irish Freedom” in Boston, New York and
elsewhere.
.The “Hibernian'” in its issue for February 13th, in which
it reports a meeting of Friends of Irish Freedom, records that the
“Friends” passed strong resolutions strongly urging President
Wilson not to enter the world war and were so in earnest as to
appoint a committee to go to Washington and insist on ns remain-
ing out of the conflict-
To use the words of the" “Hibernian”:
The committee was Instructed to remain in Washington and oppose
the passage of any legislation by congress which might bring the
United States into war or prove advantageous to Great Britain in its
prosecution of the war.”
Was that pro-German? Someone may say it was only an
abhorrence of war that prompted such action. The best refuta-
tion of such apologies and the most conclusive answer to all
apologists is the later activities of the “Friends of Irish Freedom.”
Again it is not necessary to seek some papist of little or no
standing with his fellows. Just as Jeremiah O’Leary is president
of the Catholic Truth Society so is Stephen Johnson, national
organizer for the “Friends of Irish Fredom.”
But we shall let the official organ of the Ancient Order of
Hibernians for Massachusetts, the "Hibernian” of Boston, issue
for July 24th, 1917, tell the story.
Here it is:
Shouting at the top of his voice. “It is the duty of America to keep
her boys at home.” Stephen Johnson, national organiser of the Friends
o'f Irish Freedom. Sunday afternoon charged the administration with
“Falling prey to England’s greed.”
WILD APPLAUSE. SHOUTS. THE STAMPING OF FEET AND
THUNDEROUS HAND-CLAPPING greeted Mr. Johnson’s speech before
the Bronx Branch of the Friends of Irish Freedom at Eagle Hall, One
Hundred and Forty-second Street and Third Avenue.
“Every day.” said Johnson, “our public officials are pledging their
loyalty to England, but how often do you hear an English statesman
pledging his loyalty to America? If England continues to gain the
upper hand in this country as she is doing we will soon have to put up
the same fight over here that we did in Ireland.”
Again frenzied cheering interrupted his speech.
“England will again be the dominating nation of the earth if America
will be fool enough to let her,” he continued. “This Irish question has
come to be an American question. It must he settled before peace
comes.’!'
With the above words from the lips of a leader in an organiza-
tion which meets the approval of the hierarchy it is well to bear
in mind that the pope in his attempt to convince the world of
Vatican neutrality following" the declaration of war recommended
that all Homan Catholics stand loyally by their government.
Accordingly prelates and priests in England and elsewhere
delivered excellent patriotic sermons. That has been and is being
done in America by Rome’s priests and prelates. But—some-
thing is wrong. A glance at almost any issue of the “New York
World” for August. 1917, will show how the “Friends of Irish
Freedom” propaganda has assumed such proportions that not


only officials have taken a hand, but large committees of citizens
have also had to help in checking it. Instead of such sentiments
as “no recruits for England" subsiding we find hostility for Eng-
land increasing as is deafly shown in the fact that the Irish Rebel-
lion spread to America, has taken deep root in Canada, and is still
broadening its scope. Instead of priests in France accepting war
service as a patriotic duty when called into the trenches, the wail
as to the infidelity of France for having subjected them to the
same liabilities for service as affected other citizens has echoed
around the world. Instead of Canadian Romanists rushing to the
colors, they have held back, and threatened secession should con-
scription be imposed. They did worse, they started a dynamite
war at home against those who favored conscription. They are
even operating in Spain. “The Noroeste" of Glzon, Spain, a fear-
less publication, has persistently called attention to the beneficent
results of certain Jesuitical activities to German arms. Atypical
illustration of how this paper has insisted that the Jesuits be
stopped once and for all is contained in the following:—
The German pirJvtes are sinking and shooting at our ships off the
Cantabrian coast. To carry out their criminal task, they have need of
information regarding the movement of ships in our ports, and this they
ean only get by means of wireless telegraphy. The Jesuits of Oujon
possess a wireless station, which is working in complete liberty. An
official of the telegraphs who attempted to take control of it was trans-
ferred to another post on the demand of Father Bilbona. AVe shall
continue to draw attention to this abuse until some notice of it is taken
by the Minister of the Interior*
Truly it is very clear that political Romanism everywhere is
in active service for the kaiser, just as %vas Gerlach. No stronger
claim as to the Vatican’s cognisance of the Gcrlach conspiracy need
be urged. Gerlach was caught red-handed, but these world-*
wide evidences of Romish and German propaganda have not yet
demanded the attention of the whole people though they have
been operating for three long years.
Considering all the facts confirmative of the papacy’s interest
in the present war, there is no escape from the conclusion that
the Roman Cathlic political machine is the deadliest menace to
free institutions and liberties in America. Nay more, we must
broaden the scope of the statement and include that same
machine to-day as a partner with its rightful sympathiser, Ger-
many’s autocratic despot, who is seeking to crush the liberties
of the world.
Just as Rome opposes the Allies because they arc fighting
for that world democracy which will some day mean the
paralysing of the political power of hierarchy, so the same
system by similar means is endeavouring to crush democracy in
America. More information on this and kindred subjects can be
gleaned from “The Menace," an educational journal published
at Aurora, Missouri, in the interests of fundamental democracy.
Wholly Set Up and Printed in Australia,
Reprinted by Varleys Prop. Ltd., Prince’s Bridge, Melbourne,
from the American Edition.
