

THE VALUE OF
Froebel's Philosophy
AND THE
KINDERGARTEN
System * of * Education.
LECTURE BY
W. cJ. Colville,
Delivered in School of Arts, Pitt Street, Sydney,
September 29fch, 1900.
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
Adelaide :
Printed at Wood’s Printing Works, 78 Pirie-street ’
1900.




THE VALUE OF FROEBEL’S PHILOSOPHY
THE KINDERGARTEN SYSTEM OF EDUCATION.
fj'l HE fundamental principles upon which Froebel founded
I his celebrated system of education are largely summed up
in the phrase, inner connection between the pupil’s
mind and the objects of study. Professor Hailmann,
in his admirable English translation of Froebel’s German text,
says that, unlike Pestalozzi, Froebel was a philosopher. Pes-
talozzi struggled to make all education begin with immediate
perception; while Froebel insisted, as an educational reformer,
upon what the Germans call the developing method. Inner
connection is the law of development, the principle of evolution
Froebel’s chief aim is to educate every pupil through self-
activity ; the pupil thereby unfolds his will-power in addition to
his sense-perception, and by this method arrives* at reasonable
thinking, which is the culmination of self-activity. Children
must begin with what they can easily grasp, and also with
something attractive to them. The child must become his own
master, and to that end all activities in play must be intelligently
related to the orderly growth of his mind.
It may be most truthfully said that the Kindergarten method
of teaching so far identifies work and play that the two become
inseparable. By work we ordinarily mean the pursuance of some
task imposed upon us by others, while byplay we signify such occu-
pation as we voluntarily take up. In play, children reveal their
original power, and manifest their own proclivities and inclina-
tions ; therefore it is absolutely necessary to observe children
at their games, rather than when following stated lessons, if we
desire to discover their dominant characteristics and special
aptitudes. There are two selves in every child—one peculiar,
making him different from all others, and seemingly hostile to
them, because founded on short-sighted egotism ; the other
reasonable, unselfish and universal, loving truth, beauty and
holiness. This latter self, though it appears second in the order
of evolution, is first in involution; and it is this real self,
common to all humanity, which we often designate the higher
self of the human race, to which every genuine educator must
make a direct appeal in the case of every single child. Both
selves are clearly revealed in play, and it is the proper work of
an organised system of education to give all children the fullest
PTi 3
RY 0f
MAY 1993 *
.-*> /


possible encouragement to unfold the higher and subjugate the
lower self.
Self-conquest is rightly styled the solid basis of true freedom.
It was Froebel’s remarkable insight into the unfolding of
rational selfhood which enabled him to organise that charming
method of infant education to which he gave the name of
Kindergarten. Pestalozzi expressed the noble sentiment that
all children should be educated, for he said truly that all are
children of the one God, and wo are all born for an infinite
career. On the basis of such a proposition, we can rationally
erect a public school system of education developing the intel-
lect to master all the sciences, which are the accumulated
wisdom of our race. Every child should certainly enjoy some
of the advantages of this intellectual training, in addition to
distinctly moral education, and also training in some special
industrial cause.
Froebel fully agrees with these universal propositions, but
has gone much further than his predecessors in the matter of
method ; for he has devised an efficient means for securing the
development of children between the ages of three and six, a
period when they are not ready for conventional schpol studies.
Froebel pays great attention to educating those feelings which
are the germs of intellect and will. Clear ideas and useful
deeds exist as undefined sentiments, before they are expressed
as clear conceptions of the will and intellect. Though entirely
free from theological dogmatism, Froebel’s philosophy is deeply
religious, for he sees that physical nature and human history are
clearly established on a Divine Unity which is not only a
creative energy, but an active providence. Froebel so conceives
of God, that he sees Deity as the principle of truth in the
universe. One of the greatest merits of his system is that it
furnishes a profound philosophy for teachers, whilst most
pedagogic works furnish only a code of management for a school-
room.
Froebel’s view bf the world is in substantial agreement with
all spiritual, as opposed to material, systems of philosophy. A
right view of the world around us is a perpetual stimulant to
healthy thought, for it is ever prompting us to reflect on facts
or events which are immediately before us, and we are led by
this contemplation to discover the relation always existing
between ever-changing phenomena and the ultimate principle of
the universe. Such a philosophy is a sure antidote to all
tendencies on the part of teachers to sink into dead formalism,
or to indulge in undue reiteration of simple axioms which ail but
the feeble-minded can readily grasp without such incessant
repetition. The Kindergarten teacher can always enjoy the
games and lessons with the children, and need never look upon
the work of teaching as an arduous or unpleasant duty.
In his ‘Education jf Man,’ Froebel says that eternal law
lives and reigns in all things. This universal law is necessarily
based on an all-pervading, living, eternal unity. This unity is
God, from whom all things proceed. <>'od is the primal source


of all things, for God lives and reigns in all. Things exist only
by means of the divine effluence that lives in them, and which
is the essence of them. The destiny and life-work of all things
is to unfold their essence ; it is the special destiny and life-work
of a human being, who is intelligent and rational, to become
vividly conscious of the divine essence within him, and thus
clearly conscious of his destiny and life-work, which must be
accomplished with self-determination and freedom. We may
here remark that this conception agrees very closely with
Swedenborg’s entire philosophy, and also with the views
expressed in recent years by the great naturalist, Alfred Russel
Wallace, especially in the concluding chapter of his celebrated
work enticled ‘Darwinism.’ It may further be remarked that
an essential agreement can be traced between Froebel and
Herbert Spencer in connec ion with this fundamental principle
of unification, though it must be frankly admitted that Spencer’s
theory of education appeals less to the spiritual consciousness of
humanity than does that of the ‘Kindergarten father,’ which
was the title lovingly given to Froebel by multitudes who had
derived great benefit from a study and practice of his natural
methods.
To be wise is the highest aim of man ; to educate oneself and
others with consciousness, freedom, and self-determination is a
twofold achievement of wisdom; it begins with the earliest
appearance of man upon earth, but is only manifestud with the
first appearance of full human self-consciousness. The work of
education must ever be to unfold the divine essence of man, so
that man should be raised into free conscious obedience to the
divine life principle, and become a free representation thereof.
True education leads man to see and know the divine,
spiritual, eternal principle which animates and constitutes the
essence of nature, wherein it is permanently manifested; it
should express and demonstrate that one law reigns and governs
universally. Education should lead and guide every man to
clearness concerning and in himself, to peace with nature, and
unity with God. The inner essence of things is recognised only
by the innermost spirit of man ; the outward forms of nature
must be observed by means of external manifestation, but the inner
being is revealed through its outward expressions. In conse-
quence of this, all instruction and training start from the outer
manifestation of man and things, and proceeding from the outer
act upon the inner.
The foregoing statement suffices to show that herein is a
fundamental agreement between the systems of Froebel and
Aristotle, though advocates of the intuitive system of Plato and
Emerson may find much to cherish in many parts of Froebel’s
philosophy, for ho continues, ‘Education should not draw its
inferences concerning the inner directly from the outer, for it
lies in the nature of things that always in some relation
inferences should l.e drawn inversely,’ Failing to apply this
truth, furnishes constant occasion for false judgments concern-
ing the motives of the young, leading to numberless failures in


the education of children, to endless misunderstandings between
them and their parents, and to much needless complaint and
unreasonable demand made upon children.
Education, in its first principles, should be passive, not
prescriptive. The undisturbed operation of the Divine Unity is
necessarily good, a necessity which implies that the young
human being seeks, as a product of nature (even if unconsciously,
yet decidedly and surely), that which is best, and in a form
wholly adapted to his condition, disposition, powers, and means.
This doctrine we readily see harmonises precisely with an
acknowledgment of human instinct, which in the normal human
being displays itself much as it does with the normal animal.
We willingly grant time and space for the normal development
of young plants and animals, because we have faith that they
will properly develop ; we give them needed rest, and do not
interfere arbitrarily with their growth, because we know that an
opposite practice would seriously interfere with their healthy
development. The child, however, is too often looked upon as
a piece of wax or clay, which a parent or teacher can mould
exactly as he pleases.
So strongly does Froebel insist upon encouraging a natura
instead of an artificial education of children, that he vehemently
denounces, in view of the original soundness and wholeness of
man, all arbitrarily prescriptive, categorical and interfering
methods, which he characterises as necessarily destructive of
human welfare. The term Kindergarten was originally adopted
to clearly set forth the idea that children should be assisted to grow
in educational seminaries, as flowers are helped to grow in well-
regulated gardens. The well-known gospel precept, ‘ Consider
the lilies of the field, ’ and the many references to children and
the ‘kingdom of heaven’ with which the gospel narrative
abounds, certainly suggest the precise methods of training which
the Kindergarten system is seeking to completely carry out. It
is admitted that Nature rarely shows us a perfect original state,
especially in man ; but for that very reason it becomes the more
necessary to assume its existence in every human being until
the opposite has been clearly shown ; otherwise a pure original
state mieht easily be impaired where it does exist, though con-
trary to our own expectations. In cases where there is unmis-
takable proof that the original goodness of the human being to
be educated has been seriously marred, then categorical man-
datory education is certainly demanded. But it cannot always
be proved that the inner being is marred, and the assumption
that it is, is always an unjust and mischievous one.
Prescriptive interfering education can only be justified on
two grounds at any time: it must either teach self-evident
truth, or hold up a light whose ideal value has been thoroughly
established by actual experience. But wherever self-evident
truth is found, the eternal principle of Truth will make itself
clearly evident to the unspoiled childish instinct. The eternal,
divine principle requires self-activity and self-determination on
the part of man, who is created for freedom in the divine


image. It needs also to be understood that a life whose ideal
value has been perfectly established in experience never aims
to serve as a model in all details of form, but only in essential
spirit. In its inner essence, the eternal spiritual ideal is man-
datory in its manifestations ; but it is so revealed, through the
unchanging order of the universe, that it can be apprehended
from within, not simply suggested from without. All education
must be double-sided, giving and taking, uniting and dividing,
active and passive, firm and yielding ; and between the educator
and the pupil, between request and obedience, a third some-
thing must invisibly rule, to which educator and pupil must be
subject equally; this third something is the right, the best,
necessarily conditioned and expressed without arbitrariness in
any circumstances.
The foregoing considerations are essential to an understanding
of Froebel’s system ; and when we remember that all ethical
precepts are quite as binding upon the teacher as they ever can
be upon the pupils, we shall see how perfectly rational and
thoroughly humane must be a system of education which
substitutes at all times the pronoun we for the pronoun you.
In the very simplest matters of conduct, as well as in matters of
great moral gravity, the use of the right pronoun is of immense
significance ; it makes an incalculable difference in the effect
produced by the utterance of a wise precept, whether the one
who utters it says YOU must wash your hands before dinner, or
we must wash our hands ; likewise an incalculable difference
exists between the implications conveyed in the words you must
always tell the truth, and we must always tell the truth. The
pronoun you substituted for we can be justly held responsible
for an immense amount of rebellion against moral order, because
a mere command given by one person to another, suggesting
that the weaker must submit to the dictation,of the stronger,
can never inculcate sound ethics, but must quickly lead to revolt
against authority and to a desire to escape, as soon as maturity
is reached, from all bondage to such external sway. It is only
by leading the child to perceive the truth and beauty of moral
order, to which the eldest as well as the youngest in a com-
munity must yield willing homage, that a system of education
can be upbuilt which will stand the test of all reasonable
criticism, and prove itself thoroughly compatible with the fullest
possible expression of legitimate human freedoip* Obedient,
trustful yielding to an unchangeable principle of right, to which
pupil and teacher are subject equally, should appear in every
demand of the educator.
A general formula of instruction is: Do this, and observe
what follows in this particular case from your action, and to
what knowledge it leads you. The general and the particular,
the external and the internal, must be made to appear so
perfectly at one, that we should consider the finite in the light
of the infinite, and the infinite in the light of the finite;
harmonising both in life, we should perceive the divine essence
in whatever is human, and seek to exhibit divinity through all


our human actions. The system of Froebel harmonises perfectly
at every point, both in theory and practice, with the essential
thought of man as inwardly divine ; and instead of resorting to
harsh coercive or punitive measures to drive out unnatural
tendencies to evil, the Kindergartener must ever seek to so
cultivate the essential divine element in the child. All
undesirable inheritances can be easily mastered by a persistent
calling forth of the innate goodness, which is ever strong to
conquer ill. Modern thinkers are now happily beginning to
divert their attention from heredity to environment, thereby
putting into practice practical means for bringing the very best
out of such children as are already in the world reauiring
education ; at the same time these wise educators of the rising
generation are doing a very great deal to prevent any handing
down to posterity of such abnormal tendencies as may now be
revealed in many instances.
The Strand Magazine, dated August, 1900, contains a
wonderfully interesting illustrated article detailing the results
of a new natural and noble method of child-culture, devised and
carried out by Professor and Mrs. Oelrich, of Council Bluffs,
lowa, U. S.A. This article has already excited world-wide
comment, and must have a widely beneficial influence upon all
parents, guardians, and teachers who allow themselves to give
due consideration to the beautiful truth which it so strikingly
reveals.
A Kindergarten differs in many pronounced ways from an
ordinary school; for instead of lessons, the exercises are called
plays, games, and gifts. Children who positively resent the
idea of lessons in playtime will gladly accumulate a vast amount
of highly useful information during recreation exercises; it is
therefore not the work itself, but the unpleasant idea connected
with it, which causes so many lessons to be distasteful which
could easily be made most agreeable. Duty needs to be substi-
tuted by privilege, which is a higher word than duty ; to be
allowed to learn is far better than to feel compelled to gather
knowledge. It is clearly possible to so combine work and play,
that all necessary information to equip a boy or girl for useful
manhood or womanhood can be obtained during the practise of
work which is delightfully amusing. The more easily we learn,
the more thoroughly we learn ; therefore the less liable are wo
ever to forget what we learn. Everyone who has watched a
company of bright, healthy children actively engaged in
Kindergarten exercises, must have been delightfully impressed
with the earnestness and gladness which even the youngest and
smallest of the children display in all their occupations ; and a
most delightful feature of the Kindergarten system is the perfect
friendliness which always prevails between the teacher and the
pupils, the teachers being like elder sisters and fellow-playmates
with the little ones. The children of the poor, who (particu-
larly in large cities and in crowded districts) are deprived of
many of the advantages which the very poorest can freely enjoy
in the open country, find the free Kindergartens already


established in Sydney, as well as in many other great cities aIU
over the civilising world, centres of great blessedness and use;,
and it is pleasant indeed to be able to conscientiously add that
elforts made to interest mothers in the Kindergartens are by no-
means fruitless, though as yet very much needs to be done to
bring the Kindergarten movement prominently to their atten-
tion. VV e shall now attempt to give a brief sketch of the actual
working of Froebel’s system in the active Kindergarten.
A very interesting work on the Mottoes and Commentaries of
Froebel’s Mother Plays has been translated from the German
and finely edited in its English dress by Susan Blow. In this
admirable book the reader can see at a glance how important
it is for every lesson to be presented, both practically and sym-
bolically, by means of a system which is at once instructive to-
the teacher and entertaining to the child. Some writers say
that when the Gifts and Occupations in common use in Kinder-
gartens are exclusively employed, the highest portion of
Froebel’s work remains unutilised. The Plays and Games in
which all join teach the children to ascend, through the world of
external nature, to the inner and higher life of Humanity from
outward things to self activity—from the material to the
spiritual. In the Gifts and Occupations children become con-
scious of their will as a power over matter, converting material
to use; but it is only in the Mother Plays that children come
to fully realise their spiritual sense; they therein become con-
scious of a general or social self beyond the individual self, and
then dawns the true spiritual ideal of human life. In songs and
pantomimes children use their self-activity ; by reproducing for
themselves the activities cf the social world, they put them-
selves in the place of grown-up citizens, and assume mature
modes of thinking and acting ; by this means they attain a new
consciousness of a higher self acting within each particular self,
and dictating the forms of politeness desirable for all to follow ;
and, above all, conscience begins to assert itself. Conscience
always demands unconditional obedience, for it makes known
the moral law, which is absolutely binding above all temporal
considerations. Moral law is altogether different from the laws
of matter and motion, because it relates to the living, the human,
the divine ; moral law is the law of self-activity, for no self-
active being can enjoy freedom except by conforming to it.
Froebel commenced his important philosophical treatises by
selecting the best elements already embodied in the German
systems of his day; he reviewed Emanuel Kant, Fichte,
Goethe, Schiller, and indeed all the greatest poetical and prose
writers of the fatherland. Froebel may well be called a trans-
cendentalist in the true sense, for transcendentalism has well
been described by an eminent man of letters as meaning that
there is something in our minds which did not enter them
through the gateways of the senses; but no teacher has ever
insisted more strongly than Froebel upon a wise employment of
the senses as a means of mental culture. The Mother Play,
which is I roebel s most triumphant achievement, accomplishes


the double purpose of revealing the onward march of reason in
the manifestations of childhood, and of holding up rational ideals
to childish imagination and affection. The Plays are all of them
very simple, but intensely graphic in every detail, and of a
nature which introduces the child at once to the practical
activities of the world around him.
The first Play is with the limbs, and tends to their natural and
therefore healthy exercise; it leads on from the simple use of
the members of the human body to a consideration of those
social positions in which all members of the human family must
perform their respective parts. Then there is a very pretty
play entitled The Weather Vane, intended for exercising the
joints of the hands. There are also songs connected with each
play, and these are invariably simple expositions of some
obvious natural fact leading up to an elucidation of some closely
connected moral problem. The Taste Song is a very fine illus-
tration of the author’s ingenuity, and serves to express in the
clearest conceivable manner his profound philosophy of child
culture. Froebel insists that it is dangerous to seek to produce
premature activity, or to interfere in any way with a natural
ripening process; it is dangerous, lie says, to seize unripe
objects, and most dangerous to set unripe things to
work upon other unripe things. Lead children to under-
stand that the use of what is unripe is dangerous to
physical, intellectual, and moral life, and destructive also to the
individual and to society ; whoever can make children obey this
truth will be found amongst the greatest benefactors of the
human race. The Flower Song introduces us to the sense of
smell, which is rather another aspect of the sense of taste than
another sense altogether distinct from it. A game entitled Tit
Tat exercises and developes the arms ; it is quite easy to play,
and it contributes to healthy growth, as well as to beauty and
grace; in this play clocks are introduced, the lesson of punc-
tuality is taught, and the great important point brought out that
we must not only do right things, but do particular right things
at the right time for each.
Another play is entitled Mowing Grass. In this play the
child’s hands at first are both at rest, forearms extended in
horizontal position, palms down, and fingers bent; the children
must now grasp the teacher’s hands, which are likewise
.extended, but with palms uppermost; the officiating mother
gives the child’s arms a movement somewhat resembling that
.made in mowing grass ; this movement exercises the elbow-joint,
and increases power to stand in an upright position. In
connection with this play Froebel calls attention to the injurious
effect upon intellect of looking at particular objects in detach-
ment from the whole of life. A high religious feeling of
dependence upon the incessant bounty of the hternal Being is
inculcated in this attractive play.
Other plays are called Beckoning Chickens, Beckoning
Pigeons, Fish in the Brook, The Target, PaLa-Cake, The Nest,
'The Flower Basket, The Pigeon House (intended to exercise


arms, .hands, and fingers), Naming the Fingers, The Greeting,
The Family, Numbering the Fingers, The Finger Piano, Happy
Brothers and Sisters, Children on the Tower, and many others,
all of which are accompanied by graphic pictorial illustrations
and beautiful but simple poetry, which in the German original
is even more euphonious than in the English translation.
Among the later plays those relating to special occupations are
of intense value; one entitled The Carpenter, another The
Bridge, another The Wheelwright, another The Joiner, convey
in Hie clearest manner possible some of -the most vital lessons,
with which all children need to grow familiar before they can
successfully embark on any useful career and so conduct them-
selves in the world as to be sources of blessing wherever they
may sojourn.
Though the Kindergarten movement is generally associated
particularly with the education of young children, even
university professors are now beginning to discover that
Froebel’s system is equally well adapted to youths and
maidens, and even to grown-up men and women. The almost
universal testimony of those school teachers who receive
children from the Kindergartens is that the Kindergarten
children are far brighter and more advanced as a rule than any
children of the same age brought up without its advantages.
Wide experience, particularly in America, where the Kinder-
garten movement has been widely extended for many years, and
is now in a very flourishing condition, is that it is by far the
wisest, humanest, and most successful method of child-culture yet
presented to the public. Now that it has gained a firm fopthold
in Australia, we hesitate not to affirm that its benignant
influence will soon be widely felt over all these southern lands,
and that it will prove one of the most influential agencies for
introducing a higher type of manhood and womanhood than has
yet become generally known. It is of course quite unnecessary
for teachers to bind themselves entirely by the mere letter of
Froebel’s philosophy, as the methods of conducting a Kinder-
garten are by no means rigid or inflexible; but the essential
underlying spirit of the work, being in full accord with nature
itself, can permit of unceasing elaboration, though it can allow
of no radical alteration. We now append a highly condensed
historical sketch of the noble work accomplished by Froebel,
gathered in substance from a splendid book published in
America by the well-known firm of Appleton, New York.
Froebel’s celebrated work, ‘ The Education of Man, ’ appeared
in 1826. The very title-page revealed the growth and develop-
ment of this remarkable book, just as we read in the expressive
countenance of a man or woman the life history of its possessor.
Froebel established his first educational enterprise at Keilhau
(a small village of about 100 inhabitants), in 1817. It was not a
business enterprise, in any sense of the word. Yielding to the
entreaties of his widowed sister-in-law, he had given up excellent
external prospects in Berlin in order to undertake the education
of her three boys. To these two other nephews were added.


Middendorff had brought up a younger brother of Langethal,
who himself joined the little band a few months later. Thus
the three boys and the three high-souled men—Froebel,
Middendorff, and Langethal—constituted the nucleus of this
remarkable enterprise, established wholly in the interest of the
new educational ideas of Froebel.
In spite of many difficulties and vicissitudes that would have
completely discouraged less faithful men, the institute grew
even beyond the dimensions originally planned for it. Froebel
had intended to limit it to twenty-four pupils and the three
teachers mentioned; but circumstances seemed to render it
desirable, and even necessary, to admit number of
pupils. Possibly this very success aroused the hostility of low-
minded men, which led to persecution by the Prussian Govern-
ment on political and religious grounds, and the scattering of
the thr e friends—an event which would have submerged the
institute itself, had it not been saved by the tact of Darop, who
joined the enterprise in 1823, and assumed control of it in 1833.
Froebel himself had left it in 1831. The persecutions on the
part of the Prussian Government induced the local Duke to send
Superintendent Zech to inspect the institution. Zech said,
among other things:
‘ Both days which I passed at the institute, almost as one of
its members, were in every way pleasant to me, highly interest-
ing and instructive; they strengthened and increased my
respect for the institute as a whole, as well as for its director
who upheld and maintained it, amid storms and care and want’
with rare persistence and with the purest and most unselfish
zeal. * It is most pleasing to feel the influence which goes out
from the buoyant, vigorous, free, yet orderly spirit which per-
vades this institution, both during lessons and at other times.
‘ I found here (what is never seen in actual, practical life) a
thoroughly and intimately united family, of at least sixty mem-
bers, living in quiet harmony, all showing that they gladly
perform the duties of their very different positions ; a family
held together by the strong ties of mutual confidence, and in
which every member seeks the interest of the whole, where all
things thrive in joy and love, apparently without effort.
‘ w ith great respect and real affection all turn to the principal;
the little five-year-old children hang about his knees, while his
friendly assistants hear and honor his advice with the confidence
due to his insight and experience, and to his indefatigable zeal
in the interests of the institution ; he himself seems to love in
brotherliness and fellowship his fellow-workers, as the props
and pillars of his life-work, which to him is truly a holy work.
* If i® evident that a feeling of such perfect harmony and
unity among teachers must in every way exert the most
salutary influence on the discipline and instruction, and on the
pupils themselves. The love and respect in which all the
pupils hold their teachers is shown in a degree of attention
and obedience that renders needless almost all disciplinary
severity. During the two days I heard no reproving word


from the lips of the teachers, neither in the joyous tumult of
intermission, nor during the time of instruction; the merriest
confusion in which, after instruction, all sought the play-ground,
was entirely free from every indication of ill-breeding, of rude
and unmannerly, and (most of all) of immoral conduct. Per-
fectly free and equal among themselves, reminded of their
privileges of rank and birth neither by their attire nor by their
names—for each pupil is called only by his Christian name—the
pupils, great and small, live in joyousness and serenity, freely
intermingling, as if each obeyed only his own will like the sons
of one father; and while all seem unrestrained, and use their
powers and carry on their plays in freedom, they are under the
constant supervision of their teachers, who either observe them
or take part in their plays, equally subject with them to the
laws of the game.
‘ Every latent power is aroused in so large and united a
family, and finds a place where it can t xert itself ; every inclina-
tion finds an equal or similar inclination, more clearly pro-
nounced than itself, by which it can strengthen itself; but no
impropriety can thrive, for whoever would commit some excess
would punish himself, the others would no longer need him, he
would be simply left out of the circle. If he would return,
he must learn to adapt himself, he must become a better boy.
Thus the boys guide, reprove, punish, educate, cultivate one
aqother unconsciously, by the most varied incitements to
activity and by mutual restriction.
‘ The agreeable impression of the institution as a whole is
increased by the domestic order which is everywhere manifest,
and which alone can give coherence to so large a family by a
punctuality free from all pedantry, and by a cleanliness which
is rarely met in so high a degree in educational institutions.
‘ This vigorous and free, yet well ordered, outer life has its
perfect counterpart in the inner life of heart and mind that is
here aroused and established. Instruction leads the five-year-old
child simply to find himself, to differentiate himself from
external things, and to distinguish these among themselves, to
know clearly what he sees in his nearest surroundings, and at
the same time to designate it with the right wqrds, to enjoy his
first knowledge as the first contribution toward his future intel-
lectual treasure. Self-activity of the mind is the first law of
instruction . . . slowly, continuously, and in logical pro-
cession it proceeds . . . from the simple to the complex,
from the concrete to the abstract, so well adapted to the child
and his needs that he learns as eagerly as he plays; nay, I
noticed how the little children, whose lesson had been somewhat
delayed by my arrival, came in tears to the principal of the
institution and asked, “Should they to-day always play, and
never learn ; and were only the big boys to be taught to-day ? ”
‘ In the last winter session the pupils of the highest grade of
the classical course read Horace, Plato, Phsedrus, and Demos-
thenes, and translated Cornelius Nepos into Greek. On the
day, of my first visit, when I looked more closely into the


elementary instruction, I could not suppress the wish that the
instruction might be such in all elementary schools. Now,
when I inspected the classical instruction, which has been in
operation only a very few years, I was compelled to admire the
progress and the intense thoroughness of the school in this short
time . . . and I was as thoroughly gratified by the instruc-
tion as by the discipline.
‘My experience was the same as that of all impartial
examiners of the institution. Of all the strangers who had
visited and inspected the institution, and whose opinion I had
heard, none left without being pleased, and many whom I deem
especially competent came away full of enthusiasm, and fully
appreciated the high aim of the institution and the perfectly
natural method it follows in order to attain its object as surely
and completely as possible. This object is by no means mere
knowledge, but the free, self-active development of the mind
within. Nothing is added from without except to enlighten the
mind, to strengthen the pupil’s power, and to add to his joy
by enhancing his consciousness of growing power. The
principal of the institution beholds with enthusiasm the nobility
that adorns the mind and heart of the all-sidely developed
human being ; in the high destiny of such a man he has found
the aim of his work, which is to develop the whole man, whose
inner being is established between true insight and true
religiousness as its poles. Every pupil is to unfold this from
his own inner life, and is to become in the serene consciousness
of his own power what this power may enable him to become.
‘ What the pupils know is not a shapeless mass, but has form
and life, and is (if at all possible) immediately applied in life.
Each one is made familiar with himself; there is not a trace of
thoughtless repetition of the words of others, nor of vague
knowledge, among any of the pupils. What they express they
have inwardly seen ; it is enounced as from inner necessity,
with clearness and decision. Even the objections of the
teachers cannot change the opinions of the scholars until they
have clearly seen their error. Whatever they take up, they
must be able to think; what they cannot think, they do not
take up. Kven dull grammar, with its hosts of rules, begins to
live with them, inasmuch as they are taught to study each
language with reference to the history, habits, and character of
the respective people. Thus seen, the institution is a gym-
nasium in the fullest sense, for all that is done becomes mental
gymnastics.
‘ Happy the children who can be taught here from earliest
school life. If all schools could be transformed into such
educational institutions they would send out in a few genera-
tions a people intellectually stronger, purer, and nobler.’
The above documentary evidence distinctly shows that
Froebel was not a dreamer nor an empty enthusiast, but that his
‘ Education of Man,’ like all his other writings, flowed from the
fulness of an earnest, practical life, that struggled in everyway
to utter itself productively, creatively, in full, teeming deeds.


This testimony distinctly shows that Froebel’s educational
principles and methods, like his practical educational activity,
were not confined to the earliest years of childhood, but em-
braced the entire impressionable period of human life. Suc-
ceeding volumes of the ‘ Education of Man ’ were never written ;
not because they were not clear and complete in Froebel’s mind
when he published his first volume, but because he was too
much taken up with efforts to live them out practically, against
untold hindrances.
The report of Commissioner Zech averted the immediate and
forcible dissolution of the Keilhau Institute, but it could not
undo the indirect evil effects of the Prussian persecution. The
little colony was soon reduced to straits that placed book-
publishing, and even book-writing, beyond the power of its
members. In the very next year after Commissioner Zech s
report (1826) the first volume appeared, but the institution had
not enough popularity left to induce a publisher to assume the
risk of the work, although there was still enough substance
and faith in the little band to enable it to do this independently.
Immediately after the publication affairs rapidly grew worse. In
1829 the number of pupils had been reduced from sixty to five,
and in 1831 Froebel was driven from his post, although the
enterprise was still kept up in the hands of friends.
The greatness of Froebel’s soul appeared at no time in a
brighter light than in those dark days of trouble. On April Ist,
1829, he wrote : ‘ I look upon my work as unique in our time,
as necessary for it, and as salutary for all time ; in its action and
reaction it will give to all mankind all that it needs and seeks,
in every direction of its tendencies and being. I have no com-
plaint whatever that others should think differently; I can
endure them; I even can (as I have proved) live with them;
but I cannot have with them the same aim, the same purpose in
life. However, this is not my fault, but theirs; Ido not cut
them off, they do it themselves. ’
What high and perfect faith speaks from these words! No
wonder that his contemporaries who still groped in the darker
depths of the valley, failed to see him on his height, and to
appreciate his higher aspirations. No wonder if even now
•many, who have laboriously climbed half-way up the eminence,
sit down in weariness and despondency, turn their backs upon
his light, and gaze longingly down upon the rank weeds that
gave him sustenance below. The light that holds, blessedness
they contemn because of their weakness, but the few imperish-
able rays that have entered their souls have irretrievably lifted
them out of the thickest of the darkness they cherish.
It would be a most grateful task to present a complete review
of Froebel’s great plan of education ; to show it in its complete
unity and perfect harmony; to sketch how he receives the
almost unconscious child from the hands of the Eternal, and
leads him surely and persistently to eager, conscious unity with
the Infinite Life of source and being—how, in early childhood,
he kindles the religious sense—the sense of complete, all-sided.


responsible kinship with all created things, and gently fans it
into a mighty blaze of universal good-will—how skilfully he
enables the child to gather golden harvests of knowledge and skill
from the burdened fields of experience and life, and again to
sow these in an intensely creative life of unwearied vigorous
well-doing for the sustenance and uplifting of generations to
come—how completely he blends in the bosom of a holy family
the interests of the individual, of fellow-men, of mankind, and
leads all to an ever-creative worship of an ever-creative God—
how he imparts to his pupils a thorough knowledge of the inner
connection and oneness of all things, and enables them to
handle and control in life and for life all that they find in life-
how he fills them with an eager thirst for ever wider and higher
knowledge, and with a lofty hunger for ever broader and deeper
efficiency in whatever practical calling may be theirs—and how,
by showing the intrinsic importance and indispensableness of
every calling and occupation, he plants in every human being
the feeling that on his efficiency depends the welfare of the
whole, thereby evolving a sense of inner, responsible manhood,
which is the measure of true worth in every station of life, a
practical philanthropy that holds every human being as a
beloved manifestation of Mankind, all equally in the bosom of
the Father. The reader who will thoughtfully and reverentially
peruse Froebel’s own book will find all these things far more
clearly and powerfully set forth than any review could pourtray
them.
In 1836, Froebel (in a remarkable essay on ‘ The Renewal of
Life ’) pointed to the United States of America as the country
best fitted, by virtue of its spirit of freedom and pure family
life, to receive his educational message and profit thereby. To
a large extent his prophecy has already been realized, for all
over that broad land, from Maine to California and from the
Canadian border to the Gulf of Mexico, Kindergartens are
■everywhere flourishing, and their number and efficiency prove
-continually on the increase.
