

The FOLLOWING is a ROUGH OUTLINE of the
Many Advantages that may refult to this Nation,
From a SETTLEMENT made on the COAST of
NEW SOUTH WALES.
IT S great Extent, and relative Situation with RefpeCt to the Eaftern and
Southern Parts of the Globe, is a material Confederation ; Botany Bay , or
its Vicinity, the Part that is propofed to be firft fettled, is not more than Six*
teen Hundred Leagues from Lima and Baldavia, with a fair, open Navigation,
and there is no doubt but that a lucrative Trade would fbon be opened with
the Creole Spaniards for Englifh Manufactures; or fuppofe We were again in-
volved in a War with Spain , HERE are Ports of Shelter and Rcfrefhment for
our Ships, Ihould it be neceffary to fend any into the South Sea.
From the Coaft of China, it lies not more than about a thoufand Leagues,
and nearly the fame Diftnnre from. vVrr 'Strfi I.7luiC'3 , " ■fiOil* tllC SplCe IJldrldi,
about feven hundred Leagues, and near a Month’s run from the Cape of
Good Hope.
The variety of Climates included between the forty-fourth, and tenth Degrees
of Latitude, gives us an Opportunity of uniting in one Territory, almoft all
the Productions of the known World; to explain this more fully, I will point
out fome of the Countries which are lituated within the fame extent of Lati-
tude, on either lide of the Equator ; they are China, Japan, Siam, India, Perjia,
Arabia-felix, Egypt, Greece, all Turkey, the Mediterranean Sea, Italy, Spain, South of
France and Portugal, with Mexico, Lima, Baldavia, and the greateft part of the
Pacific Ocean; to which may be added the Cape of Good Hope, &c. &c.
From this Review, It will, I think, be acknowledged, that a Territory fo
happily fituated, muft be Superior to all others, for eftablifhing a very exten-
five Commerce, and of confequence greatly increafe our Shipping and Number
of Seamen ; nor is it mere Prefumption to fay, the Country is every way capable
of producing all Kinds of Spice ; likewife the fine Oriental Cotton, Indigo,
Coffee, Tobacco, with every Species of the Sugar Cane; alfo Tea, Silk, and
Madder.—That very remarkable Plant, known by the Name of the New Zealand
Flax Plant, may be cultivated in every Part, and In any Quantity our Demands
may require; its ufes are more extenfive than any Vegetable hitherto known.


for in its grofs State, It far exceeds any Thing of the kind for Cordage and Canvas,
and may be obtained at a much cheaper Rate than thofe Materials which we at
prefent get from Rujfia, who may perhaps at fome future Period, think it Her
Intereft to prohibit our Trade for fuch Articles ; and the Difficulties that mull
arife in fuch a Cafe, are too obvious to mention, but are every way provided
againfl; in this Propofal.
With but a trifling Expence and a little Induftry, we may, in the courfe of
a few Years, eftabliffi a Commercial Mart on one Ifland, comprehending all the
Articles of Trade in Itfelf; and every Neceflary for Shipping, not to mention
the great Probability of finding in fuch an immenfe Country, Metals of every
kind. At a Time when Men are alarmed at every Idea of Emigration, I wifli
not to add to their Fears by any attempt to depopulate the Parent State ; the
Settlers of New South IVales are principally to be collected from the Friendly
IJlands and China ; all the People required from England, are only a few that
are poffidfed of the ufeful Arts, and thofe comprifed among the Crews of the
Ships fent on that Service.
The American Loyalljls would THERE find a fertile healthy Soil, far prefer-
able to their own, and well worthy their Induftry, JVhere, with a very fmall Part
of the Expence the Crown mull neceflarily be at for their Support, they may
be eftablifhed more comfortably, and with a greater Profpedt of Succefs than
in any other Place hitherto pointed out for them.
The very heavy Expence Government is Annually -put- to, for Tranfporting
and otherwife Punifhing the Felons, together with the facility of their Return,
are Evils, long and much lamented : HERE is an Afylum open, that will
confiderably reduce the firft, and wholly prevent the latter.
Upon the moft liberal Calculation, the extra Expence of this Plan cannot
exceed £3OOO. for it mull be allowed, that Ships of War are as cheaply Fed,
and paid in the South Sea, as in the Britijh Channel.
Had I the Command of this Expedition, I Ihould require a Ship of War;
fay the Old Rainbow, now at Woolwich, formerly a Ship of 40 Guns, as the
belt conftrudted for that Purpofe of any in the Navy, with only half her
lower Deck Guns, and 250 Men; 100 of which flrould be Mating; a Store
Ship likewife, of about 600 Tons Burthen, with 40 Seamen and 10 Marines;
and a fmall Veflel of about 100 Tons, of the Brig or Schooner kind, with
20 Men, both fitted as Ships of War, and Commanded by PROPER
OFFICERS.
The large Ship is neceflary for receiving 50 of the Felons, Provifions, and
Stores, with a variety of live Stock and Plants, from England and the Cape
of Good Hope. She is more particularly wanted as a GUARD SHIP, to
remain in the Country at leafl: two Years after her Arrival, or longer as may


C 5 )
be found neceftary, to protect the Settlers, Sec. The Store Ship is required
for taking an additional Quantity of Provifions, to ferve until we are able to
raife fome for Ourfelves; the Brig or Schooner is principally wanted, to
explore the Coaft on our Arrival ; for notwithftanding a convenient Place is
already mentioned for the Purpofe, Nature and Experience inform me, a
Navigable River may be found on fuch an extenfive Coaft, which when dif-
covered, fhe may then be difpatched to England with an Account of our pro-
ceedings; in the mean Time, the Store Ship may be fent to the FRIENDLY
ISLANDS for Inhabitants and ufeful Plants. The Settlement being thus
Eftablifhed, any Difficulties that may arlfe from the great Diftance of New
South Wales, are obviated in the Manner following The China Ships belong-
ing to the India Company, after leaving the Cape of Good Hope, and keeping
more to the Southward than ufual, may land the Felons on the Coaft, and
then proceed to the Northward round New Ireland, &c. or through St. George’s
Channel, and fo on to the Ifland FORMOSA for Canton. With a little Geo-
graphical and Nautical Inveftigation, this Paffage will be found more d&ASp. eafy,
and a fafer Navigation, than the general Route of the China Ships, from Madras
through the Streights of Malacca. Perhaps the Number of the Felons, after
the prefent are difpofed of, may not require more than two Ships in the Courfe
of a Year: The Expence -<&oao(»ta. attending the Tranfporting of them by this
Method, muft certainly be much lefs than by any other whatever; without
even the moft diftant probability of their Return : Every Ship may take
any Number of Felons, not exceeding 70.
NECESSARY IMPLEMENTS,
Iron in Bars, Iron Pots of Sorts, Grain of Sorts,
Forges and Anvils, Shoes and Leather, Filhing Tackle,
Spades and Shovels, Linen and Woollen Cloth, Gardening Tools,
Mattocks, Tin Ware, Carpenters Ditto,
Spikes and Nails, Thread, Needles, &c. Smiths Ditto,
Pitch Forks, Stockings, Shoemakers Ditto,
Axes of Sorts, Soap, Bricklayers Ditto,
Iron Crows and Wedges, Hatts and Caps, Mafons Ditto,
Saws of Sorts, Wheels of Barrows, Mills,
Large Hammers Seeds and Plants, Coals, as Ballaft,
Grind Stones, Articles of Trade with the"! Some Leaden Pumps, &c
Cutlery, Natives of the Illands, &c.J Scythes,
Cooking Utenfils, Window Glafs, Pewter and Earthenware.


