

THE
ABIDING COMFORTER.
A SERMON
PREACHED INST MARYS CHURCH, AUCKLAND,
ON THE EVENING OF SUNDAY,
3rd MARCH, 1861,
(Being the day of his Consecration).
BY THE LATE
Right Reverend John Coleridge Patteson, D-D.
Missionary Bishop of Melanesia.
RE-PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.




JOHN xiv. 15, 16.
“If ye love me, keep my commandments. And I will pray the
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He
may abide with you for ever."
There are, my brethren, in the lives of us all, certain times, as
I suppose, of special trial and anxiety, when the sense of our
weakness presses heavily upon us. When some heavy affliction
overwhelms us, or the difflculty of any work committed to us
appears almost insurmountable, when “ our hearts are troubled,
and we are afraid.”
At such times, when we are more than usually conscious
of our own utter inability to contend with the temptations to
despondency presented by troubles from without and the weight
of care within, the mind seems by God’s blessing to be furnished
with a more than ordinary power of appropriating and realizing
the words of Christ.
We naturally turn to that last discourse.of our Lord, in
•which He unfolded for the comfort and support of His sorrowing
disciples the counsel of God determined of old, by which He
would provide for the wants of His people, when Christ’s visible
presence was withdrawn from them. We read again and again
those words of consolation and blessing and peace, and as we
read we grow into a comprehension of the reality of His presence
among and in us ; and we know that we have Him with us still,
in greater power than ever, in more intimate communion: and
our hearts become calm, and patient, and collected: and we
feel that we shall be enabled to bear any sorrows that He may
commit to us, because we have the promise of the Comforter to
abide with us for ever.
If it were not so, how could we live through the trials to
■ iich all are liable, and under which so many are suffering 1
Lkness and pain and poverty are the lot of some, and what
It the consciousness of the “ love of God shed abroad in the
ftrt by the Holy Ghost” can “comfort them when they lie
ft upon their bed,” or when they “ eat their bread with care-
'Hss i” They know that they are in the hands of their Father
and that “ all things are working together for good
Hem that love God.”—Loss of friends, bereavement, loneliness
fall with heavier sorrow upon others—the flowers
Hie early faded, hopes destroyed, fond imaginations gone for
H no human arm to help them along the weary toilsome road
rest which seems so far away; but the word of mercy
to the dull grief-stricken heart, “ Thou art not alone • the


God of the fatherless and the widow is with thee ; Christ who has
endured it all and who knows thy present sorrow, is in thy soul
comforting and soothing thee by the blessed influences of His
Holy Spirit.” He is bringing peace, His own peace He is giving
to the mourner and the heavy laden : they see Him not, but He
is present by His Spirit; He is calling them unto Him, that they
may in Him find rest unto their souls.
And upon us all in our several callings this trial must come,
viz : that we have to lead a life of holiness and purity and self-
denial in the midst of many sore temptations, that we are
commanded to regulate our thoughts and actions by a rule
which it is very difficult to observe, that the attempt to do so
involves a continual struggle against our natural desires, that we
must wait (and perhaps wait long) upon the Lord for the
accomplishment of our hopes and anticipations of Best and
Peace.
What but the knowledge of the presence of God with us
can enable us to carry on this daily struggle? The sinful
propensities, the love of indolence and ease, procrastination and
inactivity in our Master’s work—these are ever present to us—
what should we be, if God’s Spirit were not ever present also, to
urge us to withstand these sinful inclinations, and to enable us
to do so? Our hearts might well sink down and die within us,
when we contemplate the duties assigned to us ; unless we could
cling to Christ’s own promise “ of the Comforter to abide with us
for ever.”
This is the great gift which God has given to us, the
complement, if we may so speak, of the gift of His Son Jesus
Christ. The Spirit had indeed of old communicated His
gracious influences ; for we know that John the Baptist and his
parents were “filled with the Holy Ghost,” that the holy men
of God spake in old time “ moved by the Holy Ghost David
prayed expressly “ take not Thy Holy Spirit from meand all
the saints of the Old Testament who walked with God did so
only by the grace and power of the Holy Ghost. The very
order of the words in the text teaches us that the Spirit of God
was already working in men’s hearts before the Comforter
given in the sense in which Christ then spoke to his
lor how could they “ love ” Him and “ keep His Commandments®
except by the Holy Ghost? Can we love in order to receij®
Him, without whom we cannot love : for it is “by the
Ghost that the Love of God is shed abroad in our
Can we keep His Commandments except by the Holy Glfl
when it is written, “ No man can say that Jesus is the
by the Holy Ghost ?” .
But the full plentiful outpouring of the Spirit, which m!
the special dispensation of the Spirit was not, until Jesus
glorified—when He had cleansed His disciples by the sacr;
of Himself, then the Holy Ghost lighted upon them. A


Spirit did not descend upon them while Jesus was yet visibly
among them, because the sacrifice was not yet offered. But
when they had been redeemed from their sins and were being
sent forth to dangers, and were stripping themselves (as an old
writer says) for the contest, then need was that the Anointer
should come. For, without the Holy Spirit we cannot love
Christ and keep His Commandments, and only by continual
accessions of grace can we grow up into the measure of the
stature of the fulness of Christ. And this grace He divideth to
each one severally as He will. God gave not the Spirit by
measure to His Own Son, because in Him dwelleth all the
fulness of the Godhead. It is not without the grace of the Holy
Spirit that “He is the Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus,” as He declares that in Himself the prophecy
was fulfilled, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He
hath anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor.” It is
indeed not of grace but of nature that He is the Only begotten
equal with the Father, but the taking of Man into Unity of
Person with the Only begotten is of grace, not of nature, as we read
“ The Child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom
and the grace of God was upon Him.”
But to all other than Jesus, the Spirit is given by measure,
and being given is more given, until each one according to the
measure which God wills, has his proper gift completed. And
so Saint Paul bids each one “ not to think of himself more
highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, according
as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith.”
So, as the descent of the Holy Ghost upon the whole
company of Christ’s disciples gathered together all with one
accord in one place on the Day of Pentecost marked the
commencement of that work which Christ by His Church should
carry onward to the end of time, we read continually in the Acts
of the Apostles of the “gift of the Holy Ghost” as the necessary
grace by which each individual also might be qualified to live
according to his profession after the example of his Master and
Saviour. He dwelt in the Apostles and Evangelists, men filled
with the Holy Ghost. He both sent Philip to the man of
Ethiopia and “ caught him away ” when he had fulfilled his
mission. In Ilis■ Comfort the Churches throughout all Judaea
and Galilee and Samaria were multiplied. He fell on the first
Gentile converts to the Faith of Christ so that they of the
Circumcision were astonished as many as came with Peter to the
[house of Cornelius. He separated Barnabas and Saul for the
work whereunto He had called them. He guided the Apostles
[assembled at Jerusalem to declare the liberty of the Gentiles.
fHe forbad Saint Paul to preach the word in Asia, and suffered
them not to go into Bithynia. He ordered and guided every
action and prompted every good thought and word. He was
|yith them in all places and at all times—the Spirit of their


dearly loved Lord and Master: and He has been present with
the Church of Christ ever since, animating, encouraging,
strengthening every faithful servant of the Lord—the energy
and life of the company of believers—convincing the world of
its infidelity, the parent of all sins; working in men’s hearts the
knowledge of the righteousness of Christ; proving that Christ is
stronger than Satan, that truth shall prevail over error, and
holiness over sin, that Christ has judged the prince of this world,
that He will show that judgement unto the Gentiles, and that
He will carry on his blessed work among all the nations of the
earth “ until He send forth judgement unto victory.”
What this power is, what strength is derived into the soul
from this indwelling Spirit of the Father and the Son, we learn
most fully in seasons of peculiar trial—when the world fails us
altogether, and no human friend can minister consolation ; when
no human wisdom can perfectly conceive, and no human energy
can adequately execute, the plan by which the object of our desire
may be obtained; when the issues of all our undertakings are
clearly seen to depend wholly upon the will of God, because it
is so evidently beyond our own power to control them—then it
is that the confession of our weakness most brings with it strength
from above, and that in the absence of all earthly help we have the
most entire assurance of support from the Spirit of God.
Then we shall receive comfort when we most feel the want
of it, then we shall be filled with spiritual gifts when in our
destitution we hunger and thirst after them.
And so when new responsibilities are laid upon us, new
gifts are also conveyed to us; when to human eyes great events seem
to depend upon individual enei’gy and wisdom and forethought,
the soul is upborne by the thought that prayers and hopes from
many hearts are ministering to the same end ; the Spirit is working
invisibly amongst us and in us all, and the outward
manifestation of His secret presence is given to every man to
profit withal.
Had Christ in His spiritual body still dwelt visibly on
earth, it might have been a blessed thing to have journeyed
into a far land, and there like the Magdalene to have fallen at
His feet, or like Thomas to have seen Him with our eyes
and adored Him as our Lord and our God; but how could He
then have been present with each and every one of His servants
throughout the world; how could the consciousness of His
indwelling power quicken the zeal and devotion of His
Evangelists now in the crowded city or the lonely wilderness, in
India and Africa, and among the vast multitude of China; or
how could we hope to “ bring again the outcasts and to seek the
lost ” ones, scattered throughout an hundred isles, unless we
knew that the power of Christ is present by His Spirit, “ pouring
down gifts abundantly upon men to the spreading abroad His
Gospel and the edifying and making perfect His Church 1” |


It is indeed a great and extraordinary grace of God to
have an unwavering faith in the constant presence of His
Almighty Spirit; yet the Spirit is present, though our faith be
weak ; and His grace is given, though we are most unworthy of
it; and more feeble the instrument, the more evidently is
the work, if work there be, seen to proceed from God, who will
not suffer our unworthiness to hinder this operation of His Spirit
in the hearts of His people.
Christ has said “If ye love me keep my commandments,”
and this is His Commandment that we love one another, and
this love must be more than affection to our relations, and
patriotism to our country ; For He has said again “Go ye into
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature.” And
since the whole map of destiny of the world was unrolled
before His spiritual eye when He gave commission to His
disciples to evangelize all nations, and since He well knew the
opposition that would be raised to this blessed work by the
malice of the Evil one and the sinfulness of men, since he fore-
saw that His servants must needs sink and grow fainthearted in
the loneliness of their solitary tasks, since He knew what it
must be to dwell among nations wholly given to idolatry and
heathenism, without God in the world; therefore He added
His blessed promise to cheer and sustain them with the cer-
tainty of the final triumph of Light over Darkness “Lo I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world.” He is with
us by His Spirit who is one with Him and the Father—“ always ” —
for the Comforter abides with us for ever. His word must
stand fast, His prayers must be effectual. He, God and Man is
Himself the Dispenser and Euler of the economy of the world;
for “ all power is given unto Him in Heaven and in Earth.”
And the Power seems to come to us, while we read and
meditate on such words as these ; but we lose our hold upon
them amidst the details of every-day life; and so by continual
Prayer and frequent Communion we need to renew our strength,
to confirm our faith in the abiding presence of Christ’s Spirit:—
And not by prayer for ourselves only, but by intercessory
prayer for each other, by United Prayer for the stability and
increase of the Churches, for the extension of Christ’s kingdom
throughout the world. He is praying for us, and His Spirit is
i ~*aking intercession for us, and He spreads the power of His
ayer over our unworthy petitions, and presents them all
icacious in His Name before His Heavenly Father. Pray
jrefore my brethern daily and fervently for the conversion of
jse poor islanders lying in darkness and the shadow of death,
it the Spirit of Christ will mightily sway their hearts to turn
jm from darkness into light and from the power of Satan
to God. They are specially commited to the prayers and


the charity of the New Zealand Church. And pray forme,
called too young, as in years so in all else, to an office of which I
dare not say that I realize the responsibility"; that the Holy
Ghost may ever abide with me to comfort and guide me in all
doubts and difficulties, and that I may daily increase in God’s
Holy Spirit more and more, and may come at length to His
everlasting kingdom.
