

THE AUTHOR
OF THE
PEEP OF DAY
Being the
Life Story Of
Mrs. MORTIMER
BY
M rs . MEYER








THE AUTHOR OF
THE PEEP OF DAY






George Richmond. R.A del[?].
Chas. H.Jeens, Sculpt.
dfdgjlk tyt
y


gplHE AUTHOR OF THE
H PEEP OF DAY BEING
|§| THE LIFE STORY OF
_HImRS MORTIMER <& BY
HER NIECE MRS MEYER, WITH AN
INTRODUCTION BY THE REV. F. B.
MEYER, B.A. WITH PHOTOGRAVURE
PORTRAIT AND SEVEN ILLUSTRATIONS
RELIGIOUS • TRACT • SOCIETY
56 • PATERNOSTER • ROW




PREFACE
To how many of the readers of this volume
was Peep of Day the earliest book! I can
see our copy now, and would give much to
recover it from the waste of years. Then
came Line upon Line, Lines Left Out, Streaks
of Light, Far-off, and others, which were
eagerly devoured. These were the seed-
baskets of our childhood.
To recall these books, which were so care-
fully handled, which beguiled such happy
hours, which were read by sainted lips, and
gave us the first thoughts of God, is like the
scent of honeysuckle or the song of the lark,
reminding the wanderer of the old home-
stead, and bringing back the memory of far-
away years.
The Authoress had a genius for conveying
the things of God to young and opening
hearts, though in her case, as the pages of


her biography prove, the genius consisted
largely in her power of taking pains. It
was through her conscientious earnestness
in teaching the young children of the Day
and Sunday Schools within her reach that
she acquired the art of artlessness, the grace
of unaffected simplicity.
It is matter for congratulation that she
left behind her a considerable number of
personal memoranda, which have been woven
together and supplemented by loving hands,
and present an interesting insight into her
character and life-story. They also afford
not a few side glimpses of several well-known
and illustrious persons.
The main lesson of this narrative is that
the highest possible usefulness and blessed-
ness are realised when we yield our lives and
families to the service of God, and separate
ourselves from the fascination of the world.
This is the only safe clue for our mortal life,
and until the Peep of Day is exchanged for
Meridian Light, the Far-off becomes the Near,
and we need no longer Line upon Line, or


Precept upon Precept, because that which is
perfect shall have come, and that which is
in part shall have been done away.
That I have the honour of relationship
with the compiler of these memoirs is my
excuse for writing these words of preface.
F. B. MEYER.




CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1
PAGE
Childhood ...... 1
CHAPTER II
Youth and Conversion .... 13
CHAPTER 111
Friendship with H. E. Manning ... 30
CHAPTER IV
The Peep of Day ..... 49
CHAPTER V
A Round of Visits ..... 09
CHAPTER VI
The New Church at Belmont ... 83
CHAPTER VII
Married Life ...... 98
CHAPTER VIII
Gathering Shadows ..... 108


CHAPTER IX
PAGB
Archdeacon Manning—Death op Mr Mortimer 128
CHAPTER X
s
Broseley ...... 148
CHAPTER XI
Life at Hendon and Runton . . . 160
CHAPTER XII
Closing Days ...... 195


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Mbs Mobtimer . . . Frontispiece
Hale End, Walthamstow . To face page 4
Belmont .... ~ 15
Fosbury House ... „ 49
The Rev. George Collison . „ 62
Casterton Hall . . . „ 93
Casterton Church . . „ 99
The Rev. William Howells ~ 117






THE PEEP OF DAY
“ The dawning of the Saviour’s love on
the infant mind.”
How many of its readers have been
gathered into His bosom!


CHAPTER I
CHILDHOOD
It was not as an infant the Author of the
Peep of Day learned to love her Saviour.
She was captivated by the story of His
life, but her intellect alone received it, not
her heart. No wonder that in early life she
felt unsatisfied, in spite of many comforts
and advantages. But when the glorious
light of the Gospel shone into her soul it
became her ardent desire to draw the little
ones to their Saviour. It was her delight
to relate the story of His life to one and
another again and again, and thus to learn
the best way of repeating it. Will not the
teacher and the taught rejoice together
when they meet above in the Lord’s own
presence ?
Meanwhile it may interest some who
value her little books to learn something of
A


her own life and family, and thus anticipate
the future communing of saints.
Favell Lee Be van was born July 14, 1802,
and named after her young mother. Her
father, David Bevan, the eldest of seven
sons, was descended from Bran the Blessed,
and from Robert Barclay, the Apologist of
the Friends or Quakers. She was delicate
and fractious, shrank from notice, and loved
no one so well as her nurses, spending most
of her time in the nursery, where she would
sit quietly in a corner for an hour or more
at a time. Her sister Louisa, her senior by
eighteen months, was her father’s pet and
companion, and delighted in walking out
with him as far as she could before asking
to be carried on his back.
The delicate young mother had great
sorrows in the loss of two brothers to
whom she was devotedly attached. After
the death of the second she was anxious to
live in the country. The family had lived
in Russel Square, where a third daughter


was born. They had removed to York Place,
which was then close to the fields where the
children used to walk with their nurse. It
was in this house that an evangelist was
sent to them in the person of Miss Clara
Clare, a daily governess. She was a tall
ungainly person, untidy in dress and appear-
ance, but beloved by all her pupils. She was
clever, and taught them so well that they
liked whatever she taught them. She
brought the gospel, the full free gospel, to
the young mother, who drank it in as
eagerly as the thirsty ground drinks in the
cooling stream. She had not been to church
for years, since she had found the church
services chilling, and concluded that they
were not good for her though they might
suit others. Hence she read her Bible in
private on Sunday mornings. She had
hardly ever heard a gospel sermon. Once
she had been to Mr Cecil’s church when he
was pleading with his people to come to the
Communion. “You object,” said he, “‘that
you are not fit to come’—then, what are


you fit for? —neither to live nor to die.”
This reasoning struck her. Miss Clare
advised Mrs Bevan to attend the Rev. Basil
Woodd’s church at Paddington. She did so,
and was much pleased and interested.
Soon afterwards a house was bought at
Hale End, Walthamstow. The delight of
the children was extreme, and the garden
appeared to them boundless. Miss Clare had
to leave them, for she was supporting an
aged mother and an orphan niece. But she
went down to them at Walthamstow every
Friday, and remained for the night, thus
giving them instruction on two days of the
week. She did not confine her religious
teaching to their mother and nurse, for she
took great pains with the children. Her
stories of the Saviour’s life captivated
Favell, but they sank deeper into Louisa’s
heart, and led her to know and love Jesus.
This, she used to say, was her religion,
from first to last. A great change took
place in Louisa’s conduct. She no longer
gave way to passion, and she feared the


HALE END, WALTHAMSTOW


thunder no more, as she had been in the
habit of doing, for she felt sure that her
Heavenly Father would take care of her.
When the family were settled in their
new home, Mrs Bevan desired to continue
her attendance on public worship. With her
husband and Louisa she went first to the
parish church, but heard there only moral
essays. They next tried Woodford Church,
and other churches, but all with the same
result. There was nothing to satisfy the
soul. One Sunday evening, however, the
children’s nurse came in saying she had
found a very good preacher. This was the
Rev. George Collison, pastor of the Inde-
pendent congregation at Marsh Street,
Walthamstow. He was a man of command-
ing intellect, and a noble generous nature.
He was a scholar, perhaps even too schol-
astic. Listening to his preaching was an
education. He had a most interesting turn
of mind, and preached as much by his ex-
ample as by his words. He was a man of
unblamable life and sound doctrine. He


was so humble that he took delight in every
excellence he could discern in others, and
even liked to be surpassed in the pulpit and
everywhere. Sin, wherever found, gave him
the greatest pain. No one dared to repeat
any foolish gossip in his presence. His
dignity and benevolence were truly apostolic.
To have such a guide and director was an
unspeakable advantage to both parents and
children.
There was great joy at Hale End when a
little boy was born, the first boy in the
family. He was called Robert Cooper Lee,
after his mother’s father. He had the
sweetest temper imaginable, and so devoted
was Favell to him that she earned the name
of “Little Mama.” She was never so happy
as when she could sit near him, or do him
some little service. And yet when the
children’s nurse was called to do her part
with the baby, she refused. She liked good
preaching, but she did not profit from it.
She was indolent and self-indulgent, and left
all the care and trouble of the baby to his


mother, who was obliged to part with her.
The change of nurse was a great trial to
Louisa, for the new one was not religious,
though she was kind to Favell, and taught
her to repeat some prayers at night.
Every morning the children went to their
mother’s room, and she prayed with them,
and instructed them carefully in the Scrip-
tures. The knowledge they thus gained
proved a great blessing to them in after
years. The influence of Mr Collison’s sermons
continually increased, and the family became
decidedly religious. Louisa was specially im-
pressed, and studied her Bible diligently. Her
chief friend and companion, her dear sister
Favell, did not feel with her; but they both
liked learning hymns, and writing accounts
of the sermons they heard. They required
no urging to do this, and were only unhappy
if they had not done it well. They always
laid their copy-books on their mother’s table
to be corrected, and their greatest punishment
was for her to write at the bottom of the
page that they had mis-spent their time. Mr


Collison became a personal friend, and had
great influence with Mr Bevan, who showed
him much kindness and liberality.
In due time two more little brothers were
born, Richard and Barclay, and the girls were
moved upstairs out of the nursery with their
faithful maid Naomi. Their mother conducted
their education herself. She was up at six,
working all day long, teaching her children,
looking after her household, or considering
the poor, to whom she was ever most kind
and good.
Mr Collison desired the young people to
learn the Assembly’s Catechism, and he called
sometimes to hear them repeat it. The Scrip-
ture proofs it contains were of great use to
them. He also wished them to write themes
on Scripture subjects. It was an exercise of
this kind which first showed Favell’s talents,
and both surprised and delighted him.
Life at Hale End passed with great regu-
larity. The children’s chief delight and
employment in playtime was describing im-
aginary events, and this they did with as


much eagerness and interest as if the events
described had been real. Each took a part;
one was hero or heroine, the other regulated
the circumstances. Their minds were so much
engrossed by these scenes, and in planning
events, that they lived in a world of their
own invention. This favourite amusement
was disapproved of by their Uncle George
Be van, who was often at Walthamstow. He
was a worthy conscientious man, but much
opposed to such teaching as Mr Collison’s, and
disputed so violently with Mrs Bevan that
she resolved to speak to him no more on the
subject. She told him so next time he began
to argue, and to her surprise he then said
that he had changed his views and agreed
with her. He became a great blessing in his
father’s house and family, and used to preach
regularly to the villagers in a schoolroom
which his father built for them at Fosbury
in Wiltshire. The nearest church there was
at Tidcombe, a distance of two miles. The
people were very glad to hear the gospel; one
of them became an eminent saint. Her name


was Lizzie Barlow, and her frail body and
simple cottage only made God’s wonderful
grace shine forth more brightly.
It was not the day of railroads, but the
children at Hale End often enjoyed a change
of scene, travelling by short journeys with
their own horses. On these occasions their
mother always inquired wherever they stopped,
if any religious service was held in the place.
In this way they were sometimes much
profited.
Louisa used to follow her mother’s example,
and spend an hour every day in her own
room, reading and praying. At one time
Favell did the same, but she found the practice
too irksome to continue. She longed more
and more for a number of friends and asso-
ciates. There were few neighbours such as
she desired. There was indeed the family of
a solicitor, an amiable man, a widower with
four daughters, the eldest of whom had taken
her mother’s place. She was a devoted Chris-
tian, and found her happiness in religion and
in visiting the sick and poor and ministering


to them. But the habits of retirement and self-
denial which she practised herself were too
strict for her sisters to follow with advantage.
This made Mrs Bevan feel it to be a great
mistake to make the unconverted conform to
religious observances. She did all in her power
to amuse her children, and make them happy,
though she could not give them companions.
Mrs Bevan read interesting books to the
children in the evening, and often selected
poetry. Favell was quite arrested by Para-
dise Lost, but could not bear to think of the
sin and misery of this world, which it unfolds.
Intimate friends occasionally came to spend
the day—and this was a great treat. Speakers
for the Bible Society were entertained. Mr
Bevan took the chair at the meetings, and his
girls became collectors. Every Saturday they
kept school in the laundry for the village
children, whom they rewarded with bonnets
and tippets, and tea, and sometimes dinner.
They also visited them in their cottages.
Study was pursued with interest and alacrity
under good masters. A true lover of art was


introduced to them by his friend, Mr Collison.
This was Mr Dennis, a most interesting man,
full of knowledge and instruction. He took
great pleasure in meeting them at the Exhibi-
tion, and there teaching them the principles
of painting. He also helped Mr Bevan to
collect pictures, while Mrs Bevan felt an
ever-increasing interest in the Dennis family.
Favell did not draw and paint as did her
mother and sister, nor did she take the
pleasure which Louisa felt in botany and
mineralogy; but she read books of all kinds,
especially poetry. As children, their reading
had been very much restricted, but after read-
ing Sir Walter Scott’s novels with delight
they continued to devour works of fiction.
Favell, however, did not grow happier as
she grew older, and she cried bitterly on her
sixteenth birthday because she felt that she
was unprepared for the responsibility of her
age. More and more she longed to know the
world better and to mix more with its people.
The birth of another sister was a real delight
to her, and she became her devoted nurse.


CHAPTER II
YOUTH AND CONVERSION
A gradual change now came over the family.
Their mother had no taste for the world her-
self, hut she made allowance for young people
as having different tastes, and she engaged
a dancing - master to come to them daily.
Louisa remonstrated, feeling herself not
strong enough to be trusted with the accom-
plishment. Her mother, however, thought
otherwise, and said that it would be a pity,
and it would not recommend religion, if she
were more awkward than her sisters. One
day there came an invitation to a ball.
Louisa thought that accepting it would inter-
rupt her communion with God and disturb
her peace. Her objection was overruled.
The invitation was accepted, and the ball
was much enjoyed. The next morning, how-
ever, Louisa made a point of rising at seven,


and reading Doddridge before breakfast as
usual.
After this they went to the Woodford
Assembly, and were pleased and happy there
without any of the mortifications which they
endured later. They were received warmly
by their worldly neighbours, but as they had
not been brought up for the world, they
could not shine in it, and this was a morti-
fication to their sensitive mother. She took
them out as a duty, against her own inclina-
tion. The only note of warning which reached
her was from her brother-in-law, the Rev.
Frederick Bevan. He said, “ Beware, you
are putting your foot in a stream, the force
of which will carry you away.” She had
taken great pains with her children’s educa-
tion, and she imagined that the world would
have no more attractions for them than for
herself.
Mrs Bevan was mistaken. Even Louisa
entered into every amusement with the
greatest zest. A London season was next
proposed. Later, a house, 42 Upper Harley


BELMONT


Street, was bought. It was next determined
to leave Walthamstow and escape from its
narrow circle, leaving Mr Collison also, to
their mother’s great regret. The Hale End
house was sold, and one purchased on the
other side of London.
This was a very commodious dwelling called
Belmont. It was not far from Barnet, and
had been planned by Inigo Jones. It was
surrounded by pleasant pasture lands, and
besides large gardens it had a charming grove
with tempting walks. Extensive alterations
added to the enjoyments of this country
house. The fine hall was paved with snow-
white stone and adorned with rare busts and
valuable pictures, whilst cold air was excluded
by means of a glass porch. The space out-
side the porch on both sides was filled by long
ranges of beautiful flowers in pots. Some
fine cedars fronted the mansion, and pleasant
summer-houses were found in the grove.
After spending some weeks in Brussels and
Paris, where Talma was acting, the family had
no longer any hesitation in visiting the opera


and theatre in London. The only regret the
girls seemed to feel was that they had not
received a worldly education to enable them
to shine in society. Favell devoured books
with her accustomed avidity, but a feeling of
gloom and disappointment hung over her
mind, though she took great interest in
teaching her little sister historical and Bible
narratives.
In 1825 Louisa married a worthy man to
whom she was much attached, Mr Augustus
Bosanquet. This event greatly affected her
sister, who shed many tears on the occasion.
Looking hack on their past intercourse she
felt a thousand regrets, and seemed to
anticipate the dissolution of other ties. She
became extremely restless and unable to
employ herself, or to know what to believe.
She spent much time shedding tears alone
in the grove. She felt sure that earthly
things could never make her really happy,
and she sometimes prayed that God would
give her spiritual desires. The last time she
went to the play, it was with a family one


of whose members had scruples about going
to it, which were overruled without Favell’s
feeling any compunction.
About this time her brother Richard, a lad
of fifteen, shooting rabbits, wounded his hand
so badly that two fingers had to be amputated.
He bore the operation heroically, but the
accident was a great grief to his parents and
sisters. One Sunday morning Favell was
walking in the garden with Louisa and her
husband, and the conversation turned upon
the way of salvation. The sisters said it was
“by faith.” Mr Bosanquet held the doctrine
of “ works rendered effectual through the
Savour’s atonement.” To this Favell objected,
declaring that no man could be saved without
faith. As she knew only of an inoperative
faith, it was not surprising that she could
not refute his arguments. She determined to
examine the proofs of the instruction she had
received from childhood. At this period she
enjoyed going out as much as ever, yet she
was full of inward dissatisfaction which she
tried to allay by reading Leighton and similar
B


authors when she returned from balls at
three in the morning.
The end of May a little daughter was born
to Louisa at Belmont, and called after Miss
Clare. She was mismanaged by a negligent
nurse, and caused her mother great anxiety
during long hours of weakness and solitude,
for the family were away in town. When
Louisa’s husband was not with her to cheer
her with his company she felt very sad. She
now had all she had desired, but it could not
satisfy her; and her baby was born, she
thought, to the same lot. She told no one
the anguish of her soul at the memory of the
way in which she had left her God, and she
returned to Him with all her heart. The
sisters were much together that summer, and
Favell interested herself in teaching Scripture
History to the village school.
For some months Mr Bevan’s health con-
tinued to decline steadily. He complained
of severe headache, and sometimes hesitated
in his speech. He was, in fact, touched by
paralysis. The medical men thought his case


hopeless. Mrs Bevan’s grief and alarm ex-
ceeded all bounds. Her affectionate heart
reproached her with a thousand omissions.
With moving earnestness she supplicated
God for the prolongation of his life. Her
daughters shared her feelings, and were also
deeply affected. This great sorrow softened
Favell’s heart, and prepared it, as she said,
to receive the seed of God’s word. Happily
Mr Bevan’s illness did not increase, and a
quiet peaceful seriousness stole over her
mind. She could sit for hours in her father’s
room without weariness. He had always
appeared healthy, and it was expected that
he would have a long life. But now there
was a confusion of words and ideas which
made it difficult to discover his meaning.
His children preserved the strictest silence.
His wife waited on him night and day, his
brothers rallied round him, and his eldest
son Robert left Oxford in order to help
to nurse him. It was affecting to see
him surrounded by his family, dining and
sleeping in his chair, whilst only the


faintest hopes of his recovery were enter-
tained.
Favell felt acutely that she needed some-
thing which she had not. She longed to
comfort her mother, but she did not know
the source of true comfort. She saw the
importance of religion and began the
practice of reading some verses of the Testa-
ment every evening with her brother.
As the physicians prescribed change of air
for their patient, the family rejoined his
brother Frederick at Hastings, where they
were greatly cheered by his conversation and
daily visits. He took Favell to Ore, to hear Dr
Fearon, whose faithful preaching was much
blessed to her. “I have not known rest in
the world,” she said to herself, “but it is
promised to me in God, and there will I seek
it.” Her eyes were opened to her own sins and
shortcomings, and she determined to look to
God for all the help she needed to walk
consistently. When she confided her resolu-
tions to her uncle, he said, “You know you
must renounce the world. ‘Come out from


among them and be ye separate.’” She re-
plied that renouncing the world seemed to
her a very little thing, if by the world he
meant gaiety and amusement.
Favell now felt that she had hitherto lived
to herself, and laid her every scheme of
happiness on this earth. She perceived that
the spirit of the world is like a withering
blast to the tender plant. It was indeed a
comfort to her mother to find that Favell’s
heart was no longer set on pleasure but on
living to God’s glory.
Five weeks spent at Hastings wrought a
decided amendment in the patient’s health,
and a consequent improvement in the spirits
of the family; whilst they greatly benefited
from hearing Dr Fearon. He preached out
of the fulness of his heart from the treasury
of God’s word, and in so practical and spiritual
a strain as to make his hearers feel the reality
of the world of spirits. “To be the heir of
God,” he said, “is enough to swell the most
depressed heart with joy.”
In May 1827 the family removed to Brighton,


where the grand-parents were living, and
their youngest son Richard Bevan who rode
on the Downs with Favell. She greatly mis-
trusted her own heart; yet reading in the
Psalms how David, when surrounded by
temptations, thirsted after God, she felt that
the same God could inspire her with faith,
could enable her to devote to His service all
that remained to her of life, and could
empower her as His gift to believe habitually
and really in the love of Christ. She had the
pleasure once of hearing Rowland Hill, a
magnificent old man, with powerful voice and
mental powers unabated. The instructions of
her youth now proved invaluable, invested
with the attractions of novelty and yet with
the familiarity of long use. She began in-
structing her maid, and teaching in the
Sunday School of the Rev. H. V. Elliot, whose
ministry she attended with pleasure and
profit.
One of her great interests was her corre-
spondence, an occupation which increased
with the number of her intimate friends,


whose concerns and characters she loved to
study. She found a former acquaintance at
Brighton, Miss S. Williams, who had become
a great invalid, and who was most grateful
for her sympathy and visits. A very special
friend was Miss Marian Farmer, a most sincere
and faithful character, about her own age,
and quite devoted to Mrs Bevan, who had
watched over her from childhood. To be a
friend of the soul made friendship itself
appear in a new light. The words of Scrip-
ture now had fresh force. The Lord’s last
prayer disclosing His great love, and the 119th
Psalm disclosing the desires of the renewed
heart, appealed to her with new power. How
precious the Word which had been the con-
stant study of the Lord when on earth!
The end of July the family returned to
Belmont, rejoicing in the improvement in Mr
Bevan’s health.
Favell had been at this time so much fas-
cinated by Edward Irving’s work on Infidelity
and Babylon, that she went to hear him. He
was then in the height of his notoriety. In


spite of his wild appearance, strange ges-
tures, and novel doctrines, he pleased her
imagination. But her chief desire in life
was to be useful. Daily she went out
teaching or visiting. At home she studied
Scripture diligently, alone, with her mother,
and in the family. She began to form a
friendship with Miss Mary Hall, who became
her most intimate friend. This lady lived
in the neighbourhood, at Copped Hall,
Totteridge, and was the eldest of a large
family. Endowed with a captivating voice
and insinuating manner, she was the means
of many conversions, for wherever she went
she never lost an opportunity of speaking
of the Saviour with uncompromising faith-
fulness. As to Favell, she felt that the year
1827 had been the most memorable of her
life, celebrated, she trusted in Heaven, and
to be remembered throughout eternity by
her redeemed and happy soul.
At Belmont the family did not enjoy the
privilege of a gospel ministry, but when
returned to town they heard Mr Baptist


Noel, and afterwards Mr William Howels
of Long Acre. This great preacher was a
Welshman, of so original a mind, that not-
withstanding a harsh voice and peculiar
manner, he riveted the attention of his
hearers to the grand fundamental doctrines
he taught. His preaching was the greatest
blessing to Favell and to her sister, as well
as to her husband and their servants. Very
eccentric as a man, he was a profound theo-
logian, threw his whole soul into his sermons,
and had a wonderfully clear perception of
error in its very commencement.
The works of Thomas Scott and Cecil were
great helps to Favell. Scott was a very
cordial to her soul, and Cecil, she said, for
originality, was somewhat like a marble,
so richly veined as to obscure in part the
inscription placed on it. Whitfield and Irving
also deeply interested her, the latter with
his advocacy of a literal fulfilment of pro-
phecy and restoration of the Jews, doctrines
then considered visionary.
A visit to the Rev. Frederick Bevan at Carle


ton Rode was a great pleasure to her, visiting
with him from house to house, and listening
to his conversation. At home it was a great
delight to influence her brother Robert. In
after years he used to show the fragment of
one of her letters, and for more than fifty
years he used to keep the small worn scrap of
paper in his purse, with these questions :
“Do you ever read your Bible ? Do you
ever pray? Do you swear? Do you tell
untruths?” It was a real regret when the
little fragment, yellow with age, was lost,
the purse containing it having been stolen
in a crowd abroad.
Favell, whose heart was once set on London
gaiety, now could feel supremely happy when
alone at Belmont, visiting and relieving the
sick, and instructing all who came under
her influence. As a believer she felt like
the friend of the bridegroom with a new
delight in nature, gazing on the beauty of
the trees, the fields gilded with buttercups,
and the lilacs just losing their peach-blossom
buds in the more delicate hue of their flowers.


A few days’ solitude, however, could not
enable her, she said, to judge of the effect
of seclusion in life prolonged. Never in a
room alone, in our first years, it is long
before we spend a day alone; but if single,
we may come at last to live alone, no bad
preparation, perhaps, for the succeeding state,
“each one walking in his uprightness.”
Her heart full of gratitude to God, she
marvelled that once He had appeared to her
as a taskmaster whom she desired to banish
from her thoughts. Now she was always
happy wherever she was. She cheered her
mother, and visited her grand-parents at
Brighton. Never was wife more submissive
than the grandmother, whose true piety
enabled her cheerfully to meet the growing
infirmities of her husband. He was taken
from her by paralysis at the age of eighty-
six. “When cares come pouring in,” Favell
wrote, “faith is called into active service as
the proper nurse for the tormenting little
tribe, offspring of Difficulty and Reflection.”
Two new friends were now added to the


little band. Miss Helen Johnstone, a fellow-
labourer in school and hospital visiting, and
Miss Matilda Bowles, remarkable for her
great affection and perfect sincerity. The
latter had been converted some years previ-
ously by Dr Mac Neile. She received a letter
from Favell, June 1830, describing an adven-
ture she had when walking near Belmont.
“ I met a beggar girl, who told such a history
of herself, and who appeared so well behaved,
that I adopted her, and placed her with
Sally Harris, whom I visited at the doctor’s
request, and who is now recovered. The
girl’s name is Louisa Achsel; she is fourteen.
I teach her daily, and she goes to school.
Her father was a German umbrella maker,
and travelled in a caravan with Louisa and
her sister Tracey. He was a good man,
though not enlightened, and often talked to
Louisa of the Saviour. He died at Barnet
two years ago, and his property, £SO, was
claimed by the children’s stepmother, who
took them about with her from place to
place hawking nets and matches. Louisa


she treated cruelly, and finally turned out
penniless. The poor girl begged her way
back to Barnet, where she was received by
a tinker and his wife, friends of her father.
She had been with them four months, hoping
for a situation, and begging by day. Her
ruin seemed certain. Her willingness to
give up her liberty and submit to guidance
promised well.” The year following Louisa
had the happiness of finding her sister
Tracey at Brentford, and of bringing her
safely back with her. Thus both sisters
were rescued from misery, to be once more
happy together and carefully instructed.


CHAPTER III
FRIENDSHIP WITH H. E. MANNING
1830 was a year of riots. The condition of
the working-classes then was very grievous.
A pious old man at Fosbury related after-
wards how, as a lad, he could earn only one
shilling a week, and out of this he had to
pay for the washing of his shirt. Yet he
was not a rioter, but lived on patiently,
submitting to his hard lot, and full of faith.
Like Job, he had an unbelieving wife, but
his patience and forbearance overcame her.
She was so surprised at his returning her
unkindness by drawing water for her that
her heart was changed. Dear old William
worked with unfailing industry, and when
free would mount his donkey and visit other
cottagers to tell them of his Saviour. It
was a great distress to him when his fellow-
labourers were ungodly, and he used to


comfort himself by thinking how the Psalms
proclaim the justice of God as well as His
mercy.
In 1830, at Fosbury, a working-man with
a wife and six children was expected to do
with seven shillings wages per week. No
wonder there were riots. One Sunday even-
ing in November, when the family were
there, mobs of several hundreds were re-
ported in the neighbourhood, and hundreds
more at Vernon, two miles distant. Blazing
fires could he seen, and shouting and the
breaking of machines could be heard. Next
afternoon 200 men marched up the drive
with a paper they wanted signed. They
went off cheering, after having been given
refreshments, and shouting “ Bevan for
ever! ” They promised only to break the
machines which they thought would inter-
fere with their labour. After breaking five
machines they returned to work. From
another house the rioters were scared by the
fear of firearms. Afterwards the yeomanry
took fifty prisoners, pursuing them into


barns and stables, and forcing cottage doors
open, amidst screams of women and children.
Many were the sad scenes, as, for instance,
in one cottage, five little children under nine
in the chimney corner, the father taken, and
the mother gone after him. This poor man
was released, his family being respectable,
and his weekly wages were only seven
shillings.
Favell was not at Fosbury during the
riots. Christmas Day she spent at Carleton
Rode, in deep snow, no post for three days.
The weather, however, cleared enough to
allow of some interesting visits to neigh-
bours. At one house a Russian philan-
thropist was staying, Mr Yenning, who was
intimate with the Emperor Nicholas, and
who was made by him superintendent of
prisons and lunatic asylums. He had founded
a school for the children of Siberian exiles.
Called in by one of the officers, during a
mutiny, he addressed the ringleader, a ruffian
who boasted he could but die once, and had
no fear of death. “But after death?” said


Mr Yenning. “The judgment,” was the
answer. “ And have you ever considered
that?” Then Mr Yenning read John iii.
The poor man melted into tears and became
meek as a lamb.
Another visit was to Mr Bridges, the
humblest of men, who wrote a commentary
on Psalm cxix. It was a great pleasure meet-
ing Mr Oarus, Simeon’s assistant, a most
agreeable young man, thirty years of age,
very lively, with buoyant spirits, and fervent
piety. He possessed every requisite for
worldly enjoyment, but declared he had
never found satisfaction in the vain pleasures
of the world, though he had long tried them.
His manner was arresting, and his confidence
perfect, whilst he carefully explained every
idea so that the lowest comprehension could
grasp it, and talked on all subjects, but de-
lighting most in the best.
Another neighbour was Mr Bickersteth,
who had suffered great afflictions. Yet,
speaking of the cleansing blood, he was able
to say, “ Take all things from the believer
C


and leave him Christ, he cannot but be
happy. Give him all without Christ, and he
must be miserable.”
When Favell returned to town the sermons
of Mac Neile and Irving, full of power, majesty
and sublimity, were very strengthening to
her. Such teaching was delightful to the
heart, which, unrestrained by the fear and
unconstrained by the love of God, would
have been not only restless but wretched.
She wrote to her sister in Scotland at
different times: “Thank you for wishing
me to behold such beautiful scenes as you
describe. May it be granted before and
after life closes! May we trace together the
river of God, tread the everlasting hills, and
stand upon the glorious sea when these
bodies will be changed into His likeness!
Here we carry our uneasiness within us and
groan till delivered. Of all outward circum-
stances, perhaps our society affects our
happiness most. . . . Robert is improved by
his friendship with Manning, and seems
flattered by his confidence. The total ruin


of his fortunes does not lessen him in his
esteem. I greatly admire the candour of
Manning. It affords a good foundation on
which to raise the superstructure of truth.
We may observe this in many inquirers in
Scripture, such as Nathaniel, Nicodemus, the
Treasurer, and Cornelius. He lent me a very
interesting book, Whately On the Origin of
Romanism. The observations are most acute;
the origin traced to human nature. The
book invites thought, but brings no convic-
tion to the mind of its author’s vital piety.
I am reading the first volume of Robert
Hall’s works, his simple eloquence is a con-
trast to such a type as Melville. Cennick’s
sermons are profitable.
“ H. Manning joined in our plan of repeating
proverbs. We said our task at tea every
evening. He meditated on his proverb in
the daytime, and made observations on it
accordingly. His remarks are always acute
and refined. He seemed to like those pro-
verbs which praised diligence and knowledge.
I had several serious conversations with him.


I think his talents very great, his candour
and independence of mind singular, but pride,
I fear, predominates, the pride of virtue.
He studies the Greek Testament constantly,
and endeavours to discover the drift of
every argument, unbiassed by human judg-
ment. He is perplexed on the subject of
election. He read Mac Neile’s Sermons on
God’s Sovereignty and Fatherly Affection,
and prefers his acknowledgment of the
difficulty to the common way of denying its
existence, and viewing it only on one side.
“I enjoy rational conversation so much,
that I regret the little time that pleasure
can last. All human pleasures are trifles,
and their pursuit is the Christian’s bane;
his calling is to show forth God’s praises
in every situation. I agree with Manning in
liking the philosophy of history and the
biography of life. I like to stop and moralise
at every step, to review, compare, conclude,
and establish principles as I go on.
“ Henry Manning has been with us nearly
three weeks. He is reading Irving and


Coleridge with much interest. We have
conversations exceedingly pleasant to me,
but how far they are profitable is very
doubtful. He is uncommonly well informed,
and possesses a much greater capacity of
judgment than myself; but when the heart
is not under captivity to the Gospel, every
sentence must be received with caution. He
gives me masterly opinions on Coleridge’s
reasoning, understands metaphysics, and can
detect the philosopher in his reasonings. It
is not surprising that great mental endow-
ments displayed in actual intercourse should
engage the interest of the family. Yet I
feel there is great danger of giving too much
weight to these endowments. The melan-
choly tint which broken fortunes have im-
parted to his mind, increases the interest he
excites. I earnestly hope that he may be led
to devote himself to the service of God, who
has bestowed on him His every gift. My
hope is strong from Robert’s account of his
seriousness. He praised my accuracy, which
surprised me, because he is himself so accurate.


He is reading Campbell’s Ecclesiastical His-
tory, and examining the Constitution of the
English Church. He has been reading Irving,
holds him in respect, and admires his talents
and eloquence.
“Mr Manning dined with us. I heard he
was growing more religious. I think a
work of grace is going on in his heart.
He is deeply convinced of the vanity of
the world and the sinfulness of sin. He
is much interested in the Scriptures, from
which he has formed a very high standard
of religion. If he do but pray, he must
prosper. It is delightful to see him so
much humbled and sanctified, but he does
not for a moment think himself religious;
he looks very poorly, and is not happy.
He extols Barrow’s sermons, which I think
advocate a good cause, upon weak principles,
and uphold the stream instead of the source.
He told me an anecdote of Cyril Jackson
and Horsley disputing till midnight on the
nature of eternal life. One placed it in
love, and one in knowledge. When hard


pressed, Horsley exclaimed, ‘lf you are
right, what will become of me?’ From
that time their intimacy declined. ... I do
not like Whateley’s idea of the lot of
departed Christians as being an unconscious
sleep. He is a formidable opponent but not
an infallible guide.”
In another letter she describes her last
visit to one of God’s dear children whom
she had learned to know in London, Mrs
Gillow: “Hearing of her illness, I entered
the room of that dear saint somewhat
hastily. She knew my voice and beckoned
me to give her a dying kiss. Then she
whispered, ‘The Lord has been a good and
faithful Master to me,’ and thanked us for
all past kindness. I left her with a heavy
heart. She died four days later. Knowing
her has been a great blessing. Shall we
ever be like her? Yet why not? Her
God is our God, and she was of like passions
with us. It is minding earthly things that
lets and hinders us in the race.”
The family went to Fosbury in October,


and during their stay a small meeting of
Primitive Methodists took place, a society
founded in 1810 by a farmer named Hugh
Bourne. Their numbers in 1831 amounted to
37,000. The preacher had been converted by
our Lord’s words, “Except a man be born
again,” and had been seven years engaged in
the work, notwithstanding much opposition,
walking from village to village, sleeping in
the meanest cottages, and never preaching
during divine service. Mr Manning was
interested by the account of the meeting
with its earnest pleading.
A cold caught in the damp lanes visiting
occasioned such paroxysms of toothache
that Miss Bevan was obliged to have re-
course to Mr Cartwright to extract the
offender. Her heart was full of gratitude
for the subsequent ease, as she considered
suffering was the characteristic of life and
not the exception, and she realised how
hard it must be to glorify God on a bed
of suffering and death since the mind is
unhinged by pain.


H. Manning enjoyed discussions on pro-
phecy, and wished to be furnished with
texts on the Personal Coming. Though only
twenty-three he had a solidity of mind rare
at any age. He appeared to be striving to
enter in at the strait gate, though finding
many obstacles in the way. How all im-
portant the result of such efforts! His
father’s loss of fortune seemed to have
curbed the impetuosity of youth and the
ambition of his nature.
“ Do not suppose,” Miss Bevan wrote,
“ that I have been a principal agent in
arousing his mind. The work has been the
sole work of an unseen though all-powerful
hand, in a more than ordinary degree. God
knows how it will prosper, for how often
do fair appearances perish in the bud! How
difficult it is to reconcile the mind to such
a prospect in any particular case! Perhaps
it is well not to be reconciled to it. Samuel
mourned for Saul till the day of his death.
There is nothing to be done upon this earth
worthy of engaging our hearts but seeking


the kingdom, and inviting others to accom-
pany us. No other pursuit will bear a
moment’s rational investigation, yet how
apt we are to become enslaved, now to this
interest, now to that! What is it within
us which stirs us up to pursue trifles and
causes us to grieve or rejoice immoderately
for that which scarcely deserves a tear or
a smile? The sorcerer is abroad, deceiving
the dwellers upon earth, and, if possible,
the very elect, and causing them to take
many an unnecessary step which the Spirit
will cause them to retrace with shame and
sorrow. We need watch and be sober.
“H. Manning’s candour and calmness make
him a very inoffensive opponent in argu-
ment, and his logical powers make him a
very formidable one. I feel the overwhelm-
ing superiority of the importance of his
conversion to vital religion so deeply, that
I am resigned to merge minor differences
in one great common bond. Our last con-
versation was very serious. He remains at
the gate knocking; I hope soon it will be


opened to him. Meanwhile, his situation
excites my warmest sympathy. Reflecting on
his conversation I perceive he is in bond-
age to the law. I feel my insufficiency as a
guide.”
Few counsellors could have been found
wiser or more faithful than Mrs Bevan.
Nov. 24, 1831, she wrote to her daughter:
“Dearest Favell,—Do not be too anxious.
H. M. is in the hands of One who can guide
by His counsel, and fit for His own work
by His Spirit. Your grand concern is not
yourself to be tossed from Him as the
anchor of your soul. Too great interest on
the part of such weak beings as ourselves,
while hurtful to us, is ineffectual to the
objects of it. We must, indeed, look to our
charge, but not take upon us that which
God sees would be too heavy for us. While
we pray to Him to keep our minds in
perfect peace, let us be careful how we
meddle with subjects, or admit into our
affections, objects tending to disturb it. We
can relieve our anxiety and exalt its nature


by prayer, and by prayer be most helpful
to its objects.
“Do not be too anxious nor elated at bis
praise of your reasoning, nor allude to his
talents. The great and quiet work (if
begun) will be going on more surely and
suitably, without interruption from extrane-
ous things. He is in delicate health, and may
be unequal to much mental conflict. Time
lost, in his state of mind, is time gained.
The change would, indeed, be sudden from
inflamed ambition to deadness to the world.
His Master can furnish circumstances, suggest
thoughts, deepen feelings, what can not He do ?
And, if He does it not, there is a cause, with
which no anxiety on our part for His glory,
or for the best being of the individual we
hope will promote it, can interfere. ‘Be still
and know that I am God.’ Who knows but
that after being tempest-tossed for a season,
he may seek the service of his Master as
the quiet haven where he would be? Such
doubts as his may have made a Fearon
hesitate till thirty years’ experience of human


nature and of his own heart, fitted him the
better for his work.”
At this time H. Manning was perplexed.
It would be easy for him to take orders,
but by working at the law for a few years,
he could gain a competence on which to
commence a political career. He preferred
law to business. Speaking of early over-
cultivation, he admitted that one of his
First Class was the most mindless of human
beings, acquainted with a heap of facts of
whose relations he understood nothing. He
expressed surprise that Christians should
indulge in reading works of fiction which
he renounced on merely rational grounds at
first. Early in 1832 he entered the Colonial
Office, and after four weeks’ attendance, he
left it to take orders. He was delighted
with Mac Neile. He went to Oxford for
some months to be a candidate for a Fellow-
ship. He asked Miss Bevan to write his
character, which she did.
“He is the youngest son of the late Bank
Director and M.P., has been brought up


in luxury and ignorance of religion, was
intended for the Church, but when of age
refused to enter it, having a great desire
to lead a political life. He not only obtained
a First Class at Oxford, but also his examiners’
private testimony to the elegance and ac-
curacy of his answers. From that time his
mind was increasingly directed to serious
subjects, and he desired to devote all his
powers to God’s glory as alone worthy of
engaging the energies of an immortal being.
Possessing a mind prone to examine, weigh,
and debate with unparalleled candour, and
a frame uncommonly sensitive and impres-
sible, he needs, beyond most, the strength of
light and consolation derived from communi-
cation with advanced, gifted, and energetic
Christians.”
In May 1832, by her mother’s desire, Miss
Bevan closed her correspondence with Mr
Manning. She received a farewell letter, say-
ing that “to his admission into her family,
and more especially to the conversations and
correspondence with herself, he owed the


larger part of the feelings and principles
which would, he hoped, regulate his future
life.” He promised to observe every hint
which she had given him, and even sent
away some books which she thought objec-
tionable.
The same year he was ordained, and was
appointed to the curacy of Lavington by
Mr Sargent, a devoted minister, who died
of influenza six months afterwards. Mr
Manning remained with the family, and
married the sweet and fascinating Miss
Sargent.
The death of Favell’s excellent uncle,
Charles Bevan, led to much thought on
the subject of the soul’s departure. Many
a severe affliction seemed needful to prepare
the heart to meet death with joy, nor
would a reputation for religion suffice, such
as a decided line of conduct might easily
obtain from a shallow-sighted world. Visit-
ing her grandmother at Brighton, Miss
Bevan again cheered her invalid friend


Miss Williams, now mourning the approach-
ing parting with her brother, Mr R. Williams,
who was returning to India, and leaving the
young lady behind to whom he was engaged,
and whom, alas, he never saw again. The
stay at Brighton afforded many opportunities
of usefulness and interest. On one occasion,
in preaching, Rev. H. V. Elliot said he had
never been afflicted. This was her own ex-
perience, Miss Bevan thought, and “ yet the
dissatisfaction of life she regarded as a
minor source of affliction, and most keenly
felt in the absence of any other.” If Mr
Elliot could have foretold the loss of his
wife and his own heart-broken sorrowful
appearance, he would not have dwelt on the
absence of affliction as he did.
This year the Rev. William Howels died
from inflammation of the lungs, brought on
in a fit of absence of mind one night by
forgetting to close the window which he
had flung open, in order to gaze at the
stars.


FOSBURY HOUSE


CHAPTER IV
THE PEEP OF DAY
Her father’s promise of establishing a day
school at Fosbury took Miss Bevan there.
The house had been built by her grand-
father, Silvanus Bevan, with a stone portico
and paved stone walk all round, on which
Mrs Silvanus loved to take daily exercise.
The pure light air of the place seemed to
breathe a peace and quiet most soothing to
the mind, and all was simplicity and comfort.
Miss Bevan wrote : “ Dearest Mother, —I enjoy
my situation in this paradise beyond expres-
sion, nor have I felt one moment’s depression.
I am delighted with the plan of riding. I
go alone, and enjoy it the more for its in-
dependence. A few of these breezes would
refresh you beyond expression. How highly
am I favoured, every want more than sup-
plied, my wishes executed with alacrity,
D


myself received with pleasure wherever I
go. Indeed, I feel that an incense of praise
should be continually ascending from my
heart. The mothers have been desired to
bring their children to the schoolroom at
three. Few things succeed in the first
attempt. The work is the Lord’s —He will
provide.”
When the women assembled, she took
down the names of sixty - eight children,
explained the object of the school, and con-
cluded with prayer. The object nearest her
heart was that the mistress should be able
to explain Scripture to the little ones. They
took increasing interest in her own lessons,
which she prepared with the greatest care
and pains. She was disappointed to find that
her assistant had no idea of the comparative
value of things, a deficiency she charac-
terised as the mark of folly. She was,
however, much encouraged by the piety of
the gamekeeper’s young wife, Mrs Farr, who
loved God’s Word above everything, and lost
no opportunity of interesting her neighbours


in the school. Teaching the little boys to
plait answered well, keeping them good and
happy, whilst much trouble in reproving was
saved by giving and taking tickets.
The Peep of Day was published in 1833. It
was the result of long thought and study in
the work of teaching children the facts and
truths of Scripture.
Simple and small as it is, the book was a
work of very slow growth—the fruit of years
of study and of teaching. Taught the Scrip-
tures from early childhood by a devoted
mother, and sharing in the instructions of
an eminent minister and scholar, the author
received much benefit regarding head know-
ledge. But it was not until afflictions came
that she was led to embrace the truth with
her heart. Her one desire then was to
impart to others all that she knew and felt.
She tried to benefit every one who came
within her reach. She felt the importance
of the sound doctrines of the Gospel, and
she felt the necessity for the change of heart
which could alone appropriate the blessings


received by faith. Therefore she was always
studying the Word of God, and communi-
cating its lessons with all the freshness of
her own enjoyment of them. She taught
the household, she visited the poor, she spent
long hours in the preparation of, and then
in communicating her lessons to the schools
she more or less created.
The very simplicity of each lesson was the
result of very careful study and a Avise dis-
crimination in selecting what to teach and
what to omit. In fact, she regarded selection
as one of the most difficult as well as most
important points in tuition. Her papers
contain notices of her different lessons to
different people, and not the history of the
Peep of Day alone her baby book, as she
called it. In 1833 she writes :
“I took Peep of Day to Hatchard, who
undertook to publish it. Its Bible lessons I
had long been teaching and writing.”
The author herself wished it to be a small
volume, such as a child could easily hold and
easily read after the book had become


familiar by being constantly read aloud and
taught; but this, she thought, should not be
done till the child was four years old. She
often said that time was only lost in the
end by beginning education too soon.
An unusually retentive memory enabled
her to recall her own feelings from earliest
childhood and taught her how to meet them,
for she recognised as realities, perplexities
and difficulties which might only have
appeared childish to the learned instead
of pleading for sympathy and indulgence.
Long hours of patient teaching in the schools
she opened enabled her to realise the diffi-
culties in the way of learning to read. Mrs
Williams’ syllabic system, lately introduced,
was a great improvement on the alphabetic
teaching of ancient horn books, but Miss
Bevan invented the plan of large cards, now
in common use. She took infinite pains to
classify the sounds both of vowels and con-
sonants, also of modes of spelling, and she
made short and easy sentences as illustra-
tions and helps to memory. Scholars have


smiled at her phrases, but teacher and
scholar could better appreciate their value.
As she herself said, she wrote not for
scholars but for children, and if she could
make somewhat easier the road said never
to be royal, she was content.
Peep of Day was followed by Line upon
Line, whose old Testament histories were
most carefully selected as not only the most
important, but those most easily explained
and understood. Narratives requiring more
explanation, and which might have puzzled
very little ones, were afterwards taught in
Lines left Out.
Bible narrative she regarded as the best
method of conveying Bible doctrine. Her
lessons were living histories of people who
seemed yet living and all they did so fresh,
that the children, as they listened, loved to
express their own judgments and feelings
on the subject. Their whole attention was
riveted, but the lessons were never long.
When taking a class of women the same
method was pursued, and their hearts and


consciences were touched by Scripture narra-
tives, which came to them as if they were
new, and which touched and interested them
more than other histories. The idea was
thus suggested of writing a number of Bible
stories in the form of tiny tracts. These
were afterwards put together in a little
volume called Streaks of Light , and this
small book was a special favourite with her
brother’s sweet little Ada.
The Kings of Judah and Israel is an
admirable preparation for boys having to
pass Scripture examination.
The Captivity describes the succeeding
period.
The Acts of the Apostles is an exceedingly
clear epitome of St Paul’s journeys, and
excellent for examinations.
Precept upon Precept was a kind of ap-
pendix to Peep , and written to please lovers
of Peep.
The request of old as well as young to
hear More about Jesus suggested the little
volume so called.


Night of Toil, the story of the mission-
aries in Tahiti, was compiled with much
care, and read aloud chapter by chapter
before it was printed.
Light in the Dwelling was the fruit of
diligent expositions in the family.
The large reading sheets were embodied
in two small volumes, called Reading without
Tears, followed by lessons with little boys,
and called Latin without Tears.
The geography books, Near Home and
Far-off: Part I. and 11., cost her immense
labour, but she felt rewarded by the interest
they brought to the minds of young people
accustomed to regard their geography
lessons as mere strings of names.
The books have been revised since her
death by persons well acquainted with the
several countries and subsequent events, and
thus they have been brought up to date.
Since 1863 the Religious Tract Society has
aided in publishing translations of the Peep
of Day in at least thirty-seven languages
and dialects. These are in the order of


issue
Balbodh, Malay, Ningpo Dialect, Peking
Dialect, Shanghai Dialect, Singhalese, Canton
Dialect, Persian Urdu and Roman Urdu,
Panjabi, Yoruba, Spanish, Rarotongan, Hindi,
Gujarati, Foochow Dialect, French, Hun-
garian, Chefoo Dialect, Servian, Telugu,
Arabic, Tamil, Oriya, Kongo, Malayalim,
Umbundu, Korean, Mang’anja, Cree Ojibbe-
way, Matabele, Sechuana, Oriyan.
The Peep of Day was a great help in the
school. Not there alone, but in the cottages
the Scripture narratives were eagerly heard.
“ Oh,” said one, “ I sits and looks at her as
she is telling me all about it, as clear as I
speak now, and sure, how two very little
children talked about the Saviour at night
till they fell asleep.” She called herself a
gleaner in God’s harvest, not worthy to be a
reaper. The schoolhouse was very conven-
iently near the house, just across the road
at the end of the drive, and hard by was
the home of the dear old women, Lizzie and
Betty, such an old - fashioned cottage, with


an open chimney corner, a kettle or pot-
hanging over the small iron dogs which
served as grate, a wooden dresser and bench,
all in keeping with red cloak and black
bonnets. These two dames watched over the
children as they played in their playground.
Dear Lizzie took the trouble of begging
cabbage leaves from the Baililf next door,
and making warm green soup for little ones
from a distance.
On June 5, 1833, Miss Bevan wrote to her
mother from Fosbury, where she was under-
taking the establishing a village school:
“ I have written to Hatchard to hasten
the publication of my baby book. Should
the Peep of Day arrive, will you send me six
copies. I want it exceedingly, as the means
of directing the new schoolmistress how to
continue the course of instruction I have
begun. I teach the little ones a quarter of
an hour every afternoon. I have much diffi-
culty in getting voluntary accounts, Mais
cela commence ; they answer my questions
very satisfactorily. I have proceeded by


such slow steps that I only related the
Fall to-day.
“The chief end of the school is to instruct
in the Scriptures. I should lament that one
little child who had attended the school a
single year should be unacquainted with the
particulars of the Saviour’s death and resur-
rection. Yet the children from schools in
general cannot answer the most simple ques-
tion. Ten questions on each verse (as in
Hints to Sabbath School Teachers ), would
have wearied me, and failed to instruct
them. A teacher of Scripture must prepare
her instructions; this I wish to impress on
any mistress you engage. The gratitude I
feel for your labours I cannot express. You
are continually in my thoughts, and my
heart often lifts itself up to God in thanks
for having given me such a mother.”
Miss Bevan wrote again to her mother:
“It was my happiness to be properly in-
structed early by yourself in the right
method. You may exhaust your strength in
vain, unless you remember that the memory


is most faithful when the imagination and
heart are awakened. These children will
not forget the history of Joseph, which has
drawn so many tears from their eyes, whilst
dry questions on each verse would only have
wearied them. A Scripture teacher must
prepare her instructions. I should lament
if in a year’s time one little child should be
unacquainted with the particulars of the
Saviour’s death and resurrection. How
delightful it would be, twenty years hence,
to have brought up the young men and
women of three villages! But usually one
soweth and another reapeth. I feel grate-
ful for being in this sweet spot, lulled to
rest by nightingales. My evening ride is a
great refreshment; the poor men are work-
ing in their little gardens and the girls
plaiting. Mrs Farr’s company and example
I much enjoy. I never knew anyone delight
more in God, and yet be so little in her own
eyes. lam very fond of Lizzie, too. This
self-annihilation seems the distinctive mark
of a right spirit.”


The next school assistant was a clever
woman, who had been employed in the
parish school of Bowles the Poet; but in
after years she proved disappointing.
After inaugurating the school at Fosbury,
Miss Bevan opened one near Belmont. She
had the pleasure of meeting Dr Mac Neile and
of seeing Mr Henry Manning, who brought
his sweet delicate bride to Belmont, where
she captivated all hearts.
Miss Hall had the sorrow of losing a
favourite brother. He became so ill in India
that his only hope of life was in an immediate
return to England. As he paced the shore,
waiting for the vessel in which he was to
embark, he said aloud to himself, “It is
appointed unto men once to die.” A stranger
overhearing him, added, “And after this the
judgment.” These few words struck him
so forcibly that they became the means
of his conversion. He did not live to
reach home, for he died just before the ship
came to land. But he died in peace and
faith.


Miss Bevan wrote to Miss Bowles, “ God is
always turning the wheel of Providence.
We find matter for grief hidden in every
seeming good and a kernel of joy in almost
every evil. To profit from these vicissitudes
should be our endeavour and not to escape
them. Success comes unexpected as well as
failure. In such a world faith is the first
requisite for peace.”
In 1834 Mr and Mrs Bosanquet left London
and came to Osidge, which Mr Bevan gave
them. It was a bright breezy home, only
one mile from Belmont. Thus the sisters
were constantly together again.
One Sunday they went with their brother
Barclay to hear Dr Collison once more,
and very much they enjoyed worshipping
again with him, and listening to his well-
known voice which they had not heard for
ten years. He preached on the carnal and
the spiritual mind, and what the Favour
and Friendship of God are to His people.
After the service they entered the vestry,
where he received them with the warmth


REV. GEORGE GOLLISON


and benignity of a father. He paid them a
visit soon afterwards at Belmont. As he
spoke and prayed, it seemed as if St Paul
or St John were again blessing “the elect
lady and her children.” His health did
not allow him long to continue in his
charge.
This year news came from Fosbury that
Bettie had been taken from her companion
Lizzie, who displayed the same spirit of faith
and trust in her Bible as ever. She had
learned to read it in her old age. “Here
alone,” she would say, “is comfort, out of he
all is uncertain, but the more other things
disquiet me, the more this seems to comfort,
it certainly do.”
Louisa Achsel had been placed in service
at Fosbury. In process of time she married
a deserving young man there, of the name
of Cox, and went with him to Australia, where
they did very well.
One of the Fosbury school children, a little
girl of twelve, had been much impressed by
the hymn beginning—


“ High in yonder realms of light,
Far beyond these lower skies
Fair and exquisitely bright,
Heaven’s unfading mansions rise.’
After a fortnight’s illness, she died a very
happy death.
A very severe loss Fosbury sustained in the
death of good Mrs Farr. She was only fifty-
one. Deprived of her parents in early life,
and brought up by kind relations, she had been
much impressed by her aged grandfather’s
prayerful life. At twenty-eight she came to
Fosbury as the gamekeeper’s wife. Here she
learned to know her Saviour, and she desired
never to leave the place. Her grief at the
loss of children taught her to live a life of con-
stant prayer. She trained her children in the
fear of God, and spared no pains to do good
to her neighbours. When no longer able
to walk to the schoolroom and cottages, she
would ride her donkey, and always appeared
as a friend and comforter. In her last illness
Psalm lxxi. was often on her lips. When
her pain became excruciating she sought
strength in silent prayer. Her last interview


with Miss Bevan was very affecting. She
felt that it was the last, and expressed
her gratitude for the blessings received at
Fosbury. She was most devotedly nursed
by her daughter. In the sore trial of leav-
ing husband and children, she sought for
perfect submission to God’s will.
Miss Bevan hastened to sympathise with
the poor bereaved daughter. She also felt
much for her poor friend Miss Williams, who
received the sad tidings of the death of her
brother’s intended. She had followed him to
India to be his bride, but had no sooner
reached the house of his brother-in-law, than
she had been seized by spasmodic cholera;
so that, when he came to meet her, he met
only her funeral.
The year which brought these sorrows
brought also the pleasure of a visit to Hyde,
where Miss Bevan stayed with Mr and Mrs
Craig, her old friend Miss Helen Johnstone.
It brought also the refreshment of intercourse
at Belmont with the missionary Mr Groves
and his wife. He had proposed to her as
E


Miss Harriet Baynes, but had been refused.
Two years later, hearing that she had been
grievously injured and disfigured by a waggon
which crushed her face in a narrow Devon-
shire lane, he renewed his proposal and was
accepted.
This year Messieurs Roake and Varty
published Miss Bevan’s Reading Disentangled ,
a set of thirty-four large spelling cards illus-
trated with cuts, and arranged according to
the sounds of letters, rather than their names.
Countless imitations and adaptations have
since appeared of the same kind, none, per-
haps, so easy for little scholars to learn.
Writing to her mother on the subject of
education, she said : “ The ideas of a child and
of an adult as to the dignity of sacred subjects
are totally distinct. I write for children.
Were many things which are alluded to in
Scripture as familiar to us as they were to
those for whom the Scriptures were first
written, they would lose their factitious
dignity. ‘Two women at the mill’ What
should we say to two women at the mangle ?


“It is very important with children to be
familiar. If an allusion requires explanation,
the effect of the sentiment is lost to them.
I altered the words to the thief in order not
to stop to explain a kingdom. You can ex-
plain verbally much better than in a book.
I hope the children will soon leave me for the
Testament itself. Sermons and commentaries
are written for grown-up people. Do not
young children require help to understand
the Scripture? I have tried to adopt the
best plan for making an impression on their
minds. One of my scholars can now answer
any of the questions in the Peep. Her mind
before was all confusion, as is the case with
her companion, who is much older. lam
devoting much labour to every chapter of
Line. I hope the Good Shepherd may use
it as a crook for His lambs.”
To Miss Hall, she wrote: “What delusion
we labour under as to the favour of this
world! Eternity will dissipate it to all, but
faith anticipates the work of eternity. At
my conversion, I felt as one who has seen


the bursting of the bubble which he
was pursuing. The labour of the world
in general is as vain as it would be to
write without ink, or to work without a
thread.”


CHAPTER V
A ROUND OF VISITS
In 1836 the marriage of the eldest son with
Lady Agneta Yorke was the most important
event in the family. His friend, Mr Henry
Manning, wished him as much happiness as
he had himself. “More,” he said, “I could
wish no man.”
In July Miss Bevan set off with her
brother Barclay on a journey north. After
visiting Warwick Castle, and admiring the
beautiful trees by the river side, they paid
Dr Marsh a visit, and greatly delighted they
were with his heavenly spirit and conversa-
tion. They heard from his daughter the
way in which he had been led to care so
much for the Jews. Mr Simeon asked him
if he had a grain of humility? to which
question he replied that it would be hard to
say he had none, but to say that he had


any, would prove he had none. “Well
then,” said Mr Simeon, “preach my sermon
for the Jews at Stroud, where the people
expect me.” He agreed; but as the sermon
was taken by mistake in his box to Bath, he
felt in a dilemma. “What shall I do? I
know nothing of the Jews.” He set about
reading Romans xi. Just as he was going
up into the pulpit, he heard that his box
had arrived. Should the sermon be fetched ?
“No,” said he, “Mr Simeon shall not preach,
Mr Marsh shall not preach—St Paul shall
preach.” Accordingly he read Romans xi.
and commented on it. From that time forth
he laboured for the Jews.
Our travellers heard Dr Marsh preach a
missionary sermon from the text, “He shall
see of the travail of His soul,” and again in
the evening on the signs of the times. His
heart overflowing with charity, he appeared
the most undogmatical, unpositive, unexclu-
sive man possible.
The travellers rode from Derby to Bake-
well, where they visited the great cavern in


which David could have concealed his six
hundred men. A very kind welcome awaited
them at Keighley Rectory, from Mr and Mrs
Dury, whose love of Christ filled them with
love for souls, and made them think no
exertion too great to win them. There were
no less than sixty reformed drunkards in
the place. The curate had a remarkable
history. As a Sunday School boy, he had
been educated at the expense of some young
ladies. Great indeed was his astonishment
when they asked him if he would like to be
a minister of the Church of England? “It
is of all things what I most desire,” he had
replied. At first he received instruction only
in the evening after he had done his work
at the cotton mill. This was the hardest
time in his life, but he stood the proof, and
was afterwards placed under a tutor who
prepared men for ordination. He passed a
good examination, received ordination, and
eventually married one of his benefactresses.
Louisa Achsel’s sister, Tracey, was in the
house under Mrs Durys care at the time of


the visit, and a school feast took place when
all helpers and sympathisers were welcomed
to the gathering.
After visiting Fountains Abbey and Durham
Cathedral, the travellers proceeded to Edin-
burgh, where they heard Dr Gordon and “ a
young man, named Candlish, who read an
oration of a flowery nature.” A very in-
teresting Mr Robe preached at Dunkeld, in
the Abbey Church, on the Ten Virgins and
the joy of the angels over penitents.
The Scotch lakes appeared enchanting to
them. At Dumfries, they saw the statue of
Burns represented as a ploughman, having
just disturbed with his share the celebrated
daisy, his countenance lighted with poetic
ardour, and raised towards the muse of
Scotia, who is hovering near, ready to enfold
him in her mantle. Yet the subject of all
this honour died of mortification and dis-
appointment. Our Saviour beautifully said,
“Not as the world giveth, give I unto you.”
At Carlisle they enjoyed the privilege of
listening to Mr Fawcet his subject the


words of St James, “Let the brother of low
degree rejoice in that he is exalted but the
rich in that he is made low.” After speak-
ing of the privileges which should lead the
poor Christian to rejoice, and the considera-
tion of heavenly things, which should make
a rich Christian rejoice even in his own
abasement, he guarded the rich against the
indiscretion of spurious humility, which
dragged the poor man out of his station
and wounded his feelings by ostentatious
condescension, whilst he warned the poor
against the spiritual pride, which would
incline him to overlook his earthly in-
feriority, and often rendered religious
professors peculiarly disagreeable. Speaking
on Luke xvi. 2—“lf ye have not been
faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who
will commit to your trust the true riches?”
he thought in true riches there was an
allusion to the permanent nature of
heavenly riches, whilst those on earth are
like a borrowed property, revocable at will.
After viewing the English lakes, the


beautiful Fall of Scale Force, and Lowther
Castle, they visited Mr and Mrs Carus
Wilson, their Clergy Daughters’ and Servants’
Schools, and Casterton Hall. It was indeed
delightful to make the acquaintance of this
devoted family and witness all the good
they were accomplishing. Mr Carus Wilson
ascribed his conversion, under God, to Mr
Fawcet. Mrs Carus Wilson had been greatly
impressed as a girl by the piety of a nurse
in the family. Five bright daughters, a
governess, and three sons made a lively
family circle.
At Knaresborough, Mrs Stevens expounded
in a crowded schoolroom. Her dress was
simple, her countenance full of thought, her
voice very sweet though strong. She first
played on a small organ and sang beauti-
fully. She then spoke for more than an
hour on Eph. v. Her fluency was wonderful,
her discourse like a poem in manner, but in
thought and substance worthy of a philo-
sophical thesis. Her theology was highly
commended by Dr Mac Neile, with whom


they breakfasted, and whose conversation
and family prayers they much enjoyed. He
said much on the danger of compromise, and
seemed to think that the chief danger of
our days lay in this direction.
After her return to Belmont, Miss Bevan
went to see her old friends the Parises at
Wanstead. There she met a talented young
man who reminded her of Henry Manning.
She longed to try to influence him, but re-
membered too well her former experiences
to think of making such an attempt. She
felt that any one should be well established
in grace who would venture to follow a
restless, vigorous, attractive mind in its
wanderings, and more especially so a
woman, whose vanity is excited by inter-
course with gifted intellects. Mr Baptist
Noel was the guest one evening, and riveted
the company by his remarks. Newman he
compared to a steam carriage, and said he
thought most people had appendent minds,
and followed in a train.


A day or two later Miss Bevan heard of a
circumstance mentioned at Fredville by Lord
Barham that Mr Noel had lately sat by
Princess Victoria at dinner at Ramsgate, and
that she had asked him to define an Evan-
gelical minister. The Duchess of Kent over-
hearing his reply, had observed,
“Are such ministers despised in England?
They are honoured in my country.”
Later, Miss Bevan had the great pleasure
of visiting Mr and Mrs Noel in her old home
at Hale End, where they were living, and of
enjoying his conversation, full of gentleness
and instruction.
She was much interested by Henry Martyn’s
life, and in meditating on God’s dealings with
him and his long discipline. The process of
sanctification she felt was seldom rapid. His
case was one of negative trial, a contrast to
what befell Jonathan Edwards after the aston-
ishing results which attended his ministry at
one time. Henry Venn, she said, avoided a
train of evils by refraining from wishes whilst
Satan delights to close up the vista of our


brightest hopes and intercept our view of
heavenly objects. Is it not strange, she wrote,
that we should more readily believe God will
pardon us than that He will sanctify us?
It was a great pleasure to her but no sur-
prise to hear that her brother Barclay was
engaged to Mr Carus Wilson’s third daughter,
Agnes, and was to be married to her just
before his ordination to her father’s curacy.
In July 1837 came the sad tidings of Mrs
Henry Manning’s death. Writing to Miss
Hall at Pau, Miss Bevan said: “There is
nothing shadowed forth below that we may
not aim at enjoying in reality. We are
passing through a gallery of pictures. Every
landscape we admire is the portrait of our
own inheritance. Should we be eager to
possess the pictures themselves? The com-
parison, however, is imperfect, for there is a
joy in holiness which none but the regenerate
can conceive, and this is to be our principal
joy in heaven. Dear little Emmeline an-
swered me well the other day when, her
mother having given her some china cups,


I said, ‘ Are you now quite happy ? ’ she re-
plied, ‘ Things cannot make people happy.’
“In our service for others how liable we
are to err! A most complicated treatment
seems necessary for us. We cannot bear
being used by God above a certain extent.
We must often be laid aside to undergo
some necessary process, and become useful as
spectacles, to humiliate us, and not as instru-
ments, to flatter our pride.
“I met this remark lately. Our God is too
good to desire us to over-exert ourselves and
too great to need such service.
“Even the sight of God’s beautiful nature
is unsatisfying, except in connection with its
Author and His Word.
“The soul rises superior to romantic hills,
which are but forms of dull matter, and the
more enlightened the soul, the louder it cries.
These things cannot make me blest, no, not
the Garden of the Lord itself!
“ Newton discovered the attraction of
matter. The Bible discovers to us the secret
of the attraction of spirit which philosophy


cannot produce. I heard it remarked when
a Christian grows great in his own esteem
he is like the cauliflower wick of a candle;
his light becomes dim, and he must be brought
down before he shines brightly again.”
She thus describes two sermons which she
heard at this time: In one, though the voice
was painfully loud, yet the Christian’s hope
was so dw r elt on that her whole spirit was
stirred and her eyes filled with tears, heavenly
things were made to appear so real and the
Saviour so near. The other was possessed
of great excellences, and yet had a disposi-
tion to wander among the outskirts of truth
and to keep at too great a distance from the
central point of attraction, the Cross of Christ
—the application so vague it permitted the
formalist to escape untouched.
Her brother Robert received a visit from
his old friend Mr H. Manning, who told him
that going to hear the Rev. Harington Evans
was a sin, also that he did not agree with his
sister’s theological sentiments. To this Mr
Bevan replied that he did. Her heart indeed


rejoiced over this beloved brother and his full
purpose of serving God, whilst she mourned
over the inconsistency and foolish weakness
which had mixed with her endeavours to bene-
fit Mr Manning. She said that the Oxford
divines made the Fathers appear to advocate
oral tradition, —as they never did really, for
they constantly appealed to Scripture.
Experience had taught her that spiritual
intimacies with the other sex are very
dangerous, as nothing unites more than senti-
mental disclosures. She had noticed Henry
Manning’s name as one of the few members
of Convocation who presented the Address
and kissed the Queen’s hand. When he had
spoken for the Church Missionary Society
and had been admired, she had thought his
sentiments lamentable, for he had called the
Church of Scotland schismatic. “ Alas, alas!
those midnight letters! those private con-
versations produced,” she feared, “no good
result. But how could she expect that they
would? Had she sown in tears? No, in
much excitement, with much self-pleasing.”


How different were her feelings in review-
ing the past as regarding Mr Manning or Mr
Collison! The sight of her old pastor, the
sound of his voice affected her as nothing
else could. She dwelt with delight on his
incomparable character, his diffusive bene-
volence, susceptible feelings, and masterly
intellect. How seldom are such qualities
found separately, much less united!
She recorded at this time Dr Marsh’s wish
for his friends. May
A dying Saviour’s love
A risen Saviour’s power
An ascended Saviour’s sympathy
and A returning Saviour’s glory
be the comfort of all your hearts!
A visit from Mr and Mrs Noel was a plea-
sure; and this was followed by one from a
Syrian, who had come to England as inter-
preter to the Persian Princes, Assaad Jacob
El Khayat. He had been educated by stealth,
on account of Mohammedan prejudices. A
Greek tutor had given him lessons in a cellar
by means of signs, as neither understood the
F


other’s language. In this way the Greek
verb tupto, I beat, had been impressed on
his mind by bodily experience of the act in
contrast with that of pinching or stroking.
He was anxious to promote the education of
his fellow-countrymen, and had received from
Sir Culling Smith the promise of £lOOO for
the education of five Syrians.


CHAPTER VI
THE NEW CHURCH AT BELMONT
A most delightful prospect now appeared in
Mr Robert C. L. Bevan’s intention of building
a church near Belmont. He invited his sister’s
help in the search after an Incumbent. The
building was commenced in the same month
as the Coronation of the Queen. In reply to
an advertisement in the Record, a letter was
received from the Rev. Gr. L. Wiggins, who
had been eighteen years in the ministry
abroad. Further correspondence showed him
to possess all that was desired, health only
excepted. He was preaching at that time
in the village of Nettleship, near Sevenoaks.
There his future patron had the pleasure of
hearing him, and then of inviting him to
Belmont.
As a boy of twelve, though without religious
advantages, Mr Wiggins had been so deeply


convinced of sin, that he went to consult his
minister, who told him that he was giving
himself much unnecessary anxiety since he
had committed no awful crime. This, how-
ever, was no comfort, for the cause of his
sorrow was that he had loved the world
rather than God. He suffered much persecu-
tion from his fellow - students at Windsor
College. He was ordained to a large tract
of country in New Brunswick. After labour-
ing there thirteen years he took charge of a
church in Portland for three years, when
broken health obliged him to seek refuge in
England.
It must have been a trial to Miss Be van to
learn that her most intimate friend, Miss Hall,
was engaged to Mr George Morris of the
Indian Civil Service, and was going to India
with him. She wrote to her friend on the
announcement: “It is an art the Christian
desires to learn, not to pine after gifts with-
drawn, not to abuse gifts bestowed, and not
to clamour for gifts desired. Could we attain
this art, we should have learned gratitude.”


The marriage took place in January 1838,
from Copped Hall, afterwards the residence
of Sir Bulwer Lytton. Curiously enough,
the guests’arriving on the day fixed, had to
be dismissed, the bridegroom having neglected
to procure a licence. All re-assembled on
the day following, and everything passed
off well. Doubtless the separation from her
friend was much alleviated by the advent
of the new pastor and his family, and all
the interest of the new church and school.
The new schoolmistress was a kind, motherly
widow, named Dixon, with a promising son,
whose education Miss Bevan continued so
successfully that he obtained a clerkship in
the banking house.
The church, known as Trent Church, was
consecrated in April 1838, by Bishop Blom-
field, w T ho preached from Rom. x. 4, on the
occasion: “For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness to every one that believeth.”
He laid great stress on the heart being the
seat of saving faith—“ No 'place, in itself holy.”
Speaking afterwards of schools, he said that


some old ladies objected to them for fear
their maids should become as wise as them-
selves—no harm if they were, he thought.
He said also that he was teaching his
daughter Greek.
Mr Wiggins’ first sermon was from 2 Cor.
iv. 7: “We have this treasure in earthen
vessels that the excellency of the power
may be of God, and not of us.” It was
with feelings of deepest gratitude that his
spiritual experimental teaching was received.
The moment the service was concluded, Mrs
Bevan’s white silk bonnet might be seen
disappearing through the grove, lest her
thoughts should be distracted before she
reached the house. But the health of this
interesting preacher did not improve, as had
been hoped, and it became a matter of
anxiety to procure for him suitable assist-
ance.
The first baptism which was celebrated in
the church was that of Mr R. C. L. Bevan’s
infant son, Sydney. Miss Bevan wrote a
hymn for the occasion.


Behold, 0 God, the first-born son
Of him, who built his house for Thee.
If Thou his grateful service own,
A Father to his offspring be.
Oh may this infant son delight
Within Thine earthly courts to stand!
Here may his feeble voice unite
With Heaven’s unseen seraphic band.
Lord, see another parent bear
His youngest son for Thee to bless.
Oh hear from him each lisping prayer,
While brothers, sisters, round him press.
Father, look down with gracious eyes
On every babe we now present;
Make them joint heirs in Paradise
Who share this blessed sacrament.
May these, the first who in this place
Have e’er received the sacred sign,
Be first fruits of a heaven-born race
Baptised in heart by power divine!
A new visitor to Belmont was the Rev.
Alfred Myers, author of Both One in Christ ,
who came to found a Jewish Association at
Barnet for the well-known Society, and who
was afterwards appointed by Captain Trotter
to his church at Barnet. The story of his
conversion interested Miss Bevan so much


that she condensed his Both One in Christ
into the form of a little shilling book, which
she sold to friends for his benefit.
She was much cheered at this time by the
change which took place in the gardener’s
wife, living at the lodge, always a diligent
Bible student, and yet apparently a proud
Pharisee. A threatening of apoplexy was
made the means of transforming Mrs Wheeler
into a humble penitent, renouncing her own
righteousness, and listening with humility
and delight to the promises of the Gospel.
She declared that, if assured by all the world
she could have entered Heaven in her former
state, she could not believe it. Does not her
case afford encouragement to all who entreat
people to study Scripture, seeing how in a
moment God can open their eyes to see its
light ?
The annual Church Missionary Meeting at
Southgate took place in July, the Vicar of
Edmonton in the chair. One of the speakers
was a clergyman lately come, the Rev.
Thomas Mortimer, the popular preacher at


Gray’s Inn Road Proprietary Chapel. He
afterwards came to Mr Wiggins’ assistance,
and preached for him repeatedly, driving
down in the afternoon on purpose, whilst
continuing to take his own duty morning
and evening in town as usual. Miss Bevan
described him as a “ striking preacher, though
not so judicious a divine as Mr Wiggins.”
At the end of the year 1839, after a few
hours only of indisposition, the faithful and
devoted sister of Mrs Bevan died. Mrs
Bevan, happening to be in town that day,
had the consolation of being with her to
the last.
The year 1840 found the projected church
built, and the new schoolroom at the end
of the grove, also a faithful minister ap-
pointed. Yet the continued ill-health and
constant suffering of Mr Wiggins caused the
gravest anxiety. As a slight acknowledg-
ment of his kind help, Miss Bevan sent
some of her little books to Mr Mortimer.
She thought him a truly godly man, though
not one of judgment. During an evening


he spent at Osidge, she learned that he had
begun to serve God when he was five years
old, that he had first learned to pray during
a thunderstorm, that he had never joined in
worldly society, and had never entered a
theatre. There was a family gathering that
evening of children and servants to hear
Mr Mortimer’s exposition of our Lord’s
youth and growth “ in wisdom and in favour
with God and man,” and it was observed
with pleasure how kindly he noticed the
eldest boy of the family, aged twelve, whose
sudden death by drowning, the August follow-
ing, plunged his parents in the deepest grief.
In April, an assistant having been found
for Mr Wiggins, Mr Mortimer concluded his
six months’ ministrations at Trent Church
by exchanging duty with Mr Wiggins for
the whole day. He preached on the secret
of the Lord and on the multitude no man
can number, and administered the Com-
munion. Some weeks later, Mr Mortimer
paid Mr Barclay Bevan a visit at Belmont.
Miss Bevan, happening to come in from her


morning school, entered the library where
he was sitting with his daughters, Mary
and Harriet. He was at that time in very
trying circumstances, owing to the heavy
expenses entailed by the restoration of
Gray’s Inn Road Chapel, notwithstanding
all the efforts of Sir Harry Inglis and other
friends for his relief.
A deeply interesting letter, full of happi-
ness, was received from Mrs George Morris,
nee Hall. Her husband had been appointed
to the Judgeship of Midnapoor, but had
resigned it from conscientious scruples re-
garding the sin of administering idolatrous
oaths. Shortly afterwards an Act was passed
freeing the judges from this burden, requir-
ing only that witnesses should make as-
severations in the name of Almighty God.
This was indeed a most desirable change,
since taking oaths at all is contrary to the
religious doctrines of the natives, and actu-
ally prevented respectable witnesses from
appearing in court. The case of a Brahmin
was in point, who preferred to suffer con-


siderable losses quietly rather than appear
as a witness on oath which he could not
take.
Almost immediately after the passing of
the new Act, Mr Morris was appointed
Special Commissioner at Chittagong. This
was an office higher and better than the
one he resigned. The scenery there was
enchanting beyond measure, with fruitful
valleys, winding river, and a profusion of
lovely and sweet flowers, and twelve miles
from the sea. There were about thirty
Europeans. A chaplain was promised in
time, but the darkness was great. In one
of the valleys was a humble little chapel,
built by the Baptists, who were active
teachers in the country. Mr and Mrs Morris
heard a simple elderly man there address an
attentive congregation, some of the poor of
Christ’s flock. The few devoted mission-
aries in those parts were but as a drop
indeed in the ocean, compared with the
millions perishing for lack of knowledge.
A great joy to both parents was the dear


CASTERTON HALL


little blue - eyed son who had been given
them, and who had also been preserved
through fever. Alas! the next letter con-
veyed the intelligence of his death. Mrs
Morris was quite submissive, though much
grieved. The dear infant was taken from
them before attaining the age of three
months. She had been very ill herself, but
was trying hard to learn the language well
enough to teach the way of life to all near
her, especially the young. It was a delight
to her to hear her husband read Payson’s
sermons to the officers and others.
Fosbury could now be approached by rail
as far as Andover. The school seemed
prospering, and good Sarah Farr was tread-
ing in her mother’s steps; dear Lizzie
devoted as ever. “If we have the Saviour,
she said, “we have all ; if we have Him not
we have nothing,” and, “When the time will
come to die we know not.”
A visit to Fosbury was followed by one
to Casterton Hall—“the Evangelical Hotel,”
as Mr Bickersteth called it. It was pleasant


to meet there many devoted Christians, and
also to dine with Mrs Sedgwick at Dent.
Mrs Bevan’s condition at this time was
one of much suffering. She attended Trent
Church for the last time in September, when
she stood sponsor for the babe sent to con-
sole Mrs Bosanquet under the loss of her
first-born son. Miss Bevan wrote a hymn for
the occasion of this baptism, of which two
verses were:
Born to console a parent’s heart
In sorrow’s dreary day,
Oh teach him, Lord, the heavenly art
Of wiping tears away.
Teach him to speak of Thy dear name,
Who, pitying us forlorn,
To heal the broken-hearted came,
And comfort those that mourn.
As time passed, it brought no improvement
or abatement in Mrs Bevan’s complaint, and
a visit to London, with medical treatment
there, did but aggravate the pain. A pro-
posed visit to Brighton had to be abandoned,
and the health of the dear invalid continued
to decline without intermission.


It was Miss Bevan’s habit to pay daily
visits to her school. On Sunday morning
one of her nieces used to walk over to
Belmont to breakfast with her, and then
walk down with her through the grove and
hear her give her lesson. After that they
had a cup of tea together in the mistress’s
parlour, from which they could see what
the girls were doing, through a glass pane
in the inner door. The girls were not only
allowed to rest, but also supplied with tea,
so that they should not go to church fatigued
and inattentive.
Very interesting were these Sunday lessons,
and always carefully prepared. They were
generally on subjects easy to remember, as,
for example, the animals of Scripture em-
blematic of the wicked or of the righteous.
The scholars were desired to find as many
texts as they could on the given subject,
and not only to learn them, but to write
the first few words of each passage, and
where found, in a small book. Each girl
brought her book to Miss Bevan, who would


choose two or three texts to be repeated.
The pupils were so eager that some would
even bring as many as thirty different
verses. Some of them were very anxious
to learn, as were two daughters of a coach-
man, named Campbell, who lived in the
neighbourhood.
The mistress took great delight in forward-
ing any of Miss Bevan’s plans or wishes.
These Sundays were days to be remembered.
After morning service, and luncheon at
Belmont, there was the infant class for
younger children which the niece took, and
what delightful books of biography or true
histories were always to be found, and what
long talks in that kind aunt’s room upstairs
while she rested! Yet there were shadows
and anxieties, and cares of mind as well as
body, in that upper chamber. There on a
little table to itself was the well-worn Bible,
so diligently studied day by day.
In Miss Bevan’s opinion it was most im-
portant to instruct young people daily in
Scripture history, as the best method of


teaching them theology. She considered
that Scripture doctrines can he gathered
from the Sacred Narrative with more truth
and vividness, though with less regularity
of system, than from creeds and catechisms.
She took the greatest pains to interest both
children and servants in the Bible. She
would carefully explain, for instance, the
different rules by which God or man estimates
conduct. Thus Saul was deeply guilty be-
fore God for acts of disobedience which men
in general might have overlooked.
The morning expositions at family prayers
were the subjects of much thought, and laid
the foundation of Light in the Dwelling. No
wonder her lessons, so thoughtfully and
diligently prepared by daily Scripture study,
were delightful, short,—indeed, they always
seemed too short, but full of instruction
and point. How profitable were her con-
stant visits to the sick and poor, and how
unremitting her efforts in devising and pro-
moting plans for their comfort and welfare,
such as clubs and libraries.
G


CHAPTER VII
MARRIED LIFE
Miss Bevan had seen Mr Mortimer again
for a few moments only, at another Church
Missionary Meeting at Southgate; but he
did not remain to speak. He knew that
Miss Bevan was much interested in him, but
that she had been counselled not to engage
herself till he could be released from the
responsibility of the Gray’s Inn Road Chapel
obligations. Though she had allowed her-
self to be thus counselled, she was much
pained to hear of his feelings of regret, and
she suffered great anxiety in consequence.
Finally, she received a visit from him in the
schoolhouse, when he entreated her so pas-
sionately to accept him that she consented.
When she spoke to her mother on the
subject, Mrs Bevan was not surprised. “ You
will be blessed,” she said, “you must be


CASTERTON CHURCH


blessed. I cannot forget the course you
have pursued for fourteen years, how with
a single heart you have served the Lord,
and with how much effect upon others.”
She was too ill to prolong the conversation.
Mr Bevan’s consent was asked and obtained
in March. The following month Miss Bevan
went to Casterton with her great friend
Miss Paris, and there she was married by
Mr Carus Wilson, April 29th, 1841, to the
Rev. Thomas Mortimer.
The honeymoon was spent at Windermere
and Fosbury, where the people flocked in
numbers to hear Mr Mortimer, and a deep
impression was made on many hearts. On
June 10th, Mr and Mrs Mortimer began their
home life together at Fortis Green, in
Finchley. The Sundays they spent at Gray’s
Inn Road Chapel, where they had a comfort-
able room over the vestry. Teaching the
choristers, twenty in number, was a new
interest in town, and at Finchley, ordering
the household occupied time and thought.
At his own urgent request, the coachman


Campbell was engaged. He was very grate-
ful for the instructions which had been given
to his daughters, and a most valuable servant
he proved. Very gratifying was it one day
to see a Fosbury farmer arrive at Gray’s
Inn Chapel, and hear him say what a change
had been made in his mind and in that of
his neighbours by Mr Mortimer’s addresses.
A very affecting letter was received from
Mrs Morris. It was written from Chittagong,
and was her last. It told of the birth and
death of another sweet infant, a little girl,
and of her own serious illness. A speedy
return to England could alone offer any
hope of saving her life. She said she had
received much comfort from a MS. book
her friend had given her. She never re-
turned home, but died on October 10th, 1841,
in perfect peace. Her husband brought the
book to England and returned it to Mrs
Mortimer. It contained thoughts on various
subjects—for instance, cause of difference of
opinion.
“Difference of opinion is a necessary con


sequence of imperfect knowledge. Persons
surveying a distant landscape might easily
agree respecting the most prominent objects
they beheld; but they would probably differ
respecting the more minute. What might
appear to one to be a house, might be
deemed a tree or a brook by another.
Nothing but a nearer view of the objects
would produce unanimity of opinion. The
Christian Church is travelling toward the
region of perfect vision. Why revile each
other by the way for their mutual mistakes ?
There is one object too great for any but
the blind to mistake. It is the Sun; that
illumines the scene.”
Mrs Mortimer had often written to her
mother since she left Belmont. She was
now able not only to see her, but to re-
ceive with her the Holy Communion. For
many months past there had been but one
single day without pain; but as towards the
end of August the doctors apprehended no
immediate change, her eldest daughter, who
had visited her daily the last year, ventured


to go to Fosbury to give her children much-
needed change of air. Meantime the invalid
grew worse so rapidly, that when suddenly
summoned back, although she set off in-
stantly, she found her beloved parent un-
conscious, and her brothers and sisters
watching. The end came, August 25, 6.50 p.m.
She had recognised Mrs Mortimer two days
before her death, and had given her an
affectionate parting glance.
Mrs Bosanquet wrote the following record,
at her sister’s request:—
“When our dearest mother first became
alarmed at the state of her health, she was
inclined to regard her illness as a judgment.
After seeing the doctors in London, she
passed a night of mental and bodily anguish.
She never asked to know their opinion. A
remark of Mr Wiggins, that there is no
anger in the rod with which God chastises
His people, was a comfort to her. From
the first she steadily faced the prospect of
death. Doubts ,and fears from time to time
overcast her trembling faith, and she was


quite overwhelmed with a sense of her sin-
fulness. She thought every one better than
herself, and she would have been distracted
had any one tried to console her by looking
to anything in herself. When reminded that
the Saviour did not reject the vilest, she
replied that she had not been classed with
the vilest, and she seemed to accuse herself
of hypocrisy for having borne a good char-
acter. Yet she was pleased to hear of good
she had effected. ‘Thank God, if I have
been made an instrument of good in His
hands.’ She often said, ‘ Many that be first
shall be last,’ and, ‘What discoveries will be
made in that day!’
“ She never took comfort from anything but
from looking most simply to the Lamb of
God. Taking the Lord’s Supper (which she
did with many tears) greatly refreshed her.
She was delighted with Mr Wiggins’ sermon
on ‘Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shalt be saved.’ When asked once
about the state of her mind, she said, ‘I
have no fears,’ and also that since her hus


band’s illness fourteen years before she had
realised God’s presence as she had never
before done. ‘Now,’ she said, ‘I feel Him
to be with me, and when I go from my bed
to my sofa and from my sofa to my bed, He
goes with me. He gives me as much joy as
is good for me, and He will continue it and
grant more if needful, but not else. lam
satisfied to have what He gives.’
“How she loved God’s Word! and how
thoroughly she knew it! The Psalms she
had long read on her knees with many tears.
Devotion was not a duty but a delight to
her. She would often blame herself for
having seemed to neglect duties by spending
the time in prayer, yet, ‘What could I do?’
she added, ‘ I never could have gone on with-
out it.’ She would often rise in the night to
pray, and such prayer, she said, was almost
invariably answered. Respite from pain she
regarded as an answer to prayer. In the
beginning of her illness she had dreaded pain
greatly, but afterwards she seemed quite
resigned in God’s hand. He had always


exceeded all her expectations, she said. The
most distasteful to her of all subjects was
her own praise, and the most agreeable was
the unbounded, unmerited goodness of God.
How she loved the people of God! Every
one of fervent piety was near and dear to
her. Such were friends indeed, she said, and
it cheered her to receive a line from them.
“She always thought herself better on the
Lord’s Day, because her mind was wholly
given to devotional reading and meditation.
Private prayer she valued so much that even
social prayer, at the hour of her devotion,
was an interruption, and she always secured
an uninterrupted hour every morning. Her
prayers were mingled with tears, but not
tears shed in bitterness; on the contrary, if
some weight pressed on her heart and shut
the fountain of tears, she obtained relief
when the usual hour of prayer came and
the stream overflowed once more. She had
a very thankful heart, and loved to dwell
upon her blessings. Job, she said, had bad
tidings from every quarter, whilst good


tidings gladdened her of conversions in her
family and surroundings. She had always
been unworldly, but she became more and
more dead to earthly things, and heard
them spoken of with perfect indifference at
last. Speaking with pleasure of Mr Wiggins’
sermon, which was repeated to her, she said,
‘I need every encouragement, I desire never
to be separated from my God any more for
ever. If any pray for me, let that be the
subject.’
“The last and lowest place in Heaven was
that to which she aspired. She always
viewed others in the best light, making
allowance for all failings, never repining at
her own deprivations, and full of considera-
tion for others, whilst she never made the
slightest remark on unkindness or neglect,
and yet was thankful for every attention.
She would have allowed her faults to be
exposed in any way for God’s glory or the
good of others.”
Mrs Mortimer wrote the epitaph placed
on the monument in Trent Churchyard.


Favell Boubke Bevan, born 27 Jan. 1780,
died 25 Aug. 1841, cut. 61.
She lightened many a weary pilgrim’s load,
Theirs and her own she cast upon her God,
For well she knew He’d carry all her care,
Who on the cross a greater burden bare.
Her rooms, so long enlightened by her pre-
sence and sanctified by her prayers, seemed
now but the empty cage whence the captive
bird had escaped to liberty and light.


CHAPTER VIII
GATHERING SHADOWS
In April 1842 Mr Mortimer’s daughters Mary
and Harriet were brought home by him from
Jersey, where they had been staying. In
August the whole family went to Walton
on the Naze, and much enjoyed the cliffs
and sands and quiet seclusion, as well as
congenial intercourse with Professor Schole-
field, Mr Goodhart, and Mr G. Spence, who
had left a lucrative profession to take
orders. “Life passes,” Mrs Mortimer wrote,
“but not as the ship that ploughs the main,
for the traces it leaves are durable, though
to us often imperceptible.” Writing of her
mother, she said, “Her characteristics were
a love of secret prayer, in which she poured
out her soul to God—a power to advise with
great wisdom, a disposition to console with


tender sympathy and to relieve in the most
unobtrusive manner.”
Writing to her friend Miss Dennis, “I
hope your pupils will like the history of
Count Zinzendorf I have just written. I
rejoice you are so much interested in them.
Difficulties will arise, but they are often the
precursors of the most signal success. When
all human means fail, we are driven to rest
entirely on Divine aid, and then succour
comes. You have not to bring up a sinless
race, nor an untempted one, but a redeemed
race, heirs of the promises. Look therefore
to your Saviour and theirs, aim at obtain-
ing for them the greatest possible good, and
in the end see whether you are disap-
pointed.”
The year finished very happily, her husband
very kind, her two daughters dutiful and
pious, her health very good, the Gray’s Inn
congregation increasing, and with it the hope
of the chapel’s being freed from incumbrance.
The next year, 1843, was one of trial. She
had influenza twice. Harriet fell sick also,


and Mr Mortimer was laid aside by erysi-
pelas. Mary wrote home from Ramsgate,
where she was with Harriet: “I wrote to
you before as to an unknown being; I write
now in confidence, and I love to look at the
address of my letter to one we know and
who, to the utmost of her power, will be
our protector, counsellor, and guide. Each
word of your letter only increased my grati-
tude to God for having left us motherless
no longer.”
In November, Mr Mortimer wrote: “ This is
the sixth Sabbath evening I have been de-
tained at home by erysipelas in my shins. I
preached last sitting—Sunday morning, Oct. 1
—little thinking how long an interval might
elapse before I might preach again. During
this period I have had most merciful allevia-
tions, among the greatest, the unceasing,
most devoted attentions of my dearest wife.
Should she survive me, may this testimony
comfort her heart. Sometimes I have not
had the strength of a child, being unable
to walk or even stand. She has watched


me night and day. Lord, reward her! But
oh! what is now before me ? I could
tremble, but that I believe Thou, my Lord
and Master, art with us and near us. Oh!
receive us all under Thy care, and direct us
at this important crisis. If Thou art calling
me to leave my present chapel, smooth my
way, and calm my spirit and the spirit of
my beloved flock. Thou hast done wonders
for us hitherto. I have been recounting
before God, all His love in my pilgrimage
—in Kent, at dear Madeley, at Aberystwith
and Shrewsbury, then at Merfield, my first
curacy, at Woburn, in Bucks, my second,
and then during the last two and twenty
years and a half, from April 1821 to Nov.
1843, in the great metropolis, first at St
Olaves, then at Shoreditch and Wheler
Chapel, then St Mark’s, and last, at my
present chapel in Gray’s Inn Road with my
dear and beloved Favell. I put the whole
case before Thee, Lord. Do with me and
mine as shall be most for Thy glory. Keep
us all in patient waiting upon Thee.”


Again he wrote : “ Nov. 12. Another Sabbath
spent in silence but not in sadness. This has
been a week of great mercy. I sent in my
resignation of the Chapel to Sir Robert
Harry Inglis and the other trustees. Truly
comforting is the reply of this dear friend
and benefactor. Last night dear Mr Futsoye
came. From what he said, I think I see
more clearly how God is leading us. . . .
“ This evening my daughter Mary sang two
beautiful hymns. We then read in alternate
verses John xvii. I prayed and felt much
of the Divine Presence. My mind is kept
in peaceful dependence upon God. At times
my spirits sink, and my faith is weak, but
generally I can leave all with Him, in the
assurance He loves me, cares for me, and
will order all for me.
“ Oh, my Omnipotent, Omniscient Lord
and Master, remember me for good, nor
leave me for a moment to my own ignor-
ance. Save me from false steps, for Thou
knowest


“I have no skill the snare to shun,
Or from the evil to depart;
I ever into ruin run,
But Thou art greater than my heart.”
The end of the year Mr Mortimer preached
several times, seated on a high stool, but
was much fatigued. Mrs Mortimer had
influenza again.
She wrote: “The longer one lives, the
more one perceives the small comparative
worth of learning. It is better than house
and lands, but not as good as bodily health,
and incomparably less than moral excellence.
Avoid, I beseech you, late studies and over-
anxiety. They must lead to a disordered
state of mind and body.
“ By some means or other we must be pre-
pared for a heavenly state, and we know
that the process shall not be more painful
than is absolutely necessary.”
She was cheered by a letter from Miss
Farmer, telling her of a dear little Sunday
scholar who died in perfect peace, and “was
never tired of the Peep of Day. There could
H


be no doubt that it was greatly blessed to
her; it was her constant companion during
her illness. When asked if she loved Jesus,
she raised her head, though very breathless,
and said ‘Yes, dearly.'”
Thus was Mrs Mortimer encouraged in the
lessons she began to give regularly to the
girls in Mrs Kinnaird’s school; she took
special pains to make them read and speak
distinctly.
In April 1844, Mr Mortimer preached six
lectures on the deaths of Abel, Jacob, Moses,
Elijah, John Baptist, and the thief each
of these deaths resembling our Lord’s death
in one point, and in another point differing
from it.
During part of the year, the Rev. James
Kelly was his coadjutor. The family visited
Southend, Herne Bay, and Burton Latimer,
of which place Rev. D. Barclay Bevan was
Rector.
Andrew Fuller on Genesis delighted Mrs
Mortimer. She praised it as so lively, that
it transported you to the times of the


patriarchs, and led you to sympathise with
them! “How comforting to feel the God
who led them, leads us! How readily He
pardoned their sins and extricated them from
their difficulties! How often mercy interferes
when we expect to read of judgment!”
“I am busily occupied,” she writes, “with
my commentary. The point is how to attract
the attention of the thoughtless, and how
to impart the first ideas to the ignorant.
It appears to me necessary above all things,
that their minds should be left in a state
of composure and confidence. I only aim
at infusing a little light into the dark mind,
and exciting some interest in the indifferent
mind. I wish to be lively and clear, and,
if possible, touching; but I am content to be
superficial and commonplace, at least to say
things well known to the Bible reader.”
In January 1845 Mr Mortimer began a
course of sermons on God’s Questions, begin-
ning with, “ Where art thou ? ” and next Sun-
day, “ What is this that thou hast done ? ” In
April, Mr and Mrs Mortimer met the Rev. Mr


Harington Evans, who was much impressed
with a sense of his own unworthiness,
and related the circumstance which first
awakened his mind. He was at Wadham
College with Mr Howells, and, according to
custom, had placed his name with those de-
siring to be on the sick-list, in order to
be exempted from attending chapel, lectures,
and hall. Mr Howells in his official capacity
called on him to say that, having seen him
out riding, and having heard that he was at
a dinner-party the day before, he could not
conscientiously place his name on the sick-
list. Mr Evans was startled to hear a man
speak of acting according to his conscience;
he felt that he himself was never guided
in anything by his conscience. After this
religious feelings arose in his heart, he knew
not how.
Mr Evans said also that once, as Mr Howells
was listening to the famous Huntington,
some remark in the sermon created a smile,
which was rendered more conspicuous by the
width of Mr Howells’ mouth. The preacher


REV. WILLIAM HOWELLS


felt so much annoyed that he said from
the pulpit, “ Why do you thus indulge your
risible faculties in this place?” Mr Howells,
forgetting that he had placed his hand-
kerchief on his head to guard it from the
cold, rose in his place, saying, “ I smiled not
in derision, but in approbation ! ”
Mrs Mortimer was deeply interested by the
sermons she heard preached by Mr H. Evans,
they were so searching. Never, she thought,
was the Christian conflict so minutely and
powerfully described, all the windings and
wanderings of the heart, all its deceits, all
its sorrows and sins unveiled, and the true
remedy enforced. What blessing God con-
ferred on His Church in raising up such a
preacher! Not eloquence, not depth of re-
search, not flight of imagination, but spiritual
understanding marked his ministry.
In June, she and her daughters went to
Fosbury with her brother and his family.
They went by train to Andover Road, and
thence the twenty-five miles remaining they
travelled on a red stage coach with four


horses and postilions. Her first visit was to
Lizzie, whose eyesight was too dim to recog-
nise her.
It was no little grief to hear how very
unsatisfactory the schoolmistress became be-
fore she died. She wished she had yielded to
the fear her conduct had gradually inspired.
This was a lesson to her never to employ a
doubtful agent. “ The wrong person put into
an influential situation must do more harm
than good.”
It was indeed a humbling and painful lesson
to find that her great efforts to do good had
had no better result. She feared that in
establishing the school there had been too
little feeling of dependence on God and too
much self-gratulation, and prayed such might
not be the case with other work of hers.
“ Yet there are some,” she added, “ who will
find at the last day that all their labour has
been wasted and they have spent their lives
in building a combustible house that would
not stand the fire, and, though saved them-
selves, they will be surely disappointed.”


She was soon rejoined by Mr Mortimer,
whose addresses were much appreciated by
the Fosbury people. One of the dear children
of the family party there was a little girl,
fair as a lily, her hair was soft and flaxen,
her eyes had an angel light, especially when
she smiled, as she often did; her form was
slight and elegant, and every movement was
grace itself. Lucy, for that was her name,
was the delight of her parents, who called
her Miss Lovely. She appeared to be the
strongest of their children, the flower of the
flock. After their return to Trent Park, she
was in high spirits one Friday, playing with
her cousins. Next day, after behaving very
prettily at morning prayers, she was seized
with sudden sickness. The doctor saw her
the same evening, but read no danger in
her heavy eyes. Scarcely had he left,
when she had a convulsion fit. A doctor
was summoned from London, but before he
reached the house the precious child had
passed away. The poor parents were broken-
hearted, though submissive. Mrs Mortimer


hastened to them, and wrote the following
epitaph:—
Epitaph on Lucy Agneta Bevan.
Died September 7th, 1845, aged 4 years.
Steeped in morning’s earliest dew,
Blossom thou of brightest hue,
Twined around our earthly bower,
Shedding fragrance one short hour:
Gathered by thy Saviour’s hand,
Blooming in a fairer land.
He who culled the lovely bud
Bought her with His precious blood,
Shields her soul from every storm,
Watches o’er her sleeping form,
Till, a seraph, robed in light,
Lucy, bless her parents’ sight.
Mrs Mortimer spent much time at Trent
Park and in London, doing all she could to
comfort the poor broken-hearted mother.
The anniversary of Lucy’s death was marked
at Trent by most terrific thunder and light-
ning, which struck a fine oak near the lake
and scathed it.
1846 opened with promise. Larger congrega-
tion, Light in the Dwelling finished, and the


family in health. It was decided to leave
Finchley on account of its bleakness. A con-
fidential maid was married to a catechist,
and sailed with him to Sierra Leone, where,
however, she soon died of fever.
Soon an unexpected shadow fell on the little
family. The eldest daughter, Mary, became
very ill. Inflammation and pleurisy set in.
Her sister was greatly afflicted, and had to
leave home with a nurse. Mary went to
Gravesend with her old servant Christiana,
and later to Ramsgate, where she had quarters
which she liked. Very desolate and heart-
broken was the poor father, yet striving to be
calm. Sometimes he returned from prayer
with a radiant countenance, but the trial was
very heavy.
Mrs Mortimer took a fancy to a very small
house in Camden Town, No. 1 Acton Place;
it had a garden and sycamore trees, and
a view of Highgate Church. The faithful
Campbells removed there also, and Finchley
was left without regret after five years’ res-
idence. Mary’s doctor feared that her mind


might be affected, if her body recovered, but
August 5, 1846, she died of water on the
brain. Mr Mortimer preached from, “My
refuge in the day of affliction,” and also on,
“We have not an High Priest, who cannot
be touched.” The Lord does indeed know
how to lead His children, how to embitter
prosperity, and how to sweeten adversity.
The doctor considered that Harriet was
suffering from chronic inflammation of the
brain, which affected her mind, and her con-
dition continued to be a very anxious one.
Excitement was to be avoided, but a little
tour was ordered for her, and accordingly,
the end of September, she was allowed to
leave medical care and to go with her parents
on a little driving expedition. They spent
the first night at Bedwell Park, Sir Culling
Eardley’s, and then visited St Albans, Dun-
stable, Woburn, Stony Stratford, Stow, and
Aylesbury, going home after nine days.
In a short time, Harriet grew more and
more depressed. She was always accusing
herself of having injured her sister, and could


not believe that her imaginary crime was
pardonable. She felt unable to stay at home,
and accordingly returned willingly to medical
care. Her step-mother felt her loss acutely;
she had behaved in so endearing a manner,
and shown herself more affectionate than
ever. Her father bore this affliction with
great fortitude, and hoped, with improving
health, her brain would regain its balance.
His own health, however, suffered from
influenza.
Before the close of the year came an un-
expected sorrow. Mr Bevan had got up one
morning at Belmont as usual, and entered
the dining - room, where there was a large
fire. He put on his spectacles, and began
reading a letter just given him, having sent
his attendant, the butler, to fetch something.
Hearing the bell ring, this man hastened
back, and then found his master standing
up in a blaze. He threw him down immedi-
ately, and enveloped him in the hearth-rug
and in some scarlet drugget near the window.
He then rang the bell again, when the rest


of the household rushed in and found the
arm-chair in a blaze. Probably, as Mr Bevan
stood before the fire, with his back to it, the
flame had caught the tail of the cotton
dressing-gown, which was reduced to a cinder.
Feeling the heat, he must have sat down in
his chair, and thus set it on fire. As soon as
he discovered what had happened, he had
risen (which he could only do with great
difficulty) and had rung the bell. There were
marks of fire on the floorcloth near it.
He was so calm, that on leaving the room
he desired the chair to be repaired. He then
walked into his own room on the ground-
floor. The medical man happened to be at
hand, and came in before the burnt clothes
were cut off. He was much alarmed because
the burns were so extensive, on the side,
back, leg, and arm; they were soon dressed
with lime water and linseed oil. At first
he seemed faint and restless; there was,
however, no pain; the nervous system had
been destroyed.
His children hastened to Belmont. He


passed a better night than was expected.
The doctor said he should no longer appre-
hend danger if forty - eight hours passed
safely; but before this time passed, sickness
came on, succeeded by hiccoughs which shook
his whole frame. A second doctor came,
pronounced the case not hopeless, and sub-
stituted poultices for lotion. The pulse and
countenance were good, the sickness subsided,
and there was occasional sleep. He sent
Lady Agneta an apology for not getting
up to dine with her. He sent a message to
the ladies begging them to come and see
him, which they did, and felt much affected.
He begged them to be seated, and asked
what the doctors thought of him. His
daughter Louisa replied that he was in a
precarious state, and spoke of the Saviour.
He afterwards sent for his son, Barclay, to
read and pray with him, but he could bear
very little. When he heard later that it was
Louisa’s birthday, he desired a cheque for
£lO to be written for her, and another for
her son Arthur, and even attempted to sign


them himself. Mrs Mortimer wrote: “How
terrible the passage of death, even the
easiest! How great the need of clinging to
the cross! Those words, ‘We shall be saved
by His life’ are sustaining, and the hymn,
‘Begone, unbelief,’ is soothing.”
Mrs Mortimer went home one day for a
few hours, as her husband was suffering from
influenza, but he begged her to return to
Belmont the same day. Her brother Richard
helped in the nursing, and his father inquired
how his horse had carried him. When Mr
and Mrs Bosanquet went into his room, he
asked several times, “ How deep, deep, deep ?
but no one understood till he said, “How
many feet deep ? ” Then they realised that he
was thinking how deep his grave was to be,
and Mr Bosanquet said, “ Ten, and added, Do,
sir, look above, not below,” and thanked him
for all his fatherly kindness and generosity.
All this time the wounds were healing.
The doctor said, however, that if this terrible
accident had not occurred, he would prob-
ably have died in six months. Very restless


in bed, he seemed so much more comfortable
in his arm - chair that he remained in it,
wrapped in blankets, his head supported on
the shoulder of his devoted servant, Wilt-
shire, and himself unconscious and breathing
gently as an infant.
The end was quite peaceful. He ceased to
breathe on Christmas Eve. On December 31,
he was borne through the grove, and laid
in the family vault with his wife and little
Lucy. The family assembled afterwards in
the library, and Mr Mortimer read the pas-
sage : “By one man sin entered into the
world,” and prayed. Mr and Mrs Mortimer
spent some time with her brother and his
family at Belmont, which had been two-and-
twenty years in the family, and was now let
to Mrs Teed of Campden House, who brought
her chaplain, Rev. Joseph Parker, with her.


CHAPTER IX
ARCHDEACON MANNING—DEATH OF
MR MORTIMER
After the exciting scenes just passed, Mr
Mortimer comforted himself by hoping his
wife would yet not return with regret to
their little home. He felt himself indeed a
dull companion for one so lively as she was;
but if he could not amuse her, she knew that
she could always amuse him, and he hoped
they would both remember the higher views
and objects we should set before us in the
afternoon of life.
Visits to Dorking, Bognor, and Brighton
proved a salutary tonic after the depressing
effect of influenza. Harriet’s condition con-
tinued to improve, as shown in a letter to
her father announcing the death of dear
Dr Collison. In March a condol-
ence arrived from Archdeacon Manning.


Lavington, Petworth, March 15, 1847.
My dear Mrs Mortimer,— Long as we
have kept silence, and far as events may have
parted us asunder, I nevertheless believe that
we have ever cherished kindly thoughts of
each other, and that we have been united in
desiring the love of God above all things. I
have been for some time thinking of writing
to you, but as the subject had no urgency, I
easily suffered it to tarry.
And now I cannot enter upon it without
first expressing how much I felt with you
all at the loss of my kind friend, your dear
father. Robert wrote to me and gave me an
account, from which I learned that, in all
that befell his end, there was yet great mercy
and lovingkindness. Little as I have ex-
pressed for years, I can truly say that I have
a lively recollection of the affection of your
dear mother, and of all the kindness I received
from both your parents.
My object in writing is to ask whether
the letters and papers written by me to you,
now fifteen wears ago, are destroyed or are
i


in existence. If in existence, it would be
both a satisfaction and a benefit to me to
receive them; and in exchange I would, if
you desire it, forward to you your corre-
sponding papers. Any parcel directed to
3 New Bank Buildings would be safely kept
for me. May He, who alone can give all good
gifts abundantly, bless you for all your
prayers and words of charity for my sake.
And may He grant to us unworthy, the rest
of His heavenly kingdom, through the blood
of our Lord. Let me offer, through you,
to Mr Mortimer, my kind remembrances.—
Believe me, my dear Mrs Mortimer, yours
very faithfully, H. E. Manning.
In April 1847 Mrs Mortimer took her fare-
well of 42 Upper Harley Street, after know-
ing it twenty-five years. At Dover she had
the pleasure of hearing Mr Bates. Harriet
seemed improving. She wrote most grate-
fully, “I can never forget through life how
kind you were to me; could anything have
driven away my misery, your precious


sympathy would have done it. How you
used to read and talk to me and watch
over me!” Later in the year Mrs Mortimer
visited Harriet and found her “very delight-
ful and endearing, having won all hearts,
and seeming cheerful as the day.” Mrs
Mortimer returned home feeling she had
passed a delightful day with her and blessing
God for it.
Archdeacon Manning wrote again:
Lavington, April 17, 1847.
My dear Mrs Mortimer,—l will send by
an early opportunity the parcel of letters
directed to you to New Bank Buildings
(No. 3). I have no copy of any portion of
them. I mention this because I feel that all
exchanges ought to be complete. But for a
part of your kind letter, I should not have
written again so soon. But I could not have
you for one day entertain (if it were pos-
sible you should) any doubt of the thankful
and kindly feelings with which I read your
frank and sincere words. I accept them as a


gratifying assurance that even long silence,
many changes, and supposed influences of ill
have not, in your belief, taken from me the
disposition in which you confided many years
ago. If I know myself, you are not wrong in
so believing. As to our respective opinions,
I have this conviction. On the subject of the
manner • by and through which God works
in us, that is the ordained means of coming
to Grace and Truth, we should differ per-
haps even more than you think. But upon
the sole foundation of our hope, we should
have no shadow of difference. I say this
with less doubt because it has pleased God,
in the last two months, to make this the
one subject of my thoughts. It has been
His will to send me an illness, of which I
have said little: neither wishing to alarm
my friends by fears nor to deceive myself
by premature hopes. For some time past I
have been getting down in health, and at
last a cold fell on my throat and lungs. My
doctor did not hide from me his anxiety,
and, if it please God to restore me, my next


winter must be in a warmer climate. I am,
I trust, thankful to God’s mercy for, as far
as I can see, a steady improvement of all
symptoms except certain sensations about
the chest, which may be nothing, or they
may be cause of future anxiety. But this
only time can show. And I desire to leave
myself in those Hands out of which never
issued to me all my life long anything but
love and mercies. You will perhaps hear,
not without interest, that the book, next to
Holy Scripture, which for the last sixteen
years I have most read, has been my chief
companion in illness, I mean Leighton’s
sermons. It was you, I think, who first
showed them to me. Here, at least, we come
upon the same, and that the original,
ground. If it please God, I hope to move
(for as yet I have not left the house for
nine weeks) on Sunday next to London, and
if you would come and see me at 44 Eaton
Square, I will let you know the time of my
coming up. With all old and kind regards,
which consciousness of differences does not


lessen.—Believe me, my dear Mrs Mortimer,
yours most sincerely,
H. E. Manning.
She paid this visit in June, passing an
hour with him in Cadogan Place. There
was no controversy, but a reproof. He
thought her manner was not sufficiently
serious, and so gently reproved her that she
almost cried, —nay, did shed a tear —for he
looked very thin, and seemed to think he
should not live. She thought their parting
very affecting; he was to write when abroad
and tell her how he was. She wished she
could feel more assured about him. His last
words were, “You little know how much I
owe you.” She could hardly make up her
mind to leave, fearing he would die.
He wrote to her again: July 2, 1847
My dear Mrs Mortimer,— l must not
leave home without thanking you for your
visit, the sermon* you so kindly sent me, and
* Note by her.—“ This sermon was the most heavenly
sermon I ever heard him preach.”


your last letter. And in doing so, I wish to
express clearly the object for which I sought
the meeting you were so good as to give me
in London.
Where any good has been received, we
owe our thanksgivings to the Giver of all
good, and a part of thankfulness is to
acknowledge our gratitude to any whom
He may so far favour as to employ in His
service. A sense of what I owe to Him
during my whole life, and in the most trying
portions of it; and, of what in one of those
portions I owe to you, made me desire be-
fore I left England to express it.
This, which was my last word, was my first
and almost my only object. I had no desire,
except so far as accords with the kingdom
of God, to re-awaken any kindly feelings
of this past. Still less had I any desire to
profess agreement where it does not exist.
My second letter stated that in the
foundation of all we have no difference, but
that in other points we probably differ more
than you are aware.


Least of all did I invite you to a discus-
sion of differences, from which the recollec-
tion of past kindness, as well as the highest
reasons, would, I hope, have restrained me.
My object was both simple in itself and
fully accomplished, so that I feel to have
no more that I need add to this than the
assurance that morning and night I pray
Glod to return a hundredfold to you what
you endeavoured and desired for my sake.
There is, through the divine Love of our
Lord, a time coming, and a kingdom when
all shall know each other even as they are
known. Until then we can well wait and
pray in hope and charity.—Believe me, my
dear Mrs Mortimer, yours very faithfully,
H. E. Manning.
They met again accidentally in October.
Harriet returned home in the summer, and
Acton Place was exchanged for 66 Morning-
ton Road. Mr Mortimer being absent
preaching for the London City Mission, his
wife wrote to him from Trent Park, where


Mrs Kinnaird was planning a volume for
Family Prayer, each contributed by a dif-
ferent clergyman on a given subject—the
last by Mr Auriol, on Resurrection and Glory,
“ Nothing can be more affectionate than
Harriet, or a greater comfort to me. We
often pray for you together.”
The book was published under the title
of LXX. Prayers. In November, tracts for
children in streets and lanes, highways and
hedges, were published in packets. These
were afterwards re-published as Streaks of
Light.
It must indeed have been a trial that the
January following, poor Harriet became de-
pressed once more and very anxious to leave
home again, which she did accordingly.
Writing to Miss Bowles, Mrs Mortimer
described an interesting assembly for the
Labourers’ Relief Association, when Dr
Mac Neile spoke before Prince Albert, and
concluded by showing the power of love to
lighten labour, and then its power to com-
mand obedience to the Father of the Lord


and Saviour. “How great the privilege of
the orator’s friendship, which Miss Bowles
enjoyed. Friends of high intellect and
charming manners are too delightful for me
because they absorb my thoughts and en-
gross my interest,” Mrs Mortimer wrote,
adding, “I have often wondered in days past
what I should have done, had Gabriel walked
the earth. 0 that One, greater than Gabriel,
who once did walk upon this earth, may
captivate my heart and take possession of
all my powers! With what delight and
what safety shall we associate hereafter (if
counted worthy) with angels, apostles, and
prophets! If the tongues of men are some-
times so sweet, what must the tongues of
angels be! ”
In December she went to Fosbury again
with her husband, who preached there once
more. Dear old Lizzie was wonderful, but
so weak that she was glad to go to bed at
half - past four, because it made her feel
safe, though she did not sleep.
This year, 1848, Mrs Mortimer had the


pleasure of visiting Miss Farmer in her
peaceful home, and only regretted that her
mother and aunt had not been allowed to
see her too; but “they were not permitted
to behold her life there. Such is the vanity
of human expectations, no completeness in
them, nothing finished, and the scene often
interrupted at the most critical and interest-
ing juncture. But we look forward to all
being cleared up and finished. None dis-
appear from the Universe, only from this
world. All live unto God.”
“I am exceedingly well and happy,” she
wrote, “in my little home, and so is my
husband, and we hear that Harriet is happy.
He feels quite able to preach, and has delight
in preaching.” A missionary meeting at the
chapel, with missionaries from India and
Sierra Leone, two black men and a Moorish
Jew, having the true features of Shem, who
took a little son of Ham into his arms; Mrs
Kinnaird’s school; a discussion on prophecy
between Mr Birks and Mr Baptist Noel,
which took place in Mrs Kinnaird’s drawing


room; a visit to Sandgate, where Mr Gambier
was preaching with power; a Sunday at
Sir Culling Eardley’s new estate, Belvidere,
were amongst the interests and pleasures of
the year.
1849, January.—Lieutenant Moore, 17th Foot,
was introduced to Mr and Mrs Mortimer, and
spent a fortnight with them in March. On
the 23rd of March he left his regiment, and
returned to them as their adopted son. Mr
Mortimer came home exhausted after preach-
ing at Chatham, and was ordered perfect rest
for six weeks. Leaving Mr Powell to supply
his pulpit, he travelled to Dorking, Brighton,
and the Isle of Wight, with his wife and
Mr Moore. He- was now anxious to part
with the chapel, but there were great delays
owing to a legal difficulty.
In September it was arranged for the Rev.
E. Garbett to help and eventually to succeed
to the chapel. In November, Mr Mortimer
preached his last evening sermon in the
chapel on the text, “ Rend the heavens.”
December 2, he preached for the last time


in the morning. On the 16th, Mrs Mortimer
taught for the last time at Mrs Kinnaird’s
school, after more than six years. Writing
to her sister, Mrs Bosanquet, she said, “You
with your many children do not know the
gloom which is apt to steal into a house
where there is no young person to cheer the
sight. Though we did not adopt our son to
promote our own pleasure, but the Lord’s
work, yet he does promote our comfort and
make our hearth and table more cheerful
every day. To see my husband comforted is
no small comfort to me.”
December 18th, Mr and Mrs Mortimer left
London, and went to 2 Belvedere, Weymouth,
where they attended Mr Bridge’s ministry.
Soon afterwards, Mr Mortimer became very
ill. His nerves were shaken, and the burden
of the chapel had been too much for him.
Encumbered with a rent of £320, and with-
out any parochial claim on the neighbourhood,
few could have made it answer. It now
appeared that Lord Calthorpe would remit
the ground rent of £l2O, and that the Eccle


siastical Authorities would constitute it a
District church. Mr Garbett took it, for
which they thanked God, and they were
released on a final payment of £SOO. They
had had other payments to make before,
but took comfort from the thought that the
money was devoted to the spread of the
Gospel, and therefore not lost.
They entertained a high esteem for Mr
Garbett, on account of his kindness, liberality,
and sincerity during their association, and
his preaching was eloquent and approved by
competent judges.
Mr Mortimer was now relieved from the
burden which had weighed him to the
ground. At Weymouth he had the exact
sphere he needed, the opportunity of preach-
ing gratuitously at Trinity Church to a
considerable and various congregation, with-
out responsibility of any kind, and with full
liberty to leave whenever he pleased. He
removed from Belvedere to B-odwell (Long-
hill House), but felt the air too bleak.
Mr David Mac Anally spent a month with


them. He was one of Mr Mortimer’s con-
verts, and had been at the Bluecoat School.
Though preaching constantly, Mr Mortimer
continued feeble in health. At midnight,
July 29, he had an apoplectic fit, for which
he was bled, leeched, blistered, and had his
head shaved. His doctor forbade his preach-
ing again for a year. When sufficiently re-
covered he set off, September 12, for Broseley,
which seemed likely to suit them as a place
of residence, and was near the Madeley of
his early recollections.
On the 23rd Mrs Mortimer received a letter
from Mr Mason, a medical man at Burton-
on-Trent, informing her that Mr Mortimer
had arrived there at the Three Queens Hotel,
and shortly afterwards had fallen on the
floor in a fit of apoplexy, but had become
sensible an hour after being bled, that he
had since then constantly requested that
Mrs Mortimer should not be told for fear
of the shock being too painful for her, and
also believing he would soon be able to
continue his journey. Every attention was


being paid to him and he was going on
well.
Mrs Mortimer set off instantly with Mr
Moore. They travelled all night by mail to
London, and then by train to Burton, where
they found the invalid recovering fast. They
left Burton October 4, and reached Broseley
October 7. A doctor was sent for immedi-
ately and Mr Mortimer was able to take two
drives and a walk in the garden before the
24th, when he was unable to rise, and con-
tinued dozing and helpless. His faithful
man, Campbell, spent the nights with him,
and all day long his wife and adopted son
watched over him. He sometimes smiled
on them, and “Favell” was his last word,
spoken with much difficulty. His heart
was evidently fixed in heaven, as a smile
and upward glance occasionally indicated;
his countenance was serene, untroubled
by the shadow of a cloud. He died at
eighteen minutes before four, the after-
noon of November 25, and was buried at
his dear Madeley.


Archdeacon Manning wrote again, hearing
of his death:
44 Cadogan Place, Dec. 9, 1850.
My dear Mrs Mortimer, I have just
heard of the sorrow it has pleased God to
lay upon you, and I cannot refrain from
writing. If Ido wrong, forgive me. I owe
you too much, and cherish too much affec-
tionate regard, to be silent when you are
in affliction: especially in an affliction through
which I have passed. No one knows what
it is to be left alone but they who are so.
But it has peculiar blessings of grace and
solace. Thirteen years have taught me the
wonderful sufficiency of God’s love. I re-
member at first how I used to shrink from
the thought of a lonely future. But I have
never known it. There has been at all
times a stay and a strength, a peace, and
even a happiness, which I could trace to no
source but one. And if I have found this,
what may I not hope for you? I cannot
say what help realising the Presence of our
K


Lord I have found, in the nearness with
which the unseen world is by sorrow
brought to bear upon us.
May you know this in abundant measure,
and may the tender compassion of our Divine
Lord be your perpetual solace, until you are
re-united with all the Saints you have loved
here, in His kingdom! I know you do not
forget to pray for me; day by day you are
in my poor prayers.—Believe me, my dear
Friend, always afftely. yours,
H. E. Manning.
Mrs Mortimer spent a few days with Rev.
D. Barclay Bevan, as being one who had
loved her husband with no common affec-
tion.
Returned to Broseley, Mr and Mrs Forester
were very kind to her. The year had begun
with anxiety about the chapel. What did
befall ? The chapel was taken by Mr Garbett,
but the husband was taken by God, little
indeed anticipated; but though he was gone,
he had done great good in his last year.


He preached at Trinity Church with great
fervour, till he could preach no more, and
his memory was affectionately cherished
there for many years.
Epitaph at Gray’s Inn Road Chapel.
Dedicated to the Memory
of the Rev. Thomas Mortimer, B.D.
who departed this life at Broseley, Salop, Nov. 25, 1850.
Aged 55 years.
And was buried at Madeley.
For nearly thirty years he exercised his Ministry in
London
For nearly thirteen years in this place, which he
opened as an Episcopal Chapel, April 1837.
He preached with remarkable simplicity, energy, and
affection
And, through the Power of the Spirit, he turned
many sinners to righteousness.
Radiant his mantle with celestial gems,
Gifts shone without, —Graces were wrought within:
Majestic bearing and harmonious speech,
Vast memory and fervid eloquence;
Such were the Gifts: the precious Graces—these;
Strong Faith to cling around the Rock in storms,
Bright Hope to look unto the Star in gloom,
Warm Love to follow the good Shepherd’s track
O’er Mountains drear—and seek his wandering Sheep.


CHAPTER X
BROSELEY
Mr Mac Anally came as tutor to the
adopted son, who was to go to college, by
Mr Bartlett’s advice. He was the last of
the young men introduced by Mr Mortimer
into the ministry, and he preached very well.
Another good preacher at Broseley was the
tutor of Mr Forester’s son, Mr Wilton, who
was full of poetry, and knew the song of
every bird. Mrs Mortimer, this spring, had
the grief of hearing that her friend Henry
Manning had become a Roman Catholic.
When the tomb was finished Mrs Mortimer
visited Madeley, with which her husband
had such endeared associations. She stood
in the pulpit where he first preached, and
where Fletcher used to preach, and she saw
the copy of the sermons he had lately
preached there on John xvi. and Psalm lxxi.


Naturally her mind dwelt much on the past
as she thought of the companion she had
lost, in whom the Word of God dwelt so
constantly, the friend who prayed for her
continually, and the minister who had been
blest to so many. She recollected especially
the last time he pronounced her name,
looking in her face as he slowly uttered it,
“Favell,” and never speaking again, though
he lived a fortnight longer. It was a com-
fort to think of the time they had passed
at Weymouth, where he had accomplished a
lasting work and left a name of blessedness.
In retrospect the last scene grew brighter,
whilst as regards the future she felt harassed
and perplexed. She had great anxiety on
account of Harriet, who wrote with much
affection and feeling. She was pleased by a
visit from her nephew, Arthur Bosanquet,
before he left for India. Mrs Moore brought
her daughter Minnie to see her, and two
of her god - daughters came in succession.
A dozen tame sheep and lambs were a re-
creation, feeding from people’s hands, and


living on the lawn, close to the church with
its old yew tree.
In July came the appalling tidings of Lady
Agneta Bevan’s death. Nothing could have
been more sudden. She had been prevented
from sleeping by asthma, but she had said
little, and no alarm had been excited. On
Sunday she had been to church twice, had
taken the Sacrament, and had helped the
singing by herself singing a second in a low
voice. Though she had not dined downstairs
on Monday, she had played a duet with her
nephew in the evening before she went
upstairs for the last time. At half-past two
on Tuesday morning, July 8, she woke. She
sat in an arm-chair in the open bow window,
and there she died, having no fear for her-
self, grieving only for her husband and
children. Mrs Mortimer set out immediately
and spent a week with the bereaved, also
following the dear remains to the family
tomb.
Later, she paid a visit to the West of
England, and also to Liverpool and Lytham,


at the mouth of the river Ribble, the great
attraction being Mr Self, one of Mr Mortimer’s
clergy. In his name she was most cordially
received by him in his beautiful parsonage.
Kind friends came to cheer her at the time
of the sad anniversary of her loss, and the
year closed in much mercy. The Rev.
Orlando Forester, the Rector, a most de-
voted holy man, most kind and amiable, and
without bigotry, was a man of prayer. Mrs
Forester was very decided in her opinions,
enlightened in her views and feelings, very
kind and considerate. Their only child, pre-
sumptive heir to the title and estate, was
the object of tenderest solicitude. Mr Moore,
now the adopted son, Lethbridge, was dili-
gently studying for college in preparation
for the ministry, assisted by one of Mr
Mortimer’s converts. His sister, Minnie
Moore, was living with them and amusing
herself with the poultry.
In March 1852, dear old Lizzie died at
Fosbury, and was buried in Tidcombe church-
yard. Mrs Mortimer wrote her epitaph:


Oft when her eyes were dim with age,
Well-pleased, she saw the noon-tide ray
Dart brightness on the sacred page—
Now Christ she views in endless day.
In May Mrs Craig’s stepson, Robert, died.
He rested much on God’s unchangeableness.
When he heard he could not recover, he
said he felt so happy and peaceful, he had
not felt so happy for a long time. He had
no care or perplexity then, and to Mrs Craig
he said: “Remember I have a blessed hope;
we shall not be separated long, we must
have done with the world. I had no schemes
to be broken, they were all broken.” When
his father said God would be with him, he
looked up most peacefully and replied, “He
is with me. Call mamma ”; and though when
she came he could not speak, he gave her
a last look full of encouragement and hope.
After eleven years’ service the faithful
Campbell was obliged to leave through ill-
ness, and went to London, where he died
the following year, June 24th. Mrs Mortimer’s
niece and god-daughter, Emmeline Bosanquet,


was married to Captain Gibb, R.E., and they
paid a visit together to Broseley in August.
The household consisted then of two widows,
Pugh and Smith, and little “Poppy” from
the servants’ school.
Mr L. Moore went to Cambridge in October,
returning in December. Mrs Mortimer wrote:
“We have less excuse for unbelief in age
than in youth, for we have experience to
confirm God’s promises that all things work
together for good.”
The birth of her first grandniece, Lucy,
suggested many thoughts to her. “ The
seven sons of her grandfather, Silvanus, had
thirty grandchildren who lived to grow up,
and from these she now counted seventy
great - grandchildren. Behold in Lucy the
first great-great-grandchild! ” She felt her-
self now in the midst of five generations,
two above and two below her. She stood
sponsor to Lucy in June, visiting her sister
at Osidge, and Harriet at Tunbridge Wells.
She greatly enjoyed Mr Langston’s preach-
ing at Southborough. He seemed to her


impressed with such a sense of the great-
ness of his work when he entered the pulpit,
that he had no thought beside the glory of
God, and the salvation of his hearers, rising
above the fear of man, and pouring out the
contents of his fertile mind and full heart
with as much confidence as if he were con-
versing with one friend alone. No sleepy
hearers; smock-frocks there in the morning,
as in the evening, and every eye fixed on
him from the opening to the close of the
sermon.
The year brought a long letter from Louisa
Cox, very anxious about her sister. God
had greatly prospered the Coxes, who actu-
ally owned 340 acres, besides others which
they rented. They wished to help Tracey to
come out, and they sent help to their rela-
tions at Fosbury. Their little boy was taught
to desire his love and duty to his mother’s
best friend in this world, and took great
delight in reading Peep and Line. Louisa
longed to help others, because of the help
she had herself received. Her health was


not good, but she was full of gratitude to
God for sparing her, and she hoped to be
found with oil in her lamp waiting for her
Lord. She was living at White’s Gully,
Willingua, Adelaide, Australia.
Mrs Mortimer, in writing to her brother
on the subject of his booklet, Accommodated
Texts , remarked, “When explanations are
made, great brevity is needed. People will
read nothing they do not comprehend readily.
Criticism is a thankless office, except where
candour has outgrown self-love. Remember
the four essential qualities of an opening
sentence. It must be short, easily under-
stood, interesting, and conciliatory. I hope
you will add to your list of texts, Heb.
xii. 1, ‘ Sin which doth so easily beset
us,’ or the easily besetting sin, which doubt-
less is Unbelief, to warn us against which
is one of the principal objects of the
epistle.”
As regards the study of Paley, she wrote,
“In every study it is the outline which
should be mastered first. Be familiar with


Paley’s principal features before you study
the details.”
A kind cheering letter from Mrs Craig
said that she had seen in the City Mission
Magazine the death of John Carter, city
missionary of seventeen years’ standing, and
the record how much good he had derived
from Rev. Thomas Mortimer, under God, and
added, “How many will prove his crown of
rejoicing in the day of the Lord’s appear-
ing! We must not lose sight of the fruit
given us to cheer us in the way. Look
at all the seals God gave to your dear
husband’s ministry. How many lambs also
have not you fed and others besides!”
This dear friend, Mrs Craig, though active
as ever in mind, was now in such feeble
health that she felt the end was approach-
ing. In resignation and humility, with dying
hand, she herself wrote some trembling lines,
Precious friend, I am in peace, as an empty
sinner, resting on a complete Saviour. Pray
that my faith fail not. God comfort your
faithful heart, we shall, through grace, lLse


near together.” Her last words were, “ Dear
Lord, come!” She died at Leamington,
March 7, cet. 49, after a life of great
anxiety and trial.
Speaking of Scott’s commentary, Mrs Morti-
mer said she thought it invaluable. “ Origin-
ality, fertility of thought, elegance of diction,
flights of eloquence not being desirable in a
commentary more than in a dictionary or
grammar, for a commentary is not intended
to be read alone, but is to be consulted alone
by the diligent student, who requires no
other attractions than are supplied by solid
sense and learning.”
Over-study, as well as over-anxiety, she
thought, proceeded from weakness of faith,
and advised Mr Moore to trust God in pre-
paring for his coming examination, which
proved highly satisfactory. This much grati-
fied her. She went to Cambridge for the
occasion, visited the colleges, and took tea
at Caius, where she met Mr Robinson and
others of Catharine Hall. Hearing that Mr
Mac Anally had obtained Mr Pelham’s curacy


at Hampstead, she arranged to leave Brose-
ley and take a house at Hendon. They
were sorry to leave Mr and Mrs Forester
and other kind friends. “In this world,” she
said, “there are not only great griefs and
heavy afflictions, but also innumerable dis-
appointments and perplexities, which we try
in vain to put straight. The best consola-
tion is the thought that the roughness of
the road is no more accidental than the
great pits in it. The only wonder is that
sinners should enjoy so great a preponder-
ance of happiness.”
After a residence of four years, she left
Broseley in October, sensible of many mercies,
and conscious of many sins, yet solemnised
by a feeling of responsibility, and some fear
of having made a wrong move. They were
hardly settled at Hendon when Mr Pelham’s
leaving was announced, to be Bishop of
Norwich, and the consequent departure of
Mr Mac Anally, their great friend, near. This
was indeed a very great disappointment.
Wishing her nephew Theodore farewell.


she wrote to him, “If we do not meet on
earth any more, may we meet above, beauti-
ful and glorious, neither scorched by Indian
suns, nor withered by the breath of time,
but shining in our Saviour’s image. This
is our hope. Let us both love Him who
died to give us this hope. Nothing less than
this love is religion, and all short of it
must be base ingratitude.”
The second part of Far - off was now com-
pleted, and she felt like an emancipated
slave. It had cost her much labour. She
had read about two hundred books to get
it up.


CHAPTER XI
LIFE AT HENDON AND RUNTON
Eldon House, Hendon, proved a pleasant
residence. There was a nice garden behind
the house. It took some little time to get
settled. Part of the household did not arrive
till the end of January, when deep snow
was on the ground. With the Pugh family
came Mary Oakes, a poor invalid woman
found at Broseley, who was afterwards
placed in charge of a number of orphans,
and called by them Aunt Mary.
As Harriet desired a change of abode, Mrs
Mortimer herself took her to Ipswich, and
placed her in a very nice family there.
Hendon was within reach of many relations
and some friends. Lady Raffles called, and
Sir Robert H. and Lady Inglis, shortly before
his death. The year opened with anxiety


about the ministry. Mr Pelham preached
his farewell sermon in April. His successor
was Rev. E. Bickersteth, afterwards Bishop
of Exeter: his friendship was a great comfort.
Mrs. Mortimer had a visit from her brother’s
four sons which much gratified her. “Four
as good would not be easily found,” she
thought, and she wished “ they might be
followers of the four evangelists, anti-types
of the four living creatures and corner stones
of the living temple.”
She wrote to one of her nieces on her
birthday: “ I write to assure you of my
faithful affection. I wish I had been with
you on the day. Presents, I know, you
think useless, but letters I am sure you do
not. Happy is the day that calls to mind
your birth, happy on earth to many who
have reason to love you—happy in heaven
to many more there, who freely love their
future companions in glory. But not the
love even of angelic beings could satisfy the
heart. No love can do that but the love of
Him, who is ever thinking of each object
L


of His love. Unbelief alone, can cause a
heart to sigh from a sense of desolation.
What is the love of the largest company
of creatures that ever loved the most beloved
of mortals, compared to the love of that
Infinite One? From the moment you heard
of Him, you professed to love Him. What
was that but a sign that He had fixed His
love upon you? He has marked out your
path, my darling child, and given you the
portion He saw best for you. What other
earthly portion He has reserved for you,
none can say. A fictitious writer would make
it a brilliant one; but away with foolish
imaginations, you shall have a portion that
shall tend best to prepare you for the best
of all. Only keep your heart with all
diligence, chasing away every roving wish
and every repining thought in its earliest
approach, in the name of Christ, and by the
power of the Spirit.”
“How sweet an ornament is humility!”
she wrote one day, “but it is not to be
purchased by the absence of all attractions.


Gabriel wears it on his radiant brow, while
many a vile beggar is without it.”
She felt deep sympathy with her sister
and niece during Captain Gibb’s absence in
the Crimea, rejoicing at his return, though
with shattered health, and sharing the
national joy at the fall of Sebastopol. The
festive fireworks could be seen from the
upper windows at Hendon. Miss Moore was
her companion at Hendon then.
Mrs Mortimer said “She was preparing to
make a long journey alone, or with an un-
seen companion, and should not depend
upon creatures for happiness and security,
but on the Invisible.”
She went to Osidge and Cambridge, where
she saw Mr Moore take his degree in the
Senate House, 1856, after which he joined
the household at Hendon.
Early in 1857 an uncle died, leaving her a
large increase of fortune. Astonishment was
her first sensation. Never having expected
anything, she would have been grateful for
anything, but so large a sum amazed her;


and yet she said it was a black sort of joy,
for it rent her heart to think that he who
bestowed the gift, and who had earned the
money, no longer tasted the sweets of life.
She was present, June 7, Trinity Sunday,
when Mr Moore was ordained deacon at
St Paul’s, by Bishop Tait, and then went
with him and his sister to York, Berwick,
and Abbotsford, with its library of 20,000
volumes. In Edinburgh, they heard Dr
Candlish preach deep truths on “Ye are
dead, and your life is hid.” They visited
the lovely and majestic Mrs Mackenzie, in
all her bereavement and delicate health,
yet able to say that her peace and joy
were greater than ever. Sanctified afflic-
tion showed her to be, indeed, more than
conqueror. After spending a fortnight in
the Highlands, they went to Perth and St
Andrews, and spent a few days at Sheffield
with Major and Mrs Fawkes, and met Mr
Moorhouse, afterwards Bishop.
Mr Moore had been ordained to Mr Bicker-
steth’s curacy at Christ Church, and preached


his first sermon there in September, on
“Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness.” He was ordained on the
Trinity Sunday following, and, preaching at
Trent later in the year, met his future wife
at Trent Park, Miss Emma Shuttleworth,
second daughter of the late Bishop of
Chichester. Mr Moore’s marriage took place
in May 1859, at All Saints, Prince’s Gate.
One of Miss Shuttleworth’s sisters had been
married, April 1856, to Mr R. C. L. Bevan,
and had presented him the next year with
a very lovely daughter named Ada. By an
odd coincidence, on the day of Emma’s wed-
ding a son was born to this elder sister at
Trent Park. This boy was called Anthony
Ashley, after his godfather, Lord Shaftes-
bury. Several fetes were given at Trent Park
to Mrs Kinnaird’s and Mr Pennefather’s
schools, and to the shoeblacks. Not long
after was the Barnet Conference, when many
happy gatherings took place at Mr and
Mrs Wilbraham Taylor’s, Hadley Hurst.
Nov. 1. —Mrs Mortimer’s eldest niece was


and yet she said it was a black sort of joy,
for it rent her heart to think that he who
bestowed the gift, and who had earned the
money, no longer tasted the sweets of life.
She was present, June 7, Trinity Sunday,
when Mr Moore was ordained deacon at
St Paul’s, by Bishop Tait, and then went
with him and his sister to York, Berwick,
and Abbotsford, with its library of 20,000
volumes. In Edinburgh, they heard Dr
Candlish preach deep truths on “Ye are
dead, and your life is hid.” They visited
the lovely and majestic Mrs Mackenzie, in
all her bereavement and delicate health,
yet able to say that her peace and joy
were greater than ever. Sanctified afflic-
tion showed her to be, indeed, more than
conqueror. After spending a fortnight in
the Highlands, they went to Perth and St
Andrews, and spent a few days at Sheffield
with Major and Mrs Fawkes, and met Mr
Moorhouse, afterwards Bishop.
Mr Moore had been ordained to Mr Bicker-
steth’s curacy at Christ Church, and preached


his first sermon there in September, on
“Seek ye first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness.” He was ordained on the
Trinity Sunday following, and, preaching at
Trent later in the year, met his future wife
at Trent Park, Miss Emma Shuttleworth,
second daughter of the late Bishop of
Chichester. Mr Moore’s marriage took place
in May 1859, at All Saints, Prince’s Gate.
One of Miss Shuttleworth’s sisters had been
married, April 1856, to Mr R. C. L. Bevan,
and had presented him the next year with
a very lovely daughter named Ada. By an
odd coincidence, on the day of Emma’s wed-
ding a son was born to this elder sister at
Trent Park. This boy was called Anthony
Ashley, after his godfather, Lord Shaftes-
bury. Several fetes were given at Trent Park
to Mrs Kinnaird’s and Mr Pennefather’s
schools, and to the shoeblacks. Not long
after was the Barnet Conference, when many
happy gatherings took place at Mr and
Mrs Wilbraham Taylor’s, Hadley Hurst.
Nov. I.—Mrs Mortimer’s eldest niece was


married to Rev. Horace Meyer, Vicar of
North Mymms, an event which greatly in-
terested the kind aunt who had watched over
her from infancy, and who so much rejoiced
in her sister’s happiness with Captain C. Gibb.
Mrs Mortimer’s health greatly tried her in
the course of 1860. She was cheered by an
affectionate letter from her son’s bride, ex-
pressing anxiety about her, and saying how
much they both longed for her return home
from her sister’s at Highfield. In June, three
little orphans named Summers were brought
by their uncle, and received at Hendon. The
same month a fine boy was born to Mr and
Mrs Moore, but she became so alarmingly
ill that her condition was most critical for
many long weeks. This terrible anxiety
greatly tempered Mrs Mortimer’s delight in
nursing the little one, whom she carried
about as she formerly had carried her little
sister. Everything reminded her of the flight
of time, and bade her prepare for quitting
this mortal scene. “There is more joy than
sorrow,” she said, “in such a reflection.”


Her love of babies was so great, that she
was much pleased when staying at Sandown
this year, by a child of seven coming to her
one night, with an infant she could not
pacify in its mother’s absence. She sent
the child to bed, and hushed the baby to
sleep for an hour, till the parents came in.
A philosopher, she thought, could find no
finer subject of contemplation upon earth
than a babe. “In it, immortality is to be
descried, struggling with weakness. Intelli-
gence is found, united to innocence, as in
the angels; but while the one will increase,
the other will speedily, oh! how speedily,
utterly disappear. It seems wonderful, as
you look at a boy baby, to think he will
ever be a man, much more a great man;
but to think of his state of being, after this
life is over that is, in every case, over-
whelming.”
Nothing could exceed her fondness for Mr
Moore’s baby, who was baptised at Totteridge,
Mortimer Ughtred. Sponsors, herself, Mr
Robinson of Cambridge, and Mr Mac Anally.


She had never had any baby so much with
her except her sister. She described him “as
fine and lively as a bird, his temper most
placid and gentle, and his features so small
and delicate, that every one thought him very
pretty.” He went by the name of Merty. His
father preached for different friends when
he ceased to be Mr Bickersteth’s curate.
A letter from L. Cox was a great pleasure,
written from Australia.
Honoured Madam, —lt is with a heart
full of gratitude to you, and I trust of love
to God for His mercy to me, unworthy sinner,
that I am spared to hear from you once
more, and to thank you for all your goodness
to me. I do not know where to begin. I
fear to tire your patience. When I look
back on the past, I often burn for shame
that I am no better, after all the pains you
took with me. When I think how much I
owe you, the thought of my heart is how
great a debtor I’m constrained to be. But
I trust I have sought and found the Lord.


You ask if I read my Bible and pray; I trust
I do in a feeble way. When I think of the
souls committed to my care, a great respon-
sibility, may the Lord give me grace to do
my duty! lam happy to tell you my husband
is seeking the Lord, and we both feel we can
trust our souls to Christ. I have not for-
gotten your great kindness to me, a poor
outcast, but often speak of the time when
you met me in the fields, and had compassion
on me. Tears of gratitude to God and you
often wet my cheeks. We have many places
of worship and Sunday school. Ido not teach
myself, my health is too bad. The doctors
can do nothing for me. Sometimes I think I
am dying of heart disease; but, thank God,
I feel I have an interest in the precious
blood of Christ, and if I cannot teach, I can
do something, for I can visit the sick, and
relieve the poor, and find books for the
Sunday school library. I have one daughter,
married to a farmer, who has a boy of four
months.
We paid Tracey’s passage and her hus-


band’s. I have their youngest child, and he
goes to school. They are a great anxiety to
us. I don’t know where to leave off. I ask
the favour of your prayers. Your humble
and truly grateful unworthy servant,
Louisa Cox.
“Gratitude,” Mrs Mortimer wrote, “is a
quality on which I have often meditated.
I have perceived that it grows in three soils
—in the soil of humility, of a sense of justice,
and of warm affections. Every character
distinguished by any of these qualities brings
forth a sweet harvest of gratitude. Where
all are found, there much gratitude springs
up.”
In March 1861 the lovely Ada died from
scarlatina. Her mother wrote a little
memoir of the baby saint, all the sweet
innocence of infancy combined with the
holiness of the renewed soul. What power
but the Spirit of God could fix those baby
eyes on things unseen, could enable that
baby mind to grasp infinite ideas, could


strengthen that baby heart to meet death
with desire, and tune those dying lips to
utter angel notes upon its bed of suffering?
Blessed, for ever blessed, be her God and
Saviour for becoming so early the God and
Saviour of the precious little one! She liked
the fifty-two tracts (now called Streaks of
Light) so much that she asked to have them
read to her again and again. This Mrs
Mortimer felt a great honour. She could
not bear to think she should see the lovely
face no more, nor hear those sweet accents,
so distinct, so intelligent, so full of invention
and wit. “I love Jesus,” she said, “more than
any one.” Mrs Mortimer wrote of her:
“Ada was a wonderful child indeed, and a
most remarkable instance of the teaching of
the Holy Spirit. Little can we tell when we
see opening piety, whether it is made for
an early death, or for a long life of useful-
ness. Yet this fragrant piety might some-
times be forgotten unless preserved by death,
for while death destroys flesh and blood, it
embalms the fruits of the Spirit.”


April 11.—A little girl was born at Osidge
to the Rev. Horace Meyer, who baptised her,
June 1, at North Mymms. Sponsors, her
grandmother, Uncle Arthur Bosanquet, and
Mrs Mortimer, her seventeenth godchild. Her
first had been her nephew, Horace A. Bosan-
quet, and Favell Lee, her last.
She had written a Greek grammar for
beginners about this time. The same year
she was detained at home on account of the
measles, which Miss Moore and one of the
orphans had caught at church. She felt
called by this untoward circumstance to
watch and wait. God’s ways always good.
She said there is much to be done in a
sinner’s heart which He alone knows how to
do. “Disappointment she found often the
characteristic of plans and arrangements;
yet it seems almost ungrateful to say so,
for more goes right than wrong.”
When the fear of infection was over, she
paid Harriet a visit at Tunbridge Wells, and
rejoined her family at Folkestone, which place
she thought delightful. She took the baby


boy out every day in his perambulator, and
was much gratified by his warm affection.
Here she saw the sister-in-law of the Bessie
of the Morning of Life, the ward of Dr Doyle.
She enjoyed visits to her brother and her
nieces. “ 1 love your Horace,” she wrote,
“ with his courteous kindness, and your sweet
innocent.” She engaged a new man as suc-
cessor to her servant Fellowes, David Gaskin,
who proved most faithful and never left her,
and she also bought a grey pony from Mr
Paris, which seemed only to improve with
age, and which served her to the last.
She had much anxious thought as regards
Mr Moore’s future sphere, which was deter-
mined by an offer of a living from Bishop
Pelham. She felt it would be a trial to
remove from relations so dear to her heart,
and who formed one charm of her existence;
but Mr Moore insisted on her remaining near
him, and his mother, Mrs Moore, also wrote
entreating her not to leave him. Her heart
trembled at the prospect of a distant settle-
ment in a land of strangers, but she hoped


that she might often visit her relations and
often receive them as her guests.
Sheringham is five miles from Cromer.
The way then was by rail to Norwich,
then twenty-five miles by coach—for there
was no rail at that time beyond Norwich.
As there was no parsonage at Sheringham,
the clergyman had to live in the next parish,
Beeston Regis, which was then vacant, and
a parsonage was to be built at Sheringham.
There were two villages, one agricultural, of
300, and the other piscatory, of 1000. The
country round was romantic, undulating,
heathery, and woody; the air soft and
sweet when the wind was not east. There
was a good Squire, with a fine park.
Before leaving Hendon she paid Miss
Farmer a visit, found her very suffering and
breathless, but she could not bear her friends
to know what she suffered. She wrote soon
after, and this was her last letter. “My
dearest Favell, I have been longing to write,
but was not able to make the exertion. .. .
My heart is brimful of love to you, as always.


I have nothing to add but my truest love.”
When her doctor told her she could not
recover she thanked him twice. Amongst
her last words were “God the Father Al-
mighty ! God the Son Almighty! ever
gracious, ever merciful, receive my soul.”
Her faithful maid wrote to Mrs Mortimer,
but she only received these tidings of the
illness a few hours before her death. When
she heard that in delirium she had thought
of her last visit, paid in spite of rain, she
much rejoiced that she had been to see her.
The loss of this faithful tried friend was
very great.
Mr Moore had taken his family to Shering-
ham, January 1862. Mrs Mortimer followed in
March, intending to remain with Miss Moore
at Cromer. She was persuaded to buy a
house in the neighbouring village of Runton,
a frail building, but she thought it would
last her time, now she had entered her
seventh decade. The late Rector of Beeston
had occupied it, but his successor would be
able to build a new and smaller house near


his church, with the price Mrs Mortimer
agreed to pay for the house. She was de-
lighted with the fine air and beautiful scenery,
and found great solace in solitary rambles.
There were plenty of simple poor to visit
and relieve, and there was pleasant society.
She now had six orphans, and she used to
take them out a great deal to enjoy them-
selves among the furze.
To her niece, on the loss of an infant, she
wrote: “There is great consolation in the
thought that your babe will live forever, and,
though born with a sinful nature, yet is
without the guilt of a single sin, thus re-
sembling the angels in sinlessness, yet better
than they, a soul ransomed by the blood of
Christ and destined to wear a body glorious
as his own.”
May ’62. —Mrs Mortimer wrote to her niece,
Mrs Gibb: “ Few countries like this for
beauty and freshness. How much I should
like to have you and your little ones with
me when I visit the beach after breakfast
with a train of children the baby carried


by four in a plaid down the stairs which we
have cut in the steep cliff; he is so happy
among the stones and sands that it is hard
to get him up again. . . . The thought of
past happy days with you at Woolwich gives
me a pang.”
“I am happier here at Runton than at
Cromer,” she wrote again. “ General and
Mrs Blachford have taken up their abode in
a small cottage about a mile off. Having
Christian friends near is a pleasure. My
little orphans, with Mary Oakes, live in a
cottage opposite. Nothing could be sweeter
than the scenery. We cross a field and walk
along the cliff among corn-fields. The house
is embowered in trees. It seems a surprise
to find the sea so near. A running stream
crosses the lawn and gives the house its
name of ‘ Rivulet.’ It is my delight to
hear Merty beginning to prattle; he enjoys
himself in the hay, where we sat in a nest
with the orphans, and then worked at hay-
making till our bones ached. I have a
wicker donkey-chaise and a light car for
M


the pony. We have constant society. Mr
Peterson and Mr Joseph Hoare, Colonel
Rowlandson, Gurney Barclay, Mrs Birkbeck,
a sweet Quaker lady, and kind good Lady
Buxton.”
Mr Moore could not have a cottage at
Sheringham before Michaelmas, but all could
live together at The Rivulet, and he brought
his mother, Mrs Moore, to join the party there.
In the spring of 1863 this dear lady suffered
from jaundice first, afterwards followed by
pleurisy, which caused her great pain for a
day and a night and left her very weak and
breathless, though conscious. Her last words
were a blessing. She also said, “The Son of
God will intercede for me,” and, “ There is no
other name given under Heaven whereby
men may be saved.” For years before she
had read and prayed diligently. She was
generous and grateful, unselfish, and full of
kindness. She was buried at Sheringham.
Another death the same year was that of
Sir Culling Eardley. His daughter wrote to
Mrs Mortimer, to thank her for her letter


of sympathy, and said, “It would not be
possible to forget your and Mr Mortimer’s
visit to Belvedere. His exposition of the
3rd and sth verses of Rev. xxii. was one to
which my dear mother always loved to recur.
The characteristics of life in Heaven, perfect
holiness, perfect service, perfect vision, were
always associated in her mind with that ex-
position. One clause of those verses, ‘No
night there,’ was her exclamation of joy as
she was about to enter there, and the verses
themselves were the last verses of Scripture
read to her and the last read to my father.”
Mrs Mortimer wrote to her sister, Mrs
Bosanquet: “I must assure you of my joy
on your birthday—to think that you are yet
spared to me and to many even nearer and
dearer (near and dear as I am). I remember
what none of them can, your birthday five.
I see the attic nursery in Russel Square, and
the cake on the table at tea-time in honour
of the day. I hear the nursery folks say
‘ Miss Louisa can read; I hope you will be
able to read when you are five.’ I had a


high respect for you when I knew not a
letter. You have been a comfort and blessing
to me, dearest sister, all your days, and all
the more for your marriage, which has opened
so many new channels for my affections. My
heart is with you ofttimes when you think
not. Our day is closing fast, but a brighter
one is rising. God keep our hope and faith
lively to the end ! What mercies have we re-
ceived ! —first in our mother, and now health,
so that life is an enjoyment. Yet what would
this be, if death were terrible? But I trust
it will be found a delightful change.
“It is historical to see the gracious Lady
Buxton at North Repps, the sister of E. Fry,
and widow of Sir Fowell. She walks among
her parrots and cockatoos flying at liberty
in her garden, and enjoys their movement.
One pair have made a nest, and a pretty
English-born green parrot rewards their
pains. Only one of the tribe can talk.
“I have a little pet, a sergeant’s orphan.
She is called Nancy, and under three. Her
coming was a pleasant surprise to us all.


Our boy is clever and tall, at two and a
half he was an inch and a half above three
feet. He is my constant delight. May your
infant grandchildren grow up as fast friends!
God grant our pictures may be realised and
brighter ones be painted with never fading
colours when children’s children shall grace
the heavenly banquet.”
Thinking of the time she had given to Arch-
bishop Manning, she felt how much better it
had been spent over the poor orphan Louisa
Achsel. “ How much wiser we should be, could
we foresee,” she added. She closed the year
1863 with “ thanks to God for all His mercies.
I leave all in the hands of my faithful Saviour.
He gives and He takes away. I wish to live
by faith in Him.”
1864. —She wrote to her friend Miss Dennis:
“ All zealous young teachers fall into the
error of giving too early and too much in-
struction. I almost tremble when I think
my little sister could nearly read and knew
many little verses at Merty’s age, while he
knows nothing but his letters, which he picked


up, and not one line of poetry, but spends
his joyous infancy in playing and seeing
pictures. You have seen the slight im-
portance of all but heavenly knowledge, and
you have tasted the earnest of the blessedness
flowing to those who have imparted it, though
to know its fulness is reserved for the future
meeting.”
“I have learned,” she wrote another time,
“ never to make points, and to help the child
I teach a great deal.”
Another letter from Louisa Cox, March 27:
“I have been telling my child how you used
to take us in the shrubbery and try to lead
us to Jesus as the friend of sinners. These
lessons I have never forgotten. Will you
accept the love of one who has nothing to
offer but a heart full of gratitude.”
In April the adventure occurred which is
related in Reading without Tears : “I drove
to the beach, three little ones with me in the
cart, and three bigger ones running in front.
Meeting the postman, I took my letters and
laid them on the seat by me. To strengthen


the donkey’s legs I wished it to walk a little
way into the water. As it seemed afraid, I
covered its eyes with a shawl and told the
girls to lead it in, when a huge wave
frightened them so much, they dropped the
rein and started back screaming; the donkey,
terrified and blinded, proceeded farther and
farther till the cart was under water and
the letters disappeared. Every moment the
donkey sank lower in the waves, nothing to
be seen but its ears. No boat near, but two
fishermen in a distant boat heard the screams
of the children and rowed as hard as they
could, reached the poor donkey as it was
going to sink, lifted it up by its jaws, seized
the bridle, and dragged it ashore. They were
much puzzled at finding its eyes were bound
up, but they were well rewarded, as indeed
they deserved. Who wrote the letters and
what they said, was never known, as they
were quite lost.”
In 1865, such deep snow, a way had to be
cut out, with walls several feet high on each
side. Rev. H. V. Elliot died early in the


year. He was seized with sudden pain in
his knee as he was praying at a friend’s
house, was taken home, and carried to his
room, which he never left. He died full of
humility, often repeating “Rock of Ages.”
Early in 1866 Miss Moore was married by
Mr Dallas to Mr Charles Newton, the brother
of Adelaide Newton. She met him first in
Ireland, when she was fifteen. When she
married him she became a mother to his
five little children. After the wedding Mrs
Mortimer paid her brother Barclay a visit.
All the memories of his childhood rushed
into her mind, and she seemed once more
to see him as Master Sprightly in his
mother’s arms; and she rejoiced to hear
him preach to large congregations after the
experiences and trials of his later years. She
was much refreshed by the eleven visits she
paid in as many weeks, hearing eleven
ministers, and seeing fifty relations. Re-
turning home, she enjoyed the wild hills
unspeakably, followed by her train. Never
was air and scenery more congenial, the


retirement perfect, as she wandered by cliff
and sea-side, and yet not shut out from
society. The rigours of a north-east spring
were no drawback to her.
In 1867 Mrs Mortimer wrote: “ The
Quarterly has indeed made me look foolish,
but I always knew that the language of the
nursery must appear ridiculous to the learned.
The Testament has been translated into
Piccaninny language for the blacks, and if
that language save souls, who shall object?
Let me be foolish, for Christ’s sake, in the
eyes of the world.” In this connection it is
interesting to read the testimony of the Rev.
James Gilmour of the London Mission,
Peking, in his work, Among the Mongols.
He says, “ Even a Mongol, who is a scholar,
finds it difficult to understand the Gospel of
St Matthew. The proper names and the
Jewish allusions puzzle him. If he could
begin with Peep of Day, he would understand
the Bible better afterwards. How impor-
tant the kind of instruction given to young
converts! They are too often pushed on and


pushed forward, and required to do much
when what they need is to find something.”
In 1867 Harriet was married to Mr Lan-
caster, a widower with two sons grown up.
With charming frankness she told him her
whole history.
Mrs Mortimer was now much exercised in
mind as to her future abode. The Shering-
ham Parsonage was building on a terrace,
overlooking the village. When Mr Moore
took his family to live in it, should she
seek some dwelling near her relations, or
should she remain at The Rivulet, which
used to be the Rectory of Beeston? She
had the offer of purchasing it, an offer
Mr Moore urged her very strongly to accept.
A new Rectory could be built for Beeston.
After many anxious thoughts on the subject
she decided on remaining at Runton, and
buying The Rivulet, which she did in March.
She surrounded herself with children, and
thought her garden delightfully cheerful,
full of little figures running about. She
took great interest in a proposal made by a


young sailor to one of the girls she had
brought up, and she liked to see their
happiness together. The little ones had the
pleasure of bringing up a lamb, a triplet,
only two days old when it came to them.
In October 1868 Mr and Mrs Daniel Wilson
brought her their little boy, Edward, great-
grandson of the Bishop of Calcutta. He
was nearly seven, a good, hearty boy, and
very affectionate. She hoped he might
cheer her when the little Moores, her great
favourites, would be at Sheringham with
their parents. Harriet’s affection she found
very soothing, for though it had always been
her chief aim and purpose in the relation-
ships of life to serve God and bless those
around her, yet she said she felt that she
had many sins and infirmities, follies and
mistakes, to deplore.
Early in 1869 she spent fifty days visiting
relations and friends, and was much better
for the sight of them and for rest. When
the Moores were settled in their new
parsonage she continued to busy herself


teaching*, and began studying Latin with
Arnold’s book. She was very unwell in
May, owing to congestion of the liver, but
she persevered in walking out very often
among the hills. Her neighbours showed
her great kindness and attention, as did
Mr Moore, who did all he could to cheer
her, and allowed her to have his young son
as her companion. The little boy much en-
joyed her Bible lessons with the orphans,
each reading not a verse but a clause of the
chapter after the narrative had been related
to them. Edward also shared the lessons
with them. Mrs Mortimer said that she
felt very grateful for having all her facul-
ties, and a step as light and firm as at
twenty-five. She loved to take meals out-
of-doors, under the trees, when the weather
permitted.
In September Mr Starey brought her
another pupil, his little boy, always called
Mertino —a clever, studious child, who became
Edward Wilson’s fellow - student and com-
panion.


In October there was great excitement
about a vessel wrecked close to the cliff
near. She was laden with wheat, and bound
for Newcastle. Much of the wheat was
picked up on the sands, and brought to a
barn for sale for the owner of the vessel.
Wheat thus steeped in sea-water is better
than any other for sowing, so that the
farmers are glad to buy it. The lifeboat
went out and saved the lives of the three
hands on board the wreck.
The number of the year 1870 seemed to
Mrs Mortimer to strike a solemn sound and
toll the knell of life, yet should not disquiet
those who seek to live with Christ in the
heavens. The year witnessed several family
bereavements. Her youngest sister, herself
a widow, had lost a son of exceeding
promise, and, later, a grandson of angelic
sweetness. She had written his memoir.
“ How sweet the little sentence, ‘ I love
fader —I love mudder —I love everybody I
know,’ very unlike ordinary children. All
such fragments of truth how much more


valuable and interesting than the most
wonderful fabrications of genius! In the
trying moments of uncontrollable anguish
what fierce temptation they bring to hard
thoughts of God!—insidious sin! We need
to pray that ‘God is love’ may be written
above the graves of our precious ones as
they appear before our mental eyes.” The
death of this most lovely child, in one week,
was borne with perfect submission. He was
nearly four, and a sweeter and more engag-
ing child could not have been, the joy and
delight of his parents.
Another death was that of Mrs Mortimer’s
youngest uncle. He had been unable to
sleep for many days and nights, and was
afflicted with blindness and deafness, yet
continually praying aloud and repeating
texts such as Isaiah xviii., “Though your sins
be as scarlet.” “It is truly edifying,” she
wrote, “when holy men feel sin so acutely.”
In June Mrs Mortimer visited Malvern on
Mr Moore’s account. His health was much
benefited there by Dr Henderson’s hot-water


treatment. She walked half-way up the
highest hill, and felt her powers of climb-
ing were a great mercy, and her ability of
enjoying life.
At home she said her days were peaceful
with the children, and she was much
delighted by visits from her brother Barclay
and others. She was greatly interested in
the education of the little boys and the
orphans, though Mr Moore’s children were
her special favourites. She was pleased to
see how fond Starey was of Latin. With-
out the boys she would have been dull,
sitting down to meals alone. They occupied
her most of the day, and in the even-
ing she went on with her books. The
little greenhouse which she built, and a
very gentle tame parrot, were an amuse-
ment.
Writing to her sister, she referred to
2 Peter ii. 1, as proving that Christ died for
all men for even of those going to swift
destruction, it says “Denying the Lord that
bought them.”


Mr Wilton, she said, was delightful, a
naturalist and a poet. He preached a most
instructive sermon on “a corn of wheat”—
his matter equal to his language; his
publications, pearls of thought which are
still more interesting strung together.
There are so few pious poets, our poetry
shows the poverty of our Christianity.
“With my boys,” she wrote, “I am most
particular about reading, insisting on the
right pauses. It is surprising how soon the
art of making them can be acquired, as well
as the habit of speaking out the last word.
Good reading is an acquisition that renders
a boy’s knowledge profitable and interesting
to others. With Edward I hope the third
time will do what the second failed to
accomplish. But who shall overcome the
tendency to jumble? He is not deficient in
power, but in reflecting and seeing the
point. Yet he may prove a blessing, for the
race is not to the swift. It is amazing to
see the boys’ enthusiasm about their Latin.
Starey has counted 350 words he knows, all


classified grammatically. He is charmed to
learn anything new.”
It was a great pleasure to her when Mrs
Bosanquet came for a week, and that week
was often in her thoughts. The beginning
and end of life seemed brought together in
it. The companion of her first walks in
London streets, the eager fairy-tale teller,
transformed into that dear, quiet old lady,
full of loving thoughts about the thirty
beings dependent on her care, all true, living
creatures, not unsubstantial fairies. None of
the coal waggons passing, such as used to
drown her voice, but great attention neces-
sary not to lose the sensible, kind discourse
of the ever-beloved companion.
She said she felt very well, but was often
so tired at night she could hardly keep her
eyes open, and often made herself ill by
resisting the feeling and sitting up till one,
to the great injury of her eyes. She said
that proofs, letters, teaching, guests, filled up
the day, and thus her pen was often a sloth-
ful servant of a full heart.
N


Sonnet by the Rev. R. Wilton,
Rector of Londesborough,
On the Author of Peep of Day.
Where woodbine, mixt with many a rose, embowers
Her chosen home remote, in garlands sweet;
And solemn murmurs of old ocean greet
Her sheltered garden walks and cherished flowers; —
She plies her gifted pen through lonely hours,
Or with her orphans gathered round her feet,
She duly takes the teacher’s arduous seat,
Offering to God her consecrated powers—
But all the while a multitude unseen,
Thousands of boys and girls, a rosy band,
Encircle her, the children’s sceptred Queen,
Who sways the little ones to Christ’s command,
Training fair flowers for gardens in the sky,
Where roll the waves of vast Eternity!


CHAPTER XII
CLOSING DAYS
Mrs Mortimer wrote that a visit from her
dear Maria Dennis enchained her with her
company, for there was not only congeniality
of sentiment, but a close resemblance of
tastes, and her wisdom and address in train-
ing servants and children were a great
example, her love and labour for souls was
very profitable, and she reaped as she sowed,
for many seemed to turn to God who came
under her shadow.
The education of the boys was most
absorbing. Starey was as clever as could
be desired. There was something pleasing
about Edward, though, as far as learning
was concerned, he was marble to receive
and sand to retain. Yet reiteration could
do something, it was hoped.
Mr Moore’s invaluable curate broke down


from overwork, which seemed to be a lesson
not to labour immoderately, but to remember
the advice of Jethro. Yet Mrs Mortimer was
over - fatiguing herself considerably. She,
however, allowed herself to be persuaded to
leave home, and rest awhile with relations.
She much felt the death of Lady Buxton and
of Mrs Forester, who died in the midst of
her labours; seventy or eighty mothers
followed her to the grave, and many traced
their hopes of eternity to her quiet, solid
teaching, for she was a close reader of
Scripture, and had profited greatly from
Mr Howells’ teaching, whilst wisdom, good
sense, and rectitude were her characteristics.
She had died after a few days’ illness, from
bronchitis, from which Mrs Mortimer also
suffered; but she was cheered by a visit from
Mr and Mrs Langston. They took great
interest in other people, and in all subjects,
and spoke kindly of every one. His power
of mind and of walking very remarkable at
seventy-nine.
In October Mrs Mortimer wrote: “ You


ask how I am. My health is good; my pulse
good and steady. But I confess to a weak-
ness of body I never felt before. I am glad
of assistance when I rise from my chair, and
I can scarcely creep a quarter of a mile; yet
I can eat as well as ever, and sleep better,
and I enjoy this place very much, and like
to watch the falling leaves, rushing cascade,
and roaring sea.” In November she was
very stiff and full of pain. In December she
again visited friends, feeling, she said, “ more
than ripe and ready to fall from the tree.”
The beginning of 1873 found her seriously
ill, and she was tenderly nursed by relations
and friends in succession. She sometimes
suffered much, but the warm days of June
brought back a feeling something like health
to her veins. She had lost her powers, though
not her faculties; she could only walk a few
steps, and write slowly. She also found it
difficult to spell. She attributed her illness
chiefly to late hours and incessant teaching.
Her doctor considered the giddiness and
occasional sickness were signs of cerebral


weakness. Her speech was affected, yet she
was cheerful, and enjoyed the society of her
friends. She would sit and smile at con-
versation without speaking much herself.
Her doctor said she was the only person he
ever met who wished to die. Little Edward
wrote her an affectionate letter, and so did
Florence Wright: “Will you allow me to
say how long you have been loved and re-
vered : your name as a household word,
tenderly and solemnly associated with un-
dying memories of bright young readers
and admirers long since entered into rest.
One of my most precious possessions is a
well-worn copy of Peep of Day, the early
delight and study of two nephews who
perished at Cawnpore, aged nineteen and
twenty-one.”
Mr Moore had a very serious illness at
this time, and was ordered rest. Starey had
an excellent character from his schoolmaster.
The year of great illness obliged her to
send away her boys. She entreated her
friends to beware of over-exerting their


minds, for fear of a sudden breakdown.
Everything had become a fatigue to her.
She was weary of life, and longed to be
unclothed, though waiting for the Son from
Heaven.
In December she joined Mr Moore at
Clifton—s Sion Hill,—and returned home, via
Trowbridge, in March. It was a pleasure
once again to stroll in her garden, and
dine in her bower. She found this passing
SAveet; but only was able to totter about,
having become so weak and unequal to any
bodily exertion. Yet she suffered no pain.
However, she persevered in teaching her
orphans, and also a very promising little
Jewish boy, named Alexander, to whom, in
September, was added another little boy,
named Woodward. She was able to do this
because both boys were extremely good.
They liked reading, and learned willingly.
Though the power was denied her of walking
and of writing with ease, she acknowledged
the mercy of continued sight, hearing, and
intellect. Her vitality became lowered; she


lived in a maze, and became slow of speech.
When she asked the doctor how long he
thought she might live, he said, “Not five”
(meaning “ not five years ”). She longed to
depart, “ because of no use.” The doctor
enjoined as much rest and quiet as possible.
Her friend’s husband, Mr Morris, died so
suddenly there was no time for even a look
of farewell. Having desired his shoulder to
be rubbed, he was asked if it were better,
and replied, “ Yes, thank you,” expiring
almost immediately. He was seventy-four.
Mertino Starey, coming on a visit to
Runton, was taken ill with congestion of
one lung. He remained twenty weeks at
The Rivulet, attended by his mother and a
nurse. He was partially restored to health,
and returned home to Lambeth; but he died
there, after an illness of five months. Susan,
the eldest of the orphans, had gone to
Rockhampton, and was nearly shipwrecked
on the way. Very lonely and hardworked
at first, she often longed for her happy
Sundays at Runton. Eventually, she married


a good man, and became the happy mother
of a little son, to whom she gave the name
of Alfred Mortimer.
In December 1876 Mrs Mortimer’s failing
health compelled her, to her great grief, to
give up the little boys, Woodward and
Freddy Alexander. The father of the latter
wrote saying that words failed to express his
gratitude; but he should ever pray God to bless
her who had been so kind to him and his.
A letter from her brother, Mr R. C. L.
Bevan, pleased her much. In it he said that
he was indebted to her more than to anyone
for the knowledge of those divine realities
which give peace in the midst of trouble. Her
heart loved to dwell on this brother’s birth, and
the happiness it brought her, and therefore his
words gave her great joy, wearied and weak
as she was. Mr Moore was untiringly devoted
to her throughout this period.
In the spring of 1877 her brother-in-law,
Mr Bosanquet, died, and her widowed sister
came on a visit. Mrs Mortimer tried to be
patient and grateful for the freedom from pain,


the power of sleep, and, above all, the good hope
she enjoyed. This hope was not founded on
anything in herself, but on the one sure founda-
tion, Jesus the loving Saviour. Later in this
same year, 1877, she with much labour wrote
the questions for her book on the Kings.
Mrs Mortimer spent the winter of 1877 and
1878 at Sheringham Rectory, hardly able to
speak, sometimes hardly able to hear. She
was able to walk only a few steps, but could
understand as well as ever, and enjoy the
Record. She had a kind nurse called Harris,
and was watched over and considered in every
way. Her hearing was restored in May, and
in June she returned home to The Rivulet,
free of aches and pains, and able to go out
in the donkey-carriage.
Mr Sutton was preaching one evening on
the cliff, and she was so anxious to hear
him, that she was induced to sit there in
her little carriage listening till she got a
severe chill. Next morning when her nurse
and little maid entered her room, they saw
that the right side of her face was much


swollen, that she eonld not speak, and moved
with great difficulty, dragging her limbs.
But she liked still to see friends and hear
of them.
The Sunday morning following she ex-
tended her arms in welcome to her niece
and held her hands a long time. The doctor
said she knew exactly what she wanted,
though unable to express it in words, and
her writing was not always decipherable.
He admired her patience, and said she was
going on well, but must be kept as quiet as
possible. She was quite conscious that she
was approaching the end of the weary pil-
grimage, yet she seemed a little better when
her niece had again to leave her in bed in
the upper chamber, from whose square
window she had been wont to wave her
farewells.
Less than a week later, she took every one
by surprise, coming downstairs at half-past
seven for morning prayers. It was her great
love for Merty Moore and her desire to see
him, which induced her to make this effort.


She then showed his father what she had
written on her little slate, “A nerve doctor,
where ? ” and, u Do you know of one ?” Dr
Bateman of Norwich saw her in consequence.
He thought her case was one of softening
of the brain.
The last day of July her dear friend Miss
Maria Dennis came to see her, and found
her in the old schoolroom downstairs, now
become her bedroom. She thought her very
feeble both in mind and body, though pleased
to see her. Next time she came she was in
the drawing - room, and though unable to
speak, yet able with her slate to convey
several things which were on her mind.
The following week she seemed weaker,
but was very sweet and loving, enjoyed
hearing hymns and texts, and was inter-
ested in an account of the telephone. She
had a fall in August which left her so much
weaker that two people could not get her
across the hall without the help of a chair.
Yet with her accustomed energy she wanted
to be moving all the time. A look of happy


calm lighted her face as she joined her hands
and showed Miss Dennis what she had written
on her slate. “If you were to stay ? She
was greatly pleased by Miss Dennis promis-
ing to come. She loved to have Merty and
his father near her. She always did every-
thing she could for herself, and liked her
nurse to go to prayers as well as herself.
After another alarming attack she appeared
dying, but rallied, and was delighted when
Miss Dennis came to stay. She never failed
to stretch out her arms to her and hold her
hand a long time. Love was what she
craved. Often she would listen to “Rock
of Ages,” and “Oh the bitter pain and
sorrow,” hymns she always loved. It was
very touching to sit by her bedside and see
her try in vain to speak. When she could
not even write, she heard and understood
everything, and drank in Scripture words.
Hearing of the last attack, her niece le-
turned early the Sunday morning following;
the myrtle bushes all covered with white
blossoms, and the clematis in snowy bunches


hung over the little porch. The dear patient
took her hand and smiled, but she looked
distressed, and her eyes were hollow. A
beautiful print of our Lord walking on the
sea hung opposite her bed. She was carried
into the drawing-room next day, and even
walked a little between her attendants, and
the following afternoon her youngest brother
came and pleased her by repeating texts.
But he felt so much affected when he entered
the room and saw her, that he had to con-
trol his emotion. She gazed earnestly and
inquiringly into his face, unable to smile,
but trying to show her love and pleasure,
and pulling him to her by both hands. The
sight was most touching. He repeated Matt,
xi. 28. She then soon became very restless.
The next morning she set her heart on
joining the breakfast party in her blue
wrapper, and was quite amused by Sutton’s
coloured catalogue. She saw her brother
again, her eyes speaking volumes, as if to
say, “It must be very very soon,” and she
beckoned and waved him her good-bye, he


promising to come again. She slept but one
hour that night, but was so sweet, it was a
pleasure to do anything for her. Next
morning, Thursday, 22nd August, she looked
much aged, so thin and tired, but she came
to breakfast again, and when she was
appealed to as to Dr Mac Neile’s age, she
wrote upon her slate, “Btay.” Her brain,
recording the age, was yet confused as to
spelling. How great was the trial of speech-
lessness to one specially delighting in profit-
able conversation! How distressing for her
friends when unable to gather or guess what
was in her mind. After breakfast she went
for the last time into her drawing-room, but
soon desired to return to bed, where she
listened to some Scripture reading, took
some nourishment, and presently fell asleep.
As she slept, a shadow fell across her face,
and her mouth was a little drawn on one
side. Miss Dennis came instantly and sum-
moned the household. She was sleeping in
her niece’s arms; a looking-glass held to her
lips remained undimmed. Gentler than to


an infant death had come, and even her eyes
had remained fast closed till the breath
ceased at twenty minutes past eleven in the
morning of August 22, 1878. The doctor said
it was syncope. “So He giveth His beloved
sleep.” Her brother came again, but she was
there no more to see him.
Tuesday, August 27, her remains were laid
in Sheringham Churchyard; her brother and
son chief mourners, her nephews and niece,
and little band of orphans with their matron.
Her old friends, Canon Forester and Mr Mac-
Anally, read the service most impressively.
Long ago she had told her boys to pick
the brightest flower in the garden, and wear
it for joy when they heard she was gone.
Loving hands placed a wreath of her own
clematis and myrtle upon her grave.
She dwells no longer by the rivulet she
loved so well, but there is a River whose
streams make glad the city of the Redeemed.
Her friend Mr Cope wrote: “It seems sad
to cross the threshold of The Rivulet, with
its once flowing fountain congealed and ex


hausted. But the living water is transferred
to a happier scene, where it is springing up
to life everlasting. The day seems dark
to you when the ‘light in the dwelling’
herself lies lifeless, yet with you only is
the darkness, light ineffable is with her
now.”
Miss Bowles wrote that she had been
doubly drawn to her memory “by the de-
parture of her long - beloved friend, Dr
Mac Neile. Singular they should have fol-
lowed so quickly—my two oldest, best loved,
most admired friends; his end most peaceful
and painless, conscious to the last, though
unable to speak. She had said to me in one
of her latest letters how much grieved she
would be to outlive the dear Dean” —and
she did not.
Her epitaph was written by her old friend,
the Rev. R. Wilton.
“ She loved her Lord, and lived to make Him known,
O’er all the land her fruitful words are sown.
Children unnumbered rise to call her blest,
Drawn by her voice to Jesus and to rest.”
o


On the other side of the monument of
granite:
In memory of Favell Lee, Author of Peep of Day,
Second daughter of David Bevan, of Fosbury, Wilts,
And widow of Rev. Thomas Mortimer.
Born 14th July 1802—Died 22nd Aug. 1878.
“ Precept upon precept, line upon line.”—ls. xxviii. 13.
She left the care of her books to her
nieces; they regarded them as a sacred trust.
The many changes all over the world which
have taken place since the geography books
were first written have been faithfully em-
bodied, but with great pains, to keep in view
her great desire of promoting the kingdom
of God.
THE RIVERSIDE PRESS LIMITED, ST BERNARD’S ROW, EDINBURGH


Books for the Little Ones
THE PEEP OF DAY
OR, A SERIES OF THE EARLIEST RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION
THE INFANT MIND IS CAPABLE OF RECEIVING
With Verses illustrative of the Subjects
New and Copyright Edition
With many Illustrations. Cloth Boards , 2s. 6d.
THE GOOD SHEPHERD SERIES
With many Illustrations. Imperial Bvo.
Coloured Paper Boards, is.
The Good Shepherd. The Life of the Saviour,
for Children
From Adam to Moses
The Shepherd King
Stories from the Acts of the Apostles
Children of the Bible
Children's Natural History
Easy Steps for Little Folks
Little Harry at the Seaside
Little Harry's First Journeys
Pictures for Little Toddlers
Tales of Bible Heroes
Tales Told in the Nursery
True Stories for the Little Ones
Walks and Talks in the Zoo, By Henry Scherren,
F.Z.S.


The Quiet Hour Series
METHODS OF SOUL CULTURE
By the Rev. J. A. Clapperton, M.A.
Fcap. Svo, cloth gilt, is. 6cl.
MUSINGS FOR QUIET HOURS
By the Rev. G. S. Barrett, D.D., of Norwich.
Fcap. Svo, cloth gilt, ir. 6 d.
MEDITATIONS FOR QUIET MOMENTS
By the Rev. J. H. Jowett, M.A., of Carr’s Lane,
Birmingham.
Fcap. Svo, cloth gilt, is. 6 d.
HOW TO ATTAIN FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD
By the Rev. J. A. Clapperton, M.A.
Fcap. 8vo, cloth gilt, if. 6 d.
THE WAY INTO THE KINGDOM s Of, Thoughts on
the Beatitudes
By the Rev. J. D. Jones, M.A., B.D., of Bourne-
mouth.
Fcap. Svo, cloth gilt, is. 6 d.
FRUITFUL OR FRUITLESS s A Book of Quiet Meditations
By the late Rev. Canon Hoare, M.A.
Fcap. Svo, cloth gilt, gilt top, If. 6 d.
LONDON! THE RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY
56 Paternoster Row, and 65 St Paul's Churchyard








