

■ 4 /V/ l f AJh'irO
SECOND EDITION.
THE
ENGLAND OF THE PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND AS AN ENGLISH MIDDLE-CLASS
EMIGRATION-FIELD.
■r!*- i
& Hecture.
ARTHUR CLAYDEU,
AUTHOR OF 1 ‘ THE REVOLT OP THE FIELD,” “ LETTERS ON CANADA,” ETC, ETC.
TOGETHER WITH
A Reprint of Letters to the Daily News on The English Agricultural
Labourer in New Zealand; Notes of a Month’s Trip on
Horseback through the North Island of New Zeala/nd,
* and of a Forty Days’ Trip to Australia; and a
Few Plain Directions for Intending Emigrants.
EIGHT FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS.
emigration offices,
LACEBY,
Near GRIMSBY.
LONDON:
WYMAN <fc SONS, 81, GREAT QUEEN STREET,
lincoln’s-inn fields, w.c.
1879.
Price One Shilling .




THE
ENGLAND OF THE PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND AS AN ENGLISH MIDDLE-CLASS
EMIGRATION-FIELD.
ARTHUR CLAYDENT,
AUTHOR OP “THE REVOLT OF THE FIELD,” “ LETTERS ON CANADA,” ETC. BTC.
TOGETHER WITH
A Reprint of Letters to the Daily News on The English Agricultural
Labourer in New Zealand; Notes of a Month's Trip on
Horseback through the North Island of New Zealand,
and of a Forty Days' Trip to Australia; and a
Few Plain Directions for Intending Emigrants.
EIGHT FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS.
jgiptflnft CP&t'tl'olT.
LONDON:
WYMAN & SONS, 81, GREAT QUEEN STREET,
LINCOLN VINN FIELDS, W.C.
1879.


"WYMAN AND SONS, PRINTERS,
GREAT QUEEN STREET, LINCOLN’S INN FIELDS;
LONDON, W.C.


PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
The sale of nearly Three thousand Copies of the “ England
of the Pacific ” in little more than a month proves the wide-
spread interest felt in New Zealand Emigration. It proves
also that the efforts of the writer to place the Colony before
the public in a somewhat more attractive form than is usual
among writers on the subject have not been unsuccessful.
One or two additions have been made with the view of
meeting a want for more definite information on the part
of farmers who contemplate a removal to the sunny South.
The two spirited enterprises which are described should
meet the case of small capitalists who are looking for farms
of from 200 to 300 acres. The high character of the men
who are conducting them is a guarantee of good faith.
The Piako Swamp reclamation on the North Island will
prove almost as important to New Zealand as the draining of
the Lincolnshire Fens did in years gone by to England ; and
the bold scheme of the New Zealand Agricultural Company for
subdividing their splendid estate of 300,000 acres in the South
Island, into farms of from 200 to 300 acres each, is fraught
with untold advantages to British emigrants. On the success
of these enterprises very much depends. As soon as it is
demonstrated that English capital can be profitably invested
in New Zealand farms a new era will have dawned upon her
history. The British farmer will betake himself to a country
so rich in promise and so filled with beauty. Nor will the old
home suffer by the exodus. A diminished competition for
farms will speedily bring down the rents to something like a
fair price, just as the extensive emigration of the redundant
labour has raised its market value. Nor is this all. Every
successful colonist becomes a customer in the home market.
The prosperous settler sends his orders for the incomparable
manufactures of England, and hence the spectacle witnessed


at New Zealand and other colonial ports, where acres of
wharfage are covered over with valuable machinery and other
imports from the old country.
Fully believing that in helping on this work he is advancing
the best interests of his country, the writer commends this
second and larger edition of the “ England of the Pacific ;; to
the favourable regard of the British public.
London, August, 1879.
PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
So much has been written respecting New Zealand that some
apology seems necessary for adding to it. The following
Lecture is, however, not intended so much for instruction as
for illustration. The valuable Handbook of Sir Julius Yogel,
the Agent-General for New Zealand, and a Paper read by
him before the Colonial Institute, pretty well exhaust the
subject as far as general information is concerned. The aim
of the compiler of this lecture has been to give a few life
sketches illustrative of the position and prospects of English-
men settled in New Zealand. His visit to the colony was for
the express purpose of seeing for himself how the emigrant
from the old home took to his new one.
The letters to the Daily News embodying the results of his
investigations are reprinted at the request of gentlemen
interested in the welfare of New Zealand, who deemed their
generally favourable testimony as specially valuable on account
of its absolutely independent character. The lecture, as
indicated by the title, traverses a somewhat different line,
being intended to illustrate New Zealand possibilities as
regards Middle-class Emigrants rather than actualities as
regards the Labourers. Combined, it is hoped that their
publication may be useful in overcoming prejudices or mis-
apprehensions which prevent multitudes from availing them-
selves of the splendid advantages of the England of the
Pacific.
For the pictorial illustrations the author is indebted to the
courtesy of Sir Julius Yogel, from whose Handbook of New
Zealand they are borrowed.
London, July , 1879.


THE ENGLAND OF THE PACIFIC.
New Zealand—The Labourer’s Paradise—Fifty-four Shillings per Week
versus Twelve —Cost of Living—Visit to an English Agricultural La-
bourer—Who should not go to New Zealand—Difference between
English Three per Cents, and New Zealand Eight—£3oo a year versus
£64o—Sunshine versus Gloom—Openings for English Tradesmen, Manu-
facturers, Farmers, and Market-gardeners—Evidences of High Civiliza-
tion Nelson Dunedin Christchurch Wellington—Auckland—
Statistics of Book Imports, Telegraph and Post-Office Services, Sayings’
Banks, Beer, Wine, and Spirit Imports—Visit to two English Middle-
Class Settlers—An ex-Shoemaker’s History—A Berkshire Ironmonger
as a New Zealand Farmer —The English Character of New Zealand
Life—lts supposed Loneliness—The Maoris—An Irish Settlement—
The Voyage—Life on Board Ship—Objects of Interest en route —
Conclusion.
[T lias long appeared to me that the subject of emigration
must soon occupy a foremost position among our social
questions. However wo may feel disposed to hug this little
island home of ours —and I will yield to no one in appreciation
of its unique advantages, for I verily believe it to be the most de-
sirable place of residence in the world for those who can afford a
luxurious life —it is getting clearer and clearer every year that
some of us must, sooner or later, swarm off. If any one doubts
this, he has but to insert an advertisement in the papers for a
clerk or private secretary, at a salary say of £l5O a year, about
what a navvy gets in New Zealand, and the choked condition of
his letter-box for the next week will quite settle the point. The
fact is indisputable. The home is very snug. It is abundantly
comfortable. Nowhere, on the whole, may we find better
quarters; but, as a matter of fact, it is too small. The alter-
native of emigration has to be faced. Nor need this alter-
native fill us with alarm. After devoting some years to the
study of our emigration-fields, I venture to strip the bugbear
of expatriation of its terrors, and I will also do my best to
strip emigration of its disgrace.
It is high time the work of colonization took a fitting posi-
tion in our social economy. Emigration has hitherto been
looked upon too much as a last resort of the unfortunate; and
I have heard a Canadian remark with bitterness, in view of
the Ne'er-do-wells who have flocked to his shores from the old


country, “ One would think it was written over our entrance-
gates— f Rubbish shot here/ ” Broken-down merchants,
family scapegraces, younger sons who have failed to get into
either the army or the church, and paupers of every degree of
moral feebleness —these have too generally constituted the
bulk of our human freightage to the colonies. So that, as a
matter of fact, it has come to be regarded as a sort of social
disgrace to have turned emigrant, and the friends of the
supposed unfortunate individual feel under an obligation to
apologize for the step, and a sympathetic circle of acquaint-
ances hope for the best for “ poor Jones. ”
Now, ladies and gentlemen, one of the deepest convictions
which I have brought home from the Antipodes is that it is
high time a new departure were taken in the emigration line.
Instead of regarding a removal to the “ Greater Britain” as
a sort of voluntary transportation, I would have the magni-
ficent domain kept before the energetic youth of England as
a noble field for the performance of their life-work. The
New Zealand whose hills and dales I have been exploring,
whose towns and cities I have visited, and whose boundless
resources I have seen revealed, is no mere refuge for the
destitute. It is a glorious second home for Englishmen, a
country every way worthy of its illustrious parentage, and
destined to take its place in the world as the England of the
Pacific.
My object in this lecture is more especially to place New
Zealand before the overweighted Middle-class population of
England. A thousand times, as I have viewed the varied
openings for skill and enterprise everywhere presented, the
wish has risen in my breast, “ Would that some hundreds of
the hard-pressed middle classes of England could be persuaded
to break away from their moorings, and following the example
of the labourers, come over to this beautiful southern isle and
enjoy its splendid advantages.” My presence here to-night is
an outcome of this aspiration. Much, I know, has already
been said and written touching the sunny South. Very re-
cently the versatile novelist, Mr. Anthony Trollope, has given
us a deliverance on the subject. I have not read his book, as
I prefer going to him for amusement to sitting at his feet for
instruction.
So far as I had pushed my inquiries in the direction of New
Zealand life characteristics and possibilities as an English
emigration-field, previous to my recent trip there, nothing
really satisfactory had come before my view. I was quite
satisfied with its advantages to the working man, and had un-
stintedly urged emigration thither as a panacea for his chronic


social ills. It was not necessary to take a voyage of thirty
thousand miles to convince oneself that it was a safe course for
a man to exchange a wage of from ten to twelve shillings a
week for one of from two to three pounds. The immense ad-
vantage was so obvious as to leave one with only this matter
of wonder, that thousands instead of hundreds did not eagerly
rush to secure it. lam glad to be able to say here, that after
a careful and somewhat exhaustive inquiry on the spot, this
previously-formed conviction touching our English labourers
has only been deepened and confirmed. New Zealand is,,
beyond dispute, the labourer's paradise. There he is emphati-
cally master of the position. All that is comprised in that
summary of his ambition which is set forth in the following
doggerel rhythm :
“ Eight hours’ work, and eight hours’ play,
Eight hours’ sleep, and eight bob a day,”
is more than realized.
Almost the first inquiry on the subject which I made on
landing at Nelson, elicited the following facts : A number of
unskilled workmen, that is, mere shovel and pick men, en-
gaged in removing soil from a hill side for harbour improve-
ments had just successfully struck for an advance of one
shilling a day upon a wage of eight shillings for eight hours'
work ! Here, then, was not only the “ eight hours' work," 1
and “ eight bob a day," but another shilling, just half his old
English total wage, into the bargain ! And if anything fur-
ther was needed to prove the case as regarded the labouring
man, it was only necessary to inquire as to what this fifty-
four shillings per week really meant. If in New Zealand the
man had to pay five shillings for what he could get in England
for one, the case might not be so good after all, and it might
be a moot question whether, to use a somewhat slang but ex-
pressive phrase, the game was really “ worth the candle.
But almost the first thing I inquired about, —the cost of living,,
revealed the somewhat startling fact that instead of the
English shilling's worth costing five there, the five-shilling
English leg of mutton could be bought in that very New
Zealand town for one shilling. Nor were the other necessaries
of life much less cheap. Bread and flour were about the same
price as at home; sugar a trifle dearer, but decidedly better;
tea the same price; fruits and vegetables were dear, except
cherries, peaches, and potatoes. The former of these, cherries
and peaches, were plentiful as blackberries all through the
season, December and January. Nor was there any great
difference in the prices of general drapery, clothing and boots.


I was surprised at the similarity to English prices, and it
seemed abundantly clear that in a few years' time trade com-
petition would fully equalize them.
Here, then, as regarded the working man, the case was per-
fect. Never was social redemption more complete. He leaves
England a social Pariah, and finds himself there a man. A
stranger to a good dinner in the old home, he finds himself in
the new one surfeited with food; the sport of circumstances,
and the prey of parish-officers and recruiting-serjeants in
England, he finds himself in New Zealand an important factor
in the social argument. I met one of them in a road at work
one day, and, as was my wont, I at once accosted him. He
had been out about three years. In England his average wage
was twelve shillings per week. He had heard the voice of
•Joseph Arch, and had cast in his lot with the “National
Agricultural Labourers’ Union”; for this his employer had
scowled upon him and wished him at the devil. Instead of
gratifying the pious wish of his employer, a Kentish farmer,
ho availed himself of the generous offer of the New Zealand
Government, and came out with a shipload of emigrants.
“And what do you get per week ?” I inquired.
“ Tw r o guineas, sir, all the year round,” he replied.
“ That’s rather different from your old-country prospects,”
I suggested.
“Why yes, sir,” ho answered with a knowing turn of his
head; “ instead of a big house to look forward to in my old
age, I have a little one, but then he’s all my own.”
“ Oh, then you have already got a house of your own, have
you ?” I put tentatively.
“ Yes, sir,” he answered, “ there he be,” pointing with his
rake along the road to a pretty little verandahed cottage stand-
ing in a plot of ground by the road-side. “I am just adding
a couple of rooms to him. Stop up and have a look at un,
sir.”
I did so. The wife was at home and invited me to a seat in
her parlour. It was a comfortably-furnished room, with a
sofa and various little knick-knacks, which you rarely see in
a working-man’s cottage —in the English rural districts at
any rate. The new rooms were a kitchen and a spare bed-
room ; behind, stretched out the good-sized garden, filled
already with vegetables and fruit-trees. I learnt from the
wife that with the exception of about fifty pounds, all was paid
for. Here, then, was further demonstration as to what New
Zealand meant for the British workman ! Any sober and in-
dustrious man could easily secure as the result of his toil, in
an incredibly short time, a freehold house and garden. Ob-




.
■
.
,


serving a neatly-clad little girl entering the front door, I soon
learnt that she'' had been to school, a free school it appeared,
one of six or seven to be found in the city of Nelson. I was
immensely gratified by the picture, and recalled to mind a
spiteful letter which I had read years before in the North
Wilts Herald , wherein I was advised not to show my face in
the West Berks district, lest the relatives of the unfortunate
labourers whom I had induced to leave for New Zealand should
wreak their vengeance upon me !
I laughingly alluded to this letter in a subsequent gossip
with this labourer, and his reply was pretty much to the
point, “ That feller, sir, couldn’t ’a known what he were a
saying.” lam afraid, however, he did know, for, in spite of
his anonymous signature, I detected in the scurrilous epistle
the hand of a time-serving tradesman who took advantage of
my absence from home to write what he would not have dared
to utter to my face. Such men abound in our small towns,
and are the anathema maranatha of every manly soul.
But as a middle-class Englishman, and painfully aware of
the severe pressure to which multitudes were being subjected
at home by the stagnation of trade and various other causes, I
was especially anxious to ascertain how far New Zealand
would meet their case. My presence here to-night in the
altogether novel character of a public lecturer is for the pur-
pose of laying before you, as I have already intimated, the
results of my investigation and inquiries.
What are the chances or opportunities presented by New
Zealand to the average middle-class capitalist, whether trades-
man, manufacturer, or agriculturist ? Is there a reasonable
prospect of his reaping any substantial benefit from a removal
to that distant colony ? To these inquiries I now address my-
self with a determination to be as honest and impartial as
I endeavoured to be while accompanying Mr. Arch on his
mission of inquiry touching the noble colony of Canada. In
the first place, then, I would clear the way by giving an
opinion as to who should not emigrate. I was accosted by a
smartly got-up young fellow on board a steamer one day, who
wanted my opinion as to the prospects presented by New Zea-
land for clerks—bank clerks, and such-like. I replied, Utter
ruin and self-destruction j and I repeat the verdict here. Such
men are not wanted there. The peculiarities of colonial life
are wholly unsuited to that artificial existence in which, for the
most part, they live and move and have their being. Nor
should fine young ladies, who are unused to domestic work,
and whose heaven of heavens is a drawing-room couch with
the latest novel before them, think of going to New Zealand.


It is not my province here to-night to say what this sadly
increasing section of our English society should do with them-
selves as a refuge from that blank despair which the state of
the matrimonial market threatens a large proportion of them
with. I can only say what they should not do, and that is, go
to New Zealand. Alas, for such amid the exigencies of the
life they would find there ! True women are indeed needed in
our colonies; and I know of no grander mission than his or
hers would be who would organize some scheme for removing
from the overcrowded English homes a few thousands of their
energetic and bright-eyed daughters to the towns and farms of
New Zealand. How much their beneficent ministry is needed
there to counteract the deteriorating circumstances of the
incessant toil no one who has visited the settlers' homes re-
quires to be told. lam afraid schoolmasters and professionals
of all kinds dare not entertain hopes of advancement from a
removal to the Antipodes. So far as I could see, there is every
prospect, thanks to the splendid public school system of the
country, of the home supply for all the genteel professions
greatly exceeding the demand. The suicidal vanity of bring-
ing up children with a view to their wearing broadcloth and
idling away their time behind bank counters or at lawyers'
desks, is not confined to the mother country. The Mrs.
Brown of a New Zealand city has much in common with her
namesake at home. She is very apt to think that her
Frederick, dressed like a gentleman and sporting a lot of
jewellery, is a much finer sight than the same unique being
would be at work behind his father's bench or guiding his
father's plough.
I need not stop to indicate the utter ludicrousness of the
bare idea of a Pall Mall exquisite finding himself in a colonial
town. However desirable it might be for such idlers to quit
their country for their country's good, they must not go to
New Zealand. The paradise of the toiler would prove the
purgatory of the self-indulgent idler.
There is one class, however, outside of the industrial, which
I have often thought, while in New Zealand, might emigrate
there with immense advantage. I refer to those who derive
their modest incomes from investments in English stock.
Take, for example, the case of a gentleman who is blessed with
half a dozen lads, and whose fortune consists of £IO,OOO in
the Three per Cents. He gets his £3OO a year, and has to
pinch in some quiet corner of the land to hold his own in
society. Now let me place him in New Zealand. £B,OOO he
could invest on security almost equal to that of the English Three
per Cents, at eight per cent., or, if he were of an enterprising


disposition, lie might get ten per cent. A gentleman, just
before I left New Zealand, advertised £5,000 to let out on
mortgage, and before six hours were passed he had found a
perfectly safe investment at twelve per cent, per annum. I
will, however, for the sake of argument, take the lower figure,
eight per cent. This would give him an income of £640, and
with the remaining £2,000 (less the amount spent in removal
and outfit) he could buy a good home with from ten to twenty
acres of land. Here would be occupation in the shape of a
small farm, orchard, and garden. For £5 he could buy a
milking cow, and other stock proportionately cheap. £4OO
would put him up a seven or eight-roomed house. I say
nothing about the exquisite climate, for which he would ex-
change the bitter winds and gloomy atmosphere of England.
You must go, as I have gone, and luxuriate in the delicious
sunshine, to understand what that means. I have many times
stood on a lofty New Zealand hill and felt how poor all the
luxuries of home life were by comparison with the rich
splendour of the glorious scene before me. Yonder were still
loftier ranges of the everlasting hills, with their verdure-clad
slopes revelling in the brilliant sunlight. Trickling at their
base ran the sparkling mountain stream. All around were
the paddocks dressed in living green. In the distance the
huge flax-plants reared their handsome leaves, and here and
there rose above them the graceful blossom of the pampas
grass. Nearer at hand were laden cherry-trees and peaches
hastening to maturity. To the left were a few acres of original
bush, with here and there a grand old monarch of the forest
rearing his proud head high above the rest; and last, though not
least, you saw resting on the green turf one of these said
lordly monarchs prostrate. His time had come, and with a
thud which must have shaken the whole neighbourhood, the
huge fellow had fallen to the earth.
I must not, however, allow myself to be carried away into
the aesthetic. It is not sublime scenery that will tempt the
cool, practical middle-class Englishman whom I wish to
influence, to shift his moorings. I return, therefore, to plain
bread-and- cheese considerations.
What has New Zealand to offer to the tradesman, the
manufacturer, or the farmer ? I think a fair chance of com-
fortable competency. My grounds for this belief are these : —•
Most of the tradesmen, manufacturers, and farmers already
there either are doing well or have done well, and this in spite
of sundry disadvantages under which the average middle-
class Englishman would not lie. For instance, a large pro-
portion of the prosperous New Zealanders were originally


poor labouring men. They have gone plodding on year after
year, but there has not been much spirit of enterprise among
them. Comparatively few of the tradesmen import direct
from the English, American, or Continental markets. They
depend on middle-men, the merchants of the respective sea-
ports. This places them at a great disadvantage. Their
articles are too dear for general consumption or purchase, and
hence you find hundreds of homes without conveniences and
adornments which it should be the aim of the trader to supply.
And so of the local manufactures. They are too elementary,
and there are scores of new ones which might be opened up.
One of the most pressing needs of New Zealand just
now is a development of manufacturing power. Few coun-
tries are richer in raw material. I need scarcely refer to the
immense wool growth. The fact that 64,481/324 lbs. were
exported in the year 1877 eloquently pleads for men and
machinery to work it up at home. Then the thousands of
acres of flax running to waste call loudly for rope-manufactories
and other means of utilizing this valuable article. On one
farm which I visited there were scores of acres of ground
covered over with splendid flax which the owner was burning
off for want of a better use for it. The fine timber is in a fair
way of being utilized for manufacturing purposes. At
Auckland* and Dunedin there are large wood-ware manu-
factories, and what is still more significant, woollen manu-
factories are beginning to be heard of. Of course a large
trade is done in tinned meats, upwards of 18,000 cwt. being
exported in the year 1877; but why should there not be a
New Zealand Cross & Blackwell's, a Huntley & Palmer’s,
and a thousand other manufactures, whereby the natural
products of the soil could be utilized, and a better market be
opened up for the produce of the farm ? How infinitely
preferable would be the life of the artisan under the glorious
sunshine of New Zealand to that which he spends in the dirty,
smoke-begrimed, and every way wretched and unwholesome
working-class regions of Birmingham, Manchester, Bristol,
or even London.
Pew things are more striking to the New Zealand visitor
than the difference between the morale of the artisan there
and at home. In England he finds him habitually shabbily
clothed, badly housed, and with a general air of malignant
discontent hanging about him. His appearance too often
* A company has just been formed at Auckland with a capital of .£120,000
to develope a saw-mill, sash and door manufactory. The mills will turn out
15,000,000 ft. annually. There is also a sash and door manufactory at
Aratapu employing SOO hands.


after his day’s work is done, is that of a reckless, hopeless,
ill-used individual, with a dirty short pipe in his mouth, and
either on his way to the public-house or reeling home drunk
therefrom. How different the appearance of the average
New Zealand mechanic ! He has got a pretty little verandahed
house of his own. A piano is heard in the parlour,” In
the evening you see him out for a walk with his well-dressed
family. On Sunday “Mr. and Mrs. Brown” and their
children occupy prominent seats at church, contributing pro-
bably more towards the “ cause ” than the average middle-
class churchgoer in England. In a house where I stopped
for a little while at a New Zealand city, a young man employed
at some iron-works was boarding. He earned about 55 5. per
week and lived on 20s. An hour after he returned from the
works he was dressed like a gentleman, and off for a ride on
a handsome chestnut horse which he had bought. Another
night he and his workmates would be taking half a dozen
young ladies for a row in the harbour. I am afraid I should
have to search very diligently at our manufacturing centres
to find such a comfortably-circumstanced artisan.
I shall not soon forget the shock which I received while
travelling through the “Black country” in 1873 on my way
to Liverpool. 1 was going to Canada to see what hope there
was there for half a million of English toilers whose lot seemed
specially hard and trying. Alas ! as I looked out of the rail-
way carriage windows on the revolting homes of the workers
at Birmingham, Wolverhampton, and all along the route, I
felt a kind of philanthropic despair. The mission to which I
had devoted myself enlarged with an overwhelming ratio ; and
it was not until I had seen New Zealand that I dared hope for
any real redemption for the British toilers. Now I see a door
of hope. Beneath that sunny sky and amid the rich abundance
of those fertile fields I am sure there is a happier life to be
lived; and I shall experience a new joy in life if I am able to
induce English capitalists to make it possible for tens of
thousands of our working classes to go out and realize its
bliss.
As for agriculture, thousands of our young farmers should
take their capital and skill to New Zealand, and buying out
the poor farmers who are scratching over their labour-starved
acres, and getting a bushel of corn where they might take a
sack, show what may be done amid such matchless natural
advantages. At Nelson, for instance, a district generally'
pooh-poohed by the inhabitants of Canterbury or Otago, I
could point out farms by the score which might be bought for
from £SOO to £2,000. Knowing people on the spot will tell


you that the land is poor; but it is not the land but the farm-
ing which is at fault. Of the myriads of acres of hill and vale
lying idle all along the Nelson district, I do not believe there
is an acre which might not be made to yield either grass or
corn or fruit. With a little pains and enterprise vast orchards
might be developed all ai’ound. I have seen scores of cherry-
trees which never had a care bestowed upon them, wild
growths of the soil, laden with delicious fruit, fruit which if
sent to the English market in some preserved condition would
find a ready welcome. Where a hundredweight is now
grown, a thousand tons might soon be grown. What a field
for English market-gardeners! Fancy wild peaches growing
in such profusion that pigs are fed upon them ! I have seen
sacks-full carried off to the pigs, any one of which would have
fetched threepence at least in Covent Garden market. What
if hundreds of acres were covered with those trees instead of a
score or two of square yards, and the pruning'knife applied
and the gardener’s skill introduced, and capital employed in
seconding the efforts of nature! A second garden of Eden
might be developed. The climate—l speak now more parti-
cularly of the Nelson district, with which I have made myself
most familiar—the climate I say is simply perfect. Without
the heat and liability to drought of the Australian colonies,
there is yet an abundance of delicious warmth, tempered by
sea or land breezes which make out-door work even in mid-
summer an actual delight. In winter, instead of the frost and
snow of our Northern isle, grateful rains fall, to be stored up
in Nature’s reservoirs until the ensuing summer.
No condition of successful agriculture or horticulture is
wanting. Well-made roads traverse the whole district, and
for some thirty miles there is the additional advantage of
railway communication. In other parts of New Zealand
upwards of 1,000 miles of railway are open to the public, and
probably nearly as much more is in course of construction.
In the North Island vast tracts of land are being surveyed
with a view to English settlement which for richness and fer-
tility surpass anything ever before offered to the public. I
have no doubt, from all that I have heard and seen of those
lands, that in proper hands they will become the most pro-
sperous farms in New Zealand. The men who now buy them
will in all probability become rich by the mere accretion of
value year by year, just as the fortunate purchasers of the
Canterbury plains on the South Island have done.
One very general idea respecting New Zealand should be at
once got rid of. It is not barbarism that the Englishman is
invited to. In a very literal sense, the schoolmaster is abroad.


In the most remote districts there is the village school-house
and a qualified State-paid teacher. At Nelson there is a col-
lege of a high order, and in each of the other leading cities
there are educational advantages which leave nothing to be
desired in that direction. There are also all the other charac-
teristics of an advanced civilization in New Zealand. At
Wellington —the future London of the " England of the Pa-
cific ” —a steam tramway traverses the city; a fine Athenaeum,
with its public library and reading-rooms, adorns one of the
leading streets; churches of more or less imposing structure are
found all over the city, and there is all the bustle and stir of
a thriving English seaport. The same also may be said of Du-
nedin, Christchurch, and Auckland. One of the most beautiful
churches which I have ever seen was the Knox Presbyterian
Church of the former city, and at Christchurch there is a per-
fect plethora of sacred edifices. In all these cities you find
every requisite for, and characteristic of, the most refined
society. The principal book-shops are miniature British
Museums. I know of no such immense stores of literature as
you find in them. The total value of the books imported
during the year 1877 was no less than £118,707 !
Then there is a singularly perfect telegraph system all over
the country. In the most remote districts you see the magic
wires running along, and can flash your commands at will. I
was visiting a settler some five-and-twenty miles from a city
early in this year, and, although miles away from even a
country village, I both received and answered a telegraphic
message sent from a city 150 miles off. The best idea that I
can give of this fine service will be conveyed by the eloquence
of figures. During the year 1877 no less than 1,182,955 mes-
sages were sent over the 7,530 miles of wire, and from the
8,307 telegraphic stations of New Zealand; and the cost of the
same was £85,589. Bs. Nor is the Post-office service less
wonderful in its efficiency and universality. The total number
of letters received by the various offices during the
was 7,119,765, and the number despatched was 5,935,105.
The total number of newspapers received was 4,805,785, and
the total number despatched 3,260,526. The total revenue
derived from this service amounted to £143,600. Is. sd. If it
be borne in mind that the population of New Zealand, exclu-
sive of the Maoris, on the 31st December, 18/7, was only
417,622—ab0ut the same, I suppose, as that of either Man-
chester or Birmingham—a tolerably clear conception of the
commercial and intellectual vigour of the colony will be
obtained. If it were not for the fear of wearying you with
statistics, I should like to have further strengthened my case


here by a reference to the Post-office savings 5 banks. Let it
suffice that on the 31st December, 1877, there were no less than
28,761 open accounts, and a grand total of £767,875. 17s. Bd.
standing to the credit of the depositors, giving an average to
each depositor of £26. 13s. 7d.
All this I take to mean civilization, and if it were necessary
to add anything further to the story, I should only tell you of
the £78,332 worth of beer, the £95,382 worth of wine, and
the £254,117 worth of spirits imported by the colonists during
the year to satisfy their thirst. A people that could dispose
of this prodigious quantity of strong drink must be highly
civilized indeed.
It will relieve your patience somewhat, as well as illustrate
my case, if I now place before you two photographs, as it
were, of middle-class English settlers in New Zealand. I
sought out two thoroughly representative cases—one of a
recent settler, and the other of an old one —and paid them
both a visit. It is a question often asked in England, and
rarely satisfactorily answered, “ What sort of chance of success
does an English tradesman stand who goes in for farming in
New Zealand ? 55 I remember proposing a question of this
kind to one of the shrewdest and best-informed men in Toronto,
the Hon. George Brown, proprietor of the Toronto Globe,
and being somewhat startled by his reply. “ A better one/ 5
said he, “ than that of an English farmer. 55 “ How so ? 55 I
asked. ff Why simply because in the one case there would
be a disposition to learn all the peculiarities of colonial agri-
culture, whereas in the other there is always found an invin-
cible cleaving to English customs, which is sure to lead to
failure. 55
The cases-to which I am about to refer bear out Mr.
Brown 5 s deliverance. The two settlers whom I visited had
ooth been English tradesmen. The first had been a boot and
shoe manufacturer, and the other an ironmonger. It was on
a beautiful Saturday afternoon, some time in February last,
that I accepted an invitation to take a ride out to a lone farm-
house situated far away in the mountainous regions of the
Nelson district. On either side of our well-made road scenery
of the most romantic kind was continually being revealed. On
the right, at a distance of some two or three miles a huge
mountain chain stretched along, and rising up behind it were
the lofty tops of other and still higher mountain-ranges.
Dotting these verdure-clad slopes were thousands of sheep.
The intervening space constituted the cultivated lands of the
respective settlers, whose homesteads were situated therein.
On our left similar high hills alternated with well fenced-in


paddocks, while in front of us, at a great distance, towered up
immense mountains covered with primeval bush. We found
our worthy host in a well-built house, nestling down at the
base of these hills. Encircling the tastefully-built home was a
belt of poplar-trees, enclosing some four or five acres. Within
this outer row of poplars was a row of cherry-trees, and
scattered about over the enclosed area were numberless apple,
pear, plum, and peach-trees. The farm buildings were a few
hundred yards off, and stretching away for a considerable dis-
tance to right and left were the fields which, with the sur-
rounding hills, constituted the well-to-do settler’s domain. As
we entered the gate and walked up to the house there stood
the hale and hearty looking ex-shoemaker under the verandah,
ready to extend to us a true colonial welcome. It was not
long before I had the history of this successful man, and I
think if under any possible circumstances it were lawful for a
man to indulge in a little self-laudation it was lawful in his
case. Some twenty-five or thirty years before he had left
England a comparatively poor man. His capital consisted of
about £2OO, which he had invested in leather cut up to the
sizes requisite for shoe soles. On arriving in New Zealand he
at once commenced business as a boot and shoe maker. Success
attended him until he was able to avail himself of the cheap
lands being offered by Government with a view to an exten-
sion of the boundary of civilization. Possessed of his land he
at once commenced planting, and hence the fine belt of pop-
lars and the numberless fruit-trees on his estate. The gist of
the whole story was just this—the right man had got hold of
a good thing, and his common sense and industry had enabled
him to turn it all to good account.
And that selfsame good thing is what I am here to put
before you. What that honest cordwainer has done a thousand
Englishmen might go and do to-morrow. I do not say that
any one could achieve such a success, but I know sufficient of
the middle-class population of England to feel sure that a
very large proportion of them might go forth to those New
Zealand solitudes, and by patient, plodding industry, secure
to themselves a home and a competency, if not a fortune.
Observing a young lad of fifteen or sixteen approaching the
house on horseback the settler said: —“ Yonder is one of my
sons just returned from College. I want to give him the
best education within my power, and so he goes every day to
Nelson College.” Here was a still more pleasing fact. The
father probably had never been to more than an old woman’s
day-school such as we all remember in our childhood, but
which, thank God, are now becoming increasingly scarce.


But with, a most laudable anxiety, he consecrates a portion of
his hardly-acquired wealth to the securing to his boy that
which as far transcends gold in value as the joyous life of the
New Zealand settler transcends the revolting monotony and
the laborious trifling called life of a large proportion of the
English well-to-do classes.
As I turned my back on that fine two thousand acre farm
and its radiant-faced owner I seemed to have a view opened
up to me of New Zealand possibilities which I earnestly hoped
I might one day have an opportunity of spreading out before
those hardly bestead men of my acquaintance in the old
country. At that time I did not expect, at any rate for some
years, to have that privilege, but in the wondrous evolutions
of that G ood Providence whose guidance I thankfully acknow-
ledge, I am here within six months of the visit, brought safely
over the intervening fifteen thousand miles of sea. If I am
addressing any overweighted man hero to-night, in view of
the ever-increasing worry and anxiety of his present lot,
consequent on the overcrowding of this little isle and the
severity of business competition, I would simply ask him to
“look on this picture and on that.”
My other illustration is of a wholly different character, but
I think it will be of even more real use in the elucidation of
my subject.
About two years ago a Berkshire tradesman of my acquaint-
ance, feeling himself somewhat overborne with business and
domestic cares, determined to dispose of his concern and go
with his large family to New Zealand. I resolved on looking
him up as soon as I reached the locality of his choice. I found
him just entered upon a thousand acre farm in the Nelson
district, some twenty miles beyond the city, bushwards. The
farm consisted of two-thirds of fern-clothed hill land, and
one-third of valley, thickly studded over with wild vegetation
—manuka, flax, sweet-briar, &c. About a hundred acres
only were in actual cultivation. Some two hundred and fifty
sheep were feeding on the hills, and a score of young cattle
grazed in the plains. The greater part of my friend’s family
remained at Nelson, One youth had found work in an
engineering establishment, and was taking a salary of pretty
well £l5O a-year. Another was in a house of business at a
good salary. A third had developed an old love of carpenter-
ing, and was earning over a couple of pounds a week with his
saw and plane. One or two more were equally industriously
employed, and a nice little nest-egg had each of them already
in the Nelson Savings’ Bank.
Seated at my friend’s hospitable table, I asked him how


the change had on the whole turned out, was he satisfied with
the general outlook ? His answer was prompt, explicit, and
decisively affirmative. He was supremely happy in his lot.
The outdoor labour restored tone to his jaded nerves. The
glorious sunshine made existence a delight, and living for the
most part on the products of his farm, the problem of life was
simplified.
And as I accompanied him into his orchard and joined him
in partaking of nature's bounteous feast in the shape of cher-
ries, gooseberries, &c.; and then mounting one of his horses,
accompanied him over his extensive domain —now riding over
a high hill, then passing through a kind of gorge where ferns
of every kind flung their graceful leaves all around us, the
luxuriant vegetation forming a charming archway and protec-
tion from the sun, I began to understand his enthusiastic
delight. Verily he had indeed made a good exchange!
When I had years before visited him in his old English home
I had often felt grieved at his aged, careworn aspect. The
battle was far too severe for him. Now a glorious sense of
relief was visible. The humanities within him began to have
play. He could join in the merry laugh. Life was no longer
that joy-murdering harassment which it was wont to be, but
a blessed thing every way worthy of Him who was its source,
and of that glorious immortality towards which it leads. Again,
I say, in view of the growing anxieties of English middle-
class life, “ look on this picture and on that."
I spoke of New Zealand in the commencement of my lecture
as the Englishman's second home. I used that expression
advisedly. It is emphatically English. Everywhere and on
all hands the Englishman feels at home. All the associations
are home-like. The people all have the comfortable home look.
They all talk of England as home. Our good Queen is their
much-loved Sovereign. The highest ambition of every one,
next to his gaining paradise, is to visit the dear old home
some time. Every shock felt in England thrills through the
whole colonial soul. When the news of the death of the
estimable Princess Alice was flashed across the main there was
a universal sense of bereavement. I was in a Congregational
Church one Sunday morning when the sad announcement was
made, and even now I feel moved by the remembrance of the
sympathetic thrill which went through that audience.
The prevailing tone of thought too is English. Even the
foibles of the good colonists smack of the old home. There
are the same hair-splittings in theology, and the same worship
of a Shibboleth. In a remote New Zealand village I found no
less than five places of public worship. There were Plymouth
b 2


brethren and Plymouth brethren —Darbyites and Newtonians,
just as one finds here in England. Dear, good souls, there
they were looking at one another askance just as you may see
them at Clifton and elsewhere —the follower of Darby not
daring to worship with the follower of Newton because for-
sooth the said Newton was supposed to have broached some
heretical theory touching our Lord’s humanity. Another very
important consideration is that the climate is essentially
English, a vastly improved English of course, but still
essentially our own. The English child thrives in it as he
cannot in the Australias, or India, or the Cape, or even in
Canada. I happened to be at Christchurch on a public
holiday, and as I left the station a long procession of school
children passed by on their way to some pic-nic in the
neighbourhood. I carefully noted their appearance, and was
not more struck with their neat attire than with their hearty,
healthy looks.
If I might be allowed the expression I should describe the
New Zealand climate, especially that of the Nelson district, as
a kind of glorified English.
I had grave doubts as to the tolerableness of the unavoid-
able loneliness of a settler’s life, but after living for two
months in a lonely shanty, far away from human habitation, I
can cordially endorse the well-known sentiment of Lord
Byron:—
“ To sit on rocks, to muse o’er flood and fell,
To slowly trace the forest’s shady scene,
Where things that own not man’s dominion dwell,
And mortal foot hath ne’er or rarely been ;
To climb the trackless mountain all unseen,
With the wild flock that never needs a fold ;
Alone o’er steeps and foaming falls to lean ;
This is not solitude—’tis but to hold
Converse with Nature’s charms and view her stores
unrolled.”
I never felt less lonely. Naturally timid, and of a highly
nervous temperament, I never used to feel alarmed, although
surrounded with all the circumstances which might be
expected to inspire such an emotion. I confess this has
often occasioned me surprise. As I have looked forth from
the door of my lonely shanty on a dark night when nothing
was visible but the dim outlines of the all-surrounding hills,
and no sound was to be heard save the cry of the wild fowl or
the tinkling bell of the wandering kine, I have w r ondered at
my insensibility to alarm or fear of any kind.
This is rather an important consideration, as I am con-




■


vinced that many are deterred from going abroad by the
thought of the immense sacrifice involved in the shape of
society, and many more by sundry dim notions as to the
dangers of colonial life, more especially in the country districts.
Visions of wild savages rise up before the imagination, and all
sorts of tragic circumstances are conceived of as among the
possibilities of such a removal from the old home. So far as
my experience goes I can unhesitatingly recommend the
dismissal of all such thoughts from the mind of any one con-
templating emigration to, at least. New Zealand. The Maoris
are chiefly confined to the North Island, and even there no
one now ever thinks of them with fear. They are fast either
dying out or assimilating with the European element. The
policy of the Government is gradually to gain possession of
the extensive and valuable lands still held by them, and then
sell them to English settlers. By this means, as I have before
indicated, many thousands of flourishing homesteads will be
shortly found where at present only the stagnant native Pah is
seen. One such settlement is that recently established by an
Irish gentleman, Mr. G. V. Stewart, and known as the Kati-
Kati settlement. There upon 20,000 acres of land purchased
from Government, a number of farmers from the North of
Ireland have acquired permanent freeholds where instead of
expending capital and energy on improvements of other
people’s property, they are at work under the stimulating
consciousness that a home and a livelihood is being secured
which shall be handed down, with all improvements, to their
children’s children. I would fain see some hundreds of
English farmers similarly emancipated from what I consider
their present thraldom. Instead of wasting their resources in
enriching wealthy and luxurious landlords, I would have them
set about the work of enriching themselves. Instead of paying
vast sums annually for the privilege of growing hares and
pheasants and partridges for my lord’s enjoyment, I would
have them reap the fruit of their toil, and share with their own
families the game which their own corn had fed. As I have
previously intimated, the capital of our average British tenant-
farmer would more than suffice to establish him in New Zealand
as his own landlord. And how vast the advantages of the
change ! No more rent audits. No more fear of fussy and
impertinent stewards. No more ignoble propitiations of tell-
tale gamekeepers. No more subserviency to dreaded land-
lords. No more slavery to stringent lease-clauses. In a word,
no more bartering away of the birthright of freedom for a
mess of pottage. “I speak as unto wise men, judge ye what
I say.”


A few words as to the journey out to New Zealand and I
have done.
This is after all the great bugbear—the 15,000 miles of sea.
Tens of thousands of Englishmen would at this moment be
enjoying the advantages of a New Zealand life but for the
intervening sea. They cannot face the dangers of the deep.
I wish to strip this bugbear of its terrors. After travelling
some 50,000 miles by sea, I give it as my decided opinion that
on board such magnificent vessels as are the great steamers
which now traverse the mighty deep there is no more real
danger than there is in an ordinary train on an English railway.
To such mathematical accuracy has the whole science of
navigation been brought, that a captain of an ocean steamer as
well knows the route he should take, and the exact spot in
which he is either by day or by night, as does the driver of
a Great Western Railway engine. And as for the discomforts
of a sea-voyage, I suppose no one is more susceptible to these
than myself, for no one, I think, can be a worse sailor. I
must, however, declare them to be ten times worse in imagina-
tion than in reality. My voyages to and from New Zealand
have not left an unpleasant remembrance behind them, and
my reminiscences of four Atlantic trips are all more or less
pleasurable. Of course you have much to put up with. It
would be simply idiotic for a man to expect all the comforts of
a more or less luxurious home on board ship,
I have met lunatics at sea who were in a state of chronic
discontent because they were deprived of sundry little indul-
gences which they had grown accustomed to at home; others
would get into a complaining mood, and avenge themselves by
an habitual surliness for the mal cle mer under which they
suffered. But such cases were exceptional, and it was usually
foreigners, Frenchmen or Germans, who thus figured as ill-
used individuals. The good, strong, common sense of the
Englishman soon helped him to accommodate himself to the
situation, and hence a fair share of real enjoyment throughout
the voyage. It is impossible for a man of even average cul-
ture and sensibility to resist the joy-inspiring influences of “ a
life on the ocean wave.” He may not perhaps be able to
adopt the enthusiastic words of Barry Cornwall: —
“ I’m on the sea ! I’m on the sea !
I am where I would ever be,
With the blue above, and the blue below,
And silence wheresoe’er I go.
* * * *
I love, O how I love to ride
On the fierce, foaming, bursting tide ;


When every mad wave drowns the moon,
Or whistles aloft his tempest tune ;
And tells bow goeth the world below,
And why the Sou’-west blast doth blow.
I never was on the dull tame shore
But I loved the great sea more and more ;
And backward flew to her billowy breast,
Like a bird that seeketh its mother’s nest.”
The sea-voyager, I repeat, may not be able to adopt such
enthusiastic lines as these, but if he have any soul at all he
cannot help entering into the spirit of another poet and ex-
claiming, in view of the magnificent spectacle:—
“ Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty’s Form
Glasses itself in tempests ; in all time,
Calm or convulsed, in breeze or gale, or storm ;
Icing the Pole, or in the torrid clime
Dark heaving ; boundless, endless, and sublime ;
The image of Eternity ; the throne
Of the Invisible ; e’en from out thy slime
The monsters of the deep are made ; each zone
Obeys thee ; thou goest forth, dread, fathomless, alone.”
Nor is the sea the only object of interest to the voyager.
Notwithstanding the somewhat cynical deliverance of a wit
who wrote on his cabin window—
“ Two things break the monotony,
Of an Atlantic trip ;
Sometimes alas ! we ship a sea,
And sometimes see a ship,”
I venture to think there is abundant food for reflection and
a fruitful source of interest in the surrounding circumstances
of his position. I for one, never tired of contemplating the
magnificent triumph of human skill which the vessel itself
presented. As I was rowed across Hobson’s Bay at Melbourne
to go on board the Chimborazo , which lay anchored some three
miles from the shore, I felt almost appalled as the stupendous
vessel loomed in sight. That mighty mass of wood and iron,
with its vast freight of cargo and its five hundred human
souls, to be shortly propelled at the rate of 300 miles a day
across the trackless main ! And as the moment of departure
arrived, and in response to the captain’s pressure on his gong,
the splendid engines commenced their herculean task, I seemed
to grasp afresh the poet’s thought:—
“ How poor, how rich, how abject, how august,
How complicate, how wonderful is man ! ”
And many a time as 1 have stolen up at night and taken my
stand at the ship’s prow, when in spite of darkness, storm, or


tempest, onward she sped faster than a four-horse coach would
gallop along a turnpike road, I have looked upon that quiet, self-
possessed captain whose trained intellect made him thus master
of the position, and felt that the poet's bold conception—
“ Distinguished link in being’s endless chain !
Midway from nothing to the Deity !
A beam ethereal, sullied and absorpt!
Though sullied and dishonoured, still divine !
Dim miniature of greatness absolute !
An heir of glory ! a frail child of dust!
Helpless immortal! insect infinite !
A worm ! a god ! ”
was hardly more than prosaic matter of fact. Yerily the
splendid triumph seemed worthy of a God.
And then the varied objects of interest along the route. On
the outward journey you stop at St. Vincent, one of the Cape
de Yerd islands, while coal is shipped on board; and further
on you have an opportunity of seeing the celebrated African
seaport of Cape Town. You find yourself furnished with an
opportunity of studying the manners and customs of the na-
tives, and scores of naked youths astonish you with their
diving feats. You throw your sixpences over the ship’s sides,
and in a moment half a score of darkies are out of their canoe
into the watery deep, and almost before your hand is in your
pocket again, a grinning youth shows you the glistening coin
between his pearly teeth. Then the great Australian cities
dawn upon you. Adelaide is first reached, and a small steam-
tug takes you to the port where a railway of some seven or
eight miles lands you in the beautiful capital of South Australia.
Here, as you gaze upon the splendid buildings and walk the
noble streets, you begin to understand the grandeur of our
Colonial empire. A three or four days’ further sail brings
you to the capital of Victoria, and as you make your way by
boat and rail to Melbourne and find yourself amid the busy
activities of that mighty city, you realize that the boast of
your favourite song, “ An Englishman,” is more than justified.
The bustling wharves; the crowded streets; the spacious
stores; the noble town-hall; the gorgeous public buildings;
the handsome churches, and all the varied proofs of abundance
which meet you at every turn, overwhelm you with astonish-
ment and make you rejoice that it is a part of the British
Empire you are in.
And so of Sydney, with its matchless harbour, and the
New Zealand ports, as one by one they pass before your eye.
A new world opens up to you, and the horizon of your vision is
permanently enlarged.


My task is now done. I fear I may hare wearied you,
though the effort to condense into one lecture so great a sub-
ject has necessarily left it sadly imperfect. To those desirous
of fuller information I would recommend an exceedingly valu-
able paper on New Zealand which has been compiled by Sir
Julius Vogel, the Agent-General in Great Britain, than
whom I suppose no man living is better acquainted with New
Zealand, and whose immense services to the colony I have
heard mentioned with enthusiastic admiration by all classes of
New Zealanders and in all parts of the islands.
I have not touched upon the form of government prevailing,
as I take it everyone now pretty well knows the broad and
liberal political basis upon which our Colonial Empire rests.
Nothing can be more satisfactory. Every right of manhood
is respected. A road, broad, straight and clear is placed
before every honest, industrious citizen, along which he may
travel either to commercial prosperity or senatorial fame. I
have repeatedly dined with colonial magnates who left Eng-
land poor labouring men. More than half the rich colonists
with whom I have journied to and from New Zealand have
risen from poverty. I could occupy your attention by the
hour with the various stories of their lives. With one of these
stories I now conclude my lecture.
On my voyage out last autumn I found myself strongly
drawn towards a noble-looking New Zealand farmer, who,
with his wife, was returning home after a six months' visit to
the Old Home. I soon had the history of his life. Ho was a
Yorkshireman. Five-and-thirty years ago he was a labourer
at 15s. a week on a Yorkshire farm. His employer gave him
notice one week of his intention to reduce this modest wage
to 12s. 6d. At this the stalwart hind revolted. He would
go abroad first. He went; first to Australia, and afterwards
to New Zealand. Success attended him, and now he had been
home and offered £7,000 for the very farm on which he had
worked as a common labourer.
I need add nothing to that story. If toiling Englishmen
with little but the workhouse before them, and tradesmen
whose lives are one long battle with pecuniary difficulties, and
farmer's whose inadequate capital is yearly becoming more and
more unequal to the strain imposed upon it by the increasing
cost of production, and the diminishing value of the produce,
hear not the call which it addresses to them, “ neither would
they be persuaded though one rose from the dead."


LETTERS TO THE “DAILY HEWS.”
(Reprinted by permission.)
THE ENGLISH AGRICULTURAL LABOURER IN
NEW ZEALAND.
From the Daily News of March 13th.
A Correspondent writing from Otago, in Now Zealand, says :
Foremost of the British colonies to profit by the movement among
the English agricultural labourers begun by Mr. Joseph Arch in
1872 was New Zealand. This colony no sooner saw the opportunity
for replenishing its labour market which that agitation furnished,
than it came forward with liberal offers of a free passage, worth some
£l5, to able-bodied men, to a labour field where, instead of tw T elve
shillings a week, and from ten to twelve hours of work each day,
the labourer would get four times as much for 25 per cent, less toil.
The result has been that in less than two years from the commence-
ment of the “ Revolt of the Field,” over fifty thousand labourers were
on their way to New Zealand, at a cost of more than a million pounds
sterling to the Colonial Government. Letters from pioneer emigrants
soon began to appear in print, and, extraordinary as the inducements
of the New Zealanders seemed, it soon became obvious that they had
been rather under than over stated. Such were the labour exigencies
of the southern colonies that experienced agriculturists, shepherds,
ploughmen, herdsmen, and such like became masters of the position,
and the work of Mr. Arch was practically at an end. Queensland,
South Australia, and New South Wales were also in the market with
full purses, and the English agricultural labourer had a wide choice
of new fields of labour.
Having, however, as your correspondent, accompanied Mr. Arch
in his journey through Canada in 1873, and having found myself
compelled to report somewhat unfavourably of the position of that
colony at that time as an emigration field for the agricultural labourer,
I was desirous to see for myself what this new field really offered
to the emigrant agriculturist. What are the facts as seen by an
English eye 1 How do the labourers fare in their far-off homes 1
These are questions in which all are interested, whatever be the
views they entertain as to the hopes which draw such multitudes
towards the Southern Cross. In the autumn, I therefore left
England for New Zealand, with a view to obtain satisfactory evidence
on these points, and after a fine voyage of some eight weeks, includ-
ing a several days’ stoppage at Melbourne, I found myself in New
Zealand. The Otago province had absorbed a large proportion of


English, immigrants, and thither I first directed my steps. At the
extreme southern boundary of the South island is the new town of
Invercargill, which is reached by a railroad from the Bluff, one of
the Otago seaports. I found in this rising place a spacious building
set apart for the use of immigrants, and on inquiring of the manager
as to the ordinary success of the various shiploads of labourers who
found their way to his refuge, I learned that nothing could be more
complete. Every efficient labourer and every decent girl obtained
employment at once, and the wages were invariably in excess of
those stated by the Government prospectus. Such was the demand
on every hand for labour that builders, farmers, and others were at
their wit’s end to know how to obtain the requisite help. And as I
looked all round me and saw a fine town emerging from a whilom
wilderness, and innumerable acres of fertile land awaiting the labour
of the tiller, I had no difficulty in believing the report. It is difficult
to realize the varied industries called into existence by a new town-
ship. Hunting up information I button-holed a decent man in charge
of a horse and cart. It was his own, and he found his work in
carrying parcels, luggage, &c., to and from the railway. “ And what
do you nett by the process V’ I asked of the good-natured fellow,
“ Oh, about a pound a day, sir,” was his reply. Another, with the
appearance of a mechanic, I managed to lay hold of who had been
out about five years, “ Was he satisfied 1 ” “ Rather ! ” was his
reply; and in conversation I elicited the fact that he was on his
way to independence. “ For instance,” said he, with a pleasant
frankness, unlike what one usually looks for from men of his class
at home, “ I have just completed a five weeks’ job, and after paying
all expenses, my clear profit amounts to £ 23, which I have put in
the bank,” His ambition was to get a quarter of an acre town lot of
land to build himself a house upon; and in all probability in the
course of a few years he will have his house and garden, and be to
all intents and purposes a successful, well-to-do man. This young
town of Invercargill is laid out somewhat ambitiously, and I have no
doubt its manhood will fulfil the promise of its youth. With the
view of meeting what appears to be the chief difficulty of the new
comers —the want of house accommodation—a large amount of land
in the immediate neighbourhood of the town is divided into quarter
of an acre sections, and workmen are encouraged by the aid of
building societies to erect houses of their own. Their high wages
enable them to meet the monthly payments with ease, and as a
matter of fact, as in the case of my artisan friend before referred
to, many are availing themselves of the opportunity, and thus
cultivating habits of thrift which will almost certainly result in
social ease and prosperity. It is amusing to notice the strong Con-
servatism which is generated by success. The defunct Protectionism
of England bids fair to be reproduced in the Colonies. The most
repulsive form which it assumes is an intense antagonism to Chinese
immigration. The Australian continent is just now in a state of
violent excitement on the subject. English and Scotch settlers see


in the patient and thrifty Chinese toilers formidable competitors,
and are exerting every possible influence to drive the Chinese out of
the labour market. Scarcely less lamentable is the growing desire
to discourage English manufactures by high protective duties. An-
other significant fact is the outcry raised by men who were only
yesterday penniless refugees on the Australian continent against the
democratic tendencies of their Governments. Prosperous ignora-
muses grow almost fierce in denouncing the monstrosity of giving a
vote to a poor emigrant “ without any stake in the country.” I have
conversed with scores of them, and their political discourse is worthy
of an old-fashioned Tory. I hardly know of a better illustration of
what the “ English labourer in New Zealand ” may become than what
came under my eye en route. On board our steamer was an elderly
New Zealand farmer. Some thirty years ago he was at work on a
Yorkshire farm at 15s. per week. His employer wanted to reduce
his w r ages to 12s. 6d. Being evidently a man of spirit and energy, he
resisted the reduction, and elected to try his fortunes in New Zea-
land. His position to-day is that of a considerable landed proprietor,
owning a fine and well-stocked farm, able to take his wife on a visit
to England, and while there to make an offer of £7,000 for his old
employer’s farm. Had he accepted the 12s. fid. his position to-day
would probably have been that of a worn-out labourer in the parish
workhouse, while his wife was in the women’s ward. As I sit oppo-
site to him in our fine saloon, and see him cheerfully accepted as
the social equal of all around, I feel that Mr. Arch’s eloquence
would be nothing to the silent force of such a history could it be but
laid bare before the working men of England.
On the whole I must say that my first impressions of New Zealand
as an emigration field for Englishmen are highly favourable. The
climate is so near akin to their own that no difficulty of acclimati-
sation is ever felt. Good wholesome food is cheap and abundant.
School accommodation is second to none in the world. The demand
for labour is such that nothing but their own folly can prevent any
mechanics, field workers, or other industi'ious men from rising in the
social scale. The craving for land ownership can be easily satisfied, and
all fear of the workhouse may be for ever laid aside. In a word, New
Zealand—and almost the same might be said of the whole Australian
continent—offers so splendid an alternative to the hard-pressed toiler,
trader, or mechanic of England, that all excuse for “capital and
labour” conflicts is gone. If any further rural agitation is heard of,
it will be of the masters’ wrongs, and the “ Arch ” of such a move-
ment could not do better than urge his followers to imitate their
labourers, and start for this Land of Goshen. lam now on my way
to Dunedin, of which I hear praises on every hand.


O'


tfl
n
w
3
<
a
o
H
«
o
p*


From the Daily News of March 21st.
A Correspondent writes from Wellington, New Zealand :
We steamed into Port Chalmers, Otago, on the morning of the
day before Christmas Day, and a more enchanting piece of scenery
I never witnessed. The excessive moisture of Otago imparts a
freshness and luxuriance to vegetation which reminds an Englishman
of home. Nor is there much to disturb the illusion when he mingles
with the inhabitants. Everything looks like home—the bustle, the
business enterprise, the air of prosperity, the noble churches, the
healthy look of the people—and the rain. As everyone knows,
Dunedin, the capital of Otago, and about seven miles from the port
by rail, is emphatically a Scotch town. The “ Macs ” are everywhere
in force—hence, I suppose, the wondrous prosperity of the place.
I never visited a town with more signs of progress and general
comfort. Labour seemed everywhere in demand, and the poor did
not seem to be with them at all. When unskilled labour commands
higher wages than thousands of Englishmen of high culture can get,
poverty is out of the question. Among the most interesting insti-
tutions of the town was a workman’s club—a large well-situated
building, with reading-rooms, billiard-tables, a library, sitting-rooms,
and a restaurant, where all kinds of cheap food could be obtained.
In one of the suburbs a large immigrants’ home has been erected,
where, free of charge, the fortunate possessors of strong arms and
weatherproof constitutions go straight from the emigrant ships, and
live well till they obtain employment. Happy toilers ! Here is
realized their dream of prosperity—“eight hours’ work, eight hours’
sleep, eight hours’ play, and eight shillings a day.” Skilled labour
commands a much higher price. Good masons, carpenters, black-
smiths, and mechanics generally get from twelve to fifteen shillings
per day. In almost any paper you take up you will find advertise-
ments for men, offering these wages. For instance, in one now lying
open before me I find the following : —“Notice—Wanted, 60 good
pick and shovel men ; wages 9s. per day.—Apply, &c.” The day, of
course, meant eight hours only, £l5O for four months’ work ! and
such work as tens of thousands of men in England are quite capable
of doing who are now threatened with a reduction of 3d. or 4d. per
day from their half-crown. Nor is this the whole of the case.
Workwomen are at a still higher premium. I found outside the
door of a “Labour Exchange” in Dunedin the following list of
wants: —“ Five Dairy Girls, wages £35 and £4O a year ; seven
Hotel Girls, £4O and £52 ; 27 Experienced Servants, £3O to £60.”
On inquiry at this “ Exchange” I learnt that over 19,000 persons
had found employment through its agency during the last five years.
The pay of a woman for a day’s work at a house is 4s, and food.
Large familied men are specially to be congratulated. I came upon
one who brought out some half-score of boys and girls about a year


ago. I knew him well in England, and what a hard struggle it was
to keep the wolf from the door. I had long urged upon him the
desirableness of taking his family
“ Where children are blessings, and he who hath most
Hath aid to his fortune and riches to boast,”
but it was a “ far cry ” to New Zealand, and it was not till the
autumn of 1877 that the centrifugal forces gained the day. His
experience had gone far beyond my most sanguine anticipations.
Before he had been three months in the colony the collective earnings
of himself and family exceeded £8 a week. 1 hope this fact will
come with all the force of a new gospel to many an overfamilied
man in England. lam sure it would if I could put into.words the
exuberance of self-satisfaction with which the youngsters announced
their independence of their parent’s pocket. One of the lads puts a
sovereign into his mother’s hands every Saturday as his contribution
towards the domestic expenditure. A girl not yet eighteen years
old has ten pounds already in the savings’ bank and “ dresses like a
lady.” It only needs adding as a finish to the picture that I saw
hanging up at a butcher’s door sundry fore-quarters of lamb, weighing
about eight pounds, with the price ticketed on “ 2s. 6d. each.” The
school accommodation as is generally known, is every way satis-
factory in all our colonies. The universal rule appears to be this—
eveiy householder pays a pound a year towards the educational
department, and his children, be they many or few, become free of
the school. Any deficiency of income is a charge upon the State.
I know something of rural England and of the terrible exigencies of
existence there in former years j and as I contrast the happy, con-
tented, well-fed, and well-dressed appearance of the New Zealand
settlers’ children, with the squalid, dejected, and ragged urchins with
whom I was familiar, I feel thankful that such a door of hope has
been flung open, and only wonder that where ten families now
emigrate hitherwards, there are not at least a hundred. On board a
coast steamer the other day I met a man who some twenty years
ago was a struggling country wheelwright in England. He came to
New Zealand, and to-day he owns over a thousand acres of fertile
land, and is rich enough to take a voyage to the old country and buy
there an expensive marble monument for a lost child.
We steamed into Port Lyttelton on the day after Christmas Day,
and from thence I visited the pride of all good Churchmen —the
ecclesiastical city of Christchurch. A railway—carried by a tunnel
costing half-a-million sterling through the huge mountains which
encircle the bay—runs from the port some sixty miles into the pro-
vince, and some seven or eight miles along this line is Christchurch
Station, I have seen nothing so thoroughly English as the farms
and homesteads all along the route. English grass, English hedges,
English faces, and English order everywhere. The first thing which
met me on leaving the station was a troop of eight hundred school
children just off for a holiday. I stood and watched them pass by
and I did not see one ill-clad or ill-fed looking child among them.


The town or city is not at all picturesque, as the whole neigh-
bourhood is as flat as Lincolnshire. Immensely profitable, however,
is the unpicturesque region, and fortunate settlers who, a few years
ago, became owners of two, four, or six hundred acre sections of
the land at a nominal price, are to-day proprietors of valuable
farms. As many as eighty bushels of wheat to the acre have been
grown, and the only drawback to the prosperity of the place is the
dearth of labour, and its consequent high cost. With wheat at 4s.
only per bushel farmers grumble sadly at having to pay 10s. per day
of eight hours to their labourers. “ Necessity is the mother of
invention,” and a new “ self-binding harvester ” has appeared for
their relief. By means of one of these ingenious machines a farmer
can cut down and harvest about fifteen acres per day. With the
growing wealth of the district there is, however, a growing power of
employing even dear labour, and hence the facility with which large
consignments of English emigrants are distributed. I saw in a paper
to-day the reply of a Government official to an urgent application
for immigrants from Taranaki. He writes: ‘‘We have none to
spare from other places j all are clamouring for more immigrants.
This is very significant, and should set at rest the idle reports of
interested parties as to the numbers of men out of work in New
Zealand. I have taken some pains to trace out the origin of such
reports, and I find them to emanate from colonial failures, men who
never ought to have come. Too often the old country has acted
towards her colonies as if she had read a notice on their seaboard,
«Rubbish shot here.” Many of the immigrants cannot work.
Instead of wondering that so many evil reports reach home respecting
colonial life, the mystery is that there are no more.
Leaving Port Lyttelton by a small coast-steamer we reached
Wellington in about twenty-four hours, passing through much highly
x’omautic scenery. Standing out in the bay, a few miles from shore,
I noticed a large sailing vessel, and soon found it was the Hermione,
an emigrant vessel belonging to Shaw, Saville and Co., in quarantine
through fever on board. The quay at Wellington indicated the
importance of the place as a leading outlet of the North Island.
Intense bustle prevailed, and acres of land space were filled with all
descriptions of merchandise. I soon had painful experience of
Wellington’s excessive windiness. It was almost unendurable. A
steam-driven tram-car, however’, is ever accessible, and few people
walk the streets during the heavier gales. There is little worthy ot
note in the town, and one wonders what wei'e its claims to be made
the seat of government. On inquiry as to the prospects of English
emigrants there, I found it no exception to the rule. Work seemed
everywhere in excess of workers, and no man, able and willing to use
his muscles or skill, need remain idle. I ought, perhaps, to qualify
this uniform testimony as to the demand for labour with the fact that
this period of my visit, being of course the early summer, is neces-
sarily the busiest time of the whole year. I think it highly probable
that during the winter the excess may sometimes be on the other


side, but, unlike Canada, winter in New Zealand has no terrors for
the unemployed, and, what is much more important, it has no terrors
for the employers. Building can go on all the year round, and the
actual number of men thrown out of employment must be far less in
proportion than during an English winter. An obstacle to the pro-
gress of the town is the large proportion of native population. It is
all very fine to theorise about the noble savage, and I had read a
strange lot of nonsense in England about the fine New Zealanders.
Alas ! for the nobility and grandeur. A dirty, squalid, unimprov-
able, and intolerably ugly generation are they, and one felt tempted
to think that the sooner they were all translated to the happy hunt-
ing-grounds the better would it be for universal humanity. On the
South Island they are nearly extinct, and hence a Dunedin and a
Christchurch, but here in the North Island they bar the way to im-
provement. I learnt that a number of the English emigrants on
board the llermione, before referred to, were bound for Taranaki,
and would go by a steamer on the following day. I therefore re-
solved to accompany them as far as my next port—Nelson, I am
glad to be able to testify that the appearance of these emigrants—
mostly agriculturists from the West of England—was highly credit-
able to their nationality, and although I heard complaints of their
treatment on board in the matter of food, &c., 1 must say their looks
betokened anything but semi-starvation.
From the Daily News of April 19th.
A Correspondent writes from Nelson, New Zealand :
In my two former letters I gave you an account of the prosperous
condition of the labourers as I saw them in Otago, in the Canterbury
settlement, and in other parts of New Zealand. My visit to Nelson
has enabled me somewhat to extend my observations, and to see
both the labourer and his employer in their surroundings in the
field. I reached Nelson at the close of the year. I had listened to
much laudation of the “ Garden of New Zealand,” I suppose one’s
eyes had become satiated with glorious scenery, for my first impres-
sion of Nelson w T as one of disappointment. Colonists are such
inveterate puffers of their districts that no one ought to be betrayed
by them into accepting their descriptions. A short time sufficed to
dispel the illusion as to Nelson, and one had to accept plain facts.
Nelson is a highly-piciuresque region, dotted over with every variety
of wooden houses. There is little pretension to order anywhere, and
enterprise appears to be unknown. Persons in easy circumstances
own or occupy the numberless pretty villas all along the mountain
sides and valleys at their feet, and sundry traders, occupying shops
in rough, unfinished streets, minister to their wants. The emigra-


o
3
-4
>




tion barracks occupy a good site in the Waimea road, and silently
testify as to the need of the town and district for more workers.
Poverty appears to be unknown, and the state of the labour market
may be further inferred from the fact that a lot of fellows at work
carting mould, &c., and receiving Bs. per day of eight hours, actually
struct the other day for another Is. lam afraid their demand had
to be gratified. The utter unreasonableness of such extortion is at
once seen when the price of provisions is remembered. Bread is the
same price as in England; sugar only a trifle dearer; butter lOd.
per pound ; tea and coffee a shade cheaper than at home ; meat, half-
price or less. For instance, I went with my farmer friend to the
butcher’s shop the other day, and he paid 4s. fid, for a fine leg and
loin of mutton, weighing about 141 b. I saw some splendid beef in
the shop, and on inquiry I found the price of the best cuts was fid.
per pound. It is very noticeable how this cheapness of food operates
on the labourers. I remember carving for a number of Berkshire
farm-labourers at a harvest home feast a year or two ago, and I shall
not soon forget the enormous quantities of beef and mutton which
those men disposed of. The explanation was obvious; it was their
annual sight of such luxuries, and they were consequently ravenous.
A few days ago three farm-labourers sat down to dinner at my
friend’s table. There was the best of meat provided, but oh ! the
daintiness of the guests ! “Just a nice slice here,” “Not too fat,”
and “ Well done, if you please.” No pampered diners at a London
hotel could have been more particular. The explanation was sup-
plied by one of the men, “ We gets almost too much of it, sir.”
Just so. Instead of once a year, they get the best of meat three
times a day.
Wishing to see the English agriculturist at home in the country
of his adoption, I accepted an invitation to spend a few days at a
“ bush” farm some twenty miles distant from Nelson City. A rail-
way of a very elementary character took me about seventeen miles
of the distance, and the good farmer conveyed me the remaining three
miles in his primitive vehicle. I wish I could give a fair description
of this romantic region. I found my friend’s home to consist of a
four-roomed shanty, situated in a valley surrounded with lofty hills.
If he had ever been guilty of the sentimental longing for “a lodge
in some vast wilderness,” he must at last have gained his quest.
Nothing could be more intensely lovely. His farm consisted of about
a thousand acres, and he had only just entered upon it. The immense
hills all around formed a part of his domain, and there, nibbling
away at the short grass, and more than half-hidden among the thick
underwood, furze, ferns, &c., were his sheep and cows. After a short
rest we mounted a couple of small horses, and proceeded to look over
the estate. Along narrow tracks we wended our ways over hills and
valleys, through romantic rifts, and beside trickling streams. Occa-
sionally the thick bush altogether shut out the sun’s rays for a
quarter of an hour or more, and none but well-trained horses could
possibly have threaded their ways through such strange intricacies.


I need hardly dwell on the exquisite enjoyment of the ramble. I
found myself repeatedly asking the question, “ Why do not some of
those martyrs to dyspepsia and nervous affections in England just
take their carpet-bags in band, and step on board the Cuzco, and in
a couple of months’ time find themselves in some such splendid sani-
tarium as this V After an hour’s ride we came upon a neighbouring
farmhouse of a much better character than my friend’s. Here we
pulled up, and paid a visit to the orchard. Happily the wild cherries
were just ripe, although the cultivated ones were pretty well over.
Nothing could exceed the lavish luxuriance of the crop. Scores of
trees were laden with the delicious fruit. Every farm appears to
have a number of these wild cherry-trees—a fruit closely resembling
the English “ May-duke," only with a slightly bitter smack. For
cooking purposes they are superior to the English cherries. They
are so plentiful as to be a drug in the market. Indeed they do not
pay to gather, and in this orchard there will probably be several
hundred pounds’ weight left on the trees to spoil. I saw a fine tree
of cultured cherries—the English “ black heart ” —only half picked,
the boughs being still laden with dried-up fruit. It is simply mar-
vellous how lavish nature seems in the bestowment of her gifts in this
bright and sunny region. But the English labourer amid it all, how
fared he ? Well, there was one not a hundred yards off mowing
hay. I soon interviewed him, and found his position very inde-
pendent, He had his own home and small farm, a cow or two, a few
sheep, and three or four acres of land. There was plenty of feed all
around for his live stock. When he wanted money he could always
get a few days’ work at one or other of the farms, and altogether the
man seemed about as free from care and anxiety as the sheep and
cows around him. lam afraid the level of his existence was not far
removed from that of his daily associates. Your colonial settler’s
life is sadly material. His whole energies are spent in subjugating
nature—clearing bush, and conquering brutes. English farmers, with
their compact holdings, their snug cow-sheds, their roomy stables,
their fenced-in meadows, and their numerous hands, know nothing of
the terrible exigencies of these lonely bush-farms. Every now and
then a wandering fit seizes upon the live stock, and away they go for
miles over the interminable hills. Only yesterday I was asked to
join the farmer’s son in a pursuit after a couple of runaway horses.
We mounted our steeds, and away we went through the wildest,
most rugged, and most picturesque scenery that-I ever read of. About
four miles off we found the quadrupeds munching away at a splendid
field of clover, evidently enjoying it all the more because it was
stolen. Another day it would be the sheep into whom the demons
had entered, and over the mountains would they go and be well-nigh
lost in the thick scrub. A stout lad, about such a one as an English
farmer would give Bs. a week to and grumble at the imposition, was
kept well employed at 18s. per week with a clever dog in guarding
these wandering sheep,
I am struck with one thing in connection with many colonial farmers


—their appearance of being over-worked and dreadfully poor. It is the
exception to find one who would compare in appearance, at least of
general ease of circumstances, with the average British farmer.
Their hard, horny, shapeless fists betoken manual toil such as the
Englishman is a total stranger to. And it is the same with the
female portion of the household. The dearness and scarcity of labour
make it necessary to dispense with as much as possible of it, and so
milking and butter-making, and often far worse work, falls to the
share of wife and daughters. At the farm in question the mother
and one daughter did all the domestic farm work—that is, attended
to the cow-yard, dairy, stock-rearing, and I know not what besides.
There was no servant about the house. I asked the good lady if she
was not dull in such an out-of-the-world sort of place. “ Dull!” she
replied, with an expression of surprise that such a question should be
asked, “ I haven’t time even to think of such a thing.” Yet she had
moved in good society at home, and known most of the comforts of
English life. I have ridden by the side of her daughter to a neigh-
bouring town, and seen her with about half a hundred-weight of
parcels tied to her saddle, galloping back again, apparently incapable
of fatigue, and wholly independent of human help. My thoughts
travelled to some young ladies of my acquaintance in London to
whom it would give a galvanic shock even to listen to the story of
her usual day’s work, and I wondered which had most true enjoy-
ment of life. Nay, I hardly wondered. The bright, sunny-faced girl
by ray side left no room for doubt.
The ride by rail from Nelson to this bush region revealed a
charming succession of seemingly prosperous farm-homesteads. The
town of Richmond, about mid-way, appeared to be specially
prosperous. The farms had more of an English finish about them.
I should imagine that the happy owners had reached that stage of
success when it becomes possible to indulge in the luxury of
foreign help. Here it is that the English farm-labourer finds his
opening. Sons of well-to-do farmers learn among other things at the
capital schools to which they are sent, to despise field-work. None
of the exhausting moil for them ! So, amid groanings of spirit over
youthful degeneracy, the old farmer has to article his boy to some
lawyer, or architect, or apprentice him to the local grocer, and hire
labourers to till his fields. The young ladies also learn a thing or
two at the fashionable city “ College,” and the dairy soon comes to
know them no more. Hence the demand for dairymaids, making the
wages for such work higher than that of an educated governess, I
suppose New Zealand would gladly absorb a thousand English dairy-
girls to-morrow, giving them £3O or £4O a year each, and their
board and lodging. I mentioned that unskilled labourers at Nelson
had struck for an additional shilling per day, making 9s. for eight
hours. They have now got it, and more men at the same rate are
urgently required.


From the Daily News of June 3rd.
A Correspondent writes from Richmond, New Zealand :
“ In my last letter I gave an account of a visit to a new settler in
the ‘ bush,’ and how the labourer fared in such a district. I propose
now giving a sketch of an old settler’s surroundings and of the
‘ labourer’ in such a sphere. A ten miles’ drive from Nelson City
brought me to what I was assured was one of the best-managed farms
in the whole neighbourhood. The proprietor, a Somersetshire man,
met us at the gate, and his thoroughly John Bull appearance and
hearty welcome at once made us feel free of his domain. After
refreshing myself with a glass of home-brewed ale I proceeded to take
stock of the homestead. Nothing could look more like solid success.
Immediately in front of the roomy and comfortable house was a well-
stocked garden, the trees well-laden. One of them was an apricot,
and the delicious fruit was fortunately waiting to be gathered. The
tree was as large as an average-sized English apple-tree. Peach-trees
of similar bulk abounded, covered with ripening fruit, and of course
there were any number of apple and pear trees. Beyond this garden
was a large paddock newly mown, in which several sleek horses were
luxuriating. At the back of the house, stretching away for some
hundreds of acres, were the paddocks and fields which constituted the
richest portion of an estate which in its entirety comprised some
twelve hundred acres. With a pardonable pride the fine old yeoman
took me over his fields, now ‘ standing ready for the reaper’s gather-
ing hand.’ ‘What d’ye think of that for barley 1 ?’ he asked, as he
gathered a few stalks, and rubbing them out in his hands showed a
sample of bright grain which Mr. Bass would have been glad to buy
twenty thousand quarters of at almost any price the farmer chose to
name. It was a splendid crop, and as the delicious sunlight poured
down upon it one felt no surprise at its matchless colour. I hinted
to him how glad I fancied our Burton brewers would be to get hold
of such barley, and he smilingly remai-ked, ‘ There’s no need to go so
far for a market; all this is bespoke long ago.’ I was next shown
the wheat, which seemed equally fine, though not so heavy a crop as
an average English one. One of the latest inventions in the shape
of a reaping machine was at work, and it was with evident satisfac-
tion that the farmer saw in the marvellous product of that machine
a solution of the labour difficulty. There was the wheat standing up
in front of the magic performer, and behind it, untouched by human
hands, it lay in neatly tied-up bundles, ready to be carted off the
ground. Two horses and two men would thus soon lay low a
tolerable sized field, and instead of the excessive toilsomeness of the
old-fashioned harvest-field no one seemed the least strained by the
proceedings.
After thus doing the fields dinner was announced, and I was
destined for the first time to witness that much-vaunted triumph of
democracy—the sitting down of master and men at the same table.
Seated at the head of a long plain deal table was the owner of what




o
H
H
H


in England would be considered a fine estate. On bis right hand
was his wife, a comely dame, somewhat overweighted with domestic
cares, as all New Zealand wives appear to be. On his left were his
guests, and filling the remainder of the space were five labourers and
a servant-girl. I had often heard Mr, Arch and others grow
eloquent over this feature of colonial life, and wondered how it would
work. Well, here it was then. Jack was as good as his master for
the nonce; and the terrible scourge of English society—social
distinction, laid on one side. Like a good many other attractive
baits of the stump orator: ‘A stake in the soil,’ ‘being your own
master,’ &c., I regret to have to record that it had all the appearance
of being a huge blunder. The men looked as awkward and uncom-
fortable as possible, and the rest of us seemed at our wits’ ends to
know how to prevent one another from being utterly wretched. I
tried hard to engage the men in a little cheerful talk, but this was
evidently what they were not used to, and the experiment proved a
sad failure. Scarcely more successful was an effort to draw the farmer
out. A chill was upon the whole party, and it was not till the men
had filed out, and the servant was gone into her own quarter, that
the chip was out of the porridge, and things wore their becoming hue.
As regards the pay of the labourers, however, as I have already
shown, no modification of the statements made at home is necessary.
In a paper of yesterday’s date I find the following announcement :
‘An Ashburton telegram says that farm labourers during the harvest
are demanding and receiving £4c per week and found. A\ hat will
they say in England!’ By the ‘found’ here, of course, is meant
board and lodging. If we put this at 10s., we have the startling
fact of the ‘ English Agricultural Labourer in New Zealand actually
receiving £i. 10s. a week for about half the real toil of an English
harvest-field ! I need scarcely say the living is far superior to that
of the home toiler—three good meals per day, such as are found in
an ordinary well-to-do English middle-class home. Well may the
New Zealand editor ask, ‘ What will they say in England!’ As I
read the ominous telegrams ‘ Strike of the Kent Agricultural
Labourers,’ ‘ Reduction of Wages,’ &c., I am equally astounded at
the stupidity of the labourers in not at once steering for this goodly
land, and at the employers for risking the irreparable loss.
As I have written so much that is favourable as to the woi'king-
man’s chances here, I will in this, my closing letter, give all that I
can on the other side. And the ‘ all’ is very little. I have already
referred to the high price of house rents. There are no snug cottages
with gardens for Is. 6d. per week. The comfortable English
practice of building cottages for the labourers appears to be un-
known among the landowners, and hence a vast deal of over-
crowding and discomfort among workmen generally. More money
passes through their hands, but I doubt if the thrifty, well-disposed,
English labourers do not get more real comfort and enjoyment out of
their lives than do multitudes that I meet with here. Ido not like
the hard-bargaining spirit generated by circumstances amongst these


colonists. The high wages they have to pay are the reverse of what
is said about mercy. There is certainly no blessing for the giver,
and it is a very dubious one for the receiver. There is no kindly
feeling between master and man. Of course, no labourer must
expect work a moment longer than his master absolutely needs his
services. A luxury so expensive must be indulged in as little as
possible. Where an English farmer employs a dozen hands all the
year through, a New Zealand farmer would not employ more than
two. Hence an absence of the finish of an average English farm. I
should think an English labourer who really took a pride in his work
would be broken-hearted almost at the state of the farm on which he
would find himself here. It is simply disgusting, the slovenliness observ-
able all around. I saw yesterday field after field with the corn literally
choked by weeds, and one large field of wheat was so bad that the
farmer would have burnt it off instead of reaping it if the authorities
would have permitted it. The universal reply to one’s remonstrance
is, ‘lt won’t pay to farm better. The produce wont recoup the large
expenditure consequent on the high wages.’ Never was greater
fallacy if it were the true cause, but it is not. The real secret is the
poverty of the landowners. Men have rushed into proprietorship
without at all realising what it involved, and hence instead of the
compact and well-cultured holdings of rural England, you see bound-
less acres of half-tilled land, divided by miles of fence, either of
tumble-down woodwork or overgrown gorse or quick. The rich men
of New Zealand are the squatters —owners of innumerable sheep and
miles of sheep runs, like Mr. Robert Campbell, who owns about half
a million of sheep and land enough to make a thousand good farms,
and the merchants who take the farm products at a ridiculously low
price in exchange for goods at a fabulously high price. I am afraid
another cause of the farmers’ poverty is more potent still—a love of
strong drink. Their exhausting toil leads the way to the whisky
bottle, and in this southern hemisphere the man who drinks is
doomed. It is lamentable to see how this Old World curse is
repeated in the New. I have referred to the educational advantages
of New Zealand. They are of an exceptionally high order. It
would seem as if the original settlers—for the most part illiterate
workingmen—had been all roused up to an unwonted earnestness in
the matter of their children’s education. Among various other illus-
trations of this laudable parental anxiety I notice a provision on the
Government railway whereby children are brought at a nominal
charge to the town school. Of course each village has its parish
school, as we should call it in England, but at the leading cities there
are ‘high’ schools or colleges, and to enable parents to avail them-
selves of them, quarterly tickets are granted, whereby for, I think it
is 10s., a boy or girl can have a daily ride to and from school. At
the Nelson Station, for instance, you will see a whole troop of lads
rush out of the morning train, many of whom live twenty miles off
in some bush farm. This educational furore is fraught with im-
portant bearings on the future of the colony, and already farmers are


groaning over the results. To keep their lads to the plough they
have to give them an interest in the concern, as the well-to-do farmer
to whom I have referred has done. He has three sons, to whom he
has virtually given a farm apiece. There they are with their young
wives and families all settled around the old home, mutually helpful
but individually independent, apparently realising as perfect a state
of social happiness as any Utopia could possibly depict. Machinery
will have to do the rough work, and the present domestic infelicities
to which I have alluded will disappear. The higher mental culture
will have expression in a higher social tone. Books will multiply.
The voice of music will be heard. Intellectual conversation will be
possible, until it shall be no longer necessary for the successful
colonist to return to England to save himself and family from a
relapse into barbarism. As regards the ‘ English Agricultural
Labourer in New Zealand/ his future is tolerably clear. His
children will be the future yeomanry of the country. Nothing can
keep him from this destiny if he remains only true to himself. His
large earnings will supply him with the means of either purchasing
or hiring the land, and the disinclination of the children of old
settlers to continue on their father’s homesteads will supply him with
the opportunity. Nor need England repine at this eventuality, for
each successful New Zealand farmer speedily becomes a valuable
customer of the English merchant and manufacturer. On board the
steamer which brought me out there were several prosperous colonists
who had laid out thousands of pounds in British manufactures.
Several of those men were labourers or village mechanics twenty
years ago. One such, who had been a wheelwright in Northampton-
shire, and now owned a fine farm in the Canterbury Province,
informed me that, in addition to machinery of Messrs. Hornsby, he
had purchased a marble monument for his deceased son’s grave in
New Zealand. Nothing but the best would do for such a sacred
purpose, and of course the best must come from ‘home.’ The extent
to which this sort of thing is done may be inferred from the import
statistics. In 1877 the total value of New Zealand imports was
£6,973,418, including £20,626 for agricultural implements; £176,705
for apparel; £240,638 for coals ; £858,345 for drapery ; £142,000
for machinery; £46,000 for printing papers; and, most significant
of all, £118,707 for books.
I conclude with an illustration as to what the right sort of man
may do here. Fourteen months ago an English agricultural labourer
arrived in New Zealand with scarcely a shilling in his pocket. He
was a handy sort of fellow, and took the first work that came to
hand—some fencing. Since then he has done all kinds of farm work,
principally by contract, and to-day he has over one hundred pounds
in the bank. If the hard-pressed home-toilers hear not what such a
fact as this proclaims there is nothing for them but to take whatever
their employers see fit to give. No one can blame an employer, be
he farmer or manufacturer, for not giving more for his labour than
he can help, and instead of useless kickings against the pricks, let


all who think they are worth more than they are getting for their
services, place themselves at once in communication with Sir Julius
Yogel, and bring their wares to his market. And as regards the
employers, I should advise them, instead of battling with their work-
men for a margin of profit on their high-rented farms, to bring their
capital to New Zealand, and on their own freeholds taste the sweets
of independence, and reveal to the New Zealanders the wealth which
now lies buried for want of adequate culture. With English ‘ capital
and labour’ I see no limits to the prosperity of this really splendid
colony, and in the prosperity of her offspring the mother country
would find her surest guarantee as to her own.”
The following Letter to the Editor of the Birmingham Daily Post
is added as containing a few hints suggestive of the national bearing
of the question of Emigration :
NEW ZEALAND EMIGRATION A GOVERNMENTAL
DUTY.
Sir, —As I have ever found in your columns a true sympathy
with the claims and yearnings of our common humanity, I venture
to solicit space for a few thoughts which have been suggested by
what I have seen in New Zealand and heard from England. You
appear to be passing through a season of deep social depression.
Business is stagnant, and myriads of your breadwinners are at their
wits’ end to know how to keep the wolf from the door. It is idle
to speculate as to the causes of the depression. I prefer suggesting
a remedy. As I push my investigations here as to the general
welfare of those who have immigrated during the last few years, I
am repeatedly forced to inquire, “ Why are not tens of thousands of
those hungry toilers sent over here under wise management and at
the public expense, to develop the hidden wealth, and to share the
abundant food] ” In a Nelson paper of only yesterday’s date I saw
an advertisement of two hundred legs of mutton, averaging nine
pounds each, for one shilling and threepence each. The remaining
portions of the sheep would be melted down for tallow. In the same
paper there were, only a few days ago, advertisements for pick-and-
shovel men—that is to say, mere unskilled labourers—at nine
shillings per day of eight hours. Now, sir, putting these two things
together, and then looking at them in the light of the sad statements
in your English journals, how is it possible to avoid the conclusion
I have suggested by the heading of this communication 1 By build-
ing workhouses and establishing a Poor-law Board, Government
recognises an obligation towards the people. Why should not that
sense of obligation lead to an infinitely better mode of relief, such as


the removal of people from one part of the realm where workers are
in excess of the work, and eaters are in excess of the food, to another
part, where the conditions are exactly reversed. And this is all that
emigration to our colonies really means. It is in no sense a British
loss, but rather a clear gain. The home starveling, without power
of purchase beyond the barest necessaries of life, becomes out here
not only a consumer of twice as much food, but a purchaser of three
or four times as much furniture, clothing, tools, and all other home
manufactures.
In the vessel by which I came out there were several New
Zealanders who fifteen or twenty years ago were poverty-stricken
Englishmen, utterly destitute of spending power, but what were
they then 1 Prosperous merchants and landowners returning from
the old country laden with costly purchases. One successful fellow
had bought machinery to the extent of some thousands of pounds.
Another had actually engaged a lot of London house decorators to
come out and finish off, in first class style, a fine mansion which he
is building here. A third had ordered an expensive marble tomb-
stone to go over his son’s grave. And so on all through the ship.
I should say the purchases of that one ship’s passengers would be
more than a hundred thousand pounds’ value ; and the probability
is that a quarter of a century ago the same men would not have
been able to buy a hundred thousand farthings’ worth. It is easy,
therefore, to calculate the probable returns which would flow from
an outlay of, say, a million sterling on emigration. Ten thousand
Englishmen might be taken from their poor famished English homes,
where they are without the power to buy a shilling’s worth of
Birmingham manufactures from year’s end to year’s end, and
removed to New Zealand homes, where with two or three pounds a
week coming in, and only one going out for absolute necessaries,
they could indulge in a set of tools and a score of other usefu,
articles, which would be sure to come from Birmingham, Sheffield
or Manchester. —I remain, &c., A. C.
Nelson, N.Z., March 6th, 1879.
The following Letter was written but not published, owing to the
crowded condition of the London Press consequent on the Zulu
war :
THE REMEDY FOR ENGLISH DISTRESS.
g lß) —Allow me to emphasize an expression of Lord Derby’s
which I find in the last budget of English news. Referring
to the wide-spread distress, his Lordship is reported as urging whole-
sale emigration as the only efficient remedy. A visit which lam


paying this fine colony has convinced me that no better advice could
be given. It is difficult to convey any adequate sense of the astonish-
ment which is felt here at the apparent unwillingness of Englishmen
to come and gather up the wasting wealth of this fertile island. In
all directions there is every element of wealth. The half has not
been told of the hidden riches which await the magic touch of toil
and enterprise. With a climate infinitely superior to that of
England, and soil at least fully equal, it is marvellous that so few
comparatively should be found willing to participate in its advan-
tages. So far as my investigations have gone, distress is unknown
here. When unskilled labourers are in anxious demand at nine
shillings per day and beef and mutton only fourpence per pound, it
is superfluous to speak of the prevailing comfort. All are well fed,
and no one knows anything of want or insufficiency save in his re-
membrances of the past or by what he reads of the experiences of
those at home.
And a remarkable feature of the case is that the demand for
labourers seems only to increase with the increased supply. In truth
it is tolerably clear that the population-bearing capacity of New
Zealand increases with the increased emigration, thus fully bearing
out some of Mr. Arch’s supposed crudities as to the real value of
labour. How the thing comes about is easily seen. For instance,
all around this beautiful city of Nelson from whence I write, there
are huge hills which have been generally supposed to be almost
worthless for agricultural purposes. Only as sheep-runs have they
been utilised. Now, however, as labour becomes accessible culture
is beginning to appear on the sunny slopes. Orchards are springing
up all over the hills, and no one can doubt that almost every inch of
the gigantic mountain ranges is capable of culture, and will repay
the cultivator a hundred-fold. Then again, many of these hills are
composed of valuable minerals needing only the application of skill
and enterprise to make them sources of great wealth. Within sound
of where I write there is a paint manufactory. The leading in-
gredient is a stone found in one of the mountain ranges. All that is
needed to develope the manufacture is some of the superfluous capital
and labour of the mother country. On one of the sea-coasts there is
an illimitable quantity of iron-sand capable of being converted into
the finest- steel. Here again all that is needed is that of which
England suffers from repletion. And so of a hundred other sources
of undeveloped wealth. It is not too much to affirm that there is
not a thing which is grown in England which might not be grown
much better here; there is not a manufacture in England which
might not be carried on far better hei’e; and there is not an element
of social happiness in England which might not be either found or de-
veloped here. What is needed is a more distinct realisation of the
exceeding practicality of the remedy which her colonies offer to the
social ills of the mother country.
Too much is made of the distance and of the dangers of the
voyage. As a matter of fact steam has well-nigh annihilated the


former, and the latter are unworthy of a moment’s thought. T came
here in less than two months, and the whole voyage was little more
than a protracted sea pic-nic. As for the danger I never for a
moment doubted that I was far more secure than while riding down
Fleet Street or travelling on the Great Western Railway. The con-
sideration is unworthy of a moment’s anxious thought.
Another thing in connection with emigration which should help
to give a favourable reception to Lord Derby’s advice is the inevit-
able re-action on British trade and commerce. Every prosperous
English colonist becomes a customer of English manufacturers.
The figures as to New Zealand imports, startling as they are, give
but a poor idea of her worth as a British customer. To realize this
you must stand on a New Zealand wharf and see one of the huge
trading vessels disgorge her freight. Machinery, pianos, carriages,
books, and all kinds of London, Manchester, and Birmingham manu-
factures strew the spacious wharves for weeks in countless packages.
One of the wholesale merchants here received over four thousand
packages by a recent vessel from England, and a column of the local
journal was taken up by a detailed description of them. In this
list you find large quantities of all those tempting luxuries which
are found in a London Italian warehouse or a Civil Service co-oper-
ative store.
As I looked upon the extraordinary wealth of wild fruit in
some of the New Zealand country districts a month ago, I felt that
it only needed British capital and enterprise to place large quantities
of the same before the English market. Millions of pounds of really
delicious cherries are wasted for want of a market. I have known
farmers’ daughters who have sawn off the laden branches through
sheer despair of the requisite ability to gather the fruit, and the aid
of pigs is often evoked to clear off the overwhelming crop of peaches.
And all this with comparatively little or no culture ! What this
province of Nelson might be made to yield of all kinds of fruit if
subjected to the judicious culture of English market-gardeners,
imagination fails to grasp. I saw an apricot-tree the other day in a
friend’s garden from which eighteen cases of fruit, each containing
twenty pounds weight, had been gathered.
The explanation of this rare fruitfulness is found in the exquisite
climate. I had heard much of the New Zealand climate and feared
disappointment. I might have spared my fears. No language can
exaggerate the well-nigh invariable loveliness of the atmosphere of,
at any rate, this part of the colony. The rasping bitterness of the
English climate is wholly unknown, hence the perfect immunity of
the fruit blossoms from the scourge of the home grower. And not
the fruit only reaps the benefit of such delicious climate. The wheat
and barley of New Zealand are certainly second to none grown else-
where.
Surely then, Sir, it should be the duty of every English philan-
thropist to do all within his power to bring within reach ot this
wealth of nature, the thousands of pinched and poverty-struck


inhabitants of the English counties. A few thousands spared from the
millions lavished on supposed Imperial interests, would be well spent
by the English Government in facilitating the removal of subjects
from one part of the realm where there are more mouths than food
to another where there is more food than mouths. I would suggest
that Lord Derby place himself at the head of a National Emigration
Society, and that the first thing done by such society be the purchase
at a fair price of the liquidators of the Glasgow Bank the land
held by them in New Zealand. Then I would have them send out
and settle upon it such of the deserving English poor as gave pro-
mise of ability to turn the boon to good account. In my judgment
this would be as wise and patriotic a course as even so wise and
patriotic a man as Lord Derby could possibly devise.—l remain, &c.,
Nelson, N.Z., 20th Feb., 1879. A. C.
A MONTH’S TRIP ON HORSEBACK IN THE NORTH
ISLAND OF NEW ZEALAND, FROM WELLINGTON
TO NEW PLYMOUTH, via WANGANUI, AND BACK
via FEATHERSTONE.
On the 18th April, in the year of grace 1878, a couple of
Englishmen might have been seen wending their way on horseback
northward of Wellington. They had heard a good deal of the
fertility of the country stretching away towards New Plymouth,
and purposed seeing for themselves the goodly land. For some
three or four miles their road ran parallel with the railway and
skirted the sea. On the land side were the high hills from whence
material was being dislodged for the huge reclamation works going
on in Wellington harbour. The rapidity with which a line of some
thirty trucks were filled and despatched to their destination filled
them with surprise. What might have been supposed to be work
enough for a hundred men to accomplish in a whole day, occupied
but a few minutes. So much for system and tact. Leaving this
road for an inland track, they soon found themselves in a winding
mountain gorge, and their course lay past a beautifully clear stx’eam
filled with water-cress. The romantic was now upon them in full
force. Hills presenting an ever-changing series of views rose higher
and higher before them, until they emerged upon the open country.
The township of Johnsonville is a small assemblage of butchers’ and
gardeners’ establishments, whose contiguity to Wellington ensures
ample prosperity. Past here the road, cut out of the hills, brought
them to a place known as lowa flat. Finding an old settler’s resi-
dence close to the road, they pulled up for a rest, and turning their


fcf
rn
0
o
w
H
H
S
ta
n
o
o




horses into a paddock, they proceeded to discuss the sandwiches in
their wallets, washing the highly-relished solids down with draughts
of delicious new milk. Thence they proceeded seawards to Porirua
harbour, a pretty, quiet, little place. From here a road, cut on the
hiil-side, just above high-water mark, led them to Pahantahanui. Being
low tide they frequently left the road and made short cuts across
the sands. Numbers of natives were observed hereabouts, fishing
for oysters. They reached Pahantahanui about 5'30 p.m., and gladly
made for the hotel. The next day they rose early and remounting
their horses made for Paikakariki, where they purposed breakfasting.
The road soon brought them into magnificent mountain gorges. On
either side of them the hills, rising cloudwards and covered with
trees and variegated shrubs, presented a marvellous appearance.
Each ..turn of the winding track revealed something more beautiful
than the last. Often straight below them was the sparkling moun-
tain stream, rushing along with infinite bustle and gleesomeness.
Biding along full-trot within a foot of a precipice varying from
50 to 500 feet in depth, where one false step would infallibly
send them to the bottom, was clearly a process either of making
or breaking the nervous system. Happily it was the former, and it
was surprising to themselves how soon all sense of danger deserted
them. After six or seven miles of this a sudden turn brought them
to the top of one of the highest cliffs, from whence the sea in all its
grandeur, and sparkling in the sunshine, burst upon their view.
Before them stretched out a vast mountainous region, and far below
(some 1,200 feet), was the sea, then one grand succession of mighty
waves, rolling in and breaking on the sand with a terrific and con-
tinuous roar. So perpendicular was the rock on which they were
that a stone hurled over the unfenced track went straight into the
foaming abyss. About three miles northward, and considerably
below them, lay their breakfasting point, an hotel close to the sea-
shore, The descent led through a place called Glen Valley, and
exceeded in beauty even the ascent. It was simply perfect, and well
deserved the universal praise ever bestowed upon it. Nor was the
little place towards which it led, Paikakariki, unworthy of the pictu-
resque roadway. All along the coast were innumerable pure white
sandhills, great masses and quite dazzling to look at in the sunshine.
On closer inspection the whole surface was found to be in motion,
causing a succession of small waves or ripples. This was caused by
the wind. An immense sand-hill has been known to move many
yards in a single day. On returning to their hotel after a stroll
along the beach they found a new arrival in the shape of some seven
or eight Maoris on horseback. Their chief was a finely-tattooed
old warrior wearing a blue silk sash round his head. Three of his
attendants were well-dressed and gentlemanly young fellows, half-
castes apparently. One young lady was his daughter, and two other
females seemed to be servants. They were returning from a visit to
Wellington, where they had been to see a celebrated circus. As our
travellers’ course and theirs lay in the same direction, a polite invi-


tation to make one party was accepted, and together a twenty-two
mile stage along the sea-shore was commenced. On their left lay the
island of Kapiti, about twelve miles distant. About twelve miles
along the sandy road they came to the Wakaui river, and allowing
the Maoris to take the lead, they plunged into it to reach the other
side. With legs tucked up level with their seats, they found it no
light task to avoid a bath. Seven or eight miles of similar sand-
beach travel on the opposite side brought them to some excellent
pasture land and the settlement of Otaki.
The next day, Good Friday, they were roused early from their
most welcome slumbers at the hotel by the arrival of the Wellington
five-horse coach from Foxton. At nine o’clock they were again in
their saddles, winding along a sandy sort of track seawards. Inland
they saw several Maori farms and patches of Indian corn-stalks,
the corn-cobs had been gathered, and were tied up in bundles of
about a dozen, and hung over a wooden framework some 10 feet
high to “ cure.” The stalks were left on the ground to rot off. So
much for Maori farming ! Hereabouts a couple of natives overtook
them, and one of them happening to be going in a similar direction,
volunteered to accompany them. He proved a useful guide, espe-
cially in fording one or two rather dangerous streams. One of these
streams was a considerable river, about fifty yards wide, and as their
guide rode across it, his legs tucked up as usual, they were some-
what appalled by a sudden semi-submergement, the bed of the
river having a depth of about four feet of water. There was
nothing for it but to follow their leader and hope for the best.
Thanks to the plucky horses the other side was reached in safety,
and cantering away they soon came to the noble river Ohow. Here
fording was out of the question, and a ferry had to be sought for.
Unsaddling their horses, they took their places in the boat, and being
propelled by an ingenious contrivance across the hundred yards, they
left their horses to follow in a more natural manner. Held by reins,
and with only their noses above water, the poor brutes had all their
work cut out to keep themselves from being carried away by the
strong current. Altogether the adventure was most exciting, and it
was with no small sense of relief that they once more found them-
selves seated in their saddles. Some ten miles of very sober travel
now lay before them, mere monotonous flat sand-beach, along which
they alternately walked and cantered their horses. They then turned
inland, and for some five miles the road might have been through
the desert of Sahara, so sandy and uninteresting was it. How the
bi-weekly coach managed to get across the sandy waste was a mystery
to them. At length they came to another wide river, the Manawatu.
Here a chain ferry awaited them, in which men and horses could
accompany each other across the stream. On the other side was
Foxton, a struggling settlement consisting of a few stores and three
hotels, with roads of sand and sundry private houses. There was a
pier at which steamers from Wellington and Nelson regularly call,
and the town was the terminus of the Foxton and Wanganui
railway.


The next day they left Foxton, following the railway along a road
of soft sand for six miles, the principal vegetation being patches of
flax, which in damp places seemed to luxuriate in the sand. At a
place called Carnarvon they left the railway and followed the Sandon
road some four miles till they reached the head-quarters of the
“ Douglas station.” Here they found a' large slaughtering and
boiling-down establishment, with immense shearing yards, cottages,
stores, and all the requisite apparatus for converting New Zealand
beef and mutton into available food for hungry Englishmen. The
whole thing looked like prosperity, and on their making inquiry
respecting the Douglas township a clerk was courteously told off to
conduct them to it. After travelling along the sandy tracks for
some seven miles a mass of bush was reached, through which a
rough track was cut for about six miles. Halfway through this
cutting they came upon a partially-cleared square of some three
hundred acres, the site of the proposed Campbell-town. Arrived at
the centre of the clearing they turned down a track for about two
miles, and thus had a full view of the whole plan. The laud was
evidently good, but the labour requisite to make it into farms seemed
immense. Not being able to ride along the newly-formed roads,
they found themselves at the end of their peregrinations pretty well
done up. Resuming the saddle, they once more took their way
towards Sandon, passing several settlers who were gallantly hewing
their way to fortune. Occasionally a saw-mill was visible, helping to
clear away the all-surrounding timber. After a few miles of this
they suddenly found themselves in an open country, leaving the bush,
like a huge, dark hill, behind them. The transition struck them as
very remarkable. Yonder was the vast mass of timber, with its
undergrowth of almost trackless scrub, apparently untouched by
man, and here was an open plain covered over with low fern.
Nothing could be sharper than the division, and nothing seemingly
more arbitrary and inexplicable. Two miles ot this finely-cultivated
land brought them to Sandon, well tired and fully prepared to enjoy
the comforts of an hotel.
The next day was Sunday, and after breakfast they took a stroll
about the town and neighbourhood till church-time. It struck
them as being a very tine agricultural district, resembling in culture
an English agricultural county. Far as the eye could reach, north,
east, and west, stretched out a level, open country; and on the south
was the weird-looking dark boundary of bush-land. After a rest
somewhat prolonged, in harmony with the genius of the Day of
Rest, they proceeded to Bull Town, some six miles distant, pux’-
posing to remain there for the night; but finding the scenery very
enchanting and the road pleasant, they kept on their way to the
flourishing township of Marton. En route they found various
signs of progress and innumerable flourishing farm homesteads.
The “ Fox ” settlement, Crofton, [of Temperance notoriety, seemed
an interesting enterprise worthy of the notice of English social
reformers. Marton struck them as being one of the most


prosperous towns which they had yet seen. After refreshing themselves
with a good tea at an excellent private boarding-house, and turning
their horses out into an adjoining paddock, they went to the Presby-
terian church, where they found a respectable old Scot discoursing
abundantly sound doctrine to a score or two of somewhat somnolent
hearers. They were not impressed with the attractiveness of the
service, and left the church questioning the value of so ill-appointed
a “means of grace.” As Englishmen our travellers were struck with
the contrast presented by this agricultural town or village to a
similar locality at home. Instead of a few good houses and a num-
ber of more or less tumbledown hovels, the whole place resembled a
city suburb of small detached houses, with their pretty gardens and
various signs of comfort. Entering the humblest of them, the
homes of labourers, instead of the inevitable bread and lard, with a
frying-pan full of potatoes dashed with American bacon-fat, there
was the good joint of beef or mutton ; and waiting in the pot on
the Colonial oven, was the accompanying plum-pudding. And well
it might be so, for whereas wages were high, the best fresh meat
could be bought for threepence per pound.
Leaving this land of Goshen on Monday morning their road for
six miles passed through a high, flat plateau of rich, fertile land,
until a steep hill was reached, from the summit of which the sea was
once more visible. The country then sloped downwards towards a
smaller range of hills, near the coast. After traversing a long, wind-
ing road, cut out of the side of a hill, they reached Turakina, a small,
neat village. Here they learnt that every acre of land was occupied.
Passing onward they came upon a very pretty valley and a fine
river, called the Turakina. A good wooden bridge carried them
across, and from it was visible a railway bridge over the same. An
ascent by a winding road round an immense hill revealed to them a
variety of the most picturesque scenery. Yonder lay the peaceful
valley, with the silvery Turakina winding its tortuous way along it,
and the railway twisting in and out all the way. Dotting the hills
behind them were the well-built homesteads, all looking pictures of
prosperity. Altogether the place gave the travellers a perfect ideal
of comfort, peace, and beauty. On reaching the top of a range of
hills they passed through a flat country, and the land was less culti-
vated, but still dotted over with homesteads. By-and-by a turn
round a hill brought them in view of Wanganui and the river
Wanganui. They crossed the noble river by the newly-erected iron
bridge, and found the town holiday-keeping. They were impressed
with the thriving, cleanly appearance of the place, and deemed it
almost worthy of comparison with Wellington. In the evening they
had a view from their hotel of the volunteers and artillery returning
from a tournament, which had taken place just outside the town. They
were a noble-looking band of men, and admirably mounted. On Tues-
day morning at nine o’clock they once more commenced their travels,
ascending a range of hills, from the top of which they had a splendid
view of the town and neighbourhood. Like so many other Hew


-« '


o
H
O
g
H
£
o
g
w
M
p
o
*5
t


Zealand towns, Wanganui lies in an immense valley, surrounded with
hills. Its streets are well planned, and as they gazed on the whole
scene—the river running through the town, the beautiful bridge
stretching across it, and farther down the railway with its bridge
and the half-dozen wharves for the steamers, they felt no surprise at
the universal interest felt in the young and rising township. The
only drawback seemed the huge banks of sand which occurred, as at
Foxton, and which must impede agricultural operations. Pursuing
their way over the hills they came upon a pretty lake, called Virginia
Lake, from whence Wanganui gets its supply of water, and if a good
supply of water is any guarantee of future success, the town certainly
has got it. Few towns in New Zealand or elsewhere can boast of so
exhaustless a store of life’s first necessity. A few miles farther on
they came to another of those sublime features of New Zealand
scenery—a mountain gorge. They found it no less than ten miles
long, and the ever-changing variety of its scenery altogether beggared
description. Here they received their first baptism, the rain coming
down in fruitful showers. After emerging from the gorge they
reached the town of Maxwell, a straggling place of one hotel, three
or four farm-houses, and a few small dwellings. From thence their
road lay down a small ravine, through rich grass-lands, and past a
Maori pah, or village. This latter consisted of a mass of rush hovels,
pitched helter-skelter in a field, behind a large hedge by the roadside.
They soon found themselves drawing nearer to the native settlement,
and became familiarized with the appearance of the people. They
all seemed very civil and pleased to be spoken to. Another halt-
dozen miles brought them to Witotai’a, where they crossed a river of
that name by a handsome bridge. On the river were some Maori
canoes—long, narrow vessels, cut out of a solid tree, and propelled
by hand-paddles. The hotel where they stopped was full of natives,
who seemed to have a great partiality for such resorts.
The next morning they rose early and rode to Wairoa, seven
miles distant, to breakfast, passing through a very steep and beautiful
gorge, with a rapid stream at the bottom to ford. The country
through which they passed was level, and apparently very rich. The
town of Wairoa, or Carlyle, is a small, thriving place, showing signs
of rapid progress. Leaving Carlyle, they passed through another
gorge to level country, quite open, but bounded on the horizon with
dark, long lines of bush. On their left was the sea in the distance,
and northward before them, rising solitary and sublime, like a
Gladstone among European politicians, was the far-famed Mount
Egmont. This glorious vision was not soon to leave them. All day
long it haunted them, hidden only occasionally by clouds, which
seemed to rise from its mighty base and make its sides and top their
home. Every now and then the snow-clad top and patches of snow
on the sides would show through the lighter clouds, giving the
mountain a singularly enchanting appearance. Then as those clouds
melted and passed away the outline gradually appeared again, looking
like an immense cone connecting earth and sky. Four or five miles


beyond Wairoa they entered a series of gorges, which brought them
down to the Patea river—a fine stream, equal to the Wanganui.
Crossing it by a bridge, a steep road brought them to Patea, another
rising township with its full complement of stores, hotels, &c. Find-
ing their horses pretty well done up, they left them a mile or two
the other side of Patea, and so reached the town on foot. Passing
onwards a six miles’ Avalk brought them to Rakaramia, where, finding
a good hotel, they resolved to “ rest and be thankful.” The last two
miles were done on a bullock-dray, a rough, strong kind of platform
with a long pole in front, to which were harnessed by a yoke and
chain two bullocks, and in front of these were two more similarly
yoked. The driver had a long whip, and by continually talking to
the beasts, calling them by their names, and a free use of his whip,
he managed to get the seemingly unmanageable animals along
admirably. What a man would do with four such great brutes,
“unaccustomed to the yoke,” it required no great foresight to
predict.
After a good night’s rest our travellers, now reduced to footmen,
started for Manutahi, determining there to breakfast. The five miles’
walk carried them through sundry gorges, and on leaving this little
place their path lay through a fertile country, with the usual alter-
nations of hill and dale. Their next halt was eleven miles distant
from Manutahi, at a place called Hawera, a flourishing town with
three or four good hotels, &c. Passing on towards Norm an by they
fortunately got a ride for a few miles. This very modern town
already boasted of its hotel, which our travellers deemed one of the
best they had yet stopped at. These hotels are quite a feature of
colonial life. They are mostly well fitted up, and altogether unlike
the average English public-house. They are, in fact, public boarding-
houses. Three times a day in a large dining-room a bell summons
the visitors together, and there is found an abundance of solid food, hut
no strong drink. Tea or coffee may be had at each meal, but stronger
drinks can only be got at the bar. The charges vary from one
shilling to two shillings per meal, and the utmost order prevails.
Most hotels boast of an Alcock’s billiard-table, a celebrated Melbourne
maker, but no drinking is allowed in the room. The charge for a
bed is usually one shilling and sixpence, and fees to servants are un-
known. Leaving Normanby in the morning they pushed on to Kite-
maria, across a fine, open, pasture country. Straight before them was
glorious Mount Egmont, seeming more majestic than ever, as it stood
out in the clear morning air without a cloud to drape its bold out-
line. As they gazed upon it, rising from its thirty mile diameter
base to the skies, the lines of Coleridge on Mont Blanc, as viewed
from the valley of Chamouni, rose involuntarily to their thoughts, and
they found themselves asking —
“ Hast thou a charm to stay the morning star
In his steep course ? So long he seems to pause
On thy bald, awful head, 0 sovran Blanc ?”


a
-1
◄
a
<4
a
o
"1
P 5
P
<
o
X
o
w




A few miles of walking brought them to the mountain track, a
rough way, a chain wide, cut right through the bush for some thirty
miles. The appearance of the road, if such a track can be called a
road, was very singular. Right before them appeared nothing but a
seemingly interminable avenue, with trees on either side. After
walking three or four miles, however, they reached a valley, down
which they wended their way, and found at the bottom a beautiful
stream with a quantity of fine watercress growing in it. They stopped
and partook of the true hermit’s fare, washing it down with the deli-
cious “ mountain dew.” Some miles further on they came to a large
clearing of some six hundred acres, and learnt that it was a new
town to be called Stratford, the junction of the railway from New
Plymouth to Wellington, where the branch strikes oft" to Napier, right
through the very centre of the island. Here they found signs of life
and enterprise. Gangs of men were felling trees, and others were
erecting sheds for stores and lodgings. Passing through this place
they again entered the lane of bush, and another mile, making six-
teen since they started in the morning, brought them to a lodging-
house where they found welcome rest. After tea they sallied forth
to see the process of clearing, and coming upon some woodmen who
were felling a huge giant of the forest they essayed to render help.
The tree in question was some 120 ft. high, and from 4 to 5 ft. in
diameter near its base. A large notch had been cut in the side on
which it was intended it should fall, and the men were at work cut-
ting away on the opposite side. By-and-by sundry slight creaks were
heard, and all were warned to look out. They one and all retreated
some 20 or 30 feet. Now the ominous creaks became louder and
more frequent, and looking up they saw a slight, leaning motion.
This gradually increased, and the noise grew louder, and then slowly,
gracefully, gradually the monarch bowed his head and submitted to
his fate. With a shock like the crack of doom, and a thud which
shook the solid earth like an earthquake, the huge tree came to the
ground. It was an interesting and exciting scene.
On the following day they once more resumed their journey
through the bush, and as they drew near the end of the romantic
avenue signs of life and activity became visible. This forest tract
was to become a metalled road, and side by side with it would run
the future railway. Newly-built bridges became apparent, and indi-
cated the progress of the intended roads. Gangs of men also were
seen at intervals along the track making cuttings at the top of some
of the ridges, and filling up the hollows. As they drew nearer Ingle-
wood the railway works became more developed, and for some miles
they walked along the newly-made road. Tired and wearied they at
length reached Inglewood, the terminus of the New Plymouth
Railway, and after waiting a couple of hours they secured seats in
a train to Plymouth, where they arrived about 6.30 p.m. fit only
for tea and bed.
Another Sunday morning found our travellers refreshed by a good
night’s rest and in a good frame of mind for a visit to the Presbyte-
D 2


rian Church. They found the church a plain building, and about one
quarter full. The singing was good, and the sermon on the “ Grapes
6f Eshcol ” was thoroughly enjoyed. The pastor appeared to be a
man. of considerable mental power, and his command of language was
exceptionally good. In the afternoon they witnessed the arrival of
the Union Steam-Ship Company’s steamer the Taiaroa, and a most
exciting affair it was. The steamer lay about a third of a mile from
the beach, and the passengers and merchandize had to be landed by
surf-boats—a most laborious process, and not free from danger in
rough weather. Half the inhabitants appeared to be out witnessing
the arrival, and two hours and a half were consumed in getting off
the consignment of passengers and freightage. With proper conve-
niences the work might be done in half-an-hour. On Monday they
devoted the day to further exploration of the interesting locality.
Mounting a high hill overlooking the town they saw the old blockade
used in the late destructive Maori war. It is now converted into
immigration barracks. Strong palings surround it, in which slots are
cut, through which the defenders fired upon the hostile natives. The
view from this hill was very fine, and revealed a country rich in all
agricultural requisites. When the projected harbour is carried out
Taranaki, or New Plymouth as it is to be in future called, will take
rank among the most important of the New Zealand ports.
Having thus accomplished their task our travellers commenced
their return journey, resolving, however, to make a detour at
Sandon, or Sanson, as it is named in the maps. Instead of going
via Foxton, they struck off eastward for Awahuri, in order to see
the Fielding settlemenc of the “ Colonist Emigration Aid Associa-
tion,” whose office is in Queen Anne’s Gate, Westminster, London.
On reaching the Awahuri valley they saw in the distance the huts
of this township. Finding an hotel at the Awahuri river they put
up at it. The place seemed very quiet, but the land was good, and
there was plenty for sale. A native settlement existed in the
valley, and at the hotel numbers of Maoris as usual congregated during
the evening.
' On the following morning they left Awahuri for Palmerston, some
eight miles distant. The ride took them through a bush country
interspersed with small clearings of settlers. They found Palmer-
ston a new settlement, with a square of good clean grass-land, through
the centre of which ran the railway from Foxton to Wanganui.
The only building in the centre of this square was the station.
Stores, banks, &c., clustered around it, while outside the square were
the homes of the settlers. Having breakfasted at this infant set-
tlement they proceeded along the railway track for some two miles,
and then re-entered the bush. About nine miles from Palmerston
they came upon a large swamp leading down to the Manawatu
River. Crossing this in a ferry-boat they found themselves con-
fronted with the Manawatu range of hills. Winding up the road
for about two miles they came to the entrance of the celebrated
Manawatu Gorge. Their way then led for four miles through this


gorge until they ascended to a road cut out on the mountain side.
The gorge fully sustained the universal verdict respecting it. Nothing
could exceed its wildly romantic character. They had beneath them
the river now rushing along in rapids, with a roar like those just
above Niagara Falls, and now slowly and gradually like those Cana-
dian rapids after they have taken their tremendous leap and are
flowing peacefully into the Ontario lake. Both sides of the gorge
were well-nigh perpendicular, and some four or five hundred yards
high. A rich foliage quite covered them down to the water’s edge.
Coaches traverse the seemingly dangerous pass, and the need of good
nerves on the part of both coachman and passengers may be inferred
from the fact that he dares not let his horses walk round the many
curves, lest they should stumble. Security is sought in a sharp trot,
keeping the horses at full tension as it were, and too much occupied
to shy. In places they saw the wheel tracks within a few inches
of the edge of a precipice, to go over which would be instant death
to all. Occasionally they came upon vast overhanging masses of iron-
stone rock which only needed loosening to sweep away road and all
that was thereon. The roadway was a narrow ledge from 6 to 8
feet wide, and even less in some places. As our travellers passed
along they were favoured with exceptional alternations of weather,
which served to bring out the beauties of the gorge. Now a
glimpse of sunshine, then a shower of rain \ anon a dark cloud
would throw a sepulchral gloom over all; then an exquisite rain-
bow would throw its resplendent form athwart the abyss. The
wondrous changes of colour and beauty were simply indescribable,
and, like an occasional sunset over the Nelson mountains, must be
seen to be at all understood.
At length the gorge opened out and they approached a large bridge
over the river at a considerable height above it. Passing over this
they were soon again in the bush, but had every now and then a
beautiful view of the country and of the river. A three or four
mile ride brought them to Woodville, a new settlement through
which the coaches ran to Napier and the east coast, some hundred
miles distant. Here they stayed the night. On leaving Woodville
the next day they entered on a forty mile bush road which leads to
Masterton, sixty miles off. Their journey of twenty-seven miles
that day to Eketahuna involved riding through four rivers, two of
which were wide and rapid currents, just high enough and strong
enough to test the mettle of the travellers.
After heavy rains travellers have to wait for days before they can
get over, and many a foolhardy adventurer has been swept away in
the attempt. The horse has but to make one false step amid the
boulders, and at once rider and are in the power of the merci-
less torrent. Several Maori pahs were passed and numbers of
natives in all varieties of dress and undress. One old Maori came
out of his hut to speak to them, but they did not understand his
speech. Happily they were able to do something which he under-
stood. Offering him some tobacco he thankfully put out bis hand to


receive it, revealing as he did so, absolute nakedness saving the
blanket thrown around him. Their road for the most part, was an
absolutely straight line cut right through the dense bush. They
came upon a party of surveyors near the end of their ride, hard at
work at their invaluable pioneering duties.
At length the wild, rough Scandinavian settlement of Eketahuna
was reached. Here they passed a night and interviewed the settlers.
They were not favourably impressed with the foreigners, who appeared
to be a soulless race of toiling money-grubs, with but one object in
life and but one hope, bartering away generosity and all that makes
man superior to the brutes for little piles of one pound notes.
Leaving the Scandinavians to their destiny our travellers pursued
their way in the morning through the remainder of the bush. At
length they emerged from the sylvan road and came to a large open
plain, bounded as usual all round with immense hills, save where
the forest lay from which they had just emerged. They foxmd the
land there in cultivation, but of an indifferent quality, a light, stony
soil. About three miles further on they came to a river, and cross-
ing it they found an excellent road of some six miles in length, with
good farms scattered along its course. This road led to Masterton, a
business-like town, with shops equal to any they had seen in Hew
Zealand, and which would not discredit Regent Street, London.
Everything indicated prosperity. They stopped one night in the
town and then took the road leading to Featherstone. Their road
lay across a level country with the immense Rimutaka range of
hills on their right and in front of them. Crossing a wide stream
by a bridge they came to a long, straight road of about six miles,
which brought them to Carterton, a long, straggling township in a
very early stage of formation. Passing this they once more entered
the bush, which was fast disappearing before the advancing civilisa-
tion. Settlements and clearings grew more and more numerous,
indeed the six miles were but a continuous series of them. They
learnt that all the necessaries of the settlers were supplied from
Wellington, and as that city was sixty miles off and all must come
by road, the traffic was very considerable. They frequently met
immense wagons laden with goods and drawn by six or eight horses,
reminding them of the state of things in England forty years
prior to the railway era. The township of Featherstone they found
to be a small, neat affair, nestling at the feet of a huge range of hills.
The railway works caused considerable activity among the Feather-
stonians, a number of the workmen residing there temporarily.
Hear the town was a formidable engineering exploit, a tunnel of
some miles in length through the mountain chain to Kaitoki, the
present terminus of the Wellington railway.
Leaving Featherstone early on the day following their arrival
they at once commenced an ascent of the range of hills. Their road
was in reality a vast mountain pass, longer and higher than any they
had yet been along. The track, cut as usual out of the side of the
mountain, was thirteen miles long, although probably the distance as a


bird would fly would not exceed four miles. Occasionally their road
seemed immediately before them, only some 100 feet above their
heads, but to reach it they must wind round sundry bends and
crevices, and come back again on the other side, thus going a mile or
more to get a 100 yards. Here, in these mountain gorges, were
evidently the manufactory and the home of the notorious Wellington
winds. Our travellers found it hard work to hold their own against
them, and it is no unusual thing for a cart and horse to be swept
clean away by them, so terrific is their normal force. On reaching
the top of the high mountain chain they had an imposing view of the
surrounding country through occasional gaps in the bush. A descent
of seven miles brought them to Paikakariki, where they arrived by
10 o’clock, quite ready to do full justice to a good breakfast. The
remainder of the distance to Wellington, twenty-nine miles, was done by
rail. They reached that city by 5 o’clock, having accomplished about 600
miles of travel in twenty-four days. The weather on the whole was good,
and the trip such an one as they will never forget. The abiding impres-
sion left on their minds was that the country was pre-eminently a
grand and glorious one, one which not New Zealanders only, but
every citizen of the British Empire might be justly proud of. It had
clearly all the elements of prosperity about it, and more nearly
resembled the promised land of the Israelites than even Canaan itseli
did. It was indisputably “a good land, a land of hills and valleys;
a land of brooks and rivers ; a land of sunshine and of song ; a land
whose stones are iron;” its sand along the seashore at Taranaki
being literally of iron, and out of whose hills you may not only
“ dig brass ” but gold, silver, copper, tin, marble, and “ all precious
minerals.”
TO AUSTRALIA IN FORTY DAYS.
(From the “Nonconformist” of August 20, 1879.)
The advertising columns of the daily Press have familiarised us
with the otherwise startling announcement, “To Australia in forty
days.” Few, however, have realised what it means. I purpose,
therefore, giving the readers of the Nonconformist a brief account
of how the thing is done. On a certain day last year I left Tavistock-
square, carpet-bag in hand, for a trip to New Zealand. The attractive
advertisement of the “ Orient Steam Navigation Company ” had
proved too great a temptation for me. So taking train at Fenchurch-
street, I was soon at Tilbury Fort, and on board the steamer. In
these travelling times most people are acquainted with the huge
vessels which rush hither and thither at racehorse speed over the
pathless abyss of waters which encircles our snug little island home.
Four journeys across the Atlantic had prepared me pretty well for
the stupendous vehicle. But not quite. I soon realized that a ten
days’ voyage to New York or Quebec was a very different thing from
a trip of fifteen thousand miles. In a word, I found myself one of a


moderate-sized township, consisting of a long street with a farmyard
at one end and a promenade at the other. A herd of bullocks,
several pens of sheep, a score of Berkshire porkers, some hundreds
of fowls, ducks, turkeys, &c., and a sleek Alderney milking cow,
constituted the live stock. Below deck wei'e the hundreds of
domiciles for the passengers, and the elaborate kitchens where the
hundred-and-forty meals were to be prepared for the by-and-by
hungry six hundred. Bight in the centre of the vessel were the
spacious dining-halls, where three times a day would be transacted
the most important business of the community. A couple of minia-
ture hotels were also found hereabouts, where lovers of Bass and
Guinness would get their wants supplied. Below this important
“ street ” were the sleeping-berths of the steerage passengers—a vast
cellar-like apartment fitted up with some hundreds of bunks, and
sundry rough-and-ready contrivances for victualling purposes. Under-
neath all this was the cargo of some two thousand tons weight.
Looking down through a skylight on the main deck you beheld the
powerful machinery which was to propel this floating town through
storm and tempest, at the rate of over three hundred miles a day
for forty days. “Is it possible,” one could not help asking, “ that
yonder slumbering giant can be stirred up to so appalling a task?”
By-and-by came the reply. The captain mounted his bridge, the
engineers got their signal, and, almost noiselessly, the ponderous
mass moved forward. Going down into the engine-room the pro-
pelling power was at once seen. A shaft of steel some seventeen
inches in diameter, and over 200 feet in length, with the fan or
screw at its end, revolved in obedience to the mandate of a pair of
4,000-horsepower engines, at the rate of about fifty-eight times a
minute. And so on we went, more than a ton of coal being con-
sumed every half-hour to sustain the requisite power. Our first
stoppage, after embarking sundry passengers and various eatables at
Plymouth, was at St, Vincent, one of the Cape-de-Verde group of
islands, where we replenished our stock of coal. This unpleasant
operation occupied some thirty-six hours. Barges laden with sacks
of coal came alongside the vessel, and these were hauled on deck by
steam power and emptied down sundry coal-holes, smothering the
whole ship with the dust. By way of amusement for the passengers
there were boats, manned by swarthy natives to take them on shore
at one shilling per bead, and for those who chose to remain on board
there was an exhibition of diving skill on the part of a score or so
of negro youths. Sixpences thrown into the water were invariably
caught by these fearless divers before they reached the bottom. The
next stoppage was at Capetown, another coaling station. Here
nearly all the passengers went ashore, as the stay promised to be
more protracted. In addition to some four hundred tons of food for
our engine fires, fresh provision had to be made for the six hundred
human machines on board. A boatload of bullocks were taken in,
hauled over the ship’s side by cords fixed to their horns. Sundry
other gaps in our larder were also filled up here, and after a couple


of days’ delay we again steamed off. By way of amusement we had
a succession of concerts, which, through a fortunate abundance of
musical talent on board, were remarkably good. The various means
resorted to for killing time revealed the tastes of the passengers. A
majority smoked through the hours. Others played at cards. The
sporting fraternity gambled, laying bets with one another as to the
number of miles made daily. A small minority assembled morning
and evening for Divine worship. The young men indulged in
athletic sports, and the young girls in more or less elaborate flirta-
tions. At least three decided matches were made up on board—the
hottest courtships being a couple of middle-aged affairs. One furrow-
browed New Zealander fell prone before the glances of a buxom lass
—“ fair, fat, and forty ” —and a tall Australian sheep-farmer suc-
cumbed to the witching smiles of about as fascinating a girl as ever
flirted on board ship. It was evidently a very serious matter as far
as the male gender was concerned, fully bearing out the oft-repeated
assertion that love, like the small-pox, is always worst when taken
late in life. A considerable portion of our passengers were returning
colonists —prosperous men who had been “ home ” for a trip. The
run across the Indian Ocean was chiefly remarkable for the change
of temperature which it brought. A piercing cold overtook us,
and heavy rugs, great coats, sealskin jackets, and other arctic ap-
pendages had to be routed out of their hidden resting-places in
the luggage-hold. Onward, however, went our good ship, doing her
three hundred and twenty, twenty-five, or thirty miles per day,
until the joyful tidings “ Land ahead ” sounded in our ears, and
“ Greater Britain ” appeared on the horizon. I have onty incidentally
inferred to the victualling department, but something further is
demanded of what is perhaps the most difficult part of the whole
enterprise. Anyone who has undertaken to cater for a party of fifty
or sixty, at a picnic for one day only, will appreciate the difficulties to
be overcome by the unhappy steward who has to supply the wants and
the fancies of ten times as many, not for one day only, but for sixty.
The task is simply herculean. How is it accomplished 1 In the
first place, assuming, of course, that all necessary supplies have been
procured and stored in their respective places—the live stock in
their stalls and pens, some thousands of pounds of dead meat in the
ice-house, innumerable bottles of ale, wines, and spirits in the
department sacred to such important items, about a couple of thou-
sand bags of flour for the chief baker’s use, groceries of all kinds
enough to stock a good-sized shop, medicines for the dispensary,
fruits and vegetables almost beyond computation, and tinned meats,
condensed milk, &c., in large quantities—l say, assuming all these
requisites to be on board, which, of course, is a mere matter of calcu-
lation and arrangement, the problem to he solved is how to place it
all before the six hundred passengers in the due order of breakfast,
dinner, and tea. In the first place, then, I repeat, each division of
the passengers has its appointed hours for meals—the third class
being half-past seven, half-past twelve, and half-past four o’clock ;


the second class, half-an-hour later, and the first-class at nine, five,
and eight o’clock, with an informal lunch hour somewhere midway
between breakfast and dinner. To each department is allotted a
separate staff of stewards, who are the ship’s parlour- and house-
“ maids.” These young men have to bear the chief brunt of the
difficulty, and in rough weather their task is especially hard—
carrying hot joints about a house suffering from a series of epileptic
fits, or hurrying to and fro along a street with trays of tea and
coffee during the convulsions of an earthquake. Every now and
then a specially vicious lurch or roll of the vessel will clear a table
almost, precipitating dishes and hot joints and gravy, or dozens of
cups of scalding tea into the laps of the long-suffering guests. This
of course means double trouble for stewards. I say nothing about
the internal convulsions of rough weather, and what they mean for
“chamber-maids.” The provision made for supplying the wants of
the passengers is of course graduated according to the respective
classes. The third class get a breakfast of oatmeal porridge and tea
or coffee and bread-and-butter; a dinner of soup and meat, with an
occasional addition of plum-pudding ; and a plain tea. The second-
class have stews, chops, eggs-and-bacon, with coffee or tea, for break-
fast ; hot joints, soup, and sundry entrees, with pudding or pastry
every other day, and an apology for a dessert, for dinner; and cold
meat, &c., for tea. In the first-class saloon the provision is much
more recherche, and so nearly resembles that of a first-class hotel as
to need no description. All kinds of luxuries cover the tables, and
the usual apparent waste is observable. One of the greatest luxuries
is the bath department, and although in hot weather the competition
for the delightful plunge is rather severe, there being but one bath-
room for each first and second class saloon, it is not difficult for all
who desire a bath to get it at some time or other during the day.
Experienced housewives will ask, “ How about the table- and bed-
linen V’ Well, the supply is remarkably good. How so much
spotlessly white table-cloth can be found I am at a loss to conceive,
and no one has to complain of his bedroom appointments. An
ingeniously-contrived drying-room in the vicinity of the engine-room
supplies a key to half the difficulty, but of the rest lam unable to speak.
Children seem very happy on board, and, as they are easily
amused, the time which hangs so heavily on their seniors is passed
with all the hilarity of a holiday. Light literature is the refuge of
a large proportion of the adult population.
But our journey ends, Adelaide is in view, and although a trifle
over the advertised time has been consumed, owing to a prevailing
head-wind during a large part of the voyage, still we are near enough
to maintain the credit of as fine a vessel as ever crossed the sea,
while our entire freedom from mishap justifies the highest eulogium
that can be passed both on captain and crew. Never was a voyage
more pleasantly made, and never was triumph of human skill and
business enterprise more clearly exemplified than by the safe con-
veyance of this small township over thirteen thousand miles of sea
at the rate of three hundred miles per day. A. C.


A FEW PLAIN INSTRUCTIONS FOR INTENDING
EMIGRANTS.
1, Carefully pack up in strong boxes what you intend to take.
In one box, not more than 12 inches high, by, say, 30 inches long,
with a good lock on it, put a supply of linen, &c., for the voyage. Have
your name and destination painted on each box, with “ Not wanted
on the voyage,” written on all but your cabin-box.
2, Do not overburden yourself with luggage. An infinite amount
of bother is saved by having as little as possible. Have every-
thing pretty well arranged before you come to London, so that
on arriving there you have only to take a cab; or if you have much
luggage get the rail way-porter to put you in the way of some van
proprietor, and go straight away to the dock where your vessel lies.
3, As regards outfit you cannot do better than go to a leading
house, such as Messrs. Silver & Co., Cornhill, London, and secure
the benefit of their wide experience as to what is best for the part to
which you are going. The thing to avoid is wasting your means on
unnecessary articles. Really good clothiog and tools are almost
equal to gold in value to the emigrant, but expensive guns, revolvers,
and such like are best left behind.
4. If you go by steamer, unless a direct line of steamers should be put
on to New Zealand, you cannot do better than secure a passage by the
Orient line, of which Messrs. F. Green & Co. and Anderson, Anderson,
& Co. are joint managers. For freight or passage apply to the latter
firm at No. 5, Fenchurch Avenue, London, E.C. You can book for any
New Zealand port, exchanging steamers at Melbourne. The fares to
Melbourne are from fifteen to twenty guineas for steerage ; thirty-five
to forty guineas for second saloon—a very good accommodation indeed
—and from sixty to seventy guineas for first saloon. The extra charge
from Melbourne to New Zealand is five guineas steerage, and ten
guineas saloon. There is no second class. It is advisable to secure a
saloon ticket. There are also steamers by which passages can be se-
cured to New Zealand ports despatched by Mr. J. H. Flint, 112,
Fenchurch Street, London, and one or two other firms.
5. If you go by a sailing vessel it will probably be one of Shaw,
Savill, & Co.’s, 34, Leadenhall Street, London, or the New Zealand
Shipping Co.,B4,Bishopsgate Street Within, London. The special ships
referred to on the cuter sheet belong to these firms. The ,£25 fare is
exceptionally reasonable, and from the fact of there being but one class
on board much comfort may be confidently anticipated. Sailing ships
are also despatched from Glasgow to Otago by Messrs. Henderson & Co.
6. Contrary to general advice, I do not recommend the taking of
a quantity of luxuries to vary the ship’s dietary. It is waste of
money. More good, wholesome food is found on board than you can
take, and the fewer dainties the better it is for the stomach.
7. Avoid all spirituous liquors. None suffer from sea-sickness so
much as those who are always dosing themselves with brandy. Have
done with strong drinks from the hour you leave the docks, and the
probability is that you will have a most enjoyable voyage, and le
welcomed by prosperity at your journey’s end.


8. Do not take your money with you, but go to the Bank of New
Zealand, 1, Queen Victoria Street, Mansion House, London, and get
a draft on one of their branch banks in New Zealand. This will
cost you nothing, and save much anxiety. You have only to present
your draft at the New Zealand office, and the money is at once
handed over to you. A small amount will suffice to cover the
necessary outlay on the voyage.
9. Cultivate a cheerful, hopeful disposition on the voyage. There
is rarely any real danger, and there is no alleviation of the insepa-
rable inconveniences comparable with a patient endurance of them.
SKETCH OF A NEW ZEALAND DRAINING ENTERPRISE,
KNOWN AS THE PIAKO SWAMP COMPANY.
To the east of Hamilton, and extending for many miles in the
direction of the Thames Goldfields, is observable a vast prairie where,
from the point of observation looking north-east, no hills are seen
until the eye rests on distant mountains, the Te Arolia range, nearly
thirty miles away. The great extent of fen or marsh land is known
as the Piako District, where, within the last three years, reclamation,
combined with the general improvement of the estate, has been
extensively carried on. Here is situated the Eureka station, the
head-quarters of the Piako Swamp Company. As the Piako Swamp
property is the largest block of reclaimed land in New Zealand, I
will give a brief outline of the modus operandi as at present carried
on. About four years ago the Piako Swamp Company, originated
by Captain Steele, became purchasers of the property from the
Government of New Zealand, in two lots, for the sum of ss. and 10s.
per acre, making in the aggregate 90,000 acres. On the completion
of the purchase, the Company instituted a system of reclamation that
has, up to the present, met with gratifying results. Although the
operations have only extended over three years and a-half, the sum
of .£IOO,OOO has been already expended in improvements, and it is
allowed that yet £50,000 will be required to be launched out, in
order to make the land fit for cultivation. The most important of
the improvements are the drains, which extend altogether for 500
miles in length. The labour represented by such operations may be
better imagined than described. The largest of these drains, or in
this case I may safely call them canals, is 20 feet wide, and situated
on a portion of the estate called Mangawhare. It was the intention
originally of the company to provide locks, floodgates, reservoirs,
&c., with the view of converting the Mangawhare drain into a large
canal; the idea, however, was frustrated; the fall was so great
that the water all escaped. The drainage scheme has been entrusted
to two engineers, Mr. Breakall, of Hamilton, who is at present in
office, and the late Mr. Simpson, who died soon after the company
had been inaugurated. Looking at the general improvements of
the estate, I found that they were of a first-class order, and of an
expensive and permanent description. Having entered the grounds,


by a substantial white gate, I followed through a straight road-
way leading over what at one time must have been a vast swamp,
where, on either side of the roadway I noticed two large drains
of about 10 feet wide at the top, that act as aqueducts for nume-
rous other drains or feeders. At regular distances between the
two drains are planted rows of ornamental trees and shrubs, to
form an avenue three miles long. In the neighbourhood of the
homestead, and giving a fair idea of the soil, are noticeable a
great extent of artificial grasses, principally rye-grass, cocksfoot, and
red and white clover, of luxuriant growth, over which are seen
browsing several herds of cattle in splendid condition, particularly
the Herefords. Over one of the last reclaimed paddocks I walked
through cocksfoot and rye-grass sown broadcast last year, and which,
on the occasion of my visit, was knee-deep, to view a herd of
seven young Hereford bulls, lately imported from New South
Wales, and bred by Mr. Reynolds, of Tocal. Too tame to move
out of our way by feeding on swamp-grass, their condition was
admirable; and it has been found by all breeders in the “ fen ”
districts that the “white faces” are the proper class of cattle to
propagate. Leaving this paddock, I entered a small patch of 50
acres cropped in wheat and oats, sown with a view of ascertaining
the quality of the land from a cereal-producing point of view.
The oats looked in excellent heart, and the wheat, although suffering
somewhat from the effects of the late sowing, will give a probable
yield of thirty-five bushels to the acre. Retracing my steps to
the homestead, built on a small elevation, a splendid view was
obtained of the surrounding level country. The manager’s house
and offices are built on a species of narrow promontory which runs
east and west into the swamp, affording a panoramic view of the
vast prairie or valley. On almost every side lies a great extent
of reclaimed swamp, extending as far as the eye can reach, and
has the appearance of forming a majestic circle for many miles
round the Eureka Hill. In summarising the Eureka property, I
find that there are 5,000 acres under grass cultivation, divided and
fenced into paddocks from 20 to 500 acres in extent, stocked with
a splendid class of Hex-eford cattle, and with sufficient feed for
3,000 head. Besides the Eureka homestead, there are tw.o other
out-stations on the property worthy of mention, viz., “Wood-
lands,” or the large one, situated about eight miles off the head-
quarter, containing some good substantial out-buildings ; closer at
hand is Mangawhai’e, where the outlet of the drains run into a creek
of the same name, and this block has also undergone improvements
in the way of 1,000 acres that were ploughed and sown with artificial
grasses last year. Thus it will be seen that on the Piako property
both capital and labour have been expended in the way of utilising
land originally a complete wilderness. These extensive operations
have been undertaken with the ultimate view of turning the whole
property into a number of farms, about an averaging size of 350
acres each, which it is anticipated will come within the reach of
many industrious farmei's from the old country.


TO BRITISH FARMERS CONTEMPLATING EMIGRA-
TION TO NEW ZEALAND.
THE NEW ZEALAND AGRICULTURAL COMPANY, LIMITED.
CAPITAL £1,000,000,
Divided into 50,000 Shares of £2O each.
TRUSTEES FOR DEBENTURE-HOLDERS.
Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart., Sir W. J. M. Cuninghame, Bart., M.P., and
Sir Sydney H. Waterlow, Bart., M.P.
DIRECTORS.
William Clark, Esq., C.E., 9, Victoria Chambers, Westminster.
W. J. Mndie Larnach, Esq., late Colonial Treasurer and Minister of Railways,
New Zealand; 118, Holland Road, Kensington, W.
Major-General Patrick Maxwell, Westmont, Ryde, I.W.
Captain R. C. Mayne, R.N., C. 8., 101, Queen’s Gate, South Kensington.
E. M. Robertson, Esq., 12, Stanley Gardens, Kensington Park.
T. Selby Tancred, Esq., Sheep Farmer, New Zealand; 6, Inverness Terrace,
Hyde Park.
Sir Julius Vogel, K.C.M.G., late Premier of New Zealand, 135, Cromwell
Road, South Kensington.
LOCAL BOARD, DUNEDIN.
The Hon. W. H. Reynolds, J.P., Member of the Legislative Council of New
Zealand, Director of the Colonial Bank of New Zealand.
Alfred Chetham Strode, Esq., J.P., Chairman of the Colonial Bank of New
Zealand,
G. M. Bell, Esq., J.P., Sheep Farmer.
P. K. McCaughan, Esq., J.P., Sheep Farmer.
Bankers —The Bank of England. Ireland —The Bank of Ireland. Scotland —
The Union Bank of Scotland. New Zealand —The Bank of New
South Wales.
Solicitors —Messrs. John Mackrell & Co., 21, Cannon Street, London;
Messrs. Sievwright & Stout, Dunedin.
Auditors —Messrs. Deloitte, Dover, Griffiths & Co.
Secretary —John Scott Cavell, Esq.
Registered Office —No. 110, Camion Street.
OBJECTS OF THE COMPANY.
The Objects for which the Company is established are :
(a). To acquire Land and Hereditaments of any tenure in New
Zealand, and to work, manage, and develop the same in such manner
as the Company may think fit, and in particular by farming, stocking,
grazing, breeding sheep and cattle, erecting houses, factories, stores,


and other buildings, by mining, draining, planting, and constructing
waterworks, gas or other lighting works, canals, reservoirs, wells,
aqueducts, embankments, piers, wharves, harbours, roads, railways,
tramways, and other works and conveniences, by promoting immigra-
tion, and aiding in the establishment of settlements, by manufacturing,
converting and rendering marketable colonial products, and by
carrying on any trades, businesses, or undertakings, the carrying on
of which may be deemed by the Company conducive to the develop-
ment of its property.
(b.) To provide for the Religious, Sanitary, and Educational Wel-
fare of Persons settled on the property of the Company or in its em-
ployment, and in particular by providing churches, chapels, schools,
reading-rooms, wash-houses, baths, parks, and places of recreation,
and by granting money.
(c). To establish or aid in the establishment and support of any
Associations for the benefit of the Company’s Tenants, Work-people,
and others, and in particular, building societies, mutual insurance
clubs, other than for life insurance, and co-operative stores.
(cl.) To train persons for carrying on business as Farmers, Graziers,
Estate-agents or otherwise, in New Zealand.
(e. To buy, sell, and deal in all kinds of Property in New Zealand
and elsewhere necessary or convenient for the business -of the
Company, and in particular, land, tenements, and hereditaments, live
stock, wool, consumable goods, hardware, machinery, timber, patept
rights, licenses, goods and chattels.
(f.) To lend Money to guarantee the performance of contracts;
and to act as Agent in the management, sale, and purchase of
Property of all kinds, and in the collection of debts, valuation of
estates, and otherwise.
PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR SECURING THE
BENEFITS OF THESE OBJECTS.
(a.) The Directors are prepared to receive Applications from
Farmers, with or without families, who desire to settle on farms on
the Company’s Estates and to acquire the freehold thereof on easy
terms of payment.
(6.) The land will be of first-class quality, clear of bush, and near
to one of the lines of railway running through the Company’s
property to a port of shipment. Similar land in other parts of the
Colony has readily realized £ls an acre.
(c.) Each farm will be from 100 to 320 acres (half a square mile)
in extent. Adjoining each farm about an equal area will be reserved,
which the farmer will be allowed the option of acquiring at any time
within two years on the same terms as his original holding.
(, I .) The freehold of the land will be acquired by the farmer by
twenty half-yearly payments of fifteen shillings an acre, commencing
from the date of taking possession. Any or all of the payments
can at any time be made under a discount of 6 per cent, simple


interest per annum. As soon as eight half-yearly payments are
made, the Company will convey the farm to the farmer subject to a
mortgage for the yet unpaid instalments.
(e). For every acre thus purchased, the Company will allow the
farmer, out of the first half-year’s rent ten shillings per acre for the
cost of his passage, and will also allow for every acre purchased
£1 per acre for the cost of buildings approved by the Company
to be paid as the expenditure is incurred. These payments will
only be made with respect to the original holdings, and not on the
farm held in reserve for the farmer to take at his option.
(f.) The Farmer must pay for his passage, but the Company will
be prepared, free of charge, to negotiate for the same on the best
terms obtainable. The ordinary cost of passage is, Ist class, from
£45 to £SO ; 2nd class, £25 ; 3rd class, from £ls to £lB per adult.
But passages engaged through the Company may be obtained at a
reduction on these rates. The Company will provide the farmer
and his family with free railway passage to the Company’s estates,
immediately on their arrival in Dunedin, On the estates, accommo-
dation in a depot will be provided to the farmer and his family, for
a period not exceeding three months, at a weekly charge for board
and lodging of fifteen shillings each adult, and eight shillings each
child under thirteen years of age.
( g .) Applicants must fill in the form which is supplied by the
Company. As the first party is confined to a limited number, the
Company will not undertake to approve every application. Each
one will be considered on its merits.
(k.) On the application being approved, the applicant must pay to
the Company a deposit of £25, as a guarantee of good faith, which
amount will be credited to the first half-year’s rent nn his taking
possession of the land.
( i .) In the opinion of the Directors, the farmer taking a farm
under these terms, should have, on arrival in the Colony, from £250
to £l,OOO, according to the number of his family, and the extent to
which he proposes to carry his operations. If he has a knowledge
of farming, and is industrious and frugal, the amount mentioned
should enable him to acquire a handsome competence in a very few
years. He will probably find the option of taking up the adjoining
farm a most valuable privilege.
(j.) The Company will give to the settlers on its estates every
assistance that it is justified in granting.
ABE A OF THE COMPANY’S ESTATE, AND PABTICU-
LARS OF STOCK, PLANT, &c.
The Estate is situated in the Province of Otago and Southland,
and nearly due west of Dunedin, the capital of Otago.
It is in direct communication, by two lines of railway, with the
town and port of Invercargill, distant fifty miles on the south, and


by one of these lines with the city and port of Dunedin, distant
about seventy miles.
There is also a line of railway under construction through the
heart of the property, which will be opened in 1879, and will give
all parts of the estate connection with Dunedin. A plan of the
estate and also a key plan, showing its situation in the province of
Otago and Southland, may be seen at the London office.
The different properties forming the estate adjoin, and consist
together of 167,769 acres of freehold land, in one block, of which
16,823 acres are under cultivation, in grain crops, English grasses,
and clovers, the whole fenced in and a great portion subdivided into
convenient-sized fields and meadows. There are besides 141,675
acres of leasehold lands, held partly under the Crown and partly
under trustees for Educational Deserves, who are restricted from
selling.
With the estate has been purchased the stock thereon, consisting
of 167,500 sheep, 82 draught and saddle horses, and 112 head
of cattle, together with the agricultural implements, plant, steam
engines, &c., as also the suitable and substantial residences, buildings,
wool sheds, sheep yards, shepherds’ houses and saw mills.
The annual per-centage of lambs by way of increase from the
flocks may be reckoned, one year with another, at from 65 to 75
per cent. As the freehold becomes cultivated and improved this
per-centage may be inci'eased.
Hitherto, with the lands in their natural pasture, the sheep have
been yielding annually an average of ss. each net to their proprie-
tors, while their increase and fat stock have served to pay all
expenses, besides providing for considerable permanent improve-
ments.
It is confidently anticipated that the property will rise rapidly in
value beyond the enhanced profits which will be realized from the
improvement of the lands, and the increased number of settlers.
GENERAL INFORMATION.
All kinds of farming Implements can be had at reasonable rates
in the district. There are now manufactories of such articles in
most parts of the Colony.
The Land generally is suitable for agricultural purposes, nearly all
being available for the plough, and of excellent quality.
Good Store Sheep range in price from 6s. to Bs. a head Cattle
(two-year olds) from £2. 10s. to £4 ; Horses (draught) from £4O to
£BO ; (saddle) from £l5 to £4O.
Labour has been scarce and dear, but the large and increasing
emigration from England is gradually lowering the price.
Further information and application-forms may be had of
the Secretary, John Scott Cavell, Esq., 110, Cannon-street,
London, E.C.


STEAM TO AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
(tent Steam ftabijatinn Corapnj, fimiteb.
THE STEAMERS of this Company are specially constructed and rigged
for long Ocean Voyages, and have established a high reputation for the rapidity
and regularity of their passages.
The arrangements for Passengers are unsurpassed, and the to hole of the
appointments, inchiding steam-heating apparatus, punkahs, bath-rooms, smoking-
room, ice-house, piano, library, Bfc., are of the completest character.
An Excellent Table is kept throughout, and Wines, Spc., of the best
quality are sold on board, at moderate prices.
Each Steamer carries an experienced Surgeon,
FARES TO AND FROM ADELAIDE, MELBOURNE, AND SYDNEY.
FROM LONDON.
TO LONDON.
First Class 5a100n...70 Guineas each.
„ ~ Main Deck. ..60 ~
First Class —Saloon and
Main Deck 60 to 70 Guineas each.
Second Saloon... 35 to 40 ~
Third Class, ) on
In 2 Berth Cabins f ”
In 4 „ „ 18 „
Steerage, Open Berths ) F .
for Men only ... ) 0 ”
Second Saloon ...35 to 40 ~ „
Third Class, 'I
In two and in four V2O „ ~
Berth Cabins J
Steerage, Open Berths, ) h
for Men only ] eacn ’
Pares to and from
New Zealand
additional fo
id same as above, with
for Steerage.
5 Guineas
8 Guineas additional for First Class.
N.B.—Passengers for New Zealand are transferred at Melbourne or Sydney to the magnificent
Steamships of the Union Steam Ship Company of New Zealand running in connection with
the Orient line.
Children under 12 years of age, travelling with Parent, half-price. Infants under 12 months free.
Passengers from Australia, &c., have also to pay the Suez Canal Dues of Bs,
for each person.
Return Tickets, when’engaged at the time of taking Outward Passage, are
issued at a Reduction of 15 per Cent, on the Homeward Passage Money.
Names of the Company’s Agents.
Sydney Gilchrist, Watt, & Co.
Melbourne Bright Bros. & Co.
Adelaide Joseph Stilling & Co.
Brisbane B. D. Morehead & Co.
Hobart Town Macfarlane Bros. & Co.
f Union Steamship Co.
| of N.Z. Limited.
New Zealand-! Head Office: Dunedin,
and their Agencies
L throughout the Colony.
Cape Town W. Anderson & Co.
Suez and Port Said...H. Worms & Co.
For particulars apply to
F. GREEN & CO., 112, Eenchurch Street, London, ) Joint
ANDERSON, ANDERSON, & CO., 5, Eenchurch Street, London, ) Managers.
For List of Steamships see next page,


STEAM TO AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND.
drirnt Steam |Wi§ali(rn Compamr, Jinttieh.
The following is a list of the Steam ships of this Line :
Name. Tonnage. Horse-Power.
Garonne 3,876 600
Cuzco 3,845 600
Lusitania 3,825 600
Chimborazo 3,847 600
Orient 5,000 800
Aconcagua 4,106 600
John Elder 4,158 600
.
“ O: Gr' *5
For particulars apply to
F. GREEN & Co., 112, Fenchurch Street, Lora«^S.(|||
OB TO
ANDERSON, ANDERSON & Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue,
London, E.C.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND
COLONIAL LINE.
The Vessels of this well-known and favourite Line comprise
3,5. Ttanhow Captain Symington
s.s. Afghan Captain Hunt
s.s. Syria Captain Johnson
s.s. Rotomahana Captain Underwood
s.s. Teanau ••• Captain
And other equally fine and powerful Steamships.
The Arrangements on board are replete with every comfort.
Passage-money, 15 to 70 Guineas.
Apply to
JOHN HENRY FLINT,
112, FENCHURCH STREET, LONDON, E.C.
JOHN H, WHITE,
EMIGRATION OFFICES,
LACEBY,
Near GRIMSBY


S. & J. BLIGH,
IRONMONGERS AND TOOL - DEALERS.
71, HIGH STREET, WHITECHAPEL, LONDON, E.
[Established 1805.)
Emigrants supplied with Tools of all kinds, and every description
of Ironmongery for building purposes. Every article of best quality.
Price lists sent on application, Orders by post promptly executed.
Goods packed and delivered to ship.
NORTHERN COUNTIES EMIGRATION AGENCY.
Mr. J. H. WHITE,
LACEBY, near GRIMSBY, LINCOLNSHIRE,
having given considerable attention to New Zealand Emigration, is prepared
to render valuable help to Intending Emigrants, in the way of securing the
best possible Passages at the lowest rates. As an agent for the Government
of New Zealand he is enabled to offer special advantages to farmers with
capital who are desirous of removing to the “ England of the Pacific.’’
N-B Mr. White’s pamphlet on New Zealand, with Chart of Voyage and Illustra-
tions, sent post-free for 7d. Address as above.
GENERAL EMIGRATION AGENCY.
If you want to go to NEW ZEALAND, AUSTRALIA,
or AMERICA,
SEND NAME, AGE, AND OCCUPATION
F. W. HETHERINGTON,
11, Wellington Street, Strand, London, W.C.
A Printed List of the next Sailings, sent Post-free to any Address.
A considerable reduction is occasionally made for families. Ask for
Estimate of Cost. You will find no other able to book cheaper than
F. W. HETHERINGTON.
Land Orders value £2O are granted to those who pay own Passage
to South Australia.
Four Pounds is now only required for a Passage to CANADA;
and £4. 18. from London to New York, by Steamships.
9,000 Persons have secured free, assisted, and reduced Passages
by applying to this Office.
NOW READY. Price SIXPENCE, Post-free.
“LIFE ON AN EMIGRANT SHIP”


S. W. SILVER & CO.,
SUN COURT, 67 CORNHILL,
LONDON, E.C.,
SUPPLY EVERY NECESSARY FOR USB ON BOARD
SHIP AND IN THE COLONIES.
On application, full particulars can he obtained, gratis, respecting
CLOTHING, CABIN FURNITURE,
BEDDING, CHAIRS, TRUNKS,
BOXES, FIREARMS, AMMUNITION,
LOADING IMPLEMENTS, TOOLS,
SURVEYING AND ALL OTHER
SCIENTIFIC INSTRUMENTS, &e. &c.
PASSAGES SECURED.
Lists of Necessaries for Voyage to and Residence in
All Parts of the World.
INSURANCES EFFECTED.
BAGGAGE WAREHOUSED AND SHIPPED.
CIRCULAR NOTES IN DUPLICATE,
PAYABLE ALL THE WORLD OVER.
S. W. SILVER & CO.’S HANDBOOKS AND MAPS
TO THE VARIOUS COLONIES .


S. W. SILVER & CO.’S
“TRANSVAAL” RIFLE
Is a compact Sporting Arm on the Martini. Henry principle, sighted up to 1,000 yards (with or without Safety
Bolt), and with all the latest improvements; it is also fitted with the PATENT ANTI-RECOIL HEEL
PLATE, and takes the full charge service Cartridge of the Regulation Martini-Henry Rifle,
The great advantage of this weapon being that it combines a gun and rifle in one, having interchangeable
barrels to the one stock, which is accomplished by means of the NEW BARREL DETACHMENT.
The Barrel can be taken from the Stock, and part of the Works which require oiling and cleaning, as well as
the barrel itself, are exposed to the view. By the “ detachment ” principle the Rifle is also considerably
reduced in length, for packing.
The “ TRANSVAAL ” RIFLE is specially recommended for sport in the Colonies.
Weight of Rife, 7 lb.; Length of Barrel, 27 in.; Case when Bached, 2 ft. 5 in. long.
PRICE: With Safety Bolt and high finish, £8.65.; With Safety Bolt, £7.125.; Without Safety
Bolt, £6.165.; Interchangeable Smooth-bore Barrel, £3.
The “ SETTLER’S ” DOUBLE-BARREL GUN,
for rough-and-ready work in wild countries, is a
muzzle-loader of 11 bore, weight 8 to 9 lb., 2 ft. 6 in.
in the barrels, and shoots either ball or shot. Price
£7. 7s.
“ Colonial ” Double-Barrelled (Central
Fire) Breech-Loader.— No. 12 gauge (smooth-
bore) ; a weapon of great power and general useful-
ness. Will throw shot, ball, slugs, or buckshot. This
gun can be instantly converted into a muzzle-loader
by the use of the portable steel breech chambers.
Price £15,155.
“ Companion Eifle.”— Weight under 6 lb.
This will be found a most perfect little weapon for
small Deer, Kangaroo and Antelope shooting, if the
Express Bullet be used. Price £lo.los.
Pistols and Eevolvers.—“ The New Laege
Boee Revolves.” —From “ Regulation ” to pocket
size : the most powerful and portable revolver made ;
breech - loading and six-chambered. Price, with
Holster, Pouch, and Belt, £3. 11s. 6d.
“ Eetriever ” Patent Self-Extracting
Eevolver, taking 6 Government Cartridges, the best
kind for use on Horseback, £3.105. od,, £4.105. od.,
£6. 18s. Od.
Powder Flasks, in variety.
Gun Cases of waterproof Canvas, leather, &o.
Gun Covers, of leather. Canvas, Waterproof
Cloth, &c.
Saddles, including the “ Colonist’s” Saddle, with
Raw Hide Girths, extra dees, &c. leather Saddle
Covers. Pelt Numnahs.
Cartridge Belts, Gameßags, Gun Slings.
Cartridge Magazines.
Bridles.— Patent Web, light and durable, and
others.
Spurs.—Box, Screw and Strap Spurs.
Stock Whips.
Valises of leather, Waterproof Canvas, &o.
Saddle Bags.
Knapsacks.—“ Patent Yoke,” and other. Haver-
sacks of Leather, Canvas, &o.
Lanterns.—Rob Roy Lamp. Dark Lanterns,
lamps, &c.
Flints and Steels, with Tinder Boxes.
Veterinary Instruments, in Roll-up Case.
Farriers’ Tools, in Roll-up case.
Knives. —Bowie Knives. Butchers’ Knives, set
of three in sheath, for Hunters’ use.
Fishing Tackle for Sea, lake, and River use.
Fishhooks, assorted. Winders, for long sea lines.
Beads, &c., for barter with Native Tribes.
Medicine Chests, fitted with Allopathic and
Homoeopathic Medicines. “S. W. Silvbb & Co.’s
Doctor," with Portable Case of Medicines
SUITS FOR HUNTING, SHOOTING, &c.-
Leather. Tanned Canvas. Norfolk Jackets. Water-
proof Coats, specially prepared for Tropical Climates.
Shirts. Hats, Helmets.
Boots. —Sandßoots, Shooting,Fishing, and Riding
Boots, Wading Shoes, Snow Shoes, &o.
Stockings of Indiarubber Cloth, for Fishing.
Belts. —Flannel (Anti-Cholera). Riding. Gold-
carrying, and for Revolvers, Cartridges, Knives, &c.
Eye-Preservers. —Patent Hair, Glass, do. Veils.
Portable Beds of Cork, with Waterproof
Covers, to roll up and carry on Saddle. Air Beds,
Pillows, Baths, &o. light Bedsteads, to pack in Bag.
Bush Eugs.— Waterproof Rugs, &c.
Hammocks.—" The Palkee ” Patent, for damp
camping grounds. Ashantee. West India and others,
War-Office Bed Valise, forming Ground Sheet.
Umbrellas. —Sketching and other.
Tents, various.
Canteens, fitted complete, in Baskets, Buckets,
Oak or Teak Cases, &c.
Provision Baskets of all kinds and sizes.
Essences of Meat, Potatoes, &c.
Cooking Apparatus.—“ Patent Norwegian
Kitchener and Reeeigeeatoe.” 13/6 upwards. “Rob
Roy ” Cuisine.
Water Bottles. —Col. Cochrane’s Patent Water
Bottles, to keep contents hot or cold. Dram Flasks,
&c., of every variety. 6/6 upwards.
The “ Liberian ” Urn (8. W. S. & Co.’s
Patent) is a perfect heat-retainer for keeping
Liquids of every description hot for Twelve Hours
or more at a time—without the aid of Fire, Gas, or
Flame of any kind.
Drinking Cups, in leather, Glass, Metal, and
Horn.
Buckets.' —leather, Indiarubber, &c., for
dipping in Native Wells, between rocks, &o.
Pocket Filters.— The “ Explorers’ ” Filter,
size of an ordinary cork, fitting any bottles, and easily
cleaned. 3/6. Patent Carbon Pocket Filters.
Watches. —Explorers’ Keyless lever Watch,
impervious to Water, Sand, &c. Gold and Silver
Hunting and other Watches.
Tool Chests, fitted with good household tools of
various sizes. The Exploeees’ Miniature Tool Case.
21/-. Roll-up Tool Cases, of various sizes. 22/- up.
Felling Axes, Large and Small American Wedges, Axes,
and Hatchets. Picks (for Geological use), &c., &c.
The “ Explorers’ Test Case,” with its
accompanying Books of Directions for Use. “ The
Key to Fortune in New lands,” by the aid of which
precious metals, minerals, and gems may be identified,
and their value estimated. £2. 2s.
compl®!®* 52/6.
Sun Court, 67
Cornhill,
London, E.C.


S. W. SILVER & CO.’S Publications, &c.
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND ; including the Fiji Islands. 2nd Edition, with
coloured Map. Crown Bvo., limp cloth, 449 pp., price ss. ... . ,
Sydney Morning Herald. —‘ The compilers have evidently been careful to make this book suitable to
all classes and interests, and so to arrange its matter as to anticipate all possible inquiries.’
Hobart Town Mercury (Tasmania).— ‘The compiler has devoted impartial attention to each of the
Colonies Eeally a very complete production, full of interesting matter.’
THE AUSTRALIAN DICTIONARY OP DATES and MEN OP THE
TIME: containing Short Sketches, arranged in Alphabetical Order, of the Life and Work of some
hundreds’ of Eminent Men connected with Australasia, and a Record of Seven Thousand Eemarkable
Occurrences, from the Earliest Periods of Australian History to this date. By J. H. Heaton.
Eoyal Bvo, 550 pp. Price 12s. 6d. . , , ~ , ~
The Times, Aug. 15, 1879.—'“A remarkable work. . . Shows more impressively than probably
any other kind of publication could, the immense activity of our Australian Colonies, and the rapid
advances they have made since their very recent foundation, . . . It is a creditable and useful, and,
we believe, trustworthy publication, well and legibly printed.’’
THE AUSTRALIAN GRAZIER’S GUIDE, Crown Bvo., limp cloth, price 25.6 d.
Field, May 24, 1879.—* In its pages will be found suggestions and advice bearing upon every stage
of an Australian sheep-farmer’s career; including the investment of capital, selection of land, acquire-
ment of a knowledge of detail, purchase of stock, and its subsequent management at every stage and
under all circumstances, station life, preparation and consignment of wool, &c., with sound warnings
as to the things to be avoided as well as those to be pursued.’
UPS AND DOWNS: A Story of Australian Life. 312 pp., price2s.
Saturday Review.— 1 It is not often that stories of Colonial life are so interesting. There is hardly
a phase of Squatter’s life of which we do not get a glimpse in the course of this lively and pleasant
little volume.’
SOUTH AFRICA (with. New Map and Illustrations) ; including Cape Colony,
Natal, the Diamond Fields, Orange Free State, &c. 2nd Edition, revised and enlarged. Crown Bvo.
limp cloth, 567 pp., price ss. _
Athenceum, —‘ A mine of information.’ _ ... . .
Eastern Province Herald (Cape).—' The “ Handbook for South Africa is got up m a highly credit-
able manner, and contains a large amount of valuable information. Superior to anything of the kind
we have seen.’
THE TRANSVAAL (with Map); containing information on the Political, Physical,
Commercial, and Social Aspects of the Colony. Crown Bvo., limp cloth, price 2s. 6d.
The Times.—' Contains in a handy form the particulars an emigrant most wants to know.
THE POCKET DOCTOR: for the Traveller and Colonist. ByHabbt Leach,
M.E CP. With Seasons-Chart of the World. 2nd Edition, limp cloth, price 3s.
Lancet.—' Such a work was very much needed. What the Colonist wants are plain practical short
accounts of disease and treatment, and with these he is now well supplied in this little work.
QUEENSLAND the PROGRESSIVE. By a Forty Years’Colonist. With Map, Is.
The KEY to FORTUNE in NEW LANDS. Limp cloth, price Is. 6d.
HANDBOOK to the SELECTION and MANAGEMENT of FIREARMS.
With illustrations. Limp cloth, 2s.
IMPERIAL FEDERATION. ByFEEDEBicx Voung. Edition at reduced price. Small
4t0., handsomely bound, 6s.
Westminster Review,—' Brings all the aspects of the subject forward in a controversial form.
COLONIAL and INDIAN POCKET-BOOK SERIES. 8. W. SILVER & CO.
are preparing for publication a SERIES ot COLONIAL and INDIAN POCKET-BOOKS, on a plan
which will secure the attention of Travellers, Settlers, Emigrants, and all others of that increasing class
of persons whom business, profession, health, sport, or duty sends abroad to the dependencies or to the
great centres of foreign trade. Each Pocket Book of the Series will contain all the practical informa-
tion the voyager requires for his guidance in taking his passage, securing his berth, getting his outfit,
and embarking. The first of the Series—that on South Aebioa— is now ready. Price 55., with Sheet
of Sketches of Cape Scenery, Seasons-Chart of World, &c,
THE COLONIES and INDIA. Published every Saturday, 16 pp., price 3d. Contains
leading Articles on Colonial Questions; News Summaries from Australia, New Zealand, South Africa.
Canada, India, Ceylon, West Indies, &c.; Prices of Food and Clothing, and Rates of Wages.
Home Subscription, 2s. 6d. per quarter, post free.
S. W. S. & CO.’S COLONIAL MAPS.
AFRICA, Tropical and South. : a Map of the British Colonies and adjacent Territories,
with Routes of Railways, &c., in the South, including the Discoveries of Livingstone and Camebon.
Coloured Sheet, 22 in. by 21 in., price 2s. 6d. j on roller, varnished, 3s. 6d.; mounted in sections and
case, for pocket, 6s.
The TRANSVAAL : a New Map of the Transvaal and the surrounding Districts ; Compiled
from ail available Official and Private Information, by F. Jeppe, F.R.0.5., fifteen years resident in the
country. Price, Coloured Sheet, 23 in. by 22 in., 55.; mounted on linen in sections, and case or
pocket, Bs. 6d.
The Times, Feb. 7, 1879. —‘An excellent Map.’
Cape Argus. —* One of the most beautiful specimens of engraving we have ever seen, and so far as
we can gather from competent authority, the work is thoroughly reliable.’
SOUTH AFRICA (1879), Coloured Sheet, Is. 6d„ or, in cloth case with Index to 950 Dis-
tricts. Towns, Rivers, Mountains, &c. Price, 2s.
AUSTRALIA and NEW ZEALAND ; Including the Fiji Islands: Showing Divisions,
Chief Towns, Rivers, Explorers’ Routes, &c. Coloured Sheet, Is.
SEASONS-CHART of the WORLD ; indicating also the principal Routes of Commerce,
Rainfall, &c. Coloured Sheet, is.
S. W. SILVER & CO., SUN COURT, 67 Cornhill, London.


S. W. SILVER & CO.’S
CIRCULAR NOTES
C Payable all the World ouer),
Are accompanied lay a Letter of Indication, which acts as a Letter of Introduction.
COEBESPOUDEITTS
EUROPE —Chief Cities and Towns.
ASIA.
Aden—Luke Thomas & Co., Limited.
Batavia—The Borneo Co., Limited.
Bombay—Comptoir d’Escompte.
~ Grindlay, Groom, & Co.
~ Merwanjee & Co.
Calcutta—Comptoir d’Bsoompte.
„ Colvin, Cowie, & Co,
Colombo—Somerville & Co.
Foo Chow—Hedge & Co.
Galle—Scheffer, Janz, & Co.
Hong Kong—Comptoir d’Escompte.
Madras—Binny & Co.
Philippine Islands (Iloilo)—Loney & Co.
~ ~ (Manilla)—Halliday, Wise & Co.
Saigon—Comptoir d’Escompte.
Shanghai—Comptoir d’Escompte.
Singapore—Paterson, Simons, & Co.
Fmritsur—Davee, Sahai & Chumbamull.
Yokohama—Comptoir d’Bscompte.
„ Walsh, Hall & Co.
AFRICA.
Alexandria—Comptoir d’Escompte.
~ Tod, Muller, & Co.
Beaufort W. —Barry & Nephews.
Bethulie—Stuart & Orsmond.
Bloemfontein—M. L. Pincus.
Burghersdorp—Goldmann Bros. & Co.
Cairo—R. Borg.
Cape Town—King & Son.
~ Thomson, Watson, & Co.
Carnarvon—Cornelius & Rosenthal.
~ Hanau & Katzensteiu.
Colesberg—T. Leiseur.
Dortrecht—G. Michaelis, jun.
Durban—P. Davis & Sons.
Graaf-Reinet—O. Bremner & Co.
Graham’s Town—D. H. Kennedy & Co.
Hope Town—Lilienfeld Bros.
AMERICA.
Bogotk—Koppel & Schloss.
Buenos Ayres—C. T. Getting & Co.
Callao—Bryce, Grace, & Co.
Cleveland, O.—E. B, Hale & Co,
Chicago—Hy. Greenebaum & Co.
Costa Eiea (San Jose)—Don Joaquin
Fernandez.
Galveston—C. H. Pix.
~ Walthew & Co.
Lima—Weir & Co.
Monte Video—C. T. Getting & Co.
Montreal—Evans, Son & Co.
Newfoundland (St. John’s)—H. K. Dickinson
New Grenada (Tumaco)— Grindale & Co.
New York—James Brand.
„ Eras. Moran.
Panama— H. Mallet, H.B.M. Consul.
~ E. Lyons.
Para—E. H. L. Vinen.
Philadelphia—Elliott, Sons, & Co.
~ J. M. Shoemaker & Co.
Portland (Oregon)—K. C. Janion & Co.
Quebec—J. Bell, Forsyth & Co.
Rio de Janeiro—J. Moore & Co.
Rosario—John Thompson & Co.
San Francisco—Alf. Borel & Co.
„ _ Parrott & Co.
Valparaiso—Weir, Scott, & Co.
Vancouver Isld. (Victoria)—H. Rhodes & Co.
AUSTRALASIA.
Adelaide—Henry Scott, J.P.
Auckland— Crnickshank & C».
„ Owen & Graham,
Bathurst—Benjamin Lee.
Brisbane—G. Harris.
Hope Town—Lilienfeld' Bros. Christchurch. —George Gould.
Kimberley (Diamond Fields)-M. Van Seek, „ » „ Sclander, Fletcher, & Co.
King William’s Town—Walker Bros. & Co. Dunedin— Cargills & Maclean.
Lagos—C. D. Tweton.
Liberia (Monrovia) —Hon. H.W. Johnson, sn.
Lorenzo Marques—Ablet, Compton, & Co,
Maleteng (Brit. Basutoland) —W. Aschmann.
Mauritius—Blyth Bros. & Co.
~ Ireland, Fraser, & Co,
Mossel Bay—Hudson, Vreede, & Co.
Murraysburg—Tets & Davies.
Philipstown—Teich Bros.
Pietermaritzburg—P. Davis & Sons.
Port Elizabeth—W. Anderson & Co.
~ ~ A. Mosenthal & Co,
~ ~ H. Rutherfoord.
Potchefstroom—O. W. A. Forsmann.
Pretoria—T. W, Beckett & Co. [de Paris.
Reunion (St. Denis) —Comptoir d’Escompte
Richmond—F. Mosenthal & Co.
Sierra Leone—Hon, H. J. Huggins.
Somerset, East—H. Davis & Co.
Victoria, West -Hanau & Hoffa.
Winburg—Waters & Co.
Zagazig (Egypt)—S. Felice, H.B.M. V.. Con.
ALSO
U U.UCtliil v/axgiiio tX/
~ Dalgety, Nichols, & Co.
„ Russell, Ritchie, & Co.
Geelong—Dalgety, Ibbotson & Co.
Hobart Town —T. D. Chapman & Co,
„ „ W. Knight & Co,
~ ~ E. Lewis & Son.
Launceston—Dalgety, Moore, & Co.
Melbourne—Charles Croaker & Co.
~ Dalgety, Blackwood, & Co,
Nelson— E. Buxton & Co.
~ Sclanders & Co.
Port Lyttelton—J. M. Heywood & Co.
Portland—Croaker, Scott, & Co.
Sydney—McArthur & Co.
~ Monteflore, Joseph, & Co.
Toowoomba —J. C. White.
Wellington— Levin & Co.
„ A. P. Stuart & Co,
West. Australia (Freemantle) L. Samson,
~ „ (PortWalcott)F.Mcßae*Co.
„ ~ De Grey River, (N.W, Coast)
Grant, Harper & Anderson.
nary Islands—Cyprus—Falkland Islands—Fiji Islands—Madagascar—Madeira—Malta
—New Caledonia, and Sandwich Islands.
All Particulars respecting above, on Application at
SUN COURT, 67 CORNHILL, LONDON, E.C.
Wyman and Sons, Printers ,] [Great Queen Street, London, W.C.


20 YEARS TO 31st DECEMBER, 1878,
Population
Cultivated Land..
Stock —Horses
Cattle
Sheep
Exports —Gold*
Wool (weight)
„ (value)
Otherß xports t (Grain, Tallow, Gum, &c.)
Total Exports
Imports
Savings’ Banks Deposits
Life Insurance, (New Zealand Government})—
No. of Policies issued
Sum assured
Postal —Letters received and despatched
Telegraph— Miles open
Messages sent
Eailways— Miles open for traffic
59,413
141,007 acres.
14,912
137,204
1,523,324
£52,643
3,810,372 lbs.
£254,022
£116,413
£433,949
£1,141,273
£7,862
432,856
226,618
700.000
70,000
330.000
8,700,000
£2,504,326
23,875,163 lbs.
£1,516,518
£167,258
£4,268,762
£4,985,748
£243,615
(1870) 53
£27,800
4,811,240
1,471 miles.
134,647
(1873) 145 mis.
432,519
3,523,277
137,763
578,430
13,069,333
£1,240,079
59,270,256 lbs.
£3,292,807
£1,103,981
£6,015,700
£8,755,663
£1,043,201
2,057
£632,220
15,524,761
3,434 miles.
1,260,204
1,089
* Total export of Gold to December 31, 1878, was £35,005,273.
t The increase shown in 1878 is chiefly due to Grain export from South Island.
1 The total value of New Zealand Government Insurance Policies current in June,
1879, was £3,744,997.
Statistical Memoranda Bearing on Position and Production of
New Zealand not Contained in Comparative Statistical Table.
Public Libraries, ia 1878, were 187 in number.
Places of Worship „ „ 831 „
Education —
748 Primary Schools... 65,366
73 per cent, of Children of school age, i.e., 5 to 15, attending school.
Expenditure on Education from General Revenue, in 1878, was
.£317,000.
Population, Census, 1878 —North Island, 158,208.
South „ 256,204.
Population, 1878 —Including Towns ... 395 to square mile.
Excluding 2'5 „
Lands —Total Area of Colony ... 67,419,107 acres.
Crown Lands, alienated, 1878, 15,241,639 ~
Taxation —1878-9 —Customs £1,200,000
Stamps ... ... 165,000
Land Tax ... 147,300
£1,512,300 or £3 10s. per head.
Coal —Total consumption in 1878 294,980 tons.
Output from New Zealand Mines, 1878 ... 130,984 ~
Machinery in use, 1878—120 Flour Mills.
91 Breweries.
31 Flax Mills.
945 other Factories, including Saw Mills.
Agricultural Machinery—
-4,529 Reaping Machines (one to every five holding of 10 acres and
upwards).
34 Steam Ploughs.
32 „ Harrows.
985 Thrashing Machines of which 374 are worked by steam power.
Matrimonial— In 1874 there were 238 Bachelors to every 100 Spinsters.
In 1878 yy 141 yy yy yy


■ - . .. > <•?
.
.
; • . . ,
. ...
.
‘
.


THE NEW ZEALAND SHIPPING COMPANY
(LIMITED),
HEAD OFFICE—CHRISTCHURCH, NEW ZEALAND.
Capital Subscribed £250,000
„ Paid-up 125,000
Despatch regularly every month to the principal Ports in the
Colony the following or other equally fine first-class Iron Clipper
Ships, fitted with every convenience for Passengers, and commanded
by men of well-known experience :
Rangitiki 1,188 Tons Beg. Wairoa .... 1,015 Tons Reg.
Opawa 1,076 ~ Waikato.... 1,021 „
Waimate 1,124 ~ Bakaia 1,022 „
Waitangi 1,128 „ Piako 1,075 „
Waitara 833 „ Otaki 1,015 ~
Mataura 853 „ Orari 1,011 „
Hurunui 1,013 „ Wanganui.. 1,077 „
Waipa 1,017 „ Waimea .... 848 „
Kjn Q »I * /mi « lj a rvi ref />%•
Otaki 1,015 „
Orari 1,011 „
Wanganui.. 1,077 „ „ fix'
TXTn iwi nn 04 0 A/ O & a.
Hurunui 1,013 „ Wanganui.. 1,077 „
Waipa 1,017 „ Waimea.... 848 „ C
Pareora 878 Tons Register. S'
.. NV
Fares —£l6 Steerage ; £25 Second Cabin ;
£52. 10s. Saloon {fitted cabins). W
For full particulars apply to THE MANAGER in LOFfDON,
84, Bishopsgate Street , E.C.
NEW ZEALAND.
THE PASSENGER’S LINE.
The Packets forming this old-established and favourite Line are
all first-class Ships, constructed on some of the finest models of
combined speed and strength, and commanded by experienced officers
familiar with the voyage. Upwards of 150,000 passengers have
been safely conveyed by them to the Colonies.
SHAW, SAVILL, & CO.’S
PASSENGER LINE OF PACKETS FROM LONDON TO NEW ZEALAND.
Glenlora 764
Adamant 815
Halcione 843
Anazi 468
Helen Denny 728
Bebington 941
Hermione 1,120
Calypso 1,061
Hudson 794
Chile 768
Himalaya 1,008
Crusader 1,058
Hydaspes 2,093
Elizabeth Graham 598
Lady Jocelyn 2,138
Laugstone 746
Euterpe 1,197
Pamenoth 983
Lochna ar 464
Forfarshire] ...... 1,238
n For full particulars as to passage money,
the Owners:—
SHAW, SAVILL, &_Co., 34, Leadenhall
JOHN H, WHITE,
Margaret Galbraith 841
May Queen 730
Merope 1,054
Pleiades... 997
Pleione 1,092
St. Leonard’s 1,054
Soukar 1,304
Trevelyan 1,042
Wave Queen 853
Zealandia 1,116
freight, <fec,, apply to
Street, E.C.
EMIGRATION OFFICES
LACE BY,
Near GRIMSBY,


BANK OF NEW ZEALAND.
BANKERS TO THE NEW ZEALAND GOVERNMENT.
Authorized Capital, £1,000,000. Reserve Fund, £375,000.
Directors.
J. LOGAN CAMPBELL, Esq., President.
ALFRED COX, Esq. GEORGE B. OWEN, Esq. W. I. TAYLOR, Esq.
J. C. FIRTH, Esq. C. J. STONE, Esq. Hon. JAS. WILLIAMSON,
M.L.C.
London Board.
Right Hon. SIR JAS. FERGUSSON, FALCONER LARKWORTHY, Esq.
Bart. ROBERT PORTER, Esq.
A. J. MUNDELLA, Esq., M.P. THOS. RUSSELL, Esq., C.M.G.
A. HAMILTON, Esq.
Auditors. —SAMUEL BROWNING, Esq. BENJAMIN TONES, Esq.
General Manager .—DAVlD L. MURDOCH, Esq. Inspector.— JOHN MURRAY, Esq.
Solicitors, —Messrs. WHITAKEB & RUSSELL.
hub-Ajd office,
G. S. KIBSLING, Esq., Manager.
LONDON OFFICE: 1, QUEEN VICTORIA ST., MANSION HOUSE, E.C.
E. Larkwohtht, Esq., Managing Director. Henry H. Macnab, Esq., Accountant.
London Bankers: —
The Bank of England, and the National Provincial Bank of England.
Branches and
Agencies
in New Zealand.
HEAD OFFICE, Auckland.
Akaroa. Agency of Chri-tohurch.
Alexandra, Agency ofDunedin.
Amberley, Agencv of Christchurch.
Arrow, Agency of Dnnedin.
Ashburton, Branch.
Bui's, Agency of Wanganui.
BLBN REIM, Branch.
Cambridge, Agency of Auckland.
Carlyle (Patee) Agency of Wanganui.
Carterton, Agency of W ellington
CHRISTCHURCH, Branch.
Clinton, Agen y of Dunedin.
Clutba Ferry, Agency of Dunedin.
Coromandel, Agency of Auckland.
Cromwell, Agency of Dunedin.
Darg-ville, Agency of Auckland.
DUNEDIH, Branch.
North Dunedin, Sub-Branch ofDunedin.
Fcatbe st. n, Agencv of Wellington.
Foxtou, Agency of Wellington.
Geradine, Agency of Christchurch.
GISBORNE, Branch.
Gore, Agei cy O’ Invercargill.
GKAHAMSTOWN, Branch.
GKEYMOUTH, Branch.
Greytown, Agency of Wellington.
HAMILTON, Branch,
Havelock, Agency of Blenheim,
Hawera, Agency of Wanganui.
HOKII'LKA, Branch.
Hutt, Agency of Welhngton.
Inglewood, Agency of New Plymouth.
INVERCARGILL, B anch.
Kaiapoi, Agenc» of Csristohnifeh.
Kaikocra, Agency of Chr sthurch,
Kowai Pass, Agency of Christchurch.
Kumara, Agency of H"k tika.
Lawrence, Agency ofDunedin.
Leest-n, Agency of Christchurch.
LYT PULTON, Branch.
Mangawbare, Agency of ‘Auckland,
Mar on, Agency of Wanganui.
Maaterton, Agency of Wellington
Mataura, Agency of Invercargill.
Mosgiel, Agency ofDunedin.
NARIEB, Branch.
NELSoN, Branch.
NEW PLYMOUTH. Branch.
OAMARU, Branch.
Port Chalmers, Agency ofDunedin.
TIMAKU, Branch.
TOKOMAIRIRO, Branch.
WANGANUI, Branch.
WELLINGTON, Kranch.
WESTPORT, Branch.
And manv others.
THE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND, LONDON,
GRANTS DEAFTB on any of the above-named places in New Zealand, Australia, and Fiji;
RECEIVES DEPOSITS of £5O and upwards for fixed periods, at avonrable Rates of Interest,
which are regulated by the amount and the length of time for which the Deposit is made;
OPEN 8 CURRENT ACCOUNTS for the convenience of its Colonial Constituents ;
NEgOCIATES AND COLLECTS BILLS payable in any part of the Australian Colonies
and Fiji ;
MAKES ADVANCES against produce shipped, on receipt of Bills of Lading, Policy of
Insurance, am' Invoices ;
UNDERTAKES THE AGENCY of Persons connected with the Colonies, and receives for
sale cust"dy Colonial Securities, Shares, &c., di awing Interest and Dividend on the
same as they tall due;
UNDERTAKES all other descriptions of Colonial Banking and Monetary Business, and
affoids every facility to persons in their transactions with the Colonies,
Loudon, July, 187 b.
