



THE
LIFE STORY
OF
J. H. CHAMPNESS


youta Vety fit i/lift//y and aincetef.
f<)23
J. H. Champness at 70


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
T. H. Champness at 70 3
The old Anglican Church at Epping 8
Noarlunga Township 12
Mother 14
First Wife before Marriage 25
First Wife, on leaving Noarlunga. 1882 30
J. H. Champness at 29. on leaving Noarlunga 31
Address from Tenants at Yarrock. Victoria 49
Presentation Photo from Shire of Lawloit 55
Address from Shire Council. 1895 56
■‘Carmel/* Kent Town 60
First Wife. 1906 63
Family Group 71
Present Wife 77
‘‘Carmel/’ Brighton 82


CONTENTS.
Chapter I Introductori-
Chapter ll—Ancestors 9 —l 1
Chapter lll—Birth and Boyhood 13—1‘1-
Chapter IV—Earliest Recollections 1^
South Australia 18
Adelaide 19
Noarlunga -3
Life Saving 27
Religious Work 27
Chapter V—Thoughts of England 32
A Life’s Experience with E. L. Molineaux 32
Yarrock Station. Victoria 36
Mallee Kings * .... _ .... _ 37
The Mallee. Wimraera, Victoria 39
Floods 41
Droughts 41
Bank Disasters * 42
Agricultural Bureaux 43
Agricultural and Pastoral Societies 43
Official Positions 43
Drifting 44
Parliaments 44
Church Life 44
Spiritual Life 46
Chapter Vl—Farming on Shares 48
-Starting Sons .... 30
.Business Career ... 31
.public Life 34
Freemasonry 39
Adelaide 60
Murray River 61
Dalkeith. Noarlunga 62
Colombo and Ceylon 64
Chapter Vll—England 66
London 67
The White City 68
Rest Homes 69
Broadstairs 69
Banquet to Lord Dudley 70
Paris 72
Mrs. Champness’ Death 73
Semaphore 74
Brighton, S.A 75
Second Marriage 76
Chapter Vlll.—Personal Friendships 84
Addenda—A Memoir by W. A. Dick 90
Chapter IX —Home 92


FOREWORD
The work of writing the memoirs of my es-
teemed friend, J. H. Champness, has been a labor
of Jove. Unfortunately much against his will I
have had to use the first personal pronoun, but
it has seemed good to introduce as far as pos-
sible the story as it was dictated to me.
To know J. H. Champness is a liberal edu-
cation. He is a wonderful mixture of opposing
qualities, but the more one knows of the strug-
gles and vicissitudes of his history, one is con-
vinced of the magnitude of his life work.
During the last ten years I have enjoyed his
personal friendship, and have known much of his
quiet and unobtrusive liberality.
He has assisted hundreds, nay, thousands, of
his fellow creatures.
Probably he has had no sterner critic than
myself, but in spite of it all, I am proud to call
him friend.
His courteousness and singlehanded liberality
entitle him to the fine old name of gentleman.
We are both the same age, and the strength
and weakness of advancing years are ours.


The young who read this may smile at the
stupendous egotism of decaying years. We
reply with Tennyson:
“Nay, your pardon, cry your ‘forward’,
Yours are youth and hope, but I
‘Seventy’ winters leave the dog
Too lame to follow with the cry,
Lame and old, and past his time,
And passing now into the night,
Yet I would the rising race
Were half as eager for the light.”
May the children and grandchildren of my old
friend learn lessons from his failures and suc-
cesses, and whatever the criticism of the ignorant
may be, they will not discover a simpler, truer-
hearted man than he, whose unvarnished life -
story I have tried to pen, partly from my love to
him and partly from my affection for his son, my
former pupil and chum, Percy Leonard
Champness.
W. G. Torr, M.A., B.C.L. (Oxon),
LL.D. Dublin and Adelaide, Barrister
at Law, Inner Temple, London.


Life Story of J. H. Champness.
CHAPTER I
What is Your Life? is a question often asked
and answered in many ways. To write an auto-
biography is anything but a pleasant task, for
one is reminded of so many failures, and so many
things left undone, that a review of the past often
brings apprehension and dismay.
Yet there is a sense in which such a subject
might become a pleasure. Some of my old
friends have asked me to publish some short
memoirs of my experiences, and if such a story
could prove a help and stimulus to young men,
one would gladly undertake the task.
When one has known both success and failure,
poverty and riches, sickness and health, pros-
perity and adversity, it would seem a pity thai
others should not be guided or encouraged by a
published life.
There is a knowledge of Divine leading, and
though one has not always followed the strict
path of duty, there is a consciousness of a Power-
ful Hand directing to the way of life and Peace.
Whatever is written, there is no cause for vain-
glory. “Not unto us, not unto us, but unto Thy
Great Name be all the glory.”


“Stronger by weakness, wiser men become
As they draw near to their eternal home;
Leaving the old, both worlds at once they view
That stand upon the threshold of the new.”
The old Anglican Church at Epping, England, where for
hundreds of years the ancestors of J. H. Champness
worshipped and were buried.


CHAPTER II
ANCESTRY.
SELECTIONS FROM THE LIFE OF
THE REV. THOMAS CHAMPNESS,
Founder of Cliff College, England, and
a Cousin of the Biographer.
The name Champness, otherwise Champeneys,
Champounois &c., is of French or Norman
origin, either from Champnois (a native of
Champagne), or from Champigny in Normandy.
A Champneis came over with William the
Conqueror, and the name is on the Battle Abbey
roll. The family seems to have settled and
received grants of land in the West of England.
Passing by earlier records, we learn that ‘one
Sir John Champneis came to London, and be-
came Lord Mayor in 1534-5, the year Sir Thomas
Moore and Bishop Fisher were executed for
denying to Henry VIII. the supremacy of the
Church.’
Several persons of this name are mentioned in
Reformation times, among whom was Anne
Champness, who was burnt at Canterbury as a
heretic in 1556, with four others. Fox says,
‘They were burnt at two stakes and one fire
together, and when the fire was flaming about
their ears did sing psalms.’ Of this Anne
Champness Foxe states that ‘when she appeared
before the judge and his colleagues, it was also
objected concerning the same manner of con-
fession. Whereunto she answereth in these


words and sayeth; that she wyll not be confessed
of a prieste, & addeth moreover, speakinge unto
the Priestes, that you priestes are the children
of perdition and can do no good by youre con-
fession; and lykewise, speakinge unto the Judge
and hys assistantes told them that they were
subverters of Chrystes truthe. And as touching
the sacrament of the altar, she said it was a
naughty & abominable idoll; and so utterly
denied the same sacrament. Thus persisting &
perservering in her former sayinges & answers
was condemned the saide XVIII. day of the
saide month with the other above mentioned
whome also suffered quietly & with greate com-
forte for the right of Christes religion.’ Day of
her death, January 31, 1556.
A John Champneis, who came to Essex in
1548, taught that ‘a man after he is regenerate
in Christ cannot sin with the inner man (he
could with the outer man)., This heresy Cranmer
compelled him to recant, and he had to destroy
his books and do penance before the preacher at
Paul’s Cross, with a faggot on his shoulder.
Anthony Champneys, a Jesuit, made some con-
troversial stir, and wrote numerous theological
books.
In 1701, Justinian Champness was one of the
‘five Kentish petitioners’ who were imprisoned
in the Tower for petitioning Parliament, but who
triumphantly vindicated the right of the people
to present petitions, which right has remained
unquestioned.


Of all these, Thomas Champness liked best to
think of the martyr whose voice was raised to
God in praises while the fire was flaming about
her ears; and all who knew him will reckon him
a worthy descendant of the man, who, being
imprisoned in the Tower ‘triumphantly vindi-
cated the rights of the people.’ In a sermon
which appears in his last published book, he says,
on the question of ancestry: ‘We can give our
descendants something better than gold. There
was a certain Anne Champness who was burned
at the stake. I should like to believe that her
blood flows in my veins. Perhaps it does, and so
I hate the word “priest” as I do the plague’.
The name is found in Essex documents as
early as 1247; and the Epping branch, which
changed the spelling to Champness, seems to
have been fairly large in the early part of the
eighteenth century.


Noarlunga Township: Birthplace of J. H, Champness


CHAPTER III
BIRTH AND BOYHOOD.
J. H. Champness was born at Noarlunga,
South Australia, on April 9th, 1853. My father
came from Epping Town, England, and my
grandfather had large business connections in
Epping. Canon Andrews knew of my father
when three young men, Haslam (the father of J.
A. Haslam, B.Sc., of Prince Alfred College),
Ingham (of Thebarton), and John Champness
(my father) left Epping to come to South Aus-
tralia. He little thought when he said ‘Good-
bye’ to them in England on their departure to the
ends of the earth that he would become a
personal friend in Australia of the son and
would also officiate at the marriage of the grand-
son. Canon Andrews’ name is held in loving
remembrance.
J. H. Champness has been the personal friend
of Ministers of many denominations.
My father was said to be the first white man
to come overland from Perth to Adelaide. He
did so before the time of the late Lord Forrest.
I have no personal remembrance of my father,
but Robert Hall, J.P., of Halldale, Riverton, has
given me many interesting and stirring ex-
periences of my father and himself when they
were mounted troopers in South Australia.


My mother, Catherine Harris, was an old.
colonist and probably came out in the ‘ Buffalo!’
Mother
I knew little of my English relatives. Several
uncles were retired merchants at Bath and I have
some knowledge of my Aunt Diana.


CHAPTER IV
EARLIEST RECOLLECTIONS.
There was no Public School in Noarlunga in
1858. I attended an Infant school with my"
Aunt, Marian Harris, when I was between 3 and
5 years of age. I have a lively recollection of my
boyish curls, short dress, pinafores and em-
broidered drawers. There were no knicker-
bocker suits in those days.
My Aunt was married to Albert Molineux, the
one time publisher and Editor of the ‘Garden
and Field’ and he was the founder and Secretary
of the Agricultural Bureaus in South Australia.
He had a great collection of guns —one of which
had been used by the Duke of Edinburgh on his-
visit to Australia.
FIRST TIME IN VICTORIA AS A BOY.
In 1858 my mother took me to Green Gully,
Castlemaine diggings, in Victoria, where 1117
Uncle by marriage kept a store and public house.
I well remember the men coming with their little
wooden matchboxes of gold dust to exchange
for food and liquor. Their bad language was
novel to me and I said to my mother that the
Diggers must be very good men because they
used the name of God so often.
From Castlemaine we went to Daylesford,
where I attended an English Grammar School
on Wombat Hill and wore for the first time a
shirt with long sleeves when I played rounders.


When visiting Daylesford sixty years later, I
saw the old school and was delighted to find the
son of my old Master in charge.
Among my happy reminiscences of Daylesford
was the getting up early in the morning, collect-
ing wood, boiling the kettle, and taking my
mother tea and toast in bed.
I had to earn my living and help support my
mother and I attribute any success I have had in
life to my attempts to do my duty to her both in
the sight of God and man.
‘Hast thou sounded the depths of yonder sea?
Or counted the sands that under it be?
Hast thou measured the height to heaven above?
Then mayest thou speak of a mother’s love.
At Castlemaine, although only seven years of
age, I worked in an Architect’s Office. I had to
receive callers and take their names. I spent my
spare time in drawing and was complimented on
a very lifelike caricature I made of the Town
Crier.
Our next residence was Eaglehawk Gully, a
little village at that time, adjoining Sailor’s
Gully, Pegleg Gully, and other well known rich
alluvial fields.
I went to work for a Mrs. Morgan, a Scotch
lady who had a circulating library. I earned ss.
a week and have some pleasant recollections of
the old lady’s kindness.
Forty years after, at the opening Banquet at
Swan Hill, where, being Chairman of a Shire
Council, I was the guest of Sir John Taverner, a


member of Sir George Turner’s Government, I
visited Eaglehawk, found the old shop and my
old mistress still there. “Do you remember
Harry Champness?” I asked. After looking at
me, she said “Oh dear! Oh dear! Are you the
little Harry? You were the best boy I ever had.”
I was astounded to see the wonderful growth
of Eaglehawk. It was a flourishing city with
Mayor, Aldermen, parks and gardens extending
for miles.
Our next home was in Forest Street, Bendigo.
We lived near the Anglican Church in a slab
cottage with a bark roof. Here I eked out the
little education I had received by attending an
Evening Grammar School.
Although only a boy of nine, my experience as
a literary agent in Eaglehawk led me to con-
ceive the idea of supplying the diggers with
magazines and other periodicals. I worked up a
round in Ironbark Gully and other places and
often made a profit of from £2 to £3 a week,
which I joyously gave to my mother, reserving
2/ a week for myself, one of which was spent in
supplying myself with a cup of early morning
coffee while on my round and the other shilling
went for a place in the gallery of the Theatre
Royal once a week.
As my mother did not approve of my mixing
so much with the diggers, she procured a posi-
tion as Cashier with James Craig (now James


Craig - & Co., Limited) a draper at View Point.
I received the munificent sum of 10s. per week.
On leaving I had the following testimonial: —
“This is to certify that John Henry Champ-
ness has been in my employ for 12 months
during which time he has been attentive to
his duties, strictly honest, and has given
satisfaction in every way, and I have
pleasure in recommending him.”
This is one of the preserved documents that I
have always treasured. I left the shop one day,
and on the next day returned to South Australia
with my mother.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
On the voyage from Melbourne I suffered from
seasickness so terribly that I was glad to get into
my mother’s bunk, where the stewardess found
me, after fearing that I had scrambled out of the
port hole.
The s.s. Aldinga was a favorite passenger ves-
sel between Melbourne and Adelaide. lam
afraid she is long out of date.
Mrs. Molineux, my Aunt, met us at Pori
Adelaide and took us to a restaurant, where my
only fear was that there would not be enough
food to satisfy my hunger.
It was one of my glad services to wheel in the
pram the late Albert Molineux, who became a
prominent and highly respected bowler


ADELAIDE.
On arriving in South Australia, I obtained a
position with Mr. Liptrott, an Auctioneer in
King William Street. He was a very precise old
English Gentleman whose business capacities
were limited.
I had very little to do for my 7s. or Bs. a week,
of which a shilling had to suffice for rhy daily
lunch for a week (meat pie Id., bun ld.J. I put
Is. a week in the Savings Bank.
I was able to prosecute my studies and made a
plan for every day, going through the whole of
my school curriculum as far as I was able, often
doing far more than I should have done at
school.
We lived in Gouger Street and my evenings
were employed in making trawling nets for my
Uncle, Albert Molineux. By close and strenuous
work for two to three hours, I managed to earn
fourpence a night.
I suffered from eyestrain and got low fever
when the doctor ordered me into the country.
I went to Noarlunga and worked for Joseph
Holmes, a storekeeper. I was eleven years of age
and stopped with him for 12 months. I had a
very happy time and returned to the City
renewed in health.
At twelve years of age, I went to work for
Peter Mcßostie, Grocer, of Rundle Street, where
I remained nine years. I well remember my first
day’s experience. I was sent with a hand truck
at about 5 o’clock at night in winter to deliver a


bag' of potatoes and a box of groceries. I
wandered over the illkempt roads for two or
three hours to find Daly Street. At last I found
my destination—a solitary house in a paddock
near where St. John’s Church is now. When I
returned about 8 or 9 o’clock my Master wanted
to know where I had been. I said I was sent to
deliver the goods and was determined to deliver
them even if I had to stay out all night. In after
days he commended me for my action.
I was deputed to call on certain regular
customers for orders once a week. My business
instincts prompted me to visit other houses. I
soon had a clientele who gave me orders up to
£2OO per week. My wages at the start was 10s.
per week and was gradually increased until it
reached £3 Ss.—the highest wages paid in the
establishment. I still prize the English hunting
watch presented to me by my master, Mr.
Mcßostie.
I used to get up between 5 and 6 winter and
summer. There was -no bath in our cottage in
those days. I took my bath in a tub on the brick
floor of the kitchen and poured water over myself
with a dipper, but later I improvised a bathroom
at the back of a chimney outside. I used old
hessian and bagging—punctured small holes in
a kerosene tin and pulled it up to a wooden cross
piece—poured a bucket of water into it and stood
under it. After a brisk rub down with a bran bag
I dressed and walked around the Park Lands and
through the Gardens, returning fresh and hungry
for breakfast. I started work at 7 o’clock.


When I had saved a pound, I thought my for-
tune was made and that gave me an impetus to
save more.
I had a narrow escape from being drawn into
the maelstrom of wickedness that was rampant
in Adelaide, but the memory of my mother’s
voice saved me.
As a lad and young man when at Mr. Mcßos-
tie’s (we only had in those days the public
holidays and as a rule only one day at a time, and
working in the shop one and two nights till 9-10
(and sometimes 11 o’clock) before the holiday).
These holidays were usually spent with a young
chum I had (Tom Masters), and we went on
walking tours all over the Adelaide Hills, Mount
Lofty, Waterfalls, Green Hill, Black Hill, etc.
On one occasion, we came upon a concourse of
people at Norton Summit, which proved to be
Bishop Short and Assistant Clergy opening and
dedicating the Anglican Church there. For these
excursions our mothers provided us with sand-
wiches and cakes —we got drinks of water on our
travels when thirsty and returned home at dark,
tired and weary, but hungry, happy and healthy,
to enjoy a hearty tea and rest and sleep, to re-
sume our work on the morrow.
Also I used to walk all over the suburbs of
Adelaide, Norwood, Kent Town, Stepney, Ken-
sington, Payneham, North Adelaide, Walker-
ville, Bowden, Parkside, Glen Osmond, and knew
nearly every street and almost every house.


My work was hard but I did not neglect my
duty to God and my fellow men. I became a
member of the Rev. F. W. Cox’s Church, Hind-
marsh Square. I was a teacher in the Sunday
School, Secretary of the Missionary Society, and
was connected with the Rechabites, Sons of
Temperance, and the Independent Order of
Good Templars, of which I became a Deputy
Grand Master at the age of eighteen years, and
was presented with- a velvet scarf, embellished
with the emblems of the Order. I was also one
of the founders of the Young Men’s Christian
Association. I learnt shorthand under Lorimer
Harcus, but overwork caused heart strain and I
was again ordered into the country. Mr.
Mcßostie offered to pay for a holiday trip to
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane and promised
me a partnership on my return, but I went to my
birth-place,
NOARLUNGA,
expecting- to die there. I had saved £2OO and made
my will leaving my money to my mother and a
request to be buried in the cemetery of the old
Church on the Hill beside my father’s grave.
In 1874, a severe illness with Erysipelas gave
me a change of blood and with the country air
I had a new lease of life. My mother and I lived
in the old shop and premises built and owned by
my father.
At Dr. Morau’s suggestion, I started business
buying hay and stock which proved a financial
success. After 12 months, through Messrs.


Donaldson, Andrews & Sharland, I bought from
Martin Brothers the storekeeping business
known as Burgess and Bostock, and afterwards
H. J. Coote. It was only a small village shop but
I soon enlarged my sales by adopting Mahomet’s
theory ‘lf the business won’t come to you, go
and get the business.’ For many years I had a
turnover of about £20,000 a year and made a
profit of over £2,000 a year. A Mr. Dungey
promised to find the money and guarantee my
credit. To mm I owe much.
Mr. Dick, the Manager of the Noarlunga
Branch of the Bank of Adelaide, suggested that I
should adopt the custom of paying cash and hav-
ing the discount. He gave an advance at his own
risk and the discount paid all my working ex-
penses I have always been grateful to Mr. Dick
for his action in this respect, he helped to lay the
foundation of my fortune.
In this way I became known intimately to
many of the business firms in Adelaide, some of
which have ceased to exist, viz., Whyte, Counsell
and Co., Morgan & Co., Harris, Scarfe & Co., and
Mr. Parsons, who was a Minister of the Gospel
and afterwards became a Member of Parliament
and a Minister of the Crown.
I am proud to acknowledge the great
assistance given me by such men as the Hon.
David Murray, John Gordon, Richard Searle,
and James Marshall, who became personal
friends.


My business covered a large area. It included
Tapley’s Hill, Reynella, Morphett Vale,
Hackham, Port Noarlunga, Seaview, Clarendon,
Aldinga, McLaren Vale, Willunga, Myponga,
Yankalilla, Sellick’s Hill and all through the
South. People came great distances with their
drays and waggons twice a year and delivered
their wool and other produce to my order and
took away from £SO to £IOO worth of goods. I
was one of the first to induce the farmers to cut
hay for sale, because the land was wheat sick.
They asked who would buy the hay. I promised
to find buyers in Adelaide and thus started a
great industry that has continued ever since. I
sometimes sold a thousand tons a year. I bought
teams and started young men carting hay to
Adelaide and they brought back my goods from
Port Adelaide. I had farms, stock and cattle.
On March 7th, 1875, after an engagement of
12 months, I married Blanche Molineux, younger
sister of Albert Molineux whom I have already
mentioned. I was absent from business only
one day. If “He that findeth a wife, findeth a
good thing” I found it a most excellent thing.
She was a noble woman, physically, mentally,
morally and spiritually and was a great inspira-
tion in my life work both in South Australia and
Victoria. My affection increased as the years
went by and was strongest at the end of her
earthly career. She was honorable true, faithful,
and reliable. She died on September 22nd, 1911,


First wife before marriage.


after a wedded life of 36 years. She was a good
mother to my five splendid sons and two noble
daughters.
It is gratifying to record the affection and
love that has been expressed by our children
(sons and daughters) for their late mother. They
feel that her constant and unfailing attention and
loving care during their childhood and later
years has done much to mould their lives for good
and they will ever * hold her memory in loving
remembrance, with regrets that her noble self-
sacrifice and devotion was not rewarded with
better health and greater blessings during the
latter part of her life.
My sons were Albert Ernest, Sydney
Molineux, Stanley Roy, Leslie, Percy Leonard
and my daughters Myrtle (Mrs. Langberg, of
Conmurra Station) and May (Mrs. John Hill,
of Kaniva, Victoria).
Albert married a daughter of Alderman
Essery, Mayor of Norwood and Kensington,
S.A., 1923. There is one son, Ronald. Sydney,
to a daughter of Wm. F. King, J.P., of Yarrock,
Victoria, now a resident of Nairne, S.A. There
are three sons, Edward, George and Harry, and
two daughters, Irene and Els(e.
Leslie to Miss, Wilmshurst, of Jamestown,
with one son, Ivan, and one daughter, Blanche.
Stanley Roy to a daughter (Flora) of Mr. and
Mrs. F. Thorn,of Angaston,with one son, Robert
Lyal. Percy Leonard to a daughter (Ivy) of
Mr. and Mrs. C. Eastwood, of Kaniva, Victoria,


with one son, John Howard. My daughter
Myrtle, previously mentioned, now Mrs. Lang-
berg of Conmurra, S.A., has one son Frank, and
my daughter May, now Mrs. John Hill, of Kani-
va, has four daughters, viz., Pearl, Ivy, Rose and
Blanche. My sons’ wives as above, are good,
true and honorable women, good wives and noble
mothers, and my daughters’ husbands are splen-
did men, with all of whom I am proud to be con-
nected. My grandchildren, fifteen in number to
date, have so far, proved themselves to be
worthy sons and daughters of worthy parents,
with whom I am delighted and proud and have
remembered them all in my will.
LIFE SAVING.
While living in Adelaide I saved a boy who
was drowning in the City baths although I was
nearly drowned myself in doing so.
While swimming in the Onkaparinga River
with Mr. Dick, already mentioned, we saved the
life of a boy who was drowning in 20 feet of
water. In the same hole while bathing from a
rock, known as the ‘old arm chair’, I saved the
life of Mr. W. Lowe of Noarlunga.
RELIGIOUS WORK.
I took an active interest in the Methodist and
Anglican Churches and Sunday Schools at
Hoarlunga. I sang in both choirs and have con-
tributed to their libraries for many years, and
have made provision for the gifts to be carried


on in perpetuity as I have also, since my residence
in Brighton, for the four Sunday Schools in
Brighton and Seacliff.
While at Noarlunga, I was twice elected Town
Councillor for the District Council of Noarlunga
and gave the casting vote for the erection of the
District Hall—one of the finest Country Halls;
I also supplied a Ronisch Piano, which is still one
of the finest instruments outside of the City.
The Road to the Anglican Cemetery was almost
impassable and my Council allowance for the
whole of the current year was spent in making
this road.
My increasing business and the desire of mak-
ing money increasing with it caused me to get
into unknown seas away from my God, although
I never lost touch with God’s Leading Hand
and knew however far I wandered His hand was
still stretched out to welcome me back. I had
broken off my connection with the Temperance
Societies and being absorbed in a passion for
wealth I found it necessary to learn ‘lf riches
increase set not your heart upon them.’ I
resolved that I would return to God. The
failure of my health demanded a reconsideration
of my position. I was strongly advised by David
Murray, John Gordon and others not to give up
such a splendid paying business as I had at
Noarlunga.
I took a trip to the Wimmera, Victoria, ip
1881, and while there purchased the Yarrock and
Tatiara Stations and let them to my old friends,


Robert and William Lowe of Noarlunga. On my
return to South Australia I arranged with
several wholesale firms for the disposal of my
business, which was sold to James Port of
Geelong. As my stock was very large it had to
be reduced by a sale by several thousands of
pounds, the genuineness of which brought people
from great distances. That sale was the talk and
wonder of Noarlunga and surrounding districts.
Martin Burgess of Noarlunga took charge of all
my books and accounts and I gave him Power
of Attorney to wind up any business affairs in
South Australia.


First Wife —on leaving Noarlunga,
1882


J, H. Champness at 29, on leaving Noarlunga„


CHAPTER V
THOUGHTS OF ENGLAND.
I had intended taking a trip to England —my
wife preferring to stay with her four children at
her parents’ home “Gilberta,” Riverton.
I stayed at Riverton 6 months working in the
fields and soon regained my health for I was only
29 years of age. I paid a visit to the Wimmera
with the object of arranging for a Power of
Attorney for the management of my affairs in
Victoria. My wife and brother-in-law, E. L.
Molineux accompanied me. The country was
looking magnificent, the grass was knee deep.
They advised me to give up my trip to England
and we decided to live at Yarrock Station —a fine
•old building with 16 rooms. I had made satis-
factory arrangements with my out-g'oing
tenants.
A LIFE’S EXPERIENCE WITH E. L. MOLINEUX.
My brother-in-law, Eugene, had been discuss-
ing with William Lowe their proposal to arrange
with the existing tenants to cancel their leases
and to get me to join them in a partnership to
take over the whole of the properties, and, after
consideration, and yielding to their entreaties,
this was done.
William Lowe stayed on at the Woolshed
for some months, and then went to farm his own
Selection at Bunyip. Eugene put into the ar-


rangement about £2O0 —and we took possession
and went to work in 1884. Eugene was to man-
age the farming, etc., and I was to do the sheep
and stock buying and selling, general manage-
ment, and keep the books and accounts, etc. We
had no Deed of Partnership, but just worked
under the name of J. H. Champness & Co., to see
(first) if it would prove satisfactory to both.
However, after a time we found, what with the
cost of clearing the lands, fencing, wages, gen-
eral expenses, water supply, etc., etc., for which
I found all the land and paid all the money—and
then came floods and droughts, bank failures,
and other losses; we (or I) were getting into
troubled waters and financial difficulties, and as
Eugene had interests with his brothers in South
Australia, and we thought that if we failed at
Tarrock it may cause him to lose also his inter-
ests in South Australia, and perhaps involve his
brothers in trouble or difficulty, so we decided,
and did dissolve any partnership that did exist
(if any legally existing), although there was no
Deed or anything, so, after consulting a Solicitor
—who advised that what we had done might
be construed into Partnership—we had a Deed
prepared and executed dissolving all part-
nership existing, and I paid him (Eugene L.
Molineux) all monies he had paid in to me, and
balanced all accounts, etc., in full to that date,
and he made a home with us for about twenty
years, and stayed on and lived with us till my
wife came to Adelaide ill, as stated after; and
after that he still stayed on, making Yarrock his


home as my guest with Mr. Hill, who was living
at Yarrock with his family, keeping the
house, etc.
After I sold Yarrock he came back to South
Australia and lived with his brother Augustus
at Tarlee, until Gus died, and after with Gus r
widow and family, until he died himself. We
were the best of friends all through. After Jf
came over to South Australia, he made our home
at Kent Town and -Norwood his home always on
his visits to Adelaide, and I used to visit him at
Tarlee when he was ill, and until he died there;
he was a most easy-going, genial, honest and
lovable man. He loved hunting kangaroos,
emus, rabbits, wild dogs, foxes, or anything
huntable or chaseable; also a lover of dogs. We
all (our kiddies included, as they grew up) used
to say: “Give Uncle Jean a g'ood horse and dogs
and open country, with game as above, to chase,
he was happy, and he would be like the North
American Indian, hoping "The hereafter would
be happy hunting grounds.’ ” He was an invet-
erate smoker (over half-a-pound of tobacco a
week), and would have a smoke in bed before
rising', another pipeful, or sometimes two, before
breakfast, and then practically on and off all day
long, and after tea at night-time, in bed time,
and another to wind up the day before going to
sleep in bed. He was the most happy-go-lucky
man I had ever met.
Two little incidents are characteristic:
Once he had a large and dangerous tumour in
his thigh. I took him to Dr. Ryan, at Kaniva—


a renowned surgeon, and now practising at
Nhill—who had him in hospital for some weeks,
and attended him daily and in time cured him.
The doctor said to me one day: “Your brother-
in-law, Champness, is a funny fellow. He
doesn’t seem to have any feeling or suffer pain.
I put an instrument in him one day to probe his
wound; he didn’t flinch at all. I said: ‘Does it
hurt?’ He said: ‘No.’ I pushed it in up to the
hilt, but he just went on smoking, apparently
quite contented.”
Another time at Yarrock, when bad with
sciatica, I treated him myself, got him to bed
early, bathed and massaged the affected part
with hot water, and then rubbed in a strong lini-
ment for about half-an-hour. He laid on his side
smoking away quite happily —but I was in heavy
perspiration, and my arms and legs ached, but
expecting him to say “That’s enough” ; so I
said: “Is it easier and better now, Eugene?” and
he answered: “Oh, you’ve been rubbing in the
wrong place!” However, we esteemed each
other very highly from our first acquaintance
until he died, and I hold his memory in great
respect, as I did all his brothers and sisters, and
all the Molineux family, who have now all gone
to their last rest, loved, respected, honoured and
esteemed by all who had the privilege of knowing
them.


YARROCK STATION, VICTORIA.
As I had no security to offer, I expected some
difficulty in financing this important speculation
but Mr. Dick of Noarlunga wrote a letter to Mr.
R. G. Wilkinson, the head Manager of the Bank
of Adelaide, who gave me the following letter to
the agents for the sale of Yarrock and Tatiara
Stations
“Mr. J. H. Champness informs me that he
has purchased property in the Wimmera on
which there is £3,000 or £4,000 to pay. His
cheque for that amount will be honored by
us on prasentation.”
Mr. Dick’s knowledge of me personally and my
business relationships in the past proved a satis-
factory security. I took possession of Yarrock
in 1882. The original owner of Yarrock, William
C. Messer, g'ave me a letter to the manager then
in charge, which is characteristic of the effective
methods of doing business in those days. The
letter was as follows:—“To John McKenzie,
Yarrock. I have sold Yarrock and everything
on it to Mr. J. H. Champness. Give him full
possession.—William C. Messer.” Here I had a
large and totally different experience. I entered
into both pastoral and agricultural work. The
Stations were not stocked. Originally Yarrock
was 30,000 acres but had become considerably
reduced by Selectors under the Land Act of 1869
introduced by the notorious Graham Berry.


The properties were well improved and had a
good water supply in dams and near the
dwellings, but there was little fencing. Rabbits
were in millions and emus, kangaroos, and wild
dogs abundant. I fenced the open country with
substantial vermin proof wire netting 4 feet 6
inches high and made other extensive improve-
ments.
MALLEE KINGS.
The invention of the stumpjump plough gave
me an opportunity of testing the Mallee Country
north-west and east of Yarrock. I had cleared
1,200 acres with a roller and a team of 14 bullocks
and thus became the first cultivator of the mallee
country in Victoria.
I was strongly advised not to attempt it as it
was only throwing money into the bush to feed
rabbits and other vermin. The experiment
proved a huge success. Others followed in my
footsteps and a new agricultural province was
added to the State of Victoria.
The Victorian press, Ministers of Lands, and
public bodies congratulated me as the pioneer of
cultivation in the mallee country. Mr. E. H.
Lascelles, a wealthy wool merchant of Geelong,
and myself were known as the ‘Mallee Kings’ by
both the Government and the Press. Mr.
Lascelles enclosed thousands of acres with ‘stub’
vermin proof fences for pastoral purposes and
carried out large schemes of water supply in
desert country, on which he grazed thousands of
sheep, thus making a useless country, a ‘land of
promise.’


When vermin boards were established I was
made a member of the Western Vermin Board
extending from Kaniva to Horsham and War-
racknabeal, covering 1,600 square miles of mallee
allotments and remained a member of the Board
for twenty-one years until its dissolution. I was
returned at the head of the poll every year and
was Chairman of the Board for sixteen years.
Some of the mallee blocks in the Wimmera were
500 square miles. The mallee country extended
from Kaniva to the Murray—a distance of
nearly 100 miles. William MacDonald, J.P., of
Nhill Station, was Chairman of the North
Western Block Vermin Board.
On account of the enormous increase of
vermin both in South Australia and Victoria, Mr.
Macdonald and myself were appointed by the
Victorian Government to hold a conference at
Bordertown with G. W. Goyder, Surveyor-
General of South Australia. After taking evi-
dence from residents on both sides of the Border
we recommended a vermin proof fence along the
Border to the Sea at the joint cost of the States.
The fence was erected five feet high with 1£ in.
galvanised wire netting, iron posts, and a barbed
wire on top. Mr. Macdonald and I were re-
sponsible for the erection of a vermin proof fence
along the 36th parallel of latitude from the River
Murray to the Border fence. The fence was 5
feet 6 inches high with 2 barbed wires on top and
cost over £IOO per mile. It passed through Lake
Hindmarsh. The contractors being unable to
carry on the work on account of the lack of water


and food were about to abandon it when I
arranged to finance them, otherwise the young
men would have been ruined. Being secured by
the payments made by the North Western Board
I supplied the men with horses and all things
requisite, with the result that the work was com-
pleted to the satisfaction of the Government and
the public and to the enrichment of the con-
tractors themselves.
On one occasion when the work was nearly
completed, a courteous Government officer who
was sent periodically from Melbourne to inspect
this fence, visited us as usual. My wife put up
some lunch for him for a day’s excursion. He
expected to return in a few hours. He did not
return until next morning, when a very drenched
horse and man came to the station. M) r man saw
to the horse and I to the man, and treated both
well. I afterwards received a letter of thanks
from the Government.
THE MALLEE, WIMMERA, VICTORIA.
Ultimately I cleared and cultivated many thou-
sands of acres of the mallee country. For some
time I was the Agent for Shearer Bros., who in-
vented the stump jumping plough. Most of the
residents in the North Western Wimmera
district were former residents of South Aus-
tralia. Much of the mallee land could be rented
in the early days for about ss. to 20s. a square
mile. Now much of the land is worth from £7


to £lO per acre as freehold. Most of the country
was leasehold when I bought Yarrock. I had 740
acres of freehold (pre-emptive right) including-
-100 acres on which a huge dam had been ex-
cavated to supply the sheep with water. When
I sold Yarrock I had over 11,000 acres of free-
hold, having bought out Selectors who had ful-
filled their term of residence.
My mother, who visited me at Yarrock, re-
turned to Adelaide and died in 1887, and was-
buried in West Terrace cemetery. I have always
visited her grave regularly and kept it in good
order and have just given authority for a renewal
and renovation, now satisfactorily completed.
My mother remarried at Castlemaine in Vic-
toria, the issue being four sons and one daughter.
The daughter died at an early age and three'sons
are now living in South Australia and one in
W r est Australia.
The old gold escort track from Adelaide to
Ballarat passed over the spot where the wool-
shed stands on the Tatiara Station.


FLOODS.
A few years after we started, in 1891, it rained
continuously from April to September and the
low lying country became a series of lakes, some
of them hundreds of acres in extent and from four
to six feet deep. Boats were built and used on
them. The wild duck came and bred in great
numbers. Several thousands of acres were
covered with water on my own run. My men
being unable to work on account of the rain,
spent most of their time in shooting ducks. We
had as many as 30 or 40 a day and gave away
thousands.
These lands were under water from three to
five years. When dry, the grass grew luxuriant-
ly in the silt that was washed in. Wheat and
oats were scattered broadcast and harrowed in
without plowing and produced 40 to 50 bushels
an acre. The yields gradually decreased in the
following years.
DROUGHTS.
A very severe drought extended over the whole
of the Wimmera district and lasted from
October to July, nearly a year. There was no
rain during that time. John Hill, my sheep
manager who understood the climate of the
Wimmera and in whom I put the greatest com
fidence, an honorable and God-fearing man, re-
commended placing the sheep in the scrub heath
country. We put about 3,000 fat sheep in the
heath country north of Yarrock under shepherds.
Numbers were lost in the bush. When only five
hundred were left, the rains came and we


managed to reach the open country with only
200 sheep, the others wandered away and we
were too depressed to look for them. The 200
were killed for the sake of their skins.
Because of the expense of feed a large number
of horses and cattle had to be shot. Hay and
straw of an inferior quality were purchased in
Ballarat for from £6 to £lO a ton and it had to be
carried nearly 200 miles.
The railway from Melbourne to Adelaide
reached as far as Dimboola on the Victorian side
and to Murray Bridge on the South Australian
side. The gap between was completed later
when I supplied the contractors, Millar Bros.,
with hay. The railway line follows closely the
old gold escort track to Adelaide.
BANK DISASTERS.
The collapse of the banks was felt all over the
countryside and stock reached its lowest limit.
Good heavy pigs were sold for 10s. each, sheep
a shilling a head and cattle for £1 each. Wheat
was sold at Kaniva for Is. 3d. to Is. 6d. a bushel
A great number of the residents in the Wimmera
district left for New South Wales and Queens-
land. These frequent disasters nearly drove me
to despair, but remembering God’s goodness in
the years that had passed I was able to sing
‘Ye fearful saints fresh courage take
The Clouds ye so much dread
Are big with Mercy and shall break
In blessings on your head.’


Most of those farmers who remained to fight
the battle against disaster succeeded and became
wealthy.
AGRICULTURAL BUREAUX.
At my suggestion my brother-in-law, Albert
Molineux, was invited by the Victorian Minister
of Agriculture to lecture on the formation of the
Agricultural Bureaus in South Australia. Hav-
ing obtained permission of the South Australian
Government he lectured to many of the Agricul-
tural and Pastoral societies of Victoria going as
far as Bendigo.
AGRICULTURAL AND PASTORAL SOCIETIES.
W. H. Bond, J.P., of Kaniva and I were judges
at both the Nhill and Kaniva A. and P. shows for
about 20 years. Mr. Bond was one of my first
friends, a good business man and an earnest
Christian gentleman.
OFFICIAL POSITIONS.
Taking an interest in public matters, I was
elected to the Lowan Shire Council, which ex-
tended from Dimboola to the South Australian
Border and from Lake Hindmarsh to the old
South Scrub. Nhill was the centre. The Law-
loit Shire was afterwards separated from Lowan.
I was a member of these Shires either as
President or Councillor for 7 years. I was also
President of Water Trusts, Agricultural and
Pastoral Societies, Boards of Advice and other
public bodies.


DRIFTING.
At the request of my wife and friends I re-
signed my positions as I found the temptations
connected with a public career were too great for
me and I was afraid of drifting from the high
standard of life that I desired to attain. I had
known so many splendid men go under because
of their association with public life.
PARLIAMENTS.
On my retirement I had requisitions to stand
both for the Legislative Council and also for the
House of Assembly, Victoria, for Lowan in
opposition to the Hon. Richard Baker, then
Minister of Education, but on principle I refused
to oppose him as he was regarded as a personal
friend. He was then opposed and defeated by
Mr. W. H. Irvine, now Sir Wm. Irvine, Chief
Justice and Lieut. Governor of Victoria, whom
I have admired for his great abilities, afterwards
conspicuously proved when Premier of Victoria,
and in his subsequent high positions, and for
whom I have great personal regard and esteem.
CHURCH LIFE.
I took considerable interest in Church life in
the Lowan and Lawloit Shires. For several
years I was Chairman at many of the Methodist
Church and Sunday School Anniversary gather-
ings, continuously for many years in succession.
As there was no Church service within 7 or 8
miles of Yarrock Station I allowed the use of a


large room at the Station for the use of Methodist
Ministers and others of different denominations,
and we had good gatherings. Shortly after, an
Anglican Church was built at Yearinga, near
Yarrock, and the Church book in ordinary use
was that commonly known ‘The Bush Service.’
There were no regular Church officers so I was
appointed Secretary of the executive committee
and had to collect and pay the stipend, and some-
times paid it out of my own pocket. I supplied
the Church with a good organ from Melbourne
and occasionally acted as Lay Reader. The
Church was weather board and would hold up-
wards of 150 people. A disastrous cyclone which
devastated the Wimmera, destroyed the Church
and it was not rebuilt. I then built at my
own cost a substantial weatherboard hall on
Yarrock Station, the same size as the Anglican
Church. This was used as a Public School both
for my own children and those of the share and
tenant farmers and others. The Government
supplied and we boarded the teacher. Most of
my family was educated there, and afterwards
the two eldest went to Caterer’s Collegiate
School at the Semaphore in S.A. and also to
Warrnambool, Victoria.
The Yarrock Hall was used for concerts, lec-
tures, and entertainments at a nominal charge,
as well as for the religious services of Baptists,
Methodists, Anglican, Presbyterians and the
Salvation Army free of charge, and I
generally took an active part in all these gather-
ings.


SPIRITUAL LIFE.
Although I had never lost touch with God yet
I had never regained the spiritual experience I
had during my young manhood in Adelaide.
Riches had choked the good seed. At a meeting
in the station dining hall conducted by the Salva-
tion Army I made a public confession of my
failure and re-consecrated my life to God's ser-
vice, and in spite of many weaknesses I have
tried to carry on the work of my Master earnestly
and assiduously from that day to this. Con-
scious of not reaching my highest ideal, I glorify
God for the way in which He has led me.
Before leaving Yarrock and shortly after my
wife came to Adelaide to live, I had a lump in
my throat which became very painful. I was
strong-ly advised to come to Adelaide and con-
sult my old friend Dr. W. T. Hayward, who
after examination thought it was a cancer and
advised an immediate operation. This was to be
performed at Kent Town Hospital under Drs.
Hayward, Mainwaring and another. While
under the anaesthetic the doctor felt inside
my mouth to locate the trouble and there
slipped out into his hand a small lump of
calcium of lime from the saliva duct about
the size of a large pea; consequently no
operation was needed. I was put to bed, and
on recovering' from the ether found my wife
sitting at my bedside holding my hand. Shortly
after the matron of Hospital came in and spoke
to me, saying “My word you are a lucky man.
There’s nothing wrong with you.” I said “Then


I’m not to die at present? I’ve already gone
thro’ the experience of dying and shall now have
to go thro’ it again.” The matron laughed and I
was out and about as usual and down swimming
at Glenelg in a few days.
Kaniva is taken from a native name shown
on the original station map and spelt "Kamaeva, ,r
which was the name given to the Overseer’s
Hut on Tatiara, Woolshed Hill. “Kaniva” was
originally called “Budjik Hill,” and in the early
days of settlement (in the seventies and eighties)
was referred to by the reporters and editors of
local papers as “Budjik’s breezy slopes.”


CHAPTER VI
FARMING ON SHARES.
I was probably the first in Victoria to adopt
the method of share farming. The spirit of co-
operation had always a fascination for me and I
was anxious for others to share in the benefits
received. For over twenty years I had an
average of about twenty men farming on shares.
They occupied some thousands of acres on very
liberal terms which caused me to be blamed by
other landowners who were compelled later to
adopt my methods.
I cleared the land ready for the plough and
supplied wheat, bags, seed and manure. My
tenants supplied labor, horses and machinery
and carried the wheat to market. I paid them
the market price for half the crop and sometimes
3d. or 6d. a bushel above.
In some instances many of the young men
were not able to buy the necessary stock and iirr
plements. I supplied these at a small rate of
interest and guaranteed their accounts at the
stores and banks. Many of these have become
wealthy citizens in Adelaide, Geelong, Ballarat,
and other places. On my return to Tatiara
Station, after some years absence, I received
•quite an ovation and found that many were being
helped in a similar way, but in some cases less
liberally by my successors and others. Some of
them wished me back. They said: “You were a
man and a gentleman and treated us royally.” I
have received addresses from old tenants and
•others.


Address from Tenants at Yarrock, Victoria


STARTING SONS.
I tried to give my three sons who remained
with me at Yarrock a good business, train-
ing. At first they worked for me as wage earners
and boug'ht their own clothes. I encourag'ed
them to save by giving them 5 per cent, interest
on the quarterly and half yearly balance between
us. In this way £2OO to £3OO was accumulated,
by some of them, which gave them a start
in life. My next step was to work on
shares with them as with other tenant
farmers. This proved successful, and for
many years they rented the Tatiara land and it
was a great joy to me to hear my sons referred
to by bankers, stock and station agents and
Ministers of Religion as splendid young men
good workers, first class business men, honest to
a fault, and honorable Christian gentlemen.
My son Percy was converted at a mission
conducted at Kaniva by the late Rev. Samuel
Knight, a personal friend of my cousin, the late
Rev. Thos. Champness, and wishing- to enter
the Ministry, the Rev. Henry Howard and
others advised me to put him under the
charge of my old and esteemed friend, Dr.
Torr, at the Methodist Training Home,
Brighton, South Australia. After remaining
there some time he left with very higdi
credentials as to his ability both in study and
preaching. When he returned to Victoria, cir-
cumstances unfortunately prevented him from
entering the Methodist Ministry, but he has con-
tinued preaching with great acceptance and


spiritual power in many churches of different
denominations in various parts of the Wimmera
district as well as farther afield.
After Percy’s return to Victoria I sold and
transferred the Tatiara lands to my three sons,
Sydney, Roy and Percy.
BUSINESS CAREER.
During all my business career at Noarlunga,
Victoria and again in South Australia, I have
always kept my own books and attended to the
whole of my correspondence up to the last few
months.
I am proud to be able to state that in all my
life and business career there has never been a
cheque, or Bill, or promissory note, or business
engagement of mine dishonoured.
When closing my dealing with the Victorian
Lands Department, which had been of a very
satisfactory nature for over 25 years, I asked one
of the Chief Officers in the Lands Settlement
Branch, why the Officers had so readily, and for
so many years granted applications I had made
both for others and myself, almost without
question. He said that when I first began to do
business with them they queried my statements
the same as they did those of other people, but
they had found that my statements were
invariably so true and correct that their
officers were instructed to accept my statements
and applications without question, and if possible


to do so, to grant my requests, although many
lawyers and station and land agents had been
refused in similar cases. They accepted my
statements as true, and believed my actions and
influence were used for the best and true inter
ests of genuine land settlement.
I naturally felt very proud of this because it
came from a conscientious officer of high stand-
ing and position and have pleasure in recording
it.
About 1905 the state of my wife’s health and
her desire to be among her friends hastened her
return to South Australia. I decided to give up
agricultural work and had one of the largest
sales of farm stock and implements ever held in
the Wimmera up to that time.
I brought my wife and five younger children
to Adelaide and the three youngest attended the
Norwood Public School. Roy spent nine years
with Harris, Scarfe & Co., Ltd., and his services
were very highly appreciated by them. Sydney
was my farm manager and wool classer, and I
have always been proud of his steady trust-
worthiness, honorable character, great ability
and faithful services.
Mr. Hill and his family of nine came to reside
at Yarrock and bred a very high class of sheep
and with my son, Sydney, supervised the share
farming. During successful seasons I always
gave bonuses to my employes. When Mr. Hill’s
health failed I sold out all my stock and the
Yarrock Estate, consisting of 7,000 acres of free-


hold as well as large areas of Government
<jne block of scrub country contained 390 square
miles. We supplied the stock with water by
means of wells and bores. One timbered well
was 150 feet deep and many of the bores in the
freehold country were from 100 to 200 feet deep.
Petrified shells were sometimes found in these
wells. With the help of windmills we had a
never failing supply of splendid water. The
bores were fed by a subterranean stream flowing-
from the River Murray to the sea and we never
had a failure.
During my residence at Yarrock I must have
circulated many thousands of pounds, thus
benefitting workers, trades people, railways and
the revenue of the country. I placed the sale of
my stock in the hands of Young Bros., of Vic-
toria, DeGaris of Naracoorte, and other agents.
The fame of the quality of the stock brought
buyers from South Australia, New South Wales,
and different parts of Victoria. The Australian
papers, such as The Argus, The Herald, Weejdy
Times, Register and Advertiser reported a splen-
did show of sheep and record prices up to that
time were obtained.
I kept the Tatiara country for my three sons,
who still hold about 3,000 acres of first class land.
I had purchased the stone flour mill at Lillimur
and converted it into a roller mill. My son
Albert was initiated into a milling and engineer-
ing business by a first class manager and got
further experience in a mill of Dunn & Co., Port


Adelaide and Murray Bridge, and Davey & Sons
at Angaston, and became thoroughly qualified.
After I sold the mill it was burnt and I lost over
£I,OOO on the transaction. It was a ereat ex
perience.
A broken leg gave me a long desired oppor-
tunity to pick up my reading.
PUBLIC LIFE.
In connection with the Shire Councils and
other public bodies I was repeatedly appointed as
delegate to conferences held in the Government
buildings and Town Hall, Melbourne. I some-
times presided at these gatherings and was
invited by Sir Robert Best and others to give
advice on lands and mallee settlement in Vic-
toria.
I became a rather noted character in Nhili.
Whenever I visited the town for any of my public
functions, spicy paragraphs appeared in the
public press about a little black book that I
always carried relating my experiences in South
Australia and Victoria. I wrote many articles
in the press on land settlement, cultivation and
production. I was considered an authority on
vermin proof fencing and the Governments of
South Australia and Victoria asked me for
written suggestions on successful land settle-
ment, which they published in the agricultural
reports.


PRESENTED TO
JOHN HENRY CHAMPNESS, Esq., J.P.,
President of the Shire of Lawloit
from August 1894 to August 1893
By His Fellow Councillors and Officers.
Signed on behalf of the Council,
DAVID COUTTS, President.
J. GOLDING, Secretary.
Lawloit Shire Office,
October Bth, 1895


Address from. Shire Council, 1895, accompanying
life-sized portrait


When retiring from the Kaniva Shire Council
the President and Officers presented me with an
illuminated address and two life-sized photos, one
to hang in the Shire Hall and the other for my
own home, and they are still in their respective
places.
I have discovered amongst old papers a
leading article published by the Nhill and Tatiara
Mail on August 20th, 1892, which reflects public
opinion on my municipal work of that time as
follows:—“Mr. J. H. Champness, one of the
members for the North Riding. For some reason
or other, which it is exceedingly difficult to
understand, Mr. Champness has been confronted
with two opponents, Mr. W. Riddick of Dinyar-
rak, and Mr. John Holt, of Lillimur. Why Mr.
Champness should have thus been singled out for
such opposition we are at a loss to know. We
have closely watched his career, not only as a
shire councillor, but as a public man, for a long
time past, and have at no time seen any reason
whatever why an effort, such as the one now be-
ing attempted, should be made to deprive him of
the confidence of the people of his own district.
On the contrary, there has been every reason, to
our way of thinking, why the ratepayers of the
Riding should be only too anxious to retain the
valuable services of so capable a representative
at the council table. Apart altogether from his
having long ago proved himself to be, without
doubt, one of the best public men in the Wim-
mera, if not in any country district in Victoria,,
he has unquestionably enjoyed a municipal


career hard in deed to excel. He has,
both in the old Lowan Shire and in the new
municipality of Lawloit, been a most painstaking-
councillor, and one who has brought more than
an ordinary amount of intelligence and business
ability to bear, with good results, on the delibera-
tions of either body, and particularly on those of
the latter. Hence we regard the formidable op-
position that has been arrayed against him on
the present occasion as strange, to say the least
of it. We have not a word of disparagement to
say against his opponents. Doubtless either of
them would worthily fill a councillor’s chair.
But, at the same time, we deem it our duty to
point out that the rejection of Mr. Champness
next Thursday, in face of his services and excep-
tional qualifications, would look so very much
like ingratitude on the part of the ratepayers that
outsiders would not be unreasonable in regarding
it as such.”
I often had the honor of presiding at lectures
and other public gatherings within the Wim-
mera.
In all my business experience at Noarlunga
and buying and selling land in Victoria I have
never taken any one into a Court of Law. In the
intricacies of dealings I lost thousands of
pounds, preferring to act and live amicably with
those with whom I dealt and whenever in doubt
or difficulty I followed the maxim of the good
old Book “Come and let us reason together.’


FREEMASONRY.
In 1887 I became a member of the Masonic
Craft (English Constitution) at Nhill (King
Edward VII. being the Grand Master).
On September 10th, 1889, I became a Justice
of the Peace for the Western Bailiwick of the
State of Victoria, a position I still hold. I have
also been a member of the Justices’ Association
in Melbourne since its foundation.
On taking residence at Brighton, South Aus-
tralia I was appointed a Justice for the State of
South Australia and still occupy the same
position in 1923.


ADELAIDE.
After selling- Yarrock Station and coming- to
reside with my wife and family in Adelaide, I
built a beautiful home called “Carmel,” on
Dequetteville Terrace, Kent Town, facing- the
Park Lands, surrounding- the City of Adelaide.
The name “Carmel” was selected hv my daugh-
ter Myrtle from the Hebrew Dictionary as a
place for sheep and cereals—a suitable name for
a house built by a retired sheep and land farmer.
I lived in “Carmel” till the death of mv wife in
1911.
“Carmel,” Kent Town (S.A.)
Former Residence
I became a member of Thomas Rhodes' .Men s
Class in the Kent Town Methodist Jubilee
Church. Mr. Rhodes was president of the class
for fifty years, and became one of my most intim-
ate friends. We were called 'the twins', and we


made arrangements for a trip to England
together, but owing to Mr. Rhodes’ illness I had
to go alone. I had seen the foundation stone of
the Kent Town Methodist Church laid about
sixty years ago when I was a lad, and was pleased
to become a poor steward and trustee of the
Church in my riper years. On thanking the late
Rev. William Jeffries for my appointment, I told
him that the title was very appropriate, as I was
certain to make a very poor steward, but I visited
the sick and helped people of all denominations
and assisted at the sacramental services.
MURRAY RIVER.
not help interesting myself in business
matters and was urged to invest in lands along
the Murray River frontages. Mr. William Lowe
urged me, and my eldest son, Bert, visited Loxton
with me and I bought many thousands of acres of
farming and grazing lands. One block of nearly
4,000 acres reached to the border fence between
Victoria and South Australia, 20 miles from
Loxton. It was a beautiul pastoral and grazing
country, all of which I fenced and in a few years
sold it out with more or less financial success.
I purchased a number of town allotments in
Loxton and recently sold the last. I advanced
moneys to settlers whom I had formerly known
at comparatively low rates of interest. The
whole of these advances has been paid off and
many of these helped are in a good financial
position. Professor Angus, of the School of
Mines, had given me an introduction to Mr. J. P.


Sadlier, J.P., manag'er of the Bank of Adelaide at
Loxton, who was known as the “King of Lox-
ton.” I found him a very courteous and in-
fluential gentleman, and we kept up a corres-
pondence for years.
I was one of the supporters of the Loxton Hos-
pital and was appointed a life member. I had the
pleasure of recommending Dr. W. T. Hayward’s
son as the first resident physician.
DALKEITH, NOARLUNGA.
On behalf of Mr. William Lowe, an old boy
friend, I purchased the estate of Dalkeith from
Thos. Dodd, of Noarlunga, an interesting per-
sonage, who said that he preferred the cheque of
J. H. Champness to that signed by the manager
and accountant of a bank. Mr. Lowe farmed
and grazed Dalkieth until the time of his death.
I gave him the benefit of my experience in wool
and sheep and made frequent visits, assisting in
the wool classing. Mr. Lowe was a great
sufferer from rheumatics, gout and heart trouble,
and in 1909 he invited me to meet him in Ade-
laide. When waiting I received a telegram that
he had died at Reynella sitting in his buggy with
the reins in his hands. Mr. H. W. Varley and I
were appointed executors and trustees, a position
we still hold in 1923. We sold Dalkeith and
wound up the estate, leaving the family in com-
fortable circumstances. I did my share of the
work for over 12 months without taking a penny
for expenses and received grateful letters of
acknowledgement from the family.


First Wife—l9o6


COLOMBO AND CEYLON.
About the year 1906, on account of my health,
my personal friend and physician, Dr. W. T.
Hayward urged me to go for a trip to Colombo
and accompanied me as far as Fremantle. My
son, Roy, went with me. We stayed at the Hotel
Bristol at Colombo and enjoyed rickshaw rides
to the Cinnamon and Botanic Gardens, Mount
Lavinia and the surrounding villages. We
trained to Kandy and visited the temples, the
King’s Bath, Buddha’s tooth, crawling bare foot
to kiss Buddha’s toe. We enjoyed the beautiful
walks and spicy breezes of Peridynia gardens,
and saw the indiarubber exuding from the trees.
Our trip to Neuralya was a wonderful ex-
perience. It is the highest town in Ceylon. We
traA’elled by a trunk line a certain distance and
then by the “Toy Railway,” which wound round
the mountains and zig-zagged up the slopes,
making a journey of about 30 miles although the
actual distance as the crow flies was only 7
miles. We took four hours on the journey.
There were only two carriages, and we had to
stoop to get into them. On the journey we met
a very courteous judge and stopped at the Grand
Central Hotel with him. Knowing that I was
a Justice of the Peace of Victoria he invited me
to a seat on the Bench and I was interested in
Fearing the evidence translated by an inter-
preter.
We stayed at Neuralya a fortnight and
thoroughly appreciated its marvellous scenery.
Adam’s Peak, the highest mountain in Ceylon,


was a great attraction. The print of the foot
twenty feet long of our great ancestor Adam
when he stepped across the Straits between India
and Ceylon was shown.
My son, Roy, started at midnight to see the
sunrise from Adam’s Peak at 4 o’clock and re-
turned in time for breakfast after enjoying the
marvellous panorama when Old Sol gilded the
mountain peaks. Our hotel supplied us with a
carriage and pair with coachman and footman
and lunch hamper for the brilliant charge of
about 7s. 6d. a day in English money.
Visiting the gardens we met the curator, an
Indian gentleman of great culture and attain-
ments, and he pointed out the Boer camp 30 miles
away, where 5,000 Boer prisoners had been in-
terned during the South African War.
We were highly impressed by the delightful
English climate, the luxurious growth, the tea
and coffee plantations and the oriental shepherds
leading their sheep with musical strains to their
green pastures.


CHAPTER VII
ENGLAND.
In May, 1908, I took a trip to England. Un-
fortunately my wife disliked the sea and Mr.
Rhodes’ illness prevented either of them from
going-. I had the usual varied experiences of the
sea voyag-e, visiting Fremantle, saw Cocos
Island, where the Emden was captured, and
Colombo and enjoyed swimming in the Galle Face
sea baths. Leaving Marseilles we encountered a
dense fog and could not see the ends of the deck.
The electric light was burning all day, the hooting
of fog horns and the booming of the guns in-
creasing the weirdness of the night. We could
hear vessels passing and could not see them.
Nearing Gibraltar rockets were fired and the
boom of guns warned us off. One vessel that
had passed us had been smashed to pieces on the
Rock. While anchored in the harbour, the fog
suddenly lifted like the curtain of a theatre and
the huge rocky fortress terraced with beautiful
gardens and residences made a startling and ex-
quisite picture.
On the voyage I met several people from New
Zealand and India who had been members of the
church of my cousin, the Rev. Thomas Chainp-
ness. They were pleased to meet a relative of
their old and esteemed pastor.
E. T. Cole, of Christchurch, New Zealand, and
Mr. James Mitchell, who was connected with the
West Australian Railways, were fellow pas-
sengers and we became friends.


LONDON.
We entered Tilbury Docks on Saturday night,
June 13, and proceeded to the Imperial Hotel,
Russell Square, containing seven or eight
hundred rooms and managed by some Tas-
manian people with whom I became personally
acquainted and valued their kindness.
On our first Sunday morning in London, Mr.
Mitchell and I attended a service at Westminster
Abbey, conducted by the Bishop of West Aus-
tralia, a personal friend of Mr. Mitchell, although
neither knew that the other was in London. He
gave an address on church work and life in W.A.,
and was attending a Pan-Anglican conference.
We had a peep at the Parliament Houses and
St. Thomas’ Llospital and strolled through St.
James’ Park to King’s Highway, the widest,
straightest, and best street in London, costing
millions of pounds and extending from Victoria
Railway Station to Buckingham Palace.
Here we found a large concourse of people
waiting for King Edward VII. and Queen
Alexandra, who were returning from a visit on
the high seas to the ill-fated Czar and Czarina
of Russia. The King and Queen passed in an
open carriage, bowing and smiling amid the
plaudits of the crowd.
The British Museum exhausted us in the after-
noon, but we were able to attend service at St.
Paul’s Cathedral in the evening - .


THE WHITE CITY.
The Anglo-French Exhibition at the White
City required many visits and the sights and
wonders of London and its environs left a mar-
vellous impression. On the first Monday morn-
ing after our arrival, I was warned of the
difficulty of getting a return ticket to Adelaide
unless I booked months ahead. On the way to
the Orient Company’s Office my four wheeler
encountered a dense fog and we were several
hours on the journey. The only boat I could get
was the Oruba, on which I had sailed on my first
visit to Colombo as well as to England. On my
return voyage the Chief Officer made me free of
the bridge or any other part of the ship. I had
travelled so much with them that they were not
sure whether the vessel belonged to me or to
them. I took part in the church services on
Sundays.
London was full of Australian visitors who
were attending religious conferences and seeing
the White City.
I had an introduction to the Agent-General,
and his chief executive officer, Mr. J. B. Whiting,
received me graciously, but could not tell me
where the London Branch of the Commercial
Bank was although it was only a few yards away.
He sent a clerk with me and we wandered about
for some time and then in desperation I entered
another Bank, but they had never heard of it.


The obliging officer hunted up a directory and
found that it was in No. 1 Threadneedle Street.
“Oh,” said he, “that is only next door.” London
is a wonderful place to look for anything.
I had an introduction from Mr. Walker,
manager of the Adelaide branch of the
bank, to the London manager, an affable
Scotchman, who told me that he had a letter
of credit for me for £3OO, but the peculiar
part of the private instructions were that
he was authorised to give me any money I
required and therefore could not refuse me
thousands of pounds if I demanded them. He
discovered that I had known Mr. Walker for 30
or 40 years and said he “he evidently knows and
trusts you.”
REST HOMES.
My cousin, Dr. Josiah Oldfield, medical
specialist in Harley Street, had several nursing
homes, rest homes and hospitals in various parts
of Kent. Wearied with sight seeing and being
told that I would never see Australia again unless
I had a rest I entered the Lady Margaret Home,
North Bromley. I had an exhilarating holiday
for three months and visited Chislehurst, Lord
Derby’s Castle, some Druids’ caves and ancient
Churches, and the excavations made in the chalk
cliffs from Castle to Castle.
BROADSTAIRS.
I then visited “Lawn House Rest Home” on
the Kentish Coast. It is on the same grounds as
Bleak House opposite the Goodwin Sands. I


occupied the room in which there was a marble
slab saying that Charles Dickens had written
several of his works there. From my window I
:ounted 95 ships in one glance, going up and
down the English Channel. On the day of my
arrival I saw one half of the great British Fleet
and the great'Dreadnoughts of. fame anchored
off Deal, and steamed through and around them.
Margate and Ramsgate were within a few miles
of Broadstairs
A Castle between Ramsgate and Margate was
restored and renovated by. a great peer at the cost
of over £50,000. It had most beautiful grounds.
A summer residence of the Prince of Wales ad-
joined the Castle grounds. I visited an ancient
walled town with moats at Sandwich, which at one
time was on the coast and is now a mile or two
inland. There was ; also a very fine historical
castle, “Walmer” Castle —a Cinque Port it was
called—once occupied by Queen Victoria and the
Prince Consort, and where the Prince, afterwards
King Edward, learnt to walk. The Duke of Wel-
lington resided there after the Battle of Waterloo
and died there I saw a plaster cast of his face.
The walls of the castle were fourteen feet thick.
I also visited Dover and Canterbury Cathedrals
and saw the excavation grounds in the Cathedral
exposing some ancient buildings.
BANQUET TO LORD DUDLEY.
Through the courtesy of the Agent-General I
was invited by the British Government to a
banquet at the Hotel Cecil, London, given to
Lord Dudley on his appointment as Governor-


Family Group — J. H. Champness and first Wife and Family —
September 6th, 1911


General of Australia. I assured Lady Dudley
that she would receive a royal welcome in
Australia.
I wore full dress costume and was surrounded
by old friends from Adelaide, Malcolm Reid, Fred
Scarfe, William Pope and others. I went to
Scotland with Mr. and Mrs. Rundle and family
and saw Edinburgh, the Trossachs, Loch
Katrine, on which Sir Walter Scott founded his
poem “The Lady of the Lake,” Loch Lomond,
and Glasgow. We saw the Rob Roy country and
the bridge on which he was to have been shot, but
escaped by jumping into the river. I also drank
at the Baillie Nichol Jarvie Hotel. We noted
with surprise that porridge was not on the break-
fast menus in Scotland, and we only got some by
specially ordering it. Owing to a chill after an
operation I had to return to London, which I did
via Glasgow and stayed with an old Scotch family
for a few days there.
PARIS.
I spent over a week with Mr. Cole, of Xew
Zealand in the wondrously gay city of Paris, and
saw all the sights at Versailles and other suburbs.
We took a trip up the Seine inside the city walls.
I left London by the Oruba in October, calling
at Plymouth on the way, and saw the Hoe on
which Drake was playing his famous game of
howls before beating- the Spanish Armada.
We arrived at the Outer Harbour in Novem-
ber, 1908, and received a hearty welcome from
my wife and family after a happy and interesting
journey.


After the strain of life in Victoria I tried tc>.
recuperate my health and quietly invest my
money in Government bonds and other first-class,
securities.
MRS. CHAMPNESS’ DEATH.
My wife was a confirmed invalid. I secured;
the advice of the best doctors —W. T. Hayward,,.
Sir Joseph Verco, Marten, Brummitt and his two,
sons. The end came very suddenly just after my
return from a trip to Kangaroo Island on Sep-
tember 22nd, 1911, at 2 o’clock in the morning.
After her death I completely collapsed and ,my
daughters went to live with their brothers. I
could not remain at ‘Carmel’ because of its.
tender associations, so I sold it in 1912, and
resided for six months with my nephew, the latf
Albert Molineux, at 19 Kent Terrace, and was
treated very kindly by him and his good wife and
family of four highly intelligent and gentlemanly
sons and two charming daughters, for all of
whom I have justifiable pride and grateful
regard. As also for my nephew’s sister-in-law,
Miss Jane Nicholas, a most industrious, kind and
lovable woman, who now unfortunately is an,
invalid, but bears her suffering with exemplary
Christian patience and fortitude, whom I esteem
very highly and have loving remembrance. On
September 6th, 1911, when all our family were
gathered together at “Carmel,” Kent Town, the
last complete group photograph was taken.


SEMAPHORE.
In December, 1912, I took lodging with Mrs.
McLarty at the Marine Residence, Semaphore.
I made many personal friends at the Semaphore
and my landlady and her brother, Thomas Craw-
ford, were very good to me. Also Edward and
William Oldfield and families, Mrs. Davis
and her daughter, Lily, all of whom are cousins
of mine on my father’s side. They were very
kind and helpful to me, and I hold them in very
grateful remembrance.
I became intimate with Dr. Percy Bollen and
his family. I found him a good medical adviser
and a sincere Christian gentleman. “He did
good by stealth and blushed to find it fame.” We
smoked and talked together—at least I did the
latter and the doctor did both. Many
gorgeous swims were enjoyed by us at the sea
baths at the end of the jetty, and we were wor-
shippers at the same church, the Semaphore
Methodist.
1 taught my landlady’s son, “the Honorable
Tom” as I called him, floating and swimming
until he became an expert. He developed into an
educated and intelligent young man and studied
chemistry at the School of Mines. I have very
kind, recollections of the Rev. E. S. Tuckwell,
8.A., of the Semaphore Baptist Church, and
many of his church officers —Mr. Green, Mr.
Walker and others.


I furnished the vestry of the Baptist Church in
an elaborate and beautiful way and had hung en-
larged photographs of all the ministers from the
foundation of the Church. The officers insisted
on putting up a life sized photo of myself with a
silver plate with my name as the donor of all the
furnishings of the room. The Revs. Henry
Howard and Frank Lade, M.A., expressed great
admiration for the work done.
I had thousands of copies of sermons and ad-
dresses of Mr. Tuckwell printed and distributed
throughout Australia, New Zealand and to
soldiers in France, Egypt and Gallipoli.
BRIGHTON, S.A.
While living at the Semaphore and before f
came to reside at Brighton I bought the old and
famous Brighton Inn on the main Brighton and
Glenelg roads, with 20 rooms and about six acres
of land adjoining at the back of it running west
from the main road to the sea, thinking I might
some day build and live there. Bishops and even
Governors of the State and many distinguished
old colonists had visited and stayed there in the
early days of the Colony.
The old Inn had lost its licence and was a
temperance house when I bought it. I engaged
the services of Mr. Edwin Butcher (who had
married Mrs. E. A. Lowe’s youngest daughter,
Ruby) to alter the premises to two private
dwellings of 10 rooms each, and let the north
portion to Mr. and Mrs. Butcher, and the south


part to Mrs. E. A. Lowe, and they proposed my
living and boarding with Mr. and Mrs. Butcher
at Brighton, which I ultimately did.
The title for the property was unique, being-
one of the first of the Real Property Act Titles
issued and described as being in the village of
Brighton. Nearly all the roads or streets (so
called) were like the lanes of rural England, 20
feet wide.
After living there for about two years and as
Mr. Butcher had built himself a new home in
Wattle Avenue, Brighton, I decided to ge
married.
SECOND MARRIAGE.
I had known, respected, and esteemed Mrs.
Lowe ever since her arrival at Noarlunga from
Devonshire, England, with her parents when
she was then a most beautiful and charming
Devonshire lassie of 16 years. (She and her sis-
ter, Emma, I thought the two most beautiful
girls I had ever seen, both having a cream and
rose complexion). She first married my old boy-
hood friend, William Lowe, at Noarlunga, who
died as previously stated, so after much loving
consideration we decided to marry.
We were married very quietly at Pirie Street
Church by the Rev. Henry Howard on December
3rd., 1918, and we then continued to live at the
same place for several years until I built and
occupied my new home, “Carmel,” in Cambridge
Terrace, Brighton.


Present Wife


Mrs. Wm. Lowe had been a great friend of
my first wife and ray self for over 40 years, and
before my wife died, she suggested to me that if
I married again Mrs. Lowe would be a good wife
for me, which she has proved to be, as she has
been honest, faithful, true, loving and kind, and
a devoted wife to me (as she has been a wise and
loving mother to her family by her first husband,
Mr. W. Lowe), and I am learning to appreciate
and love her more and more “as the days go by.”
We both like the quiet simple life in every way
and try to avoid outward show and the
claims, frivolities and insincerities of much of
Society life. Our tastes are identical in all
household matters suitable to our physical wants
and desires, not showy but good quiet and re-
fined. We do not care for, and therefore avoid,
public and society functions. We seldom go out,
but spend our evenings at home quietly together
reading, etc. I read good Institute and other
books aloud to her while she sits near by and
knits or darns, or does fancy work, and takes
great interest in the characters in the books I
read and making many wise comments thereon,
and we generally foster the spirit of quiet affec-
tion and mutual help. May God help me to do
her justice in loving regard and in the best way
for both.
There is only one thing in which we differ,
namely, of getting a maid or assistance in house
work, to which she objects, although I re-
peatedly urge her to do so ; but she has been such
an assiduous and indefatigable worker all her


life and will do herself (early and late) extra
work, that now she is getting older the work is
becoming a burden, and now that I have been
an invalid for some months it makes the work
harder; but we have agreed that help must and
shall be had to relieve her, and we hope that the
position will be better in that respect.
My wife’s family by her first husband, Wm.
Lowe, consists of three daughters, namely Mrs.
George Cox of Loxton, Mrs. John L. Cox of
Morphett Vale, and Mrs. Edwin Butcher, wife
of Edwin Butcher, of Brighton, builder; also two
sons, namely, Stanley H. W. Lowe, of “Wood-
lands,” Echunga—Stanley is the very image of
his late father, physically and in mannerisms, in
voice and gestures —and John T. Lowe (“Jock”)
of Unley, carrier, &c. There was another son,
Ernest, who went to the late Great War as
assistant in the First Australian Stationary Hos-
pital and paid the supreme sacrifice, being killed
at Gallipoli by a shell from the Turks on their
tent —although the white flag was flying—just
after the men had performed an operation under
ground. They are worthy sons and daughters
and I am proud of them and remember them
all, as also their children, in my will.
Through the introduction of Mr. Thomas
Rhodes I became interested in the Adelaide
Benevolent and Strangers’ Friend Society and
the Minda Home, and the Blind, Deaf and
Dumb Institution at Brighton as well as other
benevolent and philanthropic institutions. When


the first Young Men’s Christian Association was
started in Adelaide fifty years ago, I, with James
Marshall, J. A. Hartley, T. W. Fleming, W. J.
Manning and others, became founders and have
kept up my interest in it ever since. A short time
ago Mr. J. J. Virgo, General Weir, and the secre-
tary of the Y.M.C.A. (Mr. Massey) visited me
and they wanted to put up a brass plate to my
memory in the Y.M.C.A. Hall, but I told them
I preferred my name to be engraved elsewhere
in the Book of Life. I have also rejoiced in the
work being done by the Prison Gate Brigade,
the Brighton College, and the Methodist
Churches, as well as others, as I have tried to
cultivate a cosmopolitan spirit and have remem-
bered most of the institutions mentioned in me
will.
I have not taken an active part in public mat-
ters. Increasing years brought a desire for a
quiet and useful life, but I devoted my energies
and instincts to enlarging the capital which I
had brought from AGctoria, and increased con-
siderably with the idea of leaving as much as
possible to those deserving institutions which
are doing so much for the sake of God and
humanity.
I invested many thousands of pounds in War
Loans as a token of my loyalty to country and
empire as well as many thousands in the State
Bonds. By careful investments and living with-
out extravagance and show and although I have
given and am still giving to religious, charitable
and benevolent institutions both public and


private, as they appeal to me, yet I have con-
siderably increased the amount of capital that I
brought with me from Victoria.
Some years ago I was pleased to give a copy of
Revd. Henry Howard’s “Conning Tower of the
Soul” to every Methodist Sunday School Library
in the Metropolitan area.
I am patron of the Brighton Branch of the
British and Foreign Bible Society and send out
about 50 copies of “The Bible in the World”
every month at my own expense.
For many years I have sent hundreds of “The
Sunday Companion” and other religious serials
to aged invalids and friends in Australia.
I have made a settlement in perpetuity of
several thousands of pounds on Brighton College,
so long under the control of my old and dear
friend, Dr. Torr. The interest of this sum is to
be devoted for ever by the Methodist Conference
of South Australia to assist deserving students
or those desiring to be students for the work of
preaching the gospel of Our Lord and Saviour,
Jesus Christ.
A similar settlement has been made to the
Methodist Memorial Hospital in perpetuity pro-
viding admission and treatment to disabled
soldiers, their widows and children and other
needy people. I am also assisting the Bowling
Club and the Brighton Masonic Lodge, to which
I have already given an organ which is stated to
be a very fine instrument. I was one of the first
members of the Lodge and have been a mason
for 37 years.


I have built a second “Carmel” at Brighton,
where I hope to end my days. I have always
been interested in Sunday Schools and have as-
sisted the Noarlunga Schools for many years and
have endowed the above schools as well as the
Brighton Methodist, Baptist, Church of Eng-
land, and the Seacliffe Methodist with a sum to
be invested by the Trustees for the annual dis-
tribution of prizes or for assisting libraries.
“Carmel,” Cambridge Terrace, Brighton (S.A.)
Present Residence
My third son, Leslie, was one of the first to
enlist for the South African War, but as he was
only 18 years of age, his mother would not con-
sent. He tried three times and at last we found
that he had joined up at the camp in the old
Exhibition grounds, and we consented to let
him go. He was under that much admired and
respected military officer, Captain Watt, whose
men would follow him, if necessary to the death.


Leslie never had a scratch during the war and
enjoyed perfect health, but on the way to my
station at Yarrock after his return the train ran
off the line at Mitcham, fortunately without in-
jury to anyone, and while he was enjoying a
happy furlough at Yarrock a cartridge exploded
and nearly blew his hand off, and he was under
the doctor’s care for many months. I started
him in a business at Jamestown and he won the
esteem of the neighbourhood by his public spirit
and open heartedness in connection with public
sports, agricultural shows and the Masonic
Lodge, of which he was a Master.
Leslie also enlisted in the Great War and was
sent to France, where he was wounded twice and
afterwards gassed. He had a good time in Eng-
land, and on his return to South Australia his
brother Percy purchased an orchard at Clare, for
which he received no assistance from the Govern-
ment.


CHAPTER VIII.
PERSONAL FRIENDSHIPS.
I feel these Memoirs cannot be closed without
reference to some of the many kind and valued
friends I have had the privilege of making and
knowing during my life, amongst whom I
should mention first, in my young (or boyhood)
days at Noarlunga, Mr. and Mrs. George
Malpas and family, who were so kind
and good to my Mother and myself in
the early days; Mr. and Mrs. Arthur
Payne and family, and in particular one
of my boyhood chums, George Payne (now liv-
ing retired at “Home View,” Stirling West), and
his sister, Miss Emily Payne (now the wife of
Mr. Arthur Searcy, President of the Marine and
Harbours Board of South Australia); Mr. Daniel
Hutchinson and his sister, Miss Mina Hutchin-
son (now the wife of Mr. George Payne referred
to above at Stirling West), and, in later years,
when I was a young man at Noarlunga, the late
Thomas Dungey, to whom I have always felt
grateful. He assisted me in procuring the busi-
ness at Noarlunga which proved so successful,
and has been referred to in these pages. At
Noarlunga, while in business I knew Martin
Burgess (brother of the late Rev. Dr. Burgess),
James Clark, Charles Furler, Edward Teakle, and
subsequently in Victoria, after selling my busi-
ness at Noarlunga, and going to reside at my
stations at Yarrock and Tatiara, in the Wim


mera, I fraternized with W. H. Bond, J.P., mer-
chant, of Kaniva; the late John Young, J.P., of
Nhill; William Macdonald, of Nhill Station; J
W. Trumble, solicitor, formerly of Nhill, now
residing at Brighton, Victoria, T. F. Chatfield,
merchant of Kaniva, a prominent officer of
the Masonic Order, and also most of the
Managers of the Commercial Bank John
McCormick (formerly of Lillimur), Charles R.
Kelly, Alexander Leith, W. J. Dent, &c., all of
whom I found to be most courteous and obliging
officers and gentlemen. On my return to South
Australia the following became intimate friends:
the late Thomas Rhodes and family, Rev. Henry
and Mrs. Howard, Mr. Samuel Johnson, M.A ,
Superintendent of the Blind, Deaf and Dumb
Institution, Brighton, and Mrs. Johnson and their
family; James Ashton, the well-known artist, re-
garded as the cheery optimist and his genial wife,
Mrs. Ashton, at Brighton; J. H. Grundy, who
was Mayor of Brighton for five consecutive
years, and his charming and kind sister, Miss
Grundy, who was Lady Mayoress during" his
terms as Mayor; Miss Kemp, F. H. Kemp and
family; Mr. and Mrs. Ambrose Redman and
family, of “Minda Home,” not forgetting Dr.
W. G. Torr, M.A., &c., the founder of Brighton
Training Home, now Brighton College (with
whom my youngest son Percy was in residence
and training), and who has been my guide,
philosopher and valued friend and adviser for
about fourteen years, and who has so ably and
kindly written and edited this life-story, for


which and many other things I feel deep grati-
tude, and to whom my sincere and hearty thanks
are due and freely given. Also I have great
esteem for his wife, Mrs. Torr. I must mention
my nieces, viz., Amy, now Mrs. Gordon Foun-
tain, of “Wattle Park,” Mt. Torrens, S.A., Ruby
and Daisy, and a nephew, Stanley Wilson, of
Gilberta, Riverton, S.A., who are much respected
and esteemed and who have been very kind and
considerate to me. Also I must not forget Mrs.
Jane Molineux, a charming and lovable lady,
widow of my brother-in-law, Augustus, of Tar-
lee, and her worthy sons and daughters, and
especially one son, Eugene Gilbert Molineux,
affectionately known as “Jean,” who has been
my friend and chum for many years, who was for
years assistant Head Teacher at Norwood State
School and now Head Master of the State School
at Blyth—an honourable Christian gentleman,
who went through the late war and returned un-
injured.
There are other friends I should like to men-
tion, namely Messrs. A. Walker (former Mana-
ger, whom I knew in Victoria nearly forty years
ago), and A. C. Kaines, the present genial and
able Manager, of the Commercial Bank
of Adelaide; His Honor Mr. S. J. Mitchell,
S.M., Commissioner of Insolvency; W. H.
Denyer, J.P. (the Mark Twain of Brighton);
Mrs. and the Misses Ottaway; Mr. and
Mrs. S. W. Bailey, of Seacliff; H. W.
Varley, S.M.; Thomas Pope; the late Thomas
Scarfe; Rev. Francis Morton, of St. Jude’s,


Brighton; Rev. F. Lade, M.A. (Principal
of Brighton College), and Mrs. Lade; E.
Anthony, M.P. (present Mayor of Brighton),
and his wife, the Lady Mayoress; A. H. Sanders,
Town Clerk of Brighton; Miss Jessie Watt, Fred
Watt and family; Dr. M. E. Goode, of Brighton,
my present medical adviser, to whom I am grate-
ful for his careful and skilful treatment during
my present illness; Dr. J. I. Sangster, formerly
of Brighton, now of Toorak; Mr. and Mrs. G. J.
Morley and family, of St. Peters; W. R. Bayly,
8.A., Principal of Prince Alfred College, and an
eloquent orator, and his genial wife, Mrs. Bayly;
James Marshall, an esteemed friend for over
fifty years. During my connection for about
sixteen years with the undermentioned benevo-
lent institutions I was on friendly terms with the
late Sir Edwin Smith, K.C.M.G., former Presi-
dent of the Blind, Deaf and Dumb Institution at
Brighton; the late Sir Charles Goode, former
President of Minda Home. lam also on friendly
terms with W. Herbert Phillipps, President of
the Blind, Deaf and Dumb Institution, Brighton;
H. W. Waterhouse, President of Minda Home,
Brighton; and T. J. Matters, President of the
Adelaide Benevolent and Strangers’ Friends’
Society; W. J. Hill, President of Chamber of
Commerce, Adelaide (a sterling business man
and staunch friend —I have had large and satis-
factory dealings with him for over forty years);
James Gartrell, a liberal and Christian gentle-
man, whom I have known for over fifty years,
and been connected and identified with him in


many philanthropic and benevolent institutions:
also Mr. R. G. Alderman, a co-director in the firm
of G. Wood, Son & Co. Ltd.; Roft'e Searcy; Major
Bentley S. Connor, A.D.C., and F. B. H. Vincent.
Secretaries respectively of the above Institutions,
and also with the various members of the Com-
mittees of each Institution; also Miss C. Gold-
man, Assistant Secretary of the Adelaide Bene-
volent Society. There are many others, but I
find it impossible to mention them all.
It must also be stated here that since my return
to South Australia, I arranged with Elder’s
Trustee and Executor Company Limited to act
as my Agents and Attorneys, and they have
attended to my business affairs assiduously,
courteously and with promptitude, and I am
grateful to the Manager, Mr. Oswald Tipping,
and his obliging officers and staff. Amongst the
officers of the Company I would specially men-
tion Mr. L. W. Stace, whom I now regard as a
friend, and whose father and grandfather were
personal friends of mine before he was born.
Mr. Stace has been my private and confidential
adviser for many years, and I have found him
most reliable and trustworthy. He has relieved
me of much anxiety in my investments, and has
also helped me with private correspondence and
in other ways. The whole of this Life-Story has
been typed out by him ready for the printers, for
which I am exceedingly grateful.
I intended only a short and simple resume
of my early days, and the leading events of my
subsequent life, but it has grown and extended


altogether beyond all expectations, and still
there are many things unrecorded, but I am
afraid the readers, as they wander through the
whole of it, may say: “More than ’nuf said.” It
is all from memory —no records have been kept
so whatever omissions or errors have been made
I hope readers will kindly regard same as “errors
of the head and not the heart,” and have a feeling
of sympathy with the physical and consequent
mental condition under which it has emanated.
There are two friends that I ought to remem-
ber, and whose memory I treasure. They were
my lawyers and both gave me considerable help
and kindly advice, both legal friendly and
medical. J. W. Trumble, of Victoria, was a
good, safe, sound legal adviser. He recom-
mended “Lo Lacto” to me for indigestion—a
very excellent remedy. H. W. Varley, of South
Australia, a co-trustee in an estate already men-
tioned has always proved a generous-hearted
friend. I have proved that his recommendation
of Geraudel’s Pastilles for bronchitis, etc., has
been most salutarv.


ADDENDA.
A MEMOIR BY W. A. DICK, CALLER BRAE
SEACLIFFE.
It was in the early eighties, on a bright
summer’s morning that the subject of this little
memoir, Mr. J. H. Champness, accompanied by
myself and a young lad, wended our way to the
Onkaparinga, a little distance below the old mill,
which at that time belonged to James Clark and
Co., for many years millers in the Horseshoe.
Mr. Champness and I were in the habit of
going for our morning dip to this part of the river
well known to the residents of that “sleepy
hollow.”
We had both taken it for granted that our
youthful companion, who was the son of a light-
house keeper on Penguin Island in the South-
East, and accustomed to boating, would cer-
tainly be able to swim. On getting an affirma-
tive answer, Mr. Champness and I started on our
usual course and after swimming some 25 yards
turned back, when to our horror we saw the boy
in trouble. Forcing the pace, Mr. Champness
reached him as he was going under for the third
time, and pluckily dived after him and dragged
him to safety. The lad was in a state of collapse,
and for that matter we were little better, but
after the usual remedies were applied the boy
gradually recovered consciousness and was ulti-
mately able to return to the home of his friends,
with whom he was spending' a holiday, little the
worse from the terrifying and almost tragical
experience he had gone through.


When the incident was afterwards at any time
referred to, Mr. Champness in his innate modesty
was wont to divide the honors of the rescue with
the writer, but as an impartial eyewitness, justice
compels me to record the actual facts and bestow
the honor where the honor is due. Moreover,
this was not the only occasion on which our
friend was gallantly instrumental in saving a
fellow mortal from a watery grave, as many
others who have been privileged to know him, if
they are alive to-day, could testify.


CHAPTER IX.
HOME.
The eventide of my life is being spent at
Brighton amid a number of friends with whom
I enjoy much pleasant social intercourse. I have
tried to associate myself with all the religious
and philanthropic institutions of the town.
Owing to a heart strain I have had to spend
some little time in the John Scholz Hospital,
Stepney, where much of this has been written in
1923-24. The treatment there, including electric
baths, massage, etc., proved beneficial. The
Hospital is under the able management of the
John Scholz family, who have treated me care-
fully and attentively.
I look forward to a quiet restful time and when
the call comes to be able to say with old Colonel
Newcombe, “Adsum” (“I am here”).
With this I conclude the story of a somewhat
prosaic life. It has interested me in dictating it,
and I hope it may be a pleasure to my children
and grandchildren and my numerous friends.
After a somewhat chequered life of seventy
years there is some sort of satisfaction in seeing
all the way I have been led by Divine Providence.
I have seen both poverty and riches and have
learnt that real happiness consists in neither the
one nor the other, but “in a mind at leisure from
itself to soothe and sympathise.”


I have tried to do my duty to God and man and
although I have not always reached my highest
ideals I have had a great joy in my private devo-
tions and in helping the less fortunate of my
fellows.
To do the thing that is nearest and to throw
all my energies into it has been my aim. I attri-
bute my success to ability to concentrate and to
attend to detail combined with a habit of being
able to throw off all business anxieties directly I
close my books for the day.
God knows that my endeavour has been to fol-
low His guidance and
‘‘Though the path be long and dreary,
And the end far out of sight,
Foot it bravely, strong or weary,
Trust in God and do the right.”


