

THE CHILD, THE LAW,
AND THE STATE:
Being a
SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE PROGRESS OF REFORM
OF THE LAWS AFFECTING CHILDREN IN NEW
SOUTH WALES, WITH SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR
THEIR AMENDMENT AND MORE HUMANE AND
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION.
By
The Hon. CHARLES K. MACKELLAR, M.L.C.
PRESIDENT OF THE STATE CHILDREN RELIEF BOARD.
SYDNEY:
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLUCK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1907.
*6844 (a)


THE CHILD, THE LAW,
AND THE STATE:
Being a
SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE PROGRESS OF REFORM
OF THE LAWS AFFECTING CHILDREN IN NEW
SOUTH WALES, WITH SOME SUGGESTIONS FOR
THEIR AMENDMENT AND MORE HUMANE AND
EFFECTIVE APPLICATION.
By
THE HOB. CHARLES K. MACKELLAR, M.L.C.
REESIDINT OF THE STATE CHILDREN RELIEF BOARD.
SYDNEY;
william applegate gullick, government printer.
1907.
OCX A /~\ *
*6844 (a)


THE CHILD, THE LAW, AND THE STATE
BY
THE HONOURABLE C. K. MCKELLAR.
I heartily commend this publication to all men and women
who direct their attention to public affairs, and especially
to those who participate in the work of legislation or in
movements which lead up to such.
Dr. Mackellar has given long and valuable service to the
State of New South Wales in administering that portion of
its social legislation directed to the protection and reforma-
tion of children. His work has been one of self-sacrifice
and of devotion to a good and noble cause. His ability
no one questions: his experience has been of the completes!
character ; and he combines with both a love of country,
which has induced him to ask for even greater attention to
a phase of social reform which means more to a country and
its future population than most citizens have perceived. It
is because I think that he has done a distinct public service
by the compilation of these pages that I have authorised
their publication with a view of still further exciting public
attention to the value of the legislation already passed, and
to the necessity for further reforms along the lines that he
indicates.
J. H. CARRUTHERS,
Premier.
sth September, 1907.


PREFACE.
My object in offering this publication for perusal is to show
briefly the extent to which Xew South Wales has realised the
importance of " reformative ” rather than “ punitive ”
methods in dealing with the delinquent section of the popula-
tion, and to indicate the lines, which, in my opinion, admini-
strative and legislative labours should follow in the future, so
that the maximum of reform with the minimum of punish-
ment may be the result of their efforts
Naturally, my particular concern is the preservation and
protection of the young life of the community, and (lie means
by which this purpose may best be achieved I have entered
into rather fully. To my mind it is a matter for national
regret that, years ago, much more effectual legislation should
not have been introduced to ensure greater supervision over
illegitimacy and the serious disabilities connected with it.
The subject-matter in the second part is concerned specially
with the State Children Relief Board —its nature, duties, and
purpose. As these are aspects which previously have not
received full attention, I have considered them in detail and
have shown how important it is, for social reasons, that the
Board’s practical abilities should have the fullest play, untram-
melled by any restrictions of routine or technicality.


There are two aspects of the social question in this State,
which deserve very full treatment: the consolidation of the
laws relating to children, and the value of the numerous
purely private bodies and institutions, which have for their
object the performance of social work. The former of these
questions I have touched upon, but space has prevented my
considering either of them in detail.
One final word in reference to my views as to the functions
of the State Children Relief Board. In emphasising the
importance that attaches to a recognition of the fact that
the administration of such a body must be liberal and
unrestrained if it is to fully achieve the purposes for which
it was created, lam not making any innovation: lam simply
asserting that the principle of administration by properly-
constituted honorary Boards, with independent and liberal
discretionary powers for the performance of social work, is
the principle adopted not only here, but almost universally
by the different legislatures. Here, however, it happens that
this principle, after being adopted by the State, is likely to
be interfered with and practical results lessened merely
because of the existence of certain technicalities and am-
biguities.
CHARLES K. AMACKELLAR.
VI
PREFACE.


INDEX TO CONTENTS.
PART I.—The Child, the Law, and the State.
I'AUK.
Introduction —Nature and Origin of Movement... ... ... ... i
Social Legislation in New South Wales —'The various Acts ... ... 5
“Barracking”—The State Children Relief Act ... ... ... ... 6
Succeeding Acts —The Neglected Children’s Act ... ... ... 11
Vice and Crime in Children—Causes and Development—Comparison
with other Countries—ln relation to Age and Sex —Environment—
Local Statistics ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Punishment—lts Nature and Methods—Humanitarian Trend—
Statistics in Connection and their Delects and Meaning —Move-
ment of Crime—Males and Females Local Illustrations —Value
of Gaol Treatment—Children and Gaol—Dangers of Promiscuous
Treatment ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
Relative Liability of Males and Females to Criminal Acts—Quantitative
and Qualitative Views —Illustrations—Age-periods and Intensity of
Offences—Lesser Criminality of Women —Reasons—Comparison
with other Countries as to Causes— Summary ... ... ... 27
Reformatories —Their place in a Penal Code—Place of New South
Wales Deficiencies Particular Institutions “ Release,” a
Suggested Remedy—The “ Sobraon,’’ its Purpose and Value—
Farm Home, Mittagong, Comparison—Cognate Institutions—
Girls in Institutions'—Suggested Treatment —Recapitulatory ... 34


PART 11. —The Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders’ Act; and the
State Children Relief Board, its Nature, Duties, and Purpose.
PAQB.
The Neglected Children’s Act —Analysis "of Provisions—-Special
Magistrate’s Position—Children’s Court- -Defects —Truancy and
the Law, conflicting views—Method of Disposition of Children and
Procedure, two \iews —Scope-for Amendments in Act —Instances 44
The Neglected Children’s Act in Relation to Parental Right—Ethical
Basis—The Individual and Family Life—State Right of Interference
versus Parental Right—lllustrations—Necessity for Administrative
Discretion ... ... .. ... ... ... ... ... 54
The State Children Relief Board—lts Rise—Private Philanthropic effort
in Relation to State Interference—Board’s Practical Abilities—
Development of its Work—Advantages Accruing through Board's
Practical Versatility—Dangers of Intervention ... ... ... 61
The Children’s Protection Act—lts Disabilities, Defects, and Omissions
—Lying-in Homes—Bearing of Private Hospitals Bill on Short-
comings of Act—Number and Nature of Lying-in Homes —Legal
Restrictions and Ambiguities—lllustrations—Still-births, defective
Superv'sion—Suggested Remedies —Supervision of Illegitimates
and Registrar-General’s Act... ... ... ... ... ... 65
The Infants’ Protection Act—-Its Nature and Provisions—Mothers and
Infants—Objections Answered Trend of Administration
Paternity Proceedings and Corroboration—Difficulties and Remedies
—Procedure for Country Cases—Approval of Custodians’ Homes... 74
Hindrances to Administration in Acts relating’to Children, how aiising
Consolidation necessary as Remedy—Examples of Inconsistencies
in Acts ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 77
Conclusion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 79


PART I.
The Child, The Law, and The State.
The British Nation has throughout the civilised world
an acknowledged reputation for its philanthropy, and,
if the multitude of its benevolent institutions is to be
accepted as a criterion, its reputation is deserved. I
am, however, not disposed to rest the claim upon that
circumstance alone as a safe measure of benevolence,
but would rather seek its manifestation in the enact-
ment of humane and just laws for the amelioration of
the life-conditions of the lower strata of society, and
especially in the care shown for the welfare and guidance
of helpless children. And, judged by these standards
it must be admitted that the altruistic character of our
people is demonstrated. It is doubtful, however,
whether we can claim to have been the originators of
the great onward movement in that direction, and, in
fact, it must be acknowledged that far from always
being the leaders in the matter, we have at times been
deplorably conservative. The impulse to Social Reform,
which has been characteristic of the last century, has
not been limited to particular peoples, but has been
world-wide. It has been felt with different degrees of
intensity in different countries, and philanthropic bodies
have all over the civilised world applied themselves to
the task of remedying social evils of all kinds; whilst
Parliaments have during the last half-century especially
given attention to the enactment of laws for the well-
being of helpless children. This latter movement had
its origin partly because of the development of a genuine
altruistic spirit, and, it must be sorrowfully acknow-
A
Measure of
British philan-
thropy by law
rather than by
private benevo-
lence.
Conservative
attitude.
Philanthropic
movement a
general one.
The Child, The Law, and The State.


ledged, also in a considerable degree because, as a
matter of social economy, it has come to be a recog-
nised axiom that it is wiser and less expensive to save
children from environment which is likely to confirm
them in careers of vice than to provide for their punish-
ment as matured criminals. For it is recognised, as a
recent speaker has pointed out, that “ the neglected
child takes a terrible revenge upon society when he
grows into an habitual criminal.”
My present purpose is to show the extent to which
our own State—New South Wales —has shared in the
movement for social reform.
The first trace we find of legislative activity in this
direction is the Orphan Schools Act of 1826—“ an Act
for duly governing children at school and in apprentice-
ship.” It was this measure that gave State recognition
to private philanthropic efforts for dealing with destitute
children. It was followed in 1829 by the Apprentices’
Act, a similar measure allowing a society known as the
“ School of Industry,” to receive apprentices and
recover wages. That society was a private philan-
thropic body; its first annual report appeared in 1827.
The scope of its operations was very limited. It was
designed “ to provide a home and training for not more
than fifty girls —for thirty girls aged 7 to 10 years, and
twenty girls aged 5 to 10 years.” In 1834 a further
“ Apprentices’ Act ” gave authority for apprenticing
children in Protestant and Roman Catholic Orphan
Schools, and for apprenticing other poor children. These
three Acts may be regarded as the State sanction for
the policy of dealing with dependent children in institu-
tions —the method known as the “ Barrack System,”
under which children were collected in public and quasi-
public institutions, maintained there until they were
12 years old and then apprenticed. A later Act of 1844
amended the law relating to orphan and other apprentices
placed in the School of Industry and the Orphan Schools.
The amendments related to the conditions of apprentice-
ship of the children, but did not represent any advance
in the policy of dealing with dependent children.
Attitude
altruistic and
economic.
Object of
address.
Orphan Schools
Act (1826).
Apprentices’ Act
(1829).
Apprentices’ Act
(1834).
Barrack System.
Apprentices’
Acts (3) 1844-
1850-4.


The Deserted Wives’ and Children’s Act (1840) is 1
apparently the first local measure dealing with thej
question of defaulting parents. This Act contained
provisions in reference to the maintenance of illegiti-
mate children, and a noticeable point in this measure
is that “ paternity is not to be accepted on the oath of
the mother only.” Power was also given to the Court
to apprentice children, —aged 13, —for whom provision
had not been made, until they had attained the age of
21 years.
In the year 1849, under the heading of Criminal Law—•
Larceny —we find “ An Act to provide for the care and
education of Infants who may be convicted of Felony or
Misdemeanour.” The most striking provision of this
Act —in the light of later legislation on the subject—is
that whereby “ any infant under the age of 19 might be
consigned to the care of a person other than the natural
“ guardian.” This measure was followed in the succeed-
ing year by “ An Act for the more speedy trial and
punishment of Juvenile Offenders.” By this Act any
offender, under 14, charged with Larceny, could be
summarily sent to gaol for three months: or fined; or,
if “ the Justices shall deem the offence not to be proved, or
it is not expedient to inflict any punishment shall dismiss
the party charged cm surety of Good Behaviour and deliver
to the party charged a Certificate stating the terms of dis-
missal." This Act appears to me to be, in certain
particulars, a sort of legal curiosity. Why the Justices
should require from a child of 14 years sureties for
good behaviour in respect to an offence with which he
is charged when the offence has not been proved I confess
Ido not understand. This extraordinary provision was
repeated in 1852, when an Amended Act was passed
extending the age of Juvenile Offenders to 16 years.
Although these two Acts limited the jurisdiction of the
Court of Larceny, it seems to me that they should have
been of much benefit socially, containing as they did
the main features of the Probation System, had there
been any properly constituted authority to exercise such
a supervision as would have kept the Court informed as :
Deserted Wives
and Children’s
Act (1840).
Felons (Infants)
Education Act,
1849.
Juvenile offen-
ders’ Summary
Punishment Am
(1850).
(Note : Wording
of Act is “ if the
.Justices shall
deem the
offence not tc
be prov ed,.' 5 .
Necessary
machinery for
administration
not given.


to thejsubsequent conduct, of the children. But there
is no evidence that such oversight was carried out;
therefore, it is probable that the legislation was of little
practical value.
A further social measure was passed in the same year,
known as the Offences Prevention Act. It was really
an amendment of the Crimes Act, and its interest
socially is the penalties imposed for “ procuring for
immoral purposes females under the age of 21 years,”
or for “ neglecting to provide properly for apprentices
or servants.” This Act was subsequently repealed by
the Criminal Law Amendment Act, wherein a provi-
sion created procuring an offence under certain rigidly
defined conditions, without any limitation as to age.
The present law on the subject is contained in Section
66 of the Crimes Act, which practically re-enacts the
provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, under
which an offence is created for “ procuring ” any woman
under a certain definitely defined set of conditions.
In the year 1853 the Colony was worked up to a high
pitch of excitement by the early gold discoveries, and
large numbers of men abandoned their settled occupa-
tions and rushed to the Gold Fields. And no doubt
many cases of both wife and child desertion occurred
as the direct outcome of these unsettling influences;
and that this was actually the case is clearly shown
by the inauguration of the Society for the Relief of
Destitute Children, the reason stated for its establish-
ment being “ the number of deserted and destitute
children for whom some effort should be made,
and who, as the Police Office Records and Police
Reports show, are present in large numbers.” In
its first year this Society dealt with eighty-nine
children of both sexes. Its work gradually expanded.
In 1837 an Art was passed to “ incorporate and
otherwise promote the objects of the Society for
the Relief of Destitute Children.” An Act of 1864
amended the foregoing in the direction of compelling
parents to contribute to the support of their children,
dealt with by the Society; and, as adjuncts to its work,
No practical
value.
Offences Pre-
vention Act.
(1852.)
Repeal.
Present law on
the subject.
Society for the
Relief of Desti-
tute Children.
(1853.)
Causes.
{society for
Relief of Desti-
tute Children,
<1857 and 1864.)


the Randwick Asylum and the Catherine Hayes’ Hospital
were established. By 1871 the Society was dealing with
809 children (432 boys and 377 girls); and, in conjunc-
tion with the Denominational Orphan Schools and the
School of Industry, was administering the Barrack
System. In 1861 a “ Free School for the education
of the Neglected Classes ” was opened in Sussex-street.
It was the first Institution of the kind in the State.
Soon afterwards its designation was altered to that of
“ Ragged School.” In constitution it was a religious
organisation established with the object of educating
and training the “ neglected classes.” The Ragged
School opened with an enj-olment of 136 boys and
girls, and in a few years the number of schools had
increased to three.
During the next few years there does not appear to
have been any movement towards reform, but in 1866 the
late Sir Henry Parkes, no doubt moved by the legislative
activity in regard to children which took place in
England at that time, introduced what are known as
the “ Six Social Reform Acts” namely —the Industrial
Schools Act, the Reformatory Schools Act, the Drun-
kards’ Punishment Act, the Workhouse Act, the Public
Instruction Act, and the Public Institutions Inspection
Act. All these laws, with certain amendments, are still
upon the Statute 800k —with the exception of the Work-
house Act, which, happily, has since been repealed, and
the Reformatory and Industrial Schools Act of 1901 —
the amended form of the Acts of 1866 —which was
repealed by Mr. Carruthers by the enactment of the
Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders’ Act of 1905,
to which I shall refer later. The Public Institutions
Inspection Act, however, has stood in abeyance since
1887.
We see then that by 1866 the Government had com- :
pleted the policy of “barracking” the destitute and,
delinquent children of the State. The Roman Catholic
and Protestant Orphan Schools, the Randwick Asylum,
and the School of Industry provided for the destitute.
The Training Ship “Vernon” and the Industrial
Randwick
Asylum (1858)
and Catherine
Hayes Hospital.
Barrack System.
Ragged Schools
(186 i).
Social Reform
Acte.
Provision for
Dependent
Children in 866


School for Girls at Newcastle—afterwards removed to
Biioela and then to Parramatta—provided for vagrant
and delinquent children. Two or three years later sa\v
the Shaftesbury Reformatory opened for the reception
of females.
Although there is a difference expressed in the Reforma-
tory and Industrial Schools Acts as to the nature oi
cases treated by each, the distinction between them has
generally been a fictitious one. In theory, only actual
malefactors could be legally admitted to a Reformatory
School upon conviction, while destitute and ■ vagrant
children, merely because of such destitution or vagrancy,
were supposed to be sent to an Industrial School. In
actual practice very little distinction has been preserved.
Actual malefactors have been sent alike to an Industrial
or to a Reformatory School; and vagrancy, where it
has contained and displayed criminal tendencies, has
generally (although not always) been treated in a Refor-
matory. Speaking generally, and with due regard to pre-
sent conditions, the discipline of a Reformatory School
should be stricter than that at an Industrial (School,
because in the former the fact of criminal delinquency
has been proved and must be contended with. The
criminal tendencies may be present in cases sent to an
Industrial School, but usually they arc not so flagrant
as in the former instance, and may be met with milder
treatment. At the present time, however, in our State
Industrial and Reformatory Schools the discipline is
practically the same: both Institutions receiving actual
delinquents. Cases in which criminal tendencies are not
manifest are met by the employment of a different
policy—that of boarding-out or its equivalent—release
upon probation, or committal to the care of persons
named. Of this policy I shall speak in detail presently.
The Barrack System continued to be the State policy
until 1881, when the late Sir Henry Parkes introduced
into the legislature a Bill authorising a new method of
dealing with dependent children, which was destined in
a short time to entirely supersede the treatment in large
institutions. For several years a small committee of
ilifferaice
between y.
Hefoimatory
;utd an Indus-
trial School.
Hoarding-out.


ladies had been carrying-on, by means of private sub-
scriptions, supplemented by small grants in aid from
the State, a system of boarding-out orphans in private
families; and the success which had attended their
efforts induced Sir Henry Parkes to embody its principles
in an Act of Parliament, the whole cost of its administra-
tion being undertaken by the State. Mrs. Garran, Lady
Allen, Lady Windeyer, and Mrs. Jefferis, who had been
the active members of the private committee, together
with Sir Arthur Renwick, and several others were
appointed a board to carry out the Act, and under that
system the wards of the State still continue to be
provided for.
In the year 1881, under the Barrack System, the
Roman Catholic Orphan School was providing for 256
children, the Protestant Orphan School for 186, the
Girls’ Industrial School at Biloela for 130, the Randwick
Asylum for 643, the Benevolent Asylum for 156, and the
School of Industry for 35 —a total of 1.406 children.
The new policy was administered by the State Children
Relief Board, which had authority to “ withdraw
children from Reformatory or Industrial Schools, the
Benevolent Asylum, every Government asylum for
orphaned or destitute children, and any charitable
institution that may be wholly or partly supported by
grants from the Consolidated Revenue Fund, for the
purpose of placing them in homes as boarders or as
adopted children or apprentices.” This provision as to
the adoption of children meant, under the Board’s
jurisdiction, that a class known as “ foundlings,”
chiefly infants, were provided for independently in
private homes instead of, as formerly, becoming inmates
of one of the various institutions. In future, private
families were selected and paid for the keep of the
Board’s wards, under 12, at rates varying according to
the ages, and the Barrack System, as a State policy,
ceased. In the first year of the Board’s operations
103 children were dealt with.' In the following year
307 children (inclusive of 233 children withdrawn from
institutions) were under the Board’s jurisdiction. Next
Philanthropic
effort
Formation of
Board.
Condition of
Barrack Instita
tions (1881).
S.C.K. Board
Powers.
Board’s power
to withdraw
children from
Institutions and
dispose of them.


year the number had increased to 648, the large majority,
of children being drawn from the institutions, which!
were being gradually cleared. By 1886 the Protestant
Orphan School had been emptied; by 1887, the Romaq
Catholic Orphan School. The Randwick Asylum hacj
now ceased to be a place recognised by the Government!
for the maintenance of children, but was operating as
wholly private institution. The Benevolent Asylum
ceased to be used for children, except as a Receiving
Depot for them prior to their being boarded out. The
institution system continued for the treatment of
delinquents and juvenile offenders only. Private
philanthropic bodies and certain denominational institu-
tions continued to deal with the children as before, but
the State policy no longer allowed of co-operation with
them in so far as the treatment of the destitute children
of the State was concerned. By 1888 the number of
children boarded-out had gradually grown to 1,960, and
at the conclusion of the official year 1906 the number
was 7,036 —inclusive of 3,146 children placed with their
own mothers. The Amendment to the State Children
Relief Act in 1896 allowed of children under 12 being
boarded with their own mothers, if widows or deserted
wives—a provision which has been extensively availed of.
The next measure of social importance was that of the
Children’s Protection Act of 1890 —amended in 1900 and
1902. The amendments introduced in the measure of 1902
were minor, and really the result of the Consolidation
Commission. This Act was designed to check the evil
of baby-farming, which in 1892 was assuming consider-
able dimensions. In the metropolitan centres uncerti-
ficated women of disreputable character were following
the profession of midwifery, receiving women in large
numbers for confinement. There was no legislation
regulating the registration of births of the infants.
Consequently the births were not registered. The
notorious “ Makin ” case (about 1891) aroused public
interest to the fact that baby-farming was apparently
being practised to a considerable extent, and with
impunity so far as the law was concerned. The features
Closing of Bar-
rack Institu-
tions.
State Children’s
Act Amendment
Act (1896).
Children’s Pro-
tection Act
(1892) and (1900).
Makin Case.


of this case showed that this woman was in the habit
of adopting children for payment in a lump sum, and
soon afterwards destroying them by either starving
them to death or using more violent measures. A
number of deaths were traced to her, and she suffered
the penalty of the law. These disclosures hurried the
legislation controlling infants and infant-life, which had
already been too long deferred. The Children’s Pro-
tection Aot compelled the registration of custodianship
in the case of infants up to 3 years, and provided for
the supervision of nursing-homes— i.e., private houses
in which more than one infant was taken. It contained
regulations for the control of the adoption of infants,
and provided heavy penalties for the non-observance
of its provisions. But there were —and there still
remain —grave weaknesses. The character or com-
petency of midwifery nurses was not questioned in the
Act, and many of the same class of women to-day, un-
qualified and unscrupulous, continue to receive patients
for confinement to the detriment and danger of their
lives, and frequently the lives of the infants also. The
absence of regulations to enforce surgical cleanliness in
many of the places classed as lying-in homes is a
seriously-felt want. Of course, the administration of
this Act, despite its defects, has reduced the number
of these women, has enforced the registration of births
of infants where previously the registration was not
effected, and has protected the health and lives of
infants who have been placed out by their mothers
with a person, who is called a “ custodian ” under the
Children’s Protection Act. The statistics of this State
in respect to infantile mortality compare very favourably
with those of other States and countries. This I have
shown in detail in a newspaper article recently. But a
still greater improvement would soon be disclosed in
the presence of comprehensive legislation, embracing
provisions for the better competency and control of
midwives, and establishing*in metropolitan and country
centres creches on lines similar to those followed on the
Continent. I shall consider this aspect of the work
Children's Pro-
tection Act
(1892).
Provisions and
Defects.
Act has done
g’ood.
Where improve-
ment is possible.


more in detail later, when I have come to deal with
the question of amendments to the Acts minutely.
There is one point that I do not lose sight of in regard
to social work in this State, and that is the gradually
increasing necessity for stricter control of foster-homes
and lying-in homes in the country. Of late years the
rapid growth of certain districts in the State has given
new phases to old problems. Ignorance, isolation, and
the absence of established institutions in the country
centres—together with a remoteness from the adminis-
tration—are factors which, in the absence of strict
legislation and proper supervision, may lead to dangers
to child-life, and to moral evils greater in intensity
than are present in the more crowded metropolitan
areas.
The social measure next introduced in this State was
the Infants’ Protection Act (1902) —a partial supplement
to the Children’s Protection Act. This measure was
passed by the Carruthers Government in 1902; its
predominant features are the provisions in regard to
nursing homes for infants, the age limit being raised
from 3 years to 7 years for purposes of supervision;
the oversight of institutions for the care of children,"
whether such institutions are public or not; and also
the insistence on material corroboration in respect to
paternity proceedings concerned with illegitimate off-
spring. This latter provision is practically a revival of
a stipulation contained in the Deserted Wives and
Children’s Act of 1840 to the effect that “ proof of
paternity is not to be accepted on the oath of the mother
only.” In the administration of this Infants’ Protection
Act the difficulty of corroboration sufficient to satisfy
the Court has led to the dismissal of applications, the
Act being construed at present in such a way as to
require a primd facie case being made out to the Court
by the applicant before a summons will be issued against
the man charged. A provision which I placed in the
Bill when before Parliament enabled complaint to be
made by the Boarding-out Officer on behalf of these
applicants after investigation by him of the circum-
Growing import-
ance of country
conditions in
respect to social
work.
Infants’ Protec-
tion Act (1902).
Essential pro-
visions.


stances of the case. Such a clause (which, unfortunately,
was omitted by Parliament) is really essential to the
satisfactory operation of the corroboration provision.
Women, frequently, through stupidity or nervousness
when questioned in Court, omit important facts in
connection with the case —facts which are corrobora-
tive —and thereby fail to satisfy the Magistrate. The ]
provision, which I have referred to, foresaw and guarded 1
against that possibility. The Boarding-out Officer, with
a knowledge of the facts supplied in the first instance
by the applicant and confirmed by inquiry, would be
able to present to the Court needful particulars in a
reliable form, and, on the other hand, would be able
to save the time of the Court by reducing the number
of applications of an unreliable nature. The importance
of such an insertion in the Act I cannot over-estimate;
it is really the only means by which the clause as to
the necessity for corroboration can be effectively applied
without hardship or injustice to the applicant.
The Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders Act,
which was passed into law by Mr. Carruthers’ Govern- '
ment in 1905, is really the most important piece of legis- '
lation from a social point of view that has ever been
introduced into the State. It represents a policy of
dealing with children up to 16 years of age not as
criminals in an ordinary Police Court, amid all sorts
of degrading surroundings, but as offenders in regard
to whom reform may be obtained in certain cases, even
without the infliction of punishment. The salient
feature of the Act is the Children’s Court. The children
are brought before the Special Magistrate in private
and the latter may (and almost invariaby does) order
that all persons not direct!}? interested in the case shall
be excluded from the Court-room or place of hearing.
So far as it is possible the home-surroundings of the
delinquent are inquired into, and, if the information
available is not judged to be sufficient to enable the
Magistrate to form a definite opinion upon it, the case
is remanded pending further investigation by an officer
appointed for that purpose. Should the environment
Necessity
provision.
Neglected
Children a
Juvenile 0
ders Act (
Salient fea
Procedure


be found to be of such a character as to warrant such
a course, the child may be released upon probation, or
he may be “ committed to the care of some person
named” other than a,, relation; or, finally, if such
action appears to be necessary, he may be sent to one
of the Institutions, of which the principal are the Farm
Home at Mittagong, the Training Ship “ Sobraon,”
and the Carpenterian Reformatory. During the official
year ending the sth April, 1907, 171 boys have been
judged to require institution treatment, and 63 have
been sent to the Farm Home, Mittagong; 68 have been
sent to the “ Sobraon,” and 40 to the Carpenterian
Reformatory. Those cases sent to the Farm Home,
generally speaking, represent a lesser criminal or vicious
tendency in the children, and it is anticipated that a
comparatively short period of detention at the Farm
will suffice to check the development towards vice and
crime in the majority of the cases. Ordinary boarding-
out or probation provisions can then be applied to them
successfully. The lads sent to the “ Sobraon ” and the
Carpenterian Reformatory represent a more advanced
degree of criminality, and, possibly, a longer period of
detention at the Institutions will be needed to ensure
reform. But I have dealt more fully with these ques-
tions under separate headings later. The more incor-
rigible offenders are, of course, sent to Industrial Schools
or Reformatories. Here discrimination is exercised on
a basis of age and degree of criminal proclivity, as shown
by the circumstances of the case to the Court. Last
year 728 children —683 boys and 45 girls—were dealt
with by the Court in Sydney. This represented six
months’ work from the introduction of the Act in
November, 1905, to the close of the official year, April
1906. During the past twelve months (to April 1907)
1,608 cases were dealt with, of whom 136 were girls
and 1,472 were boys. This jurisdiction in regard to
children shows the great necessity that has existed for
legislation to deal with children by special treatment.
Before the introduction of the Act in 1905 juvenile
offenders were dealt with in the Police Courts—apparently
Nature of Cases.


no t to any great extent, though the actual degree of
juvenile delinquency cannot be definitely stated. If
youthful offenders were not dealt with in the Police
Courts, they were not dealt with at all. And in very
many cases it may well be that, rather than subject
children of tender ages to the exposure and degrading
atmosphere of a Police Court, the administration pre-
ferred to ignore the delinquencies altogether. The
absence of proper legislation and machinery would
thus lead to necessary reformative work being ignored
at the very time when, if it had been undertaken, the
greatest chances of success would have been offered.
I think that the large numbers of children who have
been brought before the Metropolitan Children’s Court
since its inception illustrate a reactionary policy. Now
that the means have been given in a humane and
reasonable way, the children are brought before the
Court, although in many instances the offences with
which they are charged are comparatively trivial and
the outcome of boisterous youth rather than
inherent vicious inclination, and strict temperate
treatment by the Court probably acts on them as a
permanent deterrent. This is indicated by the records
of the Court, which show that the same “ minor offen-
ders ” do not appear repeatedly before the Special
Magistrate. This power of the Court to check what
may be described as “ incipient larrikinism ” should
largely help to reduce the quantity and degree of crime in
children and thus lessen the making of criminals generally.
Were I asked to state shortly what are the causes of
vice and crime in children, I should answer —in the
majority of cases they are caused by a defective or an
inadequate fulfilment of the parental obligation, by
evil environment, and occasionally to a certain, although
limited, extent by the mental instability which is the
result of hereditary transmission from a nervously
diseased or degenerate parent. Vice and crime (as such)
are not hereditary, nor, in fact, are any other qualities
or habits which may have been acquired by the parent
during his lifetime. In this connection I cannot refrain
Effect.
Vice and Crime
in Children.
Causes.


from quoting the opinion of Sir Crichton Browne,
Visitor in Lunacy to the High Court of Judicature in
England, who in a recent letter to me on this subject,
criticising a small brochure of mine, says:—
“ I am inclined to take a wider view than you do
of the range of heredity; but, of course, the question
as to the relative influence of heredity and environ-
ment in the making of manhood is one of degree.
Xo environment or training will make a man out
of a microcephalic idiot, but there are slight con-
ditions of brain growth and mental defect in which
education may do much. I quite agree with you
that too much is often made of heredity, and then
it is a fatalistic and paralysing hypothesis. The
hereditary bias derived from a nervously diseased
and demoralised parent is not necessarily towards
vice or evil. For instance, children of inebriates
are often born of nervous, impulsive temperament,
and, if reared in unfavourable circumstances, are
not unlikely to lapse into the parental infirmity.
But, if they are brought up in a wholesome atmos-
phere and are carefully educated, their tempera-
mental qualities may evolve in a superior way,
making them bright, vivacious, sympathetic, and
even imparting to them a dash of genius.”
The views which Sir Crichton Browne expresses in his
letter have my fullest endorsement. Summed up, they
are, in effect, this: that “ provided you are not asked
to make a man out of a microcephalic idiot,” careful
education and wholesome surroundings can be applied
to the children of a demoralised parent, so that “ their
temperamental qualities may evolve in a superior way.”
In considering the question of vice in children, I strongly
hold to the view that, to a very great degree, the vicious
and criminal inclinations of children are objective rather
than subjective: they are the influences of a child’s
surroundings on the child-mind. In the early years of
, his life, a child imitates what he sees and hears ; his'
actions are largely the reflex of his surroundings. Up
to the age of Io;.he is psychologically incomplete. His
Heredity (its
bearing).
Vice in Children
Nature of child-
vice.
A child’s mental
development :
(a) imitative
( b) reflective.


faculty of reason has not developed; mentally he relies
for guidance upon his natural powers of imitation;
morally and spiritually he is what his environment is
making him. From the age of 10 or u, under normal
conditions, the child passes mentally from the inter-
mediate, imitative stage to the reflective or reasoning
stage. Power of initiative begins to develop and to dis-
play itself in his thoughts and actions. Mental growth
is rapid rather then gradual (as heretofore), and if it
has been fostered and nursed through the imitative
stage by healthy moral influences, then we have the i
makings of a good man; if the early influences have been ‘
otherwise, we have the reverse. If early, evil influences
persist, the youth —inclined to evil by external things ,
in the first place and not by any inherent vicious principle i
—will use his increasing reasoning power in the wrong !
direction. Precocity will take the place of healthy
mental development; and habits —under good influences
the greatest automatic helps to good conduct—will be
formed, which will largely not only handicap the unlucky
offspring of bad environment in any subsequent efforts :
at reform, but also offer a great obstacle to social
reformers in their dealings with him. The task of
reformers is twofold; they have first of all to “ unmake ”
his character by the destruction of early evil habits, ;
and next to “remake” it by laying a settled foundation
for the formation of new habits.
Thus we can see that child-reform to be effectual must
be begun as early as possible. The sooner it is commenced
the greater will be the success achieved. And we can
see, too, the dangers there would be if the fact of having
done wrong rather than a growing tendency to do wrong
were dealt with. If we deal with the tendency to
wrong-doing, we have an opportunity of examining and
removing or modifying evil influences that are operating
on the wrong-doer. If we wait for the fact of wrong-
doing, we unduly handicap ourselves in our efforts to
reform, and also the wrong-doer. We may wait too
long. It is for this reason that legislation on this subject
(to be effective) must be liberal in its provisions and
Importance of
early influences.
Vice not in-
herent but the
outcome of en-
vironment.
Precocity.
Habits or char-
acter.
“ Unmaking ”
and “remaking
charactei.
Child-reform
must begin
early.
Tendencies—not
facts—are the
starting-point of
reform.
Legislation to be
effective must be
liberal.


capable of liberal interpretation. It must allow of the
fullest analysis of environment. It must give the
administration unlimited powers in regard to the disposal
of children. The written expression of such legislation
must not defeat the spirit of such legislation. Law
seeks to deal only with proven facts. Reform begins
with the tendencies; and, if the tendencies are to be
ignored, so far as the effectiveness of social reform is
concerned, the legal expression of the fact might just
as well be absent.
When we discuss the question .of vice in children we
must be very careful to discriminate between offences
which are really the result of a criminal intent, and what
maybe said to be the natural and (if I may be permitted
to use the term) “excusable” delinquencies of children;
for, however paradoxical it may seem, there is a vast
number of offences, which are such only from the point
of view of the law, and certainly not from the point of
view of the child. In this category we may include
truancy, habitual wandering, breaches of regulations and
by-laws, and the multitude of offences which are more the
result simply of mischief—a misdirection of energy or want
of parental control—than of vicious intent. In other
words, we must carefully discriminate between offences
which are simply breaches of discipline and offences
against morality, using that term in its broadest sense.
I am not exaggerating when I say that a criminal
career is frequently begun at a very early age, and
continued. Professor Marro, of Italy, gives a table
of ages at which 507 offenders first began to commit
crime. This table shows that ij per cent, began to
commit crime when under 10 years old ; 17 per cent,
began between the ages of 11 to 15; 36 J per cent,
began between the ages of 16 to 20; 20 per cent,
between the ages of 21 to 25; 7 per cent, between the
ages of 26 to 30. The rate continues to decline until
it is 2 per cent, at 55 years of age. This table thus
shows that between 11 and 15 a large number begin
to commit crime, and between 16 and 20 a very much
larger number. A separate table shows that the criminal
Unlimited
powers of ad-
ministration.
“ Fact ” and
“ Intention.”
Vice in
children.
Two points of
view.
Discrimination
needed.
“The natural”
in the child.
Criminals begin
young.
Marro and
youthful
criminals.
Criminal ten-
dency highest
between 11 and
15 and to 17.


tendency is greater between 15 and 16 and 16 and 17,
than between the years 17 to 20.
In the United States of America the criminal tendency
is similar. Taking the year 1890 as an illustration, we
find that while there was only one-fifth per cent, of
youthful criminals under 12 (and no females), the
tendency to crime on an age basis increased as follows: —
Aged 12 and under 16, 3.1 males and 1.1 per cent,
females; 16 years and under 21, 17£ per cent, males
and zof per cent, females; 21 years and under 30,
28.4 per cent males and 31.4 per cent, females; 36
years and under 40, 23J per cent, males and 28.6 per
cent, females; 40 years and under 50, 14.2 per cent,
males and 17J per cent, females.
Let us consider the figures of the Metropolitan
Children’s Court here for the twelve months ending sth
April, 1907, and separate the children, on a basis of
age, into two divisions: (1) children up to 12 years,
and (2) children 12 to 16 years. Exclusive of 264
children neglected, 1,344 cases were dealt with. Of
these .01 per cent, were aged 9 or under. Between 8
and 9 years is the earliest age for the offence “ uncon-
trollable.” There were no females before the Court up
to that age. The criminal tendency increases slowly
up to the age of 12. Approximately 26 per cent, of
all the children before the Court for the year were
“ children up to 12 years.” Up to that age less than !
J per cent, were girls. The remainder —approximately
74 per cent, of all cases before the Court, were of
children “ aged 12 to 16.” Only 31 per cent, (about) 1
between those ages were girls.
As to the nature of the offences committed, those >
against property were the most numerous at all ages.
At the earlier ages, the less serious offences were more
common. These included climbing in park, bathing in
view, travelling without fare, ■ swearing, stealing‘*fruit
from. Chinamen’s gardens, trespass, breach of traffic
regulations. The more serious offences were committed
between 12 and 14, and 15 to 16. They were compara-
tively few in number though great in degree: burglary,
B
United States
similar ten-
dency.
New South
Wales tendency*
Age-division,
Sex-div.sion.
Small proportion
of girls.
Offences.


false pretences, more serious forms of stealing or receiv-
ing, and embezzlement. On the whole, judging from
the decisions of the Court, there is no reason to anticipate
other than a most hopeful outlook in dealing with
juvenile delinquency. Approximately 25 per cent, of
all cases were released on probation or committed to
the care of relatives; 33 per cent, were fined; 21 per
cent, were discharged, dismissed, or withdrawn; 4 per
cent, were ordered to be boarded-out; 16 per cent,
were committed to institutions, and of this 16 per cent,
approximately 4 per cent, were sent to Mittagong. So
that we may say that, in regard to all the cases dealt
with, the decisions of the Court indicate that only 4 to
16 per cent, of the children have vicious or criminal
tendencies, seriously developed.
As to the causes of crime in children, they may be
summed up as truancy and vagrancy, or, in other
words—environment. Truancy and vagrancy, again, are
very largely the result of parental neglect. I have
already dealt with this aspect of the matter in a com-
prehensive form in a pamphlet entitled “ Parental Right
and Parental Responsibility” (1905), and I endeavoured
to show how degeneracy and vice in parents meant
neglect for their offspring, with all the social dangers
resulting from neglect. I think, too, I showed that the
view of inherent or hereditary vice was not one that
appealed to me strongly. I believe that such a view—■
that is the view of heredity —may be reasonably followed
to a limited extent, when, indirectly, it may be found
that, from physical causes, certain qualities or tendencies
have been transmitted to offspring in certain cases.
But I bear always in mind that heredity is an argument
with a physical or physiological basis—not a moral
one. And if there is a transmission, as the result of
physical defects in the pareqt stock, in the form of
mental or moral infirmities to the offspring, then I am
strongly of opinion that the tendencies can be removed
or greatly modified by suitable environment; and if
the tendencies develop, I prefer to seek for the explana-
tion of the development in evil environment rather
Percentage of
seriously vicious
or criminal
cases.
Causes of crime.
Parental neglect
or incapacity.
Heredity an
argument with a
physical—not
moral basis.


than in an extreme view of hereditary transmission.
Environment to me is the explanation par excellence of
the good or evil in child-life: supervise the environment
and you supervise the development of the child.
Most authoritative views support the argument out-
lined above. The Rev. H. S. Elliott, at a meeting of
the National Association for the Promotion of Social
Science (Birmingham, Eng.), shows in regard to the
causes of crime generally, that in 1,000 cases drink and
bad company are the causes accounting for 50 per cent.
Remaining causes are—“ Temper,” 10 per cent.; and
then in decreasing ratio are the causes —Opportunity,
want of principle, poverty, immorality, incapacity.
Rylands, in “ Crime and its Causes,” p. 46, gives
the causes of crime as “ defective training, or the total
absence of any; immoral associates, and bad example
in prison and out of it; drink; idleness; and the here-
ditary transmission of evil tendencies. But the only
perfectly simple and final division is into two main
heads —heredity and environment.”
A very interesting instance of the influence of environ-
ment on the development of children of vicious parentage
is furnished by the records of the Department during
the past twelve months, in a certain country district in
this State. The influence of the Neglected Children’s
Act to amend the surroundings is also exemplified.
Within an area of some 60 miles different families were
living. The district had been the centre of a great
gold-rush some forty years ago, and the families referred
to represented largely the incapables and degenerates,
male and female, left upon the gold-field after the rush
had gone. The locality was a remote one, some miles
from school or church. The parents’ means of livelihood
were gold-washing or rabbiting. The parents were lazy,
dirty, immoral, and frequently intemperate. They lived
with their children in a one-roomed or two-roomed
humpy. The sleeping accommodation consisted of one
room for the family. Sometimes the room was divided,
generally it was not. Children of opposite sexes and
advanced years slept in the same room, occasionally
Importance of
Environment.
Views supports
ing this.
Difference be-
tween Vice and
Crime.
Degrading:
influences*.


the same bed, as the parents. The parents and children
were dull and stupid, and intensely ignorant—conditions
resulting from their isolation. The circumstances of
these cases, as they were reported to the Court and to
the Department, represent a most shocking condition
of degradation, and, in regard to that particular class
of people living as has been described, the degeneracy
was general. As the result of operations under the
Neglected Children’s Act, m children —representing 67
cases —were dealt with in the Children’s Courts. Of
these 57 were girls and 54 were boys. The charges
were—Uncontrollable, 23; neglected —the children living
under conditions indicating vice and crime—42;
neglected —no proper lodging —35; neglected —exposed
by parents—7. In all these cases immoral surroundings
of the worst kind were present at the time the cases
were heard by the Courts. Yet under pressure, the
parents altered the home conditions by building rooms
or removing or sending the children to relatives, so that
in the disposal of the children we find that only 17 were
sent to the institutions; 64 were released on probation
or committed to the care of relatives or friends; 13
were boarded-out. Besides this 20 others came under
the control of the State Children’s Board. The serious
part about these cases was that the majority of the
children were under 14. In addition to the foregoing,
the drastic nature of the action possible under the
Neglected Children’s Act led to improvement, after the
infliction of a caution, in 120 other cases, involving
,292 children in adjoining districts. In these latter, the
analysis was: —Children uncontrollable, 52; neglected —
not provided with proper lodging —157; neglected —
living under vicious surroundings, —58; wandering, or
exposed by parents, or no proper support, 25.
The interest of the foregoing is that the criminal
tendency had not really developed in many of the
cases, but the vicious nature of the environment by
reason of the parents’ degeneracy was so marked that
it was useless to expect the offspring to become decent
members cf society unless the environment was improved.
Disposal of
children.
Other cases
“ VioiQ.US.


There was no indictable offence charged against any of
the children, and in the absence of the provisions of the
Neglected Children's Act, no reform would have been
possible. Indeed action could not have been taken at
all, until some of the children by the committal of some
offence, had brought themselves into the category o;
“.criminal.” In the same district, prior to the action
taken under the Neglected Children’s Act, 12 children
(all males) had been charged before the Courts with
criminal offences, burglary, stealing and larceny. The
children charged were members of the same families
subsequently dealt with under the Neglected Children’s
Act. It is obvious, then, that the criminal tendency
had been the outcome of the vicious atmosphere in
which the children had been brought up.
I shall now consider the question of the punishment
of offences. The question of the punishment of crime
generally has always been a disputed one. According
to Kant, punishment as applied to crime is an act of’
retribution. Other views are that its object is the
protection of society, and that its real end is the reforma-
tion of the offender, or that it is a deterrent. But the
view expressed by Morrison (“ Crime and its Causes,”
p. 204 et seq.) is the one that appeals to me as the most
ethical and the most logical. According to him punish-
ment should be regarded as an expiation and a discipline,
in which view we see punishment in its highest form.
Punishment is thus not only punitive but it is at the same
time “ a kind of punishment from which something may
be learned.” It consists in inflicting pain in such a way
as will tend to discipline and reform the character. This
view is one of justice tempered with humanity, and makes
the punitive and reformative really inseparable.
The importance of this view in reference to children
will be obvious, and the latitude allowed to Special
Magistrates under the Neglected Children’s Act is very
necessary. Here there is discretion for punishment to
be punitive or reformative, or both. As to what it will
be depends upon the liberal mind of the Magistrate and
the nature of the case. Treatment must be largely
Punishment of
Offences.
Different views:
(a) Retributive.
. (b) Protective,
(c) Deterrent.
An expiatory
discipline.
Viewed in regard
children.
Importance of
liberal-
mindedness.


individual, and vary from the mere caution to first
transgressors, whose faults are rather those of thought-
lessness than criminal intent, to the strict expiative
penalties in the case of advancing criminality; this
latter will be lessened as reform is manifested, and the
degree to which a child will be reformed or show evidence
of reform will depend largely on the administration.
And this argument is equally capable of application
to the adult criminal. In many instances the punish-
ment is sufficient in the case of a first offender if it be
a rebuke in a public Court. On the other hand, experience
has proved that habitual criminals will not be deterred
by lenient treatment. In Liverpool (England) in the
previous decade a system of “ light sentences ” was
introduced. As a result the Chief Constable’s report
showed that the number of known thieves appre-
hended for indictable crimes almost doubled in a com-
paratively short period. Thus, while legislation should
lay down provisions that may be applied mildly or
drastically according to circumstances, it must (or
should) also leave to the Court the power of liberal
interpretation.
It is little short of remarkable—the transition from
the drawing-and-quartering extreme of punishment in
the early part of the last century to the First Offender’s
Act of the present time—a transition from the barbarous
to the humane. Transportation replaced by penal servi-
tude, with defined degrees of severity according to the
extent of reform or otherwise. Specially modified and
softened rules for females, larger gratuities and less
strict isolation. Then the British system of local prisons
with its central principle of “ work in solitude ” as
against “ work in common ” in convict prisons. In
these local prisons regard is had for comfort and personal
requisites, and for educational capabilities. The object
is to prevent a man from becoming worse by contact
with hardened criminals; “he is permitted to speak to
only those whose lives are free from crime.’’ A com-
promise between the absolute seclusion of the cellular
system and that of free association is now effected by
Degrees of
punishment.
Methods of
punishment.


a system of classification on a basis of character, nature
of offences committed, and conduct in prison.
But after all, the degree of reform is mainly dependent
on the effectiveness of the administration. To quote
Herr Krone (an eminent German authority)—“ success-
ful management of a prison demands special knowledge
and ability.” Morrison in “ Crime and its Causes ”
(p. 219 et seq.), quoting from Krone, outlines his views
as to what is needed in the “ good prison chief.” Train-
ing, earnestness, sympathy, are the essential character-
istics.
I think I have said enough to show that the trend of
modern legislation has been in the direction of humani-
tarianism, and administration has followed on those
lines so far as it could consistently with the interests of
society at large. The end in view is mainly the refor-
mative. Let us now see what has been the outcome of
this policy so far. Has it tended to lessen the degree
of crime—reduce the number of criminals ? If it has—
and I think we shall find that such is the case—let us
persist in it, for by so doing we are not only performing
a most important social work on broad, altruistic lines,
but we are at the same time adopting the course most
economical in the interests of the State. Nothing, we
learn from experts, is so expensive as the criminal. It
is better to reform a man, if it can be done, than to
wreak vengeance on him—the former retributive idea
of punishment. It is better to allow him to provide
for himself and his family, if it can be done with safety
to society, than that the State should do so, for legisla-
tion now requires that the man’s family also, if need be,
shall be maintained by the State.
It is a difficult and dangerous thing to gauge the 1
extent and degree of crime in a community from'
criminal statistics. Criminal statistics is an insti-
tution of comparatively few years standing. The
scientific treatment of crime as it is shown on the gaol
and police records is an accompaniment of the wave of
universal humanitarianism that has spread over so
many communities during recent years. Before the
Present stand-
point.
Administration
must be
effective.
Trend of social
legislation.
Humane and
reformative.
The altruistic
and the
economic.
Statistics of
crime.


introduction of statistics the growth or otherwise of
crime, the effect of punishment on crime, could not be,
estimated. Morrison points out “ Justice worked in
the dark—the more offences seemed to increase, the
more severe the punishment became, until the criminal
law of England reached a pitch of unparalleled barbarity.
Laws were on the Statute-book whereby a man might
be hanged for stealing property above the value of a
shilling.” Statistics are still deficient, particularly
in regard to the sources of crime. They show the
amount and degree of crime, but take little cognisance
of the sources. “ Crime,” it is said, “is not necessarily
a disease, but it resembles a disease in this respect, that
it will be impossible to wipe it out till an accurate
diagnosis has been made of the causes which produce
it. Other methods besides punishment must be adopted
if society wishes to gain the mastery over' the criminal
population, and what those methods should be can only
be ascertained after the most searching preliminary
inquiries into the main factors of crime. Every criminal
has a life history, and that history is very frequently
the explanation of his sinister career.”
Again, the action of legislators may go a long way
towards swelling the criminal statistics, and the educative 1
spirit—l am using the word “ educative ” in a broad
sense—has influenced modem legislation considerably, so
that now an increase in the amount of crime may mean
the increase of the moral sense of the community. For
instance, before the Elementary Education Act (Eng.)
became law the absence of children from school was no
offence legally. In iBBq nearly 81,000 persons were
tried under the Elementary Education Act in England
and Wales. And this argument is true in regard to the
development of social legislation generally. Take the
Factories Acts and their continually increasing standards
of morality and humanitarianism. The Criminal Law
Amendment Act of 1885 had a similar bearing, and the
outcome of those laws frequently means an increase of
criminal statistics. So I think we can agree with the
view, that increase of statistical crime does not neces


sarily mean moral deterioration of the country, but
rather proves increased moral sense in the community.
The question as to whether crime is really increasing or
decreasing is one upon which it is very difficult indeed
to come to a definite conclusion. There is no doubt
whatever that our gaol population has during the last
few years very materially decreased, notwithstanding
the considerable increase in our general population.
But it must not be overlooked that a by no means
inconsiderable part of the decrease may be accounted
for by the operation of the First Offenders Act, by the
tendency of the Courts to inflict fines instead of imprison-
ment, by the operation of the Alien Restriction Act, by
which undesirable people from other countries were
excluded from the State; and, finally, by the circum-
stances that the judges are disposed to inflict shorter
sentences than was the custom a few years ago.
Looked at from a general standpoint; the question of
the movement of crime is a vexed one. In 1890 the
principal authorities in Europe and America were of
opinion that crime was on the increase. In the United
States the view was that crime was increasing faster
than the growth of the population. In Germany,
according to experts, there had been a deplorable increase
“ with a dismal outlook for the future.” In France
M. Henri Joly estimated the increase of crime at 133
per cent, within the last half century; and the view
expressed in regard to Victoria, taken as a typical
Australasian State, with a special note of commendation
as to its methods of taking statistics, was that “ though
crime did not increase as rapidly as the growth of the
population, it was nevertheless a more menacing danger
among the Victorian colonists than it is at home.”
(Stat. Reg. Vic. Pt. 8.) The figures of the Victorian
prison population tor 1906, are, however, much more
satisfactory. The Inspector-General’s last report shows
that the average has fallen from 1,886 in 1891 to 1,007
in 1906. The daily average had decreased by 27 as
compared with the previous year, and the proportion of
prisoners to the estimated general population had
Increase [or'"''de-
crease of crime.
Movement of
(•rime.
Increase.
America.
France.
Germany.
Victoria.
England.
Victoria in 1800.
Victoria in 1906,


decreased in fifteen years from one prisoner to every
613 to one prisoner to every 1,229 inhabitants. The
decrease in the number of females is equally remarkable,
the daily average falling from 350 in 1891 to 115 in 1906.
The prisoners received into the gaols during the year
were 4,923 males and 865 females.
The condition of our own State is quite as satisfactory
as that of Victoria. Captain Neitenstein in his report,
dated 28th May, 1907, points to the continued decrease
in the prison population. There were 162 fewer prisoners
at the end of the year than at the commencement.
Comparing the figures of 1894 with those of 1906, there
is a decrease of 1,662, notwithstanding an increase in
the general population of 279,490— the numbers of
prisoners had fallen from 2,604 in 1894 to 1,523 in 1906.
The reduction is ascribed to the influence of improved
educational methods, and the healthy morals pervading
the social life of the community, as well as the advances
made in this State in criminology. Captain Neitenstein
anticipates a continuance of this most satisfactory con-
dition of things, “ not only for the reasons already
advanced, but also because of the valuable nature of
recent legislation, such as the measures for dealing with
Neglected Children, with Habitual Criminals, and the
Gaming and Licensing Acts.” He further goes on to
say that the further development of the steps to lessen
truancy will severely check the future growth of crime.
The number of prisoners of all kinds received into
the gaols was 12,134 —a decrease of 1,246 on the previous
year’s figures, and of considerably over 8,000 as compared
with those received twenty years ago, despite an increase
in the general population of over half a million. An
important point emphasised by Captain Neitenstein is
that “as in former years, the vast majority of those
under sentences found themselves in gaol not so much
for committing offences as because they did not pay
the fines imposed upon them. Of 8,810 summary
convictions, 6,853 were received for non-payment of
fines —rather more than three out of every four. During
the last five years nearly 40,000 persons owed their


imprisonment to this cause. I cannot help thinking
that this indicates unnecessary gaoling, and that alter-
natives might be devised to take the place of so much
imprisonment.” I mention this in view of the remedies
proposed by Captain Neitenstein—release upon proba-
tion and extension of “ time to pay ” —a purely humani-
tarian policy of checking crime.
In regard to female prisoners, the report of the Con-
troller-General of Prisons for 1906 shows that 2,647
were received under sentence—2l9 fewer than in the
year previously. This section of the prison population
is described “ as unduly swelling the criminal records by
coming into gaol over and over again during the same
year. Most of them were ‘ repeaters,’ and over half of
them were sentenced for terms of one week and under.
Their offences were those of drunkenness and immo-
rality, and matters arising therefrom. In view of the
present defective method of inflicting repeated short
sentences, proper prison treatment was impossible.
They had to be allowed to leave, a large proportion
of them diseased, a moral and physical danger to the
community, with no chance of obtaining respectable
employment, but compelled to revert to the only means
possible to them to get a living.” The remedy proposed
is a system of progressive sentences, and power of
detention until physically fit for discharge, so that their
improved condition may give them reasonable chance of
obtaining honest employment. This remedy again is
humanitarian and reformative.
I do not wish it to be inferred from what I have said
that I am underrating the value of punishment as a
remedial measure. I am well aware that the really
unduly barbarous treatment of criminals in earlier days
tends to reaction in the opposite direction, and this
may lead to the view being expressed that the value of
gaol-treatment as a curative measure is slight. The
standpoint which I wish to emphasise is that imprison-.
ment has a definite place as a reformative agency in
dealing with criminals, but that place is last; it should
not be utilised until other remedies have failed, and it
Remedies.
Females.
Proposed
remedies.
Danger
of reaction.
Place of
imprisonment.


should not be regarded as worthless if, when used under
such conditions, it is ineffectual at a first attempt. The,
view has been expressed that no one is “ justified in
saying imprisonment is worthless as a reformative agency
till it has failed at least three times.” The statistics of
Great Britain show that imprisonment is effectual after
the third time in about 80 per cent, of the cases dealt.,
with. When imprisonment is resorted to after the
failure of other methods to check the growth of the
criminal tendency in the individual, it should not become
mere detention, but must be treatment more or less
severe to operate as an effectual deterrent. Two state-
ments of the nature of propositions have been laid down ,
in regard to punishment and crime. These are—“ The
uncertainty of punishment is the great bulwark of crime,
and crime has a marvellous knack of diminishing in
proportion as this uncertainty decreases”; and again
“ In proportion as the probability of being punished is
augmented, the severity of punishment can be safely
diminished.” So that it is to the certainty of punish-
ment (rather than the severity) that we must look if 1 we
are to secure a reduction in the amount of crime. When,
as in earlier days, the absence of proper machinery such
as an organised police force, rendered the chances of
detecting crime remote, the punishments, when the
criminals were caught, were proportionately severe.
This is one explanation of the barbarity of former
punishments. As the facilities for catching criminals
increased—that is to say, as, the probability of punish-
ment was augmented, —the penalties' ’were modified.
So that in this view we see the combination of the
utilitarian with the humane argument: we have already
noticed the economic advantage. Utilitarian,, ecbnpnaic,.
and humane considerations combine to indicate that the
trend of future administration in reference to the treat-
ment of crime should be in the direction of making
punishment more certain rather than more severe.
Reverting to the condition of crime in our own State,
and to the question of the prison population, I regret to
find that I am not able to analyse the position so far as.


'the committal to-gaol of children is concerned. I should (
like to examine the details of the prison population — i
particularly in regard to children—in the earlier days of
the State—before the passing of the Reform Acts—but
the records are not available. In the earlier Statistical
Registers of N.S.W., tables are shown, giving details of
admissions to prisons on an age-basis “ under 10,” “ 10
to 20,” and so on. For purposes of analysis and com-
parison, these tables are useless. The children under 10,
of whom there were fortunately very few, are not, and
can never be, under ordinary circumstances, regarded as
criminals. The next table, “10to 20 ” is too general.
•The criminal tendency cannot really be noticed as such
until a child is old enough to be credited with a faculty
of personal responsibility. In Germany it is held that a
•child obtains a sense of criminal responsibility at the age
of 12. The degree of criminality increases after that age,
and at the age of 20 the offender may be said to be fairly
embarked on a career of crime. And the degree of crime
or vice may vary so greatly between the ages referred to
that a general comparison is impossible. I have treated
of this matter already in the present article, and may,
perhaps, say a little more on the subject here, in dealing
with the number of children confined in gaol. The
“ Reformatory and Refuge Journal,” July, 1890, says “ it
is an ascertained fact that there is scarcely an habitual
criminal in the county who has not been imprisoned as
a child.” I have already indicated what, to my mind,
is the place of gaol in the treatment of crime, and the
above statement is an illustration that the employment
of gaol-treatment too early has a hardening and a
criminalising effect. For the following table shows, from
the ages of the children, that intermediate treatment
could scarcely have been exhaustively applied. Perhaps
the law in regard to the particular offences allowed of
no intermediate steps. The figures for the Local Gaols
of Great Britain {1888) show .1 per cent, for children
under 12; 2.8 per cent, for children 12 to 16; 16.1 per
cent, for persons 16 to 21. In a communication
addressed to Lord Shaftesbury (1853) Mr. Clay, chap-
Figures re
children not
available.
Earlier table 1
Great Britain
Children in
gaol.


lain of Preston prison, calculates that dishonesty amongst
persons, who afterwards find their way to prisons, begins
at a very early age. He shows that 58 per cent, of
criminals were dishonest under 15; 14 per cent, between
15 and 16; 8 per cent, between 17 and ig; 20 per cent,
after 20. This computation is interesting in view of the
figures of the Metropolitan Children’s Court here, where
stealing is the offence which is most frequently com-
mitted. But I consider that too great a degree of
criminal tendency is imputed to a child who does a dis-
honest act. Most frequently he does not do it because
he is dishonest, but because he is a child, and it is the
nature of a child to be non-moral until he is made moral
by proper education. So that the very greatest dis-
crimination must be exercised in considering whether a
child’s conduct is the outcome of non-moral or natural
influences ; or whether it is the result of precocious
mental development in a vitiated moral atmosphere-
We learn that “ crime is at its lowest level from
infancy until the age of 16.” It is then that the
fact of criminality must be subordinated to that of an
analysis of causes —an analysis which will prove that
in many cases “ the criminal motive” was altogether
absent, and that to regard it as being present in point
of fact and to punish the offender as though it had
been present is simply to hurry him along the road to
ruin; and before he has had any opportunity to choose
between good and evil, the system of administration
gives him what he did not have before —“ Criminal
Insight.”
The records in this State, as I have before said, do not
not allow of a detailed analysis. There is no record of
the number of boys and girls in gaol prior to 1897, when
in a total of 2,260, there were 5 under 16 years of age.
In 1906 there were 4 under 16. There is, of course,
no one under 16 in gaol now. The records show that
there is a large proportion of women in gaol, and, in
view of the extreme social importance of this aspect—
perhaps the most important of all —I shall now discuss
the question of the proportion of males to females in the


gaol-population, and of the relative liability of males
and females to criminal acts.
As a preliminary to this discussion, I may state that
the statistics of all nations show that women are less
criminally inclined than men, and girls than boys. In
Europe, generally, the proportion of male to female
offenders is 5 or 6 to i. Taking the figures for New
South Wales for the past years we find that in a total
of 1,542 gaol-population for 1877, 1,313 were males and
229 females. In 1887 in a total of 2,382 the males
numbered 2,054, and the females 328. In 1897 i n a
total of 2,260, 2,017 were males and 243 were females.
In 1906, in a total of 1,523, 1,361 were males and 162
females. This represents a proportion of 6tol in the
years 1877 and 1887, and slightly more than 8 to 1 in
1897 and 1906. Various reasons have been advanced as
to why women should commit fewer crimes than men.
Generally speaking, the reasons may be summed up in
the facts of their environment. Women, to a large
extent, lead more secluded lives than men, and for that
reason escape many temptations to crime. But while
women commit fewer crimes, it has been pointed out by
experts that offences by them are more serious in pro-
portion than those committed by men. Guerry and
Quetelet (France) have shown that women in France
commit more crimes of infanticide, abortion, poisoning,
domestic theft, and ill-treatment of children than men.
Morrison (“ Crime and its Causes ”) points out that
“ the proportion of women to men criminals rises with
the seriousness of the offence ”in England. The pro-
portion of women to men summarily proceeded against is
17 per cent., while it rises to 36 per cent, for more serious
offences. English statistics show also that women are
more hardened criminals than men, and more subject to
reconviction. This fact is also illustrated by the figures of
1906 for our own State, when “ 2,647 were received under
sentence, most of them being repeaters.” If we take
the figures for N.S.W. for 1905, we find that a total of
61,127 persons were brought before the Magistrates of
the State. Of these, 50,621 were males, and 10,506
Relative liability
of males and
females to
criminal acts.
Proportion in
N.S.W.
Quantity of
crime.
Qualitative
view.
Women commit
more serious
offences than
men.
Women more
hardened.
N.S.W.,
1906 and 1905.


were females, a proportion of approximately 5 to 1:
38,172 were arrested and 22,955 were before the Courts
on summonses. Of the arrests the proportion of males
to females was approximately 4 to 1, and of the sum-
monses the proportion was approximately 7 to 1.
The convictions of males to females were as 5 to 1
approximately. In the classification of offences—such as
drunkenness, riotous conduct, vagrancy, and gambling —
the proportion of males to females was 3 J to 1 approxi-
mately. In regard to ages, the initial age of criminality
'of men appears as 6 and of females as 12 years. With
.males and females alike the greatest propensity to wrong-
doing occurs between the ages of 25 and 30 years. In a
total of 26,518 cases for the year, approximately, one-sixth
were of that age period, and the proportion of males to
females was 50r6t0 1. The next age in point of inten-
sity of crime is between 30 and 35, the proportion of
women to men being 1 to 5, and then between 35 to 40,
the proportion of women to men being still Ito 5. The
next age period in point of intensity is 21 to 25, the pro-
portion of women to men being 1 to 4! approximately.
Morrison, in “ Crime and its Causes,” gives other
reasons why women commit fewer offences against the
law than men : among them is a physical cause—
women are rarely strong enough to perform offences
requiring the exercise of violence, such as burglary
or assault. So far as degree of crime is concerned,
women seem to be as criminally inclined as men —that
is, so far as they are physically able. This is shown in
regard to the crime of infanticide, poisoning, abortion,
domestic theft offences which are committed by
women more frequently than by men. Again, women
are frequently instigators, “ though they may not
be actually engaged in crime.” Statistics show that
in many cases of receiving stolen goods women are
concerned. Domestic extravagance (as Morrison points
out) is the basis of many offences by men of forgery
and fraudulent bankruptcy. This moral, if not criminal,
guilt of women is likewise strongly marked in many
instances in the upbringing of children. Children fre-
“AYrests” and
“summonses. - ’
Convictions.
Offences.
Ages.
Age-periods and
intensity of
crime.
Other reasons
why women
commit less
crime than men.
Physical reason.
Women are often
instigators.


quently bring home articles to their parents without
being able to sufficiently account for them —articles
which they know have been improperly acquired. The
mother, rather than the father, is the parent most
directly concerned as a rule, for the father’s occupation
keeps him absent from home through the day. Self-
interest, indifference to moral rules, or active criminal
tendency on the part of the parent is often the begetting
cause of early perversity or criminal inclination in young
children, and this influence is found as frequently in
the homes of the fairly well-to-do as it is in homes in
which its presence is excused on the ground of neces-
sitous circumstances.
Industrial conditions, again, and the stress of com-
petition, by which women are brought into active rivalry
with men in the ordinary business of life, are a source
of demoralisation. Women come into the industrial
arena to the detriment or utter neglect of their social
and natural duties —the care and nurture of children.
Elsewhere I have spoken, in other pamphlets, of the
importance of the “ mothering ” influence so far as the
health and life of young infants is concerned, and the
exercise of this “ mothering ” is as important to the
mother for moral reasons as it is to the child for physical
reasons. It has been said that “ the duties of maternity
have kept alive a certain number of unselfish instincts:
these instincts have become part and parcel of a woman’s
natural inheritance, and, as a result of possessing them to
a larger extent than man, she is less disposed to crime.”
Captain Vernon Harris, late an Inspector of Prisons
in England, in a recent article in the “ Nineteenth
Century,” tells us that the comparative immunity of
women from crime is largely due to the fact that “ their
home-life shields them from many temptations to which
men are subject.” He also states that the proportion
of young mothers in the ranks of criminals is very
small indeed —Marriage and Maternity being “ un- j
doubtedly the greatest check upon criminality in;
women.” Now, in modern times, many of the women i
belonging to the lower classes, impelled by the force of ’
c
Moral guilt of
parents in regard
to offences of
their children.
Influence on
children.
Industrial
conditions.
‘ Mothering.
Marriage and
maternity
as moralising
factors in
women.


industrial competition, have left the privacy of their
homes to find employment—women whom necessity had
not previously constrained to go to work; women who,
frequently, from the long seclusion of their environment,
are not physically or morally fit to take part in the
every-day affairs and every-day work of men with men.
Not only is home-life and the proper care of children
sacrificed, but the moral tone of the mother is gradually
lowered. A proposition has been enunciated in this
connection —“ the proportion of female crime in a
community is to a very considerable extent determined
by the social condition of the women.” In Greece,
where women are compelled to live very secluded lives,
the proportion of female criminals is practically at a
minimum. In a prison population of 5,023 in 1890,
50 only were women.
This form of the problem—the question of the employ-
ment of women and their resulting demoralisation—is
difficult of solution. Society, as it is at present con-
stituted, requires the employment of women. Then
there is the argument that, if women are forced to work,
as large a career as possible should be open to them.
I do not propose to deal with this aspect of the matter
here, but one thing is quite certain—that the employment
of women under present conditions contributes to their
demoralisation by the destruction of home-life and
home-ties; their earlier seclusion leaves them a prey to
many temptations so soon as they emerge into public
affairs and as a result they gradually become more crimin-
ally inclined. Let me call to your notice a view
expressed on this point:—“Crime will never perman-
ently decrease till the material conditions of existence
are such that women will not be called upon to fight
the battle of life as men are, but will be able to concen-
trate their influence on the nurture and education of
the young, after having themselves been educated
mainly with a view to that great end.”
I shall now consider for a time the place of Reforma-
tories in a Penal Code, and their value as a reformative
agency.


If we regard Reformatories as part of a progressive
system, they would come last so far as the treatment
of children is concerned. The different points in the
system, based on a graduated scale of punishment
according to the nature of the offence, age, and degree
of criminality, are;—ist. Probation —release or com-
mittal to the care of persons named, or of relatives;
this is less a punishment—except in so far as it may
involve separation from parents in certain cases —than
it is a course of action based on an analysis of environ-
ment, and implying change of environment for reforma-
tive reasons. This principle is identical in effect with that
of boarding-out. 2nd. There is the Truant School, which
deals with wayward children or children who have
become wild largely through parental neglect, but who
cannot be classed as vicious or criminal; these children
are necessarily young. 3rd. There is the Industrial
School, dealing with children who have begun to mani-
fest vicious tendencies, and who are standing on the
brink of crime. 4th. There is the Reformatory or
Reformatory School, for dealing with children who have
transgressed the law and become actual offenders. An
age-division is scarcely possible in regard to either the
Industrial School or the Reformatory. It is implied
that children, before they will be sent to a Reformatory,
have embarked to some extent on the course of crime,
and show fairly strongly-marked propensities to vice.
It is at this stage that a grave difficulty of classification
is involved. For children, technically eligible for a
Reformatory School, in that they have been convicted
of an offence, may not for all that be vicious or even
criminally inclined. But on this point I have already
spoken fully. sth. There would be the Penal Establish-
ment for youths 16 to 18 or 19 —cases in which there
is greater hope of reform outside a gaol, but yet
requiring detention and discipline. 6th, and lastly.
There is Gaol, a form of treatment which, to my mind,
is the final resource of those who expect to induce
reform in the offender. Cases dealt with in a gaol
should necessarily be extreme and bad; for at this
Progressive
system
of punishment.
1. Probation-
release.
Ooimnital to
care of person;
or relatives
(boarding-out)
2. Truant
schools
8. Industrial
schools.
4. Reformatories
5. Pena!
establishment
G. Gaol.


stage the reformer can no longer hope for the offender
to retain his self-respect—and with loss of self-respect
goes one of the most powerful helps to reform. The
offender, with his sense of self-respect gone, may be
regarded as being without moral centre of gravity.
Once this has been lost, it is very difficult both for the
reformer and the offender to find it again.
As I have already pointed out, the technical distinction
between a Reformatory and an Industrial School is not
preserved. Children —frequently of advanced criminal
tendencies —are sent alike to either. In this State we
have no Truant Schools, despite the success that has
attended their establishment in other parts of the world,
notably in Birmingham, England. And the question of
the introduction of Penal Reformatories to deal with the
growing youth from 16 to 19 is one that is still unsettled.
The Reformatories and Industrial Schools, established
by the Government, in this State number four. The
oldest is the “ Sobraon,” formerly the “ Vernon,”
described as a nautical school ship. This institution
was established under the Reformatory Schools Act of
1866. For many years it was the only institution of the
kind to which children of more or less criminal tendency
could be sent. The numbers in this institution have
advanced from 92 in 1877 to 424 in 1905. Analysing
these latter figures, wc find that of the 424 inmates
82 were under 14, and 342 over 14. The offences were: —
Habitually wandering, 237; other offences, During
1905, 106 (under 14), 52 (over 14), and 6 (unknown)
were admitted to the institution. The offences were: —
Habitually wandering, 75; “no visible means of support,”
14; there were also 39 cases of stealing, and the balance
were admissions for minor offences ; so that the
“ Sobraon ” in 1905 was largely an institution for the
admission of vagrant rather than criminally disposed
children. As to the ages of the 424 children in the
institution in 1905, 40 children were 12 or under, 134
children were aged 12 to 14, 76 children were aged
14 to 15, 67 children were aged 15 to 16, 82 children
were aged 16 to 18; the increased ages being due to the
Reformatories
in N.S.VV.
No Truant
Schools.
Sobraon.”
Analysis of
inmates. 1905.
Ages and
Offences.


fact that the original committals had been made for a
term of years exceeding the age of 16. So that we can
see that in practice the “ Sobraon ” is an institution
for the reception of vagrant and neglected children
largely, and secondarily for children committed for
“ less serious ” offences, the ages ranging from 4 to
18 years.
Another institution for boys is the Carpenterian
Reformatory at Eastwood, established about 1895.
Originally it was an adjunct of the State Children’s
Department, but a few years after its inception, it was
transferred to the Public Instruction Department’s
control and became an institution cognate with the
“ Sobraon.” It was established for the reception of
lads of vicious and criminal tendencies, and the cases-,
dealt with there represent a greater degree of juvenile
vice than those at the “ Sobraon.” Taking the figures
for 1905, we find of 86 admitted, 40 were under 14 and
46 were over 14 years. The total number of children
in the institution in 1905 was 135, of whom 8 were '
under 12, 26 were under 14, 57 were under 16, 44:
were over 16. The offences for which the children were
in nearly every case committed may be classed as
“ serious.”
The Industrial School, Parramatta, is of the nature :
largely of a reformatory for girls. It deals with children ■
of vicious or criminal tendencies, where these tendencies
are not so far advanced as to risk the welfare of the
other inmates. It is actually a composite Industrial:
School and Reformatory—for, when really bad girls have
to be sent to an institution, the Industrial School re-
ceives them and keeps them apart from the division 1
of the inmates who are less viciously disposed. It
was established under the Industrial Schools Act of
1866. Since 1877 the figures have not varied very
greatly, being 98 in 1877 and no in 1906'. For a long
time it was the only institution that could accommodate
criminally or viciously inclined females under the age
of 16. A cognate establishment was the Shaftesbury ,
Reformatory, which dealt with comparatively few girls, :
Nature of
Institution.
Carpenterian
Reformatory.
Nature of case,
Ages and
offences.
Number,
Industrial
School,
Parramatta.
Nature of
Institution.
Classification.
Shaftesbury
Reformatory.


but those admitted may be classed on the whole as more
refractory and more vicious, and of greater age than
those sent to the Industrial School. In 1877, 6 girls were
in Shaftesbury; in 1887 there were 26; in 1897 there
were 18. The institution was closed in 1903, when
22 girls were there. It has not since been used for
reformatory purposes. As regards its control, it was
first of all under the administration of the Justice Depart-
ment, but in the later years of its service it was an
adjunct of the State Children’s Department, and was
very valuable for the treatment of refractory State
Children of advancing ages.
I cannot help thinking that many of the children at
present confined in Industrial Schools and Reforma-
tories could be liberated. Under careful supervision and
changed environment, if necessary, home surroundings
should be able to accomplish more quickly and more
absolutely reformation in the children. And these
home-surroundings can be given so easily, either by
release upon probation or committal to relatives or
friends —processes which I have already described —or
by boarding-out, the accepted policy of the State. I
do not wish to underrate the value of such institutions
as the “ Sobraon.” The “ Sobraon ” is an excellent
institution and can accomplish excellent results —if it
deals with a particular class of delinquents. But it
seems to be that, in later years, it has become the custom
of the magistrates to send a class of children to the
“ Sobraon ” with which that institution was never
meant to deal. Largely the children are too young,
and have not attained to that degree of delinquency
which would justify their presence there for a term
which frequently becomes a lengthy one of years. The
course more in accord with the general policy of the
State —more in keeping with reformative method every-
where —would, to my mind, be to admit these children
(both because of their tender years and of the lesser
degree of delinquency which their offences, if any,
indicate) to an institution such as the Farm Home at
Mittagong, where classification on a basis of age and
Nature of cases.
Control.
llclea.se of
children.
Home
surroundings.
Vtdue of
Sobraon.”
Suggested
alternative.
Farm Home,
Mittagong.


degree of degeneracy is easy. In many cases I am
convinced that the limit of the term of many of these
children would be, at most, one of months—a few
months —after which they could be boarded-out or
released, under supervision, to friends or relatives,
their former environment having been changed. In j
this view of the matter, too, we see the economic advan- !
tage. Many children return to their friends or relatives
with comparatively small cost to the State after a few
months, instead of becoming a charge upon the Govern-
ment through a term of years, as is so frequently the
case with such institutions as the “ Sobraon.” The
place of the latter, in my opinion, in relation to the :
reform of juvenile offenders, lies in dealing with youths
of advanced ages, whose characters, after careful observa-
tion in a classifying institution, have been shown to be
beyond any doubt vitiated in an advanced degree and
to represent a stage of criminal tendency which would not
justify their association with other children. In these cases
the strict, isolated, disciplinary training of the “Sobraon”
should be beneficial ; but, even then, this method should
not be allowed to become mechanical by over-long
application, but as soon as an appreciable degree of
improvement in their character is manifested, they
should be at once transferred for reclassification.
This view of the work of the “Sobraon” would neces-
sarily limit the number of admissions to that Institu-
tion; but, considering it in the light of a Reformatory,
the numbers should necessarily be small. In this
connection I shall point out two extracts from Morrison
bearing on the point: “At one time the value of
Reformatory Schools was seriously impaired by herd-
ing too many lads together under one roof; it is now
seen that the success of these Institutions is marred by
making them too large; it is accepted as a general maxim
that the smaller the school the better the results.” And
again, after pointing out that vicious habits in juveniles
are acquired by imitation, he goes on to say, —“ No
public institution, however well conducted, can ever
exercise so moralising an effect as a good home.” Surely
Economic view
also considered
ere.
Place of
“ Sobraon.’*
Necessity for
reclassification*
Numbers in
a Reformatory
should be small*


the proper place of the “ Sobraon,” as it is at present
constituted, is rather one that fits it to perform the
duties of a Penal Reformatory in regard to children
from 15 onwards —the age period at which, as I have
shown, crime attains its highest proportion. It is
between the ages of 16 and 20 that there is the greatest
scope for reform in a reformatory, as the last alternative
before gaol.
Let me now consider the work of the Probationary
Farm Home at Mittagong, which was recently gazetted
an Institution under the provisions of the Neglected
Children’s Act. The constitution of this Farm Home is
such that it can offer exceptional facilities for the classi-
fication orthereclassificationof offenders. There are unique
opportunities for observing and analysing the characters
and tendencies of children sent there. In its nature it
partakes of the character of a Truant School in that it
can give a child scholastic instruction and at the same
time control his waywardness by employing him in one
of several occupations, such as carpentering, tailoring,
shoemaking, and so on. But more than all it has un-
limited opportunities, both from the nature of its
location and its acreage, for giving children what, to
my mind, is the most powerful curative factor in dealing
with Juvenile delinquents—employment at agricultural
labour —toil upon the soil. Far removed from the glare
and glamour of city life with its thousand-and-one
temptations, its nerve-ruining attractions, its evil
associations, its unhealthy excitements, its unsettling
influences—all tending to a ruinous precocity in the
youth all too ready to succumb to them—we place the
lads down into the healthy tranquillity of rural life; we
employ him partly in scholastic, partly in regular agri-
cultural labour, systematically endeavouring in such
wise to eradicate the smartness and cunning and general
precocity which town-life so quickly imparts,—which
colour the lad’s whole actions in after life and render
him so easy a prey to sinister influences; and to substi-
tute for it a gradual healthy moral tone, and a habit of
useful and reproductive work, which rural surroundings
Penal
Reformatory.
Probationary
Farm Home,
Mittagong.
Facilities
for classification.
Nature
and advantage
Toil on he soil.
Contrast of town
and country life.


under proper supervision alone can give. Apropos of
this view I quote from Barwick Baker’s “ War with
Crime ” —“ Agricultural employment appears to be the
kind peculiarly adapted to Institutions whose aim is to
unite real advantages to the boy with the absence of all
which may appear, even to the ignorant, to make the
effects of crime desirable.” Contrast, now, this farm-
life with its infinite variety, its comparative freedom,
its possibilities of reform under discipline without aggres-
sive assertion of the fact, its facilities for observation
and analysis of character with a view to classification,
with life on the “ Sobraon,” and its strict disciplinary
training on the one hand alternating with the excite-
ments which the lads experience periodically in relation
to the nature of their recreations and their appearances
in public—its limited possibilities in the way of occupa-
tion ; its difficulties of classification.
The State Children Relief Board a few years ago
originated a Farm Home at Dora Creek, which is still
in existence. The Home was placed in the charge of a
farmer, who was not a paid officer, but who received
a weekly maintenance payment for the lads sent to
him, as well as the lads’ services. The nature of the
cases sent to him was “ State Apprentices who, after
observation, had displayed marked criminal or vicious
tendencies.” The number of boys dealt with by this
Home annually averages 15 to 20. The treatment is
largely individual. The work performed by the lads is
agricultural. As soon as there is improvement sufficient
to warrant such a course, the boys are found situations
locally with farmers (independently of the Department,
which, however, keeps an eye upon them). This method
has proved distinctly successful, and its success has been
due, in my opinion, to the few cases sent there —a course
which permitted of individual treatmest. I point this
out particularly as a practical illustration of what I
have just said both in regard to the Farm Home at
Mittagong, and the “ Sobraon.”
I have gone very fully into the question of Reforma-
tories and Industrial Schools in this State, and I have
Probationary
Farm Home,
Dora Creek.
Nature of cases.


taken the “ Sobraon ” as an instance of the system,
because I wish to show that, while Reformatory and
Industrial Schools are exceptionally valuable as reforma-
tive agencies within certain properly and strictly defined
spheres—spheres arranged on a basis of “ degree of
criminality ” after a careful classification (largely indi-
vidual) has been made —they may become actually a 1
source of danger to the inmates and defeat the object
for which they were created if their system is allowed
to become a mechanical one, either through the effects
of an ill-fitting law or through absence of facilities for
proper grading and re-grading of children, in order that
they may not be accredited with evil tendencies, which
they have not, but may rather be treated with due
regard for the good tendencies which their previous
evil environment has not yet destroyed.
And if careful, individual treatment on a basis of
exhaustive classification is needed in regard to boys,
how much more necessary is it in the case of girls. From
what I have already said and the figures which I have
quoted, it will be seen that girls begin to show criminal
tendencies at a later age than boys—a fact due to a
greater seclusion in early environment as well as to a
difference of mental development —and that there are
fewer female than male delinquents. But on the other
hand, when females do become delinquents, the diffi-
culties of reform are greater. Her past actions exert a
sinister influence on her future, and in many cases her
first offence may cut her off from the sympathy of her
sex. She finds grave difficulties in way of obtaining
employment, and gradually arrives at the stage of
moral dejectitude and despair, spoken of by Captain
Xeitenstein, which drives her further along the path of
crime. This argument against reformation from the
female’s point of view does not hold in the case of
the male. We have seen, too, that women, when they
do become habitual criminals, commit serious offences to
a greater degree than men. So that it behoves us to
be extra careful at the outset with females, and the
most promising standpoint to my mind is that of early


and thorough classification before they reach the re-
formatory stage of treatment. This course can easily
be followed in a manner similar to that which I have
suggested should be adopted for boys. Girls could be
given work, partly scholastic and partly industrial, so
that their dispositions may be carefully observed before
they are definitely disposed of; and again, with evidence
of reform, should be facilities for prompt reclassification.
I have now reviewed the nature of social legislation
in this State and compared it—and its resultant effects—
with that of other countries. I have also considered
at some length certain principles involved in criminal
administration and legislation with their results upon
offenders. The more abstract questions of vice and
crime in children, and the relative liability of males and
females to criminal acts, have been treated in relation
to foregoing matter ; finally, I have discussed the
nature and classification of Reformatories and Industrial
Schools and their place in a penal code, with special
reference to conditions in New South Wales. I now
propose, as a Second Part, to consider the Neglected
Children’s Act of New South Wales in relation to its
possibilities and its short-comings ; to show how this and
other social measures relating to children may be amended
in order that they may the better achieve their purpose;
and, lastly, I purpose explaining the nature and con-
stitution of the State Children Relief Board and its
claims to be really the only possible effective administra-
tive body in connection with the laws relating to children.
Suggested
course.
Recapitulatory.


PART II.
The Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders’
Act and the State Children Relief Board,
its Nature, Duties, and Purpose.
A serious difficulty, with which the reformer has to con-
tend in his efforts on behalf of delinquent children is that
of effective classification—the proper grouping of the
children on a basis of age and degree of criminality and
vice, and, to a lesser extent, on the nature of offences
committed. If the fullest facilities for classification are
not provided, then it will not be possible for the most
satisfactory results to be obtained so far as the reformation
of juvenile offenders is concerned. Procedure will tend to
become less thorough and suitable, and administrative
efforts will become more and more haphazard. There is
nothing so important—so thoroughly indispensable—in
dealing with children as classification ; and I. think that
its importance and indispensableness will not be gainsaid
by any individual who deals with a social matter in a
scientific spirit. Yet, in this State, we find that, before
the Neglected Children’s Act became law in 1905, there
existed no power to remove a child from a reformatory to
an industrial school. Three distinct Government Depart-
ments —the Chief Secretary’s Department, the Department
of Public Instruction, and the Justice Department—were
concerned in the control of neglected children, —concerned
in this important social matter, understand, yet apparently
not sufficiently versed in the practical aspect of things social
as to realise that the absence of facilities for the transfer
of children must seriously militate against the success of
any policy adopted in regard to them; for this defect
rendered it exceedingly difficult to effectively classify the
children who were under control. If a child were com


jnitted to a Reformatory, there he must remain until his
sentence were served, no matter how he may have improved
in conduct. No power existed under which he could be
transferred to an Industrial School, which, theoretically,
•was supposed to be suitable for the less vicious children ;
and, in the case of children, who were inmates of an In-
dustrial School and whose transfer to another institution
was sought, so much red tape was necessary that the
transfer was seldom made. If a child were sent to gaol,
there was no power to remove him except by the exercise
of the Royal Prerogative, and, on his being released by its
exercise, no power existed whereby he could be either placed
in any other institution or boarded out. And, generally, the
procedure in regard to the committal or transfer of children
was so complicated by technical difficulties that the various
Acts were ineffectual for all practical purposes. - The
Neglected Children’s Act has largely simplified these matters
with its definite provisions in reference to the transfer of
children from one institution to another, to an asylum, or
to the care of the State Children Relief Board. The ]
Minister for Public Instruction has the power of deter- j
mination in regard to the above “in respect to any child
who has been committed to or is an inmate of any insti-
tution.” The Act further provides that “a court or judge,
in committing a child to an institution, shall do so in
general terms, but may recommend to the Minister that the
child be sent to an institution of a particular class.” Further, i
“a child on being committed to an institution may, in the 1
discretion of the court or judge, be placed in a shelter, the
Minister as soon as practicable to endorse; on the order of
committal the name of the institution and the place where
the child is to be detained.” Section 19 of the Act provides
that “any child apprehended as a neglected or uncontrol-
able child or juvenile offender shall be taken to a shelter
and there detained pending the determination of a court.”
Section 35 limits the stay T of a child in a shelter to not
more than three months, while Regulation 15 provides that
“ the home of any householder approved by the boarding
out officer may be deemed to be a shelter.” I mention
these aspects of the Act to point out that, while its pro-
visions allow of quick and ready disposal of children, in
actual practice considerable delay is occasioned, and the
Minister’s power
of determination
(Sec. 35).
Court,’* nower
(Sec. 31)
Provisions for
r«a ly action.


purpose of the procedure defeated, if matters are allowed te
proceed according to an ordinary departmental routine, or
if the special magistrates confine themselves strictly in
their action to the letter rather than the spirit of the law.
The provisions mentioned are exceedingly valuable, and their
value can really only be fully appreciated when considered
in reference to a particular case, just as the exercise of the
special magistrate’s functions are found to be more effective
in proportion as he is willing to deal with the case in a
broadly humane and liberal spirit. The extent to which
he can do this depends upon himself. The Act, as I shall
proceed to show, gives him very great powers, and I do
not hesitate to say that, from this standpoint, the degree
of success which attends efforts towards the reformation of
neglected children and juvenile offenders is largely de-
pendent upon the attitude taken by the Special Magistrate
in his interpretation, not only of the legal expression of
the law, but also of its object in dealing with children,
some of whom—indeed many of them—are just at that age
at which legal interference does so much harm or good.
So that, whatever view the Special Magistrate may take—
whether he is inclined to a literal or to a liberal view of
the law—the fact remains notwithstanding, that the re-
sponsibility is his, and his alone, -the re>ponsibility of dis-
crimination in connection with the disposal of children,- -a
responsibility on the exercise of which the ultimate reform
of the children largely rests. The Department can in-
tervene in the matter only to see that the decision of the
Court is preserved in its integrity ; and if the decision has
been arrived at as the result of careful analysis of the
child’s environment, then it follow's the lines of depart-
mental policy so far as the State Children Relief Board
is concerned ; thus the administration of the Children’s
Court and the general methods of the Department in
regard to children become co-operative and inseparable, the
Court directing, humanely and benignly, how the work
should be done, and the Board supervising and classifying, so
that the decision, in letter and spirit, may be preserved in
its integrity. Both aspects are essential to the effective
performance of this work of social reform, and the degree
of reform will be greater or less according to the extent to
which these view's are realised in practice.


It will be seen from the foregoing that the whole
responsibility of determining the character of the Institu-
tion to which the child shall be committed rests in the first
place with the Special Magistrate, who may act at once
on such slender information as to the child's character and
environment as is given in evidence by a policeman : or,
before determining the treatment for the child, he may
remand the case and cause inquiry to be made into the
home surroundings by a policeman—an inquiry which in
itself is comparatively abortive, because of the natural
antagonism of the class mostly concerned to police interfer-
ence. This is the root-objection to any good resulting in
such cases if once the police are associated with the work :
for the police as an institution represent the diametrically
opposite policy —the detection and supervision of criminals:
and, naturally, that is the idea deeply rooted in the minds
of the particular class amid which the Neglected Children’s
Act operates : it is the idea that must be dispelled if the
reformative and the educative are to be substituted for the
punitive—if the new' principle, that is to say, of dealing
with delinquent children as outlined in the Neglected Child-
ren's Act is to supersede the old policy of treating them in
gaols and police courts. So it will surely be an obvious,
and really in the nature of an absurd anomaly, if a
legislative enactment is to provide “ Special ” Courts as
a substitute for Police Courts in dealing with children—
Special ” Magistrates instead of Police Magistrates,
Special (Probation) Officers, with specific instructions in
reference to the moral and material environment of
children, and to the lines on wffiich they will conduct their
investigations—if, I say, the Legislature is to provide these
special appliances so that the purposes of the Act may be
achieved, and yet have their particular significance over-
looked comparatively at the outset, and the very condition
of things set up to which the spirit and intention of the
Act alike are opposed. There is, of course, real need for
the Special Magistrate to have the assistance of an officer
in dealing with the cases that come before him. He cannot
be in a position very often to dispose of them at once simply
because he has not the necessary information to enable him
to do so. But this does not mean that because a police
officer happens to bring a child before the Court and


charge him with the committal of some offence, serious or
trivial—the records of the Court show that the charges
very frequently are of the latter type—that therefore the
police officer should continue to deal with the case. As a
matter of fact, the disposal of the child rests largely upon
what his home-surroundings are found to be, and what the
Court is satisfied that they will be in the future : and this
essential information can be given to the Court by a
probation officer only: there is no longer any legal or
implied position for the policeman after he has once brought
the child to the Court if the intention of the Act is
obeyed ; after he has acquainted the probation officer with
the main facts of the case, the latter supplies the particular
facts in a way that the police officer cannot, for the only
duly appointed probation officers are the Inspectors of
the State Children Board; special circumstances are
given to a special Court in a special manner, the probation
officer beginning his inquiries at the point at which, from
the very nature of the wmrk, the policeman must cease
to act.
I shall now more fully deal with one of the most salient
features of the Act—the Children’s Courts, and the powers
vested in the Special Magistrates who administer them.
Under Clause IX of the Neglected Children and
Juvenile Offenders’ Act it is provided that the Governor
shall by Proclamation establish Special Courts to be Chil-
dren’s Courts, and that every such Court shall consist of a
“ Special Magistrate,” presumably a gentleman chosen
because of his having made a special study of the “educative”
in contradistinction to the “ punitive ” system of dealing
with vicious children, and that this gentleman shall have
jurisdiction within a proclaimed area. But it is also pro-
vided that, in places outside such proclaimed areas—
that is, in all the outlying and comparatively sparsely popu-
lated districts—the jurisdiction of a Children’s Court shall
be exercised by a Special Magistrate or by any two Justices.
The reason for this latter provision is evident; it would cer-
tainly not be advisable to place such remarkable powers as
are given to the Court in any single Justice of the Peace,
who would probably necessarily lack experience in dealing
with cases under the new principle which is involved in
the Act.


The powers of the Special Magistrate, the administering
officer of the Court, are practically unlimited. He can release
the child on such terms and conditions as he may think fit,
commit the child foi such period of time as he may think fit
to an Asylum or to the care of any person who is willing
to undertake such duty and who is approved by him, or he
may commit the child to an Institution. Now, under those
circumstances, it will be readily conceded that the effective-
ness of this measure (and indeed its safety, so far as the
general public are concerned) depends entirely upon the view
taken by the Magistrate of the intent of the Act. And,
in view of the great powers conferred on him in his adminis-
tration, I deeply regret that the words of the Illinois Law
were not introduced into our Act, implying as they do
practical instruction to those administering it. After
enacting a number of provisions with an intent very similar
to our Act, the twenty-first section of the Illinois Law reads
thus : “ This Act shall be liberally construed, to the end
that its purpose may be carried out, to wit: that the care
and custody and discipline of a child shall approximate as
nearly as may be to that which should be given by its
parents, and in all cases where it can properly be done, the
child to be placed in an approved family home and become
a member of the family by legal adoption or otherwise.”
Prom this Clause it will be seen that the Court is practi-
cally instructed that it shall not consider itself so much an
instrument for meting out punishment as that it shall
regard itself as a means for supplying each child with in-
fluences that he has probably missed in the past.
Another omission in the Act is that it does not provide
for the presence in the Court of a probation officer, whose
duty it would be to observe the case, and on receiving
instructions from the Special Magistrate, make such in-
quiries as he might deem necessary concerning the child,
his parents, and his environment, and when the child was
liberated on probation visit his home (as is provided for
by Subsection 2 of Clause of the Act), and report
to the Court at such times as ho may be instructed. It is
true that some part of this duty is effectively performed
by a police officer, and, in the matter of the prosecution of
offenders, the services of the police will always be necessary,
but I strongly hold that the less the police are in evidence
D
unlimited
spTdai Magis-
trate.
Illinois Law.
practical
g 0 “*™ otlont<>
Probation officer
needed at Court,
His functions,
Police action
minimised.


in the matter the better. The instructions given by the
Illinois Court to the probation officers are very much on
the following lines :—“ When cases are referred for investi-
gation, you will be expected to make a personal inquiry into
the facts of the case, with a view to assisting the Court in de-
ciding what ought to be done. . . . The Court will
desire to ascertain the character, disposition and tendencies,
and school record of the child ; also the character of the
parents and their capability for governing and supporting
the child, together with the character of the home as to
comforts, surroundings, inmates, etc. The Court will wish
to determine from these inquiries whether the child should
be separated from its parents, guardian, or custodian ; if
so, whether it should be committed to the care and
guardianship of some individual or some suitable associa-
tion or some suitable institution.” Now the Inspectors of
the State Children’s Department constantly have duties to
perform which are positively identical with those prescribed
by the Illinois Court. They are, therefore, experts in such
3 investigations, and I may say that the Board receives from
- them, and considers at its meetings, hundreds of such
. reports, for the homes from which numbers of State
children are received are identical in character with those
of the majority of the children who are brought before the
Court.
Other defects of the Act which I shall briefly mention
seem to me to arise to some extent owing to the absence of
that spirit of liberality of interpretation in regard to its
provisions. Presumably, because the law does not state
literally that the Act is to be liberally construed—as in the
case of the Illinois Law—the Special Magistrates feel con-
strained to come to their decisions, guided only by the
letter of the law. If this at the present time is the legal
attitude, then it is an attitude w'hich is at variance with the
purpose of reform and the sense of the law. Let me give
you an illustration :
A boy will not go to school. His father is at work all
day, and the boy will not go to school for his mother unless
she herself takes him, when he frequently runs out. The
mother herself says she cannot persuade him to attend. His
attendance in 6 months is 24 days out of 109. The
Neglected Children’s Act defines an “uncontrollable” child
Correspondence
of Board’s In-
spectors’ duties
with those out-
lined for Proba-
tion Officers by
Illinois Court.
Other defects.
Truancy and the
Law.


as “a child whom the parent cannot control,” and further,
defines “ maintenance” as including “ clothing, support,
training and education.” The child is charged as “uncon-
trollable.” Yet, in the opinion of the Court, such a child
is not in the eyes of the law—as it stands above—an
uncontrollable child. It is true that certain country Courts,
held under this Neglected Children’s Act, have taken a
different view, and have regarded such a case as proved,
have released the child on probation, and thereby secured a
daily school attendance. The truancy has ceased. Observe
in this the difference between the literal view—the view
which considers that the law cannot deal with a truant—
the view which to my mind is not an obvious one in the
face of the definitions stated above—the view which stultifies
the purpose of the Act: and the liberal view—the view
which considers that the law intended to stop truancy and
expressed its intention in the above manner—the view which
achieves the purpose of the Act and shows the value of the
legal, liberal mind in the administration of the law relating
to children.
Consider now another defect, and let us illustrate it with
a specific instance : Section 29 of the Act states that
“if a child who has been released upon probation breaks
the terms or conditions of the release, he may be appre-
hended and brought before the Court and “if it shall
appear that such breach has occurred, the Court may
commit him under this Act in the same manner as if he
had not been released upon probation.” Section 28, sub- ]
section (3), states that “any person having the care of a|
child as aforesaid, who neglects or illtreats such child, shall <
be liable to a penalty of five pounds, and the child may \
be removed from his custody and control by the Minister.”
This subsection applies when a child has been convicted
of being a neglected or uncontrollable child, and has been
released upon probation upon such terms and conditions
and for such period of time as the Court may think fit ;
or who has been committed for such period of time as
the Court may think fit, either to an Asylum or to the
care of some person who is willing to undertake such
care : or who has been committed to an Institution.”
(Section 23, subsections (a), (b), and (c).
Opinion at
variance.
Release upon
probation ; or
committal to
care of person;
and punishment
for default.


In certain country courts, when a child is released upon
probation or committed to the care of a person, a bond as
security for the carrying out of the Court’s decision is most
frequently' sought from the parent or guardian, and in ad-
dition the terms of the release are based upon the defects
shown in the case at the hearing and are definitely stated
in detail by the Magistrate and written down as part
of the Court’s decision. In the bond we have an additional
hold on the parent and guardian in regard to the fulfilment
of the conditions of the release, and the detailing of the
various points which must he subscribed to by' the parent
or guardian makes the release a real thing—prevents it be-
coming a mere formal matter. But other Courts hold that
it is sufficient to release a child upon general terms—those
of “ good behaviour ” —without stipulating the particular
conditions : that the bond is not of advantage, and that
subsection (3) of section 28 does not apply', so far as the
parent is concerned, in the matter of punishment if the
conditions of the release are not carried out. Thus we see
again two views : the one indicating an earnest effort to
secure the intention of the Act and using its provisions as
its spirit suggests, recognising the responsibility involved
and implied ; the other view very likely a legal one —cer-
tainly a perfunctory' one—extending the probation-release
privileges in accordance with the law, stating the terms of
the release in all instances as “ good behaviour ” without
regard to the special needs of the individual case, leaving
the parent frequently in the dark as to the exact nature of
the Court’s requirements for the future, and the child
without sufficient counsel—a view which carries out what
the law literally requires hut does no more—misses its spirit
and weakens its effect. And this latter point is of very
real importance, for, very frequently the parents are ignor-
ant and unintelligent, and to these characteristics failure to
carry out the Court’s demands maybe often reasonably' at-
tributed in the absence of definite directions.
Another matter to which I shall draw attention is the
twofold view of the meaning of section 13, subsection (1).
That subsection says that “at any hearing or trial by a
Court under this Act, the Court may order that any
person not directly interested in the case shall be excluded
from the Court Room or place of hearing or trial.” Sec


tion 12 further directs that “a Court shall be held where
practicable in the vicinity of a shelter’'; or “in some
building or room approved of in that behalf by the
Minister.” One view held is that the Officers of the
.State Children Relief Board shall be excluded unless they
are actually witnesses or prosecuting officers : and they
have accordingly been excluded, though their presence
there as probation officers should have been valuable to
the Court and to the Department. This is again the
literal, legal view in which the Magistrate uses his dis-
cretion to exclude —as opposed to the liberal, legal view in
which the Magistrate uses his discretion to include pro-
bation officers—to ascertain from them the precise nature
of the case and details as to the different institutions, and
supervision of probation, and so on : and uses his discretion
also to include Ministers of Religion and obtaining from
them assurances that they will assist to supervise the moral
training of children, if released. The former view—with
the presence of a police officer in the Court, a matter of
which I have spoken elsewhere—tends to introduce the
Police Court element into the work, really in contravention
of the proviso contained in subsection (b) of section 12,
and—with the absence of a probation officer, who alone is
trained alike in knowledge of children, their general home
surroundings, and general knowledge of institutions, and
therefore qualified to help the Court—to minimise also
the effect of Children's Court efforts in the work of reform.
The latter view, whereby Ministers of Religion and pro-
bation officers and persons who can assist the Court are
allowed to be present, emphasises the fact that a Children’s
Court is a place in which advice and sympathy are offered
in the children’s interesis, and not an ordinary Court, and
asserts also, in the spirit of the Act, that Children are
there to lie counselled —not criminals to be punished.
Certain definitions, again, are capable of clearer expres-
sion, so that the principles involved in them may be the
more easily carried into effect. Definition (d) would more
readily satisfy the legal mind if the word “neglected”
were inserted before “ill-treated” in the first paragraph, so
that it would the better correspond with the proviso which
forms the second paragraph, where the word “neglect”
occurs before “ illtreatment. ” This difference is due to the
Two views.
Correct Court
view.
Definitions
capable of
amendment.


words of this definition being adapted imperfectly from
section 9 of the Children’s Protection Act of 1902, where
the word “neglected” occurs before “illtreated” and
“neglect” occurs before “illtreatment.” This omission
may make a difference to the legal mind in dealing with
cases calling for action under that section ; it certainly
makes no difference in the principle involved. The regret-
table part about the matter is that the intention of the
Legislature is to be defeated simply because of the omission
of a detail legally necessary. Let us then have the omis-
sion rectified. Again, definition (j) states that a “neg-
lected ” child is one “ who is living under such conditions
as indicate that the child is lapsing into a career of vice
and crime.” This to the legal mind is the definition most
difficult of all to prove. To the ordinary mind the defini-
tion would appear to state not only a most important
principle, but to state it clearly. However, before the
cases under that heading can be readily dealt with, legal
opinion is that the words “ is likely to lapse ” should follow
“is lapsing.” Let us then have this amendment, so that
again the intention of the law may be realised. The
definition, too, is a most important one, and, further, the
principle is not amplified or indeed interfered with in any
way by the addition of the words referred to.
Objection has been taken to the Neglected Children’s Act
on the ground that it unduly interferes with the relation
between parent and child. This argument I have discussed
in previous pamphlets to show that such is not the case. I
shall briefly review the ethical foundation on which the
principles of the Act rest.
The purpose of Government, I think, all will admit is to
secure the greatest amount of good for the greatest number,
to ensure the material, moral, and spiritual welfare of
society so far as it can. Now, society is the “State writ
large,” as the “ individual is the State writ small ” ; and this
purpose of the State to secure the greatest good for the
greatest number applies with equal force to the securing the
greatest good for the individual so far as such a course is
compatible with the interests of the greatest number or
society. That is to say, the welfare of the individual is
secondary to the well-being of society as a whole, and, if the
individual chooses to act in such a way as is not consistent
Greatest good of
the greatest
number.


with the moral interests of the community but is at variance
with them and is a danger to them, then society in its
governing capacity must step in to restrain him in its own
interests. Now, the most important feature in the life of
society, the most sacred influence on the social life of the
individual, is the family group. It is not an exaggeration
to say that it is the basic principle of Christian life—this
grouping of society into families, each with its distinctive
characteristics, yet all of them harmonising with the
general well-being. And this family life is—perhaps more
than all else—the most powerful moral and spiritual
influence on the character of the individual. Destroy this
influence by breaking up the family group, and what is the
result? The moral ruin of the individual.
And perhaps there is no law that was ever drawn that
tmre clearly expresses this view of the importance of family
Ufa than the Neglected Children’s Act. Notice how the
clauses which lay down the conditions on which children may
be released upon probation to their parents impose upon
tin latter the observance of the essential principles of
fanily life—proper training and proper material con-
ditions—the conditions which are present in the average
fanily life—and without which family life is impossible.
“ flherefore,” says the Neglected Children’s Act to the
paient who is not the average but the degenerate parent —
th( parent without real sense of parental responsibility—
“ supply these essential conditions to home-life as the
average citizen does, as you, without excuse have failed to
da, to the moral danger and detriment of the average citizen
aid his family, your own family and the State.” Supply
tiem—we will give you a chance to do so if you will let us ;
i you say you cannot we will show you how to improve
tiem ; hut if you will not, if you mean to persist in a
regenerate course, then the State will do it for you, giving
yiur family that which you were able to give them but
filed to let them have—the chance to live the life of the
a/erage citizen under proper conditions, freed from the
fitters of an ever-growing immorality, with which you were
slackling them.”
What is Parental Right ? Surely not the right of a
dgenerate parent to slowly and systematically achieve the
rin of his family by imposing upon their helpless lives the
Sacred nature of
family life.
Importance for
the individual.
The Neglected
Children’s Act
tends to restore
and so preserve
family life.
Argument of
Act.
State Right of
Interference
versus
Parental Right.


pernicious influence of his vices, shaping them to a career
of crime, transforming what should be a blessing to the
community into a curse. Shall the State in its wisdom
recognise such a claim to Parental Right, which, properly
applied, appears as a sacred obligation, a moral, heritage
bequeathed to parents in the interests of the State I No, I
say, a thousand times, no. A degenerate parent has no
sense of Parental Right and the State must not pretend
that he has. Tn my pamphlet on “ Parental Right and
Responsibility” published in 1905, I have carefully dis-
cussed the question and shown that Parental Right is, or
ought to be, limited by the right of the State to demand
that the ( q l p c [ s h a ll not, through the culpable neglect of the
parent or guardian, become a menace to the well-being of the
community. That we are legally justified in separating
children from vicious and degenerate parents is a fact estab-
lished by its embodiment in the laws of England (Act 02 ar.d
63 Yictoria, chapter 37). An Act to amend section 1 ;>£
the Poor Law Act provides that, “When the child is
nlaint ained by the guardians of a Poor Law Union, aid
the guardians are of opinion that by reason of menial
deficiency, or vicious habits or mode of life, the parent of
the child is unfit to have control of it, the guardians miy
at any time resolve, that until the child reaches the age of
18 years, all the rights and powers of such parents shdl
vest in the guardians, and therefore, those lights and powtrs
shall so vest accordingly.” The fact that this power is
limited by the antecedent condition that the child is
already being maintained by the Board of Guardians does
not really affect the principle involved. In France, indeed
the “ Loi Roussel” (1889) provides for the removal o:
children from the control of neglectful or immoral parents
And after all, if the well-being of children is to bi
considered, how can there be any question as to thi
equity of the principle in the moral interests of the. Stati
—as well as to its necessity in the interests of the children 1
In our own State we have the opinion of the Hon. Mi
Posbery, for upwards of thirty years Inspector-General d
Police, and it is this: “ General neglect of parental contre
is responsible for a very large portion of the juvenile crimt
and it can only be remedied by a stricter administration c
the truancy law, and some authoritative interference wih
Limitation of
arental Eight.
Legal justifi-
oatmn.
Partly in Eng-
land. Fully in
France.
Le Loi Roussel.
Local opinion.


the uncontrolled habits of vagrancy in the children.”
Douglas Morrison in “Juvenile Offenders 1 ' (p. 143 et
seq.) expresses the opinion that : •“ While every pre-
caution should he taken to prevent children from being
deserted, and while making the deserter of them amen-
able to the criminal law, it admits of little doubt that
society consults its best interests when deserted children
are withdrawn from the control of the parent.” In this
connection the word “deserted” is svnonymous with
“neglected.” Morrison is pointing out that children should
be sent to Industrial Schools rather than to the Union,
because the latter frequently hand the children back to the
heartless parent after he has been imprisoned for deserting
them, though the former demoralised home conditions
remain. “These conditions,” he says, “are usually idle,
drunken, callous habits, or mental unlitness to bear the
entire burden of parental responsibilities.” Again he says ;
“With children once deserted, the resumption of parental
control means the renewal of parental cruelty and neglect,
and initiation into habits of vagabondage and crime.”
Of course this removal of children from parental control—
where the law gives the right of removal—is a power that \
must be exercised wilh the utmost caution, after the most i
careful deliberation. For, degenerate the parents may be, ]
but, when their children are taken by the State because of
this degeneracy, then with the children go one of the
greatest inducements to reform in the parents. Frequently
we find that to remove the children is to remove the
strongest (and often, the only) restraining influence that ]
the parents have : to leave the children is sometimes to i
secure reform in the parents. And this fact again has
been taken account of in the Neglected Children’s Act, j
which releases the children on probation if the parents can "
amend the environment : or, if they cannot, allows them a
chance to send their children to relatives or friends, to whose
care they are committed. Only as a last resource are
children sent to institutions and removed entirely from the
parents’ influence—when the interests of the children and
the community render that course necessary.
The course to be adopted in reference to children who c
are viciously or criminally inclined, is, therefore, one of 1
two: either to modify, improve or absolutely change the
Morrison,
Very yrave care
must be exer-
cised in using
the power to re-
move children
from parents.
Influence on
parents.
Recognised ii>
Act.
Only two
possible courses.


environment, and treat the child apart from an Institution
on the one hand : or, on the other hand, if the former
alternative cannot be followed immediately, to send the
child to an Institution, realising that, if the latter course
has to be adopted, it is an extreme one, and, in.the absence
of regular classification, actually dangerous, but one that
it should be necessary to apply in the first instance to
comparatively few cases. Now there is a position which I
wish to strongly emphasise—that of “compromising” when
the child comes before the Court either by the infliction of
fines or by admonition from the Magistrate. Such action
probably has good eti'eot in dealing with adults, who pay
the fines themselves and thus realise the punishment, or,
not being habitual offenders against the law, are fitted by
their age to profit by a caution, especially when adminis-
tered in a Police Court by a Police Magistrate. But when
such a position is taken up in regard to children, the
conditions being altogether changed, it clearly becomes
anomalous. It seems to me, in the first place, that the
infliction of fines— which of course are paid by the parent—
can possess very little value indeed so far as the reformation
of the young delinquent is concerned ; and, in the second
place, a child is frequently not fitted by age to properly
benefit by a magisterial admonition : he may again have
passed beyond the incipient stage of criminal tendency, at
which a caution has fullest effect, and may need to be
placed amid different surroundings —a fact that can only
become thoroughly known to the Court after special inquiry
by officers appointed for that purpose, when it will very
frequently be found that reformation will not be possible
in the offender unless the environment is changed, or, at
any rate, unless there is some material alteration of the
social conditions under which the offence has originated.
The practice of discharging children to their parents
without the proviso that’a probation officer shall visit the
home from time to time and make such inquiries as seem
necessary, shows that those administering the law entirely
fail to understand the idea which underlies the Children’s
Court—the idea that it is not the punishment which is
expected to prevent a recurrence of the criminal habit,
but rather the amelioration of the home conditions, out of
which the offence so frequently arises—and, indeed, I
Misconception o t
nature of Act.


think that, in many cases, a material improvement may be
expected, not only in the conduct of the child, but, also,
as I have already explained fully elsewhere, in the habits
of the parent. I do not wish to give the impression
that what I have just said is the outcome of any
hypercritical spirit. Already the records of the Children’s
Court show a very large proportion of cases that have been
disposed of by the imposition of small fines, and I quite
fail to comprehend for reasons I have just given how that
course could commend itself as one which has any meaning
whatever so far as either punishment of, or hope of
reformation in, the offender is concerned. The Children’s
Court is packed with cases that evidently in the Special
Magistrate’s opinion are adequately met in the cursory
manner which I have described, but in my opinion this
is not a realisation of the tenor and provisions of that
measure. Unless the circumstances of a case are very
exceptional, I hold strongly to the opinion that a juvenile
offender, when brought before the Court, and his offence
proved, should be dealt with either in one of the several
forms (which the Act allows) of release under supervision
of probation officers, or by committal to an Institution,
with proper recognition of the responsibilities which the
latter course, as an extreme one, implies.
In this latter connection I consider that, when it is found
necessary to send a child to an Institution of a reformatory
nature, there should not be any possibility of doubt either
in the minds of the Reformatory authorities or of the
children as to what such a committal really means. There
should be no doubt, particularly so far as the delinquents
are concerned, that for wilful and persistent acts of a
criminal nature, they have been sent from their homes as a
punishment—a punishment, which, in form and discipline,
is as close an approximation to a gaol and gaol-treatment as
their ages permit; and that, if improvement is not evidenced
in their conduct, gaol alone can be their future portion. A
recognition of the punitive and expiative element must be
instilled into the children and preserved so long as the
circumstances justify that course. They must not feel that
it is an alternative to a home life or even to a life in an
ordinary Institution : they should not have pursuits or
recreations which will tend to minimise the meaning of


their presence in a Reformatory. It should not he neces-
sary, perhaps, for them to be there long, but, while
there, they should feel clearly and continually that they
are there, serving time for offences committed, and saved
from gaol only by their age, which will not serve them
as a protection from that similar punishment for long.
So soon as a case ceases to be one for Reformatory
treatment, classification comes in, the child should
be at once, removed, and the circumstances from that time
become altogether different. I mention this at length
in the light of certain views which have been expressed
by gentlemen in authority in this State, and illustrate
the danger of not realising what committal to a Reforma-
tory implies. For instance one gentleman says: “ A
“ number of boys are more proud of their connection (with
“the ‘Sobraon’) than they were of their connection with
“their parents.” Another gentleman remarks : “We have
“ 1 Sobraon ’ boys all over the country who are proud that
“ they have been associated with that Institution.” Surely,
no matter how worthy lads may have become subsequently
as the result of effective Reformatory treatment, any idea
of pride in such a connection —any comparison with home-
life —is altogether misapplied. It is indeed a gratifying
feature that numerous lads have been made good citizens—
a fact of which they may well be proud and for which they
should be very thankful. Views such as those I have
quoted rather indicate to me that children in the past have
been sent to the “ Sobraon ” who should not have gone
there at all—an aspect of the matter which I have previously
discussed. Further, such opinions suggest to me quite
another point in relation to home-life; for, if they
are to be taken seriously as replacing home-life under any
circumstances and the real nature of a Reformatory hidden,
what inducement remains for the many struggling parents
to continue to strive to bring up their offspring respectably,
to furnish for them, frequently with great hardship, the
home-conditions that are essential to moral up-bringing ?
Such views being propagated seriously, will a certain class of
parents not feel disposed to test the truth of them and save
themselves the responsibility of the training of their
children independently under arduous conditions 1 But I
need not dwell upon this. Ido not remember hearing or


reading anywhere an expression of opinion so calculated
as the foregoing to undermine parental responsibility and
lessen parental control in many oases. What a premium
to neglect his natural and moral obligations would he
offered to the parent with degenerate tendencies.
I have dealt with the nature and provisions of the
Neglected Children and Juvenile Offenders’ Act very fully
because of its social importance and to explain those
portions of it which, to the casual observer, may appear
unduly harsh or authoritative, and have sought to showy on
the other hand, that its provisions have been drawn with
the fullest observance of what parental rights are, and
to what extent the legislation of other countries, which are
earnestly engaged in the work of social reform, has fixed a
limit to them—a limit demanded by present-day social and
moral necessities and by the interests of humanity at large.
I shall now discuss the rise and progress of the State
Children’s Relief Board —the body which administers the
Neglected Children’s Act in conjunction with the State
Children Relief Act, and indeed all legislative enactments
in which the condition of dependent and delinquent children
has to be approached directly.
State Children Relief Board.
I have already pointed out that for some years prior to
the passing of the State Children Relief Act in 1881, an
independent committee of ladies inaugurated the system
of boarding out children with private families, and that in
1881, in view of their successful efforts in that direction,
the Government adopted that policy, forming many
of the members of the private committee into a Board.
Tt is a curious aspect of social work that, while its
initiation most frequently depends upon the philanthropic
enterprise, of private individuals, its development rests ulti-
mately with the State. The private body, as such, dis-
appears, and becomes incorporated with the institutions of
the State, receiving definite functions and definite powers.
To my mind this transition from private to public adminis-
tration is a logical one, and one which is inseparable from
the development of the work. And I can see, too, a very
valid reason why private effort should precede that of the
State. For, how is the latter to learn of the condition of
State Children
Relief Board.
Transition from
Private to Pub-
lic Bodies.


affairs social, how determine the grounds on which to base
its legislative rules, if it does not have the practical
experience and suggestion of such private bodies to guide
it ? The efforts of these private bodies are direct; they may
be unorganised, but at all events they employ themselves in
ameliorating evils, gradually comprehending their nature
as experience increases, and acquiring a practical intimacy
with social conditions for which no suitable substitute can
subsequently be found. And with knowledge and develop-
ment of work soon the stage is reached when the State—
made acquainted with the condition of social affairs through
the medium of these private associations —supplements or
entirely supersedes their operations. The necessity for
increased organisation, for augmented funds, is frequently
the reason, but the practical experience of the social worker
is still essential if the work is to be carried on successfully
and systematically. Thus we can understand the incor-
poration of a private body of expert social workers into a
Government Board, the State availing itself of their prac-
tical knowledge and experience, which are essential to
successful administration, and giving, in return for the
honorary services of these philanthropists, powers of admin-
istration, recognised by the Legislature, sufficient to enable
them to carry on the work with the fewest possible obstacles.
So we see that, while the attitude of the Board so con-
stituted in relation to its work is a practical and direct one,
that of the State, after it has performed its legislative duty,
is or should be largely indirect. The responsibility of the
work being entrusted to the Board, there should, for instance,
be no barriers whatever between it and its work. The
argument that justifies its existence—directness of contact
with its work—should be the ruling one so long as the
Board is in existence : and if the argument that warrants
its appointment is forgotten, then the efficiency of its work
will be impaired. The spontaneous appearance of private
organisations to perform important social functions, and
the subsequent recognition by Legislature of the peculiar
fitness of these independent, practical, philanthropic bodies
to control such work are very general facts in the history
of social science.
To come to a particular illustration, we can easily
understand why the State should have entrusted the


administration of the law relating to children to the State
Children Relief Board, all the members of which were origin-
ally earnestly occupied with social work, and we can also
readily comprehend how the scope of the duties of the
Board should have increased, for, though legislation in
social matters has been provided, no additional adminis-
trative body has been appointed, and the practical super-
vision of the added work has fallen to the State Children
Relief Board. I have previously shown how earlier legisla-
tive enactments, intended for the benefit of children—(such
as the Juvenile Offenders’ Summary Punishment Acts
1850-2) —fell into disuse really because of the absence
of any administrative machinery to give its provisions
practical application. Similarly, too, in the absence of
the State Children Relief Board, I am convinced that
such measures as the Children’s Protection Act and the
Neglected Children’s Act would soon cease to be operative.
The Board, by its actual knowledge of social conditions,
by its lengthy experience in administering the law re-
lating to children, by its regular analysis of the reports
of its Inspectors, and by its power of direct procedure,
is in a position —a unique position—to give immediate
effect to legislative enactment, and to express authori-
tative opinions as to the suitableness of present legis-
lation and the necessity for amendments. This power—
for “knowledge is power”—is not shared in by any other
body or Department in the State. The interest of any
Government Department under such circumstances must
necessarily be indirect. The Department is really not in
a position to express any opinion upon the nature of the
practical operations of the Board, for it has no special
knowledge of social conditions, and, for definite information
and suggestion, is constrained to rely upon the reports of
the State Children Relief Board. And, again, in the
multifarious subjects considered in a Ministerial Office,
when one of them is so comprehensive as the administra-
tion of the law relating to children, surely it will be
admitted that, in the absence of distinctive machinery at
the Department, and in the presence of a properly-
constituted Board, Ministerial action is, or should be,
purely formal. There is no scope for action in detail, for
there is no knowledge of conditions. And since there is
Advantages
possessed by
State
Board.


scope merely for formal action, it will surely be conceded
that Ministerial interposition should be simply formal.
Let us look now at the scope of social work, with which
the State Children Relief Board is at present dealing.
Its variety and volume are such that the term “ State
Children Relief Board ” must be construed in its broadest
sense. Originally the term “State Children” applied to
children boarded-out or apprenticed under the State Chil-
dren Relief Act, and in this sense it is still understood
in the popular mind. On the passing of the Children’s
Protection Act in 1892, it received the practical (if
not, the legal) jurisdiction of that measure, the adminis-
trative officer being the Chief Officer, he being at the
same time the Boarding-out Officer. Next the Infants’
Protection Act extended the Board’s legal and practical
powers ; and lastly, it is the sole practical administrative
body in connection with the Neglected Children and
Juvenile Offenders’ Act. Its Inspectors are the probation
officers and their work is supervised by the Board at its
meetings. No othej- administration has a working
knowledge or interest in the minutiae of the different
branches of social work, the performance of which is
essential to carry out the purposes of legislative enactments.
For many years, too, up to three months ago, the Board’s
Officers exercised supervision over the operations of the
different local Benevolent Societies throughout the
State and also over the extension of outdoor relief to
piivate families. To a very large extent, the material
welfare of the children in these families was the subject
for major consideration. The supervision of the work
of Benevolent Societies had a similar aspect, and was
further valuable, for the purposes of the Children’s
Protection Act, for the light it threw on the condition of
the lying-in of women (who were destitute) and the care
of infants in country districts. Thus it will be seen, that
the State Children Relief Board, in spite of defective
legislative powers, has been fully recognised by the State
in all the divisions of social work, directly or indirectly
affecting the moral or the material welfare of children,
whether such children were their wards or not ; and to my
way of thinking, this full recognition of the Board’s
expert knowledge in such matters was necessary and
Present scope of
the work of the
State Children
Kelief Board.
Original
Meaning.
Scope increases.
Conjoint
functions by
.request.
'Supervision of
dependent
children in every
form.


inevitable, both for economic reasons—it obviated the
establishment of additional machinery—and for practical
reasons —there was no other State-recognised body or
Department conversant with the nature of such work.
The value of the State Children Relief Board as an
administering body is that, so far, it has been enabled to |
deal without delay, and very fully, with any matter with 1
which it became concerned • and this power of dealing I
with cases expeditiously is essential to the effective per- |
formance of its work. Take, for instance, the case of an
infant with an unsuitable custodian, where even a few
hours delay might mean loss of life for the child. But,
indeed, it is scarcely necessary to enter into detail. It
will surely be conceded that all cases of protection of
children, all crises of neglect of children, all cases of relief,
must be dealt with at once if the Board is to fulfil its pur-
pose ; and the intervention of any other body, acting
according to routine, without any experience of the circum- •
stances of such work, so far from being any help to the i
Board’s purposes will be a distinct hindrance. I shall not ]
say any more on this point. I have indicated the scope
of the Board’s duties, and have shown its social value. It
is not necessary to point out the uniform success which
has attended its efforts—a success wholly due to its
practical capabilities.
There are two Acts, to which I have referred already,
which illustrate my foregoing remarks. These are the
Children’s Protection Act and the Infants’ Protection j
Act.
That the complexities in connection with the adminis-
tration of the legislation relating to children are a very real
consideration, is amply testified to by Mr. Justice Heydon
in his memo, and certificate to accompany the Children’s
Protection Bill—the consolidated form of the enactments
for 1892 and 1900. His remarks (which I shall quote r
verbatim) show that very grave difficulties existed, and 1
still exist, in connection with the administration of the
Children’s Protection Act—difficulties due not so much to
the omission of principles as to the insertion of ambiguities
in expression and anomalies in the punishments. Mr. i
Justice Heydon’s remarks, made in connection with his’
duties as Commissioner for the Consolidation of Statute
B
Advantages
gained through
State Children
Relief Board.
Power of acting
expeditiously is
essential.
Any interven-
tion dangerous
from point of
view of effec-
tiveness.
Children’s Pro
tection Act.
Technical
absurdities.
Mr. Justice
Heydon a
remarks.


Law, are very clearly put : in submitting the Consolidated
Form of the Bill to Parliament in 1902, he says : —“ The
original Acts are two of the worst drawn in the Statute
Book. Throughout these Acts there are strange anomalies
in the punishments. All the misdemeanours which are
created are made punishable with fine, ‘with or without
imprisonment with hard labour.' ‘ This makes it impos-
sible to impose imprisonment, except with hard labour.’
‘ Many of the offenders under the Acts (probably the
majority) must necessarily be females, who always get
light labour. This was evidently overlooked, and the
sections have therefore been altered so as to read, ‘ with or
without imprisonment with or without hard labour, or in
the case of a female, light labour.”
“Clause 15 illustrates the absurdities with which the
original Act bristles, some of which, unfortunately, have
had to be left.”
“ lie Clause 16, this Section, taken apparently from the
Electoral Act, spoke of ‘ rolls ’ (of which there are none
under this Act), and referred to the provisions of the last
preceding section, in which section there were no provisions
whatever having any relation to the matter. The best has
been done to give the section sense.”
“ Re Clause 22 (2), the tribunal to deal with cases under
this clause was evidently intended to be a Court of Petty
Sessions as defined by the Act. The operation of No. 71,
1900, may have made a slight variance in this, but the
original intention is preserved.”
It will thus be seen that the Children's Protection Act,
though it has enabled much good to be done, has been
seriously handicapped in many respects. There is an absence
of certain provisions in this enactment, the insertion of
which would have materially added to its effectiveness in
carrying out the social work which the Legislature intended,
namely, the protection of children particularly young
infants and children up to 3 years—and the restriction
of baby-farming. In these respects the Act has been
beneficial certainly, but, under other circumstances, it might
have done much more. Again the provisions of the Act
show some serious omissions which, considering its purpose,
interfere with its efficacy. For instance, in so-called Lying-in
Homes we find the following defects which present legislation


is powerless to remedy ; —lnadequate and unsuitable accom-
modation provided for women, who come for confinement ;
absence of skilled assistance at the proper time to the danger
and detriment of patient and infant; drugs dangerously used
because used by unskilled women without proper super-
vision : midwifery work largely monopolised by untrained
women, though trained women may be available ; an
absence of surgical cleanliness and proper precautions
against infection, resulting in repeated cases of septicaemia;
refusal to obey medical directions in cases (admittedly bad
ones) in which a doctor has been called in. These defects
are present in cases in which the Lying-in Home keepers
are admittedly respectable, in which there is no suspicion
that the women are abortionists, yet doing their work
in ignorance and prejudiced against medical treatment
or medical interference for their patients and against
trained midwifery nurses : successfully communicating their
prejudices to their patients, who are frequently ignorant
women—particularly in country districts—contending that
experience—though it be the experience begun and con
tinued in ignorance—is all that is necessary, that it enables
them to detect, “ in time to send for a doctor if need he,”
any symptoms of serious ailment in their patients —ailments
such as puerperal fever, —that it enables them to use
necessary drugs without skilled aid ; that it is not neces-
sary to have special rooms for confinement purposes, and
that there is no need for particular precautions against in-
fection ; when such, I ask, is the standpoint of these
women, surely, in spite of their honesty of purpose and their
plea that they must live “and have done the work for so
long,” such an unchecked and unoheckable standpoint
should be met by law at once, for it is a standpoint
that is not only a real danger to the health and lives of
patients and infants but it is a source of menace to public
health. The provisions of the Private Hospitals Bill which
I introduced into Parliament last November, will, if that
measure becomes law, to a large extent mitigate this most
undesirable state of affairs. The registration of women,
subject to training, is provided for, also the licensing of
premises, with due regard to size, sanitary arrangements,
and purpose. The character and fitness of women are also
taken into consideration. And this point is an essential:
Standpointot un-
trained Lying-in
Home Keepers.
Private Hospi-
tals Bill.
Nature of
provisions.


one. It may well be imagined that when to the dangers
that have been enumerated above are added those of the
intemperate “ gamp ” and the suspected abortionist, a con-
dition of things is established which, in the absence of
proper legal machinery, is sufficient to defeat the objects of
any Children’s Act, no matter how well drawn. There
is little doubt that, while many of the Lying-in Home
keepers are eminently respectable, the abortion carried-out
occurs in numerous homes now coming under the Lying-in
Home section. At the present time there are 343 Lying-
in Homes in the country and 107 in the city and suburbs.
In these homes there were 2,408 registrations of confine-
ment in 1906 in terms of the Act. Experience shows that
the moral tone of the community is lowest outside the
Metropolitan area, and particularly in centres where people
seem to be all more or less closely related. In such cases
the all-absorbing idea is to conceal the fact of maternity, no
matter what wrongdoing is needed to apparently accomplish
that end. In these instances it is practically impossible (even
in the best conducted homes) to induce the mothers to suckle
their offspring. In addition to a number of keepers of Lying-in
Homes, regarding whom there is strong suspicion that they
are evading the Act, if they are actually doing nothing
worse, there are fifteen women on a special list, who are,
without a doubt, abortionists. The majority of them have
been before the Court, and some of them have been con-
victed, but the absence of legal provisions, and the want
of definiteness in provisions that are expressed, enable them
frequently to elude the law. Women, for instance, take in
confinement cases at intervals, but not often enough to
bring them within the meaning of the law—the stipulated
two-months’ interval—yet they are in point of fact Lying-in
Home keepers. When charged, that is their defence.
Or they may plead that, even if they did take two women
within two months for confinement, they did so in friendship
and not for payment. Thus again they elude the Act. So
we can see that, with the present Act, there is practically no
supervision over Lying-in Homes, and only a partial control
of children born therein. There is no inspection of the
house, only of the schedule records, and, in a special order,
if sought, the woman must be named. Finally, persons
of inexperience, of no experience at all, of the worst
Number of
Lying-in Homes,
N.S.W.
.Registration s,
1906.
Moral tone of
community
lowest in centres
outside the
Metropolitan
area.
Black list.
Method of
evading Act.
Present egal
limits.


character, are not debarred from carrying-on “Private
Hospitals,” or Lying-in Homes when and where and howthey
please. What permanent security, then, can the adminis-
tration hope for in securing the objects which the desig-
nation of the Act implies—the protection of children?
At the best, all that can be expected is to punish an
offender when a case is very clear, so clear in fact that the
child has ceased to live and to need protection. For (to
point out another aspect of this Act) in connection with
tire registration of children who are placed out apart from
their parents, the Act can prevent a woman (called a
“ custodian ” from taking more than one child to care for
(for payment), but it cannot prevent her from taking one
child if the mother chooses to place it there, though the
woman may be a most unsuitable guardian. When the
Department intervenes, the woman may refuse to part with
it. If the child shows no signs of physical neglect, the
Department can take no action. All that can be done legally
is to wait until the infant has arrived at the stage at which
the law will decide, on evidence, that the child’s condition
does indicate neglect, then the woman may be punished and
the child transferred in a weak, debilitated state with little
(if any) chance of living. And, in this connection, too,
it is interesting to know that, under the Act, the
parent cannot be punished. Recourse may be had to
a section of the Crimes Act, the law evidently holding
that in this matter it is much more important to
punish the offender than to prevent the offence. The
Attorney-General has held that section 9 of the Children’s
Protection Act does not apply to the parent, but only to
persons who take children to care for apart from the
parent. This decision appears to be prompted by a sub-
heading, “ Adoption of Children,” though the wording of
the section itself is very general and is obviously intended
to apply to “ any person,” because it says so. Surely this
is another of those absurdities with which, in the opinion
of Mr. Justice Heydon, the Act bristles. The Neglected
Children’s Act deals almost exclusively with the question
of children — it occupies itself only in a very minor degree
with the punishment of offenders, whether they are the
parents or not. My idea in this matter, as my previous
remarks on “Punishment of Offenders” will indicate, is
Defect— No re-
fltne?s
Restricted
9*S the
children's Pro-
Bearing of
chfidren’s Act
on the punish-
offendcra.


that there should be ready facilities for punishing offenders;
and in view of the serious nature that all deliberate breaches
of Acts for the protection of children must necessarily have,
the punishment should be severe. It does not follow from
this that there would of necessity be a large number of
prosecutions for child-neglect, or breaches of Acts relating
to children.: the certainty of severe punishment for such
offences would in many cases act as a strong deterrent in
this matter, just as at the present time the general know-
ledge of the weakness of the Acts by the class of disreputable
custodians and lying-in homo keepers contributes to the
committal of certain offences with impunity. This condition
of affairs is one that should be changed by law at once.
Until it is altered, in spite of the great (and, indeed, suc-
cessful) efforts that have been made by the administrative
authorities of the Act to protect the lives of young children,
no permanent beneficial result in the direction of improving
the vital statistics in regard to very young children can
be looked for. It is indeed a marvel to me how this
important social matter could have been overlooked for
so long.
One other matter to which I shall draw attention
concerns the definition of a “still-birth” as it is contained
in the Children’s Protection Act, where it is defined as “a
child born dead after the commencement of the sixth
month of pregnancy.” There are different views as to
what really would be a satisfactory definition of this term,
medical men expressing the opinion that it should read,
“ a child born dead after the expiration of the sixth
month of pregnancy,” ' while another view is that it
should read, “after the expiration of the seventh month
of pregnancy.” The point is important. While it is
recognised that legal supervision over “ still-births ” is
necessary, the present provisions may be regarded as un-
necessary, because they are ineffectual. When the deaths
of infants “ still-born ” occur under suspicious circum-
stances, Police inquiry or Magisterial inquiry is made—
very often without a qualified medical man being called in
to assist. An inquiry of that kind is useless and valueless,
as the primary object of such is to determine whether the
child was horn alive, and only a “ post-mortem ” —in which a
doctor’s services are essential—can determine the fact. Such
Effect that
ready facilities
for punishing
would have.
Effect that
involved proced-
ure exercises.
Remedy
necessary.
Definition of a
' ‘ still-birth.”
Suggestions.
Present
supervision
ineffectual.
inquiries held
without a
doctor.


an inquiry, too, is very harmful, in that it closes the door to a
large extent to further investigation. A case in point came
under notice last year. It had been represented that a
single girl was about to give birth to a child. The fact was
verified by the circumstance that she had visited a town
from an outlying country district, had been remarked to be
in an advanced stage of pregnancy, and had purchased baby
clothing. When inquiry was made as to how the child
was progressing, the alleged mother denied that she had
had a child or that she had been pregnant. As the matter
proceeded, and her story was found to be false, she admitted
that she had been “ about five months pregnant —it might
have been more —that the child had been born dead, and
that she had buried it in the river.” The matter was
placed in the hands of the police, who visited (with the
woman) the river where she had stated the infant had been
placed. The woman pointed out the spot in which she had
buried the baby, but the body could not be found, and
because the law in regard to the charge as to “ concealment
of birth ” requires that a body must be found, and because
there was no clause in the Children’s Protection Act to
meet the case, the woman went scot-free. There is little
doubt that the child was destroyed. Just consider what
an impetus to immorality and concealment of birth is given
by the knowledge throughout a district—itself of low moral
tone—of such a case, and of the fact that there is no legal
provision to demand fullest inquiry or to punish if informa-
tion is withheld. Again, in a country district, a woman
was caught by the police in the act of burning the body of a
newly-born infant—her daughter’s. A charge of “conceal-
ment of birth ” was preferred against her, but the case was
dismissed because the body was burnt to such an extent
that it could not be stated if the “ child had been born
alive.” It is to be hoped that these are exceptional
instances, both from the nature of the offences and the
fact that there is no law to deal with them. An extension
of the term “ still-birth ” in the Children’s Protection
Act, and also a general provision as to offences of the
kind indicated in relation to young children—as a link
between a breach of the “ still-birth ” clauses and the
offence of “ concealment of birth ” —are very necessary in
the moral interests of' the State. Special supervision of
Harmful effects
Instance.
Suggested
Remedies;


the nature now offered in the Children’s Protection Act is
of very little value, and could often be dispensed with
where medical aid is called in prior to the birth. A doctor’s
indorsement of that fact on a lying-in home keeper’s
record should suffice. In cases in which medical aid is not
called in prior to the still-birth, and a medical practitioner
(if subsequently consulted) is not able to give an indorse-
ment that the conditions were satisfactory, then, in my
opinion, a “ post-mortem ” should be held. This provision
should be inserted in the Act. Apart from the uselessness
of an inquiry without a doctor into the circumstances of
the death of a still-born child, police intervention is apt to
become unnecessarily harsh, even when it is in accordance
with the procedure at present laid down in the Act. The
following case is one in point. A “ still-birth ” occurred in
a lying-in home in the country. The patient was a married
woman, who was most anxious that her child should live.
Her character and the keeper’s were above reproach.
While she was plunged in grief and disappointment at the
loss of her child, she was worried into the bargain by
police inquiries as to the circumstances of the death, the
police officer actually taking the medical certificate to the
doctor who gave it to ascertain from him “if things
were all right.” I mention this instance as showing two
defects: First, the incompleteness of the provisions of
the Act if the circumstances of the case had been other
than straightforward; the too-completeness of the Act
if the conditions are satisfactory; a complex state of
affairs which needs a legal adjustment to ensure effective-
ness of action when necessary, on the one hand, if the
case is a suspicious one; and, on the other hand, to
prevent harshness of action where there is no suspicion
attaching to the lying-in home keeper or the mother of
the infant. This danger of harshness would be greatly
lessened even under present conditions if the Clause in the
Act—Regulation 18—were utilised. Discrimination would
be comparatively easy if the “ District-Registrar forwarded
to the Chief Officer under special cover a record of all
births and deaths of illegitimate children on a form
provided for that purpose ” but, unfortunately, this
is not done. In the Registrar-General’s opinion it cannot
be done, the provisions of his own Act preventing it.


This point is one requiring immediate attention. It is
a matter in which one very important intention of the
Act is defeated simply because its provision in that respect
is in conflict with a provision of the Registrar-General’s Act.
To my mind it is very necessary that the particulars of the
births of illegitimate children should he available for the
purposes of the Children’s Protection Act on the order of
the Chief Officer. It would not only afford a most effective
check upon the completeness and accuracy of the information
provided for in the 4th Schedules of the Children’s Protec-
tion Act, but it would further enable a classification of the
mothers to be made, so that inquiry might be dispensed
with in cases in which it was found that the circumstances
were satisfactory. When it is remembered that the great
areas and sparse, scattered population of many of the regis-
trars’ districts in the country are conditions which prevent
• i
any kind of supervision at all over the parents of illegitimate
children, and over the children themselves in so far as the
registration of births and deaths is concerned, the import-
ance of what I have just referred to, and the necessity of
some improvement, will be obvious. It must be borne in
mind that many of the people living in the remote areas of
this State at the present time are frequently very illiterate,
and decidedly below the average in intelligence. They may
be living many miles from a registrar’s office, and their plea
that it is difficult, if not impossible, to register births or
deaths is reasonable. Inquiry shows that, in many instances,
the registrations are made by post, the information being
furnished by letter. As it is especially in these remote
localities that vice and depravity frequently exist, and the
moral tone is often very low, these difficulties of super-
vision—at present at most the very occasional patrol of a
mounted police constable when there is a suspected case
under notice—render the accomplishment of nefarious ends
in regard to infant children easy, with comparatively no
risk of detection. lam not in any way exaggerating this
position. The experience of the Department indicates that
in the remotest districts the moral tone is lowest, and that
in those same areas the proportion of birth and death
registrations is smallest. It is such a condition of affairs
that induces me to be so emphatic in my opinion as to the
necessity for applying the regulation which I have men-
Records very
necessary -
Difficulty of
°irionby District
Registrars in the
country
Moral ton*
emotes?
district*,


tioned, and which, though it exists in the Children’s Pro-
tection Act now, exists as a dead-letter because of a legal
technicality-.
T shall now briefly refer to the terms of the Infants'
Protection Act. The Infants’ Protection Act became
law in 1902. It is really an extension of the provisions
of the Children’s Protection Act in so far as the re-
gitration of children apart from their parents is con-
cerned. One striking feature of the Act is the provision
established for the payment of preliminary expenses
in connection with the birth of illegitimate children.
Another very important power is the inspection of Insti-
tutions for children. This latter power is valuable for
the opportunity that it gives to supervise the health
and surroundings of very young children placed out apart
from their mothers. In mv opinion a very appreciable
difference will shortly be manifested in the mortality rate
of infants -a difference for the better—simply because of
the insistence of the rule that if an infant is sent to an
institution, the mother must accompany it in order to
nourish it. Of course there may be exceptions to this rule,
but I am firmly convinced, that the more fully it can be
applied, the greater will be the beneficial effect—the larger
the number of young, delicate lives that will be saved. Since
the introduction of the Infants’ Protection Act there has
already been a great improvement evidenced in this respect,
and I feel sure that it is largely due to insistence upon the
mother’s accompanying the infant. There is an objection
raised that though you may force the mother to enter an
Institution with her infant, you cannot compel her to suckle
it. As this argument is based on the unnatural supposition
that every woman who enters an Institution desires to
destroy her infant, I do not think it can be taken seriously
or generally. If there are such instances—and there may
well be a few—l believe that the proportion is small
and can be reduced by close supervision to a minimum. In
those cases obviously the child should be taken from the
mother, and, if the circumstances warrant it, the parent
should realise the risk which she has courted, namely
punishment at law. Another objection is that the shame
of a young girl is accentuated by her admission to an Insti-
tution, and that the utter loss of her self-respect is likely to
Infants' Protec-
tion Act.
Nature of Act.
Mothers to
accompany
infants to the
Institutions.
Objections to
above.
Purely
theoretical.
A second
objection.


result through association with worthless women, who are
in the Institution for the same purpose. This objection is
one not so much against the principle of admission to an
Institution as the application of it. This objection can
he overruled hy a proper and necessary system of classifica-
tion—a factor dependent upon the administration. In
furtherance of the work of this Department in the matter,
a home under a qualified nurse in a country district
near Sydney has been established for the accommo-
dation of a limited number of women with infants
under conditions which obviate such an objection.
We may say that under a proper system of classi-
fication and administration no reasonable objection can
be urged against the practice. So far as sending these
girls to large Institutions is concerned, I hold that the
smaller the establishment the less the social danger to the
mother or infant, and 1 do not doubt that the trend of
administrative effort in this direction is towards what will
practically amount to a system of hoarding-out these unfor-
tunates, who are of good character, under circumstances
which will ensure that privacy will he preserved for the
mother’s affairs, while the fullest opportunity of rearing the
infant will be offered.
Another point to which I should like to refer is the ques-
tion of the mother’s ability or otherwise to establish cor-
roboration of her story when she goes to institute proceedings
against the father of the infant. The Act at present
requires the production “ of evidence on oath, either oral or
on affidavit, in corroboration in some material particular
of any allegation in such complaint as to the paternity of
the infant.” This stipulation for corroboration is often
interpreted by the Magistrates to mean the proving of what
is practically a primd facie case before a summons will be
issued for the appearance of the man before the Court. It
will be readily admitted that there are many cases in which
such corroboration is not possible, or, again—this applies
more particularly to country districts—the witnesses the
woman wants will not attend ; they may live too far, or they
may have some other reason, and the unfortunate is not in a
position to compel their attendance. Again, there is a class
of women, stupid and ignorant, yet with feelings of shame,
which prevent their recounting the history of their betrayal
nstance.
Trend of admin-
istrative effort.
(Question of
corroboration.
Difficulty of
women.


to the Court in the manner in which the latter considers
necessary. I quite admit the proportion of worthless,
immoral women with whom the Act has to deal; but lam
convinced that when they desire to proceed against an alleged
father, they rarely have any difficulty in procuring the con-
firmation that is needed, and this readiness to offer corrobora-
tion is largely to my mind confirmation of their worthlessness,
just as inability on the part of other women to offer it is proof
very often of a superior moral tone, and for that reason they
should be helped. The remedy to my mind is a simple one.
Applicants for summonses to issue could bring to the Court
evidence as to respectability from one or two reputable
neighbours; then, if the Court was satisfied that the man
should appear, it could direct to that effect. That is to
say, it should be largely a question for the Court’s discretion
(determined by the merits of each case) as to what extent
corroboration should be insisted upon before demanding the
man’s presence. Considering that the cases at the Court
are heard privately, the man has no reason to urge undue
publicity in connection with the proceedings. And, where
the Court has a guarantee of the woman’s good faith in the
presentation of a general certificate as to character of the
kind just suggested, there is no reason why an affiliation
process should not be fully dealt with at one appearance of
the parties. One other point should be remedied. In
country districts, where a woman has frequently to come a
long distance two or three times to interview the Police
Magistrate (who alone under the Act has power to deal
with the request) before she can succeed in seeing him, a
distinct and reasonable grievance from the woman’s point
of view is disclosed. The Police Magistrate visits certain
centres comparatively rarely. In such instances, his power
to initiate proceedings should be delegated to the Clerk of
Petty Sessions.
Another matter for attention is similar to one already
described under the Children’s Protection Act; and that is
the propriety of allowing women to take even one infant
without her previously satisfying the Board’s officers that
she is a fit person to have charge of a child. The home
should be duly inspected before a child is taken—the
practice followed under the State Children Relief Act,
which contains legal provision to that effect. If a mother
Class of women.
Remedy.
Affiliation
procedure.
Country cases.
Clerk of Petty
Sessions to have
power to deal
with case.
Custodians to be
approved by
Board’s officers
before a child is
taken to nurse.


placed her child with a custodian other than one approved
of, there should be a punishment. But as I have pre-
viously already fully discussed this point I shall not dilate
upon it further.
I have now critically analysed the several Acts which
operate in connection with the dependent children of the
State, and have shown the great necessity which exists for
the extension and amendment of their provisions, so that
the State Children Relief Board—as the only body fully
competent to deal with the various aspects of the work—may
be able to carry out completely its important social duties,
unhampered by legal technicalities, omissions or involved
procedure. These hindrances to the Board’s administration,
in my opinion, have gradually accumulated through one
Act in relation to children being considered by the Legis-
lature without reference to other similar Acts, with which
they are, in principle, closely interwoven, and from which
in sense, they are inseparable. So that now the only
sensible and thorough remedy is the consolidation of the
Acts in this State relating to children-—the State Children
Relief Act, the Children’s Protection Act, the Neglected
Children’s Act, and the Infants’ Protection Act—with the
extension of their provisions on the lines indicated and with
the omission of those inconsistencies which I have pointed
out. And these extensions do not really imply any
innovation in the matter of legislation relating to children,
but merely seek to give expression—full, liberal expres-
sion-—to the principles already countenanced and adopted
by the legislature. Por instance, in respect to what con-
stitutes a “child” in point of age, the State Children
Relief Act gives jurisdiction over their wards up to the
age of 17, while an amendment of the same Act allows
the Board to extend its jurisdiction until the child is 19,
if necessary. As such extension was meant to apply in
the event of the child’s disposition disclosing evil ten-
dencies, it is in fact legal recognition of the necessity of
supervision up to 19. The principle is thus identical with
that expressed in the Neglected Children’s Act, in which
measure, however, the age is limited to 16. Again that
latter Act deals with children of the age of 5 to 16 years,
thus necessitating, in the case of infants, reference to the
Children’s Protection Act, in which, though the age is not
How hindrances
in the Acts have
come about.
Consolidation of
Acts relating to
children.
Example: Child
and age.


formally limited, the provisions cover the period of infancy
and extend to 12, 14, or 16 years. The Infants’ Protection
Act is concerned with children—hut in a particular aspect—
up to the age of 7 years. Again “ Maintenance ”is defined
in the Neglected Children's Act as including “clothing,
support, training, and education ” —a fit and comprehensive
definition with a technical bearing suited to the purpose of
the Act. However, nowhere in the Act is the term applied
in that sense and, furthermore, in the introduction to the
Act (p. 1) explaining its purpose, the terms “ maintenance ’’
and “education'’ are cognate —“maintenance ’’ there is
not inclusive of “education.’’ In the other Acts “main-
tenance ”is not separately defined. Again, Regulation
31 of the Children’s Protection Act savs that “ where
any constable or any officer takes any child .... or where
such child is brought before a Court of Petty Sessions or
any J ustice of the Peace such Court or Justice may if
sufficient evidence be given that .... such child is under
improper or incompetent guardianship (whether any person
be charged or noth order such child to be committed to the
control of the State Children Relief Board.” To my mind, by
the application of this regulation—a most excellent one—to
any child up to 16 years of age, or even older—inasmuch as
the provisions of the State Children Relief Act consider the
age up to 17 and for two years longer, if need be—some grave
difficulties, due to the absence of necessary definitions in the
Neglected Children’s Act, could be surmounted. But there
appears to be an ambiguity in the minds of those interpreting
the law as to whether Regulation 31—for which, by the way,
there is no equivalent in any of the other Acts—can now
apply in view of the subsequent passage of the Neglected
Children’s Act and its provisions relating to children from
sto 16 years. Ido not think it can be contended that the
Regulation in question is inconsistent with the Neglected
Children’s Act. The ambiguity spoken of is apparently
intensified by the repeal of certain sections of the Children s
Protection Act and “as much of the rest of that Act as is
inconsistent with the Neglected Children’s Act.” I could
go on multiplying instances of difficulties, in various forms,
with which the State Children Relief Board has to con-
tend, which militate against legislative intentions in those
social matters being given effect to, and which indicate
Example :
“ Maintenance. - ’
Inconsistency.
General
provision in
C.P. Act
re committal.
Of any child
under improper
guardianship
to S.C.R. Board.


the urgent need of consolidation of the Acts. But this
question of consolidation is not one that I propose to discuss
in detail at present. I merely introduce it here and give
a few examples, showing the necessity for it, because 1
feel, as I have said before, that, until this means is taken
to unify and harmonise the enactments relating to children,
for so long will legal contradictions and inconsistencies
interfere with the fulfilment of the intentions of a humane
legislature, and with tbe actual operations and scope of
usefulness of the honorary, philanthropic Board, which is
entrusted with the administration of the various measures
relating to children.
I have considered—rather more fully than at first I in-
tended to—the different means and methods which have
from time to time been practised in this State for the benefit
of children, and have shown how the trend of adminis-
trative and legislative effort has been always towards
the amelioration and restoration of their home-life and
home conditions by the application of one principle—
that of “ boarding-out” —under proper moral surround-
ings ; and it is to the successful application of this
principle in one of its forms—that of committal to the
care of relatives or friends, release upon probation to
parents, or boarding out direct to mothers or strangers—
that we must look for reform in the future, whether it be
the reform of dependent and delinquent children or of adult
offenders. And when I speak of “ successful administration'’
in connection with this principle, the full measure of legis-
lative assistance is implied, so that the work may be carried
on, without let or hindrance, and the benefits of proper home
life —to replace a life, which, previously, perhaps, has been
lived under depraved and debasing influences —extended to
all those poor little helpless waifs and strays, those off-
scourings of a too-compressed social system, whom the law of
so many countries for so many centuries has all too readily
stigmatised and condemned as criminals or quasi-criminals,
who, in fact, for the most part have been the helpless victims
of irresistible social forces, with none to counsel or to aid,
left to work out their own destiny to the only possible end
■ —vice and crime. But the present century has ushered in
a more liberal and humane spirit, teaching that the final
purpose of legislative and administrative activity is not so
“ Boarding out”
the main hope of
reform for the
future.


much the determination of social facts in matters calling
for redress as it is the prevention or mitigation of causes—
of which the facts are the unhappy culmination—and that
this purpose can best be achieved by supplying proper
home influences and home surroundings where these are
absent to those who need them, improving them where they
are degenerate, destroying them where they are depraved,
bringing back, that is to say, from the abnormal to the
normal, the citizen and his moral and spiritual environ-
ment, so that neither he nor his offspring shall continue to
exercise an influence fatal to the material, moral, and
spiritual well-being of himself, the community, and the
State.
Sydney: W. A. Gullick, Government Printer. —1907.
