

Übe JSaroona Estate.
Gbc property of AlVc. B. B. Danoar.
THE original “Baroona” house, at Whittingham, near Singleton, New South Wales,
known as “Rosemount,” while in the hands of the Larnach family, was built by
John Larnach in the early thirties on part of the Castle Forbes grant of 4000
acres, then held by James Mudie, one of whose daughters (Emily) Mr. Larnach married, and
no doubt when he settled down, acquired a portion of the grant from his father-in-law, and
built the original house, a photo, of which, as it existed in the sixties, still hangs at Baroona.
Suffolk Mares and Foals.
Mr. Dangar acquired the property in 1869 from Mrs. J. Larnach, on his and Mrs. Dan-
gar’s return from a three years’ trip to England, where the former in 1868 met with a bad
accident in the hunting held which lamed him for life, and caused much trouble in later years.
The house was in a very dilapidated state when bought, hardly habitable; thus he was com-
pelled to renovate and build, which he did with the aid of the late Benjamin Backhouse, archi-
tect, who carried out the work very successfully, making the nucleus of a comfortable home,


Pastoral Homes of Australia.
Tnu L,vns Jlknry Uanuar, of Nuotsfiici.u 1
N.S.W.
beyond, with “Neotsfield,” the old home of the Dan-
gar’s about two miles away right in front, nut far
from the river.
Nearly the whole of the rich Hats when first oc-
cupied were covered with heavy gum timber (Mr. Dan-
gar remembers seeing this), which, curiously enough,
died of its own accord, before sapping was thought
of, and was then burnt off by the different owners, im-
Thu Lath Wii.uam Dancak, of Tuhanvii.i.u,
N.S.W.
which the place now is. The square ol the old main
building, with its 18-iu. walls, was retained, ami it
has since been practically built all round, with two
new wings, and from time to time since 1871, when
the renovated house was hrst occupied and named
“Baroona” (from Geoff ry flamlyn), many oilier addi-
tions and improvements have been made, as the ac-
companying photographs will show, Messrs. 1 lorhury
Hunt, F. B. Maukens, and his successor, !•'. G. (lastkv
dew, being the architects employed.
The site is almost a unique one, overlooking the,
Great Northern-road and railway, and commanding
an extensive view of the Hunter Valle)’, and mountains
Mr. A. A. Danuau,
proving the appearance of the country, ami adding
much to its value. This, as time went on, has been much
enhanced at “Baroona” by the planting of deciduous
and other trees, notably the avenue, with its double
line of elms and pines, hacked up by oleanders, ;md
the tennis courts, surrounded by a pepper-tree hedge,
and shrubberies on the top of the hill at the back of
the house, where long years ago stood the Larnach
windmill, a great landmark in the old days (it is said
that the Larnach’s lived by it for years), well remem-




I
tfi
o
5
5
»
I
I
The Lake, Island, and Windmill Baroona.


The Baroona Estate, New South Wales,
bered, no doubt, by many olu residents, and those who passed up and down the Great Nor-
thern-road, before the advent of steam flour mills and the railway. The mill was unwork-
able in 1869, and, being struck by lightning soon after, that was thougnt a sufficient hint
to take it down, which was then and there done, proving it to have been a splendid piece of
carpentering work, done no doubt by assigned servants. It must have been well built to
stand the westerly gales that tear over the hill. A pavilion dividing the two tennis courts
now stands in its place. There are also many circles, and lines of trees, which have been
forced to grow under difficulties, and are always well looked after. Mr. Dangar never allows
a year to pass without doing some tree-planting, and he thinks he has had his reward, for
they are pleasant to look upon, as they make a better show year by year, besides affording
shelter and shade for the stock. Though often windy on top of the hill, the pepper-tree
hedge and shrubberies form so ample a protection that tennis can be played in a gale without
feeling its effects,
The house stables at “Baroona,” designed by Mr. H. Hunt, and built in 1886, are rather
a feature of the place, the plan being an admirable one for the health and comfort of the men
and horses, and convenience of working. The Suffolk stallions and colts, when brought in,
are accommodated in 16 separate boxes, backed up by small paled-in paddocks (g), in which
there are shelter sheds, with water
laid on to each. Four windmills,
pumping from wells and a dam on to
the hill form the water supply, back-
ed up by an enormous underground
tank, which has never failed to sup-
ply the house.
In 1905, that portion of the rich
flat part of the New Freugh Estate
known as “Castle Forbes” (so
named by Mr. Mudie), was bought
from Mr. P. J. C. McDouall, followed
immediately by the purchase from
Dr. W. Irwin, of “O’Brian’s farm, of
145 acres, with valuable frontage
to the river, it being surrounded on
three sides by the land acquired
from Mr. McDouall, thus adding al-
together 1126 acres to Baroona, and
thereby increasing the value of the
original estate, as the bulk of it is
of inferior quality, some of it very
bad, though it now fattens fairly
The Tennis Hill and Flagstaff.


Pastoral Homes at Australia.
Front Kntkanck to House Stahi.es.
from being so long cleared, and chain-harrowed after rain as opportunity offers. The Suf-
folk colts have for years past been practically reared in what is known as the "front pad-
dock,” with its little artificial lake, in which they revel, and in spite of the inferior quality
of the soil, grow to fine horses, the hard and undulating ground being good for their
feet and action. "Baroona,” now on both sides of the Great Northern-road and railway,
comprises a total area of 2631:2:25 acres, about 200 acres of which is cultivated, lucerne,
Indian corn, oaten and wheaten hay, pumpkins, &c,, being principally grown, a stock of
lucerne hay always
being kept on hand
in case of drought.
Since 1872, the es-
tate has turned off a
remarkable number
of fat and purebred
stock of various
sorts and breeds, re-
presenting alto-
gether, to the end of
iq 12, a total return
Pure Jerseys.


The Baroona Estate, New South Wales,
A
Tins Imported Arab Stallion “Kart-tan.”
of £86518, which, allowing for the
very limited area of the property up
to 1905 (1505 acres), and the poor,
hard land, indicates that it was work-
ed to the best advantage.
ttbe Stocli,
In 1569, when in England, Mr.
Dangar purchased the pure Arab
stallion Farha.ii for 500 guineas. This
handsome animal —a pure bred Ara-
bian, a bright bay in colour, with
black points—was bred in the Syrian
Desert, near Aleffo, by Sheik el Mes-
rab, a noted character in his da}', who ran away with Lady Ellenborough, wife of a Governor-
General of India. The colt was bought by a Captain Spiers, with the assistance of Consul
Rogers, of Damascus, and brought by him to England when quite young. While at Baroona
he sired many good colts and fillies, and eventually died in Queensland, at Durundur. A
painting of the little fellow can be seen at Baroona.
Also was acquired from the King of Wurtemberg another grand old white Arab named
“Bournou,” and, in conjunction with Lion. James White, M.L.C., the Gladiateur yearling colt,
afterwards named Grandmaster, was bought at Middle Park (Blenkirons), for 450 guineas, Mr.
Dangar subsequently purchasing Mr. White’s share of the horse. Also three thoroughbred fil-
lies were acquired at Middle Park, and two pure Durham cows were bought, one, Venetia (she
afterwards made a great name for herself), at Brailes House sale, in Warwickshire, the
other, Duchess of Essex, privately from Mr. J. Clayden, Littlebury, Essex; and a beautiful
Hereford cow, Minerva, second prize at the Royal, was bought, and afterwards, with her
female produce, sold to Mr. F. Reynolds, of Tocal. Glenlee, one of her bulls, was bought by
the late Mr. C. Lumley Hill, and it helped in the founding of his Belle Vue Stud in Queensland
Mr, Dangar saw all these animals shipped, and arduous work it was, as he had not
then long recovered from his hunt-
ing accident. However, they even-
tually reached “ Baroona,” all but
two Dundee fillies bought at Middle
Park, which died on board the
“Middlesex” on the voyage out.
The remaining filly, named Sun-
shine, was by old Weatherbit, and
grew to a fine mare, her first foal, Sun-
set, selling as a yearling for 330
guineas to Sir Hercules Robinson,
but what races he won Mr. Dangar for-
gets; he only remembers that in after
years, when racing in Queensland, it
The Tennis Courts and Pavilion.


Pastoral Homes of Australia*
was said that he could carry a “bale
of wool,” the right sort of thorough-
bred to breed. Sunset was by Haw-
(
thornden. Later, another most pro-
mising filly from the same mare,
smashed one of its forelegs all to
pieces, and had to be destroyed,
soon after which the mare was
bitten by a snake and died. Grand-
master stood for three seasons at “Ba-
roona,” with a good deal of success;
then Mr. R. Rouse, jun., of Biraganbil,
bought him for 600 guineas. Thus
“Bawdsey Volunteer” (Imp).
exeunt the thoroughbreds from “Baroona,” Mr. Dangar concluding his luck did not lay
with them.
The Arabs were kept, and Shanghai, from India, at a cost of guineas, was added
to the sires. A number of select mares were brought to mate with these two Arabians, and
were bred from for some years, with more or less success, but not being able to obtain
remunerative prices for the best colts, which were kept up and fed and trained as if they
were thoroughbreds, Mr. Dangar, though believing in the Arab as much as ever, reluctantly
gave them up, and sold off most of the mares and young stock in 1882 and 1886, keeping
a good deal of the blood, some of which he still has.
Prior to this, about the year 1876, Messrs. W. J. Dangar and A. A. Dangar despatched
Major R. D. Upton, late of gth Lancers, author of “Newmarket and Arabia,” and a great
authority on the Arab, to Syria, to endeavour to purchase an Arab horse and mare. The
Major was engaged the best part of a year over this business, and, reluming to England
with a stallion and mare, shipped them out to Australia, W. J. Dangar taking the former
and A. A. Dangar the latter, the two
animals costing together something
over £2OOO. They each produced
stock; but it is needless entering into
details, they were not a success.
Messrs. Dangar had their doubts as to
the purity of the horse, and the mare's
stock were very weedy and not attrac-
tive, Evidently they left their country
for their country’s good, the wily
Arab being too much for the Major.
In 1873, two more Durham cows
, “Leader,” a Two-year-old Baroona Suerolk,


The Baroona Estate, New South Wa/est
were imported from England at a cost of while in 1878 Roan Butterfly was purchased
from Mr. J. C. Irving, of the Clarence River, for 305 guineas, and in 1880, three cows and
two heifers, descended from the Colac studs, were bought at a cost of .£945. From these
ten cows that have been mentioned, the Baroona herd of pure Shorthorns was bred up,
the young males making rather a name for themselves, being readily bought at the time
by Queenslanders and others, at good prices. Mr. Dangar for several years bred his own
stud bulls from the cow Venetia, using them for one, two and three years, according to
their merit, and then selling them; altogether she produced eight bulls, which, after siring
many others for the herd, sold for a total of The old cow died in 1885, having had
fifteen calves (two born dead) —not a bad record. Venetia and the old Arab stallion, Bour-
nou, were properly buried at Baroona, and lie side by side, the latter, though he never sired
anything, having an engraved brass plate placed over him, to mark the last resting place of
This Turk Jerseys, Baroona.
a noble old animal, admired by everyone who saw him, and shame on the Germans selling
him for two figures. In 1880, the Durham bull calf Hillhurst’s 6th Duke, was purchased
from Hon. W, McCulloch, M.L.C., of Victoria, for 500 guineas; he grew to a remarkably fine
specimen of a Durham, and was first prize and champion in Sydney in 1882, and presided
over the herd for seven years, making his mark.
In April, 1891, the pure herd having increased beyond the compass of the property, a
clearing sale of 112 females and 33 bulls was held in Singleton, and on a lowering market
realised close on £6OOO, and that was the end of the pure Shorthorns at Baroona (except a
few odd ones that were afterwards sent to Mooki Springs), the produce of the ten cows,
over about a period of eighteen years, returning altogether some Prior to this
sale, a few pure Jersey cows were purchased (there was always an outcry and scarcity of
milk in the winter months), and they and their picked descendants form a choice little milk-
ing herd, being now the only breeders kept on Baroona, their bull calves, or the best of


Pastoral Homes of Australia.
them, having already made some name for themselves, are meeting a ready sale under the
increasing number of dairy farms m the district, they seemingly being appreciated as
milkers. At any rate, they are at Baroona, the outcry has ceased, and there is plenty of
milk and cream, summer and winter.
Suffolk iiMmcbea.
The breed being established at Neotsfield for over fifty years, and Mr. A. A. Dangar
having had contact with it at Gostwyck, New England, so early as 185 S, it was only natural
he should desire to have some of them, therefore in 1882 he commissioned his brother Wil-
liam, who was then in England, to purchase two mares, and that resulted in Reading
Duchess and Lady Jane, purebred Suffolk mares, arriving eventually at Baroona. Thus
these two imported mares founded the stud, which has since prospered greatly, and is now
about at its zenith in quality. Several other importations of mares followed from time to
time, and in 1891, upon the dispersion of the Neotsfield stud, after the death of William
Dangar in 18go, the pick of the mares there, nearly all descended from imported stock,
were bought and divided by Hon. H. C. Dangar, M.L.C., and Mr. A. A. Dangar, the lat-
ter, witli this addition, then having the larger stud, which soon became so numerous that
another was started, principally from it, at Mooki Springs, Liverpool Plains, and from the
two studs all the D over A and HD conj. colts sold in Sydney at the annua] sales have come.
The Baroona stud now consists of forty very select mares, only the very best being
kept, as breeders. Seven stallions have been imported at different times, all bought from
noted Suffolk breeders, the last being Bawdsey Volunteer (first prize and champion, Sydney,
1912 and 1913) who now, with Baroona Maxim, presides over the stud. This horse, bred by
the late Sir Cuthbert Quilter, M.P., of Bawdsey Manor, Suffolk, is without doubt a fine speci-
men of the breed, a whole coloured dark chestnut, active and vigorous, combined with good
action and an excellent temper, a characteristic of the breed; likewise his small ears, another
characteristic, and on account of which Mr. Dangar has often been heard to call them the
“Arabs of the draughts”; at any rate, from his experience of the chestnuts, extending now over
fifty-five years, he has always thought, and still believes them to be exceptionally useful
animals for the country work of Australia. They also cross well with light, well-bred,
and even weedy mares, producing most useful stock, as is being proved over and over again;
four so bred are now being worked on Baroona,
One hundred and three colts, nearly all 3-year-olds, bred on Baroona, have been sold
since the stud started, one going to India, two to New Zealand, one to Fiji, one to New
Caledonia, and the balance to the Australian States, all taking their quota; thus the breed
has been distributed over a large area. A well-grown, whole-coloured lot of eleven 2-year-


*
«
f*
a
«.
s
®
f
to
o
Front of House with Billiard Room Wing, Conservatory, Lawn and Wall.
I
0
(t


Pastoral Homes of Australia.
olds are now to be seen in the before-mentioned front paddock, making their own living. In ad
dition to the 103 colts, a large number of geldings, mares, and fillies have been sold, in con-
junction with the . drafts from Mooki Springs, at quite remunerative prices, besides which
all the working draughts on the stations are Suffolk Punches, and have been so for many
years past.
personal.
Mr. Albert Augustus Dangar, fourth son of the late Henry Dangar, was born at Neots-
field, N.S.W., Bth June, 1840. His father, arriving in New South Wales in 1822, in connec
Tins Lodge and Avenue.
tion with the Australian Agricultural Company, had afterwards, as an active Government
surveyor, much to do with the early pastoral settlement of the colony, with which the family
has been largely identified ever since, still holding the two principal stations, Gostwyck
and Yallaroi, that were originally taken up, stocked and settled upon as' leaseholds, with
others acquired by Mr. A. A. Dangar for himself and Messrs. Dangar Bros., while he was
general manager, viz,., Noonndoo, in the Maranoa district, Queensland (1873); Mooki
Springs, on Liverpool Plains (1882}; Waterloo, near Walcha, New England (1899). These


The Baroona Estate, New South Wales,
five stations, practically converted into freeholds during Mr. A. A. Dangar’s management,
and comprising an area of 226,000 acres, are now held by the third generation of Dangars
(6), a performance of which Mr. A. A. Dangar and his brother, Hon. H. C. Dangar, M.L.C.,
are not a little proud, it only being accomplished by sheer hard wor*k and close attention to
business. The former is likewise proud in being able to say that during all that long period,
while employing thousands of men he himself has never been in a court of law with a single
one of then, nor thev with him.
Haroona I-lousb and Domustic Wing.
A large map (4ft. 3m. by 3ft, gin.) embracing all the country from Newcastle, north to
the Liverpool Range above Murrurundi, in fact the whole valley of the Hunter River, was
engraved and published in London in 1828, from the surveys of Henry Dangar, evidently on
the face of it a most arduous piece of work in those days, for then the country must have been
heavily timbered with but few open spaces, making the work difficult ana tedious. The
waters, roads, and grants then existing are wonderfully correctly shown on this map, and
the parishes as they now exist are delineated A copy of the map—the only one known-—•


Pastoral Homes of Australia,
is carefully preserved at Baroona. It is dedicated by Henry Dangar to "Lieutenant-General
Sir Thomas McDougall Brisbane, K.C.8., late Governor of New South Wales, and its depen-
dencies,” and the writer is of opinion the credit that was his due was never given to Henry
Dangar for the compilation of that map in those early days; it is only lately that its existence
was known of by his son.
Mr. A. A. Dangar’s schooling began early, he being packed off to Newcastle when only
eight years of age and, after a few years spent there, he accompanied his parents to Eng-
Thic Verandah.
land in 1852, and was educated principally at the Truro Grammar School, in Cornwall (then
under the head mastership of a relative, the Rev. S. Andrews), and at Hamburg, in Ger-
many. Conceiving a liking for the sea—probably acquired on the voyage home—he was
sent for a few months to Mr. Eastman’s Naval School at Southsea, Portmouth, with the in-
tention of entering the Royal Navy, but his parents, failing to secure in time a nomination
to a cadetship (limit of age then fourteen) he at fourteen and a-half, went into the mer-


The Baroona Estate, New South Waies.
chant service, and served three years as a midshipman in Dunbar’s, making two voyages in
the La Hogue ’to Sydney, and one to Calcutta in the “Octavia,” which ship took out one
of the first detachments of troops for the Indian Mutiny. While in Calcutta he saved the life
of an English soldier, who tried to drown himself,' and witnessed the landing (from steamer
and river barges) of the rescued Lucknow and Cawnpore Garrisons, a sight to be remem-
bered. He was also down in the lower hold of a sailing ship with eight)' head of elephants
Thk Lake and Front I'addock.
on board, brought round from Kurrachee to draw the heavy guns up country; also saw them
being landed on rafts specially constructed, a sight not to be forgotten either.
Leaving the sea at the wish of his parents, who had then returned to Australia, he, in
1858, at the age of eighteen, was sent to the stations, and worked for four and a half
years under the late Sir Arthur Palmer, who was general manager of his father’s proper-
ties. During that time much solid hard work was gone through, and a thorough knowledge
of squatting, stock, and men who had to do with them, acquired.


n te Pastoral Homes of Australia.
Gostwyck, in New England, and Yallaroi, near Warialda were headquarters, but many
months, from time to time with much rough experience, were spent upon two western
cattle stations, one, Boombah, on the Balonne River, then almost the limit of settlement.
In February, 1863, after a six months’ tour in North-west Queensland, Mr. Dangar took
over all the stations (6) from Sir Arthur Palmer, and became general manager of same for
his mother; thus, when not quite twenty-three, he had charge of 100,000 sheep and 22,000
head of cattle, with the usual outfit of horses on each property.
“Wellington,” Grand Champion Ram Sydney Show 1903, bred by Mr. A. A. Dangar.
Since that time, with the exception of four trips to England (first when married, in
1866, for three years, then in 1884, and 1899 during the Boer War, and lastly in 1902, to
bring back the family to Baroona, Mrs. Dangar and daughters having been absent in
Europe for six years), the subject of this notice has been closely identified with the family
properties managing the stations, firstly for his mother as before indicated, then in 1870
becoming managing partner of Dangar Bros., which continued to 1897, when the properties
were divided, that being made easy through the acquisition of Mooki Springs in 1882, the
buying of which Mr. A. A. Dangar considers the best day’s work of his life. The last-


The Baroona Estate, New South Wales,
named station fell to him in the division, with a small portion of Gostwyck, known as Pal-
merston, upon which he has lately built a handsome bungalow for a summer residence.
Hie then leased Gostwyck from Mr. F. H. Dangar, and in 1901 bought the old property outright
from his brother, transferring it to his son, Capt. C. C. Dangar, late 13th Hussars, in Decem-
ber, 1911. Ihe IQI2 cl.p from the station has averaged for fleece and pieces Hid., greasy
fleece bringing in Sydney up to iSid., a record for the last thirteen years; this, too, with
VIBW KROM VIiRANUAH.
a cut of from g to io lbs. of wool speaks for itself, and makes the late owner regret just
a little that he does not now possess a single sheep, after working among them for frfty-
four years, and breeding up such a stud of pure Merinos, that on Gostwyck he
produced the grand champion ram (Wellington) at the Sydney Show in 1903,
and many other noted winners, including pens of 10 since. Fifteen thousand


Pastoral Homes of Australia.
acres of Gostwyck, the best of the land, on the Armidale side, has been cut up and sold to
local buyers, thus contributing its share towards closer sfettlement; therefore the late owner
thinks that if the welfare of the State and the great wool industry, which contributes so
much to it, is fairly studied, this old-established flock will not be interfered with further, for
to work such a flock to advantage some scope of country is required.
Eschewing politics and public gatherings generally (one of the famdy, a brother, was
always in Parliament), Mr. Dangar, nevertheless, took an active part in the early Labour
troubles, sparing neither time nor money in the matter, and having much to do from the very
The Baroona House Stables, Back Entrance,
first with the formation of the now powerful Pastoralists’ Union of New South Wales, of
which he was vice-president for three years and president for five years. No man in Aus-
tralia has more sympathy with the real, honest, straightforward worker, as thousands can
testify, while few have worked harder than he himself, thus it naturally follows he is no friend
to the socialist agitator, and such like, who, bethinks, are the bane of his native country, and
too many of whom abound and fatten on their misled fellows. Mr. Dangar is also a J.P. of
Queensland and vice-president of the Union Club, Sydney, being the oldest member of that
body living in New South Wales.
Mr. Dangar has always been an exhibitor at the local and metropolitan shows, years ago
a very large exhibitor, as his books will testify, helping them now too with trophies and dona-


The Buroonct Estate, New South Wales,
tions. He also gives much encouragement and substantial aid to rifle-shooting, which for
valid reasons he thinks should be encouraged above everything.
Many hospitals and similar institutions benefit by his liberality, while the “Dangar Cot-
tage Hospital,” with its eighteen acres of land, tree-planted, and partly endowed, was in
1907 presented to the town and district of Singleton by himself and Mrs. Dangar, and it is be-
lieved the gift is thoroughly appreciated by the residents.
He has also had much to do in connection with the new All Saints’ Anglican Church,
now approaching completion, and which promises to be a noble structure.
Interior of House Staju.es.
Mr. Dangar and all his family spent the year 1908 in India, and during his stay there he
took a keen and active interest in hunting. At Ootacamund he hunted and rode hard for six
months, after being practically out of the saddle.for six years. It was at this place he con-
structed, with the object of opening up a difficult bit of country for the hunt, a five and
a-quarter mile ride, a large portion of it being through dense woods and the balance over hill
and dale. This piece of work is now known as “Dangar’s Ride.”


The Pastoral Homes of Australia.
Grooi* ok Suffolk Mares and Koai.s in Vari>.
In 1866 Mr. Dangar married Mary Phoebe, third daughter of the late Edwin Rouse, of
Rouse Hill, near Windsor, one of the old families of the State, and the family consists of three
sons and four daughters, one of the former and two of the latter being married.
