

Price Two Shillings.
Ftotsi
EXPERIENCE
Jktg fans in Casmania:
HUGH M. HULL, Esq., F.E.S., Tas. :
FORMERLY POLICE MAGISTRATE AND CHAIRMAN OF QUARTER SESSIONS
FOR THE COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND, AND NOW CORONER AND
CLERIC ASSISTANT OF THE HOUSE OP ASSEMBLY OF
TASMANIA.
With Map and Ten Illustrations.
LONDON:
ORGER & MERYON, 174, FENCHURCH STREET.
1859.


OPINIONS.
From the “ Hobart Town Daily Mercury Newspaper.
“ Mr. Hull concluded a lecture of upwards of an hour and a half,
which was listened to throughout with the greatest attention by perhaps
the most numerous audience ever before collected in Tasmania to listen
to dry statistics, by stating that he courted inquiry into the correctness
of any single statement which he had made, for that there was not a
single paragraph which was not strictly true, neither too floridly written,
nor the reverse—in fact, a fair picture of Tasmania.”
From His Excellency Sir Henry E. F. Young, Kt., C.B.
Governor-in- Chief.
“ I attended at the Lecture of Mr. Hugh Munro Hull’s account of the
Island of Tasmania with pleasure, and I consider it worthy of publica-
tion as a valuable contribution to the annals of the Colony.
(Signed) “ H. E. F. Young.”
From Joseph Hone, Esq., Barrister-at-Law, Vice-President of the
Royal Society, and of the Mechanics’ Institute, Chairman of
Quarter Sessions, &,c.
“ On the 23rd of last month I heard Mr. Hull deliver a Lecture in the
Hall of the Mechanics’ Institute, Hobart Town, on the capabilities of
the Island of Tasmania, embracing probably every subject connected
with the colony, and listened to by the audience with marked satisfac-
tion. Emigrants of every class, whether married or single, of decided
sobriety, and of industrious and peaceable habits, and uniformly kind
and civil in their deportment, will to a certainty be well received, and be
happy in Tasmania, their then adopted country. I would add that the
Hall wherein Mr. Hull delivered the Lecture was crowded to excess.
I have now resided here for thirty-five years, and write thus strongly
from the knowledge obtained by me personally in every part of the
Colony.”
(Signed) “Joseph Hone.
“ 178, Macquarie Street, Hobart Town.”




jt II
yy. <
■ : 1
<
K


EXPERIENCE
Jfortg J hm m Casmania:
HUGH M. HULL, Esq,, F.RS, Tas. ;
FORMERLY POLICE MAGISTRATE AND CHAIRMAN OF QUARTER SESSIONS
FOE THE COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND, AND NOW CORONER AND
CLERK. ASSISTANT OF THE HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY OP
TASMANIA.
LONDON:
ORGER & MERYON, 174, FENCHURCH STREET.
J. WALCH & SONS, —HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
WM. FLETCHER,—4S & 47, ELIZABETH STREET, HOBART TOWN.


LONDON!
ORGER AND MBRYON, FENCHURCH STREET, CITY.


PAGE.
Aborigines 15
Assurance Companies .. 43
Banks 45
Benevolent Societies .. .. 44
Birds 33
Bishops 35
Boarding-houses .. .. 44
Brighton District .. .. 68
Building Societies .. .. 45
Campbell Town District .. 60
Garrick 75
Cattle 26
Chemists 39
Churches 35
Clarence District .. .. 69
Climate 13
Coaches 34
Coal 29
Coin 46
Convent 36
Corn 18
Coroners 42
Courts of Law 42
Cumberland County .. .. 49
Debentures 46
Deloraine District .. .. 69
Education 37
Electric Telegraph .. .. 40
Evandale 70
INDEX.
PAGE.
Exports and Imports,. .. 35
Fingal District 55
Fisheries 32
Flowers .. 23
Franklin District .. .. 69
Fruits 22
Gardening 21
Gas Companies 45
George Town District .. 70
Glamorgan District .. .. 70
Gold 47
Government 84
Grain 18
Hobart Town 76
Horses .. 26
Horton College 61
Horton District 58
Hospitals .. .. .. .. 38
Houses 17
Hunting 33
Inns .. 34
Irrigation 41
Islands 83
Justices 42
Lakes 10
Land Regulations .. .. 80
Land under Cultivation .. 17
Launceston 78
Law of Master and Servant 42


Libraries
Longford District
Lunatic Asylum.
Mails
Masonic Lodges.
Mechanics’ Institutes
Medical Men
Morven District
Mountains ..
Museum
New Norfolk District
Oatlands District
Odd Bellows
Orphan Schools
Parliament ~
Police
Population
Port Sorell District
Postal Arrangements
Prisoners ..
Provisions
Quakers
Rain 13
Rechabites 44
Richmond District .. .. 65
Rivers 11
Royal Society 39
St. Mary’s Seminary .. .. 37
Savings’ Banks 46
Scenery 8
Schools 37
Servants’ Home .. .... 43
Sheep 24
Ship Building 27
Sorell 71
Steamers 40
Timber 28
Unsettled Districts—
Regulations .. .. 72
Wages.. .. 82
Waste Lands—Regulations 80
Westbury 72
Western Country .. .. 72
Whale Fishery 30


PREFACE.
It was suggested to me that my personal experience of the capabilities
of the Colony would enable me to prepare a small Pamphlet for circula-
tion among the Middle and Working Classes of Great Britain, from the
pages of which they might glean reliable information respecting Tas-
mania, the Garden op the South —the Sanatarium op India —and,
to a certain extent, the Granary op the Australias.
I decided on publishing the Pamphlet in England, and in order that
the People here might be aware of what I was about to say of them, I
invited them together, to the number of some hundreds, at the Mechanics’
Institute in Hobart Town, and read before them the manuscript of this
Pamphlet, my lecture being honored with the presence of Sir Henry
Young, C. 8., the Governor, the Colonel commanding the troops,
Colonel Broughton, R.E., and the Right Worshipful the Mayor of
Hobart Town, David Lewis, Esq.; and the satisfactory manner in
which my statements were received, endorsed the correctness of every
one of them.
I have, therefore, the pleasure of placing my Pamphlet before the
People of my glorious native country, in the firm hope and belief that
the statements contained therein will induce the emigration of numbers
of industrious people, who must better their condition by coming to
Tasmania.
Parliamentary Library,
Tasmania, Ist July , 1859,




LECTURE
ON THE
CAPABILITIES OF TASMANIA,
jßead 23rd of June, 1859.
I have the pleasure of reading before you this evening the
manuscript of a pamphlet which I have prepared for the purpose
of being circulated at the Crystal Palace at Sydenham.
I am assured of the cordial support of the Government of Tasmania in
the matter—of the substantial assistance of a vote in aid of the expense ;
were I a capitalist I should make the book more worthy of the object,
and produce from records everywhere courteously placed within my
reach, and from extensive observation and a not unfaithful memory,
a book which would more fully and felicitously depict Tasmania in its
true colors. These would not possibly be so gorgeous as those of our
gold producing neighbours. But if the deep thinker look upon this
page and upon that, he may possibly see cause to agree with me, that
though we have not the material wealth of Victoria, we have far more
moral and social worth; and that without egotism we must feel our-
selves to hold a higher position as a community. Excessive wealth
cannot be said to produce all the consequences of extreme indulgence,
nor does poverty beget an aggregate of opposite evils.
This pamphlet will be printed in England, and the first edition will
consist of 3000 copies, with illustrations from the pencils of Colonial
Artists, and when I mention the names of our venerated Bishop, Dr.
Nixon, of Sharp, and Prout Hill, you may feel assured that Tasmania
will be both beautifully and truthfully delineated. A small map show-
ing the western country which, with all its advantages, is now open for
selection by any person residing in the Colony, and also pointing out the
localities where gold has been found, will also be attached.


I trust that the gratuitous circulation of 3000 copies among as many
families in Great Britain will be the means of inducing at least a tenth
part of that number of emigrants to accept the advantages held out to
them- If it does, I feel that I shall have done some good in my
generation, and the State some service.
I fear that some present will think the subject uninteresting. To them
I say, “lend me your attention for half an hour, while I tell you what I
am going to say at the firesides of 3000 of the peasantry who have made
England what it is, about the capabilities of this your adopted Home ;
what I am going to tell your relatives and mine about Tasmania/’
I fear I cannot, in language sufficiently expressive, describe what one
sees under our bright and sunny skies—in our evergreen woods and
fields—of the views from the top of Mount Wellington—the roads-—the
farms —the bridges—homesteads—towns and villages ; all marking the
sturdy perseverance of the settler—or of the valley of the Huon winding
its fertilizing course for many a mile—or the view from the top of Ben
Lomond, where one sees the noble valley of the South Esk, the thousands
upon thousands of acres of the plains and gently rounded hills of Avoea,
ogpr which sheep and cattle are depasturing—or of the valleys of Fingal,
rich in something more than flocks and herbs, —rich in that which,
though called by philosophers the “ root of all evil,” is yet as eagerly
coveted and sought for by those philosophers, as well as others who do not
know Plato from Pluto, as if it was the source of all good.
I cannot properly describe to them the view from the Basaltic columns
of Wylde’s Crag, where the giddy climber looks down, as I have done, on
numerous lakes from which streams flowing through level country bear
fertility along their course; and on extensive plains now occupied by
myriads of sheep, and millions of acres yet to be occupied and improved
in their turn by the settlers, but I will do my best to show them what
an industrious man can secure in Tasmania.
An idle man soon becomes a poor man! This is an old and cor-
rect adage, though it is not a sequitur that a hard-working man must
become rich. We must have no idle men! We want men to live here,
to work here, to die here, and to make for themselves and their children
a home. To encourage industry and promote improvement, the present
Government has determined on throwing open for occupation at pepper-
corn rents, the five millions of acres composing the hitherto unoccupied
western country. The first effect of this measure will be to make thou-
sands of acres of good land—now lying idle—available for cultivation and
pasture ; a field will be opened up for the profitable employment of labour
and capital; a thousand happy homes will spring up where the Kangaroo


and Emu have hitherto been “ monarchs of all they surveyed.” These
homes will require happy and virtuous mistresses, who, judging from past
experience, will be the mothers of five times the number of healthy,
happy, handsome, and virtuous children, who will grow up a steady and
industrious peasantry, the sinews of the colony, who will do for Tasmania
what their forefathers have done for England.
The Count Stuzbuecki, an intellectual foreigner who visited us many
years ago, says, “ The Anglo-Saxon reproduces his country wherever he
hoists his country’s flag.”
In the following pages it will be seen, that in Tasmania, at the very
antipodes of home, the Anglo-Saxon has lost none of that energy which
has made the name feared and honoured in northern climes ; that he
retains strong feelings of loyalty and attachment to his Queen and
her Government; and possesses, even in his bark hut in the forest, a
heart ever ready to sympathize with distress, and a hand open to aid in
every good work.
I have resided in Tasmania for forty years, and during more than a
quarter of a century that I have been an officer of the Government, I
have lost no opportunity of making myself fully acquainted with the capa-
bilities of the Colony, and I now detail my experience for the benefit of
those small capitalists, or sturdy yeomen, and those of the redundant
working people of England who may wish to emigrate, in order to benefit
their condition.
I shall mention one simple fact.—When the Colonists were invited by
the Governor to subscribe to the “ Patriotic Fund,” to aid the Widows
and Orphans of the Crimean war, they responded to the call at once, by
sending in a sum equal to £l. 15s. Bd. for every householder in Tasmania,
or 6s. 3d. for every soul in the Colony ; a subscription unparalleled in
the British dominions . And what did Her Most Gracious Majesty say
of her subjects in Tasmania, when Sir Henry Young’s despatch was
laid before her ?—She directed that Her high sense of their liberality,
cordial sympathy, and loyalty, should be conveyed to them. Had the
people of Great Britain subscribed as liberally, there would have been
a fund of ten millions instead of one; and instead of the 17s. 6d.
granted to the distressed mother of a sailor killed in action, we should
have seen a record of some such a gratuity as a Tasmanian Colonist
would have bestowed in such a case.
There is very little doubt that Emigrants may find employment here
by thousands, provided only they are disposed to work ; and if they
bring with them even a few pounds of capital, so much the better.
Years may elapse before they rise to affluence, but they will have before


them a hundred living examples of men who have attained, by steady
perseverance, to yearly incomes of thousands, whose imported capital did
not exceed a very few pounds. By the same course may they expect
to rise, for Tasmania will repay honest industry with liberal remunera-
tion.
Tasmania is nearly as large as Ireland, and is situated between the
10th and 43rd parallels of latitude. Its average length is 165 miles, and
average breadth 155 miles, and contains 14,482,892 acres of land. It
is divided from the continent of New Holland by Bass’s Strait, about 120
miles wide, in which Strait is a chain of rocky islands, indicating that at
some remote period Tasmania formed a part of the mainland of Australia.
Indeed Ben Lomond has been indicated as the culminant point of the
Australian Alps.
The Island has been divided into fourteen counties, which again are
sub-divided into about 220 parishes, in which are 192 towns and villages,
100 being Post Stations.
About forty miles from the west coast, and about the same distance
from the east coast, there rises a table land of about a million and a half
acres in extent. In this part of the Island are the following Lakes,
forming the heads of the several rivers.
1. The Great Lake , 3822 feet above the level of the sea, contains
50,000 acres, and is in parts very deep. The River Shannon rises here,
and during the prevalence of high winds the river overflows its banks.
The plains around the Great Lake are very extensive and bare of trees,
and are depastured during the summer months by many thousand sheep.
2. Lake Sorell, 3000 feet above the sea, contains 15,000 acres. This
and the adjoining, Lake Crescent, of about 6000 acres, are the source of
the River Clyde. It was on the banks of Lake Sorell that O’Meagher,
the Irish exile, built his log cabin; small topazes, amethysts, and
rock crystal, are found there, at a place called the Diamond Beach •
while on the banks of the Clyde good specimens of opal, jasper, obsidian
or volcanic glass, and carnelians have been found.
3. Lake St. Clair, 3239 feet above the sea, is a noble sheet of water,
situated in a wild and picturesque country. It has an area of 10,000
acres, and is the source of the River Derwent.
4. Arthur's Lakes, 3388 feet above the sea, cover about 15,000 acres,
and are the source of the Lake River. There are some extensive plains
about these lakes.
5. Lake Echo, 3000 feet above the sea, contains about 5000 acres, and
is the source of the River Dee. The scenery about this Lake is very
beautiful.


6. Lake Richmond , 3000 feet above the sea, is a small but deep lake
at the head of the River Gordon.
7. Lake Redder, 2000 feet above the sea, covers 2500 acres, and is the
source of the River Serpentine.
There are other, but smaller lakes, which I do not mention,
The principal Rivers, which never cease to flow even in the driest
seasons, are—
1. The Derwent, with a southerly course of 120 miles to the sea,
navigable for steamers twenty-two miles above Hobart Town.
2. The South Esk, with a north-westerly course of 110 miles to the
River Tamar at Launceston, where it becomes navigable.
3. The Huon, with an easterly and southerly course of 100 miles to
D’Entrecasteaux’s Channel, navigable for steamers for twenty miles.
4. The Gordon, with a westerly course of ninety miles to Macquarie
Harbour, navigable for forty miles for vessels drawing 9 feet of water.
5. The North Esk, with a northerly course of sixty miles to the Tamar
at Launceston.
6. The Meander, with a northerly course of fifty miles to the South
Esk River, seven miles from Launceston.
7. The Arthur, with a westerly course of fifty miles to the sea.
8. The Tamar, with a navigable course, northerly, of forty miles to
the sea.
9. The Mersey, with a northerly course of forty miles to Port Frederic.
10. The Forth, with a northerly course of forty miles to the sea.
11. The Florentine, with a northerly course of thirty-five miles to the
Derwent.
12. The Dee, with a southerly course of thirty miles to the Derwent.
13. The Don, with a northerly course of twenty miles to the sea.
14. The Inglis, with a northerly course of twenty miles to the sea.
(Auriferous quartz reefs on the banks.)
Making a total of nearly 900 miles of constantly flowing rivers.
The following are considerable rivers in winter and spring, but many
of them become small running streams in summer and autumn.
Running Northerly—l. Macquarie, with a course of 70 miles.
2. Elizabeth 30 ~
3. Lake 30 ~
4. Pipers 20 „
5. Cam 20 „
6. Blyth* 20 „
7. Black 10 „
8. Picton 25 „
* Auriferous Quartz reefs on banks.


Running Southerly—9. Ouse 60 miles.
10. Jordan 50 „
11. Clyde 50 ,
12. Shannon 40 ,
13. Coal 25 „
14. Serpentine 5 ~
15. Pine 10 „
16. Franklin 20 „
17. Cracroft 15 ~
18. Clarence 10 ~
19. Frankland .... 15 ~
20. Davey 24 ~
Running Easterly—2l. Blackman 20 ~
22. Prossers 20 ,
23. Broad 10 ~
24. Repulse 10 ~
25. Little Swanport 20 ~
26. Plenty 10 ~
Running Westerly—27- Kings 25 ~
28. Mackintosh 40 ~
29. Horton 15 ~
30, Leigh 20 ~
31. Surprise 40 „
The principal mountains are—
1. Ben Lomond, 5000 feet high.
Of this and
Diggings, I annex an Illustration.
2. Cradle Mountain, 5000 feet.
3. Mount Humboldt, 5000 feet.
4. Drys Bluff, 3590 feet.
5. Mount Wellington, 4240 feet.
6. Valentine's Peak, 3300 feet.
7. Mount Arrowsmith, 4000 feet.
quartz.
8. Ben Nevis, 3900 feet.
9. Frenchman's Cap, 3800 feet.
10. Mount Arthur, 3900 feet.
11. St. Paul’s Dome, 2500 feet.
12. The Asbestos Hills, 1700 feet.
found here.
Tower Hill Gold
This is a mountain of slate and
The mineral of that name is


Many of these mountains are of commanding appearance ; the basaltic
cliffs of some of them being several hundred feet in perpendicular
height. The south point of Wylde’s Crag is a cliff 1000 feet high.
CLIMATE.
From the information obtained by a Royal Commission in August,
1858, of which Colonel Hamilton , R.E., was President, and myself
Secretary, appointed to consider the desirability of establishing a
Sanatarium for sick and wounded soldiers from India, it was ascer-
tained that the climate of Tasmania was equal, if not superior, to that
of the healthiest part of Europe; with a winter not more severe than
that of the south of France, a summer not hotter than that of London,
a spring equalling that of Montpelier, and an autumn like that of the
south of England. The Commissioners reported that the temperature
was not marked by extremes of heat or cold; that it was free from marsh
miasmata; that neither remittent nor intermittent fevers occurred; that
the heat of summer was never relaxing from the coolness of the nights ;
nor the cold of winter so severe, that agricultural and outdoor operations
oould not be carried on. This opinion is supported by that of Dr. Swar-
breck Hall , who for upwards of twenty years has closely studied the
climate, and his remark is, that “he has been taking the most minute
pains for many years to establish on sound data, that this climate is
naturally extremely propitious to health and life.”
The summer quarter commences about November, the autumn about
February, the winter about May, and the spring about August.
For the last three years, most careful Meteorological Tables have been
prepared by Mr. Francis Abbott, (who has a private observatory in
Hobart Town), and published by the Royal Society of Tasmania; from
which Tables I extract, that during the year 1856, the average tempera-
ture at Hobart Town was 56° 86'; that rain fell on 151 days to the
extent in all of 22-73 inches; that in 1857 the average temperature was
55° 20', and rain fell on 112 days to the extent of 17* 14 inches; that in
1858 the average temperature was 58° 57', and rain fell on 131 days to
the extent of 33-07 inches, or nearly double the quantity of 1857.
The greatest number of wet days in any month of 1856 was in
September, seventeen days ; in 1857, January, sixteen days; in 1858,
September, fifteen days; but on all these days the rain was very trifling.
The smallest number of days in any month on which rain fell was seven
in February, 1856; four in August, in 1857; and five in January, 1858,


Dr, Swarbreck Hall has ascertained from the eighteen years’ recorded
observations, that the mean temperature of the daily observations, and
the maximum and the minimum thermometers coincide, being 54°.
Those who consider the vast importance of fine weather, and a good
climate to that class of persons whose avocations require that they should
be employed in the open air, will place its due value on this climate as a
blessing of inexpressible importance. I give the following little sketch
of a Tasmanian Christmas. It is not my own, but I can vouch for its
ruthfulness. “ The English reader must picture to himself a Christmas.
Day passed amidst the scenes of summer; a population turning out on
New Years Day to play at cricket, or to make pleasure excursions on the
water; and an exhibition of flowers and fruits in December. We are
the antipodes of home. The 21st December is the longest day. The
thermometer frequently stands at Christmas at 70° in the parlour. Now
the citizen chooses the shady side of the street, or in doors throws up
the window and lets down the blind. Beyond the precincts of town the
country is one vast expanse of verdure; the tall corn waiving in the
gentle summer breeze, while hay-making is going on, or some early crop
courts, by its yellow tints, the sickle of the reaper. In the garden one is
pleased with flowers of every hue, and tempted by luscious fruit. The
farmer flings himself on his back on the lawn, and with merry child
faces around him, eats strawberries and cream to a delicious extent.
In our evergreen forest the cattle begin to seek the shelter of the trees,
under whose grateful shade in some cool brook, the boys are wont to
bathe. Parroquets in green and gold, flash past with their brilliant
colours ; the birds are merrily singing ; and the locust makes his summer
life one ceaseless song. No fire can be borne save in the kitchen, doors
and windows are thrown open, flowers and evergreens grace the dining
rooms for lack of the traditional holly; but the roast heef and plum
pudding of old England retain their place of hondlt on the festive board.
At that board, the colonist, mindful of the custom of fatherland, unites
his family, and after service in the neighbouring church, entertains his
friends with grace and no stinted hospitality. And if Christmas does
not come to him with the old associations of his youth, with its wind in
gusts howling through leafless trees or fast falling snow, —if scene and
clime and season invest the festival with a different aspect to that familiar
to the Englishman at home, he is not the less happy; nor is he saddened
by the reflection that his neighbour is too poor to enjoy with him the
good things of the season with its holiday and feasting; for it is Christ-
mas to every man, woman, and child in Tasmania, and there are none so
poor that they cannot have in abundance the immemorial fare; and on


all sides is heard the old English greeting, “ A happy Christmas and a
merry New Year !”
As the daughters of the Pharoahs, who in the marble palaces and
gilded halls of their foreign husbands, sighed for a draught of the waters
of the immortal Nile, so do the daughters of Tasmania, under the
burning suns of India, though they possess all the rich fruits and
gorgeous flowers of the Tropics, and live in palaces, yet sigh for the
lovely climate of their own loved home, and prefer the scent of the
simple mimosa to the most noble rhododendron of the Sikkim
Himmalaya.
POPULATION.
By the census which was taken on the SlstMarch, 1857, the population
was ascertained to be 81,492 souls. Of these, 14,333 were married men;
14,524 married women; 31,683 single males; 20,362 single females;
and 690 soldiers with their wives and children.
13,745 boys and 13,598 girls were under 14 years of age. 14,933
males and 16,227 females had been born in the colony. Thus, more than
a third of the population are Tasmanians. If to the above number of
81,492 be added the arrivals and births to the 31st December, 1858, and
the deaths and departures be deducted, the total population on Ist
January, 1859, would be 84,420. The first muster roll of the colony
was taken forty years ago, in 1819, by my father, then the commissariat
officer in charge, and the total was 4,411. In 1829, the population had
increased to 20,265 ; in 1839, to 44,000; in 1849, to 71,000; and in
1859 to 84,420. The increase in the last decennial period is very small,
but is easily explained by the fact that in the three years succeeding the
gold discovery in Yictoria in November, 1851, no less than 45,884 persons,
principally men, left Tasmania for the uncertain employment of gold
digging.
ABORIGINES.
On the Ist January last, the Aborigines had dwindled down to five old
men and nine old women, the unenergetic remnant of the large and dan-
gerous tribes, some of them nearly a hundred in number, which thirty
years ago roamed over the colony, and who used sometimes to come into
town in forties and fifties, and whose numbers were estimated (over


estimated, I think) in 1815 at 5000. These old people are now com-
fortably domiciled at Oyster Cove about thirty miles from Hobart Town,
under the care of a married gentleman who had received a medical
education. They are well supplied with food, clothing, and tobacco (for
the dark ladies smoke as well as their lords,) but strong drinks are strictly
prohibited. They hunt and fish in the neighbouring woods and waters,
but their habits are idle and slovenly in the extreme. They cost the
Government at present upwards of £SO a head yearly for their main-
tenance.
The language, of which a full vocabulary has been prepared by Dr.
Milligan, F.L.S., and Secretary of the Royal Society of Tasmania, is
almost as difficult to pronounce as to spell. The following is a sample :
“Come along, I want to speak to you.”— Talpyarwadeno tuyena
litmnamee.
“ The horse kicked the child.” — Pangooneah paraingvmenah.
“Run over the ground.”— Ringapyanganawebere.
One black gentleman’s name was Kakannawayreetya, and the black
ladies were Penghanawaddick, Unghlottymeena, and Wuttaicantyenna.
The aborigines talk to each other sometimes in their own language,
and sometimes in English, the men speaking the latter language better
than the women; but when their passions are excited by drink or rage,
they always swear in English, as that language affords them more oppro-
bious epithets than their own.
One of the black ladies, who married a few years ago a sawyer named
Smith, has recently presented her husband with a little black “ pledge of
affection ”of which the other aborigines are very proud. The Govern-
ment have given Mrs. Fanny Cochrane Smith a dowry of £25 per annum.
The women cook, procure fuel, and do all the work, the men meanwhile
smoking or snoozing on the sunny sides of their huts. They frequently
go hunting for three weeks or a month together, and while absent live on
the produce of their hunting.
PRISONERS,
On the Ist January last, there were 2200 male and 380 female con-
victs in Tasmania. Of these 670 men and 64 women were under penal
coercion; the remainder were earning their own livelihood either as farm
or domestic servants, or as ticket of leave holders.


Wheat
Barley
.. 10,849
Oats
.. 47,729
Potatoes
8,147
Peas
1,050
Beans
177
Mangold Wurzel ....
385
Turnips
2,069
Tares
402
Onions
222
Carrots
243
Tobacco
97
English Grasses ....
8,912
HOUSES.
The Englishman’s home is found everywhere throughout the colony
from the little thatched hut built of slabs, and covered to the roof tree
with geraniums ; or the dairy farm house with its vines and trained
flowers, the sunlight streaming through the leaves of English forest trees
planted with a careful hand all round the house, to remind the settler in
the land of his adoption of his old home 16,000 miles away, to the hand-
some and solid stone built mansion (overshadowed by the oaks of Old
England) with its wide domain of cultivated paddocks and green pastures,
its hedgerows of hawthorn and sweetbriar, or in some case of fuchsias
6 feet high, its orchards of tall pear trees or apples, with its hay stacks,
corn ricks, barns, woolsheds, and outhouses larger than the mansion
itself.
Every house has its garden. The householder who does not possess a
hundred square yards of garden is considered a very poor man, and pays
a low rent. In these little gardens, the flowers most carefully tended are
those of home, the simple flowers of our childhood, primroses and cow-
slips, pansies and daisies, while the sweet little violet blooms under
hedges of ever-flowering geraniums ten feet high. There were, according
to the census of 1857, 15,018 houses, of which 6760 were built of stone
or brick, and 8258 of wood.
Of these 4017 were in Hobart Town and 1546 in Launceston. The
number of inhabitants to each house varies from 4- in the Franklin
district to 7-g- in the Campbell Town district. In the City of Hobart
Town the average number is 5, and in Launceston SJ. Of course, every
day, house building is going on in all parts of the colony, and we may
now safely add a thousand houses to the number noted in 1857.
The quantity of
LAND UNDER CULTIVATION
on Ist January last was about 150
follows :
Acres.
i,OOO acres, and it was under crop as
Acres.
Li VjrJL Cto&CO ...... Oj
&c., &c.


Wheat is a grain, as will be seen, largely cultivated, both for home
consumption and for export, either as grain or flour. The average pro-
duce per acre by the rough style of farming practised, has been for some
years from nineteen to twenty-one bushels ; on good farms the produce
is double. By colonial law, the market bushel of wheat is fixed at sixty
pounds, but it is frequently grown to weigh sixty-five to seventy. At
the Great Exhibition in 1851, Tasmanian wheat received three prizes and
honorable mention, as being “ splendid samples,” and I perceive that
while the most splendid English wheat is worth 50s. a quarter at home,
our wheat is worth there 525. a quarter. At the Paris Exhibition it also
received the silver medal.
The value of wheat exported in the last two years amounts to
£150,000, while as flour it has been exported to the value of £232,000.
Barley is grown extensively, and is either cut for green fodder or
ripened, and manufactured into malt for use in making Colonial ale and
beer. The average produce of English Barley throughout the Colony is
eighteen bushels per acre, while good farming produces from fifty to
sixty. Mr. Shoobridge, a farmer of twenty-two years standing, gives
fifty bushels as his average crop. Mr. George Kemp, an agriculturalist
of thirty years standing, says his average is thirty-five, but he has grown
sixty. Alderman Lipscombe, a farmer for twenty-seven years, gives
the same average as Mr. Shoobridge, Cape Barley is also much culti-
vated. Mr. Shoobridge has grown seventy bushels to the acre, and his
average is upwards of fifty.
Oregon Barley , introduced into Tasmania in 1855 by Mr. George Hull,
has been recently cultivated with great success. With Mr, Anstey it
produced eighty bushels to the acre from one bushel of seed carefully
sown.
Oats succeed very well in Tasmania, especially in the higher parts of
the Colony, where they are frequently found upwards of seven feet high,
with proportionally heavy heads. By Colonial law oats are bought and
sold at forty pounds to the bushel. Mr. Meredith has grown them to
weigh forty-nine pounds to the bushel. The average crop is about
twenty-two bushels. They were exported in 1857 to the value of £156,000,
and in 1858 £107,000,
Potatoes are a productive crop, if carefully managed. In the rich
lands of the Franklin district, or in newly broken up alluvial soil, fifteen
tons have been dug from an acre. On Mr. Thorpe’s farm, in May 1859,
was dug one root weighing seventy pounds. Messrs. Shoobridge and
Lipscombe, large and regular cultivators, give their average crop at seven
tons to the acre. The average crop throughout the Colony is rather


more than four. Potatoes vary in different years very much in price, thus,
in 1854, during the gold fever, they were £2B a ton; in 1855, £ls; in
1856, £lO ; in 1857, £l4 ; and in 1858, £8 ; in June 1859, they were
selling at £4. Potatoes were exported to the neighbouring colonies in
1857 and 1858, to the value of upwards of £IOO,OOO. A potatoe weigh-
ing five pounds has been exhibited in Hobart Town.
Turnips are a doubtful crop. In some parts of the colony they
succeed well, in others they invariably fail. Messrs. Shoobridge and
Lipseombe give their average at twenty tons to the acre ; but the average
throughout the colony is under five. Turnips have been grown and
exhibited weighing ninety-six pounds.
Carrots are not much cultivated in fields, although where they have
been grown, the crop is from twenty to twenty-five tons to the acre. If
distillation were legalised, there is no doubt that potatoes and carrots
would be much more extensively grown. Carrots have been exhibited in
Hobart Town weighing thirty pounds.
Mangold Wurzel has of late years been attended to. Twenty-five tons
to the acre have been grown, some roots weighing twenty pounds. Mr.
Shoobridge states that he has grown forty tons to the acre. Mr. Lips-
combe gives his opinion that all root crops with careful cultivation are
larger in their yield than in England, for we have here two months
more autumn growing weather. He thinks from £l2 to £l4 an acre
would cover every expense of cultivating this crop, and the selling price
in Hobart Town is about 355. a ton.
Cobbett’s Corn is cultivated in patches for cows and fowls. It produces
at the rate of sixty bushels to the acre.
Maize, though a tropical cereal, grows to a great height, and in warm
situations its cobs ripen well. The green haulm is used for cows, and
they are very fond of it.
Gramin, an Indian legume, has been cultivated in small patches, and
will most probably be more extensively grown when its value is better
known. Mr. Lipseombe calculates the return at sixty bushels to the
acre.
Buck-wheat has been tried, but it does not succeed unless in gardens
or bees.
Rye is always a good crop in Tasmania, and is usually cut green for
fodder.
English Grasses are extensively cultivated for pasture and hay. In
the latter state it is exported to the neighbouring colonies to the value
of £15,000 or £16,000 a-year. When irrigated the Italian Eye Grass
is very productive. Sir Henry Young mentions an acre and a half at


New Norfolk which, with manure and irrigation, produced eighty-four
tons in two years.
Clover springs up wherever cattle have been fed ; it is found near the
top of Mount Wellington growing luxuriantly. It was the custom of
one of our early Governors to carry clover seed in his waistcoat pocket,
and in his rambles or travels, he would frequently stop and kick up
some earth, and then throw in a pinch of clover seed. Its results are
valuable.
The prices in Hobart Town and country towns of the grains and
vegetables before mentioned were in 1858 as follows :
Wheat, ss. 6d. to 9s. per bushel.
Barley, 4s. 6d. to Bs. ~
Oats, ss. to Bs. ~
Potatoes, £8 per ton.
Turnips, 50s. to 140 s. „
Carrots, 40s. to 120 s. „
A learned gentleman, who has
MangoldWurzel, 355. to £lO per ton.
Maize, per bushel
Tares, ss. to 10s. per bushel.
Peas, 4s. to 11s. ~
Beans, 4s. to 10s. ~
Hay, £4. 10s. to £8 per ton.
travelled much, and has recently
accepted office amongst us, where I trust he may find inducement to
remain, for the benefit of the Colony, in a recent Lecture (to which I, in
common with some hundreds of my fellow citizens, listened with much
pleasure, compared the banks of our Derwent with the Rhine; but he
said that he missed from the top of each steep the old towers , telling tales
of robbery, bloodshed, and warfare. I agree with him, for we have
indeed every variety of scenery. While the Derwent reminds him of
the Rhine, the Great Lake Plain reminds another of the South American
Pampas; the village of Kingston, on the Brown’s River, is a perfect
picture of a North American clearing in the backwoods ; the softly
rounded hills of Avoca and Pingal remind us strongly of the South
Downs of Sussex, in our own “ old country,”—“ mother country ,” as she
has been reverently and dutifully called ; while the industrious and most
hospitable Scottish settlers on our Clyde, have named their estates and
princely sheep-runs after the little farms or heath-covered hills where
the •pibroch of their forefathers resounded; while the glorious autumn
sun, setting behind the white head of the Frenchman’s cap, with
the deep blue of the surrounding hills, gilds and colors the clouds with
such tints as are seldom seen out of the tropics.
I cannot conclude this paragraph without quoting from that intellec-
tual foreigner, Count Strzelecki: —“In Tasmania,” he says, “the agri-
cultural districts are superior in appearance to those of New South
Wales ; the details of farms and farming are better understood and
defined; and the practical results are such, that no country reminds the


traveller so much of the ‘ old country ’as Tasmania. The tasteful and
comfortable cottages and mansions, surrounded by pleasure grounds,
gardens, and orchards ; the neat villages, and prominently placed
churches, forming as it were the centres of cultivated plains, divided and
subdivided by hedge-rows, and through which an admirably constructed
road winds through the island, are all objects which forcibly carry the
mind to similar scenes of rural beauty in Great Britain.”
The climate is peculiarly suited to
GARDENING,
and in most parts vegetables produce luxuriant crops, with the most
ordinary care; while in gardens cultivated by skilful and trained men,
the produce is really astonishing.
A few of the principal vegetables are mentioned below.
Peas may be sown with success, from January to December, in the
open garden. The main crops are put in in July and August. Forty-
five pods have been gathered from one root of a dwarf-pea.
Beans may be sown from June to November, and are very productive.
The Broad Windsor has been grown 6 feet high; and a root bearing
forty-eight pods is not uncommon.
Kidney Beans are usually sown from August to January in open gar-
dens. If sown earlier, they are subject to injury from frost; and if
later to damage from the heat.
Onions are sown from May to October, and produce from seven to
fourteen tons per acre. They are found to be most productive when
raised in early seed beds and transplanted. At Clarence and Niuddy
Plains, and at New Town, they are grown in fields to a large extent for
the neighbouring market of Victoria, to which they are exported in
large quantities, and where they fetch from £l2 to £3O per ton. Mr,
Lipscombe has grown onions, of which 500 would weigh a ton.
Onions of 2 lbs. weight grow in every garden.
Cabbages of all sorts are sown or planted from January to December.
Of late a destructive aphis has appeared, destroying nearly all the cab-
bage crops; but it is now disappearing.
Parsnips are sown from June to September, and are very productive
in light rich soil. If roasted, and cut into squares of about an inch,
they make an excellent substitute for coffee.
Vegetable Marrows and Pumpkins grow in the open air to a large
size. They sell readily from 4d. to Is. each, according to size, weighing


from three to twelve pounds. Pumpkins have been exhibited here weigh-
ing more than sixty pounds.
Cucumbers grow in sheltered spots in the open air without glass. A
jocular gardener at O’Brien’s Bridge used to sell his cucumbers by the
yard measure.
In some parts of the Colony and in hot summers grasshoppers are
troublesome in gardens, but they are easily destroyed by turning fowls
in among them.
Vegetation begins in the month of August to assume a vigorous pro-
gress, and the gardens remain in prime order with succession of veget-
ables generally until May when winter commences, but even then,
cabbages, peas, beans, carrots, parsnips, &c., are found in profusion.
The only native
FRUITS
are small and insignificant. Cherries as they are called, both white and
red, are a fruit the size of a currant berry, with a not unpleasant taste,
and the stone grows on the outside of the fruit; the cranberry, a sweetish
fruit which grows on a prickly creeping plant; the wild raspberry, some-
what resembling that of England, though of not so dark a colour nor so
pleasant a taste; and what is called the wild plum. All these are
readily eaten by children.
English Fruit Trees bear very largely and the finest sorts have
been imported from Europe and America. Mr. Newman, of the Royal
Society’s Gardens exhibited ninety-one varieties of apples. Apple trees
commence bearing at two years old, and there are some fine old trees
which have continued to bear ever since they were planted by Colonel
Patterson in 1812. This fruit is largely exported to Victoria where the
price is from 12s. to 20s. per bushel. Pears, quinces, peaches, cherries,
plums, apricots, and the smaller fruits bear luxuriantly. I have picked
five pounds and a half of black currants from one bush. Plums and
gooseberries are exported to Victoria while very green, usually from
October to Christmas, they are sent per steamer City of Hobart sometimes
1000 baskets at a time. The value of green fruit exported ih 1858
was £72,170.
At Brown’s River Mr. Harrison’s prune-ranking is highly spoken
of. Jam from the smaller fruits is made in large quantities for
the Victorian market, it is not unusual to see an advertisement calling
for ten tons of raspberries for jam. Mulberries are very fine and lus-
cious. Walnuts and almonds bear and ripen well. On the walls in the


open air at the Royal Society’s Gardens in the Queen’s Park, Mr. New-
man grows and ripens oranges, lemons, pomegranates, and loquats, all
tropical fruits. At Sandy Bay Mr. Osborne grows very fine pine-apples
under glass, which sell from 2s. each; while in all parts of the Colony
grapes are grown in the open air. The passion flower ripens its rich
yellow fruit; the blackberry, the hazel, the filbert, the barberry, and other
hedge fruits of England are everywhere cultivated.
OF FLOWERS AND OTHER PLANTS.
I may say that nearly all the flowers from east to west, from north to
south have been successfully introduced, for we find the camellia of
Japan; the magnolia of the Indian forests; the fuchsia of Peru; a
tussack grass from the Falkland Islands with its glorious tufts ; the
sugar and tea plants of China ; the shumack of America; the coffee and
the argan trees of Arabia; the pomegranate of Persia ; the olives of Italy;
the bamboo of Hindostan; the cedar of Lebanon ; and the India-rubber
tree of Singapore; all growing in open air, though in sheltered spots,
and thriving in almost the same beauty as in their native homes.
To name all the wild flowers would take up too much space ; but the
following cannot be passed over without notice. The warratah, with its
deep red blossoms, and the grass tree ( richea ), with its beautiful white
and pink flowers ; the blandfordia, a lily bearing large flowers of orange
and red, and the mimosas, which in the open country are small, or com-
paratively small shrubs, but which in the valleys of the mountains grow
90 feet high, with an enormous mass of bright yellow blossoms,
“ Whose balmy breath, on the whispering breeze, comes softly down each glen.”
these may be specially mentioned. They bloom in the thickly wooded
valleys of Mount Wellington, and unfold their flowers where there is
nothing but the fern tree, the lichen, or the sassafras to share their
beauty.
Many of the districts, especially the counties of Cumberland, Somer-
set, and Monmouth, form extensive sheep walks, where thousands upon
thousands of sheep are depastured, giving employment during the year
to but a few hundred shepherds; but in shearing season to many
hundreds of men, who, shears in hand, flock from the towns and villages
to the various sheep washings and shearing sheds.


In the county of Cumberland alone, half a million of sheep are
annually shorn at wages varying from fifteen shillings to twenty shillings
a hundred. Some men are able to shear nearly a hundred in a day, and
thus the best shearers earn very high wages. As shearing of course
takes place in Summer, and shearers are thirsty souls, and free with
their money, the various publicans look to this period as their harvest.
It may be broadly stated that the shearers spend from £5,000 to £6,000
in a season in the public houses.
Sheep farming in the best counties, and on clean runs, is a very
profitable investment of capital, returning as much as twenty-five per
cent.
A sheep is worth for its fleece and lamb from two shillings and
sixpence to four shillings and sixpence a year net, i, e. after paying all
expenses for shepherds, shearing, washing, cartage of wool, &c. The
usual number of shepherds is one to every 2,000 sheep ; the wages vary
from £3O to £6O a year, with a hut, and abundant rations of flour, tea,
and sugar, and permission to kill one sheep a week for meat, and the
shepherd usually selects a good fat sheep, thus giving him from thirty
to forty pounds of mutton per week, a supply amply sufficient for himself
and his wife, and family, with a chop to spare for any visitors ; for the
shepherds are very hospitable to strangers. The best breakfast I ever
had was at a shepherd’s hut, on the banks of the beautiful Lake Sorell:
lamb chops, eggs, fresh butter, cream, and strong tea in a tin pannican,
with a large round of hot damper. To make tea properly it should be
infused in a kettle and drank out of tin. When you are cold and very
fatigued it is better than all the hot grog in the world. In the lonely
districts about the Great Lake the ration sugar is frequently turned into
spirits : a bag of sugar will yield ten gallons of spirits, which are sold
all round, to the great injury of the revenue, and to the annoyance of
the sheepowners and the police.
In every country the life of a shepherd is in its nature a monotonous
one, but here, owing to the advantages usually possessed by shepherds,
(sometimes mounted) of a good dog, good gun, comfortable hut, and
ample wages and rations, the life is one which has many pleasures to
recommend it, and but few drawbacks. The Opossum supplies him with
fur bedding ; the bush gives him firewood at his very doors ; and he is
quite exempt from poor rates or taxes. When I was manager of the
savings’ banks at Bothwell and Hamilton in 1856-7, a shepherd brought
in a cheque for £l2O, and another one for £lOO, while those paying in
from £lO to £2O were not few; the results of saving their wages.
Wool is largely exported to Great Britain ; the annual quantity varies


from 4,000,000 to 5,000,000 pounds, worth from £400,000 to £500,000
a year in the London market. The number of sheep in Tasmania may
be stated at 1,600,000. The annual clip of wool is therefore from two
to two and three quarter pounds from each sheep. On some sheep-
farms, where care is taken, the increase sometimes reaches ninety-seven
per cent., and I have known it 102 per cent.; while on bad or over-
stocked runs the increase has been known as low as five per cent. The
lambing season is usually in the depth of winter (August), and the early
lambs fetch in October good prices. The Lawrenny mutton is equal to
any in England, and the sheep are fattened on the low lands of that
noble estate (valued at £100,000) which extends for ten miles along the
banks of the Clyde and Derwent rivers; itbelongs to an absentee proprietor.
Some sheep have during the last week been exhibited in Hobart Town,
said to weigh upwards of a hundred-weight each.
Cattle to the number of 80,000 are depastured in Tasmania, more
especially in the rich agricultural lands of Westbury and Deloraine,
where one family, the Messrs. Field, possess 10,000 head. This family
annually supply the market with a thousand fat beasts, for which they
obtain from £l2 to £l6 a head. Beasts are fattened in grass paddocks
up to 1400 lbs. weight.
Nearly two million acres of land are rented from the crown by sheep
and cattle holders for depasturing their flocks and herds, the average
rental being one pound for every hundred acres, paid yearly in advance.
The crown thus receives an annual income of nearly £30,000, and the
land is greatly improved by cattle and sheep fed upon it.
Very fine breeds of pigs are found here, and they are frequently
fattened up to 1,000 lbs. weight. One is advertised in this morning’s
paper to be sold, weighing 900 lbs. A good sow would be worth from
£7 to £8 a year for her brood. An Irishman fond of pig educating can
obtain a lean pig for thirty shillings, and from the crumbs from his table
and the washings of his kitchen it may be fattened to a great weight in
three months, returning 500 per cent, for his outlay. Shepherds
invariably keep pigs, and make a good addition to their wages or their
table thereby. There are more than 30,000 pigs in the Colony, and they
have lately been largely exported to Victoria, a small return for the
large and course mutton which we import thence to the value of £30,000
a year.
Butter and cheese are largely produced on very many dairy farms, and
these articles have lately been exported to the value of about £16,000
a year. The cows are turned out to graze either in paddocks of the


£
s.
d.
£
5.
d.
Bullocks, fat
13
5
0
to
14
15
0
Cows, fat
8
0
0
yy
10
10
0
Steers, fat
...... 8
0
0
yy
13
15
0
Milch Cows
6
12
6
yy
8
0
0
Store Cows
4
0
0
yy
4
15
0
Working Bullocks
16
10
0
yy
20
0
0 apr
Cart Horses
22
0
0
yy
87
0
0 ea.
native grasses, or in fields laid down with clover and other artificial
grasses; and many cows produce for some months together from six to
eight pounds of butter a week, the price of which is about two shillings
per pound. Ayrshire, Devon, and Hereford cows of great value and
beauty, are bred with much care by many of the settlers; and these gentle
animals are taking the place of the cross between the Bison and the Brahmin
Cows, which we used to have, and which had to be knocked down with a
long pole, and roped head and foot, before they could be milked. It was
at one time no uncommon thing for the milkman, after a tour of several
miles in the bush for the cattle, to be tossed in the air by one cow, and
his shins kicked by another, before he could succeed in inducing them
to part -with their usual pint of milk for the family’s breakfast.
Bullocks when properly broken in are mild, easily managed animals,
and are used for draught in all heavy work or rough carting. They
require but little care, and are usually turned out into the paddocks to
pick up their food, after a hard day’s work at the plough. They have
occasionally been broken in to the saddle and harness; and I once saw a
lady on bullock back, but she neither sat gracefully, nor seemed to
admire the peculiar pace of her steed.
There are 21,563 horses in the colony.
The richest settlers are those whose attention has been turned to sheep
farming, and some of the flocks are very large, such as would astonish
an English farmer.—Mr. William Clarke has a flock of 40,000 ; Mr. G. C.
Clark, 50,000 ; Mr. O'Connor, 65,000 ; Mr. Allison about 70,000. The
Denistoun estate feeds 25,000 ; the Fordun estate 25,000 ; Mr. Nicholas
of Cawood, about 20,000. Cum multis aliis.
The last sales of live stock were as follows;
CATTLE SALES,
Bell and Westbrook, at Carrick, 6th June, 1859.


SHEEP SALES,
£ s. d. £ a, d.
Wethers, fat 0 15 6 to 1 1 9
Ewes, fat 012 9 ~ 015 9
Young Ewes 0 15 0 „ 015 3
Store Lambs 0 9 1
CATTLE SALES.
Brent and Westbrook, at Melton Mowbray, 9th June, 1859
Bullocks, fat 12 0 0 to 16 17 6
Cows, fat
Young Steers 410 0 ~ 5 0 0
Milch Cows
Store Cows 410 0 ~ 5 0 0
SHEEP
SALES.
Wethers, fat 017 0 to 1 2 9
Ewes, fat 010 0 ~ 013 3
Young Ewes 0 10 0
Fat Leicesters 310 0 ~ 4 0 0
Store Wethers 014 6 „ 015 9
Store Lambs 0 9 3 ~ 011 3
Pigs £l. 15s. to £2. 2s. per head.
or if fat five pence a pound, weighing
the whole animal, in Hobart Town; and seven pence a pound in
Launceston.
SHIP BUILDING
Is a pursuit for which the native born of Tasmania manifest a peculiar
aptitude, It is one for which there seems to be with them a national
predilection, and it is to be regretted that a larger amount of en-
couragement has not been given, so that they might be induced to
fellow a calling so inventive and so practically beneficial. Ship b»ild


ing in Tasmania, ought above all other employments, to command
attention; for there are few colonies which possess so many ad-
vantages for successfully embarking in this enterprise. The timber is
not only equal to any other in the world, but it is easily obtained, and in
scantlings, would startle and delight the English ship builder; for the
noblest oak of the English forests would be a dwarf alongside some of
the giant trees of Tasmania. Planking was sent to England by Sir
William Denison seventy feet long and four feet wide. Timbers three
feet square and 150 feet long, can readily be obtained; while whole
forests exist in various parts of noble pines, and graceful myrtles (beech),
the latter being 200 feet high and proportionately stout, while its timber
is more close in grain, harder, and better veined than cedar.
These forest trees grow on the very banks of our rivers, and can be
brought into active service without any considerable outlay, for it is the
habit of sawyers to cut down the trees in summer, and roll the immense
bolls to the water, to be carried down to deep water by the winter floods.
During the last twenty years there have been built here, at an expense
of about £8 a ton, a fleet of not less than 390 vessels, carrying 23,200
tons, besides small craft, yachts, and boats innumerable.
Prior to the discovery of the gold fields of Australia, our timber was
not largely exported, but in 1852 it commenced to be sent to Victoria:
in that year to the value of £89,000 ; next year to £443,000 ; next year
to £306,000 ; next year to £100,000; in 1856 to £112,000 ; 1857 to
£134,000 ; and in 1858 to £87,152.
In some of the southern parts of Tasmania, the blue gum grows to the
height of 350 feet, and 100 feet in girth. The Rev. T. J. Ewing
mentions one of 102 feet round. One tree on my father’s estate, about
five miles from Hobart Town, is 330 feet high and 86 feet round. This
tree it is estimated would produce upwards of £2OO worth of sawn
timber. Sir W. Denison and General Wynyard measured it in the
presence of Lady Denison and other ladies. Tasmania timbers received
seven prizes and five certificates of honor at the Great Exhibition of 1851 ;
and two silver medals, and two certificates of honor at the Paris
Exhibition of 1855.
The value of the large gum trees may be estimated from the fact that
a tree on Mr. John Abbott’s farm at Long Bay was cut down and con-
verted into building materials, the value of which was £245. A medium
sized tree produces from fifty to sixty tons of firewood worth ten or
twelve shillings a ton, and this is the coarsest timber.
Huon pine, myrtle, sassafras, bedfordia, and other cabinet woods are
sold by the foot at considerable prices according to their veining and quality


All our forest trees and shrubs are evergreen. The smaller shrubs
are for the most part highly aromatic, and bear beautiful flowers, and in
many instances berries.
The mimosa bears a sweet tasting gum in considerable quantities,
which is eaten while soft by children. It resembles the gum arabic of
commerce, and is equally useful. The gum trees or Bucalyptic bear
gum kino, and the white species produces manna , both of which are
medicinal. The grass tree, Xanthorrcea, produces a resinous gum of
some value in the arts, and for the production of illuminating gas.
Either bituminous or anthracitic is found all over the colony. From
the reports of Dr. Milligan and Mr. Selwyn, both eminent geologists, I
extract the following particulars :
Bituminous coal is found at the Douglas River, about four miles from
the sea, in some of the seams eight feet thick; and so close in some
places do the seams run to the surface, that in a fifty feet shaft six seams
of coal were cut. A seam of twenty inches has been worked for the
Hobart Town market, where the coal is sold for £l. 10s. to £2. a ton.
Bituminous coal is also found on Mr. Chilton’s farm at High Plains.
Thirty-five feet from the surface, in a seam four feet thick, and where a
man and boy with a horse-whin produced ten tons a day, the selling
price in Hamilton, two miles off, being £l. 15s. a ton. As firewood is
very scarce in the open country about Hamilton, this mine must
eventually become very valuable.
Bituminous coal crops out in the bed of the Ouse River, where the
seam is four feet thick, under a bed of four feet thick of pipe clay.
Bituminous coal is also obtained at the Mersey on Port Frederic, a
Custom-house station, the seams being from two to three feet thick. On
the River Don, in the same neighbourhood, it crops out of the earth in
many places from twenty-six to thirty inches thick, and this coal is stated
by Mr. Selwyn to be the best in the Island. In two places where shafts
have been sunk twenty-seven-inch-seams have been found less than
twenty feet from the surface.
Anthracitic coal is obtained on Schouten Island, where vessels may
anchor within 200 feet of the coal pit. The seam is from six to seven
feet thick, and consists of layers of anthracite of a porous and coke-like
character, with several layers in succession of bituminous coal. The
miners state they could afford to deliver it at the water’s edge for four or
five shillings a ton.


At South Cape, anthracitic coal eighteen or twenty inches thick is found
but not worked; the coal is highly carbonaceous, and contains iron pyrites
to such an extent, that it is disagreeable to breathe the fumes extricated
during its combustion even in the open air.
At Richmond the anthracitic coal crops out on the west bank of the
Coal River, about a mile from a point in the estuary where vessels of
twenty tons may load. The coal burns without flame and little smoke,
but gives out great heat. The seams vary from two feet to two feet six
inches in thickness.
At Jerusalem coal is also found which burns with extreme facility, and
with a clear bright flame.
At New Town, within two miles of Hobart Town, anthracitic coal is
obtained in six shafts, at depths varying from thirty-five to eighty feet,
and the supply sent into town is considerable. It sells from £l. ss. to
£l. 7s. a ton. At Tasman’s Peninsula, known in market as Fort Arthur
Coal, it has been worked largely for nearly thirty years, and though a
coarse anthracitic coal it throws out great heat, and is much valued for
furnaces. It sells from £l. 10s. to £l. 15s, a ton.
It will thus be seen that the whole Island is interspersed with coal
formations. At Douglas River on the north-east coast, Schouten Island
and Spring Bay on the east, Tasman’s Peninsula on the south-east,
South Cape on the south, Mersey and the Don on the north, and in
the interior at Hamilton, Ouse, Bothwell, Green Ponds, Jericho, New
Town, New Norfolk, Jerusalem, and Richmond.
Labour alone is required to secure good and cheap fuel.
Tasmanian youths are apt
WHALERS.
The quantity of sperm oil brought into port by colonial whalers in
1858 was 612 tuns, the value of which is from £B5 to £B6 a tun in the
Colony, and £lOO at home; and during the first three months of 1859,
117 tuns of sperm oil have been landed, while in ships belonging to the
port there is known to be afloat 194 tuns of sperm and twenty-four tuns
of black oil; the value of the latter being £3B to £4O a tun. The value
of oil sent to England in 1858 was estimated at £49,000.*
In the year 1842, after twenty years of success in bay whaling, the
whales became shy of approaching the shores of Tasmania, and the
• The quantity now mentioned would represent a value of about £79,000.


enterprise since then has been conducted in larger ships. In the winter
time the whaling ground is off the coast of New Zealand, and in the
summer on the coast of Tasmania.
In the years 1840-43 our ports were visited by large numbers of
French whalers, owing in great measure to the bonus then granted
by the French government for every tun of oil brought into France
by French vessels. This bonus has been discontinued, and the visits
of foreign whalers (though our ports are open to them) are now
infrequent.
Nearly all the whalers resort to Port Davey, which they find a safe
and commodious harbour for vessels of any size, and it possesses to
them the additional recommendation that the neighbourhood being
unoccupied by settlers, the men have no inducement to desert from their
vessels.
As an employment for men previously ignorant of sea-going matters,
it is often attended with favorable results, and in these seas without
much danger. The custom is for a merchant to fit out a whaler at an
expense of £lOOO to £3OOO, and send her out on her speculative voyage,
whence she sometimes returns clean, that is without having captured a
whale, and often with oil and bone to the value of £5OOO or £6OOO. To
encourage the crews to exertion each man has his share or lay. If the
ship is fortunate, the lay is sometimes a goodly sum, if otherwise, the
sailor has had a home and his food.
As a proof of the uncertainty, I may say that during last year (1858)
3 ships procured less than 5 tuns of oil
4 ships procured from 5,, 10 ~
3 „ 10 „ 15 „
1 ~ 15 „ 20 ~
7 „ 20 „25 „
2 ~ 25 „ 30 ~
2 „ 30 „ 35 „
2 „ 35 „ 40
3 ~ 40 „ 45 „
1 ship procured above 45 ,
The greatest number of vessels, therefore, procured about £lBOO worth
each. The whalers this season are not doing well, owing to the pre-
valence of bad weather off the coast of New Zealand, where some have
been lost.
One of the vessels which brought forty-four tuns of sperm oil, also
brought eleven tuns of black oil, another with thirty-two tuns of sperm


oil had five tuns of black, and another with twenty-four tuns of sperm
had six of black oil. The lucky vessels were :
The Sapphire, which landed forty-six tuns, and has since procured
thirty-six, or about £6OOO worth.
The Sussex, which landed fifty-two tuns and has since procured ten
worth £4700.
The Maid of Erin which landed twenty-one tuns, and has since pro-
cured 36 tuns worth £4300.
The Offley, 360 tuns, which was fitted out by Dr. Crowther in July,
1858, for sea elephant fishing on Herds Island, has just notified her
good fortune, and she has procured 52 tuns of sea elephant oil and 43
tuns of sperm, the value of the cargo being upwards of £5OOO.
Of other fish, the finest are taken on the Hippolyte Bank near Port
Arthur, from which albicore weighing from one to 170 pounds, and
trumpetus from one to fifty pounds weight are brought by the fishermen:
they sell for about three pence a pound.
King carp (Salmon so called) of the white species, and sometimes
weighing ten pounds, mullet, perch, and gar-fish are also taken in large
quantities in the various bays, while an hour in the evening frequently
rewards the fisher in the Derwent with a heavy basket of rock cod, flat
heads, perch, &c.
The red gurnard, the silver fish, gar-fish, and flounders are taken in
large quantities at George Town, and are sold in Launceston at a low
price. At Fingal, in the clear stream of the South Esk, herrings are
taken with rod and fly, and in the month of April they can be taken by
hand in dozens in the Mill Race at Milford. They are also caught in
large numbers at New Norfolk, at the Ouse Bridge, and at the Cataract,
Launceston. Eels are abundant and of large size in all the deep and
sluggish rivers of the island, and are taken by thousands, of fine flavor
and of large size, at certain seasons from the Bothwell Mill Ponds, and
sent in light carts to Hobart Town : they sell for about four-pence a yard
in Bothwell. In the South Esk, and in most of the rivulets in the colony
a diminutive trout, about three or four inches long, is taken in consi-
derable numbers. Shrimps are taken at George Town and sent over per
coach to Hobart Town, where they are sold for sixpence a quart. Hobart
Town supplies Launceston and the interior with fine cray-fish. Oysters
are protected by local laws, and while in season, i.e., from April to
October are very fine. The South Port oysters are frequently fifteen
inches in circumference. Other shell fish are plentiful, and are retailed
about the streets by the city drabs, boys who, as Scott says, “have no
ambition beyond the cockle trade.”


A few remarks about
HUNTING AND SHOOTING.
May not be uninteresting. Kangaroos are the o ly indigenous animals
which are hunted, and on the fine open country which these animals
prefer, a kangaroo hunt, with a pack of good dogs, and a well-mounted
field of horsemen, is a spirit-stirring amusement. They generally run
four or five miles before they are run into and killed.
Usually mild inoffensive animals, they are sometimes stirred up to
wrath when brought to bay by dogs ; and there are two instances on
record, in the Bothwell district, of “ boomers ” (forester kangaroos)
haying seized men in their arms and carried them for some distance, and
then flung them violently down. I have seen the haunches of a boomer
which weighed ninety-six pounds, and stood seven feet high. The
average weight of a brush kangaroo is about eighteen to thirty pounds ;
the “ wallaby ”is still less. The latter are taken in large numbers, by
means of wire snares. Their skins, when dried in the sun, fetch from
one shilling to one shilling and sixpence each.
The numbers in the fine open country about Hamilton may be inferred
from the fact that a man was brought before me charged with having
stolen 140 skins, the produce of a season’s hunting. In a ride of half-a-
dozen miles, you will see the same number of kangaroos. The shep-
herds feed their dogs on the flesh, which indeed makes the finest soup
possible.
Opossum shooting on moonlight nights with the aid of small dogs is
a sport entailing some trouble and not much profit. The skins are
heavily clothed with fur, and they form admirable waterproof rugs.
Opossums and native cats are usually taken by means of wire snares
fastened on poles leaning against gum-trees, which hang the animal
without injuring his skin. A good rug of sixty skins can be got for
about £2. or £2. 10s., according to quality.
Birds. —Those fit for the table are bronzed-winged and brown pigeons,
wild ducks, teal, plover, quail, snipe, parrots, wattle birds, ground doves,
&c. At certain seasons the pigeons are numerous and in good condition.
Parrots come down on the new sown fields in thousands, with all varie-
ties of green, red, and blue plumage ; and they can be shot a dozen at a
time while feeding. When taken young, they are easily taught to talk.
Thirty brace of quail frequently reward the sportsman for his day’s
shooting, especially about Clarence plains.


Wild ducks are so numerous in some of the Lagoons near Fingal, and
also near Muddy Plains, that the late Police Magistrate of Pingal told
me he killed twenty-seven at a shot. I have counted thirty-six in a pond
ten feet square. And Mr. Pedder, of Muddy Plains, informed me that
he had killed, with a long duck gun, forty-two at two shots in a Lagoon
in front of his house. Wattle birds when in season are very fat, and
require to be stewed down before they can be made into pies.
To Bees the climate is most kind. The flowers of the eucalypti and
mimosa furnish food for them; and our honey, which was exhibited at
the Crystal Palace, was much admired.
In some parts of the Colony, as at Perth, Bothwell, Boss, &e., old
tea-chests and boxes are used for bee-hives, and honey is procured by
the ton. It is sold in the interior from fourpence to sixpence a pound;
and is used by the settlers either in comb or as mead, or in the manu-
facture of beer. Swarms of bees which have escaped, take possession of
hollow trees ; and I have seen more than a hundred pounds of honey
taken from a hole in a gum-tree.
A medical gentleman informs me that when living in the country,
combining rural with his professional occupations, the wax he obtained
from his bees, with a little mutton suet, supplied his household with can-
dles for the whole winter. He says he has had thirteen swarms from
one hive in a season.
COACHES AND TRAVELLING.
At present two four-horse coaches run daily between Hobart Town
and Launceston; peforming the distance, 120 miles, in about fifteen
hours ; this includes time for breakfast and dinner on the road.
Two four-horse coaches also run every night, one of which carries the
mail. The charge varies from about two-pence to four-pence per mile.
The guards are invariably civil and attentive; and the box-seat is a
coveted place.
Seven other four-horse coaches run on the various roads; and four
two-horse coaches, or conveyances as they are called; while omnibuses
ply a few miles out of Hobart Town, nearly every hour, charging about
two-pence per mile.
The various Inns on the principal lines of road are substantial brick
or stone buildings, with well-furnished rooms, civil attendants, aid
at good and reasonable fare.
Ellis’s Inn at Green Ponds, Blackwell’s at Melton Mowbray, Bacn’s


at Tunbridge, Kean’s and Morrison’s at Campbeltown ; the Bush Inn at
New Norfolk, the New Inn at Hamilton, The Crown and the White Hart
at Bothwell, the Bridgewater Inn, and others, would be a credit to the
old country, not only in their outward appearance, but in the respecta-
bility of their management. The best rooms are generally from twenty
to twenty-fire feet long, sixteen or eighteen feet wide, and proportionally
high; with pier glasses, velvet pile carpets, damask curtains, &c.; and
the bed-rooms are very comfortable.
RAILWAYS
are in contemplation. There is at present a prospectus out for the for-
mation of one from Doloraine to Port Frederic (tw r enty-five miles), to
convey the enormous quantity of grain produced in the former district
to the port, for shipment either to Launceston or Victoria.
The value of our Exports in 1858 was £1,151,609, of which £534,555
were from Hobart Town, and £617,054 from Launceston,
The value of Imports was £1,328,612.
A simple fact may be stated in proof of our growing commercial pros-
perity. In 1849 our Exports amounted to £500,000; now, as I have
stated, they are more than a million; £870,000 being of articles the
produce of the Colony.
Bark used to be an article of large export, but it is now almost discon-
tinued. The price is from £ll to £l3 a ton, and is easily obtained by
unskilled labour. It is a matter of surprise to me that it does not form
a large item in our exports.
CHURCHES.
In every county of the Colony churches and chapels have been erected,
partly by subscription, and partly by grants of money from the Colonial
Treasury; the rule under the church act having been, that where a certain
congregation could be secured the government gave £IOOO towards the
building of a church and minister’s dwelling, and by the same act a
salary of £2OO a year was secured to the officiating clergyman. There
are now forty-four beneficed clergymen of the Church of England with
two archdeacons, presided over by the Right Reverend Dr. Nixon, a
talented and highly accomplished gentleman. In the last session of our
parliament an act was passed enabling the Church of England to govern
itself by means of a synod, consisting of three elements; first, the


bishop ; second, the clergy ; third, lay representatives. The synod met
in May 1859, and its first act was to fix the salaries of the clergy at
£3OO a year in the towns, and £250 with a house, and £SO for a horse in
the interior, making it however, compulsory on the parishes to provide
one-third of the minister’s stipend. More than half of the population of
the Colony are placed in the census under the Church of England. It
is to be hoped that the new arrangement will work well, for great things
may be done where clergyman and people are animated by one aim, as
they should be,—“the Glory of God and their mutual welfare.”
There are ten beneficed clergymen of the Church of Scotland, whose
incomes vary from £260 to £6OO a year, partly from government and
partly from their congregations. The presbyterians are not a numerous
body, but the truth of the adage is shown in their congregations, that a
“house-going parson makes a church-going people.”
Of the Free Church there are four ministers wholly supported by their
congregations ; the minister of Chalmers’ Free Church receiving £450
and a manse, both of which buildings have been erected at great expense
by his flock.
The Church of Rome is presided over by a prelate whose public and
private virtues command the esteem of every one. His title as conferred
by the Pope is Bishop of Hobart Town. Four ministers are paid from
the Treasury, the salaries varying from £260 to £600; while eight others
are supported by their congregations. A convent of Sisters of Charity
in Hobart Town affords visitors to the sick and imprisoned, and also
education to the poorer children of the catholic faith, —there are 17,000
catholics in Tasmania.
The Wesleyan Church is represented by nine ordained ministers, and
a great many lay preachers. The society receives £6OO a year from the
Treasury, and its chapels and Sunday schools are found in every district,
and are well attended.
The Independents have twelve ordained ministers, all liberally sup-
ported by their congregations.
The Baptists are a small body and have two ministers.
The Society of Friends is not a numerous body, but it forms a highly
respectable portion of the community. Of one “ whose spirit has flown
to the only rest which is not a deceit; far beyond the twilight judgments
of this world, high above its mists and its obscurities,” we cannot speak
too highly. He rests from his labours and his works do follow him !
Marc Anthony is made by Shakspeare to say, “ The evil which men do
lives after them—the good is oft interred with their bones.” So let it
not be with Washington Walker.


SCHOOLS
To the number of eighty, and costing the Government £12,000 a year,
are established under the northern and southern Boards of Education.
The masters receive salaries according to their acquirements, thus : a
first-class master receives £l5O a year and a house, with a fee of 9 d. per
week for every scholar in daily attendance ; a second-class master £l2O
with house and fees ; third-class, not more than £lOO with house and
fees. In the central school in Hobart Town, about 250 children receive
their education.
Of schools of the higher class presided over by clergymen, are the
Hutchins' School! to which are attached four scholarships; the High
School with four scholarships ; the Horton College; the St. Mary's
Seminary; and the two Church Grammar Schools; while there are
about thirty-five private schools under the care of gentlemen or ladies
of acknowledged talents. There are also two infant schools, and two
ragged schools which have recently been established with great success.
In the Queen’s Orphan Schools at New Town, more than 400 children
of both sexes are educated and maintained at the expense of the
government.
By a recent act of our parliament, a Council of Education consisting of
fifteen of the elite of Tasmanian gentlemen has been established, the
chief justice being president, and both bishops members, with power to
grant a degree of associate of arts, and establishing eight scholarships of
£2OO a year each, to be held by Tasmanian boys for four years at some
British University; and also sanctioning such further scholarships as
may seem advisable to the council of education. It will from these re-
marks be seen that the religious and educational advantages of Tasmania
are of a high order. In the country districts wherever a few children can
be got together, the education Board appoint a master, and for every
£1 subscribed by the inhabitants towards building a school-house,
the boards advance £2, and the services of Messrs. Davidson & Spong,
architects of taste having been secured, the designs for school-houses are
at once handsome and well arranged.
In connection with some of the public schools libraries have been estab-
lished, which are aided by the Board in the same way as the school-
houses. The education board has recently been able to secure the ser-
vices of a highly talented gentleman as inspector for the south side of the
island, and from what the public have seen of that gentleman, they are
prepossessed in his favor.


In a climate so healthy as this there is scarcely any necessity for
HOSPITALS.
Except in the large towns, cases of severe sickness or chronic disease
are rare, and can be treated at the patients’ own houses, without incon-
venience.
Her Majesty’s General Hospital in Hobart Town is a handsome well-
situated building, capable of affording accommodation to about 120
patients usually occupying it. Pauper patients are treated gratis at this
hospital, and it is attended by the surgeons paid by the Government.
St. Mary’s Hospital is a neat stone building under the care of Dr.
Bedford and a house surgeon. The medical fees vary from four to six
shillings a day. Any man may become a member of this hospital on
payment of an annual sum of eighteen shillings if he is under twenty
years of age, and rising by a sliding scale up to £l2 a year, if he is
seventy and upwards; for this he will receive medicines, medical
attendance, food, lodging, &c , while he may be sick during the year.
Families also on payment of the trifling sum of four shillings and four
pence a month can secure medical attendance at the dispensary, or at their
own houses in severe cases. This cannot be too generally known to the
poorer classes.
The Launceston Hospital has a resident surgeon, and receives £lOOO
a year from the Government, on condition of giving up a number of beds
to paupers.
Campbell Town Hospital, about eighty miles from Hobart Town and
thirty-five from Launceston, has been established for a few years, and is
found advantageous in dangerous cases. It receives aid from the
Government to the extent of £l5O a year.
New Norfolk Hospital is an extensive range of buildings which have
cost £30,000. The cases treated here are those of mania or idiotcy. A
large majority of its unfortunate inmates are or have been prisoners.
St. Paul’s Hospital at Circular Head is capable of receiving patients,
but there are none to occupy it.
Sixty-six duly qualified medical men reside in the colony, two of whom
having realised fortunes have retired from active practice. The charges
for medical attendance vary, as in England (according to the circum-
stances of the patient or the distance to be travelled), from three shillings
and sixpence to £7 a visit. The great liberality of medical men to their
poorer patients is spoken of everywhere throughout the colony.


Twenty chemists and druggists have established themselves, ten of
whom are in Hobart Town. The charge for drugs is moderate. In the
country districts every medical man has his own dispensary, unless a
chemist should happen to be in the neighbourhood. I can say from
experience that the country medical man in most instances finds a diffi-
culty in realising a sufficient income ; by sufficient, I mean an adequate
remuneration for his valuable services and for the expense of his education,
even in districts with a thousand inhabitants.
The Royal Society of Tasmania is composed of more than 300 members
elected by ballot; the subscription is thirty shillings a year; the
Society holds meetings for discussion of scientific subjects. The Queen
has been graciously pleased to become the patron of the Society, and the
Governor is the president. The Society maintains a Botanical Garden
of twenty acres in the Queen’s Park, which is open to the public for six
days in the week, and our citizens to the number of 15,000 visited the
gardens in 1858. The Society has also a museum, the contents of which
are of a varied character, and are valued at £3OOO, besides a valuable
scientific library of 1300 volumes. A branch of the Society holds
monthly meetings in Launceston.
The Mechanics’ Institute of Hobart Town is the parent institution in
the Australian Colonies. The Governor is patron, the Bishop of Tas-
mania president. It is governed by a committee of twenty members, and
possesses a library of more than 3000 volumes. Lectures are given
during some months of the year on various subjects.
The Mechanics’ Institution at Launceston is also established on a
popular basis, and last year the sum of £3OOO was raised for building the
institute.
The Mechanics’ Institute of the Huon, though in its infancy, is
flourishing.
There are many Libraries. The largest is the Parliamentary Library
of about 7000 volumes, open to the public during the recess of Parlia-
ment on members’ orders. Next is the Public Library with 5000
volumes; then the Launceston Public Library; the Bothwell Public
Library with 1700 volumes; the Evandale Public Library with 1500
volumes; the Longford Public Library; the Church of England Book
Society; the Launceston Theological Library; and Messrs. Westcott’s,
Lovett’s, and Lawrence’s General Libraries; Mr. Doyle’s Catholic
Library; and the Libraries of Messrs. "Which and Hudson in Launceston.
Private libraries of large extent are rare.


POSTAL ARRANGEMENTS—STEAMERS, &c.
The charge for letters passing through the Post Office, is as follows:
For English or Foreign letters six-pence each; if double letters, douhlee
postage.
For Country letters four-pence each; if double letters, double postage..
For Suburban letters two-pence each.
For Town letters Id. each.
Books and packets may be sent through the Post Offices on payment:
of sixpence for every quarter of a pound.
Mails are made up daily for most of the important towns throughout
the Colony, and twice and three-times a week for other towns and the
neighbouring Colonies.
They are also made up by every mail steamer or clipper for England,
via Melbourne.
Newspapers pass outward and inward free of postage.
The screw steamer City of Hobart, 618 tons, conveys mails and
passengers between Hobart Town and Melbourne twice a month; the
charge being £7 in cabin, £3 in steerage.
The screw steamer Tasmania, 460 tons, conveys mails and passengers
between Hobart Town and Sydney twice a month; the charge being
£lO. 10s. in cabin, and £4 in steerage.
The steamers Royal Shepherd and Black Swan, 300 tons each, trade
between Launceston and Melbourne, each making three trips per month,
by which arrangement a vessel leaves every five days.
The fares are cabin £4, steerage £3.
The steamer Titania trades between Launceston and Circular Head,
calling at the intermediate ports.
The steamer Culloden trades twice a week between the Huon River
and Hobart Town.
The steamer Monarch trades daily between New Norfolk and Hobart
Town.
The steamer Oberon trades with the East Coast weekly, bringing up
grain and produce and taking back supplies.
The steamer Cobre is laid up at present.
THE ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH
has been established from Mount Nelson three miles to the south of


Hobart Town to George Town, a distance of 165 miles, having an
intermediate station at Launceston 120 miles. The charge is three
shillings for a message of ten words.
The ship hearing the cable to be submerged between Tasmania and
Victoria is daily expected, and when it is laid down, which will be done
with dispatch, we can flash messages to friends in Adelaide, Melbourne,
and Sydney, hundreds of miles off, and receive replies in a few minutes.
Its advantages to the mercantile world will be of the utmost importance.
IRRIGATION.
It is surprising that Irrigation has not been practised to a greater
extent than it is, when the results are shown in every case to be so
valuable, and expense, in proportion to the profits, so very trifling. One
acre of grass land irrigated during the summer months is worth thirty
of dry land for pasture; besides which water destroys the small cater-
pillars which in some seasons infest grass lands.
In the address of His Excellency Sir Henry Young to the Northern
Agricultural Society, he pointed out the high importance of Irrigation.
His Excellency referred to the Lake Country as affording ample means
for carrying out a general system, and mentioned a tract of 163,000
acres on the Lake River alone which could all be irrigated from that
river.
The Surveyor General stated that no country in the world is more
happily situated as regards water for irrigation than Tasmania. In
1844 Major Cotton commenced some extensive works intended to spread
water in artificial channels over the lands bordering on the Macquarie and
Elizabeth Rivers, from reservoirs, draining 180 square miles of country,
and calculated to supply 30,000 acres for irrigation, and to keep up
supplies of water all the year round for Campbell Town, Ross, and
Tunbridge. These works were however abandoned.
It is said that the last thirteen public works for irrigation executed in
Madras by the Indian Government, have returned a profit of 134 per
cent., and there is every probability of a handsome return for capital
expended in such works in this Colony.
THE POLICE
Protection of the Colony consists of seventeen police or stipendiary
magistrates, twenty-two chief district constables, twenty-six district


constables, and 173 policemen distributed throughout the Colony. The
rural police are well armed and drilled. Each of the municipalities
possesses a police force of its own, dressed in the style of the metropoli-
tan police, but with a cap in lieu of the hat. The pay of the police is
five shillings a day ; and in town they are on duty twenty-four hours
and off duty the same. In the country they are expected to be “ always
wide awake.”
The security of life and property may be said to be as great as in
England ; for it is no unusual event for householders to forget to fasten
their windows, and in the country, very little care is taken even to lock
the outer doors ; for forty years my father and brothers have travelled
over the country at all hours and in almost all parts, and they have
never been stopped or molested. For myself, I can state, that while
police magistrate of an extensive outlying district, sixty-two miles long
and fifty miles wide, travelling for nearly two years on routine official
visits day and night, on duties not calculated to make me a favorite of
the lower classes, I never carried arms, and never met with anything
but kindness and hospitality, even in the merest hut; could this be said
of some of the outlying districts of Great Britain ? I think not.
The Commission of the Peace contains the names of 325 justices,
most of whom act when required.
Forty-one Coroners are distributed throughout the Colony: whose
duty it is not only to inquire into deaths, but also into the cause of fires
in houses or of crops.
Courts for the recovery of debts up to £lO are established in twenty-two
towns, and of debts up to £3O in seven of the larger towns ; the expense
varies from four shillings up to £5, according to the amount of debt, or
whether a lawyer is employed or not. The courts are usually held once
a month in the various police offices in the Interior, the police or
stipendiary magistrates acting as commissioners. In Hobart Town and
Launceston there are special commissioners who have higher powers
than the country commissioners.
Lawyers. —There is one of this learned and (I dare say) useful class to
every 380 men in the Colony. If the same proportion existed at home,
what a substantial standing army of learned men there would be.
The law in force in this Colony with regard to masters and servants is


such as fully to protect both parties. Indeed there are some who com-
plain of its partiality towards the servant. It applies to all persons
above sixteen years of age, and is not near so stringent in its provisions
as the laws under which servants are managed in England. It has been
decided that written agreements are not necessary ; that wages are to be
paid quarterly unless otherwise specially agreed. If wages are detained
the servant can enforce payment and compensation for the detention;
and masters are heavily fineable for illtreatment or abusive language to
their servants. No females can be imprisoned under this act for any
offence against its provisions.
Absence from service, drunkenness, disobedience, and other offences
are punished by fine or deduction from wages, and both master and
servant must give a month’s notice of cessation of service, unless
otherwise specially agreed. In every case two justices must decide the
complaint.
A Female Servants' Home is established in Hobart Town, with a
committee of management, and Lady Young as patroness. The rules
for admission are that every female shall produce to the matron her
discharge and character from her last place, and pay three shillings a
week in advance, which will entitle her to a bed, fire, cooking utensils,
washing, &c., and the use of the sitting room. In the event of the
female only requiring to remain for a few days, she is charged sixpence
per night, and the balance of her three shillings is returned to her. The
doors are closed at nine p.m. when all are expected to be in, and prayers
being read, the lights are put out at ten. No intoxicating drinks are
allowed on the premises, but no futher restraint is used. Any inmate
preferring it, may buy her meals from the housekeeper at ninepence per
meal. The value of the home is duly appreciated, as a respectable
female has always clean, orderly, and good lodgings to go to, and also
reference gratis to a register of vacant situations. This information is
obtained from Mrs. Crouch, the lady of the Under Sheriff, to whose
benevolent exertions the home owes its establishment and maintenance.
FERE AND LIFE ASSURANCE COMPANIES,
Eleven are established, five of which are branches of English establish-
ments. By means of these companies the settler can not only insure
his life, his houses and barns, but also his growing crops from fire, at
very moderate rates, so moderate, indeed, that the companies are doing
a large business, and the shares are very remunerative, and difficult to


be purchased, except at high premiums. The dividends vary from
twenty to thirty per cent, on the original price of the shares.
The life companies charge lower per centages than in England; thus
endorsing the high opinion entertained of the salubrity of the climate
of Tasmania, and the improved chances of life it realises, both to those
born in it, and those making it their home, though born elsewhere.
Deaths in Tasmania on an average of last two years have only been at
the rate of one to seventy-six inhabitants, or about thirteen to the
thousand, while the registered births have been about one to every
twenty-five of the population.
BOARDING AND COMMON LODGING-HOUSES
Are numerous in the City of Hobart Town and Town of Launceston;
in every town in the interior, one common lodging-house or more will be
found, where labouring people can obtain lodgings on reasonable terms.
The Boarding-houses in Hobart Town and Launceston are well built,
substantial, and roomy houses, where the attendance and table are gene-
rally most creditable. At one, i.e., Devonshire House, carriages and
horses are kept for the use of visitors, and the rooms are supplied with
pianos, a Library, and Newspapers.
The Common Lodging-houses are put under very stringent regulations
as to cleanliness and respectable management, and the keepers pay a
licence fee of forty shillings a year.
A few remarks as to the
FRIENDLY BENEFIT SOCIETIES
may be interesting.
The Freemasons have six Lodges, under a Provincial Grand Master
and the usual mysterious staff of officers.
The Odd Fellows have twenty Lodges in various parts of the Colony.
The objects of the Society are to encourage temperance, and to assist one
another in sickness or distress. With such excellent objects who can
doubt that the Order deserves to flourish ? The Governor General is
Patron and a Brother of our Order, the Governor is vice-patron, but not yet
a brother, and the members are now counted by thousands. The funds
in hand by last accounts are about £5OOO for sick and funeral purposes.
The Rechabites have several tents. Their objects are similar to the


Odd Fellows, except that they are total abstainers. The tents have 196
adult members and seventy-one juveniles, with a fund for sick and
funeral purposes of £2900.
Five Teetotal Societies are in full operation. The Roman Catholic
Society has built a noble hall of cut stone, with gothic windows and well
fitted up, entirely from voluntary contributions. The Temperance
Alliance have bought a Hall for their meetings, and paid £l7OO for it.
The ancient order of Foresters has a court of thirty members,
established in 1857.
Three Musical Societies, three Young Men's Societies, fifteen Reli-
gious Societies, three Benevolent Societies, a Dorcas Society, two Chess
Clubs, six Cricket Clubs, an Archery Club, Public Bathing Establish-
ments, Fire Brigades, Agricultural and Horticultural Societies, Ornitho-
logical Societies, and others, all valuable in their various spheres, are in
full operation.
A Building Society has been established in Hobart Town under Act
of Parliament, and two in Launceston. In the former, the Shares are
£5O, with a subscription of ten shillings a month. At Launceston, the
Shares are £lOO, with a subscription of eleven shillings a month. By
these societies, money is lent to Shareholders for building purposes.
A GAS COMPANY
Has been established in Hobart Town, with a capital of £60,000 in £2O
shares, the dividends being limited to twelve per cent, per annum. Its
last dividend was seven per cent. A company has also been formed in
Launceston with a capital of £30,000 in £lO shares, and the dividends
are also limited to twelve per cent. With such unlimited supplies of
coal throughout the colony, it is expected that gas will soon be in general
use, the expense at present, one pound a thousand feet, being little
more than tallow candles.
BANES.
Six are in full operation in Tasmania, with aggregate assets to the
value of £1,800,000, and liabilities £1,100,000.
The Banks are all flourishing, if we may judge from the published
returns, lam no financier, but I lay the following before you :


The Commercial Bank shares are £lOO each, all paid up; the last
dividend declared was at the rate of ten per cent., and the shares fetch in
the market £153.
The Bank of Yan Dieman’s Land shares are £5O each, all paid up, the
last dividend was ten per cent., and the selling price £7B.
The Union Bank shares are £25 each, all paid up ; the last dividend
was twenty per cent., and the selling price was, in the colony £62. 10s.
and in England £63. 10s.
The Australasian Bank shares are £4O each, all paid up, the last divi-
dend was twenty per cent., with a bonus, and the selling price was £BB.
The Savings’ Bank in Hobart Town, is a flourishing establishment, in
which upwards of £120,000 are deposited. The Bank allows interest to
depositors at the rate of 4 per cent., declared half-yearly, and sums from
one shilling to £l5O may be deposited. £104,000 are invested in mort-
gages, and £lO,OOO in debentures.
The Savings’ Bank at Launceston is also flourishing, and the same
interest is allowed, and it has £91,000 invested in mortgages.
Branch Savings’ Banks on a small scale are established at the Huon,
at Bothwell, and at Hamilton.
As the trustees of the savings’ banks are selected from the highest
public officers and most respected merchants, their security is undoubted.
On the Ist January, 1859, the coin in the hanks of the Colony was
said to be about £376,000, this does not include the amount in circula-
tion, which may be about £30,000, making a total of £406,000.
The Government have authorised the issue, for various public purposes,
of debentures to the value of £518,000. These bear interest, payable
half yearly, at the rate of 6 per cent. Those at short dates have all been
bought up eagerly by all classes of persons. The repayment of £307,000
is secured upon our land revenue, which amounts to £BO,OOO a year, and
in no year are more than £25,000 worth of debentures made repayable.
On the 31st March, 1859, debentures were outstanding to the amount
of £282,000.
An Act was passed recently to allow savings’ banks and trustees to
invest their moneys in Government debentures, the security being of so
high a character, although the interest is below that which can be
obtained from other sources. In the case of debentures, however, there
is no trouble, no mortgage deeds, no lawyers, no annoyance in obtaining
interest, the only trouble being that of presenting the coupons, and
receiving the amount half yearly at the Treasury. A debenture is at
any time a transferable security, and the selling price is par.


1852
77
0
23
1853
44
7
2
1854
34
15
0
1855
4
0
0
1856
270
3
0
1857
249
9
0
1858
126
12
0
To 11th March, 1859
18
0
0
I will now make a few remarks on the Tasmanian
GOLD FIELDS.
The Legislature having voted a sum of £5OOO as a reward for a work-
able gold field, it may not be uninteresting to show what have been the
results of the search for gold in Tasmania.
The only field which has been regularly worked, although gold has
been found in small quantities in many parts of the Colony, is at Fingal,
near Tower Hill, one of the spurs of Ben Lomond; and on this field,
according to reports furnished to the Government, 824 ounces of gold
have been obtained up to March 1869, the value of which, at £3. 16s. an
ounce, is £3131.
The quantity taken from the “ Nook,” an area of less than a mile,
exceeded in one year ending 31st March, 1857, £lOOO in value, and this
was the produce of four or five diggers regularly employed.
Tomlinson and Lupton, two hard working men, digging from 3rd No-
vember, 1866, to 2nd February, 1857, produced 20 ounces 10 dwts. of
gold, which they sold for £76. Is. 9d. This gave them each £2. 19s. 3d.
a week for their labour. They worked without any machinery or appli-
ances. In 1853, six years ago, I visited the diggings at Fingal, and saw
gold taken from every tin dish of soil, the man and his wife whom I
visited being employed in digging with a spade and a trowel, a small tin
dish, and an old washing tub. Their week’s work produced them
£2. 14s. 9d.
The following is the official return which I have been allowed to copy
from the Colonial Secretary’s office: —
Years. Ounces, dwts. grains.
823 23 5 value £3131. 4s.
The distribution of gold has been found to extend over a vast tract of
country, generally under beds of drift gravel and stones, loose or ce-


mented with clay. In summer the total absence of water among the
hills near Fingal, and in the winter its too great quantity, are drawbacks
to the successful working without machinery. Gold has been traced at
intervals through the entire country from Fingal northwards, to the
Bay of Fires on the east coast. It has been found in the South Esk, in
quartz at the Frenchman’s Cap to the west, and those specimens of
quartz, which were sent to be tested in Sydney, showed gold to exist in
every piece, in some to the extent of thirteen ounces to the ton. At the
celebrated Clunes works in Victoria 1 oz. 10 dwts. per ton is the average
yield. The results of the quartz crushing machine at present at work at
Fingal give a weekly return of twenty to thirty ounces.
The proper exploration of the Fingal and other known gold fields will,
however, require a much larger body of men, and more efficient ma-
chinery than we now possess. Occasionally a patch of ground is hit upon,
from which a few ounces of shotty granular gold is taken, and there has
always been sufficient success to encourage experienced diggers to
persevere.
A man, who had been a successful digger in Victoria, says, that one
of the richest gold fields there was prospected by 400 diggers, who left
it; eighteen months afterwards a fourth party of diggers visited it, and
it gave remunerative employment to 20,000 diggers.
So may it be with Fingal. The auriferous country is proved to be
extensive, even with the petty searching of fifty-eight men; may we not
entertain valid hopes, that an exploration by 1000 men would result in a
rich and satisfactory gold field ? Three reefs of quartz have just been
discovered on the north coast, near Emu Bay, all containing gold. In
consequence of the quartz reefs of Fingal being now fully worked, the
government has just appointed a gold commissioner, and issued digging
regulations.
I now proceed to give an account of the various districts, of those
over which I have myself travelled, noting anything worthy of observa-
tion, and comprising 6,000,000 acres of country, I give a full account;
of the others, with which I trust to make myself personally acquainted
during the ensuing summer, if I can spare time from my office duties, I
give merely a short notice.
First comes the county of Cumberland, comprising the police districts
of Hamilton, Bothwell, and Greenponds, of which I had the pleasure,
while police magistrate, to make myself fully acquainted.


PASTORAL COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND AND THE LAKE COUNTRY.
One who wishes to see this part of our fair little island of Tasmania
to the best advantage, has only to take his seat in the Launceston coach
at five o’clock in the morning, in the spring month of September, and
after a three hours’ drive over a splendid road, and through a country
studded with villages and farm-houses, he will find himself at the clean
and well-built inn in the village of Greenponds, kept by Brother Harvey.
He has then to enjoy a country breakfast of delicacies, such as do not
often find themselves on the matutinal tables of the Cits of Hobart
Town, and when that best of meals is discussed, he will find Tommy
Scott ready with his tandem and conveyance to take him over the Den
Hill, over the Jordan, and over very tolerable roads to Bothwell, a dis-
tance of eighteen miles. This road leads through the village of Apsley,
in which is an inn, and some cultivated fields, besides a Police Station ;
the Jordan River meandering alongside the road for some distance. The
road over the Den Hill has been made within the last few years, by the
energetic Road Trustees of Bothwell; before its completion the carriage
of wool and grain from the district, and supplies to it, was nearly imprac-
ticable and very expensive. The conveyance now performs the eighteen
miles in little more than two hours, while wool and produce are conveyed
to and from Hobart Town, a distance of forty-six miles, for £4 per ton.
The traveller looks down from the heights of the Den Hill on to the
Black Marsh, which is a beautiful valley in a high state of cultivation,
composed of about 600 acres, the rent of which is £5OO a year. At the
head of the valley is seen a very large house, unfinished, which was
intended to be one of the finest of the district. Death’s cold hand
chilled the liberal heart of the owner, and the shell of the house now
stands, looking grimly down on the beautiful green valley and numerous
flocks of sheep whitening its bosom.
The Den Hill, and indeed almost all the hills in the Bothwell district,
are composed of sandstone, —near the top of one of the hills, however,
is formed a vein of limestone which is worked, and produces very tole-
rable lime, which sells in Bothwell at two shillings and sixpence a bushel.
The village of Bothwell is in a valley, and is laid out in streets, running
at right angles with each other. It is nearly two miles long, and the
Clyde river runs through the centre. Here we find a neat church, in
which the services of the Church of England and Scotland are performed
alternately by Ministers of these denominations residing in the village,
an extensive Public School, under a trained master from Scotland, a
Library, composed of 1500 volumes of books, among which are a few of


the standard novels, several large inns, which in their outward appear-
ance, and inward cleanliness would not disgrace the old country, —and
some well-built and substantial public buildings. From the Priory, a
noble white stone building in the Elizabethan style, with its Gothic
doors and stained glass windows—its marble mantelpieces, and its pretty
grounds—the residence of the lady of one of the early commandants
of the colony—the view of the village is very prepossessing. This view
comprises many thousand acres of nearly level country, studded with
farm-houses, two large water mills, two breweries, tanneries, shops, and
nearly a hundred houses surrounded with orchards, the Clyde meandering
through the middle of the valley, and crossed by several light bridges.
The river is forded at one point, and the traveller proceeds on the road
to the Shannon, passing through Ratho with its irrigated fields, and
leaving the Nant Mill, and the extensive cultivation of Blair and Logan
on the right, he ascends a steep hill with a villainous road; he descends
it on the other side and comes upon Cluny, another Elizabethan house,
and wide open plains, sugar-loaf hills, covered with she-oak trees, and
extensive seeep walks, with numbers of wild kangaroos, some of them six
feet high, bounding away in every direction, until he arrives at the
Hermitage, on the river Shannon. This is a noble stream, and takes its
rise in the Great Lake, which is a piece of water covering 50,000 acres,
and which, when acted upon by a high wind, causes the Shannon to
overflow its banks. Here is another Police Station, and it is also the
residence of the senior Justice of the district. It was here that
Dr. Ross, “ The Father of the Press of Tasmania,” first settled down
with his interesting family. Off to the right again, but not in a vehicle,
we come to the Lake Country, or the high plateau on which the Lakes Cres-
cent, Sorell, Wood’s, Arthur’s, and others, are found. Lake Sorell is
Very extensive; wild ducks, black swans, teal, and other game are found
in quantities; and here are several large sheep stations, where the
traveller is sure of a good cup of tea and some hot damper and fresh
butter, with lamb chops, a discretion.
It is on the borders of this Lake, that the beautiful little amethysts
and topazes are found. One beach, known as the Diamond beach,
actually glistens in the sun with its sands of rock crystal, quartz, and
topazes. It was here that o‘Meagher, the Irish Exile, built his cabin.
It was here that John Mitchell, Smith O’Brien, and their compatriots,
used to meet, and talk over old adventures, and here they found
“ When the heart is tried the sorest
There is balsam in the forest,
Says the Lady Leonore.”


From the lakes the traveller returns to Bothwell under the precipice
of the Table Mountain, through the Denistoun property of about 25,000
acres, where he will see nearly 2000 acres under irrigation, where he
will find a hospitable owner, and see a well-ordered establishment.
Plovers by hundreds, and quail and snipe tempt the farming sportsman
from his other avocations ; and the angler can pick up with his hands,
hy going up to his waist in rich mud, a good basket of eels in an hour.
It is said, indeed, that one proprietor sells his eels by the hundred
weight for the Hobart Town market: eels are sometimes sold at four-
pence a yard. Every garden possesses its bee hives. Honey is sold
from threepence to fourpence a pound, and is of a very fine description,
made from the flowers of the weeping gum tree, which, with its beautiful
foliage, covers the country for many miles. Twelve miles from Bothwell
the traveller finds, in a lonely little valley, a low-roofed cottage, with
vine and flower covered verandahs, and extensive farm buildings : this is
Montacute, the residence of the member for the county, a retired officer
of the royal navy, who, with a liberality worthy of the cause, has built
and endowed a neat stone church, which has been consecrated by the
Lord Bishop, and in which Divine service is performed by the eloquent
minister from Bothwell. The country then towards Hamilton becomes
hilly, covered with she-oak and gum trees, and execrable roads, over
which the weary traveller grumbles and his horse stumbles. Catherine
Yale is a pretty and romantic spot, shut in by hills on all sides, and
extensively cultivated. A road here leads off to the left to the Hollow-
tree district.
Hiding down Jack Oliver’s Hill, so called from an unfortunate man
who broke his neck on its precipitous side, the traveller has a glorious
view of Hamilton village, lying some hundred feet below him, and
located in a small valley like the basin of a volcano, the Clyde river and
the Dens Rivulet winding their way through fringed banks of willows.
Here is a neat church, a handsome bridge, large inns, breweries, and
some good shops, and round the village are some of the largest landed
proprietors in the Colony, possessing 20,000, and even as many as 40,000
sheep, the annual value of which, after payment of expenses, may be
taken at four shillings a head. The traveller here, as at Bothwell, and
indeed as everywhere in the country districts of Tasmania, may secure
every hospitality. He will cross the Clyde bridge on to the Lawrenny
property of about 13,000 acres, he will ride through the race course, with
its park-like country, past Kimbolton ruins for several miles, till he
comes to the Derwent, over which is built the Dunrobin bridge, leading
to the “ Unsettled Country.” The Derwent is here a noble stream,


having received the waters of the Ouse, or Big River, the Shannon, the
Dee, the Nive, the Nivelle, and others. He will ride along its banks for
a few miles still on the noble Lawrenny estate, belonging to an absentee
landlord, and farmed by agents and superintendents, whose exertions
bring to market the finest mutton in the world, and known as the Law-
renny mutton, from sheep fed upon its rich valleys, which, at a trifling
expense, could all be irrigated, rendering one acre worth thirty for
pastoral purposes, until he comes to the Ouse river, with its bridge of
eleven arches, with its neat inn, and its delicate herrings, of which the
angler can bag three dozen in an hour with a fly and a rod, and along the
road he can canter to Rotherwood, leaving Cawood and Hunter’s Hill
with their hospitable owners on the right.
The Rotherwood Arms is a handsome inn, with marble mantel-pieces,
and built on the edge of the Ouse, which is here very beautiful. Coal
of a bituminous character is found in quantities all over the district.
Onward the traveller jogs over a Government road, past the inn atShaw-
field to Yictoria Yalley, where thousands of pounds were wasted under
the old and vicious probation system, and the ruinous walls of numerous
buildings and cells alone remain to mark where a thousand of England’s
erring exiles once congregated. Away twenty miles along a Government
road till Marlborough is reached, the furthest village on that part of the
country; here are thousands upon thousands of sheep, with but few
houses, and here again did mother country shell out her gold to a great
amount. The village must have cost thousands to clear and drain, and
yet could hardly find a tenant at sixty pounds a year. This will be an
important point when the unsettled lands’ country becomes peopled, and
stores no doubt will be built here. The climate, however, is very inhos-
pitable, and the snow lies deep in the winter and spring ; indeed, a shep-
herd has been frozen to death in February, the height of our summer.
To the left of Hamilton is the valley of the Hollow Tree, and the road
leading to the Broad Marsh. In the Hollow Tree valley is a good deal
of cultivation and some substantial farm houses.
The country about the River Dee is not very good; it is principally
used as sheep farms. Here resides the Member of the Assembly for the
county. In former days, and it is even said now, illicit stills existed in
the retired valleys of this part of the country foiling all the efforts of
the police, notwithstanding the high penalty attaching to their possession.
From Marlborough there is a track across to Lake St. Clair and the
Great Lake, and from the latter down to the valley of the Meander and
the Mersey country. Shepherds and others frequently make, what is
termed a short cut, from the Mersey to Hobart Town, across the Great


Lake plain, where for many miles the country is as level as a bowling
green and devoid of timber. It is a dangerous route however, as lawless
characters most frequently make for that part of the country, where the
freemasonry that exists between them and the shepherds, many of whom
were old government men, gives them secure shelter. The sight of a
blue-coated policeman leads to a smoke curling to the sky from the first
hut he reaches, and in ten minutes the same warning signal passes
from north to south, and east to west.
The county of Cumberland is one great sheep walk, containing more
than half a million of sheep and ten thousand head of cattle. Grain of
various sorts is cultivated to the extent of about 5000 acres only, indeed
very little is grown beyond what is required for consumption within the
district. The ale brewed from malt nearly equals that imported from
home. The sheep shearing annually employs a very large number of
men who receive from seventeen shillings to twenty shillings a hundred,
and who spend their money as quickly as they get it. It has been
ascertained that five thousand pounds have been paid for sheep shearing
in one year alone in this county. The lover of the beautiful would find
much to please him ; the noble falls of the Clyde, the still more romantic
cascades of the Native Creek, the quiet beauty of Lake Sorell, the
grandeur of the Frenchman’s Cap mountain standing out white with
snow from the bright blue mountains surrounding it, the precipice 1000
feet high, of Wylde’s Crag, and the divine valley of the Florentine ; all
delight with their beauty, and all that is wanted is Anglo-Saxon energy
and British capital to turn the country into rich fields of grain and pretty
vine-clad cottages, where a free, a happy, and industrious people may
form homes for the sturdy, democratic, but handsome boys now growing
to manhood in every valley ; and set the other parts of the Colony an
example of steady industry and sobriety.
Municipal Institutions will soon be established in the county, giving
to the people the English privilege of taxing themselves, and of spending
their money within their own districts : of course retaining the other
privilege of an Englishman (and which they are so loath to part
with) of grumbling at everything and everybody, while they are
filling their barns with produce and their pockets with gold-purchased
debentures.
To the shepherd, more especially this district, holds out great ad-
vantages ; comfortable huts, good wages, unlimited mutton chops, enable
him to save money. In 1857, some of this class brought their cheques
for £IOO, £l2O, and smaller sums to the District Savings’ Bank, and
farm servants were able to save their £lO or £2O owing to the cheapness


of food and the advantages of obtaining the luxuries of life, such as tea,
tobacco, and ale, at most moderate prices. The excellent schools es-
tablished under the trained masters of the Board of Education, hold out
inducements to the labouring class to give, at a very trifling cost, viz.
sixpence a week each child, such an education to their children as is
suited to their position in society; while the churches and chapels of
all denominations presided over by visiting clergymen, are filled each
Sunday with a worshipping people, the very police office at Bothwell
being turned alternately into a chapel for small but respectable congre-
gations of Wesleyans and Roman Catholics.
To this short description of a beautiful part of the Colony may be
added a few practical observations on the statistics of the county.
The population is composed of 2600 people, of whom nearly 1000
are females, and 788 children under fourteen years of age. The county
contains a million acres of land, which are owned by about 170 pro-
prietors, who employ 226 shepherds, and 327 farm servants. There
exist seven churches, three schools, good and sufficient police protection,
manufactories of various articles required in the country, flour mills,
postal communication twice a week, stage-coach conveyance three times
a week to the main road, at very reasonable rates ; while the prices of
bread and meat may be quoted lower than town prices, and the luxuries
of life but a trifling advance on town prices. "Wages vary from five
shillings a day upwards, according to skill or requirements. The deaths
from various diseases do not amount to one per cent, of the popula-
tion, while the cases of sickness can be immediately attended to by
resident medical men. Hamilton could be lighted with gas at a trifling
expense, from coal obtained at High Plains, within a couple of miles of
the village, and within thirty-five feet of the surface, and it might be
made to form the entrepot of the New Country.
Prom Hamilton, southward, the road leads over rounded hills, covered
with volcanic scoriae and opalised -wood, towards New Norfolk, passing
through Macquarie Plains, and crossing the Derwent near the Woolpack
Inn. It is here that the large opalised tree exists: the whole country
bearing evidence of volcanic origin. At the Woolpack is a police station,
and indeed the traveller can scarcely ride ten miles in any direction in
the district without meeting a station-house, and a sturdy armed police-
man, the terror of the evil doers, and the active letter-carrier for the
neighbouring justices.
Were it not for occasional falls in the River Derwent, it would form a
splendid canal to convey the Hamilton, or the Ouse coal to New Norfolk,
and thence by steamer to Hobart Town, and at a cost which would


compensate the owner and relieve the poor of Hobart Town of part of
the charge for a very expensive necessary of life.
The Town Common of Hamilton, consisting of about 2000 acres,
which has until recently been reserved for the townspeople, is now being
surveyed in small allotments, and these as they are brought into market
find ready sale at the rate of £4 and £5 an acre, and although the
distance from which timber for fencing has to be carried renders the
fencing expensive, the hills around the township shew that these allot-
ments pass into the hands of men who do not spare their capital in
making improvements.
AVOCA AND FINGAL.
The conveyance, on leaving Morrison’s Hotel, Campbell Town, well
horsed by two stout greys, carried me over some very bad roads—past
roads—past the cairn raised to the memory of the murdered police ma-
gistrate of olden time—past Stoney Creek, with its herrings, and the
beautiful bend of the South Esk—and round some hills covered to the
summit with she-oak, every tree of which would be worth eighty shil-
lings in the Hobart Town market, until after a short level we arrive at
Avoca, after crossing the bridge. Here I found some very excellent
cheese and ale, and an attentive landlady. I saw in the distance Boa
Yista, with its orchards, and gardens, and its flower-covered verandahs,
where the bushrangers Dalton and Kelly, seven years ago, robbed the
house and shot Constable Buckmaster, while the police and the inha-
bitants of the township could hear the guns and see the people, without
for an instant guessing what was going on. The flood rises very high in
the river in some seasons, and one summer the platform of the bridge
was floated away, although thirty feet above the ordinary water level.
On this occasion I hopped over the river from stone to stone. Some
miles of very level gravelly road brought us to some lagoons on the
roadside, which were covered with wild ducks ; one bevy we counted of
thirty-six; they were not at all shy of the conveyance, though we passed
within half musket range. We then came upon the old Fingal probation
station, with its ruined buildings, its little chapel, and overseers’ cot-
tages, and arrived in Fingal at the Talbot Arms at two o’clock. Looking
towards the river I see the Government House and garden, with its
hedges of broom in full flower, at present occupied by the police magis-
trate, who from his parlour window looks down on a beautiful piece of
water, where frequently black swans make their appearance, and where
herrings of a delicacy unequalled can be taken with the fly, where the


banks are bright with the halcyon or kingfisher, with its black and
yellow feathers, darting at the small trout in the stream, and where the
platypus is found in every deep hole of the river.
A canter of a mile and a half, on a borrowed nag, took me to Mala-
hide, with its orchards and fine old pictures, and another ride in the
opposite direction to the little churchyard of Fingal, in a deep quiet little
valley at the foot of brown sandstone cliffs some hundred feet high.
Here I saw the neat marble tomb of the Honourable William Talbot,
once the hospitable owner of Malahide, and other burial places well
railed in, and roomy enough to contain ten generations of the families
owning them. The thickets around are well stocked with pigeons and
kangaroo, and here also are found some noble specimens of the black
snake, one of the most venomous of its tribe. Mounting my friend’s
dog-cart, the box of which was well supplied with a couple of the afore-
said wild ducks well cooked, a cold shoulder of lamb (no other cold
shoulder do you get at Fingal), bread a discretion, and some claret and
bottled ale, not forgetting the saltcellars, we started early for the dig-
gings, and after crossing the river, knocking over three ducks with a
double-barrelled gun, and after a tiresome drive through scrubby valleys
we arrive at the locus in quo. Here we found some men and one woman
picking away with tub, pick-axe, and tin dish, but it was an apology for
gold digging. The precious metal was there, no doubt, but not to be
found as they were searching for it. The possibility is that the gold has
been washed down from Tower Hill and its surrounding hills, and has
been carried into the extensive alluvial flats which spur out in all
directions, ultimately ending in the river. To search these flats will
require thousands of diggers, and appliances for keeping the water out of
the holes. Men have been at work in these valleys for four or five years,
with greater or less success; the landlord of the Talbot Arms could tell
something as to the quantity found, for a good deal of it finds or did find
its way there.
Gold digging, however, is one of the lowest employments in which a
hard-working man need employ himself in in Tasmania. When a steady
labourer can earn his £4O or £5O a year, with a comfortable cottage and
good substantial rations, sheltered from the storms of winter, and not
burnt up with the summer sun, he need never go to the precarious and
unsatisfactory employment of gold digging, where one finds an ounce,
and a thousand find nothing.
We intended going further in this direction, but rain came on and put
a stop to our journey, and most decidedly to our enjoyment. A day or
two afterwards we started on horseback for the purpose of ascending Ben


Lomond, 5400 feet high, and after a long ride of some hours we arrived
at Aitkin’s shepherd’s hut, having ridden through some noble forests of
the finest timber in the island, and passed some extensive deposits of
granite and quartz rocks. The hut is about 4000 feet above the level of
the sea, and just under the culminant point of the mountain. Here we
enjoyed an excellent breakfast—hot bread, fresh butter, lamb chops, tea
and cream, with fresh eggs. Oh! such an appetite as we had; and
while eating we listened to the shepherd’s wonderful exploits among the
“devils” (dasyurm ursinus), of which he had killed some dozens in a
pit. We rode away along some very fine marshes, nearly dry, and
covered with sheep, until we arrived at the summit, or rather as near to
it as horses could take us, and the most lovely view burst upon our
sight. Avoca under our very feet; Fingal, green and beautiful, to the
left; Campbell Town and the Macquarie away in the distance, and
ninety miles off, as the crow flies, and mingling with the clouds, we saw
the head of Mount Wellington. Our glimpse of this fairy land was but
short, for we had a heavy ride to take homewards. Filling our pockets
with specimens, from a devil’s skull, with its formidable teeth, to a
block of granite or a mass of quartz, and large bunches of warratah
flowers, we started homewards, and got to our beds deep in the night.
All the country about here is sheep pasture; we saw very little culti-
vation, compared to the great extent of country passed over. What
noble farms, what beautiful homesteads, what a happy peasantry might
be established if these princes of wastes and lords of pastures would all
emigrate to Victoria, and transfer their properties to those who would
encourage the small tenant system. A grain rent of two bushels of
wheat per acre would pay the landlord well, and would enable the tenant
to live and maintain his family. Villages would spring up ; little rustic
churches would be erected; the Board of Education would liberally aid
in the establishment of schools, with their little attached libraries, and,
instead of the forty or fifty struggling townships now existing in Tasmania,
there would be ten times the number.
I have seen in my forty years’ residence in this colony villages spring
up from the wilderness, and have watched their progress until they have
become towns; and we may hope that our sons may see the fertile
valleys of Tasmania, and its splendid river banks, clothed with small
towns, filled with a free and industrious peasantry, in the place of the
lonely shepherd’s hut, and the solitary shepherd roaming listlessly about
and whistling for sheer want of thought, while the deep silence of the
surrounding country is only broken by the yelp of the sheep dog or the
scream of the white cockatoo.


HORTON DISTRICT.
The Horton or Circular Head District embraces the settlements at
Circular Head, Woolnorth, Emu Bay, Table Cape, and King’s and Bob-
bin’s Islands, or an extent of country covering two and a half millions of
acres, of which 350,000 have been alienated by the Crown. At present
there are about 5600 acres under cultivation, nearly half of which is laid
down in English grasses. The quantity of stock for so large an extent
of country is very small, being about 7000 sheep and 2500 cattle.
There are five towns or villages, in two of which are respectively seventy
and sixty houses, two have each two houses, and one is not yet built
upon.
Nine rivers with a depth of water ranging from twelve to six and a
half feet on the bars at their sea mouths, rise in the district, and there
are excellent anchorages at Circular Head, Woolnorth, Emu Bay, &c.,
at which places a steamer touches periodically from Launceston. The
population is very small, viz :■ —-931 males and 617 females. Four
churches have been erected and Ministers appointed to the churches of
England and Rome, and Lay Preachers of other denominations. There
is a Local Court of Requests, for the recovery of debts up to £lO, and a
body of Police sufficient for the maintenance of order in the district, and
a number of Justices of the Peace reside at different localities. At the
Government schools children from three years of age to thirteen or four-
teen are taught reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar, geography, &c.,
while the girls are taught the usual branches of needle-work. The
children are mostly those of small tenant farmers, and their services are
so valuable to their parent’s during the agricultural seasons as to render
the attendance at school very fluctuating.
Beer of good quality is produced at two breweries. Provisions vary in
price, but the prices of the necessaries of life may be stated at but little
in advance of the other districts of the colony. Wages of mechanics
vary from ten shillings to sixteen shillings a day, and laborers can earn
from fifteen shillings to twenty shillings a week with rations.
There is great room for improvement in the roads of the district; it is
believed that the fertile parts would be quickly sought after and occupied
if there were good roads to enable proprietors to bring their produce to
market; the bridges are all temporary erections, but much good is ex-
pected from the exertions of the Road Trust which is just getting heartily
xo work.
Of course, in an extensive district of hill and valley, of open plain and


thick scrub, the climate is of every variety. The mountainous portions
to the S. and S. E. are cold and bleak, with much snow. Where the
country has been settled, and this is only along the coast, the climate is
mild though changeable, but the changes do not run into the extremes
of heat and cold, the dense forests and general luxuriance of vegetation
combined with proximity to the Western Ocean procure for these settle-
ments frequent showers, and a moister climate than is found in the other
parts of the colony.
Timber of the finest quality and of enormous size is found here : pine,
myrtle, sassafras, lightwood, all excellent woods for furniture or fancy
work, can be easily obtained. By the myrtle must not be understood the
small fragrant shrub of the English garden or the Tasmanian flower-pot,
but a tree beautiful in foliage, delicately veined in its timber, and yet of
so large a size that three horsemen can shelter their horses in the bole of
the tree, where fire has burnt its way to the heart, while the height varies
from 50 to 200 feet.
Table Cape and Circular Head are singular examples of extraordinary
elevations of trap rocks, towering suddenly from deep water and con-
taining extensive areas on their summits. Quartz is found in or near the
bed of every river, running in veins through slate, or rising in abrupt
irregular masses. At Woolnorth blocks of metal quartz rise abruptly
in precipices, in one case to a considerable height above the forest trees.
The rocky Cape and its branches reaching an elevation of a thousand feet
are composed of this rock. Particles of gold have been found in the
scattered fragments of rock, and an analysis of quartz from six different
localities was made, in one instance realizing at the rate of fifteen ounces
to the ton. Nodules of copper have been found in the quartz in other
localities.
A Chalybeate spring exists at Duck Bay, where limestone is also
found.
Kangaroos and other animals are found in numbers, while the birds
and reptiles common to Tasmania appear to exist in great profusion.
For irrigation purposes water can be obtained everywhere, though the
moistness of the climate would render its use unnecessary, still in some
of the barren tracts there is no doubt that the various crops would be
much benefited by irrigation.
It may be said that the farmers in this district trust too much to the
cultivation of the potato, at times a doubtful crop, and very variable in
price in the market, one year forty pounds a ton have been paid for
potatoes, another year not half so many shillings. In no part of the
colony are emigrants more required than in the Horton district, where


an extensive field exists for their exertions. In no place is the land
located so far as five miles from the sea or the banks of a navigable river;
soil of the finest description exists here, and it only requires a little
capital, an active Road Trust, a stout heart, and Anglo-Saxon energy, to
turn the forest into rich clearings, and to cover the valleys with thriving
settlers.
If sufficient encouragement were given, a steamer would ply between
the ports of the district and Melbourne or Port Fairy, bringing over meat,
and taking back grain and timber, the distance being a run of about 120
miles only, while at the free port of Stanley all English and foreign goods
could be easily landed, and distributed throughout the district at a cost
not much exceeding that paid for them in other parts of Tasmania.
I will close this short sketch of the extensive and half-explored district
of Horton, by an extract from a beautiful Poet now resident in Tasmania.
“ Par, far beyond, prolific regions spread,
Where whispering winds have made their balmy bed.
Disturbed but by a Lbichhakdt’s daring tread;
A broad oasis spreads its vesture fair.
And smiling Verdure reigns triumphant there.
Luxuriance crowns the various plains with green,
Whilst streams meandering gently sweep between,
O’er his domain the Emu wanders wild.
And deems himself fond nature’s favorite child;
Rears his high head, and to each wavy chain,
Shoots his bright gaze, sole Monarch of the plain.”
THE DISTRICT OF CAMPBELL TOWN.
This important district comprises about one-eighth of the island, com-
mencing at the Blackman’s River on the south, and terminating near
the Snake Banks on the north. There are nearly 5000 acres under the
plough, the remainder being mostly used as grazing lands ; the whole of
the lands, excepting a very small portion, are purchased. The district
is one of the most healthy in the colony, and although not extensively
populated, still it comprises a very large number of wealthy families,
some of whom derive incomes from their holdings, varying from £5OO to
£5OOO per annum. The valuation of the property exceeds £44,000
annually. Nearly 300,000 sheep are depastured upon the lands of the
district, exclusive of horses, numbers of which are bred here.
The main line of road runs through the centre of the district, upon which
road the three principal towns are situated, Ross, Campbell Town, and


Cleveland : the coaches from Hobart Town and Launceston pass through
daily ; the journey from Hobart Town to Campbell Town being performed
in about ten hours. I cannot do better, in giving a description of the
district than relate a ramble I had through it a few years back, when my
legs were younger and my heart lighter than it is now. Making Ross
the starting point, we first strolled through this picturesque little village,
with its well-built free-stone bridge and carved arch-stones, opened by
Colonel Arthur in 1836. Here are also three well-kept inns, that known
as the “ Ross Hotel,” being a fine large double-winged stone building,
with every accommodation for the traveller. Religion here has its due
share of places of worship ; the Church of England delighting in a stone
church at an inconvenient distance from the township ; the Wesleyans,
with their neat little chapel in the very centre of the town; and the
Roman Catholics with the chapel formerly used by the Government for a
road station. The average congregations at all these places are consi-
derable ; that of the Wesleyans being the greatest. There is a well
conducted public school here, presided over by Mr. Richards. Places of
business, i.e., general stores, are here pretty thick, that of Messrs.
Yallentine and Co. being a very extensive establishment. Re-crossing
the bridge and turning south, we strolled a couple of miles, which brought
us to Horton College, a noble institution for so young a colony. This
edifice was erected entirely at the expense of one man, Captain Horton,
at a very large cost. Here we were shown the superior arrangements for
the education of sixty boys, besides accommodation for the various
masters (all of whom are resident) and the domestics. At the time of
our visit fifty boys were in college, all of whom were looking as healthy
and happy as their most loving parents could wish. This establishment
is most ably presided over by Mr. and Mrs. Manton, with a staff of com-
petent assistants. Partaking of an excellent and substantial dinner with
the boys in the dining hall, we left the Horton College with the remi-
niscences of our own school days heavily upon our minds, and not know-
ing which way to turn, we tossed up a feather and followed it. Its
direction was down the Macquarie River Road ; this is a cross-road lead-
ing from the main road at Ross Bridge to the Lake River. A few years
back this road was a bog nearly the whole way, but is now greatly
improved by the Road Trust. The country about Ross is fine and open,
and some of the largest sheep farms are in its vicinity ; those of Ellen-
thorpe, Mona Yale, Syndal, Beaufrout, Chiswick, and Somercotes, the
latter being well irrigated by the waters of the Macquarie, are among the
largest.
Commencing our course onward we pass through the estate of Wil-


liamwood on our left, mostly used as a sheep farm ; then Ashby, a small
but beautiful farm, with its well-arranged and prolific garden ; further on
we come to Bloomfield, Fosterville, and Craigelshea, small, but well
managed and productive estates. Hurrying along we pass Morningside,
Baskerville, and at last make a halt at Streamshall, the residence of
W. R. Allison, Esq., the M.P. for the district; here we met with that
warm and hospitable reception for which the proprietor is noted. The
scenery around here is beautiful in the extreme, embracing a most
extensive view of the valley of the Macquarie, with its rich, fiat, arable,
and grazing lands, backed by the Ben Lomond ranges in the distance,
and its different and prettily situated homesteads meeting the eye at
various points. We know of few landscapes in the colony more beautiful
than that viewed from the verandah of the house at Streamshall.
Bidding our host farewell, and getting from him a hearty “ God speed,”
we crossed the river, and came upon Winton, a noble sheep farm, with
its honest hearted, hard working proprietor, one of the oldest settlers in
the district, a true “Son of Scotia.” Keeping on we passed Kirklands,
with its neat little Presbyterian Church and quiet little churchyard;
the farms hereabout are exclusively sheep farms, and the soil for grazing
purposes of the best kind. Making a detour we came to Rokeby, with
its extensive and far-famed garden, which was formed by a fine old
settler, who here collected a most valuable library, which has descended
to a son, who resides on an extensive property eastwards, named
Vaucluse. Away to the left we proceeded until we arrived at Cleveland.
Here are two good inns and several shops, also a neat little brick church,
built by the Messrs. Gibson. The main road here is like a garden walk,
well gravelled, and the coach bowls along at a tremendous pace. Turning
our face southward we jog along, passing the extensive estate of Wanstead,
with its fine agricultural lands in front of its handsome looking home-
stead, this farm belongs to absentee proprietors, and is most judiciously
managed by a paid agent. Skirting a portion of the Ricarton estate,
we arrive in sight of Campbell Town, the chief town of the district.
Here we find everything characteristic of a moderate sized English inland
town; each denomination resident here has its own place of worship;
the Church of England, a large unsightly red brick building, of which
the Rev. Mr. Brickwood is the officiating clergyman, resident at Camp-
bell Town, but performing a service at Ross as well as Campbell
Town every Sunday ; the Roman Catholics have recently built a pretty
little chapel, in the old English Gothic style, the Rev. Mr. Fitz-
gerald being the officiating pastor; the Presbyterians have also a very
handsome church, with the Rev. Dr. Turnbull for their minster; and,


lastly, the Wesleyans have a very neat little chapel, with the Rev. Mr.
Manton for their clergyman. All these places we were glad to find had
large attendances upon every Sunday. Education too is here well pro-
vided for, for in addition to the public school, under the supervision of
the Board of Education, there is a grammar school, ably presided over
by Dr. Boyd, its head master, a gentleman whose high scholastic attain-
ments well fit him for the conduct of such an important establishment;
and we were glad to find the grammar school had within its walls the
sons of some of the principal families in the colony. The inns in this
town appeared to us superior to any we had seen in the island, all of
them being of very large extent, well furnished, and, what is of greater
importance to the traveller, well supplied with the best of eatables and
drinkables. There are many large and well-stocked stores in this town,
as also an extensive brewery, steam mill, assembly rooms, and many ex-
cellent private residences ; among the latter we were particularly struck
with the picturesque little cottage, built in the true Elizabethan style,
and enclosed by a neat garden, the Residence of Dr.Yalentine, one of
the medical practitioners of the district. Campbell Town boasts of what
no other inland town in the colony can, namely, a hospital. A few bene-
volent individuals formed themselves into a committee, and by dint of
hard persuasion upon others, and their own liberality, established a self-
supporting hospital ; this, ever since its opening, has done a vast amount
of good for the distressed sick. During the first year of its establish-
ment nearly seventy cases of suffering humanity were treated and re-
lieved at this institution. The hospital is now firmly established, and
may it prosper say we. The police of the district has its head-quarters
here; the stipendiary magistrate being an old and efficient officer of the
Government of nearly thirty years’ standing. Few districts in this
colony are so free from crime as that of Campbell Town. Strolling
westward we find ourselves upon the estate of Merton Yale, where we
passed a pleasant hour in conversation with its gentlemanly and much
esteemed proprietor. Further on we came to the pretty Italian villa
residence of Rosedale. From thence through Meadow Bank, we returned
to Campbell Town well satisfied with our hurried stroll through so large
a portion of this beautiful district.
Should the inhabitants of the district hereafter see their way clear to
adopt the municipal system, they can do so with many advantages,
having a large number of educated men of liberal ideas resident among
them. It possesses also great advantages in its ecclesiastic and scho-
lastic establishments ; and in our opinion only wants a little energy on
the part of its resident proprietors to irrigate its lands, possessing as it


does so many natural advantages to make the district become the most
important and productive of all the districts between Hobart Town and
Launceston.
LONGFORD.
Longford, formerly called Norfolk Plains, has long been considered
the “ Garden of Tasmania.” Viewing the beautiful and varied scenery,
the splendid rivers, the orchards, pleasure grounds, and gardens, the
extensive plains and valleys, the tourist would say the name would not
be misapplied. It was here that the early settlers from Norfolk Island,
once (while occupied by convicts) called the Ocean Pandemonium, and
now the residence of the gentle and religious Pitcairn islanders, who
were dispossessed by the Government for convict purposes, in 1809 and
1810, were located on small but rich little farms, and where many of
their descendants now possess beautiful and happy homesteads.
Longford has always progressed, even while the rest of the Colony has
been under a cloud —it has rapidly progressed, until it has attained its
present important position as a highly-cultivated and well-stocked dis-
trict. It covers an area of half-a-million acres of country, of which
about 300,000 acres are in the hands of private individuals either by
grant from the Crown, or by sale. Very much of the land is of the
best quality, and upwards of 30,000 acres are under cultivation. The
population consists of about 4000 persons, a large number of whom are
thriving and industrious farmers. There are no less than five villages.
Longford, the principal, and the head quarters of the police, contains
300 houses, which are well and substantially built, intersected by wide
streets and squares, which give it the appearance of a moderate-sized
inland town in the old country.
Perth is the next village of importance, built on the bank of the South
Esk. The main road from Launceston to Hobart Town, as I have said,
passes through Perth. Next comes Carrick, a rising and prosperous
village, with upwards of a hundred substantial houses. Carrick is the
key to the great western country, and the whole of the traffic to the
westward passes through it. Cressy and Bishopsbourne are neat town-
ships rising into importance. The Great and Lesser Lakes spoken of in
the Sketch of Cumberland district, are on the borders of the police district
of Longford, from which village the latter are only distant about thirty
miles; on the way to them the traveller can indulge his taste with a
glass of the water from the hot mineral spring in the Western Tiers.
This water is said to be equal in nastiness of taste to the Spa waters.


The climate of Longford is considered very healthy; during last year,
the births were three times as numerous as the deaths.
The places of public worship are numerous; the principal church is
Christ Church, Longford, a handsome cut-stone building, containing 800
sittings, erected some years ago at the cost of upwards of £10,000; it
possesses a magnificent stained-glass window, which was presented by
an inhabitant at a cost of £5OO. The Wesleyan Chapel is a capacious
building, with a large congregation. The Wesleyans possess five places
of worship in the district. Cressy, Perth, and Garrick have also churches
and chapels.
Two stage coaches run daily between Longford and Launceston, besides
conveyances to and from other townships.
The cattle and farm stock of Longford are justly celebrated, and last
year the Agricultural Society held a show there, which was most credit-
able, and far exceeded the usual exhibitions in the midland district of
Campbell Town.
Longford district is noted for its hospitality ; and were there not many
first-class hotels equal to those of old England, the houses of the settlers
are ever open to travellers. To mention all would take more space than
can be spared in this summary, but of the principal we may mention
Banshanger, Woolmers, Rhodes, Entally, Woodhall, Brickendon, Mount-
ford, Norley, and others. Gardens of the most expensive character,
green-houses, shrubberies of English trees, with picturesque out-buildings,
are attached to all these residences, whose owners bear names honoured
by the whole colony, and of date contemporaneous with its infancy.
Longford pointing to the western country, which is going rapidly a-
head, —petitioning for railways, praying for rural municipalities, opening
up coal mines, digging Dysodile, building steam saw mills, and other
go-a-head works, —will form an important position half-way to the sub-
capital, Launceston.
Of the westward I regret to say I know nothing from personal inspec-
tion, but I leave it to abler pens to describe, well knowing that hardly
too much can be said in its praise.
RICHMOND.
And now for a description of this district, which concludes my notes
of those parts of the Colony with which lam personally acquainted; and
I am glad that I can speak so well of the last and most extensively culti-
vated part of our antipodean home.


Rambling over hills and valleys was an amusement of which I was
ever very fond ; and in the winter evenings, when—
“ The wild wind blew at my window pane,
And pattering- fell the winter rain,
And the cat sat by the anthracite fire.”
I used to write in my journal the results of my rambles, to refer to which,
now that I am physically unable to do the like, is often my custom of an
evening.
It was in the summer (when the pedestrian enjoys the sight of yellow
corn-fields around him, and indications of industry and activity among
the homesteads which he passes) that we shouldered our walking-sticks,
and started for Richmond. The gentle hills sloping to the Derwent all
along the Risdon road were cultivated to the water’s edge; the blue
waters of the Derwent kissed the green leaves of the crops along its
borders; Mount Wellington towered sublimely in the back ground, with
the extensive and well kept gardens of Warwick Lodge, Bishopstowe,
and New Town Park in the foreground, while the little yachts and
pleasure boats in New Town Bay enlivened the water view. After passing
Bleak House and its gardens, Risdon Ferry was soon reached, and here
a crossing was effected for a small coin. The river at this point is wide
and deep, and exposed to the strong N.W. winds.
The road passes Risdon, the seat of the member for the district, with
the neighbourhood of which are associated the interesting facts, that it
was there that the Englishman first sat down on the soil of Tasmania,
and it was there that the blood of the aborigines moistened the sand of
a home which the savage could no longer call his.
A good road, which cost a mint of money, winds its way up Grass
Tree Hill, near the summit of which is a glorious view, and a neat little
cabaret, where a glass of ale refreshes the traveller puffing from the
exertion of ascending so far. This road was constructed at the instance
of General (then Colonel) Arthur, a man like Sir W. Denison, though
far his inferior in every talent except diplomacy, and a grumbling colonist
made it the ground of a complaint to the Home authorities, because it
led to Campania, a noble estate, then the property of the said Colonel.
This complaint had for companions some other charges, of which the
Bridgewater Causeway, near which was the Colonel’s marsh farm and
the new wharf cutting, where he had bought old Bobby Knopwood’s
cottage, were two, but they all fell to the ground. The road descends
gently towards Richmond, passing Anglewood, Glen Ayr, the residence
of the poet of Tasmania, and the coal diggings, and the ruins of old
convict stations, which are now rapidly becoming “ things of the past.”


After passing along some level country we entered Richmond, which
is not by any means a pretty town, the country being too flat. There
are good churches for the Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Roman
Catholics in Richmond, Sorell, and Jerusalem, and all are well attended
on the Sabbath. Richmond is a populous district, the male population
extending to 3765, and the female to 1838, inhabiting 330 houses.
Much land is in cultivation, 22,700 acres having been cropped last year.
Richmond, indeed, is the grain-producing district of the southern part
of Tasmania, as Longford is of the northern A dozen justices of the
peace maintain order, and the people are very healthy, notwithstanding
there are half that number of surgeons resident. A portion of the
police district of Richmond returns a member to the Upper House, and
another portion two members to the Lower House of Representatives.
The Coal river, an inconsiderable scream in the summer time, runs
through the town, and on its banks are some fine homesteads, inhabited
by hospitable settlers. Indeed, the hospitality of the Tasmanian settlers
is proverbial. I have myself ridden out of the way of a heavy storm up
to the door of a house, the owner of which I knew but by name, and
giving my horse to the servant who came to the door, have walked into
the hall, and met the genus loci in his shooting coat and slippers, who
pressed my hand, asked me in to dinner, introduced his family, and then
asked my name; and here, weather bound, I stayed for three days,
playing backgammon with paterfamilias, singing duets with the girls,
and getting into the good graces of ma by nursing the baby, a duty at
which use has made me an adept, and when the little ones had been
packed off to bed, sat over the blazing wood fire listening to the roar of
the outside elements, and supporting the policy of the Ministry of the
day against the arguments of mine host, who was a bit of a radical,
which arguments were mostly as weak as the water with which we diluted
our grog, and as easily disposed of; and however you may differ from
the settlers in politics, there is a warmth and feeling in their hospitality
which far exceeds even the boasted hospitality of home.
“Home,” sang a poetical little fellow-clerk of mine, some twenty
years ago,—he is now a white haired pensioner—
“Home! hath it not a thousand thing’s,
A thousand things so fair and bright.
That all our heart’s imaginings
Find there the deepest, best delight?”
Admitted; although I feel assured that as deep delight can be ex-
perienced in the happy Antipodean homes formed by the Anglo-Saxons
in Tasmania, as ever fell to their lot in the Auld Countree.


But lam forgetting my Richmond trip. Night came on before we
had seen all that was to be seen in and around the town, and the moon-
light was, as is usual here, beautifully clear, so we determined to have
some light supper and trudge home.
“ Oh! sweet and beautiful is night,
When the silver moon is high,
And countless stars, like clustering gems,
Hang sparkling in the sky;
While the balmy breath of the wattle tree
Comes faintly down the glen,
&c. &c.”
“ And the moan of the wild pigeon makes us sigh,
And think how nice it would taste in a pie 1”
We returned home rather tired, having done twenty-four miles in as
many hours. Ah! those were happy days! Bulwer, the new Secretary
for the Colonies, beautifully says—“ As our memory gazes on the past,
the light spreads not over all the waste, but falls narrow and confined
along the single course of our life, like the star on the wave which gilds
but one broken line to each eye.” So, my memory, burying the secret
sorrows which, though the world sees them not, every heart possesses,
brings before my eye bright lines and remembrances of kind hearts
from almost every district in Tasmania, which I have felt pleasure in
describing.
BRIGHTON.
Chief Town, Pontville, nineteen miles from Hobart Town, on the main
line of road to Launceston.
This is an agricultural district, covering 130,000 acres of country.
The River Jordan flows through it. Most of the houses and a hand-
some bridge, and church and chapel are built of a very fine white free-
stone with which the township abounds.
Population, 1596 males, 1154 females; 455 houses; 32,489 sheep,
2381 cattle, 1122 horses, 1649 pigs. Land in cultivation 16,805 acres.
Churches at Pontville, Broadmarsh, and Greenponds; chapels at
Pontville, Broadmarsh, Greenponds, and Bagdad. Several large inns.
Broadmarsh has a Road Trust, annually raising and expending about
£6OO.
Eight resident Magistrates ; Bench Clerk, T. H. Haskell; two Sur-
geons ; two Public Schools; Postmaster, at Pontville, A. Thrupp ; at
Kemp-town, J. Ashton.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.


CLARENCE.
Five miles from Hobart Town. This is an agricultural district.
Three resident Magistrates; one Surgeon. Churches at Rokeby and
Bellerive, and chapels. Postmaster, at Bellerive, Mr. M‘Arthur; at
Rokeby, Mr. Farrar. Coroner, Edward Abbott, Esq. Four inns at
Bellerive; one at Rokeby. The Kangaroo steamer passes between Hobart
Town and Bellerive every half hour, fare 6d.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
DELOEAINE.
130 miles from Hobart Town, thirty from Launceston, and twenty-one
from Latrobe on Port Frederick.
This is an agricultural and pastoral district covering 230,000 acres of
country.
The Rivers, Meander, Mersey, Rubicon, and Dasher, flow through
the district.
Population 2300.
Five churches; several inns. Land in cultivation 20,000 acres.
Gold has been found here in small quantities. A branch Savings’ Bank
and a branch of the Liverpool and London Insurance Company. Three
resident Magistrates, and one Surgeon. Postmaster, Mr. Humphries.
A Road Trust raising and expending about £4OO a year.
It is in contemplation to extend a tramway from Deloraine to the Port
of the Mersey.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
FRANKLIN.
Chief Town, Franklin, twenty-one miles from Hobart Town. This is a
thickly timbered district, covering 1,300,000 acres of country. The
Huon, Mount, and Kermandee Rivers flow through the district.
Population, 1422 males, 929 females ; 529 houses ; 4307 sheep, 1124
cattle, 209 horses, 1014 pigs. Land in cultivation, 2528 acres.
Church and chapels at Franklin; three inns; a Road Trust, raising
and expending £6OO a year.


Seven resident Magistrates ; one Lawyer, who is bench clerk; three
Surgeons ; Postmasters, at Franklin, Mr. Spong ; at Port Cygnet, Mr.
Hedditch; at Shipwrights’ Point, Mr Hawkins; at Port Esperance,
Mr. Pulfer.
From the harbours of this district vessels load with timber for Victoria.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
GEORGE TOWN.
Chief Town, George Town, 160 miles from Hobart Town. This is a pas-
toral district covering 700,000 acres of country. Through it flow the
Tamar, Piper, Bingarooma, and Foresters rivers.
Population, 818 males, 505 females ; 215 houses; 62,980 sheep, 1534
cattle, 310 horses, 343 pigs. Land in cultivation, 1834 acres.
An Episcopalian church in George Town ; two inns ; four resident
Magistrates ; one Surgeon; Postmistress, Mrs. Davies.
This is the seaport of the Tamar and is an Electric Telegraph Station.
The District returns a member to the House of Assembly.
GLAMORGAN.
Chief Town, Swansea, 100 miles from Hobart Town. This is a pastoral
district covering 670,000 acres of country. Through it flow the St. Paul’s,
Swan, and Prosser’s rivers. It possesses several small ports to which
steamers and other craft trade from Hobart Town.
Population, 710 males, 481 females; 204 houses; 92,240 sheep, 2111
cattle, 389 horses, 741 pigs. Land in cultivation, 4164 acres.
Several inns ; eight resident Magistrates; two Surgeons; Postmaster,
at Swansea, Mr. Amos; a Road Trust raising and expending about
£6OOO a year.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
MORVEN.
Chief Town, Evandale, 110 miles from Hobart Town. This is an agricul-
tural district, covering 260,000 acres of country. Through it flow the
rivers South Esk and Nile.
Population, 1932 males, 1234 females; 517 houses; 82,769 sheep,
4992 cattle, 1744 horses, 2488 pigs. Land in cultivation, 13,937 acres.


Churches and chapels ; several inns ; eight resident Magistrates ; one
Surgeon; a Road Trust, raising and expending £3OOO a year; Postmaster,
Mr. Wass.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
NEW NORFOLK.
Chief Town, New Norfolk, twenty-one miles from Hobart Town. This is
an agricultural district covering 125,000 acres of country. Through it
flow the rivers Derwent, Back, and Plenty.
Population, 1507 males, 1134 females ; 485 houses ; 33,036 sheep,
1232 cattle, 635 horses, 838 pigs. Land in cultivation, 8741 acres. Hops
are largely grown here.
Church at New Norfolk and Wesleyan chapels ; several inns ; seven
resident Magistrates; three Surgeons ; Postmaster, Mr. Clewer.
New Norfolk is famed for its extensive Lunatic Asylum, and for its
Mullet, and for being the village to which nine-tenths of the newly mar-
ried people proceed to pass the honey-moon.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
OATLANDS
Chief Town, Oatlands, fifty miles from Hobart Town, on the main
road to Launceston.
This is a pastoral district, covering 450,000 acres of country.
Through it flow the Jordan and Blackman Rivers.
Population, 1354 males, 882 females ; 386 houses; 227,363 sheep,
4959 cattle, 1393 horses, 1206 pigs. Land in cultivation 10,102 acres.
Three churches in Oatlands, viz., an Episcopalian, a Roman Catholic,
and a Free church ; one at Jericho ; and several chapels.
Nine resident Magistrates ; two Surgeons ; several inns. Postmaster,
Mr. Cuppridge.
Oatlands has a large gaol; and a sessions of the Supreme Court is
hdd here.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
PORT SORELL.
Grief Towns, Torquay and Burgess, 190 miles from Hobart Town.


This is a heavily timbered district, covering 560,000 acres of country,
possessing two ports from whence vessels trade with Victoria and else-
where. Gold has been found in the quartz reefs. The Rivers Mersey,
Don, Forth, Severn, Arve, and Emu flow through the district.
2021 sheep, 1873 cattle, 354 horses, 1447 pigs. Land in cultiva-
tion 5803 acres ; several inns.
Seven resident Magistrates, and a Sub-collector of Customs; two
Surgeons ; Postmaster, Mr. Hall.
The steamer Titania trades between Launceston and Torquay, and
the port is frequented by vessels carrying coals, &c. from the Mersey
mines. The Mersey is navigable for vessels of 200 or 300 tons for seven
miles from the heads, and the port will be connected with the rich agri-
cultural district of Deloraine and Chudleigh by means of the proposed
railway.
WESTBURY.
Chief Town, Westbury, 120 miles from Hobart Town,
This is an agricultural and pastoral district, covering 570,000 acres of
country. Through it flow the Rivers Meander and Mersey.
Population, 2348 males, 2068 females; 845 houses; 47,141 sheep,
16,548 cattle, 4303 horses, 6255 pigs. Land in cultivation 40,052
acres.
Churches and chapels, Episcopalian and Roman Catholic; several
inns.
Eleven resident Magistrates; a Road Trust raising and expending
£l3OO a year ; four Surgeons; one Lawyer.
The district returns a member to the House of Assembly.
WESTERN COUNTRY.
Beyond Marlborough, which is the most distant settled township of
the Hamilton district, is the Western Country, which under recent Act
of Parliament, it is proposed to set apart for gratuitous occupation in
lots of not more than 10,000 acres, leased at a peppercorn rent for a
period of ten years, with the sole condition that 100 sheep or twenty
head of cattle shall be depastured for a portion of each year on every
thousand acres; or the free grant of not less than fifty nor more than
640 acres, on condition that the man settles on the land, and has the
means of cultivating or improving it; that is, he must have capital equal


to £1 for every acre granted to him. At the end of five years, if a man
proves that he has resided on his land, and has cleared a tenth part of
the land, or erected buildings worth £250 for every fifty acres, then the
land becomes his own property.
The country beyond Marlborough is well adapted for pasturage, but
from the great elevation of these plains, about 3800 feet above the level
of the sea, the winters are long and cold, and remind the settler Of home.
Oats and turnips succeed well, and here and there wheat is grown, but it
is not a satisfactory crop. It is too subject to frosts for potatoes. The
shepherds state that as the country is becoming cleared and occupied,
the weather in winter is becoming less severe.
The appearance of one of the valleys is most remarkable, for there is
not a live tree of any size in a valley which contains 20,000 acres, and
this feature extends for fifteen miles to the river Clarence. The hills
bounding the valleys are all covered with live trees. It is supposed that
frost or electricity destroyed these trees about thirty years ago.
The country is covered with greenstone boulders, while the rocks are
ironstone and granite; belts of myrtle forest abound. Every description
of scenery is to be found, and the wide valleys are variegated with beau-
tiful trees. Mount Arrowsmith 4000 feet high, is capped with two piles
of quartz rock resembling bee-hives. The valley beneath is a drift of
quartz and greenstone, while the mountain itself is of slate and quartz,
the former being vertical.
The valley of the Collingwood river twelve miles long, looks like a
park studded with plantations of ornamental timber; the marshes are
bounded on each side by steep declivities on which the quartz rock crops
out like battlements.
Kangaroos abound on the plains of the river Loddon, where the feed
is excellent; they are easily taken with snares. The Loddon plain is
about 5000 acres; where the scrub has been burned off the good feed
abounds, and the marshes are gradually drying up. From the prevalence
of westerly winds, much'more rain falls here than in the interior, or on
the east coast.
The other rivers of this part of the country are the Arthur, Gordon,
Frankland, Horton, King, Spring, Florentine, Huon, &c., and on most
of them are extensive plains. All that is required is occupation, and
burning off in the summer. Wherever fire has been, a much finer
description of grass springs up; wherever cattle have fed, you find
clover and English grasses; and wherever a sheep treads, it improves
the pasturage by nibbling down the young scrub, and opening the way
for the sunshine to bring out the native grasses.


These notes are taken from Mr. Surveyor Tally’s report.
It has been surveyed from Lake St. Clair in the north to the Huon’s
mouth in the south of the island, and commencing at the 20,000 acres of
Mr. W. J. T. Clarke’s sheep run at Navarre plains; the pasture land
follows the course of the Gordon river for thirty-five miles or about
65,000 acres ; there is then about eight miles of hilly country, and the
valley of the Huon river with some fine land of about 80,000 acres is to
be found. The distance of the nearest point of the Gordon from
Hamilton is about twenty-five miles as the crow flies, but the track
which has been opened by Mr. Dawson is about thirty-two miles. Every
three or four miles the Gordon is fed by small streams from the surround-
ing hills. The Gordon runs for many miles due south, almost parallel
with but about five miles from the Florentine, always an abundant
stream which runs due north.
Dense forests of that beautiful cabinet timber the myrtle, exist all
through the valleys of this part of the country. The forests of myrtle,
gum, sassafras, &c., of the Florentine valley have been thinned by fire,
and the change effected is great; giving this rich valley a large step
forward in its sure progress to occupation, for it is composed of a deep
alluvial soil, and if cleared would be exceedingly fertile under cultiva-
tion. The several sites for villages, at the bridge over the Repulse
river, at the bridge over the Florentine, and at the opening of the
Gordon plains are all well watered, and are considered good sites. Lime-
stone is the prevailing rock.
Passing over the ridge beyond the Florentine, we come on the Gordon
plains, open and undulating, intersected with belts of wood, they are
prepared at once for summer feeding of flocks. The fine harbour of
Port Davey will be the chief outlet for its produce. Its valuable timber,
its mineral indications, and its promise as a sheep country, as well as
the extensive forest tracts bordering on it, which will gradually as in
other parts of the colony, develop rich agricultural lands, give to this
country a value which has not yet been appreciated.
The harbour of Port Davey consists of two distinct inlets, one running
to the north called Port Davey, into which the River Davey falls, and the
other to the east called Bathurst Harbour, a secure harbour of great
extent and perfectly secure, running easterly about fifteen miles, where
it opens into a salt water lake of about thirty square miles. The hills
afford constantly flowing rills of water, and the Spring River winding
through a flat and fertile valley, is navigable for ten miles up. The
distance from this by way of Lake Pedder, Florentine Yalley, and
Hamilton, will be, to Hobart Town, about 120 miles.


Near the coast in some places quartz rises to an elevation of 3000
feet, before it is broken through by the granite, and the surface evidently
dips to the eastward, giving place to the granite upheaved at a lower
level, until it disappears entirely; the line of its disappearance being
about N.W. and S.E., through Wylde’s Craig, a bold bluff about 2000
feet high, within sight of Hamilton and Bothwell.
The port called Macquarie Harbour is a large inlet of the sea on the
west coast, running up into the land about twenty miles until it meets
the Gordon River, and diverging on the right into a considerable bay,
called Hebe’s inlet, and on the left into Kelly’s basin. At the south-east
corner of the entrance is Sarah Island, formerly the head-quarters of the
convict station. The country around is thickly timbered with pines,
which usually grow to the height of sixty or seventy feet and about fif-
teen feet in girth. The celery-top pine which is found here is a tree
which grows very tall, and makes excellent spars for vessels. A species
of climber with a deep green leaf grows here with remarkable rapidity,
and is called the Macquarie Harbour Vine; its clusters of berries are
acid and not bad tasted, and the juice was formerly used in lieu of lime juice.
From the great moisture of the western coast and the numerous
streams constantly flowing from the thickly wooded hills all round, the
water of Macquarie Harbour has a dark and dingy appearance in flood
times. After crossing the bar at the mouth of the Gordon, that River
is navigable for forty miles, and is in most parts deep and never less
than 100 yards wide. The hills are composed principally of quartz. Blue
marble and limestone abound, and there are indications of several
minerals in small quantities.
The exploring party under Mr. Lewis in the early part of 1859
reported that at one spot, about thirty miles from Port Davey, the hills are
literally covered with crystalline quartz and slate reefs full of mica; that
the quartz boulders when broken had a silvery looking mica through the
veins the same as gold. They bottomed one hole at eight feet near
Mount Direction, and found on the solid rock a greyish-looking mineral
similar to lead ore, with quantities of iron pyrites.
They also reported coal of good quality for gas. At fifteen feet from
the surface in another spot they found black-lead, but they returned to
town without having found Gold.
GARRICK.
A description of this township will give a pretty good idea of nearly
all the villages in the colony, with this exception, that Garrick possesses
few more energetic, spirited settlers, than any other village.


It was a wilderness twenty-five years ago, and on a creek witli a
splendid waterfall, an enterprising man built a small mill; then arose a
public-house, and a few 7 wooden huts ; then a watch-house. Being but
ten miles from Launceston, and on the road to the rich westward lands,
its progress has been rapid during the last seven years. The father of
the Venerable Archdeacon Reibey left land to build a church upon, and
a glebe to support it. His son built the church, and several houses
besides, and called the street after his name.
The village now contains 400 inhabitants, who possess a steam-mill
and a water-mill for grinding flour; a brewery worked by steam, and the
proprietor grows and malts his own barley; and the village also contains
all the requisite trades, such as tailors, saddlers, clock and watchmakers,
masons, builders, carpenters, &c. &c., a post office, and a post boy in
livery. There are four inns equal to those in the old country, and at
one of them a weekly stock sale is held. The Liverpool and London
Insurance Company have an agent. A surgeon resides in the village.
The clergyman does duty alternately with the Archdeacon; A Public
School is well attended; and the Garrick Race Course is the best in
Tasmania. Its Mechanics’ Institute has just been opened; and the
Garrick Benefit Society is flourishing. This Society dines with the
Archdeacon at his hospitable residence at Entally every New Year’s Day ;
and on the same day the Archdeacon’s lady feasts all the children,
where the Cricket Club and joyousness are the order of the day.
Garrick has also a Road Trust expending £6OO a year, in the forma-
tion and improvement of rpads.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF HOBART TOWN.
This City is the seat of Government and is situated on the Estuary
of the River Derwent, forty miles from the southern boundary of the
Colony. It contains upwards of 4000 houses, and 9196 males and 9062
females, total 18,258.
The scenery around the city is most varied. Mount Wellington towers
4200 feet high over the north-west end, and taking a survey of the
city beneath my feet, from the little graveyard on top of the Hermitage
Hill, I see, looking north-west, the grand basaltic pillars of the moun-
tain, the top of which is now (July) covered with snow, and near the sum-
mit is the ice-house which supplies the city with ice in summer. Al the
very root of the mountain, with the Hobart Town Rivulet flowing past its
walls, is the Female Factory, an irregular pile of brick and stone bind-
ings, the little graveyard covered with green mounds, marking wiere


rest the female convicts and their offspring who have died in prison.
The Wellington Hamlets spread along the valley for a mile or so, —pretty
white cottages each with its patch of garden, and here and there larger
houses, with gardens and orchards surrounding them. Northerly, we
have the upper part of the city, with houses tier above tier, as the hills
rise gradually from the lower land on which the great proportion of the
city is built, and through the middle of which runs the rivulet, along the
whole course of which tall chimneys mark where steam saw-mills or flour-
mills have been erected. North-east we have Mount Direction, Grasstree
Hill, and the Quoin with its abrupt precipice on the opposite bank of
the Derwent, with the towers of the Government-house topping the trees
in the Queen’s Park, with the circuitous gravelled drives in every direc-
tion. The spires of St. David’s Cathedral; St. Joseph’s, St. George’s,
St. Andrew’s, Trinity, St. John’s and the Congregational Churches,
stand above the mass of houses, and we have the whole business part
of the city ; at the south of which is the high chimney of the Gas works—
the New Battery—the Barracks, and the Ten-gun Battery ; and beneath
my feet the large and handsome residences in Holbrook place the west end
of Hobart Town Looking south we have the Cove, where the navies of
Great Britain and France might lay in safety. On the opposite bank,
about four miles off is Kangaroo Point and the Village of Bellerive, with
the extensive beaches of the neighbourhood—Queenboro Hamlets, Sandy
Bay and its beaches—the winding road to Brown’s River—Mount Nelson
Electric Telegraph Station—Betsey’s Island famed for its silver-haired
rabbits ; and over the low range of brown hills, forming the division be-
tween Ralph’s Bay and the Derwent, we see the water of that extensive
bay—beyond, with deep blue hills in the back ground, is the Bay of Pitt-
water—and beyond again, over the blue hills of Tasman’s Peninsula,
the sea. Looking south-west, we have the new track to the Huon, with
extensive garden cultivation and paddocks, and cottages. Steamers ply
to and from Kangaroo Point every hour. The public Baths, where the
charge is 6 d., are ten minutes walk from the town. In the city itself
the municipality keep excellent order; policemen in uniform, every few
hundred yards; and every attempt is made by the municipality to keep
the streets clean, well macadamized, and footpaths well drained and gas
lighted, and water is laid on to almost every house wishing to receive
the benefit. A great number of handsome well-built cabs are plying
from their various stands; the Market Place is an extensive building
filled with stalls, where almost every variety of merchandize, from a pin
to a potatoe —from a needle to an anchor—from a reel of thread to a
ship’s cable, can be obtained. The public Abattoir is outside of the


city, built on a point of land standing out into the bay; and the shops
of various descriptions are handsome, well built, and well supplied. To
walk through the city after 9 p.m., a stranger would think Hobart Town
was deserted, so quiet and orderly are its arrangements. Indeed it is
the general remark of strangers that for a seaport town, and inhabited
by 20,000 people, they have never seen so well regulated a city as Hobart
Town. The income of the municipality in 1858 was £21,779. Some
very handsome and extensive mansions have been erected in the imme-
diate neighbourhood, amongst which may be mentioned Boa Vista, the
residence of Samuel Moses, Esq.; Sunnyside, the residence of T. D.
Chapman, Esq.; and Newlands, the residence of George Stevenson, Esq.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF LAUNCESTON.
This is the second town of importance in Tasmania, and is situated
at the confluence of the North Esk and South Esk Rivers, which here
mingle their waters, and flowing 40 miles to the Sea form the Tamar
River. This river is navigable for vessels of 1000 tons up to the wharf.
Launceston contains 1546 houses, and 4051 males and 3823 females.
The town is enclosed on the east and west by hills, known as the Wind-
mill and Cataract Hills ; and looking down on the town from the former,
the view is very extensive towards George Town, with the Tamar wind-
ing its way for many a mile. Pig Island is a few miles down the river.
The Tillage of Invermay, with its cottages pleasantly situated, each with
its garden and shrubbery, with rose or vine covered porches. Crossing
the point at Trevallyn, where it is proposed to put up a suspension-
bridge at an expense of £7OOO, the vineyards of that estate are seen,
and further on, farm after farm spread along the river banks. Looking
southerly, the Talley of Patterson’s Plains spreads out with hedges of the
dear old hawthorn and sweetbrier, and extensive cultivated fields.
The Horticultural Gardens are well kept; and the streets, particularly
Brisbane Street, are clean and full of well-built houses and shops. The
principal buildings are the Mechanics’ Institute, the Bank of Austra-
lasia, the Churches and Chapels, and many new buildings are in pro-
gress.
The Income of the Launceston Municipality in 1858 was £5679, which
was expended in making and mending the streets. Water is laid on to
nearly every house, the works having cost about £40,000. Launceston
is an intermediate Electric Telegraph Station between Hobart Town and
George Town. A Gas Company has just commenced its operations,
and the Municipal Police and Eire Brigades are effective bodies.


CONCLUSION.
In what I have, in this little pamphlet, put together at some trouble,
and with great care, I have only applied my own experience where I
have not had better authorities to refer to. I have compiled it with no
view to personal advantage, but solely for the benefit of a colony in
which twelve of my brothers and sisters were born, and nearly half that
number of my own children.
In the present day, writers on the colonies either draw too florid a
picture, or otherwise, according to their temperament. In this pamphlet
there is not one paragraph that is not strictly true.
I trust that Tasmania may contine to flourish, —may make herself a
name and an honoured place in history; and that in her service (to
quote the words of my favorite poet) :
There may be “ thousands of active brains,
When mine no longer are busy ;
Thousands of willing- hands,
When mine shall have ceased from their labours
Thousands of happy ( Tasmanian ) hearts.
When mine shall be at rest for ever.”
HUGH MUNRO HULL.
July, 1859


LAND REGULATIONS—IBSB.
('2l Victoria , No. 33. )
The following is a summary of the regulations under which the Crown
Lands of this colony are occupied or purchased. The disposal rof the
lands is vested in the Governor in Council, who is empowered to :make
and issue such regulations as may he deemed expedient from tiime to
time. The execution of the provisions of the law, and of regulations
issued hy the Governor in Council, is confided to the Surveyor-Gemeral,
as the Commissioner of Crown Lands. The lands are classified as
follows—l. Town Lands ; 11. Agricultural Lands ; 111. Pastoral Lands*
The first comprise all lands within the limits of any town, township, or
village now existing, or hereafter to he reserved, or within five miles from
the nearest part of either Hohart Town or Launceston. The second
class comprises such lands as are suitable for settlement for the purpose
of cultivation. All other lands are included in the third class. Town
lands must he sold by public auction. Agricultural lands shall be sold
by public auction in lots not exceeding 160 acres each. Pastoral lands
shall be sold by auction in lots not exceeding 1280 acres each. The
upset price to be fixed by the Surveyor-General, but not to be less than
£1 per acre, with survey fee and cost of grant deed added, except for
land which has never been held under a grazing license, the lowest upset
price for which shall not be less than 10s. an acre, with survey fee and
cost of grant deed added. Lands which remain unsold at auction may be
bought within a year by private contract at upset price. Any person
shall have the right of purchasing by private contract at the fixed price
of £1 per acre (exclusive of survey fee) any single lot of agricultural or
pastoral land containing an area of not more than 320 acres, provided
such land has not been let or occupied under a depasturing or occu-
pation license since the Ist December, 1857, or advertised for sale by
public auction. Credit is allowed for all lands above the value of £4O, if
required.
The terms of payment are as follow—For Town Lands, if purchased
for cash, one-fifth to be paid at the time of sale, and the residue within
one month; if for credit, one-tenth of the price to be added by way of
premium, the price and premium together becoming the purchase money,
one-fourth of which to be paid in cash, and the residue hy three equal
annual instalments. For agricultural and pastoral lands, if purchased
at auction for cash, one-fifth at time of sale, the residue within one
month ; if purchased by private contract for cash, the money must be


paid on signing the contract; if purchased by auction or by private con-
tract on credit, a sum equal to one-fifth of the price shall be added
thereto by way of premium, and the price and premium together shall
become the purchase money, one-fifth of which shall be paid at time of
sale or signing the contract, and the residue by eight annual instalments
of one-tenth of the purchase money. Purchasers on credit may pay off
the balance remaining unpaid at any time during the period of credit.
Lands may be leased for any term not exceeding fourteen years at ten
and twenty shillings per 100 acres, subject to resumption at six months’
notice, if required for sale or for any public purpose, compensation being
given for fences. Licenses may be issued for occupying any agricultural
or pastoral lands for any term not exceeding twelve months. Licenses
may be issued to any person for felling, removing, and selling timber
growing on any agricultural or pastoral lands which are not leased.
The regulations under which lands are granted to persons wishing to
settle thereon, are briefly as follow:
The Commissioner of Crown Lands may contract in writing with any
person for not less than fifty, nor more than 640 acres of land, in what
is now termed the unsettled districts, and of which a short description is
given at page 72, under the following conditions.
The person shall prove that he is worth one pound for every acre he
may apply for; and for this purpose stock, machinery, implements of
husbandry, or money, may be taken to mean capital. For five years he
shall reside on the land or a part of it. During the five years he shall
bring into cultivation a tenth part of the land he has given to him, or
shall put up buildings to the value of fifty pounds for every ten acres
If the contract is only partially fulfilled, the Governor in Council may
extend the term if he thinks proper; and at the end of five years, if the
contract is completed, the land shall belong for ever to the settler ; and
should the settler die within the five years, his heir may stand in his
place.
Again, the Commissioner may let any parcel of land, not more than
10,000 acres to any person on the following conditions : The person
shall stock the land leased in the proportion of 100 sheep, or 20 head of
cattle for every 1000 acres, and keep the stock on the land for a portion
of every year. In the event of the lease being determined before the ex-
piration of the term, where the land is required for sale or for public
purposes, the lessee is entitled to be paid for all fences, buildings, or
drainage done by him, and, indeed, for all reasonable improvements.
Up to the Ist of May, 1859, no less than 2,534,526 acres have been
applied for, under the foregoing regulations, by 261 persons.


THE FOLLOWING IS A RETURN OF THE AVERAGE RETAIL
PRICES OF PROVISIONS DURING 1858.
£ s. d.
Ale, Colonial per gallon 0 4 0
Bacon per lb. 0 1 9
Beer, Colonial per gallon 0 2 0
Bread per lb. 0 0 2|
Butter, fresh do. 0 2 0
potted do. 0 1 10
Cheese do. 0 16
Coffee do. 0 1 6
Candles do. 0 0 8
Flour per cwt. 110
Meat, Beef per lb. 0 0 7
Mutton do. 0 0 7
Veal do. 0 0 9
Pork do. 0 1 0
Potatoes per cwt. 0 8 0
Salt per lb. 0 0 2
Sugar, moist do. 0 0 4
loaf do. 0 0 10
crystallised do. 0 0 5
Soap do. 004
Tea, black ! do. 0 2 6
green do. 0 2 6
Coal, Tasmanian per ton £1 5 0 to 1 10 0
Sydney do. 2 0 0 ~ 2 7 0
English per ton 3 0 0
Wood, fire do. 0 15 0
AVERAGE RATES OF WAGES PAID IN TASMANIA DURING
THE YEAR, 1858.
s. d. s. d.
Bricklayers 8 0 to 12 0 a day, without board.
Joiners 8 0 ~ 14 0 ~ ~ ~
Carpenters 9 0 ~ 15 0 ~ ~ „
Masons, Cutters 7 0 ~ 16 6 „ ~ ~
Builders 8 3 ~ 13 0 ~ ~ ~
Plasterers...., 8 0 „ 11 0 ~ ~ ,
Painters 8 0 „ 11 3 ~ ~ ,
Plumbers 8 0 ~ 13 6 ~ „ ~
Quarrymen 6 6 „ 8 0 ~ ~ „
House Servants, with hoard, sc. (in great demand). Cooks £2O to
£5O ; general female servants, £2O to £3O ; laundry maids, £lB to £25 ;
nursery maids, £l5 to £25; Grooms, £25 to £5O ; farm servants, from
£26 to £4O.


ISLANDS BELONGING TO TASMANIA,
Albatross Island.
Barren Island, where topazes are found,
Bruni Island, cultivated in parts and built upon. There is also a
light-house on its south point.
Betsey’s Island, noted for its silver-haired rabbits.
Babel Island.
Chappell Island.
Clarke’s Island, with its light-house.
Flinder’s Island, formerly the residence of the aborigines, built upon
and partly cultivated. H ere topazes and rock crystals of great
beauty are found.
Hummock Island.
Hunter’s Island.
Huon Island, built upon and cultivated.
Ironpot Island, with its light-house.
King’s Island, with its light-house.
Maria Island, built upon and cultivated.
Maatsuyker’s Island.
Petrel Island.
Pig Island, in the Tamar.
Robin’s Island.
Swan Island, with its light-house.
Schouten Islands, with their coal mines.
Slopen Island, noted for quails.
Walker’s Island.
Waterhouse Island.


GOVERNMENT,
The Governor-in-Chief— Slß HENRY E. F. YOUNG, C. B.
Ulimstrg.
Attorney-General — Francis Smith, Esq.
Colonial Secretary — William Henty, Esq.
Colonial Treasurer— Frederic M. Innes, Esq.
W. P. Weston, Esq.
Without Office .. /R. Q. Kermode, Esq.
■ John Walker, Esq.
Parliament consisting of Two Houses— A Legislative Council, of
Fifteen Members ; and a House of Assembly, of Thirty Members.
Chief Justice —Sir Valentine Fleming, Kt.
Puisne Judge —Thomas Horne, Esq.
Bishop of Tasmania —Right Rev. F. R. Nixon, D.D.
Bishop of the Roman Catholic Church — lit. Rev. R. W.
Willson, D.D.
Thirty Public Officers.
Fifteen Clerks of First Class and Officers ranking with them.
Twenty-nine . Second ditto.
Thirty-two . . Third ditto.


H
55
w
£
«
«
g
5
w
W
H
«
55
w
►J
o
fe
rt
o
A
f*
w
55


CATHEDRAL CHURCH OP ST. DAVID’S, HOBART TOWN,


HOBART TOWN, FROM THE TOWER OF ST. DAVID’S CHURCH.


BEN LOMOND AND TOWER HILL, GOLDFIELD, FROM GREENHILL.


PART OF THE TOWN OF LAUNCESTON.


pj
6
w
w
o
a
w
p
a
Pm
O
H
W
w
H
H
◄
H
P
◄
O
pa


BOA VISTA,
The seat of Samuel Moses, Esq., J.P., one of the leading merchants in
Hobart Town, is, as will be seen by the illustration, a very large and
handsome building, with a commanding view of the city and harbour.
The house was originally built by Dr. Scott, of the Royal Navy, but great
additions have been made both by the late Comptroller-General and the
present spirited proprietor. To the mansion are attached, in addition to
hothouses, conservatories, pheasantries, and other ornaments, the usual
English outbuildings, and the grounds are laid out with much taste, being
replete with a great variety of shrubs and plants for their adornment and
embellishment.


FLOG'S I
' C£f> - f


OPINION S— CONTINUED.
From James Wilson Agnew, M.D., Vice-president of the Mechanics'
Institute, and Senior Mem,her of the Council of the Royal Society,
and a Practising Physician in Hobart Town.
“ I was present at Mr. Hull’s Lecture on the Capabilities of Tasmania
on the 23rd of June, and having heard his statements, I have pleasure
in saying that I can support their correctness, more especially those
regarding the climate and general healthiness of Tasmania.”
{Signed) J. W. Agnew, M.D.
From Dr. Joseph Milligan, F.L.S., Secretary to the Royal Society of
Tasmania, and a Justice of the Peace.
“ I have carefully perused Mr. Hull’s paper on Tasmania and its
capabilities, and I am inclined to think that its publication in England
will prove most valuable to the Colony, in contributing to disseminate
accurate details of the climate, soil, and productions of the Island, as
well as of its inhabitants as a community. If attentively read and
considered, it cannot fail to be of great service to persons intending to
emigrate, and may probably aid in determining many to select Tasmania
in preference to other Colonies as their future home. Certainly it will
have this effect if their object be to secure a settlement in a country
resembling England more closely than any other does, in respect of
climate and other physical conditions, and almost identical in social and
political institutions. To those who already know Tasmania, the book
will be not less important for the purpose of reference.”
(Signed) Joseph Milligan.
From Dr. E. Swarhreck Hall, a Medical Practitioner in Hobart Town,
and formerly on the Medical Staff; Author of “ Vital Statistics."
“ I attended Mr. H. M. Hull’s Lecture on the capabilities of Tasmania,
and having had the opportunity of also perusing his manuscript, I can
support the general accuracy of his statements from my own experience
during a residence of 25 years in different districts of the Island.”
(Signed) E. Swarbreck Hall.


