

The
MELBOURNE
Marriage Guidance
Council
AFFILIATED WITH THE NATIONAL
MARRIAGE GUIDANCE COUNCIL OF
GREAT BRITAIN
Hon. Secretary:
C/o 18 Orrong Road, Armadale, S.E.3.
Telephones Haw. 2958 and
U 9296 (2 lines)


DONOR


The Melbourne Marriage
Guidance Council
The Need .for Marriage Guidance:
importance of successful marriage and
{Jarenthood cannot be exaggerated. The
happiness of the individuals concerned is of
prime importance, but it involves also the
welfare of the yhole nation.
ManyV marriages go', wrong which could
be put *right if the persons concerned re-
ceived the .right kind of help at the right time.
But often those requiring this sympathetic
help and Understanding, based on expert
knowledge and experience, do not know
where to seek it.
The Melbourne Marriage Guidance Coun-
cil has been set up to give personal service
to those who desire advice or help about
marriage and parenthood. It has the sup-
port of many eminent men and women, and
is served by a staff of highly qualified
marriage counsellors and consultants.
The Scope of the Council:
While the Council is prepared to offer
help or advise on any problem connected
with marriage and parenthood, it will not
encroach on the work of other individuals or
societies. Its desire is to work in the closest
co-operation with others who share its aims,
and as far as possible to act in an advisory
eapacity, directing people to the best sources
of information and treatment.
The personal service offered by the Council
falls roughly into three sections—preparation
for marriage, problems of married life, and
problems of parenthood.


Preparation for Marriage:
Prevention is better than cure. It is recog-
nised by authorities that only a very small
percentage of people about to marry get ade-
quate preparation for marriage. Young
people can be saved a great deal of trouble
later on if they can be provided with indi-
vidual preparation for marriage.
The Council undertakes to give this
preparation. Instruction is given in the art
of marital adjustment, both individually, and
by means of films and lecture classes. Sug-
gestions are offered about the best books to
read. A physical examination by a doctor
can be arranged, if desired.
The aim is to do as much as possible, by
careful preparation, to ensure that marriage
can be embarked upon with every reasonable
prospect of success.
Problems of Married Life:
Many marriages break down, or fail to
achieve harmony because of complicated
problems emotional, sexual, cultural,
spiritual, economic—which the couple can-
not solve by themselves. The Council offers
the services of a panel of expert Counsellors,
who have had special training in dealing
with personal problems. It is usual to
arrange a preliminary interview, in which
some indication can be given of what will be
required to remedy the trouble.
Problems of Parenthood:
The right approach to parenthood is of
great importance to successful marriage, and
the Council offers guidance on this question
to married people. Advice is given where de-
sired, concerning family planning, and guid-
ance is offered to those whose marriages are
childless. The Council is anxious to do
anything which will further the welfare of
family life.
Appointments:
Those who desire help or advice should
write or telephone to the Secretary, when an


appointment will be arranged. An interview
cannot be granted without a previous ap-
pointment having been made.
All consultations take place under circum-
stances in which the strictest privacy is as-
sured. Personal information brought for-
ward in an interview is treated as absolutely
confidential.
Advice by Correspondence:
Experience has shown that it is not ideal
to give advice without a personal interview,
because it is obviously difficult to gain, by
post, or phone, all the facts necessary for
the making of a sound judgment. But every-
thing possible will be done to help those
who write for advice.
Cost of the Services Offered:
It cannot be too strongly emphasised that
the Council is not a commercial, profit-
making enterprise, but an attempt to provide
an urgently-needed public service. It is ob-
vious, however, that such service involves
considerable expense.
Those who avail themselves of the ser-
vices offered by the Council are expected to
contribute according to their means, but no
one who seeks help is asked for money.
Those members of our community who
share our concern about the urgent neces-
sity of this work are asked to give practical
expression to their interest by contributing
to the finances of the Council.
THE TEN PRINCIPLES
r JTHE work of the Council is based on the
following ten points:—
1. That the safeguarding of the family unit
as the basis of our community life is of vital
importance to the future welfare of the nation.
2. That the right foundation for this unit
is permanent monogamous marriage, which
alone provides satisfactory conditions for the
birth and upbringing of children, for the ex


pression of the function of sex, and for a
secure relationship between man and woman.
3. That it should be plainly acknowledged
that the achievement of successful marriage is
no easy task, but that sustained and disci-
plined effort is required to build up that
physical, mental and spiritual harmony which
alone can bring the relationship to its full
maturity.
4. That the right approach to marriage,
and the choice of a partner, are matters of
such paramount importance that it is a clear
duty to the rising generation to provide its
members with such instruction and guidance
as may safeguard them from wrong attitudes
and false judgments.
5. That in addition an adequate course of
more detailed preparation should be avail-
able to all who are about to marry.
6. That the right basis for personal and
social life is that sexual intercourse should
not take place outside marriage.
7. That it is a public duty to do every-
thing possible to prevent the tragedy of the
broken home, and the train of evils which it
initiates, by the provision of sympathetic
and expert treatment for the prevention and
cure of marital disharmony.
8. That parenthood normally brings to
marriage not only the fulfilment of its racial
end, but also the achievement of one of its
deepest satisfactions; and that everything
possible should therefore be done to promote
fertile unions.
9. That scientific contraception, while
serving a purpose in assisting married
couples to regulate the spacing of their
children, becomes a danger when misused to
enable selfish and irresponsible people to
escape the duties and disciplines of marriage
and parenthood.
10. That it is essential to bring about a
state of society in which the welfare of the
family shall receive primary consideration,
and w'here parenthood shall no longer labour
under social and economic disabilities.


MELBOURNE MARRIAGE
GUIDANCE COUNCIL
1950 -1951
Patron: Sir John Newman-Morris, Kt.,
C.M.G., M. 8., 8.5., F.R.A.C.S., F.A.C.S.
Chairman: The Rev. John Sayers.
Vice-Chairmen: Dr. W. L. Carrington, M.D.
Dr. R. E. Maclean, M. 8.,
8.5., D.P.M.
Dr. J. A. Smeal, M. 8., 8.5.,
M.R.C.P., D.P.M.
Honorary Treasurer: Mr. Colin Kitchen,
B.Sc.
★
TTHE aim of the Council is to promote happy
and successful marriage and parent-
hood.
In addition to the personal service des-
cribed in this leaflet, the Council also pro-
vides facilities for education towards an ade-
quate approach to marriage and parenthood:
(a) for young men and women, to help
them prepare for marriage;
(b) for married people, to help them to
realise the fullest possibilities of their
relationship ;
(c) for those who deal with marriage
problems, to provide them with a
fuller equipment for their work.
A panel of competent lecturers is avail-
able. Those desiring their services should
write to the Hon. Secretary, c/o 18 Orrong
Road, Armadale, 5.E.3. Telephones: Haw.
2958 or U 9296 (2 lines).
