

Br j/r - fejP C:^
I /jsl \f\
s fi l V
J f ni»■>»««■ j. // mJ ;■ v /
■j "X / *m X;>. W |1 II
IBg y\ I
■B X'x. Hfef ,.W _4Sf H
f , (#a ** iS> ' 4ff% i • i
<f VI Mbla % «w f mM vK % I4B 7 V
a m \ b :,:
jj f aE
M i|l| jfl |A\ aB
mSL* E flV| f* £¥
j0^j009k abb aSB VS 1 fv
II IS JSp | " f a ill
/ J0tr fiSHf ■
Ak T i f^.^gBtefiiiMiM w Ti I ||
. s fur ' 4 vk HfflHHk OHC% rm. *-■*& *■& I *
x T1B r —KM 1 HHi /
I iu \ i
I jm |a ft R| ,
jFsSg ’mJjtsB&W' «M ■!
»’ \ &£ jLKjmtSi mWM j™ •
« jHnB C\|T| mm h








The Anzac BooK






„ - --»-z :■ B =TYr7i-B.rgr-n , r —i.-rr » y _-■*■££> | p '. 'Viiiiiai ■ iii ~
“The Australian and New Zealand troops have indeed B^Jj


The
{ ' < f. . , ,2;
Anzac Book
Written and Illustrated in Gallipoli by
The Men of Anzac
For the benefit of Patriotic Funds
connected With the
A. & N. Z. A. C,
Cassell and Company, Ltd
London, New YorK, Toronto and Melbourne
1916


The Copyright in all
the Contributions, both
pictures and writings,
contained in The
Anzag Book is
strictly reserved to the
Contributors.


LITERARY CONTENTS
PAGE
INTRODUCTION. By Lieut.-Gen. Sir W. R. Birdwood . . . . ix
EDITOR’S NOTE xiii
THE LANDING. By A Man of the Tenth (A. R. Perry, 10th Batt. A.I.F.). 1
THE REMINISCENCE OF A WRECK. By Lieut. A. L. Pemberton (R.G.A.) 7
AN AUSTRALIAN HOME IN 1930. By “ Soldieroo ” (2nd Field Co., Aust.
Engrs.) ®
NON NOBIS. By C. E. W. B 11
THE iEGEAN WIND. By H. B. K 14
OUR FATHERS. By Capt. James Sprent, A.M.C. (3rd Field Amb.) . . 14
GLIMPSES OF ANZAC. By Hector Dinning (Aust. A.S.C.) .... 17
PARABLES OF ANZAC .23
THE YARNS THAT ABDUL TELLS. By A. P. M 24
THE GRAVES OF GALLIPOLI. By L. L 25
TO A LYRE-BIRD. By H. J. A. (8th Batt. 2nd Infantry Brigade) . . 26
THE NEVER-ENDING CHASE. By Am. Park 30
ANZAC DIALOGUES. By N. Ash 81
FROM QUINN’S POST. By Pte. V. N. Hopkins, A.M.C 32
THE HAPPY WARRIOR. By M. R .33
HOW I SHALL DIE. By Pte. Charles Lowry (9th Aust. Batt.) . . 34
BEACHY. By Ted Colles (3rd L.H. Field Amb.) ...... 35
THE ANZAC HOME—AND A CONTRAST. By E. Cadogan (1/1 Suffolk
Yeomanry) 41
FLIES AND FLEAS. By A. Carruthers (3rd Aust. Field Amb.) ... 44
ANZAC TYPES:—
1. Wallaby Joe. By W. R. C. (8th Aust. L.H.) ..... 45
2. The Dag. By E. A. M. W 47
3. Bobbie of the New Army. By “ Tentmate ” (11th London Regt.) , 49
THE INDIAN MULE CORPS. By B. R. 50
HILL 60. By C. J. N 50
JENNY. By Lance-Corp. F. C. Dunstan (B Depot, 6th A.A.S.C.) ... 53
%
MARCHING SONG. By C. J. N .54


PAGE
FURPHY. By Q. E. D 56
FROM MY TRENCH. By Coup. Comus (2nd Batt. A.I.F.) .... 57
ABDUL. By C. E. W. B 58
A CONFESSION OF FAITH. By Capt. James Sprent (A.M.C.) ... 59
OUR FRIEND THE ENEMY. By H. E. W CO
ARMY BISCUITS. By O. E. Burton, N.Z.M.C 61
THE LOST POEM. By R. A. L. (1st Aust. Stat. Hosp.) . . . .65
A LITTLE SPRIG OF WATTLE. By A. H. Scott (4th Battery, A.F.A.) . 67
THE TRUE STORY OF SAPPHO’S DEATH. By M. R 68
THE EVERLASTING ARGUMENT. By C. D. Me., R.S.D. (11th Aust. A.S.C.) . 68
THE UNBURIED, By M. R. (N.Z. Headquarters) ...... 69
THE STORY OF ANZAC (Sir Ian Hamilton’s Dispatches) .... 71
ANZACS. By Edgar Wallace ......... 95
TO MY BATH. By H. H. U. (Northamptonshire Regt.) . .... 96
ANZAC LIMERICKS. By C. D. Me 96
HOW I WON THE V.C. By “ Crosscut ” (16th Batt. A.I.F.) ... 98
ICY. By E. A. M. W . . . . 102
THE TROJAN WAR, 1915. By Arthur H. Adams ..... 104
THE PRICE. By Corp. Comus (2nd Batt. A.I.F.) ...... 104
KILLED IN ACTION. By Harry McCann (Headquarters, 4th Aust. Light
Horse) .... ......... 105
A GREY DAY IN GALLIPOLI. By N. Ash (11th A.A.S.C.) . . .106
MY ANZAC HOME. By Corp. George L. Smith (24th Sanitary Sect., R.A.M.C.T.) 107
WHAT FRANK THOUGHT. By A. J. Boyd (A.N.Z.A.C.) . . . .108
ARCADIA. By Bombardier H. E. Shell (7th Battery, A.F.A.) . . . 110
THE CAVEMAN. By J. M. Collins (9th Batt.) ...... 113
AN ANZAC ALPHABET. By J. W. S. Henderson (R.G.A.) . . . .115
THE KAISER TO HIS SECRETARY. By H. B. C 119
THE ANZAC THUNDERSTORM—FROM THE TRENCHES By I. A. Saxon
(21st Aust. Batt.) ........... 122
SENSE OR ? By C. D. Me. (Sergt.) ....... 123
OUR SAILORS—THE AMPHIBIOUS MAN. By Lieut. A. L. Pemberton . 124
POSSIES. By “ Ben Telbow 125
MR. AEROPLANE. By H. G. Garland (16th Aust. Batt.) . . . . 126
ANZAC IN EGYPT:—
1. Mahomed—and Australia. By C. . . . . . . .127
2. Anzac in Alex. By L. J. Ivory (4th Howitzer Battery, N.Z.F.A.). . 128
Literary Contents


PAGB
GREY SMOKE. By R. G. N. (11th Aust. A.S.C.) 131
A WAIL FROM ORDNANCE. By Lieut. Kininmonth (A.0.C.) . . . 132
“ DINKUM OIL ” 134
THE BOOK OF ANZAC CHRONICLES:—
1. The Flood. By “ Genesis Gallipoli ” . . . . • . • 135
2. The Book of Jobs. By W. R. Wishart (No. 1 Aust. Stat. Hosp., Anzac) 136
3. The Perfectly True Parable of the Seyen Egyptians. By Capt. A.
Alcorn (No. 1 Aust. Stat. Hosp.) ....... 138
THE SILENCE. By Pte. R. J. Godfrey (7th Aust. Field Arab.) . . .141
THE GROWL. By E. M. Smith (27th Batt.) 142
MY LADY NICOTINE. By H. G. Garland 142
THE RAID ON LONDON. By “ Private Pat Riot ” . . . . . 143
SING! 145
ANOTHER ATTEMPT AT AN ANZAC ALPHABET. By “ Übique ” (21st
Indian Mtn. Battery) . . . . . . . • . • 146
TO SARI BAIR. By “ Ben Telbow ” (10th Aust. Batt.) .... 148
ON WATER FATIGUE. By Trooper George H. Smith (7th Light Horse) . 148
WHEN IT’S ALL OVER . . . By Harry McCann (4th A.L.H.) , . 151
SPECIAL A. & N. Z. A. C. ORDERS
1. The Landing ........... 152
2. The Battles of August ......... 152
3. Arrival of 2nd Australian Division, and Sinking of the “ Southland ” 153
4. Lord Kitchener’s Message ......... v 153
5. Gen. Bird wood Relinquishes Command of A. & N.Z. Army Corps . 154
6. The Evacuation of Anzac . . . . . . . . . 154
7. Telegrams ............ 156
FOUR DESIGNS FOR “THE ANZAC MAGAZINE” COVER . . .159
CORRESPONDENCE . . . 161
/
ANZAC FASHIONS: SUMMER 162
„ „ WINTER 163
ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS 164
ADVERTISEMENTS . 165
Literary Contents


LIST OF PLATES
A.N.Z.A.C. By W. Otho Hewett. (Colour) Frontispiece
FACING PAGE
LIEUT.-GEN. SIR W. R. BIRD WOOD x
“AT THE LANDING AND HERE EVER SINCE.” By David Barker.
(Colour) ............. 22
“ KITCH,” By C. Leyshon-White. (Colour) 32
ABDUL. By Ted Colles. (Colour) 58
ANZAC SKETCHES. By David Barker. (C010ur) ...... 66
SOMETHING TO REMEMBER US BY. By Ted Colles. (Colour) . . 70
MAP OF ANZAC. Drawn by Private R. T. Goulding (N.Z. Inf.) . . 90
THE NEW STAR. By Ted Colles, after F. J. Leigh. (Colour) ... 96
THE SILVER LINING. By C. E. W. Bean. (Colour) 122
OUR REPTILE CONTEMPORARY. By David Barker. (Colour) . . .134
“APRICOT AGAIN!” By David Barker. (Colour) ..... 142
EACH ONE DOING HIS BIT. By W. Otho Hewett. (Colour) . . . 164
\


INTRODUCTION
SIR. W. R. BIRDWOOD
IT is my privilege to have been asked to write an Introduction for The
Anzac Book, and to convey the cordial thanks of all the inhabitants of
our little township here to those who have so kindly given us the free use
of their brains and hands in writing and illustrating this book in a way which
does as much credit to them as the fighting here has done to the Force. We
all hope that readers of our book will agree in this, while those who are more
critical will perhaps remember the circumstances under which the contributions
have been prepared, in small dug-outs, with shells and bullets frequently whistling
overhead.
It may be of interest to readers to hear the origin of the word “ Anzac.”
When I took over the command of the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps in Egypt a year ago, I was asked to select a telegraphic code address
for my Army Corps, and then adopted the word “Anzac.” Later on, when
we had effected our landing here in April last, I was asked by General Head-
quarters to suggest a name for the beach where we had made good our first
precarious footing, and then asked that this might be recorded as “ Anzac
Cove ” —a name which the bravery of our men has now made historical, while it
will remain a geographical landmark for all time.
Our eight months at “Anzac” cannot help stamping on the memory of
every one of us days of trial and anxiety, hopes, and perhaps occasional fears,
rejoicings at success, and sorrow —very deep and sincere—for many a good
comrade whom we can never see again.
I firmly believe, though, it has made better men of every one of us, for we
have all had to look death straight in the face so often, that the greater realities
of life must have been impressed on all of us in a way which has never before
been possible. Bitter as has been my experience in losing many a good friend,
I, personally, shall always look back on our days together at “Anzac ” as a time
never to be forgotten, for during it I hope I have made many fast friends in
all ranks, whose friendship is all the more valuable because it has been acquired
in circumstances of stress and often danger, when a man’s real self is shown.
In days to come I hope that this book will call to the minds of most of us
incidents which, though they may then seem small, probably loomed very large
before us at the time, and the thought of which will bring to mind many a good
comrade—not only on land, but on the sea. From the day we were put ashore


M Ia H'k o^smr^_
by Rear-Admiral Thursby’s squadron up till now we have had the vigilant ships
of His Majesty’s Navy watching night and day, in all weathers, for any
opportunity to help us. We will all of us look back in years to come on
Queen, Prince of Wales, Queen Elizabeth, London, Triumph, Bacchante,
Grafton, Endymion, as well as such sleuth-hounds of the ocean as Colne,
Chelmer, Fincher, Rattlesnake, Mosquito, and many others, as our best of
friends, and will think of them, their officers and ship’s company, as the
truest of comrades, with whom it has been a privilege to serve, and as the best
of representatives of the Great Fleet and Service which carries with honour and
ensures respect for the British flag to the uttermost parts of the earth.
Boys! Hats off to the British Navy.
It may be that, in thinking of old “ Anzac ” days, the words of the
Harrow school-song will spring to one’s mind:
“ Forty years on, growing older and older,
Shorter in wind, as in memory long,
Feeble of foot, and rheumatic of shoulder.
What will it help you that once you were strong! ”
But it has indeed helped us all to have been with strong men at “ Anzac,”
and whatever the future may have in store, I, personally, shall always regard the
time I have been privileged to be a comrade of the brave and strong men from
Australia and New Zealand, who have served alongside of me, as one of the
greatest privileges that could be conferred on any man, and of which I shall be
prouder to the end of my days than any honour which can be given me.
No words of mine could ever convey to readers at their firesides in Australia,
New Zealand and the Old Country, one-half of what all their boys have been
through, nor is my poor pen capable of telling them of the never-failing
courage, determination and cheerfulness of those who have so willingly fought
and given their lives for their King and country’s sake. Their deeds are known
to the Empire, and can never be forgotten, while if any copy of this little
book should happen to survive to fall into the hands of our children, or our
children’s children, it will serve to show them to some extent what their fathers
have done for the Empire, and indeed for civilisation, in days gone by.
I sincerely hope that every one of my old comrades may meet with all the
good fortune his work here has deserved, and live to a ripe old age, with hap-
piness, and be occasionally reminded of old times by a glance at The Anzac
Book.
Anzac,
December 19, 1915,
Introduction


f
-
“LIEUTENANT-GENERAL SIR W. R. BIRDWOOD
Has been the soul of Anzac. Not for one single day has he ever quitted his post.
Cheery and full of human sympathy, he has spent many hours of each twenty-four
inspiring the defenders of the front trenches, and if he does not Know every soldier in
his force, at least every soldier in the force believes he is Known to his chief.”
Sir lan Hamilton's dispatch •




EDITOR’S NOTE
fT U 'VIIS book of Anzac was produced in the lines at Anzac on Gallipoli in
the closing weeks of 1915. Practically every word in it was written
-ML and every line drawn beneath the shelter of a waterproof sheet or of a
roof of sandbags—either in the trenches or, at most, well within the range
of the oldest Turkish rifle, and under daily visitations from the smallest
Turkish field-piece. Day and night, during the whole process of its composition,
the crack of the Mauser bullets overhead never ceased. At least one good
soldier that we know of, who was preparing a contribution for these pages,
met his death while the work was still unfinished.
The Anzac Book was to have been a New Year Magazine to help this little
British Australasian fraternity in Turkey to while away the long winter in the
trenches. The idea originated with Major S. S. Butler, of the A.N.Z.A.C.
Staff. On his initiative and that of Lieutenant H. E. Woods a small commit-
tee was formed to father the magazine. A notice was circulated on November
14th calling for contributions from the whole population of Anzac. Any profit
was to go to patriotic funds for the benefit of the Army Corps.
Between November 15th and December Bth, when the time for the sending
in of contributions closed, The Anzac Book was produced. As drawings and
paintings began to come in, disclosing the whereabouts of some of the talent
which existed in Anzac, a small staff of artists was collected in order to produce
head- and tail-pieces and a few illustrations; and a dug-out overlooking Anzac
Cove became the office of the only book ever likely to be produced in Gallipoli.
It was after the contributions had been finally sent in, and when the work
of editing was in full swing, that there came upon most of us from the sky the
news that Anzac was to be evacuated. Such finishing touches as remained to
be added after December 19th were given to the work in Imbros. The date
for the publication was necessarily delayed. And it was realised by everyone
that this production, which was to have been a mere pastime, had now become
a hundred times more precious as a souvenir. Certainly no book has ever been
produced under these conditions before.
Except for this modification in the scheme of its production, The Anzac
Book remains to-day exactly the same as when it was planned for the Australian
and New Zealand Army Corps still clinging to the familiar holly-clothed sides
of Sari Bair.


The three weeks during which this hook was being produced will be remem-
bered by the men of Anzac as being the period during which we were visited
by the two fiercest storms which descended upon the Peninsula. During the
afternoon of November 17th the wind from the south-west gradually increased
to more than half a gale, and brought with it, after dark, a most torrential
thunderstorm. A day or two later this subsided, leaving a dishevelled Anzae.
But the wind swung slowly round to the north, and by November 27th it was
blowing a northerly blizzard; and the next day five out of every six Australians,
for the first time in their lives, woke to find a white countryside and the snow
falling. How deeply that snow impressed them can be seen in these pages—for
dust, heat and flies were much more typical of Gallipoli.
The book was composed from first to last in the full prospect of Christmas
at Anzac, and it remains a record, perhaps, all the more interesting on that
account. The Printing Section of the Royal Engineers, especially Lieutenant
Tuck and Corporal Ashwin, and Lieutenant G. L. Thomson, R.N.A.S., and
certain Naval Officers helped us with some drawing-paper, ink and paints, and
the Photographic Section with some excellent panoramas; but for the rest, the
contributors had to work with such materials as Anzac contained: iodine
brushes, red and blue pencils, and such approach to white paper as could be
produced from each battalion’s stationery.
The response to the committee’s request for contributions was enormous,
and in consequence the editors have been able to use only portions, even if
they be a half or a quarter, of the longer articles and stories submitted to them
—but they have done this without hesitation, rather than reject the articles
altogether. The competitions for certain contributions resulted as follows;
Cover —Private D. Barker, sth Australian Field Ambulance; Drawing —
Trooper W. O. Hewett, 9th Australian Light Horse; Drawing (Comic) —
Private C. Leyshon-White, 6th Australian Field Ambulance; Prose Sketch
—H. Dinning, 9th Co., Australian A.S.C.; Prose ( Humorous ) —Second-
Lieutenant J. E. G. Stevenson, 2nd Field Co., Australian Engineers; Verses
—Captain James Sprent, 3rd Australian Field Ambulance; Verses ( Humorous)
—T. H. Wilson, A Co., 1 6thßattalion A.I.F. The greater number of the
contributors were private soldiers in the Army Corps. The sole “ outside ”
contribution is Mr. Edgar Wallace’s poetic tribute to the Australian and New
Zealand Force, which is included in these pages with the consent of the author.
The thanks of those particularly concerned in the production are especially
due to General Birdwood, for his close and constant interest; to Brigadier-
General C. B. B, White, who, though at the time burdened with most anxious
duties, never failed to give some of his few spare moments to the solving of
difficulties incidental to this publication; to the Commonwealth authorities and
the Publicity Department in London; and particularly to Mr. H. C. Smart,
Editor’s Note


*
<e Ideal
for his untiring assistance, invaluable advice, and for the help of his outstanding
ingenuity in organisation, and of the splendid business system and abundant
facilities which he has created in the Australian Military Office in London; to
the War Office and the Admiralty, and the Central News for permission to
use valuable photographs; and to many others, both in the A. and N.Z.
Army Corps and outside it, who have given their best help to make this book a
success. For the Staff —C. E. W. Bean, editor; Privates F. Crozier, T. Colies,
D. Barker, W. O. Hewett, C. Leyshon-White, artists; A. W. Bazley, clerk—
the work has been a labour of love for which only they realise how little thanks
they deserve.
The Anzac Book Staff.
iEoEAN Sea,
December 29, 1915.
Editor’s Note


*• >-«-v
, i M‘<^
\M\PWIrtt; Of rn 7Efl5Qfl


The Anzac Book
. A
THE LANDING
a Man of the Tenth
COME on, lads, have a good,
hot supper—there’s business
doing.” So spoke No. 10
Platoon Sergeant of the TOth
Australian Battalion to his men, lying
about in all sorts of odd corners aboard
the battleship Prince Wales, in
the first hour of the morning of
April 25th, 1915. The ship, or her
company, had provided a hot stew of
bullv beef, and the lads set to and took
•r '
what proved, alas to many, their last
real meal together. They laugh and
joke as though picnicking. Then a
voice : “ Fall in!” comes ringing down
the ladderway from the deck above.
The boys swing on their heavy equip-
ment, grasp their rifles, silently make
their way on deck, and stand in grim
black masses. All lights are out, and
only harsh, low commands break the
silence. “This way No. 9 —No. 10 —
C Company.” Almost blindly we
grope our way to the ladder leading to
the huge barge below, which is already
half full of silent, grim men, who seem
to realise that at last, after eight
months of hard, solid training in Aus-
tralia, Egypt and Lemnos Island, they
are now to be called upon to carry out
the object of it all.
“Full up, sir,” whispers the mid-
shipman in the barge.
“ Cast off and drift astern,” says the
ship’s officer in charge of the embarka-
tion. Slowly we drift astern, until the
boat stops with a jerk, and twang goes
the hawser that couples the boats and
barges together. Silently the boats are
filled with men, and silently drop astern
of the big ship, until, all being filled,
the order is given to the small steam-
boats : “ Full steam ahead.” Away we
go, racing and bounding, dipping and
rolling, now in a straight line, now in
a half-circle, on through the night.
The moon has just about sunk below
the horizon. Looking back, we can see
the battleships coming on slowly in our
rear, ready to cover our attack. All at
once our pinnace gives a great start
forward, and away we go for land just
discernible one hundred yards away
on our left.


— —
- North
Sujfla jrom Qn$a C*
e r
Then—crack-crack! ping-ping! zip-
zip ! Trenches full of rifles upon the
shore and surrounding hills open on us,
and machine-guns, hidden in gullies or
redoubts, increase the murderous hail.
Oars are splintered, boats are per-
forated. A sharp moan, a low gurgling
cry, tells of a comrade hit. Boats
ground in four or five feet of water
owing to the human weight contained
in them. We scramble out, struggle
to the shore, and, rushing across the
beach, take cover under a low sand-
bank.
“ Here, take off my pack, and I’ll
take off yours.” We help one another
to lift the heavy, water-soaked packs
off. “ Hurry up, there,” says our
sergeant. “Fix bayonets.” Click!
and the bayonets are fixed. “For-
ward!” And away we scramble up the
hills in our front. Up, up we go,
stumbling in holes and ruts. With a
ringing cheer we charge the steep hill,
pulling ourselves up by roots and
branches of trees; at times digging our
bayonets into the ground, and pushing
ourselves up to a foothold, until, top-
ping the hill, we found the enemy had
made themselves very scarce. What
had caused them to fly from a position
from which they should have driven us
back into the sea every time? A few
scattered Turks showing in the distance
we instantly fired on.. Some fell to rise
no more; others fell wounded and,
crawling into the low bushes, sniped
our lads as they went past. There were
snipers in plenty, cunningly hidden in
the hearts of low green shrubs. They
accounted for a lot of our boys in the
first few days, but gradually were
rooted out. Over the hill we dashed,
and down into what is now called
“ Shrapnel Gully,” and up the other
hillside, until, on reaching the top, we
found that some of the lads of the 3rd
Brigade had commenced to dig in. We
skirted round to the plateau at the head
of the gully, and took up our line of
defence.
As soon as it was light enough to
see, the guns on Gaba Tepe, on our
right, and two batteries away on our


I
jf?
„ GrCiba ftpt .from 500*
© _
left opened up a murderous hail of
shrapnel on our landing parties. The
battleships and cruisers were continu-
ously covering the landing of troops,
broadsides going into the batteries
situated in tunnels in the distant hill-
side. All this while the seamen from
the different ships were gallantly row-
ing and managing the boats carrying
the landing parties. Not one man that
is left of the original brigade will hear
a word against our gallant seamen.
England may well be proud of them,
and all true Australians are proud to
call them comrades.
Se-ee-e-e . . . bang . . . swish! The
front firing line was now being baptised
by its first shrapnel. Zir-zir . . . zip-
zip ! Machine-guns, situated on each
front, flank and centre, opened on our
front line. Thousands of bullets began
to fly round and over us, sometimes
barely missing. Now and then one
heard a low gurgling moan, and, turn-
ing, one saw near at hand some chum,
who only a few seconds before had been
laughing and Joking, now lying gasp-
ing, with his life blood soaking down
into the red clay and sand. Five
rounds rapid at the scrub in front,”
comes the command of our subaltern.
Then an order down the line: “Fix
bayonets!” Fatal order—was it not,
perhaps, some officer of the enemy
who shouted it? (for they say such
things were done). Out flash a thou-
sand bayonets, scintillating in the sun-
light like a thousand mirrors, signalling
our position to the batteries away on
our left and front. We put in another
five rounds rapid at the scrub in front.
Then, bang-swish! bang-swish ! bang-
swish ! and over our line, and front,
and rear, such a hellish fire of lyddite
and shrapnel that one wonders how
anyone could live amidst such a
hail of death-dealing lead and shell.
“Ah, got me!” says one lad on my
left, and he shakes his arms. A bullet
had passed through the biceps of his
left arm, missed his chest by an inch,
passed through the right forearm, and
finally struck the lad between him and
me a bruising blow on the wrist. The
The Landing


« «
One -for Ch anak ,
man next him —a man from the 9th
Battalion —started to bind up his
wounds, as he was bleeding freely. All
the time shrapnel was hailing down on
us. “ Oh-h!” comes from directly
behind me, and, looking around, I see
poor little Lieutenant B , of C
Company, has been badly wounded.
From both hips to his ankles blood is
oozing through pants and puttees,
and he painfully drags himself to
the rear. With every pull he moans
cruelly. I raise him to his feet, and
at a very slow pace start to help him
to shelter. But, alas! I have only got
him about fifty yards from the firing
line when again, bang-swish! and we
were both peppered by shrapnel and
shell. My rifle-butt was broken off to
the trigger-guard, and I received a
smashing blow that laid my cheek on
my shoulder. The last I remembered
was poor Lieutenant B groaning
again as we both sank to the ground.
When I came to I found myself in
Shrapnel Gully, with an A.M.C. man
holding me down. I was still clasping
my half-rifle. Dozens of men and
officers, both Australians and New
Zealanders (who had landed a little
later in the day), were coming down
wounded, some slightly, some badly,
with arms in slings or shot through the
leg, and using their rifles for crutches.
Shrapnel Gully was still under shrapnel
and snipers’ fire. Two or three platoon
mates and myself slowly moved down
to the beach, where we found the
Australian Army Service Corps busily
engaged landing stores and water amid
shrapnel fire from Gaba Tepe. As
soon as a load of stores was landed,
the wounded were carried aboard the
empty barges, and taken to hospital
ships and troopships standing out off-
shore. After going to ten different
boats, we came at last to the troop-
ship Seang Cho6n, which had the 14th
Australian Battalion aboard. They
were to disembark the next morning,
but owing to so many of us being
wounded, they had to land straight-
away.
And so, after twelve hours’ hard
fighting, I was aboard a troopship again
—wounded. But I would not have
missed it for all the money in the
world.
A. B. Perry,
10th Battalion A.I.F.


Photograph bp C, E. W, 'BEAN
THE SUNRISE OF APRIL 25, 1915
The small boats taking troops to the shore can be seen beside the transports and close to the land




THE REMINISCENCE OF
A WRECK
[lt may be necessary to explain that wood —for the roof-beams of dug-outs
and the shoring up of trenches in wet weather —was priceless in Gallipoli. But
whilst this book was being compiled Providence sent a storm. In the morning the
beach was littered with portions of a wrecked schooner, stranded lighters, pieces
of pier—all strictly the property of H.M. Government as represented by the
officer commanding the Royal Engineers. “ A gift from Heaven/' one Australian
was heard to remark as he looked at the desolate scene next morning. Nor were
his British brethren less grateful.—Eds.]
V
r B A HE storm had ceased, the sea was calm, the wind a trifle raw,
A And miles and miles of wreckage lay upon the sandy shore;
And every time the waves came up they brought a little more.
The Sergeant and the Junior Sub. in contemplation stood.
They wept like anything to see such quantities of wood—
And then they smiled a furtive smile which boded little good.
The wood lay round in lovely heaps and smiled invitingly.
“ Do you suppose,” the Sergeant said, “ that this is meant for me?”
“ I doubt it,” said the Junior Sub. “ Here comes the C.R.E.*
<“ If fifty kings and fifty queens and fifty C.-in-C.’s
Presented fifty indents and bowed low upon their knees,
I hardly think that they would get more than a few of these.
The Sergeant and the Junior Sub. walked on a mile or so,
Until they found a shelving bank conveniently low;
And there they waited sadly for the C.R.E. to go.
“ Oh, timbers,” quoth the Junior Sub., who spoke with honeyed
speech,
6t I hardly think it safe for you to lie upon the beach.”
And as he spoke he stroked the backs of those within his reach.
♦ C.R.E.—Officer commanding Royal Engineers.


'-'A ■£%>.
fr~r%
y\ q\\
a€l'j ~Jr/V W
/A ti f A
U/j y x^ 7 tK re v,
ti f \
CEWB.
St-udqojci battalion in Repose*
The timbers leapt beneath his touch and hurried plank by plank;
They crowded round to hear him speak, and lined up rank on rank —
But one old timber wagged his head and hid behind a bank.
“ The time has come,” the Sergeant said, “ to talk of many things—
Of bully beef and dug-outs, of Kaisers and of Kings,
And why the rain comes through the roof, and whether shrapnel
stings.
“ Some good stout planks,” the Sergeant cried, “ are what we chiefly;
need,
And four by fours and spars besides are very good indeed—
So if you’re ready, sir, I think we may as well proceed.”
“ Oh, C.R.E.!” remarked the Sub., “ I deeply sympathise.”
With sobs and tears they sorted out those of the largest size,
While happy thoughts of days to come loomed large before their eyes.
Next morning came the C.R.E. to see what could be done;
But when he came to count the planks he found that there was none—
And this was hardly odd, because they’d collared every one.
Lieut. A. L. Pemberton,
R.G.A.
Taylor’s Hollow,
8.12.15 i


AN AUSTRALIAN HOME
IN 1930
WHEN you come to an old
spotted gum right on the
saddle of Sandstone Ridge,
after an eighteen-mile ride
from Timpanundi, you’re very close to
Freddy Prince’s war selection. There’s
a well-made gate in the road fence on
your left, and it bears the legend,
“ Prince’s Jolly.” Through that the
track will lead you gently uphill into a
wide and gradually deepening sap,
until you think you’ve made some
mistake. Then look to your left, and
behold the front entrance to Freddie’s
dug-out.
An old shell-case hangs near by,
and when you strike it you’ll hear
an echo of children’s voices, and a
small platoon of youngsters charge you
at the double. First time I blew in it
was just on teatime, and my first
glance in at the well-lit gallery and the
smell of the welcome food are worth
the recollection. Fred came out and
led my cuddy round to the stable sap,
where he was given what had been on
his mind for some hours past. I didn’t
lose much time in settling down to tea
—it was already too dark to look around
outside. Besides, as Fred explained,
there was nothing to see of the home-
stead bar the inside, and by the third
year of excavation most of that had
been dumped into the gully and pretty
well all washed away.
The meal finished, we played games
with the kids. Fred seldom read the
papers—he said he didn’t want to strain
the one eye that was left to him—so
Mrs. Prince retired to absorb the news
I had brought in their mail-bag, and
to prepare herself to issue it to her
husband later.
Long after the children went to
burrow, he and I smoked and pitched
away about the past. He told me how
he and many others had come to adopt
the underground home. It had been
the case of making a penny do the work
of a pound, and Fred himself had done
the work of a company. It had been
a hard struggle, but the missus was a
treasure, and never growled except
when things were going well—as some
people will do. It was just a case of
dig in, dig up, and dig down. Any-
thing in the way of iron or steel was
prohibitive. Timber was too expen-
sive, and in any case the timber that
stood on the selection he had been
forced to sell in order to stock the farm.
It had been a problem of years, but he
had made a job of it; and when he
showed me round the house I didn’t
grudge him his little bit of pride.
The main gallery opened to the sur*


face at the front and back, and was
about forty-five paces long. It was
driven through hard ground, and was
well arched so that it required no tim-
ber. On one side there was a branch
to the pantries and the galley, and on
the other side the dining-room and the
bedrooms, which were really one big
chamber with solid pillars of earth left
at intervals, forming a group of rooms
each with a dome roof and canvas par-
titions. A borehole had been put
through to the surface at the centre of
every room for ventilation and light, a
device of reflectors enabling one to
bring the sunlight in at all hours of the
day.
Once, as we sat and smoked, a sub-
dued chattering came from the adjoin-
ing room. I looked up and saw the top
of a periscope over the partition. In-
stantly it disappeared with a noise like
the scattering of furniture. Then a
voice: “ Oh, daddy, do you know
what?”
“What’s happened, Kit?’’ replied
the father.
“ Two of your biscuit photo-frames
are smashed.”
“ Oh, never mind, old girl,” said
Fred; “it’s time they began to break
up after fifteen years. Go to sleep,
both of you.”
As I lay awake next morning I over-
heard some homely details. How the
baldy steer had hopped over O’Dwyer’s
parapet into his lucerne patch; and
Jimmy ought to have widened the
trench last week when he was told to;
and the milking sap hadn’t been
cleaned out the previous day because
Georgie had forgotten he was pioneer;
and Jerry O’Dwyer had shot two crows
from the new sniper’s pozzy* down at
the creek —and so on.
When we sat down to breakfast Mrs.
Prince was primed with news. “ I told
Fred,” she said, “ I didn’t believe we’d
taken Lake Achi Baba; the latest cable
says it’s still occupied by the German
submarines.” Fred nodded as if he
didn’t care much.
“ Achi Baba used to be a hill once,
wasn’t it, daddy?” chipped in one of
the youngsters.
“ Yes, it used to be one time,” re-
plied his father, looking into the blue
puffs that drifted away from his pipe
and out past the waterproof sheet of
the dug-out door. In those blue
mists of the past what he saw was
the bald pate of the great hill, with
the howitzers tearing earth out of
the crest of it by the hundredweight,
while the Turkish miners ever heaped
the outside of it with the spoil from
their tunnels. “Yes, it was a hill
once.”
Thus Freddy and his wife and family;
live their life as happily as if there were ;
no war.
“ SOLDIEROO,”
2nd Field Co., Aust. Engrs.
• Pozzy or Possie—Australian warrior's short for “position,” or lair.


N Ol unto us, O Lord, to tell
Thy purpose in the blast,
When these, that towered beyond us, fell
And we were overpast.
We cannot guess how goodness springs
From the black tempest’s breath,
Nor scan the birth of gentle things
In these red bursts of death.
We only know —from good and
great
Nothing save good can flow ;
That where the cedar crashed so
straight
No crooked tree shall grow ;
That from their ruin a taller priJe
Not for these eyes to see—
May clothe one day the valley side ....
Non nobis, Domine. q g


THE “RIC”
New Arrival (as something hums past the parapet): “’Strewth! Wot’s that?”
Officer: Only a ricochet.”
N. A.: “An’ d’we use ’em, too, sir?”


LL-ijuMi-^jfcMicii -rwini/iii i ii anpigi^wfjjaiiisjjiJWiBBttM
THE DESTROYER ON THE FLANK
Drawn by GILBERT IV RQAGU


THE AEGEAN WIND
nPHE winter winds of Lemnos,
They blow exceeding fast;
There’s nothing quite so stiff on earth
As that persistent blast.
It ducks around the corners,
Through all the hills it shoots;
It blows the milk from out your tea,
The laces from your boots.
Is this the soft yEgean wind
Which Byron raved about.
That whirls across the ridges
And turns you inside out?
Or is it some invention
Which Providence has made
To give a breezy welcome to
The Third Brigade?
H. B. K.
\\T ANDERING spirits, seeking lands unknown,
~ * Such were our fathers, stout hearts unafraid.
Have we been faithless, leaving homes they made,
With their life’s blood cementing every stone?
Nay, when the beast-like War God did intone
His horrid chant, was our first reckoning paid
For years of ease. Their restless spirits bade
Us fight with those whose Homeland was their own.
'Rest easy in your graves, the spirit lives
That brought you forth to claim of earth the best.
Ours it is now, and ours it shall remain;
Mere jealous greed no honest birthright gives.
Shades of our fathers, hear our faith confessed,
We shall defend your Empire or be slain.
Capt. James Sprent,
A.M.C. (3rd Field Amb.).


*\®af Jr t$m 1J. "&^K < jST r T- «- W$Kl tf. dm* i %£ ? ±ffiCtSF~*~T : liiiik^BsSI
jaBk mmmt * i jsskSt \
Drawn by F • R, CROZIER
“Wandering spirits, seeking lands unknown,
Such were our fathers, stout hearts unafraid.”




% p? ef •§■
A\ -a / f © rio
V i 1 /\m r> jW)
hi m All ill (ati
wj/\ \(l a I Lu /W&
HvJiiI r^rJ
) >\/vf 1 )' t' f)ffS Iff
\X f vi ,; 'f i) //Ma y/
ju K Y?> <&.
£S"Slb» C £«a
„ 7*ic,tur& o) & battalion. Tit%tinq -
GLIMPSES OF ANZAC
IT’S the monotony we revile, not —
to a like degree—hard work or
hard fare. To look out on the same
stretch of beach or the same patch
of trench wall and the same terraces of
hostile black and grey sandbags day
after day is to be wearied. There is
the same sitting in the same trench,
shelled by the same guns, manned, per-
haps (though that we endeavour to
avert), by the same Turks. Unhappily
it is not the same men of ours that they
maim and kill daily.
And if one’s dug-out lies on a sea-
ward slope there is, every morning, the
same stretch of the lovely Aegean,
with the same two islands standing over
in the west.
Yet neither the islands nor the sea
are the same any two successive days.
The temper of the Aegean at this time
changes more suddenly and frequently
than ever does that of the Pacific.
Every morning the islands of the west
take on fresh colour, and are trailed by
fresh shapes of mist.
To-day Imbros stands right over
against you; you see the detail of the
fleet in the harbour, and the striated
heights of rocky Samothrace reveal the
small ravines. To-morrow, in the early
morning light, Imbros lies mysteriously
afar off like an Isle of the Blest, a
delicate vapour-shape reposing on the
placid sea. .
Nor is there monotony in either
weather or temperature. This is the
late autumn. Yet it is a halting and
irregular advance the late autumn is
making. Fierce, biting, raw days
alternate with the comfortableness of
the mild late summer. This morning,
to bathe is as much as your life is worth
(shrapnel disregarded); to-morrow, in
the gentle air, you may splash and
gloat an hour and desire more. And


you prolong the joy by washing many
garments.
Here in Anzac we have suffered the
tail-end of one or two autumn storms,
and have had two fierce and downright
gales blow up. The wind came in the
night, with a suddenness that found
us most unprepared. In half an hour
many of us were homeless, crouching
about with our bundled bedclothes,
trespassing tyrannically upon the con-
fined space of the stouter dug-outs of
our friends—a sore tax upon true
friendship. They lay on their backs
and held down their roofs by mere
weight of body until overpowered.
Spectral figures in the driving atmo-
sphere collided and wrangled and swore
and blasphemed. The sea roared over
the shingle with a violence that made
even revilings inaudible.
The morning showed a sorry beach.
There were—there had been—three
piers. One stood intact; the landward
half of the second was clean gone; of
the third there was no trace, except in
a few splintered spars ashore. A col-
lective dogged grin overlooked the
beach that morning at the time of
rising. The remedying began forth-
with ; so did the bursting of shrapnel
over the workmen. This stroke of
Allah upon the unfaithful w T as not to
go unassisted.
With misgiving we foresee the win-
ter robbing us of the boon of daily
bathing. This is a serious matter.
The morning splash has come to be
indispensable. Daily at six-thirty you
have been used to see the head of
General Birdwood bobbing beyond the
sunken barge inshore; and a host of
nudes lined the beach. The host is
diminishing to a few isolated fellows,
who either are fanatics or are come
down from the trenches and must clear
up a vermin-and-dust-infested skin at
all costs.
Not infrequently “ Beachy Bill ”
catches a mid-moming bathing squad.
There is ducking and splashing shore-
wards, and scurrying by men clad only
in the garment Nature gave them.
Shrapnel bursting above the water in
which you are disporting raises chiefly
the question: “Will it ever stop?”
By this you mean : “ Will the pellets
ever cease to whip the water ?’ ’ The
interval between the murderous light-
ning flash aloft and the last pellet-
swish seems, to the potential victim,
everlasting.
The work of enemy shell behind the
actual trenches is peculiarly horrible.
Men are struck down suddenly and un-
mercifully where there is no heat of
battle. A man dies more easily in the
charge. Here he is wounded mortally
unloading a cart, drawing water for his
unit, directing a mule convoy. He
may lose a limb or his life when off
duty—merely returning from a bathe
or washing a shirt.
One of our number is struck by
shrapnel retiring to his dug-out to read
his just delivered mail. He is off duty
—is, in fact, far up on the ridges over-
looking the sea. The wound gapes in.
his back. There is no staunching it.
Every thump of the aorta pumps out
his life. Practically he is a dead man
when struck; he lives but a few
minutes—with his pipe still steaming,
clenched in his teeth. They lay him
aside in the hospital.
That night we stand about the grave
in which he lies beneath his ground-
sheet. Over that wind-swept headland
the moon shines fitfully through driv-
ing cloud. A monitor bombards off


; % y ; ■
aK ;, y -
” ?: ' •> ,. '*■ - K<. <»$>
. .;■■ -<;;;■ ■ 'S ,.-~y. : , '■■■.■ _ ' ' ■ • - __ . '
yr , ,,-,■ .,
THE STORMS OF NOVEMBER
Transport in Trouble, November 17
After the Blizzard of November 29
Anzac Pier in the Storm of November I 7
Photographs by C. E, W . *BEAN


IHHH ■■& • ; ■ - .. ''^fi : ' ■■ *■■ .' w. - ■ngn. • ■ ■ ■■**!
■Hpww H^^... - ■ WSy^
>
f ' . *•• -'"" rt ' . ’ • V/-/V^*»«
I ,
.
■
■ . ;
" ' > - . * ' '
% ■ < :
-
f;
-
-. »*»«» ifnMo.n'nMfirr . '-f-^y. ■::■■:■. ■?.:£*■'■■ ‘
iMP8i : W* -, * ■* ...,-mM.t Is/ *Vt
Photograph bp Central News
General Birdwood taking a Dip
Photograph by C. E. W. BEAN
Shrapnel over Anzac Beach
The shrapnel cloud can be seen, and also the water off the beach whipped up by the
pellets from the shells


shore. Under her friendly screaming
shell and the singing bullets of the
Turks the worn, big-hearted padre in-
tones the beautiful Catholic interces-
sion for the soul of the dead in his
cracked voice.
At the burial of Sir John Moore was
heard the distant and random gun.,
Here the shells sometimes burst in
the midst of the burial party. Bearers
are laid low. A running for cover.
The grave is hastily filled in by a couple
of shovel-men; the service is over; and
fresh graves are to be dug forthwith
for stricken members of the party. To
die violently and be laid in this shell-
swept area is to die lonely indeed. The
day is far off (but it will come) when
splendid mausolea will be raised over
these heroic dead. And one foresees
the time when steamers will bear up the
Aegean pilgrims come to do honour at
the resting places of friends and kin-
dred, and to move over the charred
battlegrounds of Turkey.
Informal parades for Divine Service
are held on Sabbath afternoons for such
men as are off duty. Attendances are
scanty. The late afternoons are be-
coming bleak; men relieved from
labour seek the warmth of their dug-
outs.
The chaplain stands where he can
find a level area and awaits a congrega-
tion. When two or three are gathered
together he announces a hymn. The
voices go up in feeble unison, punc-
tuated by the roar of artillery and the
crackle of rifle fire. The prayers are
offered. The address is short and shorn
of cant. This is no place for canting
formula. Reality is very grim all
round. There is a furtive under-watch-
fulness against shrapnel. One almost
has forgotten what it is to sit in security
and listen placidly to a sermon at
church.
The chaplains have come out to do
their work simply and laboriously.
They are direct-minded, purposeful
men. One is a neighbour in a Light
Horse regiment—a colonel. He flaunts
it in no sandbagged palace. His dug-
out is indistinguishable from those
of the privates between whom he is
sandwiched mere waterproof sheet
aloft and bed laid on the Turkish clay;
a couple of biscuit boxes with his odd-
ments —jam, and milk, and bread;
writing materials and toilet requisites.
A string line beneath the roof holds his
towel and lately washed garments. He
is a simple parson, hard-worked by day
and night in and about the trenches,
careful for such comforts as can be got
for his men in this benighted land;
lying down at nights listening to the
forceful lingo of his neighbours, and
confessedly admiring its graphic if well-
garnished eloquence. He sees his duty
with a direct gaze—a faithful Church-
man at work in the throes of war.
In a land of necessarily hard fare a
regimental canteen in Imbros does
much to compensate. Unit repre-
sentatives proceed thence weekly by
trawler for stores. One feels almost
in the land of the living when so near
lie tinned fruit, butter, cocoa, coffee,
sausages, sauces, chutneys, pipes,
tobacco, and chocolate. Such a reper-
toire, combined with a monthly visit
from the paymaster, removes one far
from the commissariat hardships of
the Crimea.
The visualising of unstinted civilian
meals is a prevalent pastime. Men sit
at the mouths of their dug-outs and
relate the minutiae of the first dinner at
home. Some men excel in this. They
Glimpses of Anzac


do it with a carnal power of graphic
description which makes one fairly
pine. One has heard a colonel-chap-
lain talk for two hours of nothing but
grub, and at the end convincingly
exempt himself from any charge of
carnal-mindedness. Truly we are a
people whose god is their belly. But
that we never admitted until this period
of enforced deprivation.
Those comforts embraced by the use
of good tobacco and deliverance from
vermin at night are the most desired;
both hard to procure. There is some-
how a great gulf fixed between the
civilian quality of any tobacco and the
make-up of the same brand for the
Army. Once in six months a friend in
Australia dispatches a parcel of cigars.
Therein lies the entrance to a fleeting
paradise—fleeting indeed when one’s
comrades have sniffed or ferreted out
the key. After all, the pipe, given
reasonably good tobacco, gives the
entree to the paradise farthest removed
from that of the fool.
Of the plague of nocturnal vermin
little need be said explicitly. The
locomotion of the day almost dissipates
the evil. But it makes night hideous.
The tendency is to retire late and
thus abridge the period of persecution.
One’s friends drop in for a yam or
a smoke after tea, and the dreaded
hour of turning-in is postponed by
reminiscent chit-chat and the late pre-
paration of supper. One renews, here,
a surprising bulk of old acquaint-
ance. Old college chums are dug out,
and one talks back and lives a couple
of hours in the glory of days that have
passed. Believe it not that there is no
deliverance possible from the hardness
of active service. The retrospect, and
the prospect, and the ever-present
faculty of visualisation are ministering
angels sent to minister.
Mails, too, are an anodyne. Their
arrival eclipses considerations of life and
death —of fighting and the landing of
rations. The mail-barge coming in
somehow looms larger than a barge of
supplies. Mails have been arriving
weekly for six months, yet no one is
callous to them.
Of incoming mail, letters stand in-
evitably first. They put a man at home
for an hour.
But so does the local newspaper.
Perusing that, he is back at the old
matutinal habit of picking at the news
over his eggs and coffee, racing against
the suburban business train. Intimate
associations hang about the reading of
the local sheet—domestic and parochial
associations almost as powerful as are
brought by letters.
And what shall be said of parcels
from home ? The boarding-school
home-hamper is at last superseded. No
son, away at Grammar School, ever
pursued his voyage of discovery
through tarts, cakes and preserves,
sweets, pies and fruit with the in-
tensity of gloating expectation in which
a man on Gallipoli discloses the con-
tents of his “parcel.”
“ ’Struth! a noo pipe, Bill!—an’
some er the ole terbaccer. Blimey!
Cigars, too!—’ave one, before the mob
smells ’em. ... D d if there ain’t
choclut! Look ’ere. . . . An’ ’ere’s
some er the dinkum* coc’nut-ice the
tart uster make. . . . Hallo! more
socks! Nev’ mind : winter’s cornin’.
’Ere, ’ow er yer orf fer socks, cobber?
. . . Take these —bonzer ’and-knitted.
Sling them issue-things inter the sea.
• Dinkum—Australian for ** true.”


“AT THE LANDING. AND HERE EVER SINCE”
Drawn in Dine and Red Pencil bp DAVID DARKER




. . . I’m d d! —soap for the voy’ge
’ome. . . . ’Angkerch’fs!—orl right
w’en the blizzards come, an’ a
chap’s snifflin’ fer a week on end.
. . . Writin’ paper!—well, that’s the
straight tip, and no errer! The
beggars er bin puttin’ it in me letters
lately too. Well, I’ll write ter-night
on the stren’th of it. Gawd! ’ere’s a
shavin’ stick! —’andy, that! I wuz
clean run out—usin’ carbolic soap,
it! . . . Aw, that’s a dinkum
parcel, that is !”
Hector Dinning,
Aust. A.S.C.
PARABLES OF ANZAC
I
FROM SHELL GREEN
From a Correspondent in Australian
Field Artillery, “ Sea View ,” Boltons
Knoll, near Shell Green.
H" WAS looking out from the en-
trance of my dug-out, thinking
how peaceful everything was,
when Johnny Turk opened on our
trenches. Shells were bursting, and
fragments scattered all about Shell
Green. Just at this time some new
reinforcements were eagerly collecting
spent fuses and shells as mementoes.
While this fusillade was on, men were
walking about the Green just as usual,
when one was hit by a falling fuse.
Out rushed one of the reinforcement
chaps, and when he saw that the man
was not hurt he asked: “Want the
fuse, mate?”
The other looked at him calmly.
“ What do you think I stopped it
for?” he asked.
II
THE TURK IN THE
PERISCOPE
The same Correspondent writes:
I AM sure that wherever the old
sth Light Horsemen, who put in
such a warm spell at “ Chat-
ham’s ” * some time ago, congre-
gate after this war the following
incident will be told and retold:
Bill Blankson was a real hard case,
happy-go-lucky, regardless of danger.
Bill was put on sapping for over a fort-
night, and at the end of that time had
a growth of stubble that would have
brought a flush of pride to his dirty
face if he had seen it. But he hadn’t
seen it —one does not carry a looking-
glass when sapping.
At the end of the fortnight he was
taken off sapping and put on observing.
* Chatham’s Post at the southern end of the line
was attacked by the Turks for several days in Novem-
ber.
Parables of Anzac


Anyone who has used a periscope
knows that unless the periscope is held
well up before the eyes, instead of the
landscape, one sees only one’s own
visage reflected in the lower glass.
Bill did not hold the periscope up
far enough, and what he saw in it was
a dark, dirty face with a wild growth
of black stubble glaring straight back
at him. He dropped the periscope,
grabbed his rifle, and scrambled up the
parapet, fully intending to finish the
Turk who had dared to look down the
other end of his periscope.
He had mistaken his own reflection
for a Turk’s*
THE YARNS THAT ABDUL
TELLS
ONE of the chief pastimes of
the Turks who live behind
the black and white sandbags
opposite (writes an officer
who knows them intimately) is that
of listening to stories told by the
storytellers in the cafes of the Asia
Minor villages. The hero of these
stories is very often a certain Nastradi
Hodja (who really existed at one time,
and made a reputation by his wit as well
as through his stupidity). Here is an
example of the sort of story about
Nastradi which especially pleases the
Turk;
Nastradi Hodja’s wife woke up one
night through hearing a noise. She got
up, and going out on to the landing on
the upper floor, outside her bedroom,
called out:
“ Nastradi, what was that noise?”
Nastradi’s voice came up from below.
“ Don’t pay any attention to it,” he
said. “It was only my shirt that
tumbled down the stairs.”
“ Does a shirt make such a noise?”
she asked.
“No,” was the reply; “but I was
in it.”
A. P. M.


THE GRAVES OF GALLIPOLI
r TMdE herdman wandering by the lonely rills
Marks where they lie on the scarred mountain's flanks,
Remembering that mild morning when the hills
Shook to the roar of guns and those wild ranks
Surged upward from the sea.
None tends them. Flowers will come again in spring,
And the torn hills and those poor mounds be green.
Some bird that sings in English woods may sing
To English lads beneath —the wind will keep
Its ancient lullaby.
Some flower that blooms beside the Southern foam
May blossom where our dead Australians lie,
And comfort them with whispers of their home ;
And they will dream, beneath the alien sky.
Of the Pacific Sea.
“ Thrice happy they who fell beneath the walls,
Under their father's eyes,"’ the Trojan said,
66 Not we who die in exile where who falls
Must lie in foreign earth." Alas ! our dead
Lie buried far away.
Yet where the brave man lies who fell in fight
For his dear country, there his country is.
And we will mourn them proudly as of right—-
For meaner deaths be weeping and loud cries :
They died pro patria !


Oh, sweet and seemly so to die, indeed,
In the high flush of youth and strength and pride.
These are our martyrs, and their blood the seed
Of nobler futures. ’Twas for us they died.
Keep we their memory green.
This be their epitaph. Traveller, south or west,
Go, say at home we heard the trumpet call,
And answered. Now beside the sea we rest.
Our end was happy if our country thrives :
Much was demanded. Lo ! our store was small—
That which we had we gave—it was our lives.’’
L. L.
TO A LYRE-BIRD
/"Ml, Lyre-bird! tethered to the earth,
Thou envy’st not the skylark in the sky,
But pour’st a thousand mocking notes of mirth,
Drowning the ravished songsters singing nigh.
If wing’d—so pure thy voice—thou might’st aspire
To drown indeed the whole seraphic choir!
And, listening to thee —captive in thy chains—
I think me of a singer such as thou
Who captured Nature’s notes for lovely swains,
And echoed them behind a mountain plough;
And moiled and sang, to prove to Gods above
The charm of earthly singing and of love*
Leave to the soaring minstrel of the sky
Her privilege of song at heaven’s gate;
Leave to the nightingale the charms whereby
She lights the grove and hushes strife and hate.
As great a boon —oh, blessed bird !—is thine,
Gyv’d to the soiling earth, yet singing still divine !
H. J. A.
Bth Batt., 2nd Infantry Brigade.
The Anzac BooK


•- - '
1 • Aft. ‘ >< 'TP^ : »,
•>-* SmL % Sfe[ ?/
PpRBftu PML’'^ ** tjf~ 'I '- v ■ >
*|#.,» *f» 'H
#>' • ■ mm3Kr ■' I .
j&fartJk.
fltsmS&B.
V« ..jfr „ • i ' :- ■f* •
..J-tw
-mmk.\ -
irt‘_ rf« 'ii£ J * !^S? .‘^HKHifc^'- , .\
> ' c . v * -... :
, '"' ‘ * * V* **i‘ ', v,***
t ■ ■ . X. v * ”
GRAVES AT ANZAC
The Cemetery in Shrapnel Valley
The Grave of a Brigadier—
Col. H. N. Maclaurin, Rilled April 27,
1915
A Cemetery by the Beach
T holographs by C, E. W . *BEAN




THE HOPELESS DAWN
•* STANDING TO ! ”—4.30 a.m.


/
c) . / j.
*.??. I* './ 1 £
•?| rfji'i . ♦ I H ? '
. • ,■: * -V }■ >• > I : < s ' „ ,•• j
% ? **»A * « , )■ r* !n r { / )T; ' l.> •
.8$hfc*ul«r>{ & *'* % ! ?n
v|/U^l ;d {id ill f! ? fti /;
| **
e • uey$^o n - h hv^t
• t*s M «2 A C
THE NEVER-ENDING CHASE
HILST seated one day in my
dug-out, .
Weary and ill at ease,
I saw a gunner carefully
Scanning his sunburnt knees;
I asked him why he was searching,
And what he was looking for.
But his only reply was a long-drawn
sigh
As he quietly killed one more.
Am. Park.


ANZAC DIALOGUES
IT was a fine day, and they were
standing by waiting for instruc-
tions from the warrant officer to
commence unloading and loading;
and in the general murmur of voices
one noted the broad tones of the British
Tommy and the harsher ones of
Tommy Kangaroo, the latter less care-
ful of his grammar than the .other; also
the loud-voiced directions of the Indian
Tommy, or rather Johnny, who con-
descended now and then to break into
pidgin-English (with a smile).
Presently from amongst a group sit-
ting in the shelter of a stack of bully
beef came the request: 44 Give us a
light, mate,” in the blunt style which
belongs to Tommy Kangaroo.
44 Aw, yes,” replies Tommy Atkins,
or 44 Kitch,” as he is beginning to be
called. 44 Aw, yes.” And while the
other is pulling at his fag : 44 Have you
got any baadges, choom?”
44 No, I gave mine to a little nipper
who used to sing on the stage at the El
Dorado in Cairo.”
44 Did you now! She must have a
fine stack of baadges now, that ’un.
You’re about the fifteenth lad that I
know has given his baadges to ’er.
Aw, thanks ” —taking back his cigar-
ette. 44 1 see you’re from Austra-alia.
What State did you live in?”
44 Vic,” is the reply.
44 1 wonder if you knew my brother?
He went to Victoria a couple of years
ago. Got a job on the ra-ailways, he
did, and wanted me to come out too.
I’ll go when this is over; but ’ee’s
married now, ’e is, and got a couple of
pet lambs that ’e said was given to ’im
by a chap named Drover; ’is name is
Dobbs.”
44 Never met him, matey, but he
is all right, you bet. A Pommy *
can’t go wrong out there if he isn’t too
lazy to work.”
“ Ah, yes, he tells me they called ’im
Pommy, but that they was good lads.
I could not understand them slinging
off at ’im and ’im thinking they were
treatin’ ’im like as ’e was one of them-
selves.”
44 Oh, well, yer see, mate, we don’t
call the like of ’im 4 Pommies ’ because
we dislike ’em, but just as a matter of
description. Of course, sometimes one
of ’em gets ’is back up and calls us sons
of convicts in return for us chuckin’ off
at ’im, and then he’s told lots of things
—sometimes true and very often un-
true; but Australia’s all right, mate.
You need not be ashamed to be called a
4 Pommy ’ out there.”
44 Blime, there’s old 4 Beachy ’ t at it
again,” breaks in another. 44 ’Ee’s a
fair cow, ’e is. Made me spill two
buckets er water this mornin’, and our
flamin’ cook told me I was too lazy to
go down for it. I’ll give ’im 4 Beachy ’
* Pommy—short for pomegranate, and used as a
nickname for immigrants.
f “ Beachy ” —a battery of Turkish guns, well known
on Anzac Beach.


after this job is over if ’e don’t look
out. Hallo, Johnny, Beachy catch-em
mule, eh?”
‘’ Beachy no good—mule good,”
replies the tall spare Indian, with a
smile, as he tries to bring his pair of
mules under the shelter of the stack.
“ Mule very good,” he says, as he
squats in front of his pair.
“ ’Ow long yer been ’ere, choom?”
asks Kitch of Kangaroo.
“ Nearly six munce now. Blime, I
could do with a spell now, too. I’m
beginnin’ to get a ’ump like a camel
from carryin’ these flamin’ boxes.”
“ Aw, yes, but it’s better than bein’
in the trenches, ain’t it?” asks Kitch.
“ Blime, no,” is the reply. “ A
man’s got a chance to hit back there,
but down ’ere it’s up to putty. It’s
bad enough to be eatin’ bully beef, but
carryin’ it as well is rotten. I couldn’t
look a decent bullock in the face now
for what I’ve said about ’im when ’e’s
tinned.”
“ Did yer ’ear wot was doin’ up at
Narks Post larst night, Bill?”
“Yes; some d d gobblers
thought they would catch our mob
nappin’ but missed the bus, and some
of ’em are still runnin’ yellin’ to Aller
to stick to ’em. Blast ’em! I’ll give
’em Aller when I get a chance. Keep-
in’ a man stuck on ’ere when ’e might
be havin’ a good time somewhere else.
I’ll bet ”
“ Come on, Bill, ’ere comes the
W. 0.,” * says his mate.
“ D ’im—see yer later, matey ;
and I’ll try to get a badge for yer.”
“ Don’t forget, choom. Ah want
it to send to my married sister’s little
lass. She thinks youm lads be prime
boys.”
“ Prime boys,” mutters Bill, as he
grabs his case of bully. “Yes, prime
boys jugglin’ Best Prime Bully Beef.”
“ D—r- it—shut up, Bill,” says his
mate. “ You’re always growlin’—
you’ll want flowers on your grave
next.”
♦W.O.— Warrant Officer.
N. Ash.
FROM QUINN’S POST
CELESTIAL star that crossed my path,
Leaving fair visions in my soul;
Oh! why did you e’er leave your realm
And break my heart? With mournful dole
Now restless night doth me pursue,
And fiends do tempt my sold to hell.
Ah! gentle maid, if you but knew
My inner shrine, and it could tell
My hidden love, as deep, as true.
As gentle as sweet birds at play ;
Drift back, bright star, and comfort me
In this unending, dreary day.
Y. N. Hopkins,
Pte., A.M.C., ait. 17th Aust. Bn.


~
T~n
“ KITCH ”
Drawn With an lodine "Brush bp C. LEYSHON-WHITE




(A SOLILOQUY) <filp
5 r SOMEWHERE- IN THE-
J| g . ANZAC ZONE -
~ JtUUP’Mf
(A SOLILOQUY)
SOMEWHERE: IN THE-
ANZAC ZONE-
I
ITN my sandy dug-out by the sea
A Of Saros beyond Samothrace,
I’m as happy as happy can be,
And I’m bent upon washing my face
Before I go into my tea;
But the water’s so scarce in this land
That we do all our washing with
sand—
And we always have sand in our tea.
II
In my fly-filled dug-out by the sea
Near Anzac, beyond Samothrace,
Both the cook and colonel agree
That you must have some semblance
of grace
At breakfast, at dinner, and tea,


To prevent you from damning the
eyes
Of the savage and pestilent flies —
For you always have flies in your tea!
11l
In my shell-swept dug-out by the sea
Of Saros, beyond Samothrace,
I’m as happy as happy can be,
Tho’ the shrapnel comes flying apace
Over moorland and mountain and lea—
For I wish you to quite understand,
Tho’ the hens have vacated the land,
Yet we always have shells with our tea!
M. R.
HOW I SHALL DIE
T ONLY wait the eventide,
The rising of the moon —
My little barque I’ll gently slide
Into the still lagoon.
Here storms are fierce and nations wage
Across the seas their strife,
And death’s wild billows break their rage
Against the rocks of life.
I only wait the last, long call—
Perchance a short farewell—
Then gently for the mists to fall
O’er silent hill and dell.
Private Chas. Lowry,
9th Aust. Battalion.


—■!*»# <>■■ I
""" l Mlll / ,||.c. u«w
* • ‘5 ’
BEACHY
OUTSIDE was a cold, dark,
windy and cheerless night,
and the world seemed cower-
ing under the black, threaten-
ing rain-pall above, which could be felt
rather than seen. Inside my host’s
diggings we were lounging back in the
warmth and light, smoking and yarn-
ing of other times and places, while the
partner of his home brewed the warm,
fragrant, comforting decoction which
seemed to contribute so much to the
mood and proper appreciation of such
friendly comfort in the midst of the
audible turmoil of unfriendly outer
circumstances.
Once again from outside there came
a whir and rattle past the door, and I
smiled significantly and glanced in that
direction.
“ Oh, don’t go until after the next
one,” urged my host’s companion, see-
ing my attention diverted to things
outside of our present cheery circle.
With this my friend seemed to con-
cur, and drew himself closer to the fire.
“ Yes, there’s plenty of time yet,” he
said. “ There’ll be a lot more of ’em.
So you might as well sit tight in, safely
and comfy, and try another cup.”
I didn’t need much coaxing, and
thrusting the thought of the long, un-
pleasant journey home out of my mind,
I settled down to further cheery chat
and the enjoyment of stimulating
internal comforts.
The conversation seemed to have
progressed but a little further when
above the wind outside could be heard
again the warning roar and rumble,
fading away and terminating in a
muffled clang and clatter in the dis-
tance. “ That settles it, Billo, old
chap,” I said, half rising. “ Pass over
my coat. If I hurry off now I’ll be
just in time.”
But my friend didn’t move to oblige.
“Now, what’s the use of hurrying?”
he urged once more. “ They’ll be pass-
ing every minute now for a long time
yet. So why not settle down and
enjoy yourself a bit longer? ’Taint
very often you come this way.”
By the time I had finished my reply
to his persuasions I found, again, that
my chance had gone—and I would
have to wait now, anyhow.
And so the time passed. We talked
and talked, while a useful youth who
lived near by, and had attached himself
to my friend Billo, made three re-
appearances with hot water for the
cups that cheered as the night went on.
“I wonder where ‘ Razzy ’ is?”


presently remarked my host; “ the jug
wants refilling.”
Just then the disturbing rumble
passed the door again, and I rose to
my feet. “ Don’t bother to disturb
him,” I said. “ I suppose he’s retired
to his digs. Besides, now’s my chance
to scoot too; I’ve a long way to walk.
Throw me that coat.”
Finding that all protestations were
useless, my friends reluctantly allowed
me to go, but not without wilily ex-
pressed forebodings as to what un-
pleasantness might await me outside
now that I had refused to enjoy their
society and comforts any longer.
They accompanied me to the door,
and a cold blast of wind met us. There
were ominous thunder rumbles in the
murky distance.
“ A boshter * night for a walk,” I
remarked, buttoning my coat about
me.
“Yes,” grinned my friend, peering
out into the darkness. “ And they’re
running to a peculiar sort of time-table
to-night—passing about every seven
minutes. You’d better get a wriggle
on. There’s a short cut that w r ay,” he
added, pointing to the right, “ just
past the corner of the cemetery.
That’s where they stop. So for God’s
sake shake it up; if you don’t, they
won’t see you home at all. It’s an
unhealthy night to be out.”
I asked them to say good night to
the youth “ Razzy ” for me, and to
thank him for his comforting ministra-
tion, then bade them farewell and
moved off.
I blundered along the sloppy, un-
paved footway, peering tensely into
the uncanny blackness about me, and
* Bosker, boshter, bonzer—Australian slang for
splendid.
hurried uneasily in the direction of a
patch of faint pale blotches that I
hoped and took to be the monuments
in the little burying-ground down
beyond. I found that my direction
was right, and presently I was hurry-
ing past it as fast as I could manage
in the wind and darkness. From some-
where behind me—it sounded miles and
miles away through the noise of the
wind—a faint low moaning sound
reached my ear. I stepped forward
uneasily, but before I had advanced a
yard it had become more prolonged,
and growing ever louder and closer
until I seemed to feel it coming—
coming with tremendous and ever-
increasing speed: a horrible, nerve-
shattering, deafening, wailing shriek.
I stood dazed and paralysed—rooted to
the spot. With a scream of hellish
intensity—it was all within a second,
really—it was on me. There was a
flash of blinding light, then everything
ended so far as I was concerned.
My next interest in life was a feeling
that I had just been hurled up at the
moon, over it, and had descended
slowly, ever so slowly, like a feather,
to earth again. In fact, I wasn’t quite
sure that I was not a feather; and I
opened my eyes carefully and tried
to feel myself. “’Ssh-sh-sh! Don’t
disturb yourself—remain quiet and
comfy,” said a persuasive voice beside
me. I looked around as far as I could
move, and knew that I was in a hos-
pital, but where or of what kind I could
not think for the moment. I lay awhile
gazing blankly and unthinkingly at a
low white ceiling above me. Presently
I fell to wondering.
In what suburb, in what town (it
seemed to have been hundreds of years
ago that it had happened), and what


ii. ' V ; . ' ' ;
/ . ' - r v » ■ I'
y| -/I I f l< . ‘ I J
! . \ '7 If / ' :1. ■; ' / , , " ' . / . - ;
* _ ■ • • - / • __ : ■:> f“‘g
:
-\ , . . ■ . - - , ; ‘ “^>V
;. * - v A ••'• • >*>< •; ' C* X,-.., >♦& * X’’'i. f s \.:. v .
\ - > : - ‘ - xf
’ / ‘ ‘ i.
f \ ’' v ; ’ . ,
i •
RACING BEACHY BILL
Drawn b s H. C. WIWBVSH


I
I •
; , >
; " ' - ■■ N T " , ...
,
k :: - :
I
I:» '
t
I*" .. -
ACHI BABA. SEEN FROM ANZAC
(The dugouts and paths of Anzac are seen in the foreground. Above them on the sky line is the massive Kilid Bahr
plateau, the near promontory in the centre is Gaba Tepe, and above is the peak of Achi Baba. The British position
at lielles comprised the distant coast up to a point a little astern of the destroyer)
Drawn by G, T. M. ROACH „


part of Australasia could it be that a
peaceful citizen, walking a darkened
street, homeward bound, could be vio-
lently assailed, near the resting-place
of its harmless sleeping dead, by an
awful uncanny horror descending from
the black unknown? Was I cursed,
haunted, bewitched—or what? Then
there came to me the vague memory of
a friend,,one whom I familiarly knew
as “ Billo,” and in some way associated
with my terrible, mysterious experi-
ence. But somehow it didn’t seem to
fit in with the slowly gathering evidence
of my returning senses, for it seemed
to me that “Billo” had long before
quitted suburban civilisation for some
great adventure —perhaps—yes, it was
a war somewhere —in which I, too, had
later resolved to follow his example and
do my share. Then how came it that
this terrible experience had befallen me
in the midst of the enjoyment and
comforts of civilisation?
I had a positive though hazy memory
of a comfortable, warm room, pleasant
drinks, cheery conversationßillo ”
and his companion, the latter a rough,
kindly sort of being—no, it could not
have been a woman; besides, “ Billo ”
was a bachelor. I remembered that
distinctly.
Suddenly it became clear to me, and
I remembered a silent, rugged man
facetiously dubbed “ ’Enery ” by my
friend—a kindly chap, of very few
words, with whom I had not been long
acquainted. Where had “ Billo
picked him up ? There also came
before me the memory of a small,
dilapidated man or youth, dark com-
plexioned; somehow also attached to
“ Billo.” His name was —yes, that
was it. . . • Who the deuce was
“Razzy”? My mind here became
dazed, and speculation drifted off in-
to a confusion of reflections: that
“ Razzy ” was a foreigner of some sort,
living with us under the same con-
ditions, yet in some way very different
and in a degree inferior; that the hour
at which I left my friend “ Billo’s ”
home and his inexplicable associates
was quite early in the night—perhaps
only nine-thirty. This latter fact
seemed to linger in my mind, for
presently—with a hazy conviction that
there were sure to be other pedestrians
abroad on a suburban street at that
hour—l heard my own voice asking no
one in particular; ‘ ‘ Was there anyone
else there?”
It came as no surprise to hear a
man’s rough voice reply :
“ Only a Maltese —at least, we think
he was. He was blown to smithereens.
But don’t let ’em see you talking too
much, mate.”
The room seemed to rock. I opened
my eyes, and with difficulty caught
sight of the speaker. He was in khaki
and wore an A.M.C. badge on his arm.
I was on a hospital ship.
“ Then that must have been poor
‘ Razzy,’ ” I muttered at last. Before
my mind’s eye there seemed to unfold
a dissolving scene. The cosy rooms of
my, friend “ Billo ” became a dug-out
in a hillside, lit by a slush lamp made
from bacon fat. “ Billo ” and his
rugged, silent companion were wearing
the familiar time-tattered uniform that
I knew so well ages and ages ago
(actually it was five days back); the
door through which I had passed into
the unpleasant night was an oilsheet
tied down to keep the weather out; and
the frequent rumbling roar was not
that of a passing suburban train which
I was timing myself to catch. On the
Beachy


( V -J I y 'Rjffrad o|<JiR
\ * f - £2tusr»nlian
' u?« SoWier ntarainq
5:3 from fhs. FitlcJ o|
Qlorvj <*lr H£|!?s-
ct5l— m«< "* '9'5
contrary, it was the intervals between
that sound which interested me. For
each of those rushes past the door of
my friend’s dug-out was a hurtling
Turkish shell, and I wanted to make
my escape at a reasonably safe moment.
Also, the place where “ they ” chiefly
lobbed was the cemetery at the foot of
the rugged track (I had dreamed of it
as the unpaved footpath of a new
suburb), where rest a score or more
game Australian lads who had taken
part in the landing on Gallipoli. The
unfortunate “ Razzy,” by the way, was
but one of a gang of Maltese labourers
brought by the authorities, at a later
and safer period, to help in the landing
of stores from the transports in the bay
at Anzac. He had become friendly
with my luxury-loving friend “ Billo,”
and, in gratitude for various kindly
considerations, was willing to provide
the hot water to make our hot-rum
drinks on that memorable night at
“ Billo’s ” station on our right wing.
(I was quartered miles away on the
extreme left.)
So it was near the cemetery that the
unexpected shell got me; and appar-
ently “ Razzy ” also, who was return-
ing to his camp a hundred yards away.
There seemed something so droll about
the whole strange illusion that, al-
though in a state of dazed depression,
I might have laughed but for an in-
describable pain in my left side. I saw
that my left arm was supported on
something and lay above the bedclothes
and seemed very heavy.
“ Feel comfortable?” said the
A.M.C. man.
“ Yes, except for the pain in my left
hand,” I answered.
He looked down, and I followed his
gaze.
“ You haven’t got no left hand,” he
said quietly.
I saw that he was right, and this new
illusion struck me as being about the
last straw.
With a dazed sort of conviction I
muttered: “ Well, it’s a rummy
world ” —and promptly lay back and
drifted out of it for the time being.
Ted Colles,
3rd L.H, Field Ambulance.


THE ANZAC HOME—AND A
CONTRAST
I AM sitting, at the moment of
writing, in a dug-out, one of those
dismal, dark, damp holes cut into
the clay of the Dardanelles, serv-
ing us as a haven of refuge by day
and by night from the übiquitous
Turkish bullet.
The proportions of this extemporised
dwelling resemble those of an exceed-
ingly small family tomb —one which
might belong to a family too proud not
to possess a family tomb at all, but too
poor to possess one of adequate size and
comfort (if one can speak of comfort in
such a connection). Its dimensions
should be about ten feet by four, but
I am not enthusiastic enough at the
moment to ascertain them precisely.
Its three walls are of crumbling clay.
Where the fourth wall strictly should
be is an exit which lets in the draught.
Over my head are stretched waterproof
sheets which let in the water. On the
floor, in fine weather, is an inch of
dust, and in bad weather a proportion-
ate amount of slimy mud. A few
sandbags ranged round the parapet
threaten to tumble in and annihilate my
existence. I am sitting on a roll of bed-
ding. My haversack, water-bottle, field-
glasses, webbing, pistol, gas helmet,
and india-rubber basin are arranged
round my feet like so many pet dogs
begging for biscuit ; and in such an
entourage I think of my room at home
—and that is where this matter of
contrast comes in.
It was the same at dinner. We—
that is to say, my brother officers and
I—sat in another variety of dug-out;
this time an open one —open to all that
blows and falls. Our repast consisted
of an exceedingly stringy rabbit, ex-
tracted from a tin of an ominous purple
hue —an evil-looking dish ’ eked out
with somebody or other’s baked beans,
which are all very well in their way,
but when used as an unvarying vege-
table at all meals begin to pall; bread,
with the crust like a cinder, to which
fondly cling bits of sacking and mules’
whisker; the corpse of a cheese; and
the whole washed down with tea made
in the stew dixie, and tasting more of
dixie and stew than of tea.
As I lean back against the clay wall
of my dug-out, and innumerable par-
ticles of dust cascade down my neck, a
soft reverie steals over my senses. It
seems to me to be about six or seven
o’clock on a murky November after-
noon in London. I have splashed
home from my work in the wind- and
rain-swept streets the motor-buses
have covered me with black mud—my
umbrella has afforded me the most in-
adequate shelter. But these things
seem of little account to me here in
Gallipoli. I see myself reaching my
home in the best of spirits, entering


the hall, and shutting off the outer
darkness. My sense of contrast gives
me a lively notion of dry clothes, of a
comfortable room, of a genial fire, and
of an absorbing book. In future I
shall be grateful for the rain and the
mud and the murky streets for making
these good things seem by contrast so
much more valuable.
Think of it! To sink into a great
arm-chair in front of my library fire,
after a hard and anxious day’s work,
and contemplate the near approach of
an excellent evening meal. How com-
fortable and warm and hospitable my
room appears as I lean back and listen
to the rather depressing, smothered
rumble of the traffic in the street
below. Thick curtains hide away the
melancholy November London atmo-
sphere. Sweet-smelling logs crackle
cheerily on the hearth; a reading-lamp
by my side sheds subdued lustre on the
immediate vicinity of my chair. My
servant glides into the room noiselessly
over the soft carpet, and places the
evening paper by my side. I choose a
cigar from my case, light it, and then
I am perfectly content —and my con-
tentment is due to contrast between
my content with the existing situation
and my past discontent with other
situations at other times and in other
places.
After a refreshing siesta I go up-
stairs, exchange my workaday clothes
for a smoking-suit. Two or three
bachelor friends are due to dine with
me, and by the time I have dressed
and descended again to the sitting-
room they are there ready for my
greeting.
And what a pleasant evening it is
with their company. We talk of old
times, old acquaintances, and old
places. We talk of our big-game
shoots, of our campaigns, and of our
travels, the recollection of which seem
so delightful now that distance lends
enchantment to the view. Dinner is
over; a glass of brandy and old port,
some smokes, and we are just adjourn-
ing to the next room
“ Wake up, old chap—three o’clock.
Your turn for the trenches. It is
snowing hard and the Turks are very
active.”
Contrasts indeed!
E. Cadogan,
1/1 Suffolk Yeomanry.


v s' T' / /O
v ■*s / / / / APTfc(\
riAQfMAri,.
The Ass : “ Are you wounded, mate 7 99
The Victim s 99 D’yer think I’m doing this fer fun? M


FLIES AND FLEAS
REGARDING these two par-
ticular pests, my attitude in
the past has been characterised
by the utmost forbearance; I
tolerated them and looked upon them
as harmless and possibly of some useful-
ness to the community. The Gallipoli
specimens, however, have changed my
state of “benevolent neutrality” into
one of most deadly warfare. No
“ Hymn of Hate ” has yet been com-
posed which would give expression to
the hatred which has possessed me.
Do you but go into the trenches in
the endeavour to perform your duty to
your country, and the flies immediately
try to dissuade you by getting into
your eyes, ears, nose and mouth.
Nothing will drive them away; they
delight in this; they are entirely with-
out pity. Retire to your dug-out in
the hope of escaping their attentions,
and they are sure to follow you.
Smoke till you all but asphyxiate your-
self, and you find them as active as
ever. Nothing that human ingenuity
can devise will cause them to retreat;
they defy our puny efforts. You may
imitate the Kaiser and “ strafe ” them
for all you are worth, but it is only
waste of breath; they glory in this and *
come back all the more.
What we frequently distrust in the
way of tucker holds no terrors for the
Gallipoli flies; they delight in taking
risks if only to impress us with their
fearlessness. Stepping boldly on the
edge of a syrup-covered biscuit, they
immediately get their feet entangled;
but they will not retreat —that would
be against all their traditions. Instead,
they will struggle their way towards
the centre, vfrhere they gladly give up
the contest and die.
They are born conquerors. I doff
my hat to them in spite of my hate.
With the setting sun the flies retire,
but operations are simply handed over
to their allies, the fleas; and no
worthier ally could be found than
those pilgrims of the night. You may
feel beat to the world, but there is no
rest for you; as soon as you lie down
to enjoy a well-earned rest the attack
commences. Advancing in open or
close formation, according to circum-
stances, the enemy attacks on every
flank with fixed bayonets, in the
handling of which his units are ex-
perts. If driven off, they come again
in still greater numbers ; they appear
to have unlimited reserves of reinforce-
ments which can be mobilised on the
shortest notice. Their organisation is
perfect. Counter-attacks in the dark
are all in the favour of the enemy, and
morning finds that they have with-
drawn their forces to advantageous
cover in the blankets, from which it is
impossible to dislodge them. Keating’s
Powder is of no avail against the Galli-
poli fleas; it requires a still higher
explosive to have any effect.
The honours have so far fallen to
the enemy. Personally, I would be in-
clined to discuss terms of peace, but I
doubt not he is too depraved to accept
my advances.
A. Carruthers,
3rd Australian Field Ambulance.


*' ''
ANZAC TYPES
I—WALLABY JOE
ITTIS real name matters little;
—|| suffice it that he was known
_ among his comrades as “Wal-
laby Joe.”
He came to Gallipoli via Egypt with
the Light Horse. Incidentally, he had
ridden nearly a thousand miles over
sun-scorched, drought-stricken plains
to join them.
Age about 38. In appearance the
typical bushman. Tall and lean, but
strong as a piece of hickory. A horse-
man from head to toe, and a dead shot.
He possessed the usual bushy beard of
the lonely prospector of the extreme
backblocks. Out of deference to a
delicate hint from his squadron com-
mander he shaved it off, but resolved to
let it grow again when the exigencies
of active service should discount such
finicking niceties.
His conversation was laconic in the
extreme. When the occasion de-
manded it he could swear profusely,
and in a most picturesque vein. When
a bursting shell from a 44 75 ” on one
occasion blew away a chunk of prime
Berkshire which he was cooking for
breakfast, his remarks were intensely
original and illuminative.
He could also drink beer for in-
definite periods, but seldom committed
the vulgar error of becoming 44 tanked. ’ ’
Not even that locality 44 east of Suez,”
where, as the song tells us, 44 There
ain’t no Ten Commandments and a
man can raise a thirst,” could make his
steps erratic.
He was very shy in the presence of
the softer sex. On one occasion his un-
wary footsteps caused him some embar-
rassment. Feeling thirsty he turned


into one of those establishments, fairly
common in Cairo, where the southern
proprietors try to hide the villainous
quality of their beer by bribing sundry
young ladies of various nationalities and
colours to give more high-class vaude-
ville turns. The aforementioned young
ladies are aided and abetted by a
coloured orchestra, one member of
which manipulates the bagpipes.
A portly damsel had just concluded,
amidst uproarious applause, the haunt-
ing strains of “ Ta-ra-ra boom-de-ay.”
She sidled up to Joe with a large-sized
grin on her olive features.
“ Gib it kiss,” she murmured, trying
to look ravishing.
But Joe had fled.
Henceforth during his stay in Egypt
he took his beer in a little Russian bar,
the proprietor of which could sneak
English, and had been through the
Russo-Japanese War.
When the Light Horse were ordered
at last to the front, Joe took a sad fare-
well of his old bay mare. He was, as
a rule, about as sentimental as a steam-
roller, but “ leaving the old nag behind
hurt some.”
On the Peninsula and under fire his
sterling qualities were not long in com-
ing to the sui’face. Living all his life
in an environment in which the pick
and shovel plays an important part he
proved himself an adept at sapping and
mining. At this game he was worth
four ordinary men. No matter how
circuitous the maze of trenches, he
could find his way with ease. He could
turn out all sorts of dishes from his
daily rations of flour, bacon, jam, and
of course the inevitable “bully” and
biscuits. An endless amount of initia-
tive showed itself in everything he did.
His mates learned quite a lot of things
just by watching him potter about the
trenches and bivouacs. His training at
the military camps of Australia and,
later, in Egypt, combined with the
knowledge he had been imbibing from
Nature all his life, made him an ideal
soldier.
He was used extensively by his
officers as a scout. As the Turkish
trenches were often not more than
twenty yards from our own, needless to
say the scouting was done at night, the
Turks’ favourite time to attack being
just before dawn. Often during these
nocturnal excursions a slight rustle in
the thick scrub would cause his mate
to grasp his rifle with fixed bayonet and
peer into the darkness, with strained
eyes and ears and quickened pulse.
“ A hare,” Joe would whisper, and
probably advise him to take things easy
while he himself watched.
This went on for some time until
one night his mate came in alone,
pale-faced and wild-eyed. Interrogated
by the officer on duty, he informed him
that Joe had been shot.
We brought the body in. He had
been shot through the heart—a typical
affair of outposts.
Tucked away in one of the innumer-
able gullies, a little grave, one among
hundreds, contains the body of one of
Nature’s grand men. On the wooden
cross surmounting it is the following :
No. 008 Trooper J. Redgum,
20th Australian Light Horse.
Killed in Action.
W. R. C.,
Bth A.L.TI.


2. —THE DAG
YES; ’Enessy was a dag if ever
there was one! I remember
the day ’e came into camp at
Liverpool ’e was wearin’ ’is
best Sunday grin, and when some
bloke wot was in the mob yelled out
“ Marmalade,” ’e turns round and says
to ’im; “ Wot’s your complaint,
mate?” The bloke ’e repeats “Mar-
malade.” And ’Enessy says: “Ah!
That’s wot I thought it was. You’d
better see a doctor, and ’ave it operated
on right away, me man!”
’E could eat like a ’orse. Blime!
The way ’e used ter stoke up on ther
bread and jam was a treat for sore eyes.
’E always used ter ask to be put on the
job of picket round the quartermaster’s
store, and they never tumbled to ’is
game for a long while. ’E used ter
watch ’is chance, and every night would
slip in and pinch a loaf of bread and a
tin of jam, and as ’is job consisted of
keeping the cook’s fire a-going all
night, ’e always ’ad a cup of coffee
ready when ’e wanted it. One night ’e
nips into the store to git ’is usual bit of
supper, and ’e bangs right into the
bloke wot was just put in new at the
Q.M. that day.
“Wot are you doin’ ’ere?” asks the
bloke.
“ Blime! I thought I ’ad a fair
cop,” says ’Enessy, quick as lightning.
“ I ’card someone moving about in
’ere, and thought it was a chap pinchin’
stuff.”
“ And who are you?” says the
bloke.
“Me! I’m the bloomin’ picket,”
says ’Enessy.
“ Oh! Alright, picket,” replies the
bloke. “ I sleep in here, so you
needn’t worry about the store while
I’m here.”
“Alright, mate!” says ’Enessy.
“ Can yer give us a bit of grub? Fair
dinkum, I’m ’ungry!”
So ’e gets ’is grub after all, but ’e
couldn’t come the double no more after
that.
When ’e came over the water and
first sees the Turkish trenches, ’e says :
“ Strike me pink! But where’s them
Turks they talk about?”
Says I: “ They’re right there behind
them sandbags, old cock! And don’t
you forget it, neither!”
“ And don’t they come out and
show themselves?” ’e asks.
“ Wot for?” says I.
“ Why, for us blokes to shoot at, of
course!” ’e says.
One mornin’ early while we was
standin’ to arms ’e lights up a bumper,
so I tells ’im not to let the officer cop
’im or there’d be trouble. Just then
along comes the bloomin’ officer, so
’Enessy sticks ’is lighted bumper down
south into ’is overcoat pocket, and ’olds
it there out of sight. The officer sniffs
about a bit, then ’e asks ’Enessy:
“ Are you smoking?”
“ No, sir!” says ’Enessy.
“Well, I can smell smoke!” says
the officer. Then ’e looks pretty ’ard
at ’Enessy and says : “ What’s your
name?”
Anzac Types


Remember Biaf little <veq mart at
G-amhrtt Flal'.-T
“ ’Enessy, sir.”
“ Well, Henessy, your pocket’s on
fire!”
’Enessy looks, and hang me if that
bloomin’ cigarette ’adn’t set fire to ’is
coat pocket. But the officer only
says: “Don’t do it again!” and
whips off.
It was when we came out of the fir-
in’-line for a week’s spell that ’Enessy
met ’is Waterloo. ’E was detailed for
guard down at the drinkin’ water, and
’e was to take all his nap and camp
down there. The first night, when ’e
was doin’ ’is shift ’e sees a dark shape
movin’ along and challenged it three
times, but never gets no answer. So
’e ups with ’is gun and lets fly.
When the corporal rushes along to
know what the blazes was the matter,
’Enessy ups and tells ’im, so they goes
forward together pretty careful, and
soon they sees a black heap lyin’ on the
sand ahead of them. Gor blime! If
’Enessy ’adn’t gone and shot one of
them poor little Indian donkeys which
’ad strayed along the beach. Well, ’e
was chaffed pretty considerable by ’is
cobbers,* and got fairly sick of bearin’
about it.
Next night when ’e was doin’ ’is shift
again, ’e sees another black shape
movin’ along the beach, so thinkin’ ’is
cobbers were ’avin’ a joke with ’im, ’e
picks up a big stick and goes forward
with it. ’E ’ad gone about twenty
yards, when suddenly there was a flash
and a report, and ’Enessy drops down
with a bullet through ’is chest. Strike
me pink! A real Abdul ’ad come up
this time, and it wasn’t no bloomin’
donkey, neither! ’Enessy was ’it
pretty bad, but ’e grabs ’is rifle and lets
fly, and one more bloomin’ Abdul ’ad
gone to join ’is Prophet. Next day
’Enessy was taken away on a ’ospital
ship, but that was near three months
ago. I ’ear that the blighter is back on
the beach now, and you will be able to
see him yourself when ’e comes back to
the squadron. But strike me! ’E’s a
bloomin’ dag!
• Cobbers—mates.
E. A. M. W.


3.—80881E OF THE NEW ARMY
BOBBIE’S gone sick.
This probably doesn’t interest
you. But, oh, how we miss him.
So we must tell somebody.
Bobbie, the ever-smiling embodi-
ment of breezy youth; the spirit of
cheerfulness; the Beau Brummell of
the trenches.
Bobbie landed with the regiment,
and went through thick and thin with
it. But always with a smile and never
a scratch. Bullets flew off Bobbie at a
tangent.
Of our officers, three only of the
original arrivals were left when Bobbie
went. He had watched the others go
away one by one, some wounded, some
sick, and some —well, just left,
“ Where the foe and the stranger will tread o’er
their heads
When we’re far away on the billow.”
Bobbie had grown quite proud of his
staying powers, which carried him
through three months of real hardship
and trying work night and day. But
for Bobbie’s smile in adversity and his
way—for he has a way with him—many
of his brave boys would have given up.
But Bobbie’s bright example spurred
them on and they “ stuck it,” like their
idol.
Bobbie’s only a youngster, but he is
made of the real “ stuff that’s bred in
the army.” When he found himself
exalted to the command of a company
his head didn’t swell. The added re-
sponsibilities were not too heavy for
Bobbie’s shoulders, which really were
not broad relatively when compared
with his broad smile. Bobbie acted like
a tonic to a man run-down.
But, at last, Nature (in collusion with
the M.0.) asserted her imperious will,
and Bobbie just had to go to hospital.
So Bobbie bowed to the inevitable, and,
still smiling, went away.
Bobbie in hospital! What a picture!
TTis bright smile, his rosy cheeks, and
his immaculately parted hair, framed in
snowy-white pillows. Bobbie—the irre-
sistible !
Bobbie, we were loath to lose you;
Bobbie, we miss you; but, Bobbie,
won’t there be a weeping and a
wailing when the nurses have to let
you go?
Still, “ it’s an ill wind that blows
nobody good.” Bobbie’s chocolate
sweetened the bitterness of parting;
Bobbie’s tinned fruit sustains us in his
absence; Bobbie’s cigarettes sooth our
sorrow.
“ Tentmate,”
11th London Regt.
Anzac Types


THE INDIAN MULE CORPS
MY work in the A.S.C. has
brought me very much in
touch with the Indian Mule
Corps; and I don’t think
“ The Anzac Book ” would be com-
plete without some mention of that
admirable body of men.
What should we at Anzac have done
without “ Johnnie ” and his sturdy
little mules? Horse or motor trans-
port could not have faced the difficulties
of Anzac. The mules are sometimes
stubborn and unmanageable, but we
knew that before. And the drivers are
—most of them—hard workers, intelli-
gent and anxious to please. I often
marvel on a rough day, when the loaded
carts, nearly up to their axles in mud
or sand, are beached on that wild sea-
shore, on the watery edge of which they
are kept during the day; and wonder
still more when, after standing there
for a few hours, the mules draw them
out when the convoy leaves at night.
For the mules do not like the sea, and
when the weather is rough it is very
difficult to get the little beasts any-
where near it.
One thing, however, really does hang
up work for a time, and that is
“ Beachy Bill ”in action. Even then
some of the “ Johnnies,” who are less
fearsome than the rest, go on with their
work, and have from time to time been
hit.
Therefore, all praise to the Indian
Mule Corps.
B. XI•
HILL 60
AS some far swimmer, turning, views once more
England’s white cliffs, and strongly cleaves t’ward shore,
But, tide-encumbered, faints; so far and dear
Thy crystal arms and pillared throat appear,
Love, to thy soldier who makes earth his bed
In this grey catacomb of unnamed dead.
Thy voice, o’er tossing seas of eves and dawns,
Comes like dim music heard on magic lawns;
And, when in prayer thou kneelest, this grim brow
Feels the cool benison of hands which thou
Wouldst often grant. Now know I ’twas not vain
Our love, whose memory softens present pain.
C. J. N.


*
y Wk % x f* * , yg
?’|; j Kll
sd 1 ' >'W* ’ 1S| «f s 'W'xTii. . * i >
v" : - • WiL'- fill ,> ■ M -‘^i
m V 1 y • v - »^.:,,." &<-:-Vr ' ; f,'<®
’i ' i*% ■ ’.SB f ,■ ■ *’f J.[r s f s T' ' " .’; ( i
&■*!«[ M fij :.«Sr«i^'^ :
■■ mamiW' %sm fj lr .W* m f HX i ■H t* .* * 'l\ |Hi ;'Hpi*Sg» , y&ZS&W-. .« »?»
■-■ fc |*yKio» jMg >?' ’ **•; > *; * \ 36- l%> mmk Is
■ IMHUp M \ f v
■"■ i ' '■
< : ;t jkiw » ,„<» . *. * ffisSBIiSBsjE -^««^ 1 *««s«»^^|><«»s«gYifriiin^
Drawn by F. R . CROZIER
“HILL 60“




JENNY
H OR the delightful diversion
which little Jenny, with her
* frolics and gambols, provided for
the A.S.C.’s when they really
had a moment to spare another medium
will have to be sought. Though of
short duration, her life appeared a
charmed one whilst it lasted. Her free-
dom of action was the envy of every
soldier along the beach. Her disregard
for the enemy’s bullets and shells com-
manded our unbounded admiration.
But whether her immunity for six
months was due to the kindness of
the Turks or their bad shooting, or
her own good judgment, who can
say?
Jenny’s origin is enveloped in some
obscurity; but it is said that with her
parents, Murphy of Red Cross fame
and Jenny Senior, she toddled into our
lines when quite a mite ; and, once hav-
ing crossed over the border into civilisa-
tion, the three emphatically refused
to return whilst the objectionable
Hun element obtained in their native
country.*
Jenny the younger was no mere
mystic mascot for the humouring of
an especially created superstition. Her
congenial company and high spirits, her
affectionate ways and equable tempera-
ment, were the factors which gained for
her the obvious rank of “ Camp Pet.”
Her friendly regular visits will be
missed, and the picture of her patrician
head and dark-brown shaggy winter’s
coat. Her refined voice was music com-
pared with the common “ hee-haw ”
which characterises her kind, or the
peremptory foghorn of the sergeant-
major.
But now she is no more. Our sorrow
is immeasurable. The mother never left
the babe whilst it suffered excruciating
agony through a deadly shrapnel pellet.
Skilful, indefatigable attention, in-
numerable applications of the “ in-
vincible iodine,” proved futile. Jenny
Senior is grief-stricken, and now lies
upon the neat little grave in which her
infant was placed by the big Australian
playmates who now mourn their irre-
parable loss.
F. C. Dunstan, L.-C.,
B Depot,
6th A.A.S.C.
•This origin is a myth. The parents landed with the troops on April 25, 1915. Murphy, who bore a red
cross between his two long ears, is said (in company with his master, Pte. Simpson, 3rd Australian Field Ambulance)
to have carried 72 wounded men from the firing line through Shrapnel Gully, at the time when that valley
thoroughly earned its name, before his master met his death on one of these errands of mercy. Murphy himself
was subsequently hit by a shell, but happily survives, and was, we believe, brought safely away from Anzac.—Eds.


MARCHING SONG
T3 OOTS, belt, rifle, and pack—
All you’ll need till you come back;
All you’ll doff when you lie down to sleep;
All they’ll take off when they bury you deep.
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
Boots that went light down the Suffolk lane
Will shuffle and drag ere they tread it again.
Nails that rang gay on the cobbled street
Will have pierced through the sock into somebody’s feet
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
Belt—for water-bottle and sword :
One to save life; the other—oh, Lord!
’Fore you’ve finished with them, you bet,
One will be dry and the other wet.
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
Rifle—the soldier’s only friend—
True, if you treat her well, to the end :
Feed her with five, and the tune she’ll play
Will reach the heart of a Turkish Bey.
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
Pack—that holds what a man most wants:
A shirt, an overcoat, socks and pants,
A Bible, a photo of heart’s desire;
But you’ll throw it away when you charge—or retire.
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
Leather and canvas, steel and wood,
They’ll stand by you if you’re good;
Keep them oiled and keep them dry,
They’ll see you home safely—by and by.
Boots, belt, rifle, and pack.
C. J. N.




FURPHY
IT was the colonel who propounded
the theory first, on hearing some
rumour more optimistic than re-
liable. “ These furphies* are the
very devil,” he said.
Now, I had a theory about Furphy.
I was waiting for an opportunity of
following it up, and it came this way :
I was on the beach one day when
a friend met me and asked if I had
heard the latest dinkum. On learning
that I hadn’t, he informed me that
Greece had declared war on Turkey,
and was going to land 100,000 men
within the next few days on the
Peninsula. I inquired for the source,
and he said he got it from a fellow
who had just gone along the beach
towards the left. I asked what the
man was like. That sort of puzzled
him. He said he was a tall man —no,
he thought he was only middle height
or perhaps a bit on the small side. His
hair was dark—no, now that he thought
a bit, he fancied it was fair. In fact,
the more he tried to describe him the
less could he remember him. “ He’s
my Moses,” I said, and hurried off in
in the direction he had gone.
Passing through the sap to Shrapnel
Gully, I met another friend.
“Heard the latest?” he inquired.
I said “ No.”
* Furphy was the name of the contractor which was
written large upon the rubbish carts that he supplied
to the Melbourne camps. The name was transferred
to a certain class of news item, very common since the
war, which flourished greatly upon all the beaches.—
Eds.
“ Four Italian staff officers seen on
the beach to-day,” he said breathlessly.
“ Two hundred thousand Italian troops
being sent here.”
“ Who told you?” I asked.
“ Fellow just going into White’s
Valley.”
“What was he like?” I inquired
excitedly.
“ An ordinary fellow —not tall, and
not short.”
“ His hair?”
“ Well, it wasn’t dark —yes, it was—
no, I don’t know.”
“ How did he walk?”
“I never noticed,” he said; “in
fact, he didn’t seem to walk at all.”
I left him standing, and got down
the sap and over into White’s Valley
in a record time, and bumped into
another acquaintance.
“ Heard the news?” he said.
“No.”
“ Why, three hundred thousand
Italians have landed at Helles, and
Achi Baba is to be taken to-night.”
I asked who his informant was, and
he began to flounder into contradic-
tions. I rushed off, knowing that I
was well on the track of Furphy.
In Victoria Gully I heard that
Roumania had declared war, and
400,000 troops were marching through
Bulgaria to Constantinople.
“ Who told you? What was he
like?” I gasped at the teller.
“ Just a bloke,” was the answer.
“ ’E ’ad two legs, two arms, and a


’ead, two eyes ” Then he added in
a puzzled fashion: “ But, dammit,
did ’e?”
I didn’t wait any longer, but was off
again. At Shell Green I heard that a
man —just a feller, rather—had told
them that the Russians had surrounded
and captured Hindenburg’s army, and
that 500,000 Russians w r ere to make
a landing in Turkey. The Russian
officers were here already. The man
who had seen them had just passed five
minutes before. I wasn’t far from
Furphy now.
At Chatham’s Post they were buzz-
ing with excitement over the news that
600,000 French were going to be
landed between Kaba Tepe and Helles.
I asked if they thought it was true,
and they assured me that they had
heard it from a man who looked as if
he knew. No two descriptions of him,
however, agreed. I was getting closer
to Furphy.
I hurried along the trenches as fast
as I could, but got no information till
near Lone Pine, where I heard that a
big mob of Turks was expected to
surrender that night. It was said they
could not face the prospect of the
coming landing of the whole Italian
army. Besides, they were short of
food and water, they were being badly
treated by their officers, and their guns
had hardly any ammunition left. A
75 just then knocked a portion of
parapet over me. I remarked that
anyone could see the information was
right about Abdul being short of am-
munition, but where did the informa-
tion come from?
“ A fellow that just went by,” they
said; “looked like a staff officer.”
Getting near Steele’s Post, I saw in
front of me a man with an indescrib-
able gait. He seemed to float along
instead of walk. It was Furphy!
I hurried, but seemed to make no
gain on him. I began to run. Near
Courtney’s Post I was twenty yards
from him, and called to a man to stop
him. My quarry brushed past. I put
on a spurt. I was within about five
yards of him when, all of a sudden, he
sank into the earth. As his head dis-
appeared he smiled an oily grimace at
me.
And I noticed that there were small
horns behind his ears.
Q. E. D.
FROM MY TRENCH
A CLEAR, cold night, and in the southern air
Those far-off thunderings so often there; *
A Turkish moon is shining fitfully—
My thoughts are ’neath another moon where we
Paced slowly through the tree stems —you and I.
And, looking back at yon farewell, I sigh
And wonder whether then I cared as much
As now I do when far beyond your touch.
Cpl. Comus, 2nd Bat., A.I.F.
♦ Cape Helles is about 12 miles south of Anzac, and the distant rumble of the guns
there was constantly in the air at Anzac.— Eds.
From My Trench


ABDUL
TIT’E’VE drunk the boys who rushed the hills,
” * The men who stormed the beach,
The sappers and the A.S.C.,
We’ve had a toast for each;
And the guns and stretcher-bearers—
But, before the bowl is cool,
There’s one chap I’d like to mention,
He’s a fellow called Abdul.
We haven’t seen him much of late—-
Unless it be his hat,
Bobbing down behind a loophole . . .
And we mostly blaze at that;
But we hear him wheezing there at nights,
Patrolling through the dark,
With his signals—hoots and chirrups—
Like an early morning lark.
We’ve heard the twigs a-crackling,
As we crouched upon our knees,
And his big, black shape went smashing.
Like a rhino, through the trees.
We’ve seen him flung in, rank on rank,
Across the morning sky;
And we’ve had some pretty shooting,
And—he knows the way to die.
Yes, we’ve seen him dying there in front—
Our own boys died there, too —
With his poor dark eyes a-rolling,
Staring at the hopeless blue;
With his poor maimed arms a-stretching
To the God we both can name . . .
And it fairly tore pur hearts out;
But it’s in the beastly game.


V' * ' ~ 'ZZty" "' .T* VV" °^m|-: V * > "’~^?*. / • '%'ii 1,1)11 '' r**\ 3 T "•'' ’ >v ’"* ■ ■• ■-—.. t- -■ ’*'■■y
: 38S am "•"-•■■■'••' »
pF . JV ' V
|HBV9
I ‘ / w"'’ *s I" *'., | s I - 'I?
JH r
' - "•■■ ~ '• 'tiiiBr :t &v reBP**r lliiPyp j&A
jg|p. £ akpr^
; . w.'W*.-t'„ <1 «%, inj| mgr
~ 1 **•* iwm ■ . \
>» v t . % ||ppF
- *■" % V i, * - k \J , «&$£ v * s 'J*3&£^
ABDUL
Drawn by TED COLLES




So though your name be black as ink
For murder and rapine.
Carried out in happy concert
With your Christians from the Rhine,
We will judge you, Mr. Abdul,
By the test by which we can —
That with all your breath, in life, in death,
You’ve played the gentleman.
C. E. W. B.
A CONFESSION OF FAITH
”\I7HO would remember me were I to die,
~ ’ Remember with a pang and yet no pain;
Remember as a friend, and feel good-bye
Said at each memory as it wakes again?
I would not that a single heart should ache—
That some dear heart will ache is my one grief.
Friends, if I have them, I would fondly take
With me that best of gifts, a friend’s belief.
I have believed, and for my faith reaped tares;
Believed again, and, losing, was content;
A heart perchance touched blindly, unawares,
Rewards with friendship faith thus freely spent.
Bury the body—it has served its ends;
Mark not the spot, but “ On Gallipoli,”
Let it be said, “ he died.” - Oh, Hearts of Friends,
If I am worth it, keep my memory.
Capt. James Sprent,
A.M.C. (attached 3rd Field Amb.)
A Confession of Faith


OUR FRIEND THE ENEMY
(A Sketch by One Who knows him Very Well)
"H N a shady spot beneath the scarlet-
blossomed Judas trees, Abdul sat
1 sipping his coffee, contemplating
the busy scene in the small market-
place. There were happy fishermen
hanging their nets to dry on the lime
trees for which the village is famous,
after their night’s toll in the Black Sea.
Their catch was a good one, and was
even now being put up for sale in the
narrow alleys by the Jews. The village
barber was a hard-worked man that
day, for the Turk is vain and also dig-
nified, and was it not the eve of the
Bairam festival! Groups of gaily
coloured villagers among the fruiterers’
baskets were busy haggling over their
bargains. The word “ Cauzaum ” (my
lamb) would often be flung by an in-
furiated vendor at stalwart Kurds,
workers in the neighbouring quarry,
who fingered his luscious grapes whilst
cavilling at his prices. From a latticed
window a veiled woman with a shrill
voice called to a little red-fezzed boy
escaping from his mother.
The Mouktar (mayor), with a jasper-
handled stick, was pointing to the new
fountain, its gilded inscription of ex-
tracts from the Koran shining in the
sun. Had not the Mouktar sat day
after day outside the door of the great
Dahlie Naziri (Minister of Interior)
waiting to obtain a credit for the con-
struction of the fountain whose w r aters
were from the Beicos bends?
“ God is great, and Mahomet is 'His
prophet,” murmured Abdul, as he
slowly counted off another bead from
his amber rosary. “ I am a happy
man,” he murmured to himself. “ Was
not my Kismet good; when lifting the
veil of my wife at the marriage cere-
mony I found that she was beautiful?
She is a good housekeeper; her coffee
resembles that of the creamy Arabian
coffee bean. Is not the gilled ram that
I bought for to-morrow’s sacrifice
worthy of her cooking?”
Abdul wandered along homewards to
his cottage near the shore; for it was
drawing close to the midday call to
prayer, and his heart was full of thanks-
giving to Allah.
*****
Abdul is struggling along the main
road leading to Stamboul with many
others. He no longer hearkens to the
beating of the tom-toms, and to the
patriotic exhortations of a straggling
mob following behind with green ban-
ners. ‘ 4 It is Kismet,” he murmurs, as
he turns once more for a last look at the
silvery winding thread below—the Bos-
phorus, on whose shores lies his home,
his all. He has been told there is a
war. He does not question; he knows


not the cause. It is fate. He trudges
on. *****
The fighting has been fierce. He is
hard pressed. Sweating with blood he
draws back. His regiment is hard put
to it, and, like sheep without a master,
the men are preparing to disperse.
Already German machine-guns from
their rear are on to them. The road
home means death. Like a man he
faces the rush of his opponents.
*****
He sees strange faces—the pain from
his wounds is calmed. Once more there
swim before his eyes his home, his wife,
his plantation of maize so promising.
Allah was great —it was Kismet.
H. E. W.,
A. & N. Z. A. C.
ARMY BISCUITS
BISCUITS! Army biscuits!
What a volume of blessings and
cursings have been uttered on
the subject of biscuits —army
biscuits!
What a part they take in our daily
routine : the carrying of them, the eat-
ing of them, the cursing at them !
Could we find any substitute for bis-
cuits? Surely not! It is easy to think
of biscuits without an army, but of an
army without biscuits —never.
Biscuits, like the poor, are always
with us. Crawling from our earthly
dens at the dim dawning of the day,
we receive no portion of the dainties
which once w r ere ours in the long ago
times of effete civilisation; but, instead,
we devour with eagerness —biscuit por-
ridge. We eat our meat, not with
thankfulness, but with biscuits. We
lengthen out the taste of jam with
biscuits.' "We pound them to powder.
We boil them with bully. We stew
them in stews. We fry them as
fritters. We curse them with many
and bitter cursings, and we bless them
with few blessings.
Biscuits! Army biscuits! Consider
the hardness of them. Remember the
cracking of your plate, the breaking
of this tooth, the splintering of that.
Call to mind how your finest gold
crown weakened, wobbled, and finally
shrivelled under the terrific strain of
masticating Puntley and Chalmer’s
No. s’s.
Think of the aching void where once
grew a goodly tooth. Think of the
struggle and strain, the crushing and
crunching as two molars wrestled with
some rocky fragment. Think of the
momentary elation during the fleeting
seconds when it seemed that the molars
would triumphantly blast and scrunch
through every stratum of the thrice-
hardened rock. Call to mind the dis-
appointment, the agony of mind and
body, as the almost victorious grinder
missed its footing, slipped, and snapped
hard upon its mate, while the elusive
biscuit rasped and scraped upon bruised
and tender gums.
Biscuits! Army biscuits! Have you,
reader, ever analysed with due careful-
ness the taste of army biscuits? Is it
the delicious succulency of ground
granite or the savoury toothsomeness
of powdered marble? Do we perceive
a delicate flavouring of ferro-concrete
Army Biscuits


with just a dash of scraped iron rail-
ings? Certainly, army biscuits, if they
have a taste, have one which is pecu-
liarly their own. The choicest dishes
of civilised life, whether they be baked
or boiled, stewed or steamed, fried,
frizzled, roasted or toasted, whether
they be composed of meat or fish, fruit
or vegetable, have not (thank Heaven!)
any like taste to that of army biscuits.
Army biscuits taste like nothing else
on the Gallipoli Peninsula. It is a
debatable question indeed whether or
not they have the quality of taste. If
it be granted that they possess this
faculty of stimulating the peripheral
extremities of a soldier’s taste-buds,
then it must also be conceded that
the stimulation is on the whole of an
unpleasant sort. In short, that the
soldier’s feeling, apart from the joy,
the pride, and the satisfaction at his
completed achievement in transferring
a whole biscuit from his outer to his
inner man without undue accident or
loss of teeth, is one of pain, unease,
and dissatisfaction.
It may seem almost incredible,
wholly unbelievable indeed, but armies
have marched and fought, made sieges,
retired according to plan, stormed im-
pregnable cities, toiled in weariness and
painfulness, kept lonely vigils, suffered
the extremes of burning heat and of
freezing cold, and have, in the last
extremity, bled and died, laurel-
crowned and greatly triumphant, the
heroes of legend and of song, all with-
out the moral or physical, or even
spiritual aid of army biscuits.
Agamemnon and the Greeks camped
for ten years on the windy plains
of Troy without one box of army
biscuits. When Xerxes threw his pon-
toon bridge across the Narrows and
marched 1,000,000 men into Greece,
his transport included none of Teak
Green and Co.’s paving-stones for the
hardening of his soldiers’ hearts and
the stiffening of their backs. Caesar
subdued Britons, Gauls, and Germans.
Before the lines of Dyrrhachium his
legions lived many days on boiled grass
and such-like delicacies, but they never
exercised their jaws upon a rough,
tough bit of—army biscuit.
Biscuits! Army biscuits ! They are
old friends now, and, like all old
friends, they will stand much hard wear
and tear. Well glazed, they would
make excellent tiles or fine flagstones.
After the war they will have great
scarcity value as curios, as souvenirs
which one can pass on from generation
to generation, souvenirs which will
endure while the Empire stands. If
we cannot get physical strength from
army biscuits, let us at least catch the
great spiritual ideal of enduring hard-
ness, which they are so magnificently
fitted to proclaim.
The seasons change. Antwerp falls,
Louvain is burned, the tide of battle
surges back and forth; new reputations
are made, the old ones pass away,
Warsaw, Lemberg, Servia, the stem
battle lines of Gallipoli, Hindenburg,
Mackensen, each name catches our ear
for brief moments of time, and then
gives way to another crowding it out;
but army biscuits are abiding facts,
always with us, patient, appealing,
enduring. We can move to other
theatres, we can change our clothes,
our arms, and our generals, but we
must have our biscuits, army biscuits,
else we are no longer an army.
O. E. Burton,
N.Z.M.C.


Gawd help the firBt bloomin' Turß I see to-night ’*


' * DAuio^Ajawe^
A PRESENT FROM HOME
** Do they think we’re on a bloomin’ pionic ? ”


THE LOST POEM
I CALLED to see our regimental
poet last evening. He had pre-
told me that he intended
to 44 write something ” for 44 The
Anzac Book.” Our poet is also
Q.M. Sergeant, and when he is not
writing requisitions or taking 44 bak-
sheesh ” out of our rations, and water-
ing our rum, he writes poetry.
When I called on him he was in his
dug-out, surrounded by bully-beef tins,
empty cases, and his ill-gotten shares
of our daily issues. He has many
callers, and I am afraid their inquiries
rather spoilt his verses. When I
arrived the Q.M.S. was already in a
poor humour for writing poetry. The
O.C. had been worrying him about
galvanised iron for cover for some dug-
outs ; three men had complained about
the scantiness of their rum issue—which
somehow always annoys the Q.M.S.;
and he had received no letters in the
day’s mail except a bill from a chap he
had borrowed a pound from in Charle-
ville two years ago. Still, our Q.M.S.
is a sticker, and he read me the covering
letter which he was sending to the
Editor.
He said he thought it would be
as well to get the letter off his mind
first. That would make the writing of
the verses necessary, and he would have
to complete the job in order to keep
faith.
Before I arrived he had written :
Yes, Mr. Editor, I will try to “ write some-
thing ” for your book. ’Tis a glorious
day, bright with sunshine, and the snow has
melted away from the sides of the hills —snow
that so many Anzacites saw fall for the first
time. I know a state where no snow falls.
And, to-night, being rum issue night, I would
sing to you of black soil plains and wheat-fields,
of warm comfy boundary riders’ huts, and of
holidays where plump maids join you in surf-
bathing excursions. But you see lam a Q.M.S.,
and at other times when I have tried to versify
I have been disturbed. We have a Quarter-
master, but, of course, Ido all the work. Well,
let’s rhyme. Boy, bring me the lyre. The
Quartermaster ? No, I don’t want the Quarter-
master. I want a harp that I may sing to my
muse. . . .
He had just read this much out when
the sergeant came in and reported that
the C.O. insisted on the galvanised iron
being procured to-morrow. Then a
corporal called and wanted to know
could six men in his section have new
boots, and when would the rubber boots
be ready for the coves in the trenches ?
44 How can a man write when he is
interrupted like this?” asked our poet.
44 1 had a lovely inspiration, too, about
surf bathing. It ran like this ”
But again there was an interruption.
The sergeant cook was the caller, and
he was angry and hostile. 44 How the


can I cook seventy beef teas,
forty puddings and two hundred milk
diets with the bloomin’ quarter issue of
water I get? Love me, when I was
cooking for shearing sheds out on the
Barcoo, where it never rained, I could
get as much water as I wanted. If you
want them bloomin’ milk diets you
got to get me water —or cook them
yourself.”
I don’t know whether our poet had
a rod with which he taps the rock and
brings forth water, but he mollified the
sergeant cook by getting water from
somewhere. It tasted well in the rum,
too. I would have heard the first line
of the poem if one of the sergeants in
our hospital had not called down for
three hot-water bottles, a tin of Bovril,
and some brandy for a sick soldier. I
wonder how sick you have to be before
you get brandy? Before the sergeant
had gone the orderly officer came in.
He bullied the Q.M.S. about not get-
ting some tents repaired.
“ It’s hard work trying to write a
poem here,” said the Q.M.S. sadly,
when the orderly officer departed.
“ For two pins I’d chuck writin’, but
that idea about the surf girls is too good
to lose. I was going to start with this
line ”
“ Those patients up in Number Three
Ward must have more blankets. And
you will have to get another forty beds
ready to-night,” yelled a voice at the
door.
“ Excuse me a bit,” said the poet.
He was gone about an hour. When he
returned there were five men waiting
to interview him. The corporal wished
that the Q.M.S. would explain how
men were to keep their boots on with-
out laces, and whether socks were sup-
posed to be everlasting. The second
caller came on a more peaceful mission.
He simply wished to know if the
Q.M.S. had heard anything about a
consignment of Christmas billy-cans
that good people in Australia are sup-
posed to be sending us. I don’t know
why, but this query made my friend
very angry. “Do you think I’ve got
your bloomin’ billy-cans?” he yelled.
Why should a Q.M.S. say a thing like
that ? And he seemed so indignant
about it, too. The third chap wanted
some paper and an envelope to write
to his girl; the fourth wanted an old
blanket and some twine to make a
shroud for a man who had died; and
the fifth asked whether the Q.M.S.
knew what was the latest war news.
When he was told to go to a place
warmer than Port Darwin, he asked
quietly if either of us could tell him if
sheep would do well around Adrianople
after the war.
It was growing late, but I thought
I would wait a bit and hear that first
line about the surf bathers. Two men
came in for soap; a doctor chap called
to ask whether there was any fruit to
make a fruit salad for a sick man; a
lance-corporal said his boots hurt, and
got a bigger pair; the cook came back
and complained that somebody had
pinched six tins of condensed milk ; and
an officer’s servant inquired whether
his boss could have an old box and a
ground-sheet to make a bath.
Then the Q.M.S. had another rum
and took up his pencil again. He
spread out a piece of paper and com-
menced to write. “ I’ll get that first
verse off and read it to you,” he said.
He would have done it, too, but for
the sergeant-major. Our sergeant-
major is a—well, he is just a sergeant-
major, and he does not write verse.


- wmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmmrn*
THE HOSPITAL CAMP
WATER CARRIERS
A Y.M.C.A. CANTEEN QUEUE
ANZAC SKETCHES
By DAVID BARKER




“ What about those great-coats?”
he roared. “ Didn’t I tell you to get
them to-day? And they are not here.
Weeks ago I ordered you to get them.
I don’t suppose you ever requisitioned
for them. What’s that you’re writing
now—requisitions ? ’ ’
“No, sir,” said the Q.M.S. “It’s
a poem.”
Then the ’major saw red. “What
the blazes have I got here?” he yelled.
“ Men dying from cold because they’ve
got no coats, and you writing poems.
What the ”
He fainted away, and I was present
when the doctors came out of the hos-
pital tent to which they carried him.
One of the doctors said the sergeant-
major was a splendid soldier, but he had
received a tremendous shock from some
unknown cause, and they don’t think
he can recover.
When the Q.M.S. heard that he
became very despondent. “ I won’t
write that poem now,” he said; “ but
it would have been a splendid thing.
All about a pretty girl in the surf who
met a fellow from the bush. . . .’
R. A. L.
Ist Australian Stat. Hosp.
A LITTLE SPRIG OF WATTLE
mother’s letter came to-day,
And now my thoughts are far away,
For in between its pages lay
A little sprig of wattle.
\
“ The old home now looks at its best,”
The message ran; “the country’s dressed
In spring’s gay cloak, and I have pressed
A little sprig of wattle.”
I almost see that glimpse of spring:
The very air here seems to ring
With joyful notes of birds that sing
Among the sprigs of wattle.
The old home snug amidst the pines.
The trickling creek that twists and twines
Round tall gum roots and undermines,
Is all ablaze with wattle.
A. H. Scott,
4th Battery, A.F.A.
A Little Sprig of Wattle


THE TRUE STORY OF SAPPHO’S
DEATH
! Deciphered — With much labour —by a bomb-throWer of the
NeW Zealand Infantry “Brigade from a Very old tablet
dug up in the trenches at Quinn’s Post
'T'IIE Isles of Greece! The Isles of
Greece!
Where burning Sappho sang,
Both day and night, without surcease—
She didn’t care a hang!
She sang so much by night, by day—
She couldn’t sing at all.
Her manager he docked her pay :
She didn’t fill the hall!
At length, distraught, in fiendish
glee,
From, cliffs that I have seen,
She flung herself into the sea.
One mile from Mitylene!
’Twas thus that Sappho bold did end
Her gay, voluptuous days;
And monks, who never can unbend,
' Press-censored all her lays!
M. R.
The moral of this tale is that
You guard what Deus sends :
You cannot burn the candle-fat
i
At both the candle ends !
[Note. —The epic loses much of its beauty through a hurried translation from the Ancient
Greek during a Turkish attack.]
THE EVERLASTING' ARGUMENT
SAID Pat Malone to a big, brown Sick,
44 They say at fighting you’re mighty slick.”
Said Jock McNab, 44 Have you noticed the Seeks?
They wear their shirts outside their breeks.”
Said Cornstalk Joe, 44 Say what you like,
I’ll swear S-i-k-h spells Sike.”
Ses I to ’em all, 44 What need to bicker?
Pronounce it so’s to rhyme with shikker.”
C. D. Me.,
R.S.D., 11th Aust. A.S.C.


~
69 '' ' "'
THE VHiyflED
TVJ OW snowflakes thickly falling in the winter breeze
Have cloaked alike the hard, unbending ilex
And the grey, drooping branches of the olive trees,
Transmitting into silver all their lead ;
And, in between the winding lines, in No-Man’s Land,
Have softly covered with a glittering shroud
The unburied dead.
And in the silences of night, when winds are fair,
When shot and shard have ceased their wild surprising,
I hear a sound of music in the upper air,
Rising and falling till it slowly dies—
It is the beating of the wings of migrant birds
Wafting the souls of these unburied heroes
Into the skies.
M. R.,
N.Z. Headquarters.


f ' .r
\ \ I
1 • J ; - ■ ■ ; j
l - ‘ ,
| - £
% ’* •
|
i
THE BOMB EXPERT


| , *B
* V \ m **»-'— V I itfJ^ilf* l< ... " s Pis Imtk
m 1 «T f \ £r FSgm . p 4AaM|HkBHMMCr '
/ / / \ JF gp v’feM %'
f _ § ■ i I x Bp •■' '. :t.::?'&'w#~aPJ^M..
I ■ •” jV. Vait 1 - .. . . .■ \~&as&tmS<..* /m apP® ♦, *1H*s
, f ■'
V >'
»■ v I jP *&' 5 ;<m : "v fM** ''~*xM/'\ n»
j^Vr g ’ n .,■ ? . ■<£* ' J> V ' "- r -^
.,>■/"'■ ■ <■
SOMETHING TO REMEMBER US BY
“Drawn bp TED




THE STORY OF ANZAC
THE following extracts from the
dispatches of Sir lan Hamilton
form a short official summary of the
history of Anzac :
The Australian and New Zealand Army Corps
sailed out of Mudros Bay on the afternoon
of April 24, escorted by the
2nd Squadron of the Fleet,
under Rear-Admiral Thursby.
The rendezvous was reached just after half-past
one in the morning of the 25th, and there the
1,500 men who had been placed on board H.M.
ships before leaving Mudros were transferred
to their boats. This operation was carried out
with remarkable expedition and in absolute
silence. Simultaneously the remaining 2,500
men of the covering force were transferred
from their transports to six destroyers. At
2.30 a.m. H.M. ships, together with the tows
and the destroyers, proceeded to within some
four miles of the coast, H.M.S. Queen (flying
Rear-Admiral Thursby's flag) directing on a
point about a mile north of Kaba Tepe. At
3.30 a.m. orders to go ahead and land were
given to the tows, and at 4.10 a.m. the destroyers
were ordered to follow.
All these arrangements worked without a
hitch, and were carried out in complete orderli-
ness and silence. No breath of wind ruffled
the surface of the sea, and every condition was
favourable save for the moon which, sinking
behind the ships, may have silhouetted them
against its orb, betraying them thus to watchers
on the shore.
A rugged and difficult part of the coast had
been selected for the landing, so difficult and
rugged that I considered the Turks were not
at all likely to anticipate such a descent. In.
deed, owing to the tows having failed to main-
tain their exact direction, the actual point of
disembarkation was rather more than a mile
north of that which I had selected, and was
more closely overhung by steeper cliffs. Al-
though this accident increased the initial diffi-
culty of driving the enemy off the heights inland,
it has since proved itself to have been a blessing
in disguise, inasmuch as the actual base of
the force of occupation has been much better
defiladed from shell fire.
The beach on which the landing was actually
effected is a very narrow strip of sand, about
1,000 yards in length, bounded on the north
and the south by two small promontories. At
its southern extremity a deep ravine, with ex-
ceedingly steep, scrub-clad sides, runs inland
in a north-easterly direction. Near the northern
end of the beach a small but steep gully runs
up into the hills at right angles to the shore.
Between the ravine and the gully the whole
of the beach is backed by the seaward face
of the spur, which forms the north-western
side of the ravine. From the top of the spur
the ground falls almost sheer except near the
southern limit of the beach, where gentler
slopes give access to the mouth of the ravine
behind. Further inland lie in a tangled knot
the under-features of Sari Bair, separated by
deep ravines, which take a most confusing diver-
sity of direction. Sharp spurs, covered with
dense scrub, and falling away in many places
in precipitous sandy cliffs, radiate from the
principal mass of the mountain, from which they
run north-west, west, south-west, and south to
the coast.
The boats approached the land in the silence


and the darkness, and they were close to the
shore before the enemy stirred. Then about
one battalion of Turks was seen running
along the beach. At this critical moment the
conduct of all ranks was most praiseworthy.
Not a word was spoken—everyone remained
perfectly orderly and quiet awaiting the enemy's
fire, which sure enough opened, causing many
casualties. The moment the boats touched
land the Australians' turn had come. Like
lightning they leapt ashore, and each man as
he did so went straight as his bayonet at the
enemy. So vigorous was the onslaught that
the Turks made no attempt to withstand it and
fled from ridge to ridge pursued by the Austra-
lian infantry.
This attack was carried out by the 3rd Aus-
tralian Brigade, under Major (temporary
Colonel) Sinclair Maclagan, D.S.O. The Ist
and 2nd Brigades followed promptly, and were
all disembarked by 2 p.m., by which time 12,000
men and two batteries of Indian Mountain
Artillery had been landed. The disembarka-
tion of further artillery was delayed owing
to the fact that the enemy's heavy guns opened
on the anchorage and forced the transports,
which had been subjected to continuous shelling
from his field guns, to stand farther out to sea.
The broken ground, the thick scrub, the
necessity for sending any formed detachments
post haste as they landed to the critical point
—all these led to confusion and mixing up of
units. Eventually the mixed crowd of fight-
ing men, some advancing from the beach, others
falling back before the oncoming Turkish
supports, solidified into a semi-circular position
with its right about a mile north of Gab a Tepe
and its left on the high ground over Fisherman's
Hut. During this period parties of the 9th
and 10th Battalions charged and put out of
action three of the enemy's Krupp guns. During
this period also the disembarkation of the
Australian Division was being followed by that
of the New Zealand and Australian Division
(two brigades only).
From 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. the enemy, now
reinforced to a strength of 20,000 men, attacked
the whole line, making a specially strong
effort against the 3rd Brigade and the left
of the 2nd Brigade. This counter-attack was,
however, handsomely repulsed with the help
of the guns of H.M. ships. Between 5 and 6.30
p.m. a third most determined
counter - attack was made
against the 3rd Brigade, who
held their ground with more than equivalent
stubbornness. During the night again the Turks
made constant attacks; but in spite of all
the line held firm. The troops had had prac-
tically no rest on the night of the 24-25 th;
they had been fighting hard all day over most
difficult country, and they had been subjected
to heavy shrapnel fire in the open. Their
casualties had been deplorably heavy. But,
despite their losses and in spite of their fatigue,
the morning of the 26th found them still in good
heart and as full of fight as ever.
It is a consolation to know that the Turks
suffered still more seriously. Several times our
machine guns got on to them in close formation,
and the whole surrounding country is still
strewn with their dead of this date.
The reorganisation of units and formations
was impossible during the 26th and 27th owing
to persistent attacks. An advance was im-
possible until a reorganisation could be effected,
and it only remained to entrench the position
gained and to perfect the arrangements for
bringing up ammunition, water and supplies
to the ridges—in itself a most difficult under-
taking. Four battalions of the Royal Naval
Division were sent up to reinforce the Army
Corps on April 28 and 29.
On the night of May 2, a bold effort was
made to seize a commanding knoll in front of
the centre of the line. The
enemy’s enfilading machine
guns were too scientifically
posted, and 800 men were lost without advan-
tage beyond the infliction of a corresponding
loss to the enemy. On May 4, an attempt to
seize Kaba Tepe was also unsuccessful, the
barbed-wire here being something beyond
belief. But a number of minor operations
were carried out, such as the taking of a
Turkish observing station, the strengthening
of entrenchments, the reorganisation of units,
and the perfecting of communication with
the landing - place. Also a constant strain
was placed upon some of the best troops


of the enemy, who, to the number of 24,000,
were constantly kept fighting and being killed
and wounded freely, as the Turkish sniper
is no match for the Kangaroo shooter, even
at his own game.
The many urgent calls for reinforcements
made during the previous critical fighting had
forced me to disorganise and
mix together several of the
formations in the southern
group, to the extent even of the French on
our right having a British battalion holding
their own extremest right. For the purposes
of the impending fight, it became therefore
necessary to create temporarily a Composite
Division, consisting of the 2nd Australian and
New Zealand Infantry Brigades (withdrawn
for the purpose from the northern section)
together with a Naval Brigade formed of the
Plymouth and Drake Battalions. The 29th
Division was reconstituted into four brigades,
i.e. the 88th and 87th Brigades, the Lancashire
Fusilier Brigade (T.F.), and the 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade. The French Corps Ex-
peditionnaire was reinforced by the 2nd Naval
Brigade, and the new Composite Division
formed my General Reserve.
During the three days (May 6/Bth) our troops
were destined to be very severely tried. They
were about to attack a series of positions
scientifically selected in advance which, although
not yet joined up into one line of entrenchment,
were already strengthened by works on their
more important tactical features.
[After recounting the heavy fighting by
which the 29th Division made its advance on
May 6 and 7, the dispatch continues :]
The troops were now worn out; the new lines
needed consolidating, and it was certain that
fresh reinforcements were reaching the Turks.
Balancing the actual state of my own troops
against the probable condition of the Turks, I
decided to call upon the men to make one more
push before the new enemy forces could get
into touch with their surroundings.
Orders were therefore issued to dig in at sun-
down on the line gained, to maintain that line
against counter-attack, and to prepare to ad-
vance again next morning. The Lancashire
Fusilier Brigade was withdrawn into reserve.
and its place on the left was taken by the
Brigade of New Zealanders.
General Headquarters were shifted to an
entrenchment on a hill in rear of the left of
our line. Under my plan for the fresh attack,
the New Zealand Brigade was to advance
through the line held during the night by the
88th Brigade and press on towards Krithia.
Simultaneously, the 87th Brigade was to
threaten the works on the west of the ravine,
whilst endeavouring, by means of parties of
scouts and volunteers, to steal patches of
ground from the areas dominated by the
German machine-guns.
At 10.15 a.m. heavy fire from ships and
batteries was opened on the whole front, and at
10.30 a.m. the New Zealand
Brigade began to move, meet-
ing with strenuous opposition
from the enemy* who had received his reinforce-
ments. Supported by the fire of the batteries
and the machine-guns of the 88th Brigade, they
pushed forward on the right and advanced
their centre beyond the fir trees, but could
make little further progress. By 1.30 p.m.
about 200 yards had been gained beyond the
previously most advanced trenches of the 88th
Brigade.
At this hour the French Corps reported they
could not advance up the crest of the spur west
of Kereves Dere till further progress was made
by the British.
At 4 p.m. I gave orders that the whole line,
reinforced by the 2nd Australian Brigade,
would fix bayonets, slope arms, and move on
Krithia precisely at 5.30 p.m.
At 5.15 p.m. the ships’ guns and our heavy
artillery bombarded the enemy’s position for a
quarter of an hour, and at 5.30 p.m. the field
guns opened a hot shrapnel fire to cover the
infantry advance.
The co-operation of artillery and infantry in
this attack was perfect, the timing of the
movement being carried out with great pre-
cision. Some of the companies of the New
Zealand regiments did not get their orders in
time, but acting on their own initiative they
pushed on as soon as the heavy howitzers
ceased firing, thus making the whole advance
simultaneous.


The steady advance of the British could be
followed by the sparkle of their bayonets until
the long lines entered the smoke clouds. The
French at first made no move, then, their
drums beating and bugles sounding the charge,
they suddenly darted forward in a swarm of
skirmishers, which seemed in one moment to
cover the whole southern face of the ridge of
the Kereves Dere. Against these the Turkish
gunners now turned their heaviest pieces, and
as the leading groups stormed the first Turkish
redoubt the ink-black bursts of high-explosive
shells blotted out both assailants and assailed.
The trial was too severe for the Senegalese
tirailleurs. They recoiled. They were rallied.
Another rush forward, another repulse, and
then a small supporting column of French
soldiers was seen silhouetted against the sky
as they charged upwards along the crest of the
ridge of the Kereves Dere, whilst elsewhere it
grew so dark that the whole of the battlefield
became a blank.
Not until next morning did any reliable
details come to hand of what had happened.
The New Zealanders’ firing line had marched
over the cunningly concealed enemy’s machine-
guns without seeing them, and these, re-open-
ing on our supports as they came up, caused
them heavy losses. But the first line pressed
on and arrived within a few yards of the Turkish
trenches which had been holding up our advance
beyond the fir wood. There they dug them-
selves in.
The Australian Brigade had advanced through
the Composite Brigade, and, in spite of heavy
losses from shrapnel, machine-gun, and rifle
fire, had progressed from 300 to 400 yards.
The determined valour shown by these two
brigades, the New Zealand Brigade, under
Brigadier-General F. E. Johnston, and the 2nd
Australian Infantry Brigade, under Brigadier-
General the Hon. J. W. McCay, are worthy of
particular praise. Their losses were corre-
spondingly heavy, but in spite of fierce counter-
attacks by numerous fresh troops they stuck to
what they had won with admirable tenacity.
On the extreme left the 87th Brigade, under
Major-General W. R. Marshall, made a final
and especially gallant effort to advance across
the smooth, bullet-swept area between the
ravine and the sea, but once more the enemy
machine-guns thinned the ranks of the lead-
ing companies of the South Wales Borderers,
and again there was nothing for it but to give
ground. But when night closed in, the men of
the 87th Brigade of their own accord asked to
be led forward, and achieved progress to the
extent of just about 200 yards. During the
darkness the British troops everywhere en-
trenched themselves on the line gained. On
the right the French column, last seen as
it grew dark, had stormed and still held the
redoubt round which the fighting had centred.
[The 2nd Australian Infantry Brigade and
New Zealand Infantry Brigade were for three
days in the trenches they had dug, but on
the completion of the push towards Krithia
were retransferred to Anzac. The history of
Anzac during the next three months is told
in the following extracts :]
Turning now to where the Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps were perched upon
the cliffs of Sari Bair, I must
begin by explaining that their
rdle at this stage of the
operations was—first, to keep open a door lead-
ing to the vitals of the Turkish position;
secondly, to hold up as large a body as possible
of the enemy in front of them, so as to lessen
the strain at Cape Helles. Anzac, in fact,
was cast to play second fiddle to Cape Helles,
a part out of harmony with the daredevil
spirit animating those warriors from the South,
and so it has come about that, as your Lordship
will now see, the defensive of the Australians
and New Zealanders has always tended to
take on the character of an attack.
The line held during the period under review
by the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps formed a rough semi-circle inland from
the beach of Anzac Cove, with a diameter of
about 1,100 yards. The firing line is every-
where close to the enemy’s trenches, and in all
sections of the position sapping, counter-
sapping, and bomb attacks have been incessant.
The shelling both of the trenches and beaches
has been impartial and liberal. As many as
1,400 shells have fallen on Anzac within the
hour, and these of all calibres, from 11 inches
to field shrapnel. Around Quinn’s Post, both
above and below ground, the contest has been


■
......
Ml I & ■ aJMl _
• * v *; >? •>* JT f '•<i A
; vi > H Jra ” 9r - P 1 . ' *,•**
; ** J * T^
;. : .' "- v ».
IH ' ■%•„ .,- . ,J$f . ‘3BT ■-»-■ ■•« -I*'' ■ ! ’. ■; .,
t { $ ’-» ; Ur ' "lPR*s V ■'j*,^|''v*
'1|| SgF i ** .,. .
R • •[.'*% f mat - jk ; * , /'
•■ , ‘ff a • •.:»■ ’ - V;>^ : i .i ■ ' i- "jAf **JH. \ib
'■ IHKHHHir ftev ■’'%fe 9 '' V«r T. : jMmSmr--' . mfe: ***m& , m
% aHRH - 1 v'^»'■•?■&' f mp~- jpSs ■ »* ”■ ' ** .'%■• » v - •• '^SK*
April 25, 1915. Destroyers taking Troops to Shore
April 25, 1915. Troops Landing: a Cruiser Firing on Gaba Aepe
Gen. Bridges’ First Headquarters
(The General can just be seen in the shade of the dugout)
Photographs by C. E» W* 'BEAN


i
"• * * *■ - i
: :, ; '■■
'
Wm§ ' ft* '*f * *4 j S , mf „ jiSWBr^
Ki
| s
' v'Vf.' V' . ’ . ■' * .;■ ' ’ !'.■■■<■■-.' - , ' f^'
‘..ife A* *■;:• * ,. .»•
• V # ■ ' ---if. » i* U I,* ■ iK ■'»,? ' >y
- . “ f ' - • - • ■ >t if ? m .JHi
■ •• •.v. *■ .-
•> ' '*.■*! * *. ' '*', • ' v/ ;■ /'"/ "
•i\.'-rW. - '’ • ■■■ ■ • • . •. • ..‘ ■ - : ' ,, \&'i'■ -■!;■'■ '■ , ■■ .. " .' r *.J 5 : “• ■ ' .' ■ ; M
‘ ? v . * - ’ •„ 4* •• j * C "• ,\ *, » yjf --' •* gu ,' !< .irawglv'.» Jl&i&<k !§\ aS #y jw t| '«S?$v
r ♦ ■»«♦. i' s&‘\4*!' t *V',*- ‘A. * JIL | iBr f «<-* Wjgijy 1 «&■- IP >a .&SWfz M~ III# > illf^
, , .
:•••■' ■;. - i : .. f - ; ’ ‘ •''■*•=; ; v ' ' .• •/ ’
The Height of Russell’s Top
The i urKisb Trenches at Lone
Pine shortly after the Fight
Photographs bp C. E, W. HE AN
Photograph bp Printing Section. R.E.
Table Top
Showing Headquarters of the 3rd Light Horse Brigade


particularly severe. This section of the line
is situated on the circumference of the Anzac
semi-circle at the farthest point from its
diameter. Here our fire trenches are mere
ledges on the brink of a sheer precipice falling
200 feet into the valley below. The enemy’s
trenches are only a few feet distant.
On May 9 a night assault was delivered on
the enemy’s trenches in front of Quinn’s Post.
The trenches were carried at the point of the
bayonet. At dawn on May 10 a strong
counter-attack forced our troops to fall back
on Quinn’s Post.
On the night of May 14-15 a sortie was
made from Quinn’s Post with the object of
filling in Turkish trenches in which bomb-
throwers were active. The sortie, which cost
us some 70 casualties, was not successful.
On May 14, Lieutenant-General Sir W. R.
Birdwood was slightly wounded, but I am
glad to say he was not obliged to relinquish the
command of his corps.
On May 15 I deeply regret to say Major-
General W. T. Bridges, commanding the Aus-
tralian Division, received a
severe wouijd, which proved
fatal a few days later. Sincere
and single-minded in his devotion to Australia
and to duty, his loss still stands out even
amidst the hundreds of other brave officers
who have gone.
[General Bridges was succeeded by Major-
General H. B. Walker. The Ist Australian
Division was also commanded by Major-General
J. G. Legge, who afterwards organised and
commanded the 2nd Australian Division.]
On May 18 Anzac was subjected to a heavy
bombardment from large calibre guns and
howitzers. At midnight of
the 18th-19th the most vio-
lent rifle and machine-gun
fire yet experienced broke out along the front.
Slackening from 3 a.m. to 4 a.m. it then broke
out again, and a heavy Turkish column assaulted
the left of No. 2 section. This assault was
beaten off with loss. Another attack was
delivered before daylight on the centre of this
section ;it was repeated four times and re-
pulsed each time with very serious losses to the
enemy. Simultaneously a heavy attack was
delivered on the north-east salient of No. 4
section, which was repulsed and followed up,
but the pressing of the counter-attack was
prevented by shrapnel. Attacks were also
delivered on Quinn's Post, Courtney's Post,
and along the front of our right section. At
about 5 a.m. the battle was fairly joined, and
a furious cannonade was begun by a large
number of enemy guns, including 12-inch and
9.2-inch, and other artillery that had not till
then opened. By 9.30 a.m. the Turks were
pressing hard against the left of Courtney’s
and the right of Quinn’s Post. At 10 a.m.
this attack, unable to face fire from the right,
swung round to the left, where it was severely
handled by our guns and the machine-guns of
our left section. By 11 a.m. the enemy, who
were crowded together in the trenches beyond
Quinn's Post, were giving way under their
heavy losses.
According to prisoners' reports 30,000 troops,
including five fresh regiments, were used against
us. General Liman von Sanders was himself
in command.
The enemy's casualties were heavy, as may
be judged from the fact that over 3,000 dead
were lying in the open in view of our trenches.
A large proportion of these losses were due to
our artillery fire. Our casualties amounted to
about 100 killed and 500 wounded, including
nine officers wounded.
The next four days were chiefly remarkable
for the carrying through of the negotiations
for the suspension of arms, which actually took
place on May 24. The negotiations resulted
in a suspension of arms from 7.30 a.m. to
4.30 p.m. on May 24. The procedure laid
down for this suspension of arms was, lam
glad to inform your Lordship, correctly observed
on both sides.
The burial of the dead was finished about
3 p.m. Some 3,000 Turkish dead were removed
or buried in the area between the opposing lines.
The whole of these were killed on or since May
18. Many bodies of men killed earlier were
also buried.
From May 28 till June 5 the fighting
seemed to concentrate itself around Quinn’s
Post, Three enemy galleries had been de-
The Story of Ansae


tected there, and work on them stopped by
counter-mines, which killed twenty Turks and
injured thirty. One gallery
had, however, been over-
looked, and at 3.30 a.m. on
May 29 a mine was sprung in or near the centre
of Quinn's Post. The explosion was followed by
a very heavy bomb attack, before which our
left centre subsection fell back, letting in a
storming party of Turks. This isolated one
subsection on the left from the two other sub-
sections on the right.
At 5.30 a.m. our counter-attack was launched,
and by 6 a.m. the position had been retaken
with the bayonet by the 15th Australian
Infantry Battalion, led by Major Quinn, who
was unfortunately killed. All the enemy in
the trench were killed or captured.
On May 30 preparations were made in
Quinn's Post to attack and destroy two enemy
saps, the heads of which had reached within
five yards of our fire trench. Two storming
parties of thirty-five men went forward at 1 p.m.,
cleared the sap heads and penetrated into the
trenches beyond, but they were gradually driven
back by bombs, of which the enemy seemed
to have an unlimited supply.
During May 31 close fighting continued in
front of Quinn's Post.
On June 1, an hour after dark, two sappers
of the New Zealand Engineers courageously
crept out and laid a charge of gun-cotton against
a timber and sandbag bomb-proof. The struc-
ture was completely demolished.
On June 4 three separate enterprises were
carried out by the Australian and New Zealand
Army Corps. These were
undertaken in compliance
with an order which I had
issued that the enemy's attention should be
distracted during an attack I was about to
deliver in the southern zone.
First a demonstration in the direction of
Kaba Tepe, the Navy co-operating by bom-
barding the Turkish trenches.
At Quinn's Post an assault was delivered at
11 p.m. A party of sixty men, accompanied
by a bomb-throwing party on either flank,
stormed the enemy's trench. In the assault
many Turks were bayoneted and twenty-eight
captured. At 6.30 a.m. the trench had to be
abandoned.
On June 5 a sortie was made by two officers
and 100 men of the Ist Australian Infantry,
the objective being the destruction of a machine-
gun in a trench (known as German Officer's
Trench). The darkness of the trench and its
overhead cover prevented the use of the
bayonet, but some damage was done by shooting
down over the parapet. The aim of this
gallant assault being attained, the party with-
drew in good order with their wounded. Casu-
alties in all were thirty-six.
On the night of June 29-30 the Turks,
acting, as we afterwards ascertained, under
the direct personal order of
Enver Pasha to drive us
all into the sea, made a big
attack on the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, principally on that portion of the line
which was under the command of Major-
General Sir A. J. Godley. From midnight
till 1.30 a.m. a fire of musketry and guns of
greatest intensity was poured upon our trenches.
A heavy column then advanced to the assault,
and was completely crumpled up by the
musketry and machine-guns of the 7th and
Bth Light Horse. An hour later another grand
attack took place against our left and left
centre, and was equally cut to pieces by our
artillery and rifle fire. The enemy's casualties
may be judged by the fact that in areas directly
exposed to view between 400 and 500 were
actually seen to fall.
From the very first I had hoped that by
landing a force under the heights of Sari Bair
we should be able to strangle
the Turkish communications
to the southwards, whether
by land or sea, and so clear
the Narrows for the Fleet.
Owing to the enemy's supe-
riority, both in numbers and in position;
owing to under-estimates of the strength of the
original entrenchments prepared and sited under
German direction; owing to the constant
dwindling of the units of my force through
wastage ; owing also to the intricacy and
difficulty of the terrain, these hopes had not


„••*•'•■>■ /:dlfe- v"' v - !Mi S i ™w *
’-• 4*&<f(>* -*$ A
■--&,~ ' > SSefe'' C’ : f /■••' ..
v .'2*. ? *.?&■ -fe**'
<s " K .«?*,, ' z *■ *W»9&r <■
ite " ■-> ' ■ -JL . : i
sir#’ • - - ,;: ’..Lfi
•',;£• i :i ' > • w. • ?
.*&*.< X. \...■ |. ia - 1-trMCjf-ii.- A
Photograph bp Printing Section, R.E,
Sniper’s Nest (held by the Turks), from which part of the North Beach is
clearly visible. The white tents on the point are on North Beach
The North Beach, showing the Sphinx


r ■
\
B iv g ■%»_„.. .
'
w^S*BBs^Ssm®Si
> lii’: ,4
? xi. .. Jflw
ii I , m >. „ ; %888l^^passm’j&ipjMiipj)i|MliMijji^8»^
I
'
■■■•■ -**' * -
- JH|
fi~- ■:..•■■ "'., ' -, *
«** •'«■■ M • : . V '
Wr'Z™ ■ - .—|
r :,. ...
r .
I'
• *0v>. •• . • ■:
~-*-"T > . .Ar : * . v" ' V* v • *:
• •
I s -T*' ‘ inlilfirTiil^^^^^^^imi
Anzac Cove
Turks firing on the stranded destroyer “Louis” at Suvla Bay
Photograph by E. BROOKES, circulated on behalf of the Press Bureau ; supplied by Central NeWs


hitherto borne fruit. But they were well
founded. So much at least had clearly enough
been demonstrated by the desperate and costly
nature of the Turkish attacks. The Australians
and New Zealanders had rooted themselves
in very near to the vitals of the enemy. By
their tenacity and courage they still held open
the doorway from which one strong thrust for-
ward might give us command of the Narrows,
Before a man of the reinforcements had
arrived my mind was made up as to their
employment, and by means of a vigorous
offensive from Anzac, combined with a surprise
landing to the north of it, I meant to try and
win through to Maidos, leaving behind me a
well-protected line of communications starting
from the bay of Suvla.
On the nights of August 4, 5, and 6, the
reinforcing troops were shipped into Anzac
very silently at the darkest
hours. Then, still silently,
they were tucked away from
enemy aeroplanes or observatories in their
prepared hiding-places. The whole sea route
lay open to the view of the Turks upon Achi
Baba’s summit and Battleship Hill. Aero-
planes could count every tent and every ship at
Mudros or at Imbros. Within rifle fire of
Anzac’s open beach hostile riflemen were
looking out across the iEgean no more than
twenty feet from our opposing lines. Every
modern appliance of telescope, telegraph, wire-
less was at the disposal of the enemy. Yet
the instructions worked out at General Head-
quarters in the minutest detail (the result of
conferences with the Royal Navy, which were
attended by Brigadier-General Skeen, of General
Birdwood’s staff) were such that the scheme
was carried through without a hitch.
The troops now at the disposal of General
Bird wood amounted in round numbers to
37,000 rifles and seventy-two guns, with naval
support from two cruisers, four monitors, and
two destroyers. Under the scheme these
troops were to be divided into two main portions.
The task of holding the existing Anzac position,
and of making frontal assaults therefrom, was
assigned to the Australian Division (plus the
Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades and two
battalions of the 40th Brigade); that of
assaulting the Chunuk Bair ridge was entrusted
to the New Zealand and Australian Division
(less the Ist and 3rd Light Horse Brigades), to
the 13th Division (less five battalions), and to
the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade and to the
Indian Mountain Artillery Brigade. The 29th
Brigade of the 10th Division (less one battalion)
and the 38th Brigade were held in reserve.
During August 4, 5, and 6, the works on
the enemy’s left and centre were subjected
to a slow bombardment, and
on the afternoon of August
6 an assault was made
upon the formidable Lone Pine entrenchment.
The work consisted of a strong point d’appui
on the south-western end of a plateau, where
it confronted, at distances varying from 60
to 120 yards, the salient in the line of our
trenches named by us the Pimple. The en-
trenchment was evidently very strong; it
was entangled with wire, and provided with
overhead cover.
The detailed scheme of attack was worked
out with care and forethought by Major-General
H. B. Walker, commanding Ist Australian
Division, and his thoroughness contributed, I
consider, largely to the success of the enter-
prise.
The action commenced at 4.30 p.m. with a
continuous and heavy bombardment of the
Lone Pine and adjacent trenches, H.M.S.
Bacchante assisting by searching the valleys
to the north-east and east, and the monitors
by shelling the enemy’s batteries south of
Gaba Tepe. The assault had been entrusted
to the Ist Australian Brigade (Brigadier-
General N. M. Smyth), and punctually at
5.30 p.m. it was carried out by the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th Australian Battalions, the Ist Battalion
forming the brigade reserve.
Two lines left their trenches simultaneously,
and were closely followed up by a third. The
rush across the open was a regular race against
death, which came in the shape of a hail of shell
and rifle bullets from front and from either
flank. But the Australians had firmly resolved
to reach the enemy’s trenches, and in this
determination they became for the moment
invincible. The barbed wire entanglement was
reached and was surmounted. Then came a


terrible moment, when it seemed as though it
would be physically impossible to penetrate
into the trenches. The overhead cover of stout
pine beams resisted all individual efforts to
move it, and the loopholes continued to spit
fire. Groups of our men then bodily lifted
up the beams and individual soldiers leaped
down into the semi-darkened galleries amongst
the Turks. By 5.47 p.m. the 3rd and 4th
Battalions were well into the enemy’s vitals,
and a few minutes later the reserves of the
2nd Battalion advanced over their parados ,
and driving out, killing, or capturing the
occupants, made good the whole of the trenches.
The reserve companies of the 3rd and 4th
Battalions followed, and at 6.20 p.m. the Ist
Battalion (in reserve) was launched to con-
solidate the position.
At once the Turks made it plain, as they
have never ceased to do since, that they had
no intention of acquiescing
in the capture of this capital
work. At 7.0 p.m. a deter-
mined and violent counter-
attack began.
For seven hours these counter-attacks con-
tinued. All this time consolidation was being
attempted, although the presence of so many
Turkish prisoners hampered movement and
constituted an actual danger. In beating off
these desperate counter-attacks very heavy
casualties were suffered by the Australians.
Part of the 12th Battalion, the reserve of the
3rd Brigade, had therefore to be thrown into
the mel6e.
Twelve hours later, on the 7th, another
effort was made by the enemy, being resumed
at midnight and proceeding intermittently till
dawn. At an early period of this last counter-
attack the 4th Battalion were forced by bombs
to relinquish a portion of a trench, but later on,
led by their commanding officer, Lieutenant-
Colonel McNaghten, they killed every Turk
who had got in.
At 5 a.m. on August 9, the enemy made
a sudden attempt to storm from the east and
south-east after a feint of fire attack from the
north. The 7th Battalion bore the brunt of
the shock, and handled the attack so vigorously
that by 7.45 a.m. there were clear signs of
demoralisation in the enemy’s ranks. But
although this marked the end of counter-
attacks on the large scale, the bombing and
sniping continued, though in less volume,
throughout this day and night, and lasted till
August 12, when it at last became manifest
that we had gained complete ascendancy.
Thus was Lone Pine taken and held. The
Turks were in great force and very full of
fight, yet one weak Australian brigade, num-
bering at the outset but 2,000 rifles, and sup-
ported only by two weak battalions, carried
the work under the eyes of a whole enemy
division. The irresistible dash and daring of
officers and men in the initial charge were a
glory to Australia. In one corner eight Turks
and six Australians were found lying as they
had bayoneted one another. To make room
for the fighting men, the dead were ranged
in rows on either side of the gangway. After
the first violence of the counter-attacks had
abated, 1,000 corpses—our own and Turkish
—were dragged out from the trenches.
The Lone Pine attack drew all the local
enemy reserves towards it, and may be held,
more than any other cause, to have been the
reason that the Suvla Bay landing was so
lightly opposed. Our captures in this feat
of arms amounted to 134 prisoners, seven
machine-guns, and a large quantity of ammuni-
tion and equipment.
Other frontal attacks from the existing
Anzac positions were not so fortunate. They
included an attack upon the
work known as German
Officer’s Trench, on the ex-
treme right of our line, at
midnight on August 6-7,
also assaults on the Nek and
Baby 700 trenches opposite
the centre of our line, de-
livered at 4.30 a.m. on the 7th. The 2nd
Australian Brigade did all that men could do ;
the Light Horse only accepted their repulse
after losing three-fourths of that devoted
band who so bravely sallied forth. All that
day, as the result of these most gallant attacks,
Turkish reserves on Battleship Hill were being
held back to meet any dangerous develop-
ment along the front of the old Anzac line.


and so were not available to meet our main
enterprise, which I will now endeavour to
describe.
/ i 1
The first step in the real push—the step
which above all others was to count —was the
night attack on the summits
of the Sari Bair ridge.
It was our object to effect
a lodgment along the crest of the high main
ridge with two columns of troops, but, seeing
the nature of the ground and the dispositions
of the enemy, the effort had to be made by
stages. We were bound, in fact, to undertake
a double subsidiary operation before we could
hope to launch these attacks with any real
prospect of success. The two assaulting
columns, which were to work up three ravines
to the storm of the high ridge, were to be
preceded by two covering columns. One of
these was to capture the enemy's positions com-
manding the foothills, first to open the mouths
of the ravines, secondly to cover the right
flank of another covering force whilst it marched
along the beach. The other covering column
was to strike far out to the north until, from
a hill called Damakjelik Bair, it could at the
same time facilitate the landing of the 9th
Corps at Nibrunesi Point, and guard the left
flank of the column assaulting Sari Bair from
any forces of the enemy which might be
assembled in the Anafarta valley.
The whole of this big attack was placed
under the command of Major-General Sir
A. J. Godley, General Officer Commanding New
Zealand and Australian Division. The two
covering and the two assaulting columns were
organised as follows :
Right Covering Column, under Brigadier-
General A. H. Russell—New Zealand Mounted
Rifles Brigade, the Otago Mounted Rifles
Regiment, the Maori Contingent and New
Zealand Field Troop.
Right Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-
General F. E. Johnston. —New Zealand Infan-
try Brigade, Indian Mountain Battery (less
one section), one Company New Zealand
Engineers.
Left Covering Column, under Brigadier-
General J. H. Travers. —Headquarters 40th
Brigade, half the 72nd Field Company, 4th
Battalion South Wales Borderers, and sth
Battalion Wiltshire Regiment.
Left Assaulting Column, under Brigadier-
General (now Major-General) H. V. Cox.—
29th Indian Infantry Brigade, 4th Australian
Infantry Brigade, Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), one Company New Zealand
Engineers.
Divisional Reserve. —6th Battalion South
Lancashire Regiment and Bth Battalion
Welsh Regiment (Pioneers) at Chailak Dere,
and the 39th Infantry Brigade and half 72nd
Field Company at Aghyl Dere,
The right covering column had to clear
the Turks off from their right flank positions
upon Old No. 3 Post and
Table Top.
Old No. 3 Post connected
with Table Top by a razor back. Working
parties had done their best with unstinted
material to convert this commanding point
into an impregnable redoubt. Two lines of
fire trench, very heavily entangled, protected
its southern face.
Table Top is a steep-sided, flat-topped hill,
close on 400 feet above sea level. The sides
of the hill are mostly sheer and quite im-
practicable.
Amongst other stratagems the Anzac troops,
assisted by H.M.S. Colne , had long and care-
fully been educating the Turks how they
should lose Old No. 3 Post, which could hardly
have been rushed by simple force of arms.
Every night, exactly at 9 p.m., H.M.S. Colne
threw the beams of her searchlight on to the
redoubt, and opened fire upon it for exactly
ten minutes. Then, after a ten minutes’
interval, came a second illumination and bom-
bardment, commencing always at 9.20 and
ending precisely at 9.30 p.m.
The idea was that, after successive nights of
such practice, the enemy would get into the
habit of taking the searchlight as a hint to
clear out until the shelling was at an end. But
on the eventful night of the 6th, the sound of
their footsteps drowned by the loud cannonade,,
unseen as they crept along in that darkest
shadow which fringes a searchlight’s beam—
came the right covering column. At 9.30 the
light switched off, and instantly our men poured


oat of the scrub jungle and into the redoubt.
By 11 p.m. the whole series of surrounding
entrenchments were ours I
The remainder of the right covering column
carried on with their attack upon Bauchop’s
Hill and the Chailak Dere. By 10 p.m. the
northernmost point, with its machine-gun, was
captured, and by 1 o’clock in the morning the
whole of Bauchop’s Hill, a maze of ridge and
ravine, everywhere entrenched, was fairly in
our hands.
The attack along the Chailak Dere was not
so cleanly carried out—made, indeed, just
about as ugly a start as any enemy could wish.
Pressing eagerly forward through the night, the
little column of stormers found themselves
held up by a barbed-wire erection of unexampled
height, depth, and solidity, which completely
closed the only practicable entrance to the
ravine. Here that splendid body of men, the
Otago Mounted Rifles, lost some of their bravest
and their best, but in the end, when things were
beginning to seem desperate, a passage was
forced through the stubborn obstacle with most
conspicuous and cool courage by Captain Shera
and a party of New Zealand Engineers, sup-
ported by the Maoris, who showed themselves
worthy descendants of the warriors of the Gate
Pah. Thus was the mouth of the Chailak
Dere opened in time to admit of the unopposed
entry of the right assaulting column.
Simultaneously the attack on Table Top
had been launched under cover of a heavy
bombardment from H.M.S.
Colne, No general on peace
manoeuvres would ask troops
to attempt so breakneck an enterprise. The
angle of Table Top’s ascent is recognised in our
regulations as “ impracticable for infantry.”
But neither Turks nor angles of ascent were
destined to stop Russell or his New Zealanders
that night. The scarped heights were scaled,
the plateau was carried by midnight. With
this brilliant feat the task of the right covering
force was at an end. Its attacks had been
made with the bayonet and bomb onlv:
v /
magazines were empty by order; hardly a
rifle shot had been fired. Some 150 prisoners
were captured as well as many rifles and much
equipment, ammunition and stores. No words
can do justice to the achievement of Brigadier-
General Russell and his men. There are ex-
ploits which must be seen to be realised.
The right assaulting column had entered
the two southerly ravines—Sazli Beit Dere and
Ghailak Dere—by midnight. At 1.30 a.m.
began a hotly-contested fight for the trenches
on the lower part of Rhododendron Spur, whilst
the Ghailak Dere column pressed steadily up
the valley against the enemy.
The left covering column, under Brigadier-
General Travers, after marching along the
beach to No. 3 Outpost, resumed its northerly
advance as soon as the attack on Bauchop's
Hill had developed. Every trench encountered
was instantly rushed by the Borderers, until,
having reached the predetermined spot, the
whole column was unhesitatingly launched at
Damakjelik Bair. By 1.30 a.m. the whole of
the hill was occupied, thus safeguarding the
left rear of the whole of the Anzac attack.
The left assaulting column crossed the
Ghailak Dere at 12.30 a.m., and entered the
Aghyl Dere at the heels of the
left covering column. The
surprise, on this side, was
complete. Two* Turkish officers were caught
in their pyjamas ; enemy arms and ammuni-
tion were scattered in every direction.
The grand attack was now in full swing,
but the country gave new sensations in cliff
climbing even to officers and men who had
graduated over the goat tracks of Anzac. The
darkness of the night, the density of the scrub,
hands and knees progress up the spurs, sheer
physical fatigue, exhaustion of the spirit
caused by repeated hairbreadth escapes from
the hail of random bullets —all these combined
to take the edge off the energies of our troops.
At last, after advancing some distance up the
Aghyl Dere, the column split up into two
parts. The 4th Australian Brigade struggled,
fighting hard as they went, up to the north of
the northern fork of the Aghyl Dere, making
for Hill 305 (Koja Ghemen Tepe). The 29th
Indian Infantry Brigade scrambled up the
southern fork of the Aghyl Dere and the spurs
north of it to the attack of a portion of the
Sari Bair ridge known as Hill Q.
Dawn broke and the crest line was not yet




r- ■ • . 1 ' I ■ ■ ~ ■"' '" ■ - :
|: < I
.
f '■ ■ * * • | I •
1 | > . 1 ...|
£ • ' - •-sf
THE LEFT OF ANZAC
i , KuchuK Anafarta Table Top
Sutls Say Salt L^Ks
This photograph shows the spurs of the main range into which the Anzac attach was pushed on the night of August 6
THE HEART OF ANZAC
Russell’s Top The Nech Baby 700 Pope’s Battleship Quinn’ls Post Maclaunn s Hill
Hill Hill , A , X ,,«UScK
This photograph shows the head of Shrapnel Gully (Monash Valley). All the trenches on the distan n ge are
Photographs by Printing Section, R,E.






in our bands, although, considering all things,
the left assaulting column had made a mar-
vellous advance. The 4th Australian Infantry
Brigade was on the line of the Asm a Dere
(the next ravine north of the Aghyl Dere) and
the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade held the
ridge west of the Farm below Ghunuk Bair and
along the spurs to the north-east. The enemy
had been flung back from ridge to ridge ; an
excellent line for the renewal of the attack had
been secured, and (except for the exhaustion
of the troops) the auspices were propitious.
Turning to the right assaulting column, one
battalion, the Canterbury Infantry Battalion,
clambered slowly up the Sazli Beit Dere. The
remainder of the force, led by the Otago
Battalion, wound their way amongst the pit-
falls and forced their passage through the
scrub of the Chailak Dere, where fierce opposi-
tion forced them ere long to deploy. Here,
too, the hopeless country was the main hind-
rance, and it was not until 5.45 a.m. that the
bulk of the column joined the Canterbury
Battalion on the lower slopes of Rhododendron
Spur. Eventually they entrenched on the top
of Rhododendron Spur, a quarter of a mile short
of Chunuk Bair —i.e. of victory.
At 9.30 a.m. the two assaulting columns
pressed forward whilst our guns pounded the
enemy moving along the
Battleship Hill spurs. But
in spite of all their efforts
their increasing exhaustion as opposed to the
gathering strength of the enemy's fresh troops
began to tell —they had shot their bolt. So
all day they clung to what they had captured
and strove to make ready for the night. All
had suffered heavily and all were very tired.
So ended the first phase of the fighting for
the Chunuk Bair ridge. Our aims had not
fully been attained, and the help we had hoped
for from Suvla had not been forthcoming.
Yet I fully endorse the words of General Bird-
wood when he says : " The troops had per-
formed a feat which is without parallel.”
Great kudos is due to Major-Generals Godley
and Shaw for their arrangements ; to Generals
Russell, Johnston, Cox, and Travers for their
leading ; but most of all, as every one of these
officers will gladly admit, to the rank and file
for their fighting. Nor may I omit to add that
the true destroyer spirit with which H.M.S.
Colne (Commander Claude Seymour, R.N.)
and H.M.S. Chelmer (Commander Hugh T.
England, R.N.) backed us up will live in the
grateful memories of the Army.
In the course of this afternoon (August 7th)
reconnaissances of Sari Bair were carried out
and the troops were got into
shape for a fresh advance
in three columns, to take
place in the early morning.
The columns were composed as follows:
Right Column, Brigadier-General F. E.
Johnston. —26th Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), Auckland Mounted Rifles,
New Zealand Infantry Brigade, two battalions
13th Division, and the Maori Contingent.
Centre and Left Columns, Major-General
H. V. Cox. —21st Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), 4th Australian Brigade,
39th Infantry Brigade (less one battalion),
with 6th Battalion South Lancashire Regi-
ment attached, and the 29th Indian Infantry
Brigade.
' The right column was to climb up the Chunuk
Bair ridge ; the left column was to make for
the prolongation of the ridge north-east to
Koja Chemen Tepe, the topmost peak of
the range.
The attack was timed for 4.15 a.m. At
the first faint glimmer of dawn observers saw
figures moving against the sky-line of Chunuk
Bair. Were they our own men, or were they
the Turks ? Telescopes were anxiously ad-
justed ; the light grew stronger; men were
seen climbing up from our side of the ridge ;
they were our own fellows —the topmost sum-
mit was ours I
On the right, General Johnston's column,
headed by the Wellington Battalion and sup-
ported by the 7th Battalion
Gloucestershire Regiment, the
Auckland Mounted Rifles
Regiment, the Bth Welsh Pioneers, and the
Maori Contingent, the whole most gallantly led
by Lieutenant-Colonel W. G. Malone, had raced
one another up the steep. Nothing could check
them. On they went, until, with a last deter-


mined rush, they fixed themselves firmly on the
south-western slopes and crest of the main
knoll known as the height of Chunuk Bair. With
deep regret I have to add that the brave Lieu-
tenant-Colonel Malone fell mortally wounded
as he was marking out the line to be held.
In the centre the 39th Infantry Brigade and
the 29th Indian Brigade moved along the
gullies leading up to the Sari Bair ridge. So
murderous was the enemy's fire that little
progress could be made, though some ground
was gained on the spurs to the north-east of
the Farm.
On the left the 4th Australian Brigade
advanced from the Asmak Dere against the
lower slopes of Abdul Rahman Bair (a spur
running due north from Koja Chemen Tepe)
with the intention of wheeling to its right and
advancing up the spur. Cunningly placed
Turkish machine-guns and a strong entrenched
body of infantry were ready for this move, and
the brigade were unable to get on. At last,
on the approach of heavy columns of the
enemy, the Australians, virtually surrounded,
and having already suffered losses of over
1,000, were withdrawn to their original posi-
tion.
In the afternoon the battle slackened, ex-
cepting always at Lone Pine, where the enemy
were still coming on in mass, and being mown
down by our fire. Elsewhere the troops were
busy digging and getting up water and food,
no child's play, with their wretched lines of
communication running within musketry range
of the enemy.
At 4.30 a.m. on August 9th, the Chunuk
Bair ridge and Hill Q were heavily shelled. At
5.16 a.m. this tremendous bombardment was
to be switched off on to the flanks and reverse
slopes of the heights.
The columns for the renewed attack were
composed as follows :
No. 1 Column, Brigadier-General F. E.
Johnston.—26th Indian Mountain Battery
(less one section), the Auckland and Wellington
Mounted Rifles Regiments, the New Zealand
Infantry Brigade, and two battalions of the
13th Division.
No. 2 Column, Major-General H. V. Cox.—
21st Indian Mountain Battery (less one sec-
tion), 4th Australian Brigade, 39th Brigade
(less the 7th Gloucesters, relieved), with the
6th Battalion South Lancashire Regiment
attached, and the Indian Infantry Brigade.
No. 3 Column, Brigadier-General A. H.
Baldwin, commanding 38th Infantry Brigade.
—Two battalions each from the 38th and 29th
Brigades and one from the 40th Brigade.
General Baldwin's column had assembled in
the Ghailak Dere, and was moving up towards
General Johnston's headquarters. But in
spite of all precautions, the darkness, the rough
scrub-covered country, its sheer steepness, so
delayed the column that Baldwin, owing to the
darkness and the awful country, lost his way
—through no fault of his own.
And now, under that fine leader, Major
G. G. L. Allanson, the 6th Gurkhas of the
29th Indian Infantry Brigade
pressed up the slopes of Sari
Bair, crowned the heights of
the col between Ghunuk Bair and Hill Q, viewed
far beneath them the waters of the Hellespont,
viewed the Asiatic shores along which motor
transport was bringing supplies to the lighters.
But the fortune of war was against us. At
this supreme moment Baldwin's column was
still a long way from our trenches on the
crest. And instead of Baldwin's support came
suddenly a salvo of heavy shells.
The Turkish commander saw his chance;
and the South Lancashires and Gurkhas, who
had seen the promised land, were forced back-
wards over the crest.
That evening from Ghunuk Bair the line
ran down to the Farm and almost due north
to the Asma Dere southern watershed, whence
it continued westward to the sea near Asmak
Kuyu. On the right the Australian Division
was still holding its line and Lone Pine was
still being furiously attacked. The Ist Aus-
tralian Brigade was now reduced from 2,900 to
1,000, and the total casualties up to 8 p.m. on
the 9th amounted to about 8,500. But the
troops were still in extraordinarily good heart.
During the night of the 9th-10th the New
Zealand and New Army troops on Ghunuk Bair
were relieved. For three days and three
nights they had been ceaselessly fighting.
They were half dead with fatigue. Their lines


SC ALL, 1125,000.
Yards «oo 300 *>0 .00 *<|° «y _ _!!£___ Yard£
British Trenches Turkish Trenches Roads and Tracks
ANZAC
Facsimile of a beautiful example of Map Drawing by Vie- R• T. COULDINC, N.Z, Inf •




of communication, started from sea level, ran
across trackless ridges and ravines to an
altitude of 800 ft., and were
exposed all the way to sni-
pers’ fire and artillery bom-
bardment. It had become
imperative, therefore, to get
them enough food, water, and rest; and for this
purpose it was imperative also to withdraw
them. Ghunuk Bair, which they had so mag-
nificently held, was now handed over to two
battalions of the 13th Division.
At daybreak on Tuesday, August 10, the
Turks delivered a grand attack from the line
Chunuk Bair—Hill Q against these two bat-
talions, already weakened in numbers, though
not in spirit, by previous fighting. First our
men were shelled by every enemy gun, and
then, at 5.30 a.m., were assaulted by a huge
column, consisting of no less than a full division
plus a regiment of three battalions. The North
Lancashire men were simply overwhelmed in
their shallow trenches by sheer weight of
numbers, whilst the Wilts, who were caught
out in the open, were literally almost annihi-
lated. The ponderous mass of the enemy
swept over the crest.
Now it was our turn. The warships and the
New Zealand and Australian Artillery, the
Indian Mounted Artillery Brigade, and the
69th Brigade Royal Field Artillery were getting
the chance of a lifetime. As the successive
solid lines of Turks topped the crest of the ridge
gaps were torn through their formation. They
became exposed not only to the full blast of the
guns, but also to a battery of ten machine-guns
belonging to the New Zealand Infantry Brigade,
which played upon their serried ranks at close
range until the barrels were red-hot. Enor-
mous losses were inflicted, especially by these
ten machine-guns ; and of the swarms which
had once fairly crossed the crest line only the
merest handful ever straggled back to their
own side of Chunuk Bair.
At this same time strong forces of the enemy
were hurled against the Farm, where there
arose a conflict so deadly that it may be con-
sidered as the climax of the four days’ fighting
for the ridge. Portions of our line were pierced
and the troops driven clean down the hill. At
the foot of the hill the men were rallied by
Staff Captain Street, who was there super-
vising the transport of food and water. With-
out a word, unhesitatingly,, they followed him
back to the Farm, where they plunged again
into the midst of that series of struggles in
which generals fought in the ranks and men
dropped their scientific weapons and caught
one another by the throat.
By 10 a.m. the effort of the enemy was spent.
Soon their shattered remnants began to trickle
back, and by night, except prisoners or wounded,
no live Turk was left upon our side of the
slope.
By evening the total casualties of General
Birdwood’s force had reached 12,000, and
included a very large pro-
portion of officers. The 13th
Division of the New Army,
under Major-General Shaw,
had alone lost 6,000 out of
a grand total of 10,500. Baldwin was gone,
and all his staff. Ten commanding officers
out of thirteen had disappeared from the
fighting effectives. The Warwicks and the
Worcesters had lost literally every single
officer.
But physically, though Birdwood’s forces
were prepared to hold all they had got, they
were now too exhausted to attack —at least
until they had rested and reorganised.
The enemy’s positions were now being
rapidly entrenched, and, as I could not depend
on receiving reinforcing drafts, I was faced
with the danger that if I could not drive the
Turks back I might lose so many men that I
would find myself unable to hold the veiy ex-
tensive new area of ground which had been
gained. I therefore decided to mass every
available man against Ismail Oglu Tepe, a sine
qua non to my plans whether as a first step
towards clearing the valley, or, if this proved
impossible, towards securing Suvla Bay and
Anzac Cove from shell fire.
The same day, a force consisting of two
battalions of New Zealand Mounted Rifles, two
battalions of the 29th Irish Brigade, the 4th
South Wales Borderers, and 29th Indian
Infantry Brigade, the whole under the com-
mand of Major-General H. V. Cox, was working
independently to support the main attack.


General Cox divided his force into three
sections ; the left section to press forward and
establish a permanent hold on
the existing lightly-held out-
post line covering the junction
of the 11th Division with the Anzac front;
the centre section to seize the well at Kabak
Kuyu, an asset of utmost value, whether to
ourselves or the enemy ; the right section to
attack and capture the Turkish trenches on the
north-east side of the Kaiajik Aghala.
The advance of the left section was a success ;
after a brisk engagement the well at Kabak
Kuyu was seized by the Indian Brigade, and,
by 4.30, the right column, under Brigadier-
General Russell, under heavy fire, effected a
lodgment on the Kaiajik Aghala, where our
men entrenched and began to dig communica-
tions across the Kaiajik Dere towards the lines
of the 4th Australian Brigade south of the Dere.
A pretty stiff bomb fight ensued, in which
General Russell's troops held their own through
the night against superior force. At 6 a.m.
on the morning of August 22, General Russell,
reinforced by the newly-arrived 18th Australian
Battalion, attacked the summit of the Kaiajik
Aghala. The Australians carried 150 yards
of the trenches, losing heavily in so doing, and
were then forced to fall back again owing to
enfilade fire, though in the meantime the New
Zealand Mounted Rifles managed, in spite of
constant counter-attacks, to make good an-
other 80 yards.
A counter-attack in strength launched by the
Turks at 10 a.m. was repulsed ; the new line
from the Kaiajik Aghala to Susuk Kuyu was
gradually strengthened, and eventually joined
on to the right of the 9th Army Corps, thereby
materially improving the whole situation.
During this action the 4th Australian Brigade,
which remained facing the Turks on the upper
part of the Kaiajik Aghala, was able to inflict
several hundred casualties on the enemy as
they retreated or endeavoured to reinforce.
The last days of the month were illumined by
a brilliant affair carried through by the troops
under General Birdwood's command. Our
object was to complete the capture of Hill
60 north of the Kaiajik Aghala, commenced
by Major-General Cox on August 21. Hill 60
overlooked the Biyuk Anafarta valley, and was
therefore tactically a very important feature.
The conduct of the attack
was again entrusted to Major-
General Cox, at whose dis-
posal were placed detachments from the 4th and
sth Australian Brigades, the New Zealand
Mounted Rifles Brigade, and the sth Connaught
Rangers. The advance was timed to take place at
5 p.m. on August 27, after the heaviest artillery
bombardment we could afford. This bombard-
ment seemed effective ; but the moment the
assailants broke cover they were greeted by
an exceedingly hot fire from the enemy field
guns, rifles and machine-guns, followed after
a brief interval by a shower of heavy shell,
some of which, most happily, pitched into the
trenches of the Turks. On the right the detach-
ment from the 4th and sth Australian Brigades
could make no headway against a battery of
machine-guns which confronted them. In the
centre the New Zealanders made a most deter-
mined onslaught, and carried one side of the
topmost knoll. Hand-to-hand fighting con-
tinued here till 9.30 p.m., when it was reported
that nine-tenths of the summit had been gained.
On the left the 250 men of the sth Connaught
Rangers excited the admiration of all beholders
by the swiftness and cohesion of their charge.
In five minutes they had carried their objective,
the northern Turkish communications, when
they at once set to and began a lively bomb
fight along the trenches against strong parties
which came hurrying up from the enemy
supports and afterwards from their reserves.
At midnight fresh troops were to have streng-
thened our grip upon the hill, but before that
hour the Irishmen had been out-bombed, and
the 9th Australian Light Horse, who had made
a most plucky attempt to recapture the lost
communication trench, had been repulsed.
Luckily, the New Zealand Mounted Rifles
refused to recognise that they were worsted.
Nothing would shift them. All that night
and all next day, through bombing, bayonet
charges, musketry, shrapnel, and heavy shell,
they hung on to their 150 yards of trench.
At 1 a.m. on August 29, the 10th Light Horse
made another attack on the lost communication
trenches to the left, carried them, and finally


•gwfc
'•’<-' ■-'- .*/...; t ' me1h& ' JSK-fe v" I -%iiKfiiM £* % l r It <3
n J m
!EHi #TM ■&§*] 1>; ' 4
M < m* . v V 1^
|p^ ** V,
- ''•■■• > “-
Bombing Practice in Shrapnel Valley
In the Trenches
A sniper with a periscope rifle and an observer with a periscope
Official photographs by E. ’BROOKES, circulated on behalf of the Press Bureau ; supplied by
Central News


L j ' f -' y " ? & --« s -
AUSTRALIAN GUNNERS
Photograph bp courtesy of " Daily Mirror "


held them. This gave us complete command of
the underfeature, an outlook over the Anafarta
Sagir valley, and safer lateral communications
between Anzac and Suvla Bay.
Three Turkish machine-guns and forty-six
prisoners were taken, as well as three trench
mortars, 300 Turkish rifles, 60,000 rounds of
ammunition, and 500 bombs. Four hundred
acres were added to the territories of Anzac.
And now, before affixing to this dispatch my
final signature as Gommander-in-Chief of the
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force, let me
first pay tribute to the everlasting memory of
my dear comrades who will return no more.
Next, let me thank each and all, Generals,
Staff, Regimental Leaders, and rank and file,
for their wonderful loyalty, patience, and self-
sacrifice.
So I bid them all farewell with a special
God-speed to the campaigners who have served
with me right through from the terrible yet
most glorious earlier days —the incomparable
29th Division ; the young veterans of the Naval
Division ; the ever-victorious Australians and
New Zealanders ; the stout East Lancs, and
my own brave fellow-countrymen of the
Lowland Division of Scotland.
Lan Hamilton,
General, Gommander-in-Ghief
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
ANZACS
The children unborn shall acclaim
The standard the Anzacs unfurled ,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world .
Some of you got a V.C.,
Some “ the Gallipoli trot,”
Some had a grave by the sea,
And all of you got it damned hot.
And I see you go limping through town
In the faded old hospital blue,
And driving abroad —lying down,
And Lord I but I wish I were you I
I envy you beggars I meet,
From the dirty old hats on your head
To the rusty old boots on your feet —
I envy you living or dead.
A knighthood is fine in its way,
A peerage gives splendour and fame.
But Td rather have tacked any day
That word to the end of my name.
Td count it the greatest reward
That ever a man could attain ;
Td sooner be “ Anzac ” than “ lord,”
Fd rather be “ Anzac ” than “ thane.”
Here's a bar to the medal you’ll wear,
There’s a word that will glitter and glow.
And an honour a king cannot share
When you’re back in the cities you know.
The children unborn shall acclaim
The standard the Anzacs unfurled ,
When they made Australasia’s fame
The wonder and pride of the world .
Edgar Wallace»
(This tribute to the Anzacs is included at the express wish of the Editors)


TO MY BATH
r IMIIS lyric may be bad, O Muse,
But do not press on me too hard;
In times of war you must excuse
Somewhat your bard.
A dug-out where I have to bend
My back, and even lodge my knees
Against the roof, would suit our friend
Diogenes—
But hardly seems a meet abode
For any would-be laureate
Who’ll sing, ad lib., an epic—ode—
Or hymn of hate.
Consider my attempt to write
lambic tetrametric lines
As influenced by gelignite
And bombs—and mines.
No high falutin’ stilted phrase,
No feeble tribute of a “ sub.,”
Can ever adequately praise
Thee, dearest Tub.
Perchance I’m sun-scorched : then I
sigh
To hear thy crystal waters lap
And trickle o’er my toes when I
Turn on the tap.
If blizzards fresh from Samothrace
Are mingling with December snows,
When icicles in clusters grace
“ My youthful hose
A world too wide for my shrunk
shanks ”
Then I, nostalgia stricken, dream.
And see thy white enamelled banks
Through clouds of steam.
Just as when corybantic drakes
(Or ducks, just as the case may be),
With clamorous quack, seek limpid
lakes,
So seek I thee.
But baths are not our rations in
Gallipoli. ’Tis too far south—
“ The bubble reputation’s in
The cannon’s mouth.”
H. H. U.,
Northamptonshire Regt.
ANZAC LIMERICKS
HpHERE’S a certain darned nuisance called “ Beachy,”
-*■ Whose shells are exceedingly screechy;
• But we’re keeping the score,
And we’re after your gore—
So look out, “ Beachy Bill,” when we meet ye.
nPHEY’YE given us all respirators,
And we’ve bundles of ancient Spectators;
But we’d give up the two
For a good oyster stew.
Or a dixie of chipped pertaters.
C. D. Me.


i 9 g nK|jE@ |i t.v I T , /* ? s f! / s ? :* i p |p| r r ‘5 |S|Sg % f5p ii
;•. J.> ‘ . .V **$ < - * y. * V -.<V C \ ■ ; - ' ■ *.. ' _"■': % ' ; t>|; if | ' «§#?•'
; • ■•'■;••••• - ■ : ‘ ' :
’\ “ ''"■ -*> J/ -&V $'^ 1 0^}1 S '<^;'^'^ t\£ ' ** ‘ •' * ‘»* ,.- \ \ > v ■* */ *
* V , "i J s *- v* c ‘ * ; * figST' , s ,.“ /; *
|r
'1 [ ,
.-vhff ; - ■■ , j •;; 8 .y- : .
•■■' ■ . ■ <‘ -■f' 1 \ ’ ‘ .-■ 5 : ■ ", > ,■■ ■. . ■: '. '
\ X fl
\ "^.JB
.>■ 'imiuSb'M:<’£ e itS,tk il;fc.S w »■*’ »■! 8 8 1 !
m. ’^b
|k V
;., • . ■ .■•/. '- •.. ,. ’ ■ v' •" • ' ’ ■ .:'-V' *£V
■k. W aSgfflBfiBBBi - * * 1 1 * • mBSmsHB/Br . A.A.J' } , ,,*
’*’' ’#■;
.,,",. ; . y ‘ 1 ||: ; W ' : . \ ; ' v: ‘■ ; \ : .
■0if0%§^0 Sl^lll^SSlfl#' 1 v * / * '% >' ' l ’'' f -v','' ”' ®W-' “41 ’*'• ’ ii’ ; - <
• •-■:■; ■ :-■/■ •; ■ : ■•.■-' .
, .. . *m iSirS# I - -
B hhbv 'H' : .r /v ,
.Jpf
\ B ■ J " 8W ~^ M1r- HWwewee*.
f ii\ ' 4 nJ w
WimmmKmn:, MS?: ■, Mk&mjSmm ~ M ■ *••*—»- ‘ yyt^^B
v <jf '' ax^^*^^6&v^-< s^\»v v » x
• .X
Cv M
m, 4 ~ _,,g % rAu . J^<:,, «~y:, * I
THE NEW STAR
DraWn by TED COLLES, after F, J, Leigh




Turkish Divisional Orders (some time In July): “ The Australian and
New Zealand Army Corps is approaching the limits of its resources. Most
of the men have no clothing at all, except trousers, and even these are
now being cut into pieces, so that one pair of trousers is sufficient for
four men.”


{The sort of thing We must expect to hear after the War is ended)
'V/'ES, that’s the red ribbon I’m wearing—■
A Just a small strip of scarlet, you see,
But there’s no one can tell how I prize it
Nor the glow it occasions to me.
For it speaks of the broad fields of honour
Which we wrung from the red jaws of hell—
And my eyes grow bedimmed for the cobbers *
Who battled and conquered and fell.
Yes, that’s the V.C. How I won it,
It isn’t for vie to relate.
(We heroes are always so modest,
And boasting’s a thing that I hate.)
Well—seeing you write for the papers,
I’ll make an exception of you;
Don’t mention my name if you write it,
Tho’ every partic’lar is true.
It was during a fight for an outpost—
It was called the Green Knoll, I believe—
And the Turks on the top dealt out slaughter :
They’d a week of defeat to retrieve.
It was five thousand feet to the summit,
And almost as steep as a wall;
And they met every charge as we rushed it
With bayonet, shrapnel, and ball.
* Cobber is Australian for a tried and trusted friend.
98


How I Won the V.C.
’Twas defended by nine tiers of trenches
(That’s strong for an outpost, you’ll guess),
With twelve 42 centimetres,
Which kicked up the deuce of a mess.
We’d been fighting five days without resting,
When the eighth line of trenches we took;
For ev’ry man there was a hero—
From me to the company’s cook.
And there w r as the knoll just before us—
Some two hundred paces or more;
With barb-wire and bayonets bristling,
And the parapets sloppy with gore.
And the howitzers roared like perdition
And vomited fire and death;
Till we saw it was madness to charge them,
And halted a moment for breath.
Ah, stranger, imagine the picture,
And then stand with horror aghast—
We had fought for a month without sleeping,
And we stood facing failure at last
We had squandered the best of our Army,
We had “ stuck ” to our ultimate gasp ;
And there, in the moment of triumph,
The prize was to slip from our grasp.
Then suddenly out sprang the Major,
His face lighted over with bliss—
“ Pass the word there for Lance-Private Wilson;
He’ll find us a way out of this!”
(If there’s one thing I hate, it is skiting,*
When I hear it I always feel sore,
So you won’t think I boast when I tell you
He ought to have done it before !)
And a great cheer arose as I faced him
And nodded (I never salute),
And said to him : “I’ll see you thro’, sir,
And win you some glory to boot.
The chaps of the 16th Battalion
Are not easy snoozers to beat;
I’ve a notion (I says) that will lick them—
’Arf a dollar I line them a treat!
* Sldting—Australian tor “ swanking” in speech. « Skite ’’—blatherskite.


44 1 don’t want no red-tapey orders,
And I don’t want no kudos nor pelf;
You get back to your own little dug-outs,
And I’ll tackle the knoll myself!
I’ll lay down my life for my country,
For old England, the land of the free;
And you’ll find that the bloke called Horatius
Was only a trifle to me ! ”
Ihen I shook hands with all the battalion
(There were only thirteen of us left),
And they cheered me again till the foemen
Must have thought us of senses bereft.
And I gathered my arms and my rations,
And girded myself for the fray—
If I live to be ninety or over,
I will always remember that day!
I had five hundred rounds for my rifle,
And of hand bombs I took forty-one;
A machine-gun was slung to my shoulders,
And I carried a periscope gun.
As for rations—well, all I took with me
Was a tin of Fray Bentos * or two,
And in my breast pocket I planted
A nice Army biscuit to chew.
Then I waved a farewell to my cobbers— ,
I was too much affected to speak;
There are times when the bravest of soldiers
Have feelings that render them weak.
One tear—then I turned to the trenches,
And charged like a lion at bay
As I caught the last words of our Colonel,
Crying: “Bonzerf . . . Gorstrafem . . . Hooray!”
You talk of charmed lives—l’d a thousand;
As I rushed up that hill like a goat
I got thirty-two shots thro’ my trousers
And nine shrapnel balls thro’ my coat;
And a Japanese bomb burst beneath me
—For a moment I gave up all hope,
But it proved the best thing that could happen.
For it pushed me half-way up the slope.
* Fray Bentos is a brand of tinned meat,
t Bonzer—Australian for “ excellent.”
The Anzac Booh


Then a fifteen-inch shell came straight at me
—I hadn’t a moment to shirk—
But it struck on that hard Army biscuit
And rebounded —and blew up a Turk!
You doubt it? Well, if you want proof, sir,
The truth of this tale to endorse,
Here’s the biscuit —that dent in the middle
Is where the shell struck it, of course!
Ah, yes, ’twas a terrible moment;
I was then slightly wounded, ’tis true —
Just a bayonet stab in the gizzard
And a crack from a bullet or two.
But I gathered new strength for the conflict,
And, just as the darkness came down,
I was under their parapets, resting,
And I knew I had beaten them brown!
For this was the scheme I had worked on,
’Twas a little bit mean, you may say—
But I knew that the Turks were half-famished,
And fought on one biscuit a day;
And the tins of Fray Bentos I carried,
I chucked in the trench then and there;
And I heard the poor beggars pounce on it,
And I knew they were caught in the snare!
******
The morning broke, smiling and peaceful—
Ah, shame that we soldiers must fight—
’Twas a piteous scene met my vision
With the first rosy quivers of light.
When I peeped in the trench, not a Turk, sir,
Was left of that legion accurst —
For they’d whacked the Fray Bentos among them.
And each man had perished from thirst.
That’s the yarn. If you know the 16th, sir,
You’ll know how our Colonel can smile.
He said to me : “ Corporal Wilson,
You’ve dished up the beggars in style.”
Promotion! Some say I deserve it,
But that’s really nothing to me;
I don’t want no honour or glory,
JBut—that’s how I won the V.C.
“ Crosscut,” 16th Battalion, A.T.F.
How I Won the V.C.


ICY
" " ,r OBODY seemed to know
much about him except that
1 he was generally considered
by all those who knew of him
in the squadron to be a 44 cold-foot,”
and his nickname was appropriately
44 Icy.” Not that the others had any
particular cause to call him that,
but whenever 44 Beachy Bill ” came
screeching overhead he would involun-
tarily duck and then smile in that pecu-
liar manner of his as much as to say,
“I can’t help it!” Beachy wasn’t
his worst enemy, though, for if there
was anything that he dreaded it was
those Turkish 44 75’51t used to
make us feel as if we could shake him
when we saw how he would double him-
self up. And yet one never liked to
attempt anything of the kind whenever
he used that smile. Moreover, as he
was over six feet in height and corre-
spondingly strong, it would not have
been politic. His was a baffling smile,
recalling the peculiar smile of the
44 Monna Lisa,” and, like it, unfathom-
able. He was a very quiet kind of
chap, and when it was his turn to do
fatigues, he would go and perform
whatever was required of him without
ever grumbling. His mates used to
take a mean advantage of his good
nature, and would shunt all the work,
such as sweeping out the 44 possie,” or
trenches, on to him.
About the time of which I am writ-
* The Turks had a battery of French “ 75’s ”at Anzac,
seized as the guns were coming from France during
the blockade of Servia in the Balkan War.
ing we had noticed that Abdul was
sapping somewhere down the gully.
Sometimes we could distinguish dark
shapes moving about, and no amount
of sniping on our part would stop them.
They worked only during the night,
and each morning we found that the
pile of new earth down the gully had
grown higher. At last we understood
his plan—and it came to our turn to
make a counter move.
One evening I was told off among
others to go out and dig a new trench in
front of Abdul’s new sap. We had to
block him from getting to a certain
place on the little ridge which hitherto
had been in 44 No-Man’s Land.” I
noticed that Icy had also been told off,
but he was to be one of the covering
party. All that night we worked hard,
digging ourselves in and filling sand-
bags which we threw up in front of us.
At first we were undisturbed, but sud-
denly the bullets began to ping-ping
over our heads, and we knew that Abdul
had tumbled. Still, as he was himself
intent on digging he did not come out
at us, but contented himself by snip-
ing, thinking to drive us off in that
way. However, it was a bit late in the
day for that; since by the time he
found us out we had already several
good sandbags filled, and these pro-
tected us as long as we kept well
down.
Several of our chaps were winged,
but as none of the wounds was very
serious we didn’t mind that. When it
had struck five in the morning we


knocked off and retired to sleep away
the day. Half a dozen bomb-throwers
who had volunteered for the job then
took our places, bringing with them a
few bombs, their rifles, ammunition,
water bottles, and a supply of bully
beef and biscuits. There they spent
the whole day, lying low under cover
of the sandbags. But Abdul troubled
them not! Next night we went out
again to resume work, and then it was
that certain things happened which
made us look upon Icy in a different
light.
We had no sooner started work
than ra-ta-ta-ta-ta went a machine-gun
somewhere out to the left, and the
bullets came pinging round hot and
close, winging three and killing two on
the first discharge.
John Turk had stolen a march on us
by placing a machine-gun away out on
his extreme flank where he could to a
certain extent enfilade us. That sort
of thing could not be allowed to last,
as we had to bury our noses in the
ground each time the confounded gun
opened up. Our covering party, being
out ahead of us, escaped the hail of
bullets better than we did. The place
was now becoming too hot to stay in,
so the order came along to retire inde-
pendently to our trenches, until some-
thing could be done to stop the
machine-gun.
When we mustered again in the
trenches, we found that one man of the
covering party was missing. The man
was Icy. As we were talking about
him—wondering who should go back to
look for him—there came the noise of a
commotion from the direction of the
Turkish machine-gun. Bang ! bang !
went a couple of bombs, followed by
cries and shouts from Abdul, and
above it all we were certain we heard
fragments of language, of the category
known in Australia as “ bullocky.” *
What could it mean ? By this time the
alarm had spread along the whole of
Abdul’s front trenches, which belched
forth liquid fire. In our own trenches
everyone had mechanically sprung to
arms; and we stood there wondering
while for fifteen minutes the Turks
fired without ceasing. Gradually the
noise subsided—and we noticed that for
some reason the machine-gun away on
the left was strangely quiet.
An hour later we were stealing out
again to have another attempt at com-
pleting our new trenches when I
stumbled over the form of a man lying
prone. Bending over to see him, I
found it was Icy. His clothes were wet
and sticky with blood, and half under-
neath his body there showed the muzzle
of a machine-gun. As we lifted him
up, we saw that the gun was there
complete, tripod and all.
We took him into the lines and
handed him over to the dressing-
station ; and just before we came away
he opened his eyes and told enough for
us to realise that Icy had sneaked over
and stolen that Turkish gun. To this
day we don’t quite know how he did it,
as he never will talk about it; but be-
fore they took him on to the hospital
ship next day—with his sixteen bullet
wounds and scratches all told—there
went down to see him a crowd in which
I was amongst the foremost, which
apologised to Icy very humbly.
And, do you know, he only smiled
back at us in that funny old way of his.
E. A. M. W.
* Bullocky—stands both for the bullock driver and
for his chief gift.
Icy


THE TROJAN WAR, 1915
(These verses were not actually written at Anzac, but were selected by the Editors for inclusion in this
volume as an Australian’s tribute to the Spirit of Anzac)
WE care not what old Homer tells
Of Trojan war and Helen’s fame.
Upon the ancient Dardanelles
New peoples write —in blood —their name.
Those Grecian heroes long have fled,
No more the Plain of Troy they haunt;
Made sacred by our Southern dead,
Historic is the Hellespont.
Homeric wars are fought again
By men who like old Greeks can die;
Australian backblock heroes slain,
With Hector and Achilles lie.
No legend lured these men to roam;
They journeyed forth to save from harm
Some Mother-Helen sad at home,
Some obscure Helen on a farm. '
And when one falls upon the hill—
Then by dark Styx’s gloomy strand,
In honour to plain Private Bill
Great Agamemnon lifts his hand 1
Arthur H. Adams.
THE PRICE
DEAD figures writhe and beckon in my dream;
Wild eyes look into mine;
While I, bewildered, watch the bloody stream
With misty eyes ashine.
It rends my heart, and I am nothing loath
To have the murder cease.
Horror it is and carnage, yet are both
Part of the price of peace.
Corpl. CoMUS, 2nd Bat., A.I.F.


KILLED IN ACTION
"VI/" HERE the ranges throw their shadows long before the day’s surrender,
Down a valley where a river used to tumble to the sea,
On a rising patch of level rest the men who dared to tender
Life and all its sweetness for their love o’ liberty.
In a thousand miles of ugly scrubby waste and desolation.
Just that little space of level showing open to the sea;
Nothing there to lend it grandeur (sure, it needs no decoration)
Save those rows of wooden crosses keeping silent custody.
There’s a band of quiet workers, artless lads who joked and chatted
Just this morning; now they’re sullen and they keep their eyes away
From the blanket-hidden body, coat and shirt all blood-bespattered.
Lying motionless and waiting by the new-turned heap of clay.
There are records in the office—date of death and facts pertaining.
Showing name and rank and number and disposal of the kit—
More or less a business matter, and we have no time for feigning
More than momentary pity for the men who have been hit.
There’s a patient mother gazing on her hopes so surely shattered
(Hopes and prayers she cherished bravely, seeking strength to
hide her fear),
Boyhood’s dreams and idle memories—things that never really mattered—
Lying buried where he’s buried ’neath the stars all shining clear.
There’s a young wife sorrow-stricken in her bitter first conception
Of that brief conclusive message, harsh fulfilment of her dread;
There are tiny lips repeating, with their childish imperception,
Simple words that bring her mem’ries from the boundaries of the dead.
Could the Turk have seen this picture when his trigger-finger rounded,
Would his sights have blurred a little had he heard that mother’s prayer?
Could he know some things that she knew, might his hate have been
confounded ?
But he only saw his duty, and he did it, fighting fair.
Just a barren little surface where the grave mounds rise ungainly.
Monuments and tributes to the men who’ve done their share.
Pain and death, the fruits of battle, and the crosses tell it plainly,
Short and quick and silent suffering ; would to God it ended there.
Harry McCann, Headquarters, 4th Aust. Light Horse


A GREY DAY IN GALLIPOLI
AS I look westward towards the
/ % grey iEgean Sea, generally
% peaceful, deep blue and oft-
times appearing goiden-hued
by the mystic hand of sunset, but
now flecked with ripples of white
like a distant hill-side strewn with
new-shorn lambs, and hurried on by
the murmurings of the grey .sea’s
bride, the grey cloud-bearing Mother
Wind, as she splashes the foreshore
of this grey land with fleecy fringes
of her mate, and makes her way
over the grey hills, through rugged
landslip or tangled, stunted, unfriendly
evergreens, grey phantoms flit to and
fro, passing with a careless nod, as it
were, the little grey homes of those
whose thoughts so seldom had time to
feast on aught but the bright days
before the Peril came; but who now,
with a foretaste of hell in their souls,
need only such a day as this to
make them feel the presence of the
grey world’s messenger whose name is
Loneliness. Loneliness garbed in a
mantle of merging grey sea and grey
sky, trimmed with the spires and
turrets of grey and seemingly unsouled
ships, whose presence in the blue and
gold days was as that of old friends
well met, but which now seem to be
ragged rents in the solemn dress of
Loneliness, reminding one of a dere-
lict’s slovenly covering held together
over a hopeless breast by an old gold
brooch —perhaps the gift of a mother
or handed down from bygone ages.
Loneliness comes not to all of us
garbed in this fashion. To others, who
look eastward, she comes dressed in the
sombre clothes of the grey hill-side, and
with yearning eyes beckons them on to
the chances of the blue and gold life in
Constantinople ; or, perchance, if their
luck is that of many another good
soldier, to that other grey life forever
with the grey seas, grey skies and grey
forgetfulness on these ghostly, forsaken
grey shores of Gallipoli.
N. -Ash,
11th A.A.S.C.


MY ANZAC HOME
<n*OME and see my little dug-out—way up on the hill it stands,
Where I can get a lovely view of Anzac’s golden sands;
When “ Beachy Bill ” is shelling, I can see just where he lands,
From my cosy little dug-out on the hill.
It isn’t quite as roomy as the mansions of the Tsar;
From sitting-room to bedroom is not so very far,
For the dining- and the smoking-room you stay just where you are,
In my cosy little dug-out on the hill.
The fleas they wander nightly, as soon as I’ve undressed,
And after many weary hunts I’ve had to give them best.
As the ants have also found it, there is very little rest
In my cosy little dug-out on the hill.
I’ve a natty little cupboard, and it looks so very nice,
’Twas made to keep my bread and jam, my bacon and my rice;
But now it’s nothing other than a home for orphan’d mice,
In my cosy little dug-out on the hill.
There is no electric lighting in this blighted land of war,
So I use some fat in syrup tins, and stand it on the floor—
And when it’s working overtime I sweat from every pore,
In my cosy little dug-out on the hill.
When the nights are clear and starry—then the scene is beautified
By the silvery gleams and shadows that across the mountain glide;
But if it’s wet and stormy—well, I go to sleep outside
Of my cosy little dug-out on the hill.*
I
When the time comes round for parting from my little eight by four,
And I can get a good night’s rest without a back that’s sore,
Well —perhaps some day I’ll miss you, and will long to live once more
In the little cosy dug-out on the hill.
Corpl. George L. Smith,
24th Sanitary Section, R.A.M.C.T.
* The roof of a dug-out, as usually designed, is a device for keeping the shrapnel out and
letting the water in.


WHAT FRANK THOUGHT
A PRIVATE sat under a tree.
It was not the Lone Pine, but
.the other one. Winter had
stripped it of foliage, and all
around was bleak and uninviting.
In his bronzed fist, which had carried
buckets and biscuits since April 25th,
he held a letter, highly perfumed, from
his “young lady ” —she whom he had
escorted on so many occasions to Syd-
ney’s social events in the piping days
of peace.
He had not heard from home since
embarkation, and had often wondered,
as he bathed in just enough water to
temper a whisky and shaved by means
of a lethal instrument better fitted for
cutting a hedge than a beard, whether
they really cared. A fit of hesitancy
now seized him, and he hardly liked to
read the letter. By means of the top
of a tin of sardines which he had bought
cheap—two bob he had paid for it on
the beach—he saw his unshaven face,
the neck of his soiled shirt, and his crop
of unkempt hair. He was interrupted
in this by the attentions a “ little
friend” was paying him. This he
located. He then lighted the end of a
cigarette (which he had kept stowed
away in the top of his puttees) before
risking another glance at himself in the
top of the two-bob tin of sardines.
“ What a guy,” he murmured. “ If
Jessie could see me now, would she
turn me down for some cold-footed,
well-groomed fellow? I don’t think.
She’s all right, and would understand
it’s no gipsy tea we’re at.”
However, it was with some slight
nervousness that he opened the letter.
Following the customary greetings,
Jessie wrote:
“ Dearie, be sure to keep your hat on
at all times. Egypt, I hear, is awfully
hot about Christmas-time. The doctor
was telling me the other day that he
could hardly sit on the veranda of Shep-
herd’s in the middle of the day. Keep-
your hat on, even when at Shep-
herd’s. The climate is so treacherous.
Doc. says he recommends this hotel.
Shall we send letters to you there?
Iced drinks and heavy meals are dan-
gerous, doc. says.”
This was more than flesh and blood
could stand. “Am I having my leg
pulled?” he asked. He looked at the
envelope, and found it had been posted
in Sydney thirteen months ago. He
swore roundly at the expense of the
postal people, and as all the rest of the
letter was hopelessly out of date, he
turned his attention to the next item
of his very belated mail. It was an-
other letter from Jessie. She again
rambled on about Egypt, its climatic
horrors and the dangers of Cairo’s
attractions.


He bit his lip and smiled sourly
when he came across a passage which
related to the dancing deeds of a male
acquaintance of his.
“ Frank, as you know, has not en-
listed yet,” she wrote. “He is not
sure of a commission, because chaps are
called upon to pass a beastly exam.
He says it’s rot to ask him to sit for an
examination, and he would just hate to
serve in the ranks. In his case, ‘it
would be super-patriotic,’ he says, to
do so. I don’t understand what he
means by this, but no doubt you will.”
Hughie knew that the man referred
to was big enough to push all the Turks
off the Peninsula; and Jessie proved a
Job’s comforter when, later on, she
told him that Frank only attended
dances given for patriotic purposes.
The next item was a parcel contain-
ing hair-oil, twenty-five costly cigars, a
cigar-holder, a suit of pyjamas, and a
booklet given away by a firm of tobac-
conists, explaining to would-be-recruits
that “Henry Clays” would be for-
warded to any part of the Australasian
front free of carriage. The parcel was
addressed to Gallipoli.
“ Darling,” wrote Jessie, in the
letter that accompanied the parcel,
“ keep these things in your tent.* It
must be a fag getting the oil you liked
so much. I suppose you have to walk
some distance from the firing-line to
the nearest shops. No doubt the cigars
* It may be necessary to explain that every man in
the Gallipoli Peninsula was within easy range of the
Turkish artillery. For anything except a hospital to
use a tent would have been to give an open invitation
to shrapnel. “ The nearest shops ” were about three
miles behind the Turkish lines.
will be acceptable after dinner, and,
later on, the pyjamas. Don’t think me
forward in sending the latter. But I
know fellows do wear them. I’ve seen
them advertised in the Herald. lam
sending these things for use in Turkey.
“ I have read all about the charge
you chaps made on the 25th of April,
and hope you were allowed to get well
up in the front. It would just suit you.
I know it is dangerous, but Frank says
if it is dangerous for the men, how
much more dangerous must it be for
the officers. He says he will insist upon
leading his men in all charges. Be-
tween you and me though, Hughie, I
don’t think he will enlist. He has
several pairs of lovely socks to hand by
to-day’s delivery from David Jones’s,
and if they are not for the yachting that
is to start next week, then I’m slow.
Frank and I are going to Bandwick
Races on Saturday, and if we see any-
thing in your battalion colours we will
back it and buy something for you with
what we collect. Frank says he is sure
you would like us to do this.
“ Please don’t get shot, dear. We
intend to send you lots of nice things
for Christmas.”
Hughie, a gay dog in the good old
ante-bellum days, who occupied a cosy
job and circulated his sovereigns,
tramped back to his dug-out through
the saps, revolving wicked thoughts
about Frank. Always a philosopher,
he cleaned his rifle with the hair-oil, cut
up the pyjamas to make pull-throughs,
and to newly arrived reinforcements
distributed the cigars. He and the old
hands had lost any appetite they ever
had for such comforts.
A. J. Boyd,
A.N.Z.A.C.
What Frank Thought


ARCADIA
T ’VE stayed in many a boarding-house,
-*• From good, to fair, to rotten,
Seeking the comfort of a home
With all its cares forgotten.
In pubs I’ve dwelt and drowned the
cares
Which canker life by meeting
With open hand each casual friend,
And moistened well each greeting.
I’ve dwelt in many a town and shire,
From Cairns to Wangaratta;
I’ve dropped into the Brisbane show
And Bundaberg Regatta.
But now I’ve struck an ideal spot,
Where pleasure never cloys.
Just list’ to the advantages
This choice retreat enjoys—
The rent is free, no board to pay,
No land or income taxes,
And on my tail no middleman
Nor fat man fatter waxes.
If I should say I need some clothes,
Someone will just “ take action ” ;
No tailors’ bills can worry me
And drive me to distraction.
And should my health appear to fail
And appetite grow fine,
My doctor hands me—not a bill,
But just a Number 9.*
The scenery is glorious,
The sunsets are cyclonic;
The atmosphere’s so full of iron,
It acts as quite a tonic.
And even parsons preach the Word,
Nor take up a collection ;
While politicians don’t exist,
Nor e’en a by-election.
No scandal ever hovers here
To sear our simple lives ;
And married men are always true
To absent, loving wives.
But the crowning gift of all is—no-
One’s happiness is marred.
Finding answers to the questions
On that d d War Census Card.
And should you doubt if there can be
A spot which so excels,
Let me whisper—it is Anzac !
Anzac by the Dardanelles.
Bombardier H. E. Shell,
7th Battery, Aust. F.A
♦ Number 9—a particularly effective and universal remedy in the field service panier in the form of a pill.


>Y.
LUXURIES FOR THE TURKS


\
thz> <So»rK
OUR FIRST WHEELBARROW
(An Historic Incident)
. ®!f f f (s V dd f nly meeting perspiring Australasian staggering under his
twentieth half-ton load in the very first wheelbarrow ever improvised at Anrac-
till then sacks had been used): “Hallo, my man! Thafs a very good scheme
Did you invent that barrow?”
Perspiring Australasian : “I wish I could find the beggar who did ! ”
f


Jm I I - # ..., .
■Jgm*s* ''*&l*sS$ jjB ; ..^
v x \ U< x X B| *■* , •# - **^*S-jd|f8
v JtmW \ ,• JHk Hh_ y/ s
% N \^pBK
BK. ifeMra ■ . M
5 .r £;•••.- A
SS&-.-- - \ :
• :.' IMBHr . iMR i"* &mm fi%:.\Z/~\*
PRCPS—^fcF
fc—_ —. — — _ __ ■ •
THE CAVEMAN
WAS dreaming in the trenches when thoughts and visions dim
Took shape—there squatted close to me, with mien and visage
grim,
A dark and hairy caveman, huge of form and bare of limb;
And he eyed me very strangely—and I thought I said to him :
Oh! prehistoric caveman, did you own some rock-bound lair
Where, secure from interruption, you consumed your scanty fare?
Did you sally forth for hunting—or to seek some maiden fair?
Did you club her on the cranium and drag her by the hair?
64 She’d be mostly good when captured, cooked your grub and had
her share.
You were happy, Mr. Caveman, tho’ your brawny limbs were bare.
You were cold and hungry sometimes, but upon this point I*ll swear
You were better off than we are —you’d no uniform to tear.


“ Poor benighted Mr. Caveman, if you'd only only known
Of our glorious progression—all your arrowheads of bone
Would have been replaced by rifles, and for little slings of stone
You’d have had a 4.7 gun —what joys you might have known!
“ Things have changed, poor Mr. Caveman, since you went your
simple way,
But we’re living still in caves, sir, dug most carefully in clay.
We call them trenches, dug-outs, saps; but, call them what we may,
They are made to hide our skins in, just as in your heathen day.
“Two thousand years ago came One —taught ‘Peace on earth,
goodwill ’;
Unceasingly we’ve preached it since, and that ‘ Thou shalt not kill.
And all these toilsome, changeful years we’ve retrograded till
We are with you, Mr. Caveman, for we’re simple cavemen still.”
I thought I was quite eloquent; my brain began to burn,
When a hand stretched out and shook me—’twas a hand I could not
spurn.
I yawned and tried to dodge that grasp, but I awoke to learn
’Twas the N.C.O. on duty, saying : “ Come, my lad, your turn!”
J. M. Collins, 9th Battalion.


r
V - t - \Kfe» •
■•■•■' x-: ' :^.. |J»J»?»J«WW*>»■<:«I N \’* 5W **’\ -*'*•***»- <***' _ jmi
Xf \ '-\ ~”’~T J**
* | ■ Q —
i“w^ir w ifeF|
• - .-
1
S' • «*»«. : H .
, v ■ jijkg
AN ANZAC ALPHABET
J. W. S. HENDERSON , R.G.A.
A is the Aeroplane buzzing above.
Sending us tokens of friendship and love.
Bs Beachy Bill, such a marvel of cunning,
A message from whom sends the best of
us running.
C is the Chilliness felt in the feet
When bullets commence to invade our
retreat.
D is the Dug=out we’ve spent so much time
at,
Working in hopes of defeating the climate*
E is for Eye=wash, a wonderful lotion,
Employed by the man who is Keen on pro=
motion.
F is the Fool who got caught in a trap.
By pulling the tail of a mule in a sap.


■;,'/ ’ . ‘
■- ......
**s»t w*
i , i j'' --ir • V /A- N
i \/< ii \i )
\§ \^J]f y)
y& f
f \ /
if \ /
I '
- xoorr- <---^»^«^^v.ZI ? ■■■•»<
I /t*5T~\
f4fX
t ' j
G is the General devising a strafe,
And cursing his highly incompetent staff.
H is the wretched unfortunate Hill,
Bombarded and mined but impreg=>
nable still.
I s the Intelligence
officer who
Is said to exist at
G.H.Q
Forgive a digression and
spare me the time
To think of a word that
will make a good rhyme.
And if the delay is a little
provoking,
Remember it's J and the
word may be Joking.
K is the Kaiser at home
in Berlin,
Chanting his quaint
maledictory hymn.
L is the Liar who
loves to relate
Achi Baba has fallen,
and gives you the
date.
M is the Major observing from lati®
tudes
Tending to strained and discomforts
ing attitudes.


’
\v^/
V <# X v *
$ S A t*
■*. -~ i\\ ; ' ■...
i ~ J-~* \ \
ii&r ; \ \ N jjj ,^ n _
"“ 1 ■ "
($dj
':./
,MM) ■ vmm mn^r
; ■ . /' i
' .
•
iv
N is the Navy bombarding a lair.
Ignoring the fact that there’s nobody there.
O is the Optimist struck
by a splinter.
Happy to think he’ll be
home by the winter.
P is the spotlessly uniformed Paragon,
Living in splendour on H.M.S.
“ Arragon.”
Q is the Questions we ask with a wail.
Do skippers like and where is
our mail ?
R’s the report of the latest success.
Strictly compiled for the use of the
Press.
S is the Sniper ; it’s also his Sickness
On finding his cover is lacking in thick*
ness.
An Anzac Alphabet


£V /£•*
'^~ r , ;i
i)Mluii : i , w ... ■« vwqmw^ >v ' we<mK««6w«4<v»<A-^
'..vvwof- ■*>•■ '<$' Wfn*!!'**
.A-v...... . . X m**.-:.*Ls'
fr •••;. ' " ' ' - ' ' " • : ' '
~ o w«Vf-w»--' ' v
* WV> ’ , ... v .-■■-’ > *
j
*»&£'■■*.
I
T’s the Telephonist cutting off stations
In the midst of important conversations.
U is the Uniform made for
the wenches.
Slightly deranged by a day
in the trenches.
Note, —This illustration has had
to be postponed pending a
final statement by Mr. Hilaire
Belloc as to the date of the
certain exhaustion of German
resources.
V is the Victory talked of by editors,
Who wish to get rid of importunate creditors.
W stands for the various Wiles
The Germans employ to keep Turkey in
smiles.
Y is the Youth who was scornful of danger.
Till caught in the rear by a violent stranger.
But X is the Xmas that some day will come
When turkey and sauce will be served
with our rum*
Z is the Zenith of power and glory,
A fitting conclusion to this little story*
118


W (Dictated) XMAS, 1915
THE KAISER TO HIS
SECRETARY
“T3EACE upon earth and unto men goodwill! ”
Such words rang true of yore. (Excuse my laughing.)
Ironical they’ll ring while Huns are still
A-strafing!
My Vaterland, I know, has set its back
Against such old-world heresy and schism,
And deems such tidings but a mere anach-
ronism !
Not till our Eagles twain replace the U-
Nion Jack from Dover Harbour unto Calais,
Proving thereby the truth of “ Deutschland li-
ber Alles!”
Not till all men shall hearken my decree,
Not till all worlds shall tremble at my nod,
Shall peace on earth be countenanced by Me—
or God.


N
\
\!
\ w
cf Riga.
sit
And write—forgive the French—un
petit billet-
Doux with the season’s compliments
to Lit-
tle Willie.
Tell him how once his courage I
admired,
How recently—to my surprise—l’ve
heard an
(I trust) unfounded rumour that he’s
tired
of Verdun.
Bid him select a new cathedral’s spire,
Bombard it! Seize it! Never mind
the losses!
Tell him its peal of bells will make
more ir-
on crosses.
To Hindenburg say—be must do his best,
And if he can’t advance, then he must dig a
New line, “ according to our plans,” due west


To her who knows how Bulgars’ palms are Greeced,
Send greeting suited to a Royal Queen —oh!
And bid her give her brother’s love at least
To Tino.
To Enver write : “ Since some of you seem lost
And some of you don’t seem to know quite where ’e are,
I’ve squared at —well—at never mind the cost,
Bulgaria.
“ That is my part; you must now stop the gab
(Why, anybody can do that much, damn it!)
Of those who try to shake the faith of Ab-
dul Hamid.”
Then when I’m satisfied that General Bird-
Wood and his Anzacs at the Dardanelles
Are busy studying the latest word
In Hells,
And my supplies are safe, then right away
I’ll hie to Egypt—not by ocean liner,
But by a rather safer route through A-
sia Minor.
These plans of mine, at which some seem surprised,
Are not, as fools think, calculated solely on
The out-of-date campaigns of undersized
Napoleon.
For when I’ve got the British blighters beat
(Here comes my cunning), what I mean to do is
To exercise, on water smooth, my fleet
Near Suez.
Then, finally, for Double Eagles’ head,
In order to perpetuate my Kultur,
By Royal Decree I’ll substitute instead —
A Vulture.
n. b. o«
The Kaiser to his Secretary


THE ANZAC THUNDERSTORM
FROM THE TRENCHES
DO not we know that fall of
night over Anzac!
Boom-boom! Boom-boom!
Boom-boom! All the after-
noon the warships on our right had
been engaged in the playful work of
tearing pieces from the hillsides of Achi
Baba, eight miles to the south of us,
ruining the trenches of our friend the
enemy, blowing up a supply base, a
mule train, dropping shells on the
forts, or indulging in some of the many
small acts of friendliness to which Jack
Tar is prone. As the evening wore on
we could see the flash from both shell
and gun>.
About the time we finished our
frugal evening meal lightning began
to play in intermittent flashes, like a
heavenly searchlight, from far across
the hidden Narrows and Asia Minor,
and put to shame the puny bursts of
light from the handiwork of man. The
boats were still at it, but their dull
booming was now intermixed with the
rumble of distant thunder.
The lightning becomes more vivid.
There is a rattling, crashing roar from
the artillery of the skies that can never
be equalled by any earthly batteries.
Sureiy the Creator is in angry mood
to-night, as comes a deafening peal,
followed by vivid flashes of forked
lightning in fantastic shapes. One
seems a long arm with hooked fingers,
as though the Most High would grasp
one or both of the contending armies
and hurl them into the seas. The
lightning plays around the steel points
of the bayonets of the motionless
sentries, standing ever ready under the
parapets, and keeping a ceaseless watch
the night through on the enemy
trenches.
Trench and traverse, hill and valley,
are revealed by a brighter light than
that of day. The rude wooden crosses,
marking the places where, alas! too
many of Australasia’s best have fallen,
are brought out in bold relief against
the dark background of holly scrub,
and the narrow strips of winding road-
way on the long hillsides from the beach
—the work of months—up which per-
spiring fatigue parties toil with rations,
water, ammunition and other necessary
stores the day long, are laid out as a
relief map by Heaven’s electricity.
A rattling, crashing roar, such as I
have never heard in any Australian
thunderstorm, is followed by a deafen-
ing clap, and a huge ball of fire falls
earthward at terrific speed in the direc-
tion of Constantinople, followed by a
sound as of a shattering explosion,
which causes the very hillsides to
quake, traverse and parapet to tremble,
and the roofs of dug-outs to send down
a shower of stones.
The ships have long given up the
unequal struggle to make their voices
heard against those of the elements,


THE SILVER LINING
Sunset over Imbros as seen from Anzac
DraWn by C. E. W • DEAN




and as the storm passes over, and the
rumblings of the thunder become more
and more distant and the lightning less
vivid, the veil is drawn from the face
of the moon, and the White Lady sails
out into her own once more.
The storm has had its effect on those
manning the trenches. The bubbling
rattle of the machine-gun, the sharp
crack of Turkish rifles, and the heavier
report of our own arms, which usually
punctuate the night, are noticeable by
their absence. The turmoil of an hour
ago has turned to unbelievable quiet.
I. A. Saxon, .
21st Australian Battalion.
SENSE OR ?
HP HERE’S a certain hard-hearted old censor
A (Which is not meaning any offence, sir)
Who won’t let us tell.
When we say “ I’m quite well,”
Where we’ve planted the water condenser.
And that same stony-hearted old censor.
When we speak of the shell-smoke as dense, sir,
Will rule it out straight—
And the same if we state
That some of our non-coms, are denser.
I
And yet this same rigid old censor
(Whose business must now be immense, sir)
Will let it go through—
Tho’ he knows it’s not true—
If we tell her our love grows intenser!
But though mostly this rigid old censor
Is a far stiffer bar than a fence, sir,
Yet he let down the rails
For our Christmas mails,
So three jolly good cheers for the censor.
C. D. Me. (Sergt.)
Sense or 7


_ osr,-«i «v <»«•«. . -* f* *? «s»
C.tVJ.B» ss«* <s> - « ■* S *
OUR AMPHIBIOUS
MAN
Our special correspondent having been permitted the exceptional
privilege of obtaining some insight into the Work of the NaVy,
We are enabled to publish the following invaluable article:
BUT was that really he? That
stylish pair of khaki-coloured
overall trousers surmounted by
a serviceable-looking British
warm patrol tunic of the same excellent
material? At first glance it was hard
to distinguish him from the dapper-
looking foot-gunner, with whom he was
engaged in lively conversation. Their
words were inaudible to us onlookers,
but from what one could gather the
foot-gunner was making some interest-
ing comments on the system of naval
pinnaces.
And was this all of the representative
of the greatest naval power that ever
placed foot upon the land ? But as the
observer drew nearer, the flash of illu-
mination came. For there, poised ele-
gantly on the bows of the natty blue
trench sou’wester was the emblem of
Britain’s naval supremacy, the silver
anchor in a golden hoop.
“Shiver my corrugated iron!” he
was saying—using a phrase I remem-
bered having heard so often as a young
sub-midshipman (or “ spotty,” as they
are affectionately known by their
seniors) on the old Bellicasus —when,
noting the presence of company, he
turned with a polite smile to the in-
truders and waved his apologies. It
was then that one noted the true stamp
of the man. He was a sailor every inch
of him, from the drop of salt spray that
dangled lazily from the tip of his nose
to the purple-tinted seaweed that clung
affectionately to the soles of his boots;
and his speech was laden with that
peculiar crispness and alertness which
we associate with sailors; they imbibe
it from the salt atmosphere of the gun-
room and the ward-room. But what
struck one most about him was his
youthful appearance. “ What’s What ”
would probably give his age as 29


*
(though he did not look a day more
than 28j), and yet from the three bands
on his cuff it was obvious to one of the
writer’s experience in naval matters
that he must be a subaltern-com-
mander.
“Is it much like what you thought
it would be after all your training?” I
asked.
“Yes, pretty much,” was the reply,
with an oddly reminiscent smile.
“ Iron is heavier than water, and a
pinnace afloat is worth six aground.”
Here, I realised, was a man of per-
ception—one who was fitted to guide
the destinies of a great nation.
“And the landing of all these vast
quantities of stores,” I urged; “ is not
that a great task?”
“ We do not land them,” he said im-
pressively and decisively, with the air
of one closing an argument. “We
unship them.”
I nodded understandingly. So that,
then, was the key to the great mystery.
Lieut. A. L. Pemberton,
H.Q. Staff, 24th Siege Bde.
K.G.A.
POSSIES
“T) OSSIE!” exclaimed the inquiring General. “What is a
r ‘Possie’?”
“ That, sir,” said the C.0., “is Australian for recess, either
firing or sleeping. It’s a contraction of ‘ position.’ ”
“Now that’s where you’re wrong,” said the Chief Staff Officer,
in a tone which admitted no argument. “ Posse!—p-o- double s-e.
Posse—a small force. Your firing recess is manned by a small force
—what?” ,
And the C.O. was overcome by very great emotion.
“ Ben Telbow.”
Fossies


MR. AEROPLANE
{With compliments to the R.N.A.S. in the Dardanelles)
TJTURRAH for Mr. Aeroplane,
A-sailin’ in the blue;
I’m glad to see you up again—
Me compliments to you.
I’m Tommy Brown, Australian,
Who’s fightin’ here on land;
An’, strike me, Mr. Flyin’ Man,
I’d like to shake your hand.
Sometimes I feel I’d like to streak
Beside you in the sky;
An’ then my nerves go all a-shake
To think you’re up so high.
By jingo! how your bloomin’ grit
Must make old Jacko dance;
An’ don’t he fuss to make a hit,
When given half a chance.
But on you go inquirin’,
As if the job were fun, .
An’ Jacko was a-firin’
A nipper’s toy popgun.


You give the battleships the wink,
They gets their guns to bear;
An’ then—oh, strike me blue an’
pink—
Then don’t the Turkies swear!
*****
Ah, well—beyond the hills you go;
We wish you best o’ luck.
Remember, all the boys below
Enjoy your bloomin’ pluck.
H. G. Garland,
16th Aust. Battalion.
ANZAC IN EGYPT
1. MAHOMED-AND AUSTRALIA
MAHOMED was Mahomed.
He was also a guide. The
combination meant that he
knew everything, and what
he didn’t know he made up, and what
he made up he told so often that at
last he believed it.
We were on the usual Nile excursion
—made by nearly the whole Austral-
asian force at one time or another—
to Memphis and Sakkara.
A boat had been arranged, and
Mahomed tried to entertain us on the
boat. He did. Knowing our absence
from home and wives, he gave us a full
account of his three wives; also some
obscure, but not uninteresting, details
of their feelings towards each other.
Each was “ a pearl,” and he didn’t
know which was the pearliest. The
idyllic peace of Mrs. Mahomed in tri-
plicate was enough to make one a
follower of the Prophet.
His next dissertation was on the
Koran. But theology doesn’t appeal
much to soldiers. Padres have reduced
their services to a maximum of twenty
minutes. Before long our astute guide
recognised a necessity of a change of
subject. He gave us riddles —the
riddle of the Sphinx : How one could
divide equally between two men a ten-
gallon flask of water with only three-
and seven-gallon flasks to do it with.
The best of us took nine moves to do
it in; Mahomed did it in five—and
looked humble. Then he gave us
another : Four men and their wives are
on one side of the Nile, and have to
pass over to the other; but their
jealousy will not allow any man to be
alone with a lady not his wife. Maho-
med threw this problem at us with an
air of triumph. There was the boat,
there were the four men, there were
the four wives, there was the Nile.
The Nile was certainly there, and our
puffing, stodgy steamer had gone two
or three miles before we gave it up.
We did give it up. Mahomed manipu-
Anzac in Egypt


lated the ladies and their spouses with
ease, landed each on the other side, all
conventions being strictly observed.
Then the Pyramids came into view.
We were rather tired of the Pyramids.
But the guide wasn’t. What would a
guide be without Pyramids—or the
Pyramids without guides? So we
heard again all their history. Each
new Mahomed throws in a thousand
years or two more or less. But what is
a thousand years in Egypt?
We were tiring of the Pyramids.
Mahomed started on the other bank —
Napoleon, Napoleon’s towers, Napo-
leon’s granaries, Napoleon’s fortifica-
tions.
Now there is a limit to all things.
We could stand Moses Island; we
could listen to the accounts of
Pharaohs, Pyramids, Sphinxes, and
Mrs. Sphinxes. But Napoleon!
Napoleon hadn’t even known Aus-
tralia.
However, Mahomed was wound up.
He was inspired. He was even intre-
pid. What if the infidel dogs did cut
down his baksheesh; they should have
the whole story. So the British (and
the Australasians) in Egypt went to
the wall. Napoleon reigned. He got
it all.
It was then that our youngest subal-
tern put in an easy under-arm, and
Mahomed hit out!
“ Yes, we know all that about
Napoleon,” said the sub., “ but what
about Sir George Reid ?”
We waited breathless. Was it a
boundary hit or a catch at point?
“ Oh,” said Mahomed, “ I know all
about Saint George Reid. He a great
man. There is his mound over there.”
“Ah!” we exclaimed. And then,
with happy inspiration, someone asked,
“ Is he dead?”
“Oh, yes; dead a hundred years.
Saint George Reid, a very good and
great man. He has a fine tomb. If a
sick man goes there, he gets cured
quickly.”
We tipped Mahomed generously.
C.
2. ANZAC IN ALEX
I HARDLY think old Bend’s
little wineshop in Alexandria
will be known to many of the
A.N.Z.A.C., or to many Alex-
andrians for that matter. But in
case any of you find yourselves ever in
Alexandria again, this is how you will
discover it:
Standing at the head of the Rue
Cherif Pacha—everyone in Alexandria
knows the Rue Cherif Pacha who
knows anything at all about the place
—with the Kodak Company’s fine shop
on your right hand and His Britannic
Majesty’s fine Caracol on your left, you
could reach it in three bomb-throws, if
the last of the three happened to be a
“ googly ” and swerved in from the off,
just round the corner into the Rue
Attarine. So, you see, it is right oppo-
site the Attarine Mosque; and as you
sit of an evening at Benci’s doorway,
smoking his cigarettes, with his wine
at your elbow, and watch the motley,
polyglot crowd ceaselessly passing, you
have your eyes always coming back to


the carved and inlaid door of the old
temple, and up the graceful minaret
into the great lift of a night sky
glorious with such liquid gold of stars
that memory of herself will take you
back to many a mellow night when
stars of even more melting loveliness
bent above you in your own homeland
down South.
But you never saw such a restless
crowd in an Australian or New Zealand
street as this double line of dapper
Europeans and of sallow Egyptians,
Syrians, Armenians, and hungry-look-
ing Greeks, threading the low swirl of
khaki tunics and Arab rags. And ever
and anon the stream ebbs before your
“ garry-driver’s ” long-drawn “ Haa-
sib” (mind out), to let pass some
official dignitary or some riotous party
of Kangaroos, or some handsome, red-
tabbed officer of the regular staff, or
maybe ’tis an even more handsome and
stalwart private of the ranks, beside
some dear, dainty, winsome thing
under one of those little fly-away hats,
with that dark kiss-curl clinging close
to her cheek —you know exactly the
kind of maid and the kind of curl I
mean.
And still the tall, quiet minaret
and the broad, quiet heaven seem to
lean together; and one grows pensive
sitting at Benci’s narrow door of a
summer evening.
Old Benci himself is a brisk little
Italian, doubtless of middle age. I
think it must have been as a mark of
affection that we called him “ Old
Benci,” for his hair still keeps some-
thing of its youthful brown. He has
not a word of English and about "two
of French, but you know at once from
his open, sunny face that, like most of
his compatriots, he has a heart of gold;
and, at a price to fit a ranker’s pocket,
he keeps a Chianti that is first-rate.
It was Tillett who found him for us.
Tillett is a New Zealand Medical Corps
man, grey-headed, full of years and the
experience they have brought him;
equally at ease in French, Italian and
Spanish from his early life on the Con-
tinent, and a dabbler in Greek and
German by way of diversion; but so
quiet and unassuming withal, and so
rarely confidential about himself and
his affairs, that we knew little of him
beyond that he was at that time doing
odd jobs of healing for the drivers of a
New Zealand battery withdrawn from
the Peninsula. For us he was a
most likeable chap, an excellent in-
terpreter when our mediocre French
failed, and—his chief merit—the dis-
coverer of Benci and his tavern. With
a palate tormented by stewed tea
and the heavy canteen beer beloved
of the yokels of Old England, he
had traversed wellnigh every quarter
of Alexandria in vain quest of the
cheap and honest draught wine that he
knew must be there somewhere, and
yet must be neither that so very
“ordinaire” red wine of France, nor
yet the wretched “ health wines ”of
Greece, that carry in their tang
memories of the physician and the sick-
bed of our pre-war days. And between
him and Old Benci there had grown up
quite a sincere affection, apart alto-
gether from Chianti at P.T. 1 per
glass.
It was delightful, the pantomime
that went on whenever any of us
arrived without Tillett. With a coun-
tenance full of anxious solicitude,
Benci would point vaguely out into the
night, carry his forefinger to his own
grey head, and then up would go his
Anzac in Alex


eyebrows in interrogation. This we
knew to mean, “ Where is our friend
of the grey hair that you are here to-
night without him?” And one of us
would answer by laying his face to the
table and snoring heavily or in mimic
sentry-go along the passage. Oh, but
it was good to see the smile that broke
and beamed across his honest face, with
his pleasure at finding himself intelli-
gible to his country’s allies.
The rest of these allies, so far as our
coterie was concerned, were a sergeant
of the Ceylon Tea-planters, back from
Gallipoli in charge of his company’s
horses, and a Maori of that gallant,
reckless band whose “ Komate! Ro-
tate!” rang along those hills in
August—well-born and well-educated,
in physique strong and solid, but with
movements as quick and sure as a cat’s.
In this tanned army only the full lips
and the slightly flattened nose betrayed
his origin.
He and I had been friends at
the same New Zealand ’varsity, but,
like so many of the best of his race, he
was no ‘‘ sticker,” and in the third year
of his medical course he had side-
tracked himself on troubled studies of
mind and consciousness and refused to
carry on with his dull public health and
medical jurisprudence. Since leaving
’varsity he had been living on his
means, he told me, spending most of
his time in wandering. Napier, the
tea-planter of Ceylon, was your well-
bred, clean-limbed, rather aggressively
healthy-minded young Englishman.
These three, at any rate, were the
centre of that bright little knot of
friends that, in a three months’ stay in
Alexandria, had drifted and stuck to-
gether in a community of tastes and
ideas and downright liking for one
another. And though one or other
of us might be held by night pickets,
or C.8., or on visits to our hospitable
French and Italian friends, yet on
any night of the week, from seven till
midnight, you would find two or three
of us forgathered at the back of the
little shop in the shadow of the great
black casks and behind the wooden
grille that, while allowing us from the
dim interior a clear view of the street,
yet shut us off effectively from the eyes
of the night patrol. For it was before
Sir John Maxwell’s “Iron Law of
closing time ” that we held our revelry
chez Benci, and it was safe to wager
that something was amiss if we went
home by any but the 1.10 a.m. tram
for Ramleh, or by carriage even later.
But those were our palmy days in
Alexandria—the days before the swarm
of Tommies came, and our pockets
began to empty, and an officious picket
in the fullness of its own importance
went farther afield than Sisters Street
and patrolled the whole town in its
lumbering motor-wagons. . . .
L. J. Ivory,
4th Howitzer N.Z.F.A.


■ 1 ' 1 , • ■■ • ■ .»» > 1 .' ; y V v , ■ •. ■ ■. ' ; •»
pipe! old comrade! friend o’ mine,
Have I then made you sad ? Or is it just
That you and I’ve been drinking wine,
Embittered by this dull grey day; or must
It be that you too know
That smoke and hopes “ grey ” both may go?
Grey smoke of yours, grey thoughts o’ mine,
Seem strangely both in one accord to-day.
Perhaps it is that croon-song of the pine,
Recalling memories dear and far away
Or is it that this grey day’s mystic spell
Foretells the end of hope and smoke in Hell?
Ah, no ! old pipe, methinks this grey day
came
To temper such as you and I to stand
The small and weary problems of life’s
game,
And learn to cheer another one, whose
hand
Has groped in vain, and vainly gropes
For better things that grey like smoke
and greyer hopes.
R. G. N., 11th Aust. A.S.C.


A WAIL FROM ORDNANCE
WE’RE only in the Ordience,
Not troopers of the line;
We don’t attack no enemy,
Nor in the papers shine.
We just wait here from morn till night,
Expectin’ these ’ere shells
That makes our lives, what were so
bright,
So many earthly ’ells.
We ’and out underpants and socks,
And boots and coats galore,
To them as gives and takes hard knocks
An’ soon gets used to war.
We keep their clothing up to dick.
Equip and arm ’em, too;
We rig out the returning sick
Almost as good as new.
They blew us from our depot south
A bit along the beach,
We humped our blueys, nothing loath,
And settled out of reach.
Our store grew large and prosperous.
We laughed at Turk and Hun,
Until they trained on us one day
A blasted four-point-one.
Each morning they put in a few
To bring us from our beds,
From time to time the whole day
through
They make us duck our heads.
One eye is cocked for cover,
And one ear is for the whiz,
An’, until the fuss is over, we
Postpone our daily biz.
Now, when the war is over,
And we return to peace,
Though we may live in clover,
Enjoying lives of ease—
A striking clock will wake us,
A blow-out make us run,
And cry again our old refrain :
“ Gott straf ’ that four-point-one ! ”
Lieut. Kininmonth,
A.O.C.


Young Officer: “Haw, haw, no shave?”
Australian: “ He, he, no rasaw 1 ”


g 'k* i. 3 2| i*
r f |{
Ngj * y- ° fe i? 1 * r* * 11*113 I «.§l
•Xj'uJ vi.* k J C | (f> ® “-1 2 3-<-y ’1 4? "g ® .2
a;k. { / U , U *1 * 1 f -x- 3 a.2 H
'a „ - » I* g
<f)ij «5 P u “=|
a tQnsk0s-- u I 1 1
o %f >“ ’ ?ali' lg«
0 -jF 3 t
g a •-*
- TTZ iM U aiP* el*
is 4.34|i j sir. y i1-|li4 i- 5
«bm ;f ip Ip ffilh SI
f-'> _4 , h$m rhJ Pi-k! jsi
©/ iiflt; o! | * #1 In
y <[ is air sfiCI S?s
J Ua Jv~S |P 4 (S*te|jy| I'sS
H q1 ,jI Ms
*>if it •M p pb ip"Mp i it!
jj4 <■ 4|| H { 1 jw i) HI ra.hi Hj fs-;
s* -■ 111 yjiitUi4.fsfyjS fsi
83 M4 %c* UiSsr«: £<*
sjI ihilHllnmMl i-s
a fir
., — -*,” — *h <o (B
4< A n _. <?( ,| "? S .*
*• s j il•* 3 r-41 «vt / - .«e ®
c $ £.2 ,=T 3 I - ?-- 2-»i x g /-~ n '-- — jt< —09 , 0 *“ <9 2
„to | s i«3 Mil 4fi WsST^ sf. :ii
r* o D o 1 IX3 life k'K ; - _ > e »i s
|1 T ®yA >6r: t ' •§ £
4 .- I 111 f3 I Ml V ia 5 w
? § v> d2 i <■ ~ ■ 1 ■ 1 H *Q


I"—" in mini
DAOIO BAQKfQ
OUR REPTILE CONTEMPORARY
Drawn by DAVID DARKER




THE BOOK OF ANZAC
CHRONICLES
1. THE FLOOD
AND it came to pass that King
/ Hun called together his mighty
J a men and said unto them :
2. 44 Behold I have dreamed
a dream, and the Gott of Boasts hath
appeared unto me and said :
3. 44 Bring together all your ships
of the sea, your wealth of the land, and
your mighty men of valour, including
your first-born.
4. 44 4 For I say unto you, now is
The Day.
5. 44 * Ye shall go forth to battle
against the kingdoms of the earth to
wage war against all who do not bow
down to thee and call thee 44 The One.”
6. 44 4 For I have decreed that thou
shalt rule the earth to the uttermost
corners of it.
7. 44 4 Let thou and thy son take but
six days’ rations in your haversacks, for
on the seventh day thou shalt dine at
the Palace of the Buckinghamites with
the King of the Allyites as thy mess
orderly.
8. 44 4 Forget not thy pomade nor
thy tooth-brush, neither shalt thou
leave behind thy gases nor thine iron
rations, for thou mayest have need of
them.
9. 4,4 And go ye forth to kill and
plunder; spare none, but put all to the
sword; and put your trust in yourself
alone and—er, myself, if it so please
thee.
10. 44 4 For this is The Day.’ ”
11. And all his mighty men bowed
down to him and said : 44 O King, live
for ever; verily thou hast truly said, and
thy kingdom shall extend to the ends
of the earth and the heavens and to the
depths of the sea.”
12. So King Hun blew his bags out,
smote him on the chest, and called
aloud, saying, 44 1 am IT.”
13. And the same day he brought
together all his legions of men and his
ships of the sea and all the wealth of
the land : for they were all ready.
14. And they counted and found
umpteen million men of valour, two
ships, seventeen anchors, fourteen shil-
lings and fivepence in gold, umpteen
billion rolls of paper money and enny-
gottsquantitee gas.
15. But they left the two ships
at home, fastened to the seventeen
anchors.
16. And the King-of-all-the-Huns
said, 44 It is enough, IMSHEE !” *
* Imshee is the Arabic for “ go away.” The Austral-
asian Corps, which had so far employed it only to
street hawkers in Cairo, used this war cry on April 25.
—Eds.


17. So they imsheed.
18. Now, it came to pass that the
Huns ran amok both East and West,
North and South, and their cry was
“Strafe!” and “Ber-lud!” and they
got both in abundance.
19. For they threw themselves on
the neighbouring villages, breaking
through the back gate without warning,
and slaying the watchdog and the pig,
the husbandman and his wife, the baby
and the nurse, the cat and the canary.
20. Nor even did the Boy-about-the-
place have time to reach his air-gun
from off the shelf; for the Mad Mass
tarried not to wipe its sword, but only
to quench its blood-lust and its thirst.
21. And when they had laid waste
all that land, they boiled over into the
next.
22. But it came to pass that by this
time the cries of murder and children
in torment had reached far and wide,
and before another sun had set two
men met the horde of Huns.
23. And the Huns lifted up their
bleary eyes and asked, “ Gott strafe,
but who vas dis dat do dry stob our
leedle game?”
24. And the Man-from-the-west
with the strong arm and the iron jaw
proclaimed to the multitude,
25. “ I am K. of K., and THIS IS
THE END OF THE SECTION.”
26. And the Butchers all lifted up
their voices with one accord, saying,
“ Gott sh-sh-traf,” and “Hie, Ber-
lud.”
27. But the Huns stopped, yea,
verily.
28. And so it came to pass that the
King of the Huns dined not at the
Palace of the Buckinghamites with the
King of the Allyites as his mess orderly
—neither on the sixth day nor in the
sixth year.
29. But the King of the Huns and
Little Willie ate their iron rations
instead.
30. And the flood was over the face
of the earth for many days and many
nights till the Mighty Winds arose and
drove it back.
31. And behold, the King of the
Huns said unto himself, “ Verily, it
was a dream, and instead of ‘ The Day ’
is now nothing but 4 The Night.’ ”
32. So he fell asleep.
33. And great was the fall thereof.
Genesis Gallipoli.
2. THE BOOK OF JOBS
A ND it came to pass that on the
/% seventh day of the week of
J the fourth month of the year,
being the twenty-fifth Sunday
after the Melbourne Cup, there jour-
neyed forth from the land of the
Greeks, yclept Lemnos, a mighty host.
2. And “ Birdy ” commanded them,
saying, “ Take from the Turks the land
of Gallipoli, that we may occupy it.
Possess yourselves also of the command
of the Narrows, that all who are free
may enter.”
3. Therefore, the Colonels, Majors
and Captains took heed, and after much
lengthy pow-wowing issued to their
men this edict; “ Hear ye, men of
Australia and New Zealand, what the


‘ Boss ’ hath commanded. Ye shall
girdle yourselves about with ammu-
nition, and, after landing as seems
meetest, make assault upon the hills
and valleys of Gallipoli, which the sons
of Abdul do hold to our detriment.”
4. To the Ninth, and the Tenth, and
the Eleventh, and the Twelfth Bat-
talions of foot soldiers this follower of
Medon addressed himself thus : “ Pre-
pare ye the track that the First, Second
and other Brigades, even your com-
rades, may make peaceful footing.
And each man take with him a first
field-dressing and two days’ rations, for
we know not what difficulties we might
encounter.”
5. And to the Army Medical Corps
likewise he addressed himself, com-
manding them to attend to the weak,
the injured and the weary, and lo! his
words were not in vain, for the land
was treacherous and harboured many
pitfalls.
6. And it came further to pass that
the enemy proved themselves “ hard-
doers ”; yea, verily, they were a stub-
born folk, for they had builded unto
themselves dug-outs and trenches on
the land of their forefathers, and were
aware of the coming of the invader.
7. But “ Birdie’s ” host were of the
hills and dales; men of much cunning
and resourcefulness.
8. Therefore, without the flourish of
trumpets, they sallied forth to the
right, and to the left, and the centre.
9. And they did that which was right
in the sight of the “ Boss,” for they
used their “ Blocks ” and held the
ground, which seemed impossible to
those not possessed of faith in his
judgment.
10. And on the day of the twenty-
sixth, and of the twenty-seventh, and
on succeeding days, they did also build
trenches, and burrow holes into the
earth like unto the rabbit, that they
might abide safely, for it was further
commanded that this should be
done.
11. Now it came to the ears of the
Chief, and it was a true saying, that
the Valley of Shrapnel was even as
Gehenna, fraught with many dangers
to the unwary. Therefore it was com-
manded that the pioneers should pre-
pare a track crooked, making it thereby
difficult, yea, insurmountable.
12. And when this and sundry tasks
were completed, the First, the Second,
the Third and the other Brigades of
human pack-horses, so that the good
work might be continued, were re-
inforced by a multitude of those who
are known as the Lost Horse Regi-
ments.
13. And lo! the host of Birdwood
flourished amazingly, even to the extent
of rum and porridge.
14. By this time, being the twelfth
month of the same year, it waxed
“ plurry ” cold, even unto a fall of
snow, and the erstwhile Land of Jacko
did breed much “ flue ” and “ pneu,”
and it did seem as though the plagues
of the ancient Gyppos had descended
upon them.
15. But the lodine Infantry were
magnanimous with their potions; thus
in our generation the sick were cured
of their suffering, and the balm of
Gilead descended upon them.
16. At the time of the eleventh
month of the same year as this is
written a Chief of the Rulers journeyed
from afar to take counsel with his
chiefs, and, by his guiding, smooth out
and make plain the difficulties which
had beset their paths.
The BooK of Anzac Chronicles


17. This accomplished, it was given
unto “Birdie ” that he should com-
mand all, excepting only the good ship
Arragon, which contains such a hetero-
geneous mass as that good ship of
Noah’s did contain.
18. Now, the rest of the Acts of
Kitchener, and all that he did and said,
have they not been written in the
Peninsula Press and other vaporous
rags, erstwhile our “ filthy contem-
poraries ’ ’ ?
19. Heed ye all of this, ye who dwell
in the Antipodes, for the time is nigh
when the clouds of war shall lift and
we may abide in halcyon peace; for
this is the Dinkum Book of Jobs, as
will be written in the Book of
Revelations.
W. R. Wishart,
No. 1 Aust. Stat. Hosp., Anzac.
3. THE PERFECTLY TRUE PARABLE OF
THE SEVEN EGYPTIANS
NOW a multitude of Egyptians
journeyed unto Anzac, even
nigh unto the seats of the
mighty. And when they had
come unto the place whereon it was
written they should rest, they took
counsel one with the other, saying,
“ ,Lo, behold, we have no light.”
2. Then one, more bold than the
rest, journeyed forth to gather fuel that
peradventure had been washed to the
beach and had escaped the claws of
Apollyon, the Camp Commandant.
And after he had searched a while he
raised his eyes and praised Allah. For
near to the waters he found a tin can
having a wick, like unto the lamps of
his forefathers, even from the days of
the Prophet. And straightway he re-
turneth to his companions, saying:
“ Rejoice with me, for Allah has been
bountiful and I have had good for-
tune.” Thus saying, he kindled the
lamp, but it would not bum. And he
kindled it a second time, but still the
lamp refused to give her light. Then
they cast it into the fire, and they all
gathered round to enjoy the light and
warmth thereof.
3. And it came to pass that while
they yet warmed their hands there
was heard a mighty crash, and of the
“ Gyppies ” that remained were picked
up seven stretchers full.
4. Verily it is not meet at Anzac
to put to “ base ” uses such jam-tin
bombs and other trifles as Apollyon
abandoneth, even when you find them
kicking about on the seashore.
Capt. A. Alcorn,
No. I A. S. Hospital.


THAT FLEA! ! ”


a C-< ■ / •
/ - I i - / • '
# O - \;f .
r ■ v
*h* i ' '*' ■ 14 .
, i.s , i>iTc#l > v i
? v \
/ ~ *§§? " ~g^
' -** '*■ t«m4 -
.#*$ , • ■ '..%■■■ , • • ■-;■
- «»■ h IM . N.
t »» i i iii,.i ■-^S*"^BWSMMBlB|Mfc | .
Australian sees Snow for the first time
"Drawn bp S. H. C. PRICE
This ij the Life
Drawn by L. F. S. HORE


•I
THE SILENCE
is indeed a false,
false night;
There’s not a soldier sleeps,
But like a ghost stands to his
post,
While Death through the
long sap creeps.
There’s an eerie filmy spell
o’er all—
A murmur from the sea ;
And not a sound on the hills
around—
Say, what will the silence
be?
Private R. J. Godfrey,
7th Aust. Field Amb.


THE GROWL
'T'HEY told us w’en we ’listed
A We’d have a lot to bear—
There was ’ardships, good and plenty,
And a chance to “do and dare.”
An’ since lobbing ’ere at Anzac
We’ve ’ad a scrap or three,
But wot we’re goin’ crook for is,
There's only tea for tea.
We can take our “ iron rations,”
Tho’ they ’and ’em out like ’Ell,
An’ we’d charge the blankey Turkeys
Thro’ a cataract of shell!
But wot narks us more than any
Is to ’ear the sergeant say :
“ The sea’s too rough to land our
stores;
There ain’t no jam to-day! ”
When we’re stuck up in the trenches,
W’ere the shells is failin’ thick,
And Johnny Turk’s machine-guns
Does the interviewin’ trick,
We give ’em all they gave us,
And a bit of interest, too,
But w’y don’t someone tell ’em
We’re just perishin’ for stoo!
We lays down in the open
W’en our “ bivvies ” * isn’t dug,
The rain comes down in rivers,
And we’re any think but snug;
We “ stand to ” ’arf the bloomin’
night,
But the whole of that is naught,
If they’d give us all we wanted
Of the steak wot comes to port.
W’en it rains they give us lime juice,
W’en it’s ’ot they give us rum;
The baccy don’t arrive because
The mule train didn’t come.
The mail is ’arf a day be’ind,
And w’en it comes to light,
We blanky well can’t read it,
’Cause it’s dark as Egypt’s night.
But, anyway, that’s roustin’,
You don’t want to ’eed our ’owl;
They say as ’ow a soldier
’As a perfect right to growl.
If it’s bully beef till Doomsday,
We ain’t goin’ to make a fuss—
So long as we can lick the Turks,
That’s good enough for us.
* Bivvy—bivouac, shelter.
E. M. Smith,
27th Battalion.
MY LADY NICOTINE
(With thanks to alt of )
npHE hills of old Gallipoli
Are barren and austere,
And fairy folk, unhappily,
Are few indeed out there.
But one I know whose industry;
Both night and day is seen,
For all attest her ministry—
My Lady Nicotine.


“APiUCOT AGAIN!”
Drawn by DAVID DARKER




I do not pen unfeelingly
These random lines of thanks,
For I, in old Gallipoli,
Am fighting in the ranks.
However long the day may be
Or cold the watch of night,
My lady finds unerringly
The road to the respite.
Her gift is small and seemingly
Of little value, yet
It teaches me so charmingly
To think and to forget.
So I and those along with me
In all this dreary scene
Unite in giving thanks to thee,
My Lady Nicotine.
H. G. Garland.
THE RAID ON LONDON
A Modern Chronicle bp Private PAT RIOT
ENGLAND has been conquered
by Julius Caesar, William of
Normandy, nearly (but not
quite) by William of Germany,
and, lastly, by plain Bill of Australia.
And of the three it is clear that the
conquest of Australian Bill was the
most successful of all, when it is re-
membered that at the time of his
triumphant entry into London he was
not the man he is; he was sick and
wounded. He did not invade the city
with his shield in front of him. He
was carried on it; he came a conqueror
on crutches.
Private Bill Kangaroo was a lanky,
sawny bushman who, when a certain
foreign militarism went mad and the
band began to play the concert of
Europe, read between the lines of his
newspaper, thought a bit, saddled his
brumby, and rode for the nearest town
that ran a railway, staying there just
long enough for a final shout. He
passed the doctor easily, took a quite
insanguinary oath (for once) to do his
job as a soldier, and went into camp.
How Private Bill made his kangaroo-
like leap up the ridges of Gallipoli has
been told by a war correspondent to a
public which had, up till then, been
vaguely aware of his existence as a poor
relation from a South Sea Island. It
is fairly certain that future historians
will teach that Australia w r as discovered
not by Captain Cook, explorer, but by
Mr. Ashmead Bartlett, war correspon-
dent. Anyhow, the finding and ex-
ploration of the territory is not in the
same continent as the discovery and
exploration of its people, and Bill has
seen the correspondent in the trenches,
and regards him with much more
curiosity than ever he regarded the
quondam explorer. But he was un-
concerned with these things, and was
acting co-respondent in the case of
Crescent v. Southern Cross when a
The Raid on London


sniper’s bullet hit him in the neck and
put him out of court. A hospital ship
brought him to the City of London.
London first came to know him
through the medium of its most useful
person, the policeman. Bill had no
love for a policeman as a reader of Riot
Acts, but he developed quite an affec-
tion for him as a Pointer of the Way.
44 I’m bushed ” became a familiar
greeting between them, and the
Kangaroo was never disappointed when
he strolled across the street to ask
P.C. 49 the way he should go. A
London motor-bus might have done
what a Turkish bullet failed to do if
the man in blue had not stopped the
traffic and played the part of pilot to
him. The raised hand that held up the
stream only for royal persons was lifted
for the strolling soldier from the South,
and the busmen laughed at the bush-
man. To be 44 bushed ” in the heart
of London became a common experi-
ence with him, and one had a suspicion
that nefarious taxicab drivers often
took advantage of his innocence of
locality to drive him in circles before
dropping him at his destination, per-
haps five minutes from the starting
place. It was the shortness of city
distances that puzzled him, and he was
amazed to find names that were his-
torical and household words 12,000
miles away borne by quite unpreten-
tious streets and lanes. When English
people learned that he had travelled
1,000 miles to pass a doctor and join
the Army, they gasped and said he
must be joking.
What a class war failed to do, a race
war has done. The poor and their
patrons, noblemen gentle and simple,
vied with each other in dealing hospit-
ably by the private soldier who had
climbed the heights that commanded a
view of the Past and the Future. In
the stately homes of England, Bill (in
the servant’s phrase) met the 44 big
guns ” as 44 one of themselves,” and
was astonished at the surprise thus
caused. But he was amazed, in turn,
when the servants told him they had
been in the house ten years. With
many embellishments, he assured them
that a girl in service in Sydney would
think she owned the house if she
stopped so long in one place.
To Bill, going into the Carlton or
the Hotel Cecil wasn’t sitting in the
seats of the mighty, but just the same
as entering the pub at Yungaburrah,
and he wandered in these places with-
out any desire to 44 cut a dash.” He
approved of the costly surroundings,
but when he saw the smallness of the
glasses put before him, Bill sat in the
seats of the scornful. He really enjoyed
himself better in that inn where he
found a group of Cockney cronies.
The landlord had to respond repeatedly
to his 44 Fill ’em up again,” and Bill
afterwards declared it to be the cheapest
night’s fun in the town.
Parsimonious people would say that
Bill Kangaroo didn’t know the value of
money, for it took him some time to
appreciate the small coins of the realm
at their face value. He thought it
looked mean to keep on asking, 44 How
much?” and when seeing the sights of
the city he always pulled out silver
more than sufficient to cover expenses.
The pennies he received in change soon
filled hxs pocket, and at first he gave
them away; but as he saw that he
would soon be penniless, he would go
into one of those places described as
being 44 strictly within the meaning of
the Act,” and surreptitiously ask the


barman if he could do with change.
His dislike of the base metal and a
habit of tipping in silver bade fair to
earn for him the nickname of the
“ Silver King.” Tipping he reckoned
a curse, but, knowing that many men
lived by tips alone, he passed the coin
quite as cordially as he disliked the
practice. Bill never bought in the
cheapest market to sell in the dearest;
he didn’t think it “on the square.”
His greatest adventure was the
Zeppelins. Seated in a theatre one
evening, he heard a woof! And just
after that a second one, closer a third,
a fourth, and then a fifth just outside.
Woof! Crash! Men and women
began to rush for the doors, until the
man who rose to the occasion on that
memorable 25th rose to this one, and
shouted above the tumult of falling
glass and tramping feet that it was safer
in than out, and that if they kept their
seats all would be well. The actresses
on the stage, though quaking with
fright, stuck pluckily to their parts
until the final act. Bill himself wanted
dearly to go out and see the infernal
machines and their effect, but, for
example’s sake, he stayed till order was
restored, when he slipped out of the
building.
What he saw outside filled him with
thankfulness that he was a soldier, help-
ing to smash the raiders and their kind.
Wandering down the street, past great
gaping holes in the roadway, an over-
turned motor-bus and some wrecked
buildings, he found himself on the
Embankment, and then on the bridge,
where he saw a damaged arch of
masonry. He sat down to think,
little dreaming that he was fulfilling
Macaulay’s prophecy concerning the
man from “down under” sitting on
the ruins of London Bridge.
Bill’s furlough was finished shortly
after this; his raid v terminated with
that of the Zeppelins. He was glad to
return to the front; and he knows now
that, in assisting in the pruning of
Prussia, he is fighting for more things
than ever he thought of when he took
the oath of allegiance.
But he swears that when the job is
done he will again visit the land of his
father’s fathers, and toast it in a big,
big toast.
&th Battalion.
SING!
'T'ROOPER SING, of the 2nd
Light Horse Brigade, on the right,
was said to have sniped his two hun-
dredth Turk.
But his name and fame had not
spread all around the lines, for a
Staff Officer, in visiting the snipers
of Quinn’s Post, came upon a Light
Horseman who, very justifiably, was
priding himself upon having definitely
hit twelve of the enemy.
“ Did you hear that fellow Sing on
the right of the line ” began the
Staff Officer.
“ Well, sir, they don’t sing in front
of me,” put in the Quinn’s Post man
promptly. “They’re too b well
f tightened!
The Raid on London


ANOTHER ATTEMPT AT AN
ANZAC ALPHABET
A was the Anguish that spread o’er my race
When I saw the remarkable look of the place.
T>’s “ Beachy Bill,” who fired at my ship—
Punctured the funnel and gave me the 44 pip.”
Cwas the 4 4 Crump ” that went by with a screech
As I jumped from a lighter and fell on the beach.
]P\ was the Daring I failed to display
When fragments of shrapnel came whizzing my way.
Ewas Earth which I found in my hair
As I woke in the morning and crawled from my lair.
T? were the Fleas, and also the Flies,
Who feed on a fellow wherever he lies.
/'"''i were the Gripes that gripped me within—
The result of commodities packed in a tin.
T T was the Hole that a howitzer made;
It would take me an hour to fill in with a spade.
T was the Idiot who stuck up my head
Before I was taught to take cover instead.
Jwas the Jam with our rations and rum —
Wo found it was almost invariably 44 Plum.”
T7" was the Knowledge I quickly acquired
Of hiding whenever the enemy fired.


Another Attempt at an Anzac Alphabet
was the Louse that lurked in my vest,
Reconnoitred my person, and tickled my chest.
V/T was the Monitor, firing at night.
Which kept me awake when “ above ” didn’t bite.
TVT was the “Night stunt,” with trembling heart,
Expecting each moment the Maxims would start.
/~Vs the 0.0.*; let’s give him a cheer—
It isn’t his fault that nothing comes here.
"O are the Piers —see them shiver and shake
Whenever a launch makes a wash with her wake.
Q stands for “ Quick,” to the tunnel we dash
When a horrible missile explodes with a crash.
T> are the Rumours we hear every day
That the Turkish moral has quite faded away.
O is the gilded Staff Officer —who
Censors my letters and tears them in two.
HP is the Tauhe that drones in the sky
(Thank goodness, I haven’t been ordered to fly !)
’f T is the Underground sap we expand—
There’s a twopenny tube to the Narrows in hand.
Yis for Victory. How we shall sing
Rule, O Britannia, and God Save the King!
\l7' the Wire we put round our works—
* ’ We generally find that it’s pinched by the Turks.
the “ X-periments ” made with a bomb —
A neat little cross on a nice little tomb.
i
"VT" in the world have I ever been placed
In a trench of cold water right up to my waist ?
r y r is the mule corps recruited from Zion,
Bearers of water and rations of iron.
“ Übique,” 21st Indian Mtn. Battery.
* Ordnance Officer.


TO SARI BAIR
T"\ID Ari Burnu, Sari Bair,
With lips of hot desire,
And clutch your skirts in wild despair
At your disdainful ire?
Oh, Sari Bair, with frowning brow
And flinty breasts of stone—
Fierce Anzac breathes a fiery vow,
Thou art for him alone.
To drive your Abdul from his lairs,
He comes in proud array;
And loud he swears, and when
swears
The Turkish hosts give way.
Dear goddess, wise in ancient lore,
Let Abdul curse the Hun;
The waning Crescent fades before
Australia’s Rising Sun.
But cheer up, poor old Sari Bair,
And smile ’midst battle smoke,
For Anzac, wild of eye and hair,
Is quite a decent bloke.
“ Ben Telbow,”
10th Aust. Battalion.
ON WATER FATIGUE
IT’D like to get the Hun who sends
The little bits of shell
Which buzz around as wearily
I top that blooming hill.
He only does his duty,
But my only shirt I’d sell
For half a chance to give the cuss
A non-return to H !
Trooper George H. Smith,
7th Light Horse.


!. /■>
(f\
|_J1 — ’
/ Mq V r' j' sfh v
. 1 LA \ =? vA
V 5 n C V >
r-L>J^
cvTi- '
yoam 7j.
. ®®ri e t Rt » nfi WCt weather ) s “ my lad. have you got nails
m your .boots ?
Free “ ing Australasian s “ Well, I'm that cold I hardly
Knew if I ve got nails in my feet.”
On Water Fatigues “Me next I"


News lim
"Ihe O'-tre n\i v/as
J>loeKed cm oor lejf.—
—
A Cheery Optimist


WHEN IT’S ALL OVER . . .
TIT'E were finished with the fightin’, we were finished with the war,
’ * And the dove of peace looked healthier than e’er she did before;
For the Allies put the acid on the Hohenzollern crowd,
And they piled the costs on William when they knew they had him
cowed.
But we didn’t care a cussword if his soul were saved or sold;
We were bound for home and beauty, and the wanderlust was cold.
Yes, we dream of home and Mother, and of Dad and Sister May,
And the girls who used to know us, waitin’ half a world away;
And we’re wantin’ but to find them just the same and nothin’ more—
Just the same old dear old home-folks that we knew before the war.
And I’m hoping they’ll be looking for the boy that used to be,
Not a hero with a halo for the crowd to come and see.
Oh! I’ve snarled to read the phrases that the writers coined for us—
“ Deathless heroes —lasting glory,” and the other foolish fuss;
For we’re simple sinful soldiers, and we’re often rude and rough,
And our characters ain’t altered since we donned the khaki stuff.
(“ Smithy ” terms this “ the outpourin’s of an overburdened soul,”'
But I’d like to stuff a blanket in that long-offendin’ hole.)
As I gaze on Bill, me cobber,* sure I smile a little smile,
For his happy, careless nature doesn’t fit the poet’s style;
No, he don’t resemble Caesar in his looks or in his speech,
Nor Napoleon nor Cromwell —why, they ain’t within his reach.
He’s a decent sort of cobber, but he doesn’t push a claim
To be classed “ a gallant guardian of Britain’s honoured name.”
I’ve a grouch on jingo writers and the poets and them all,
Who have placed us common persons on a public pedestal;
Will they dust our coats and speak to us and help us when we fall,
Or paste a different label on us—something very small ?
It’s their fault I’m entertaining just a tiny little dread
That me friends may want a hero with a halo round his head.
Harry McCann,
4th. A.L.H.
* Cobber—Australian for a srell tried and tested pal.


SPECIAL A. & N. Z. A. C. ORDERS
The following are some of the “ special orders 99 issued on notable occasions to the
officers and men of the A. & N. Z. Army Corps.
I. THE LANDING
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND ARMY CORPS
April , 1915.
Officers and Men*— In conjunction with
the Navy, we are about to undertake one of
the most difficult tasks any soldier can be
called on to perform, and a problem which
has puzzled many soldiers for years past.
That we will succeed I have no doubt, simply
because I know your full determination to
do so. Lord Kitchener has told us that he
Jays special stress on the role the Army has
to play in this particular operation, the success
ipf which will be a very severe blow to the
enemy—indeed, as severe as any he could
receive in France. It will go down to history
to the glory of the soldiers of Australia and New
Zealand. Before we start, there are one or
two points which I must impress on all, and
I most earnestly beg every single man to
Jisten attentively and take these to heart.
We are going to have a real hard and rough
time of it until, at all events, we have turned
the enemy out of our first objective. Hard,
rough times none of us mind, but to get through
them successfully we must always keep before
US the following facts. Every possible en-
deavour will be made to bring up transport
as often as possible ; but the country whither
we are bound is very difficult, and we may
not be able to get our wagons anywhere near
us for days, so men must not think their wants
have been neglected if they do not get all
they want. On landing it will be necessary
for every individual to carry with him all his
requirements in food and clothing for three
days, as we may not see our transport till
then. Remember then that it is essential
for everyone to take the very greatest care
not only of his food, but of his ammunition,
the replenishment of which will be very difficult.
Men are liable to throw away their food the first
day out and to finish their water bottles as soon
as they start marching. If you do this now,
we can hardly hope for success, as unfed men
cannot fight, and you must make an effort to
try and refrain from starting on your water
bottles until quite late in the day. Once you
begin drinking you cannot stop, and a water
bottle is very soon emptied.
Also as regards ammunition—you must not
waste it by firing away indiscriminately at
no target. The time will come when we shall
find the enemy in well entrenched positions
from which we shall have to turn them out,
when all our ammunition will be required;
and remember,
Concealment whenever possible.
Covering fire always,
Control of fire and control of your men,
Communications never to be neglected.
\Y. R. Birdwood.
11. THE BATTLES OF AUGUST
SPECIAL ORDER
By General Sir lan Hamilton, G.C.8., D.5.0., A.D.C.
Conimander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Expeditionary Force^
General Headquarters,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
September 7, 1915.
The Commander-in-Chief, Mediterranean Ex-
peditionary Force, desires formally to record
the fine feat of arms achieved by the troops
under the command of Lieutenant-General Sir
W. R. Birdwood during the battle of Sari Bair.
The fervent desire of all ranks to close with
the enemy, the impetuosity of their onset and
the steadfast valour with which they main-
tained the long struggle, these will surely


make appeal to their fellow-countrymen all
over the world.
The gallant capture of the almost impreg-
nable Lone Pine trenches by the Australian
Division, and the equally gallant defence of
the position against repeated counter-attacks
are exploits which will live in history. The
determined assaults carried out from other
parts of the Australian Division’s line were
also of inestimable service to the whole force,
preventing as they did the movement of large
bodies of reinforcements to the northern flank.
The troops under the command of Major-
General Sir A. J. Godley, and particularly the
New Zealand and Australian Division, were
called upon to carry out one of the most difficult
military operations that has ever been attempted
—a night march and assault by several columns
in intricate mountainous country, strongly
entrenched, and held by a numerous and deter-
mined enemy. Their brilliant conduct during
this operation and the success they achieved
have won for them a reputation as soldiers of
whom any country must be proud.
To the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, therefore, and to those who were asso-
ciated with that famous Corps in the battle of
Sari Bair—the Maoris, Sikhs, Gurkhas, and
the new troops of the 10th and 13th Divisions
from the Old Country—Sir lan Hamilton
tenders his appreciation of their efforts, his
admiration of their gallantry, and his thanks
for their achievements. It is an honour to
command a force which numbers such men
as these in its ranks, and it is the Commander-
in-Chiefs high privilege to acknowledge that
honour.
W. P. Braithwaite,
Major-General,
Chief of the General Staff.
111. ARRIVAL OF 2nd AUSTRALIAN DIVISION. AND
SINKING OF THE SOUTHLAND
SPECIAL ARMY CORPS ORDER
Army Corps Headquarters,
September 7, 1915.
In welcoming the 2nd Australian Division
to join the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, the General Officer Commanding, on
behalf of all their comrades now serving on the
Peninsula, wishes to convey to them our general
feeling of admiration for the gallant behaviour
of all ranks on board the transport Southland,
when that vessel was torpedoed on the 2nd inst.
All the troops of the Empire now serving
with the Army Corps have heard with pride
of the courage and discipline shown at a moment
when the nerves of the bravest were liable
to be so highly tried. Not only was there
not the slightest confusion on the part of the
troops, who quietly fell in prepared to meet
whatever fate might be in store for them.
but later on when there was a prospect of the
Southland being able to make her way under
her own steam, and volunteer stokers were
called for, men at once came forward for this
duty and successfully helped in getting the
Southland into Mudros.
The 2nd Australian Division knows well the
high reputation it has to live up to, to carry
on the brave deeds done by those who have
been here earlier in the campaign, but with
men like those on the Southland we are fully
assured that our new comrades are going to
prove themselves equal in all ways to the old
hands who have fought so well.
C. M. Wagstaff, Major,
for Brigadier-General, General
Staff,
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps.
IV. LORD KITCHENER’S MESSAGE
AUSTRALIAN AND NEW ZEALAND ARMY CORPS
Special Army Corps Order,
November 25, 1915.
Lord Kitchener has desired me to convey
to the Australian and New Zealand Army
Corps, a message with which he was specially
entrusted by the King to bring to our Army
Corps.
His Majesty commanded Lord Kitchener
to express his high appreciation of the gallant
and unflinching conduct of our men through
Special A. 6 N. Z. A. C. Orders


fighting which has been as hard as any yet seen
during the war, and His Majesty wishes to
express his complete confidence in the deter-
mination and fighting qualities of our men
to assist in carrying this* war to an entirely
successful termination.
Lord Kitchener has ordered me to express
to all the very great pleasure it gave him
to have the opportunity, which he considers
a privilege, of visiting “ANZAC” to see for
himself some of the wonderfully good work
which has been done by the officers and men
of our Army Corps, as it was not until he
had himself seen the positions we had captured
and held, that he was able fully to realise the
magnitude of the work which has been accom-
plished. Lord Kitchener much regretted that
time did not permit of his seeing the whole
Corps, but he was very pleased to see a con-
siderable proportion of officers and men, and
to find all in such good heart, and so con-
fidently imbued with that grand spirit, which
has carried them through all their trials and
many dangerous feats of arms, a spirit which
he is quite confident they will maintain to the
end, until they have taken their full share in
completely overthrowing our enemies.
Boys 1 We may all well be proud to receive
such messages, and it is up to all of us to live
up to them and prove their truth.
W. R. Birdwood.
V. GENERAL BIRDWOOD RELINQUISHES COMMAND
OF A. & N. Z. ARMY CORPS
SPECIAL ARMY CORPS ORDERS.
Australian and New Zealand Army Corps,
December 1, 1915.
Boys, —I cannot tell you how really sorry I
am to be leaving '* Anzac/’ as I have to do
on shifting over to Army Headquarters.
I have not, however, any intention of saying
“ Good-bye ” to anyone, for I trust it is by no
means “ Good-bye/’ as I still hope and intend
to see as much of all my old friends in the Army
Corps as I possibly can do.
Nor am I going to express my thanks to
officers and men, even if I could find words
to do so. I feel it would only be presumption
on my part, for it is for the British Empire to
do that; and I well know it will do so.
My one wish is to be able to finish this war
alongside of all my old comrades of " Anzac”;
having begun it together close on a year ago
now in Egypt, I sincerely trust that many
of us may be spared to see it through together,
when the time comes to make an end of our
German enemies, though that day may be yet
far distant.
W. R. Birdwood, Lieutenant-General,
Commanding Australian and New Zealand
Army Corps.
VI. THE EVACUATION OF ANZAC
SPECIAL ORDER OF THE DAY
General Headquarters,
December 21, 1915.
The Commander-in-Chief desires to express
to all ranks in the Dardanelles Army his un-
reserved appreciation of the way in which the
recent operations, ending in the evacuation
of the " Anzac ” and " Suvla ” positions, have
been carried to an issue successful beyond his
hopes. The arrangements made for with-
drawal, and for keeping the enemy in ignorance
of the operation which was taking place, could
not have been improved. The General Officer
Commanding Dardanelles Army, and the
General Officers Commanding the Australian
and New Zealand and 9th Army Corps, may
pride themselves on an achievement without
parallel in the annals of war. The Army and
Corps Staffs, Divisional and subordinate Com-
manders and their Staffs, and the Naval and
Military Beach Staffs, proved themselves more
than equal to the most difficult task which
could have been thrown upon them. Regi-
mental officers, non-commissioned officers and
men carried out, without a hitch, the most
trying operation which soldiers can be called
upon to undertake —a withdrawal in the face


\
S—
i=r rzif^Bh
jL 1
Sniping. —
of the enemy —in a manner reflecting the
highest credit on the discipline and soldierly
qualities of the troops.
It is no exaggeration to call this achieve-
ment one without parallel. To disengage and
to withdraw from a bold and active enemy
is the most difficult of all military operations ;
and in this case the withdrawal was effected
by surprise, with the opposing forces at close
grips—in many cases within a few yards of
each other. Such an operation, when suc-
ceeded by a re-embarkation from an open
beach, is one for which military history con-
tains no precedent.
During the past months the troops of Great
Britairj and Ireland, Australia and New Zealand,
Newfoundland and India fighting side by side,
have invariably proved their superiority over
the enemy, have contained the best fighting
troops in the Ottoman Army in their front,
and have prevented the Germans from employ-
ing their Turkish allies against us elsewhere.
No soldier relishes undertaking a with-
drawal from before the enemy. It is hard to
leave behind the graves of good comrades,
and to relinquish positions so hardly won and
so gallantly maintained as those we have left.
But all ranks in the Dardanelles Army will
realise that in this matter they were but carry-
ing out the orders of His Majesty’s Govern-
ment, so that they might in due course be
more usefully employed in fighting else-
where for their King, their Country, and the
Empire.
There is only one consideration —what is
best for the furtherance of the common cause.
In that spirit the withdrawal was carried out,
and in that spirit the Australian and New
Zealand and the 9th Army Corps have proved,
and will continue to prove, themselves second
to none as soldiers of the Empire.
A. Lynden Bell, Major-General,
Chief of the General Staff,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force,
Special A. 6 N. Z. A. C. Orders


VII.
THE FOLLOWING TELEGRAMS ARE PUBLISHED
FOR INFORMATION :
December 20, 1915.
1. From His Majesty the King.
It gives me the greatest satisfaction to hear
of the successful evacuation of “ Suvla " and
“ Anzac" without loss of troops or guns.
Please convey to General Birdwood and those
under his command my congratulations upon
the able manner in which they have carried
out so difficult an operation.
George, R.I.
December 21, 1915.
2. To His Majesty the King.
I have communicated your Majesty's gracious
message to General Birdwood and the
Dardanelles Army. In their behalf and my
own I beg to give expression to the deep
gratification felt by ail ranks at your Majesty's
encouraging words of congratulation. The
troops are only inspired by a desire to be
employed again as soon as possible wherever
their services may be used to best advantage
against your Majesty’s enemies.
Sir Charles Monro,
Commander-in-Chief,
Mediterranean Expeditionary Force.
December 21, 1915.
3. From The Secretary of State for War.
His Majesty's Government received your
news with the greatest pleasure and wish im-
mediately to express to you and all under your
command their high appreciation of the ex-
cellence of the arrangements for the with-
drawal from " Anzac" and “ Suvla,'' and
their warm admiration for the conduct of the
troops in carrying out the most difficult opera-
tion of war. They appreciate as fully the
effective help which Admiral Wemyss and
the Navy as well as General Birdwood and
the Corps and other commanders afforded you.
The thanks of the Government for this fine
achievement are due to you and to all con-
cerned, and I wish also to congratulate you
personally*


-wm<. 'tiiz&s -■>■■- 'CSV- s< * &, >
Hi
—■ - ~ - , ' ***** , - ”, -1 "*\|*' ' ‘'xa** / -■> -■
• : ' ■•■?■' ■■■■' , '.■; ' . “ : ' : ' ;
s %/ / ,/< • , ',, . , ; ■>, <■ > * ,
•.;■<■'• , ] - '■' ' ' <■ ” . ■, ; , v^
/ <. , % ,'V" -- f' /, -■•■,%v f *f v y " x " " <v M ' ... .&(&& '
few.
---H * 7
V if ||B
a.— *' » r \ 4?”* ' % * • 1 (■p*
; j **. * * ; * ' v
Lord Kitchener speaKing to the men at Anzac
General Birdwood is standing beside him. The tents in the background are a hospital
General Birdwood showing Lord Kitchener the Turkish position from Russell’s Top
Official Photographs circulated on behalf of the Press Bureau and supplied bp the Central NeWs


, ;if ->i
' . ’ /'
The “Terror” of the sth.
Very New Officers “Well, my man, what’s the matter
with you ? "
Australasian: “ That over there hit me on
shoulder with his pick S ”
V.N.O. : “I don’t quite get you.’*
Aust.: “That fellah ovah theah struck me heah.”


A 60uv«nir
'Ik j jA 1
Au5tralian Z<z ' aiand
and - Corps,
if" --.
I i
| I
f ~v —** —
Still £oit*£ ttrsn|’ J- I
<^CI , |
Wf : "i*»
jpw- ; *.', , *? * • " *' . *, ;* *V
' •*- ,. *■ • , ! *•, ** *y"
rl * -?-' >* r - r m
I
gj. ■
m - 1 M
|mpi|| ** fV-^.<■
m f ' ;j^l
/ \ '• • s >Ss g^
— r . •* y<|^a * (|^^ juuL “"" rj '^^^^^^^^^*'
IIBl* nTvte rpiiyi m 4y- i^SR^^.
| IvTri^^
1 ■r« eM^te^| —■^i»— as ‘ |p^2d$Z!
RiH^^^®^*^ w * si,M> * SS8a?^? ’^^ ss< * sts^8S,1^^^‘^^s^^^^ f^^?^!^?^*^3^ , i^,.... ;
Um^^^^^^hm>!MimhhhmhmmIhmmhhmin«H
'Ey MaJ. D. A. LANE. 12th Aust. "Batin.
By G. W. HUTSON. R.E.
By F. P, HEWKLEY. 1 Aust. DiV. Coy.
By /4. ff. BARDIN. Ist Aust. DiV. Engrs.
FOUR DESIGNS FOR “THE ANZAC MAGAZINE” COVER


E - •• ** •* *•; * : T m
bhIHk 4^^
8
C • Sv\o kx ~ WA'lC^-
mm * mmm * MmmmM^*mmm^^^mm^^!m^^mm^m^^m^^^^m^m^
FOR CONSTANTINOPLE
THESE SEVEN-LEAGUE TRENCH BOOTS OUGHT TO
DO THE TRICK


CORRESPONDENCE
Dear Mr. Editor, —Thinking that perhaps
a little news about a hitherto unheard of de-
partment of the army (i.e. a Field Ambulance)
might interest you, I have set down (having
previously obtained the kind permission of the
great-grandchildren of the justly celebrated
Mr. Euclid, late of these parts, deceased) such
axioms as will be of use and guidance to those
requiring to know the habits of a Field Ambu-
lance.
Ax. 1. —A Field Ambulance shall be an
irregular conglomeration of humanity
and other animals, which shall never
under any circumstances conform to any
fixed order or condition.
Ax. 2. —Whenever possible, the number
of N.G.O.’s in a Field Ambulance shall
exceed the number of men by 50 per
cent., in order that the said N.G.O.’s
may have a twenty-four hours’ rest when
on duty, supervising fatigues, etc. (This
Axiom is taken from the detailed
account of Corps Orders made by
William the Conqueror in the year 1066.)
Ax. 3. —A Field Ambulance shall never
under any circumstances move off on
the first instance, but all necessary
fatigue for the moving shall be fully
indulged. Only under extreme circum-
stances may it move on the second in-
stance. (Vide AAZQP, Para. 14490053.)
Ax. 4. —All batmen in a Field Ambulance
shall be equal to anything.
Ax. s.—lf at any time a Field Ambulance
should be lost, the finder will, provided
he doesn’t require it for a war curio,
immediately place it in the most isolated
place available, and forget it, because
several others are trying to do the same.
—Yours truly, Nobby,
Actg. D.A.L.G. & P.O.
To Abdul Mustafa Mahomet, Bird
Trenches (or neighbouring green)
From Holly Spur y Suicide Valley , Anzac,
Decern., 1915.
Dear Abdul,—l’m scribbling this letter in
the trench with my back to the wall, and I’ve
heaps of good news that I’d better get down
while I think of it all. You’ve been so abnor-
mally quiet—say, Abdul, has something gone
wrong ? Not a charge or a sign of a riot, not
for ever and ever so long. They tell me you’re
sick of campaigning, that you’d aim in yont
kit if you could ; that your courage and patience
are waning, and the prospects ain’t looking
too good. Are you counting your hopes of
returning to that little home there in the
wood, where there’s peace, and a good fire
burning, and the rations are plenty and good ?
It’s near Christmas, you know —that’s the
reason we’ve buried our growls for a while \
for you couldn’t be sad in the season when
everyone’s wearing a smile. But, of course*
I forgot you’re not sharing the joy that we
Christians know, and I guess you’re not giving
or caring a damn for the whole bally show.
I’ll chance that it gives you the “ willies ”
if you’ve heard, it won’t hurt to repeat—that
the cards and the boys’ Christmas billies * are
here, and no kid, they’re a treat. Plum duif
for the boys who’ve been fighting on the
biscuit and beef (army store); I tell you we
don’t need inviting to back in our carts for
some more. Gee, the chocolate and cake are
delicious, and there’s sweets and smokes in
my pail, and a card with the sender’s best
wishes —I’m sending my thanks per this mail.
Folks who reckon that loving is living, whosd
hearts are as big as their land, whose happiness
centres in giving—that’s our folks and their old-
fashioned stand.
Well, Abdul, I’ll finish this trifle, for my
thoughts are beginning to drift, and the sergeant
has passed me my rifle, and it’s time I took over
my shift. I’m concluding this note with a
moral —take a tip from a bloke in the know—•
pick your men when you’re picking a quarrel.
—Yours truly, Australia Joe.
P.S.—By the way, they’ve been stating that
you’re scared to come out any more ; don’t
forget there’s a welcome here waiting, a warm
one, you bet; au revoir.
Corpl. A. V. McCann,
“ G ” Squadron,
4th A.L.H. Regt.
♦ The " billy ” is a tin can something like what Is
known in England as a milk can, in which the Austra-
lian of the bush boils his water and makes his tea. A
billy packed with various good things was being sent
to each Australian soldier for Christmas.


■MH—ir* ' wmrn , | I , .F
mim FASHION£SUNNER !
" ,f Bom- r fl.KscotT 4^B*rtfcßY.FA.
1. Australian sharpshooter disguised as a bush deceives a bird
2. First signs of summer: discarded puttees. Infantryman down from the firing line
3. Water-carrying in hot weather is hard work and requires few clothes
4. Sun-flaps on caps and shorts had quite a good run
5. Officer (incog.) armed with stick and bullet-pierccd periscope* (No periscope
& complete without bullet holes testifying to hair-breadth escapes)
6. Gas helmets will never be as popular as home-made shorts
7. The English-made slacks (for the “ Australian giants’*) were much too slack except
under the armpits
8« Slacks and a roll of blankets give a very Australian appearance


111
An all-Australian outfit is all right for
i Beeping out the cold (if not the wet)
But if you have a figure and want to
cut a dash on the Anxac Beach get a
“British warm”
A mackintosh cape and gum knee-
boots are grand fop wet weather
But when old Zero pays you a visit put
’em all on


ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS
ftp our Inquiry Office Orderly , Pis. T. COLLES, 3rd L.H.F.A •
Snidger. —We quite agree with you that
this is a soldiers’ journal rather than a Sunday
School prize book. Nevertheless, the chaplain-
editor feels we must decline the limerick series
you submitted us. Our head printer is a
married man with a growing family, and sternly
refuses to handle your matter. So that settles
it.
Anxious. —Your cold feet complaint must
not necessarily be a chronic affliction. Many
chaps have been permanently cured by a little
vigorous pedestrian exercise : such as vaulting
the parapet and bogging into a dinkum bayonet
charge. So cheer up I It will go away of
its own accord once you get “ warmed up
to it.”
Comic-Cuts. —Sorry all the generals you
have so far seen do not come up to your humor-
ous expectations. When you do meet the
general of whom you approve, we should
advise you just to drop him a line and let him
know. It will warm the poor old fellow up.
Hungry Always. —Yes, soft —or light—diet
is absolutely necessary in treatment for dysentery
or gastritis. If you think you know better
than the doctor, experiment with green quinces
and lemonade. . . . Let’s know how you get
on.
Chaplain of the —th. — Dear kind-hearted
old chap I Haven’t you quite enough to do
here without worrying your head over the
progress of war-relief funds in Australia ?
Anyhow, it may please you to know that it is
proposed to impose a special fine for every
time the word “ blanky ” is used by men or
officers; the proceeds to go to the various
funds. So you need have no fear of the said
funds not reaching the million £ mark in
quite a short time now.
Seedee Bot. —You can’t expect us to
diagnose your complaint if you don’t make
your symptoms clear. But if you feel that
.a torchlight procession is going on in your
Interior, you have probably exposed yourself
too suddenly to an attack of Cambridge
sausages and tinned peaches. Try a change
of diet, say, whisky and Schweppes with steak
and kidney pudding.
Undignified. —We sympathise with you
deeply in your suffering from the effects of
a shrapnel pellet. Naturally, every man on
returning to his country would be proud to
display to his admiring relatives and friends
those honourable scars received on active
service. You had bad luck, but at the same
time you should not have tried the ostrich
act when the shell burst.
Parcel Post. —You say you wouldn’t mind
an occasional case of eat-and-drinkabies in
the parcel as well as the socks and shirts and
box of liquorice powders. They will all be
useful, but anyway, think of your poor flurried
aunts and sisters at home, fighting their way
with knitting-needles—wild-eyed and tousle-
haired —through a deadly maze of skein-wool
entanglements I It's horrible I WeTe better
off where we are.
Adjutant. —Yes, it’s a pity that one of your
men—such a seasoned veteran and a capable
and obedient soldier, too —should have such
kleptomaniacal tendencies. But we wouldn’t
advise you to have him sent back. Make
him your batman, instead. , . . Why, the
man was born for the position I
Fuzzy. —Your suggestions will be handed
on to the proper quarters. The only objection
to the suggested cinema show at Reserve
Gully might be that the boys in the firing
trenches would make it too hot “ sneakin’ off
to the pitchers ” every night. . . . Afraid
you’ve no hope of seeing a pub built over
the road, opposite William’s Pier. . . , Yes,
it’s possible that our motor wagons might run
penny section moonlight trips to Salt Lake
and back to Anzac. But we fear that there
is no hope of a palais-de-danse there.


li {toll i
y
EACH ONE DOING HIS BIT
Drawn by W. OTHO HEWETT




A
PUBLIC NOTIC
J^OTICE. —The Turkish artill
to refrain from wastin
whilst our meals are being serve
pUBLIG NOTICE. —The E
will not be working up tl
while. Some cook stole the c
a pudding.
K ABA TEPE MUSEUM.—(
A piece of long extinct A
now being exhibited.
Admission . —One slice of bre
HOME.—t
established a home for !
and books. Any books or pap
there and no questions asked.
jy^EDICAL. —Men suffering f]
fullness after eating, are
state where they got the extr
—Men are advise
eyes open for an individu;
pyjamas, green glasses, straw
mackintosh. It is thought that
disguise.
PERSONAL, MISSING
etc.
seen two months ago in
Duke of Buckington’s grou
Bert Rao.khlocks* T.eft Gallinr
[^OST. —Pair of field glasses. Finder please
return same to our Champion Optimist.
WANTED
—The address of a good barber.
One able to cut hair and shave preferred.
Apply any platoon.
RANTED . —Section commander requires pair
of good field glasses to find his men when
there is shrapnel about.
Q M.S. requires a man who can even partly
' satisfy mess orderlies.
jTXCHANGE . —Corporal would exchange a
wristlet watch (not going) for a spring
mattress or a tin of MacConochie’s Rations.
ANTED. —Some nice girls to stroll with on
the Engineers’ North Pier.
RANTED. —Fifty thousand Turkish prisoners
for wharf-lumping, road-making, and build-
ing officers’ dugouts. Plenty of permanent
work for men of right stamp. Apply any
beach fatigue party —Australian N. Z. Army
Corps.
PULL private wishes to buy guide book to
London. Places safe from Zeppelin to be
marked with a cross.
'J'O LET. —Nice dugout on the skyline.
Owner leaving for field hospital.
MISCELLANEOUS
MAN with good memory would like the job
of taking messages from the troops to
friends in Cairo.
RANTED TO BUY. —The 2nd Brigade will
buy large or small quantities of old beer.
Fresh beer not objected to.
pEAD Prof. Fire Trench’s book on the kill-
ing of insect pests with a shovel.
gUSINESS FOR SALE.—Mess orderly will
sell goodwill of a flourishing business for
a box of fags.
QOMPLETE SPY OUTFIT FOR SALE.—
Including pair of blucher boots, sombrero
hat, two cutlasses and a yashmak. Owner
having failed to be discovered for two days is
going out of business.
Sergt. Noonan, 6th Battn.


Advertisements
BEACH THEATRE
of Varieties, Anzac.
TO-DAY!!
TO-DAY!!
Celebrated Pair of High Kickers and Whistling Wonders
Miss ANNA FARTA
{Soprano)
AND
Miss OLIVE GROVE
{Contralto)
Also FIRST APPEARANCE AT ANZAC of the
world-renowned
JACK JOHNSON
For One Night Only
TIRED TIM j the Juvenile Acrobat,
AND
KABA TEPE, the Turkish Juggler,
will combine in their
ASTONISHING DISAPPEARING TRICK
N.B. —The Anzac Artillery guarantees that this is
positively the last appearance of the above artists.
166


Advertisements
-f
nJ
1®“ Makers of Guns, Pins, and Things.
KRUPFS
(ESSEN, HUN-LIMITED)
NON - EXPLOSIVE
:: SHRAPNEL ::
THE BEST
ALL "SIZES
«
ENTIRELY UNASKED-FOR TESTIMONIALS
FROM ENEMY SOLDIERS:
I don’t mind your shrapnel in the least.” —Pte. ,
“ Please send me some more. They make such beautiful souvenirs.”
2nd Lieut. * , .
Try our
“1892 Converted
17 Bob the Ton.
New Fuses and Carriage extra.
Agents (for import to Turkey): Foxy Ferdy and Co.
N.B. —The firm will undertake the packing and forwarding of all orders
by the direct route, but will not guarantee their arrival at destination.
When ordering, please state whether you prefer goods packed as pianos,
soft goods, or chocolates.
Terms; CASH IN ADVANCE.


Advertisements
BEACHCOMBERS
(Strictly Limited)
Universal Providers and
Importers to the Troops
At Exorbitant Prices
□
All Best Brands of Army
Rations on Sale Daily
□
Direct and Regular Ship-
ments by our Special
Trawlers
▼
IDEAL MILK —a Speciality
MEDICAL COMFORTS 9 from 30/- upwards
Terms—Very Prompt Gash. No Questions Asked.
THE OLDEST HOUSE IN GALLIPOLI
Estab. April 25, 1915. Still Going Strong
SUPPORT HOME INDUSTRIES


Advertisements
Staff —Hue
10/-
CAPS—AII Breeds.
Cr
Very Smart
19/6 i
“ Nicholas ” A la Mode
19/- { Special Line) i/ioi
AARONSTEIN, ROBBEM O CO., All Principal Capitals.
'Badges (Cap), 21/ = upwards.
CHAMPAGNE
2290/- doz.
SPILLER, BOOSER CO.
Anzac and London.
Agents in Gallipoli for all the Leading Brands of Wines and Spirits.
DRINK OUR WINES
YOU’LL NOT LIVE
To Regret it.
Shipments direct to all the Leading 'Beachcombers,
Our Genuine Old Imbros Whisky
{GUARANTEED RARE)
£l2 per doz. botts.
NONE OTHER SEEN AT ANZAC. Ask the boys yourself—see what
they say —or the G.O.C.
Try our “ Triumph ”Brandy
ALL LANDING CHARGES SAVED.
Direct from Captain’s Cabin Square 24 H3, one mile from Kaba Tepe.
Or apply A.P.M., Anzac.


‘ ■ '' 1 ' !
1915
' >
Printed by Cassell & Company, Limited, La Belle Sauvage, London, E.C.
300.916


NLoy
%b ■ H k <^2
f} N
Date Due NATlONAlT
UC DflRAJlYOFAUSTRAlU
/
y
*
3 1508 00868518 7


