

fj.sgayg" "*'" SSZK^SSt




“ Land of hr own heath and shaggy ivood ,
“land of the mountain and the flood."
“ Sydney has two great Heritages; one is the
Harbour and the other is the Mountains.”
BATTY & CHALCRAFT, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
24 REGENT STREET, REDFERN.
188 T .


GOVETT’S LEAP, BLACKHEATH.
2


Introductory.
“ Blue and baseless, and beautiful,
Did the boundless mountains bear
Their folded shadows into the golden air,
The comfortlessness of their chasms was full
Of orient cloud, and undulating mist,
Which, when their silver cataracts hiss’d,
Quiver’d with panting colour.”— Ruskin.
IMHE early colonists regarded tlie mountains as the
fgski land of mystery. In the dim distance they stood
out blue and indistinct. They were deemed the boundary
of the settlement, and for a long time as impassible. The
deep ravines and towering craigs which appeared at their
sides, showed the difficulty that any explorer would have
to face. The mountains were the wonderland.
Such are the energy and pluck in the British character
that an early attempt was made to examine them.
In 1789 Lieutenant Dawes led a small detachment of
troops on a journey for discovery. They took ten days
provisions, but after penetrating nine miles into the
mountains, returned. In August, 1790, Captain Watkin
Trench made another attempt. He had a good escort, and
an excellent equipment, but he was not more successful
than his predecessor.
Interest in the mountains seemed to grow with the
difficulties of exploration. There was a strong desire to
know their extent, height, and what there was beyond.
Three years passed, and Colonel Paterson, of the New
South Wales Corps, took the matter up. He determined
to follow the Hawkesbury as far as it was navigable, and
then to ascend. He was one who had been accustomed to
the Highlands of Scotland, and, as he had a strong escort,
and some aboriginals as guides, great hopes were enter-
tained of his success. Popes, ladders, and grapnells were
provided, besides ammunition and plenty of food. Not-
withstanding all, an altitude of four hundred feet only was
reached. A hill-top passed showed others rugged and
barren, and more difficult to scale. A return soon became
a necessity. * V C >-
3


EXCHANGE STORES,
BLACKHEATH.
QEHBBAL STOREKEEPER,
GOTEITS LEAP EOAD.
Large & well assorted Stocks always kept.
Families on
Orders attended to carefully, and punctually despatched.
Families intending visiting Blackheath can send
their Orders on to the above address, when
Goods ivill be in readiness on arrival.
4


In the next year (August, 1794), Hacking, who was
Quarter-Master of H.M.S. ‘‘Sirius,” with some adventur-
ous comrades, began an ascent. They went twenty miles
further than those who preceded them, and then had to
retreat. There was no satisfactory result.
George Bass, whose name will ever be held in honor,
was the next to make an attempt He was the surgeon
of H.M.S. “Reliance,” and was the discoverer of the
well-known Straits that bear his name. The voyage had
been undertaken in an open boat. His pluck and daring
show what the sons of Britain can accomplish under
the most trying difficulties. For fourteen days he, with a
little band of faithful followers, struggled manfully up
the mountains. The party climbed the cliffs, or
precipices, on hands and feet, with the assistance of
ropes and iron hooks. Bass went much further than any
of his predecessors. He reached a point afterwards known
as Pulpit Hill, about five miles from Blackheath. There,
‘ ‘ after innumerable difficulties, having ascended to a great
height, he could only descry another apparently impracti-
cable ridge, with intervening woods.” He erected
a pyramidical heap of stones, and then returned.
Skill and bravery had nearly effected a remarkable
triumph. In passing, we may say that the fate of this
energetic explorer is full of romantic interest. Sometime
afterwards he entered into partnership with the owner of
an armed vessel, to carry on some kind of forced trade with
the Spaniards on the coast of South America. With
several of his shipmates he was seized by the authorities at
Valparaiso, when unfortunately off his guard. He was
sent to the mines. The curtain falls. He probably
perished miserably. Sons of this modern England when
they visit Pulpit Hill may shed a tear as they think of the
fate of George Bass, the brave pioneer.
Six years later Mons. Bareillier made an attempt at
exploration. He was an engineer and an aide-de-camp of
Governor King’s. He had a chain of posts, with a base of
supplies, but the results were less than in former expedi-
tions. Two years after Mr. Cayley, the Government
Botanist, endeavoured to unravel the mystery. He did
better than Mons. Bareillier, as he reached a point near
what now is Linden. A cairn of stones was erected at the
place, which Governor Macquarie later on christened
“ Caley’s Repulse.” The distance is about 52 miles from
Sydney, and 1672 feet above the sea level.
A few years after Governor Macquarie and Mr. Gregory
5


NEATEB
FURNISHED COTTAGES,
BLAGSBEATB,
Overlooking the beautiful Kaninibla Valley, and within
five minutes walk of the Railway Station.
Blackheath is the highest part of the mountains, and
most central for scenery, Mount Victoria being four miles
on the one side, and Katoomba seven on the other, and the
famous Govett’s Leap and Fern Gully being within
easy walking distance.
The Cottages are as follows
With two Bedrooms, containing two double and
one single Bedstead, Dining Room, and
Kitchen, per week . . .. . . ..220
With three Bedrooms, containing three double
and two single Bedsteads, Dining Room,
and Kitchen, per week .. .. . . 2 10 0
With four Bedrooms, containing four double
and two single Bedsteads, Dining Room,
and Kitchen, per week . . ~ . . 2 15 0
Two semi-detached, with four bedrooms, con-
taining three double and four single
Bedsteads, Dining Room, and Kitchen, per
week ..300
All the above cottages are furnished with every
necessary, including linen and cutlery, wood and coal
provided.
There is a General Store, Butcher, Baker, Greengrocer,
and Milkman near the cottages. Buggy to be had at 2s.
per hour.
It is necessary to forward a week’s rent to secure a
cottage, unless previously occupied.
All letters promptly attended to by
J. NEATE,
Proprietor.
6


Blaxland made an attempt to cross the Mountains, but
without success.
It was not until 1813 an actual triumph was achieved.
Blaxland arrived at the conclusion that the only way to
cross was to ascend the ridge that abuts upon Emu Plains,
and separates the Valley of the Grose from the Warra-
gumby, and follow it in all its numerous windings. He
invited to accompany him the great William Charles
Wentworth, then only a lad, and William Lawson,
formerly an officer in the New South Wales Corps. They
started with four servants, five dogs, and four horses, laden
with provisions, &c., from Mr. Blaxland’s farm at South
Creek, on Tuesday, 11th May, 1813. They reached, on
the 19th, wrote Mr. Blaxland:—“A pyramidical heap of
stones, the work evidently of some European, one side of
which the natives had opened, probably in the expectation
of finding some treasure deposited in it. This pile we
concluded to be the one erected by Mr. Bass, to mark the
end of his journey. That gentleman attempted some time
ago to pass the mountains, and to penetrate into the
interior ; but, having got thus far, he gave up the under-
taking as impracticable, reporting on his return that it
was impossible to find a passage even for a person on foot.
Here, therefore, the party had the satisfaction of believing
that they had penetrated as far as any European had been
before them.” Here Lieutenant Lawson cut his initials on
a tree, it was at Pulpit Hill before referred to, and now
known as the “Explorer’s Tree.” Around this the
Government has placed a stone enclosure, and there is a
tablet with the following very erroneous inscription: “This
wall and fence has been erected by the Hon. J. S. Parnell,
Esq., Minister for Lands, to preserve this tree, marked
by Blaxland, Lawson, Wentworth, being the farthest
distance reached in their first attempt to cross the
Blue Mountains, in the month of May, A.D., 1813.”
The spot is one of much historical interest, and it is
hoped the statement on the tablet will in due time be
corrected. The party proceeded, and, after fatigues of no
ordinary kind, managed to reach the site of Bowenfells.
They had crossed the mountains. Bathurst plains were
seen in the far distance. Mr. Blaxland wrote as to the
event, “It has changed the aspect of the colony from a
confined insulated tract to a rich and extensive continent.”
Five days took them home again.
George William Evans followed up the discovery, and
pressed on until he reached the site of what now is the
7


SLUE MOUNTAIN TILLA*
BLACKHEATH.
Five minutes walk from Station, 3,494 feet above sea level, on
the Western Line of Railway.
MR s. mUT X s
Is prepared to receive visitors requiring change of air.
Terms: Two Guineas per week, or 7s. 6d.
per day.
To prevent disappointment, intending visitors should intimate the
Accommodation they require.
TO LET
A Cottage Furnished
With every requisite, containing Six Rooms, five minutes
walk from Station.
WENTWORTH STREET,
BLACKHEATH.
Wood and Water found. Terms on application to
Me. W. LOOSLEY,
Wentworth Street,
Blackheath •
N.B.—There are two Stores, two Butchers’ Shops, &c.,
&c., so that intending visitors can get anything needful
with little inconvenience.
8


beautiful inland city of Bathurst. A road or track was
formed under the superintendence of Mr. Cox.
On the 25th April, 1815, the energetic Governor
Macquarie, with Mrs. Macquarie, and suite, crossed the
mountains to the site of Bathurst. On the night of the
29th April, 1815, it is recorded that the party camped at
Blackheath.
The main road was afterwards formed by convict labour,
under Sir Thomas Mitchell. It was a masterpiece in its
way. The centre of operations was Blackheath, where a
stockade was built, close to where the public school now
stands. In the little cemetery there are the graves of
several soldiers who died there, the dates on their tomb-
stones being much later. The central position of the place
for all matters connected with the mountains was in those
early days fully recognised. The first regular township,
however, was formed at Mount Yictoria, then One Tree
Hill, where the railway contractors had a camp. It was
not until about nine years ago that the Government surveyed
a township at Blackheath, and sold allotments. Since then,
especially during the past two years, the progress has been
both steady and remarkable.
Hints to Travellers, Climate, &c.
“ Peregrinations charm our senses with such unspeakable and sweet
variety, that some count him unhappy that has never travelled —a kind
of prisoner, and pity his case that, from his cradle to his old age, he
beholds the same still, still, still the same, the same.”— Burton.
Although it may be a very hot day in Sydney, do not
forget your overcoat. It may prove very useful. While
there are in the height of summer on the mountains some
really warm days, ast here are in a climate like that
of England, so also there are some very cold ones. In fact
in travelling up both rugs and overcoats are often very
acceptable.
It is possible that in the day time the sun may be hot on
the mountains, but the whole climate essentially differs
from that of Sydney, in that it is not relaxing. The moist
sea breeze is absent, and whatever heat there may be is
a “ dry heat.” It does not keep one in a bath of perspira-
tion, and thus thin one down. Those who have travelled
much in these colonies will not need to have explained the
immense difference upon the frame between a “ moist
heat” and a “dry heat.” The nights are always cool,
9


C. WOOLLER’S
BLACKHEATH (opposite Station.)
IpEA, |||OEEEE & AT ANY |(OUK?
ALL FRUITS IN SEASON.
Choicest Colonial Wines,
BEST BRANDS OF TOBACCO & CIOARS.
STATION- ST., BLACKHEATH
ID. JSIICHOLSOJh
Begs to acquaint tourists and visitors to the Blue Mountains
that he is prepared to supply Vehicles and Saddle Horses,
at moderate rates, to carry parties to the following places
of interest: —Grovett’s Leap, Perry’s Look Down, Hat Hill,
Wentworth Falls, Nelly’s Glen, and Mount York.
Buggy Meets all Trains.
A Guide will accompany Ladies and Gentlemen desiring- his services
to the various Scenes of the Neighbourhood.
Special arrangements to convey Parties Hare Shooting-Plenty
of Sport.
10


pn the mountains, and it need scarcely be added that there
is no need of mosquito curtains.
Do not imagine occasional mist is fog. The latter
always rises from the ground, the former is from the
clouds—in fact is part of a cloud. It is a rarified atmos-
phere, and never has the injurious effect of fog. There
are never any fogs at Blackheath.
The great Dr. Lang in his history of the colony, speak-
ing of the Weatherboard Hut, now Wentworth Falls, says :
“ I have no doubt that a considerable village or Sanitarium
will eventually spring up in this vicinity, for the health of
valetudinarians from Sydney and elsewhere in the low
country, who may require a rapid change to a colder
climate, the elevation of this locality being 2,856, or nearly
3,000 feet above the lower level. For as 250 feet of
elevation are equivalent, in point of temperature, to a
degree of latitude, the mere removal of a patient from
Sydney, which can now be easily effected by the railway
in three or four hours, would be tantamount to a voyage or
journey to some country of eleven degrees higher latitude.
For example, although the morning was delightfully warm
when I left the inn at Penrith, I felt the winds on these
elevated levels cold and piercing.”
We would impress upon the tourist that if he goes to the
mountains it is worth his while for many reasons to get the
greatest altitude he can. He will find the change greater,
and the climate more bracing. Blackheath is 638 feet
higher than Wentworth Falls. As it is a climate similar
to that of the south of England all kinds of English fruits
can be grown. Apples, currants, cherries, raspberries,
&c., all flourish. One _of the greatest blessings the
Sydney people have is this marvellous Sanitarium so near
at hand. The climate is unsurpassed in the colonies, not
excepting that of Tasmania. The air is pure and invig-
orating. Business men soon lose all weariness, and chil-
dren, previously weak, even in a few days, wear the bloom
of health. The bustle and cares of city life may have
chased sleep away, but on our “ Highlands ” tired nature’s
soft restorer swiftly returns. And the Appetite! Men
and women who could scarcely be tempted to take the
daintiest food in the low country soon eat like ploughboys.
Blackheath specially suits lung and chest diseases. There
are those who owe an altogether new lease of life to a few
months residence there.
Mineral waters of remarkable health-giving properties
were discovered near the township a short time ago, and a


MR. WILLOUGHBY,
jSuRGEON pEIHTIST,
“ Himilli/* iliillliili
Provides free accommodation to liis clients during the days
they remain at Blaclcheath on their professional visit.
(5 E 2 cD
Clients, one or move of a family, can combine
their Dentistry with visits to the various
places of interest on the Blue Moun-
tains, making Blackheath their
headquarters mean while
Delicate patients, in cases where time and care is required
to complete their Dentistry, will find it greatly to their
advantage to avail themselves of the opportunity and mode
of treatment offered by
mm» w BMiiißii
As he at the same time guarantees most Careful, Scientific Work
in all Branches of his Profession, at Sydney Prices.
12


Sydney firm is likely to engage largely in the trade of
supplying the same, even to other parts.
It is quite recently that the Sydney people have in a
measure realised the fact that they have such a grand
health resort at their very doors. In time the great
majority of Sydney families that can afford it will spend the
summer on the mountains, and in winter hundreds will be
there who want the tonic of sharp fresh air rather than
drugs. And is not health better than wealth ? A writer
well says:—“ Health is the greatest of ajl possessions, and
’tis a maxim with me, that a hale cobbler is a better man
than a sick king.” Old Isaac AYalton writes, “In the next
place look to your health, and if you have it, praise Glod,
and value it next to a good conscience, for health is the
second blessing that we mortals are capable of, a blessing
that money cannot buy, therefore value it, and be thankful
for it.” The conquering races of the world come from the
cold climates.
Take a pair of really comfortable boots for walking. It
is astonishing how far persons can walk on the mountains,
who in S} r dney would never dream of going a mile on foot.
About Blackheath a few miles over bush roads, with some
climbing up and down rocks and precipices, are thought
nothing of. The climate makes all the difference. The
bracing air makes one buoyant, but at the same time will
not compensate for tight boots. Remember also that one
need not appear in that prim neat way usual in George
Street at 4 p.m. One’s best clothes are better left at home.
Easiness, comfort, and convenience are the requisites for
the mountains, rather than appearances.
It is unnecessary to take any provisions. There are
good stores in the town, from which all requirements can
be purchased. The boarding houses are well provided, and
several cottages are to let, comfortably furnished.
The Journey.
“ How Divine,
The liberty, for frail, for mortal man,
To roam at large among unpeopled glens,
And mountainous retirement, only trod
By devious footsteps ! —Regions consecrate
To oldest time ! ” Wordsworth.
The tourist would probably leave Sydney in the cool of
the morning, by the nine o’clock train. The first stoppage
13


THORP AUDLIN HOUSE,
BLAOKH£ATK.
ESG/ITE IRDS.,
GENERAL CARRIERS
And DAIRYMEN.
aoaiii i iiiiii m nil.
Parties conveyed to the undermentioned places at the following
Return Rates, per head :—
To Govett’s Leap .. .. .. 1/6
Hat Hill 2/-
Mount York .. . . . . .. 3/-
Nelly’s Glen and Katoomba Falls .. 5/-
Wentworth Falls . . . . . . 6/6
Jenolan (Fish. River) Caves . . .. £2
Picnic Parties £1 per day
ALL ORDERS PROMPTLY ATTENDED TO.
14


is at Homebush, tbe next at Granville. A short stay is
made at Parramatta, the oldest place in Australia next to
Sydney. It lies somewhat in a valley, and wears a homely
and picturesque appearance. Before Penrith is reached
some of the finest land in the county of Cumberland will
have been traversed, and the glory of more than one large
orange orchard will have been impressed on the traveller’s
mind. Ten minutes are spent at Penrith, where refresh-
ments are provided at a moderate cost. Directly after
again starting the peaceful Nepean is crossed. The
bridge is one of the masterpieces of engineering, and from
the train a good view is obtained of one of the longest
reaches in the river. The foot of the mountains has now
been arrived at, and the ascent begins. From this point
it is a toiling and toiling upward for the train until Black-
heath is finally reached.
The Zig Zag is the first most striking feature. It has
long been regarded as the wonder of the colonies. The
top is less than 500 feet above the level of the sea, but the
view therefrom is one of rare beauty. There stretches out
before the tourist miles and miles of country, a part of
which is the rich valley of the Hawkesbury. The river
winds in and out among the fields. It is one of the
greenest spots in sunny New South Wales. Further off
are small towns, and in the distance the smoke of Sydney
can be discovered, distant by road about 39 miles. The
train is now T upon the mountains, but at Faulconbridge, 10
miles further on —the country seat of Sir Henry Parkes—
the altitude is not more than 1463 feet. The height, how-
ever, increases with almost every mile, and the traveller
can usualty find the atmosphere becoming cooler and cooler,
although the warmest part of the day is approaching. He
begins to fully realise as he passes deep ravines, and looks
across to bold, rocky precipices, that he is no longer in the
“ Lowlands,” but in our “ Highlands.” Here and there
he will see, half hidden in the trees, pretty villas, or
cottages, the summer residences of some of the leading
colonists ; and by the time the train has drawn up at
Lawson, 2399 feet above the sea, he wall not be the least
surprised at the difficulties of the early explorers. Before
he at the next station, Wentworth Falls, there is
another considerable rise, and some splendid gorges will
have appeared in view'. The succeeding stoppage is at
Katoomba. Its pretty little station decked out with ferns
will be admired. The train, on leaving, still toils upwards
—the highest township has still to be attained. There are
15


ARGYLE HOUSE.
flOlil lifilll,
General Storekeeper,
STATION STREET,
BLACKHEATH.
Tourist Parties supplied with every
requisite at Sydney prices.
WILLIAM CALE,
jpat«3 \V’nter anil
Govett. St, Blackheath,
As eminent authorities have pronounced the Mineral
Waters of Blackheath to be the clearest and
purest in the world, they are eminently
adapted for the Manufacture
of Cordials, &c.
AY. Gale’s Manufactory is replete with a first-class Modern
Plant, and is therefore equal to his increasing trade.
Orders kindly solicited, and promptly delivered to any part of the
Blue Mountains.
CHARGES MODERATE.
16


seven miles through, the heart of the mountains, the
wonderland or home of mystery to the 'early colonists.
Valleys are passed of unparalleled magnificence. Soon a
confined tableland is reached, 3494 feet above the level of
the sea; upon it is the beautiful little town of Blackheath,
and stretching out in the distance westward can be seen the
far-famed Kanimbla Valley. The hour is about 1.25 p.m.,
and the run from Sydne} r 73 miles. After a short stop-
page the train goes on its way, gradually descending to-
wards Mount Victoria.
Blackheath Notes.
‘ * Hills draw like Heaven,
And stronger sometimes, holding out their hands
To put you from the vile flats up to them.”— E. B. Browning.
Where the present Public School now stands originally
existed the Stockade, in which the prisoners of the early
days were kept during their non-working hours, and, in-
spiring as the view may be to the “free man” of the
grand Kanimbla Valley from this spot, yet we cannot but
think of the sad hearts that here have brooded over it. Such
is forcibly brought back to us by one or two little things
that have recently come to light. A few weeks since a lad
playing in the neighbourhood discovered a farthing of the
reign of George IV., 1826, nailed on to the stump of an old
tree; and amongst the trees opposite, descending the
valley, is to be seen the work of another unfortunate, who
has engraved his name on a tree within a heart, “Miller,
Convict.” It was only during the last winter, also, that
an elderly gentleman was observed intently engaged ex-
amining the ground abutting on the railway line, and
enquiry elicited the fact that 40 years ago this gentleman’s
father was a Government official at Blackheath, and he,
then a boy, was riding in a dray driven by another lad, a
prisoner, when the horse bolted, resulting in the death of
the young fellow. Now, after 40 years, he was endea-
vouring to find the stone that marked his companion’s
grave, which he ultimately did in the adjoining graveyard.
In preparing for the erection of the School, arm and
leg chains worn by prisoners were unearthed. A billy-can
full of brass buttons bearing the stamp of the 93rd
regiment was also dug up in a garden on the Govett’s
Leap Eoad.
17


nnK
BLACKHEATH,
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
Mrs. SEYMOUR
Can offer ladies or gentlemen a quiet and comfortable
borne at ber
I’riuatr Tin a riling sf ablisf|n|£tit.
VICTORIA KOTOR, BLACKHRATH,
(Near the Station.)
Blackbeatb being at an altitude of some 3494 feet (tbe
bigbest township in tbe Blue Mountains), and almost
midway between Mount Victoria on tbe one side and
Katoomba on tbe other, has a delightfully cool climate,
and is in tbe very centre of all tbe most inviting scenery
that these Mountains are world-renowned for. Tbe
far-famed Govett’s Leap is within miles of Victoria
House. Mrs. Seymour has on hire
-BUGGIES OR SADDLE HORSES,-
At reasonable rates, by which visitors can be
conveyed to the various scenes, and to tbe
Fish River Caves.
Terms on Application. Special Arrangements for Families.
|G-:3" Letters promptly attended to , and intending visitors
met at the Station.
18


We regard Blackheath as having the most central position
on the mountains for visitors. From it points of interest are
the most easily reached. It stands midway between
Katoomba and Mount Victoria. Both those townships
are, according to the government maps, situated in the
parish of Blackheath. It has nearly always been regarded
as the central part. In the old times it was the base of
operations for making the great road across the mountains.
The arrangements were under the management of Sir
Thomas Mitchell. A company of the 93rd regiment was
stationed there, of course the labour was performed by
prisoners.
There is now a neat church at the place, the minister in
charge is the Eev. AY. A. Leech, B.A. The Incumbent is
the Eev. E. Symonds, who is now absent on leave in
England. A regular service in connection with the Baptist
Church is held at “Morden”.
The public school is a well conducted institution. The
post and telegraph offices are at the railway station.
Butter, milk, and eggs are plentiful. There are three
dairies. Horses and vehicles can easily be procured to
take visitors about, and to the Fish Eiver Caves. The
terms are very moderate.
Eegarding tourists, it may be remarked that a great
increase is expected directly the Blaney-Murrumburrah
line is opened, as it will connect the Blue Mountains
directly with Victoria. As it is visitors from Melbourne
who wish to see the mountains have first to go to Sydney,
and make a special trip up and back again to Sydney.
When-the connecting line is open they wall be able to take
the mountains and enjoy all the sights by staying a few
days on the way, and then proceed to their journeys end.
The distance from Sydney to Melbourne via Blackheath will
then be only 38 miles further than via Goulburn. It is
hoped the authorities will issue return tickets by which
travellers may go by one route and return by the other.
Govett’s Leap.
This is without doubt the grandest scene of the Blue
Mountains. The tourist will pass Hydora House, and turn
the corner at Victoria House. The road is then thoroughly
made and good right out to the verge of the Leap, which
19


TO LET
LARGE & WELL FURNISHED
COTTAGE,
SEVEN ROOMS, Sfc., Replete with everg
Comfort and Convenience.
MISS SMITH can also receive a limited
number of visitors at “Morden.”
■Apply
MISS OARSIDE,
46 AVATKIN ST., NEAVTOAVN.
OR TO
MISS SMITH,
“ MORDEN,” BLACKHEATH.
20


is about a mile and a half from the station. On the way
several pretty villas will be seen, and notably the summer
residence of John Pope, Esq., and also that of George
Evans, Esq.
As to the scene itself, it would be next to impossible to
do it justice. Like that of the Falls of Niagara, it grows
upon one. On looking at it first the great depth, about
2000 feet—a distance over eight times the measurement of
the Sydney Post Office Tower —strikes the observer with
awe. Around are enormous rocks, towering up like
battlements, the lowest of which would be at least 3000
feet above the level of the sea. Below, the valley is full
of trees, no doubt tall, but appearing in the distance no
bigger than bushes. Tree ferns and other vegetation seem
to grow in rank luxuriance. In the centre, hidden by the
wealth of timber, a stream moves silently off to mingle its
waters with the Grose Fiver, which flows under the craigs
of Mount King George. At the right hand, 160 feet below
the hut, is seen “ Govett’s Falls,” the waters of which have
a sheer drop of 520 feet. Below, again, is the beautiful
cataract, called the “ Trinity Cascade,” and to the left, but
lower still, is the “Left Hand Fall.”
The valley is from three quarters of a mile to a mile and
a half wide. The direct depth to the centre of the gorge
is about 1,800 feet, and increases at a little distance to 2,027,
or about 1,050 feet above the level of the sea. It is not
practicable to descend from this point, nor at all, without
following a circuitous route with a distance of at least
eight miles.
A Pailway Guide, published by the Government, says,
quoting Mr. E. Barton : —“Once on the track the visitor
has nothing to do but to follow it up until he reaches the
tremendous rent or depression in the earth, which is said
to be the deepest chasm with perpendicular cliffs in the
known world. It is almost surrounded with these cliffs,
which are believed to be nowhere less than 3,000 feet
above sea-level. The full sublimity and grandeur of the
scene is not realised at the first glance. After contem-
plating it for some time the mind becomes filled with awe
and wonder as it vainly strives to comprehend
‘ the vast immeasurable abyss,
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild 1“
The trees in the valley below, although one or two hun-
dred feet high, or perhaps more, are indistinguishable in
their individuality. The scenery is full of grandeur, and
to add to its beauty there are two streams which are
21


N- & O, B_ DELANEY,
Wholesale and Retail
BLACKHEATH,
MOUNT VICTORIA AND LITTLE HARTLEY.
Prime Beef and Mutton, Dairy Fed Pork, &c., &c.
Visitors can be Supplied with Fresh Meat
and Bread every day.
All orders for the surrounding District punctually
attended to.
«T A TRIAL SOLICITED.
“WINDERMERE,”
GOVETT’S LEAP ROAD,
BLACKHRATH.
MRS. McFEDRIES,
llifiii IQiiD I MUM
Near the Station
Comfortable and Quiet Home. Terms Strictly Moderate,
■ -y -^ I —^7 —V V
Families accommodated with Suites of Rooms.
22


precipitated into the mighty chasm, and although meeting
with no impediment but the atmosphere in their descent
they are dissipated into mist before their waters can reach
the bottom; and often, when the wind is favourable, they
are wafted upwards and along for a considerable distance.”
Another writer says :—“To the right, at the distance of
about half-a-mile, the Govett’s Leap or Fall pours itself
headlong over a perpendicular wall of dark-tinted rock,
520 feet in sheer descent, into a mass of black fragments
of stone, which has in the course of ages accumulated at
the base of the cataract. This descending mass of water,
white and misty as the driven snow, sways as the wind
blows to and fro, like the veil of a bride ; the vast height
of the waterfall, the strong contrasts of colour, and the
undulating motion so produced, imparting a very singular
and most charming effect. When the sun attains a certain
altitude a rainbow plays for hours around the cloudy folds
of this fairy veil.”
The Rev. Dr. Cameron Lees, one of the Queen’s Chap-
lains, who, while on a visit to this country saw the Leap,
said, in a letter to the Scotsman : —“ It is well worth seeing.
It is a great depression, or narrow gorge, in the hillside,
bounded by steep precipices, and floored by huge trees,
which seem dwarfed by the height of the rocks that hem
them in. It is probably the only place in Australia that
can be called picturesque, and would be thought romantic
even among the Grampians or the hills of Skye.” Dr.
Lees spoke most disparagingly of this colony generally.
He seemed to delight in decrying its great natural advan-
tages and institutions, but when Govett’s Leap was before
him, prejudice seemed banished, and he appeared unable
to withhold that just meed of praise which is due to the
wonderful magnificence of the place.
Hat Hill and Perry’s Look Down.
Leaving Blackheath station, and passing the pretty and
picturesque English Church and Parsonage, driving
eastward, the visitor finds himself upon Hat Hill Road.
This will lead him to three points of much interest, viz.,
Glenroy, Hat Hill, and Perry’s Look Down. Glenroy is
about a mile and a quarter distant. Here the traveller
suddenly emmerges from the wood and comes upon a
23


GROSE RIVER, NEAR BLACKHEATH


magnificent view of Mount Hay. The pretty cottages
belong to the Rev. Canon King, the Rev. Edward
Symonds, and Miss Phillips, Principal of St. Catherine’s
College, Waverley.
About four miles from Blackheath stands Hat Hill
(said to resemble a flattened bell-topper), beside it is “ The
Rooster,” nature’s carving in stone. The view is extensive
and handsome. Mount King George, Mount Hay, The
Dromedary, Mount Tomah, Mount Victoria, and Mount
Piddington are seen around. From the top of the Hat,
Katoomba is seen on one side, with Mount Victoria on the
other, and the more distant scope includes Sydney and
Botany Heads.
Two miles further on the traveller reaches “ Perry’s Look
Down.” Here he finds himself on the top of gigantic and
perpendicular crags or cliffs, whence he can gaze with
mingled feelings of horror, amazement, and delight into
the unfathomable abyss of the gorge beneath. With one
end of this he is already familiar, as Govett’s Leap.
Perry’s Look Down is a flank view of the same gorge,
but seen from a higher point it appears huger, more
monstrous, wonderful, and terrible, and well justifies the
dictum of Darwin, who pronounced it to be “the largest
hole in the world. The best view of this modern Avernus
is through the forked tree, but it requires much nerve to
grasp the prongs with either hand and lean forwards and
look down, down, down, into a depth the bottom of which
the keenest sight cannot gain. It may safely be said that
no day in the mountains will repay the pleasure-seeker
better than that upon which he makes this excursion to
Glenroy, Hat Hill, and “ Perry’s Look Down,” and it will
occupy a full day with pleasure and advantage.
“DOCKER’S LADDER.”
Is the rather dangerous descent of 2150 feet near this
point to “ Junction Camp,” which is in the Valley of the
Grose, where fairly good fishing can be obtained.
The Mine Road.
The road which runs from Blackheath to the Coal
Mine is miles long, and was made some three years
since by the Blackheath Coal Mining Company, whose
workings are situate 1,500 feet below. Just before


CHARLES WOOLLER,
BUILDER & CONTRACTOR,
BLACKHEATH.
Plans and Specifications prepared if required.
KIDLOW DAIRY,
(Three miles from Blackheath.)
THOMAS CLIFF,
DAIRYMAN.
Milk, Eggs, and Butter Supplied Daily.
VICTORIA HOUSE SUB-DIVISION,
WHkMM -v r r,
This land fronts the G-ovett’s Leap and Bathurst Roads, and is one
minute from the Station. It is in the very heart of the Township,
and, in fact, is the most centrally situated block on the mountains.
The allotments are generally 25 x 150, and are specially suitable for
business premises. Remembering that position is of primary import-
ance for all purposes of trade, these allotments can be recommended
as the best that can be procured by any who want a first-class stand.
Price, £7 per foot. Terms, one fourth cash, balance payable by
instalments within three years. Six per cent, interest.
Special arrangements can be made to Lease any of the allotments
with or without option of purchase. By this plan a few shillings a
week ground rent will procure a good business position.
Apply to Mr. C. Seymour, Victoria House, Blackheath, or to
Mr. S. B. Baly, 142 King Street, Sydney.
TAA-dSTID FOR SALE.
MOUNT VICTORIA—37 Acres, near Station, £2,000
MOUNT VICTORIA—ViIIa Sites, 40 x 100, £BO
BLACKHEATH—IO Acres, Hat Hill Road, near station, £4OO
"WENTWORTH FALLS—I 2 Acres fine land, well situated, £3OO.
TAYLOR BROTHERS, Young Street, Circular Quay, Sydney.
26


descending tlie valley proper, and some cpiarter of a mile
from the railway, is a large fallen monarch of the forest,
from which vantage ground a most expansive and charm-
ing view is obtained of the valley on clear days, when the
blue mist lifts, which so often enshrouds the distant peaks.
Here sat for many days sketching, and admiring the
glorious panorama before him, that unfortunate English
gentleman and artist, Mr. Bainbridge, who perished after-
wards in New Zealand, at the time the Pink Terraces were
destroyed. We now descend the new road for about a mile,
and turning off to the left through the trees, and across
the little mountain rill, the
“ MERMAID’S CAVE ”
opens to our view, when the sweet music of its pretty cas-
cade, with litchens, ferns, &c., all round us, would tend to
make us think we were indeed amongst the mermaids.
Retracing our steps we gain the road, and within a hun-
dred yards, on the right hand side, is another pretty nook
called
“ ANNIE’S REST.”
We pass on, and 300 yards farther down, just beyond
where the huge roots of a tree partially obstruct the road-
way, we climb up to the right to a cave only recently
discovered, and which has been named the
“ DUNBAR FALLS.”
Here all is hushed save the continual patter patter of the
glistening drops on the broad fronds of the verdant
denizens of this as yet undisturbed nook—it is a veritable
earthly paradise, and amply rewards us for the rather
difficult climb from the road.
Pursuing still the Coal Mine Road to the valley for
about 400 more yards, we again take a climb up to the
right, through the thick brushwood and rocks, and two
hitherto unknown caves open to our enchanted view, far
surpassing anything yet seen. It is only within the
last two or three months they have been discovered by a
resident of Blackheath. The tree ferns, mosses, &c.,
everywhere abundant, appear at their very best, all over-
shadowed by the immense towering rocks above, over which
comes the ever-refreshing mountain rill. The larger of
these caves has been christened by a Sydney lady
“TAR ALT A GATE,”
and the smaller by a local resident
“EVELINE’S BOWER.”
Several smaller caves are to be seen as we pursue our
way down to the Coal Mine, from which there is a track to
27


THE HYDORA HOUSE
Close to the
BLAOKHEATH RAILWAY STATION,
On the BLUE MOUNTAINS,
R. J. S. NICOLLE,
Desires to inform the gentry of Sydney, visitors and
others, that he has opened the above House,
and hopes, by strict attention to their
wants, and moderate charges, to
merit a share of the
public patronage.
None Tout the Best Brands of 'Wines,
Spirits, &c., kept.
BATHS, BUGGIES, AND EVERY CONVENIENCE FOR
THE USE OF VISITORS.
The above house is most centrally situated for visiting all
the places of interest (approached by good roads) viz.,
Grovett’s Leap and Falls—an unbroken descent of water of
between five and six hundred feet—within two miles ; the
Trinity Cascade, the Left Hand Fall, Perry’s Look Down,
Docker’s Ladder, Kanimbla Valley, and Mounts King
G-eorge, Hay, Tomah, and Wilson, with their grand views
and magnificent display of mountain scenery, all within
easy distance of this Hotel.
Parties conveyed to the Fish River Caves.
TEIViVIS MODERATE.
28


“CECIL’S DELL,”
from whence we can return along the ridge homewards to
Blackheath, having the Kanimhla Valley to the left, and
the Coal Mine to the right of us. There is a bridle track
from the Mine to the valley, where it forms a junction with
the track from Katoomba to the Jenolan Caves.
The Kanimbla Pass.
BLACKHEATH.
The above Pass was quite recently discovered by Mr. T.
Porter, in his endeavours to find a short way down to the
Kanimbla Valley, in which he has been successful, so
that it is quite possible to reach the flat in the valley
below in about an hour. The track (a rough one) has been
marked, and two rustic ladders erected by the discoverer
to assist those who would fain ascend.
It has generally been the practice of both residents and
tourists on the mountains to name whatever fresh nooks or
natural beauties they may have found. The above was
named “Louisa Caves,” but we have adopted “Kanimbla
Pass ” as the more appropriate, for ’tis a Pass indeed of
rare beauty. This secluded spot is reached within half-an-
hour’s walk of Blackheath Railway Station. Passing the
small graveyard on the left, the road must be followed
down to within 100 yards of the Brewery, where a track
leads off to the right; this should be continued right on to
the plateau on the hill above, where, leaving Mr. Porter’s
cottage to the left, we strike diagonally across through the
scrub, and stopping to take another view of the enchant-
ing valley before us, we gradually descend. A break in the
cliffs appears, the murmur of a babbling brooklet is heard,
and we find ourselves in a narrow gorge, cavernous rocks
on either side, standing out dark and sombre in contrast to
the verdant carpet of moss beneath, where in virgin beauty
crowns of lovely ferns dip their pendant fronds in the
stream running through this Pass, and dashing in a series
of cascades over the rocks. But our way is to the right,
close under the cliff, and along the narrow terrace, where
another silvery stream meets our view, and other caverns
open up. We follow the stream down through the gorge,
carefully descending in some precipitous places, and finally
emerge into the bright sunlight on the “ Resting Rock.”
W are at the base of high cliffs, seven or eight hundred
feet high, branching away to the right and left, enclosing
29


WENTWORTH FALLS.
30


in their iron grasp the mighty valley, to which “Porter’s
Track” from this spot leads to. A word of caution is
necessary here to the venturous explorer—be prepared to
remain in the valley all night if you desire to descend.
Verb. Sap.
Wentworth Falls.
13f Miles from Blackheath, by road or train.
The late Dr. Lang wrote :—“ Where the rivulet from the
Weatherboard hut discharges itself there is a break or bay
in the line of cliffs on that side, as if a vast portion of the
wall of rock had been quarried out for the purpose, the
two points appearing from behind like two lofty headlands
jutting out into the valley, and bearing a remarkable resem-
blance to the Heads of Port Jackson. The rivulet, which, in
its course of two miles and a half, has been swelled by one or
two smaller streams issuing from lateral valleys to the size
of a common mill-stream, precipitates itself all at once over
the rocks at the head of the bay, and is lost in the abyss,
the fall being at least 1000 feet. On gaining the edge of
the precipice, the waters seem to shrink instinctively from
the frightful leap to which they have been conducted in
their course down the valley, each individual drop appear-
ing endowed with separate volition, and seeming deter-
mined to shift for itself; and the whole mass of fluid
resolving itself into what appears like innumerable particles
of snow.”
Darwin, in his “Naturalist’s Voyage,” says of this part
of the country, “About a mile and a half from the little
inn called the Weatherboard, the country is elevated 2,800
feet above the sea-level. Poliowing down a little valley
and its tiny rill of water, an immense gulf unexpectedly
opens through the trees which border the pathway at the
depth perhaps of 1,500 feet. Walking on a few yards one
stands at the brink of a vast precipice, and below one sees
a grand bay or gulf, for I know not what other name to give
it, thickly covered with forest. The point of view is
situate as if at the head of a bay, the line of cliff diverging
on each side, and showing headland behind headland, as
on a low sea coast. These cliffs are so absolutely vertical
that, in many places, a person standing on the edge and
throwing down a stone can see it strike the trees in the
abyss below. About five miles distant in the front another
31


iiSiiiii fill! ittia
W. 1. EDWARDS.
AT KATOOMBA
The above is the nearest House to
KATOOMBA VALLEY,
EERN OULLY,
THE THREE SISTERS,
THE ORPHAN ROCK,
And KATOOMBA PUBLIC RESERVE,
And within easy distance of all the principal Scenery on the
Blue Mountains.
Buggies Meet all Trains.
TERMS STRICTLY MODERATE.
32


cliff extends, which then appears completely to encircle the
valley; hence the name of bay is justified as applied to this
grand amphitheatrical depression. If we imagine a wind-
ing harbour with its deep waters, surrounded by bold,
cliff-like shores, to be laid dry and a forest to spring up
on its sandy bottom, we should then have the appearance
and structure here exhibited.”
Lawson.
This township is named after the intrepid Lieutenant of
that name, and is one of the first places of interest in the
higher altitudes of the mountains. It is the next station
to Wentworth Falls, and 15 miles from Blackheath.
There are several fine views and Falls within a short
distance of the Railway Station, notably Dante’s Grlen
and the Livingstone Falls. Lawson is a rising township,
and by reason of its nearness to Sydney a favourite
sanatorium.
Katoomba.
This is a thriving township, and on the road to the Falls
that bear its name. The coal mine near at hand helps to
give the place a somewhat busy appearance. There are
points of interest in the neighbourhood which will well
repay the trouble of a visit. The “ Falls ” are only about
a mile and a half away, and there are other sights of
considerable beauty within an easy distance. There are
several boarding houses for visitors, and the “ Carrington ”
is a first-class hotel. Katoomba is a township often much
admired. The Fish River Caves can be reached from this
point either by riding or driving.
Katoomba Falls.
These Falls are about a mile and a half from the township
of Katoomba. A good view of the immense valley of the
Jamieson can be had from that point. A short distance on
is the “Orphan Rock,” a great lonely obelisk, and a
litttle further is the new coal mine opened by Mr. North.
The distance from Blackheath would be a little over
eight miles by a picturesque road.
33


ORPHAN ROCK, KATOOMBA.
34


Leura Falls.
These are near the Katoomba Falls. They are well worth
seeing, as the stream of water as it falls into the valley
below resembles a bridal veil. From this point there is a
grand view of the valley of the Jamieson, also of Mount
Solitary. In the far distance can be seen mountains near
the Goulburn district. At about 200 yards to the left,
overhanging a great gorge, is the “ Echo Tree.” The echo
is a very remarkable one. A few yards further on in the
Katoomba direction is a track turning off to the right.
Those who follow it and keep all right-hand tracks, will
reach a very fine fern gully, A descent will repay all
trouble, as visitors will find themselves at the foot of the
Falls. The view overhead is one of surpassing splendour.
Should, however, the descent into this gully be not made
by keeping to the tracks on the left hand, the “Meeting of
the Waters” will be reached. This is caused by the
junction of two mountain streams coming down from rocky
heights, and which, when united, rush on and leap into the
valley below, and so form the Leura Falls.
Nelly’s Glen.
(Six miles from Blackheath, Two miles from Katoomba.)
In Nelly’s Glen there is a lovely cascade formed by the
meeting of two watercourses. It is a gorge or deep dell from
the top of the mountain to the Kanimbla Valley. It gradu-
ally falls to a depth of 500 feet The walls on either side
appear to have been washed and tunnelled out by the floods,
and caves of various sizes have been formed. This is a won-
derful place for ferns and mosses. There is a remarkable
echo in the Glen—the word shouted is repeated three
times.
Mount Victoria.
This is the oldest township on the mountains, and is situated
about four miles westward of Blackheath. It arose
through having been the railway terminus for some months.
It was then called “ One Tree Hill.” It has a Church, and
35


THE
KATOOMBA,
THE Proprietor of the “Carrington” desires to bring under the
notice of the public of Australia the many attractions and
advantages the Hotel and neighbourhood offer to all desirous of
change, or seeking health, rest, and enjoyable scenery.
Situate on the Western line of Railway, 66 miles from Sydney,
and at an elevation of 3,400 feet above sea level, in the very heart of the
Blue Mountains, it possesses the most equable and invigorating
climate, midst most charming and marvellous scenery —all the famed
resorts of the district being within easy distance. These include
those wonders of the world—the Jenolan or Fish River Caves,
G-ovett’s Leap, Wentworth Falls (the “Weatherboard”), Katoomba
Falls, Leura Falls, the “ Meeting of the Waters,” the Megalong Zig
Zag, etc. The numerous walks and drives in the immediate neigh-
bourhood of Katoomba are unsurpassed. The temperature of the
place rarely ranging above 75 degrees during summer. Katoomba
offers to those suffering from the enervating effects of the coast and
interior of Australia the most beneficial change, giving all the
advantages of Tasmania or New Zealand without the dangers and
discomforts of a sea voyage.
The Hotel stands on a most beautiful eminence, surrounded by
extensive garden and grounds, and commands one of the most mag-
nificent and extensive views obtainable in the Blue Mountains. The
establishment has been renovated and painted throughout, twenty
new bedrooms added, and every sanitary appliance that modem
science has indicated as effectual has been adopted, thus making it
one of the largest, most comfortable and best conducted Hotels in the
Australian colonies.
The public Dining and Drawing Rooms are unequalled, and the
arrangements such as to insure the comfort and convenience of its
patrons.
Private Apartments may be secured on application, personally
or by letter. The Bridal Suites of rooms are furnished in the most
recherche style.
Buggies and Saddle Horses always on hire. Post and Telegraph
Office —letter delivery twice a day. Letters and telegrams instantly
acted upon on receipt.
F. C. GOYDER,
PROPRIETOR.
36


two good schools. The accommodation for travellers is good.
Mount Piddington, which is near at hand, gives, from the
top a capital view of the surrounding country. The “ Fairy
Bower ” is a pretty spot, the road to which a finger post
will show. The rugged nature of the country is here very
striking. Should the visitor pass on a little further he will
come to the “Witches GUen.” It is another charming-
spot. Ferns here abound. A path on the left will lead to
Fern Cave. Cox’s Cave, named after its discoverer, is not
far from the township.
Pulpit Hill.
(6 miles from Blackheath.)
This is a plane of singular historic interest. It was the
furthest point reached by Dr. Bass in 1796, in his brave
attempt to cross the mountains. (See the historical intro-
duction.) The “Explorer’s Tree” is here. Lieutenant
Lawson cut his initials on it in May 1813, when on his
journey with Blaxland and Wentworth, in which a way
across the mountains was discovered. The inscription on
the tablet at foot of the tree will be seen to be incorrect.
The place is reached b} r the main road, in the Katoomba
direction.
Medlow.
This is a railway platform three miles from Blackheath.
There is a large sawmill there, and consequently a plentiful
supply of good timber for building purposes.
Look Out Hill.
This is about the third of a mile towards Sydney from the
Blackheath station on the main road. It is considerably
higher than the line, and on a clear day with a field glass
Sydney can be seen.
37


"MOUNT ALLEN"
HOTEL,
■waaaw®sssOT
ETER MULHERAN,
PROPRIETOR.
The Hotel is situated in the midst of the grandest Scenery
on the Blue Mountains, which is of the most
romantic description, & is quite
close to the Falls.
The Hotel is noted for Comfort, and every attention is paid
to visitors.
Best Quality of Wines & Spirits.
Comfortable Accommodation for Visitors Si Tourists.
CHARGES MODERATE.
HORSES & VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
38


Mount York.
Tins is about miles from Blaekheath, via Mount
Victoria.. It was the last point passed by Blaxland,
Lawson, and Wentworth, in their exploring expedition of
1813. The view into the Hartley Valley is exceedingly
fine.
Hartley Vale.
This place is about seven miles from Mount Victoria, or
eleven from Blaekheath. The N S.W. Shale and Oil
Co.’s AVorks and Mine are here. A visit will prove both
interesting and instructive. The processes can be seen by
which kerosene oil is made from the shale.
Clarence Siding.
(15 Miles from Blaekheath by Train.)
This is remarkable as the highest point reached by the
train —3,658 feet. There is no township at the station.
The honour of being the highest town (3,494 feet) on the
mountains, as well as the most central, belongs to Black-
heath.
The Great Zig Zag.
This can be seen on the way to Lithgow. It is 19 miles
from Blaekheath by train.
Lithgow.
(23 Miles from Blaekheath by Train.)
The potteries and Mines of this district are well worth a
visit. A tourist can leave Blaekheath by train in the
morning, see on the way the Western Zig Zag, spend the
day about Lithgow, and return in the evening.
Mount Wilson
The place is about ten miles from Blaekheath by road.
We may here mention that at the hotel or boarding houses
buggies and horses can be obtained at Blaekheath to take
39


BALMORAL HOUSE,
PRIVATE
Biiiiiii iifiiiiißiiii
Mrs. DUNN
I)EGS to inform her patrons and the general public, that,
J having added to the above house a large Drawing-
room, Private Sitting-room, and seven large and well
ventilated Bed-rooms, beside Ladies’ Bath-room (with office
attached), she is prepared to offer special facilities to
Tourists, Invalids, and others seeking change of air and
scenery.
For families, Wedding Parties and others, every comfort
of a home can be obtained, and at reasonable charges.
Terms, &c., on application to Messrs. J. T. Tilcock,
George Street, Sydney, ; H. L. 1 )uxx, 280 Pitt Street,
Sydney; A. B. James, Morrisett Street, Bathurst, or to the
undersigned
MRS. DUNN.
Vehicles and Saddle Horses may be obtained
as required.
40


visitors to this or any other part in the mountains, and at
moderate charges. Mr. Du Faur writes of Mount Wilson :
‘ 1 A ride of about five miles from the platform, along the
northern water shed of the Grose, and of about three miles
further along a spur hearing to the northward from Bell’s
line of road, and leading down to some of the heads of
Wollangambe Creek and the Colo River (affluents of the
Hawkesbury) brings the tourists to the foot of a ridge,
which on his right hand appears to be bounded by the
usual perpendicular escarpment of horizontal sandstone
characteristic of the Hawkesbury formation; but the dense
undergrowth, the increased size and improved symmetry
of the trees, and the rich black soil under his feet, tell of a
sudden change.”
The Jenolan or Fish River Caves.
For ever: in thy deep green gracious glens
The silver fountains sing for ever, far
Above dim ghosts of waters in the eaves,
The royal robe of morning on thy head
Abides for ever! Evermore the wind
Is thy august companion ; and thy peers
Are cloud and thunder, and the face sublime
Of blue midheaven! Henry Kendall.
These caves can be well reached from many points on the
mountains. The distance from Blackheath on horseback is
a little over 30 miles. The road to Pulpit Hill is followed,
and then the tourist turns off to the same line as that
followed from Katoomba. A nearer way, however, was
recently discovered, by which the road to the mine is
traversed, and beyond the mine there is a track which
meets the above-mentioned line at a point nearer the caves.
There is another route by way of Mount Victoria, for
buggies, which is 35 miles. Horses and buggies can be
obtained for the trip at Blackheath, at moderate terms.
Another way to the caves is from Tarana Station (120
miles from Sydney.) Upon notice being given to Mr.
Wilson, the keeper of the caves, Oberon Post Office, a
vehicle will meet the train. The distance from Tarana is
36 miles.
An excellent boarding house is kept by Mr. Wilson. A
few days notice should always be given. He provides a
guide, and will be found very attentive to visitors. An old
suit of clothes should be wmrn. Three or four days at the
caves will be necessary.
41


KATOOMBA.
DAVID B O W J\l,
nnnnNii
First Class Accommodation, combined
with Civility & Moderate Charges.
Suites of Rooms for Tourists, Visitors, and
Commercial Travellers.
Horses and Buggies on Hire.
(5 ” e)
Extensive Stabling & Coach House.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
42


It is said the Jenolan caves may rank among the won-
ders of the world. It would be quite beyond our limits to
give any adequate description. The traveller must see
them for himself. Every New South Welshman should take
an early opportunity of visiting them, unless he has already
been there. Many, however, go a second and third time,
and come away more enchanted than ever. The principal
caves are chiefly as follows:—The “Imperial Cave ” is
entered by the grand arch. Visitors then climb to the top
of the ladder, and proceed, headed by the guide, and each
carrying a lighted candle. The “Wool Shed” is thought
to be like wool on a sheep’s back. The “ Architect’s
Studio” is remarkable as having long stalactites. The
“Margaretta Cave” is very large. The “ Helina Cave”
has a figure supposed to resemble the Madonna. The
“Lucinda or Diamond Cave” has a floor like a bed of
diamonds. “Katie’s Bower ” has stalactites resembling a
pipe organ. The “ Bone Cave ” contains wallaby bones.
The “ Crystal Eock ” is a great rock, and appears to have
water running over it. The “Shawl Cave” is also con-
tained in the “Imperial,” and also the “Lady’s Finger”
and ‘ ‘ Lolly Caves. ’’ The ‘‘ Show Booms, ” « Lot’s Wife, ’ ’
“Crystal City,” “Mystery,” and “Nellie’s Grotto.”
“Selina Cave,” “Diamond Wall,” “Crystal Palace,”
“Gordon Palace,” “Jewel Casket,” “Gem of the West,”
“ Fairy’s Eetreat,” “ The Queen’s Jewels,” and the under-
ground river. The “ Lucas Cave ” and the “ Elder Cave ”
contain each many caves.
Mr. Wilkinson, Government Geologist, says as to the
formation of the Caves :
“ It is not uninteresting to reflect that this limestone, now
a compact grey marble, was once a mass of living corals,
‘ stone lilies,’ and molluscs, revealing the former exist-
ence, in the Siluro-Devonian epoch, of conditions of marine
life somewhat resembling those which support the beauti-
ful living forms which build up the reefs in the coral seas
of the present day ; and it is significant of the vast changes
that this part of the surface of the earth has undergone,
when we see fresh-water streams, at an elevation of several
thousand feet above the sea, now flowing through rocks
that were originally formed beneath the waves of the
ocean, at a very remote period of the earth’s history.
First the decaying vegetation of some ancient forest is
invisibly distilling the gas known as carbonic acid; then a
storm of rain falls, clearing the air of the noxious gas, and
distributing a thousand streamlets of acid water over the
43


iifiiiii iiiiii ion.
KATOOMBA,
Mr. R. FR YE R.
(Late of Hartley Yalfe),
Having purchased the above commodious premises, desires
to inform his many friends, together with the general
public, that he is prepared to supply
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION,
Combined with civility & moderate charges.
Arrangements can be made to provide transit for persons
wishing to view the celebrated Jenolan Caves.
GLENAMPLE & MONTROSE
Ispriw iiiiiiii iiiillisliiilii
KATOOMBA,
Situated in the Healthiest locality on the Blue Mountains,
W. M. BAIRD, Proprietor.
Glenample ” being the first Boarding Establishment at
Katoomba, the Proprietor takes this opportunity
of thanking the public for past patronage, and
wishes to announce that he has lately added
to it “Montrose House,” where every
comfort can be obtained.
TERMS MODERATE.
44


surrounding country, which as it drains off not only wears
the rocks it passes over but dissolves them in minute quan-
tities, especially such as contains much lime; and then,
laden with its various compounds, flows off to the distant
sea, where reef corals, lying in fringing banks round
the coast, are slowly absorbing the lime from
the water around them and building the fragile
coatings that protect them during life. Slowly as the land
sinks the coral bank increases in height, for reef corals can
only live near the surface of the water, and soon a con-
siderable thickness has been obtained; while below the
upper zone of live corals lies a vast charnel-house of dead
coral coverings. Then comes a change ; suitable tempera-
ture, or some other essential condition, fails, killing out all
the corals, and through long ages other deposits accumu-
late over them, gradually crushing and consolidating the
coral bank into a firm rock. At last a convulsion of the
earth’s crust brings it up from the buried depth in which
it lies, leaving it tilting on its edge, but still, perhaps,
below the surface of the ground. Rain, frost and snow
slowly removes what covers it, until it lies exposed again
to the sunlight, but so changed that only for the silent but
irresistible testimony of the fossil forms of which it is com-
posed, it were hard to believe that this narrow band of
hard grey rock was once the huge but fragile coral bank
glistening in the bright waters with a thousand hues.
And now the process is repeated; the decaying vegetation
of the surrounding forest produces the carbonic acid, the
rain spreads it over the ground, which is now the most
favourable for being dissolved, and the consequence is
that the acid water saturates itself with the limestone rock ;
and whenever the least evaporation takes place, has to
deposit some of its dissolved carbonate of lime in one of
the many stalacitic forms before it can flow off to the sea
and distribute its remaining contents to fresh coral banks.
Thus the old coral reef melts away far inland, and the lime
that formed the coatings of its corals is again utilised for
the same purpose. What a simple succession of causes
and effects! and yet, before the circle is completed, long
ages of time has come and gone. And what a fine example
of the balance between the waste and reproduction that
takes place in nature !”
45


BATTY & CHALCRAFT,
STEAM
IS
3|p; gpg Jffyii gp^gj
24 REGENT ST., REDFERN,
SYDNEY.
(Adjoining Hudson Brothers.)
Orders from country residents receive prompt attention
Billheads, Business Cards,
Memos, &c., &c.,
C IHI IE A DP E S T E,A_TES_


T rains.
Trains leave Sydney at 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. (Sundays
excepted.) The mail train at 8 p.m. will stop at Black-
heath if a special request before starting be made. On
Saturdays there are extra trains at 7 a.m. and 1.45 p.m.
In returning, trains leave Blackheath at 5.23 a.m. and
2.2 p.m. On Mondays there is an extra train which leaves
at 7.45 a.m. The journey usually occupies a little over
four hours.
Fares: —First-class: Single, 12s. 6d. ; Eeturn, 16s. 6d.
Second Class: Single, Bs. 3d. ; Eeturn, 11s.
By the additional Saturday trains the fare is 2d. per
mile first class, and Id. per mile second class ; but special
excursion tickets are issued for these trains at the rate of
2d. per mile first class, and Id. per mile second class,
return; or, the double distance being reckoned at the
single rate These tickets are available for returning by
Excursion Train the same (Saturday) evening, by the
Monday morning, or on that day week by the same train.
The visitor may, if he like, prolong his stay and return by
any ordinary train by paying the amount of difference of
the fare.
Tourists can use the Luggage Trains between the inter-
mediate stations on the mountains. There are four or five
which call at Blackheath daily. Times of arrival and
departure can be had at the station.
47


(From the Official Statement made hy the
Railway Department.)
Miles from
Sydney.
Feet above sea
Township.
Lucasville
Springwood
1216
Faulconbridge
Numantia .. .
1463
Woodford
Lawson .
2399
Wentworth Falls
Katoomba .......
2856
3349
Medlow
3450
BLACKHEATH
3494
Mount Victoria
Hartly Yale .
Mount Wilson .
Clarence Siding
Lithgow
3422
3318
3478
3658
3006
Note. —These altitudes will remind the tourist how much higher is
the point reached by the train on the Western than on the Southern
line. Blackheath is no less than 1,323 feet above Bowral. Snow is
not unfrequent in winter at the altitudes over 2000 feet. The
heaviness and frequency of the falls depend upon the height of the
land. Some of the healthiest most pleasant and bracing weather is
that which directly follows a good fall of snow.
4 r
level.
48




