



t si llidjarfr.
A LATE ADDITION TO THE ENGLISH
BIBLE.
“ There was a man sent from God whose name was John —the Evangelist
John,”
“ God is not dumb that he should speak no more.” —The Prophet Lowell.
OBJECTS.
To bring glory to God in the highest,
peace on earth, goodwill among men.
To preach the Gospel to the poor, to hind
up the broken hearted, to set at liberty
them that are bruised, to preach the ac-
ceptable year of the Lord. To show how
this Ohristlike work can now be done sys-
tematically, quickly and intelligently.
METHOD OE WORK.
Ist. To write this short letter, and in
plain commonsense English state Christ’s
mission and doctrines and political econ-
omy, then in simple language show to
workers and electors its superiority over
present political economy. 2nd. To ex-
plain that if the Church still declines to
preach Christ’s practical Christianity and
apply it to the six working days, and so
bring work and comfort to all, that
workmen electors have now power to
save their brother colonists. 3rd. To
explain that the only thing needed in the
colony to solve the capital and labour
problem, is for each electorate to return
to Parliament a man who grasjis what
justice to all workers means. 4th. To
travel with this explanation of Christ’s
political economy and sell it to every
elector. The price being one penny will
allow all to buy it. The arguments are
condensed, easily understood, and are
purposely made brief that none may tire
of reading. The remedy for the present
unemployed problem will be seen to be
reasonable and easily applied where the
great majority of electors are the intelli-
gent workers of New South Wales.
PROBLEM.
Ist. How the teaching of Christ’s moral
laws, given in the sermon, on the Mount,
can be substituted in the church for the
present scheme for man’s salvation, which
ignores" practical obedience to Christ’s
reasonable laws, but still retains a
priestly or ministerial sacrificial plan
which Christ never taught. 2nd. How
this change from man’s scheme for his
own salvation to Christ’s moral law plan
for man’s salvation can be effected
quietly without any disturbance of pre-
sent conditions of church worship, and
with perfect friendliness between minis-
ters and their congregations. 3rd. How
Christ’s moral laws can be made the
basis of a new constitution for New South
Wales, and quietly, by lawful parliamen-
tary procedure, substituted for the present
code of laws which have been derived
from a heathen nation. The said laws
are unjust and not suited to the present
intelligence of the colonists; they are
crushing all moral goodness out of those
who wish to be honest, and are keeping
all, including ministers, in spiritual
darkness, and the colony itself in a state
of disaster and unrest.
chapter Ist.
“ I propose to beg no question, to shrink from
no conclusion, but to follow truth wherever it
may lead. Upon us is the responsibility of
seeking the law, for in the very heart of our
civilization to-day women faint and little child-
ren moan. If the conclusions that we reach run
counter to our prejudices let us not flinch; if
they challenge institutions that have long been
deemed wise and natural, let us not turn back.”
—Henry George.


In seeking to expound the laws of opposed to Bible laws, it is useless our
God, revealed in the gospel of Jesus
Christ, as they relate to present daily
life and work, and' to the possession of
land and capital more clearly than it is
now being done by the churches, I wish
it clearly understood that I am not writ-
ing from antagonism to any church, or
sect or individual. I, as a working man,
herein give an explanation of the mean-
ing of just and right life as applied to
the week days and work. This interpre-
tation I have reasoned calmly out with
the open Bible before me. I have written
every sentence with care and in a prayer-
ful spirit and feel how important are the
questions I discuss, not only for time, but
for eternity. I honestly believe these
views of life will preach the gospel and
bring material comfort to all the poor,
and spiritual life and fullness of joy to
all classes, more quickly than present
church teachings and national laws are
now doing. The views are not suggested
by any personal injustice or hardship, as
1 have for twenty-six years worked for
eleven hours a day, and belong to the
middle working class, and know from
personal experience that “ A man’s life
consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth.” I believe
chat definite, honest, daily work, with
either brains or hands, is necessary to
the moral health of every colonist, as
well as to the material prosperity of the
colony; and that the working classes
not only produce the wealth but form
the moral strength of the oolony.
My desire is to got every colonist who
is poorer and less comfortable into regular
work with good wages, so that he may
b® at least as moral and comfortable as I
am. I see God has supplied abundant
natural resources in a rich colony like
New South Wales for this moral state to
exist for all colonists. I plainly see this
other fact, that until the laws touching
the ownership of large blocks of God’s
land by individuals are altered and made
to agree with Christ’s moral laws, this
moral state with all happily at work is
impossible. While the foundation land
laws of the colony are based on injustice
preachers, editors and politicians, trying
to build up a sound moral colony on such
a rotten foundation. From the study for
years of the sermons and prayers in the
churches, the addresses of the cleverest
ministers at synods, unions and confer-
ences, the articles of editors and journal-
ists, the speeches of the ablest politicians,
I see all parties are trying to do an im-
possible thing ; that is, to get the colony
into a moral, prosperous condition re-
gardless of obedience to Christ’s moral
laws, regardless of just, first principles
touching the ownership of God’s land.
Turning to English Christian life, thought
and politics, as briefly yet clearly stated
by Mr. Stead in the Review of Reviews , we
find that editors like himself, representing
higher journalism, politicians like Glad-
stone and Roseberry, and nearly all
leaders in the churches, are striving along
the same impossible lines of disobedience
to Christ’s moral laws to get English
society moral and happy. The result for
the present is, strikes and rumours of
strikes, and four millons of free born
Englishmen either white slaves or pau-
pers. The position of the United States
may be sjummed up in one sentence:
Mr. Andrew Carnagie preaching salvation
by faith, but employing Pinkerton police.
I would therefore point out to makers of
public opinion, leaders in churches and
parliament, and on the press, that as
they have year after year persistently
ignored obedience to Christ’s moral laws
as necessary to the true prosperity of the
colony, it is now reaping as a result of
disobedience to those laws, political dis-
grace, financial disaster, geneual muddle
and unblessedness, shared in by all
classes. Further, these conditions will
continue till Christ’s practical Christian-
ity is accepted as the remedy for the
present chaotic state of society, and His
doctrines obeyed by the leaders them-
selves.
The six propositions in the next chap-
ter contain the foundation truths upon
which I intend to advocate the upbuilding
and reconstruction of society in New
South Wales.


CHAPTER 2ND.
“Can we shut our eyes to the fact that the
religious opinions of mankind are in a state of
unrest and change ? And when we regard the
uncertainty of current beliefs and the war of
creeds, is it not plain that the one thing think-
ing men are waiting for is the introduction of
law among the phenomena of the spiritual world.
When that comes we shall offer to such men a
truly scientific theology. The reign of Law will
transform the whole spiritual world, as it has
already transformed the natural world,”— Pro-
fessor Drummond.
Ist. That God placed men on the earth
fully intending that they should all enjoy
life. He sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to
save those that wore selfish and sinful,
and through him gave certain moral laws
and doctrines to add to the happiness
and comfort, the knowledge of the mean-
ing of true life on earth. In obedience
to these laws is now to be found the only
law by which to live an intelligent, happy,
Christian life, and understand God’s
design for man.
2nd. Thou shalt love God with all thy
heart. Thou shalt love thy neighbour.
Thou shalt love one another as I have
loved you. Thou shalt not lay up trea-
sures for thyself on earth. Thou shalt
not resist evil. Thou shalt do justice to
all men alike.
3rd. That God’s natural world, de-
signed for man’s health and happiness,
is governed by law and order, that full
obedience to these laws produces physical
health and strength. God’s moral and
spiritual world is governed by law and
order, this law and order designed for
man’s spiritual health and happiness is
contained in Christ’s sermon on the
Mount, Full obedience to these moral
laws produces fullness of joy, spiritual
life, health and strength, and is the only
reasonable plan of loyal Christian life.
When obedient and faithful to Christ’s
doctrines, man sees, not through a glass
darkly, but clearly, what God’s will is,
and how man himself is, through reason-
able obedience to God’s law, to work out
His design for the colony.
4th. That man’s orthodox church
teaching, that all God’s children are sin-
ners, and that salvation from sin and
spiritual life are only to be obtained
through faith in the atonement of Jesus
Christ —the theory of the cross and blood
and sacrifice of our Saviour—is hereditary
and traditional, is simply a priestly in-
terpretation of life; is not Christ’s reason-
able Christianity ; is not God’s plan for
man’s salvation and happiness here and
hereafter.
sth. That until pious Christians of all
denominations, however devotedly they
love Christ as their Redeemer, actually
accept His doctrines for daily working
life, and practically obey them and teach
that all must do so to gain eternal life,
no amount of fervent prayer for God’s
blessing, nor Bible study, nor attendance
at church services, sacraments, prayer
meetings, nor preaching nor missionary
zeal, will open their eyes to the fact that
in disobedience to G od’s moral laws they
have got a wrong conception of Christlike
life, and are blindly failing to honor or
obey Him as their Saviour; even while
loving Him most sincerely.
6th. Full obedience to Christ’s doc-
trines given in the Sermon on the Mounc,
is now possible to the individual leaders
in the church and parliament and on the
press, and is the only thing needed to
speedily, quietly and lawfully, bring
about the practical solution of the labour
problem and establish society on a firm
foundation of justice, truth, and right-
eousness, and bring regular work to all;
and so work out God’s design for the
happiness of the colony.
chapter 3.
“ Our age is retrospective. It builds the
sepulchres of the fathers. Why should not we
have a poetry and philosophy of insight and not
of tradition, and a religion of revelation to us,
and not the history of theirs. The sun shines
to-day also. Let us demand our own works,
and laws, and worship.”— Emerson.
Let me here say to those who fear I
am dishonouring my Saviour, those who
have inherited religious belief, or been
born again in the present evangelical
theory of life and salvation by faith
through the merits of Christ’s atonement,
that I am honouring Him through my
love and obedience. To those who love
Christ and know Him as their personal
Saviour, who conscientiously de-


lieve the present church theory of life
must he the true one, as their pious and
wise elder relatives accept it, and all the
holy grey-haired ministers, who for long
years have studied the Bible, prayed,
preached, and laboured to win souls for
Christ, accept it, I would point out that
atonement and sacrifice have to do with
priestly service and worship only. Christ’s
doctrines refer to seven days a week
practical life, and it is not now by belief
in His sacrifice, but by practical obedience
to His laws that we will honour Him
and carry on His mission. To those who
say these Christlike views of earth life
are too idealistic, utopian, and advanced
for the present selfish race of Christians,
that the Holy Spirit through the Church
is gradually leading men through the
evangelical period, and perhaps in a
hundred years the race will be so un-
selfish that Christ’s reasonable doctrines
will be preached, and men will live in-
telligent spiritual lives, I would say it is
sinful, and, from an economic point of
view, very foolish not to preach it at
once. To those who see the mighty
worldly interests involved, and the vast
changes needed in wealthy Christian
society before these views can be accep-
ted ; who see it means a mightier refor-
mation of religious thought than Luther
started, let me say that the change I
advocate is as much in the interests of
the rich as the poor. The truest hap-
piness of both will be accomplished
quietly when Christ’s doctrines and moral
laws are preached in the churches. Let
none think I wish to make people reli-
gious or moral by act of parliament. I
want all to get a clear grasp of what
Christ’s morality means, and not con-
fuse it with orthodox church morality,
which is more pagan than Christian.
In publishing this epistle I am quite
aware I am standing out as clearly as
Martin Luther when he nailed his protests
to the door of the Church in 1511.
It is my intention to publicly advocate
Christ’s doctrines and show how they can
now be made the basis of a sound, strong
legislative policy, to get the colony out of
its political disgrace. After I have
proved to all parties, Christian and non-
christian, religious and irreligious, un-
selfish and selfish, the superiority of
Christ’s political economy over modern,
and shown its many advantages to all
workers, I will influence them to elect to
parliament just men who make a life
study of social and labour problems. I
will then seek election, and if successful
will co-operate with the others who have
a passion for justice being done to all
honest workmen, and we will by earnest
attention to wise progressive legislation,
get all colonists at work, and get it done
systematically, and not let the colony
drift to anarchy.
I see it would be quite useless for one
man, who wants justice done as Christ
taught, getting into such a parliament as
the present. Lie must first educate the
electors and show the justice and econ-
omic wisdom of land nationalization an d
State co-operative work, when they will
choose clear-headed, just men, to legis-
late for them. These legislators —in-
fluenced by their love of justice and their
desire to see ail men well employed—will
put a tax on land, and with the revenue
so received will start State industries,
such as cattle and sheep raising, farming,
fruit growing, mining for coal, iron, gold
and silver, and manufacturing these into
useful forms of wealth in State workshops.
By such action the main causes of the
present distress would soon be removed,
as all the unemployed would be absorbed
in productive work to add to the wealth
and get the colony out of debt and finan-
cial and political disgrace. This wise
government will grasp the position that
it is (1) its Christian duty to find every
colonist—who cannot get it elsewhere —
regular work. (2) That it is a sound
commercial policy to give good wages for
eight hours work to all colonists at pro-
ducing wealth to get the colony out of
debt. The silly newspaper theory, that
it is not the duty of a wise government
to find every colonist regular work, will
be exploded. It will be clearly shown
that with such vast resources for produc-
ing wealth and making a clear profit for
the State, the more men and women


employed by the state at productive work but to my mind they have laboured or
the better. The colony’s debt will be
paid off, taxes reduced, and the individual
and general wealth much increased.
Legislators who grasp these economic
truths will soon set laws in operation to
make the regular employment of every-
one an accomplished fact. By doing this
the Gospel of glad tidings will be prea-
ched to all the poor unemployed thou-
sands of colonists. The drink problem
will be considered, and by restriction and
prohibition of its sale to those to whom
drink has become a disease, the broken-
hearted wives and children of poor
helpless drunkards will be made glad.
Other reforms will follow by degrees.
The subject of peace on earth and good-
will among men will receive earnest
attention. The injustice of taxing the
poor labouring colonists to the extent of
£200,000 a year to defend the property
of the rich will not be tolerated. When
these reforms have been lawfully effected,
and justice done to all the producers of
wealth, then we will preach the accept-
able year of the Lord and sing Glory to
God in the Highest, who inspired us to
give a common sense reasonable meaning
to Christ’s Christianity and to make
just laws.
One reason why I am so fully per-
suaded that the law of obedience to
Christ’s moral law is God’s law to unfold
to his sons His design for the salvation
of the world, is because I see such reli-
gious teachers as Rev. Mark Guy Pearse
and Professor Drummond; social econ-
omists as John Ruskin and Henry
George; moral philosophers as Carlyle
and Emerson; Christian journalists as
Hugh Price, Hughes, and W. T. Stead;
gifted poetical writers as Tennyson
and Elizabeth Browning; though all
hkve written nobly, and taught some
truth, justice, and righteousness, it
has not been Christ’s truth, justice, and
righteousness; as they have all failed to
teach the law of actual obedience to
Christ’s commands touching the posses-
sion of treasures by the individual, as
being an essential law of God to save the
world. They see there is law somewhere,
are still labouring- in the dark, trying to
reform the world by laws and plans of
their own, quite ignoring Christ’s per-
fect economic laws.
chapter 4.
‘ ‘ There is a statement of religion possible
which makes all scepticism absurd.”—Emerson.
Reasons why all may know a reform-
ation is near :
Ist. The mightiest force on earth,
namely a God-inspired love for humanity
and truth, is animating Christian Social-
ists, who are pleading for simple justice
to all, and who are the coming saviours
and leaders of the people in Parliament,
who will be elected by the choice of the
people themselves.
2nd. Another powerful force, namely,
selfishness and self-interest in the great
body of colonists, when they see that a
Christian- Socialist Govexmment will mean
shorter hours of work, better wages for
all, and more freedom to enjoy life, will
gladly accept it.
3rd. The thousands of shopkeepers
who wish to live moral lives, are now
forced by the curse of competition to dis-
grace their manhood, will accept a co-
operative system when they understand
how practical a way it is out of the
present commercial muddle.
4th. The fact that preachers have
woke up to see that it is useless preaching
to men who for six days in the week,
under the present system of trade, have
to choose between moral or financial
ruin.
sth. Intelligent working-men, in most
churches, have now power to request their
ministers to preach Christ’s doctrines and
social economy, and stop preaching Paul,
or any man’s theology.
6th, The fifty-seven thousand depositors
in the svspended banks, who know they
have been wronged and have no redress,
will vote for Christian Socialism and a
State bank and the suspension of the
present incompetent bank directors and
capitalist financiers.
7th. The host of intelligent share-
holders —whose treasures they ig-
norantly and selfishly laid up for them-


selves on earth and have taken wings and
flown away—will have their eyes opened
to the truth, that living on usury and
the sweat of other men’s brows, as they
have been doing for years, is sinning
against humanity, will vote for a social
system in which they can live moral lives.
Bth. The vast body of electors who are
tired of present politicians and disgrace,
bank failures and loss of money, com-
petition and thousands ©ut of work,
general political and financial muddle
which incompetent politicians, editors and
so-called leading men have got the colony
into, will gladly accept Christ’s political
economy, as they see it means the remo-
val of these evils.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter. Love God and keep His Son’s
commands, and obey His economic laws ;
for this is the whole duty of man, and
the only sound remedy for the colony’s
disasters.
Questions for working colonists to put
to Candidates at the mi
General Election.
Ist. Are you in fovour of justice in
taxing the land, and restoring it to its
rightful owners —the people ? Yes or No.
2nd. Are you in favour of intelligent
Government, and every honest colonist,
who wants it, being found regular pro -
ductive work as a simple act of justice ?
Yes or No.
3rd. Will you protest against the im-
morality and injustice of expending
£200,000 a year of the working man’s
wages to defend the property of the rich
colonists ? Yes or No.
MM HE truths ye targe are borne abroad
d|f By every wind and every tide ;
The voice of nature and of God
tyS, Speaks out upon your side.
Press on ! the triumph shall be won,
Of common rights and equal laws ;
The glorious dream of Harrington,
And Sidney’s good old cause.
Blessing the cotter and the crown,
Sweetening worn labour’s bitter cup,
And, plucking not the highest down,
Lifting the lowest up.
E. TIPPER, PRINTER, NEAR TELEGRAPH OFEICE, WEST MAITLAND.
Fellow Workmen, keep this
tract by you. Talk it over with your
brothers. Stop discussing freetrade and
protection. Discuss justice and land
ownership. Study Social problems. Justice
and prosperity are now in your hands. You
know the remedy,—Apply it. Elect just
men and you will get just laws, and just
laws in a rich colony means prosperity.
Choose your just men from amongst
farmers, mechanics, and miners, who
justly earn that on which they live, and
who are the makers of the wealth of the
colony. Don’t choose talkative traders,
lawyers, or professional men, who ac-
cumulate wealth for themselves, but only
at the expense of the honest producers,
out of the sweat of other men’s brows on
which they live in luxury.
The weapons which your hands have found,
Are those which Heaven itself has wrought,
Light, Truth and Love ; your battle-ground
The free, broad field of thought.


