

THE UNIFICATION
OF THE
Australian Railway Gauges
S. J. POLLITZER, C.E., &c.
PRICE: ONE SHILLING
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., Publishers,
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and London.




PIWZ
THE UNIFICATION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY GAUGES.
S. J. POLLITZER, C.E., &o.
(Author of and Lecturer-on various Scientific Subjects).
1897.
GEORGE ROBERTSON & CO., Publishers,
Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide, and London.




THE
Unification of the Australian Railway Gauges
%
S. J. POLLITZER, C.E, Etc.
THE recent elections for the Adelaide Federal Convention, which
were so largely contested throughout Australia, have produced,
together with the proceedings of the Convention itself, a vast amount
of federal literature, which, in not a few instances, proves the authors
thereof great thinkers for their thoroughness, and able organisers for
their quick and clever conception. The reading matter on Federation
has, during those few months, assumed considerable proportions, and
illustrated the subject from nearly all possible points of view;
however, not from all. The one point universally left alone by either
candidate for, or member of, the convention was : “ Should the railways
be federated or not?” True enough, every one of these gentlemen
had his opinion for or against such federation; but it is feared that
there was hardly one who came forward with any substantial and
■cogent reason to support his opinion; and an opinion that cannot
stand the sound proof of logic, is certainly not worth having.
On the other hand, the reader should bear in mind, that to form
an opinion on this weighty question, is not so easy a matter by any
means ; because, before arriving at any conclusion, one is bound to
investigate first, its economic aspect, which is a work of a purely
technical, and less of a political nature. There is, therefore, some
tangible excuse in the non-production of arguments mentioned above.
The author has set himself the task of investigating this technical
problem ; and be it remarked, right from the start, that the object
of this essay is not to make propaganda either one way or the
other, but simply to give figures, as nearly correct as they could be
got, from which the reader should be enabled to draw his own
conclusions.
And if, besides his profession, an apology should be needed for
the compilation of this paper, the writer begs to remark that previously*
some 16 years ago, when still in the service of the South Australian
Government, he occupied himself with this very same problem; and
when the first Convention in 1883 met in Sydney, he was the first
who brought this matter under its notice, as can be seen from the
Sydney Morning Herald of the 4th December of that year.


Be it, therefore, strictly borne in mind that the following investi-
gation is not one that deals Avith the federation of the railways, but
simply Avith an examination of how best to simplify and unify the
various Railway Gauges of Australia, so as to make these railways
more useful in their economic object to the benefit of the various
colonies. Moreover, the writer believes, that the unification of the
gauges ought to be taken in hand first; and only after that a scheme
might be thought out how to federate them if it be desirable.
One more remark yet as to the authorities of the figures in
the sequel. The principal assistance and guide Avere the two excellent
Avorks of our Government Statistician, Mr. Coghlan: “Wealth and
Progress,” and “ The Seven Colonies occasionally reference was made
to the last Annual Report of the Sydney Railway Commissioners \
very scanty information could be got from the Victorian, Queensland,
and South Australian Statistical Registers. The probable estimates
are the result of the writer’s judgment, in consultation with various
contractors, as, for instance, Mr. Plenry-Hudson, Mr. W. Mason, and
a feAv others to whom indebtedness for their kind aid is gratefully
acknowledged.
Everybody Avell knows that in Australia, at the present time, the
Railways are laid out in three different gauges. The first is the
narroAv gauge of a Avidth of 3ft. 6in., Avhich is wholly used in Queens-
land, and has there a total length of about 2880 miles; the
greater portion of the South Australian Raihvays, that is, about 1230
miles, are of the same narrow gauge; or the total length of the
narrow gauge lines in Eastern Australia is about 3610 miles. The
second is Avhat is known almost throughout the whole of Europe and
America as the standard gauge of a Avidth of 4ft. B|in., which is solely
used in this colony, and Avhere it attains a length of about 2530 miles.
The third is the broad gauge of a Avidth of sft Sin. ; it is laid down all
over Victoria, there covering a length of about 3120 miles, and partly
in South Australia, with about a length of 490 miles, or the total
length of the broad gauge amounts to about 3610 miles. The total
length of all these gauges is, therefore, about 9750 miles in the Avhole
of the eastern half of Australia,—excepting the Northern Territory of
South Australia—that is, in the four eastern colonies. And, with the
exception of about 550 miles of the Northern Division of the
Queensland railways, the rest, of about 9200 miles, is almost one
completely connected net of lines.
Although the title of this essay speaks of “ Unification,” this,
however, is practically impossible ; the more correct term would be
“ Simplification because Australia has not the means of unifying
the three gauges; nor, if she had, would this sparsely populated
continent warrant such an additional gigantic expenditure. If,
therefore, we speak of Unification, it is "not meant that the three
different gauges are to be transformed into one only, but that they
should be made into two gauges, thereby eliminating one out of
existence; and, if such a thing can be accomplished, a very great
task will have been achieved, indeed.


For greater convenience we tabulate above figures : —
Gauge.
Colony.
3 ft. 6 in.
4 ft, 8£ in.
5 ft. 3 in.
Totals.
Length in Miles.
New South Wales ...
—
2530
—
2530
Victoria
—
—
3120
3120
Queensland
2380
—
—
2380
South Australia
1230
490
1720
(End of northern territory)
Totals ...
3610
2530
3610
9750
Out of these three gauges, one will have to be eliminated for
good —which one shall it be ?—and out of the
remaining two, one will
have to be adopted as the standard for most populated colonies.
Out of these three gauges, one will have to be eliminated for
good—which one shall it be ?—and out of the remaining two, one will
have to be adopted as the standard for most populated colonies.
Which one shall that be 1
Looking at the above table, it would appear that New South
Wales, with her least mileage, should make room for either the narrow
—Queensland, or the broad —Victorian —gauge. That New South
•Wales—nor, for the matter of that, Victoria—will ever adopt
the narrow gauge is only too obvious ; because the railway traffic in
these colonies is already so great, that it could not possibly be served
with a narrow gauge rolling-stock. On the other hand, neither
Queensland nor South Australia can give up entirely their narrow
gauge trunk lines on account of the too prohibitive costs of trans-
forming the whole of them into either of the other two gauges ; besides
their traffic is only of a limited extent, hence the narrow gauge is
■quite sufficient to cope with that traffic.
From this it follows that, no matter what gauge may be adopted
as the standard for Australia, the narrow gauge will remain, and will
not be abolished, at least, not for generations yet to come. The fight,
therefore, reduces itself to a single combat between the two wide gauges
■of the most populous colonies of Victoria and New South Wales.
Which of these two to eliminate, and which to adopt, is a very
momentous question, which has to be ventilated from a multitude of
views. As stated above, New South Wales with about 1100 miles less
than Victoria and South Australia together, one would be inclined to
think, at a first glance, that our mother colotiy should make room for
her two younger offsprings. However, the question of more or less
mileage cannot be chiefly taken into consideration ] the principal axis
around which this question eternally revolves is the question of cost;
and how these compare by altering each of these two gauges into the
other can chiefly, yet not solely, settle, which of the two is to be
adopted. Another point almost as important a factor as cost,
is the time during which such a transformation of gauges can be
oarried out. It might, in some instances be, perhaps, preferable to
pay a little more for cost provided the interference with the existing
traffic could be made less. Anyhow, these, and many more points, are
subjects that will be gone here into systematically by first proceeding
with the comparative cost.
Before going further to ascertain the comparative estimates we
ought to know what will be the extent of the new adopted gauge.


1. The Unified Gauge.
Queensland...
1270 miles
JS'ew South Wales ...
2530 „
Victoria
3120 „
If, for the sake of argement, the New South Wales gauge should be-
adopted, it would never do to alter the Victorian gauge only ; the
whole of the South Australian broad gauge would have to be altered
as well, otherwise that colony would be a great loser, and Eastern
Australia would still have all three gauges. On the other hand, by
doing only that which was just mentioned, Queensland would still
remain in her isolated position as she now is, and she would have, no
advantage from the unification of the gauges, and the break of the
gauge would still be where it now is —at our northern boundary, near
Tenterfield.
As was stated before, the unification of the gauges has for its
object great economic advantages for the respective colonies ; these
economic benefits do no exactly mean the whole of each colony, but
mainly that the most populous districts of each, or the capitals of the
four colonies shall be connected with one uniform gauge ; that is,,
that from Brisbane to Adelaide there shall be one uniform, un-
interrupted gauge, no matter what gauge it may be, whether the
standard New South Wales, or the broad Victorian gauge.
This, undoubtedly, sooner or later, will be an accomplished fact to,
a certain disadvantage for our northern sister. Because, as she now
stands, Queensland has one uniform gauge only throughout her whole
extent, whereas, if unification is decided upon, she will have two
gauges.
There is not the slightest doubt that Queensland will have to put
up with this inconvenience. It is, therefore, simply a question as to
the extent of this undesirable inconvenience.
If there is to be one uniform gauge between Brisbane and,
Adelaide, and a break of gauge is to be somewhere in Queensland, it is
not likely that the Brisbane people will allow this break on their
Southern Division where the line branches off to Sydney. A more
preferable scheme would be to make the break at Brisbane itself, and
have a double station at that city, so as to accommodate both gauges
simultaneously. But even this feasible scheme would meet the
requirements half-way only, as transhipments from one gauge to the
other would by this be a constant source of unnecessary taxation. To
get out of this difficulty, the best scheme that recommends itself is the
dearest—that is to transform the whole of the 1270 miles of the
Southern Division of the Queensland railways, which includes also the
coast line north of Brisbane, which in a very few years more will have
been connected with Rockhampton, and here at Rockhampton leave,
for the present, anyhow, the break of gauges.
This unexpected scheme will be a pretty expensive one for
Queensland, but as it is a radical gauge cure, it will prove the cheapest
in the long run. Reviewing now the new form of the railways as
suggested here, we shall have a total mileage of—
2. The Narrow Gavge.
South Australia ... 490 »
1110 miles
Total ... 7410 miles
1230 „
Total ... 2340 miles


The method of unification of the 7410 miles will therefore have
to be investigated from the following chief points of view :—a,
estimates of cost; b, time of completion ; and c, interest on cost.
A. COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF COST.
From the foregoing it is apparent that the 2340 miles of narrow
gauge will remain unaltered, and that therefore there will be no
expenditure on their account in connection with unification.
On the other hand, out of the 7410 miles for unification purposes,
either the 1270 miles narrow and the 3610 miles broad gauge lines—
that is a total of 4880 miles—will have to be transformed into the
New South Wales standard gauge, or the 1270 miles narrow and 2530
miles standard gauge—that is a total of 3800 miles will have to be
transformed into the broad gauge system.
We will now ascertain the cost of each, and begin with the former
first.
I. Transformation op Gauges into New South Wales Standard
Gauge.
1. Transformation of sft. Sin. Gauge into Jfft. B\in. Gauge.
In transforming a wider gauge into a narrower one, it may safely
be assumed that the cost of such transformation will be a minimum
pretty nearly under all possible contingencies ; at any rate, there is
not much argumentative power required to prove that under normal
conditions it must be a considerably cheaper process than if the
reverse were the case. To start with, additional land resumption is
not required at all, nor would there be any expenditure required for
earthworks, bridges, culverts, tunnels, ballast, and sleepers—all these
items would remain intact in the same state as they originally were con-
structed. All that really would be required would be to bring first
the rails together by 6Jin. ; secondly, to do the same thing with the
station yards, however without touching any of the existing buildings;
and thirdly and chiefly, to purchase a new rolling stock, and, where
possible, to transform the old one.
First. —To bring the rails 6-tin. closer together; this, it can safely
be anticipated, will in nearly all cases have to be carried out by laying
down one additional rail only for the whole length of the linemen such
a side as the engineers may deem most practicable ; and of course this
new rail will be 6Jin. apart from either one or the other of the old
rails, and will then form with the second old rail the proper gauge of
4ft. BJin- There will be very few exceptions to this general rule of
procedure : that is, over such bridges where the rails are not bedded on
an intervening layer of ballast, but are with their sleepers directly
secured to the girders of the structure. Then it will be necessary to
lay down two new rails inside the old ones at a distance of 3Jin. each
from the old rails. There is no need of explaining here further how
the connection of these two new rails of the bridges with the one new
of the road is to be effected ; suffice it to say that it can be done, and
cheaply too. After mature consideration, I believe that the whole
track could be so altered at the rate of about £3OO sterling per mile ; this
rate does not include the cost of additional rails, nor is it intended to
bring those costs into these estimates, because on every railway thei’e
are always many thousands of tons of rails in store; they are, as in


(a.) Relaying of Rails ...
£300 per mile.
(h.) Alterations of Station Yards
£200 „
(c.J New Rolling Stock ...
... £2,080 „
Amount ...
... £2,580 „
the case under consideration, brought into temporary requisition only,
and as soon as the road is completed the third and now superfluous
rail will take their place. The 3610 miles to be altered broad gauge
will temporarily, for its third rail, require about 290,000 tons of rails
and fastenings. This enormous quantity it would be hardly safe to
assume to be in store in Victoria and South Australia ; but what
might be assumed is that, with New South Wales together, it might
reach nearly to the above quantity, whilst the remainder would have
to be purchased. However, this expenditure, for reasons given above,
could not be charged to capital cost.
Second. —As regards the alterations in the station yards, in
replacing the rails, switches, crossings, <fec., substantially the same
arguments hold good as in the first section. The author is of opinion
that the stations could be altered at about the rate of £2OO sterling
per mile of line.
Third. —The costs of the new rolling stock are ascertained in the
following manner :—According to the last Annual Report of the
Sydney Railway Commissioners, the total costs of the New South
Wales railways amount to £14,560 sterling per mile in average,
including everything. Mr. Coghlan, in his statistics, tells us that the
average costs of our lines, exclusively of rolling stock, workshops, &c.,
amount to £12,480 per mile. Deducting the latter from the former
figures there remain £2,080 sterling as the net cost of rolling stock,
workshops, &c., per mile of line of our gauge or the gauge in question.
In making the alteration of broad into the standard gauge, it cannot
be assumed that the whole rolling stock of the broad gauge will be
useless ; on the contrary, the major portion of it will be used again.
For instance, the whole of the carriages, trucks, axles, and wheels can
be used again, by shortening the axles and fixing on them the old
wheels and carriages anew. The locomotives, on the other hand, will
hardly be of any material use. Taking all these things into considera-
tion, it is fair to assume that the old rolling stock will represent one-
half of its original value only, and this value has to be credited with
the cost of transformation. Above we have seen that the standard
gauge rolling stock costs £2,080 per mile, and in the absence of any
definite returns, it is also fair to assume that the broad gauge rolling
stock will be proportionately dearer ; and therefore to suppose that it
probably costs £2,200 sterling per mile, may not be far from the mark,
Hence, deducting half of this—that is, £l,lOO from the total cost —
will leave the total net cost of the transformed line.
Summarising these three items we obtain the net cost of the
transformed gauge, thus ;
Credit value of old Rolling Stock ... £l,lOO „
Total nett costs of Transformed Line
£1,470 „
The total nett cost of transforming the whole length of broad
gauge is, consequently, equal to £1470 x 3610 miles = 505,306,700.


fa.) Strengthening bridges and widening tunnels
(b.J Ballast ...
(c.) Sleepers...
(d.) Rails
(e.) Laying of road
(/-) Station-buildings and yards
(g.) Rolling-stock ..
£1.500
£150
£250
£1,240
£560
£500
£2,080
Amount
£6,280
From this deduct:
Value of existing Rolling Stock ...
Value of old line
£900
£830
£1,780
Net total Cost (per mile)
£4,550
2. Transformation of 3ft , Gin. gauge into Jft. in. gauge.
The operation of transforming a narrow into a wider gauge is
considerably more difficult, consequently, also much dearer. It is safe
to say, however, that no additional land resumption would be required ;
and on good authority I am informed that the earthworks would not
require any outlay, as the cuttings and embankments are wide enough
to carry even the broad gauge. The other items which would
require capital for their alteration are :
First, strengthening bridges, and widening tunnels. To obtain
the cost of this item within reasonable limits of accuracy, involves a
terrible amount of work, which to accomplish single-handed is, for the
author, impossible, he is bound to rely in this, as in many more
instances, not so much on guesswork as on technical intuition; he
believes that £l5OO per mile might be within reasonable limits, and of
this amount the major part will have to be expended on widening the
tunnels, and only a small proportion of it for strengthening the bridges.
Second. Ballast will be required in proportion to the increased
width of linches, and that will cost £l5O per mile.
Third. —Sleepers will be entirely fresh as those of the old road
are not strong enough ; these new sleepers will cost £250 per mile.
Fourth. Rails. By the same reason as sleepers, so also, entirely
new rails and fastenings will be required, which will cost £1240 per mile.
Fifth. —Laying of the new road will cost £560 per mile.
Sixth. —The alterations of yards and buildings on stations might
be close within the sum of £5OO per mile.
Seventh. —The new Rolling Stock will cost, as before, £2,050 per
mile.
I rom these seven items there has to be deducted three fourths,
that is £9OO for the value of the existing narrow gauge rolling stock;
because that much of it might be useful for the remaining narrow
gauge lines ; and also by the same reason one tenth, that is £B3O of
the value of the old line.
Summarising the foregoing we obtain the total net cost of trans-
forming per mile of line thus :
And Total Cost of whole length of 1270
miles is
£5,778,500


And the Grand Total Cost of Transform-
ing the broad and narrow into the
standard gauge is :
3610 miles broad gauge ... ... ... £5,306,/00
1270 ~ narrow ~ ... ... ••• £5,7/8,500
4880 miles Grand Total Cost ... ,£11,085,200
11. Transformation op Gauges into Victorian Broad Gauge.
1. Transformation of J+ft. Shin. into sft. Sin. gauge.
To carry out this operation it will not exactly be so easy as in the
reversed case that has been dealt with just now, and, at the same time,
it will not be so expensive as widening the narrow into the broad
gauge. There will be no land-resumption, no earth or bridge works,
and no sleepers required, and the estimates, at per mile, will assume
the following figures :
(a.) Widening Tunnels ... ... ••• ••• £l,OOO
(b.) Ballast
(c.) Re-laying of Rails ... ... ••• ••• £BOO
(cl) Alterations of Station Yards ... ... ... £470
(e.) New Rolling Stock ... ... ••• £2,200
Amount ... ... ... ••• ••• £4,040
Deduct half value of old Rolling Stock ... ... £1,040
And net Total Cost of Transforming the
whole length of standard gauge into
broad gauge is consequently equal
£3,000x2530 £7,550,000
2. Transformation of 3ft. 6in. into oft. Sin. gauge.
(a.) Strengthening Bridges and Widening Tunnels ... £1,600
(b.) Ballast .. . . £lBO
(c.) Sleepers ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• £250
(cl.) Rails ... ' £1,240
(e.) Laying of Road ... ... ... ••• ••• £560
(/'.) Station-buildings and Yards ... ... ... £550
(g.) New Rolling Stock ... ... ••• £2,200
Amount ... ... ••• ••• ••• £6,580
From this deduct:
|of value of existing Rolling Stock ... ... £9OO
* „ old line ... ... ••• ••• 830
£1,730
Net Total Cost per mile £4,850
And the Net Total Cost of the whole length
of 1,270 miles .. ... ... ... £6,159.500
And the Grand Total Cost of transferring the standard and the-
narrow gauges into the broad gauge is :
2,530 miles standard gauge ... ... ••• £/,590,000
1,270 „ narrow gauge... ... ... ... 6,159,500
3,800 miles
Grand Total Cost £13,749,500


From the above calculations, we see that, in the transformation of
the narrow gauge, there is a small difference only in favor of the
standard gauge ; there is, however, an immense difference in favor of
this gauge in the comparative total estimates. These calculations con-
clusively prove, as regards cost, if unification is to be carried out, that
it can only be done on the basis of adopting the standard gauge, and
no other ; for, in the total estimate, there is effected a net saving of
nearly three millions sterling.
B. TIME OF COMPLETION.
The next very important question to settle is, which of the two-
above-calculated conversion systems can be carried out in the shortest
possible time. The authors object—and, for the matter of that, of the
general public as well —is not so much to ascertain the length of
this or that transformation can be carried out, but rather to examine,,
on general principles, which of the two transformation systems will be
the more rapid in its construction. Above, the conclusion has been
arrived at that, from point of cost, the standard guage will have to be
adopted as the universal Australian gauge. Should, however, the present
investigation materially prove that, for its completion, much more time
will be required than for the construction of the broad gauge system,,
then, perhaps, it might be advisable to recommend the adoption of the
latter; and, if only twelve, or even six months can be saved, it
certainly is a consideration of vital importance.
It is, therefore, not absolutely necessary to enter with minute
precision inte elaborate calculations to show the exact time which this
or that system will require for its construction ; a general, comparative
view of the manner and method how the various works of the different
systems will be carried out, will, no doubt, considerably enable us to
form a pretty shrewd guess to decide definitely on the best system.
Starting with the narrow gauge first, we see that, according to the
above estimates, we have, for its conversion into either the standard
or the broad gauge, the identical seven items in each case. That
means to say, that, no matter which of the two systems may be decided
upon, there will be always one and the same kind of work to be
performed, which will be a matter of degree only. Comparing atten-
tively these seven items, we find the the third, fourth and fifth are
identical in amount; hence we can assume that these three items can
be carried out in the identical same time, if converted into either one
or the other gauge. In item seven—Rolling Stock —we find the
considerable difference -of £l2O per mile. However, this difference
does not mean an increased difference in time in the transformation
into the broad gauge; because, to transform the narrow gauge inte
either the standard or broad gauge, the Rolling Stock, which has to be
entirely new, does not come into any consideration, and does not
interfere at all with the time of completion of the line itself. And,
although the dearer stock will certainly take some little more time to
build, however, for obvious reasons, both the cheaper and the dearer
can be done during the very same time; hence, as regards Rolling
Stock, the time of completion will also be, in both cases, alike. In the
remaining three items we also find differences in the amounts, and
these differences mean that the higher-figured items will correspondingly
require more time for their construction. The first item—Strengthening


of Bridges —will be, in both cases, alike, and there will be no difference
in time ; because, to strengthen a bridge for the standard is the same
as strengthening it for the broad gauge, and vice versa. With widening
of tunnels it is a little different, because a wider gauge requires also a
wider tunnel, which means more work ; hence this item is, apparently,
slightly in favor of the standard gauge. The remaining two items—
viz., Ballast, and Alterations of Station-yards and Buildings—show,
by the same reasons, a slight advantage in favor of the standard gauge.
The saving of time in all these three items will not be of any material
consequence. Ho matter, however, how small this saved time may be,
it is a distinct advantage yet ; and, for this reason, it is fair to suppose
that the narrow gauge lends itself better to transform it into the
standard than into the broad gauge.
On similar lines as the narrow gauge, we can now review the
standard and the broad gauge, and analyse, from the comparative
estimates, every item contained therein, by equating the equal items
in each system, and see whether the remainder will form an equation
also.
To transfer the broad into the standard gauge, there are three
items in the estimates; while, in the reverse case, there are five. Out
of the former three, there is one identical in amount with one of the
latter—that is, re-laying of rails is, in both cases, the same amount of
£3OO per mile ; which means to say, that this work will take, in either
case, the same amount of time to perform. After this, there is the
item of rolling stock, which cannot be treated on the same principle of
reasoning as the narrow gauge ; because, in both these systems, the
majority of the old stock will have to be transformed while the old
system is still carried on, though obviously on a reduced scale. The
50 per cent, credit allowance, made in each case, shows that the
transformation of the new line and carrying-on the traffic on the old
line are simultaneous operations, and only very little new rolling stock
will be purchased. This means that this stock cannot, independently,
be prepar ed, and so fix for it a positive time, as in the case of the narrow
gauge lines. To transform the standard gauge stock into the broad
gauge stock will cost £2,200 per mile, while, in the contrary case, it
will only cost £2,080, a distinct advantage in favor of the latter by
£l2O. However, this great advantage in money does not so well
represent a similar advantage in time; because the transformation, in
either case, is almost identical, excepting that, for the standard gauge,
the broad gauge axles are shortened ; while, for the broad gauge, the
new axles must be purchased, which might be considered a slight
advantage in favor of the standard gauge.
The next item appearing in both estimates is the alterations of
station yards, and the great difference in these two figures clearly
proves as well that considerably much more time will be requited to
transform the standard into the broad gauge —for say, for sake of
argument, a standard gauge station with ten lines, to transform into
the broad gauge with the same number of lines, requires much moie
room, buildings will have to be pulled down and fresh ones erected in
their stead, afl of w r nich would take considerable time to do. All this
work would be entirely unnecessary in the contrary case ; hence this
item shows a considerable advantage in saving time by adopting the
standard gauge.


So far all items of one estimate have been compared with a part
only of the other; therefore the remaining of the other, that is to
convert the standard gauge, goes against it by two full items, that is
ballast, but principally widening tunnels. Without having much to
argue, it is clear that these two items go dead against the broad gauge,
and the standard gautre is the one to be chosen.
O O
Summarising all points in this chapter, we come to the positive
conclusion that, to save the greatest possible time in the construction of
the unification of the Australian Railway gauges, we have no other
choice than to adopt the standard gauge.
Some readers might perhaps be anxious to know what probable
time it will take to transform the 4880 miles of narrow and broad into
the standard gauge, and what time to transform the 3800 miles narrow
and standard into the broad gauge ? The least the author can say is,
that the answer to these questions is an enigma, and not being a good
prophet he does not care to be a false one, for these are worse punished
in modern than in testamentary times, when they were simply slain.
In each of these figures there are contained the 1270 miles of narrow
gauge in Queensland, of which it is almost impossible to say how long
it would take to reconstruct them, since it almost means as much as
making an entirely new line. However, deducting them from both figures,
the author believes that with proper and most careful preparation, and
with a great amount of courage and energy, the remaining 3610 miles
of broad gauge might, within about twelve months’ time, be entirely
converted into the standard gauge ; while the remaining 2530 miles
standard could not, in probably treble that time, be transformed into
the broad gauge.
C. INTEREST ON COST.
The investigation as to the covering of the interest on the outlay
of this conversion or unification of gauges of these 7410 miles of rail-
ways have puzzled the author not a little. The getting of the necessary
capital for this unification is in itself a momentous task to inquire into,
much more this task becomes intricately complicated to find out how to
cover its annual interest, and in addition to this the Sinking or
Redemption Fund. And this question is multiplied in the difficulty
of answering that interest and redemption shall be borne in such equit-
able proportions by the respective four colonies, which shall, be con-
sidered as fair as possible.
Should the four eastern colonies decide amongst themselves to
carry out this unification, then no doubt each colony will have to raise
a loan equal in amount to the estimates of her to-be-converted railways.
These loans would have to be guaranteed by the four colonies combined
at such a rate of interest as each respective colony is paying now, or
probably, and better still, at a lower rate; and in addition to this
interest they would have to provide as well for a Sinking or Redemp-
tion Fund to pay off these contracted loans within, say, 50 years.
There is hardly any doubt to be assumed that the four colonies
could not raise a loan in the English money market for this purpose,
provided the interest is properly guaranteed. In what way, and on
what basis, however, is this guarantee to be effected, so that it shall be
a fair and equitable burden to the citizens of each colony ? •
Out of the 11 millions sterling required for unification, New South
Wales does not want one solitary shilling for her railways ; and yet


this unification will benefit her as much as Victoria, who wants 4|
millions, and much more than Queensland, who wants 5f millions.
Therefore it is evident that New South Wales, that actually does not
want any capital, still derives great benefits from unification, should
also in all fairness pay her share for these benefits. On the other
hand, Queensland, who, through this unification, becomes the greatest
debtor in this partnership combination is, if not a loser, the least
gainer ; therefore she cannot possibly be expected to take on her own
shoulders this heavy burden, beyond that proportioned share of
economic benefits which she actually receives. To ascertain the
positive absolute gain to each colony through unification is impossible ;
but it reasonably can be assumed that the denser populated colonies
will win more than those of smaller population. In other words, the
gain is in direct proportion to population. If, therefore, a direct tax
on each Australian citizen were to be and could be imposed, this tax
would be the fairest means of dividing that burden equally amongst
the colonies. This means of taxation is, however, not to be thought of
on account of the difficulty and cost of collecting it in this instance.
Another theory suggests itself—that js to assume that each colony
gains in that proportion as to the length of her railways. A little
reflection will show one at the first glance that this theory does not
■quite hold good, because New South Wales shows nearly two millions
more earnings for almost the same length of lines as Queensland, and
more by one-third of a million for nearly 500 miles less than Victoria.
Neither of the two suggested modes are practicable, but a modi-
fication of each with a combination of both might be the best adapt-
able—that is, charging the population that directly makes use of the
railways by increasing the passenger and goods traffic rates to such an
extent that will cover and return the required interest and redemption
together.
These additional charges will be over and above the existing rates,
which include already working expenses; hence they will be net
profits or earnings for covering the two items under consideration.
It is fair to assume that each colony shall raise such additional
rates on their existing traffic as is proportionate to their total earnings,
and which will be sufficient to cover interest and redemption, lo
start with, according to latest official returns, the proportion of earn-
ings between passenger and goods traffic for the whole four colonies is
like 35-2 per cent, to 648 per cent.; accordingly the £434,610 for
interest and the £221,704 for redemption will have to be divided in
the same proportion, which will give the total additional charge for
each item for the whole of the colonies together. Now to subdivide
each item for each of the four colonies, it will have to be done in the
same proportion as the respective earnings now are—that is, to provide
for this amount of interest and redemption New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, and Queensland will have to provide over and above
their existing earnings from passenger traffic 42, 41, 10, and i per
cent., and from goods traffic 38 5, 33 7, 15 and 12*8 per cent respec-
tively, which will total up the sum of £656,314 sterling, being the
annual total amount for interest and redemption together. Dividing
above enumerated percentages of the respective colonies by their
number of passengers and total tonnages we obtain the unities which
are to be charged in addition over and above the charges now levied


in these respective colonies. In doing this we find New South Wales
will have to make an additional charge of 1|- penny on every passenger
and nearly 10 pence on every ton ; Victoria, a little over penny on
every passenger, and 1 pence on every ton ; South Australia, 1 penny
on every passenger and 15| pence on every ton ; and finally, Queensland
2 pence on every passenger and nearly 11) pence for every ton. In the table
attached at the end of this paper these calculations are shown minutely
how this scheme of charges is to be carried out, and the simplicity of
the table requires no further comment.
Of course, the figures in the annexed tabular statement, for prac-
tical working purposes, may not be quite correct, nor does the compiler
suppose that they are sufficiently minute; this, however, has nothing
to do with the principle upon which they are based. The principle
upon which these additional charges are to be made appear to be
feasible enough, and with the authorities it must remain how to work
it out with more minute precision, so as to make it acceptable and,
above all, practically workable; the writer's object being simply to
indicate how the necessary surplus revenue can best be obtained.
From these annexed tabulated calculations it is seen that the
average total rate of annual revenue contributed by each colony will
be :—New South Wales, 39 - 7; Victoria, 36‘2 ; South Australia, 13 6 ;
and finally, Queensland, 10-5 per cent. In other words, the mother
colony, that does not want any capital for unification, is called upon to
pay the greatest share of this intercolonial liability. The question now
ar i ses —i s this liability justified, and if justified, is it right that New
South Wales should bear the greatest share ?
If the colonies agree that unification is to take place, then there
is no doubt whatsoever that New South Wales must contribute'her
share although her gauge may be the one that is adopted. In absence of
any better argument it certainly cannot be denied that each colony is
to pay in just proportion to her earnings, or what comes to the same
thing in proportion to her wealth, in which case, therefore, the mother
colony has to pay the greatest share.
This question can also be answered in a similar manner from a
different point of view. Suppose, for sake of argument, the Victorian
gauge would be adopted, then our colony would want more than half of
the unification capital, Victoria and South Australia would want none
at all. It is only reasonable to suppose that in such a case the two
last-named colonies should justly pay their above calculated pro-
portioned share, although their railways would remain intact; hence
it follows that we should pay our share notwithstanding that our
railway remains unaltered.
There is something else yet to be pointed out in those calculations,
and that is that they represent all charges for the first, and. therefore,
for the dearest year. All subsequent years will, in an arithmetical
proportion, decrease these liabilities as gradually each annual redemption
is paid off. Further, correct statistics will have to be kept, and, each
year, these proportioned percentages will have to be re-adjusted in con-
formity with the fluctuations of the traffic.
It seldom happens that a loan is raised on the redemption system ;
the reason that the writer departed from this general rule is that if the
railways had originally been constructed on the unification principle,


they would not, with the exception of, perhaps, Queensland, have cost
more than they actually did cost; hence, it is fair to conclude that
there is no just reason to debit them with a perpetual additional loan
of eleven millions sterling.
CONCLUSION.
In conclusion, the author has a few more remarks only to add to
what was said in the foregoing pages. He does not for one moment
suppose that the figures of these estimates are incontrovertible truths ;
they are pure and simple estimates of a most preliminary character j
for, to show a result that shall be within five per cent, margin, which
only then could be called fairly accurate, requires a staff of a great
number of professional assistants that it is not in the power of the writer
to employ. Moreover, it is not denied here that even errors of import-
ance may have crept in ; for instance, to widen the tunnels of the
4ft. B|in. gauge to transform them into the broad gauge of sft. 3in.,
may not be required at all, if those standard gauge tunnels happen to
be wide enough to let the broad gauge rolling stock pass through them.
If that is the case, then certainly there -\yonld be an error of consider-
able magnitude in favour of the broad gauge.
In compiling this essay the writer was continually guided by two
cardinal axioms : First, to investigate the theoretic principle of the
scheme, and this, he believes, he has accomplished satisfactorily;
for, in the natural order of things, it is just as natural and right to
assume that a narrower gauge must also of necessity have narrower
tunnels, as that the rails must be widened when adopting a broad
gauge. The second principle he tried to work out not only on
impartial footing, but with a fair amount of precision, was to give the
estimates within reasonable limits of exactness; this, as stated
repeatedly above, to tackle single-handed, to say the least of it, is the
work of Sisyphus ; consequently there is no claim made that these
estimates are really within reasonable limits of accuracy ; should they
happen to turn out within ten per cent, of actual outlays, either above
or below then), then certainly it would be more of a remarkable
coincidence than the result of previous careful study from surveys and
observations. Still, the writer cannot dissociate himself from the
opinion that the latter might be the case.
To Mr. G. R. Martin, Assistant Government Statistician, and his
staff, the author wishes to express his special gratitude for the
courteous way they assisted him in getting the necessary information,
and placed at his disposal all such works from their library, by which
he was enabled to gather data for the compilation of this essay.
A map showing the proposed unified gauges is annexed to this
paper.
This pamphlet was finished when the sad news of the death of
the late lamented Mr. Eddy reached Sydney. In the demise of the
Sydney Chief Commissioner of Railways it is not alone that New
South Wales lost one of her ablest men, but to Australia at large his
premature death is deplorable \ for had he lived he would have been
the chief agent to bring ah«ii£ = ? ; J la= of the Australian
Railway Gauges. RY
A V U/C S^fcOLLITZER,
Sydney, June, 18$h? c\ C.E., Ac.
3 VvO “ DEC J 992
Xiv . J/




' : ■'
•A V


Four Colonies.
Colony.
Length.
Estimated
Cost of
Unification
Colonial Rate
of Interest.
Interest on
Estimates.
Actual Traffic Returns taken from Latest Reports.
Net Returns to be obtained to cover Interest
Estimates.
on
Net Returns to be obtained for a 50 Years’
Redemption.
Net Returns for Interest and 50 Years’ Redemption
tog-ether.
Passengers.
Goods.
Totals.
Passengers.
Goods.
Totals.
Passengers.
Goods.
Totals.
Passengers.
Goods.
Grand Totals.
Numbers.
Receipts.
Rate per
Passenger.
Tons.
Receipts.
Rate per Ton.
Receipts.
Rate.
Receipts.
Rate per
Passenger.
Receipts.
Rate per Ton.
Receipts.
Rate.
Receipts.
Rate per
Passenger.
Receipts.
Rate per Ton.
Receipts.
Rate.
Receipts.
Rate per
Passenger.
Receipt.
Rate per Ton.
Receipts
Rate.
Miles.
£
%
£
£
d.
%
Number.
£
s. d.
%
£
%
£
d.
%
£
d.
%
£
%
£
d.
%
£
d.
%
£
%
£
d.
%
£
d.
%
£
NEW SOUTH WALES
2,530
—
3-79
—
21,005,048
1,043,922
HI
42
3,953,495
1,776,495
9/-
38-5
2,820,417
39 7
64,252
0-734
42
108,465
6 58
38-5
172,717
39 7
32,776
0 374
42
55 311
3 360
38 5
88,087
39-7
97,028
1*108
42
163,776
9 940
38-5
260,804
39 7
VICTORIA
3,120
4 586,400
3 92
179,786
40 210,733
1,025,432
h
41
2,435,857
1,556,159
12/9
33 7
2 581,591
36 2
62,722
0-374
41
94,908
9 35
33 7
157,630
36-2
31,996
0 190
41
48,415
4-770
33-7
80,411
36 2
94,718
0 564
41
143,323
14 120
33 7
238,041
36-2
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Excii. of Northern Territory)
2,210
720,300
401
28.884
5,224,854
261,242
12
10
1,000,408
692,685
13/11
15-0
953,927
13 6
15,298
0 702
10
44 244
10-61
15-0
59,542
13 6
7,804
0 358
10
21,549
5-169
150
29,353
13 6
23,102
1-061
10
65,713
15760
15 0
88,895
13 6
QUEENSLAND
(Excii. of Northern System)
1,830
5 778,500
3 91
225,940
1,971,942
177,343
21i
7
667,223
581,709
17/5
12-8
759,052
10 5
10,710
1 303
7
34,011
12-23
128
44,721
10 5
5,463
0 665
7
18,390
6-615
12 8
23,853
10-5
16,173
1-968
7
52,401
18 840
12 8
68,574
10 5
Totals
9,690
11,085 200
3 92
434,610
68,412,577
2,507,739
8|
100
8,057,063
4,607,048
11/5
100
7,114,787
100
152,982
0 538
100
281,628
8-38
100
434,610
100
78,039
0 261
100
143,665
4-279
100
221,704
100
231,021
0 814
100
425,293
12 693
100
656,314
100
(35f2 %
...
+
... 64-8%)
=
... 100%
(36-2%
+
...64-8%)
=
.. 100%
(35-2%
+
...64-8%)
=
... ioo%
(35-2 %
+
...64-8 %)
=
... 100%
T A ~RTTT ■ A ~R, STATE IMHEEI ITT
SHEWING
Estimated Cost of, and Annual Interest and Redemption on Converted and Unified Railways; also Mode of Raising these Annual Payments on the basis of Existing Earnings as shewn in the last Official Returns of the


14242-
muo
R424Z
■Jt ■


iV'
r


