

The Conflagration
in Europe
With details of Western Frontier, Armies,
Railways, Roads, etc.
By
F. LUTTON CARTER, M.A.
CHRISTCHURCH, WELLINGTON, DUNEDIN, N.Z.
MELBOURNE AND LONDON
WHITCOMBE & TOMBS LIMITED
1914




The
Conflagration in Europe
Giving details of Western Frontier, Armies,
Railways, Roads, Military Difficulties,
Historical and Statistical
Information, etc.
BY
F. LUTTON CARTER, M.A.
Christchurch, Wellington & Dunedin, N.Z.;
Melbourne and London :
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED
1914


PREFACE.
This booklet is an enlargement of a popular lecture
which the Board of Governors of Canterbury College did me the
honour of asking me to give instead of Professor Stewart, who
had joined the Expeditionary Force.
For many years I have been convinced of the German
Peril, and the following pages give the views formed during
a fairly long residence in the two countries and from a
careful perusal of the many articles which have appeared
in the various monthlies and elsewdiere on the subject.
The ordinary man is no expert. For such technical
information as is given on the railways of Germany I am
indebted to a writer in the ‘ ‘ Fortnightly, ’ ’ who is known
as Y. and for the pages on the Plan of Campaign to the
Military Correspondent of the ‘ ‘ Times. ” For several of
the maps my thanks are due to Mr. ,T. Monteath, of Christ’s
College. Mr. B. Matthews has been kind enough to read
through the proofs.
F. L. CARTER.
Christ’s College,
Ist September, 1914.


CONTENTS.
PAGE
The German Army . . .. . . . . 7
Reasons for the War . . .. . . .. 14
Alsace-Lorraine . . . . .. . . . . 17
Western Germany . . . . .. 21
The Railways . . . . . . . . 23
Two Views of Attack .. . . . . 28
German Portresses and Strategical Preparation . . 32
France —The Army . . . . . . 36
The Fortresses and Country . . . . .. 43
Plan of Attack . . . . . . . . 48
Belgium .. .. . . . . . . . . 51
The Army .. . . . . . . 53
Stavelot-Malmedy . . . . . . 54
Moresnet .. .. .. .. 54
Some Questions the War may Decide . . . . 55
Airships and Aeroplanes .. . . .. 55
Cavalry Armament . . . . . . 58
Submarine v. Battleship . . . . . . 61
Infantry Attack . . .. .. 62
What Changes may Occur if the Allies Win .. 64
Historical Notes . . . . .. 69
Germany . . . . . . .. 69
Russia . . .. . . . . 72
Servia . . .. .. .. 75
Statistical Information . . .. . . 77
Great Britain .. . . . . .. 77
Austria-Hungary . . .. . . . . 78
Germany .. .. .. . . 80
France . . . . .. . . 82
Russia .. .. . . . . 85
Servia .. .. .. .. 85
Belgium . . . . . . . . 86


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE
The German Emperor and his Six Sons . . . . 9
In the Firing-line: German Infantry Entrenched .. 11
German Army Manoeuvres—Machine Guns in Action . . 13
Zeppelin Lv. in Collision with a Tree . . . . 14
The Zeppelin Lv. after an Accident . . . . 15
German Infantry in Rapidly-dug Trench . . . . 17
Bomb-dropping on to Dummy Dirigible, near Berlin .. 18
German Army Movements—Getting Soup in Field . . 21
German Airship Destroying Gun on Motor Car . . 24
German Railways on Dutch-Belgian Frontier . , 26
Battle of Blenheim . . . . . . . . 29
Battle of Ramillies . . . . . . . . 30
Envelopment Movement at Ulm . . . . . . 31
Krupp 6-5 Centimetre, to Pierce and Fire Dirigibles . . 34
French Manoeuvres —Cavalry Guarding Railway . . 37
French Infantry of the 2nd Army . . . . . . 40
French Manoeuvres —A New Automobile Searchlight . . 45
French Manoeuvres —An Automobile Workshop . . 49
New English Submarine Gun against Aerial Enemies . . 56
New English Submarine Gun against Aerial Enemies.. 57
Ships of British Squadron Visiting Kiel Harbour . . 64
Pack Horses Carrying Telephone Cables .. .. 66
A Dirigible Balloon seen from Below . . . . 67
German Warships Manoeuvring . . . . . . 70
Russian Army Manoeuvres —Quickfirers . . . . 72
Russian Manoeuvres —Infantry . . .. . . 73
Russian Manoeuvres —Cavalry Entraining Horses . . 74
Signalling Device of Russian Artillery . . . . 75
A Huge Russian Aeroplane . . . . . . 76
The British Army Dirigible “Eta” .. .. 78
Kiel Canal .. . . . . . . 81
Forts in the Western Theatre of War . . . . 83


The
Conflagration in Europe
The German Army.
It is hard for anyone who has not lived in
Germany to realise what the Army means to
the country and its people. The whole life of
the nation seems to centre round it; the soldier
is honoured and respected, and not, as with us
it so often happens, treated with contumely and
contempt.
From their earliest days children are brought
ip) amidst scenes of military life. It may be
the father has to go off for his training in the
Landwehr, or the elder brother comes home on
leave whilst doing his military service, or there
is the excitement of the Abiturient Examen—
tbe passing of which reduces the service in the
Active Army to one year and permits the can-
didate to enter as an “Einjahrige Freiwillige”
—a one-year volunteer. At school the children
hear constantly of the great deeds of
Frederick the Great, —der alte Fritz—of the
marches he made and the victories he won
against overwhelming odds in the Seven
Years’ War, whilst at home, they see


veterans of tlie war of ’66 and listen to
their stories of the epic battles round Metz and
Sedan in 1870. And so the army becomes part
of their life, it is with them all through their
years even to the grave, for on their last journey
they will be attended by members of their local
Army Society,—Kriegsvereine that exist all
over the country, composed of men who have
passed the age of 48.
“Wehrpflicht” or liability for service begins
at seventeen and ends at forty-five. Prussia
was the first country in Europe to adopt the
principle of national service. When she lay
prostrate at the feet of Napoleon after the
Peace of Tilsit in 1807, a man named Stein was
appointed President of the Military Com-
mission. By the treaty Prussia was allowed to
maintain an army of only 40,000 men, a number
that was useless in case the opportunity occurred
of throwing off the French yoke. Stein accord-
ingly introduced the Short Service principle
passing men into the Reserve and finally into
the Landwehr and Landsturm. The principle
of universal military service was proclaimed in
181.') and at the same time the Landwehr was
put .upon a proper basis. Men as a rule are
called up to serve in their twentieth year,
though, if it is more convenient for a volunteer
to delay his service, he is allowed to choose any
year up to his twenty-fifth.
The volunteers ot a year can as a rule select
their regiment. They need spend only their
first six weeks in barracks; the rest of the year


they are allowed to live in rooms in the town
where their regiment is quartered, hut they
have to pay ail their expenses. A very large
proportion of the volunteers become Reserve
officers. The standard of the examination which
excuses them one year’s service is something
between the matriculation and the junior
scholarship examination.
The German Emperor and his Six Sons.
The term of service in the First Line, or
active army, is seven years, two in the ranks
and five in the reserve, except in the cavalry
and horse artillery, in which the periods are
three and four. During the period of reserve
service the soldier is regarded as belonging to
his corps, and is obliged to join it twice for
training. The maximum period of training is
six weeks.
The next stage is five years in the first “ban”


of f^ le Landwehr, or Second Line Army, with
two periods of exercise of eight to fourteen
dci\ s. After five years in the first “ban,”
the soldier passes to the second ban
until lie lias completed his thirty-ninth
y ear. Finally, all soldiers pass into the
second “ban” of the Landsturm where they
remain until they have reached the age of forty-
n\ e. Ihe first “ban ”of the Landsturm consists
of all those between seventeen and thirty-nine
v ho for one reason or another have received no
military training.
A large number of young men, who are fit
for service, but who are in excess of the yearly
contingent required, form the Ersatz (literally
compensatory) reserve. They are liable to three
trainings and in case of mobilisation are at once
called up to complete their training and are
then sent to the front to supply the waste of
war. There are twenty-five army corps in the
Empire.
Fach regiment is composed of three bat-
talions. Such in peace time is the composition
of an army corps but in war time, by the employ-
ment of reserve soldiers, it is probable that each


division will lie augmented by a brigade. To
each infantry division is attached twelve
batteries and a regiment of cavalry: to each
army corps four batteries of howitzers; also a
battalion of rifles (Jagers) and a pioneer bat-
talion. At war strength an army corps contains
about 43,000 combatants.
In the Firing-line at Manoeuvres: German Infantry Entrenched.
There are not Jess than nine cavalry divisions;
each division composed of twenty-four squad-
rons and eiglit or twelve guns.
Tlie total combatant force of the German
Empire, including the Landwehr, is about
3,350,000 men. The Landwehr would be used
primarily for guarding lines of communication
whilst the Landsturm would act as guard over
arsenals, railway bridges, etc., and would only


come into the fighting line as a last and
desperate resource.
The Prussian War Office performs the
functions of an Imperial Ministry of War,
but Bavaria, Saxony, and Wiirtemberg have
also War Ministers. The King of Bavaria
retains by special convention the administration
of the Bavarian troops. Bavaria is bound to
vote military supplies in a fixed proportion to
the budgets of Saxony, Wiirtemberg and
Prussia.
Q, Tl ' e , of tlle German Army is the General
Ntaff at Berlin—der grosse Generalstab. It is
composed of specially selected officers from all
arras and care is taken that they should not
get out ot touch with the actual life of the army
by sending them from time to time for service
with their regiments. To the Staff the whole
organisation of the Army is entrusted, from the
size of the button on the soldiers’ coats to the
drawing up of plans for all the probable cam-
paigns in which Germany is likely to be
engaged. The father of the General Staff was
Moltke, and though he has been succeeded by
men of equal keenness, still they have not
approached him in ability. In the pigeon-holes
ol the war-office of Berlin the plan for the
present campaign has doubtless lain for years,
altered slightly from time to time as fresh cir-
cumstances have arisen or new railways been
built or a further step in the ideal plan been
carried out. Everything is thought of and
provided for even “down to the last button on


the soldiers’ gaiters,” as the French War
Minister in the Franco-German war told the
assembled deputies on the eve of the outbreak.
Every soldier in peace-time is kept in touch
with the Army by local officials, known as
Bezirk (district) or Kreis (circle) officers. Each
German Army Manoeuvres —Machine Guns in Action.
man is provided with a book in which his age,
rank, regiment, and centre for mobilisation
purposes is inscribed. He must always report
himself to the local officer if he wishes to go
away from his district for a few days, so that
he can be got at by telegraph in case of mobili-
sation. If mobilisation takes place the soldier
reports himself as speedily as possible at his
mobilisation centre, where he will find his


i iflo Gild field kit all ready to be served out
to him, and lie is prepared at once to take his
place in the ranks.
Reasons for the War.
i his opens up a vast field for discussion, but
a few theories may be adumbrated without being-
expanded. For years the pressure of the Slav
races has been growing greater. Repressed
Zeppelin L.v. in collision with a tree.
as they have been since the Middle Ages,
the foundation of the various Balkan States
in the last few decades of the nineteenth
century laid the kindling for a fire that
would some time burst into a gigantic
blaze. The successes of the States in the recent
Balkan war made them realise their power, and
Put the flame to the kindling laid so long ago.
Servia, the State which came out of the Balkan
embroglio better than anyone had expected,
made up her mind that she was no longer going
to be under the tutelage of Austria, and


remembered that she had a big score to
wipe off, which she had chalked up when
Austria annexed Bosnia and Herzegovina in
1908. Austria, who so long as Servia had
not attained her majority, was content,
though with an ill grace, to allow Russia
to act as guardian to her, refused any
longer to recognise that guardianship. More-
over the Servian success had frustrated
The Zeppelin L.v. after an accident returning home for repairs.
Austria’s age-long hope of obtaining an outlet at
Salonica on the Aegean Sea —Servia must be
brought to heel. Russia refused to consider
her guardianship had ended et hinc illae
lacriniae. So much for Austria; it is her last
and greatest struggle against the warring
elements of the South-eastern provinces that she
has curbed for these many years.
To turn to Germany. Of Germany’s alliance
with Austria we need say no word. Germany
had other questions to ask herself. Had the
hour struck for a trial with England before


France had reorganised her army, and whilst
England was in confusion over Ireland? Had
she better not seize the present moment whilst
Franz Joseph was still alive and Austria still
a united power than await the many unexpected
things that might occur at his death? Then,
too, there was Russia, the ally of France,
growing stronger year by year. She had —as
a recent writer puts so clearly in an article in one
of the Reviews —“to choose between immediate
dangerous action and deliberate dangerous
postponement. She must either extinguish the
Franco-Russian alliance (and give up her views
of expansion at English expense) or she must
take the risk of losing Austria after Franz
Joseph’s death, and prepare to face later perils
by fortification at home.” Some day or other,
on some excuse or other, the struggle with
Russia was well-nigh bound to come, and was
anything to be gained by putting it off,
although, as I hope to show later on, Germany
was not quite ready?
Finally, there is the possibility that the war
party at Berlin got the upper hand. For years
that great military machine, the German army,
has been fashioned and trimmed into shape; its
chiefs and Prussian Junkerdom have believed
it invincible, and, perhaps, against his better
judgment, the Kaiser, whom even the Vorwarts
grudgingly admitted the other day, has been
for years on the side of peace, allowed himself
to be overruled, and signed the fatal order for
mobilisation.


Alsace-Lorraine.
There was, under any circumstances, this
perennial question, and this I propose to
examine more closeiy. We know that the French
have never ceased to yearn after the provinces
German Army Manoeuvres—Infantrymen in rapidly dug trench.
which were wrested from them in 1870 and
doubtless in undertaking this war, they look
forward to regaining possession of two
of the richest districts in Europe. To
hat extent are they justified in regarding
them as part of France? If we peer
back into the dark ages we find that at
the break up of the Roman Empire Alsace
was settled by Germans of the same stock as the
rest of Southern Germany, but Lorraine was
B


occupied by the Franks, people, be it remem-
bered, who, though giving their name, never
gave their character to France. They were
merely a conquering tribe like the Normans in
England, who soon lost their identity in the
native races. The Vosges became the border-
land between the Frankish and Germanic
Rehearsing for War in the Clouds: Practising Bomb-dropping on to
a Dummy Dirigible, near Berlin.
kingdoms, but the Vosges do not run as far
north as Lorraine, and the latter province,
although ruled by German princes, has. par-
ticularly around Metz, remained French in
language and sympathy. For centuries this part
of the world remained a sort of no-man’s land,
harried alternately by France and Germany,
so that Alsace became a by-word for disorderly
independence. My readers will remember


Macaulay’s lay on the battle of Naseby put into
the mouth of Obadiah Bind-their-kings-in-
chains-and-their-nobles-with-links-of-iron, Ser-
geant in Ireton’s Regiment:
"The furious German comes, with his clarions and his drums,
Ifis bravoes of Alsatia, and pages of Whitehall.”
By the close of the 15th century, Metz and
French-speaking Lorraine had become defi-
nitely part of France, and at the end of the 17th
century the whole of the two provinces had
passed under French rule, and remained so until
1871. Three months ago the people would have
hoped, perhaps, that they might be allowed to
form a State like Luxemburg, under German
control, for they said:—
Fran (yds ne peux
Prussien ne veux
Alsacien suis.
What do they hope now?
Since 1870 the Prussians have done their best
to Germanise the land, and they have done it
with Prussian thoroughness and Prussian
mulishness. They have offered inducements to
Germans to settle there, French is a forbidden
language officially, and the officials are drawn
from Prussia and imbued with Prussian ideals.
If the rulers of Germany had had any sense they
would have chosen the officials from South
German folk, who would have had more in
common with the natives and would have been
more tactful and have understood them better.
Not so long ago a Strasburg jeweller, who was
changing his shop, gave notice of the fact in his


window in both French and German. He was
punished for using French. However he got
square with the authorities for he went hack and
straightway placarded his window with the
notice, “hier spricht man deutsch.”* I remem-
ber web, when I rode over the border a few
years ago, being struck by the fact that the
German guard, who stopped me, had been
imported from Eastern Germany.
That day I had bicycled from Verdun and I
stopped the night at Amanvilliers, and in the
cool of the evening strolling along the road up
to St. Privat, I came across an old French-
man sitting, like Kaspar, outside his cottage
door, now that his work was done, and he told
me of the fearful battles that had raged upon the
green. He spoke to me in a voice quivering
with indignation of the lache Bazaine, who had
refused to send Canrobert assistance when he
had hurled hack the Prussian Guards, and only
required reinforcements to break through the
German hosts. I wonder whether that old man
will live to see the triumphant French marching
down again into Metz! But that is by the way.
All round Metz the native is bi-lingual, I
remember that I got into the train at Metz with
a crowd of horse-dealers, and listened with
interest to them as they talked, now in French
now German, sometimes mixing their tongues in
the strangest manner.
*Jlere German is spoken.


Western Germany.
West of the Rhine there are two distinct types
of country—plain and hill. From the Dutch
frontier down to a line drawn from Bonn due
west to Belgium the land is flat, a rich plain
deposited ages ago by the Rhine after it had
German Army Movements —Getting their Soup at a Field-kitchen.
worn its way through the highlands of the
central west. Here we are in one of the richest
districts of Germany, both from an agricultural
and manufacturing point of view. Take any
map, and it is at once apparent from the number
of railways, which are laid out as though with
a ruler, how rich the land is and how flat it is.
South of the line mentioned from Bonn to
Belgium, the country rapidly rises into the


high tableland of the Eiffel. This, in its turn,
extends roughly as far as the Moselle. The
highest points of this tableland reach up to well
over two thousand feet. To the north it is
drained by the Roer, to the west by the Ambleve
and I rum, to the east by the Ahr, and south-
wards by numerous small streams that empty
into the Moselle. Largely an ancient volcanic
region, it has of late years developed a big fruit
trade, but is not thickly populated, and contains
many pleasant out-of-the-way spots. Generally
speaking the trend of the valleys is north-
east. Crossing the Moselle we get into the
region of the Hundsriick that extends as far as
the Xahrthal, and from there southwards to the
V osges the land is hilly without being moun-
tainous; as one goes south the main valleys turn
gradually from a north-easterly trend to an
easterly one, the axis of the valleys being in the
land round Saarbriicken. Apart from the Rhine
the only really important rivers in all the region
are the Moselle and Saar. Western Germany
is, however, dominated by the Rhine. To the
north of Bonn the great Rhine plains stretch all
the way to the sea. Ten miles south of that town
the valley suddenly narrows in at the Sieben
Gebirge, and is contracted into a space often
not half a mile wide until Ringen, when it
expands again to a broad valley some twenty
miles in breadth, gradually narrowing in as it
approaches the Swiss frontier, where the
Black Forest impinges upon it. From Bale to
Diisseldorf it has an average fall of two feet


per mile over a distance of 360 miles. A com-
paratively shallow stream in many places as far
as Mainz, it attains a depth at times of 76 feet
before it reaches Cologne. On the banks of the
Moselle at Cochem is one of the longest tunnels
in Germany, some two and a half miles in length.
Prom Mainz to Cologne there are only three
bridges, one for the railway, a short distance
above Coblenz, a bridge of boats at Coblenz,
and a bridge at Bonn —three bridges in 120
miles.
The Railways.
All German railways are controlled by the
State, and like everything else in Germany,
they are managed in such a way as to be of the
fullest use to the country in time of war. For
pur]loses of administration the system is divided
into eleven controls; at the head of each is a
colonel, or, at any rate, an official holding a rank
equivalent to that of colonel in the army. All
the men working the railways are old soldiers,
so that in some respects the railways can be
regarded as a military machine. Every station-
master in case of mobilisation knows exactly
what to do; he has in his office an envelope sent
him by the General Staff at Berlin; he may
have had it by him for years. One day the word
is flashed along the wires that mobilisation has
been ordered,and immediately he breaks the seal
and learns what are his new duties. He will read
in his instructions all changes in the times of the
trains and the number of troop trains which will


pass through his station; lie will discover how
many waggons he has to provide for transporta-
tion purposes from his district, and whether the
troops are to lie provided witli refreshments at
ns station, besides many other details which
have to be attended to when the ordinary life
ot the nation is so violently disturbed.
All matters connected with the concentration
ot the troops have long ago been worked out.
A German Airship Destroying Gun on a Motor Car. Shells are
under the driver's seat.
and, as soon as war is decided upon, the troops
login to move from the garrison towns in the
interior to their position on the frontier; so
carefully has this been thought out that none of
the troop trains cross each other’s track; they
"in s raight to their destination, moving slowly
7 Jt ‘ * n !! n ® of oloulrle the ordinary length
deposit their load and run straight back for
ano her complement. There is no blocking of
loads no halting for signals, the drivers know
that the metals are clear the whole way through.


During the last thirty years the Germans have
been steadily building strategic lines in all
directions. For the German Government there
is no difficulty in doing this without fuss or
show. If the General Staff points out that for
its plan of campaign a line is necessary at a
particular point, the War Minister is always
able to obtain money for the purpose; it may
come out of the Army estimates, but in no case
have those estimates ever failed to be adopted
by the Reichstag, and the sums required voted.
One has only to take a map of Germany which
gives the railways to see how thoroughly these
strategic lines have been built in all directions,
particularly on the eastern and western fron-
tiers. As our interest lies particularly in the
west, I shall try, in the next few lines, to show
my readers how far-sightedly the Germans have
been making preparations for this war. All the
facts are drawn from intensely interesting
articles that have appeared in the “Fortnightly’'
at various times over the nom de plume of Y;
I hope that Y will forgive me for using them so
much in extenso.
In 1896 the Germans established a summer
training camp at Elsenborn for the use of their
Coblenz garrison. The nearest station was at
Hellenthal, some twelve miles away. Having
established the camp, the German Government
decided to improve communications with it, and
built the line from Aix-la-Chapelle to St. Vith,
passing one mile to the west -of the camp at
Sourbrodt. This line was a single line only with


double lines at the stations of Montjoie, Kalter
Herberg, Sourbrodt, and Weismes, and so it
remained until 1908. It should be remembered
that this line was absolutely sufficient for all
German Railways on the Dutch-Belgian Frontier.
local needs, with its branch line from Weismes
to Malmedy. In 1908 and the following years the
Government doubled this line, the embankments
were widened and strengthened, and at no point
was the line carried over any bridge or viaduct;
everything was done by means of embankments


At the stations to the north of Montjoie sidings
were added, although there was no local traffic.
At Montjoie four sidings were constructed to the
north of the station and three sidings, each of
500 yards, to the south. At Sourbrodt, the
station for Elsenborn, the two modest sidings
grew into a perfect network, some half-a-mile
long, equipped with turntables. Further con-
structional work was carried out during the
period 1910-12. A fresh line was constructed
from Malmedy to the Aix line, so as to avoid any
tunnels, and a double railed line was built from
the main Cologne-Treves line to the new
junction; the new line not containing a single
tunnel or viaduct, although traversing difficult
country. Extensive sidings were put in at all the
stations, although there was no traffic.
Further than this, a short line, which ran off
from the main line on the left bank of the Rhine
up the Ahr valley, was extended so as to join the
main Cologne-Treves line. Before these various
alterations were made all troops had to be sent
round through Cologne in order to reach
Malmedy. Now that has been entirely changed.
A few pages back I spoke of the bridges, or
rather the want of bridges, over the Rhine
between Cologne and Mainz, and the remark
was also made that the Germans were not quite
ready. This want of bridges was on the point
of being remedied. One bridge in particular,
between Rudesheim and Bingen, was being
constructed at great cost and in such a way that
the trains were to be carried right over the


railway on the left bank of the Rhine and
straight on to the line for Treves and Saarbriick-
Saargemund, the two concentration points
against Luxemburg and Lorraine.
The Germans also obliged the Belgians to link
up Malmedy with Stavelot so that direct com-
munication was obtained between the Belgian
main line and the military lines of the
Eiffel country. Many more instances might
be given of the efforts that the Germans
have made during the last few years
with a view to throwing with the utmost
speed vast bodies of armed men on to the Dutch-
Belgian frontier. At any rate, we can now under-
stand how it was that they were able to gather
so speedily such immense forces around Liege.
It was reckoned that the new lines permitted
them to detrain 120,000 men with materiel in
twelve hours ready to cross the Belgian frontier;
and their suppositions seem to have been correct.
Two Views of Attack.
There are two schools of military thought on
the subject of attack, which may be designated
by the titles of the Penetration School and the
Envelopment School. A great commander will
be able to make use of either theory when the
opportunity occurs, but each army leader is
inclined to adopt the tactics which have given
his side success in previous wars, and as great
leaders are not produced in every war one can
be pretty certain what the strategy of any army


leader will be according as lie belongs to the
army which has won its battles by following one
or the other of the theories. Let ns take one or
two instances to see exactly what is meant by
the words Penetration and Envelopment.
In the battle of Blenheim, Marlborough at first
endeavoured to roll up the French right flank In
Battle of Blenheim.
A. English Infantry Attack repulsed five times. B. English Cavalry
Attack, led by Marlborough, which broke the line. C. Eugene's Attack
which failed until the line was broken. D. Weakly held French line.
carrying the village of Blenheim, the key of the
position, where the French had strongly en-
trenched themselves. Failing in this he led all
his cavalry across the Nebel, and broke through
the French line, cutting off the two wings, and
forcing the one to surrender and the other to
retreat. He penetrated the line.
Let us take one more instance of penetration,
preceded, not as at Blenheim by a definite attack,
but by a feint for the purpose of weakening the
enemy’s line at a special point and then pene-
trating it.


At the battle ot Ramillies Marlborough founcj
the French posted on a concave line (a tactical
mistake) extending from Taviers to the marshy
ground in the neighbourhood of Fouls. Mari
borough feinted on the right and frightened
Villeroi into moving a large body of troops
towards his threatened left. The English
commander then hurled his men at Taviers,
broke through the weakened line, and drove the
French in disorder from the field.
Battle of Ramillies.
A. Marlborough's feint B Villeroi strengthens his left. C. Marl-
borough drives home the decisive charge.
As a classic instance of envelopment, let us
take Ulm. Ulm was held by the Austrians with
two Russian armies advancing from Vienna to
support them. Napoleon so timed his attack that
Ney, Lannes, Soult, and Murat each got to his
appointed place on the lines of communication
on the same day. The Austrians were completely
defeated. The Archduke managed to escape
north with some 2000 men, and the road to
Vienna was open to the whole French armv


before the Russians got half-way to Ulm.
Vienna was captured a month later.
The two great objections to the Penetration
theory are: —( a ) With the enormous improve-
ment in the rifle and quick-firing guns that has
taken place in the last quarter of a century,
troops which attack the front of a hostile line
would he crushed by a converging fire and driven
back by the reserves of the adjacent sections
of the hostile line. The striking successes in
Envelopment Movement at Ulm.
past times in tactics of penetration were, in
German opinion, largely clue to the short range
and comparatively harmless effect of the fire-
arms of those times, (h) It requires a genius of
the Napoleonic type to discover when the right
moment has arrived for an attack on a hostile
weakened line.
The Envelopment theory is discountenanced
as converging movements demand most skilful
timing, and any failure lays the divided parts of
the army open to attack in detail; a further
objection is that with the enormous fronts of


modern battles a commander must have at bis
disposal an almost limitless supply of men so as
to be able to outflank bis opponent. In all the
German army manoeuvres of this century no
attempt lias ever been made to penetrate; the
German strategist seems to be the slave of the
single idea of envelopment.
German Fortresses and Strategical
Preparation.
Up till the death of Moltke, in 1891, the
Germans bad no fortified places west of the
Rhine. On the Rhine there were Wesel,
Cologne, Coblenz, Mainz, and Strasburg, and
though all those places are still strongly forti-
ed, powerful defences have been erected
nearer the French frontier. Beginning in the
south, Istein has been covered with modern
works; Neu-Breisach has had its front of
defence extended a distance of thirteen miles-
Saarlouis and Bitsch have been fortified;
Metz has seen the perimeter of its forts extended
to a distance of forty-six miles, and between
that place and Thionville lines of defence have
been erected, whilst at Thionville a fort has been
built at Guenbage, some distance to the west of
the town. All this has taken place within the last
twenty-five years. What is the reason? We can
find two. In the first place, the French army
has improved, and the powerful front line of
torts permits the concentration of big masses
°1 troops who would be within striking distance
ot the German border. In the second place, the


whole German plan of campaign for attack upon
France has undergone a change. We have seen
that the idea of envelopment is the dominant
note of German strategy. This theory requires
a large number of men over a very wide front,
and this front is denied on the French frontier
south of Luxemburg.
On this frontier there are six natural lines of
advance —
Metz to Verdun — two roads.
Pont a Mousson to Commercy.
Chateau Sal ins to Nancy and Toni.
Strasburg to Luneville —
while in the south there is the big opening
between the Vosges and the Jura mountains,
but this is effectively closed by Belfort, which
resisted all attacks in 1870 and has been
immensely strengthened since. In the north
there is an opening towards Stenay, but that in
its turn is too narrow, as the distance from
Verdun to the Belgian border is only twenty
miles. The other lines of advance all lead out
to the powerful fortresses of Verdun, Toul,
Epinal, and Belfoid, backed by Langres. Here
was no possibility of giving play to the favourite
theories, and another line had to be sought,
whilst the south had to be fortified to guard
against invasion, the mass of the army being
employed elsewhere. Doubtless also the pros-
pect of being attacked by the Russians at the
same time as the French had something to do
with the fortifications, as containing forces
could be left here whilst the main army


was in tlie east, but this plan of campaign was
not adopted. Jt was decided to overrun France
first and try and contain the Russians in the
east. But revenons a nos moutons. The new line
was found between Treves and Aix-la-Chapelle;
here they had a line of 100 miles for
The Krupp 6-5 Centimetre, designed to pierce and fire Dirigibles.
pouring out their vast forces, and by a converg-
ing movement, keeping the Meuse on their right
hand, they would be able to reach seventy miles
of practically undefended French frontier—from
Givet to Verdun—with only the one fortress
of Meziere, and that not one of the best. Here
is the secret for the immense development of the
strategic lines which have taken place along that
frontier in the last seven years. The interesting
question arises, did the Germans make anv


mistake at the opening of their campaign? They
made no mistake but they made a miscalculation.
The Germans, instead of making use to the
utmost of these lines of advance thought
to improve upon them by marching down
the Meuse valley, where doubtless the
roads are better and the railways capable
of carrying more traffic; but they had
reckoned without Liege, and it was here
that their calculations seem to have gone
wrong; that they deliberately chose this route
we cannot doubt from the places where the mass
of their men crossed the frontier. They did
not realise how great a resistance these forts
were capable of offering, and instead
of being able to advance straight on
towards the Givet-Longwy line they found
themselves obliged by the resistance of the
Belgians to sweep round in an extraordinarily
extended flanking movement, and so instead of
being on French soil within a week it took them
a month to get there. I cannot help thinking,
too, that this part of their plan going agley has
hindered them from marching out a force from
the Thionville lines to turn the right flank of the
French troops; that, however, is of course only
supposition, but it tallies with the recognised
German strategy. The troops for this northern
movement were doubtless drawn from the
Coblenz-Cologne bases and other important
garrisons in northern Germany, whilst the
southern troops have kept up demonstra-
tions in order to prevent the French


from withdrawing large numbers of men
to strengthen their northern line. What
probably happened was that the first great
deluge was poured out of Coblenz and Cologne,
and when we read that troops apparently quite
fresh were seen marching into Louvain, it is
permissible to think that these came from the
interior garrisons, e.g., the Guards are always
quaiteied at Berlin, and they appeared on the
scene for the first time in the attack on the
British line at Mons.
France—The Army.
A\ e have seen how the German Army is part
and parcel of the whole national life; how the
child is brought up amidst military influences,
and how the grown man lives and dies amidst
constant reminders of warlike days. Such, in
my experience, is not the case in France. The
army is there and national service is there, but
there is not the same interest. The State does
not exist tor the purpose of producing the best
fighting machine as the German State seems to
do. My impressions may be wrong, but if we
< an judge li 0111 articles that have appeared from
time to time in that worthy republican paper,
Le lemps, which T shall quote later on, there
seems, at least, to be some ground for them.
Military service in France is compulsory in
the fullest sense of the term, no exemptions
being allowed, except for physical disability.
According to the law of 1913 the soldier begins
his service at twenty, and is in the active army


for three years, passing then into the resei ve for
eleven years. From thirty-four to forty-one he
is in the territorial army, and then passes into
the territorial reserve for another peiiod of
seven years. Men of the reserve army are called
up twice for two periods of training of a month
French Manoeuvre— Cavalry guarding a railway line.
each, whilst those in the territorial army have
only one training of two weeks.
The Army is divided into two parts for service
at home and service in the colonies —the Metro-
politan and the Colonial Army. This division,
however, does not apply to the troops in
Algeria and Tunis, which are regarded as
forming part of the Metropolitan army. The
colonial troops are recruited for the most part
by voluntary enlistment. In case of mobilisation
the Gendarmerie and the Garde Eepublicaine


are called up to add to the combatant army,
whilst the Customs Corps and Chasseurs
Forestiers, who are recruited from the terri-
torial army, would he employed as garrison
troops.
Mention should be made of the Aeronautical
Corps, a branch of the army which the French
have exploited with considerable success. It
possesses 334 aeroplanes and 14 dirigibles.
1 he total strength of the French forces seems
to be probably in the neighbourhood of 3,300,000
men, though some authorities give them
4,000,000 men.
The administration of the French army con-
sists of a general staff and a number of depart-
ments, all under the War Minister. In the
consideration of general questions the War
Minister is assisted by a Council, called the
Conseil Superieur de la Guerre, consisting of
himself as president, and twelve generals of
rank, including the Chief of the General Staff
(the generalissimo of the army in time of war),
and the Chief of the Staff of the Army.
What is the army like? To those who have
followed with any attention the many unhappy
dissensions which have taken place about the
army and within the army during the last
twenty years this question must cause vague
fears.
Think of what has taken place in army circles
during the last two decades. There was the
miserable affaire Dreyfus, when General
Boisdeffre, Mercier, Colonel Henri, and many


other highly placed men in the French army
were proved to have been guilty of forgery; so
deep did feeling run that a proposal was made
to one of the Ministers by a prominent anti-
Dreyfusard, in November, 1899, that twenty of
the most prominent Dreyfusards should be put
out of the way; there were the notorious affaires
of spying and delation in the opening years of
the century, when no officer was safe from the
petty spite of any enemy; there was the long
struggle over the dissolution of the religious
houses, which shook the whole officer class, as it
is drawn from the Catholic milieu; there was the
disorganisation of the army by the introduction
of the two years’ service against the advice of
every single military expert in France; there
was, in 1907, the mutiny of a regiment during
the wine-growers’ revolt in the south of France;
and, finally, there has been, certainly during the
first decade of the century, no attempt to check
the Socialist and anti-militarist propaganda in
the army, organised by the Confederation
Generate du Travail, and for which a special
fund was set aside termed the “Sou du Soldat.”
Listen to what “Le Temps” said in 1910: —
“On a vu, depuis quelques annees, beaucoup
d’officiers devoir leur avancement a la propa-
gation a entrance des idees modernes a la
caserne: solidarity sociale, mutualite coopera-
tive, discipline consentie etc. etc. L’experience
de toutes ces nouveautes commence a se faire
sentir lourdement.”
And yet again the same paper said, “It is well


known that the company which is best noted is
the one possessing the most prosperous co-opera-
tive stores, and not the one possessing the best
French Infantry of the 2nd Army.


trained men as regards field service
Lieutenants and snb-lieutenants have no longer
the right to punish their subordinates,” So it
was up to 1910; then came the Agadir incident,
and with it an apparent stiffening of the French
national life, but what do we read in the speech
of M. Charles Humbert, the rapporteur of the
Army Committee, so recently as July 12th, of
this year. “Forts,” he said, “were defective in
structure, guns lacked ammunition, men were
without boots. There was no provision for the
defence of fortifications against aerial attacks,
the wireless installation at Verdun could not
receive messages when that at Metz was
working. So-called improvements were obsolete
by tbe time they had been discussed and adopted.
If war broke out the men would have to take
the field with only one reserve boot in their
knapsacks, and that boot thirty years old ” The
War Minister, M. Messimy, admitted that there
was a shortage of 800 guns as compared with
Germany;that France had spent 0n1y£46,000,000
on her army in the last fourteen years as com-
pared with Germany’s £88,000,000, and that at
present there were no guns for defence against
aerial enemies. He stated that the French
quick-firer was superior to the German, but that
in guns of heavy calibre the French army was
behind that of Germany. Can it be wondered
that M. Clemenceau said that it was tbe most
disastrous statement be had heard since 1871?
Can one be blamed for wondering, as Dr. Hill
does in tbe February number of the “Nineteenth


Century” for this year, whether the Republican
regime is in itself compatible with the existence
of a modern European army based on universal
and compulsory service?
We are not honest unless we are prepared to
face tacts; there has been enough of ostrich-like
performance in the past. Whilst we and France
have been busily engaged in sticking our heads,
eyes, ears, and neck into the sand, Germany has
been working ceaselessly and untiringly. Yet
there is something, nay much, on the credit side.
It was a great deal for a Minister to get up and
openly acknowledge the deficiencies, it required
a brave heart, and the French heart, amidst all
their rotten political strife, heats strong and
true. \\ e have only to think of the splendid way
in which the French soldiery fought in the war
of 1870, badly equipped and hopelessly led, to
be certain that to-day, embarked on a war
towards which the nation has looked for many
years, better equipped at any rate than in 1870.
and undoubtedly better led (for the men at the
head of the French army are soldiers to the core,
or they would not have stood what they have
had to stand during the last fifteen years)
FArmee Frangaise will render a good account
of itself. This is not the place to discuss the
French political system, but I should like to
draw the attention of my readers to the fact that
since 1905 there have been twelve Ministries in
France, and to leave them to draw their own
conclusions.
The French deficiencies in men and materiel


will be remedied to some extent by the help
from Belgium and England. With Belgium we
shall deal later on, but England has sent in the
first expeditionary force at least 100,000 men
with some 480 guns. One point, too, must not
be overlooked. Whatever the French array may
lack in equipment or numbers it pos-
sesses in its infantry the finest marching
soldier in the world. Let me, to bring out this
point, tell my readers what the Foreign Legion
is expected to do beneath the torrid heat of the
African sun. The minimum march for these
men when en route is 25 miles per diem, and
the total weight a legionnaire has to carry in the
shape of haversac, rifle, ammunition and such
trifles as pioneer equipment is fifty-five pounds;
the English soldier carries forty.
The Fortresses and Country.
The advanced line of tlie French fortresses of
the first class is Belfort, Epinal, Toni, and
Verdun, with forts d’arret at Nancy, Luneville
and Remiremont. The second line consists of
Besangon, Dijon, Langres, Rheims, La Fere,
Mauberge, and Lille.
The forts cluster thick in the south-eastern
district and diminish in number as the German
frontier is left. For years the fear of the
French military authorities had always been
that the next inroad of the Germans would
follow much the same line as in ’7O, and so they
went on strengthening their eastern defences


until at last they seem to have become almost
impregnable. Belfort never yielded in 1870;
it can hold 20,000 men within its enceinte , and
its lines during the last thirty years have been
strengthened immeasurably; the same applies
to the other fortresses, and especially to Verdun,
the key of the eastern frontier, which has been
given a perimeter nearly as large and as strong
as Metz,
Hemmed in by forts, by the Vosges, by the
Monts V aucilles, and the Plateau de Langres,
it would have been impossible for the Germans
to have carried out their theories, which demand
a wide unbroken front, so that the various army
corps marching in parallel ranks, the strongest
on the wings, would have no difficulty in con-
verging towards a particular point.
In recent years the French have realised that
the German plan of invasion had undergone a
change, but they were faced by the fact that a
neutral country lay between the French frontier
and Germany, and it would have been difficult
to go to the French Chamber and demand money
for fortifications along a line which, according
to international law, was safe. We have seen
with what ease the German War Office has
always been able to get money for its plans, and
we have seen the stinginess, in comparison, with
which money lias been doled out by the Chambre
des Deputes. If the demand had been made a
long discussion would have arisen, of which
advantage would have been taken by some


political group or other to upset the
Government. Nothing would have been done
except to raise a storm of bitterness, and
to have increased the tension already in
existence between France and Germany.
And so but little was done, and the Germans
French Manoeuvres—A New Automobile Searchlight.
were able to prepare their plans with the know-
ledge that once well on the way there were no
forts to stop them on the French border.
Why was it that the French did not go to the
assistance of the Belgians? asked one of my
listeners the other night. If we carry our
minds back to the early days of the war
we shall remember that the Germans in
the first few hours had taken possession


ot the Ardennes country, and in a day
oi two had crossed the Meuse, and were
circling round the north. Their railways
had enabled them to throw their armies on to
the border at once. The French had no railways
built with a view to strategical operations com-
parable with the German lines. It would
have been useless for them to have ad-
vanced across the Belgian frontier army
corps by army corps, as the Germans
would only have met them and beaten
them in detail. From the first the French plan
of campaign was to take up a position as near
the Belgian frontier as the necessities of con- ’
centration permitted, and await the enemy. As
a matter of fact the allies did cross the Sambre.
but they only did so because they felt themselves
obliged to do something in view of the brave
resistance of the Liegeois, but as soon as the
Liege obstacle had been to all intents and pur-
poses overcome, and the Germans were enabled
to extend their right flank, the allies fell back
to the line of defence originally chosen. Before
considering the French defence any further let
us look at the country.
On the east side of the Moselle and Saar we
have seen that the trend of the land is roughly
from south-west to north-east, gradually losing
its northerly direction as the south is ap-
proached. West of the Moselle the hills run
noitli and south. It would be more correct to
say that this change begins at the Saar valley.
Looking at a good map we shall see that the


hinge upon which this northerly trend of valley
and hill tit is the Plateau de Langres and the
Monts Fauci lies. Out of this hinge run four
rivers, the Moselle, the Meuse, the Aire, and
the Aisne, the most notable watershed between
the rivers being the forest of Argonne, through
the northerly end of which the Aire forces its
way. West of the Argonne the type of country
changes, and one gets plateau land and the
rolling slopes of the champagne country, with
the river valleys running rather east and west,
but with no serious natural difficulties to an
enemy approaching from the north. That is the
point I want to make. From the western fron-
tier one has at close intervals three valleys, the
Moselle, Meuse and Aire, backed up by the
Argonne heights and the Aisne valley. Through
the Argonne there is one important opening,
through which the railway runs, at Clermont;
the space between the Argonne and the Monts
Fauci lies being covered by Toul. Coming in by
the north-west frontier these valleys are
eliminated except the Meuse, and, once over that
and through a short piece of unimportant hill
country in the Ardennes department, the enemy
is able to advance along valleys and railways
all converging in the direction of Paris, with
only the second line of fortresses—the Rheims
and La Fere —to bother him. Taken broadly,
northern France is low plateau and pleasant
downland country, whilst in the north-west the
land is plain, all excellent country for a large
army to make the best use of its numbers.


Plan of Attack.
We know that in the war of 1870 Napoleon’s
plan had been to cross the Rhine in the neigh-
bourhood of Karlsruhe and march on Stuttgart
and Munich, expecting to receive the support of
the South German people. In the present war
the man in the street has no knowledge of what
the French plans are; we can hut guess. What-
ever plan has been adopted by the general staff,
has doubtless been adopted in conjunction
with the Russians, as, for the last fifteen years,
the French have always looked forward to
fighting this war as the allies of Russia.
‘‘France,” as the “Daily Graphic” said the
other day, “is the anvil for the Russian
hammer. ’ ’ Any possibility of initiating a move-
ment was taken out of the hands of the French
by the lightning suddenness of the German
descent on Belgium. That there is a great
advantage in taking the initiative nobody will
deny, but in thinking of the French plans of
attack we must always remember that it pays
the French to allow the German to get as far
from his base as possible for the more a spring
is unrolled the weaker it becomes; the French
spring on the other hand is wound up tight
ready to jump in any direction when it sees the
German army losing its first momentum. One
English writer has suggested that it would pay
the French to reserve the great trial of strength
until the Germans should have arrived in the
neighbourhood of the Rheims-La Fere line,


holding them back and worrying them as much
as possible, but not allowing a decisive engage-
ment to take place until then. That the French
would adopt this plan seems highly improbable,
as it would mean allowing the Germans to
advance across a large piece of France and
French Manoeuvres—An Automobile Workshop.
would oblige the inhabitants to put up with
much suffering. Up to the present stage of the
war (August 28th) the French seem to have
been content to offer a keen resistance to the
German advance, but have acted practically
entirely on the defensive. If the telegram
which has just been published is true, that large
bodies of Germans have been withdrawn to meet
the Russians, we may, perhaps, expect the roles
D


to be changed, and see the allies assume the
offensive; some time, at any rate, we may hope
that that will be the case. When that happy
moment arrives, it does not seem probable that
any advance will be attempted from Verdun,
but the Germans will be followed through
Belgium, whilst from the south, the Rhine valley
will be entered through the Belfort trouee and
a rolling up process will begin, obliging the
Germans gradually to withdraw from Lorraine
towards the Rhine.
Assuming that the French are able to drive
the Germans back through Belgium, they will
always have to be on their guard as to what
forces may issue from Metz and catch the
advancing troops on the right flank. It would
seem that, if the Germans are obliged to retreat
from the Sambre and Meuse, a line along
the Moselle, Kyll, and Roer would offer an
excellent defensive position, supported on the
south by Metz and on the north by Cologne; if
they were forced to retreat from there, they
would have several lines of railways running to
the Rhine, and would then act in truth as “ Die
Wacht am Rhein,” We should hope, however,
that the pursuit would be so vigorous that they
would have difficulty in reaching the few bridges
across the Rhine.
Whenever we consider what the French may
or may not do, we have always got to remember
their national temperament. It is still as true
of the French nation to-day as it was in the days
of Cspsar, that they are impatient, and with an


impatient character the difficulty of playing a
waiting game and maintaining an attitude of
defensive resistance is immensely increased.
The French soldier has always been one for
dashing charges; he can perform prodigies of
valour when his spirit is fired, and possesses an
elan unsurpassed by any troops in the world.
In this war, which has been undertaken by the
whole nation, and in which personal politics
play no part, let us hope that the French
generals and government will lie able to restrain
the national impatience, and will not he urged
on to strike until the time is ripe.
Belgium.
Belgium is smaller than Canterbury by nearly
3000 square miles, and lias a population averag-
ing 652 to the square mile. It is divided into
nine provinces. Of these Flanders, Antwerp, and
Limburg are flat plains intersected by many
canals and dykes; in Hainault and Brabant the
country is of a more undulating character, and
over the Meuse, Namur, Liege, and Luxemburg
are hilly and often intersected, particularly in
Luxemburg, by steep ravines,
“A fair green land of hill and plain, of rivers and water-
springs. ’ ’
The watershed of the country lies along a line
drawn nearly straight from Lille to Liege, North
of this line the country is drained by slowly
flowing streams running parallel to each other
that empty into the Scheldt or its northern


tributary, the Demer. Out of a total of nearly
3,000,000 hectares of land—(an hectare equals
21/0 acres) —all but 231,000 are under cultivation
and there are only about 920 people who hold
more than 100 hectares. It was during the 17th
century that Belgium earned for herself the
unenviable name of the “Cockpit of Europe.”
In the course of the seventy years that closed
with the peace of Utrecht in 1714 there was
scarcely a city that escaped pillage once if not
twice, and some of the most sanguinary battles
of the period were fought upon her soil. In the
magnificent resistance that the Belgians offered
to the Germans, we see that the old spirit still
lives and breathes which enabled the country
to withstand the many vicissitudes that it
underwent in the earlier years of its history.
My readers will remember that far back in the
14th century Flanders had become a place of
manufacturing importance, and remained so
until its industry was strangled by the Spanish,
blight of the 16th century. Until the battle of
Waterloo Belgium remained an agricultural
country. A few years after that the iron
quarries and coal mines in the south began to
be exploited, and soon a line of busy manufac-
turing towns arose along the valleys of the
Sambre and Meuse.
From 1815 to 1830 Belgium formed part of
the Netherlands, but as a result of a revolution
that broke out at that date in Brussels she broke
off from Holland. By the Treaty of London
(November 15th, 1831) the neutrality of


Belgium was guaranteed by Austria, Russia.
Great Britain, and Prussia, but it was not until
1839 that all the States of Europe recognised
the kingdom of Belgium. The two principal
elements of the population are the A\ al loons
and the Flemings. There is a third compara-
tively unimportant element, ethnically speaking,
in the French. The Walloons are believed to
be partly of Celtic extraction, and speak a
corrupt French dialect, whilst the Flemings are
allied to the Teutonic races, and their language
differs but slightly from the Dutch. A rough
boundary between the two races is found in a
line drawn from Calais to Brussels and then
eastwards to Liege, the Flemings being found
north of the line. Brussels itself is much
affected by French influences, and is often
regarded as a Paris in miniature.
The Army.
The army is recruited partly by voluntary
enlistment and partly by conscription. The
service of the compulsory recruits varies from
fifteen months to two years, according to the
particular arm to which they are allotted. The
total length of service is eight years in the first
line, or “active army,” and five in the second
line, or reserve forces.
What the exact numbers of the Belgians are
cannot be stated precisely, as the reorganisation
that was carried through in 1910 has not yet had
time to take effect; at the time the changes were
effected it was expected that the total number


of trained men available would be about 350,000,
ot whom more than a third are intended for
fortified positions. In addition to the army
there is a Civic Guard of 46,000, and the
Gendarmerie, amounting to nearly 4000 men.
Stavelot —Malmédy.
Before closing this brief account of Belgium
a few words concerning these two places, of
which much was heard at the beginning of the
war, may be of interest. These two little places
—the one, Stavelot, in Belgium, the other,
Malmedy, in Germany—formed a small princi-
pality down to the Treaty of Vienna in 1815.
The inhabitants are of Walloon descent, and
use the Walloon dialect. In Malmedy, until
1002 no attempt was made by the Prussians
to stamp out local customs and the local
language, but since then French has been
banned in the schools and German rigor-
ously enforced. The Walloons detest the
change, but except at their own fireside
they are afraid to make use of their
mother tongue. It will be interesting to see
whether, as an outcome of this war this outlying
Walloon district will once again be joined to
Belgium.
Moresnet.
On the Prussian frontier a few miles north-
east of Liege, is a mountain containing one of
the richest zinc mines in the world. Upon this
mountain has been built a little town, consisting


of a single street and a square. For tlie best
part of a century the government lias been
carried on by a Town Council presided over by
a burgomaster. For some ten years past the
Germans have been endeavouring to obtain
complete possession of Moresnet. Custom-house
officers patrol the street separating the German
jurisdiction from the Belgian, and in 1907 the
town was forced to take a plebiscite as to
whether it would pass over entirely into the
hands of Germany, but ninety per cent, of the
population voted for annexation to Belgium.
For the present, however, the little town retains
its neutral position.
SOME QUESTIONS THE WAR MAY
DECIDE.
Airships and Aeroplanes.
The two principal combatant countries,
France and Germany, have so far pinned their
faith, the latter on airships, the former on aero-
planes. Not that Germany has neglected
aeroplanes, but she has devoted much more
attention to dirigibles of the Zeppelin type, of
which she has 24, the number of her aeroplanes
not approaching the 334 possessed by France.
The following are some of the dimensions of
the Zeppelin which was lost off Heligoland in
September, 1913; at that time she was the most
powerful airship possessed by Germany, but


since then others have been built. The Zl, as
she was called, was 525 feet long and had a
diameter ot 50 feet. On the top of her gas
chambers was a platform of aluminium alloy
The New English Submarine Gun against Aerial Enemies in it
position on the deck.
carrying a one-pounder gun. She was thought
also to have carried another one-pounder and
four machine guns in her cars. She had a radius
oi action ol about 1000 miles in fine weather.
Experiments have been carried out with wire-
less telegraphy on airships and aeroplanes. Up


to the middle of last year the wireless installa-
tion on an airship had a range of 300 miles,
whilst that on an aeroplane one of 100 miles.
An isolated man can be seen from 2000 feet up
in the air, and grouped bodies are visible
from a height of 4000 feet; photographs are
taken by means of the telephoto lens.
The New English Submarine Gun —Directed against Aerial Enemies.
It will be interesting as the war proceeds to
watch whether the airship or aeroplane is the
most successful. An airship has greater powers
of offensive action, can carry a larger number,
and can remain steady over a fixed spot. On
the other hand they are more affected by the
wind than the aeroplanes, they cannot travel so
fast, they take more time to repair, they are far
less handy to move about, and they offer a much


bigger target. An aeroplane is more indepen-
dent of the weather, can be more easily repaired,
is much more handy to move about, and is a far
more difficult object to hit, both on account of
its size and its rapid movement. It has been
reckoned that an aeroplane, passing over an
enemy at fifty miles an hour, will only be
within range of a gun that carries 5000 yards
for about 3y 2 minutes. In ordinary weather an
aeroplane can be sighted three miles away,
Useful reconnoitring work can be carried out at
a height of 3000 feet. An airman is taught to
reckon the strength of the forces that he sees
below him by comparing them with the amount
of space they take up along the road which is
on his map in front of him, or, if they are
massed by comparison with the amount of space
they occupy with certain definite objects which
are also indicated on his map of the country.
Again some idea of the number of troops can be
gained from the commissariat train, or the
number of guns accompanying them, or. in the
case of infantry, from the number of mounted
officers that are visible.
England and Germany have both manufac-
tured special guns against aerial attack. France
does not possess any.
Cavalry Armament.
In discussing this question one has to ask
oneself such things as: What is the role of
cavalry! What kind of an enemy is to be met!
What sort of a terrain will yon have for the


fight ! besides many other questions of a similar
character.
The cavalry man’s work is many sided. If
one considers but a few of his duties it will be
seen that one arm solely is not sufficient for a
cavalry soldier, and that his horse is not just a
means of conveyance.
The cavalry are expected to form an impene-
trable screen so as to allow certain dispositions
to be made behind: they are expected to gather
information about the enemy and the “terrain”:
they must push back the enemy’s screen, seize
and hold commanding points, such as bridges,
hills, etc.: they have to try and cut lines of com-
munication, support convoys, and be always
ready to surprise the enemy, and in case of a
victory their horses must be fit and their arms
of the right sort to pursue the enemy.
To be prepared to act under such circum-
stances as these, it would seem that the best
armament is:—For very highly trained cavalry,
front rank lance and second line sword; for
yeomanry and short service troops, straight
pointed sword; and in both cases a short rifle
or carbine slung on the back. It has been argued
that in close country reconnoitring troops armed
with lance and sword will have no advantage
over those whose sole weapon is the rifle. But in
close country a rencontre between opposing
patrols must be frequent on account of the
frequent turns in the road, etc., and must be
more sudden than in open country that provides
an extensive field of fire. The German Field


Service Regulations lay down that patrols will
Jose no opportunity in attacking the enemy’s
patrols whenever and wherever met, and no one
can doubt that this could be effected but by a
mounted charge. Is it fair to place patrols in
such a position that the Mounted Rifleman must
first dismount, find cover for his horse, and then
prepare to fire? He will be uncommonly smart
if he can accomplish all this in a minute. The
patrol lias the alternative of retiring, but a force
that would adopt such a method is best
disbanded.
1 o win one must attack, and the best defence
is attack. How can an attack be carried out
against hostile cavalry with artillery and
machine guns if the Mounted Rifle has no arm?
Take for example a hill equidistant from two
forces who desire it—one force Cavalry, the
other Mounted Rifles. Who will win?* The
Cavalry, as soon as they arrive, will be ready
lor immediate attack, whilst the Mounted Rifle
will require a short space to make ready. All
foreign armies have no hesitation, and give
every mounted soldier the arme-blanche to use
mounted; even the Mounted Infantry school in
England has been disbanded.
The reason for depriving the Mounted Rifle
or Yeoman of the arme-blanche is that he does
not do sufficient training, and would be a danger
to either the horse or his comrades. A cavalry
fight is often miles ahead on its own, in the air
as it were, and that is again a reason why he
should be armed so as to guard against surprise


attacks. Machine guns ought to be attached to
squadrons, and if the force is a large one artil-
lery should accompany it as well. The oppor-
tunities of a surprise attack by Cavalry are
always greater than with any other force, as
they are less dependent upon roads or weather —
they are more mobile, and anything that is done
to detract from the chances of the success that
comes from mobility is a step in the wrong
direction.
Undoubtedly, at times, Cavalry will have to
do dismounted work, and so they ought to carry
a carbine, but do not take away the lance and
sword; for how many times when the morale of
infantry has been shaken has the final coup been
administered by a cavalry charge with lance
and sword driven right home with the obvious
intention of getting to close quarters?
Submarine v. Battleship.
A spirited correspondence has taken place
recently in the “Times” between Sir Percy
Scott and Lord Sydenham on this topic. The
former argues that the Admiralty should build
no more Dreadnoughts as the submarine has
rendered them obsolete. To this Lord
Sydenham rejoins that the case for submarines
has not been proved. He instances the fact that
torpedoes have never come up to expectation,
although for many years much was expected of
them. In the Japanese war the only really suc-
cessful torpedo attack was upon the ships at
anchor outside Port Arthur, and then they were


ot prepared. Hie rumour went through
mg land a year or two ago that the reason the
naval manoeuvres had been suddenly brought to
a close was the extraordinary success of the
submarines; but, as Lord Sydenham says, naval
manoeuvres are not war, and the greatest care
is exercised so that no damage should be done
to the frail shell of a submarine. “The sub-
marine ” he goes on to say, “must, if she is to
attempt any offensive action, frequently rise to
the surface, and can then be drenched with small
shell, any single one of which would be sufficient
to put her hors de combat .” Further, her
periscope always affords a target, vide the
shot of H.M.S. Birmingham. Though it is early
days to speak of the result of the naval war, at
present, at any rate, the submarines do not
appear to have been able to render a very good
account of themselves; fortunately, for us.
Infantry Attack.
ihe story is told of how at Fontenoy, when
a French and English regiment were advancing
towards each other they halted, and the
officers of the one cried to those of the other,
Messieurs, a vous de tirer le premier coup. ”
That was the days of Brown Bess. Kipling
writes of her,
Though her sight was not long, and her weight was not small,
Yet her actions were winning, her language was clear-
And everyone bowed as she opened the ball
2 n ,i h t arm ° f Sol . ne hl 'gh-gaitered, grim grenadier.
Halt Europe admitted the striking success
Of the dances and routs that were given by Brown Bess.’'


With her disappearance in the middle of the
last century the aspect of infantry fighting has
gradually changed. Men now advance in small
columns up to the zone of fire and then extend
to three or four paces. If they are caught in
close formation as at Magersfontein, the
slaughter with arms of precision and magazine
rifles is awful. Whereas the company used to
be the fire unit, it is now the section. Orders
are given by whistles and signs. The firing line
advances by short rushes, and is continually
strengthened by supports sent up from the rear.
As the decisive moment approaches when it
appears that the enemy’s fire has been beaten,
the line is strengthened, and the final rush
takes place. The limits of extension are fixed
by the need of having the fire controlled. As one
part of the line advances the rest of the line will
attempt to help it by directing their fire more
particularly against that part of the enemy’s
line from which the advancing sections are
likely to suffer.
In the German manoeuvres it has been a con-
stant criticism that they have not paid sufficient
attention to extended formation, trusting that
their numbers will carry them through, and
what they have done on manoeuvres they seem
to cling to in war. An English officer, writing of
the German attack recently, said that “it was
like firing into a herd of bullocks.”


What Changes may Occur if the Allies Win.
At the commencement of the war the world
was startled by the proclamation of the Czar of
Russia to the Poles, wherein he promised them
that lie would refound the ancient State of
Poland and place it, as a dependent country,
under a viceroy. One thing, at any rate, we
may hope will he avoided when the reckoning is
Linking German Naval Bases: reconstructed Kiel Canal. Ships of
the British Squadron visiting Kiel Harbour.
paid and accounts are settled, and that is that
ethnic unities will not he chucked about by the
various Powers as they were at the Treaty of
Vienna. It does not seem possible for such a
state of affairs to happen again. Since 1815
international sentiment has changed, and the
great Powers will be more careful how they
treat the different parts of Europe that: may
change ownership; is not the middle of the 19th
century known as the age of the Rise of
Nationalities?


To return to Poland. In the year 1740 the
kingdom of Poland consisted of a large tract of
country reaching nearly as far as the Oder on
the west, hounded on the south by the Car-
pathians and the Dniester, on the east by the
Dnieper and Drina. By 1796 this big kingdom
had disappeared; torn by internal dissensions
she had not been able to resist the advance of
Austria, Prussia, and Russia. Once since then
it has looked as though she might rise again,
when, in 1815, at the end of the Napoleonic
wars, Alexander of Russia held nine-tenths of
Poland and proposed to refound the old Polish
kingdom. But Europe decreed otherwise. A
big stretch of country to the east of Posen and
sweeping up by Thorn to Eastern Prussia was
added to Prussia; Austria received Galicia, and
Russia the rest except Cracow, which remained
a little independent State down to 1848. If the
allies win it would seem possible that territory
as far as Posen and stretching northwards
towards Graudenz and southwards along the
Oder valley will he taken from Prussia and
Galicia from Austria, and then what was
approximately the old kingdom of Poland will
he re-established under the aegis of Russia.
Servia, who has always looked with longing
eyes on Bosnia and Herzegovina, with whose
people she is ethnically connected, will have her
borders enlarged so as to include those two
provinces, and will reach to the sea coast on
the Adriatic, a longing which remained unsatis-
fied after the Balkan war. The Servia of that
E


day will then be unrecognisable as the Servia
of ten years ago.
Along the Adriatic coast of Austria and in
the Tyrol there are half a million Italians, and
Italy has always felt that they ought to be under
her sway; will she get that as the price at any
rate of her neutrality?
Packhorses carrying Telephone Cables.
Turning to the north, we see little Denmark
watching eagerly and wondering whether she
will be able to recover her lost provinces of
Schleswig-Holstein, which were so ruthlesslv
torn from her in 1864. Prussia has never suc-
ceeded in Prussianising them, and within the
last few years she has attempted to evict all of
Danish blood and sentiment from the land and
to settle it with pure-blooded Germans.
What will happen to the Kiel Canal? Will it
be put under the charge of Denmark, or will it


be made an international waterway? This will
probably depend upon what reward Denmark
receives.
Belgium, gallant little Belgium, will recover
her lost Walloon excrescences about Malmedv,
As the target appears: A Dirigible Balloon seen from below.
and will perhaps be given Luxemburg under
the same conditions that Germany has now with
regard to custom rights.
France, in her turn, will probably recover her
lost provinces, and will find her frontier again
at the Rhine. In some ways this would not be
altogether satisfactory, as undoubtedly east of
the Saar the German element is predominant.


It would be better if she were to receive the
Saar and Moselle valley as far as Treves and
Alsace in the south, but that does not provide
her with a satisfactory frontier.
What will happen to Austria, who in some
ways has taken the part of “the rich man of
Europe ’ ’ !
The two dominant races in the dual empire are
the Germans and the Magyars, the former num-
bering 11,000,000 and the latter 9,000,000; all
the other races, without the Poles and the
Ruthenians, of whom a large number are in
Galicia, amount to 16,000,000. The Germans
are handicapped by the Czechs in Bohemia,
whilst the Magyars have Roumanians,
Croatians, and Servians to deal with. Is it
probable that we shall see all the German
peoples unite and Hungary left to fend for itself
with the mixture of races around its border!
and possibly the old State of Bohemia arise
from the ashes of the past!
Two other results would flow from the victory
of the allies, a vast extension of Slavonic in-
fluence, a result not altogether to be desired,
but under the circumstances impossible to avoid,
and, we might hope, the regeneration of France,
nerved to shake off the decadent state into
which she seems to have fallen, by the moral
gain of a successful war.
So far we have discussed what we hope may
happen —absit omen. If we lose, Germany will
be mistress of the whole of western Europe.
She will absorb Belgium at once, and in time will


take possession of Holland and Denmark;
France she will crush by a terribly heavy war
tax. How would England fare? It is difficult
to see, provided we manage to keep control of
the sea, what Germany could do to us. It would
seem probable that we should again play the
part we took in the Napoleonic wars and refuse
to give in, hoping, gradually, to wear the
colossus out by a stringent blockade of all the
ports controlled by her, and support Russia,
whom no one has ever yet beaten in a continued
contest on the eastern frontier, where we hope
the Kaiser will meet his Peninsula.
HISTORICAL NOTES.
Germany.
Modern Germany owes its rise to Prussia. The
kernel of the kingdom of Prussia is the ancient
Mark of Brandenburg, a stretch of level plain in
the middle basins of the Elbe and Oder, a little
more than half as big as Canterbury. It was
called the “Mark” or “boundary” (English,
“march” as in the Welsh “Marches”) because
it was originally a kind of military colony estab-
lished by the Dukes of Saxony as a defence
againt the Slav tribes, who then occupied the
eastern plains of Germany. Its ruler had the
title of Markgraf, and early in the fifteenth
century that of Kurfiirst (Elector) because he
had the right to take part in the election of the


Hol} Roman Emperor. Since tlie beginning of
Hie fifteenth century the country has been under
the rule of the House of Hohenzollern. From
1640 to 1688 Frederick William L, “the Great
Elector,” ruled. Under him the size of Prussia,
as the State was now known, increased consider-
ably. It is from his reign that the ]ong enmity
with France dates. His son became the first
German Warships Manoeuvring.
king of Prussia. Under Frederick the Great,
1740 to .1786, Prussia not only largely increased
her territory, hut became one of the great
military powers of Europe. Then followed the
downfall during the Napoleonic days, to be suc-
ceeded by a steady rise in power down to 1864.
when Prussian history merges into that of
Germany.
Napoleon, passing like a scourge, over Europe,
swept out of existence some hundreds of petty
independent States that existed in Germany,
and set up in their place a number of larger
kingdoms and dukedoms. Through the first


half of the 19th century Germany suffered in
common with the rest of Europe from revolu-
tions that were caused by the growth of
democratic sentiment trying to obtain a share
in the government. In 1861 William I. became
King of Prussia, and in the following year
appointed Bismarck as his first minister.
Bismarck, the man of Blut und Eisen, was
already dreaming of a hegemony of German
states, north of the Riesengebirge, under the
leadership of Prussia. In 1864 came the war
with Denmark, and two years later the “Seven
Weeks’ War” with Austria, which led to the
formation of the North German Confederation,
with Prussia at its head. In 1870 the great
Franco-German war broke out, and as a result
of its success the King of Prussia became the
Emperor, William 1., of Germany; the act of
proclamation taking place in the Salle des
Glaces at Versailles in January, 1871.
There are twenty-two independent states in
the German Empire, with three Free Towns, and
the Imperial land of Alsace-Lorraine. For local
affairs the various states have their own legisla-
tures, but matters of common interest are settled
by the Bundesrat and the Reichstag at Berlin.
The Bundesrat contains the representatives of
the various governments, and is composed of
61 members. The Reichstag is composed of the
representatives of the people of the Empire
elected on a basis of universal suffrage, and
contains 397 members.


Russia.
About the time of the Norman invasion of
England we find Russia divided into a large
number of petty principalities in the district
round the upper Volga, During the 13th
century the Tartars poured in from the East and
were able to subjugate the various little states
of the Russians. Until the end of the 14th
Russian Army Manoeuvres—Quicktirers.
century the Tartars held the upper hand, and
then the princes of Moscow began to come into
importance, and played the leading part in
freeing Russia from the control of the Tartars
in 1380, The Moscow princes gradually ex-
tended and consolidated their dominions at the
expense of their less powerful neighbours until
by the end of the 16th century they had formed
a stable and powerful kingdom, and were
beginning to think of extending their boundaries
towards the west. In the year 1667 the Dnieper
was recognised as the boundary between Russia


and Poland, lint it was not until 1720, 150 years
after the first efforts of Ivan the Terrible, that
Peter the Great was able to gain a footing on
the Baltic. During those 150 years the dynasty
Russian Manoeuvres— Infantry.
had changed, and the Romanov line had mounted
the throne in 1618. Peter it was who built St.
Petersburg at the mouth of the Neva, for ‘'a
window through which his people might look
into Europe. ’ ’ His reign lasted from 1689 to 1725.
In the 18th century the most famous monarch
was Catherine IT., who ruled from 1762 to 1796.


m JZ ’T‘' e , and ffas squired on the Baltic,
and I oland finally swept from the map in 1795
Alexander 1., 1801 to 1825, is famous for the
part he played in Napoleon’s downfall, and for
Ins leadership of the Holy Alliance-a league
Russian Manoeuvres — Cavalry entraining horses.
<)f European princes to put down tlie spread of
democratic ideas. During the 19th century the
expansion of Russia in Europe was carried on
at the expense of Turkey. It was only in 1855
that serfdom was abolished throughout the
Empire.
hip: conflagration in Europe


Servia.
The first mention of the Serbs is to be found
in Ptolemy and Pliny. Coming from the sources
of the Dniester, they descended to the Black
Sea, and then moving up the Danube settled in
the north-western corner of the Balkan
Peninsula in the seventh century. For five cen-
turies they remained a divided nation of clans.
Signalling Device belonging to Artillery. Russian Army Manoeuvres.
similar in their government to the Irish of
Henry ll.’s time, sometimes under Bulgar, some-
times under Byzantine rule, until the end of the
twelfth century. For about 150 years the Serb
kingdom attained to a certain degree of import
ance, and was sufficiently powerful in 1355 to
try to become the leader in a confederacy
against the rising Turkish power. In 1389, at


ip great battle of Kossovo, Servia became
tributary to the Turks, but it was not until
seventy years later that it came under the direct
rule of the Porte. For 345 years Servia endured
the Turkish regime. In 1804 the Serbs, under
the leadership of Karageorge, were able to free
A Huge Russian Aeroplane.
themselves from Turkish rule, only to be re-
conquered in 1813. In 1815 a second revolt
to I lowed under the leadership of Milos Obreno-
vicb, and Turkey finally granted Servia
autonomy in 1830. The Obrenoviches were the
rulers of Servia until 1842 when a revolution
placed the Karageorgeviches on the throne.
Since then there have been several changes in
the reigning family, the most noted being Kina-
o


Milan Obrenovich, who reigned from 1872 to
1889. As a result of the last revolution a
descendant of the Karageorgeviches at present
occupies the throne —King Peter, born in 1844.
STATISTICAL INFORMATION.
Great Britain.
Population in 1913, 46,000,000 (estimated).
Census of 1911—
England and Wales, 36,000,000.
Scotland, 4,760,000.
Ireland, 4,390,000.
Army —-Total Regular Force, 234,586.
Army Reserve, 146,756,
Special Reserve, 63,089.
Territorial Army, 251,706.
(Native Indian Army), 164,000.
A division consists of 18,700 combatants and
76 guns.
The war establishment of a cavalry regiment
is 562 sabres in three squadrons.
The war establishment of a battalion of
infantry is 1024 combatants, in eight companies.
A division of the Indian Army is composed
of 3,708 British and 9,168 native troops; with
30 guns.
Navy—Super-Dreadnoughts 1 , 16,
Dreadnoughts 2 , 17.
Pre-Dreadnoughts, 40.
Cruisers, 50.
1. Super-Dreadnoughts carry guns of or over 13.5 inches.
2. Exclusive of an Australian Dreadnought.


Navy— Light Cruisers, 76.
Torpedo gunboats, 18.
Destroyers, about 248.
Torpedo boats, about 100.
Submarines, 85.
The British Army Dirigible “Eta.”
Debt—£7l6,ooo,ooo.
Total imports of food and drink in excess of
exports, £253,000,000.
Austria-Hungary.
Population. —The inhabitants of the dual
monarchy are composed of three principal
groups—Germans, Magyars, and Slavs.
Germans, 12,000,000.
Magyars, 10,000,000.


Slavs—
Bohemians, Moravians, and Slavoks,
8,400,000.
Poles, 5,000,000.
Ruthenians, 4,000,000,
Slovenes, 1,250,000,
Serbs and Croats, 3,800,000.
Roumanians, 3,275,000.
Italians, 760,000.
Total, 48,405,000.
Other nationalities bring up the population
to some 51,000,000,
The Slavs are divided geographically into
three main groups, the Eastern, North-western,
and Southern. The Russians form the Eastern
group. The North-western group includes the
Poles, the Wends in central Germany, the Czechs,
Moravians, and Slavoks in Austria-Hungary
The Southern Slavs are composed of Serbo-
Croat s and Bulgarians.
The word “Slav” dates from the time when
the Germans supplied the European slave
markets with captives taken from these races.
The Ruthenians are a race in the Austrian
Empire of the same stock as the Little Russians.
The national debt amounts to £574,700,000.
The Army. —Estimates as to its number vary
considerably. There are probably close on
2,000,000 trained men, and another 1,500,000 in
the Landsturm. Guns about 2000.
Liability to military service extends from the
nineteenth to the end of the forty-second year.


The total of first line combatants is about
820,000 —fifteen army corps, composed of two
divisions each, and one of three divisions.
An army corps contains 34,000 combatants.
A cavalry division contains 4,000 combatants,
Navy —Dreadnoughts, 2.
Pre-Dreadnoughts, 12.
Cruisers, armoured, 3.
Cruisers, 7.
Torpedo gunboats, 7.
Destroyers, 15.
Torpedo boats, 54,
Submarines, 6.
Naval ports—Pola and Trieste,
Germany.
Population of 65,000,000, of whom 3,000,000
are Poles.
Prussia, 40,165,000.
Bavaria, 6,887,000.
Saxony, 4,806,000.
Wiirtemberg, 2,437,000.
Baden, 2,142,000.
The smallest state is Waldeck, 23,250,
Army —First line, 1,500,000.
Landwehr, 800,000.
Ersatz and Landsturm, 2,000,000.
Guns, 3,300.
Twenty-five army corps, each composed of
43,000 combatants.
The strength of a 3-brigade division would be
about 21,000.


The Kiel Canal.


Navy— Dreadnoughts, 21.
Pre-Dreadnoughts, 20.
Old battleships, 9.
Armoured cruisers, 9.
Protected cruisers, 38.
Destroyers, 152.
Torpedo boats (old), 47.
Submarines, 37, or more.
Naval ports—Kiel, Wilhelmshaven, Danzig,
Cuxhaven, Sonderburg.
Debt, £240,000,000.
A war treasure of £6,000,000 in gold was kept
at Spandan. \\ riters reckon that Germany was
prepared to spend £150,000,000 during the first
six weeks of the war, and then trusted to be able
to raise more money on the strength of her
victories.
In 1913 Germany imported £265,429,000 of
foodstuffs and agricultural products more than
she exported.
The total shipping under the German flag on
January Ist, 1913, was 3,153,724 tons.
France.
Population, 39,600,000. There is no large
body of foreigners.
Army— First line, 1,400,000.
Second line, 1,100,000.
Third line, 2,000,000. Many probably
of not much value.
Guns, 2,500.


Forts in the Western Theatre of War.


The normal strength of a mobilised army
corps is about 33,000 combatants. There are 21
army corps.
A cavalry division represents 4,700 com-
batants.
The Tnrcos are negro and Bedouin foot
soldiers.
The Spahis are Aral) cavalry.
The Zouaves are French troops, recruited for
service in Algiers.
Navy—Dreadnoughts, 7.
Pre-1 )readnoughts, 21.
Armoured cruisers, 10.
Protected cruisers, 12.
Torpedo gunboats, 7.
Destroyers, 87.
Torpedo boats, 150.
Submarines, 76 (?).
Naval ports—Cherbourg, Brest, Lorient,
liochefort, Toulon.
M. Camille Pelletan, Minister of Marine 1902
to 1905, is responsible for the decline in French
naval power. From being second in the world
their fleet is now only fifth.
Debt—£l,3oo,ooo,ooo.
France’s import of food products in 1913 ex-
ceeded her export by £43,000,000.
Ihe mercantile marine amounts to about
1,450,000 tons.


Russia.
Population of European Russia, Poland, and
Finland, 140,000,000. In European Russia and
Poland there are 1,700,000 Germans and
4,000,000 Jews.
Army—First line, 2,900,000.
Second line, 1,064,000.
Other troops, 191,000. Guns, 3,500.
There are 27 army corps in European Russia.
An army corps with a cavalry division repre-
sents 40,000 combatants.
A cavalry division amounts to 4000 sabres.
One must remember that the total number of
soldiers has to be divided between the three field
armies of European Russia, the Caucasus, and
Asiatic Russia. The “Statesman’s Year Book”
says that under favourable circumstances
1,200,000 men might perhaps be assembled in a
single theatre.
The Cossacks occupy the S.W. portion of
European Russia, hold their lands by military
tenure, and are liable to service for life. The
Cossack troops are almost entirely mounted, and
provide their own horses and equipment. Every
Russian is compelled to serve. Service begins
at the age of 20 and extends to the completion
of the 43rd year.
Debt, £880,000,000.
Servia.
Population—3,ooo,ooo.
Army—3oo,ooo.
Debt, £26,000,000.


Belgium.
Population—7,soo,ooo.
Army—3oo,ooo.
Debt, £148,000,000.
The statistics of the armies have been drawn
from various publications, but they can only be
approximate, as no Power publishes the number
of its soldiers. Troops of the third line are often
of very poor quality on account of age, want of
training, and in some cases deficiency of
equipment.


PRINTED BY
WHITCOMBE AND TOMBS LIMITED
CHRISTCHURCH
