

AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH
COLONIES
Whatever may be wanting to the new colony
of South Australia, it has, from first to last,
never lacked puffing. Its friends are most inde-
fatigable, its patrons most zealous : that they are
equally impartial and disinterested,is with many
a matter of extreme doubt. The principle upon
which this highly-favoured new colony was or-
ganized, has excited warm discussion in the
mother-country. It possessed some good fea-
tures, some bad, and many more equivocal, and
with what seemed a strong predisposition to run
into jobs, and to promote selfish or class inte-
rests. But the time for arguing about the semi-
feudal organization of the colony has passed away.
Some objectionable things have been obviated,
and others modified ; and, now, the substantial
question becomes, what are the real condition and
prospects of the colony, and what are its ascer-
tained capabilities, advantages, and disadvantages,
and the causes of the preference to be given to it
over the older settlements of New South Wales,
Van Dieman’s Land, and W estern Australia ?
South Australia has lately excited considerable
interest in Scotland, where people are repelled
by the many evils and horrors attending the con-
vict settlements. A few highly respectable
Scottish settlers of capital have lately gone out,
with the intention of fixing in the province, and
also a good many labourers, as free emigrants,
either under their immediate auspices, or con-
nected with them. The unhappy state of affairs
in Canada, has, for the present, arrested the
current of western emigration, and is, indeed,
converting Canadian settlers into emigrants ; so
that, in the opening year, the stream will be
directed to some part of the Great South Land.
Many families and individuals are already anx-
iously pondering their ultimate destination—that
important step which, once taken, cannot easily
be recalled. Each of the colonies has its advo-
cates ; each, moreover, has its peculiar and de-
cided present advantages; but individuals, and
especially heads of families, deliberating upon the
step of changing their country, must look forward
as well as around.
To the consideration of this important ques-
tion, we come with as little bias as it is possible
for human beings to feel; and, so far as South
Australia is concerned, it so happens that nearly
all our information has been derived from sources
and persons liable to the suspicion of being but
too favourable to the new colony, from direct per-
sonal interest in its prosperity. South Australia
is, at present, in the ascendant with what to us is a
most interesting class of emigrants—respectable
labourers and artisans, and intelligent and edu-
cated small capitalists, aspiring to improve their
condition, or to keep their place in society, af-
ter the struggle has become hopeless in the Old
World. Now, it strikes us that some of this
class are likely to give a preference to South
Australia as their new home, without sufficient
knowledge and consideration, and from relying
too implicitly upon statements sent abroad un-
der the sanction of popular names. Very little
is yet known of that colony, save the nature of
its organization ; nor is it possible to see a sin-
gle advantage which it possesses to set against
its drawbacks, save that immense one, the ab-
sence of a convict population. Yet enough has
transpired, through the new colonists themselves,
to shew that even this advantage exists more in
name than in reality. The publication of the
Report of the Committee on Transportation, or
what is familiarly termed Sir William Moles-
worth’s Committee, will be favourable to the new
colony, with respectable settlers, by placing the
moral condition of the penal colonies in the
darkest and most repulsive light, and by ac-
cumulating their horrors in one frightful mass ;
but, for its few years, and its scanty popula-
tion, carefully (in the lower class) selected from
the untainted poor, we must own that South Aus-
tralia is, in manners and morals, treading very
hard upon the heels of its elder depraved breth-
ren. Jn the mother-vice of these colonies, low
drunkenness and debauchery, Mr Gouger, the
Secretary of the Colony, already gives his own city
of Adelaide pre-eminence over Hobart Town.
It is known, to all interested in the subject,
that the land of the new colony was vested in
commissioners, not, perhaps, in the way best
fitted to promote the general public interests ;
but it is too late to turn to that topic now.
These commissioners held discretionary, un-
limited, and irresponsible power, for the allot-
ment and sale of all the land in the province.
Before a single settler had landed, £35,000 were
raised in London by sales, which sum was applied
to defraying the first expenses of forming the
settlement. The land was then sold at twelve
shillings per acre, the minimum price, and a very
high rate indeed, compared with that of the
other colonies; but then the full advantage
came back to the purchaser, or, at any rale, to
the colony, in the produce of the sale of all
lands being at once consolidated in the Emigra-
tion-Fund, which was to bring out labourers. The
money arising from the sale of crown.land in
the other colonies, is now, in like manner, de-
voted to bringing out labourers, and young
women as servants. The price of land in South
Australia is now raised to £1 per acre, which
must at once be paid into the Emigration-Fund.
Though there are, we believe, numerous com-
plaints of unfairness in allotting and disposing of
land, and though, in all probability, there might
at the outset, have been a little jobbing, the
plan now fixed and acted upon, appears per-
fectly fair and above-board. The Commission-
ers—the absolute Commissioners —reserve the
power of fixing what shall be sold, and in what
quantities, but the sales seem fairly managed, by
sealed tenders and a fixed order of giving pre*
776


erence. This power of allotting they hold, to
prevent a straggling settlement, and to secure
the alleged advantages of a denser population
to the new colony, than if farmers were per-
mitted to range about, and sit down where they
please. The smallest of the sections is eighty
acres, and two sections are about the smallest
purchase that seems to be made. Every holder
of 100 acres is entitled to the labour of three
men and three women, the agreement as to wages
and food, being, we imagine, quite free. The
holder of a certain quantity of land in actual
property, is now entitled to rent a range of pas-
turage upon very easy terms, as we shall after-
wards see ; and the rule as to locality, is lately so
far relaxed in favour of extensive purchasers,
that, if 4000 acres be bought at once, the offerer
may point out a place where the commissioners
are bound to survey 15,000 acres, and give him
his choice out of this quantity of land. Very
flattering accounts are given of the richness and
fertility of the soil; but, we are bound to say, upon
what appears exceedingly narrow experience, and
insufficient data. It has always been said, that
the soil of New South Wales is superior to that
of Van Dieman’s Land; but that of South Aus-
tralia is in turn represented as very superior to
the soil of Eastern Australia.
The raptures with which Captain Sturt spoke
of the paradise he had discovered, affects people’s
imaginations to this day. Mr Gouger, the se-
cretary of the colony, rests his opinion of the
fertility of the soil upon the report of Colonel
Light and of one or two more colonial officials
who have made long journeys into the interior,
and upon a letter published in The True Colonist ,
of Hobart Town, and written by a Mr Wade, a
native of Van Dieman’s Land, of considerable
property, who has settled in South Australia,
The exaggerated tone of his letter in other re-
spects, renders this gentleman’s testimony doubt-
ful as to this exceeding superiority of the soil.
The natural productions of the province are,
perhaps, similar to those of New South Wales ;
but we can learn little about them. We hear
of no minerals save limestone, which is found about
Adelaide town, and of no metals. The timber is
useful for fuel and fences, but this is not a country
of wood. The climate appears almost as hot as that
of the West Indies, and at some seasons very va-
riable ; and the only decided natural superiority
of the colony to counterbalance its natural disad-
vantages, are the alleged absence of those scorch-
ing droughts which are the bane of agriculture,
as of stock and sheep, in New South Wales. One
account states, that there are never three weeks
without rain, and Mr Gouger asserts that hardly
a week in summer passes without refreshing
showers. But experience, unless it were that of
the aborigines, who have not, we presume, been
consulted, is still unable to pronounce on this
important subject; and all observation tends to
establish the fact of droughts being of as pro-
bable occurrence in the new colony as in the
older one, and, if so, the evil must be aggravated
by the greater heat of the climate.
But we prefer taking our testimony upon all
debatable points from the mouth of the official peo-
ple, the colonists, or those under their influence.
We have seen that the entire sum obtained by
the sale of land, goes to procure labour to culti-
vate that land, or to purposes necessary to the
very existence of the colony; and we are willing
to believe that, if there have been any abuses
in this department, they will not again occur.
For public objects, the commissioners are em-
powered to raise by loan, £250,000, on the secu-
rity of the colonial revenue, and, failing that, on
the land—a somewhat dangerous latitude. What
debt has been incurred does not appear; and,
probably, the £35,000 previously raised in Lon-
don, has hitherto defrayed all the public charges
of surveys, salaries, &c. &c.; for hitherto there
seem to be no public works either executed or
undertaken. There is not one bridge nor a mile
of road yet made, so far as we learn.
The first settlement, and the capital of the
colony, is the town of Adelaide, the site of which
was adopted after considerable dubiety. It ap-
pears well chosen. It is situated six miles inland
from Port Adelaide, and at about the same distance
from a chain of hills, of which Mount Lofty is the
most prominent, ranging in height to 2500 feet.
The capital was planted so far from the sea for
the sake of a plentiful supply of water, and to
avoid the social evils which appear inseparable
from all sea-port towns. It is divided by a stream,
named the Torrens—in honour, we may presume,
of a most zealous patron of the colony, and a
speculator on its prosperity. Ground is re-
served for a town at the harbour, which can
easily, if the colony flourish, be connected with
the capital by a railroad or canal. Great fore-
thought has been shewn for the health, conve-
nience, and pleasure of the future inhabitants, in
laying out the city. Sites have been set apart
for many useful public buildings; and around
the town there is a park, 500 yards wide, re-
served for public walks and drives. The town
land was sold from the first at £7 an acre. It
has risen rapidly in value, and may be expected
to rise much farther. The example of Sydney
and Hobart Town, and other colonial towns,
where the most extravagant sums have been ob-
tained for building ground, may be expected
to introduce the speculating or gambling spirit
into these transactions; but only a few per-
sons can obtain prizes in this lottery, although
the colony should flourish. Limestone is found,
we have said, at Adelaide, and is applied
to purposes of building; and fuel is obtained
from the gum-tree. The locality is tolerably
well covered with this and other useful kinds of
wood. We hear nothing of even the smallest
attempts at raising grain crops. Vegetables
have thriven, and many fruits will no doubt
thrive; but far more has been said on these minor
subjects than the experience of the settlers can
warrant. We hear nothing of success in raising
even potatoes; and Mr Gouger advises emigrants
to carry out best white biscuits from London,
packed in japanned tin boxes, to keep off the
3 U 2
777
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


flies and white ants—‘‘thoughbread of excellent
quality,” he says, “ can now he had at Ade-
laide.” It is decisive as to the heat of the
climate, that Mr Gouger declares it too warm
for currants and gooseberries. Pigs and poultry
appear to thrive well, and to increase. Of sheep
stock and black cattle no very decided opinion can
yet be given. Every probability, however, is in
favour of their thriving, although the soil should
not prove so superior to that of the other colo-
nies as it is declared. Even Mr Wade confesses
his fears, that the immense crop of grasses which
he saw on the plains will not stand the summer.
They bear an immense crop of grass; but I think they
will not stand the summer. lam informed that they
are very luxuriant grazing lands in the spring and fall
of the year ; but when I visited them it was the height
of summer, (December,) and they then appeared dry.
Some of them had been burnt while I was there ; and I
noticed, when leaving, some grass on a plain near Ade-
laide that had been burnt not a month previously, with
new growth of grass at least four inches long.
In New South AFales, the natives set fire to
the long grass, to favour their pursuit of the
game ; but we are not told who fired the plains
near Adelaide. The climate, from the latitude,
should not be hotter than in New South Wales ;
yet it is attended by all the Egyptian plagues of
the swamps of the Mississippi. “ The rivers,” we
are told “ decrease in size as you approach the
coast, and the grass is not so durable as inland.”
Mr Wade says, the climate, though hot, is very
regular. But the letters of emigrants, published,
and judiciously selected by the Secretary of the
Colony, Mr Gouger, give contradictory testimony.
Mr Wade “ saw the thermometer at 132° on
some days; but this is considered highbut he
saw no one with a cold. Now, influenza and
catarrh are frequent in New South Wales, from
the variableness of the temperature. We do
not hear of pestilential fevers, nor epidemics of
any sort. Some of the emigrants speak of head -
aches, and there is a species of ophthalmia, oc-
casioned by the hot wind; which disease, how-
ever, is denied by Mr Gouger, who states that
the irritation in the eyes is occasioned by a
small fly getting into them. He says, the cli-
mate, though hotter than the south of France,
retains all the enlivening qualities of that de-
lightful region. An emigx-ant labourer, named
Chapman, and one of the select letter-writers,
says of the climate—
Our summers, if we may judge from the last, are re-
markably settled, and considerably warmer than in Eng-
and; but the winter, or rather the rainy season and the
spring, are, for aught I can observe, equally variable;
but, although the changes are sometimes severely felt for
the time, it does not appear that they are attended with
that fatality, or rather ill health, so prevalent in the
mother-country. It is quite common in this country to
bask in the most agreeable sunshine for three or four
days ; and this will be succeeded by two or three days of
cold wind, and frequently rain, now and then a hail-
storm, but these are slight. The hoar-frost has made
some of the potatoes droop, but we have no frosts like
those of England ; and, taking all circumstances into con-
sideration, as well as soil and climate, nothing should
induce me to return for a permanence. There is one
thing justice compels me to mention : in the summer we
sometimes have a hot wind which affects the eyes very
materially ; and I have known a person nearly blind for
three or four days. The common house-fly, the blue-
bottle fly, and the musquitoes, are quite a pest in the
hot weather ; but slight veils of gauze will protect our
faces, and wire-gauze is a most valuable article to pre-
vent the fresh meat from walking away.
On this important subject Mr Gouger con-
firms the above as to the plague of insects—
In decayed wood, and in the bark of trees, small
scorpions, centipedes, and tarantulas are frequently found :
the sting of the first, and the bite of the two last, would,
of course, be very painful; but, unless in the case of an
infant or person of diseased habit, no fatal effect would
be likely to ensue.
Of the insect tribe, however, white ants are the most
injurious of any I have met with. They are very nu-
merous ; and wherever a quantity of dead wood is to be
found, the white ants assemble. But they do not spare
living timber; I have seen trees of large growth, appar-
ently solid and healthy, filled with them : they have been
perforated to the very top by the ants, and have become
the habitations of millions of these pernicious insects.
Nothing escapes them, or seems above or beneath their
notice. During ray stay at Glenelg, I was obliged to
place all my furniture and boxes upon glass bottles, and
watch daily whether or not these marauders had com-
menced their attacks : still I found the damage done me
was considerable. They nearly destroyed a box of valu-
able linen ; the corks of all the bottles, not sealed, which
were in some large casks, were demolished, and the con-
tents let out; while the temporary floor of my tent, one-
inch-and-a-quarter battens, was quite destroyed.
Musquitoes are very numerous and troublesome in some
parts of the country, and especially to new comers. At
the harbour especially, where there is an extensive mud-
flat, skirted by mangrove trees, they are in myriads.
Cultivation, however, and the removal of dead timber,
soon drives them away to a place where they may remain
undisturbed.
In giving advice to emigrants, he says—
You will find it expedient to purchase jugs and vessels
in which liquids and stores are kept, with covers to
them; the number of flies which seem to claim a right
to everything consumable by man, is extraordinary ; and
not only economy, but common cleanliness, requires pro-
tection from the persecution of these marauders. The
large meat-fly of Australia, be it known to you, instead
of depositing the germ of maggots, deposits them actually
living; in order to preserve meat, therefore, hot, cold,
cooked or uncooked, for a single day, go to a wire-
worker’s and purchase some wire-gauze dish-covers, and
some pieces of strong but close wire-work, sufficiently
large for the manufacture of a commodious safe on arri-
val out.
The country is not, so far as we see, much
annoyed with venomous reptiles, though they are
found. Guanas and lizards are common, but they
are harmless. The large kangaroo and the emu
are already retiring. The wild turkey, or bustard,
is still found, and quails and wild ducks are
rather plentiful. This, however, does not appear
a country of game. Fish are found near Adelaide,
but not in plenty or variety. This source of
comfort and sustenance is, however, still nearly
unknown, and it may turn out more productive.
Cockles and mussels have been found in abun-
dance near the harbour, and also a few oysters.
In the Torrens, the only fish is a small delicate
fish like a smelt.
In this colony, the vine may thrive ; and cotton,
tobacco, coffee, rice, the sugar-cane, the tea-
plant, may be cultivated at some future period.
Indian-corn and wheat crops may, to a certain
extent, be relied upon ; but, in the meanwhile,
the great staple commodity is grass, and nothing
778
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


2d Season.
608+170—38= 740
Fourth Season.
„ 592=296 • 293
332t253—28= 557
3d Season.
740+253—49= 944
Fifth Season.
„ 756=378 • 378
557+296—43= 810
4th Season.
944+296—63=1177
Sixth Season.
„ 912=471 • 471
810+378-63=1220
5th Season.
1177+378—78=1477
Seventh Season.
„ 1182=591 • 591
1220+4/1—89=1602
else is sure. If sheep-stock and cattle do not thrive
as well as, or better than in New South Wales
or Van Dieman’s Land, the immediate prospects
of the colony are gloomy. Mr Wade, the gentle-
man referred to as authority by Mr Gouger, on
the question of the soil, is decided on the super-
iority of the new settlement, in these important
cases. He says—
Men of capital would also find it advantageous to
settle their flocks and herds in South Australia. I feel
confident that the return on such beautiful pasturage
would be considerably greater than here. They can also
secure good stock-runs in advantageous situations. They
would certainly have to pay £\ per acre for what they
wish to purchase, or rather subscribe that sum to the
labour-fund, as the produce of the land-sales is all ex-
pended in carrying labourers from the mother-country ;
where arrangements are making for sending a sufficient
supply of useful servants, under thirty years of age.
Then, again, the stockholder has the privilege of holding
1,280 acres of the unoccupied land, at a rental of £4 per
annum, for every 80 acres he purchases. This privilege
is given to buyers of land only, none bat buyers being
allowed to occupy grazing land.
It is not said how long the Commissioners are
to continue this great privilege, though we hear of
three years and a renewal, the preference to be
given to the old tenant; and it is probable, they
will not have much reason to withdraw the in-
dulgence for a considerable time. We submit “to
stock and store-farmers” this passage from Mr
Gouger. If the quantity of land that he fixes,
(four acres) for the subsistence of a sheep, be a
just estimate, it gives a quite new view of all
Australian farming. He is contending for the
superiority of his own colony, and reasons thus:—
t It has been urged by some that this mode of disposing
of public land is nothing but a species of sale at a very
high price, and that land can be got at a much lower
rate in other colonies. In reply to this argument I offer
the following facts relative to the only other British
colony of which I have personal knowledge, Van Die-
man’s Land. I leave out of this question now the pur-
pose to which the purchase-money of land is applied,
because, though in the case of South Australia the money
is returned in the form of imported labourers, in Van
Dieman’s Land colonists are brought to the settler’s
door by application to the government. In South Aus-
tralia, land of the first quality is to be had in the
greatest abundance by the payment of £1 an acre to the
emigration-fund : of this land, upon comparison with
much in Van Dieman’s Land of the very best kind, two
acres in a state of nature will be required to keep one
sheep; in Van Dieman's Land no such land is now to
be obtained of the Government; it is all appropriated;
and of that which is now open, four acres would be re-
quired to keep one sheep. I speak upon this point, not
only from my own observation, but upon the concurrent
testimony of some of the oldest colonists and best judges
in Van Dieman’s Land, Again, in South Australia,
land, peculiarly valuable by situation, can be obtained
of the commissioners at the same rate as country land ;
in Van Dieman’s Land it is now impossible to get any
suburban or town lots without paying a very high price.
But Mr Gouger forgets that lots in the neigh-
bourhood of Hobart Town or Launceston, if higher
in price, are of rather more value than in the
neighbourhood of the capital of Adelaide, and
are likely for a long time to remain so. He con-
tends, on another ground, that the highest-priced
land is in reality the cheapest, as the fertility
of the soil (in South Australia) gives two to one
against Van Dieman’s Land. Mr Gouger, in dis-
cussing the best way of employing capital, so as
to obtain the most profitable return, considers,
among other things, sheep-stock as one of the
best. Taking the rate of increase of the flocks
from that of Van Dieman’s Land, which, how-
ever, he regards as far inferior to what South
Australia, with its fertile soil and fine climate,
must yield, he shews very flattering results, as
likely to be obtained even in the infancy of the
settlement. As we are convinced that, unless
sheep, or rather wool, become the great staple,
there can be no prosperity for the colony for
generations, if ever, we submit these details
fully to our readers :
I have shewn this statement to some of the leading
graziers in Van Dieman’s Land, and they all agree that
the data are under, instead of being beyond the facts.
In this calculation, the increase is taken at the rate of
80 per cent, per lambing season, and seven lambing sea-
sons are supposed to take place in five years : the loss by
natural and accidental deaths is calculated at five per
cent, per lambing season. No deduction is here made for
the expense of management, the produce in wool fully
covering this outlay. The original purchase is supposed
to be 500 ewes.
First Season.
Ewes, Deaths. Increase Lambs. Ewes. Wethci
500—25=475 at 80=380=190 • 190
per rent.
Second Season. wether*.D«»ths.
475—25=450 „ 340=170 • 170 190—10= 180
Third Season. Dca ,,„.
4501190—32= 608 „ 506=253 • 253 180+170—18= 332
Thus, at the end of five years, the 600 sheep originally
imported, would have increased to 1,477 ewes, 1,182
lambs, and 1,602 wether sheep ; giving a total of 3,088
sheep, and 1,182 lambs. I shall not carry on this state-
ment to money results, but this can be done by any one
who chooses to calculate it. The cost of fine-woolled
ewes, two and four teeth, in Van Dieman’s Land, in
January 1838, was about 18s. each, and the net cost of
freight to South Australia from Launceston is about 10s.
a-head.
A Van Dieman’s Land grazier will pronounce this
calculation crude. He would smile, for instance, at my
giving all the value of the wool for the expense of man-
agement ; and he would ask why the wethers should not
be sold from year to year, and ewes bought with the pro-
ceeds, whereby the increase would be naturally much
greater; but I have been content with shewing what the
profit is upon the lowest calculation and inferior manage-
ment. At your leisure, you can add to the computation
I have made the extra profit arising from selling males
and buying females, without being afraid of building
castles in the air.
Oxen and cows, again, are a very fruitful source of
profit, and the luxuriant pastures around Adelaide keep
them always in excellent condition. I am by no means
going beyond the fact when I declare that oxen in South
Australia, worked hard up to the day of their being
slaughtered, make as good beef as the best I have tasted in
Van Dieman’s Land, and quite equal to any commonly
sold in the English shambles. Pigs maintain themselves,
and get fat, in the swamps by Glenelg, without any care
being bestowed on them : they are increasing very rapidly
throughout the province, and some very good breeds have
been introduced.
Poultry of all kinds succeed very well, and are increas-
ing fast.
Those who are curious or interested may com-
pare the above with Captain Sturt’s calculations.
779
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


We may here notice a fact most important to the
welfare of the colony, which has occured since Mr
Gouger wrote his letters:—
Some enterprising settlers of New South Wales have
driven over from that colony to Adelaide a herd of oxen :
three hundred and fifty head of cattle arrived safely with-
out the loss on the road of one animal. The road thus
discovered will now speedily become the track of flocks
of sheep and herds of cattle from the overstocked market
of Sydney to South Australia ; and the consequence will
be, that animals for the knife will be provided at low
cost, while fine-wooled sheep will easily be brought to the
colony at low prices.
This is undoubtedly a satisfactory incident.
We set less store by the fact of thirteen colonial
ships being at one time seen in the harbour of
Port Adelaide, as, although they were trading to
the colony, there could not be permanent trade
for them.
Besides the Commissioners—the sole pro-
prietors or trustees of the colony—there is in
the province a rival interest, or another interest,
The South-Australian Land Company —a body of
commercial speculators in England, who already
hold one-seventh of all the country-land sold in
the colony, and a sixth of the town sections.
These wholesale dealers started at once as bank-
ers, whale-fishers, ship-builders, store-keepers,
store-farmers, and dealers in everything. Their
whaling has hitherto failed, and also some other
of their multifarious callings; and the Com-
pany are now contented with their profits as bank-
ers, (in which capacity they may become useful,)
and as extensive land-owners and ship-owners.
They seem enlightened landlords. They give en-
couragement to tenants of small capital, and offer
leases. They assist tenants (for a considera-
tion—ten per cent,, the legal rate of interest in
the colony,) with loans to build homesteads and
purchase stock. One good feature of these Ab-
sentee Australian lords of the soil, is, that the ten-
ant may purchase his farm at any time during the
currency of his lease, at a price stipulated at its
commencement. The leases are for twenty-one
years. Probably this Great Kangaroo Company
nowfindthattheyhave enough of land and to spare.
However, as their interests arc closely bound up
with the prosperity of the colony, their influence
and enterprise must be of great use in the be-
ginning of the settlement. For it is still only
beginning; and there cannot be too much caution
employed by persons of capital, meaning to be-
come settlers, in committing themselves to the
chances of its still doubtful fortunes. The ex-
clusive system, and the high price of land, makes
it almost impossible for labourers to become pro-
prietors. It was, indeed, an original object with
the Commissioners to guard against small proprie-
tors, and at once to establish, if not castes, classes.
The inducement of high wages, held out to
labourers to become emigrants, if not altogether
fallacious, we consider extremely equivocal.
A few clever and active artisans, when anything
is going forward, do make great wages ; but the
rate is very fluctuating; and provisions, from the
mere circumstances of the infant colony, although
there were no jobbing and monopoly, are exces-
sively dear, relatively to the highest rate of wages,
and to prices in the older colonies, This must be
for a time; but the evil will diminish. Mr
Gouger states that when he was in Hobart Town
in February 1838, “ the emigrant labourers, who
arrived from Ireland, could find no employment;
and the streets of Hobart Town were accord-
ingly as much infested with beggars as any town
in France.” In some parts of Van Dieman’s
Land, labour is cheaper than in England ; while
in other parts it is much higher. But, if emi-
grant free labour is thus plentiful, the complaint
of the evils of convict labour is removed, as the
settlers need no longer employ convicts. Emi-
grants for South Australia, if to be taken out at
the expense of the emigration, fund, should be
bona fide labourers, not handicraftsmen or arti-
sans, though those possessing the common and
necessary trades, as shoemakers, carpenters,
tailors, masons, &c. &c., are, we believe, tole-
rated, if not welcomed. They must, if possible,
be married, and not under fifteen nor above
thirty, though this last rule has been relaxed.
A good feature of the scheme is, that the num-
ber of the sexes should be as nearly as possible
equal, so young single women may go out if
under the protection of their friends. Children
above one year are to be paid for. But there is
some talk of relaxing this rule too. The colony
requires young recruits and great encouragement.
The free emigrants receive the necessary atten-
tion on landing from an agent; and employment
is provided for them until they are hired by the
private settlers. Mr Gouger frankly warns this
class against indulging absurd expectations about
their condition in the colony. There, labouring
men must live by the sweat of their brow, as
everywhere else. Disappointment, and its attend-
ant, discontent, if not idleness and dissipation, are
sure to follow the downfal of the towering hopes
of finding a new Cockaigne, a Lubberland, where
the fowls fly about ready roasted, crying, “ Come,
eat me.” Imaginations of a similar kind are apt
to affect the fair sex, of which Mr Gouger relates
this diverting instance.
There is a standing joke in Adelaide against a young
woman, who, having married just betore she left England,
got, during the voyage, certain elevated notions of her
newly acquired dignity. On the emigrants from her ship
landing, a gentleman walked down to Glenelg to hire a
servant, and, seeing this person standing on the beach by
her boxes, he rvalked up to her, and, after talking a little
about the voyage, asked “ if she was engaged ?” “ En-
gaged,” said she, with a simpering yet modest smile, “ I
am married, sir ?” “Oh! my good girl,” rejoined the
inquirer, “ I beg your pardon, I, too, am married, and
certainly did not mean the kind of engagement you sup-
posed. I want a servant, and wish to know if you are
hired.” “ Hired, indeed !” said she, in a very altered
tone, and bridling up to her full height, “do you think I
mean to work, then ?—no, indeed, my husband will never
allow that; he will keep me.” The event, however, has
not justified the prophecy; and, having recovered her
senses, she now works hard. Colonization is hard work;
and no one, unless possessed of a considerable capital,
ought to think of going to a new country, unless he is
disposed to put his shoulder to the wheel in good earnest.
The consequence of a sudden and great rise
of wages, is often idleness, and rum and spirit-
drinking ; which, according to the Secretary,
780
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE TENAL COLONIES.


flourish quite as luxuriantly in this choice
community, as in the old penal settlements.
Mr Gouger is forced, reluctantly, to own that
there is more drinking of the demoralizing
kind in his own settlement than in the others.
“In Adelaide,” he says, “a dozen drunken peo-
ple, mariners and labourers together, are to be
found daily at those dens of iniquity, the gin-
shops. In Van Dieman’s Land, (and I draw the
contrast with great sorrow,) during a three
months’ residence, I have not seen a half dozen
men intoxicated.” But a dozen mariners and
labourers could not keep even one Adelaide gin-
shop in brisk trade ; and we hear of many such
“ dens” in the young colony, and apprehend that
there is, at the outset, not a much higher rate of
morality in the new than in the old settlement,
nor much difference between the free emigrants
of South Australia, and the emancipists and ex-
pirees of Van Dieman’s Land. This last colony,
however, is in a more healthful moral condition
than New South Wales. The criminal sessions
are held quarterly at Adelaide. While Mr James
was there, (who has lately published a work
upon South Australia, which we have not yet
seen,) fourteen criminal convictions, as we learn
by the newspapers, were obtained. Some of the
persons convicted were banished to Van Dieman’s
Land ! and one man was executed, under circum-
stances dreadfully revolting. His crime was
shooting at and wounding the sheriff. He appears
to have been a desperate character—and, pro-
bably, in the circumstances of the society, bis
execution may have been justifiable ; but, alas !
for such a necessity so early in the history of this
pet and pattern colony. And what are we to
conclude of a population of about 2500, very
carefully selected, w'hich already affords a crim-
inal calendar like the above?
As to the prospects of working men in the new
settlement, we should imagine that, for labourers,
there may be a very considerable demand; and
also room for a small number of the ordinary
handicrafts, and even for a few glaziers, plumbers,
and such like callings. But it must be evident
that, in a population so small, leaving out that
the wealthier part, at least, bring full supplies
from England, there cannot be much demand; and
that an artisan who finds over employment for a
time, may shortly fail of work. “ Labourers,”
says Mr Gouger, “ of all kinds are wanted ;” and
“ shepherds, especially from the Highlands,
would obtain high wages.” But shepherds have
high wages at home, or equivalent advantages.
In speaking of wages in all of these colonies, the
public hear always of the prizes, and seldom of
the blanks ; or rather, in this lottery, it seems all
prizes and no blanks. Mr Gouger treats the
matter with candour in his own particular case,
though his general assurances may be too flatter-
ing. For some months, he gave to six men “ ac-
customed to all kinds of colonial labour—such as
clearing land, grubbing of trees, fencing, and gar-
dening—6s. a-day.” But, he adds, “ These were
skilful men, and each worth two of those just
landed from England. They were all Irishmen.”
And 6s. a-day must, no doubt, have been deemed
immense wages to an Irish labourer, dear as
potatoes and all kinds of provision were then in
Adelaide. Mr Gouger says that they are not
dear; but many will take leave to differ from him
who read his rates :
Provisions are by no means dear : excellent beef and
mutton are always to be obtained for Is. a pound; salt beef
and pork for about 9d.; kangaroo, 9d.; wild ducks. Is.
each; quail, 6d.; snapper, about 6d. a pound ; and other
fish in proportion. Fresh butter is 2s. 6d., and salt but-
ter Is. 6d.; milk, lOd. a quart; flour, 555. the barrel of
1961b5.; sugar, 6d., and tea, 3s. 6d. and 4s.
With so many colonial ships in the harbour,
and Van Dieman’s Land so near, to look to no
other quarters, we cannot understand why flour,
salt beef, and pork, and the unexcised commo-
dities of tea and sugar, and soap, should be so high.
In those letters from emigrants which Mr
Gouger brought to England to their friends and
relations, the rate of wages and the price of
provisions are frequent topics. One steady man,
named Simons, a blacksmith, who, from the
nature of his trade, has prospered exceedingly
at Adelaide, gives a rather interesting account
of his progress. He sets out by complaining
loudly of the conduct of the captain, surgeon, and
superintendent of the ship in which he went
out: but Mr Gouger affirms, that this must be
a solitary case, and it may fairly be supposed
that the Commissioners and their agents will try
to ensure good treatment to those they are
bringing out. Simons writes—
Good labourers, of any description, are now getting
ss. 6d. to 6s. per day, and they were and are very much
wanted : tradesmen can get 10s. per day ; but most that
is wanting is carpenters, bricklayers, and masons. I
can earn myself £1 per day, and not rvork so hard as I
did in England for 7s. Beef and mutton is plentifully
supplied by the commissioners at Is. per pound ; pota-
toes is very dear at present; but the next season I expect
they will be cheaper than they are in London, as they
grow very fast, as likewise do most vegetables. Fowls
breed three or four times a-year; all cattle breed very
fast, so that wc may expect meat soon to be very cheap.
Shoes is exceedingly dear ; clothes is much cheaper than
we could expect. Parrots and cockatoos are plentiful,
which are excellent eating ; there is plenty of kangaroo,
but very shy, as likewise is emus, turkeys, geese, and
ducks.
Dear brother and sister, if you can rely on my word,
I would advise you to come out to Australia, where you
will better your condition tenfold, as also would Janies
Tupper, as he could by shingle-splitting earn £l a-day, as
it is an article of great consumption. Please to inform,
your mother if she will send R. Tupper out, Mr Gouger,
the bearer of this letter, will bring him out rvith him, and
I promise to do the best in my power for him. I have
bought an acre of land in the city of Adelaide which cost
me £B, which is now W’orth £5O, without anything
being done to it, and land of every description is increas-
ing in price every day. We have now got a comfortable
stone cottage and a good shop, with two fires constantly
a-going, and a good garden well stocked with vegetables.
My brother is now at work with me, and is doing very
well.
This is one of the great prizes. A man
named Cronk—who was probably skilful in co-
lonial matters, as he had previous experience in
both the other colonies, and seems to have been
employed at Adelaide to negociate with the
Aborigines.—writes thus—
Dear kindred, I do not know what sort of account
781
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


you have heard of this place : my opinion is, as many
more, that there is every promising prospect of a flourish-
ing colony. The town is improving very fast, and we
have not had to undergo one-half of the inconveniences as
I expected we should, for we never have been short of
provisions yet, for the vessels are continually coming from
Sydney, Van Dieman’s Land, and other places. We
have some large flocks of sheep, and herds of bullocks and
cows, also horses ; and vessels still coming in with stock
and provisions. The land produces very fine rich grass,
of various sorts; the town is beautifully situated on two
spots of rising ground, with a strong running stream of
■water through the centre, which runs all the year round.
The town is surrounded by large plains. The people
that has made gardens, their crops has turned out very
fair crops; I have seen small spots of wheat and oats,
looks remarkably well at present. Any person coming
out here can never regret it, for labour will always be in
full demand, and I hope I shall have the pleasure of see-
ing my brothers and relations out here. I have one acre
and a quarter of land in the town, which will become
very valuable in the course of a few years. My master
gave £5 per acre, and I have been offered £BO for it;
but I refused to sell. I sold three-quarters of an acre, as
I purchased for i6lO per acre, I sold for £23 a few days
after. Labour of every kind is in full demand. Wages
here is, for labouring men, about 30s. to 365. per week ;
mechanics, from 50s. to 60s. per week. Price of provi-
sions ; fat beef and mutton, Is. per pound; salt pork,
lOd.; butter, 25.; fresh butter, 35.; sugar, Bd.; tea, 35.;
kangaroo, 9d.; milk, Bd. per quart; beer, Is. 2d. to Is,
6d. per quart. Dear mother, I hope you have received
the letters I have sent you, five in number; for lam in
expectation of seeing my brother John, and William Gray
here shortly; also, a letter from yon. The gentleman,
Mr Gouger, has had the kindness to favour me with
bringing these few lines to London for you, which he
will be so kind as to send you a letter where he resides,
as you can ask any question of the colony, and of our
way of employment; and if either my sisters or brothers
would like to come out here, he will have the kindness
to give you every instruction how to proceed.
There are letters now in England from emi-
grants and settlers, of a very different com-
plexion from the above ; but these have not come
through Mr Gouger’s care, and we look only to
his selection, professing to take the most favour-
able view possible of the colony. The wife of
one of the emigrants writes to her parents very
circumstantially. Her husband had acted as
cook on the outward voyage, for which he was
to receive £5. At Adelaide he got into imme-
diate employment as a butcher, at £2 a-week,
with an allowance of fresh meat and a little
milk. His employer ivas a* store-keeper, for
whose wife his wife charred. To those who
love the “ simple annals of the poor,” Anne
Cooke's epistle will have an interest besides the
information which it conveys.
We had a most excellent man and perfect gentleman
for our captain, and I must say the same by our doctor,
which made things very pleasant on board. Our doctor
was likewise very clever in his profession, which, I am
sorry to say, I had occasion to prove. I was taken
with sea-sickness before we got to Portsmouth, which
continued till within a week of our landing; for some
weeks, I never left my bed, except to be lifted out to have
it made : at the end of that time, my bed used to be laid
on the deck of a morning, and I was taken up and laid
upon it. Indeed I suffered much more than any other
person on board, and we had a gi eat deal of illness. A
person of the name of Rush brought two children on
board with the hooping-cough, which our little darling,
Peter, caught, and suffered for two months on board with
it, as it had such an effect upon his bowels. You have
no idea of the miseries of illness on board of ship ; the
dear little fellow seemed a great 'deal better the last
week or two we were on board; and on Saturday, the
21st October, we landed, and everybody was delighted
with his little tricks in the boat, as we came to shore;
you might have taken'a lease'of his life, to all appear-
ance, but he changed poorly in the morning, about eight
o’clock, and on Sunday morning, about six o’clock, he
had a dreadful fit, and continued out of one into another,
till Tuesday night, and from thence gradually sinking
till Thursday night, at twelve o’clock, when he expired
like a lamb. My tears fall so fast, I can scarcely see to
write at all. 1 endeavour to resign myself to the will of
God, but nature will have its way ; and it seems hard,
after bringing him so many miles, to lose him now. The
doctor says it was the cough, and that his lungs were
entirely gone. Dear father, if you could call and tell
Mr Hutt, the mischief it caused letting those people
bring such a complaint on board, as there was three died
on board with it, besides my little dear, and there are at
least twenty bad with it now here, I think they would
be more particular in future. Notwithstanding all my
trouble, I am now getting as strong and hearty as ever I
was in my life; the climate seems to have such wonder-
ful effect upon my constitution, and indeed on everybody’s
that conduct themselves sober and steady. The heat,
yesterday, at twelve o’clock, was 100° in the shade, and
for all that, your appetite is as sharp as in frosty weather
in England. We seem to be always hungry , which
proves the healthiness of the climate. Indeed, it is a
wonderful country; a complete natural garden. The
flowers which grow wild about, would shame many
English gardens, and to sec the trees and beautiful ever-
greens about the fields, it looks like a fine park.
The provisions are at present very high ; fresh meat,
Is. per lb. ; butter, 2s. ; bread, Is. Bd. per quartern ;
sugar, from ’Jd, to Bd. per lb.; tea from 4s. to ss. ;
pepper, 2s. per lb. ; soap, 7d. to 8d; coffee, 2s. per lb.;
but wearing apparel would frighten you. Boots and
shoes are dearer than anything. Men’s shoes, from 12s. 6d,
to £1 a pair; boots from £1 : 10s. to £2 : 10s. Women’s
in proportion. Straw bonnets, £1 ; 65., that would be
about Bs. at home. I shall do well by the thimbles,
hooks, and eyes, and other things I brought out with
me, as they are an immense price here; I have already
sold some. I send this letter by Mr Gouger, a gentle-
man who will be so kind as to call on you, and he will
give you £5 from me, if you will be so good as to lay it
out in the following articles.
The articles wanted are strong leather boots,
for both husband and wife, from a shop in
Skinner’s Street ; worsted stocking shirts for
the husband, and flannel petticoats for the wife.
Their experience of the colony would not be
much, as they came to anchor on the 17th of
October, and the woman's letter is dated the 7th
November. This “ always hungry” woman, upon
her fortnight’s knowledge, urges "alhher friends
to come out. She was getting a pint of porter
a-day from her mistress, while it was selling at
Is. 2d. a-pot ! —and she continues —“ Pray tell
whoever thinks of coming out they must make
make up their minds to be sober, as liquor, being
so cheap here, it is the destruction of many here ;
it is quite dreadful. Dear mother, 1 daresay
you remember I am twenty-five years old to-
day ; I wish you was here with me.”
Mr Gouger cannot say quite so much for the
sylvan beauties of the land of their adoption as
romantic Anne Cooke. The trees he thinks
“by no means handsome.” The umbrageous part
of the large trees is generally at the top. There
is a yellow wattle of great splendour, which,
when in flower, emits a most fragrant odour.
There are also many well-grown and ornamental
782
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


shrubs. The beautifully plumaged and splendidly
coloured parrots and small birds of the other
Australian colonies are found here.
There is a local necessity for the strong half-
boots which Mrs Cooke ordered. Among the
novel delights of the colony, there is one to be
provided against, thus noticed by Mr Gouger:—
The clothing required in South Australia is just what
you have been in the habit of wearing in England, but
add thereto some blue camlet or light white jackets, to
be worn during the summer season instead of a cloth
coat. A supply of leather gaiters and strong gardening
- gloves will be found very useful; and you will in general
find high-shoes or half-boots the best pi’otection for the
feet. There is a kind of spear-grass bearing a bearded
seed, which much inconveniences pedestrians during half
the year, and for protection against which gaiters or half
boots are required. The seed is very sharp, and sticks
into the feet and ankles with great pertinacity, unless
they are well protected from it. ...
Brass and iron bedsteads are by far better than wood,
and mvsquito-curtains will assuredly be required by all
new-comers. Good mattrasses cannot be had in the
colony ; you will not be sorry, 1 think, if you brought
out a bale of curled horse-hair, and the tick to put it
into; there are persons who understand upholstering
resident in the colony.
Well provided as the colony is with trading-
ships and merchants, Mr Gouger orders his sup.
plies of wine, dried-fruits, salted tongues, &c.
half-yearly from the Cape of Good Hope, as
the safer and cheaper market, and he advises his
friends to follow his plan, “ Ironmongery, fur-
niture, articles of dress, and haberdashery, are
all very dear in the colony ; do not, therefore,
hesitate to take out with you a sufficient supply
of these really useful commodities.” Draught
bullocks and sheep may now be best obtained from
Van Diernan’s Land, where there are excellent
breeds. Really, what with the musquitoes, the
myriads of flies, the live maggots, the white ants,
the small snakes, the disease of the eyes, the na-
tive dogs, (which are like wolves, and attack the
sheep, goats, and poultry,) the spear-grass, and
all the other natural agremens of the colony, it
would require some special advantages. Mr
Gouger points out one ; but it will, we feax’, never
be x-ealized, as the law-makers must be the op-
posing interest. It consists in organizing a
scheme of finance, for raising the colonial revenue,
not from excise or customs, but from realized
profits, or by a property-tax, in fact. He esti-
mates that, in town and country, £178,998: 16s.
have already been realized in re-selling the lands
originally purchased from the Commissioners:
immense profits, certainly, and the world will
have some curiosity about who have turned
their silver or copper into gold ! This balance
(£178,998:165.) is, he says,
The actual amount of profit gained by the pur-
chasers of the town and preliminary sections, since the
foundation of the province, a little more than a year.
What a result ! To obtain the foundation of this pro-
vince, the sum of about £60,000 has been expended ; it
has already created within itself, property which would
more than three times overpay the cost of its creation.
But again here is a sxxbject for taxation! Profit has
arisen to individuals to an enormous amount, and in a
very short time, by means for the production of which
the gainers have expended no capital. Here is that
“ x’ent,” scientifically speaking, that accidental profit
which has always been deemed, by economists, the very
best subject for taxation, because it is felt by no one; by
the institution of this tax now, in the infancy of the
province, it will be relieved from all debt, and need not
be encumbered, for the sake of revenue, either with excise
or customs.
Were this great and decided step taken now,
in the infancy of the colony, its advantages would
be incalculable:—but it will not. It would be
setting a very dangerous example indeed to the
people of the mother country. We, however,
thank Mr Gouger for this liberal and states-
man-like idea. The government of the new
province, which was at first what this gentleman
justly terms unique, is now the same as in the
other colonies ; though the extraordinary powers
of the Commissioners are not to be touched. As
soon as the population amounts to 50,000, the
colony is, like the others, promised a constitu-
tion, which may perhaps, when the time comes,
have some popular principle. The same objec-
tion cannot, at all events, exist which the Tories
urge against giving the franchise in the penal
colonies, as there is no convict population from
which to obtain emancipists and expirees. It is
not unlikely, however, that a few of the above
characters are already flourishing in Adelaide,
and supplying some of its most lucrative callings.
The colony is secured against convicts, but not
against those who have been convicts.
It is needless to look too narrowly into the
manner in which either the Commissioners,
or those who placed the province at their dis-
posal, obtained their titles ; but we are compelled
to think of what might be the consequences to the
settlers of hostility from the aborgines. The
most pleasing feature in the new settlement is
the wisdom and humanity with which the natives
have hitherto been treated. Still this is a ticklish
and delicate point; and here exists a danger from
which Van Pieman’s Land, though by wicked and
disgraceful means, is now forever x-elieved. Upon
that beautiful island, as large as li’eland, there is
now not one native of the original race ! The
last remnant of the aboriginal tribes, was, as we
lately had occasion to notice, after foul treachery
and violence had been done to them, sent to an
island in Bass’s Straits, where more than half
their number have already died, of, accord-
ing to the evidence of the surgeon, Mr Barnes,
given last summer before Sir William Moles-
worth’s committee, the home-sickness the
languishing desire to return to their country. If
the colony of South Australia can manage to be-
have with somewhat less cruelty and treachery
to the natives, than has marked the history of
other colonies, they will not only promote the
security of their own settlements, but gain public
opinion at home to their side. Mr Gouger does
not set out in the ordinary style, by giving an
ill name to the black dog marked to be hanged ;
for he entertains no bad designs. Hitherto
colonial dealing with the aboriginal race in South
Australia, is a picture that has no sanguinary
shades. We have, therefore, sincere pleasure in
presenting it to our readers :
About a fortnight or three weeks after landing at
Glenelg, one of the settlers, who was out shooting, saw
783
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


at a distance a native man and boy employed in making
afire; he prudently withdrew his sporting charge, and
put a bullet into each barrel, in case of being obliged to
defend himself. Having taken this precaution, he ad-
vanced silently until within a short distance, and then
laughed heartily. The natives immediately seized their
spears; but,as he continued laughing, and held a biscuit
to them, they put down their spears and approached him.
They then embraced, and he succeeded in bringing them
down to the settlement. Having early intimation of
their approach, I went to meet them. The man appeared
to be of about thirty years of age, and the boy about
eight; both seemed intelligent, and, as far as my know-
ledge of physiognomy went, anything but furious. As
soon as they saw me, they laughed, and patted me on the
back, which ceremony I, of course, returned; but, wish-
ing to make them comprehend as completely as possible,
that we wished to be friendly with them, I took a stick,
and, holding it over my head, broke it, saying, “ Worn-
hara, wombara no good,” upon which the man seemed
perfectly delighted, and with great earnestness embraced
me. The wombara is a weapon used in the native war-
fare. We then went to the government-store, where they
were supplied with a second-hand military coat, cap, and
trowsers each, which wonderfully delighted them; and
on a lookingglass being placed before them, they were
almost convulsed with laughter. This sensation having
subsided, we introduced to them a new wonder; a pipe
being given to one of them, it was lighted by a burning,
glass : they looked above and below to find the fire, and
seeing nothing but a piece of transparent substance in a
wooden frame, they seemed rather alarmed. On this, I
pointed to the sun, then to the glass and tobacco; but
the pantomimic explanation was hardly complete before
the native patted his chest in token of comprehension,
laughed, and then looked at each of the party as if im-
pressed with awe at our superior knowledge and con-
trivances. They were then taken round the settlement;
and as at each tent they got some small present, they were
evidently highly gratified with their reception. They
remained some days with the person who had succeeded
with so much credit to himself in bringing them down,
and then returned to the woods, under a promise to bring
down their whole family. A few days afterwards,
they reappeared, attended by their friends and relations,
all of whom received the same useful presents and warm
welcome as had their predecessors, From that time up
to my leaving the colony, we were surrounded by natives,
and not one instance of dishonesty or treachery on their
part, has occurred.
The aborigines I have seen are generally a well formed
and active race, differing in many important points from
the accounts I have perused of the natives ot New South
Wales. They are also unlike those who once existed in
Van Dieman’s Land, Once existed ! Yes, in less than
thirty years, the black possessors of the soil have been
nearly destroyed ; and in a few more, not one will live
to tell the tale. There are now, lam informed, but two
women at Flinders’ Island capable of perpetuating their
race; and the proportion of deaths to births shews that
the native population will soon be extinct. The progress
of English colonization is marked by a trail of blood ;
but this is episodical, and 1 gladly return to my account,
with a feeling of pride, that, instead of being charged with
cruelty, the inhabitants of my adopted country have,
hitherto, acted towards the aborigines the part of a
humane and Christian people.
I have said the South Australian natives are well-pro-
portioned and active; I have not seen one defoimid per-
son among them ; and they are not only generally
healthy, and free from those cutaneous eruptions which
so often afflict savages, but the excellence of their consti-
tutions enables them to throw off diseases, and to recover
from wounds which would be fatal to Europeans.
It is imagined the language of those savages is
the Malay, but we think on very slender proof.
Their weapons, and implements of hunting and
fishing, are of the rudest kind. In feeding, they
are nearly as omnivorous as the highly civilized
Chinese. Whale-blubber is a dainty lately added
to their repasts, and they attend the whalers on
the coast to procure it. They have the acute
senses of other savage tribes, in tracking their
enemies or their prey. They have no settled place
of abode, but each family wanders over a space
of miles, “ punishing aggression made on their
boundaries by other families !” When the Com-
missioner’s settlers shall come upon these bound-
aries, the time will have arrived for testing the
mutual dispositions of the colonists and the
natives. Mr Gouger places them at the very
lowest point in the scale of civilization, as regards
the arts of life.
Yet they are not incapable of advancement; they are
very observing and attentive, and have a degree of shrewd-
ness which might serve as an indication of higher talent.
They are, moreover, very obliging, and they very willingly
perform works for those settlers of whom they form a
good opinion. A little sugar, biscuit, or bread, is a
sufficient inducement for them to bring wood, water, or
stone for building, and several instances have occurred
of ten or twelve of these poor fellows working during six
hours consecutively for an individual for biscuit. With
good usage they are exceedingly docile, and fortunately
we have yet but once* had experience of them under
other circumstances.
He regrets that no effective general arrange-
ment has been made for attempting their civiliza-
tion ; but his own suggestions, and those he has
given from other sources, do not meet the case.
For what should our public service in those
colonies require regiments of natives—like the
Sepoys of India,or likethe Hottentots regimented
to protect the frontier from the Caffres ; or more
properly to assist the settlers in making hostile
aggression on the aboriginal races? For what is
a field-police of natives required in South Aus-
tralia, save to overawe the natives themselves?
This untainted settlement, which prides itself so
much on its purity, is not surely yet sunk into
the condition of a penal colony, where to set
a black native to catch a white thief, might be
good policy ; and if the natives are not hostile,
a very small police ought, for generations, to
suffice to a population collected upon principles
so favourable to morality. One passage of Mr
Gouger’s tempts a smile. It seems no legal pro-
vision by purchase of land has been made for the
aborigines—and he thinks this best. Those who
may be assumed to have had some slender rights
in the soil, prior to the grant made to the Com-
missioners, are not, from sound reasons of poli-
tical economy, to have their wants considered :
No legal provision, by way of purchase of land on
their behalf, or in any other mode, has been yet made;
nor do 1 think that w'ith proper care it is at all ncces-
sary. I can see no reason why they should not, in a
comparatively short time, be made to understand our
notions, and to depend upon their own exertions for a
livelihood. The field-police would be a good introduc-
tion to civilization; and I have no doubt but that it
would be succeeded by their adopting, to a great extent,
our habits and modes of life. At any rate, until it and
other means shall have been tried and found fruitless,
the enervating effect of specific legal protection should
not be tried.
We are not the least afraid that it will. But
* In this case gross provocation having been given by
the white man, revenge was taken by the black.
784
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


really to speak of the enervating effects of giv-
ing coarse rations and a few clothes to those mi-
serable beings whom the settlers are driving
from their hunting-grounds and fishing-streams,
is something beyond a jest.
The commissioners have done one wise thing.
They have made no reserve of lands for the
Church, nor for any purpose whatever, save
public roads. Mr Howard was appointed chap-
lain to the colony by King William, with the
moderate salary of £250. The Lord Bishop of
Australia has already attempted to extend his
pastoral crook and care to this gentleman, in
the matter of fleecing him of a good part of his
fees ; but the Bishop’s jurisdiction is denied, and
his spiritual encroachments are said to be pro-
vided against by the act in Council, appointing
the chaplain along with the other functionaries.
As there are neither Church lands nor tithes
in the colony, Mr Gouger hopes that Volun-
taryism may be its principle in religious institu-
tions ; and Episcopacy will assuredly not wax
rampant upon stipends of £250 a-year. But
Church fees, of which we hear, are as objection-
able in principle as tithes. An Independent and
a Methodist minister have gone out ; and one of
them is to open a school of the better sort, or
boarding academy. Schemes, upon rather a wide
scale, for ensuring universal and good education,
are, we are told, in progress ; and a newspaper,
though not, it would appear, printed in the col-
ony, was established for its use, or to promote
and advocate its interests. This opens up a
dark chapter. Party spirit of the worst sort
seems to reign with the utmost rancour in all
these colonies ; but especially in South Australia.
This much appears, even from the very cautious
statements of Mr Gouger, the Secretary of the
Colony. He owns—
Our society is at present mixed and disjointed. That
it should be mixed is no wonder, as the desire to emi-
grate is produced by so many causes, varying in different
persons, according to their circumstances and habits.
Society can be found here, therefore, of almost any kind,
even from the very degraded, up to the most refined
and gentlemanly. Of these two classes, and the many
intermediate shades, I am glad to assure you that the
great preponderance is in favour of the intellectual and
good ; and there can be no doubt that the evil passions
of the badly inclined would not have appeared in such
strong relief, had they not been encouraged by the only
newspaper which the province at present possesses.
One party of the colonists, the dominant party,
are about to establish another paper ; but their
protest against the organ which turned traitor to
the views of the Commissioners, and the interest
of the great Company, is far from satisfactory.
The protesters , beginning with Mr Gouger him-
self, are nearly all official men. They complain
that “the great and leading principles of the
colony have scarcely been alluded to; while points
which, for the interest of all concerned, should
have been touched upon but slightly, have been
brought prominently forward ; that, instead of
such accounts of the soil, climate, harbours, and
other natural features of the country, as could
have been honestly made, and, if made, would
have encouraged emigration, and given confi-
dence to the numerous and wealthy proprietors
resident in England, partial and garbled articles
have been inserted, and investments in land dis-
couraged rather than advocated.” This, with
“ anonymous calumnies” in every number, on
public men, and so forth, finishes the charge
against a print which, probably, told more truth
than was at all times convenient, and perhaps not
in the mildest way. It would, however, ill be-
come us to condemn this unseen journal, as, even
upon the shewing of the Secretary himself, and
other eloqaent advocates and trumpeters of the
colony, we should be inclined, to a justifiable ex-
tent, to follow its example ; and, at least, to urge
u pon persons of capital, and especially upon labour.
ers contemplating emigration to South Australia,
the most strict preliminary inquiries, and the ut-
most circumspection. Of the older settlements,
it is so far satisfactory that w'e know the very
worst; while their resources are only beginning
to be developed. In point of morals, the grand
point, South Australia, we fear, very much re-
sembles all new colonies. If none of its inhabit-
ants have been transported, some of them, ac-
cording to Mr Gouger, have richly deserved
that distinction.
The heat of the climate in the new settle-
ment, is an irremediable and permanent draw-
back upon the happiness of life, admitting its
superior fertility. Nothing can atone for the
winged and crawling plagues of such a region,
when added to the unavoidable discomforts at-
tending every new society. The high price of land
will be of less consideration to many, though
the difference between 55., the price in New
South Wales, and 9s. in Van Dieman’s Land,
and £l, in this colony, is an important matter to
small capitalists. To labourers, the high price of
provisions and clothing, which, though it may be
only temporary, and must give way if the colony
thrive, is also a serious matter, in choosing a place
of permanent residence. The narrow field of-
fered to the industry of handicraftsmen by a|small
population, is another capital objection. Half a
dozen tailors too many, for instance, would, in Ade-
laide, glut the tailor-market, reduce wages, and
occasion great hardship to the craft. It appears
to us that there is impropriety, if not wilful and
cruel delusion, in the hopes which the Commis-
sioners, and the Company, and other colonial
companies hold out to working-men. In a series
of letters published by, we believe, the local
agent of the Commissioners, in The Stirling Ob-
server, and reprinted as a pamphlet, and one,
by the way, containing many fallacious and
highly-coloured representations of the new colony,
we see that " a free passage is offered to all
sorts of agricultural labourers, shepherds, bakers,
blacksmiths, braziers, tinmen, smiths, ship-
wrights, boat-builders, coopers, curriers, farriers,
mill-wrights, harnessmakers, boot and shoe-
makers, tailors, tanners, brickmakers, and all
persons employed in the erection of houses, and
their wives.” Now, say that, of the working-
men of Great Britain and Ireland, only twenty
in each of the above callings, with their wives
785
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


and a child or two each, should volunteer for the
paradise of South Australia, the accounts of
which must unsettle the minds and excite the
imaginations of tens of thousands, what would
be the immediate consequence ? Their numbers
would at once about double the population, which
is still considerably under 3000 ; provisions, which
ar-e nearly all imported, and already very high-
priced, would rise, and there would not be full
employment, save for the labourers, and a few
handicraftsmen. What would become of all the
superfluous bakers, tailors, glaziers, plumbers,
harnsssmakers, &c. &c. landed at once, not in a
country like America, or even like the other
Australian settlements, where employment may
be found in one place if not in another? The
best that could be hoped, would be converting
handicraftsmen, for a time, and probably a long
time, into indifferent labourers, and with slender
pay. This state of things is not likely to exist,
for it is impossible that the Commissioners and
the Company’s agents can permit emigration to
an extent ruinous to the emigrants. They will
undoubtedly check the numbers, and apportion
the callings of the applicants to the real wants
of the colony ; but why send abroad, under their
sanction, those delusory general invitations to
all kinds of workmen ? The letters in the Stir-
ling newspaper drew the favourable attention of
Mr Hutt, (then the agent for emigration, and
one of the Commissioners,) who offered some cor-
rection of trifling errors in “ these able state-
ments,” which were accordingly, we are in-
formed, adopted by the publisher in the pamphlet
alluded to. The Letters were published in the
spring (February or March) of last year, when
almost nothing could be satisfactorily known of
the success of the colony. We extract but one
or two sentences. After complimenting Mr
Edward Gibbon Wakefield and Colonel Torrens,
as originating the scheme, and pointing out the
natural as well as the moral defects of New South
Wales as a settlement, the writer, in eulogizing
the new colony, continues—
Here also, by a happy coincidence, the two indentations
of Spencer's and St Vincent’s Gulfs, extending far into the
interior, open up a large extent of fine land to water com-
munication ; and across the offing, Kangaroo Island
stretches about 100 miles in length, abounding with ex-
cellent salt, surrounded by seas the most favourable for
the black whale fishery, and with harbours and every
adaptation for commerce. Such is the situation selected
for a great experiment, the complete success of which has
constituted an epoch in the history of colonization. This
statement we propose to verify by an account of the pro-
gress and present state and advantages of South Australia,
in our next.
What dependence can rational men place in
the statements of a writer who thus early repre-
sents the experiment as already made—nay, a
year or fifteen months ago, as attended with
“ complete success ?” Again, it is said—
The first years of colonies have often been those of hard-
ship and disaster ; but even the earliest accounts from the
settlers of South Australia have uniformly spoken in so
lively a style of the unusual concurrence of favourable
circumstances, that we propose in the sequel to lay before
our readers extracts from their published correspondence,
as the best means of realizing the picture of the little syl-
van community ; but, in the meantime, we shall proceed
to explain the arrangements for encouraging and facili-
tating emigration.
Here details are given; and the statement
concludes with this significant warning, “ Rut
from the great increase in the value of land in the
colony, it is quite possible that these terms may
be advanced.”
We will ensure settlers, at a small rate, against
a rise in the price of rural land for several years
to come. A few extracts of letters are given by
the Stirling writer—the principal ones, we see,
written by the same gentlemen-settlers who are
among the protesters against the blabbing news-
paper. A few of these we select, that the reader
may compare them with Mr Gouger’s select cor-
respondence. Mr Brown, the agent for emigra-
tion, had not long landed, when he wrote in high
confidence. The Deputy-Surveyor-General is
equally pleased. These gentlemen far transcend
Mr Gouger in admiration of the beauties and
capabilities of the colony ; but a Mr Morphett—
who went to act as agent for the absentee pro-
prietors, w'ho in London had “ bought a pig in a
sack,” either to sell again with large profits, or
to fatten, if that were found more profitable—is
in ecstasy. He writes in February 1837, from
Glenelg, a second township, of which little is
now heard, and which is probably not progress-
ing with much rapidity :
Since I last wrote to you, many and great have been
the improvements which we have made in this land of
our adoption. 1 have no doubt of the success of our
colony. Our flocks and herds are on the increase—mer-
chandises are forwarded to our shores ; the Commissioners
in England send us well-selected, steady, and industrious
labourers. The residents at Sydney, Hobart Town, and
Launceston, not only approve of our plans, but will aid
us, and many will join us as emigrants ; and I hope the
day is not far distant when the produce of our lands and
pastures will be found in the marts of the mother country.
It is almost impossible to speculate on the value which a
few years will fix upon our land. Many who purchased
from mere speculation, will find that their property will
become a permanent support for themselves and families.
The land on the eastern coast of St Vincent’s Gulf, ap-
pears of the most beautiful and fertile character ; and our
sheep-runs, in the neighbourhood of Adelaide, will be
extensive and of good quality. In a commercial position
we shall be well situated, and the navigation of St Vin-
cent’s Gulf is very favourable. In a few years South
Australia will be of great agricultural and commercial
importance ; and the principles upon which this colony
has been founded, will spread to settlements already esta-
blished, and many more which England will find it her
interest to form and encourage. This is the country for
a small capitalist, with sober and industrious habits. His
family, which in England is oftentimes an incumbrance,
will be a fortune here ; and he will attain a rank in so-
ciety, which in England is rarely attainable. To the
ladies of our colony we are much indebted, for the good
humour and forbearance with which they bear the few
inconveniences incidental to the life of a first settler. After
the exertions of the day, we have the pleasures of society
and conversation; and the delight which we feel in such
re-unions is not surpassed by English entertainments
Many of the ladies in England, who feel qualms at emi-
grating, would not hesitate to join us, if they knew how
small a sacrifice is made for future prosperity.
At this period, the colony did not amount in
all to 1200 persons. In May 1837, another
settler writes from Adelaide :
“ The town is situated in an extremely beautiful spot,
786
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


and, perhaps, as lovely a one as any in the world. The
situation is highly salubrious, and the climate most de-
lightful. The harbour equals the London docks, and I
am quite satisfied will be a most flourishing place of busi-
ness in a few yeai’s. The country is tolerably woody, but
sometimes there are plains of ten or twenty miles extent,
almost without trees, and having every appearance of park
land, with splendid soil. The voyage has been very agree-
able with nearly all the ships that have come here. t The
climate far surpasses France—there are no creatures to
injure you. There is already very good society, and the
colony advances rapidly. I pronounce it will soon be
one of the finest in the world, if those to whom the de-
velopement of the principles are intrusted do their duty
and carry out the instructions of the Act of Parliament.”
The Immigration agent, in another letter, dated May
last, says —“ We have now had nearly seven months of
colonization. A finer climated country cannot be in the
world.”
I have hitherto been living in my tent, and have found
no inconvenience fx’om the exposure to the W'eather, ex-
cepting a profusion of dust in dry and windy weather,
and a little chilliness in the clear and cool evenings. \et,
even now, though so near our Christmas, we have weather
more like the fine days of our early autumn, than any-
thing like winter. Beautiful plants and flowers are
springing up constantly, and we have had such a succession
of them, that scarcely a day passes but some one brings
us another new flowei 1 . A very important subject for
congratulation is, that we had no disturbance with the
natives. I frequently go to sleep with fifty of them lying
within ten yards of my tent, without a moment’s suspicion,
on cither side, and without losing a wink of sleep. They
are superior to the Sydney and Van Dieman’s Land blacks,
both in appearance and intelligence. My temporary
house is putting up.
One letter contains a statement to which we
entirely subscribe —“ In this colony, every one is
making a very large profit who has anything to
sell.” That is, of course, anything useful, or,
especially, that will eat. This person, Mr
Stephen Hack, soon afterwards went to Launces-
ton to purchase bullocks, which, when the colony
must have been considerably under 2,000 (in
October 1837) he says, were required “ by the
butchers at Adelaide to the number of sixty
a-week,” weighing 640 lbs. each, and selling at
Is. a lb. At all events, the colonists must, in
those days, have been well off in the article of
beef; for here is about 19 lbs. a-week each,
over head, to man, woman, and child, besides
fish, kangaroos, cockatoos, wild ducks, quails,
wild turkeys, pork, and salt provisions. Mr
Hack says he could purchase and import these
bullocks at from £l4 to £l5 a-head; so, at sixty
a week—supposing Peter Cooke’s employer had
partof the business—he was driving a good trade.
“ Cattle,” he adds, “ pay better than sheep in
South Australia ;” and so they must, while stock
is wanted, and while milk sells at lOd. a-quart,
and fresh butter at 3s. a-pound. Yet, if any
one be tempted by the immense profits of Mr
Hack, we would implore him to consider their
very precarious basis. The Scotch are too
shrewd, the English too considerate a people
to pin their faith to the statements of these
heralds of the new colony; but credulous indi-
viduals, here and there, may, nevertheless, be
their dupes.
Unless the Commissioners and the Company
lay aside some of their magnificent theories of
creating a system of agriculture ail at once, and
by their mighty fiat, like that of Norfolk or
East Lothian, though on a far grander scale,
they will retard the advancement of the settle-
ment. Where labour is so dear, no capitalist
will trouble himself much about agriculture,
while his profits are larger, and his trouble less,
in raising sheep. Whence, then, is the colony
to be fed, if it is to have none of those useful
pioneers of agriculture in every new country,
yeomen labouring with their families upon very
small farms, which are their own property ; rais-
ing provisions for the neighbouring market, and,
at the same time, in their children, a race of hardy
and skilful husbandmen?
The omnipotent Commissioners might, at least,
have secured a peasant’s potato-garden upon each
allotment. As it is, the agricultural labourer who
can obtain a free passage to one of the other colo-
nies, in which he may look forward to investing
very small savings profitably in land—to New
South Wales, where he may at this moment obtain
as much land for £2O as he can in South Australia
for £BO, and where there is no restriction as to
the size of allotments, nor interference with his
rights and management—would be an egregious
fool to go to South Australia. We are, however,
quite in the dark as to the restrictions imposed
by the Commissioners; though, unless a man
purchasing one section, or 80 acres, or two sec-
tions, 160 acres, or whatever it may be, is tied up
from dividing his freehold, either by sale or be-
quest, there must soon be plenty of small farms,
as in the other colonies, and, moreover, very dear
small farms.
To conclude this long paper;—For the in-
terests of absentee proprietors—viz., capitalists in
this country, speculating upon land at the other
side of the globe, buying, as we have said, a pig in
a sack, either to fatten or to sell at a high profit—
we are not particularly solicitous. They can afford
to let their capital lie dormant for a time, or even
to lose it, if need be; but we would earnestly
warn all persons meditating emigration to Austra-
lia, whether labourers, tradesmen, or small capi-
talists, and more especially those having fami-
lies, to be on their guard against fallacious state-
ments and direct perversions of the truth to pro-
mote selfish interests. Every one of those colo-
nies has its jobbers, advocates, and trumpeters;
and they all exaggerate, though none, just at
present, carry the propensity so far as the indi-
viduals connected with South Australia. That
colony may become, in time, all that it is said
to be already; but, again and again, we would
urge that very little is known about it. The
colonists themselves have given up some of their
first high-flowm notions. It was intended at
first to settle on Kangaroo Island, which was
then the terrestrial paradise; but that idea was
properly abandoned, upon farther inspection of
the place.
The whale fishery has hitherto failed, though
it may yet succeed. Harbours that were believed
the best in the world have been found dangerous,
and valuable lives have been lost in attempting
to verify the rash conjectures of sanguine in-
787
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


dividuals.* The fact, that the province is not
liable to the same parching droughts which
have often proved most injurious to the older
settlement, is not verified. The experiment,
instead of “ complete success,” has not, in anyone
branch, been fairly made. In adducing facts, we
have not looked to the darkest side of the pic-
ture. We have, indeed, seen nothing on the
dark side, save by reflection in the admissions or
inadvertences of the colonial advocates. We by
no means despair of any of the colonies. Yet
we should think small capitalists, with families,
thoughtless and rash who adventured to this one.
The land there will not fly away—nay, the land
will not rise in price for a long while; and the
more matured settlements will be a safe step
taken in advance towards the Southern or West-
ern Goshen, to those who desire safely to establish
a family, and on narrow means. To those com-
mercial adventurers and land-jobbers—those who
are always ready to hazard desperate costs to
sweep large stakes—we have nothing to say. Such
characters, and sharks of a still lower description,
are never wanting in new settlements where
there is money going.
Since the above was written, certain letters
and paragraphs in The Times newspaper, have
drawn forth a statement from Colonel Torrens,
the Chairman of the South Australian Commis-
sioners. We conceive it best to publish the
whole correspondence, that the subject may at
once be brought under the view of our readers,
many of whom, in this quarter, are deeply in-
terested in the fortunes of emigrants who can
hardly yet have reached the colony.
FROM “ THE times” OF 25TH OCTOBER. 1
CITY ARTICLE,
These journals [the Sydney papers] contain extracts
from the South Australian papers. That colony is re-
presented in an unfavourable light, and the Sydney wri-
ters observe that they are disposed to think that “ colon-
ization bubble” would burst ere long. The colony, it is
asserted, was a prey to “ jobbeHs” both there and at home;
the ‘‘officials” out there were imitating their betters here
in a “ small way,” by ‘‘jobbing in pork, to the injury of
the settlers, who are subjected to a competition in the
market by those who ought to support instead of oppose
their interests.” The same “ officials,” too, it appears,
were all out of sorts among themselves, “ assaulting
each other, retiring or being dismissed from office.” Al-
together, the settlement seemed in a very confused state.
In the meantime, the colonists were carefully advised from
England that “£2OO could readily be obtained here [in
London] for a preliminary land order, and £5O for a town
section.” This, of course, kept up the spirit of land-job-
bing in the colony, as probably intended, and, not to be
behindhand, an account is given of the sale of a country-
section there of 134 acres for £lOOO, being, however, si-
tuate “ close to the town on the northern bank of the
river, has a frontage to the proposed road to the harbour,
is very excellent land, and one of the most valuable sec-
tions in the colony,” a sort of description which would
seem to shew that the mode of setting out things to the
best advantage was as well understood there as here. These
statements, it may be observed, must be admitted with a
• A gloom was cast over the infant colony by the mel-
ancholy loss of its Supreme Judge, Sir John Jeffcott, and
Captain Blenkinsop, and part of the crew of a whale-
boat, in an attempt to explore the harbour of Encounter
Bay, and the entrance of the Murray River,
certain qualification, as probably exaggerated by the feel-
ing of jealousy with which the new colony was regarded
at Sydney.
The Goshawk, chartered by the South Australian Com-
pany, had arrived at Nepean Bay, on the 14th of May,
from Hamburgh, which she left in December, and the
Downs on the 4th of January. She had on hoard two
passengers only, and the servants of the company. The
cargo consisted of “ provisions only,” it was emphatic-
ally remarked.
FROM “ THE TIMES” OP THE IST NOVEMBER.
To the Editor of the Times.
Sir, —Your paper of the 25th instant, contains two
valuable pieces of information on the schemes of our
colonization-mongers—the one on South Australia, under
your city article, and the other on New Zealand. The
unfavourable accounts from the former place must be
very alarming to every well-wisher of his country people,
whether approving or disapproving of the piracy of other
people’s land either by his own people or by the autocrat
of Ku.sia. Permit me to claim insertion for the follow-
ing extracts from a letter I have received from South
Australia ; to the veracity of the writer I pledge myself.
D. L. N.
“ Adelaide-town, June 2,lB3B. —This colony continuesin
an uproar; the officials are quarrelling and fighting
amongst themselves, whilst the emigrants are nearly
starving. It is true the land has been allotted, but the
officials here hold so many of the best pieces of land that
no further progress has been made. The expense, delay,
and difficulty of clearing new land has caused the other
(that possessed by the officials) to be sold at £l5O to
nearly £3OO per acre ; nor is the climate or land so good
as was represented to us in London, indeed nearly barren,
and never can pay the time, labour, and expense of culti-
vation; in this we were most grossly deceived in London,
and glad indeed would many be to get back to their
native country, even to a ‘ potato and salt.’ Many of the
agriculturists have spent their means in waiting for the
allotments, and ‘ whilst the grass grows must starve.’
All necessaries here are exceedingly dear, indeed four times
the price in England, and, as it is all exported, we must
submit to the unfair competition of the officials, who, in-
stead of attending to their duties, are speculating for them-
selves. The Company is the bane here, for by their means
of buying up necessaries for an outrageous profit, we shall
soon have spent all our money, and be reduced to
labourers on their lands. I can give you no idea of the
infamous proceedings here of the various persons connected
with authority; and, as to the ‘ allotments,’ it is a mere
farce, a ‘jobbing,’ like your companies in England. We
are reduced to entire dependence on these persons; where
it will end I cannot say, but I hope our countrymen will
not be deceived to come out here, however advantageous
it may be to the company and to the colonists. My own
occupation enables me to be indifferent, in a pecuniary
view, to all these things ; but I cannot look coldly on the
misery which awaits the people here, grossly deceived in
every respect, and ill-used and abused.”
FROM “ THE times” OF NOVEMBER BTH.
To the Editor of the Times.
SIR, —The Directors of this Company once more de-
viate from their custom of disregarding anonymous
letters in newspapers, to relieve intending settlers in
South Australia, or the friends of persons already there,
from alarm, in consequence of the unfounded statements
of “ D. L. N.” in your paper of the Ist instant.
The accompanying letter from her Majesty’s Coloniza-
tion Commissioners merely states authenticated facts.
The charges against the Company are beneath notice
when the assertions of “jobbing in allotments” can be
tested by another fact—viz., that the orders of choice were
decided by lot, and the selections made from upwards of
100.000 acres.
Requesting the favour of the insertion of the present
letter, and that from the Commissioners, I am, Sir,
your most obedient servant.
E. J. Wheeler, Manager.
19, Bishopsgate Street within , Nov . 7-
788
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.


“ South Australian Colonization Office,
Adclphi Terrace, Nov. 5, 1838.
“ Sir, I have to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter ot this day’s date, representing that the Directors
of the South Australian Company are desirous that the
Colonization Commissioners should reply to a letter
signed k D. L. N.,’ which appeared in The Times of the
Ist inst„ and which states that the soil of South Australia
could produce nothing, and that the people were nearly
starving.
“ In reply, I heg to observe, that, after the multitude
of authentic letters which have been received from South
Australia, from persons who are of known respectability,
and who all concur in representing the condition of the
working people as most prosperous, and in continuing
the original statement of Captain Sturt, that, in the neigh-
bourhood of Gulf St Vincent, Lake Alexandrina, and
the Murray, the land is of the richest quality, the Com-
missioners are of opinion that it has become unnecessary
to reply to counter-statements put forth by anonymous
writers in this country upon nameless authority in the
colony ; nevertheless, the Commissioners will be ever
ready to communicate to the South Australian Company
and to the public all the information respecting the state
and progress of the colony which they may from time to
time receive. The latest accounts from South Australia
are confirmatory of its rapid prosperity. Despatches
have been received from the resident Commissioner, dated
May 23, stating that the Lord Goderich, the Canton,
and the Trusty, had arrived at Port Adelaide with 382
emigrants ; and that mechanics, before they had time to
get on shore, were offered work at 14s. a-day. Despatches
have also been received from Governor Hindmarsh, dated
June 12, by which it appears that 200 of the working
people had purchased amongst them a rural section of
134 acres in the neighbout hood of Adelaide for £lOOO,
in order that they might build their own houses on their
own land. When high wages can be paid for labour in
a country which produces nothing, and when people
almost starving can purchase land with their surplus
earnings, than the statements of ‘ D. L. N.’ may be
worthy of regard. I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Robert Torrens,
Chairman of the Commission.
To E. J. Wheeler, Esq.
We do not mean to comment on the above.
That the whole land is nearly barren, is obviously
nonsense, and the manner of selling it seems per-
fectly fair. There may, indeed, be ruinous de-
lays in a place where provisions are so dear as
quickly to exhaust a small capital. The purchase
made by the 200 workmen, of £5 worth of land
each, on which to build houses, is so far gratify-
ing ; but The Times, city article points out the
true cause of the high price of this rural land,
in its quality and favourable situation. Next to
the labouring people getting small farms and be-
ginning to raise provisions for the market of
Adelaide, the above must be satisfactory as to
the prospects of working men in the colony.
Still, for this class, the most satisfactory state-
ment that could be published by the Commis-
sioners, is, how r much wheat and potatoes, &c.,
have been grown last year ; how cheap are bread,
beef, mutton, butter, milk, shoes, &c. &c., be-
come. Colonel Torrens cannot mean that all,
or nearly all, the mechanics on board the trans-
ports were offered 14s. a-day ;* but that sum,
in the present state of the colony, would be re-
quired by the artisans who have emigrated,
though it should impoverish, if not ruin the agri-
cultural settlers. In The Liverpool Albion we
see loud complaints of the colony, and an ear-
nest warning to working-men; while Colonel
Torrens’ letter has produced a reply in The Times
of the 10th, signed T. H. 8., in which the old
story is reiterated, and alarming new facts
brought forward. T. H. B. does not believe in
e ‘ jobbing” in the sale of lands, but he avers that
there is great difficulty in getting possession;
and, to many settlers, delay must be injurious,
if not fatal. He inquires of Mr Wheeler whether
“ a large proportion of the cattle of the colony
have not died from a disease called the ‘ rotten
horn,’ for which no cause save the soil can be
assigned, and for which no remedy has hitherto
been discovered ?—and whether this circum-
stance, together with the price of mechanical
labour, has not reduced several persons who
emigrated with £2,000 or £3,000, to the condi-
tion of day-labourers ?”
Although there may be exaggerations in the
statements on both sides, there is more than
enough, in the circumstances of the colony, to
justify our exhortations to full and deliberate
inquiry. If the Commissioners, and those inter-
ested in the welfare of the colony, wish to retain
public confidence, they ought not only to liberal-
ize their scheme, but to shew, by specific state-
ments, and not vague and general assurances,
that it is the interest of emigrants to go in pre-
ference to South Australia.
*lt is said that 14s. a.day is offered mechanics. If
the Commissioners will assure mechanics of 7s, or ss.
a-day,and the necessaries of life at a moderate price, or the
rates of England, then we shall be glad to see thousands
embark for the new colony. We at this moment know
of a Scotsman, a cooper, in Hobart Town, who emigrated
at his own cost about five years ago, and who writes
home to his relations that he can make a guinea a-day;
and many days he may have made a guinea. In the first
eighteen months, he comfortably maintained a wife and
three children, and saved £7O, which might still purchase
a small farm, if he could not put his money to better use
where interest is so high. But would any one advise a
legion of coopers, or any one cooper, to go to Hobart
Town in the expectation of earning as much ? Ceitainly
not. If, however, the choice lay between Sydney, Hobart
Town, Adelaide, or Perth, we know the advice we could
conscientiously give.
FLOWERS,
FALLEN
But see!—their forms already fade
Our child is dead !—strew o’er her grave
The fairest flowers;
Beneath mine eye !
Thus all things beautiful are made
To bloom and die.
Fair child 1 fair flowers I how tranquilly
Emblems of hope she vainly gave
Of brighter hours.
I’ll watch them while their bloom can give
A passing breath,
And think our child, while yet they live,
Ye pass away !
Would I could thus unconsciously
Death’s call obey I
Sleeps not in death !
789
THE NEW COLONY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA, AND THE PENAL COLONIES.
