

\ o SB
Ik
Peru PBm
The Baconian Authorship of
Shakespeare?s Plays Refuted
H. JUNOR BROWNE
AUTHOR OP
? The Holy Truth? ? The Grand Reality? ? A Rational
Faith? (&c.
A Paper read at a Meeting of the V.A.S. at Austral Buildings,
Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria, on Bth August, 1898.
? There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.?
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and London


* '


The Baconian Authorship of
Shakespeare?s Plays Refuted
H. JUNOR BROWNE
AUTHOR OF
Hie, Holy Truth , ? The Grand Reality ,? ? A Rational
Faith,? &c.
A Paper read at a Meeting of the V.A.S. at Austral Buildings,
Collins Street, Melbourne, Victoria, on Bth August, 1898.
? There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.?
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND CO.
Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and London




THE BACONIAN AUTHORSHIP OF SHAKE-
SPEARE?S PLAYS REFUTED.
It is truly surprising to me that anyone can believe for a
moment, notwithstanding all the plausible arguments ad-
duced in its favour, that Bacon was the writer of the plays
which, ever since they were written, have borne the name
of Shakespeare as their author, for the following reasons :
Is it in the slightest degree probable that the publishers of
the plays, who must have been well acquainted with both
Shakespeare and Bacon, and who could have no reasonable
motive to deceive the public by falsifying the authorship
of the plays, would have put Shakespeare as their author
had they been written by Bacon 1 Or is there the
remotest probability that Ben Jonson, Chapman, Marlowe,
Greene, Marston, and Dekker, who were among the men of
letters of the day in which the plays were written?the
contemporary dramatists?were all, with the Queen, the
Court, and the general public, deceived, or that they acted
in collusion to deceive the world by not openly declaring
that Bacon was the real author of the plays, if such were
the case, and not Shakespeare, whose name they bore as
their author? These reasons alone, I hold, are sufficient
to disprove the sophistical claim that the plays were
written by Bacon. Even Baconians themselves must
admit that, were their theory correct, it is passing strange
that the truth as to the authorship of the plays never
leaked out. Had Bacon been their author, Ben Jonson,
who at one time was opposed to Shakespeare, would doubt-
less have been only too glad to have had an opportunity of


belittling Shakespeare and of hurling him from his throne
of popularity. It is true that after Shakespeare?s death
Ben Jonson made ample amends for his former unkindness
to him, as did nearly all his other jealous contemporary
playwrights. In a letter to Lord Ellesmere, introducing
Burbage and Shakespeare, the Earl of Southampton, who
was one of Shakespeare?s most generous patrons, wrote,
after commending Burbage ;?? The other (Shakespeare) is
my special friend, till of late an actor of good account in
the company, and wrote some of our best English plays.?
Shakespeare was frequently commanded by Queen Elizabeth
to read his plays to her, and he appeared before her as
their author. It is not at all likely, I maintain, that he
would have dared to impose upon Her Majesty, by taking
credit as being the author of the plays if he were not. It
has been stated that none of Bacon?s contemporaries credited
him with being the author of the plays, while some fifty
writers recognized Shakespeare as their author while he
lived, and over a hundred others did so during the half-
century following his death, yet some wiseacres, 300 years
afterwards, profess to have discovered that Bacon wrote
the Shakespearian plays, &c.
One of the several writers on ?Who Wrote Shakes-
peare?? observes Heminge and Condell, friends and
fellow-actors of Shakespeare, in their address to the great
variety of readers of the Folio of 1 623, seven years after
his death , said ?lt had been a thing, we confess, worthy
to have been wished that the author himself had lived to
have set forth and overseen his own writings. But since
it hath been ordained otherwise, and he by death departed
from that right, we pray you do not envy his friends the
office of their care and pain to have collected and published
them.? Heminge and Condell appear in the list of ? the
principal actors in all these plays,? which is led by the
names of Shakespeare and Burbage, prefixed to the first


Folio. As Bacon lived until 1626, they, too, must have
been victims to the deception, if it was as Baconians
assume. The same edition contains these notices :
?? To the memory of my beloved, the author, Mr. William
Shakespeare, and what he hath left us.? ?Ben Jonson.
? * We wond?red (Shakespeare) that thou went?st so soon
From the world?s stage to the grave?s tyring-room.?
? J. M. ( probably John Marston).
? Hugh Holland writes upon the lines of life of the
famous scenic poet, Master William Shakespeare :
? Those hands which you so clapt go now and wring,
You Britaines brave, for done are Shakespeare?s dayes ;
His dayes are done that made the dainty plays,
Which made the globe of Heaven and Earth to ring.? ?
The same writer from whom I have quoted also observes
that ?Francis Meres in 1598 wrote:??As the GreeK
tongue is made famous and eloquent by Homer, Euripides,
&c., and the Latin tongue by Virgil, Ovid, and Horace, so
the English tongue is mightily enriched and gorgeously
invested in rare ornaments by Sir Philip Sidney, Spenser,
Drayton, Warner, Shakespeare, and Chapman.? Then,
speaking of the ? gentle bard,? Meres declares him ? the
best for comedy and tragedy among the English drama-
tists.? But of course Meres was bluffed like the rest ; he
did not know Ignatius Donnelly, or maybe he would have
written ? Bacon ? instead of ? Shakespeare.?
Some time ago a man discovered a cryptogram in Burns?s
poetry which proved that Adam Smith wrote ? Tam o?
Shanter,-? and Dangle writes to say that he has collected
evidence which conclusively demonstrates that Shakespeare
was a Scotchman, and played the ? Cock o? the North? on
the pipes before the dhunie wassails of the great clan
McWorter. Dangle can also establish beyond a doubt
that Shakespeare wrote ?Little Jack Horner.? .


There is a quality, a flavour, a style in Shakespeare?s work
which foils the elaborate arguments of the Baconians, and
breaks up their ingenious cryptograms and anagrams. Let
the student who is interested in this matter read Bacon
again, and contrast his style with that of Avon?s swan.
Do the following lines, for instance, resemble Bacon?s
phraseology ;
? ? What is?t ? A spirit.
Lord, how it looks about ! Believe me, sir,
It carries a brave form : but ?tis a spirit.?
? ?The Tempest, scene 2.
?Many Warwickshire words, idioms, and expressions
occur in Shakespeare?s plays, none of which appear in the
works of Bacon ; and the latter, an accomplished scholar,
would not be guilty of so many errors as exist in the
plays ?such, for instance, as the introduction of clocks into
the Rome of Julius Csesar, of pistols into the time of
Henry IV., and of cannon into the age of King John.?
As the author from whom I have quoted writes : ? The
plays of Shakespeare were written by a practised actor
and manager; by ? a poet unsurpassed for fertility of
invention, unequalled for melody of language, unap-
proached for delicacy of fancy, inexhaustible in humour,
profoundest of moralists ; a man who knew human nature
by intuition ?as Mozart knew counterpoint, as Chopin
knew harmony.? And the man who fills that description
was William Shakespeare, of Stratford-on-Avon, and none
other.? Pope wrote ;?? If ever an author deserved the
name of an original, it was Shakespeare. The poetry of
Shakespeare was inspiration indeed ; he is not so much an
imitator as an instrument of Nature .? And Coleridge wrote
of ?the inexhaustible mine of virgin wealth in our
Shakespeare.? There are some people who still uphold
the old theory that the earth is a flat surface, with four
corners, that it is the centre of the universe, round which


the sun revolves, and give reasons to their own satisfaction
for so believing. One of these reasons is that water
always presents a flat surface, therefore to speak of a
rotund ocean is a flagrant absurdity. Another is that the
sun rises in the east, travels overhead, and sets in the
west, as everyone can see. With such philosophers the
advocates of the Baconian authorship of Shakespeare?s
plays should shake hands. Having in the foregoing, on
the basis of the historical records regarding Shakespeare
and his writings, demolished the erroneous theory of the
Baconians, I shall now proceed to explain the enigma,
? Who wrote Shakespeare?s plays 1 ? on a basis not yet
popularly accepted, but which notwithstanding this will
stand a rational analysis, ? impugn it whoso list.?
Here is what ? the many-sided William? has himself
stated on the matter under consideration. I make no
apology for here introducing the subject of intercourse
between the seen and the unseen worlds, for its reality is
now too widely known and too generally acknowledged by
all who are not blinded by prejudice or bigotry to require
explanation. Having given to the world in 1888 the
dramatist?s 250 years? experience in spirit life, received
through the organism of an almost illiterate young man,
under the title of ? The Grand Reality,? I claim to have
some knowledge on the subject, though I make no preten-
sions to being either a Shakespearian or Baconian scholar.
I may observe that when first I was addressed, through
the sensitive, by the spirit purporting to be William
Shakespeare, I had grave doubts regarding the personality
of the control, and I then inquired how he came to know
that such an individual as I existed, and why he had
selected one so little interested in the writings bearing his
name, to give to the world a record of his experiences in
spirit life 1 His reply was : simply from the facts that he
was anxious to do so, and had obtained control of a


sensitive through whom he could, when in the trance state,
convey intelligently his sentiments, and had discovered in
me one who was not only willing to receive and publish his
experiences since he left the mundane plane of life, but one
who was also in a position to do so. On my asking him
wdiy he did not speak through the sensitive in verse, as was
his wont to write when on earth, he replied that then he was
controlled to write automatically by a band of poetic spirits,
one or other of whom was versed in some of the various
subjects treated of in the plays, but that now he had not
their aid, and that, even if he had, the sensitive?s brain was
not, as was his own when he was on earth, suitable to
express poetry through. On my mentioning that some
people in the present day attributed the authorship of the
writings bearing his name to Francis Bacon, he observed
that, like all false theories, there was a modicum of truth
therein, for, from his not being able, from want of educa-
tion, to correct a single stanza of the poems written
automatically through his hand, he used to submit the same
to Bacon to edit and correct before presenting them to
public criticism.
It is probable that, at times, when the conditions were
not favourable for spirit control, Shakespeare?s own phrase-
ology was expressed in parts of the writings, hence the
introduction in places of Warwickshire words, idioms, and
expressions, and that Bacon, perceiving Shakespeare?s
illiteracy, in editing the plays made liberal alterations and
corrections in his own phraseology in many of the defective
parts. This would account for the style and expressions
in many places being those of Bacon, while the bulk of the
plays was written through the hand of Shakespeare; also
for similar views and expressions appearing in the writings
of both Bacon and Shakespeare.
Ben Jonson in his ? Discoveries? writes ;??I remember
the players have often mentioned it as an honour to Shake-


speare that in his writings (whatsoever he penned) he never
blotted out a line.? The simple reason for this was, as
admitted by himself, that he was unable to correct a single
stanza written through his hand automatically owing to his
want of education, I may here observe that, in like
manner, the sensitive through whom I received Shake-
speare?s experiences in spirit life orally when in trance,
which were taken down in shorthand and afterwards tran-
scribed, could not have corrected a single line of ? Ihe
Grand Reality,? through his deficient education. Ben
Jonson, without doubt, believed that Shakespeare was the
author of the plays, since he wrote ;
? To draw no envy (Shakespeare) on thy name,
Am I thus ample to thy Eooke and Fame ;
While I confess thy writings to be such
As neither man nor muse can praise too much.
In a letter dated 1681, written by Nahum Tate, and
headed ?To my esteemed friend Thomas Boteler, Esq.,?
referring to King Lear, he wrote : ?? None but Shake-
speare could have formed such conceptions.? Mr. Tate
evidently did not hold the Baconian theory in regard to
this play at least. The facts that no mention of his plays is
made in Shakespeare?s will, and that no manuscript of any
of his plays was found among his effects after his ? death,?
are held by Baconians as proofs that he did not write them,
whereas it only proves that, like the generality of writing
mediums, he put little or no value on what was written
automatically through his hand.
Shakespeare told me, through the sensitive alluded to,
that his younger days on earth were spent in slaughtering
sheep and delivering the meat to customers, and that often
in those days his hand would be controlled to write all over
the skin of the sheep he had just skinned, but from his not
understanding, as I and others now do, about automatic
writing through sensitives, he placed no value on what had


thus been written, consequently, he added, many plays
probably almost equal to any written through him in after
years were in this way lost to the world. He further
added that to anyone of common-sense it must be apparent
that for one occupying so humble a position in life as he
did, and possessed of so little opportunity for learning as
was the case with him when in youth, it was an utter
impossibility that he, from his own knowledge, could have
written the numerous plays bearing his name, comprising
as they do such a variety of subjects. ? The fact is,? he
said, ? I had neither the requisite education in history, law,
philosophy, or geography, nor the court experience, to write
them. Acting on the stage was more suited to my taste
than the writing of plays.?
The following are extracts from a communication from
the same dramatist, received through another sensitive :
? Who am 1 1 That is the question which may be passing
through your mind. It has been a troublesome and
vexatious question with many, and all about a man who
reached a pinnacle of fame. ... I made a name in
earth-life; I left a name behind me, and though over three
centuries have elapsed since my birth on earth, my name is
better known to-day than when I lived my earth-life. By
name William Shakespeare, of Stratford-on-Avon, a son of
John Shakespeare, gentleman yeoman, and Mary Arden, of
the ancient family of the Ardens, whose pedigree is trace-
able from the advent into this island (Britain) of the
Norman Conqueror. ... I was the eldest of ten.
That is a moot question?l say I was the eldest of ten,
biographers say of eight only. John Shakespeare, my
father, told me, and he knew best about it.
? To me it seems as much a wonder that my name should
have been rendered immortal as it does to others. If I
had received any special advantages in an extraordinary
education, I should have perhaps been brought to think


that these advantages were the cause of my fame ; but in
starting in life I did not possess the advantages of a
classical education. My knowledge of the ancients was
absolutely nil, and of the Latin tongue the extent of my
knowledge abides with me just as plainly now as it did
when I left the Free Grammar School at Stratford-on-Avon,
to which I went for education, not where I was educated.
I remember wading through the substantives in the Latin
grammar. I remember musa, a song ; gladius, a sword 1
? nagister, a master. Then there is the pronoun? hie, hcec,
hoc, genitive hujus. I remember that well. I got on as
far as amo, amas, moneo, audio, the auxiliary verb being
preliminary, sum, es, est, sumus. There commenced, and
there ended, my knowledge of the ancients. I got on just
as well without it. I was spiritually controlled; I was
never myself either in acting or writing. . . . Every
word of ? King Lear ? I wrote hearing the words clair-
audiently. ? Coriolanus ? was another play I wrote after
my retirement from London ; I wrote this hearing it also
clairaudiently. ?The Merry Wives of Windsor? was
written (automatically) through my hand in nearly illegible
characters. I had been with Drayton and Ben Jonson,
having a social glass together, and after our carousal, for it
finished with one, I stopped at the inn where it took place,
and filled seventy-four sheets of manuscript from 2 a.m. to
4.35. This was ? The Merry Wives of Windsor.? You
have read my maiden effort?my ? Yenus and Adonis.? I
dedicated it to Southampton?s Earl, with an apology for its
dedication. I had just come up to the great metropolis,
leaving the wife and children at Stratford. I was friend-
less and being prosecuted.
?Biographers kindly say I came up in poverty. They say
I acted as waiter to the Blackfriars Theatre, horse-keeper
outside, and that the cry resounded night after night,
* Where is Will Shakespeare, to hold my horse till after the


performance 1 ? What is stranger to me than this bio-
graphical notice is its general acceptance. I had written
my ? Yenus and Adonis,? and also several other minor pieces
that were known only among a select circle of friends,
amongst whom was one by name Burbage. He was one of
the same county, but not of the same town, and was one
of the shareholders in the Blackfriars Theatre. He,
knowing that I was an original writer, and a tolerably
good hand at mimicry in revels, invited me to London,
having heard of my prosecution, and I accepted his
invitation.
? The name * Busiris ? (his chief controlling spirit) was
given to me after my retirement from the stage, and after
the purchase of my house at Stratford-on-Avon, and after
I had settled down to comfortable country life. There I
also wrote ? Coriolanus ? and ?Antony and Cleopatra.?
Five plays I think I wrote after I retired. Yes, it was
five. The quality of verse-making was mine normally, but
my verses then were inferior to those I wrote under the
influence of Busiris. I was thoroughly controlled when I
wrote, and when anyone came in before I was restored to
consciousness, they would be struck and pass remarks
upon my want of attentiveness ; they would charge me
with an absence of consciousness, I put it all down to
meditativeness ; I knew it w T as something beyond myself,
but I dared not mention it. I was always deemed
eccentric.
? I was right loyal in my friendships, and contentiously
indifferent to those for whom I felt no partiality ; in fact, I
was a man of extremes, a sensitive, a term which embraces
all the eccentricities of a soul tabernacled in clay. , . .
After a successful life on earth, I had a happy, joyous
transition, and a welcome reception in the spirit-spheres.?
The following lines from the same dramatist were received
through another sensitive. They may not be considered


by critics equal to those written by the hand of Shakespeare
when he was on earth, but it must be borne in mind that
he had not the aid of the band of poetic spirits he had then,
and that he had to convey his sentiments through the
organism of another individual, with its attendant difficul-
ties. They are entitled ? Life ?:
? * To be, or not to be,? is not ? the question; ?
There is no choice of life. Ay, mark it well:
For Death is but another name for Change.
The weary shuffle off their mortal coil,
And think to slumber in eternal night.
But, lo ! the man, though dead, is living still;
Unclothed, is clothed upon, and his mortality
Is swallowed up of life.
? ? He babbles o? green fields, then falls asleep,?
And straight awakes amid eternal verdure.
Fairer than ? Dreams of a Midsummer?s Night,?
The fields Elysian stretch before him.
No ? Tempest ? rends the ever peaceful bowers
Of asphodel and fadeless amaranth !
No hot sirocco blows with poisonous breath ;
No midnight frights him with its goblins grim,
Presaging sudden death. No Macbeth there,
Mad with ambition, plotteth damning deeds ;
No Hamlet, haunted by his father?s ghost,
Stalks wildly forth intent on vengeance dire.
The curse of Cain on earth is consummate ;
It knows no resurrection. Spirits learn
That spirit is immortal, and no poisoned cup,
Or dagger?s thrust, or sting of deadly asp,
Can rob it of its God-like attribute.
This mortal garb may be as full of wounds
And bloody rents as royal Caesar?s mantle,
Yet that which made it man or Caesar liveth still.
? Man learns, in this Valhalla of his soul,
To love, nor even finds ? Love?s Labour Lost.?
No two-faced Falstaff proffers double suit;
No Desdemona mourns lago?s art;
And every Romeo finds his Juliet.


The stroke of death is but a kindly frost,
Which cracks the shell and leaves the kernel room
To germinate. What consummate fools
This dread of death doth make us ! Reason plays
The craven unto sense, and in his fear
Chooses the slow and slavish death of life,
Rather than freedom in the life of death.
Thus Ignorance makes cowards of us all,
And blinds us to our being?s best estate.
Madly we cling to life through nameless ills,
Pinched by necessity, and scourged by fate,
Fainting in heat and freezing in the cold,
While war, and pestilence, and sore distress,
Fever and famine, fire and flood, combine
To drive the spirit from its wreck of clay.
?O, poor Humanity ! How full of blots,
And stains, and pains, and miseries thou art!
Here let me be thine Antony, and plead
Thy cause against the slayers of thy peace.
Though wounded, yet thou art not dead, thou child
Of Immortality?thou heir of God !
He who would slay thee, be he brute or Brutus,
Plunges the dagger in his own vile heart.
And yet thy wounds are piteous. I could weep
That aught so fair from the Creator?s hand
Should be so marred and mangled, like a lamb
Torn by the ravening wolves. Here let me take
Thy mantle, pierced with gaping, ghastly wounds,
From daggers clutched by ingrate hands. O Truth !
How many in thy sacred name have slain
Humanity, thinking they did God service,
Rome and not Caesar?Doctrines, and not Men.
? I cannot count the wounds which lust of power,
And wealth, and place, and precedence have made.
But, 0 ! the keenest, deepest, deadliest stabs
Of all were made by false Philosophy
And false Theology combined?
Philosophy, that knew not what it did ;
Theology, that did not what it knew.
See here ! That rent made by the fear of God,
That gracious God, whose ? mercy seasons justice,


Who feeds the raven, clothes the lilies, heeds
The sparrow when it falls, and sends His rain
Alike upon the evil and the good.
And yet they were all ? honourable men ?
Who taught this doctrine?honourable men !
Whose failing was a lack of common-sense.
? And, lo ! here is another ?Fear of Truth !
Blind Superstition made this horrid rent,
And Bigotry quick followed up the thrust.
O ! ?tis an eye weeping great tears of blood !
An eagle eye, that dared to love the light,
Which Bigotry and Superstition feared,
Lest it should make their deeds of evil plain.
Thus is it, he who dares to see a truth
Not recognized in creeds must die the death.
But noonday never stayed for bats and owls,
And Truth?s clear light shall yet arise and shine.
? See here ! another wound?The dread of Death?
That blessed consummation of earth-life,
Which soothes all pain, makes good all loss, revives
The weak, gives rest and peace, makes free the slave.
Levels all past distinctions, and doth place
The beggar on a footing with the king.
O, poor Humanity ! those who conspired
To slay thee, through exceeding love of God
And for the glory of His mighty name,
Smote at the very centre of thy peace,
And damning doubts, like dagger?s thrust, attest
How zealously they aimed each cruel blow.
? And yet, this rent and bloody mantle is not thee !
Slain, but not dead?thy spirit shall arise
And face thy startled enemies again,
As-royal Caesar?s ghost appeared to Brutus
In Sardi?s and Philippi?s tented plains.
Thou royal heir to kingdoms yet unknown !
A mightier than Caesar is thy Friend.
He stays the hand of Cassius, Brutus, all
Who aim their weapons at thy life, and dulls
Their daggers? points against thy deathless soul.
From every gaping wound of fear or doubt,


Murder or malice, sorrow or despair,
Thy spirit leaps as from a prison door.
It laughs at death and daggers as it flies
To hold companionship with spirits blest :
And having thus informed itself of life,
The question then? ? To be, or not to be,?
Is swallowed up in immortality.
? ? Then, sweet Humanity, thou favoured child
Of God, look up ! An everlasting chain
Doth bind thee to the mighty Heart of all.
Love?s labour never can be lost; He who
Created shall, through Love, perfect and save ;
And that which hath such poor expression here
Shall find fruition in a brighter sphere.?
Should my statement that William Shakespeare was
highly endowed with spiritual gifts and was inspired to write
under spirit control, as he has stated, be deemed extrava-
gant by any, I would ask them to turn up ? Cassell?s
Biographical Dictionary ? for the name of Heinecken,
Christian Heinrich, where they will find a much more
extraordinary case of spirit-control recorded. It is there
stated that Heinecken was born at Lubeck in 1721 and
died in 1725. That ?he was able to talk when ten months
old. At the mature age of one year he was well versed
in the Mosaic history; one month afterwards knew the
history of the Old Testament, and when fourteen months
old was thoroughly acquainted with that of the New.
Each month he imbibed with his nurse?s milk?for he died
of a weaning fit?some further information. Ancient
history and geography, anatomy and genealogy, divinity,
historical and doctrinal, Latin and arithmetic, appeared to
have been learned with such rapidity that he might have
had written on his tomb, ? Veni, vidi, vici.? Before the Kino-
of Denmark he delivered twelve speeches, without a single
falter, and passed a good examination in the history of


Denmark in German, Latin, French, and Low Dutch.?
Under what other hypothesis than spirit control, let me
ask, can the fact be accounted for that a four years old
infant had a biography of such a marvellous character 1
(I may here observe that I saw an intelligent message
written through the hand of one of my own children
before she knew her alphabet, and two of my other
children wrote automatically in foreign languages and on
subjects totally unknown to them, as much to my surprise
as it will be to others who may read this.) That wonder-
ful book, the Koran, the Bible of one-sixth of earth?s in-
habitants, was written by Mohammed, an illiterate camel-
driver.
Mozart was doubtless similarly inspired, for, according
to Cassell?s biography of him, at eight years of age he
was known as an able composer and performer ; before
he was fourteen he wrote a complete opera, and at
that age he was appointed conductor of the concerts at
Salzburg. There can therefore be little doubt about his
having been musically inspired by spirit musicians, who,
through their love of music, devoted their lives to it when
upon earth, and who in the spirit-life are still deeply
interested therein, the change called death only altering
the conditions of existence, not the desires and affections
of the individual. This I have ascertained through com-
munion with those who can speak from personal experience,
during the five-and-twenty years I have devoted to the
investigation of psychic science, which, though occult now,
will ere long become an exact science, since it is a complete
induction and harmonizes with every fact in nature. It
alone supplies the simple explanation of the enigma?
? Who wrote Shakespeare?s plays ?? Owing to the strong
popular prejudice against it, like the opposition shown
against the revolution of the earth round the sun as
proclaimed by Galileo, it will continue to meet with


opposition for many years to come, but being based on
demonstrable facts, its universal acceptance is only a
matter of time, for facts are the basis of all true science
and philosophy, and do not bend to the prejudices and false
theories of men. Let me remind all scoffers that what has
been held up to ridicule in one age has become a common-
place fact of the next; therefore, let them carefully in-
vestigate this subject before condemning it as unworthy of
their consideration.
Paley in his ? Evidences ? has wisely observed ;?? Con-
tempt prior to examination is an intellectual vice from which
those of the greatest faculties of mind are not free. I
know not, indeed, whether the men of the greatest
faculties are not the most subject to it.? And, as Sir
Humphry Davy wrote : ?? Facts are more useful when
they contradict than when they support received theories.?
? That which is ridiculed to-day the distant future shall adore,
And truth, which error seeks to slay, live evermore.?
Note.? For further information on the subject read ? The
Destiny of Man,? by the same writer. Price, 6d.
George Robertson and Co., Printers, Little Collins-street, Melbourne.


?
'
.
*


?




