

fee
Hysh
“i T t - , r\
the *
Z ELECTORAL ACT, }i
(/{t) * \J
AND
HOW TO WORK IT.
35) A SERIES OF LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE
C) APPROACHING ELECTIONS,
BY
HENRY PARKES,
FORMERLY MEMBER OP THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY FOR THE CITY
OP SYDNEY, AND FOR THE NORTH RIDING OF CUMBERLAND.
Sydney V :>
»••); PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHER, MR. G. T. THORNTON, ((
BY W. C. BELBRIDGE,
iQ 62, YORK-STREET, OPPOSITE AVESLEYAN CHAPEL.
MDCCCLIX.




THE
ELECTORAL ACT
AND
HOW TO WORK IT.
A SERIES OF LETTERS ON THE SUBJECT OF THE
APPROACHING ELECTIONS,
HENRY PARKES,
FORMERLY MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY FOR THE CITY OF
SYDNEY, AND FOR THE NORTH RIDING OF CUMBERLAND.
Sydney t
PRINTED FOR THE PUBLISHER, MR. O. T. THORNTON,
BY W. C. BEUBRIDGE, v
62, YORK-STREET, OPPOSITE WESLEYAN CHAPEL.
MDCCCLIX.




The following letters were published anonymously in the Maitland
Mercury with no intention of their reproduction in any other form. It
has been urged, however, by persons who in general terms adopt the
views put forth in them, that they may be more useful in promoting
the end in view if published in my name. This is the explanation of
their having been prepared a second time for the press. If they serve
the purpose of the hour, and contribute their mite of influence to a
satisfactory representation of the country in the new Parliament, I shall
feel that my exertions, extending over the last eight years, to effect a
reform of our electoral system, have not been inappropriately terminated.
H. P.
April 18, 1859.
/r/^77^
i* B.l~x




THE ELECTORAL ACT, AND
HOW TO WORK IT.
LETTER I.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE “MAITLAND MERCURY.”
Gentlemen —I purpose, with your permission, saying a few words
on some of the important topics that suggest themselves in prospect of
the general election about to take place in this colony. For many years
past I have been in the daily habit of thinking, and canvassing the
thoughts of others, on the political questions submitted for discussion,
and, though confined to a private station, have felt it a matter of duty to
take the part of an English citizen in all that related to the public
welfare. This fact may perhaps secure even for my opinions a dispas-
sionate consideration from your readers.
The questions I would submit to the constituencies of the colony
may be stated as follows: —
l ß t. Will the Electoral Act prove a Measure of
Substantial Reform ?
2nd. Does the Determination of this Question depend
entirely upon the Electors ?
3rd. Ip it does so depend, what is necessary to determine
it in the Affirmative ?
Each of these questions embraces several subjects which might be
treated separately with advantage, if time and my engagements per-
mitted, but, while stating my views I hope with sufficient clearness for
the occasion, I shall not deem it necessary to proceed in any strict order
of analysis.
We have been told by every popular authority that the Electoral
Act is a great concession to the Liberal cause. It increases the number
of representatives from 54 to 81 j it extends the franchise to the widest
limits compatible with the interest of the poorest man permanently
resident amongst us; it gives to the elector the protection of the ballot;
it opens the door of the Legislature to any free subject who can gain the
votes of a constituency. These surely are the great essentials of re-
presentative freedom. Yet the Act containing all these popular rights


is at present no more than a form of clay waiting for the people to
breathe into its nostrils the breath of life. Printed on foolscap, it does
not look more formidable than an Impounding Act, or an Act for the
suppression of goats, and it is absolutely weaker in positive provision for
its vital fulfilment. Public officers and courts of justice can do little in
carrying out this Electoral Act. Its great objects cannot be effectually
secured without the active co-operation of the people themselves. As
the richest garment, if unworn and neglected, soonest discovers the marks
of decay, so the fullest powers of freedom are most certain to produce in-
jury to the commonwealth, unless the people hold firm by them and
honestly employ them. It is not difficult to conceive of a community which,
entitled to elect its own law-makers, with the same extended franchise,
the same freedom of choice, the same secret voting as the Electoral Act
concedes, would yet either esteem their privileges so lightly as to decline
the trouble of exercising them, or act in such utter ignorance of the
nature of their rights as to be blind to all the consequences. In either
case, while men are capable of fraud, cunning, ambition, and force, the
result would be slavery. Such would be the almost certain result of the
experiment of Parliamentary Government among any of the Asiatic
nations. But we, the people of New South Wales, are not Chinamen—
at least, not yet—but Britons, and the descendants of Britons. For this
reason, there may not be occasion for serious apprehension that irremedi-
able injury will result from any neglect or perversity on the part of even
large sections of the people in discharging their duty at the approaching
elections. A sufficient body will act with the spirit and intelligence of
the nation to preserve the equilibrium of our institutions. It is never-
theless true that history supplies us with numerous examples when the
English people, carried away by some cry of the hour, designed by cunning
partizans for the express purpose of misleading them at the poll, have
committed errors that have run through the legislation of long and
disastrous periods, and for which many a bitter and fruitless regret has
afterwards burst forth in popular agitation. It is true that in no part of
the world have the people yet attained to a condition of enlightenment
and independent thought so general as to ensure the issue of party contests
free from absurdity and injustice. Our national descent, then, is not
enough to guarantee the right use of the powers conferred on us by Mr.
Cowper’s Reform Act; and upon their right use at the right time depends
the value of the Act itself.
From this point let us realize to ourselves the possibility of the
Electoral Act not proving a measure of substantial reform. Unless the
eighty seats in the new Assembly (the University seat is not likely to be
filled for some time to come) be occupied by eighty men the majority of


whom shall he eminently distinguished for honesty of purpose, educated
experience, clear reasoning power, and something of self-discipline, and of
that habitual respect for the mere forms and usages of public life which
is perhaps the surest sign of the moral strength to dispassionately dispose
of large and conflicting interests, the Electoral Reform, so long desired
and so earnestly contended for, will prove, after all, a practical delusion
If, unfortunately, the majority should consist of ignorant and incapable,
dupes on the one hand, and unprincipled and clever schemers on the
other, the grand popular experiment must be admitted to have failed.
And what would be the consequence of such a failure as I have
indicated in the issue of the forthcoming elections ? The new Assembly
will be elected for five years —a period with us that will probably embrace
more changes in the condition of society, and more demands of an urgent
nature on the wisdom of Parliament, than twenty years in the mother-
country. The elements thrown together will have ample time to work,
and will work to some purpose, for the questions to be decided are of the
highest magnitude. Experience has taught us, too, that the most fawning
and pliant in profession, when before the electors, are precisely the men
to assume unwonted arrogance and to defy public opinion when com-
fortably settled in their seats. But five years of vicious legislation —
though sufficient of itself to throw us back irrecoverably in the march of
Australian improvement —would be the smallest part of the evil conse-
quences. What further remedy in the mere institutional part of Govern-
ment could we then seek to apply ? What more, after manhood suffrage,
free choice, equal representation, and the ballot ? Where look, beyond
these, for the essentials of a new reform ? If the constituencies make a
mistake now, is it not clear that popular liberty will stand discredited
before the lukewarm, the apathetic, and the doubtful, who together with
the avowed enemies of the liberal cause, make up so large a mass of
society ? The country is put upon its trial ; the issue must be accepted
as a declaration of the fitness or unfitness of the people for the full enjoy-
ment of their political rights.
I think I have said enough to show that the first question started in
the beginning of this letter is one of sufficient importance, and that the
determination of it is involved in sufficient doubt, to demand the anxious
attention of your readers. In my next, with your favour, I will endeavour
to show how entirely in the hands of the people is their own fate
January 6, 1859


LETTER 11.
TO THE EDITORS OP THE “ MAITLAND MERCURY.”
Gentlemen —ln your issue of January 11, you were good enough
to publish a letter from me, on the subject of the approaching elections,
to which I would now desire to re-call the attention of your readers.
Having endeavoured to bring under serious consideration the question
Of possible failure in carrying out the Electoral Act, I shall now address
myself to some of the points wherein the people are liable to lose sight of
how completely the matter is in their own hands. That they have full
power in the present state of the law to decide the elections admits of no
manner of question. The right of the suffrage is within the reach of
every man sane and free ; and every man can follow the dictates of his
judgment and preserve his conscience inviolate under the protection of
the ballot. It is not, however, so certain that this true and obvious
state of things is fully understood, or that it will be acted upon so as to
secure the fullest amount of benefit to the country. Some important
conditions precedent are necessary to the satisfactory and just discharge
of the elector’s duty at the poll, even where the vote is recorded with a
conscientious regard to the public interest. There may exist an anxious
solicitude to secure the liberties and advance the prosperity of the coun-
try, and a manly resistance of all sinister influences ; but if, from
negligence or inattention, no timely effort has been made to bring into
the field something like the true qualities that should distinguish the
Representative, the most upright and intelligent elector may find himself
in the dilemma of having to give his vote to a man far below his standard
of legislative fitness as the best of a bad batch of candidates, or of yield-
ing himself up to the moral necessity of self-disfranchisement, after all.
The voter’s duty does not begin at the poll. To secure a right choice
the right stamp of man must be brought before the constituency. The
law has nothing to do with this beyond granting permission and confer-
ring power it leaves it a task to be undertaken by anybody—a duty
incumbent upon everybody concerned. There is no officer appointed by
the Electoral Act to select eligible candidates, but unless such selection
be made, it is clear enough that all the officers that are appointed cannot
with their collective authority bring about the return of good members.
Here, then, is a duty, preliminary to all other steps, which must be per-
formed, in every constituency, by the electors in common—a duty which
falls upon all with equal obligation—a duty the neglect or misperform-
ance of which must inevitably pervert the choice at the poll. Let this
be borne in mind by every elector who cherishes within his breast the
faintest desire to serve his country.
Supposing that good candidates arc in the field, still they arc not to


l)e taken upon trust. The elector must think and act for himself at
every stage throughout the election. And, first, he must distinguish
between good candidates and merely good men ; he must steadily bear in
mind that, though it may be received as an axiom that no bad man can
make a good legislator, still it does not follow that many really good men
may not make very bad legislators. As to what are the true requisites
of fitness in a candidate, I shall devote my next letter to that subject ;
my judgment, of course, may err, and my opinion may be of little value;
but I ask your readers to try all things” for themselves, and accept
nothing from me or from others, except by its inherent soundness and
good reason. In forming a safe opinion of their comparative fitness, the
elector should carefully and dispassionately review the past conduct of
the men who come forward to solicit his suffrage. We may be sure that
all will be lavish of liberal professions. Opinions to suit the temper of
the times will be on every tongue. What man now would stand upon
the hustings, and not declare himself a reformer of abuses and a friend to
popular government ? With manhood suffrage, there is no other
password to a seat in Parliament. 13ut it is easy to test the soundness of
these opinions—easy to ascertain the value of these professions. The past
career of every man is either known or unknown. If unknown, that fact
alone is a sufficient condemnation, for it is clear evidence of unpardonable
nresumption in a candidate for the highest trust in the State. If known,
let the collected evidences of the past be justly and calmly weighed, with
a single view to the candidate’s fitness for the business now to be taken
in hand, and there will be little danger of error in the estimate so
formed.
« I have but one lamp by which my feet are guided ; and that is the
lamp of experience. I know of no way of judging of the futuie but by the
past.” These were the words of Patrick Henry in the dawn of that great
struggle for liberty which ended in American independence. What was
true in relation to that grand event is true in regard to so subordinate-
an occurrence as our elections. The unsupported professions of the
British Crown in the management of the American colonies were no more
to be suspected than the unsupported professions of a candidate for the
representation of Sydney or Maitland. In every case the mere professions
which run contrary to the recorded actions of men ought to be received
with suspicion, and especially so where the service is voluntary, and the
duties to be performed relate to the highest and most complicated interests
of mankind.
No elector who has impartially considered the views I have advanced,
will need any caution from me not to choose his representative on the mere
word of influential or prominent persons. He will know how to treat
the flattering suggestions of ail cx-Mcmbcr of Parliament or a Cabinet


Minister. Whatever may be his individual opinions, he will prove the
sincerity of his belief in them, while he asserts his personal independence,
by a free and unbiassed choice of the man who is to be their exponent in
the Supreme Council of the country.
We have seen that the people have the power to mould the character
of the new Parliament—to create it of what likeness they think proper;
and that, whether the work be of noble proportions or a thing deformed,
they can neither be robbed of the blessing, nor escape from the curse, of
their own hands. But, to reap the harvest they must sow the seed.
Every man must consider that the scale between right and wrong will be
turned by his weight of influence. All must be up and stirring. We
must think as well as feel—think of what contributes to a sound policy
for the country as well as what tends to the temporary triumph of a
party. We must search for facts, examine records, and compare qualifi-
cations, proving all wordiness by its light of thought, and distrusting
what we cannot prove.
February 18 th, 1859.
LETTER 111.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE “ MAITLAND MERCURY.”
(tENTLEMEN— With your permission I will now resume my subject,
confining myself to the consideration of the representative character.
An accomplished statesman of the last generation has told us that
‘‘among the objects of representation” there are two that should be
especially taken into account in constituting any Legislative Assembly—
“ the qualifications for making good laws, and those for resisting
oppression.” Were it certain that we could secure these general
qualifications in the ascendant, we might rest satisfied that they would
include all other of subordinate cast and of occasional importance. Thus,
if the majority of the Assembly had the wisdom, forecast and moral
rectitude to enact none but good laws, and displayed the jealousy of
power and the pride of independence which, combined with cultivated
talent, are the best safeguards of the public liberty, we might feel
tolerably safe that they would be equal to any duty which might devolve
upon them in improving the physical advantages of the country, or in
preserving order and economising time in their own proceedings. But,
to see what these golden qualifications consist of, we must with some
minuteness go into the humbler qualities, which would necessarily come


into play in the performance of political functions. As in arithmetic, so
in practical politics, we can only arrive correctly at the sum-total by
adding up all the various items in the account.
In the first place, the man of depraved tastes and profligate habits,
abandoned to the gratification of his sensual propensities, can never make
an efficient “ Kepresentative of the People.” His abilities may be of a
brilliant order, the language of freedom may be ever flashing from his
lips, he may glow with patriotic eloquence, and the people may see him
daily in their foremost ranks ; but, if he be a man of ungoverned passions
and immoral life, depend upon it, the interests of a free country will be
in danger in his hands. No open violator of the first laws of God will be
found a faithful guardian of the rights of the people. But, let it be
remembered, there are other lusts besides the indulgence in unlicensed
pleasure j and some of these are much to be feared in men who are
struggling for social position against the influences of early poverty and
defective education. There are the lusts of uncomprehended power, of
senseless notoriety, and of family aggrandisement. Where men are
known, it will not be difficult to detect in antecedent follies the tendency
to these public vices: and it may safely be concluded that he who has
made it a principal object of his life to stand on a little higher ground
than his neighbour, will not change his nature amidst the temptations
surrounding a seat in Parliament, when his vote may be the means of
opening to him new avenues of social advantage and enjoyment. Not
only should the gambler and the debauchee be shunned, but in choosing
our representatives, we should look with suspicion on any person whose
leading characteristic is vanity, or avarice, or mere family pride. As to
this latter quality, if we are to have an aristocracy, let it be a true
English one, with the refinements of good breeding, and the solid
advantages of a high education ; not an upstart exclusivism, elevating
itself by the adventitious props of political life, and winning favour with
the people by its professions of purity, while gaining strength within its
own circle by the lowest arts of corruption.
There are, however, some men who do not come under any of these
descriptions, who, nevertheless, should not be elected to seats in the
Legislature. He who has expended the whole strength of his mind on
the concerns of his own fortune, and is entirely unacquainted with the
nature of first principles, who would bring the same rules of an
unenlightened expediency to bear equally on operations of trade and
questions of State policy, whose powers of invention have been limited to
alluring his customers to an additional purchase, and who has never
suspected that the rest of mankind were much different from himself,
would hardly make an efficient legislator, though he be a person of
estimable character, of pecuniary independence, and entitled to general


respect. Many men who are all animation in their proper element, once
removed from it, are “ like fish out of water.” It is of little use to force
upon them a class of duties for which they are unfitted, both by nature
and by habits of life.
We now come to the positive side of the question—the true moral
requisites in the Representative character. I will class these requisites
in the order of importance I assign to them, leaving out of sight for the
moment all considerations of political creed, and confining our view to
the simple functions of legislation. I place them thus:—l. Personal
integrity. 2. Habit of observing public affairs. 3. Clear and indepen-
dent judgment. 4. Stability of purpose. 5. Reasoning power. 6.
Speaking ability. It will be seen that I have placed last in my category
that which is generally considered the most attractive quality in a
candidate, the talent for public speaking; but, from long observation, I
am convinced that this glittering talent is in itself less valuable, in
conducting the business of Parliament, than any one of the other qualities
I have enumerated. By the above categorical arrangement, I wish to
express my opinion—Ist, that all the qualities therein grouped are
necessary to the efficient performance of legislative duties; 2nd, that
personal integrity alone would be better than any one of the other
qualities alone, that personal integrity and habit of observing public
affairs would be better than any other *two, and so on to the end. Of
course, I suppose some degree of education in the candidate ; and if high
accomplishments and the influence of property can be added, so much the
better. But I think the importance attached to property, as a guarantee
of independence, is not justified by experience, especially in these colonies,
where, instead of the settledness and repose of wealth which we see in the
territorial families of England, every rich man is straining all his
energies to become richer. Members of Parliament, who are extensively
mixed up in land speculations and other complicated property interests,
are not the least likely persons to stand in need of favours from the
Oovernment ; and those who have had opportunities of judging, will bear
witness that they are not the most scrupulous in asking for them. At
the same time I should regard it as a state of things to be deplored, if
property were to lose its just weight in the Legislature.
If the electors as a body would discard all sectarian influences and
all senseless cries of faction, and, whether radicals or conservatives,
determine to adopt in the selection of their candidates some such simple
standard of moral fitness as I have ventured to give above, we might
hope to sec both sides of the House stronger in their respective principles,
higher in mutual respect, and more worthy of the country. There is one
object of far higher concern to every patriotic mind than any party
triumph, and that is the elevation of the Legislature by its associated


virtue and talent, and the preservation of its name and character in the
respect of the people. Eor this reason, then, at this critical conjuncture,
let every exertion be made, to form the new Parliament of honest,
observant, independent, firm, courageous, and able men, no matter
whether they be rich or poor, from the university or from the workshop.
The more mixed they are in experience, in attainments, and in pursuits,
the more truly they will represent the country, so that they are men ot
sterling character, and not shams.
I for one will give my vote for the staunchest democrat that comes up
to my standard of moral fitness ; but I would rather be beaten at the
poll by a respectable conservative than discredit a good cause by support-
ing a bad man.
March 5, 1859.
LETTER IY.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE “ MAITLAND MERCURY."
Gentlemen. —Most persons who have paid attention to the action of
the popular mind in an election—the extent to which it is influencea by
personal likings and aversions, by feelings properly belonging to ex-
traneous circumstances, and by the amount of mere tact and management
of the parties immediately interesting themselves in the result must bo
agreed that the votes of a constituency are often fixed by the delusive
effect of some idle fallacy, which no one seems to examine at the moment,
though everybody subsequently admits its hollowness. Before we pass
from the contemplation of the representative character, let us extend our
observation to one or more of these hackneyed fallacies.
Nothing is commoner than to hear the friends of some local candidate
extolling his claims on account of his personal acquaintance with the
district he aspires to represent, and his presumed knowledge ot its
peculiar wants. “ Send him in,” they exclaim, “and you will ha\e a
man in the legislature who has lived amongst you and who understands
your interests.” The sentiment is generally received with a burst of
cheers ; it seems so natural that a man who in his life and property is
identified with the district should “understand their interests,” and
therefore be the very man for the honest electors. And, if the candidate s
qualifications derived from residence and local knowledge are not oycr-
coloured, they must be held sound for his election to the Municipal
Council, now that every important district is about to take upon itself
the management of its local affairs. But the duties we are*considering
have exclusive relation to the national legislature—that body which is


called upon in a spirit of strict equality and justice to legislate for the
whole community, and which cannot confer favours without an abuse of
its powers. In choosing their member of this body, the electors of every
district should bear in mind that “ their interests ” and “ their wants ”
are, generally speaking, the interests and wants of the country at large;
and that, unless their choice comprehend the moral and intellectual
qualifications for the higher duties and more comprehensive business of
legislation, they can hardly expect their representative, with all his local
knowledge, to carry an overwhelming influence on any occasional motion
when their welfare in an especial manner is at stake. He is but one out
of eighty ; and, if he has discovered no strength for the heat of their
patriotic struggles, no skill for the solution of their legislative problems,
his seventy-nine colleagues will evince little sympathy in his feeble
complaint of some local grievance, and little toleration for his ill-directed
efforts at redress. Thus, in choosing a man who understands their local
wants, but who understands nothing more, the electors may lose their
rightful share of influence in the general legislation of the country,
while their member will fail to command the amount of attention justly
due to those subordinate matters on which his election turned.
Nothing that I have said is intended to bring in question the
desirableness of returning resident candidates, where such can be selected
possessing the other necessary qualifications. But I hope I have shown
that local knowledge alone will not make an -efficient legislator ; and
that the electors in every case will overlook their true interests, if they
do not endeavour to secure those faculties and attainments, without which
the business of legislation cannot be successfully carried on. It is this
higher class of qualifications which will give their member sufficient
influence in the legislature to obtain for any question affecting them
locally a favorable consideration ; so that in all respects their
representation will be safest in the hands of the man of ability and
sound principle, whether a resident or a stranger, and in no respect can
it be advantaged by local connexions secured at the expense of general
fitness.
There is another kind of popular fallacy, which, though in itself
inconsistent and absurd, is often called in aid of those, who are most
conspicuous for the art of making the best of a bad cause, and is often
successful. It is the fallacy of the political pedlar, who employs all his
eloquence to magnify the value of the commodity he has for sale. A
constituency is addressed by some aspiring gentleman whose tongue
refuses to second his ambition ; and straightway we arc told that he is a
o practical man,” who goes into the legislature to work, and not to talk.
It is no won4er that this takes with many persons who live under a painful
impression of the worthlessness of much that is said and done in Parlia-


meat. But, ten to one, the silent gentleman before us says nothing,
because he has nothing to say ; and he will be able to do no work, because
there is no work to be done for which he is fitted. If there were given
tasks of manual labour to be performed in the legislature—a field of
potatoes to be dug, a flock of sheep to be shorn, a ton of sugar to be
weighed, a bale of calicoes to be measured —he might be of
use ; and probably his more eloquent brethren wouldi not be un-
willing to take advantage of his boasted capacity for work. A
different kind of work, however, awaits him in the House of Assembly;
and, unless he has some matured views on the questions to be considered,
and some power, combined of the qualities pointed out in a former letter,
of enforcing them when occasion offers, it is very little there that he will
be found capable of doing. I have already said that Ido not put a high
value on the mere ability to speak, but a man, if he had thought for
himself, and is full of any one important subject, though he may not be
either a rhetorician or a happy reasoner, will be able to express his
sentiments with sufficient fulness and clearness to be understood, when
he professes to be stimulated by a sense of duty to seeking a seat in
Parliament. The fallacy of your “ practical man ” and your “working
member ” too frequently is a covering for nothing but moral decrepitude
and mental incapacity.
The kind of fallacy we have under notice often assumes the opposite
complexion, and expends itself in eulogies on the candidate who can
“ speak for himself,” and will not prove a “ dummy ” in the house. As
the parrot family among birds will imitate the human tongue, and repeat
particular phrases without their brains being disturbed by any spark of
meaning, so there is an order of men who will talk with interminable
glibness on subjects of which they must for ever remain in hopeless
ignorance. There need be no fear of the man of this stamp “ speaking
for himself,” but, if elected to the legislature, he will speak to the shame
of his constituents.
Let not the electors for a moment lose sight of the sterling qualities,
the mind and manhood, which are the only securities for a faithful
discharge of the representative trust. The only “practical man” for
legislation is the man of sound heart and clear head, of ripened
knowledge and earnest thought, of independent spirit and fearless tongue.
The only person who in this sort of business can “ speak for himself” to
any purpose, is the same man.
March 14, 1859.


LETTER Y.
TO THE EDITORS OF THE “ MAITLAND MERCURY.”
Gentlemen —To succeed in returning “fit and proper” men to
Parliament, the electors ought to be prepared to take upon, themselves a
reasonable amount of trouble. They have a duty to perform, and they
should feel a pride in performing it well. It would be unpardonable
folly to neglect the ordinary affairs of life, the obligations of business,
and the wants of a family, in pursuit of any .political object ; and, if
taking part in an election called for so great a sacrifice, I should counsel
every man not to stir from his own door. But no sacrifice of the kind is
demanded. The zeal of the citizen is not incompatible with the industry
of the tradesman ’ and the most uncompromising in his polities may be
the most obliging in his social intercourse. An election is not an every-
day occurrence, and a portion of the time usually spent in amusements,
or lost in listless inactivity, would be sufficient, if vigorously employed,
for the service which every man at such a time owes to his country.
Besides, there is no man in a free state who has not a personal interest
in the result of a Parliamentary election. It is only by such means that
the power is given to frame the laws, regulate the liberty, and adjust the
burdens of the country. And these consequences will reach the poorest
citizen, however limited may be his possessions. Where the government
is responsible to the people, the people should all be politicians.
Public meetings-are perhaps the most effective means of fairly and
honourkbly carrying an election. There is a hearty satisfaction in meeting
the candidate, face to face, whether friend or opponent. One cannot
judge of a man by his printed language, however smooth its periods, and
hotvever popular the opinions it unfolds. He must be seen in the
movement of which he is the object. The eye must follow him from
point to point in his progress—note how he fronts the violence of
opposition—how he demeans himself in the moment of triumph—what
contingencies he counts of most importance in the chances of the struggle
—before any just estimate can be formed of his character and powers.
And the sentiments of the constituency can be best brought out in
public meeting, where all stand on equal ground, and where the opposite
propensities of John, Bull, to drown common sense in extravagant
admiration, or to find -fault in defiance of all reason, may be indulged
without let or hindrance. Nobody need feel alarmed by the political
fermentation in one of these gatherings j a little noise at such times is
a wholesome thing, It ; is far better than the skulking canvass, in which
every low backbiting art is emploj’ed to gain strength at the expense of
others, and every sinister influence is brought to bear on the unwary
voter. Men are none the worse for rubbing their political opinions


against each other ; and the sharper the friction the greater the chance
that some clear light will be drawn from the collision.
But public meetings cannot be made the substitute for individual
action. Every elector must take the matter home to himself, and debate
the question in his own mind. How is the country to be represented to
epsure its freedom and prosperity ? How can he most effectively
contribute to that great end ? He has no right, to entertain any
unworthier consideration. He has nothing to do with the success of his
personal friend, or the promotion of any particular man in the public
service. But he has to do with the character and qualifications of the
man, be he who he may, who asks to be elevated to a seat in the
legislature. Let him review this character, and examine these qualifica-
tions, fairly and dispassionately, and satisfy his conscience that his
support is given to the right side.
This process of enquiry is not to be put off till the hour of public
meeting or the day of election. It should be taken up in the quiet
walks of life, and anxiously carried through to a rational conclusion. It
is as much a matter for the sacred circle of home as any other duty
devolving upon the member of a free community. Are not the women
and children interested in the election of men to make laws for them ?
The subject is one which the good citizen will not scorn to talk over with
his wife—which no sensible woman will wish her husband to regard with
indifference.
If wisdom and justice are to guide the deliberations of Parliament,
the electors must look through society and find these patriotic attributes.
The result depends upon their sense of duty, and their individual
exertions.
March 16, 1859,
LETTER VI.
TO THE EDITORS OE THE MAITLAND MERCURY.
Gentlemen — l shall conclude my observations with a word or two
on the important character of the business which the new Parliament will
be called upon to undertake. lam fully aware that all politicians have
the weakness to imagine a crisis in the time and and circumstances of
their particular activity. But I hope I have given no ground for sus-
picion that I am carried away by any such hallucination in writing these
letters. Let us pause and consider for what purpose representative
governments are instituted. Is it not to guard the rights of the people,


to adjust the public burdens equally, to promote the moral welfare of
society ? Then, what will be the great organic measures of the legislature
about to be elected ? A law to settle the principles of a system for the
management and disposal of the public lands!—can any act of government
more closely affect the rights of the people ? A complete revision of the
revenue laws, and the introduction of new principles of taxation! —at what
time is the hand of the just and enlightened statesman more needed to
equalise the public burdens ? A scheme of public education to reconcile
all sectarian differences!—is not that a task deserving the united exertions
of our social reformers ? „ These are some of the great questions waiting
to be dealt with by the legislature, and their discussion will necessarily
bring into agitation the whole elements of government. But there are
other oi'ganic changes which cannot be postponed:—for example, the
question of one house or two, and, if two, the constitution of the Upper
Chamber; and again, the organisation of the Ministerial Departments,
which still remains to be settled. Truly, the constituencies are called
upon to declare themselves at a period of more than ordinary interest.
When the foundations of the political fabric are to be examined,
reconstructed, or extended, it is no extravagance of language to say that
the community is passing through a crisis, and one that may be fraught
with consequences affecting the welfare of generations to come.
We will dwell for a moment on the land question. How intimate is
its relation to every established interest ! How various are the lights in
which it may be considered ! How different' are the opinions on the
subject entertained by conscientious thinkers ! But with all this confusion
of ideas, and this difficulty of circumstances in approaching the question,
how clear to every mind is the vastness of the consequences which must
flow from its settlement! Through all differences of policy, at all stages
of discussion, the subject is admitted to be one of unequalled importance.
The public territory cannot be alienated a second time. God has only
given for man’s use one surface of the soil. If the present inhabitants of
the colony, holding the virgin land fresh from the hand of the Creator,
with an omnipotent voice in the disposal of it, forget the sacred nature
and magnitude of the trust reposed in them, in giving authority to any
sot of men finally to deal with the priceless possession—if they forget
how powerfully the measures of the handful of possessors of to-day will
affect the social condition of the unborn millions of the future, and how
largely the conduct of the forthcoming legislature on this question of the
land will influence the formation of the national character—if they do
not in common retain a lively sense of their responsibility at every step
in this stupendous business, all hope of that moral supremacy, which is
the great characteristic of British progress, will be gone from New South
Wales. The Parliament they are about to elect will be elected with


special reference to this transcendent work of legislation. The greatest
of the rights conceded by Great Britain—plenary power oyer the wild
lands—is now to be exercised by the colonial legislature for the first
time.
It would be inconsistent with my purpose to touch upon the dis-
cussion of party politics, and therefore I shall abstain from any statement
of the definite views I should seek to enforce if I were debating this
(question on its merits. I allude to it here only to impress its importance,
which cannot be exaggerated, on the mind of the elector in performing
the duty before him. Whatever may be his opinions or mine, whether
we are in favour of free selection and deferred payments, or of a lew
upset price, competition, and no credit—whether we incline to give a
tenure of years to the stockholder, or to restrict him to a sufferance
tenancy—in any case, we must see that our representatives possess the
intellectual grasp, the forecasting thought, the independent judgment,
and the steady energy to give effect to our opinions.
So, in investigating the phenomena of financial science, and deter-
mining the structure of a fiscal system: there can be no statesman-like
action without statesman-like capacity. And this subject, in all its
complicated details and difficult ramifications, is comparatively new to the
legislative mind of the colony, and has not yet been touched by
Responsible Government. Succeeding Ministries have glanced at it, and
left it where they found it, content with any temporary expedient that
would preserve to them political power. But no observer of the times
can be insensible to the impending battle of principles in this dangerous
field of legislation. Are we to have the competitive freedom of commerce
and industry which now pervades the policy of England, and of which
Mr. John Stuart Mill is perhaps the most generally accepted exponent ?
Or, are we to adopt the protective theory of America, that the peculiar
necessities of a new state do not admit of the application of general
principles, as maintained by the arguments of Mr. Clay and her Univer-
sity economists ? We cannot go on much longer with our patchwork
tariff, and still neglecting our principal sources of legitimate taxation.
But let it not be overlooked by the constituencies that strong and expe-
rienced minds are required to conduct the country safely through this
perilous enquiry.
So again, on the question of education: the profoundest attributes
of the Christian statesman are required. Here, too, our three years of
Responsible Government have yielded no harvest. In fact, I very much
fear that the cause of public education has gone backward, that it is
sustained by a less expansive faith and a less tolerant spirit, under the
new order of things. The game of political ambition on a small scale is
not favoi able to the breadth of view and the enlightened exercise of


I might go on pointing out the importance of many other measm'es,
which must depend upon the wisdom of the next Parliament. But I will
leave the enquiry to the electors, whose good feeling, I trust, will acquit
me of presumption in what I have already said. In these letters I have
no party object in view. I wish to see the extended liberty of the
Electoral Act justified by a Legislative Assembly of high character and
ability, which shall reflect honour upon the colony, and be capable of
laying the foundations of a powerful nation.
March 18, 1859.
s fAhp
f\TH<o
K! oojy
■power, on which any sound system of national instruction must depend.
But the generations are advancing in upon us, wave after wave of
imploring faces; and though we shut our eyes, we cannot shut out the
danger of the surging ignorance and vice that threaten society in the
future. Let the elector, when he looks upon the candidate for his
suffrage, pause for a moment and think of the claims of the little children
—the helpless thousands in the holes and corners of our towns, and under
sheets of bark in the wild bush, who must grow up the moral strength or
the moral weakness of his country.




3tJ
g A
GENERAL
PRINTING OFFICE,
62, YORK STREET, SYDNEY,
OPPOSITE THE WESLEYAN CENTENARY CHAPEL.
W. C. BELBRIDGE,
FORMERLY SUPERINTENDENT IN THE OFFICES OP THE MELBOURNE
11 ARGUS” AND SYDNEY “ EMPIRE,”
Begs to intimate to bis numerous friends and the public generally that (J v A
he has commenced business as a General Job Printer, at the premises
No. 62, York-strcet, Sydney, where he will be prepared to execute vt
orders for all descriptions of work at the shortest notice and on the •••■.
most reasonable terms.
CATALOGUES, BILL HEADS, PLACARDS, LAW FORMS, ADDRESS CARDS, ELECTION
NOTICES,'&C., &C., PRINTED AT AN HOUR’S NOTICE, AND IN THE FIRST STYLE
OF WORKMANSHIP.
General Printing Office, 62, York-street, Sydney,
Opposite Wesleyan Chapel.
