



\


With SPECiAii Eefebence to the Recent Address by the
Moderator of the Presbyterian Assembly.
Why even of yourselves judge ye not wliat is right ? ”
Luke I2C, 57v.
I invite your attention, this morning, to an address recently
■delivered in this city by the Rev. George Macinnes, Moderator of
the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales. That address has since been published in pamphlet form,
under the following title :
“The Death of ihe Verbal Theory and the Unveiling of Christ: or
The Bible a ‘ Sufficient Witness ’ to the ‘ Self evidencing ’ Christ.’ ’
This is an age of Criticism. Perhaps you have heard that
■statement previously, but it is none the less true. This,
is an age in which the effects of criticism are beginning to be
clearly seen. For y-ears, there has been a criticism of the Bible,
but only in comparatively recent times have we seen the eft'ect of
that work upon the so-called Orthodox Churches and the leaders
of the most powerful denominations. Individual members of
churches or scattered preachers of various sects have given
evidence, by their utterances or their writings, that they have left
the older and narrower doctrines and have found their way into a
brighter and a broader faith. Among those who have done good
service in this diiection, we might mention Prof. Wm. Robertson
Smith, whose death has been recently announced, and who used to
be connected with the Free Church College in Aberdeen, in the
North of Scotland.
V ■


On several occasions I have taken the opportunity to speak,.
from this pulpit, of the different ways of looking upon, and of '
estimating, that collection of hooks which is commonly called'
“ The Bible.” I have tried to indicate, in as few and as simple
words as possible, some of the results of Modern Biblical criticism;
to direct attention to the weak points in the strictly
doctrine of inspiration ; and to show the true place and position of)
“ The Bible ” in the ranks of ordinary human literature.
This morning, in briefly referring to the address delivered by the'
Rev. George Macinnes, it is quite possible that I shall not be able
to say anything that will be particularly new for the majority of'
my hearers ; but there may be some present to whom I can introduce
the purely rational conception of the origin and nature of “ The ■
Bible,” while I am not without hope, that, by some means, my
words may find their way to a larger audience than is now actually,
gathered together in this Church.
I wish it to be distinctly understood that my subject is a some-
what simple one. You will not be invited to consider any of the
more elaborate details of “ Biblical criticism.” Time will not per-
mit me to go over the extent of ground that I have, on two previous
occasions, tried to cover in a discourse on —“ The Bible, what it is,
and what it is not 1” It will be my endeavour, in the first place,
to show how the theory of the Moderator, and of those who agree
with him. difiers from the theory of the more rigidly orthodox:
school of theologians who profess to believe in the verbal inspiration,
of all the various books of the so-called “ Holy Scriptures.” Then,
in the second place, it will be my duty to explain the purely
rational position, and to show how far, and in what manner we,
who adopt tlmt position, differ from the theory put forward by the
Moderator and others of what may be called the more liberal!
orthodox section.
THE VEEBAL THEOEY.
In the first part of this self-imposed task it is my very great“
pleasure to follow, with general approval and sympathy, the attack
made upon the Yerbal Inspiration Theory. We can appreciate the-
opening remark, by the Moderator, that “We are at the beginning'
of a change, the most profound and far-reaching, the most"
momentous and the most fraught with promise, that?.


has ever taken place in the history of the Christian
Church
and our appreciation is none the less because we firmly believe
that the consequences of this great change will be more far-
reaching, much more radical and even revolutionary, than is, at
■present, anticipated by the rev. gentleman whose words I have
just quoted.
We can sympathise with his faith that “ change” is only another
name for development under Divine direction ; and with his con-
demnation of “ a blind and unwise resistance” to a change that
seems to promise greater light, wider freedom, and an invincible
strength to the Church of Christ throughout the world.
But this sympathy is touched with the profound conviction that
the development will not stop where the Eev. George Macinnes
would wish it to, any more than where the Eev. Dill Macky would
wish it to stop. Det it be confessed thatßiblical criticism” is,
more or less, a rationalistic process, and that it is as futile to say to
the advancing thought of the age—” Thus far shaft thou come, but
no farther!”—as it was for King Canute to seat himself upon the
and bid defiance to the rising tide.
There is no mistake about the distance to which the Moderator
is prepared to go, in his condemnation of the Verbal Inspiration
Theory, He will welcome the change to” a more reasonable and truer
view of the real nature and actual function of the Book.”
The theory that is condemned and rejected is ” that the Scriptures,
just as we now have them, are in all their parts, and in
all their contents, and in their very words, as well as their
ideas, equally inspired; equally free from error, not only in
teaching morals and doctrines, but also in stating facts,
even the most ‘ unimportant facts, whether scientific,
historical or geographical; and equally authoritative
throughout as a rule of faith and practice.’ ”
In support of the opposition to this more rigidly orthodox view of
inspiration many arguments are put forward that have been urged,
years ago, by Unitarian and other Liberal teachers, and for the
promulgation of which they were even denied the right to call
themselves ” Christians,” a right that would in all probability, be


denied even by those liberal orthodox Clergymen who have them*
selves advanced so far in the direction of purely rational thought
and faith.
The history of the Verbal Theory tends to destroy its claim to
consideration. It did not find a place, with one exception, in the
Eeformed Confessions. It was not countenanced by the West-
minister Assembly ; it does not appear in the Confession of Faith;;
and it has never received the official sanctian of tbe Church. Thus,
we are told by this representative Clergymen of the Presbyterian
Church, that the Verbal Inspiration Theory ‘As one of those
traditions of the scribes at which Christ launched withering
invectives!”
In dealing with the text of the Old and New Testaments, the
Moderator plainly states a few simple facts that are well worth
keeping in mind. There is not now in existence one fragment of
any one of the original MSS. “We cannot get within centuries
of the Old Testament originals.'’ The purest text of the New Testa-
ment that can now be attained is the result of the selection and rejec-
tion of various readings. The very process of selecting the different
books that make up “ The Bible ” seems to involve the exercise of
human reason, and to make the whole volume dependent upon the
results of such reasoning. There are discrepancies and contradic-
tions to be found in the Book and orthodox ingenuity has been
compelled to explain or reconcile these. The process has
been amusing, and the result very often ridiculous. The more
liberal school of theologians will admit that there are two-fold
narratives of the Creation, the Flood, the exile of Joseph in
Egypt, and so on. This, and much more, is frankly admitted, and
t is shown to be fatal to the Verbal Theory.
The result is made all the plainer by a consideration of the way
in which the various Books have been selected as inspired, while a
large number were rejected as unworthy of acceptance. Listen to
the following passage, in which the argument is put forth in as
clear and decisive a form as might be used by one of those ostra-
cised individuals known as Unitarians : —“ The Verbal Theory
regards the Bible as one book, homogeneous and of equal
authority in all its parts. But the Bible is really a library,
—a literature of many books by many authors, mostly
anonymous, and written at different times extending over
6


many centuries. Each of these books was separately pub-
lished and circulated. Now all are gathered into one-
Collection. The fact of a book being in that Collection
stamps it with Divine authority. Many of the books make
no direct claim to that authority. Their being in the
Collection depends on tb.e judgment of those persons
who placed them there. The Verbal Theory requires from
those persons absolute inerrancy. If they were not
they might have blundered into admitting an uninspired
or excluding an inspired book.”
Thus, then, does the old theory of the inspiration of the Bible, —
the theory that every statement is absoluteh' correct, and that
every portion is of equal value, —the theory that we have the actual
words given from Almighty God, —thus does the old theory of
Verbal Inspiration utterly collapse.
We can rejoice that the old dogma is losing its hold upon the
minds of thoughtful and earnest men. These opinions, as to the
inconsistencies and the mistakes that occur in the Bible, have'
been expressed, over and over again, by liberal thinkers in past
years,—but they wereas frequently, denounced as being subver-
sive of the whole fabric of Christianity. These opinions—new to
many people,—are old friends with some of us. But, because they
are likely to make more impression coming from the lips of the
Moderator of the Presbyterian Assembly, we welcome their advent
in the orthodox Camp;—we look forward to the day when the
dogma of Biblical infallibility will utterly collapse in all sections of
the Christian Church, and when a more reasonable, and withal a
more reverent, doctrine will take its place.
THE MODEKATOR’S THEORY.
But now, having briefly noted the grounds upon which we
sympathise and agree with the Moderator’s rejection of the Verbal
Inspiration Theory, let us try to comprehend the position that he
takes up with regard to the “ true nature and function of the Bible.”
He frankly acknowledges that there is, in that Book, “ a develop-
ment of revelation and a progression in morals.”
If, therefore, we are to find,any halting place on the way to-
wards the acceptance of the Bible as simply a portion of ordinary-
human literature, where shall that halting place be found ?
7


I must confess that the answer given by the Eev. George
Macinnes, and by others of the same school, is exceedingly vague
and some of us may think very fanciful. It need not surprise us
that many of those who are deeply and sincerely concerned for the
fabric of orthodox Christianity, look with a large amount of
suspicion, and even dread, upon the utterances of their more
“liberal” brethren. I refrain from condemning those ultra-
orthodox champions as mere bigots or “ ancient fossils ” as I have
heard them called. They seem to me to apprehend the logic of the
situation. They see the danger of removing the old bulwarks.
They recognise the hopelessness of tryirg to trust human reason
up to a certain point and then to stand still.
fdo not—l cannot blame them if, at times, they are somewhat
Eitter in their references to the brethren in their own ranks who
concede so much to the critics who criticise the Bible in so free and
independent a spirit.
If they gnash their teeth when the heresies of Unitarianism are
mentioned and if they regard the Unitarian teacher as an outcast
from the true Church, what must their feelings be when brethern
in their midst adopt many of the arguments that Unitarians have
made familiar to thoughtful and cultured persons,—what must
their sufferings be like when they have to sit still in their places
and listen to the newly elected Moderator bringing the results of
the Higher Criticism to bear upon the Bible itself and ruthlessly
•over-turning that theory of the Verbal Inspiration which, in their
opinion, is the only safeguard of their faith.
I feel some human sympathy with those sturdy champions of
•orthodoxy. No wonder they rose up to denounce the (to them) wolf
in sheep's clothing, the nationalist in the garb of an orthodox
Presbyterian, the critic in the garments of a friend.
Let me make a confession. I cannot quite grasp the meaning of
the theory that is put forward, by the Moderator and those who
hold the same position, with regard to inspiration. To whom shall
'we go in order to learn the true nature and function of the Bible ?
The answer given is : —“We goto the Lord Jesus Christ,”
But the Moderator’s position does not seem to be a logical one.
,Must we not go to the Scriptures in order to learn of Christ ? And
8


if they are the authority for our knowledge of him, are we justi-
fied in turning round and maintaining that he is our authority for
the Scriptures ? We are assured that “ Christ tells us that the real
and sole function of the Bible and its supreme value lie in
this : that it is His witness, making Him known to men.”
This is a rather remarkable statement. Whence does the Moder-
ator glean this information as to the saying of Christ ? The Bible,
at any rate that portion which relates to Christ, was not in existence
until long after his death. Possibly the meaning is that Christ
foretold the witness that would be borne to him. If so the state-
ment of the case is very vague and unsatisfactory.
Eeference is also made to “the independent, self-evidencing
Christ ”
but only by one of two ways could this evidence come to us : either
by the revelation of the Scriptures, in which case they are all-
important, or by the inward witness of his spirit in the soul, in
which case any man would be at liberty to bolster up his own pre-
judices or fancies by declaring that they were revealed to him by
the inward witness.
We are told that “ if we believe in the “self-evidencing”
Christ, on His own authority, we shall find it easy enough to
believe in the inspiration of the Scriptures, without any fine
spun theory, and without any proof but this convincing one :
that they are the ‘ Sufficient Witnesses ’ who have revealed
to us the ‘ self-evidencing ’ Christ,”
Now, Ido not wonder that the old-fashioned theologians, the
champions of the stricter doctrine of Biblical inspiration, look with
disfavour, and even with some measure of alarm, upon this fanci-
ful and most unsatisfactory substitute.
That it is unsatisfactory and liable to become illogical is seen
from the fact that we are first assured that when the Verbal Theory
has gone into “ the limbo of exploded fallacies,”—the Bible and
its authority remain, and then we are told that Christ is the sole
authority.
This new theory must, I suppose, have given satisfaction and
comfort to a number of earnest and most worthy men, but for the
present I must range myself along with the most rigidly orthodox


[if they -will graciously refrain from resenting my association with
them !] in declaring that the theory of the “ sufficient witness ” and
of the “ self-evidencing Christ” is no satisfactory or permanent
substitute for the dogma of Biblical infallibility.
THE BATIONAL THEORY.
Having got rid, like the moderator and his friends, of the Verbal
Inspiration Theory,—what is our position as adherents of a purely
rational and Liberal Faith ?
We echo the words— ‘‘ The Bible is really a library, a literature
of many books by many authors, mostly anonymous, and
written at different times extending over many centuries.”
Those words exactly define our position, and we mean precisely
what they assert, —and we do not attempt to reconcile them with
any theory of special inspiration or any theory whatever that will
take the Bible out of the range of ordinary human literature.
Reason has been allowed to influence the other doctnues. It
has been exercised by critics in discussing the true nature of the
Bible, —in detecting errors and inconsistencies, —in tracing the
growth of the Book into its present form.
At the Bar of Reason great questions have been discussed, and by
tiome decided.
It is useless to step in, at a certain stage, and saj^ —Reason must
now give way to Faith. The Judge will not step down from the
Bench. The trial must still go on. They who appeal to Ceesar must
go to Ccesar.
They who appeal to Reason must abide by the sentence that is
delivered.
Reason must be trusted “ all in all, or not at all”; her
sovereignty is undivided, her will must be supreme !
Do not imagine that the value is taken away from the Bible when
we recognise and receive it as a portion of human literature, as part
of God’s Eternal Word spoken through man.
It then becomes most valuable ; its value is of a practical kind.
It proves to us that great thoughts, pure desires and holy
10


emotions have taken possession, and may still take possession, of
the human heart and mind.
Is it not true that
“ Out from the heart of Nature rolled
The burdens of the Bible old ” ?
It takes its place in human literature, and then we learn the
grand, the glorious truth that there are many inspired writings,—
there are many sacred Scriptures. The work of revelation was not
confined to any one age or race. Grod, we believe, is still revealing
Himself and has many wonders and glories yet to make known to
men.
As Lowell said : —“ God is not dumb, that He should speak no
more ! ”
Our doctrine of inspiration is broader and grander than that of
either the strictly-orthodox or the liberal-orthodox school of
theologians. We do not narrow or cramp the idea of revelation.
We do not surround it with a fog of incomprehensible phrases,
nor do we hamper it with superstition and dogma.
“ The sacred scriptures; they are scatter’d up and down the
mighty course of literature from the most ancient Veda to
the most modern hymn or storjn That is the most inspired
•which is the most inspiring.
Let us have done with narrow views of religion and its relation
to human life. Let us learn that every good and pure book must
be more or less sacred. That which can inspire us with true
thought and noble purpose must itself have been inspired by the
Spirit of truth and holiness. The Bible is a portion of human
literature; true, and not the only portion that is worthy of being
classed as the Word of God, spoken through his faithful servants
in this world. The Holy Spirit was not struck dumb when the last
verse of the book of Bevelation was written.
That Spirit is abroad to-day and will speak to every soul that
hearkens for the still small voice.
“ The word by seers or sibyls told.
In groves of oak or fanes of gold.
Still floats upon the morning wind.
Still whispers to the willing mind.
One accent of the Holy Ghost
The heedless world*hath never lost.”


THE REAL CHRIST.
In a few words, I desire to make reference to the statement, in
the Moderator’s address, that the chief discovery of this 19th
century, that which will make it-an epoch in the world’s histojy, is
the discovery of Christ, the real Christ.
With that statement I am most heartily in accord; but it is
more than probable that I should differ somewhat as to the nature,
and characteristics of the “ real Christ.” Not only will he be
better known than he was in the councils of the early Church, or
in the Assembly at Westminster.
I believe that he will be better and more clearly known than he
is in the creeds of modern orthodox Christianity. The “real
Christ ” has yet to be given back to the world. He was stolen away
by the champions of dogmatic theology. ‘ ‘ They have taken away
my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him ! ” But there
shall yet dawn the day of a glorious resurrection. Humanity’s
Easter morning must yet come, and then the “ Real Christ” will be
given back to the world in the dignity and glory of his pure human-
ity, and without the mock purple robe in which he was hidden by
the irreverence and superstition of those who claimed to be his
disciples.
But, though there may be dividing lines between the position of
the Rev. George Mclnnes, and the position which my own con-
science compels me to take up, perhaps those lines are narrower
than we might suspect.
Perhaps we are nearer in heart sympathies than may appear
when controversial subjects are engaging our attention. I know—
sadly and bitterly do I know—how we of the Unitarian Church
are thrust aside, misrepresented, abused, reviled by those who
fess to be the true followers of the Gentle Galilean, by those who
claim an exclusive right to the name “Christian.”
And yet, if I (as your humble representative in this city),
were desirous of stating the difference between the the theology
of the Churches and the theology of Christ, —if I wei’e seeking for a
brief but striking contrast between the old rigid orthodoxy and the


Liberal Faith, —could a better statement be given than this follow-
ing passage from the Moderator’s address ;
“ The present orthodox theology has for its root idea the
Sovereignty of Grod, and from this it logically grows
and spreads. It was elaborated by Calvin, but was fashioned
by Augustine, whose mind was dominated by the image
of Imperial Eome, which is reflected in his conception of the
‘ City of God.’ The primary ideas are ; God is an autocrat.
Man is a subject, a rebel and a criminal. All the relations
of God and man are stated in forensic terms borrowed from
the jurists. Suffering is penal and is inflicted in the
interests of ‘ law and order.’ On the other hand the root-
idea of the theology of Christ is the Fatherhood of God. The
Sovereignty of God is also fully recognised. It is, however,
the sovereignty, not of an absolute despot who rules by
irresistible might, but of a Father who rules by love. In the
Consciousness of Christ, God is a father. Man is a son,
disobedent indeed, but capable of being reconciled. And
suffering is chastisement inflicted for the reformation and
good of the sufferer. The real attitude of God to sinful men
is indicated, not in the ideas of Roman jurists, but in the
parable of the Prodigal Son.”
With sympathy and admiration for the sentiments and idea&
contained in that passage, we may well take leave, for the present,
of the brave and learned preacher whose recent utterances have
formed the theme of this morning’s sermon.
We may entertain the hope that the liberalising tendencies, at
present at work within the different churches, may continue ;
the barriers between sect and sect may be broken down ; that some
of the self styled followers and servants of Jesus will learn some-
thing of his gentle charity and of his boundless love; and thus [to
quote the Moderator’s words once again] “that the happy time
may be brought nearer when all men shall look up to
Heaven and say, ‘ Our Father,’ and shall cast their eyeS'
abroad over all the earth and say, ‘ Our Brothei-s.’ ”
13


