

**tT
S P THE CASE OF MR. BESET
STATED IN AN
ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE TABLE OF THE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COLONY OF
NEW ZEALAND, ON THE 30th JULY, 1869.
WITH AN APPENDIX.
Magna e»t veritas et prevalaiit.
Slucftlanfc :
PRINTED BY WILLIAM ATKIN, HIGH STREET.


,
*
,


DEDICATION.
I dedicate the following pages to William Oemiston, Esquire, one of
the settlers on my land at Wangarei, who, as soon as he became aware
that I had neither received, nor been offered any compensation for
the land which was sold to him and the other settlers by the Govern-
ment, gave himself no rest until he had procured the other settlers to
join him in a Petition to the House of Commons, praying for an
investigation of my case, in order that justice might be done, for their
relief, as well as my own: And also to the other old colonists who
joined with him in that Petition, and who subsequently petitioned the
I rovincial Council of Auckland and the General Assembly of New
Zealand for the same object. It being a result of those Petitions
that a Judicial decision was at length obtained in my favor, after
twenty-seven years vainly spent in attempting to bring my case to
issue.
JAMES BUSBY,
Auckland, Gth 1869.


■
.*


PREFACE.
The following address was delivered at the table of the House of
Representatives, on the 30th of August, 1869. It is necessary to state
that no part of it was written till ten days after its delivery. Part of
what was said has probably been omitted, and something which might
not have been said may possibly be included; but certainly nothing
that was not present to the mind of the speaker before the address was
spoken.
It was understood that it would appear in Hansard with the debates
of the House. But, on the 3rd of August, Mr. Creighton stated that
“he found in the Hansard report the following words,” “ Mr. Busby
appeared at the Bar of the Honse and made a statement in support of
his claims.” For statement see the appendix to this volume.
He trusted that the House would take action on the subject and say
whether Mr. Busby’s statement was to appear as an appendix to the
Reports of the debates of the House, as “it was not right that state-
ments, known to be untrue, and which had not been contravened,
should be published under the authority of the House.” He also
stated that he “ knew that the report of the speech was nearly all in type
in the Q-overnment Printing office.” On the following day “an interim
report was brought, up from the Reporting debates committee, repre-
senting resolutions,” to the effect that Mr. Busby’s statement at the
Bar of the House be not printed as an Appendix to Hansard.
No doubt the Members of the House are privileged to slander their
neighbours; but while the press is free, the privilege of exposing
these slanders cannot be denied to the injured party—and it is intended
in an appendix to do full justice to the misrepresentations and evasions
of the truth, as well as to the blatent falsehoods, by which the House
was induced to allow a second session to pass without making provision
to redeem the Governor’s dishonored bills, and for the satisfaction of a
judgment debt, as well as to vindicate its own Legislation, which had
been set at nought by a provincial functionary.
It is, however, necessary to the full understanding of the following
address that it should be prefaced by some explanatory remarks.


On the second day after the meeting of the Assembly the following
petition was presented by Mr. Clark .
“To the Honorable the House of Representatives of the Colony
of New Zealand, in Parliament assembled, the petition of
James Busby, of Waitangi, in the Bay of Islands, and
Province of Auckland,
“ Humbly sheweth,
“ That your petitioner humbly represented by petition to your honor-
able House during its last session, and to a Select Committee to which
that petition was referred ;
“1. That the arbitrators appointed under the authority of the Land
Claims Arbitration Act, 1867, had awarded him the sum of £36,800>
as special damages in respect of his claims to land at Wangarei and
Ngunguru.
“2. That His Excellency the Governor had thereupon issued to your
petitioner, under his own sign manual, certain scrip in pieces of £5O
each, which, by a provision of the ninth clause of the Land Claims
Arbitration Act, 1867, were to be received in payment for any land open
for sale or selection within the Province of Auckland.
“ 3. That immediately on your petitioner attempting to use that
scrip in the purchase of land, the Superintendent not only refused his
application for certain allotments which were open for sale under the
Waste Lands Act, but set apart, for special settlement, such country
lands as were of any value, and withdrew from sale such allotments of
town and suburban land as had been previously advertised.
“4. That in consequence of these proceedings the scrip issued to
your petitioner had been rendered unsaleable, and unavailable for the
purchase of lands having any value.
“5. That in conformity with the unanimous recommendation of the
Committee to which your petitioner’s petition was referred, a bill was
brought into your honorable House to give effect to its previous legis-
lation, for the relief of your petitioner ; but that the consideration of that
bill in the House was adjourned from time to time, till it became
impossible to carry it through before the end of the session.
“ 6. That your petitioner has used every means in his power to make
the scrip available for the purchase of land ; having applied for lands
under every variety of circumstances and situations, but without having
succeeded in obtaining one acre of land from the Provincial authorities,
or in having sold one single piece of scrip.
“7. That with the concurrence of a majority of the Provincial
Council of Auckland in its last session, the Superintendent has not only
effectually prevented your petitioner from obtaining any land in
exchange for the scrip, but has succeeded in rendering ineffectual for


that purpose any act of the General Legislature of such a nature as
was proposed to the General Assembly and carried through a second
reading in its last session; inasmuch as the Superintendent and the
Provincial Council, in the exercise of their lawful powers, have appro-
priated all the land having any value which remained open for the
purchase of the scrip, for the endowment of schools and other purposes
of the Provincial Government.
“ Your petitioner accordingly prays your honorable House to take
the premises into consideration, and afford him such relief as may
seem meet, and your petitioner will ever pray, &c., &c.
“James Busby.”
On the same day on which the above petition was presented, Mr.
Carleton gave notice that he would move that the petition be referred
to a Select Committee, naming for the Committee such members of the
Select Committee to whom the petition of last session had been referred
as were present, and making up the number in lieu of those absent
with the names of such members as were most likely to give their
attention to the subject.
The committee proposed was to consist of Mr. Curtis, Mr. Clark, Mr.
Ludlam, Mr. Richmond, Mr. Jollie, Mr. Edwards, Mr, Bradshaw, Mr.
Collins, and Mr. Carleton.
The first five were members of the Select Committee of last session,,
as was also Mr. Carleton. This committee was objected to by Mr.
Vogel, who stated that “ with one exception the members had been
chosen from one side of the House.” Mr. Pox proposed to leave out
four of the names, and substitute those of Mr. Williamson, the Super-
intendent of Auckland; Mr. Creighton, the Provincial Secretary of
Auckland ; Major Heaphy, late Commissioner of Waste Lands for that
province ; and Mr. Vogel, the member for the Gold Fields —the three
first of whom had been instrumental in making the Land Claims
Arbitration Act 1867 nugatory; audit was at their instance that the
bill proposed last session had been postponed till it was too late in the
session to allow of its being passed. Mr. Carleton objected to propose
those members, on the ground that “ if Mr. Busby had been a member
of the House most assuredly he would not have put him upon the
committee to sit as a judge in his own case.” He stated that “he
could only assure the hon. member (Mr. Vogel) that he did not yet
know who was on one side of the House, or who was on the other, at
all events, in the composition of the committee, that was the last
thought that ever occurred to him. In framing the committee his first
desire was to select those honorable members who were likely to under-
stand the subject best, who were likely to take the most interest in


it, and who would give their constant attendance, as they had no
means of enforcing attendance.”
Mr. Carleton having asked leave to withdraw his motion, the petition
was in regular course referred to the Committee on Private Grievances.
On the 10th June I addressed to the Colonial Secretary the following
letter: —
“Sm, —I have the honor to enclose herewith a scheme for the set-
tlement of my case, which was suggested by Messrs. Clark and Mac-
farlane, and to which I earnestly beg your early and particular
attention :
“It was proposed to the Superintendent of Auckland by Mr. Mac-
farlane, who informed me that he could not prevail upon him and Mr.
Creighton to agree to it.
“ The following are the circumstances —Having accidently met Mr.
Macfarlane at the lodgings of Mr. Clark, I was informed by these
gentlemen that they had been discussing my case, and that they wished
some compromise could be agreed to, in order to prevent the matter
becoming a political question, as it had done last year. They invited
me to tell them my views—l replied that the sum of £36,800 had been
awarded to me, and that it could not be expected that I should be
satisfied with less than that sum, as the province had received my
property to the amount of between £50,000 and £60,000.
“ That as a majority of the Provincial Council had endorsed the pro-
ceedings of the Superintendent in placing the lands of the province having
any value, not only beyond the reach of the scrip, and thereby rendering
it useless, but in so disposing of a great part of the land as to place it
out of the power of the General Assembly to recover it, there appeared
to be no other alternative than the payment of the debt in money or
debentures : that fortunately the increase of the Provincial Eevenue
had been so great since the last session of the Assembly,that the
province could well afford to pay the debt in money, and thus not
only remove the difficulty which the Select Committee of last session
had experienced in finding the means to do me justice without en-
croaching on the funds of the colony, but enable the Superintendent
to attain the object which he had in view, in withdrawing from sale all
the lands previously offered, and which he explained in the following
words (see Hansard, 2nd September, 1869, page 114).
“ ‘ He (Mr. Williamson) had taken the steps he had done to save the
lands entrusted to his keeping for those immigrants who had actually
arrived in the province, or were coming out under the Act of the
last session of this House,’ and he added, ‘he had not taken the step
The increase on the last December and January quarters over the previous corresponding
quarters, amounted to no less than £43,719


lie did with, a view of depriving Mr. Busby of a single advantage
which he had derived from the award.’
“Mr. Clark referred to my having told him that I had offered to
take some out-of-the-way blocks of land which were not likely to be
soon required for settlers, and asked whether I would now be willing
to take those blocks. I replied in the affirmative, when he took a
pencil and noted down the particulars, which amounted to about
£9,000. I stated that in receiving the land thus referred to, and the
remainder either in money or debentures bearing interest, I should
give up to the Provincial Government all the land at Ngunguru, and
all that remained unsold at Wangarei, saving as much as would cover
the expense of the survey, although I had the best advice that my legal
title to that land was not impaired, by the difference which it now
appeared had existed between the arbitrators as to the effect of the
award. I now, sir, respectfully submit for the consideration of the
Government whether it is not more fitting that any Bill which may be
brought in for the purpose of dealing with the case should emanate
from the Government, rather than from a private member, seeing, as
was stated in the House, the question is one more affecting the relations
of the General Legislature to the Provincial authorities than to myself;
and seeing, also, that it is necessary to vindicate the signature of Her
Majesty’s representative, and the Legislation of the Parliament of the
Colony from the dishonor which has been cast upon them.”
On the 16th of the same month I addressed anotherjetter to the
Colonial Secretary in the following terms :
“ Sir, —Referring to my letter of the 10th instant, and the scheme
of settlement therein proposed, I have the honor to inform you that, in
addition to Messrs. Clark and Macfarlane, the following Auckland
members have authorized me to use their names as agreeing to the
proposed compromise, which they consider reasonable and fair to the
province, viz. : Messrs. Ball, Farmer, Carleton, Swan and Russell;
these seven forming a majority of the representatives of the Province
of Auckland, exclusive of the Superintendent and the members of his
Executive Council. Other members have expressed themselves as
favorable to the scheme so far as regards myself, but object to it as
considering that the colony and not the province should be held
liable.
“I have, &c.,
“James Busby.”
These letters were referred to the Committee on Petitions, which did
not make their report till the 24th of the month, when they
reported “ That it was unnecessary to enter into the detail of this well-
known case, and that the committee have no suggestion to offer to the


House upon the subject-matter of the petition.” On the Ist of July I
wrote to the new Colonial Secretary, referring to my letters of the 10th
and 16th June, and to the scheme proposed for the settlement of the
award enclosed in that of the 10th, and begged the early attention of
the Government to the case. In the meantime more than one member,
other than those who had allowed me to use their names, had urged Mr.
Williamson to agree’to a Draft Bill which had been prepared, embodying
the scheme recommended by the seven Auckland members, with this
alteration, that as he (Mr. Williamson) had objected to the three
blocks of land which he said were the most valuable in the province,
the whole compensation was to be made in money and debentures,
but without effect. He stated that he was prepared to carry out the
compromise which had been offered last session. On the 6th of July I
received a letter from the Colonial Secretary, in which it was stated
that “ the Government will offer no objection to the adoption of a
compromise of the kind mentioned by you, provided that compromise
be agreed to by His Honor the Superintendent of the Province of
Auckland, and a majority of the members of the House of Representa-
tives from Auckland.” On the Bth of the same month I wrote to the
Colonial Secretary that “ unless the influence of the Government should
prevail to bring about such an agreement, so far as- regards the Super-
intendent, there is no hope of its being effected, as it is understood
that he and several other Auckland members hold it to be their duty
to the province to use every means in their power to prevent the settle-
ment from becoming a Provincial charge,” that “ under such circum-
stances I trusted that I might be allowed to request the serious
attention of the Government to the words of the award, which appeared
to me to impose upon it an obligation to make provision for the
settlement of this debt, of so binding a character as to be incapable of
being set aside or impaired by any proviso or contingency whatever.”
The words to which I referred are the following :
“As to the second issue, we do award and adjudge that the said
James Busby has suffered special damages in respect of bis said claims,
as follows:—That is to say, at Ngunguru, £14,200; and Wangarei
and Waipu, £22,600 ; and we award and adjudge him the sum of
thirty-six thousand eight hundred pounds accordingly.”
I quoted from Hansard Mr. Williamson’s reasons for the course he
took —that “he (Mr. Williamson) published a notice, which he issued
by law, withdrawing from sale or selection all lands which had been
before that time open for sale or for selection,” to save the lands en-
trusted to his keeping for immigrants—and “ not with a view of
depriving Mr. Busby of a single advantage which he had derived
from the award.” I suggested “that it might possibly appear to the


Government that by recalling these passages to His Honor’s recollection
it might convince him that it was not altogether consistent with the views
therein expressed, to refuse his assent to an arrangement which would
not only leave the disposal of all the Provincial lands for the encourage-
ment of immigration, but add to those lands all that remains unsold at
Ngunguru (estimated at 45,000 acres), and at Wangarei and Waipu,
and still leave the pecuniary position of the province in a more satis-
factory state than it was when he considered it necessary to save the
lands for immigrants.”
To this letter I received from the Colonial Secretary, under date
the 20th July, the following answer :
Ist. “I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the Bth instant, and to express the regret of the Government that you
have not been able to arrive at a compromise in reference to the settle-
ment of your land claims.
2nd. “ The government are unable in the present state of the business
of the session, and under the great pressure of other matters, to devote
their attention, at present, to your case; but they will, during the
recess, if you continue unable in the mean time to effect a compromise,
consider the whole question with a view to its final determination.”
To this extraordinary letter I made the following reply :
“I beg to submit that I consider my land claims to be definitively
settled by the award of the arbitrators, and that were that award
against a party who was within the jurisdiction of a court of justice,
I should be put in possession, not only of the sum of £36,800 awarded
and adjudged to me, but of all the lands remaining unsold within the
boundaries of my original claims. My legal title to those lands,
which was suspended by an Act of the Imperial Parliament —the 28
and 29 Viet. ch. 63—was revived by the 9th clause of the local statute,
the ‘Land Claims Arbitration Act 1867.’ The sum of £36,800 was
awarded exclusively for special damages —the title to the land remain-
ing unsold was left untouched. While therefore, I felt myself entitled
to stand upon the legal interpretation of the award which the Act
provides, ‘ shall not be set aside on any grounds whatever,’ I readily
yielded to the suggestion of two of the members representing the
Auckland Province, to relinquish all claim to those lands on condition
that the sum awarded for special damage should be at once settled by
cash or debentures, which proposition was made as that of a settle-
ment which would leave no room for party action.
“ Before the receipt of your letter Mr. Clark had given notice that
he would ask leave to introduce the bill which I submitted to the
Government, and, if a petition, which I have prepared, to be heard at
the bar of the House, and which I trust will be favored by the


Government, be granted, I hope to convince the Government and a
large majority of the House that a due regard to the public faith can
leave them no alternative but that of agreeing to a proposal so advan-
tageous to the Province of Auckland, unlesss it be that of carrying out
the award in its integrity, by issuing grants for the lands remaining
unsold, as well as paying the sum of money awarded.
“With regard to the second clause of your letter, I would earnestly
deprecate the deferring till another session the final settlement of the
matter, as I am so situated that such a delay would be most disastrous,
if not absolutely ruinous, to me.
“I have, &c.,
“James Busby.”
To this letter the Colonial Secretary replied by acknowledging its
receipt, and again stating that it was “on the subject of my ‘land
claim,’ and by expressing his hope that the bill about to be
introduced will meet the approval of the General Assembly, and thus
enable it to definitely settle the question this session.”
Such was the state of the case when I petitioned to be heard at the
bar of the House, and when my petition was granted.


AN ADDRESS, &c.
Sir, —As I find that it has been stated that further legislation in my
case is unnecessary—that having passed the Act of 1867, and the
Government having given effect to it by the issue of the scrip—the
business of the legislature is at an end. I shall first address myself to
this point,—and I shall endeavor to illustrate the question by an
example of plain every-day business. A merchant ships to his agent
in London 500 bales of wool, and in payment of a debt to a local bank
he draws bills upon his agent for £5,000, secured upon the wool. The
ship is wrecked, the wool altogether lost, or so much injured that the
£5,000 cannot be realised from it. What would be said of the
merchant, if, when called upon by the bank to make other provision
for the bills, he should reply that he had already done all that was
required of him? This is precisely the case of the legislature in
relation to the scrip issued under the hand of the Governor. Or, to
take a more parallel case, and which may be used as an illustration
without being meant offensively. A tradesman issues his bills to a
large amount, and before they become due he removes from his ware-
house the goods which were looked to by his creditors as the means of
meeting the bills he had given them. What would be said of this
tradesman if he had shown his creditors some empty cases and casks,
and some articles which were left on the shelves because they were so
worthless that no one would buy them, and told them they might take
payment out of these? Wbuld not a jury very soon convince such
persons as the merchant, who shipped the wool, and the tradesman,
who removed his goods, of the necessity of making some other provision
for the payment of these bills? Yes: but it may be said “this is not a
ease for a jury”—no doubt it is somewhat different—for whereas there
are various circumstances which will set aside the verdict of a jury, the
law which created this tribunal, that of the arbitrators, has enacted
that its verdict “ shall be final and conclusive, and shall not be set
aside on any grounds whatever.”
I shall now beg the attention of the House to the very different
circumstances in which this question now conies before it —to what
existed during the last session. There were then two very serious
difficulties in the way of a satisfactory settlement, which are now
entirely removed. The first was the doubt raised by an authority
which was certainly entitled to the highest respect of this House, as
to the complete validity of the title to the land to which the arbitrators
found me entitled at Wangarei and Waipu, to the extent of 98,000
acres. Indeed it was stated by Mr. Bell, from his knowledge as Com-
missioner of Land Claims, that I never could have obtained a complete
title to all that land. And further, that if the arbitrators had had
before them all the documents connected with the history of the case,
they never could have made such an award.


The latter statement was completely met by Mr. Richmond, then one
of the Ministry, who stated, on the authority of Dr. Pollen, who had
been one of the arbitrators, that though the original documents had not
been before the arbitrators, they had authenticated copies of every
document of importance, and had entered into the fullest investigation
of every point connected with the case. And with regard to the former
statement, the survey of the boundaries of the land had been recently
completed under the directions of the surviving chiefs, who sold it, and
with the assistance of three of the young chiefs, who, in 1839 had
accompanied the purchaser over the boundaries to put him in possession
on the completion of the purchase.
The survey is certified by these men as well as by the Surveyor, Mr.
Wilson, a Justice of the Peace, and it is stated that they, the natives,
accompanied the Surveyor over the boundaries in order that the lines
of the Surveyor might coincide with the lines marked by them in 1839,
and that the plan is a correct representation of the same. The signa-
tures to the plan are also authenticated by Mr. Aubrey, the Resident
Magistrate of the district.
Several circumstances might be stated as the grounds of the opinion
expressed, that a complete title to the land could not have been
obtained. Perhaps it will be sufficient to state that when the purchase
was completed, it was my wish to retain the natives who were then
living on the land, and that I offered to such as should remain, to secure
to them and their children, so long as they should continue to occupy,
30 acres for each adult male. A copy of the deeds of lease, by which
this was done, was furnished to Commissioners Fisher, Godfrey, and
Richmond, when they investigated the case in 1841. The extent of land
thus disposed of was stated in the evidence taken before them, at
between 1,000 and 1,100 acres. But there was no reservation in the
deed of purchase, nor any break in the boundary line. In both respects
the conveyance of the whole of the land was as entire and complete as
words could make it. I beg here to read a short quotation from
a lecture lately delivered at Auckland by the Rev. Mr. Buller, a
Wesleyan Missionary, who lived for many years at the head quarters
of Tirernu, the principal chief, who sold me the land at Wangarei and
Waipu, and was there at the time the purchase was made, and which
I take from the Southern Cross of the 28th June last.
“Thus difficulties arose which were detrimental to the public welfare,
and were equally injurious to the natives. For instance, when a
company of Nova Scotians desired to form a settlement—that successful
body of settlers now at the Waipu—and the Government had no dis-
posable land for their purpose, application was made to native chiefs to
sell that which had already been bought from them by Mr. Busby.
Never was a land-purchase effected in a more open, straightforward,
or honorable way than that of Mr. Busby’s, although his title
was not legalised. An officer was sent to Te Tirarau, a
fine old chief, with some sense of honor —to re-buy this land.
He indignantly repelled the offer. ‘Do you think,’ he said, ‘I
will sell land twice over? It is no longer mine—go to Busby, to
whom it belongs.’ It is easy to see the effect of such repeated attempts
upon the native mind. While the Government falls into contempt,
they are demoralised, till their cupidity overrides their honesty. The


‘land question,’ more than anything else, forfeited the confidence of
the natives.”
The other difficulty was to find an acre of land worth 10s. for every
10s. of the scrip; for it was stated by one member of the select
committee of last session, and I believe agreed to by the rest, that they
were bound to find me an acre of land worth 10s. for every 10s. of the
scrip. The difficulty was how to do this, without having recourse to
the confiscated lands, which being the property of the colony, they
were unanimous in refusing to make available for the scrip, and there
were also other claims upon the provincial lands, all of which the
Superintendent had withdrawn from sale or selection, and wished to
retain for the encouragement of immigration. This difficulty is now
removed by the flourishing state of the Provincial Revenue, the increase
of which has been so great that the excess of the two last December
and March quarters, over the previous corresponding quarters, was no
less a sum than £43,719 —thus enabling the Provincial Government to
discharge the whole sum of £36,800 awarded by the arbitrators, and
still leave in favor of the Province a balance of nearly £7,000;
besides _ not only retaining all the provincial lands for the settlement
of immigrants, but adding thereto all the lands within my original
purchases remaining unsold at Ngunguru, Wangarei and Waipu,
which are to be given up to the Provincial Government as provided by
this bill, on the condition that the sum of £36,800 awarded for special
damages shall be paid in cash and debentures.
I shall now proceed to show the House by what means, and how
effectually, the Provincial authorities succeeded in rendering the Act
of the General Legislature of 1867- entirely nugatory—and in making
the bills issued to me under the hand of the Queen’s representative of
no value whatever. I hold in my hand two Provincial Government
Gazettes dated respectively the Bth and 12th May 1868. In the
former the Superintendent publishes a copy of the award of the
arbitrators, which he had received the day previously from the agent
of the General Government; and withdraws from sale or selection
a large number of town and suburban allotments; and sets apart
and reserves seven blocks of country land for certain immigrants who
have arrived or who are expected to arrive, and desire to settle in the
Province of Auckland; and in the ensuing Gazette of the 12th May he
sets apart five other blocks for the same purpose. In his speech on
the motion for the second reading of the bill, which was brought in last
session to give effect to the Land Claims Arbitration Act of the previous
session, Mr. Williamson states his reasons for the course he had taken.
He says: “in that Gazette he published a notice, which he issued by law,
withdrawing from sale or selection all lands which had been before
that time open for sale or for selection.” His reasons for this, as
stated at large, were that as authorised by the Waste Lands Act
of 1867, he had appointed agents in all places where he thought it
desirable, even in the Canadian dominion, for granting land orders
and that if the lands had remained open for selection they might have
been taken up by Mr. Busby’s land scrip and deprived him of the
opportunity of settling the immigrants which he expected. He also
stated that “ he had not taken the course he did with a view of deprivin'’’
Mr, Busby of a single advantage which he had derived from the


award,” although he (Mr. Williamson) considered that award as
excessive. Having by various postponements made it impossible to
pass the bill before the House last session, the Superintendent with
the concurrence of his Council appropriated, as appears from the
Gazette of the 24th October last no fewer than 1074 allotments of
town, suburban, and country lands, to endowments for education and
other local purposes. What the aggregate value of these allotments
may be it is difficult to estimate —but for some of them (as many as
15) I had offered £75 and £SO each. By this appropriation was
withdrawn property over which my scrip gave me a lien, and which no
one but myself could buy, unless willing to pay more for the allotments
than myself, to the amount of probably £20,000, and it was thus made
impossible for this Legislature to keep the public faith to me, unless
by paying in money the upset price of these allotments. _
I will now beg the attention of the House to certain proceedings of
the provincial authorities, which shew their determination to prevent
the investment of my scrip on any land having an exchangeable value.
I quote the following passage from what is termed the “Financial
Statement” of the Provincial Secretary to the Provincial Council, on
the 17th December last, as reported in the Southern Cross of the 24th
of that month : “ I may state that last session a sum of £4,000 odd
was appropriated for the purchase of native lands. This is one of the
legacies from former Governments, and is part of the money promised
to be paid by Mr. E. Graham, when he was Superintendent. lam
sorry to see that Mr. Graham is not in his place to-day, for I may have
to allude to his Superintendency in terms perhaps not quite so compli-
mentary as are usually heard in this Council. The Government thought
it was their bounden duty to keep faith with the natives in this matter.
The Kaipara natives have received a sum of £2,050, and the Govern-
ment have carried out their part of the bargain, at all events. Mr.
Busby thought that the Hotea block was a valuable piece of land, and
he put in his application for it. The Government, by the terms of the
purchase, would have had to pay a sum of £2,000, and £I,OOO a-year
for some six years, in addition to £2,000 originally paid to the natives,
and for what ? To give effect to the contract with the natives ? By no
means; but for the purpose of handing over the valuable block of land
to Mr. Busby, if they had proceeded without consideration. At this
time the Executive were attending to their duties in another place, and
I alone was left in Auckland. I thought it would be somewhat exceed-
ing my duty if I paid, under the circumstances, this large sum of
£2,050, without taking some guarantee that the claim of Mr. Busby
would not override the claims of the province, and I thought it would
be better to make the natives a present of the £2,000 and the land,
rather than pay an annual sum of £I,OOO for six years to hand it over
to Mr. Busby. The natives came with Mr. Eogan and I explained
it to him. Next day Dr. Pollen, the resident Minister, as he is called—
though I do not recognise the position of resident minister under the
Constitution—called up with Mr. Eogan, and, representing the General
Government, undertook that there should be no action taken by the
General Government prejudicial to the interest of the Provincial
Government; and he also stated that it was a time of difficulty with
the natives—in point of fact that it would be convenient to the General


Government if the money were paid. I said if the General Govern-
ment would not back the unwarranted claim of Mr. Busby to this land,
which had no foundation in equity, we would pay the money; and we
paid the money on the faith of that guarantee. The Council will see
that a sum of £5,188 must be paid next year to keep faith with the
natives. That liability was incurred by Mr. Superintendent Graham,
I believe, under Mr. Oarleton’s administration.”
From this statement it would appear that the Agent of the
General Government was called in to assist the Provincial Government
in defeating my claim.
I may state to the House that I had applied for land under every
variety of circumstances and situations, and had even offered to take
three large blocks situated far beyond any demand that was likely
to arise for settlers for a length of time, but invariably met with a
refusal. In one case I raised the question before the Supreme Court
at Auckland by applying to the Chief Justice for a Mandamus , to compel
the Commissioner of Lands to do the duty required of him by the 6th
clause of the Auckland Waste Lands Act.
Certain suburban allotments had been put up for sale, only one of
which was sold. By the 20th clause of the said act, any person who
tendered the upset price of these allotments within twelve months
of their having been offered for sale, and not knocked down to any
bidder, was entitled to become the purchaser of them. The words of
the clause are as follows:
“20. It shall be lawful for any person within 12 calendar months
after any auction to become the purchaser by private contract of any
land so put up for sale as aforesaid, and not knocked down to any
bidder, on paying for the same in cash the upset price at which the
same was put up for sale. Provided always that it shall be lawful for
the Superintendent, instead of permitting any land to be purchased as
authorised by the last two clauses, to cause any lands which shall not
have been already applied for under the said clauses to be put up again
to auction, giving such notice thereof as is hereinbefore provided in
respect of land to be offered at auction.”
(The 19th clause gave the same power of purchasing by private
contract “ any land in respect of which the deposit had been forfeited”).
When I tendered the sum of £1,025, being the upset price, for fifteen
allotments which had been put up for sale three months before, and
had not been knocked down to any bidder, and of which no notice in
the required form, that they would again be put up to auction, had
been given, I was much astonished on being told that I could not be
allowed to purchase them, as they had been withdrawn from sale. I
of course denied the power of the Superintendent or the Commissioner
of Lands to deal with those allotments otherwise than as the law
pointed out, and insisted on my right to be put in possession of them ;
and it was to enforce this right, than which I could conceive nothing
better established, that I had recourse to the Supreme Court.
The judgment of the Chief Justice was concluded in the following
words:—
“ Eeference was made to the general nature of the act which Mr.
Tole (the Commissioner) is to be commanded to do. The act or duty
is expressed in the precise language which the Commissioner has


dictated as sufficient. Moreover, this Court directs the act to be done
in general but distinct terms, but does not enter into details to direct the
mode of doing it. Upon the whole, I am of opinion that the objec-
tions to the issuing of this writ of mandamus fail, and that the rule
must be, as it is, made absolute.”
Upon one of the objections which was ingeniously—more ingeniously
than ingenuously —urged by Counsel, the judgment of the Court “had
wavered,” and the Chief Justice delivered himself in the following
terms:—
“ Upon the main remaining question, viz. whether these lands come
within the description of lands open to sale or selection from which
Mr. Busby is entitled to select and tender his scrip in payment, I
confess that my own reasoning has wavered in doubt, and I should
pledge the judgment of this Court with still greater diffidence, did I
not feel that, if that judgment should be wrong, the Court of Appeal
will correct it.”
The Counsel had assumed that scrip as created by the Land Claims
Arbitration Act, and “land orders” issued under the Waste Lands Act,
were corelative terms, and carried on his argument on that assumption.
Whereas the land orders were for a certain number of acres of land,
subject to certain conditions ; but the scrip was for money, each piece
being £5O sterling, and in all respects equal to a £5O note in the
purchase of land. I will beg to read to the House a minute which I
wrote on reading the judgment of the Chief Justice:—
“ THE QTJEEH Y. TOLE.
“ A distinction which appears to have escaped the notice of the Chief
Justice, but which nevertheless appears to be a very material one, is
the following, viz., that there is no analogy between the ‘ land orders ’
issued to immigrants under the provisions of the Waste Lands Act, and,
the scrip issued under the Land Claims Arbitration Act, 1867.
“ The land orders issued to immigrants are subject to limitations and
conditions, from which the scrip issued under the Land Claims Amend-
ment Act are wholly free.
“ The number of acres specified in the land orders must be selected
either out of any special settlement land, or out of any general country
land that may at the time be open for selection.
“ The selection must be made within six months after the arrival of
the immigrant in the province, or otherwise the land order shall be null
and void.
“Any selection made by an immigrant can only be finally granted
on the condition of his having bona fide occupied the land selected, for
a period of two years at least.
“ The land order is only available for lands open for selection, but
not for lands open for sale.
“The ‘scrip’ issued for public works is ‘available as cash,’ and
consequently for ‘ any town, suburban, or general country land, which
may be open for sale.’ But it must be exercised within three months.
“From all these limitations and conditions, the scrip issued under
the Land Claims Arbitration Act is wholly free. The terms on which
it is issued override all these conditions and restrictions, and make it
available under all circumstances under which cash would be available.


It represents cash, and not acres of land, being in fact the payment of
a debt, whereas the ‘land orders’ are privileges granted, subject to
conditions which confine the selection to country land, and limitations
to enforce the conditions to which they are subject.”
When the subject was before this House the last Session, the Select
Committee to which it was referred, and who investigated the whole
question with great care, reported that the former Act having been
rendered nugatory by the action of the Superintendent, further Legis-
lation had become necessary, and a bill was brought in embodying the
recommendations of their report, by which it was provided that all
the lands in the province should be for twelve months appropriated
exclusively to the satisfaction of the scrip, reserving only the rights of
persons who had received land orders, or should have received them
within a period sufficient for the agents to have received instructions to
issue no more land orders. By this means the scrip could have been
invested at its full value—which is impossible now; for besides the
1074 allotments before alluded to, some land has been sold for money,
■ and probably many land orders have been issued—-as notwithstanding
that it was moved in the Provincial Council on the 17th June, 1868,
“ that it is desirable that the Provincial Q-overnment should take im-
mediate steps to cancel the appointments of its emigration agents in
England and elsewhere,” it was not till the sth December following,
that a circular, was issued to those agents that that they were “to
cease after the expiration of three months from the date in which you
shall receive this circular, to issue any land orders under the provisions-
of the Auckland Waste Lands Act, 1867, until otherwise advised.”
So that it is probable the issue of these land orders may in some places
be continued to this day.
Sir, no one did more, perhaps no one so mnch, in the early days of
the Provincial Council to induce that body to make provision, at a
period when it could have been done effectually, for the maintenance of
educational establishments, out of the Waste Lands of the Province,,
as myself. I had seen the results of such a provision in the New
England States where I collected all the statistics of education which
had been published in those states, and circulated them amongst the
people of Auckland. But however anxious for the cause of education
I cannot afford to have it provided for at my expense. Those 1074
allotments and all the land which has been sold since the date of the
award—and all the land orders which have been issued since the
agents might have been instructed to issue no more, are as much a
deprivation of my property as if their value had been deducted from
the sum of £36,800 awarded to me.
Having, Sir, as I trust, demonstrated the necessity for the settle-
ment of this award in cash, if not to the whole, at least to the extent
of one half of its amount, I shall proceed to notice some observations
which have been made as to the value of the scrip in the market.
It surely was not the intention of the Legislature to pay this debt in
assignats or greenbacks. Each scrip represented £SO sterling—and if I
could not get land worth £SO sterling for each scrip I was entitled to
its value in money. But in point of fact, though at the time when I
agreed to the terms of the arbitration, I was in doubt as to the value of
the land over which the scrip was to be exercised, my opinion was


entirely changed when by careful enquiries in various directions, I
became better informed on that subject—and after I had been enjoined
by’my principal creditor not to sacrifice the scrip, as he had been
advised by a very old Auckland colonist that it was sure to become
valuable, I then determined to invest the scrip in the purchase of land
—and to purchase land for settlers who wished to add to their property,
taking a mortgage on their property for three-fourths of the purchase
money on the payment of one-fourth —or for the whole purchase
money provided the mortgage should be made to cover some
improved lands besides. In this way, Sir, I think it will be very
evident that I could have realized the full value of the scrip—if not a
great deal more, considering the additional value which the gold fields
have given to all kinds of property in the province.
But, Sir, there is another circumstance which ought not to be lost
sight of—that when the Land Claims Arbitration Act was passed it was
understood that the scrip would run over the confiscated lands, as
well as over the other lands within the Province—and I entered into
arbitration on that condition. The following is the letter which I wrote
to the Colonial Secretary, agreeing that my claims against the Govern-
ment should be settled by arbitration :
“Auckland, 11th October, 1867.
“ Sie, —Since I posted my letter to you of the 7th instant in relation
to the Land Claims Arbitration Act, 1867, I have seen the draft of an
Act to enable the Governor to make regulations for the disposal of the
confiscated lands, which seems to me to remove the ambiguity which
was supposed to attach to the 9th clause of the above Act, and to
make the scrip to be issued by the arbitrators under that Act available
to the full extent over the confiscated lands.
On this assumption, aud on the assumption that the Bill has passed
the Legislature, without any alteration which would affect the value of
the scrip, I think it best to lose no time in nominating an arbitrator,
and I beg that you will be pleased at your earliest convenience to
communicate to Mr. Samuel Jackson or to myself, the name of the
arbitrator appointed by the Government.*
“ I have, &c.,
“James Busby.”
Then again, I would remind the House that this scrip was the resti-
tution, and only the restitution in part, of property of which I had been
deprived. Why the arbitrators decided on giving me only £36,800,
when they had evidence before them that the Government had disposed
of my property to the amount of upwards of £50,000, I have never
learned. Perhaps it was on the same grounds that the Nova Scotian set-
tlers on my land maintained that the Government had done right in
depriving me of that land; ‘ ‘ for what, ”as one of them said to a friend of
mine, “ could he do with so much ? ” To this my friend replied: “ Could
he not have sold it to you ? And could he not have given each of you a
cow or two on the thirds, which is more than the Government would
do for you.”
The Provincial Authorities express their willingness now to carry out
the award according, as they say, to the intention of the arbitrators.
♦ The Arbitrator was appointed by a separate letter.


But with the best intentions of doing so, I have shewn that that is now
impossible. But what in reality are their intentions as shown by the
bill now before the House. Why, to restrict the operation of the scrip
to the lands which were open for sale or selection at the time the
award was made, and to make the scrip available for twelve months—
whereas it now runs over every acre of land in possession of the
province, and can be exercised at any time —be it at ever so late a
period—that the lands are brought into the market. The effect would
be to make the scrip worth from 18d. to 2s. in the pound of its real
value.
Now what is this but an act of repudiation ? an ex post facto law
to destroy the obligations of a solemn contract, which a specific law
has enacted “ shall not ho set aside on any grounds ichatever .” There is
nothing can be more abhorrent to the jurisprudence of every civilized
country than a law of this nature, seeing that it is a violation of
public faith, the maintenance of which is the only security for
property.
It is the characteristic of the States of America, of those of New
England at least, the constitutions of which are subject to revisal, in
some States at regular periods, in others when occasions appear to call
for it—that amongst the restrictions laid upon the Legislature by
the conventions of the people, from which, as the sovereigns, they
derive their powers, there is none more remarkable than this—“ That
they shall not pass any law impairing the obligations of contracts. ”
This, Sir, is a law not simply to impair, but absolutely to destroy
obligations of a character than which it is impossible to imagine any-
thing more binding.
Contrast this with the bill which was brought in by Mr. Clark. It
is a voluntary office to relinquish legal rights of great value, namely,
all the land to which I have been found entitled at Ngunguru, Wangarei,
and Waipu, on condition of the immediate settlement of the sum of
£36,800 awarded for special damages, in cash and debentures. If it
be said that it was not the intention of the Arbitrators that I should
have both the money and the land, —I reply, that it now appears that
such was not the intention of one of the Arbitrators. But I am
speaking now of legal rights, which are established by the award
itself; and no judge —if this question were brought into a Court of
Judicature—would look beyond the plain meaning of the words of the
award, or entertain any suggestion of what was or might have been
the intention of one or both of the Arbitrators. But look farther than
the legal rights, look at the equities of the case. There is the most
incontestible evidence that the Government realized my property to an
amount nearer to £60,000 than to £50,000. The sum of £36,800 was
awarded exclusively for special damages. But there was besides
evidence before the Arbitrators that the property in an investment of
£3,500 in a timber district was entirely lost through the conduct of
the Government, and that a loss of £1,218 had been sustained by the
importation of two cargoes of sheep and cattle, which was also in great
part attributable to the Government. To what a sum would these
losses amount at the present date ?
A late member of this House, the hon. Mr. O’Neill, made an
observation in the course of the debate last year, which illustrates in a


striking manner the injustice of which I have been made the victim.
“ He asked what return would Mr. Busby have got for his money if it
had been invested in town allotments in Auckland ? He knew of an
instance where an allotment which had been purchased at the first sale
for £250, was now worth £SOO a year.” The allotment in question was
given by Mr. John Blackett as an endowment for two scholarships in
St. John’s College. I was in England when he received a letter from
the Bishop of New Zealand or Sir William Martin, I forget which,
informing him that the rents of that allotment now amounted to £6OO
a year, and asking his advice how it should be disposed of, as its
amount was now out of all proportion to the purpose for which it was
intended. The allotment had been let on lease for 21 years at the rent
of £SO. It was then producing, as appears from the report of the
Diocesan Synod, about £640 a year. Now I leave it to the House to
say what my investment, which at this day amounts —at 10 per cent,
interest —to upwards of £40,000, would have amounted to if invested
at 20 per cent, for the first 21 years, and afterwards at 150 per. cent.
Why, sir, it would have amounted to several hundred thousands of
pounds. And was I not entitled to look for as good a return for my
money invested in a country where there was no law to protect
property, as if it had been invested under the protection of British
laws ? I think it will be admitted that the profit ought to have been
greater, in proportion to the greater risk.
Sir, I know it is in the nature of falsehood, if continually reiterated,
to be accepted as truth, and that the convictions thus established
become, in some minds, so fixed that they will listen to nothing which
will disturb them. If there are such in this House, I would only ask
them to consider the effects upon the credit of the Colony of a repudi-
ation of this debt, which the rejection of the one bill, or the adoption
of the other bill now before the House, would amount to. In turning
over some papers the other day, I met with the following extract from
the Sydney Morning Herald, a paper which, probably, for moral
influence, if not for the extent of circulation, stands at the head
of the Australian journals :
“ The reparation made to Mr. James Busby by the Government of
New Zealand is one of the most remarkable instances of justice
delayed, but not finally denied, that we have met with for some years
past. There are no new facts elicited by the recent discussions. Eor
many years, with a resolution thoroughly characteristic, Mr. Busby
has asserted his rights and reiterated his claims. They have been before
the public in various forms. They have been admitted by one officer
of the Government and denied, if not repudiated, by another. But it
is impossible to. resist the truth, if there be only power to kindle its
light and to keep alive the flame. The parable of the Unjust Judge
is a lesson for all time. Those who neither fear God nor regard man,
ultimately find greater convenience in doing justice than in doing
wrong. This is seen in private, but more frequently in national
affairs. The patriot who takes up a just cause and employs right
means, unless death interpose, has an engine that will batter down the
strongest door, and make resistance impossible.
“ The case in question lies indeed in a very narrow compass. Mr,
Busby bought under the system of the times a considerable quantity


of land at New Zealand. It is not alleged either that he did not pay
the purchase money, or that the chiefs who sold to him were dissatisfied
at the time of their bargain ; or that they received less than the cur-
rent price ; or that there were any of those elements of fraud by which
a covenant can be set aside. But when in possession of all this land
the Government administered by Sir George Grey appropriated to the
uses of the Government itself land acquired under regulations which
existed before the assumption of authority by the Crown in New
Zealand. Ifc does not follow because Sir George Grey is proved to
have done wrong that this was his purpose, or that he was not carry-
ing out a policy which had been strongly asserted and adopted by
British authorities.
“ Our readers will recollect that there were purchases made of a very
odd kind in the time of Sir George Gipps, and a memorable speech
delivered by that distinguished Governor exposed a transaction in which
Mr. Wentworth was a chief party, which would have given a large
tract at half a farthing an acre.
“ The arbitrators find that Mr. Busby is entitled to 152,374 acres of
land, and £36,800 for special damages in respect of his claims.
There is something glorious in the nature of compound interest to
those who share in its pleasant results. Even boys learn this
in their early stages of arithmetic, by which they demonstrate
that a small coin would in the course of a given, and not very
great number of years, amount to a mass larger than the
globe. There are, however, many who have been compelled
to study this science of compound interest on the darker side. Com-
pensation must take into account the length of time which has elapsed
during the litigation, and place the claimant in the position he might
have occupied if his money had been invested, and all his investments
had leen safe.
“ It is honorable to the people of New Zealand that they have recog-
nised claims which are well founded, however onerous. They may
have been deferred, but it is something that under the regime of
responsible government burdens entailed by the policy of former years
have not been cast aside. People who keep faith, and give signal
examples of this practice, can never stand ill with the monetary world ;
for they have that virtue which, beyond all others, it is most disposed
to prize. There are no limits to credit which is sustained by confidence,
and built not merely upon the power, but the established will, to do
right.”
Well, Sir, if there is any member of this House who has had the
misfortune to be subject to interest accumulating upon interest, he
will not be surprised to learn that during the nine-and-twenty years
which I have spent in bringing this case to its present issue, I have
incurred debts to the amount of between £ll,OOO and £12,000,
besides spending many years of my life, exclusively in this pursuit. I
shall now conclude what I have had to say as regards my pecuniary
interests. If others have been guilty of oppression and wrong, it is
your privilege—the God-like privilege—to relieve the oppressed, and
to make restitution for the wrong, which I trust you will not do
grudgingly, but in a spirit of truth and liberality.


But I have now, Sir, to ask the further forbearance of the House
in regard to a matter which every right thinking man values much more
highly than pecuniary interests —my good name. I have read, Sir,
in a volume, which is published under the sanction of this House, a
tissue of charges of almost every degree of criminality from that of
being a greater traitor to my Sovereign than Wiremu Tamihana —the
man who levied war upon the Queen, and set up a king within her
dominions, to that of attempting to overreach persons whom J invited
to purchase my scrip by misrepresenting its value. This paltry charge has
been twice uttered in this House, and repeated in a letter to the Colonial
Secretary—and then published in the newspapers. It is the habit of
such persons to measure their neighbor’s corn by their own bushel. And
what makes all this the more aggravating is the fact that when these
charges were uttered there were documents on the table which would
have proved that they were in every instance without any foundation
whatever —I trust the House will permit me to read these charges in
order that they may see of how grave a character they are. I read
from the reports of Hansard on the 10th September, 1868, pages
262, 263.
“He (Mr. Williamson) must say that the delay which had taken
place with regard to the satisfaction of Mr. Busby’s claims lay at his
own door, and that gentleman himself was the great obstruction to the
settlement of his own claims. His claims originated at a time when he
was the representative of the Crown in this colony, and it might bo
recollected, at all events by those who had been connected with the
New Zealand Company, that Mr. Busby’s claims originated at a time
when, in the northern parts of New Zealand, there existed what were
called ‘ the Independent Chiefs of the North.’ By the system which
existed under the rule of the Independent Chiefs of the North, Mr.
Busby was agent at that time, he was the instrument in bringing about
that which he (Mr. Williamson) believed to have been the foundation of
the king movement in this colony. * * * He thought that Mr.
Busby’s sense of justice, and he had always thought so, ought to have
stood between him and the course he had taken, when he was British
Resident in New Zealand. He took another course: he brought
thirty-seven chiefs around him, and persuaded them to sign a declara-
tion of independence ; he used his influence with half-informed officials
of the Crown to come to New Zealand and to recognise their flag; and
while they were in that position, knowing that he was at the same time
advising the Queen’s Government to take possession of New Zealand,
and prevent the irregular colonization of it; he went in and purchased
those extensive tracts of land, for which at the end of his days he was
about to receive an amount of compensation that would tend greatly
to cripple the already crippled resources of the Province of Auckland.
What was Mr. Busby’s course throughout? did he present himself
before the commissioners, Mr. Richmond and Mr. Godfrey ? No ;he
rested his claim at that time upon the fact that he had purchased the
land from independent chiefs, members of an independent nation. Read
his speech at the bar of the Council of New South Wales; read his
speech afterwards when admitted to the bar of this Assembly. They would
find that he rested his claim upon the fact that he had purchased from
the independent chiefs of an independent nation. He (Mr. William-


son) was at Hamilton not long ago, and the honorable member for
Newton (Mr. Graham) was also there, and they witnessed the great
king maker of New Zealand, the late William Thompson, going
before the Judge of the Land Court and presenting his title—his
native title—his father’s heritage—handed down to him from father to
son ; he presented his title before the judge at a time when he was
suspected of rebellion to the Queen (sic). That man was a more loyal
subject to the Queen of England than Mr. Busby had proved himself
to be throughout the course of his history, including the time when he
was British Resident of this colony. If Mr. Busby had taken the same
course which William Thompson had taken, that would have been the
course for a loyal subject of the Queen of England to have taken: it
would have been a recognition, on his part, of the legalized course
which had been established in the colony for the settlement of the early
claims. He did not do so ; he set at nought, year after year, the
opportunities he had of presenting his claims to the Commissioners.
Under the Land Claims Final Settlement Act, 1856, he had an oppor-
tunity again afforded to him of presenting his claims. They were
gazetted, and he was called upon according to the terms of the Act
within a certain time to appear and establish his right to the lands
which he claimed. Did he do so ? No, on one or two occasions he
presented his claims to the Commissioners, but the great bulk of his
claim at Wangarei, for which he claimed compensation now, was never
submitted to the Court of the Land Claims Commissioners. Now, at
the end of his days, he came here, and this House had endeavoured to
do what they could, notwithstanding his contumacy, and notwith-
standing the manner in which he had treated the Courts from the
beginning, and notwithstanding the insult, the injury, the defamation
poured out against almost every public man in the country—notwith-
standing all that, this House, in its mercy to him, passed a bill last
session with his (Mr. Williamson’s) concurrence to give him compen-
sation.
****««««***#
“Mr. Busby was about to buy land which was withdrawn long
before that time, and which was situated in Parnell —he advertised
his scrip—it was offered for sale to persons; and the wording of Mr.
Busby’s advertisement was not in accordance with that which should
have proceeded from him under the circumstances. He carefully kept
out of the advertisement the words which appeared in the Act, ‘ Lands
open for sale or selection.’”
Well, Sir, with regard to any official conduct while British Resident,
I had laid on the table documents which proved that I had left the
public service with honor. With such testimonials, both from the
Secretary of State and from my immediate superior, the Governor of
New South Wales, as might be satisfactory to any man ; besides
offers of further employment in a suitable situation, which offers were
renewed by the Secretary of State, Lord Stanley, six years after.
Before my unfortunate connexion with New Zealand, I had filled
some of the highest offices and been employed in some of the
most confidential services in that colony; and no man of my
age and station ever had a better prospect of reaching the highest
promotion which the Colonial Department has to bestow ; and if these


prospects tailed, my consolation is that it never was alleged that I
had failed in any duty—but that offence was taken .at my determination
to make the truth known, however unacceptable to my immediate
superiors.
With regard to my having purchased land, I had laid upon the
table despatches from the Government of New South Wales, which
shewed that if any authority had been necessary, I had the fullest
authority to purchase land to any extent I pleased, and that when
commissioners were appointed, as I had recommended two years
before, I was the second to submit to them my titles for investigation.
It was not competent to the British Government to say to me, or to
any other of Her Majesty’s subjects, “You shall not purchase land in
New Zealand.” It was a matter in which they had no jurisdiction.
But they might have said to me “if you purchase land in New
Zealand you cannot continue to represent the British Government
there.” Did they do so? Certainly not—on the contrary every
encouragement was given to the purchase of land by British subjects
as one of the most effectual modes of civilizing the country—and if,
Sir, instead of purchasing no more land than was necessary to obtain
a return from the capital I was prepared to invest in it, I had
purchased the whole territory of the united tribes from the Gulf of
Hauraki to the North Cape, and allowed myself, as was at one time
seriously proposed to me by some of the leading chiefs, to be elected
their king, I have no idea that the British Government would have
interfered in the matter. I am quite sure that by the comity of
nations they would have had no right to do so ; and the example of
the late Sir James Brooke is too recent to allow of any grounds for
dispute. He not only became an independent sovereign, but continued
to hold a high diplomatic office under the British Government. Then,
Sir, with regard to the scrip—that I had not advertised it as only
available for the purchase of lands open for sale or selection.
Would money have done more ? Certainly no person could have
purchased for money any lands that were not open for sale or
selection ; and the scrip was in every respect, for the purchase of
land, equivalent to money.
As to the more serious charges, they had the effect of making me
do what I had not done for perhaps thirty years—look into the
despatches which I had addressed to the British Government while
British Eesident in New Zealand, and I rose from their perusal with
the most intense satisfaction, perhaps with some degree of pride, from
the conviction that when the early history of New Zealand should
come to be written, these despatches, which by the direction of the
Secretary of State were sent to the Colonial Office in England, as well
as to the Governor of New South Wales, would prove that I had at
least deserved from the Government of New Zealand very different
treatment from what I have met with.
In a letter to the hon. member for the Bay of Islands, which was read to
the House last session, and printed in Hansard , I referred to a pamphlet
which had been laid upon the table of the House, as containing,
amongst other tracts, a Memoir which I addressed to Lord Goderich in
1831, which by the acknowledgment of Mr. Under Secretary Hay, first
directed the attention of the British Government to the importance to


British interests of these islands, and led to my appointment by King
William IY. as His Majesty’s Resident in this country. I stated in that
letter that I had good grounds for believing that the Memoir in
question had saved this country from becoming a province of France,
instead of a British colony. But on reading the account of my early
proceedings, which, when I looked into them a few months ago, were
almost as new to me as they would be to any member of this House,
I saw that I had much better grounds for expressing a belief that to
my instrumentality it is owing that these Islands are now a portion of
the Queen’s dominions, instead of a dependency of France. I hope the
House will not object to a short chapter in the history of those times.
I am charged with having brought together thirty-seven chiefs and
induced them to sign a Declaration of Independence as a means of
establishing my right to the lands for which I am now about to receive
compensation. Now what are the facts ? The purchase of these lands,
though the negotiation was commenced eighteen months earlier, was
not completed till December 1839. The Declaration of Independence
was made on the 20th October, 1835, and the union of the tribes, of
which the declaration was a sequence, took place in the month of March
of the same year, so that if this charge were true, the effect would have
occurred from four to five years before the cause.
I had not been long in New Zealand before I discovered that it was
impossible to transact business with any one chief, and that the first
step toward establishing the form of a government was , such a con-
federation of the tribes, as might induce each chief to relinquish his
separate jurisdiction, and appoint a committee of the whole to act
with me in business which concerned them all. The account of this
transaction is better given in an extract from what would appear to be
a Scotch newspaper, than any that I could now give of it. The paper
from which I read was found amongst the papers of a cousin of mine,
a lady with whose family the honorable member for the Bay of Islands
did me the favor to become acquainted on his last visit to England.
It was sent to me by her husband after her death, which occurred in
1866:
“FIRST PARLIAMENT AT NEW ZEALAND.
“By the arrival of the Japan, South Seaman, from the Bay of
Islands, we have an account of an interesting transaction which
occurred at that place in March last, namely the adoption of a national
flag by the New Zealand chiefs. It appears that several large vessels
had been built in that country by the enterprise of British subjects,
which had been seized by custom-house officers on their arrival at
Sydney, having been, though owned by subjects of great Britain,
neither built in a British possession, nor in a country where a recognised
government existed, from whose flag they might have claimed
protection. Under these circumstances, Mr. Busby, the British
Resident at New Zealand, had suggested to the Governor of New
South Wales the expediency of procuring the chiefs of New Zealand to
adopt a flag, which should be respected as the flag of an independent
nation, and under the protection of which, ships built at New Zealand
might trade to the British possessions; and General Bourke, the present
governor of New South Wales, having coincided in these views, had


taken the opportunity of his Majesty’s ship the Alligator proceeding to
New Zealand, to forward to the British Resident three flags from which
the chiefs might select a flag for their country. The chiefs accord-
ingly assembled, to the number of between twenty and thirty,
with a large body of followers; and what we believe may be called
the first New Zealand Parliament, was held under a large awning
formed by sails tfom his Majesty’s ship Alligator, near the house in
progress of erection for the British Resident. The three flags having
been exhibited, Mr. Busby addressed the chiefs on the nature and
importance of the business for which they were assembled, and
recommended each chief to give his vote freely for the flag which he
preferred ; a recommendation which they fully acted up to, as the flag
finally chosen was only carried by a majority of two votes. On being
hoisted as the flag of New Zealend, it was saluted by the frigate with
twenty-one guns.
“At the time of this occurrence, eleven British and three American
ships were at the Bay of Islands, and it will surprise most of our
reader's to learn, that from fifty to sixty persons of respectability, and
all, with two or three exceptions, British subjects, were assembled to
witness the ceremony. This party, which consisted of the officers of
the Alligator, the commanders of the ships in the harbor, missionaries
and respectable settlers, sat down after the conclusion of the ceremony
to an entertainment which was served up in one of the rooms of the
Resident’s house, finished off for the occasion by the aid of the flags of
the ship of war. The chiefs and their followers were entertained in a
different fashion, being abundantly supplied with a mess of boiled flour
and sugar, with which they appeared better pleased than they probably
might have been if all the science of M. Tide himself had been put in
requisition for the gratification of their palates.”
This union was at least the nucleus of a Government, a basis for
future organisation—and it was not long before its great importance
was manifested. In the month of October, 1835 I received a letter
under a broad seal, with devices emblematic of sovereignty, and the
words “ Sovereign Chief of New Zealand.” The letter was dated from
Otaheite, and signed “ Charles Baron de Thierry,” and announced his
intention to come to New Zealand to assume his sovereignty over the
territories which had been purchased for him by the Rev. Mr.
Kendall, one of the early missionaries of the Church Missionary
Society at the Bay of Islands, with adequate force to maintain his
jurisdiction. I think I will best enable the House to judge of this
person by reading some extracts from a letter which he addressed to
Captain Fitzroy, subsequently Governor of this Colony-—with a copy
of which Captain Fitzroy favored me on his arrival in the Bay of
Islands in command of Her Majesty’s surveying ship the Beagle.
The letter is dated Otaheite, 19th November, 1835, and noted by
Captain Fitzroy as received on the 22nd of that month. The letter
appears to have been written in vindication of his character and
proceedings from some doubts which Captain Fitzroy would appear to
have expressed respecting them. It is a very long letter, and I shall
only quote two or three paragraphs from it. It begins: —
“ It may be expedient, in consequence of our conversation to-day, to
address you in my double birthright of English gentleman and French


nobleman, in order to enable you, an officer commanding one of His
Majesty’s ships of war, to make any report which your duty may
dictate to His Britannic Majesty’s Government.
“By birth from emigrant nobles, I am a French nobleman,
having all the rights of a Frenchman, I am godson to his
majesty Charles X., and was formerly attache to the French embassy in
London under the Marquis d’Ormonde, in 1816. Born in England (in
Portman Square, in 1794), I have the rights of an Englishman; I
have been an officer in H.B.M.’s 23rd light dragoons, for the truth of
which consult the army list of 1815 and 1816, and the records in the
Commander in Chief’s office.
“ That I had the honor of being well known to His late Majesty,
and to H.E.H. the Duke of York you can know from the Duke’s
testamentary executor, Colonel Stephenson.”
Then follows a long list of the most distinguished names in Europe,
beginning with the King and Eoyal family of Holland, and ending
with Louis Phillippe, King of the French; all of whom, he says, however
high their rank, will gladly bear witness to the truth of his statements,
and, to the latter, he says, “he will, in case of necessity, appeal, not
only for the truth of his statements, but for protection.”
“As a sovereign chief of New Zealand I have declared my indepen-
dence, and I have assumed my own independent flag. This I have a
right to do by all the laws of nations. If H.M. the King of England
objects that I was born a British subject, I will claim the right as a
French noble.
“lam no pirate, no obscure adventurer; I am a philanthropist,
and go forward strong in the protection of God, to save the people of
New Zealand and Nuhuheva from the miseries that have hitherto
been accumulated on the devoted heads of aboriginal people.
“ You said you would take particular care to warn the people of
New Zealand, and the Governor of New South Wales of me; that
you considered me a dangerous personage, who might do much evil
and no good, &c.”
After a further enumeration of families of rank, with whom he had
been in habits of intercourse in England, he concludes by saying,
“ Now, sir, I have given you a list of all my principal residences for
thirty years past to the present day, and in the course of your future
voyages and travels you may enquire concerning me.”
“Leaving you to your meditations,
“I am, Sir,
“ (Signed) Thierry.”
It will appear from the dates that before this letter was written, I
had taken effectual steps to prevent the establishment of any foreign
authority in New Zealand. I had assembled the chiefs of the confed-
eration, and informed them of the expected arrival of a Frenchman,
who claimed to be a king over a part of their territories, in virtue of
a purchase of land made for him by the Eev. Mr. Kendall; and repre-
sented to them that by their articles of union, as confederated tribes,
they had bound themselves to prevent the assumption of any authority
within their territories that did not proceed from themselves; and
that it was necessary to be on their guard against the arrival of this
person, and his intention to make himself a king over them. I did


this, sir, from a conviction that a man of education and knowledge of
the world might, even with a very small following, and limited means,
hy joining himself to one of the tribes —which were then in a state
of warfare with their neighbors—have acquired such an ascendency
over them as to have ultimately established himself in his assumed
sovereignty, and, on the first difficulty occurring, have appealed to
France, with the almost certain result of making these islands a
French Province. These are the reasons set down in my despatches for
causing the natives to issue a declaration of their independence, which
effectually prevented the assumption by the Baron de Thierry of any
sovereign jurisdiction. The declaration concluded by appealing to the
King of England, expressing their love for him, and their gratification
at his having acknowledged their flag; and as they protected his
subjects who were settled in their country or came there to trade, by
praying that he would continue to be a parent for them in their child-
hood as a nation, lest their chieftainship should be destroyed.
These proceedings of mine were but scantily approved by my imme-
diate superior, the Governor of. New South Wales.
On communicating the declaration of independence to him, he
objected to the second article as being aimed at the Additional Resi-
dent, who, in conjunction with several of the chiefs at Hokianga, had
passed what they called a law, to prevent the importation of spirits,
forgetful that these chiefs, by the articles of confederation, had relin-
quished any separate jurisdiction in such matters —which proceedings
had been communicated direct to Sir Richard Bourke, and had been
approved by him without previous reference to me, although the
Additional Resident had no authority to institute any proceedings of
that nature without my sanction. But my proceedings, both with regard
to the confederation of the tribes and the declaration of independence,
received the full approval of His Majesty and his Government in
England, as will appear from the following despatches: —
“ Downing street, 21st December, 1834.
“ Major General Bourke, C. 8., &c. &c. &c.
“ —I have had the honor to lay before the King your despatch
No. 39, of the 29th of April last, respecting your proceedings in con-
currence with your Council, and in communication with the British
Resident at New Zealand, for complying with the wishes of the chiefs
of those Islands, to adopt a national flag in their collective capacity,
and recommending that after the adoption and approval of this flag,
the registers of vessels built in that country granted by the chiefs
and certified by the British Resident, should be considered as valid
instruments, and respected as such, in the intercourse which those
vessels may hold with the British possessions.
“ I am commanded by His Majesty to signify to you his gracious
approbation of the course which you have pursued in these respects,
and I have at the same time to forward for your information the copy
of a letter from the Admiralty in answer to one from this department,
by which you will perceive that their lordships have conveyed the
necessary directions upon the subject to the Admiral commanding in
chief on the East India station.
“I am, &c.
“ (Signed) Aberdeen."


“ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, New South Wales,
“ 19th November, 1836.
“ To James Busby, Esq., British Resident at New Zealand.
“ Sir, —I am directed by his Excellency Sir Richard Bourke to
inform you with reference to the postscript* to your letter of the 30th
October 1835, that the Secretary of State for the Colonies has received
the declaration of the independence of New Zealand, dated the 28th
October 1835, signed by thirty-five hereditary chiefs and heads of
families, and laid the same before the King. Lord Grlenelg has there-
upon received His Majesty’s commands to assure the chiefs in reply to
the desire they have expressed in that declaration to maintain a good
understanding with His Majesty’s subjects, that His Majesty will not
fail to avail himself of every opportunity of showing his good will, and
of affording to those Chiefs such support and protection as may be
consistent with a due regard to the just rights of others, and to the
interests of the King’s subjects.
“ I have the honor, &c. &c.,
“ (Signed) Alexander McLeay.”
When the Baron de Thierry arrived at Sydney, I received the
following letter explanatory of the (Governor’s views regarding him :
“ Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney, New South Wales,
“ 13th October, 1837.
“ Sir, —The (Governor directs me to transmit to you the enclosed
address of the Baron de Thierry to the white residents in New
Zealand, which has been forwarded to His Excellency by the Baron,
who is now in Sydney, and to inform you that Sir Richard Bourke
returned no answer to the covering letter, having, on this occasion, as
well as at an interview which the Baron requested and obtained,
declined entering into any communication whatever as to his claims or
projects with regard to New Zealand.
“ His Excellency further directs me to transmit to you the copy of a
letter addressed to him by the Baron de Thierry, dated the 7th instant,
to which he has not replied.
“ I have, &c.,
“ (Signed) E. Deas Thompson.”
The Baron chartered a vessel at Sydney to bring himself and his
following, consisting of 57 persons, to Hokianga, and on landing
there was saluted by the vessel from which he landed, and also by one
of the settlers on shore who possessed some carronades. But the chiefs
refused to acknowledge him in any other capacity than as a settler, and
they gave him a piece of land in acknowledgment of three dozens of axes
which they had received, and which they had looked upon merely as
the earnest of the purchase, the goods which were to have been given
as the full consideration for the territories he claimed never having
reached them. So late, however, as the 26fch March, 1838, the Baron
had not relinquished his hopes of such support as would have enabled
him to assume a sovereign jurisdiction. In a long letter which he
addressed to me under that date he says “I have no wish to rule but
by the mildest form of representative government.” * * * I intend per-
severing in the task which my long devotedness to the people of this
* The postscript alluded to stated that the original declaration had been sent to the Secretary of
State by a ship which had sailed direct to England from the Bay of Islands.


country has imposed upon me. * * * Despatches equally encouraging
to my hopes and flattering to my feelings, have recently reached me, but
as they relate to events yet to come, and to the early arrival of those,
and of means which are still at the mercy of the waves, I will say
nothing more of them. A little time will show whether my cause is
supported in Europe and America, and whether I am able to do for New
Zealand, what she so much requires, to place her on the footing of a
civilized nation.”
In the same letter he refers to his communications with the Governor
of New South Wales in the following terms :—>
' “You are perfectly aware, sir, that in the absence of proof we are
justified in judging from inferences; —Sir Richard Bourke did not
promise to uphold my measures, —but he assured me that he had no
orders to prevent them, and by the declaration that * I had a right to
govern over what I might consider my family, and over any tribes and people
who would choose to acknowledge me,'* the Governor gave the only
encouragement which I could have expected under present circum-
stances ! Should you in the administration of your laws have to pass
sentence of death on a British subject, let it be inflicted by the chiefs,
that as the head of a still unacknowledged Government, you may
avoid the risk of a prosecution by the friends of the criminal if you
were to visit the colonies. By thus pointing out the safest road the
Governor enabled me to infer that he was well disposed towards me.
It is useless, however, that I should here repeat the substance of all
His Excellency told me ; —it is enough that he should have repeatedly
assured me that he had no instructions to offer me the least impediment,
and that your opposition to me was not his act but your own.”f
About this time there arrived in New Zealand a French ecclesiastic
as bishop in partibus infidelium— who resided some time in Hokianga,
but eventually removed to the Ba} ? of Islands. Until the date of the treaty
of Waitangi I had been unable to trace any active interference on his
part or on that of the priests who accompanied him, with a view of
creating a French interest. Admiral du Petit Thouars was also in
these seas, during which time he established the French protectorate at
Tahiti. But whether he found the ground preoccupied, or had no
instructions with respect to New Zealand, there was no overt act of
interference on his part.
My functions as British Resident ceased on the 29th of January,
1840—on which day Captain Hobson, R.N., arrived with the commission
of Consul to treat for the cession of the sovereignty of the country, or
of such parts of it as the chiefs might be disposed to cede to the Queen ;
and with a commission of Lieutenant-Governor to assume the Govern-
ment of the territories which might be ceded. My duty of service was
at an end, but the duty of loyalty remained. On Captain Hobson disclosing
his objects to me, I immediately summoned the confederated chiefs,
and explained to them the desire of the Queen to establish a Govern-
ment in the country, which would afford protection, as well to the
Queen’s subjects as to the Maoris; and here again the importance of
* Underlined in the original.
+ Underlined in the original.


the previous organization was strikingly manifested. It was not
without strong opposition on the part of some of the chiefs connected
with the French bishop, who accompanied him to the meeting, clothed
in cloaks of the most expensive character which Paris could furnish.
They urged their countryman to “ send the man away, and not to sign
the paper, that if they did they would be reduced to the state of the
natives of New Holland, and would be sent to break stones on the road
for the pakeha.” But the majority prevailed in favor of the treaty,
and as the Ngapuhi were the most powerful of the native tribes, their
adhesion to the treaty formed the greatest inducement for the other
tribes throughout the Island to give their adhesion to it. Some time
afterwards Captain Hobson addressed to me a letter in which he stated
that “ through your disinterested and unbiassed advice, and to your
personal exertions, I may chiefly ascribe the ready adherence of the
chiefs and other natives to the Treaty of Waitangi; and I feel it but
due to you to state that without your aid in furthering the objects of the
commission with which I was charged by Her Majesty’s Government,
I should have experienced much difficulty in reconciling the minds of
the Natives as well as ot the Europeans who have located themselves
in these islands, to the changes I contemplated carrying into effect.”
It is probably known to the majority of this Assembly that the first
legislation for the Colony of New Zealand took place in the Legislative
Council of New South Wales, to which colony the New Zealand
settlements were attached during the first year of their existence. I
was in Sydney during the winter of 1840, and was perfectly astonished
when Governor Sir George Gipps communicated to me his intention
with respect to what he called the claims to land in New Zealand. I
told him that with respect to by far the greater number of purchases
made by settlers in the North, they would be found to be equitable,
and that they would be supported by the native chiefs from whom
they were acquired; and that by the mode in which he proposed to
deal with them he would not only work great injustice to the pioneers
of British settlement in New Zealand, who deserved well of the
Government, btit entirely destroy the child-like confidence which the New
Zealanders then had in the uprightness of the British Government, and
for ever destroy the hope of governing them by moral influence. Having
failed to convince him of this, I petitioned the Council to be heard
against the bill. On this occasion one of the Judges of the Supreme
Court came to mo and implored me, in the most earnest terms, not to
oppose the Governor’s bill. But I told him that it was a matter I
could not debate with him; that I could not in conscience allow so
much mischief to be done as I foresaw would result from this bill, if I
could prevent it, and I did everything in my power by describing the
actual state of things to dissuade the Council from passing such a Bill.
But my efforts were in vain; the first Land Claims Bill was passed, and
I earned by my endeavors only the ill-will of the Government of that
Colony, which has been followed by that of every successive Govern-
ment in New Zealand to the present day. Sut, sir, it has been the
very joy of my life that I resisted the temptations held out to induce
me to submit to the Governor’s wishes, which were not small; the
recognition of my own purchases of land on the ground of service, and
further employment in a suitable position in the public service. For if


I had yielded to those temptations, and withheld my testimony, I am
sure I should long since have been sunk down to the grave by remorse
at the reflection that all the blood since shed in New Zealand might
have been required at my hand.
Well, sir, we are all acquainted with the modern sayings that
“ history repeats itself,” and that “truth is stranger than fiction.”
In the days of our Richards and Edwards, what was the state of the Jews
in England ? They were held to be incapable of possessing property—
the legal maxim was, Judceus vero nihil possidere potest, quia quicquid
acquirit, acquirit regi. Who would have thought that in the middle of
the nineteenth century, in the reign of Queen Victoria, in the days when
all Christian governments recognised the duty of doing good to all men,
whatever faith they might profess, this atrocious maxim would have
been revived under the British Government, and applied to their fellow
Christians, to Christian missionaries, men who are held in the highest
estimation by all persons who duly estimate the importance of Christi-
anity to the world, and the duty of establishing it in the dark places of
the earth. Take for example the case of the late Archdeacon Henry
Williams, a man to whom both races in New Zealand were more
indebted than they ever could or ever can be to any other man. He
had eleven sons and daughters, and for them he purchased eleven
thousand acres of land, at more than double the price which the Land
Claims Bill itself had fixed as an equitable consideration. He was told
that he had acquired the native title, but that it did not vest in himself
but in the Queen, for whom they would take possession; and they would
give him a grant of 2560 acres out of it. Now, had Mr. Williams occu-
pied the comparatively pleasant position of a Chaplain in the Colony of
New South Wales, where the law was passed which dealt thus with his
property, each of his sons would have been entitled to a free grant
from the Crown of 1,920 acres, and each of his daughters to 1,280
acres. Such were the ideas of law and equity possessed by our first
legislators.
Well, sir, they did not altogether, in rivalry of ancient times, deal
with the missionaries—as the Jews were dealt with when a price was
set upon the eye of a Jew or a Jewess, in order to extract from them
their wealth. They did not put out the eyes ot the missionaries—but
they put out the eyes of the country. Darkness and distrust,
and indignation, culminating at length in rebellion, took the place of
the most perfect confidence. The natives said “do the pakehas
suppose that we have so little sense, as to believe that if the Queen
treats her own children in this manner, we shall meet with better
treatment?” For myself, after the anger which the part I took
occasioned, I could not expect better treatment than the missionaries.
Before coming to this country I had represented to Sir Richard Bourke
that it would be necessary to purchase a piece of land to erect the
house which the Secretary of State had directed me to be furnished with
in frame. But I was obliged to do this at my own expense, although
I appealed to the Secretary of State against the injustice of being
compelled to purchase out of my private funds a site for an official
residence —it cost me £3OO to purchase about 270 acres of land, and
to place the building upon it. And no sooner was the title proved
before the Commissioners, than I received an official letter marked


“immediate,” informing me that it was intended to reserve the great-
est portion of the site for a public township—this no sooner came to
the ears of the natives than they sent to tell me that “ when this blast
fMarangai) proceeded forth from the Governor—l was to give myself
no concern, for they who sold me the land woiild maintain me in
possession of it.” This, sir, was the origin of Heke’s war, and to these
proceedings of our early rulers we are indebted for all the miseries of
the last twenty-five years. My object, sir, in trespassing so long on
the patience of the House is to obtain from them such reparation for the
attacks upon my character, which have appeared in the reports of their
proceedings, as will be afforded by the publication of this address in the
same volumes, which reparation I trust they will allow me.


.
■


APPENDIX.
It is hoped the following quotations from Hansard's reports of the
Debates in the House of Representatives, and the observations attached
to them, will not only serve to enlighten the community upon the
character of some of its public men, but enable the Legislature at its
next sitting to form a right judgment upon a question so deeply affect-
ing the credit of the Colony, and to take action accordingly. It is most
gratifying that after all the misleadings, of which the following are
only an example, the House showed itself by a large majority to be
sound at heart. Mr. Curtis’ motion that “an award having been given
against the Colony, by the Ai’bitrators appointed under the provisions
of the Land Claims Arbitration Act 1867, it is incumbent upon this
House to satisfy the same without further delay, and that the Govern-
ment be requested to take immediate steps to that effect,” —having
been carried by 24 against 16, the minority, including four members
of the ministry, the Superintendent of Auckland, three other provincial
functionaries, and the late Commissioner of Waste Lands, who was
instrumental in setting aside the law of 1867 ;so that the ministry was
only supported by seven non-official members in repudiating the
obligation of a judgment debt.
The proposal of settlement, which Mr.
Busby had agreed to at the instance of
Mr. Clark and Mr. McFarlane, was
explained by Mr. Clark in the following
words on the 22nd July :
Mr. Clark, in moving the resolution
standing in his name, said he believed
that the whole of the correspondence for
which he asked would be comprised in
three or four letters. His object was to
show that there were seven of the mem-
bers for the Province of Auckland who
had agreed to a proposal made by Mr.
Busby, at the instance of the hon. mem-
ber for the Northern Division and himself
(Mr. Clark). That proposal, he under-
stood, had been submitted to the
Government, and the Government, as he
also understood, had sent an official letter,
in which it was stated that if the Super-
intendent of Auckland, and a majority
of the members for the Province in
this House, would signify approval of
the proposal, the Government would offer
no objection to it. From all that he had
been able to learn, the hon. member the
Superintendent of Auckland did not see
his way to concur in the proposal. He
(Mr. Clark) was inclined to think that, so
far as that non-concurrence was concerned,
Mr. Williamson would second the mo-
tion, as he felt convinced when the papers
were produced they would not bear out
the statement made by his honorable
friend. He was sorry the honorable
member should have stated that the
arbitrators’ award of £36,800 made over
to Mr. Busby was to be paid in scrip to
be exercised in lands open for sale or
selection in Auckland, as he knew the
proposal of Mr. Busby was that the award
was to be paid to him in cash and in de-
bentures. The papers would show the
discrepancies between the proposals of
Mr. Busby and the statement which the
honorable gentleman had been pleased to
make. He should say no more on the
subject at present. He should be glad to
see the papers laid on the table, and
therefore he had great pleasure in second-
ing the motion.
Mr. Creighton would suggest to his
honorable friend the member for Auck-
land City East to amend his motion, as
part of the correspondence to which he
had referred would be found to have
taken place before the Petitions Com-
mittee had made their report. The hon,
member had referred to a letter to the
effect that a majority of the Auckland


the hon. member did not represent the
views of his constituents. At all events
that honorable member’s view did not
agree with what must be the view of all
who understood the subject, and who
considered it only with the object of
having even-handed justice done. About
two years ago, when he was a member of
the Provincial Council of Auckland, a
petition was put into his hands, and
which he was requested by a gentleman
who had been a member of this House to
present to the Council, and to ask for the
appointment of a Committee. He did as
he had been’’requested, and from that
petition had grown the action whieh had
been taken in this House. There had
already been a judicial decision upon the
question, and there had also been what
he might be allowed to call a legislative
decision, inasmuch as, by the Land Claims
Arbitration Act 18«7, it was provided
that the award of the arbitrators should
not be set aside upon any ground what-
ever, He would read to the House the
only issue which was now in dispute
between the parties; because it must be
remembered that Mr. Busby, on condi-
tion that this issue was carried out, had
agreed to withdraw any claim to unsold
lands which he believed to have been
awarded to him. The sole remaining
issue was: —
“ As to the second issue, we do award
and adjudge that the said James Busby
has suffered special damages, in respect
to his claims for land, as follows, that is
to say : at Ngunguru, £14,200 ; at
Wangarei and Waipu, £22,600. And we
award and adjudge him the sum of
£30,800 accordingly.” ,
He submitted that the Government of
the Colony was bound to make provision
for the payment of this judgment debt;
and he submitted also, that tho House
was bound to see that the Government
performed this duty, inasmuch as the
obligation was incurred by an act of the
Assembly, and that the public faith was
pledged to its fulfilment. He hoped the
House would not sympathise with his
friend the Superintendent of Auckland in
the view he took of the matter, and that,
after the action it had already taken, it
would see it to be its duty to give effect
to its own act in the matter. He was
aware that there were some hon. members
from Auckland who, while satisfied that
Mr. Busby’s claim was a'good one, were
inclined to think that the claim should
come upon the Colony rather than upon
the Province of Auckland. He could not
members were agreeable to a certain
proposal. That letter had been submitted
to the Committee before it made its
report. He was sorry the hon. member
would not get at all the correspondence
at the letter which Mr. Busby wrote to
the Chairman of Committee when his
petition was under consideration. He
desired to speak with respect of Mr.
Busby, whose character he highly re-
spected; but he could not but inform
the House that during that time there
was an attempt made by Mr. Busby to
induce the Committee to find for him on
the issues which he had submitted in his
petition, and which set forth averments
which were not strictly in accordance
with facts. The correspondence to which
he had referred would prove that Mr.
Busby had endeavored to obtain the con-
sent of certain hon. membvrs to use their
names for a particular purpose, and had
by those means sought to influence the
Committee to report in his favor He was
sorry he should have had to make those
remarks. He would move as an amend-
ment to strike out all the words after
“ Government,” and insert in lieu thereof
the words “ from the first June last.”
The private letter which Mr. Busby had
addressed to the Chairman of the Petitions
Committee should also be produced to the
House, as it would throw some light upon
the question. The Provincial Government
were prepared to carry out in its entirety
the award made to Mr. Busby, as inter-
preted by the two arbitrators who agreed
in the matter. He had a copy of the
letter of those gentlemen to Mr. Busby,
giving their interpretat on of what the
award was, and which he would read to
the House.
The above observations seem to have
been made on the principle of throwing
as much dirt as possible, as some of it is
sure to stick.
The only answer that can be given to
Mr. Williamson’s assertions is that they
are positively false. Mr. Clark said
nothing but what the papers moved for
would prove. There is not the slightest
discrepancy between what Mr. Clark
stated and what appears in the correspon-
dence moved for, including the letters
required by Mr. Creighton’s amendment,
which were quite unnecessary, as they
were in substance recapitulated in those
moved for by Mr. Clark.
The letter referred to by Mr. Creighton
as having been “ submitted” to the Com-
mittee before it made its report, “ was
the official communication to the Colonial


agree with them in that view. Having
sat on the Committee of the Provincial
Council of Auckland, and having gone
into the evidence, he felt that there had
been sufficient evidence adduced to satisfy
him that the Province had received land
which belonged to Mr. Busby to the value
of £50,000. He had nothing further to
say in moving the motion which appeared
in his name.
Motion made and question proposed,
“ That the correspondence between Mr.
Busby and the Government, subsequent
to the Report of the Public Petitions
Committee on his Petition, be laid on the
table.” — (Mr. Clark.)
Mr. Williamson, in seconding the
amendment, said, he did not wish to be
charged with any unfairness in the mat-
ter, as he had taken the course which he
believed he ought to have adopted. The
ground he urged for the course he had
taken was that the House should have an
opportunity of re-considering the whole
question—that time should be given for
the whole matter to be considered by the
House. Having heard that a difference
of opinion existed as to the nature of the
award, he and the gentlemen who acted
with him united in giving effect to the
award as far as the Arbitrators’ interpre-
tation went, and they made a compromise,
which they renewed this year, namely, a
provision that the Bay of Islands land
should be included in that scrip. The
course he took on that occasion met with
the approval of Mr. Busby, for it gave
him better conditions than the award
gave him, inasmuch as, by the bill and
by the award, the scrip given to him was
made exercisable only by himself, which
was of very little value indeed, for if Mr,
Busby had sold a thousand of that scrip
to any person, and he died before the
scrip was exercised, it would be totally
valueless to the holder. He thought the
whole of the papers should be produced,
and therefore seconded the amendment.
On the 28th July Mr Williamson
moved, For leave to introduce a Bill
intituled “ An Act to confirm and give
effect to an award given under * The
Land Claims Arbitration Act, 1867.’ ”
He desired very much that some con-
clusion should be arrived at during the
present session with regard to Mr. Busby’s
claims, and therefore it was that, with the
consent of the gentlemen now in Wel-
Secretary of a proposal for a settlement
at the instance of Mr. Clark and Mr.
Macfarlane, and subsequently agreed to
by five other members, and it was Sent to
the Committee along with all the rest of
the correspondence—so that the attempt
“ to influence the Committee to report in
his favor,” if there was such an attempt,
was the act of the Colonial Secretary,
and not of the writer of the letter.
As to the mysterious private letter
which Mr. Busby had addressed to the
Chairman of the Petitions Committee,
which he (Mr. Creighton) “would not
characterise as it ought to be,” it is alto-
gether an invention of Mr. Creighton’s
brain. Mr. Busby knew of no such letter,
and the Chairman was equally ignorant
of it. He said to Mr. Clark, “ Mr. Busby
wrote me no letter.”
It is positively disgusting, no other
word is suitable, to have to remark on
such a tissue of falsehood ; all that can
be said of it is, that it would be impos-
sible to express more falsehood in the
same number of words. The point as to
the difference of opinion between the
Arbitrators, Mr. Busby had given up, as
the foundation of Mr. Clark’s proposal.
Seven of the sixteen members for the
Province of Auckland, being a majority
of those who were not receiving salary
from Mr. Williamson, agreed to the Bill
proposed by Mr. Clark. With what truth
then can it be said that this Bill, pro-
posed by Mr. Williamson, had been pre-
pared “ with the consent of the gentlemen
now in Wellington who represented the
Province of Auckland?” It is well that it


lington who represented the Province of
Auckland, he had himself prepared a
Bill which he thought would be more
advantageous to Mr. Busby than even that
which had been passed two sessions ago.
He wished that Mr. Busby should be dealt
with in a spirit of fairness, and that
everything in his favour, to which he was
entitled should be embodied in the bill.
He had been wronged by those who
thought that he had wished to keep back
anything from Mr. Busby which he was
entitled to receive. Mr. Busby had writ-
ten to the arbitrators who acted upon the
Act of 1867, and they had given their
interpretation of the award which they
had made. He desired not only that the
spirit of the award should be given to
Mr. Busby, bat also that an extension of
time should be granted to Mr. Busby for
the exercise of his scrip—that it should
be exercised within twelve months after
the passing of the Bill—and that it should
be transferable. He trusted that, when
the Bill was brought in, the prayer of
Mr. Busby’s petition to the House would
be assented to, so that he might be per-
mitted to state his own case to the House.
Mr. Williamson, in reply, said that
last year he offered a compromise in this
matter, to which the Government of the
day, represented by the hon. Mr. Hall,
agreed as being fair and reasonable, as
did several members from the Anckland
Province. He was not sure whether the
honorable member for the Bay of Islands
did not see its fairness and reasonable-
ness. He (Mr. Williamson) wished, by
the Bill which he asked leave to intro-
duce, to get his proposal of last year
before the House.
Land Claims Arbitration Act SuppJe-
mentary Act.
By this Bill Mr. Busby binds himself
to make a sacrifice of his legal rights to
a large amount in order to procure an
immediate settlement of a debt —which,
as will appear to any one who examines the
award, would, if brought into Court, make
it imperative on a Judge not to advert
to circumstances external to the award
itself, but to take it in its true and literal
meaning, and decide that Mr. Busby was
entitled not only to the sum of £36,800
in money or its equivalent in land—which
is all he claims under this Bill—but to
143,000 aCres of land besides; to which
Mr. Busby proposes by this Bill to give
up all claim.
It is beside the question to say that the
scrip was not worth its nominal value in
the market; because Mr. Busby took it
is here stated, as it is also afterwards
stated by Mr. Creighton, that this Bill
represents the proposed Compromise of
last year, because it makes it very clear
that the nature of that proposal had been
misrepresented to Mr. Hall and to Mr.
Carleton when they considered it reason-
able. In order to enable the House to
judge of this Bill, compared with the one
introduced on the recommendation of Mr.
Clark and Mr. Macfarlane, the following
analysis of both Bills was sent under
cover to each member of both Houses :—•
Land Claims Arbitration.
The title of this Act is a false recital.
It is not to confirm the award—which
needs no confirmation, seeing that the
law of 1867 enacted that “it should
be final and conclusive, and should not
be set aside on any grounds whatever ”
but to offer for that award a compen-
sation not exceeding in value Is. fid. in
the pound.
This Act is brought in by a person
whose conduct was reported by the Com-
mittee of last session to have made the
Act of 1867 nugatory, and who now asks
the Legislature to pass an Act which not
only would condone his own conduct, but
make the Legislature a participator in it.
The scrip possessed by Mr. Busby has
no limitations whatever. It gave him the
power to purchase all the land in the


as it was, and intended with a small
exception to invest it in land, which would
according to all experience have even-
tually proved of much greater value.
To look at the equity of the case—the
sum of £36,800 was awarded in compen-
sation for the sale of Mr. Busby’s property
by the Government to the amount of up-
wards of £50,000, besides other wrongs.
(See the evidence of Mr. Sinclair before
Committee of the Provincial Council of
Auckland)
Mr. Busby has spent many years of his
life and incurred debts to the amount of
from £ll,ooo to £12,000 in prosecuting
this cause to an issue, for which the arbi-
trators allowed him no costs.
July 30, Land Claims Arbitration Act,
Mr. Ckeighton regretted that his hon.
friend the Superintendent of Auckland
was not in his place to move the second
reading of this Bill, but in his absence
he would briefly do so. It was very well
known to the House that last year a com-
promise was suggested between Mr. Busby
and the Provincial Government of Auck-
land, and that that compromise was agreed
to on behalf of Mr. Busby by the hon.
member for the Bay of Islands, Mr.
Carleton.
It was suggested that Mr. Busby should
accept of land scrip in the Province of
Auckland to cover his award of £36,800,
that the land which the Government
locked up should be thrown open for sale
or selection, over which he could exercise
his scrip, and that the Government would
open the Bay of Islands settlement block
to enable him to make any selection there.
Mr. Busby was also to get a Crown
grant for the land which he claimed to
have purchased in the Bay of Islands,
and which had not been disposed of by
the Provincial authorities.
The honorable member for the Bay of
Islands had been agreeable to what was
understood as a fair compromise at that
time, but Mr. Busby refused to carry it
out. The Bill, the second reading of
which he now moved, proposed to give
Province to the amount of his scrip, unless
some one else should be disposed to buy
it at a higher price for money than Mr.
Busby was willing to give for it in scrip.
This Bill proposes to destroy the value
of that scrip by limiting its operation to
twelve months, and restricting it to some-
thing like one-tenth of the land for which
it is available.
It offers as an equivalent for this, lands
at the Bay of Islands, for which no sane
person would give £l,ooo.
Any Act passed by the Assembly deal-
ing with the award of the arbitrators,
without Mr. Busby’s concurrence, would
be an act of repudiation, which would
injure the Colony by depreciation of its
securities and its standing in the money
market, to many times the amount of the
debt. They might as well annul one of
the Acts which enabled the Government
to contract for their various loans.
Mr. Busby had nothing to do with the
Provincial Government of Auckland or
any compromise suggested by or for
them—nor had any one authority from
him to enter into any compromise. Mr.
Busby could look npon it in no other
light than that of an attempt to com-
pound for a robbery. That the nature of
this compromise was misrepresented both
to Mr. Hall and Mr. Carleton, must be
very clear—for this Bill is stated both
by Mr. Williamson and Mr. Creighton to
be intended to give effect to it—and Mr.
Carleton now expressly repudiated it.
Mr. Busby was already in possession
of scrip under the hand of the Governor,
and he would have been very simple in-
deed to exchange it for scrip of the Pro-
vincial Government. His own scrip gave
him the choice of every acre of land which
was under the administration of the Pro-
vincial Government, as no land could be
brought into the market but what his
scrip would purchase —and for this it is
proposed that he should accept scrip
available only to purchase land which
was in the market when the scrip was
issued—and to make this purchase within
twelve months.
The cool assurance of this is admirable.
The grants for this land were issued by
Governor Pitzroy in 1844.
God help the country whose adminis-
trators can propound such ideas of equity.


effect to that compromise, and was one
which in all respects he believed would
deal equitably in this case.
Mr. Busby, as the House was aware,
now objected to exercise his scrip over the
waste lands of the Province. Finding, by
the development of the Thames goldfield,
that the Provincial chest was a little fuller
than it was in those days, it would be a
much more agreeable operation to obtain
£36,800 of the money of the consolidated
revenue belonging to the Province, rather
than exercise that amount in scrip over
the waste lands of Auckland, and be
subjected to the taxes and annoyances
which the proprietors of large estates of
waste lands in that Province were usually
subjected to. He did not think the House
would countenance the attempt which was
now made to give Mr. Busby a very large
sum of money, which never was contem-
plated by the Act under which the award
was made. Clause 9of the Land Claims
Arbitration Act provided :
“ It shall be lawful for the Governor,
in satisfaction of the award of the said
arbitrators to issue to the said James
Busby a Crown Grant or Crown Grants
of any lands comprised within his original
claims and remaining unsold, and further
to issue in respect of the aforesaid claims
or damages such amount of land scrip, in
such form and for such sums as shall be
awarded and directed by the said arbitra-
tors, which land scrip shall be received
in payment for any lands to be selected
by the said James Busby within the said
Province of Auckland, out of any lands
open for sale or selection under the pro-
visions of the laws for the time being in
force within the said Province relating
to the disposal of Waste Lands of the
Crown.”
That contemplated an award which
was to be made in land scrip, and not
in money, and that it was so under-
stood would be seen by the letter already
read to the House, signed by Mr. Jackson
and Mr. Mackelvie, who made the award
under which Mr. Busby claimed compen-
sation.
The Bill now before the House carried
out in a liberal manner the intention of
the arbitrators who made that award. It
provided that Mr. Busby should exercise
the land scrip over the waste lands of the
Province, and also proposed to convey to
him the unsold land in the Bay of Islands,
so that, in point of fact, the Provincial
Government were now prepared to give
effect to the award as the arbitrators
Does Mr. Creighton forget Mr. Wil-
liamson’s words —“He published a notice
which he issued by law withdrawing from
sale or selection all lands which had been
before that time open for sale or for
selection?” —And is he not aware that
every proposal of Mr. Busby to purchase
land was refused by the Provincial Gov-
ernment ?
There was no dispute about the scrip,
it was money scrip, each piece being of
the value of £5O sterling—and by law
was to be received as money in payment
for land. It was given in part restitution
for lands the property of Mr. Busby,
disposed of by the Government to the
amount of between £50,000 and £60,000,
and for other wrongs.
It is difficult to find words to charac-
terise such a statement as this. The Bill,
instead of providing that such scrip should
be exercised over the waste lands of the
Province, restricts its action to such parts
only—probably not one-tenth of the
whole —which had been proclaimed open
for sale or selection before the 6th day of
April 1867, the date of the award, and
restricts its exercise within twelve months,


themselves intended to make it. They
explained that, on account of the way in
which the Act was worded, they were
compelled to submit the matter to two
legal gentlemen for their opinion as to
how they should draw up their award.
It was thus made in such a way as to
lead Mr. Busby to believe that he was
awarded both land and money. He (Mr.
Creighton) must confess that when he
first read the award he was of the same
opinion, and he thought it was a
monstrous award. The arbitrators, how-
ever, explained that they did not mean
to give land scrip representing the origi-
nal sum invested, with compound interest,
and also all the land purchased. The
award was still considered extravagant,
but the Provincial Government were pre-
pared to give effect to it as now inter-
preted provided the House would pass
this Bill, and finally close a sore question
which had been going on for the last
twenty years. Mr. Busby had entirely
overlooked the point which had been
brought home to him very clearly, when
he attempted to dispose of land scrip in
the Auckland market that was not trans-
ferable. If he had died before exercising
the original scrip, it would not have been
worth anything, and his heirs at law
could not have acted upon it. The Bill
now before the House gave Mr. Busby
more than he would have received under
the award. It gave a value to the scrip
which it did not otherwise possess. It
provided that for twelve months the scrip
might be exercised by any person who
might be the holder of it. Of course it
was not to be lost sight of that Mr. Busby
might have refrained from exercising that
scrip for a number of years, and waited
until choice lots of Provincial land had
been put up for sale, and picked the eyes
out of the provincial estate —as indeed he
set about doing—but then there was the
other contingency, that it might just
happen that the scrip after all would
turn out of little value to himself or his
family. He (Mr. Creighton) thought
that would be a misfortune, for what-
ever opinion he held as to the award
itself, he believed Mr. Busby from first
to last had had a very considerable griev-
ance ; at all events he thought some
reparation was due to him—not by the
Province of Auckland, he maintained, but
by the Colony. The transactions to which
that gentleman referred, and the injury
done him, had taken place when there
was no Province of Auckland; and Mr.
Busby had claimed that, because Sir .
and this is termed carrying out in a liberal
manner the intention of the arbitrators
who made the award, —whereas it would
make the scrip not worth probably one-
tenth of its present value.
It has been thought right to give Mr.
Creighton’s speech in full—but enough
has been already said to convince any
person who has read the address and the
correspondence contained in the preface,
that the whole comprises one of the most
extraordinary concatenations of falsehood,
and attempts at making the Legislature
agree to an act of robbery, that words
could be found to express. Instead of
continuing to answer, seriatim, every
unfounded assertion, it may be well to
give a few of the observations made by
other members upon it.
Mr. Cahleton said: He was sorry to
say that he was scarcely able to agree
with any of the statements made by
the honorable member for Newton.
In the first place the Bill imposed
a limitation of twelve months, where-
as in the existing Act there was no
such limitation. In the next place it
empowered the claimant merely to select
out of land which happened to have
been opened at a particularperiod, instead
of out of lands as they might be brought
into the market. The proposed advan-
tage of allowing Mr. Busby’s heirs and
assigns to partake of the benefit under
the Bill was no advantage whatever. He
had been legally advised that although
that provision was not expressed in the
Act of 1867, it was nevertheless implied.
There was nothing ofiered, but very
much taken away.
Mr. Travers said it appeared to him
the Legislature of the Colony was doing,
and had for year< done, great injustice to
all persons who had any claims to urge
against the Crown. In England the
courts of law were open to persons who
had claims against the Crown, and the
Crown interposed no difficulty whatso-
ever in the way of the person ob-
taining satisfaction of his claims through
the ordinary operations of the courts of
law; and if the Government of the
Colony had consented to place upon the
Statute Book an Act similar to that
which existed in every other Colony of
Great Britain —An Act under which
claims could be brought against the
Crown without the cumbrous machinery
of the petition of right—Mr. Busby


George Grey had done him a wrong, the
Province of Auckland must compensate
him. He could not at all see the logical
sequence of that. No doubt it was in
conformity to a special law. The House,
in 1867, passed an Act providing that
Mr. Busby’s claim should be left to arbi-
tration, and the arbitrators were to award
special damages in land scrip, which was
to be exercised in the waste lands of the
Province of Auckland. The Provincial
Government now proposed to give effect
to that award, and the Bill before the
House did so in the direction he had just
indicated. He thought the matter was
so very well understood, and had been so
frequently before the House, that it
would only be a needless waste of time if
he were to follow Mr. Busby in the state-
ment he had made. No doubt, a great deal
of it might have been necessary to set
him right before the public of New Zea-
land, and those who were unacquainted
with the transactions to which he had
referred; but, in his opinion, it had no
reference to the matter in hand. The
question was simply this, whether the
House would set aside the Act under
which the award was made, and give him
something which the arbitrators did not
award him nor contemplate awarding him,
or whether they should pass this Bill,
which would finally set the matter at rest,
fairly interpret the award, and compel
the Provincial Government to give it
honest effect. He might refer to the
action which the Provincial Government
took in locking up the land at the time
when the award was made, but he thought
that had been sufficiently discussed in
the House at an earlier stage of the ses-
sion. There was one point to which he
would slightly advert, however—he meant
the action of the Provincial Government
in dedicating land to ecclesiastical pur-
poses. In this they had not interfered
in the slightest degree with the land open
for sale or selection at the time the award
was made. He had had a conversation
with the late Waste Lands Commissioner
on the subject some time ago, and also
with the present Waste Lands Commis-
sioner in Auckland, and he had their
assurance that the endowments for com-
mon school purposes were not open for
sale or selection under the Waste Lands
Act. Mr. Busby must have waited for a
long time before he could exercise scrip
over that land, which consisted chiefly of
suburban allotments in the neighborhood
of Auckland, and villages and towns in
the Province, which were of little money
would have been * a position to go to
the Supreme Court of New Zealand, and
ask that Court to enforce the award
which had been granted to him. He
was not prepared to say that that remedy
was not open to Mr. Busby yet, but it
would be a most unheard of proceeding
for any Legislature to deal with a claim
ex post facto, and in such a way as to
bar existing rights. If the Legislature
were not prepared to give effect to the
award according to its fair intererpreta-
tion, then they should take no action in
the matter; if it were prepared to give
effect to the award, then it could take
action only in the direction of giving
that effect. An action which would have
the effect of interfering with the fair
adjustment of the matter, and to the
language of the award itself would be
doing a very great injustice to the indi-
vidual, and would also be doing a very
great injustice to the Legislature and the
Colony.
Mr. Potts considered that the unfor-
tunate letter of Mr. Busby had very
little to do with the justice of the case.
It was time that the legislation of 1867
was carried out by the House, and it
was due to the dignity of the Legisla-
ture that it should take steps for that
purpose. It was for the interest of the
Colony that the question should be
settled at once, and he saw no reason
why it should not be disposed of this
session. He thought that some allow,
ance might be made for Mr. Busby when
they considered that it was stated in the
Act of 1867 that he had “ special claims
against the Crown, which were distinct
from those of any other person what-
soever.” He thought that great stress
should be laid upon that point, and that
some palliation might be found for the
conduct of Mr. Busby in the delays and
disappointments from which he had
sufferd for many pears.
Land Claims Arbitration Bill.
Adjourned Debate.
Mr. Cuetis said he must be allowed to
protest against the remark of the honor-
able gentleman at the head of the
Government as to the proceedings of Mr.
Busby’s friends. He (Mr. Curtis) was
not aware that he was a friend of Mr.
Busby, with whom, indeed, he had
scarcely exchanged a dozen words, and
who was unaware of his intention to take
action in this matter. Each of the Bills
on the subject was a Bill which proposed
to deal with a claim which, both legally


value if put up to auction now, but which,
in the course of time, would become valu-
able endowments for educational pur-
poses. He thought that, instead of any
■censure being cast upon the Provincial
Government for the course they have
adopted, the House should be very grate-
ful to them for having, at a time when
they were pressed for money, had the
resolution and courage to refrain from
selling those lands to increase revenue,
but locked them up for the purpose of
providing for the educational wants in
the Province in years to come. He en-
tirely denied that Mr. Busby’s claim was
at all affected by the action of the Pro-
vincial Government in that matter. A
wrong impression might have remained
cn the minds of honorable members as to
those points, if he had not made the
statement he had done. As he had
already said, the Provincial Government
had introduced this Bill to give effect to
the award made by the arbitrators under
the Land Claims Arbitration Act 1867.
He thought the House ought not to
set aside both the original Act and
the arbitrators’ award, in order to give
Mr. Busby something very different.
With these remarks he begged to move
the second reading of the Land Claims
Arbitration Bill.
Mr. Dillon Bell had begged the hon.
member for Christchurch not to read
the preamble of the Bill (the Land
Claim Arbitration Bill 1867), but that
honorable member having persisted in
doing so in. spite of his earnest request
over and over and over again not to,
it became his painful duty to state to the
and morally, was binding upon the
Colony, and which the Colony, as he con-
ceived, was bound to discharge without
further delay. But the Bill now before
the House would evade that claim instead
of discharging it, and it would destroy
rights under an award made with the
sanction of law. The arbitrators awarded
to Mr. Busby a certain area of land, and
land scrip to a certain amount. This Bill
proposed to ignore the award, so far as
land was concerned; and if the House
ignored the award as to land, it might
equally well ignore the award as to scrip,
for the award on each of these issues was
made in the same words. It had been
said, under the hand of the Governor,
that the award when made should be final
and conclusive, but this Bill asked the
House to declare that the award should
not be carried out. The act of 1867,
under which the reference was made, said
that the arbitrators should define the form
in which the scrip should be given, and
in the award the arbitrators gave the
form of the scrip. This Bill proposed
that that form should be altogether
altered. The award declared that the
time within which powers under the
scrip could be exercised should not be
limited; this Bill provided that those
powers should be exercised within twelve
months —which, when so large a sum as
£36,000 was concerned, would be to re-
duce the value of the scrip about two-
thirds, The award, taken with the Act,
left the powers under the scrip to be exer-
cised over all lands which were, at the
time of the award, or which became, dur-
ing the period of the exercise of those
powers, within the authority and dispo-
sition of the Province of Auckland; this
Bill provided that the exercise of those
powers should be confined to the land
which happened to be open for sale
under the Waste Lands Act of the
Province at the time when the award
was made. The effect of these alterations
of, and deviations from, the terms of the
award, would be to render the award
almost without benefit to Mr. Busby.
He could hardly think that the House
would consent to the Bill, which he did
not hesitate to characterize as an abso-
lutely dishonest Bill.
In order to prove that the Preamble
of this Act was not warranted by the
facts of the case, Mr. Bell states that
“ there is the most absolute evidence
to show that the purchase which Mr.
Busby made was an inchoate one, and
was not complete from the natives.”
Now, there were, exclusively of the


House a few facts. He was attacked
with illness about the middle of the ses-
sion of 1867, in consequence of which he
was obliged to leave Wellington, but he
was obliged to say that if he had been
here that preamble never would have
passed, because it was absolutely at vari-
ance with the fact.
Mr. Travers did not know that.
Mr. Dillon Bell.— The hon. member
ought to have known that ho had very
good reason for asking him not to read
it. The whole of the case, after the
argument which the honorable gentle-
man offered, rested upon that preamble,
and he repeated, and staked his credit
upon it, that if he had been here the
preamble never would have passed. And
he would say something more: the
honorable member for the Bay of Islands
would never have taken the course he
did, because it contained the most serious
imputations against him which he was
quite certain the honorable member for
the Bay of Islands would never have
put on record if he (Mr. Bell) had been
present. It was not the case 'that Mr.
Busby made any complete purchase of
those lands. There existed the most
absolute evidence to show that the pur-
chase which Mr. Busby made was an
inchoate one, and was not complete from
the N atives ! and when the Government
concluded the purchase of the land on
account of the Crown, although they
took Mr. Busby’s purchase from the
Natives as the basis of their dealings,
they made payments on the part of the
Crown for the completion of the title,
which completion was not done by Mr.
Busby himself. Now he would tell the
House all the circumstances, which
would set all doubt on that point entirely
at rest. He would state first in a few
words that the claims on account of that
particular were originally brought by
Mr. Busby before the Commissioners in
1841, but were withdrawn by that gen-
tleman himself after he had commenced
the investigation of them. In conse-
quence of that, the claims were excluded
from litigation, and feeling that a great
wrong would be done to Mr. Busby if
he were excluded absolutely from any
justice being done to him in consequence
of the unreasonable course on his own
part, he (Mr. Bell), being the Land Com-
missioner, admitted the claims to hear-
ing, and gave Mr. Busby the fullest
opportunity of proving his title to the
lands which he claimed. H e might say
that he (Mr. Bell) at that time had been
subjected to very strong accusations of
Bay of Islands purchases, three distinct
purchases, and the facts relating to those
of Wangarei and Waipu— and those
relating to Ngunguru—are entirely dif-
ferent. The titles to Wangarei and Wai-
pu were referred by the Government to
the first Commissioners, and were inves-
tigated by them in 1841 —and there
never has been the slightest dispute
about the validity of the purchase.
When the Government tendered money
to the Natives for the lands comprised
in those titles, they refused it —200
sovereigns which had been sent to Wan-
garei by one of them, were returned by
them, on the ground that, having sold
the land to Mr. Busby, it was not theirs
to sell to the Government. Mr. Rust,
one of the earliest settlers at Wangarei,
accompanied the bearer of the gold to
Major Nugent the Native Secretary’s
office, and saw it returned to him. And
the Natives were finally only induced
to take the money, on the assurance that
Mr. Busby had received compensation
for the land—and that he was satis-
fied. Mr. Bell never investigated those
titles at all —they were not brought before
“ successive Land Commissioners,” the
title having been proved before the first
Commissioners, Messrs. Fisher, Godfrey
and Richmond in 1841—what Mr. Bell
stated as to the Natives “denying the
extent of the sale, ” and the land
being “simply not in existence,” refers
exclusively to Ngunguru. The whole
of the evidence relating to all the
claims, “which was taken before suc-
cessive Commissioners,” was before the
Arbitrators, and they were perfectly
convinced of the validity of all the
native titles. If Mr. Bell had re-
ferred to the Map of the survey of
Wangarei and Waipu in Mr. Domett’s
office, he would have found that survey
certified by the Resident Magistrate, as
also by the Surveyor, who is also in the
Commission of the Peace, and that it
was signed by three of the Natives who
were sent to point out the boundaries
specified in the deed when the purchase
was made in 1839 —and that they “had
pointed out to them (the surveyors) those
boundaries, that the lines of Mr. Wilson
(the surveyor) when cut, may agree with
those boundaries.” There were besides
Petitions to both Houses of the Legis-
lature, in 1867, from the survivors of the
natives who sold the land, and their sons,
praying, or rather demanding, that jus-
tice might be done to Mr. Busby, as
“great had been his justice to them.”
These facts are not very consistent with


injustice and partiality on the part of
Mr. Busby ; on one occasion being called
by that gentleman “ a messenger of
Satan sent to buffet the land claimants,”
and being held up, in fact, to the execra-
tion of the public. Notwithstanding
that, he gave Mr. Busby the most ample
opportunity to bring his witnesses ; he
brought them, and they absolutlely
denied the extent of the sale. They gave
their evidence at Mr. Busby’s own re-
quest, and he (Mr. Bell) assisted him
in examining the Natives, with the
earnest desire to get every acre that was
reasonably due to Mr. Busby, but the
Natives stated positively that they had
not sold all the land to him. Well, he
(Mr. Bell) was not satisfied with that;
the Natives admitted the deed to Mr.
Busby, and said it was quite true they
had sold him some land. Of course they
did not understand a word of the deed.
He might say, however, that in every
transaction between Mr. Busby and the
Natives that gentleman always acted in
the most straightforward and upright
manner; but he had been mistaken, not
only in the extent of territory which he
supposed he had purchased, but in the
extent to which the Natives had a right
to sell. He (Mr. Bell) was not satisfied
with the denial of the Natives of their
sale, and in the case of Ngunguru sent
up surveyors with instructious to go and
survey every acre of land which could
possibly be got under the original deeds
for Mr. Busby, telling the Natives
at the same time that they would lose
nothing by giving it up. Well, the
survey proved that of which his own
eyes afterwards satisfied him, namely,
that there was not the land which the
arbitrators, in total ignorance of the
transactions, and without having taken
the trouble to say anything about the
matter, had awarded. He (Mr. Bell)
visited the spot after having sent the
surveyors, and to his unbounded astonish-
ment, after having taken an immense
deal of trouble, the land was simply not
in existence He stood upon the ground,
and saw the hills around him, the man-
grove swamps and the muddy river, and
he said “ Where is this vast territory ?”
If the House had decided to refer this
claim to arbitration on the assurance
that the land had been purchased by Mr.
Busby, then he said it had been misled,
and he was bound to say to the House,
“If you are going to investigate this
case, you must make provision that the
evidence which was taken before succes-
sive Commissioners should be examined.”
He should have felt bound to say to the
the title being of an inchoate or im-
perfect character.
With regard to the third purchase, that
at Ngunguru: this title was never referred
to the Commissioners, and it was not
till the Act of 1858, which enabled Mr.
Bell to take cognizance of it, that an
investigation was made. The difficulty
to which he alludes arose in this way.
Two years after the land was purchased,
and after a saw mill and other expensive
buildings had been erected, the Natives
told the manager, that they had marked
out a new boundary which would be all
that we should get, “as the Government
would only allow 2560 acres, and they
would keep the remainder to themselves,
as the Government had no right to it,
and should not get it ” The two chiefs
whose names were first signed to the
title deed, were taken before Mr. Bell’s
Court, and acknowledged the original
title deed when it was produced to them,
as well as that the money and the pro-
perty specified therein, which at Sydney
prices amounted together to £550, had
been given to them. But they demurred
to the boundaries specified in the deed—
and described the boundaries as those
which they had proposed on hearing that
the Government would not allow more
than 2560 acres. It is more than prob-
able that after the lapse of nineteen
years they had altogether forgot the
original extent of the purchase, and
were taken by surprise when they found
it described in the deed. When Mr. Bell
sent a surveyor, four years after this
investigation, with instructions to survey
any land the Natives would allow, the
present generation altogether scouted the
titles—saying that Mr. Busby had not
beSn on the land for twenty years, and
had given up all right to it. But
after a fortnight’s negotiation, the old
men prevailed upon them to allow
about 1,100 acres to be surveyed.—
During Mr. Busby’s absence in Eng-
land they got a Crown grant for the har-
bour frontage, which they sold, to the
extent of 260 acres. But finding that their
application for further grants would be
opposed in the Native Lands Court, they
would appear to have altered their tactics;
for on the completion of the Wangarei
survey, my agent was asked by one of
the chiefs who certified the survey, “when
I proposed to have the Ngunguru land
surveyed ?’’ and stated that it was of great
extent, and the Natives were now willing
that it should be surveyed.


House, “ Do not accept a preamble which
asserts what I deny to be the fact; if you
are going to pass any Act at all, you must
take the evidence into consideration, in
which you will find, —first, that the claim
was voluntarily brought into Court by
Mr. Busby; secondly, that it was taken
out of Court by himself; thirdly, that it
was brought before successive Land Com-
missioners ; fourthly, that it was proved
that he had not extinguished the native
title, and it had to be extinguished by
the Crown ; fifthly, that I had carefully
investigated the case. He had thought
it his duty, in consequence of the hon.
member for Christchurch declining to
accede to his request that he would not
read the preamble, to make this state-
ment, which he would not otherwise have
done. He was bound to say that the
preamble —upon which the whole claim
rested —did not contain a correct state-
ment of the case, and would never have
been inserted if he had been present
when the Bill passed. Still, now that
the Act had been passed, no one was
more anxious than himself to have it
fairly carried out; and it was the duty
of the House to interpose against any
action which had a tendency to defeat
the operation of the Act. If he had been
in Auckland at the time the Superinten-
dent withdrew the lands from sale, he
should have told him he was wrong in
flying in the face of the Act.
On the 3rd of August the following
proceedings are reported in Hansard : —
PRIVILEGE.
Mr. Fox. —Before proceeding with the
business of the House I wish to bring
under its notice a matter of personal
nature, and it is with very great pain
that I have to do so, as the cicrumstances
of the case constitute one of the grossest
breaches of privilege which has ever
been committed towards this House, and
are an attempt at intimidation, levelled
at the Government of the Colony, such
as has never been practised. I will not
make any allusion to the preliminaries
of the case, further than to remind the
House that on Friday last it was pleased
to indulge a gentleman well known here
as a claimant for land, Mr. Busby, with
an opportunity of speaking in support of
his claims at the bar of the House, an
opportunity which he took advantage of
to the extent of two hours. On the
following morning one of my colleagues
received a letter, which I will read by
permission of the House. In regard to
the opening words, I will remark that
no person has any right to attempt to
shield himself from the consequences of
The letter addressed to Mr. Fox was
written without any intention of its
being seen by any one before it appeared
in the public newspapers. But when
passing Mr. M cLean’s office it occurred
to Mr. Busby that he would have cause
to complain of him for taking such a
step without first communicating with
him; after the very friendly exertions
he (Mr. McLean) had made to have his
case brought to a settlement. Not find-
ing Mr. McLean in his office, he sat down
there, and wrote the annexed note. Mr.
Fox was not properly in possesssion of
the letter addressed to him; it ought to
have been returned to the writer by Mr.
McLean within one hour after he received
it; but it was not returned till late at
night, when it came enclosed in a note
from Mr. Fox.


his action by marking his communication
as “ private and confidential,” and my
honorable colleague therefore very pro-
perly brought the matter under the
notice of the Cabinet:—
“ Most private and confidential.
“My Dear Sir, —I was on the way to
have the enclosed published in the news-
papers, when it occurred to me that it
would be injustice to the friendship you
have shown me were I not to show it to
you, and give you the opportunity of pre-
venting the necessity for its publication,
by conveying to me an assurance that
the Government will give its full support
and influence to the Bill now before the
House. If you find yourself in a position
to give me that assurance, destroy this
note, if not, pray return it to me before
two o’clock, as I have no copy of it.
Need I add that no person knows, or
shall know anything of the enclosed
until it should be necessary to publish it.
—Yours very truly, James Busby.”
I will read to the House the letter
which was enclosed :
“Wellington, 31st July, 1869.
“To the Hon. Mr. Fox, Premier Minister
of the Colony of New Zealand.
“ Sir, —You are a lawyer, and ought
to know something of jurisprudence.
You are in the position of a statesman
who ought to be alive to the importance
of keeping the public faith inviolate.
But whale you gave scant, if any, atten-
tion to a man pleading for the payment
of a debt due to him by the Colony and
. secured to him by an Act of the Colonial
Parliament, you took your seat on the
Treasury Bench to listen with apparent
complacancy to the proposition of an ex
post facto law to dissolve the obligations
of a solemn contract and to pay that
debt with a composition of something
like eighteen pence in the pound.
“Is it nothing, Sir, to you that the
person at whose instance this monstrous
proposition was brought forward was
guilty of conduct, in his public capacity
of Superintendent of the Province of
Auckland, which, if acting in a private
capacity, would have subjected him to
the punishment due to a fraudulent
bankrupt. Is it nothing that he trampled
the law under foot, and treated the sig-
nature of the Queen’s representative
with contempt, dishonoring the bills to
which the law required him to give effect?
“ You will not Sir, have forgotten
that, in the letter dated the 6th of the
present month, I was informed that the
Government would offer no objection to
a proposition made at the instance of
two and agreed to by five others, of the
This letter leaves little room for com-
ment, it is full and explicit enough.
Mr. Fox said respecting it on another
occasion that it was “ a letter containing
calumnious, false, insulting and deroga-
tory assertions.” If these assertions
were not true they would no doubt be
calumnious, insulting, and derogatory
but there is not a word in the letter that
is not literally true ; and the public will
judge between Mr. Fox and Mr. Busby
on which side truth and right lie. It is
no doubt necessary to the transaction
of business in a public assembly that
each member should assume, or appear
to assume, that what is stated and done
in that Assembly is stated and done in
good faith. But no such reserve is neces-
sary on the part of the outside public.
The offence of the letter is—not that it
was written —but that there should have
been occasion for its being written. It
may possibly be deemed consistent with
good taste in a Prime Minister, as well
as with his privilege as a Legislator, to
charge another gentleman with an offence
which would subject him to transporta-
tion, on such grounds as this. But Mr.
Fox overrates the authority due either
to his position or his profession, if he
persuades himself that he can in this
case make it be believed by any person
competent to form a judgment on the
subject, that he is to be regarded in
any other light than as the agent of
the Colony bound to fulfil its public
engagements. The assumption of its
being of the character of a threaten-
ing letter addressed to a Judge is too
absurd to require refutation. It is pre-


Auckland members, forming a majority
of the members from that Province not
receiving salary from the Superinten-
dent, by which I made great sacrifices of
my legal rights on the condition of
obtaining without further delay the
payment in cash or debentures of
£36,800 adjudged and awarded to me
under an award which the law said shall
not be set aside on any grounds what-
ever, provided it was agreed to by the
Superintendent of the Province of
Auckland and a majority of the
members from that Province.
“ Has it then came to this that the
action of the Government is to be regu-
lated by such a person as this ?
“ If, Sir, you had honored me by at-
tending in your place last evening, while
I was addressing the House, you woujd
have heard read a leading article from the
Sydney Morning Herald which would have
showed you how much the eye of the
public of that Colony is upon the trans-
actions of the Government. I pray your
attention to the last paragraph of that
article, assuring you, that if the Govern-
ment repudiates this debt, I shall lay the
whole transaction before every member
of the Stock Exchange in England as
the readiest way of convincing the
English Government of the necessity of
changing a constitution under which the
highest duties of government are sacri-
ficed to the necessities of men holding
its offices. The paragraph I refer to is
the following:—
“ * It is honorable to the people of
New Zealand that they have recognised
claims which are well-founded, however
onerous. They may have been deferred,
but it is something that, under the
regime of responsible Government,
burdens entailed by the policy of former
years have not been cast aside. People
who keep faith and give signal examples
of this practice, can never stand ill in
the monetary world, for they have that
virtue which, beyond all others, it is
most disposed to prize. There are no
limits to the credit which is sanctioned
by confidence, and built, not merely
upon the power but the established will
to do right.
“ I have the honor to be,
“ Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
“ James Busbv.”
That is a copy made by my secretary.
I returned the original letter, as I felt it
would be an insult to let it lie on my
table. There are three courses open to
me, which I might pursue —the first
would be to hand the matter over to the
cisely such a letter as any creditor was
entitled to write to a debtor who had
allowed eighteen months to pass without
making provision to redeem his dis-
honored bills, or to discharge a judgment
debt. Mr. Pox, as head of the Govern-
ment and agent for the public, could not
be exempted from the rules of law and
morality which are binding upon private
individuals on the contrary, he was
bound to give them effect, “not only with
good faith, but with punctilious prompti-
tude, and in a spirit of liberal courtesy.”
The following is the rule of civilised
Governments in such matters, as laid
down by the most eminent of modern
jurists, the late Mr. Justice Storey.
“ The natural presumption in such cases
is that the Contract was made upon the
credit and responsibility of the Govern-
ment itself, as possessing an entire
ability to fulfil all its just contracts, far
beyond that of any private man; and
that it is ready to fulfil them, not only
with good faith, but with punctilious
promptitude, and in a spirit of liberal
courtesy Such being the case where
there is only a “ presumption ” of the
liability of a public agent. But in the
present case there was no room left for
the “ presumption,” merely, of an exist-
ing contract—for an express and solemn
contract was entered into on the faith
of a specific Act of the Legislature apply-
ing to that contract alone, and enacting
that the award to be given under it
“ shall be final and conclusive, and shall
not be set aside on any ground what-
ever.”
In civilized countries where law is
respected, and a judicial decision con-
sidered to be an end of contention,
it would be difficult to obtain belief
for the fact of a public administrator
having set himself deliberately to defeat
the law to which it was his duty to give
effect. But how much more difficult of
belief that he should have been suffered
in an Assembly of Legislators, whose
law he had set aside, to propose an act
of public bankruptcy, not only to con-
done his own act, but to make the
Legislature a participator in it. Could
Jack Cade have gone beyond this if he
had succeeded in establishing a “ Respon-
sible Government ” in his day ? High of-
fice like “ misfortune would seem to bring
one acquainted with strange bedfellows.”
As to the terms in which Mr. Fox found
it convenient to characterise the letter.
It might possibly be considered a breach
of privilege, and on being informed of
this, Mr. Busby lost no time in addressing
a letter to the Speaker in which he stated


Attorney-General, to see whether it does
not come within the provision of those
Acts relating to threatening letters, in
which case the author would be liable to
transportation. I will not, however,
take that step ; Mr. Busby is an aged
man, who has been in his day a good
colonist of New Zealand, and has filled a
commission under the Imperial Govern-
ment, and I will not place him in so
humiliating a position. Again, I might
move that he be called to the bar of this
House to answer the gross breach of
privilege which he has committed. I
will not do that. After due considera-
tion, I propose to lay the letters on the
table of the House for the information of
honorable members, in order that the
House might take action if it thinks pro-
per ; and when the Bill, with regard to
which the Government of the day is
threatened and endeavoured to be coerced
in its action, is called on for its second
reading, I shall move that the notice be
struck off from the Order Paper, and that
it be not again inserted during this ses-
sion.
On the 28th August, on the motion
for the second reading of the Land Claims
Arbitration Act Amendment Act, —
Mr. Fox, in reply, said that every
member of the House knew that there
was a second Bill which was promoted
by the authorities of the Province of
Auckland : and he thought that the pro-
per course would have been, had such a
course been possible at present, to have
referred both bills to a Select Committee.
It was utterly impossible for the House,
whether in Committee of the whole or
not, to do justice as between the two
proposals, whether at this period of the
session or at any other period. Honorable
members could not give such close atten-
tion as was necessary, nor had they suffi-
cient material before them for a proper
understanding of the question. It could
only be fairly settled by an investigation
by a Select Committee, at which the
parties interested could be brought face
to face and be examined. As far as he
had been able to master the merits of the
question, he entirely coincided with the
views of the representatives of Auck-
land. On the merits alone, then, he
would oppose this Bill of Mr. Busby’s,
but before coming to the merits of the
question at all he must appeal to the
House not to allow its dignity to be de-
graded, as it would be if the threats used
by Mr. Busby were passed over without
most severe rebuke. The hon. member
that he was wholly unconscious of wri-
ing what might be accounted a breach of
privilege, and had no intention of doing
so—and therefore requested that he
might be allowed to withdraw the letter,
saying that it ought not to have been
addressed to him. But the Speaker re-
turned the letter saying that it ought
not to have been adddressed to him.
On which Mr. Busby wrote in the same
terms to Mr. Fox, who replied that
“Nothing will be satisfactory except
the fullest apology and retractation.”
As to what would have happened in the
House of Commons: as there is no
precedent for a British Minister repudi-
ating a judgment debt, so, as Mr.
Travers truly said, a parallel case could
not have occurred there.


for Christchurch, speaking on another
question, had said that if such a threaten-
ing letter as had been sent by Mr. Busby
had been sent to a member of the Imperial
Government, it would have been at fence
tossed into the waste-paper basket. But
he (Mr. Fox) had no hesitation in saying
that if such a letter, referring to two
Bills pending in the House af Commons,
had been sent to a member of the Im-
perial Government, the writer would have
found himself in Newgate within the
shortest possible time; that he would
only have been released on a retractation
of the letter, and making the most ample
apology for having written it; and that
until there had been such retraction and
apology, the House of Commons would
not have allowed the Bill promoted by
the party or his friends to be considered
for an instant. After retractation and
apology, the writer might have been
released from Newgate on payment of the
heavy fees incident to such a case, and
his Bill might then have been proceeded
with. He was sorry that any honorable
member of that House could attempt to
palliate the conduct of one who had
written a letter containing calumnious,
false, insulting and derogatory assertions,
the writer of which had refused to retract
or to apologise for one word of that letter.
The Government would be no party to
this Bill of Mr. Busby’s being dealt
with in any way, until Mr. Busby had
withdrawn his letter, and had amply
apologised for having written it.
Mr. Travers wished to explain that,
in additiou to his remarks about the
waste paper basket, which had been re-
peated by the honorable member at the
head of the Government, he said that a
parallel case could not have occurred in
England, because there could not be an
appeal to the Imperial Parliament to
ratify or vary an award such as was made
to the House in the present case.
Motion for discharging the order agreed
to.
W. ATKIN, PRINTER, HIGH STREET, AUCKLAND.
