

THERMO-ELECTRICAL
COOKING MADE EASY.
Proved Recipes for guidance
in the use of the " RATIONAL”
Electric Cooking Stove.
(D. CURLE SMITH'S PATENT.)
BY
H. NORA CURLE SMITH.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
KALGOORLIE:
BIRD & ANNEAR, Genera! Printers and Bookbinders. Egan St.
1907.




How to manage the
“Rational” Eleefrie CooKing
Stove.
The great expense of electrical cooking apparatus, and
price charged for current has hitherto made cooking by
electricity quite beyond the reach of people with small in-
comes. Now, however, by the farsighted policy of the
Kalgoorlie Municipal Council, and the fortunate invention
of the “national” Electric Stove, cooking by electricity)
comes within the reach of anyone, as, with current at
per unit, it is little if any dearer than wood. The
saving of mental strain, the comfort of a cool kitchen and
no hot stove to stand over, the immense saving in wear
and tear of cooking utensils, and the delightful cleanliness
of the stove would tell in its favour even if it were a little
dearer than wood, but with careful management it need
cost no more. lam often asked how servants get on with
it, and if they are extravagant. I find that servants of
ordinary intelligence manage it very easily after one or
two lessons. One or two that I have had have been more
successful in its management than I have been. With any
wood, coal, or gas stoves some servants would be extra-
vagant if not watched. In a number of cases where these
stoves have been in use for some time, the average con-
sumption of current has been units, that is equivalent
to less than sd. a day. For a large family the cooking
should be done with an average of five units a day. With
very simple food it should be less.
The lower compartment is for roasting, hot-boxing, cake
baking, braising, and, if desired, stewing-. The centre coil
carries lof an ampere, which gives sufficient heat to con-
tinue the process of braising, or stewing, if the oven is
warmed to 200 degrees to start with.
To roast joints of meat, all the oven switches must be
turned on, likewise for cakes. 350 to 400 deg. F, is a good
temperature for roasting. If the thermometer gives a
reading of a much higher temperature than that it will be


advisable to turn off one switch for a time, this will be
further explained in the recipes. In the top of the oven
there is a movable pad. As a general rule it will only be
necessary to remove this for cooking pastry, as it requires
greater top heat than most things. To get this top heat
you must turn on the BOTTOM switches of the griller, and
slip the tin slide into the grilling drawer so as to deflect
' the heat downwards. If, however, the griller is in use at
the same time the slide will not be necessary as the dish
in the drawer will act as a deflector. It is only for pies
: and small cakes and occasionally for browning puddings
' that it is necessary to remove the top pad of the oven.
; Joints and cakes brown to perfection at a temperature of
, 350 degrees, without removing the pad. Temperature for
i cakes will be further explained in the recipes.
Some puddings, such as rice, custard, prune meringue,
or any that have to bo cooked slowly, can be baked in the
lowest division of the oven. This compartment is also
suitable for stewing, for keeping sauces warm, and so on,
and for warming plates. It is, of course, only useful for
these purposes when joints, or cakes, are being cooked in
the top part of it.
The two side coils each consume current at the rate of
one-third of a unit an hour, the centre coil consumes only
about one-ninth of a unit an hour ; therefore in roasting
or baking with all three coils in use, the cost is at the
rate of thrce j quarlcrs of a unit an hour, and costs
in Kalgoorlie one penny farthing an hour. At this rate a
five-pound joint, surrounded by potatoes, with a pudding
in the bottom compartment, and something else stewing,
can be cooked at a cost of 2d., which allows a full quarter
of an hour for warming the oven.
The middle compartment, or griller, is for grilling, fry-
ing, baking scones, biscuits, small cakes and tarts, and
can be used for browning puddings if the dish and pudding
are not too deep for the drawer. In cooking scones,
pastry, and small cakes, it wull be found that if the griller
is HOT TO START WITH one bottom and two top
switches will give enough heat. The grilling drawer is the
place to prepare breakfast, as one can fry bacon and eggs
(or anything else), make toast, and bake scones, all
while the kettle is coming to a boil in the top division.
The grilling drawer is the only place where damage can
be done by overheating. Thus, if the top compartment
has been in use for some time, or the oven compartment, a
fair amount of heat wall have found its way into the griller.
If, wdren the griller is already VERY warm, all the coils
are turned on for grilling or frying, they will probably
generate far too much heat, and a few' minutes after the
grill is put in the fat will take fire. There is absolutely
NO DANGER to tie- stove if this does happen, but it makes
a horrible mess, and probably burns the meat to a literal
cinder. There are only two things to do if this happens.


The first is, keep the drawer shut, and allow it simply to
burn itself out. This is messy, and everything in the top
compartment gets smoked. The second plan is to pull out
the drawer and smother the flames by slipping a bit of
sheet-iron, or some non-inflammable material, on the top
of the grilling dish. The drawback to this scheme is that
there may not be a sheet of iron handy just at the moment.
In any case turn off all the current until the flames are
extinguished. No harm will come to the coils from such
a conflagration ; they will burn themselves clean again.
Once warned, it is an accident that can only happen
through thoughtlessness, and the absolutely certain way to
prevent it is to test the temperature of the drawer with a
thermometer. If a thermometer is not to be had, then the
griller must be carefully watched. If the coils in the top
compartment have been on for some time, it will probably
be a good rule NOT to turn on IV.. V., VI., the top coils
of the griller. If the grill is not cooking quickly enough,
then turn them all on. The temperature required for
grilling and toasting is (100 deg. F.
The top compartment is for boiling, and stewing, mainly,'
but can bo used for various other things as experience will
show. For instance, if one wants to go out for a tew
hours, and come home just about meal time, one could do
this :
Prepare a stew- of meat and vegetables in a pan
with a close-fitting lid. Set it over the right hand grid
in the top compartment, and turn on switches IT. and 111.
until it comes to .simmering point, then put n thin tin
slide over ■ the hole, put the stew at one side, a small
pan of soup at the other, and a custard pudding beside
them. Put a few small potatoes in the crevices, to bake
in their jackets. Now turn oil No. IT. switch, leaving No.
111. to continue the process of cooking. Shut down the
lids and come back in two and a half 1 lours, when your
dinner will be ready. This can be done just as well in the
oven.
The pudding may have to be browned in the griller, but
that will only take a few minutes. There are many adap-
tations of this plan, which will appeal to busy people.
This dinner has the advantage of being very
economically cooked, as No. 111. switch only carries halt an
ampere, and therefore, will only use one unit in about nine
hours. It is scarcely necessary to point out that the more
one can adapt cooking to the steamer, and stewing, the
less current will be consumed. The steam cooker which
belongs to the stove will be found a most convenient con-
trivance, as it can be used either for steaming or for boil-
If you want to boil a joint, or boil soup, meat, and
bones for stock, you take out the tw'o strainers, also the
ring stand in the bottom, and there you have a fine, large
P°l’ which will hold two and a half gallons of water.
Needless to say that it is also capable of holding a good


sized joint. To bring soup, or steamer, to a boil, it is
best to turn on both Nos. 11. and 111., then when it boils
turn off No. 11., leaving No. 111. only, which, though it
uses very little current, will keep anything boiling ONCE
IT HAS" REACHED BO HANG POINT. Dry frying and
omelets also belong to the top compartment, ami should
be done over the left hand grid, as that carries the most
current. Pan-cates can also be made there, or in the
grilling drawer. The loft hand grid is tit all times the
place to cook things that require much heat.
The kettle must always be re-filled from the fountain,
which is fitted in top compartment ; any soup or vegetable
pan, where water is wanted, should also be filled from
there. In this way we use less current, as the fountain
water is generally lukewarm at least. The fountain
should always be kept filled, so as to absorb waste heat.
To use the stove economically, one has to plan how to
use the heat generated to the best advantage. For in-
stance, in hot-boxing beet in the oven, you can put pota-
toes in their jackets at tin 1 same time as you put in the
moat pot, and .when the meat is cooked your baked pota-
toes are cooked too. Only they must go in a't the same
time as the pot. Again, suppose yon are boiling soup,
or steaming, etc., in the top oven, you can seize the
opportunity of making some little cakes in the griller, or
you can put a milk pudding in the griller—one that will
cook slowly. A lower switch may have to be put on until
the pudding is warmed, but that would only be for a few
minutes. There are numerous other ways by which a care-
ful cook can economise in current.
If a coil burns out it follows that it will give no more
heat. Turn off the main switch, slip the dead coil out of
the two metal clips that hold it, and insert another in its
place. Each coil is provided with a metal attachment at
both ends, which fit into the clips in the oven. The oper-
ation is absolutely simple, but ALII AYS turn off the main
switch before touching a coil in the stove. Having
inserted your new coil, do not forget to turn on the main
switch again. You can always discover which coil is
burnt out by looking at the ampere meter as you turn on
the different switches. If the needle does not move when
you turn on a switch, then that is the dead coil. If you
have no ampere meter, you may find it out by timing the
revolutions of the unit meter as you turn on the switches,
or you may test it very simply by laying a small piece of
paper on each coil. The live coils will very quickly burn
the paper, while the dead ones will leave it still white.
You may also find the fault by turning on one switch at
a time, and holding the hand over or under the coil which
it controls. If heat is felt coming from it, the coil is
right, if not, it has been burnt out, and must be replaced
with a spare one. Nos. 111., V., and IX. barely show on
the ampere meter. If there is any doubt about one of


them, switch on all the current of the compartment,, watch-
ing the needle at the same time, then turn off the half
ampere coil. One can see quite distinctly whether it moves
or not when ALL the current is on, though it is some-
times the merest flicker when the half-ampere switch only
is turned on.
To clean the inside of the oven, turn off the main
switch, slip something over the coils to protect them from
any drops of water, wring a rough cloth out of some very
warm, strong soapsuds, and wipe down the sides and in-
side of door. Turpentine may be used if the sides are
greasy, or monkey soap. Keep the iron side of the top
pad very bright, if it is dull it will not deflect the heat so
well. Do not slop a lot of water about, a damp cloth is
all that is wanted if the oven is not shockingly neglected.
In using the stove economically, it is necessary to
conserve the heat as much us possible. The heat is wanted
INSIDE the OVEN, not in the LOOM. Therefore, do not
open the doors oftener than is necessary, and close them aa
soon as you have turned the meat, or inspected the sauce-
pans. In the same way with the grillcr, when you want
to take out a tray of cakes, lift the tray out and shut the
drawer, in order to store up the heat. Also, when the
utensils are finally taken out of the various compartments,
close the doors at once, and keep them closed, in order to
conserve any superfluous heat. By this means the stove
is always kept WARM, and so it does not take so much
current to heat it again.
Another important point is the pots and pans used.
The thinner the utensil the better will be the result,
heavy iron would waste a huge amount of current in the
process of getting hot, THEREFORE, ON NO ACCOUNT
LSE 11. Enamel is a non-conductor, therefore avoid
enamel ware ; tin pans are cheapest, and wit It reasonable
care last a long time ; aluminum is best of all ; thin copper
is also very good. A steamer, kettle, and grilling dish
are supplied with each stove, but in getting others always
buy the thinnest.
The steamer supplied will hold a large-sized pudding
mould, or basin for beefsteak pudding, in the lower com-
partment, or potatoes, or cauliflower, etc., may be steamed
there, while a small pudding mould and a jar of thin
custard can cook in the large top division, and peas or
beans, etc., can cook in the small division. Another tin
j s . supplied with the steamer for cooking stews, small
joints, making soup, etc. Round the top compartment of
the stove, a water tank is inserted, and will absorb any
heat that would be wasted in the insulation. It must be
kept filled. It will hold nearly three gallons, and all ket-
tles and saucepans should be filled from it. As the water
is generally lukewarm from the waste heat, it can, of
couise, be brouirht to a boil with less current.


The bottom of the kettle, and all steamers, saucepans,
and frying pans must be kept BLACK. Not dirty, but
black. If the bottom gets greasy, wash it with hot water
and soap, but do not use monkey soap, or it will take the
black off. The bottom of all utensils should be DULL
BLACK, while the sides and lids cannot be kept too bright.
This, dull black absorbs heat, while the bright sides pre-
vent radiation, or loss, of heat. These are very important
points in getting good results from the stove. The tank,
which runs round three sides of the top compartment, must
also be kept a dull black. Soap and water only, must be
used to cleanse this, as turpentine or monkey soap would
rub the paint off.
As soon as the kettle has been emptied, it is important
that it should be re filled from the fountain and returned
to the top compartment, that it may absorb any surplus
heat, and so boil more quickly when it is wanted. It is also
advisable not to put more water in the kettle than will
be wanted. Thus, in filling it for breakfast, measure the
supply necessary, and so do not waste current in boiling
an unnecessary amount.
Soup can often be boiled economically in the oven,
especially if something else is being cooked in it at the
same time. A little experience will soon teach the proper
time to use the oven instead of the boiling compartment.
We give a few tried recipes which have been cooked
successfully in a “ Rational ” stove again and again.
When one has had a little experience as to temperature,
any cookery book may be used with perfect safety. Each
compartment is provided with a loop-hole, which can be
utilised for the escape of steam, or for taking the tempera-
ture. Every one should have a glass thermometer capable
of reading up to 600 degrees. To cook with the aid of a
thermometer will save much current, and a very great deal
of worry. I give no elaborate recipes, only a few that
even a novice can follow with success if she attends to the
directions.
In conclusion—what is most wanted in order to get
economy, and good results, is a liberal application of
common sense. A small monthly bill in conjunction with
good and plentiful food, will be a proof of the housewifely
intelligence of the cook.
H. NORA CURLE SMITH.
Kalgoorlie, January, 1907.


RECIPES.
SOUPS.
1. SIMPLE STOCK
Take half a shin of beef to four quarts of water. Cut
off all the beef and slice it. Have the bone sawn in several
pieces. Place it in the steamer, cover with the water
(hot from the fountain in,the stove), add a teaspoonful of
salt, about twenty pepper corns, two blades of mace.
Bring it to a boil, skim off the scum as it rises. Boil
for live hours, add occasionally one cup of boiling water
to keep up the quantity. Then strain through a forfar
towel, and it will be ready for use next day, when the fat
must be carefully removed and set aside to be clarified.
The fat from the shin is the best that can be had, and
should never be thrown away.
Stock should always be made the day before it is
wanted, in order to get it perfectly free from grease. In
cold countries one can add vegetables, such as two onions,
two carrots, one turnip, and some celery leaves, but in hot
countries these must be omitted, or the stock will ferment
before morning. Any trimmings of fowl, rabbit, mutton,
or veal may lie added, and a small piece of ham or bacon
bone is an improvement. Except in very hot weather, this
stock will keep for several days in a cool place.
Bring to a boil with all the current under the left hand
grid, then turn off No. 11., and let it simmer for five or
six hours with only No. HI. This stock is suitable for
any brown, or vegetable soup, or for gravies. Eor white
stock, one must substitute knuckle of veal for shin of
beef.
2. VEGETABLE SOUP
Take one carrot, one small onion, one turnip, and put
them through the mincing machine. Put them in a sauce-
pan with a little bit of butter and brown. Dust in about
half a teaspoonful of rice flour, or maizena to brown with
them. When browned, add four large cups of stock, and
a little pepper and salt. Boil for one hour. Add a hand-
ful of fresh peas twenty minutes before serving.


3. CAMP SOUP :
There are always a few odds and ends of meal and
vegetables in the safe in the morning—perhaps a chop or
two, or some steak, stew, or bones of a joint. Cut up
the meat, put the fat away, break the bones, put them in
a saucepan or jar with any cold vegetables, an onion, and
enough water for the amount of soup you want, a dash
of cayenne pepper, and some salt. Bring to a boil,
simmer for one hour, strain through a wire strainer, press-
ing the vegetables through with a wooden spoon. Return
it to the saucepan to be made thoroughly hot, and serve.
If you have any cold peas do not put them in until after
the soup has been strained. If desired a teaspoonful of
bovril or Liebeg’s extract of beef can be added, but gener-
ally speaking, it is not necessary. Instead of bovril, a
few spoonfuls of concentrated milk (not the condensed stuff)
or fresh cream may bo added. Or less water may be used,
and ordinary skimmed milk be substituted. This can be
boiled on the right hand grid, and one switch
turned off when it boils, or it may be cooked in the oven
in a jar or casserole with all the current on to start with,
then VIII. and X. turned off. If some pudding or stew is
in the oven at the same time, this will often be found an
economical way of cooking.
4. GREEN PEA SOUP
Take two cups of fresh green peas, or one tin of good
tinned peas, three cups of water (or stock), one onion, one
carrot, a few celery leaves, a small sprig of mint, and
pepper and salt. Simmer all together for one hour, then
mash through a wire strainer, keeping back the carrot and
herbs. Return to the saucepan with a teaspoonful of
butter and a few spoonfuls of cream or concentrated milk.
Warm thoroughly, and serve with sippels of fried bread.
If stock is not used, add a dessert spoonful of bovril at
the end, or boil a few bacon bones with the peas. This
makes a nice green soup. Bring to a boil, then simmer
for an hour over a half ampere coil,
5. PEA SC UP WITHOUT STOCK
If the peas are soaked over night, the soup can be made
in an hour and a half, if not, it will take two hours and
a half.
Take one cup of peas, wash them thoroughly, then add
four cups of hot water, one onion, one carrot, and a few
celery leaves, and some pepper and salt. A few rib bones
from bacon, or a ham bone, will be a great improvement,
but are not indispensible. Slice the vegetables, simmer
for two hours, rub through a fine strainer, and return to
the saucepan. Add a little bit of butter and when hot
serve with fried sippets of bread, and sprinkle about a salt
spoonful of powdered dried mint on the soup when in the
tureen.


Bring to a boil, then turn off all except a half-ampere
switch.
6. POTATO SOUP WITHOUT STOCK
Take half-a-dozen fair-sized potatoes, an onion, a blade
of mace, and four cups of hot water. Slice the potatoes
and onion and boil to mush. Put it through
a colander, and return to the saucepan with
three cups of milk, a dash of cayenne pepper,
some salt, and about half an ounce of butter. If
too thick, add more milk. Boil briskly all the time.
This soup can be made quickly if the potatoes are finely
sliced and put on with hot water from the fountain.
7. TOMATO SOLP WITHOUT STOCK:—
Boil about ten fair-sized tomatoes in four cups of water,
one blade of mace, a few blades of celery, half a teaspoon-
ful of white pepper, and salt to taste. Slice the tomatoes,
and boil all together to a pulp. Put through a wire
strainer. Have about a teaspoonful of butter worked into
a dessert-spoonful of flour in a cup, add some hot soup
until it is thin enough to pour, then add it gradually to
the soup, and return all to the saucepan. Now add
slowly a cupful of milk, and warm the whole. Do not let
it boil or the milk will break. Just before serving, add
as much carbonate of soda as will lie on a threepenny bit.
Prcsh milk is almost necessary for this soup, as the
Bacchus Marsh milk is apt to curdle. If Bacchus Marsh or
any other concentrated milk is used, it must be mixed very
carefully after the soup has been re warmed, as it will not
stand the reheating process. Bring to a boil over the left
hand grid and boil briskly with No. 11. switch, turning off
No. 111. when it boils. If celery is not obtainable, a salt
spoonful of well-pounded celery seed should be used.
8. HASTY BROWN SOUP
Take a teaspoonful of butter and rub into it as much
flour and maizena (half and half) as it will take up. Put
this in the saucepan you are going to make the soup in,
and brown carefully over the left hand hole. It must be
slin-ed all the time, and not allowed to burn. When
brown add slowly four large cupfuls of warm water, two
teaspoonfuls of bovril or Liebig’s extract of beef, one large
onion (sliced), a salt spoonful of pounded celery seed, a
tiny pinch of pounded mace, a dash of cayehne pepper,
salt to taste, and half a teaspoonful of burnt sugar. Boil
for fifteen minutes, strain into the tureen and serve. This
°? n foiled anywhere on the stove, and set to the back
of f* lo f°P compartment, or in the lower compartment of
the oven until it is time to strain and serve it.


9. CAMP MULLIGATAWNY OP PEA-STICK SOUP
One tablespoonful of butter, one onion (sliced), one
dessert spoonful of Indian curry powder, two inches of
pea-soup stick, three cups of hot water, one teaspoonful
bovril.
Pry the onion in the butter until brown, then remove
it. Mix the curry powder with a dessert spoonful of water,
and fry it in the butter. Pound down the pea-soup stick,
and add it to the butter and curry, then gradually add
the hot water, then the bovril. Boil all together for a
few minutes and serve hot.
This soup can be made very quickly. If desired, a little
plain boiled rice can be served with it in a separate dish.
Boil over the right hand hole with all its current.
10. JULIENNE WITH BOVRIL
To four large cups of water allow two ieaspoonfuls of
bovril or Liebig’s essence of beef, one onion cut into the
tiniest fragments, one carrot cut into pieces about half an
inch long, and very thin, one turnip the same way, a pinch
of pounded celery seed or a blade of celery cut Very small.
Season with pepper and salt, boil from twenty minutes to
half an hour, according to the age of the vegetables. Boil
over right hand hole with all the current.
11. SCOTCH BROTH (Old Scotch recipe) :—
Broth is made of beef or mutton, and all superfluous
fat must be cut off. Put into a pot three quarts of cold
water along with a cupful of pearl barley, and let it boil.
When it boils, put in two pounds of the best part of neck
or back ribs of mutton. Allow it to boil gently for an
hour, skimming occasionally. Then add one carrot and
two small turnips, cut into squares, one onion finely
shredded, also a couple of carrots and turnips simply cut
in half. Leeks may be used instead of a large onion, or
small spring onions. Less carrot and turnips can be used,
and a cupful of finely shredded cabbage or greens substi-
tuted. Bring to a boil again, and boil gently for an
hour. If green peas are in season, a few will be a pleasant
addition to the broth, and should be dropped in twenty
minutes before the end. Season with salt only, and skim
off every particle of fat before serving.
The meat, which is not supposed to be over cooked, is
served as a second course, and should be garnished with
the uncut pieces of carrot and turnip, and a little of the
broth as gravy. Boil over the right hand hole, when it
boils, turn off No. II. The half-ampere coil will boil it
gently.
12. RICE SOUP :—
This is generally made from the liquid that a joint of
mutton has been boiled in. Take eight cups of mutton


stock, add half a cupful of finely cut young carrots and
turnips, two spring onions finely shredded, and three
dessert spoonfuls of rice. Boil for ten minutes, then add
a cupful of young green peas, and a teaspoonful of finely
chopped parsley. Boil again for twenty minutes, and
flavour with salt only. Cook over the right hand hole
with all the current until it boils, then turn off No 111
BOILING BEEF OR MUTTON.
13. BOILING BEES’ OR MUTTON
Boiling joints of beef or mutton can be done in the
ordinary way by putting the joint in the steamer, covered
with hot water, as usual, and allowing one quarter of an
hour to the pound after the water boils. But a much
more economical, and equally satisfactory way, is to hot-
box it, for which I will give two or three recipes.
14. TC HOT-BOX CORNED BEEF
. lave a -I olll * s& y> six P ou nds of silverside of corned
beef. Thoroughly wash it, then put it in the steamer or
any pot (thin) big enough to hold it, and cover it with
hot water. Shut the lid tightly down, and put it in the
oven four and a half hours before dinner time. Bring it
to a boil with all the current on, then turn off the two
side switches, and leave the main one on for half an hour
en turn it off also, thus leaving no current on at all’
Never open the oven door from the time the pot boils
until dinner time Then open it and take out P the meat,
he cooI W l ?n pe + f Ctl . y CO ° kecL Carrots and turnips may
the meat " pot U i^ 7 mUSt be P ut in ™th
™ e , at ; Potatoes in their jackets may be baked round
the pot, but they must be medium-sized, and put in at the
same time as the meat as the door must ne/er be opened
TheV 1 ? 6 P°Vf, boil ™g-. Spices may be added if desired
The beef should be allowed to cool in the brine.
IS. TO HOT-BOX MUTTON
hot W we+ the then put Hin the pot and cover with
hrLuTf ’ f n -i aC ? d , S ° me salt - Put Uin the oven and
bmgto a boil with all the current on. For a six-pound
lomt, four hours before dinner will be enoimh • When H
comes to a boil, skim it, and bring to a bod again then
swi+el the i Centre Tn half an toar turn-off
be cocked als °’ whG ? dlnne . r time comes it will
which can be n - Wlt A P ars ' onion, or caper sauce,
wmcn can be cooked m the top compartment.


16. BOILED BRISKET OF BEEF
This is an excellent way to boil fresh or salt brisket.
Only give it half an hour longer with the centre switch
than any other joint.
17. HAM :
Ham can be boiled to perfection on the hot-box prin-
ciple. It will take longer than beef. Soak a ham for
three hours in water, longer it it is very salt, then put it
in the boiling pot with enough hot water to cover it. Put
it in the oven with all the current on, when it comes to a
boil skim off the scum. Then shut down the lid tightly,
put weights on it if necessary, shut the door, and in 15
minutes shut off the two side switches. Leave the centre
switch on for half an hour longer, then turn that off and
do not open the oven door for twelve hours,when the ham
can be taken out and skinned, and sprinkled with tine
brown bread crumbs. This is for a moderate-sized ham.
The most convenient time to cook a ham is at night, after
the evening meal has been cooked, then it can be left in
the oven over night. It will be all the better if allowed
to cool in the brine.
ROASTING.
18. ROAST BEEP, MUTTON, LAMB, VEAL and PORK
In the “ Rational ” oven meat takes about 15 minutes
to the pound of roast, a small joint ; but 20 minutes for a
large joint will cook it thoroughly. Wipe the joint with a
damp cloth, then flour carefully all over, and set it on a
low stand in the baking dish. Have some dripping in the
baking dish, and smear a little on the joint too. Have
the oven heated up to at least 330 degrees, put in the
meat and close the door. At the end of 30 minutes turn
the meat, and shut the door. Now test the oven without
opening the door. If the temperature rises above 400
turn off a side switch for a time. Turn the meat from
time to time, and baste it with some of the fat, but not
on any account oftener than every 20 minutes. The oven
should never be allowed to get beyond 400 deg. F., or the
meat will scorch. Veal and pork should be allowed a few
minutes longer to the pound.
When serving, it is quite possible to make gravy in the
baking tin, but we strongly recommend making the gravy
of stock, quite separately, and having it ready in the top
compartment ; then if you pour the contents of the baking
pan into a basin, the gravy from it can be effectively used


afterwards for soup or making up cold meat. Gravy made
in the baking pan after a joint has been roasted is almost
always greasy. Meat should always be turned with tongs,
or by hand, as sticking a fork in allows the juice to run
out, and makes the joint tough.
19. ROAST FOWL
When the fowls are drawn and singed, wipe them
thoroughly inside and out, and stuff them with the follow-
ing mixture A few slices of minced ham or bacon, a cup
of bread crumbs, the liver parboiled and minced, a tea-
spoonful of parsley minced, an egg and a tablespoonful of
milk. Fill up the breast skin with this and secure the
skin on the back with a small skewer. Put the balance
of the stuffing inside. Truss the fowl and tie some thin
slices of fat bacon over the breast, which is always apt to
get cooked before the legs are ready. Twenty minutes
before the end, pull off the bacon, baste the fowls well, and
dust some flour over the breasts in order to brown: them
nicely. Give a couple of young fowls weighing about two
and a half pounds when cleaned, an hour and a half to
cook. The oven must be at least 350 deg. F., when they
are put in, and must be kept up to that heat all the time
Put the top pad down as near them as possible in order
to deflect the heat. Poultry requiring a keener heat than
joints of meat. Baste the fowls every 20 minutes with
lard or butter. Serve with brown, and bread sauce.
20. TO ROAST DUCKS
Clean and wipe with a damp cloth. Truss and stuff
the ducks with sage and onion sauce, as follows Slice
two or three onions of moderate size. Boil them for five
minutes with eight or ten sage leaves. This takes the
strong coarse flavor out of them. Drain them, and chop
them small, and cook over the left hand grid for ten
minutes in a tablespoonful of butter, add a cupful of fresh
bread crumbs fust before taking them off, and some salt
sepp5 epp , er - Stuff th ® breast of the ducks and secure the
with on thf hack. Put the rest of the stuffing inside
fTwk 10 f hopped - u P liver. Roast in the same manner as
owls, and serve with brown, and apple sauce.
21. ROAST RABBIT
■ , ?'' ( j p , tlle head on the rabbit w hen dressing it. Soak
drv Stuff a +t m Salt t nd watt!r for an hour, then wipe it
fm in •* i he Paunch as for w ith the liver chopped
to V. T SCW , U ? - Skewer the hind and fore legs close
r and skewer the head between the shoulders
, of , baCOn the back, set it on a grid
Baste fro. i g - dl f h - and Warm the oven to 350 F
Baste from time to time, and twenty minutes before serv


ing remove the bacon, or buttered paper from the back, in
order to brown it. The rabbit must be young. Serve
with brown gravy and red currant jelly. Time to cook,
from an hour to an hour and a half, at 350 degrees l .
STEWS AND CURRIES, &c.
22. BABBIT COOKED IN ITS OWN JUICE
Soak the rabbit in salt and water for an hour. Cut
it up and then dry. Lay it in a dish with a tight-fitting
lid, with a teaspoonful of butter. Set this in a sauce-
pan of water, and bring to a boil over the right hand grid.
When boiling, turn off No. 11. switch and cook it for an
hour with No. 111. Put a couple of blades of mace with
the rabbit to stew. When cooked lift the pieces on to a
hot dish to keep warm. Pick out the mace, and add two
tablespoonfuls of concentrated milk (not condensed) or
cream to the liquid, add also some pepper and salt.
Thicken with a teaspoonful of maizena, add half a tea-
spoonful of finely chopped parsley, return the rabbit to the
pan for a few minutes and serve.
23. INSULATED CHICKEN
This must be cooked very slowly. Draw, singe, and
wash the chicken. Then cut off the legs, and the wings,
out the pinions off at the first joint, cut the entire breast
away from the back, and cut it right through in three
cross sections, cut the legs through at the drumstick joint,
cut the back in four and lay it and the giblets in salt and
water for half an hour to draw the blood out. Now lay
all except the breast in a saucepan with a cupful of white
stock, with one onion, one blade of mace, a few parsley
leaves, some peppercorns, and one drop of oil of cloves.
Bring to simmering point over either grid, then draw to
the back of the top compartment, while something else
cooks on the grid. The chicken must not keep simmering,
but only hot at, say, 200 deg. F. or even less, for an hour,
then lay in the breast pieces, and stew for another half
hour. Keep the lid closely fastened down. Then lift out
the chicken (the' back, giblets, and pinions need not be
sent to table), and keep it warm. Strain the gravy
through a fine wire colander, add half a cup of Bacchus
Marsh or other concentrated milk, or fresh cream. Thicken
with a teaspoonful of smoothly-mixed flour or maizena,
add some salt, and return the chicken to the pan for five
minutes to warm up perfectly. Lay the chicken in the
middle of the dish, pour the sauce over it, and garnish
with slices of hot hard-boiled egg, with a little bit of the
liver on each circle.


24. EGG AND BEEF BRAWN
Take half a shin of beef and cover it in a pot of hot
water adding salt, a few peppercorns, and a blade of
mace/ Let it boil gently over the right hand grid until
the meat is quite tender. Then cut off the best pieces of
glutenous meat, and some of the fat. Return all the rest
to boil for a couple of hours. When the glutenous beef
has cooled and set, cut it into dice (if cut when hot it
will be stringy and ugly), put it in a saucepan with a
tablespoonful of tomato sauce, a dessert spoonful of Wor-
cester sauce, and, if necessary, a little salt. To every cup
of chopped beef take a cup and a half of long boiled stock.
Simmer together for ten minutes. To every cup of chopped
beef allow three hard-boiled eggs. Prepare a basin or
mould by rinsing it with water, line it with half slices of
hard-boiled egg, and carefully spoon the beef mixture into
it. Put the balance of the egg in the centre of the dish.
This will set into a stiff jelly, and is much nicer than
brawn without eggs. Ox head may be substituted for
shin but is much more troublesome to prepare. When
serving, garnish with parsley and sliced beetroot, or small
tomatoes cut in two.
25. BEEFSTEAK PIE WITH EGGS
Boil three eggs hard, peel, and cut in quarters. Take
two pounds of good steak, cut rather thin, cut it in strips
about two inches wide, flour each piece, sprinkle pepper
and salt on it, put a quarter of an egg on each piece, and
roll lightly, pack in the pie dish with a small jar, cup, or
pie raiser in the centre, pack any extra eggs in the spaces,
half fill the dish with water, cover with paste, and bako
for an hour and a half in a hot oven. Pull out the pad,
and put the pie as high up as possible. Have the oven at
a temperature of 380 deg., and turn on the lower grilling
drawer switches five, minutes before putting the pie in.
20. POTTED MEAT
Take a pound of fillet of beef and a quarter of a pound
of bacon. Cut them up and pack them in a jar with some
pepper and salt, a salt-spoonful of powdered
mace and a tablespoonful of water. Cover the jar and set
in the back of the oven, or the top compartment, with a
moderate heat, for an hour. It must not boil. Then put
it twice through the mincing machine, or pound it in a
mortar, and put it through a wire colander. When
smooth, put it in a saucepan with a quarter of a pound
of butter, a tablespoonful of anchovy sauce, a tablespoon-
ful of ketchup, half a salt-spoonful of cayenne pepper.
Mix over a grid, stirring all the time, when all is thorough-
ly mixed, and very hot, pack it into small jars or bottles.
Melt a little butter, and pour in the top of each, cover and
put away in a cool place. This is excellent for sandwiches.


or for serving: as a relish at breakfast or lunch. It will
keep for a long time if the butter is intact, but when that
is broken it must be used quickly.
Any cold meat or fowl can be made up in this way.
27. HUNTEE’S PIE
Take a stale 21b. loaf, either a pan or cottage one. If
pan, it must have crust on both ends. Cut off the top,
scoop out the inside, and plunge in cold water for a
minute, then butter the inside and fill up with layers of
under-done cold meat, chopped onion, and potatoes. Any
scraps of cold carrot, parsnip, etc., may go in. Put
pepper and salt between each layer. Cut the meat in
small pieces, and slice the vegetables. Pill right to the
top, add half a cup of gravy, or good stock, put the slice
of crust on the top, and bake in the oven at a temperature
from 320 deg. to 350 deg. Set the loaf in a dish with a
scrap of dripping to keep it from burning, and set the dish
on the middle shelf. The pie can be sent to table with a
napkin round the base, if desired. Before serving, pour
in a cupful of good gravy, or a sauce of fresh. tomatoes.
28. STEWED BEEF FILLET
Take a 21b. piece of lean fillet out in a thick lump. Lay
finely-cut slices of onion in the bottom of a saucepan, with
a little bit of butter. Flour the fillet all over, and brown
with the onions and butter, over the left hand grid. When
brown, add a wine-glass of port wine, a wine-glass of
stout, and a table-spoonful of ketchup. Draw to the back
of the upper compartment, and stew gently for two hours.
It must be right off the grid, with only a very mild heat,
as it must barely simmer. Something else can be cooking
on the grid to utilise the heat. Never raise the lid,
simply shake the pan occasionally. When cooked, lift out
the steak and thicken the gravy with a teaspoonful of
flour, add pepper and salt, boil for two or three minutes,
pour round the steak, and serve.
29. SOUSED STEAK
Take one pound of good rump steak, cut quite an inch
thick, and score it lightly across at one-inch intervals, lay
in a souse composed of one table-spoonful of vinegar, two
table-spoonfuls of Worcester sauce, and a little pepper.
Soak the steak in this for six hours, timing it from time
to time. Then warm the grilling drawer, and, having
buttered the griller, grill the steak for ten minutes, turn-
ing twice with a pair of tongs. If liked, add a few spoon-
fuls of stock to the souse that remains, a little pepper and
salt, and a very little roux or flour thickening, boil, and
serve round the steak.


30. ROLLED LOIN OF MUTTON
Six pounds of loin will make a nice roast sufficient for
seven or eight people.
Bone the mutton, and remove the kidney and inside fat,
then sprinkle over the boned side some pepper, half a tea-
spoonful of powdered dried herbs, and make a filling of
half a cup of minced ham or bacon, one cup of bread
crumbs, a teaspoonful of minced parsley, a salt-spoonful
of pounded mace, and another of grated nutmeg, two drops
of oil of cloves, some pepper, but no salt. Rub well to-
gether, adding one well-beaten egg. Spread the mixture
over the mutton, and roll lengthways, keeping the thick
side in the middle. Sew the skin and turn up the ends
to keep the dressing in. It can be tied with tape instead
of sewing, and the ends skewered. Do not roll it too
firmly, as the dressing must have some room to swell.
Roast this in the oven at a temperature of 320 deg. for
one hour, then set it aside to cool. When the fat in the
dripping pan is set, remove it, and put the gravy in a
stew pan. Flour the rolled mutton carefully, and lay in
the stew-pan with the gravy, and stew very slowly for two
hours. Then take out the joint, and keep warm. Add
to the gravy one glass of port wine, one glass of ketchup,
and a very little smoothly-mixed flour—about half a tea-
spoonful, or less. Boil it up and pour round the mutton.
When the mutton has been brought to simmering point on
the right hand grid, with both switches turned on. No. 11.
can be turned off. The lid must be kept closed.
31. STEWED KIDNEYS
Take one ox kidney and divide it into pieces about, an
inch square. Carefully remove all fat. Soak the kidney
in lukewarm salt and water for a few minutes, then rinse
them in clean water. Put a dessert spoonful of butter in a
saucepan, which will fit the right hand grid. Roll the
kidney in flour, and when the butter froths in the pan,
drop the kidney in, and stir round until it is all brown,
then add half a cup of water and some pepper and salt.
When that is thoroughly mixed, add another half cup of
water, and allow it to come to simmering point. It can
now be drawn to the right hand griller and stewed slowly,
with No. 111. coil only, for two hours. Serve very hot in
a deep dish, or form a wall of mashed potatoes in a meat
dislg brown them, and pour the kidneys in the centre. In
stewing, care must be taken that the sauce docs not get
too thick and burn. They should be stirred from time to
time, and the sauce should be as thick as cream. If
thicker, add a little water.
32. MINCED COLLOPS
Take a pound and a half of rump steak, and mince it,
keeping back the fat and any gristle. Melt a dessert


spoonful of butter over the left grid, when it froths add
the mince, with a heaped teaspoonful of flour mixed, and
pepper and salt. Stir until it is lightly browned, then
add half a cup of stock, or water, and simmer for twenty
minutes. Serve with strips of toast, or strips of fried
bread in a deep dish. The general mistake is to cook the
collops too long, and much too fast.
33. STEWED STEAK ;
This is a good way to cook tough steak. Cut the
steak in pieces two inches square, roll in flour, and throw
in a pan with a little bit of butter, or good dripping.
Brown thoroughly, then add half a cup of stock, or water,
a tablespoonful of ketchup, and some salt and pepper.
When simmering, draw it half off the grid, and stew for
two hours with the half ampere switch (No. III.). If
necessary, add a little thickening before serving.
34. BEEF OLIVES
Take good rump steak cut thin, cut into strips about
two and a half or three inches wide. Prepare a mixture
of half a cup of bread crumbs, a teaspoonful of chopped
parsley, a teaspoonful of powdered (or, if fresh, minced)
thyme, marjoram, and mint, and powdered celery seed
mixed, a little grated nutmeg, some pepper and salt, and a
table-spoonful of lean bacon, or ham, minced. Mix well
with an egg, and spread some on each piece of beef. 801 l
up and secure either with a small skewer, or by winding a
piece of thread round, and tying it. They must be se-
curely fixed.
Melt a teaspoonful of butter in a stew-pan, pack the
olives in with two table-spoonfuls of ketchup, and one
table-spoonful of stock. Bring them to simmering point
over the right grid, then draw back and turn off No. 11.
They must stew very slowly for two hours. Lay them on
a hot dish, remove the fastenings, add a little thickening
to the gravy, boil up, pour over them, and serve.
This can also be made in one large roll, and either
stewed or baked.
35. TO COOK BEEP, ETC. au casserole :
The fire-proof clay or earthenware saucepans, which are
known as casseroles, are very useful for all sorts of stews,
and can be used must effectively in the “ Rational ” oven.
Beef. —Get a thick piece of beefsteak, say two pounds,
and cut it in inch-thick slices. Mix together some
flour, pepper and salt, and roll each piece in it. Have
some carrots, turnips, parsnips, and onions sliced (the
onions may be kept 'whole). Brown beef and vegetables
in a frying-pan oxer the left grid, pack the browned beef
in the casserole, with the vegetables round it. At the side


out in a bunch o£ sweet herbs, or, if preferred, sprinkle
ome minced herbs over the stew, add two sliced tomatoes,
or failing that, a teaspoonful of vinegar, also half a cup
of’water, and cook slowly for three hours. This can be
cooked in the top compartment if brought to simmering
point, and then placed at one side of the compartment,
while" the steamer, or the kettle grid is full on at the other.
Or it may be cooked on the middle shelf of the oven, with
the centre switch on only, or, if the oven has been in use
for some time for baking or roasting, the casserole may ba
get on the roasting shelf, with all the current on for about
ten minutes, then shut off all the current, shut the door,
and hot-box it, or if roasting or baking is going on in the
oven the casserole may be kept in the lowest compartment
where it will cook comfortably. In that case, however, it
must all be hot when put in.
Mutton can be cooked in this way with celery, turnips,
carrots and parsnips. Cut oft most of the fat, or the
dish will be greasy.
Very aged fowls may be cooked in this way, and are
delicious. Any vegetables may bo used except potatoes,
which go into a mush. Tomatoes, or vinegar, should be
put with tough meat, but many tomatoes will make it
watery. Unless it is a joint that has to be carved, the
meat should be served in the casserole, with a napkin
folded round it. Fowls should be divided, and fried brown,
and any fat cut away.
Veal can be treated in the same way as beef, though
the vegetables and seasoning should always be varied as
much as possible. Cabbage should not be cooked with
these dishes.
Vegetables can be cooked by themselves in this way —
frying them, first in butter or flour, hut green vegetables
are not suitable,
3fi. CURRIED MUTTON:—
Take one pound of lean mutton, cut into small
pieces, and roll in flour. Cut one large onion into thin
slices, also two or three beads of garlic. Put two table-
spoonfuls of butter into a saucepan on the left grid, when
melted, lay in the onions and garlic, and fry a light brown,
then take them out. Mix a dessert spoonful of curry
powder with a table-spoonful of water, and pour into the
butter, fry for a few minutes, then add a dessert-spoonful
of Worcester sauce, and a table-spoonful of tomato sauce,
in a few minutes add the mutton, some white pepper, and
a good dash of cayenne, also half a teaspoonful of salt.
Fry for a few minutes, then add a cupful of stock, or
gravy ; draw to a side, and allow to stew slowly for an
hour. A spoonful of good Indian chutney is an improve-
ment. Soak a cupful of dossicated cocoanut in a little
milk for an hour or longer, then strain it off. Mix into
the milk a teaspoonful of flour, and add it to the curry.


also the juice of half a lemon, or a dessert-spoonful of
lime juice. A grated, or finely chopped, apple in the curry
is an improvement, but is not a necessity. Send the
soaked cocoanut to table in a small dish, also, if obtain-
able, some toasted Bombay ducks (toast them in the
griller at about 350 dog. I'. for six or seven minutes).
Serve the curry in an entree, or vegetable dish, with boiled
rice in another one, and always hand the rice first, as the
Curry should be put on the rice. Beef may be curried with
the same sauce.
37. CURRIED FOWL
Use the same sauce as for mutton, but cut the fowl
into pieces. Cut the legs in three pieces, and out the
breast right across in three pieces, also the back. Stew
very slowly. Serve as for mutton curry.
28. CURRIED RABBIT
Use the same sauce as for mutton, but cut the rabbit
into neat pieces. The rabbit must be soaked in luke-
warm salt and water for an hour. When cut up, dry
thoroughly, and flour before frying.
39. CURRIED FISH
Make a sauce the same as for mutton, but omit the
tomato sauce, and the apple, and put in instead, half a
teaspoonful of anchovy sauce. Clean the fish, cut off the
heads, tails, and fins ; if large fish cut them in slices.
Whiting and garfish, if small, may be curried whole with
their tails through their heads. In currying fish, the fish
does not require frying like mutton. Have the sauce all
ready, with the stock added to it, then lay the fish in,
and stew very gently for half an hour.
40. CURRIED CRAYFISH
This is made in the same way as for fish. Try to keep
the pieces of crayfish as large as possible, and let no shell
go in the curry.
41. CURRIED EGGS
Make a sauce as for mutton curry. Boil three eggs
hard, peel, cut in two, and drop into the curry.
Keep them warm in it for ten minutes. Make a wall of
rice in an entree or small meat dish, and a small centre
mound, thus leaving a hollow ring. Pour the sauce into
this, and set the eggs into the sauce.
42. CURRIED OMELET
Make an omelet of three eggs (see omelet), or take some
cold omelet. Cut it into inch squares, and lay them in


curry sauce, prepared as for mutton curry. Serve with
rice, or on squares of toast,
43. KEDGEREE :
To one cup of boiled rice allow two hard-boiled eggs,
about the same amount of any cold fish, and some pepper
and salt. The fish should always be taken off the bones
while it is hot, as it comes off much more freely, and it
is easier to get the small bones out. Cut the eggs into
small pieces, flake, or break up the fish, and put all into
a saucepan with two table-spoonfuls of butter {frothing
hot). Set it over the left grid, and toss lightly with a
fork until it is piping hot. Heap high on a hot dish, and
serve.
GRILLING.
44. GRILLING
In grilling take tile deep pan winch fits into the drawer.
Place the wire grid-iron in the bottom of it, in order to
keep the grill out of the fat, and let the hot air get round
it. [f the meat is simply placed in the pan without the
grid-iron to raise it out of the fat, it is not grilled, but
fried. Always rub the hot grid-iron with fat, or butter,
before laying a grill on it,
15. GRILLED STEAK
The best steak for grills is fillet, therefore procure fillet
steak cut about an inch thick, rather more than less.
Turn all the current on round the grilling drawer, and
give it five minutes to heat up before putting the grill in,
but put the pan and grid in when you turn on the current,
that it may all be warm. Lay in the steak, turn it throe
times, and cook from twelve to fifteen minutes, according
to thickness. Send it to table without putting any salt
on it, as that simply draws the juice out of the meat on to
the dish, instead of leaving it in the grill. In turning a
grill never run a fork into it, always use some sort of tongs.
A fork lets the juice out, and makes the steak tough.
I urn the top current on for grilling, unless the current
is turned on in the top compartment, when earc must be
taken that the grilling- drawer is not above 600 deg. E.
46. TO GRILL CHOPS
Heat the grillcr as for steak. Chops will take from
ten to twelve minutes, according to thickness. Turn them


every three minutes with a pair of tongs. Send them to
table without any salt.
47. TO CHILL CHICKEN : -
Have the chicken split right through the breast and
back, length ways. Cut oli the pinions and trim it
generally. Heat the griller, etc., rub butter over the
chicken, and the hot griller, and lay it with the inside
downwards on the grid. it will have to be turned thrice,
and must be basted on the top side (without turning)
frequently with butter. It will take about fifteen minutes.
Serve very hot and without putting salt on before it goes
to table.
48. TO CHILL FISH
Small fish may bo grilled without being split, but they
must be scored at inch intervals on their sides. A sharp
knife is wanted for this, and the cut should not bo deep.
Have the griller hot as usual. Brush the fish over with
melted butter; and just before putting the fish' in, brush the
hot grid-iron also, with butter, then lay the fish in, and
in three minutes turn them. In another three minutes
they will probably be ready. Whether split or whole, the
fish should be thoroughly scaled, and have the fins cut off.
The heads are optional, the tails should be left on. If
the fish are too big to grill whole, they should be split up
the middle, and the backbone taken out. This is a simple
process with a sharp knife. Slip the knife down the front
on one side of the bone, then down the front on the other side close
to the bone, and then cut anything that still holds it with
a pair of scissors, to avoid tearing it. Brush on both sides
with liquid butter, also brush the grid-iron, when hot,
with butter. Lay the fish on it, head and tail, cook from
five _to ten minutes according to the thickness, without
turning. When ready sprinkle a little salt over them, fold
them back to their natural shape, and serve.
Grilled fish is particularly light, and therefore a good
way of cooking it for invalids or dyspeptics. A little
pepper may be put inside, if desired.' For grilling, the
fish must be perfectly fresh.
49. LAMB CUTLETS
Heat the griller and grid-iron for five minutes, with all
the current, butler the grid-iron, lay the lamb cutlets in.
Turn them in three minutes ; in six minutes they should
be ready.


FRYING.
50. FRYING:—
There are two methods of frying—one in a kettle of
deep fat, or oil, smoking hot, the other in a frying-pan,
with just a little hot fat or oil. They have both two
names. The first is known as French, or dry frying, the
second as English, or wet frying. Dry frying, and wet
frying, are most appropriate, for, if things are properly
dry-fried they are never greasy, whereas, if they are wet-
fried, they are more often greasy than dry.. If haste ia
necessary, I recommend wet-frying, if not, dry-frying will
be infinitely more satisfactory. For some things it is
simply a necessity. In order to dry fry you must have a
deep pan, with two or three pounds of fat, or oil, in it.
People talk glibly of immersing fish, and so on, in boiling
fat. This is a misconception. Pat boils at 600 deg. P.,
and fish dropped into that would be frizzled black in a
few seconds. When the fat bubbles, it is only evaporating
the water in it, there is jalways more or less. It is at
that stage far too cold for frying purposes. After the
bubbling it will get perfectly still, and presently begin to
smoke. When it has smoked for some time, test it with
a bit of bread, If the bread turns light brown,
it is hot enough for fish, cutlets, fritters, etc., etc. If the
bread is dark brown, it is too hof, so turn off the switch
for a few minutes until it cools a little. For raw potato
chips, potato balls, doughnuts, and various other
things, it is advisable not to have it quite so hot as for
fillets of fish, and lamb cutlets, as the outside would be
cooked before the inside would be ready. If you have a
thermometer, the testing can be done by that. For
filleted fish, lamb cutlets, and thin fritters, the fat should
be at from 450 deg. to 470 deg. F. For larger things,
such as veal cutlets (which always take longer to cook),
potatoe chips, and anything thick, from 410 to 440 deg.
P. will be sufficient. When cooked, lift, up the slide or
frying basket, lay the fish, etc., on some blotting paper,
and set in a warm spot to drain, return the slide to the
kettle, and put more fish in. The fat may get too cold,
if so, w T ait a few minutes to let it warm up again. Thick
fish, veal cutlets, elc., should be put in the oven for a
few minutes to drain, in case they have not been cooked
right through.
In preparing for dry-frying, it is advisable to have a
kettle, or deep saucepan to fit the left grid, with at least
two pounds of fat in it. This will reach 450 deg. in about
twenty minutes. The fat should, if possible, be put in
warm place some time before it has to be used, that it
may absorb any waste heat, and so save direct current.
The saucepan, or kettle, in which it is used should not be
a soldered one, but either rolled, or made in one piece like
a preserving pan. 1 have several times seen solder run


with hot fat in the pan. Put the pan on the grid, as
directed, and keep the lid on until the bubbling commences,
then tilt the lid up to let the steam out freely. Keep it
on in the same way while the fat is smoking, leaving just
enough space for good escape of smoke. This plan will
keep a lot of heat in. The same fat may be used until it
begins to get dark, when it would discolour the fish.
Also, the same fat may be used for fish and fritters. If
it is properly hot it does not become tainted with any-
thing cooked in it. When it has finished its work for the
meal, it should be poured through a hair-gauze wire
strainer, to keep back all sediment, and from time to
time, re-clarified. Pat from wet-frying should never be
put with dry-frying fat, as it spoils its colour and
taints it.
Thin lamb cutlets, and fillets of fish, will only take
about half a minute to dry-fry. They should be taken out
as soon as they are a light-brown.
51. EGG AND BREAD CRUMBS FOR FRYING
It is a good thing to have a good supply of bread
crumbs always* on hand. Have the bread bone-dry, either
by exposure to the air, or by drying slowly in the oven.
Have no dark crusts, or toast, in the bread, as that spoils
the colour of the fish. When dry, put them through a
bread-crumb machine, or a mincing machine. If you have
not got either, roll them with a rolling-pin, and put them
through a wire colander. The crumbs must be small and
even. Egg, should be well beaten up, and have some olive
oil and water added to it. Unless the material to be
crumbed is very large, the whole egg is not required. If
you have half-a-dozen medium-sized whiting filleted, the
following mixture would be enough :—one dessert-spoonful
of whipped-up egg, one toaspoonful of water, and half a
teaspoonful of salad oil. This mixture is much better,
and more easily managed, than pure egg, and, incidentally,
much more economical. Pure egg makes too thick a crust.
The oil never tastes. It is absolutely necessary to have
a brush to put on the egg. Camel-hair is too soft, a soft
bristle brush, or hog-hair, will be better. The fish, or
cutlets, must be dry, therefore dust some flour on a piece
of paper, and shake the fish, or outlets, gently oh it.
This will flour them evenly, and they will just take up the
right amount. Have a second paper with bread crumbs
ready, and as you brush each fillet, or cutlet, with egg,
shake it gently in the bread crumbs. Here, also, they
will just take up the right amount. Lay them on a dish.
It is always better to let them lie ready for some time
before frying. At least an hour, if possible. To dip the
fillet into egg, is a very sloppy and extravagant plan, and
is productive of clumsy-looking dishes. Whether the fish,
or cutlets, are to be dry or wet-fried, they should be ogg-
and- bread-crumbed in the same way.
Crumbed toast biscuits should be used for invalids,
instead of bread crumbs, as they are more easily digested.


52. FISH CUTLETS
Three hard-boiled eggs, three table-spoonfuls of cold
fish, one table-spoonful of boiled rice or boiled potato,
one table-spoonful of butter. Mince the hard-boiled eggs,
bone and pound the fish, add the eggs, rice (or potato),
and pound thoroughly together, until they are a perfect
mash ; add one teaspoonful of anchovy sauce, pepper and
salt, and one table-spoonful of butter. Mix well, and
warm over the right-hand aperture until in a soft mush,
then spread on an oiled plate to cool. When cold, cut
into cutlet shapes, dip in egg and bread crumbs, and fry
in the griller in a little good dripping or butter, or dry-
fry. Serve with anchovy sauce, or plainly.
53. FAGGED TONGUE
Two hard-boiled eggs, two or three table-spoonfuls of
minced tongue, one teaspoonful minced parsley, one
table-spoonful of butter, three table-spoonfuls of gravy, or
stock, one teaspoonful of flour. Pound together,
add the gravy, and warm all together in the top compart-
ment, stirring all the time, until they are in a thick,
smooth mush, then spread on a plate to cool. Divide
into cutlets, or any other shape, dip in egg and bread
crumbs, and fry in the griller or dry fry. Serve with
tomato, or brown sauce. They should stand for some
hours, to harden, before frying.
In using the grilling compartment, keep the drawer shut
as much as possible, while frying is going on, but at the
same time be careful not to let it get beyond 600 deg. F.,
for either frying of grilling.
54. TO FEY FISH—WET FRYING
Have the fish all ready, rolled in bread crumbs, or
batter, ready to dip them in. Put a little fat, or oil, in
the deep grilling pan, and turn on all the current round
the griller. When the fat, or oil, is smoking hot, lay in
the fish and close the drawer. Open in a few minutes,
and turn them if they are brown, when they are lightly
browned on both sides they are ready. Fish in batter
requires a couple of minutes longer to cook, and more fat
to fry in. When cooked lay them on absorbent paper to
dry off the superfluous fat. This must be done in the oven,
or top compartment, to keep them hot.
55'. TO FEY LAMB CUTLETS
Turn on all the current round the griller. Put some
fat in the deep grilling pan, and let it get smoking hot.
Have the cutlets ready, neatly trimmed, and covered with
fine bread crumbs. Lay them in the hot fat, and turn in
three minutes. They will cook in live or six minutes,
unless they are unusually thick.


66. TO FEY BACON
Fill the deep grilling pan with thinly-sliced bacon, put
it in the drawer, then turn on all the current, and while
the griller is heating, the bacon will be cooking. Bacon
should never be put into a very hot grilling drawer. Do
not put any lard or dripping with the bacon.
67. TO FEY BEAINS
Soak the brains in salt and luke-warm water for an
hour, then boil gently for ten minutes, putting them on in
hot water, or stock, with a dessert-spoonful of vinegar and
a little salt. When cool, trim off the skin, divide them)
neatly, brush with egg, dip in bread crumbs, and fry in
hot fat till they are light brown. Serve with thin fried
bacon.
58. BEAINS IN BATTEE
Prepare as above. Have them as dry as possible, dip
in rather thick batter, and drop them into hot'fat. Turn
them when brown.
59. TEIPE IN BATTEE.
Have the tripe thoroughly boiled. Trim the pieces, and
wipe them dry. Dip in batter, and fry in hot fat. Brown
on both sides, and serve with a little crisp bacon. It is
better dry-fried.
BAKED FISH.
60. BAKED WHITING.
Take some medium-sized whiting, clean, and cut the fins
off, also the bones of the shoulder. Then cut them off
the back-bone, running a sharp knife along the back and
sliding it as close to the back-bone as possible. Have some
slices of cod roe, and some bread crumbs mixed with butter,
pepper, salt, and finely-minced parsley. Lay the fillets of
whiting out, and sprinkle on each some of the bread-
crumb mixture, then take half a slice of roe (more or less,
according to size), lay it on the thick side of the fillet,
roll it up and pack it in rather a shallow pic dish, stand-
ing each fillet on end. When the pie dish is full, pour over
it some custard mixture made of one egg, one cup of milk,
and a salt-spoonful of salt. Bake in the oven at about
280 deg., or in the griller. It must be gentle heat, and
will take fully halt an hour to bake a medium-sized dish.


It can be cooked in the lower compartment of the oven
when something; else is cooking above, but will then taka
longer. Before serving, stick a tiny leaf of parsley into
each fillet. The cod-roe may be omitted. Garfish can
also be served this way. Serve cold or hot.
61. TO BAKE GARFISH
Clean the garfish, cutting off the fins and the head, but
leaving the tails on. Split them open with a sharp knife,
and take out the back-bone. Have some bread crumbs
ready, mixed with a little bit of butter, some pepper and
salt, and chopped parsley. Sprinkle some of the mixture
on each fish, then roll them up and pack them in a shallow!
pie dish, with the tails standing up. Take equal quan-
tities of vinegar and water, and fill up the pie dish until
it begins to appear round the garfish. Then sprinkle soma
more of the buttered bread crumbs over the whole, and a
little finely-minced parsley over all, and bake in the oven
at about 350 deg. for about half an hour. Serve cold or
hot.
62. BAKED WHITING WITH ONION
Clean the whiting, cutting off all the fins, head and
tail Divide the whiting into pieces an inch and a half or
two inches thick, cutting right through the back-bone.
Pack the pieces neatly in a pie-dish, and fill up the spaces
with chopped onion. Before using wdth the fish, boil the
onion for five minutes to take off the harsh flavour.
Cover the fish with a custard mixture made of one cup of
milk, one egg, and some pepper and salt. Strew some
finely-chopped parsley over the top, and bake in a slow
oven at a temperature of about 280 deg.
Schnapper cut into fillets is very good cooked by this
recipe.
EGGS.
63. TO BOIL EGGS
Have a saucepan or frying-pan, with a close-fitting lid,
and big enough to cover the left hand grid. Have a
table-spoonful of water, boiling, in this lay in the eggs,
cover closely, and boil from three to four and a halt
minutes, according to taste.
64. TO POACH EGGS IN MILK
Have some milk boiling over the right hand grid, turn,
off No. 11. switch when the milk boils, drop the eggs gently


in, cover closely. The half ampere coil is quite enough
to cook them. When the yolk is set, lift them out with a
slice, and serve on hot buttered toast.
65. TO POACH EGGS IN GRAVY
Poach as with milk, lift the cooked eggs out, strain the
gravy, return it to the pan with a little thickening, and
serve round the eggs.
66. SWISS EGGS
Butter some oval dishes or patty pans, and drop an egg
into each. Sprinkle a little salt and pepper over them,
then put a coating of grated cheese over each, and bake m
the oven, or in the griller, with the grid-iron under them.
67. ESCALLOPED EGGS
Take somq bread an inch and a hall thick, cut it in
rounds with a cutter about two inches in diameter. Mix
one well-beaten egg with half a cup of milk, and dip the
bread all over in it. Scoop out a deep hollow in each
piece. Beat up two eggs well, add a little pepper and
salt, and fill the hollows. Bake in the griller, with a
good bit of butter in the tin. The butter must be froth-
ing hot before putting the eggs in. Turn on all the cur-
rent, and after they have been in two minutes turn off the
bottom current. The griller must be hot before putting
them in.
68. SCRAMBLED EGGS
To every egg allow one table-spoonful of milk, and
some pepper and salt, and to every four eggs allow a
table-spoonful of butter in the saucepan.
Beat up the eggs, add the pepper and salt, then the
milk. Put the saucepan on the left grid, and, when the
butter melts, pour the eggs in, and stir until it is quite
thick. Use a wooden spoon. It must be thick, but not
allowed to get hard, or it will break. Serve on squares
of hot buttered toast.
69. TO PRY EGGS
If to be served with the bacon, they can be fried after
it in the same fat. If not, they should be cooked in a
much smaller pan, on one of the grids. Put some butter,
good dripping, or lard, in the pan, and when it froths,
drop in the eggs one at a time. Spoon the fat over them,
and when the yolks are set they are ready.


70. SAVOURY OMELET
Have ready-fried a slice or two of bacon. Cut it up
very small. Beat three eggs lightly together with some
pepper and salt. Heat two table-spoonfuls of butter, or
good salad oil, in an omelet pan, over the right hand hole
in the top compartment, then drop in the omelet, and stir
till it thickens, then allow it to set, and brown under-
neath. Keep the edges free with a knife. When brown
underneath (it does not take long), spread the bacon over
the omelet, tilt it to one side, and turn one half over, so
as to make it half-moon shape. Serve piping hot.
A herb omelet can be made by putting a small quantity
of parsley, thyme, etc., well minced, with the egg, and
omitting the bacon, or a plain omelet may be made by
omitting all but pepper and salt. Fried brains make a
good filling.
SAUCES.
71. WHITE SAUCE FOB VEGETABLES
Mix together a table-spoonful of butter, with one table-
spoonful of flour, and a pinch of salt, add slowly one cup-
ful of very hot milk. Put in a flat saucepan over the left
grid, and stir with a wooden spoon or stick. Boil for a
few minutes, and it is ready.
72. BROWN SAUCE
One table-spoonful of butter, one table-spoonful of flour,
two cups of stock. (If stock is not available, dissolve
one teaspoouful of bovril in two cups of,water.) Melt the
butter in a flat pan over the left grid, then stir in the
flour and a pinch of salt. When quite brown add gradu-
ally the stock, stir till it boils, then set it at the back of
the compartment, cover it, and allow it to cook there for
half an hour, or longer. Skim, if necessary.
73. APPLE SAUCE
Pare and slice about four good baking apples. Set
them in a saucepan with a table-spoonful of water on the
right grid, and stew with No. 11. switch till soft. Rub
them through a fine wire strainer, add a table-spoonfiil of
butter, return to the pot, stir till hot, and serve.
74. BREAD SAUCE
Boil one cup of milk with one onion, one clove, a few
peppercorns, and a pinch of salt. Strain this on’to two


heaped table-spoonfuls of dry bread crumbs (if moist, use
three table-spoonfuls), return it to the saucepan, and bring
to a boil over the left grid, stir for a few minutes, then
add a table-spoonful of butter, mix well, and serve.
75. MELTED BUTTER
One table-spoonful of good butter, one table-spoonful of
flour. Melt the butter, and mix in the flour, add gradu-
ally one cupful of warm water. Simmer it for a few
minutes over the left grid, then take it off the fire and stir
in two table-spoonfuls of butter, and some pepper and
salt. When well mixed serve. If required for boiled fish,
add a teaspoonful of lemon juice. If too thick, add a
little more water.
76. PARSLEY SAUCE
Make a sauce of one table-spoonful of butter, one tea-
spoonful of flour, a pinch of salt, a teaspoonful of finely-
chopped parsley, and a cup of milk. Mix the butter and
flour, pour the milk on them very hot, add the parsley and
salt, and bring to a boil on either grid. Boil for a few
minutes, and serve.
77. ANCHCVY SAUCE
To one cup of melted butter sauce, add one large table-
spoonful of bottled anchovy sauce, and a little cayenne
pepper.
78. CAPER SAUCE
Follow the directions for parsley sauce, but substitute
for the parsley, two table-spoonfuls of capers, either chop-
ped or whole.
79. EGG SAUCE
Two or three hard-boiled eggs, and a cup and a half of
either melted butter sauce, or the same white sauce as in
parsley sauce. Cut the eggs into small pieces.
80. ONION SAUCE
Boil two large onions, then chop them up very fine, or
put them through a wire colander. Add them to a
cupful of melted butter sauce, or a cupful of the same
white sauce as in parsley sauce.
81. SIMPLE WHITE SAUCE FOR STEAMED PUDDINGS.
Mix one table-spoonful of flour or maizena with a little
milk, pour on to it one cup of boiling milk, return to the


saucepan with a table-spoonful of sugar, and bring to a
boil on either grid. Boil for a few minutes, then remove
from the stove, add a teaspoonful of lemon juice, and
serve.
82. WINE SAUCE
Mix a dessert-spoonful of arrowroot with a little wine,
pour half a cup of boiling water on it. Put it in a sauce-
pan with two table-spoonfuls of sugar, half a cup of sherry,
and a teaspoonful of brandy. Bring to a boil, and serve.
83. HARD SAUCE
Take two table-spoonfuls of butter, and work in as much
castor sugar as they will take. Add a teaspoonful of
brandy, and some essence of vanilla. Pile high on a small
dish, and serve with boiled puddings. This will keep
for days, but should always be freshly piled before serving.
84. ROUX OR ROO
Melt a quarter of a pound of butter in a saucepan on
either grid. When it froths, stir in gently as much flour
as will form it into paste like thick honey. Keep stirring
until it gets a rich brown color. Put it in a jar, and
keep it for thickening brown gravy and brown soups. It
will save much trouble to have it always in the house.
VEGETABLES.
So. TO BAKE POTATOES
Choose medium-sized potatoes, or, if very large, out
them in half. Arrange them round the tin that the joint
is being cooked in, and turn them when you turn the joint.
Time to bake, one hour, or less, according to the sort of
potatoes.
86. TO BOIL POTATOES
Generally speaking, old potatoes should be put on with
cold water, and new potatoes with boiling water. As the
electric stove takes longer to bring things to a boil it is
advisable to put old potatoes on in hot water. Cook
them in a flat saucepan over either grid in the top com-
partment, with all the current on. Turn half the current
off when they boil. Time, 15 to 20 minutes after the
water boils. When ready, strain away the water, and set
them to the side to steam, putting on a folded cloth


SfASft Sele/S^r 00 " beSt “ their **-*
87. TO STEAM POTATOES :
tl,p ß ? , «p" + - the i“ oß * economical wa T to cook vegetables in
18 to steam them. Have the steamer
ready with boiling water over the right hand grid in the
*°P :o “P ar * ment - Put the potatoes in the lower or top
compartment of_ the steamer, according to what else has
from Oiw,, 4n a salt over them, and steam
no tat ops “tTA 08 ' acc ? rdm 8- to the size and sort of
potatoes. Should they be left on too lone, and o- e t over-
a°wt nf y r ++ ° aU Sa J e the situatioa by mashing them with
lill w’ t u a I 6 bttlg “ ilk or cream * this, of
course, will have to be done in another dish, and thev must
afterwards be returned to the stove to warm up. ‘
88. TO BAKE POTATOES IN THEIR JACKETS
• thoroughly wash and scrub the potatoes. Choose fair-
sized ones a«d all about the same size. Thev can be
cooked in the top shelf of the lower oven while something
else is cooking underneath. The oven should not be over
comwLbT aocount - , About 2 80 "ill cook them very
comfortably m from one and a half to two hours. y
89. POTATO CHIPS
+t.^ Wllen i,i thf H potatoeß are P ared and washed, dry them
them j n ® liceS about an eighth of an
inch thick not thinner, and not much thicker. Then cut
A fe Ces , nto strips half an inch wide, and throw them
hot the baSk u t u Wlth eT arm fat - K the fat is too
s :VI ate bU l n before they are co ° k cd through,
also if thl ne? ! 80 h ?* aS J° r fryin S fish or fritters,
not be mu ar ® I°° t hraAhe y "dll harden, and
-S d- , Tb ? y , sbould be crisp outside and soft
that thev m h t P° tatoes about with a spoon, or slice,
out of th I b f° wn . eVCn , Iy ' and lift tbe frying basket
, tl , tbe kettle when they are pale brown. Tip the
out_ onjblotting* cL?h !Tn T warm
90. POTATO BALLS
in The 6 SIX , medium ' sized Potatoes (about 21bs.), boil them
£ the usual manner, taking care to get them very d™
when strained. Mash them thoroughly with a tabfe-
spoonful of butter, and a little pepper and salt. They
must be absolutely smooth. Beat up two eggs, reserve a
spoonful for egg and bread crumbs, and mix the rest with


the potatoes. When cool, flour a board, and form the
mixture on it into round balls, rather smaller than a
tennis ball, then brush -with egg, roll in bread-crumbs, and
fry in a kettle of hot fat at 420 deg. F. When light brown,
lift out and drain. Serve on a folded napkin. Cold
potatoes can be used for this dish.
91. POTATO PANCAKES
Take three or four boiled potatoes, hot or cold, mash
them thoroughly with a teaspoonful of butter, a well-
beaten egg, a teaspoonful of flour, two tablespoonsful of
milk or cream, and some pepper and salt. Warm the
grilling drawer, and put a little butter, or good dripping,
in the grilling pan. When smoking hot, drop in the
mixture from a table-spoon, flattening each piece to form
a round cake about half an inch thick, when brown, turn.
When brown on both sides, they are ready. They must be
laid on absorbent paper to drain, before serving. Serve
very hot.
92. MASHED POTATOES
When potatoes are cooked in the steamer, it is not al-
ways easy to dry them at the end, as when they are sim-
ply boiled. It can be done, but I find it simpler to
mash them. Steam them, as described under the third
vegetable recipe, only, if you have decided that they are
to be mashed, they may as well be cut in quarters before
being put in the steamer, as they will cook more quickly.
When cooked, turn them into a saucepan, and mash till
quite smooth, with a fork or a potato masher. Add some
pepper and salt, a little bit of butter, and a few spoon-
fuls of cream, or milk, mix thoroughly, and return to the
stove to warm up. When quite hot heap lightly in a
vegetable dish, and serve. If desired, a very little finely-
chopped parsley may be sprinkled on the top.
93. TO FRY COLD POTATOES
Put a little fat in the grilling pan. When hot, slip in
potatoes already sliced, when brown, turn them. When
brown on both sides, they are ready. Turn on all the
current to warm the griller, then turn off the two top
side-switches, leaving the centre switch on.
94. TO STEAM CAULIFLOWER
Trim the cauliflower, and set it flower downwards in a
basin of salt and water for an hour. This will bring any.
insects to the surface. Now carefully divide the cauli-
flower, taking care never to break the sections. Cut it
so that each section of flower has a section of stock with


it, Pack them carefully in a tray of the steamer, and
sprinkle a little salt over them. Have the water in the
steamer boiling when you put the tray in. Time—it
depends on the age and freshness of the cauliflower. It
varies from 20 to 35 minutes. Serve with thick white
Sauce or melted butter. When cooked, the individual
pieces may be lifted out with a fork put through the stock
and neatly arranged in the vegetable dish. This is a
much better way than cooking the cauliflower whole.
95. TO BAKE TOMATOES
Skin the tomatoes by putting them in boiling water,
and after a minute or two the skin will peel off easily.
Slice them into a pie dish in layers, sprinkle a little salt
and pepper between each layer. When the dish is filled,
sprinkle oyer it a small cupful of bread crumbs, mixed with
a small piece of butter, some finely-chopped parslev, and
salt. Bake for half an hour in the top
°f the oven if a joint is below, or it can be baked in the
griller with one bottom coil on. Turn this off before the
end, and turn on all the top coils for a few minutes to
brown it.
96. TO BOIL RICE
Bice for curry, etc., can either be boiled in the top
compartment, over the left grid, or in the oven Eor the
top compartment put it in a wide saucepan, with plenty
of hot water the more water the better. Bice must have
room to kick. If m the oven, either a deep or flat pan
can be used as convenient. To test if it is cooked, squeeze
a gram between the finger and thumb, if soft, strain at
once, and pour some boiling water over it. Set a dish
under the colander to catch the last drips, and fold a
towel over the top. Set it in a warm place to drv, and
when dishing, use a fork to throw it lightly into the dish.
Unly the tiniest pinch of salt is W'anted with rice.
97. TO STEAM PEAS
. Put the peas in the small compartment of the steamer
in the top tray. It will hold enough for five or six
people. Put some long blades of mint with them, and
sprniide some_ salt and a teaspoonful of sugar over them,
lime from lo to 35 minutes, according to the age and
sort of the peas. _ When cooked turn into a hot vegetable
dish with a bit of butter. Give them a gentle shake to
mix the butter, and sprinkle a tiny pinch of powdered dry
nuiK out them. Of course the stems of mint must be
taivcn out bh’toro serving.


98. BAKED PUMPKIN
Peel , the pumpkin, scrape out all the ragged inside.
Cut it in slices about half an inch thick. Put about an
ounce of butter in a dish with a close-fitting lid, lay in the
pumpkin, sprinkle some salt and white pepper over it, close
the lid, and bake for about an hour for three pounds of
pumpkin at a temperature of from 320 to 350 degrees.
Then mash thoroughly with more butter, if. necessary, and
serve very hot.
99. FRIED POTATOES AND PUMPKIN
Mash together some cold potatoes and pumpkin, add a
dessert-spoonful of flour, a well-beaten egg, and a little bit
of butter. Form into round cakes, and fry in hot fat
in the griller.
100. BAKED HARICOT BEANS
Take one and a half cups of dried haricot beans, wash
them, pick out any black ones, and set them to soak over-
night. When they are soaked, put them on to boil in
lukewarm water, or steam them for an hour. Have a jar
with a lid, or a saucepan, ready, also half a pound of
chopped lean bacon. Lay the beans and bacon in layers,
add a little pepper, and, if liked, a little tomato sauce.
Have a layer of bacon on the top, and close the lid.
Bake for three hours, and at not more than 200 deg. P.
101. CRUMBED CAULIFLOWER
This can be made with either freshly-boiled, or with
cold cauliflower. Make a sauce (over the left hand grid)
of one table-spoonful of butter, one heaped table-spoonful
of flour, and two large cups of milk. Make the flour into
a perfectly smooth paste with some of the milk (cold),
then add the rest of the milk, either hot or cold, turn into
a saucepan, and add the butter. Stir it constantly, and
let it boil for a tew minutes, then add two or three table-
spoonfuls of grated cheese, a little salt and pepper, and a
very little cayenne. Pile the cauliflower in layers, with
some sauce poured over each. Make the pile higher in
the centre, and pour the balance of the sauce over the
whole. Rub a tiny piece of butter into a table-spoonful
°i dry bread crumbs, sprinkle this lightly over the pile,
Biiu then sprinkle another spoonful of grated cheese over
the whole.
Bake on the top shelf of the lower oven, or, if not too
brown in the griller with the top current only. If
the cauliflower is cold, the dish should be cooked in the
lower oven. It should become a delicate brown.


102. BEETROOT
Wash the beetroot carefully, so asi not to break any,
of the fibres. It must.not be out at all, otherwise it will
bleed when boiling, and be useless. Small roots will
take about an hour to boil, and large, of course, longer.
They must be boiled gently. W'hen cooked, peel off the
skin with a dry cloth, cut the beetroot iu slices about
three-eighths of an inch thick, put it in a saucepan with
a spoonful of butter, return to the stove to warm, shake
gently before serving, so as to get the butter over it all.
No salt is required iu cooking beetroot.
If it is to be used cold, the beetroot should be sliced in
the same way, and a little white vinegar should be poured
over it. Cook over the right hand hole, and turn off one
switch when it boils.
103. WHITE BEETROOT, OR SILVER SPINACH
Thoroughly wash the leaves, then cut out the stem vein
in a V shape (it can be cooked as a separate vegetable).
The green leaves, can be either steamed or boiled, in either
case they take about twenty minutes, or half an hour, to
cook. When cooked drain them dry on a wire strainer,
press them with a wooden spoon to get all the water out,
cut across and across with a knife, press again, then return
to the saucepan with a little salt and pepper, and a bit
of butter, warm thoroughly until dry, then serve, making
criss-cross cuts with a knife, when they are in the vegetable
dish. Like true spinach they can be served as a separate
course with poached eggs laid on them.
The stems of the silver beet may be boiled from twenty
minutes to half an hour, according to their age, then
strained thoroughly, and served with white sauce, or
shaken up with pepper, salt, and butter. Both these can
be effectually cooked in the steamer.
•104. JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES
Wash and peel the artichokes. They must be boiled
over the right hand hole, and when they boil, turn off No.
11., and leave them boiling gently with No. 111. only. Old
artichokes must be put in with lukewarm water, young
ones with boiling water. They will take from 16 to 30
minutes, according to their age. Strain them through a
wire strainer, and serve with white sauce. To make them
extra good, they can be boiled in milk and water, with a
scrap of butter.
105. FRENCH BEANS (STEAMED)
String the beaus, cut them in long, thin strips, and
throw them into cold water. When washed, pack them in
one of the compartments of the steamer (the smallest will


hold quite a lot of beans), and steam from half an hour
to an hour, according to their age. Sprinkle a little salt
over them When cooked, put- them into a warm dish
with a little butter, and a salt-spoonful of castor sugar
shake well together, and serve. It is well to' keep them
in the top, or any other hot compartment, for a few
minutes, to evaporate any surplus moisture.
106. BOILED ONION'S
Ordinary onions are not suitable for steaming, as they
require water to carry off the too strong flavour. Spanish
onions may be steamed, if boiled for five or ten minutes
ftrst. Rave the onions all of about the same size, peel
and wash them, put them in a saucepan of boiling water,
and boil for five minutes. Strain and wash them in cold
water, then return to the pan with more boiling water,
and a little salt. Boil gently for an hour and a half, or
longer, according to their size. Bun a skewer through one
to judge if it is tender. When ready, strain and serve with
white sauce, or melted butter, over them.
. Bring to a boil with all the current on, and keep boiling
with No. 111. switch only. Large onions take nearly three
hours to cook.
107. BAKED ONIONS
Choose some Spanish onions of equal size. Wash and
scald in boiling water in the top compartment for five
minutes. Strain, and lay the onions in a baking tin or
pie dish, with a little butter, to prevent them from stick-
mg’ to the dish. Baste from time to time with butter
and bake from two and a half to three hours. A little
bit of the top may be scooped out and filled with butter
before putting in the oven. If the oven and top compart-
ment are m full use, they can be baked in the grilling
drawer at a temperature of about 300 deg. F. This will
only require the lower switch turned on from time to time,
to keep the temperature even.
108. VEGETABLE MARROW
This vegetable is very watery, and should be steamed.
Pare, and cut in oblong pieces about two inches wide
removing all the seeds and fibrous centre. Steam from
twenty to thirty minutes, according to its age. When
ready, serve with white sauce poured over it, or served
separately in a sauce tureen.
109. BAKED AND STUFFED VEGETABLE MARROW
Take two or three pounds of the thick end of a large
marrow. Scoop out the seeds and fibrous matter. Fill


up the interior with underdone cold meat, well minced, and
mixed with pepper and salt, a pinch of pow-dered celery
seed, and a spoonful of butter. Cover with a slice of
marrow-, or a sheet of buttered paper. Set in a dish with
a scrap of fat and a few spoonfuls of -water to keep it
moist underneath, and bake in the oven at a tempera-
ture of 300 deg. E. for about an hour. Serve with brown
sauce in a separate tureen. This is an excellent way of
cooking marrow, as it retains all its natural juice. It
should be sent to table with a napkin folded round it.
Turn on all the current in the oven for fifteen minutes
before putting the marrow in. When it is in, turn oft the
back switch.
110. MASHED TURNIPS
Take three fair-sized Sw-edish turnips. Be sure that
they are sound and juicy, otherwise they are not worth
cooking. Peel them, divide into slices, and wash them.
Steam them for an hour and a half, or longer, according
to their age, or boil them. When cooked turn them into
a saucepan and* thoroughly mash them till they are quite
smooth, adding one table-spoonful of butter, and some
salt and pepper. Return the saucepan to the top part of
the oven, and stir over the left hand hole till thoroughly
hot. A table-spoonful of cream may be added at the end.
Serve heaped lightly in a vegetable dish, and criss-crossed
with a fork. White spring turnips can be cooked in the
same manner, but will not take so long to cook.
PUDDINGS.
111. UNCLE TOM’S PUDDING
Warm £lb. of treacle, then mix half a pound of flour,
3oz. suet thoroughly minced, one table-spoonful dark
brown sugar, one teaspoonful ground ginger, one tea-
spoonful ground cinnamon, and one teaspoonful carbonate
of soda. Beat up one egg, and add with half a teacup of
milk. Mix well, pour into a buttered mould, and steam
for an hour and a half. Serve with thin white sauce, or
with hard sauce.
112. CANARY PUDDING
Take the -weight of three eggs in butter and sugar, the
weight of two eggs in flour, the grated rind of one small
lemon, and three eggs. Soften the butter, but do not oil
it, beat the sugar into the butter, drop in the eggs one at
a time, and beat for a few minutes between each, add the


grated lemon rind, then sift in the flour. Beat well, pour
in a buttered mould and steam for two hours. Serve with
white wine sauce, or with hard sauce.
113. ELECTRIC PUDDING
Two cups of bread crumbs, one and a half cups of milk,
two table-spoonfuls of sugar, 3 eggs, and 2oz. butter.
Vanilla essence.
Cream the butter and sugar, add the eggstone at a time,
then the crumbs and milk, and flavour with vanilla to
taste. Pour into a mould and steam for an hoijr and a
half. Serve with wine, raspberry or hard sauce.
114. MARMALADE PUDDING
Two large cups bread crumbs, three eggs, two table-
spoonfuls sugar, one heaped table-spoonful butter,
three table-spoonfuls marmalade, and three cups of milk.
Cream the butter and sugar, add the eggs one at a time,
then the marmalade, bread crumbs, and milk. Pour in a
well-buttered mould atd steam for an hour and a half.
Serve with hard or white sauce.
115. APPLE PIE :
Pill a pudding dish with sliced apples ; heap them high,
sprinkle over a few spoonfuls of sugar, the grated rind ol
a lemon, and one or two drops of essence or oil of cloves,
mixed with two or three table-spoonfuls of water and the
juice of one lemon. Cover ywith good puli paste, or with
a short crust, and decorate with some fancy cut pastry, il
liked. Heat the lower oven to 380 deg. by turning on the
bottom switches of the griller, putting some tin utensil in
the griller to deflect the heat. Put the pie in the top
shelf for ten or fifteen minutes, if there is any chance of it
scorching, remove it to the middle shelf. It is necessary
to have a hot oven to start the pastry properly, but it
can safely be reduced later. When nearly cooked, take it
out and brush it with some white of egg, and return to the
oven. Sift some castor sugar over it before serving. Time,
three-quarters of an hour. If there is any danger of the
crust burning, turn off some or all of the top heat.
116. APPLE PUDDING
Pill a pudding basin with, sliced apples, some sugar, and
a couple of table-spoonfuls of water with one drop of oii
of cloves. Cover with a suet crust made in thev propor-
tion of Goz. of suet to 11b. of flour. Add a pinch of salt
and enough water to make it into a fairly stiff dough.
Spread this over the apples to the outside of the rim.
Wring a cloth out of hot water, flour it, and lie over the


pudding. Steam for two hours or more, according to size
Ihe thmg to be guarded against in apple and beefsteak
puddings, is too high a basin. See that the basin to be
used is sufficiently low to admit of the crust rising without
steamrar pressed against the top compartment of the
117. SAGO PUDDING
miffi llo 'tli thr °+ of sago to three cups of
milk, three table-spoonfuls of sugar, and three eggs a
scrap ot butter, and the rind of a lemon. Set the saso
ffether k "wh e lml -u a . nd lemon rind are simmering to-
iH ffito ih the r lk is flavoured with the rind, strain
milk is eo S oT° ! Uga L Beat the and the
butter P enough, add it carefully to them. add. the
one hour^tl! 1 V P udd ; n g d rih, and bake slowly for
Dartment are ' % *f . both Ihe oven and top com-
the oven Tf . USe ’. ° r m tbe ower compartment of
ten '+ If insufficiently browned, set it in the griller fo-
breaT L S - ° r IeSS With all the to P ™rrent on. Rice and
currelt PUddln§ ' S T y &ls ° be cooked with this amount of
118. CHOCOLATE PUDDING
Two dessert-spoonfuls of cocoa, two table-spoonfuls of
sugar, two dessert-spoonfuls of mkizena or arrowroot two
vaffill a CUPS ° f milk ’ and haH a teas P°°nfnl of essene'e of
come Ut to he a m boil° n grid in 3 flat sauce P a * to
Utm a b ° lL ,f lx tke arrowroot and sugar, with a
little of the milk cold, and when the milk boils pour it on
t em, stirring all the time. Blend the cocoa with a little
minute “ t 0 tlle - d boil for"a few
Tud serve ™fd es Ben° e . and turn into a prepared mould
ana ser\e cola, with cream or custard.
119. PANCAKES
cup TO of3 eg fr al lT fl ° ne flour and half a
RradualH 'the^ X w mth a Kttle milk > add th c rest
ftUn nv* • \ a ? d G £% s > we ll~beaten together and
time w" 17 Pm ? k ° f S ™- All ° W them to stand for some
b briore cooking. Place the frymgpan over the left
hand or kettle grid, rub it with butter and allow it to wt
n«uc°r gh ’ ly h °w Butter again before dropping the * fim
pancake in. Prom two to three table-spoonfuls of the
mixture, according to the size of the pan and see that the
m xtnre runs evenly all over the pan. When if rises in
blisters turn it with a flexible knife (first making certain
When s a iightlv e brown “ a su^ar
/’i f , slightly brown roll up and place in a pile on a
Imfltenhot 0 " S hot di -n: They must be cooked T'Pklv
a eaten hot. Serve with quarters of lemon.


To make pancakes and omelets well it is absolutely
necessary to keep separate pans for them, and never_ to
let them be used for anything else. They must be scrupu-
lously clean. To ensure freedom from grit, it is advisable
to rub them with some dry salt, before using, and wipe
with a soft cloth.
120. MAGPIE PUDDING
One table-spoonful of butter, three table-spoonfuls of
milk, two table-spoonfuls of sugar, one egg, half a cup of
stoned raisins, three-quarters of a cup of flour, and one
teaspoonful of baking powder. If self-raising flour is
used the baking powder may be omitted.
Cream the butter and sugar together, add the egg and
beat for a few minutes, then sift in the flour, add the milk
gradually, and lastly the raisins. Beat well together, and
pour into five or six buttered cup moulds. Steam for
twenty-five minutes, turn out, and serve with white sauce,
or with red wine sauce.
121. BAKED RICE PUDDING
Three-quarters of a cup of rice, four cups of milk, two
table-spoonfuls sugar, two table-spoonfuls minced suet, and
half a teaspoonful ground cinnamon, or a little grated nut-
meg, and one cup of raisins, or dates cut up small.
Wash the rice, then mix all the ingredients except the
raisins and nutmeg thoroughly together, taking care that
the suet does not get in lumps. Pour half the mixture in a
pudding dish, then scatter in half of the raisins or dates.
Pour the rest of the rice mixture in, and scatter the rest
of the fruit over the top. It will sink under the milk, then
dust the cinnamon or nutmeg over the top, and bake slowly
for two or two and a half hours. If possible, bake it in
the low- part of the lower oven, when something else is
cooking above. It can be cooked in the top_ oven in the
same way, and put in the griller for a few minutes, with
all the top switches on to brown it.
122. PRUNE FLUMMERY
One pound of thoroughly stewed prunes, whites of four
eggs, three-quarters of a cup of sugar.
Stone, chop up, and mash the prunes to a smooth mush.
Beat the whites of eggs to a very stiff froth, add the sugar,
and gradually beat in the chopped prunes. Pile the mix-
ture in a pudding dish, and bake twenty minutes in a very
cool oven. Serve either hot or cold, with whipped cream,
or custard. If the oven is too hot, the pudding will col-
lapse. Cook in the oven at a temperature of about 150
degrees. It need not be browned. If to be used cold, it
can be cooked when the oven cools down after a joint or
cakes. Use the juice as well as the prunes.


123. PLUM PUDDING
Take half a pound each of minced suet, stoned raisins
currants, sugar breadcrumbs, a quarter of a pound of
sultanas, and half a cup of chopped citron and lemon peel
(mixed), one grated apple, the grated rind of one lemon
four eggs, one table.spoonful of flour, half a cup of milk’
half a teaspoonful of cinnamon, two drops oil of cloves a
pinch,-of powdered mace and a very little salt. Mix all
thoroughly together and steam (or boil) in a cloth or
mould for four hours, and serve with wine sauce
x?TT°r Ver tbe , rfg ; ht hand S' rid - and when boiling turn
oil JNo HI switch, thus leaving an ampere and a half to
cook it. At half time, pour in a cup of boiling water at
the side of the steamer.
124. BATTED RHUBARB
and W l P W h fV h " bar m Md Cut 5t ?nto about an inch
CUDS of h sul long ’ ,1 T° two p° ,mds of rhubarb allow three
the ? a “ d tW ° s P° onfuls of ground ginger. Mix
the sugar and ginger together drv. Lav the rhubarb n
the pie dish m layers, with a sprinkling of the ringer and
ing a oJ^thTtoD eaßll 'T r r rV “ !r sn ? ( * 9,t for a final sprinkL
them u P' Take a cup of bread crumbs, rub into
them a dessert-spoonful of butter, and strew over the top
firri l m Ve ” l° r an h °" r - E ’ eat th e oven thoroughly
turn’ rh V bart) has been in for fen minutes
turn off all but either the eighth or tenth switch.
125. BAKED CUSTARD
of fugar aT ° f milk d. two table-spoonfuls
and a g little nutoeg "" & ’ 6m ° n ’ a blt of stick oinnamon,
the®tft t hanf 1 S'oliT^t rind “ d + over
slowly, to extraettho tC °? mc to a boil rather
men/’men boiling^ add ib” “ lemon and “fa-
ther oughlv Have’ the Sl,£?ar ’ ll a ’ ld see that it melts
wm w -its
throug*! 1 a fine wire strainer into a pie dish TW + am
httle nutmeg over the top, and bake. ' ' ate a
hot. If not cooked vem- slowly it will break. 9
126. ROLEY-POLEY
P° und of flour allow half a pound of well-minced
suet, a pinch of salt, and a little cold water.
r ub , the suet and flour and salt together by hand until
it is all in crumbs. Then with a sharp spoon, not a


wooden one. add just enough water to , make it into a
smooth paste. Flour the board well, and roll out till
about a quarter of an inch thick. Spread plum, raspberry,
black currant, or any full-flavoured jam on the paste, and
roll up. Moisten the edges, and pinch them together, fold
back a little bit at each end. Rinse a cloth out of hot
water, flour it, roll the pudding in it, tie each end tightly,
and boil for two hours.
Set a broad, shallow saucepan over the right hand grid,
and when the water boils after the pudding is in, turn off
No. 111. switch. If the left hand grid is in use too, you
can turn off No. 11., and turn on No. 111. 0! course, the
water must lie boiling before the pudding goes in.
127. GERMAN FRITTERS
Cut two slices half an inch thick off a square loaf.
Stamp out with a cutter four rounds out of each slice.
Beat up one egg with three-quarters of a cup of milk, and
lay the bread in it half an hour before it is wanted, turn
it in a few minutes so that it may get saturated with the
custard. Fry a delicate brown in a little butter. When'
both sides are brown, serve them with a spoonful of jam
on each. A spoonful of lemon curd may be used instead
of jam.
12S. FRITTER BATTER
To one cup of flour allow three-quarters of a cup of
milk, one egg, and a teaspoonful of oil.
Mix Hour and milk together, add well-beaten egg, then
oil. Rust be absolutely smooth, and like very thick cream.
Mix at least an hour before it is wanted. If to be kept
over night, lay a damp cloth over it.
129. PUFF PASTE :
One pound Hour, one pound butter, fully three-quarters
of a cup of water, two teaspoonfuls of lemon juice, a
pinch of salt, and one egg.
The flour must be sifted, and the butter must be solid
but not frozen. It should be pressed in a clean cloth to
get all the moisture out.
Put the salt with the flour, also two ounces of the
butter. Chop the butter into the flour, then with a knife
or finger tips, mix in the water and lemon juice and yolk
of egg, and form the whole into a smooth dough, kneading
until it is elastic. Flour the pastry slab, lay the dough
on it with more flour over it, and roll out to about an
inch in thickness. Keep the paste as square as possible.
Spread a quarter of the butter on the centre of the paste,
fold over three times, pinch in the ends, turn half round
and roll out, keeping it square, and always rolling from
you. Put the second quarter of the butter on the centre


of the paste, fold in three, and pinch in the ends, turn half
round and roll out again, keeping it long and as square-
cornered as possible. Do this a third and fourth time,
then fold once more, and set away in the ice-chest or cooler
to stiffen. Leave it there until you are ready to use it,
when you must roll it out to the required thickness. In
very hot weather it will be advisable to put it in the
cooler between each rolling, as the butter gets so unman-
ageably soft.
Very nice pastry can be made with 12oz. of butter to the
pound the flour, all other ingredients being as given here.
Half this amount of paste will cover a medium-sized pie.
Puffs for oyster and savoury pasties should be cooked in
the grilling drawer, which should be heated up to 500 deg.
or more. Put them in and soon turn off the bottom heat.
A little watching is necessary at first lest they burn.
Beefsteak pies should be cooked in the top of the oven.
Take out the insulation pad at the top, get the pie as near
the bottom of the griller as possible to ensure a good
result. It will be necessary to have the oven heated to
350 deg. P., then turn on the two lower coils of the grill-
ing drawer and bake. It is a great advantage to have
the gnller in full use when the pie is put in. Deep fruit
pies can be treated in the same way. Shallow fruit pies
can be baked to perfection in the grilling drawer by heat-
ing the drawer to 500 deg., then when the pie has been in
for a couple of minutes, turn off the bottom current and
finish cooking with the top heat. It is advisable for this
to have the fruit partly cooked before putting the paste on.
Puff paste pies can also be cooked as directed for short
crust, but I find the top of the oven and the grilling
drawer the best plan.
130. SHOET CEUST
This is suitable for both fruit and beefsteak pies in
places where it is too hot to make puff paste in summer.
At all times it is suitable for fruit pies.
One heaped cup of flour, three table-spoonfuls of butter,
one spoonful of pounded sugar, a pinch of salt and a little
water, and a pinch of baking powder.
Eub the butter into the flour, salt and powder, till it
looks like fine crumbs, then add as much cold water as will
make it into a smooth dough. Flour the pastry slab, and
knead the dough out with the finger tips ; w-hen it is
anooth underneath roll it out once and cover the fruit pie.
It should be half an inch thick.
To cover a meat pie, omit the sugar. To make the
paste richer, put a beaten-up egg instead of so much -water.
Bake in the middle shelf of the oven with the pad in the
slot above, with the temperature at at least 350 deg. Put
a thick asbestos or uralite mat under the pie, or it will
bcil.


SIMPLE SAVOURIES.
131. MACARONI AND CHEESE
Put a cupful of macaroni in small pieces into a sauce-
pan of boiling milk and water, and a little salt. Boil
over the left grid till tender.
Have ready two heaped table-spoonfuls of grated cheese,
and half a cup of fresh bread crumbs.
Mix some pepper lightly with the cheese, and mix with
the bread crumbs a little pepper and salt, and a table-
spoonful of butter.
Vlien the macaroni is boiled, strain it, and return
to the pan with a spoonful of butter and a table-
spoonful of cream or milk. Butter a pie
dish, and lay the macaroni and grated cheese in it in
separate layers, putting a macaroni layer first. Keep a
little cheese to sprinkle over the top. When the macaroni
is all in, sprinkle the bread crumbs over the top, pick up
the cheese on the point of a knife, and sprinkle it over
the bread crumbs. Now set it in the griller for a few
minutes, with the top ooiW only turned on, and brown'
lightly. Serve with Worcester sauce, mustard, and salt.
132. SCOTS’ CHEESE CAKES
Take one cup of flour, one cup of oatmeal, put through
a flour-sifter (measure after sifting), a table-spoonful of
butter, a pinch of salt, a pinch of carbonate of soda, and
a little water.
Mix the butter by band with the dry ingredients, then
mix all together with sufficient water to form a fairly stiff
dough. Dust some fiour on the board, turn the mixture on it,
throw some more flour over it, and knead out, pushing the
edges together if they split. Put some more flour on the
board, and some more on the top of the dough, rub the
roller with flour, and roll out as thin as possible. Cut
out cakes with a cutter about two inches in diameter,
clean off the fragments, rub the board over with flour,
also the rolling pin, and roll each cake into an oval shape.
The thinner the cakes are the better. When they are cool,
butter them and sprinkle grated cheese over them. If
desired place half of a stuffed olive on each, with the
stuffed side up. If Gorgonzola or Stilton is to be used,
follow the following recipe.
133. CHEESE FOE OAT-CAKE SAVOURY
One dessert-spoonful of ripe Gorgonzola or Stilton, one
dessert-spoonful of butter, half a salt-spoonful of dry
mustard.
Spread on the oat-cakes, and if convenient sprinkle a
little grated cheese (any sort) on the top.
Pile the cakes in a dish, and serve as an after pudding,
savoury, or for supper.


134. SAVOURY GEMS
Split oatmeal gems in two, butter, and heap with the
following mixture :
Take one table-spoonful of powdered ham or bacon, the
yolks of three hard-boiled eggs, a little salt, a table-
spoonful of tomato sauce, and a good dash of cayenne
pepper and a salt-spoonful of mustard. Pound all well
together, and spread on the gems quite half an inch thick.
Chop up the whites of egg, and sprinkle them on top.
Serve cold.
135. STUFFED EGGS
Take six hard-boiled eggs. They must boil for ten
minutes. Peel them very carefully. The best way is to
chip them gently all over, and peel them. With a sharp
knife cut them through the middle, taking care not to
break the whites. Turn the yolks into a basin, and place
each white on a nasturtium leaf, or small lettuce leaf. If
they will not stand straight, cut a little bit off the base.
Pound the yolks* together with a teaspoonful of anchovy
sauce, a dessert-spoonful of Worcester sauce, and a little
pepper. When quite smooth fill up the white cups, heap-
ing it over the whites, and on the top of each place a tiny
sprig of parsley. Serve hot or cold.
136. OLIVINES :
Take two hard-boiled yolks, and one teaspoonful of
pounded ham, mix together with some cayenne, and half
a salt-spoonful of mustard. Have tiny strips of buttered
bread half an inch thick, spread the mixture thickly on it,
and place a quarter of an olive cut lengthwise on each.
137. SARDINETTES
Butter tiny rounds of bread—either brown or white.
Chop up a few sardines (after scraping off the kkin and
extracting the backbone), and mash with sonie cayenne
pepper, Worcester sauce, and a very little vinegar. Spread
on the bread-and-butter, and sprinkle some finely-chopped
nasturtium leaves over them.
138. CHEESE STRAWS
One cup of flour, one table-spoonful of butter, one heap-
ed table-spoonful of dry, grated cheese, a small salt-spoon-
ful of mustard, some cayenne and salt, and one egg.
Rub the butter into the flour, then mix all the ingredi-
ents together. Roll out and cut into thin strips about
three-eighths of an inch wide. Bake in the griller. Lay
the strips on a tin, set the gridiron in the bottom of the


grillcr and the tin on that. Heat the drawer and the
gridiron to at least 400 deg. before putting the |tin of
straws in. Two or three minutes after putting them in,
turn off both the bottom) switches and one top one. They
should be a delicate brown, and very crisp and short. If
more convenient they can be cooked in a hot oven. For
economy of current, it should be after a joint, or cakes.
The straws should not be more than five inches long, lest
they should break in handling.
CAKES AND SCONES, &c.
130.—PLUM CAKE :
Three cups Hour, one cup sugar, half pound butter, five
eggs, two teaspoonfuls baking powder, two cups of cur-
rants, one cup raisins, half cup chopped lemon and citron
peel, a handful of chopped* almonds, and a few drops of.
almond essence.
Cream the butter and sugar together. Drop in the eggs
one at a time and beat well between each, till it is all a
very light colour. Sift in the flour and baking powder,
and mix until it all gets very pliable, then add the cur-
rants and peel. Butter a cake-tin and lay four folds of
paper in the bottom. Have the lower oven heated to
about 380 degrees. Put the cake on the top shelf, close
the door, and do not open it until the cake is cook-
ed. If you put the cake in at 350 degrees, the tempera-
ture will pronqdly drop below 250 degrees, but in the
course of about twenty minutes will rise again. This is
the time to start the thermometer. When the temperature
rises above 320, turn off one switch. If it continues to
rise above 320, turn off the other side switch. Before the
end, it will be’necessary to turn off even the centre switch.
Time to cook, one and three-quarter hours at a tempera-
ture of 300 to 320 degrees. When cooked keep it in a warm
room to cool.
140. ARROWROOT CAKE
Three eggs, quarter pound butter, three-quarters of a
cup of sugar, one cup arrowroot, one cup flour, one tea-
spoonful baking powder, the juice of one lemon.
Cream the butter and sugar together till almost white,
add the eggs one at a time, beating well between each,
sift in the arrowroot, then the flour and baking powder
and lemon juice. Beat all well together, and pour in a
buttered mould with four papers in the bottom. Bake at
a temperature of 300 deg. for an hour. Regulate the heat
as directed for plum cake.


141. ARROWROOT MERINGUES
Whites of four eggs, two cups sugar, one dessert spoon-
ful arrowroot. Mix the sugar and arrowroot over the big
hole in the top compartment, with the three switches on.
Add the whites, and stir until it gets warm and thick."
Have some white paper floured with a mixture of icing
sugar and maizena. Drop in pyramidal dabs on the paper
about a teaspoonful at a time, and cook for a long time
very slowly. The centre switch will give quite enough
current. Open the door and see that they are not cooking
too quickly. They have simply to harden. They can be
tinted with cochineal, or with cocoa for a variation. If
cocoa, vanilla must be added to give it a chocolate flavour.
Ihey can be fixed together with jelly or cream, in which
case it may be necessary to scoop out a little of the
inside.
142. HIDDEN SECRETS
One egg, three ounces butter, one , cup maizena, one cup
flour, half cup sugar, a few drops essence of almond, a few
dates, nuts, raisins, preserved ginger, or dried fruit for
falling.
Beat the egg-, butter, and sugar together, add the flour
a * d , essence * Tkis should make a workable dough. Stone-
the dates, and put three cuts across each, without severing
them entirely. Stone the raisins, shred the almonds, or
walnuts (any nuts may be used), chop the preserved ginger
also the dried fruit. Take a bit of dough the size of a
pigeon s egg, and flatten it between fingers and thumbs to
a round shape. Put a date in the : centre and roll the
sides over it, set it on a sheet of buttered paper with a
wire shelf underneath. Repeat the process, but substitute
two raisins and some shredded almond instead of date.
Ihus nil some with dates, some with almonds and raisin's
some with and so on, having as much variety as
possible in the filling. These are very easy to make. They
can be baked in the griller, or on the top shelf of the
oven. If m the griller care must be taken that they do
not scorch underne-.th. The tray on which they are laid
should be raised half an inch above the bottom of the
drawer. The bottom switches can be turned off when they
have got thoroughly hot. '
!f in the oven they should be on the middle shelf, and
the pad must be slipped into the slot just above. Any
biscuits and small cakes can be cooked this way. The
£ ad the heat more fl uickl y on to them by being
bro'itglit close. The oven should be at about 350 degree
when they are put in.
143. WHISTLEBRAE SHORTBREAD
Two-thirds of a cup of rice flour, half a cup of
sugar, a cup and a half of flour, half a pound


■of butter. 3lix all together, knead into a firm
lump, lay a piece of white paper the size of the
oven shelf upon the table, dust it with rice flour
lightly, and knead the shortbread on to it as nearly square
or round as possible. Bake in the oven (as directed for
Hidden Secrets) for about twenty minutes. When light
brown it is ready. Do not cut it until it is cooked. Dust
some icing sugar over it. If round, cut out a centre piece
the size of a small cup, and all the other pieces out from
it. If square, cut in strips. It is generally made at least
half an inch thick, but if wanted for afternoon tea should
only be a .quarter of an inch, and cut in fingers.
144. HIGH POUND CAKE
Take four and a half cups of flour (not heaped-up, but
even across the top), two cups of sugar, two cups of butter,
three cups of stoned raisins, two cups of picked currants,
one cup of picked sultanas, one and a half cups of orange,
lemon, and citron peel, chopped small, half a cup of
almonds cut in strips, nine eggs, a pinch of pounded mace,
a few drops of essence of almonds or ratifia, and a tea-
spoonful of baking powder.
Cream the butter and sugar with a wooden spoon.
Beat the eggs together until they are a mass of froth, then
add to the butter and sugar. Sift the flour and pow 7 der
together, and add gradually, beating well all the time,
then the fruit peel, almonds, mace, and essence.
Put four folds of buttered paper in the bottom of the
cake-tin, and one thick fold round the sides. Pour in the
cake and set it on the middle shelf of the oven, which
should have been heated up to 350 deg. P. The tempera-
ture will drop 100 deg. or more, and must not be allowed
to rise again above 300 deg. ; 280 deg. will not be unduly
low r . Bake for three hours. Set it to cool in a warm
room, and let it remain in the tin for at least an hour
before turning it out, then set it on a wdre tray ,to cool.
As this cake is very suitable for icing, I will give the
recipes for them.
145. ALMOND PASTE
Threei-quarters of a pound of almond meal, one and a
quarter pound of icing sugar, the whites of two eggs, the
juice and grated rind of one lemon. Mix all together in
an enamelled, or copper pan, until quite smooth, then put
the pan on the left hand grid until the paste is quite thick.
Let it cool a little, then spread over the cake, putting a
little on the sides and a very thick layer on the top.
Smooth it with a palette knife dipped frequently in hot
water. Let it stand a full day, and then ice it.
146. ICING FOB CAKES
To one pound of icing sugar allow the whites of three
eggs and a tea-spoonful of lemon juice, lime juice, or


white vinegar. Beat the whites of eggs to a stiff froth,
and add the icing sugar and lemon juice. Beat until the
icing gets quite white and thick, then spread it evenlv over
the almond icing. Smooth it with a wet palette \knife or
paper knife. If the icing is wanted verv thick put a
second coating on the day after the first," Keep a little of
the icing to decorate the cake, either white or with the
addition of cochineal. Or, if preferred, decorate it with
chrystalized fruit, and strips of angelica, put on while it
is still wet. In hot weather the icing will dry by simple
exposure to the air, but in cold or moist weather it will
have to be dried in the stove. Shut it up in the oven
when the oven is about 150 deg., turn off all’the current’
and leave it there over night. If it is not hard in the
morning repeat the process when convenient. It must
not on any account be allowed to get brown.
• ® ver a cake will keep it perfectly moist for months
m the driest climate. It is a good plan to cut a piece of
cardboard half an inch bigger than the base of the cake
all round. Place the cake on this before icing, and Ft
the icing come right down on it, so that the .cardboard is
a shield lor the bottom of the cake and a protection ba-
the icing.
147. SCOTS’ SNOW CAKK
Take one pound arrowroot, half pound castor sugar
halt pound butter, the whites of six eggs, and flavouring
to taste Cream the butter, sift in the sugar and thl
arrowroot, then the eggs whipped to a stiff froth, add the
flavouring, and give the whole a good beating. Have the
mould lined with thick paper-two sheets on the bottom-
pour the mixture in, and bake on the middle shelf at a
temperature not exceeding 300 deg. F., for an hour and a
quarter. Do not open the door for the first hour. This
IS very good with potato starch instead of arrowroot.
148. SWISS ROLL
Take two eggs, half a cup of sugar, and a quarter of a
teaspoonful of carbonate of soda, and beat them well to-
gether Then add one cup of sifted flour and half a tea-
spoonfu! of cream of tartar, if too thick to spread easiiv,
add a table-spoonful of warm water. Beat well, and pour
into a buttered Swiss roll-tin—that is, an oblong sandwich
tin Spread it evenly, and bake it in the grilling drawer
lo bake it heat the gnller for five minutes with the o-rid-
iron in the to raise the sandwich-tin above” the
coils. Kay the sandwich-tin on the gridiron, and close the
drawer. In two minutes turn off both bottom switches,
then turn off the top switches, and at eight minutes the
cake ought to be cooked. If so, turn it out on a sheet of
sugared paper, or tea-towel, spread it at once with raqi-
berry, or strawberry jam, and roll quickly, while it is still
not. oprmklo a little icing sugar over it.


149. OEANGE CAKE
Three eggs, half cup sugar, half a cup butter, a cup and
a half flour, one teaspoonful carbonate of soda, two of
cream of tartar, and a little milk. Beat the yolks, butter
and sugar together, then add the whites, beaten to a stiff
froth, then the flour slightly warmed, and lastly the soda
and cream of tartar mixed in a table-spoonful of milk. If
too stiff add another spoonful or two of milk. Beat for
five minutes, spread in buttered sandwich-tins, and bake as
directed for Swiss roll.
In cooking sandwiches in the griller, it is essential that
the top compartment should not have much current on.
To have the kettle switch on (No. I.) almost invariably
means scorching the cakes under it.
Icing for the orange cake is as follows : —White of one
egg, grated rind of three oranges, a little juice (if required)
and a cup and a half of icing sugar. Mix all together
until quite smooth, if too thick add a little more orange
juice. Spread it with a wetted knife between the layers of
sandwich, and all over the top. It can be left plain or
decorated with flakes dt orange, or with little strips' of
chrystalized orange or angelica.
150. VICTOEIA SANDWICH
One cup of flour, one cup of sugar, three eggs, one tea-
spoonful of baking powder, one table-spoonful of butter,
and three table-spoonfuls of boiling water.
Beat the butter and sugar together, add the eggs, and
beat well. Sift in the flour and baking powder, add the
boiling water, and bake in well-buttered sandwich-tins, as
directed for Swiss roll and orange cake. When cooked,
spread raspberry jam between the two, and sprinkle icing
sugar on the top.
151. COCOANUT CAKE’:-
Three-quarters of a cup of butter, one cup sugar, one
cup dessicated coooanut soaked in the milk, two cups of
flour, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder.
Beat butter, sugar, and eggs together, then add the
milk and cocoanut. Sift in the flour and baking powder,
and beat well. Pour into a well-papered tin, and bake
on the middle shelf of the oven at a temperature of from
300 to 320 degrees for an hour, or an hour and a quarter.
Keep it in a warm place to cool off, or it will drop in the
middle.
152. COCOANUT BISCUITS
Mix two cups of dessicated cocoanut with one of icing
sugar, the well-beaten whites of two eggs, and two table-
spoonfuls of rice, flour, or maizena. Strew the baking tin


with a mixture of icing sugar and inaizcua, drop the
biscuits on it in pieces the size of a pigeon’s egg, and cook
in the oven at a temperature of 350 deg. F. They should
only be very delicately browned, and will cook in from ten
to fifteen minutes.
153. LEMON CUED
One pound sugar, the yolks of six eggs, and the whites
of four, the grated rind and juice of three lemons, and
quarter of a pound of butter.
fcitir the ingredients in an earthenware, enamel, or pre-
serving pan, over the left grid, until they become as thick
as honey. Pour into jars or bottles and cover carefully.
It will keep for months, and is very useful as a filling for
Victoria sandwich, or for small pastry.
154. AEEOWEOOT BISCUITS
Two table-spoonfuls of butter, one egg, half cup sugar,
Halt cup arrowroot, one cup flour, one teaspoonful baking
powder, and flavouring to taste.
Beat well together and bake in the top of the oven
alter cakes , ve been cooked - The temperature should be
350 deg. at least, when they are put in. Sprinkle a
mixture of maizena and icing sugar on the trays, and put
the mixture in small dabs, a little distance apart.
155. SIMPLE CUEEANT SODA LOAF
Take one cup of self-raising flour, and mix with it one
tajble-spoonful of brown sugar, half a teaspoonful of allspice,
and one of ground cinnamon, a little nutmeg, and two
c f ps , of 5”r antS k Tllen add enou gh milk to make a dough
of the stiffness of scone dough. Put it in a buttered loaf-
tin, or a small pie-dish, and bake in an oven at about 350
degrees. It must be baked fairly quickly.
15G. OATMEAL GEMS
Beat separately the yolk and white of one egg, the latter
to a stiff froth. To the beaten yolk, add a cup of well-
cooked oatmeal porridge made without salt, and half a
euf) of milk. Beat for a few minutes and add a cup of
white flour and a pinch of salt. Then fold in lightly the
beaten white Have the gem irons very hot (heat them in
the grilling drawer), butter them, and pour the batter in
until each cup is nearly full. Heat the griller to 600 deg.
P., as for grilling. It will hold two gem irons. A few
minutes after they are in, turn off one bottom switch.
Possibly after a time it may be possible to turn off one or
more of the top switches, it will depend on what current is
•if? f, , m the top cpm P ar tment. A peep at the gems
will tell how they are going. The gem irons must be very


hot when the batter is put in, the greatest heat must be
on the top, and they must be cooked to a bright brown
color. The colder the mixture is before putting in the
irons, the better it will rise. It will take from 15 to 20
minutes to cook them. They can be eaten hot or cold,
and must be torn apart, not cut through. Further, they
will be found digestible, either cold or hot, by the’ most
confirmed dyspeptics. Wheat meal porridge may be substi-
tuted for oatmeal for a change. These gems are remark-
ably good, and will keep for several days, though they are
best fresh. The gem irons must be made of thick iron.
157. POP-OVERS :
One cup of flour, seven-eighths of a cup of milk, quarter
of a teaspoonful of salt, one egg, half a teaspoonful of
melted butter.
Mix the salt and flour, add the milk gradually so as to
obtain a smooth batter, then the egg, well beaten and
light, beat for a few minutes, and pour into hissing hot
gem irons, and bake as directed for oatmeal gems, only for
a longer time.
They may be baked in buttered earthen cups, when the
bottom will have a glazed appearance, but they are best
baked in gem irons. They are best hot, and the same
remarks apply as for oatmeal gems, except that they are
only nice the day they are cooked.
158. GRAHAM POP-OVERS :
T wo-thirds whole wheat flour, seven-eighths of a cup of
milk, one egg, one-third of a cup of flour, quarter of a tea-
spoonful of salt, half a teaspoonful of melted butter.
Prepare and bake as pop-overs.
159. TOASTING
Bread may bo toasted perfectly by laying it on the wire
in the bottom of the grilling drawer. Have the drawer
heated to fiflOdeg., then lay in the bread, cut about half an
inch thick, and shut the drawer. Open it in three minutes,
and turn the toast. Close again, and open in two min-
utes, when the toast will be ready. New bread takes
longer than stale. Toast can, wdth economy, follow bacon,
etc., for breakfast, or it can be done on the grid at the
same time as chops.
160. MIXTURE FOR FLOURING CAKE TINS
Two table-spoonfuls of maizena, six table-spoonfuls of
castor sugar. Mix well together, and keep in a tin with a
perforated top like a kitchen pepper-castor. Dust over
pudding-moulds, cake-tins, or shelves on which biscuits or
shortbread is to he baked.


161. SCONES :
Two cups ol flour, one cup of milk (butter-milk is good),
a table-spoonful of butter, a pinch of salt, and two tea-
spoonfuls of baking powder. Mix the flour, powder and
salt together dry, then add the butter, and rub it together
until thoroughly crumbed. Make a hole in the centre,
pour in the milk, and mix quickly and lightly with a metal
spoon. Sprinkle some flour on the board 1 , turn out the
dough, throw some more flour over it, and roll out lightly to
about three-quarters of an inch in thickness. Cut in
pieces either straight across with a knife or with a round
cutter, and bake in the griller. Before you start mixing,
turn on all the current round the griller. This will bring
it to about 600 degrees by the time the scones are prepared.
Put them in the griller pan and slip them into the drawer.
When it is closed, turn off one top and one bottom switch.
Scones can also be 'ooked in the oven to advantage, but
the griller is good for speed in heating up.


CONTENTS.
SOUPS.
1. Simple, Stock.
2. Vegetable Soup.
3. Camp Soup.
4. Green Pea Soup.
5. Pea Soup.
6. Potato Soup.
7. Tomato Soup.
8. Hasty Brown Soup.
9. Camp Mulligatawny Soup.
10. Julienne Soup.
11. Scotch Broth.
12. Rice Broth.
BOILING.
13. Boiling.
14. Hot-Boxing Corned Beef.
15. Hot-Boxing Mutton.
16. Hot-Boxing Brisket of Beef.
17. Hot-Boxing Ham.
ROASTING.
18. Roasting Beef, Mutton, etc.
19. Boast Fowl.
20. Roast Duck.
21. Boast Babbit.
STEWS, CUBBIES, Etc.
22. Rabbit Steward.
23. Insulated Chicken.
24. Egg and Beef Brawn.
25. Beefsteak Pie with Egg.
26. Potted Meat.
27. Hunters’ Pie.
28. Stewed Beef Fillet.
29. Soused Steak.
30. Rolled Loin of Mutton.
31. Stewed Kidneys.
32. Minced Collops.
33. Stewed Steak.


34. Beef Olives.
35. Beef, Etc., au Casserole.
36. Curried Mutton.
37. Curried Fowl.
38. Curried Babbit.
39. Curried Pish.
40. Curried Crayfish.
41. Curried Eggs,
42. Curried Omelet,
43. Kedgeree.
GEILL1NG.
44. Grilling.
45. Grilling Beefsteak.
46. Grilling Chops.
47. Grilling Chicken.
48. Grilling Eish.
49. Grilling Lamb Cutlets.
FETING.
50. Frying. »
51. Egg and Bread Crumbs for Frying.
52. Frying Pish Cutlets.
53. Fagged Tongue,
54. To Fry Fish—Wet Frying.
55. To Fry Lamb Cutlets—Wet Prying.
56. Frying Bacon.
57. Frying Brains.
58. Frying Brains in Batter.
59. Prying Tripe in Batter.
BAKED FISH.
60. Baked Whiting.
61. Baked Garfish.
62. Baked Whiting with Onions.
EGGS.
63. Eggs, Boiled.
64. Eggs, Poached in Milk.
65. Eggs, Poached in Gravy.
66. Eggs, Swiss.
67. Eggs, Escalloped.
68. Eggs, Scrambled.
69. Eggs, Fried.
70. Savoury Omelet.
SAUCES.
71. Sauce, White.
72. Sauce, Brown.
73. Sauce, Apple.
74. Sauce, Bread.
75. Sauce, Butter.
76. Sauce. Parsley.
77. Sauce, Anchovy.


rS. Sauce, Caper.
79. Sauce, .Egg*.
-SO. Sauce, Onion.
SI. Sauce, White Sauce for Puddings.
82. Sauce, Wine.
S3. Sauce, Hard.
SI. Roux, or Roo.
VEGETABLES.
So. Potatoes, Baked.
So. Potatoes, Boiled.
87. Potatoes, Steamed.
Potatoes, Baked in their Jackets.
69. Potatoes, Chips.
90. Potatoes, Balls.
91. Potatoes, Pancakes.
92. Potatoes, Mashed.
93. Potatoes, Pried.
91. Cauliflower, To Steam.
95. Baked Tomatoes. »
96. Rice, To Boil,
97. Peas, To Steam.
98. Pumpkin, To Bake.
99. Pumpkin and Potatoes Fried.
100. Haricot Beans, Baked.
101. Cauliflower, Crumbed.
102. Beetroot.
Iu3. Unite Beetroot or Silver Spinach.
104. Jerusalem Artichokes.
105. Trench Beans.
106. Onions, Boiled.
107. Onions, Baked.
108. Vegetable Marrow, Boiled.
309. \egetable Marrow, Stuffed.
110. Turnips, Mashed.
PUDDINGS AND PASTRY.
111. Pudding, Uncle Tom’s.
112. Pudding, Canary.
113. Pudding, Electric.
114. Pudding, Marmalade.
115. Apple Pie.
116. Pudding, Apple.
117. Pudding-, Sago.
118k Pudding, Chocolate.
119. Pancakes.
120. Pudding, Magpie.
121. Pudding, Baked Rice.
122. Pudding, Prune Flummery.
123. Pudding, Plum.
Baked Rhubarb.
12o. Puoding, Baked Custard.
126. Pudding, Roley-Poley.


127. German Fritters.
128. Fritter Batter.
129. Puff Paste.
130. Short Crust.
SIMPLE SAVOURIES.
131. Macaroni and Cheese.
132. Scots' Cheese Cakes.
133. Cheese for Oat-Cake Savoury.
134. Savoury Gems.
135. Stuffed Eggs.
136. Olivines.
137. Sardinettes.
138. Cheese Straws.
OAKES, SCONES, Etc.
139. Cake, Plum.
140. Cake, Arrowroot.
141. Arrowroot Meringues.
142. Hidden Secrets.
143. Whistlebrae Shortbread.
144. Rich Pound Cake.
145. Almond Paste.
146. Icing for Cakes.
147. Scots’ Snow Cake.
148. Swiss Roll.
149. Orange Cake.
150. Victoria Sandwich.
151. Cocoanut Cake.
152. Cocoanut Biscuits.
153. Lemon Curd.
154. Arrowroot Biscuits.
155. Simple Currant Soda Loaf.
1.56. Oatmeal Gems.
157. Pop-Overs.
158. Graham Pop-Overs.
159. Toast.
160. Mixture for Dusting Cake Tins.
‘161. Scones.
Bird & Annear Print, Egan Street, Kalgoorlie.
