





There will always be an
81 st
y
1943
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
W. R. SMITH & PATERSON PTY. LTD.
Kemp Place, Valley, Brisbane
RESTRICTED


Contents
Page
Editorial ..... 3
For America . . . . 4,5
Foreword .... 7
General MacArthur . . . 8,9
General Kenney .... 10, 11
General Wilson .... 12, 13
General Connell .... 14,15
Lt. Colonel Fry . . . . 16, 17
Insignia ..... 18, 19
Commanding Officer’s Staff . . 20
Activation Order . . . 21
Headquarters .... 22—25
Medical Section . . . . 6,7
Security ..... 28,29
Headquarters Group . . . 30,31
Mess Hall .... 32,33
Photographic .... 34
Headquarters Squadron . . 35
Citations .... 36
Jeep ..... 37
Commendations . . . 38-43
Men in Coveralls . . . 44,45
A-20 46
A Tribute ..... 47
Let’s Reconnoitre ... 48
P-38 .... . 49-52
Test Pilots .... 53
Eagle Farm Activities . . . 54—65
Offshots ..... 66
Page
Cartoons ..... 67—75
Officer’s Parly .... 76, 77
Activation Party . . . 78, 79
Non-Com. Club .... 80, 81
Archerfield Repair . . . 82—84
Lt. Colonel Gunn ... 85
Allison Overhaul . . . 86—92
A.N.A. Instrument Shop . . 93
A.N.A 94, 95
Cartoons .... 96—110
Are You Remembering! . . 11l
Charts 112, 113
Motor Supply Company . . 114
De Haviland Propeller Shop . . 1,15
Q ANT AS . . . . 116,117
Paul and Gray . . . . 118
Flphinstones . . . . 119
King and Katts .... 120
Hudsons ..... 121
Chart ..... 122
Motor Pools .... 123—127
Christmas Letter . . . 128
Offshots 129
Depot Supply Section . . . 130—141
Odds in Verse .... 142
Cartoons ..... 143—147
My Old Barracks Bag . . . 148
To the Boys .... 149
Personnel .... 150—172
RESTRICTED


Editorial
When this war is over and you are back home, your book will mean more to you than it does
now —in retrospect many irksome things will be forgotten—attainments and happier times remem-
bered. You will have on record the part your group played in this war’s history, which primarily is
the purpose of this compilation, also to familiarize each section with the work being done by the
Group as a whole. You will probably be surprised at its ramifications and attainments in the short
period of twelve months. Of the obstacles and real battle behind these attainments —hut a brief
reference is made, to deal with it fully would mean another volume.
The subject matter in the hook has, where possible, been treated pictorially—giving a truer pic-
ture than is possible in writing.
To any who may feel that their section or any part thereof has not been treated with the respect
due, we offer an explanation. The period of time allotted for acquiring data, etc., for publication was
too limited to permit of any other course than that of Brevity—as a result some mailers may have
been omitted.
To all those who have been helpful in making this publication possible we extend our sincere
thanks.
Editor.
Capt. B. E. Peterson Historian Officer
HISTORIAN STAFF:
Miss V. Condie Editor and Compiler
Cpl. W. Witxiams Assistant
Pfc. R. Davisson Artist
Sgt. L. Becker Artist (Relieving)
Miss I. Rowe Stenographer


Not for Australia, a land quite fair,
Nor for England who is always there.
But, for America, my home so dear.
That is the reason I am here.
I did not ash to he sent overseas,
Tho I still get down on my bended knees
To Th ank my God, who was pleased to see
A Soldier for Uncle Sam, in me.
Cpl. JOHN P. HARRISON,
81st.






Foreword
To you who have the honour to say “This is Our Book.”
I say our book because each and everyone of us has had a part in making this history of the
81st Air Depot Group. True, there are many chapters yet unwritten including the final one of this
war, but what has already been accomplished by you men has made this group history well worth
recording. It shoivs pride in your group and a job well done, for men who have pride in their work
can only know success.
On May 11, 1942, the 81st Air Depot Group was activated by official orders from the War De-
partment at Washington. Then it was just an organization on paper, but during the past twelve months
through building, planning, and hard work we have been able to make the “81st” an organization
well known throughout this whole theater of operations.
At first we were spread all over Australia. Headquarters Squadron and Supply Squadron were
activated at Brisbane. Repair Squadron was attached to the 4th Air Depot Group at Tocumwal. Some
of our men were at Wagga Wagga; others at Amberley. A few more were down in Melbourne, but
little by little each of these Squadrons and detachments were moulded into the outstanding group it
is today. These first few officers and enlisted men had it tough, for there was no training period
in the 81st. They learned as they carried on, yet performing a mans sized job. Fortunately that early
cadre formed a nucleus of good men with whom we could build the group which has now grown many
times its original strength.
Accomplishments in these, past months have been equally great and many. Eagle Farm was prac-
tically built from, the ground up. Many and varied types of Army Aircraft have been erected and
repaired, there. Modifications such as the A2O and 825 projects have been transformed into deadly
striking power by you men. Also many million pounds of supplies stored in Garages, Wool Sheds
and other improvised Warehouses have been shipped to combat areas and service units in this theater.
Furthermore, urgently needed major engine overhaul facilities have been established. These and many
other outstanding achievements will always be remembered when the 81st Air Depot Group is
mentioned.
Many of you, ivho are serving behind the combat lines, may feel that you are not contributing
much to the ultimate victory. You feel that you want to do something important. Believe me you
have accomplished almost the impossible. Your efforts are vitally important to ensure complete
victory.
With the knowledge we now possess and instilled with vigour on the success of past perform-
ance, the future holds no fears that each succeeding chapter will be just as outstanding as these which
are here recorded. I only hope that you will be as proud of your book as I am of mine.
LIEUT. COL., AIR CORPS
Commanding.




General MacArthur
. O'!"®*’
kV,




General Kenney
K.l» ■
y v« ►
„..C^
v
jc'-*'*'




General Wilson
. t o* ***
G fct4t* , ‘ v
6


"THE HARD TASK WE WILL DO NOW THE
IMPOSSIBLE WILL TAKE US A LITTLE LONGER"
General Connell
6^'
o *<s> ct '
o-<<'>*






Lie ut. Col. Fry
o\S*


PROPOSED INSIGNIA
AWAITING APPROVAL


Insignia
INSIGNIA DESIGNED AND DRAWN BY
Pfc. R. K. DAVISSON, H.Q. AND H.Q. SQUADRON, 81st


Commanding Officer's
Staff and
Appointments
L.T. COLONEL MONAY (then Major, Engineer-
ing and Acting Executive Officer. Colonel
Monay held Engineering Office till early
in January, when he was appointed Ex-
ecutive Officer. Promoted Lt. Colonel,
January 2nd, 1943.
MAJOR McNELLY, succeeding Colonel Monay
as Engineering Officer. Appointed Feb-
ruary 18th, 1943.
MAJOR SPEARS (then Capt.), Depot Supply
Officer until early in March. (Left).
MAJOR BARNES, succeeding Major Spears, as
Depot Supply Officer, March 10th, 1943.
(Right).
CAPTAIN PETERSON (then Lieut.), as Adjutant.
Total of 81st personnel at this time be-
ing 6 officers and 142 enlisted men. Pres-
ent time 52 officers, 5 Warrant officers,
765 enlisted men, 129 attached enlisted
men. Total personnel 894.
20




Left to Right
Front Row
BROWN, Joseph M., Capt.
GRIFFIN, John A., Capt.
COX, Kenneth E., Capt.
LAMBERT, Curtis L., Capt.
PETERSON, Burton E., Capt.
FRY, Ralph L ., Lt. Col.
MONAY, William H., Lt. Col.
GROVER, Percy, Major
HOFFMAN, Frederic G., Major
BARNES, Robert H., Major
SPEARS, Charles A., Jr., Major
ATTWOOD, John C., Capt.
LAUGHLIN, Lacey B., Capt.
Second Row
CHING, Marcus, Capt.
MULLER, Marcus H., Major
LANDRY, Norman S., Capt.
HUNT, Melvin R., 1st Lieut.
TRUMBULL, John R., 1st Lieut.
ZINCK, Robert C., Capt.
Read —Left to Right
Left Side
SCHUYLER , Phil. J., 2nd Lieut.
CLOCKSIN , Albert J., 2nd Lieut.
HAYES, Hal. F., 1st Lieut.
TOMPKINS, Tom R., Capt.
RUPP, Frederic J., 1st Lieut.
BIRD, Harold H., 1st Lieut.
McNEAL, Vester L., 1st Lieut.
McNELLY, Fred W., Major


ENGLISH, Frank C., 2nd Lieut,
JRQUHART, Kennetli S., 1st Lieut.
SELMAN, Rupert 1,., 1st Lieut.
LANDLEY, James J., 1st Lieut.
MAY, Paul C., Capt.
EVANS, William K., 1st Lieut.
Top Row
LINGENFELDER, Charles A., 2nd Lieut.
ANDERS, Paul L., 2nd Lieut.
COX, John W., Jr., 2nd Lieut.
WILSON, Ralph S., 2nd Lieut.
LUECK, Darwin D., 2nd Lieut.
MALKAN, Arnold G., 1st Lieut.
PADEN, William D., 2nd Lieut.
LANDERS, Ted R., 2nd Lieut.
SHERAN, James K., 2nd Lieut.
LAWSON, Robert M., 2nd Lieut.
SCHANTZ, Glenn H., 2nd Lieut.
HOLLOWAY, Kenneth H., 2nd Lieut.
LAUGHLIN, John R., 2nd Lieut.
CUPP, Walter E., 2nd Lieut.
YOUNG, Vernon M., 2nd Lieut.
FARRIOR, William O., Capt.
Right Side
COCANOUGHER, Harold F., Capt.
GERTNER, Joseph, 1st. Lieut.
DAVIT, Paul E., 1st Licut.
GARBER, Donald L., 1st Lieut.
FRAZIER, John R., 1st Lieut.
CLARK, Robert M., 2nd Lieut.
FLETCHER, John T., Jr., 1st Lieut.
AUSTIN, Robert R., Jr., 2nd Lieut.




HEADQUARTERS
UNITED STATES ARMY AIR SERVICES
ALLIED AIR FORCES, SOUTHWEST PACIFIC AREA
OFFICE OP THE COMMANDING GENERAL
APO 501
May 11, 1942.
General Orders)
)
No 4)
Under authority in War Department Radiogram No. 1563, dated May 1,
1942, the Eighty First Air Depot Group, consisting of the following
squadrons, is hereby constituted and activated with temporary stations
as indicated: —
Organization Temporary Station
Headquarters and Headquarters Squadron Brisbane, Queensland
81st Supply Squadron Brisbane, Queensland
81st Repair Squadron Wagga Wagga, N. S. W.
By command of Major General LINCOLN: .
MILLARD C. YOUNG,
Lt. Col., Air Corps,
Executive.
OFFICIAL:
R. T. NICOLS, JR. ,
Major, Air Corps,
Actg. Adj. Gen.


COMMANDING OFFICER
AND STAFF
Seated —right to left
LT. COL. FRY, C.O.
LT. COL. MONAY, Executive Officer
MAJOR BARNES, Depot Supply Officer
Standing
MAJOR McNELLY, Engineering Officer
CAPT. PETERSON, Adjutant
Headquarters
A very small office, previously a car display room, had temporarily to suffice for Headquarters.
All personnel, i.e. Personnel Section and Command Section working in the same room. But six days
after the inception of the Group, on May 17th, carpenters and labourers commenced expansion of
office space, on the double. Round and under carpenters —in noise, dust and dirt —the business of ac-
tivating and organizing the 81st commenced.
In these early days it was more a question of negotiating and laying foundations to get projects
commenced, than actually accomplishing a great deal immediately.
Yet these same projects commenced under conditions, which to say the least were not helpful,
with the added serious obstacles of, inexperienced personnel on work which needed skilled labour,
difficulty in getting parts, tools, etc., in a very short time were functioning if not smoothly—with ever
increasing momentum. As instance —
Supply. —From a very humble start has grown to be one of the largest Supply Sections overseas.
Repair and Assembly. —Archerfield, Amberley Field and Eagle Farm.
The statistical charts reproduced in this book show the tremendous volume of work accomplished
in this section.
Eagle Farm Repair Section was commenced by the 38 Bomb Squadron, transferred from Amber-
ley Field for the work —until replaced by the 81sl Repair Squadron from Tocumwal in August 1942.


ME SSAGE CENTRE
Routing of all correspondence, telegrams, distribution, mimeograph
and mail. The monthly average on Teletype messages; Incoming
1,021 (approximately) ; outgoing 1,496; total 2,517. For the same
period, correspondence and messages, new correspondence 2,070,
old correspondence 2,250; total 4,320.
PERSONEL
The Draftsmanship of this Department comes
under four categories—Mechanical, Architectural.
Topographic and Chartographic. They commenced
activities on September 14, 1942, the designing and
drafting being carried out by Cpl. J. R. Lukes and
Cpl. Y. M. Medalie, Pvt. L. LeFurgy (Char-
tographer) being attached later.
Plans and constructional details are drawn up
for recording and constructional purposes. De-
lineations made of Aircraft Installations —such as
the recording of all modifications and improve-
ments pertaining to aircraft. The most important
project of this type being the nose and side guns
and bomb rack installations in the R-25c.
Proposals are also made for Property Develop-
ments and plans drawn of all layouts of plots, loca-
tions, roads, runways, buildings, warehouses, and
overhaul plants, etc. The most important consign-
ment being the set up of Allison test stands. At
present this Department is working on soundproof
test stands for Allison overhaul.
The Chartographic Section handles the drafting
of all statistical charts, traffic interpretations and
graphic records. The drafting of all charts dis-
played in this publication were drawn by this Sec-
tion.
DRAFTING
23
Pay, service records,
allotments, bonds,
classifications are all
handled by this Sec-
tion.


Lt. Clark, Statistical Officer is also Unit
Censor —on this Section he lets the poem be-
low speak for him —it was presented him by
a well-wisher.
Now have no fear, little soldier dear,
That we like censoring mail;
Although it’s true we find a few
Gems in the common shale.
And we raise a smile at the careful guile
Of the man who thinks us mutts;
Who hides a word with tricks absurd
That causes more flaming cuts !
Who wants to read your private creed?
Believe me, it’s no pleasure!
The same old lies and alibies
And new ones for good measure.
The same old tale gets very stale
The thousandth time of reading;
The shallow ruse and weak excuse,
The sentimental pleading.
It isn't odd that we thank our God
That we are good forgetters;
Else we’d go insane wth futile strain
Of piles of b Army letters.
LT. CLARK, STATISTICAL OFFICER
Statistical Control Section
Just an infant in the 81sl, this Department is responsible for daily, weekly and monthly aircraft status reports, also
weekly shipping recapitulation for permanent erection and maintenance records of all aircraft handled and assigned to 81st.
Advisory on engine status and personnel 127 a and B and critical items report.
Completion of statistical survey of the progress of 81st since its inception to the present time.
Transportation
Transportation, as one of the important
activities of the 81st, began in a small way.
A motor pool with three soldiers, two dis-
patchers, eight civilian truck drivers, four
staff cars, eight trucks, three semi’s, and one
C 2 wrecker struggled to cope with the over-
whelming demand for transportation. Sup-
plies arriving from the States were encroach-
ing rapidly the very limited spaces on the
docks, and had to be moved quickly and effi-
ciently. These first few months meant only
one thing—hard work and long hours.
Early in October Lt. Sheran succeeded
Capt. Zinck (then Lieutenant) as transporta-
tion officer. At this time work was nearing
completion on the two new motor pools—
Eagle Farm handled the heavy duty vehicles,
with Ascot Garage doing all servicing except
TRANSPORTATIONS OFFICER
24


for first initial work on the heavy duty trucks. The town motor pool handled for the most part the staff cars
and the cargo trucks.
Growth? Yes! It has been tremendous—now are moving upwards of twenty million pounds per month. As
the warehouses and various other units have built up, so transportation has progressed with them—indeed, it nearly
loses itself in the growth of the other sections and in turn it is a part of their growth, for they could not thrive
without the necessary transportation.
Driving personnel since activation has increased to approximately two hundred—staff cars now number 27,
trucks 60, pick-ups and utilities 34, ambulances 4, trucks and trailers 21, C 2 wreckers 3, plus many others.
Eagle Farm heavy duty handles the transportation of all salvaged aircraft within a three hundred-mile radius.
This heavy duty group is on call twenty-four hours a day with men working without a definite time schedule.
Hours of driving, eating hours or places mean nothing —they have a job to be done.
The ramifications of this unit are many and varied —but it suffices to say that this Department is just one
more link in the 81st chain —a strong chain which gives the boys “up there” the wherewithal to push success-
fully forward.
MR. L. J. McMAHON
Construction, Billeting and Real Estate
Manager.
Stencils on an average of 210 per month.
Copies 120,000 per month.
Also Mimeographing for the entire Group.
Operator is DOUGLAS SCHWEDE
CLAIMS & SALVAGE OFFICER




EAGLE FARM
Medical Section
The duties of this Section have a wide scope —it
not only cares for 81st A.D.G., but also has Head-
quarters of sth Air Force, and Headquarters of Air
Service Command. To effectuate the work of this
Group is Major Graver, Flight and Group Surgeon,
as well as C.O. of 81st Dispensary. Assisting him are
seven officers and twenty-five enlisted men.
The present Dispensary is a completely modern
two-story building, one of the finest set-ups in Aus-
tralia —truly a far-cry from the inadequate quarters
of four small rooms, in which the section originated
and the small personnel of two officers and seven
enlisted men.
At present 1,500 enlisted men and 1,200 civilians
come under the care of this unit. As many as 2,000
patients per month are treated.
Eagle Farm has its own Dispensary, caring for 750
men and —one wallaby.
All pilot examinations between Melbourne and
Townsville are taken care of by the Dispensary.


Security
Guarding-—guarding against damage
through carelessness, neglect or by
deliberate intent—what is currently
the world’s most valuable material—
strategical equipment, supplies and in-
stallations.
To offer maximum security for the
Groups some twenty installations
twenty-four hours a day, entails a patrol
route of thirty-seven miles. Small trucks
are used by the cruising guards. Each
installation is checked three to four
times hourly during the night, at irre-
gular intervals, and sentinels posted
where necessary. Doors are checked to
see that they are locked, areas surround-
ing installations are checked, loiterers
and intruders escorted away from these
areas. Checking of identification discs
of civilian employees, inspection of fire
fighting equipment, watching for fire
hazard and the accumulation of waste;
in fact, one of the cars patrols for ten
hours daily primarily for that purpose.
Security Section also keeps a close
watch on 81sl A.D.G. vehicles on the
road, reporting any traffic violation, and
if necessary confiscates any Army prop-
erty left on the streets without protec-
tion.
All irregularities observed, however
small are recorded and reported in de-
tail.
The Security Section’s aim is to rec-
tify any hazardous condition or danger-
ous practice before it takes effect.
At the inception of 81st security, per-
sonnel totalled eight soldiers—present
strength sixteen soldiers, twenty-two
civilians. The civilians standing guard
are issued with night sticks, and are in-
structed to call the nearest soldier in
the event of any irregularity.
The patience and conscientiousness of
this small vigilant group of men is to
be admired—whose work is ever Watch-
ing and Guarding.
These boys lake their work seriously
as shown by these action shots.
Eagle Farm also has an equally effi-
cient security section.
28


A NIGHT’S ROUTINE
December 6th the guards do say
Was really quite a busy day,
And there was really quite a bit
Of excitement when the sun’d set.
The guard did call at 9.15
A fire near 14 to be seen,
But when upon investigation,
They found it was a near location.
So you can imagine the result,
The poor tired guards were all turned out,
And put upon a special alert,
With full instructions to insert.
At 9.30 our cruising boys,
Reported two mother’s pride and joys
Were found acamping in a crate,
Somewhere within Warehouse 13 gate.
The case was full of felt and litter,
And the boys were all adither,
Smoking fags, three candles burning,
Trouble sure the boys were earning.
Matches, etc., all confiscated,
Boys went with parents, so trouble abated.
At 10 p.m. I do declare,
What do you think the guard found here?
A boy and girl on pleasure bent,
They were removed with much repent,
And escorted by our guard supreme
From Warehouse Number Fifteen.
At 10.15, say what a cheek,
A civilian who was not discreet,
Was found beneath a sign reading—
We request there’ll be “No Smoking,”
With a much lit fag within his mouth.
The guard instructed “put it out.”
At 10.45 the cruising squad
Came upon a man who to work had trod,
Who was causing quite a sensation
By not having his identification.
When questioned it was ascertained,
That he the disc had quite mislaid.
So the captain was at once contacted,
“Send him home,” he, the guard instructed.
11 p.m. say, all’s now serene,
And our guards who’d been so keen,
Did heave a sign and give a yawn,
And wish it was more close to morn.
29


HEADQUARTERS
First Row
S/gt. RYE
M/Sgt. COOPER
S/Sgt. SMILER
S/Sgt. GUINN
T/Sgt. BENDA
M/Sgt. HILLS
Capt. LAUGHLIN
1st/Sgt. FREEMAN
M/Sgt. WESSMAN
S/Sgt. HINTON
S/Sgt. RIMES
S/Sgt. SNIDER
S/Sgt. HALL
Second Row
Sgt. HUBBARD
Sgt. EPPERSON
Sgt. HENDERER
Sgt. WHIRACRE
Sgt. BOYD
Sgt. SALTER
S/Sgt. FULARA
S/Sgt. CONGELTON
Sgt. ZONGROXE
Sgt. MARCHESINI
Sgt. STALCUP
Sgt. KELLY
Sgt. GUILLAUME
Sgt. IOMMI
Third Row
Cpl. HARRIS
Cpl. LEDUC
Pfc. FRICK
Cpl. ROBISON
Pvt. KALAMAJKA
Pvt. McKEE
Pfc. DRISCOLL
Sgt. CUTLER
Pfc. STEELE
Pfc. WIKCZINSKI
Pvt. GREATHOUSE
Pvt. BURKE
Pfc. DAVIDSON
Pfc. CORD
Fourth Row
Cpl. SHULL
T/5 BARNES
Pfc. DICKENS
Pfc. MOODY
Cpl. SCHAR RINC HOUSEN
Pvt. LUNA
Cpl. BYERS
Pfc. TODD
Pfc. MAZZOCCHI
Cpl. WM. WILLIAMS
Cpl. RAEL
Cpl. McCARVILL
Pvt. SENSIBA
Pvt. TALON
Pvt. BADOLATO


SQUADRON
Fifth Row
T/5 PARSONS
Pvt. SMITH
Pfc. SEDDON
Pfc. KULIN
Pvt. MESSIER
Cpl. CASS
Pfc. MYERLY
Pfc. ROBB
Pfc. HANSON
Pvt. GUCKERT
Pfc. KNITTEL
Pfc. MADIGAN
Pvt. LAGALA
Pfc. HADDAD
Sgt. MARSHALL
Sixth Row
Pfc. BRYKALA
Cpl. WESTBROOK
Cpl. WOLF
Cpl. BACCIARINI
Cpl. O’ CONNOR
Cpl. KOSZIUSZKO
Pvt. LYNCH
Cpl. MAIER
Cpl. SMITH
Cpl. MAYFIELD
Cpl. MEDALIE
Pfc. SCHNE LDER
Cpl. LUKES
Pvt. GREIFENSTEIN
Pvt. KAWICKI
Seventh Row
Cpl. TOUCHTON
Pvt. PERLMUTTER
Pfc. MAHR
Pfc. POULSEN
Pvt. OWENS
Pfc. McCLOSKEY
Cpl. WEAVER
Pvt. LINDSEY
Sgt. BLASKE
T/5 MEEHAN
Cpl. JAMES WILLIAMS
Cpl. BEAVER
Pfc. KLAUS
Eight-Row
Sgt. LEONE
Pvt. LITTLE
Pvt. DOUCETTE
Sgt. WALTER O’BREIN
Cpl. GUGALA
Cpl. IVEY
Pvt. HORSEY
Pvt. KRAJEWSKI
Cpl. KEISTER
Pvt. LINES
Cpl. SIMPSON
Pvt. SPATIR


THE
LINE
UP
THE SERVE-OUT
THE DINING HALL
Mess Hall
Wednesday, December 23rd
—an important day? Of
course! The first meal was
served in our new, well-
equipped, and modern mess
hall. This new set-up along
with subsequent additions and
alterations is one of the finest
in any man’s army. The change
was a welcomed one after
several months in the old mess
at the main warehouse.
We think our mess-kit clean-
up facilities are the tops. Sup-
pose we let the pictures tell
the rest of the story of this
thrice-daily activity of ours.
MAKING THE MEN U


Eagle Farm
Mess Hall
Conditions have been im-
proved considerably at this
Mess Hall in the past few
months.
With the setting up of two
field kitchens for attached men,
came a great improvement in
the preparation of the menu
and the variety and quality of
the food handed round. The
boys of this section claim that
it is the best in the service.
Their appreciation was
plainly shown, when they pre-
sented the Sergeant respon-
sible for these improvements,
with an iron crown and a
home-made electric mixer.
THANKSG IVIN DAY
DINNER
CLEAN- UP
CHEFS WIT H MASCOT


Photographic Section
Photographic laboratory commenced June
10, 1942. Sergeant Neikes and Corporal Krause
(then privates), who were both experienced
photographic men, conceived the idea —Captain
Laughlin was appointed photographic officer.
The Section now covers a wide range of acti-
vity such as the photographing of Army and
Civilian Personnel, compilation of pictorial his-
torical records or organization, photographic
copies of records, accidents to planes, trucks,
other vehicles, and equipment. Photographing
instructional plans and sketches, repair plans,
duplication work and service inventions. Photo-
graphs of military intelligence reports to Com-
manding Officers, record photographs of im-
portant buildings, equipment and installations.
News photography and special work for Army
Units —quite a step from just an idea, and in a
period of eleven months.
All photographs in this book are the work of
the Photo. Lab. boys —proof of their skill at
their work. Without the willing co-operation of
these hoys this book would not have been pos-
sible in period of time allowed for compiling
and publishing.
Pfc. STEELE, Sgt. NEIKES. Pfc. HANSON,
Cpl. KRAUSE
INSTALIN G PROJECTION PRINTER IN PHOTO SECTION
PROJECTION PRINTER IN OP ERA TION
NEGATIVES DRYING
Cpl. KRAUSE READY FOR ACTION


Headquarters Squadron consists of the follow-
ing Sections —
Medical Finance
Transportation Historian Department
Photographic Ordnance
Chemical Statistical
Operations and Flight Sections
HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON
Headquarters Squadron had its fame
For Clerks and Cooks and Guards, who claim
To be the best in everything.
Operations, Engineers, Photomen, Supply-eers,
Ordnance men and Chemicals, Officers, who work
(like hell),
All these and more our Squadron make,
But how many of them can bake a cake.
There’s Driskill with his ping-pong game,
But now it’s tennis. What’s her name?
Myerly with his blue-eyed blonde,
Of him we hear she’s very fond.
High Point’s favourite, Harvey Luck,
Just see that grin, it cheers you up.
Mahoney, with the golden tenor voice,
At Red Cross shows, always first choice.
Cooper, Master Sergeant Ray,
No noise at night, he works all day.
But still the guards, back in their pen,
Make most of their racket after half past ten.
Horsey with his eagle eye,
Tells when your pistol is aimed too high.
Harry Cutler’s our baseball man.
He plays like Fritz, with great elan.
Hamner’s never learned to fly,
But we all know the reason why.
Badolato writes so much,
We’re ’fraid he’ll drive the censor nuts.
Kalamajka gets the mail,
Madigan, too, from his Dee Dale.
If you’re looking for a he-man
Just get a glimpse of Sergeant Freeman.
Benda, too, is quite a talker,
And so are Hall, O’Brien and Whitacre.
Jimmie Williams boxes well,
Ask Blaske, how his eyes did swell.
Joe Leone comes from South Philly,
So you can bet that he’s no “lily.”
Yale Medalie goes up and down
The scale, you know, best fiddler in town.
Burke would knock ’em off the track,
Around “The Loop” in a GI hack.
Hanson never gets enough
Of toast and eggs and all that stuff.
Now Gugala is sad and off the hub —
Ann’s letter put him in the brush-off club.
But when we hear the Tiger’s call.
Out of Bed we all must fall,
Unless it be LeDuc in bed,
’Cause in the morn he sleeps like lead.
And Jimmie Maier just loves to fall
Out of bed at bugle call.
Let’s not forget Supply Sarge Jim,
He of the figures, slight and trim,
And how he takes good care of us,
But not without an awful fuss.
And when the lights are on the blink,
It’s always Raef of whom we think.
Of course we could go on for hours
Telling ’bout this gang of ours;
But we still believe performance counts,
So, watch our smoke, and deeds that mount,
Till the day our Allies and us will go
Through Berlin, Rome, and Tokyo.
HOME OF HQ. & HQ. SQUADRON
Capt. LAUGHLIN-C.O., HQ. & HQ. SQ.
Men of Headquarters Squadron.
35
1st Sergeant FRE EMA N. HQ. & HQ. SQ


Lt. Col. Fry presenting Purple Heart to M/Sgt. Hill
RESTRICTED
HEADQUARTERS
UNITED STATES ARMY FORCES IN THE FAR EAST
A.P.O. 501,
General Orders) 17 April 1943
: EXTRACT
No 18)
AUTHORIZATION TO WEAR CITATION DEVICE
1. The following named officers, army nurses, warrant officers, and enlisted men, now on duty
in the South-west Pacific Area, having been assigned or attached to the units cited in War Department
General Orders No. 14, 21, 22 and 32, 1942, between the dates specified in such citations, are author-
ized to wear the Citation Device as a permanent part of the uniform —
Gen. DOUGLAS MacAHTHUR, 037, USA
Maj.' Gen. RICHARD K. SUTHERLAND, 04623, USA
Maj. Gen. RICHARD J. MARSHALL, 04635, USA
Brig. Gen. SPENCER B. AKIN, 02916, USA
Brig. Gen. WILLIAM F. MARQUAT, 05533, USA
Brig. Gen. HUGH .1. CASEY, 09298, USA
Brig. Gen. CHARLES A. WILLOUGHBY, 04615, GSC
Brig. Gen. CHARLES P. STIVERS, 04667, GSC
★ ★ ★
Lt. Col. RALPH L. FRY, 0117388, AC
Lt. Col. WILLIAM H. MONAY, 0286311, AC
Maj. FRED G. HOFFMAN, 0383720, AC
Cart. HAROLD F. COCANOUGHER, 0396380, AC
Capt. JAMES E. COLOVIN, 0895117, AC
Capt. CURTIS L. LAMBERT, 0890034, AC
Ist Lt. MELVIN R. HUNT, 0431826, AC
2nd Lt. JOHN W. COX, Jr, 0409898, AC
WOJG GEORGE A. HEARD, W 2114922, AUS
M/Sgt. JOHN M. FLYNN, 6550823, AC
M/Sgt. RICHARD E. HENDERSON, 6551252, AC
S/Sgt. RICHARD E. HOLDER, 6141935, AC
Pvt. Icl. HARRY P. MURDOCK, 6579298, AC
Pvt. MORRIS S. USSERY, 18015565, AC
★ ★ ★
By command of General MacArthur
Officials
/s/ L. S. Ostrander
L. S. Ostrander,
Brigadier General
Adjutant General
R. K. SUTHERLAND,
Major General, United States Army,
Chief of Staff.


Our Jeep
The Jeep having earned for itself an en-
viable name, adds one more accomplish-
ment to its long list of achievements.
Pictured here is a new undertaking for
this illustrious “little fellow.” An im-
provisation? Yes, and a successful one.
The story: An out of the way place—
no rail transportation available —hastily
laid tracks —our friend, the Jeep, readily
becomes the “Iron Horse.” He does a
job, too. Known capabilities —hauling of
20,000 tons.
General and Jeep
Its been known that Air Corp Pilots do
barracks flying. But this is the first A.C.
General to do Roundhouse Railroading.
37


Commendations


GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
SOUTH-WEST PACIFIC AREA
A.P.O. 500
February 23, 1943
AG 330.13 (2-23-43)
General Orders)
No 20)
Secret Section I
Message of the President of the United States Section II
11. With great pride the Commander-in-Chief publishes to the Command the following message
of the President of the United States.
“The efficient bombardments launched hy your air forces during the past few weeks and especi-
ally in the last few days in support of the situation in the Solomons and in furtherance of your own
operations command our admiration. The arduous land campaign along the Papuan Coast which has
decimated the enemy and now threatens him at Salamaua has made a great impression on our people
and must have a demoralizing effect on Japanese confidence in the fighting efficiency of their ground
troops.
“My thanks go to you and your leaders and to the officers and men of the Australian and United
States Forces who carried the fight to the enemy on all levels and over great distances and even
greater difficulties.”
By command of General MacArthur:
R. K. Sutherland,
Major General, United States Army,
Chief of Staff.
Official:
/s/ B. M. Fitch
,/t/ B. M. Fitch
Colonel, Adjutant General’s Department.
Adjutant General.
Ist Ind.
HEADQUARTERS, ALLIED AIR FORCE, APO 925, 27 February, 1943
To: R.A.A.F. Command Units
Fifth Air Force Units
1. It gives me great pleasure to add my personal commendation to the personnel of the
R.A.A.F. Command and Fifth Air Force for their splendid accomplishments which are so highly
praised by the President of the United States.
/s / George C. Kenney
/t/ George C. Kenney
Lieutenant General, A.U.S.,
Commander.


HEADQUARTERS
81st AIR DEPOT GROUP
Office of the Group Commander
ARMY POST OFFICE 923
7 March, 1943
Subject: Bismarck Sea Victory.
To: Officers and Enlisted Men, 81st Depot Repair Squadron,
APO 923.
1. It is a real pleasure to sit down and write you men
this note of commendation for your part in the smashing
Allied Victory off the coast of Hew Guinea. True, none of you
were pilots, nor were you members of the crews, but a part
of each of you rode through combat with those planes. The
stirring success of the B-25’s is amide proof of the good work
you men started several months ago. To you men at Eagle
Farm goes the credit for making the 11-23 the hard hitting
plane it is to-day.
2. When this program started, you were working on what
you thought was a routine job and sometimes you no doubt
figured “What’s the use.’’ Today you have your answer. None
of us could have predicted what those changes would mean in
a future battle. Now we know —a smashing victory!
8. We, who are far behind the actual battle lines, have a
big job to do, namely, furnishing the fighting men with all
the tools they need to do the best job. What happened the
other day proves how important that job is.
4. In the near future you will probably be called on for
more jobs just like the last, but I am fully confident that
they will be just as successful and yield just as great a return.
R. L. FRY,
Lieut. Col. Air Corps,
Commanding.


HEADQUARTERS
FIFTH AIR FORCE
APO 925
12 March, 1943.
Subject; Commendation.
To: All Organizations, Fifth Air Force.
1. The recent spectacular action against enemy shipping in the Bismarck Sea was the result of a concerted
and determined effort on the part of all elements of the Fifth Air Force.
2. That enough airplanes were in commission to carry out the attack in sufficient strength to achieve the
marked degree of success which was attained, reflects credit of the highest degree upon the maintenance personnel
of both the tactical units and the service units of our Air Force.
3. That all classes of supplies necessary to make the attack successful were delivered at the time and at the
places required, is an indication of the high standard of service constantly being rendered by the supply ser-
vices of the Air Force.
4. The effectiveness of the forward fire of the airplanes making the low level attacks on the Japanese con-
voy is ample testimony of the skillful workmanship of the personnel responsible for the design and installation
of the forward firing fixed guns in these airplanes.
3. A field modification of bomb fuzes carried out within a very short time prior to the attack proved
eminently successful for low altitude bombing and examplifies the tireless energy and ceaseless effort on the part
of the services to make available to our combat units the very best possible means of prosecuting the war.
6. The results which were attained by our combat crews were made possible by the efficiency of our ground
elements, without whose complete co-operation successful operations against our enemy cannot be accomplished.
7. It is the desire of the Commanding General to express his appreciation of the fine work done by all units
of the Fifth Air Force, which so enabled the combat crews to carry out their most difficult missions. This same
spirit of co-operation assures us of continued successful air operations against the Japanese.
By command of Lieutenant General Kenney:
S/Donald Wilson
Donald Wilson,
Brigadier General, A.U.S.,
Chief of Staff.
Distribution;
“A”


GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
SOUTH-WEST PACIFIC AREA
GENERAL ORDERS)
No 25)
A.P.O. 500
March 9, 1943
Message of Commendation from Field Marshal Wavell Section I
Message of Commendation from Lieutenant General Arnold Section II
Message of Commendation from Air Marshal Trenchard Section 111
The Commander-in-Chief takes great pride and pleasure in publishing to the Command the following para-
phrased messages of commendation:
I. “Sincerest congratulations on your magnificent victory. The news of this great success in the South-west
Pacific Area is most heartening.
WAVELL
Field Marshal.”
11. “Our airmen, wherever they may be serving, join with me in offering to you and the Allied Air Force
under your command the most sincere congratulations upon the splendid victory achieved in the Bismarck Sea.
A great disaster has been inflicted on the enemy as a result of your magnificent leadership, and the daring of
your Air Force.
ARNOLD
Commanding General, Army Air Forces.”
111. “Heartiest congratulations from an old Air Force Commander to you and all ranks on the wonderful
victory of Bismarck Sea which resulted in the sinking of the whole enemy convoy and escort. Our Allied airmen
are hastening our enemy’s defeat. You have shown wonderful appreciation of how Air forces and Air power
should be used.
TRENCHARD
Marshal of RAF.”
By command of General MacARTHUR
R. K. SUTHERLAND,
Major General, United States Army,
Chief of Staff.
Official:
S/B. M. Fitch,
B. M. FITCH,
Colonel, Adjutant General’s Department,
Adjutant General.


GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
SOUTH-WEST PACIFIC AREA
GENERAL ORDERS')
: A.F.O. 500
No 28) March 20, 1943
COMMENDATION FROM CHIEF OF THE AIR STAFF
The Commander-in-Chief takes great pride and pleasure in publishing to the Command the following mes-
sage of commendation from Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Portal, Chief of the Air Staff:
“On behalf of all ranks of Royal Air Force I send you warm congratulations upon magnificent victory of Air
Forces under your command in recent action in Bismarck Straits. The annihilation of the Japanese convoy by
your aircraft is yet another grave defeat for the enemy. And it is proof, if such were still needed, of the devas-
tating power of shore based aircraft when they have secured command of the air over either land or sea.”
By command of General MacARTHUR
R. K. SUTHERLAND,
Official: Major General, United States Army,
/s/ B. M. Fitch, Chief of Staff.
/t/ B. M. FITCH,
Colonel, Adjutant General’s Department,
Adjutant General.
AG 201.22
Ist Ind.
HEADQUARTERS, ALLIED AIR FORCES, APO 925.
To: A.O.C. RAAF Command, APO 925
Commanding General, Fifth Air Force, APO 925.
1. The Commanding General takes pleasure in publishing the foregoing to the personnel of the RAAF Com-
mand and Fifth Air Force.
By command of Lieutenant General KENNEY:
DONALD WILSON,
Distribution : Brigadier General,
“A” Chief of Staff.
GENERAL HEADQUARTERS
SOUTH-WEST PACIFIC AREA
GENERAL ORDERS)
; A.P.O. 500
No 26) March 10, 1943
COMMENDATION FROM THE PRIME MINISTER ON BEHALF OF
THE GOVERNMENT AND PEOPLE OF NEW ZEALAND
The Commander-in-Chief takes great pride and pleasure in publishing to the Command the following mes-
sage of commendation from the Prime Minister of New Zealand:
“Will you please convey to General MacArthur on behalf of the Government and people of New Zealand a
message of warmest congratulations on the decisive victory of his forces in the Bismarck Sea. This action has un-
doubtedly contributed in considerable measure towards the lessening of the immediate menace threatening Austra-
lia and New Zealand and is an important step towards victory in the Pacific.
FRASER
Prime Minister.”
By command of General MacARTHUR
R. K. SUTHERLAND,
Official: Major General, United States Army,
/s/B. M. Fitch. Chief of Staff.
B. M. FITCH,
Colonel, Adjutant General’s Department,
Adjutant General.




The 81st Repair Squadron
March 13, 1943.
Angels with greasy faces and coveralls —that to you Officers and Men is the proper slang word
for the men of the 81st.
Those unsung heroes of the Army Air Corps, who day after day, month after month, keep the
engines of those cloud-chasing monsters purring like kittens.
And when I say “Unsung Heroes” I mean that these men work, not for the glory of publicity, but
for the good old Red, White and Blue which stands for liberty, freedom and peace for their families
and for themselves.
Surely, we stay behind the lines, in fact, hundreds of miles, but every one of us is just as good
a soldier as any doughboy on the field. Combining a soldier and an airplane mechanic, or a radio
operator, or a weather observer, requires extensive training and the will to succeed. Herein we have
the average man oj the 81st Repair Squadron.
The 81st Repair Squadron has men trained to perform any duty in the field of aviation. We
have the most experienced Test Pilots in the South West Pacific Area. Who helps make them the
best? —Again its these Angels with greasy faces.
The 81st has taken part in many a battle — no, not actually fighting at the front, but by making
available the planes and material needed there. In the battle of the Bismarck Sea, a major blow
against the Japs, the B2s’s strafed and bombed until there were no survivors left of the vast Japanese
invasion fleet, which consisted of twenty-two ships laden with troops. These B2s’s were equipped with
eight stationary guns in the sides and in the nose. The idea was originated and carried out by the men
of the 81st, and we feel that ive did a damn good job. The installation plans were designed and the
installation carried out from scrap by us, so you see we were directly connected with the Battle of the
Bismarck Sea. Glory? — Hell; No, that is just another step towards ’Frisco for us, and another sock
on To jo’s jaw.
When we first took over this field there were only two hangars and two uncompleted runways with
about 200 men. Now we have seven hangars and numerous other warehouses and administrative
buildings and a personnel of approximately 800 men.
We repair planes, we maintain planes, and we even build them out of the junk pile.
Show me another outfit that can equal the 81st and well —Oh Hell! it’s, useless to try because-
there is no better on the face of this earth. If you call this bragging—well . . .
KEEP ’EM FLYING
Corp. Joseph L. R. Bussiere.


PICTURE OF A20 WITH THE EQUALIZERS THAT
LIQUIDAT ED THE "NIPS" AT KOKODA AND BUNA


j The Armament Section of the 81st Air Depot Repair Squadron. This section is
JOHN FLYNN GEORGE KOTISHION
CLIFFORD POWELSON MICHAEL LACOTA
TED BUNNELL JAMES MURPHY
BURTON TITTLE DONALD McPHAII.
JAMES HANLON JAMES PELTEKIS
LEO ROBERTS JAMES PRIDLIDES
STANLEY TRIZINSKI SIDNEY SCHNELL
ROBERT BROWN WALTER SKUTNICK
RICHARDSON CHRISTIANSEN JOSEPH SZMIGIEL
EVERETT GLASFORD GEORGE THOMA
HUGH EDWARDS CONRAD URNABSKI
ALEX KADINGO WESLEY WAREHOUSE
ROBERT KATAJA ARTHUR WOODY
LEO ROERTS
They have had over a year’s service in Australia, and during this time, they have put more air-
planes in combat condition than any other unit in the South-West Pacific Area.
On leaving the boundaries of the United States, their services were voluntary. Yes, —they volun-
teered their services so that they may become members of Pursuit Fighter Teams fighting in combat
zones.
Their ambitions however, on arriving in Australia, were never realized, and through unfortunate
circumstances, they became Casuals —“Men without a Squadron.” It was during this period as
Casuals, that they have established themselves as a unit capable of doing any task assigned to them.
Their work was varied, and their methods crude, but obstacles were of no hindrance to these men, big
or small.
Being without an Organization, and with no one to represent them, they never had the slightest
possibility of promotion. Despite this fact, they carried on just the same—untired, unresentful, and
resourceful. No sooner did a new shipment of airplanes arrive for assembly or repair, whether it
was an A-24, P-40, P-39, B-26, or an A-20a, it wasn’t long after, that these same airplanes showed
their fighting ability in combatant areas, in the best of combat shape.
Came July 4th, 1942. These men were no longer the “Forgotten Men” of the Air Corps, for it
was on this day that they became assigned to the 81st Depot Repair Squadron. It was with this or-
ganization that they have helped to make the A-20a and the B-25, the deadliest combat planes in the
area.
Reading of the many successes being accomolished today by our aircraft in the South-West
Pacific Area, it is no wonder then, that we should be proud of these men, the Armorers of the 81st,
who have done so much to make these successes possible.
S/SGT. JOSEPH A. ROMANOWSKI,
Eagle Farm.


Let’s Reconnoitre Eagle Farm
I’ll enquire if they’ll permit
Us look round Eagle Farm a bit.
Yes; Major Hoffman —he’s good enough
To let us see them do their stuff.
So folks we’ll commence our tour
As interest here, you’ll find, I’m sure.
First the HANGARS TWO, THREE AND FOUR.
Installations here galore
And planes aplenty here you’ll see
In stages of assembly.
They set them up and tear them down
With ne’er a part upon the ground.
They inspect, erect and modify
A plane till it is fit to fly.
Guns and bomb racks they install;
They also paint and grease them all.
Now we must be on our way
If we’re to see it all today.
Over here you see the LINE CREW
Which search and check for things not true.
They test all planes to find a fault
And when defect they do report
They sure do get right to the heart.
Dismantle and replace spent part.
For their job is to do repair
On planes which have been in the air.
They ground test and inspect a plane
Tilt it is in the air again.
So friends we’d better slip along
For the time is getting on.
Now we have the ALERT CREW.
They fill the planes with oil and fuel;
On the runway they put the lights
To allow the planes to land most nights.
They clean and clear the taxi strip
To allow the Pilot land his ship.
They haul all crashes to repair,
For they cannot leave them lying there.
Well my friends our time is short,
If we don’t hurry we’ll see naught.
Now we have the WELDING SHOP
Which you’ll find is very hot.
For right in here they weld all breaks.
And the steel once in plain plates
They anneal and bend to different shapes.
Here you’ll see them weld a part
With Oxy, Acetylene and Arc;
Here they solder, do not gum
Using Silver, Soft and Aluminium
They cut and braze the whole day long;
Now we’d better travel on.
Now we have the ARMAMENT.
To them the guns are always sent.
They test, clean and inspect;
A bore must not have one defect.
They level and test fire them all;
Mounts and brackets they install;
They send them out for firing proofs;
They fit ejection and feed chutes;
Ammunition cans they load;
Install the guns, both side and nose.
Now my friends we’ve seen this crew
We’ll move along, I think, don’t you?
Now we have the BOMB RACK CREW
Which I think will interest you.
They synchronize, clean and ad just,
For these boys sure dislike rust.
They install Frag racks and chutes
So bomb hits will not be flukes;
Controls connected to Cockpit
And nose section of each ship.
Now I think we’ve seen all here
So let us have a look elsewhere.
Here we have the MACHINE SHOP.
Miscellaneous jobs there’s quite a lot.
They make the nuts and bolts and screws
And sometimes they make even tools;
They make the ammunition tabs,
Accessories from iron slabs;
They lathe and turn them into shape
Re-making parts that have a break.
I do not wish to hurry you,
But there is such a lot to view.
Here is the SHEET METAL SHOP.
They repair the fuselage, bottom to top;
They mount the blisters, right and left,
And cover the frame of each project;
They install the bottom concession plate;
Can support and centre mount brace;
They fabricate and install gun mounts
Heating ducts, and all that counts.
Now my friends time's getting short
So we’ll continue on our walk.
Here all things are ELECTRICAL.
They wire bomb racks and circuits all;
They service the batteries on the sides;
Adjust the switches —connect the wires;
Tachometers they do check;
Conduits for circuits they erect
Relays and fuses they install;
Junction Box and Booster Coil;
So we’ll now continue through
For we still have much to do.
Here is the CABLE DEPARTMENT
Who in each and every consignment
Connect the cables to the guns.
Tension adjusted—cables restrung
And the turnbuckles safetied
And all the pulleys realigned;
Tubes and dash plates they install.
Now my friends I think that’s all,
So on our way we’d better be
For we still have lots to see.
In this shop called SUPERCHARGER
They overhaul the regulator.
Tolerances are also checked
And reassembled after test;
Turbine wheels they sand blast;
Diaphrams they too, do cast.
And Impellers they do scrape
To help along the air intake.
Well my friends that’s nearly all
For the night’s about to fall.
The PROPELLERS they keep over there
They will not stand much wear and tear.
They balance and check them each time
An airplane’s brought into line;
They paint and keep them in repair
So they will cut and draw the air,
For if they are not balanced right
An airplane will not take flight.
The rest we’ll see on our way home
So on our way we’d better roam.
I guess it must be time for chow
As the MESS HALL is filling now.
Good food I guess they’re serving round
As there’s not many off to town.
So I think our way we’ll make
Towards the guard at the main gate.
SECURITY is his section,
Intruders they put on the run,
They stand guard both day and night.
Well, thank you. Sir—and Goodnight.


The Hand of man is plainly seen
Both on the Land and on the Sea,
But man’s great masterpiece
This era, is Air supremacy.
Our Fighter Pilots did their best,
No craven hearts had they,
But out-manouvred in the ozone,
The price too heavy that they pay.
The call went out for better planes,
The Zeros had us guessing,
Our planes were good, we knew they were,
But the Zeros went one better.
The call was heard and heeded,
Par Zero would not do,
The Experts vowed a plane to build.
When in combat, the Jap would rue.
They kept their vow. An achievement great,
No sluggards these on laurel wreaths,
Our Fighter Pilots got their chance,
Zooming, speeding P-38.








Test Pilots
First arrival of P-38’s at Eagle Farm
was in August 1942—Great Day.
First test flight was carried out by
Major Hoffman on August 20th, 1942,
the following day Captain Farrior took
the second test flight.
Capt. Lambert, C.O. of Repair Squad-
ron was responsible to a large degree for
the initial development of Eagle Farm.
MAJOR HOFFMAN TESTED THE FIRST P38 ASSEMBLED
HERE IN AUG. 20, 1942
TEST PILOTS L. TO R.-Capt. MAY. Lt. SELMAN,
Major HOFFMAN. Capt. FARRIOR, Lt. HANDLEY


Operation's Office
The operation’s office was opened on the
10th of June with a personnel of one man and
one airplane —a 22-B, “Salty” by name.
The work at this time was to report status
of aircraft under repair and erection atAmber-
ley Field. Gradually different fields were
added and by September 9th a report was be-
ing kept on Charleville, Charters Towers,
Archerfield as
well as Eagle
Farm and Amber-
ley.
On November
20th an office was
opened at Eagle
Farm with the
following subse-
quent improve-
ments: Control
tower opened
January Ist, wea-
ther section Janu-
ary 6th, runway
lights and wind
tee on March 6th
—all of these im-
provements mak-
ing for greater efficiency in aircraft acti-
vity on the field.
This unit has at the present time a
personnel of twenty-one enlisted men.
Lt. Lawson was Operational Officer till
end of February, 1943.
Basketball
Very few of the 81st Air Depot Group
personnel know that the Repair Squadron
has a basketball team. Well, they have—
and a pretty good one too, with a record
to prove it.
In the Brisbane Servicemen’s League
played during the months of November,
December and January, the Repair Squad-
ron landed in second place in the Satur-
day Night Division, losing only to the
147th F.A. At one period of that time,
the Repair Squadron won twelve straight
games, practice games included. In the
play-offs between the first and second
place teams of both leagues, the Saturday
and Wednesday Night Divisions were
runners-up, defeating the Medics in the
semi-finals 36 —16 and then losing to the
147th F.A. in the finals.
The players who represented the Re-
pair Squadron in this league were: S/Sgt.
Vyskovsky (Manager), Cpl. Cass and Pfc.
Phare (Co-Captains), Sgt. Morris, Cpls.
Hiller and Decker, and Pvts. Gerolomo,
Driscoll and Albanese.
At present the Repair Squadron is a


participant in a pre-season two game knock-
out tournament in which ten teams are parti-
cipating and have up to date one victory
against no defeats so far under their belt. A
few new players have been added to the
roster: S/Sgt. Kindle, Pvts. Murray, Rickert
and Fisher. With this new addition to the
squad, Co-Captains Cass and Phare and the
boys hope to cop off the honours in the tour-
nament now under way (basing their claims
on the fine record practice games won prior
to the start of this tournament), and (if the
war lasts long enough) the new league that
will be formed at the completion of the pres-
ent tournament.
CAPT. SIMPSON, C. O., Repair Squadron.
1ST SGT. SIMMINS, Repair Squadron.
WARRANT OFFICERS
Left to Right
Anderson, Dorvan K.; Blois, George A.;
Renfroe, Edward E.; Stralik, John J.;
Engle, Loy F.; Marlin, Paul E.


Glider Erection
Eagle Farm
Just one more Eagle Farm enterprise
—Glider erection.
Thus far three gliders have been as-
sembled with parts for twenty-eight more
awaiting erection. Total thirty-one.
These gliders have a fifteen-passenger
capacity—-can even carry a jeep—-hut
for the most part are used lor transport-
ing supplies and troops.
One plane can low three gliders. The
control personnel consists of a pilot and
a co-pilot.
A difficulty—the air currents about
this part of the country are treacherous
for gliders. The gliders arc whipped
around and consequently this causes the
tow r ship to bounce about.


This Section was assigned to 81st
Group, and attached to Repair Squadron,
Eagle Farm, on January 15, 1943, tak-
ing over from the 677th Ordnance. Ist
Lt. P. E. Davit being appointed Ord-
nance Officer; 2nd Lt. Schuyler, Property
Officer; and T/Sgt. P. Benda, Section
Chief of Headquarters Section.
In the commencement the total per-
sonnel was nine soldiers, now twenty-
seven, all these men have had experience
in battle zones and have a working know-
ledge of the guns they are handling. For
the first four months this section was
■working under canvas, but on April 20,
1943, were installed in a new building.
It is the work of this Section to repair,
clean, check and test 30, 50, and 20 mil.
machine guns, as well as all types of Ser-
vice pistols, rifles and 1917 A 1 30 cal.
machine guns (used by ground staff).
They also service all gun turrets and
handle the decosmoling and assembling
of all new guns.
It will be interesting to note that all
50 cal. guns installed in the B-25’s used
in the Bismarck Sea Battle were handled
by this Section, turning out approxi-
mately 25 per day. Three specialized
men of this Section also handled all the
20 and 37 mm. guns installed in the
P-38’s and 39’s respectively, which
passed through this Base. Also attached
are four specialized men —three me-
chanics and one welder—who provide all
new parts deemed necessary. They also
have four of their personnel stationed
with the 22nd Ordnance (Central Ord-
nance Warehouse) to supervise the hand-
ling and delivery of all supplies for the
81st Group—such as cleaning and pre-
serving material, guns, parts, and ammu-
nition.
For a period of five months this Sec-
tion has handled approximately 1,000
guns.
57
Ordnance


SUPERCHARGER OVERHAUL


Supercharger
Sgt. Davis in charge; Mr. Nelson —
General Electric Representative —advi-
sory.
This Section dates right back to “To-
cumwal” days, the move to Eagle Farm
has been a very recent one.
Commenced with a personnel of six
soldiers —has now a personnel of twelve
—eleven soldiers, one civilian.
The first overhaul doubles the life of a
supercharger. The second overhaul 50
per cent.
The statistical chart on opposite page
gives the value of this overhaul work.
First unit was delivered from Eagle
Farm in October 1942 —to date a total
of 230 units have been delivered.




SALVAGE
and Reclamation
This Section in the commencement was handled by the 81sl Repair Squadron personnel, Eagle
Farm, there being at that period, no new material for assembly. Upon the arrival of new equipment,
etc., this work was turned over to civilian personnel. Soldiers have the work of dismantling damaged
planes and the sorting and classification of parts.
Crashed airplanes are sent in from all areas and combat zones to this Section, and any plane
that crashes within a radius of 300 miles is picked up and brought in by the 81st Heavy Duty Motor
Pool.
The plane is then dismantled and each part is sorted and tagged. All parts are inspected by
specialized men and any mechanical parts which are repairable are repaired. The usable parts sorted
and resorted into their various categories and nomenclatures. The parts which cannot be repaired and
are of no value as spares are segregated to their various sections, such as rubber, aluminium, steel, etc.
All engines pass through the Engine Section of Salvage Department and Factory Representatives
advise on procedure. Engines are cleaned and then shipped to an overhaul firm.
Lt. Lingenfelder, Reclamation and Classification Officer.


"SAWDUST SADIE"
Salvage worries Mr. Jaeger, Bell Factory Repre-
sentative, felt something could be done about it—
so teamed together.
Cpl. Fleming Sgt. Brown Pvt. Ott
S/Sgt. Daly Sgt. Cain Cpl. Wareham
Cpl. Williams Pvt. Thomas Sgt. Hendricks
Cpl. Decker Sgt. Cernkovitch Pvt. Vasquez
Pvt. Anderson Cpl. Ehlers T/Sgt. McEntee
Cpl. Wolhford Pvt. Jensen Cpl. Conoway
Sgt. Stafford Cpl. Thorsen Cpl. Garcia
Pvt. Miller Pvt. Quant Pfc. Geronimo
Pfe. Thompson Pvt. Keen S/Sgt. Stovall
S/Sgt. Eckert Pvt. Ford Pvt. Valcovich
Pvt. Day Pvt. Opgard Mr. Jaeger
Pvt. Cook


Result P.39 Airacobra. "Sawdust Sadie." The pride
of these boys at Eagle Farm, and is she a smart lass
—She claims the downfall of eight Zeros. Course
she might be bragging, but we give her the benefit
of the doubt.
"The Boys" pose, so they should—raising a fam-
ily of six is any man-sized job. Yes, "Sawdust Sadie"
has five sisters, not so smart as she perhaps, but—
still "pretty cute." The boys think they did a good
job, so do we.


The Boys at Eagle Farm
Find yourselves, Boys - We tried and gave up


Records
of
Achievement
Machine Shop. —The boys of this De-
partment have completed 2,733
work orders; 606 for the B-25,
156 for the P-38, and 1,071
general work orders.
Welding Shop. —Here we have the com-
pletion of 1,788 general work
orders, plus 1,403 orders for
the B-25.
Evidence of the enthusiastic and excel-
lent work of the boys of these two units
is clearly shown by the above records.


81 st AIR DEPOT GROUP HEADQUATERS
ARRIVAL OF REPAIR S QUADRON FROM
TOCUMWAL-AUG., 1942
GOO BE R DUST-B18 ASSIGNED 81st ADG-
BETTER KNOWN AS THE GENERAL'S SHIP
SGT. NEIKES AND THE PRIMITIVE FACILITIES
AVAILABLE IN THE VERY EARLY DAYS
B25 IN SILHOUETTE






ALRIGHT, WHICH ONE OF YOU GUYS PUT THE BLOODY AIRSCREW ON
BACKWARDS ?










CRIPES, I LOANED ME SWEATER TO THE SHIELA FOR. A
FORTNIGHT . ..NOW LOOK AT IT !


"I'M SORRY, MAJOR, I CAN'T SEE YOU TONIGHT, I HAVE A TERRIFIC HEADACHE."


HE RE WAS I IN A P.38


Officers' Party
OFFICERS’ THANKSGIVING PARTY
26th November 1942
“Neville Court,” the lovely home of Col.
Fry, was used as a rendezvous for the party.
Pumpkin Jack-o-lanterns lighted the path-
way to the house.
Corn stalks decorated the grounds.
A turkey strutted about in one corner of the
courtyard.
An orchestra played while guests danced on
the patio.
Supper was buffet style with turkey aplenty.
Highlight of the night was General Con-
nell’s speech, when presenting Colonel Fry
with one dumbell.
It is the custom in the Air Corps to publicly
proclaim and make a suitable token award to its
distinguished sons for the accomplishment of
worthy deeds.
In this instance Col. Fry, with 20,000 flying
hours to his credit in the air mail (20,000
leagues under the sea) (with gestures), did on
or about 25th November, at Eagle Farm, accom-
panied by his trusted assistant. Major Monay,
take off in a Dutch B-22, familiarly known as a
Falcon, for a joy ride and familiarization flight.
After leaving the ground. Col. Fry did, with
scrupulous care, refrain from retracting the
under-carriage. He coasted about the heavens
for quite an appreciable time, conjuring up all
sorts of things to say to and about the guy who
said these Dutch crates would cruise at 150
miles an hour. Didn’t the air speed register
only 135 miles with nose depressed?
Thoroughly disgusted with the performance,
or lack of performance, of the old crate, he, Col.
Fry returned to the vicinity of Eagle Farm and
made his approach for a landing.
Then he, Col. Fry, did v-e-r-y, v-e-r-y carefully
push the wrong button, retracting the landing
gear, and, despite the screech of the klaxon
warning horn, shouts and arm waving of his pas-
senger, and in the full glare of the red spotlight
from the tower operator, he, Col. Fry, made
what is considered to be the smoothest belly
landing on record.
Col. Fry, it is my duty and pleasure to present
to you a token well merited and appropriate to
the occasion —One Dumbell.
77


IN THE MOOD??
WARMING UP
KINDA NICE!
G-A- R-E-F-U-L
AH- HA! THE BOTTLE OPENER!
GIVING OUT


"Activation Party"
The boys really “went to town”
on Activation Party Night (July
Ist, 1942).
We’ll let the pictures tell the story.
79
SO WHAT?
UHH- HUUOMMM
WHAT-NO DAMES!


Non-Commissioned
Officers'
Club
Organized by the First Ser-
geants of the Group and financi-
ally started by factory represen-
tatives, the club in a month grew
in membership from 50 to 225.
%
Shots shown here are of the
opening night, October 1942.
Credit goes to Sgt. Sneider
(Secretary) for keeping the club
“alive.” Has done and is doing a
fine job.
The hoys aren't going to leave
things as they are —have plans
for improvements—such as add-
ing a reading room, lounge
chairs, etc.
On dance nights, an American
hand officiates.
Good luck, boys, keep the good
work going.
MU RAL ARTI ST JACK K. STEELE — CENTRE STANDING
80
WHE RE'S THE BEER?


GIVE EMTIME!
WALLFLOWERS!
JOLLY MAILL-UP
YOUR GUESS
WE'LL TAKE THE GLASS!
NAICE!


Archerfield
Repair
Repair Section has through force
of necessity adopted “Improvise’'
as its slogan. They have had to im-
provise with tools, improvise with
labour, .where machines would he
of almost inestimable value. Im-
provise with space to carry out the
work —its been a case of getting
buildings where and when they


could and arranging the work lay-
out to suit the building, instead of
the building to suit the work.
But the work has been outstand-
ing, shots on this page and on suc-
ceeding page give an idea of some
of the panel work necessary to re-
build the damaged parts. All panel
heating has to be done by hand —no
machines available.
The replacement of a complete
wing assembly section on a B-24,
this has never been attempted out-
side a factory, where cranes would


be used to lift and hold the wing
while in course of adjustment,
wooden trellises have improvised—
the method adopted as in ship build-
ing.
These are two instances —there
have been many such. The rebuild-
ing of a plane so badly damaged as
to be condemned —Repair put it in
commission again, and so the good
work goes on.
MAJOR
MULLER
Engineering
Officer
Archer field
Army
Personnel
An othe r Repair Job for Archerfield


Col. P. Gunn whose combat experience and assistance made the 50 cal.
nose gun installation possible. Col. Gunn’s decorations are Silver Star,
Flying Cross, Citation for Philippine Campaign.


Allison
Overhaul
Plant
Comparison .. Progress
Facing Camer aFact ory
Reps.
MUT CRUL L. BU RK BR UNSDO N
BOB RAY


Allison Overhaul
A Conversation — Result —Allison Over-
haul Assembly Plant.
When approached G.M.H. agreed to
“give it a go.”
The schedule set down was —the de-
livery of the first overhauled engine in
eight weeks. The first engine was de-
livered on the 15lh November 1942,
seven weeks after the commencement,
beating the “deadline” by one week.
Packed into these seven weeks was quite
some action. First a plant had to be
built, then 1,500 special tools, 300 as-
sembly stands, erection of petitioning,
monoroles, electrical service, water and
gas all had to be made and installed—
necessitating the calling in of fifty odd
contractors.
The training of a personnel of 180
men and women absolutely untrained,
with no previous experience with internal
combustion engines. Yet, the first over-
hauled engine was delivered one week
ahead of schedule.
Originally the plant was 20,000 sq. ft.
of floor space, layout suitable to produce
five engines per day—this has been in-
creased in six months to 40,000 sq. ft. to
produce ten engines per day.
At the present time there are about
530 employees.
These overhauled engines must pass a
very rigid test before being O.K.d, they
have the same test as a new engine.
W.O. BLOIS M/Sgt. HODGES, T/Sgt. GRAY, Pfc. RUSSELL.
81st Military Personel at Allison Overhaul plant.


ALLISON
Group of three standing at Honing
Machine
Left to Right —J. McEwAN, “Inspector”;
L. ALDERATER, “Plant Superintendent;”
COL. MAONAY, Executive Officer.
A VIEW OF THE BUILD UP SECTION
PRECISION INSPECTION DEPT.


In Foreground. —
BURK BRUNSDON
LT. HOLLAWAY
BOB RAY
MILT CRULL
BOB STEWART
CLEANING SECTION
COMPLETED ENGINES WAITING
TEST
ALLISON


GENERAL VIEW, SHOWING THE
CUBICLE SECTIONS
SHOT OF ONE BOOTH OF THE
“BUILD-UP” SECTION
IGNITION MANIFOLD SECTION.
INSTRUCTION IN PROGRESS
REWIRING IGNITION MANIFOLD
ALLISON


G ETTING READY FOR TEST
CHARLIE FLYNN, L. ALDERATER, MAJOR McNELLY,
1ST LT. A A NDE RSO N , J. McEWAN, CAL. MONAY
HEAR VIEW OF No. 1 TEST STAND
BOYS THAT HELPED BUILD THE
TEST STANDS
GENERAL VIEW OF TEST STANDS


ENGINES OVERHAULED —BRISBANE AREA


A.N.A.
Instrument
Shop
Hereat A.N.A. Instrument Shop
has been done the greater part of
instrument overhaul, repair, and ad-
justment for the 81st A.D.G.
This highly technical work is car-
ried on by specially-trained group
of men and women under the astute
supervision of Mr. Griffin —a for-
mer Flight Sergeant in the R.A.A.F.
Work is done on practically all
types of aircraft instruments such
as: tachometers, compasses, selsyn
instruments, altimeters, gyro’s and
pressure gauges.
When we think of the value of in-
struments in making for safety, re-
liability, and economy in aircraft
operation, plus the aid to the pilot
in the handling of ships, we fully
realize the importance of the fine
job being done here at A.N.A.


ASSEM BLING SINGLE ROW ENGINES
CLEA NING SINGLE ROW SHOP
CYLINDER OVERHA-VALVE SEATING
INSPECTION SHOP
Australian National Airways
THE OVERHAULING OF ENGINES HERE
Prior to the activation of the Bist, all engines
for overhauling had to be shipped south, which
necessitated loss of valuable time. Local firms were
contacted and though they were perfectly willing to
SEMBLY TWIN ROW SHOP


CRANKSHAFT ASSEMBLY-COMPLETED ENGINES
IN BACKGROUND
BARREL HONING-CYLINDER REBORING.
ENGINE READY FOR TEST
MAGNIFLUX PART OF INSPECTION
attempt the work, they had no experienced per-
sonnel, no technical data, tools, test benches or the
wherewithal to do the job. However, the 81st under-
took to supply test benches, tools and what infor-
mation they could, one firm decided to try the job
on one engine—they did, and won through. Now
plants have been erected, capable of turning out
four engines per day.
ACTI ON SHOT IMPROVISFD TOOL IN USE






WE MAY BE "DOWN UNDER" BUT WE'RE STILL ON TOP!


OH BOY, WAIT' TILL I TELL THE GIRLS AT THE BARN .. EVEN RIPLEY WONT BELIEVE THIS!


First Night in Army
After listening to the sergeant for a half hour on Military Discipline, I was handed a pamphlet—this is
what I read: PARACHUTE—CAT; RIP-CORD—TAIL OF CAT; LIEUTENANT—ROOM-ORDERLY; BAR-
RACKS-HANGAR; CHOW—WASH DAY; BUNK—WALL-LOCKER; PREPARE FOR INSPECTION-
DRESS IN CIVILIAN CLOTHES; MESS-KIT—BARRACKS BAG FULL OF DIRTY CLOTHES; SALUTE-
WAVE AT; POST EXCHANGE—NURSE’S QUARTERS; FIELD EQUIPMENT—AIRPLANE; HAVERSACK
—TUG; DISCIPLINE—FIRST-SERGEANT.
I was glad I joined the army. I wanted to have a place with Uncle Sam, and I had it. I knew that the
army was going to be tuff going, but I wanted more than anything else to have a well-built body.
I started out in this army quite confused. I couldn’t catch on to things very rapidly, but that was
because I was brand new.
I studied my pamphlet very carefully, I caught on to things very quickly—in my mind. If
someone would say to me that I should clean under my bunk I knew that meant WALL LOCKER.
I had things down pat —still in my mind.
I was up bright and early the first morning and the second thing I heard
was a voice say . . .
“I want every man to sweep and mop under his bunk.”
I knew that meant wall locker, and so I set out to sweep. I had quite a
time because the locker was so near the floor that I had to move the thing.
I finally got the thing pushed over and so I swept and mopped.
“What are you moving your wall locker for?” a friend asked.
I hesitated. “Did you hear what the man said? He said to sweep and mop under
your bunk.”
That fellow looked at me kind of goofy-eyed, but I did not pay any attention to him.
He wasn’t doing what the man said to do anyway. He was mopping some place else. He didn’t read his Pamphlet!
The Discipline seemed to be very interested in me. He told me that he was going
to take me out and show me the proper methods of saluting. He couldn’t trick me —I
read and studied my pamphlet. Here we go.
“Get ready,” said the Discipline. “Here comes an officer and when I tell you to
salute I want you to salute.”
He was trying to catch me, but I knew better.
“Now salute,” he whispered.
I waved at him. For some reason or other the Discipline seemed to be disappointed
in me. The officer walked up to me and asked:
“Don’t you know your Discipline, soldier?”
“Yes, I do,” I said smiling.
“Well then why didn’t you salute me?” asked the officer with a terrifying disposition.
“I did salute you.” I talked as rough as he did.
“Where’s your discipline, wise guy?” he asked with a wry face.
“He’s right here with me,” I said knowingly. “I don’t believe you know your Disci-
pline either.”
I didn’t get on very good that time for some reason or other. The Discipline left me
and told me he would see me later. The officer and the Discipline walked on together. Oh
me, such is life!
The Discipline must have left the officer, anyway the guy came around a tree and
halted me saying: “I want to see you immediately at the barracks.”
I went down to the barracks and I saw a lot of airplanes down there. I did not know
what he wanted me for around airplanes. I waited and waited and the Discipline never showed up. I guess he
didn’t want me after all. I didn’t worry— then.


I went back to the place where I slept and there 1 f ound him. He had put one over on me.
“All you fellows who are in here will prepare for inspection,” said the Discipline.
I knew what that meant so I got out my civilian clothes, washed and shaved, and was ready
to go wherever they wanted me to go.
I noticed some of the other fellows hadn’t memorized their pamphlets because they were
getting out a lot of trash and putting it on their bed. I was sitting on my bed waiting for
action. All the boys were standing by their beds when in walked three officers and the Discipline.
One of the guys hollered “Attention!” I knew what that meant all right because I heard the Discipline talk-
ing about it. I got up from my bed, pulled my stomach in a little, let my arms hang, moved
my feet so that someone could slide a box in front of them and I didn’t say a word. I was
just as still as the other guys.
“For Heaven’s sake, what’s the matter with this guy?” The one officer asked the Dis-
cipline. They were looking at me, to my surprise!
Get out your field equipment and haversack immediately,”’ cried the officer.
I ran out of the sleeping quarters, went down to the barracks, got hold of a haversack,
hooked it to a field equipment and called it mine. Away I went. I brought everything up
to where the officers were, went inside and told them I had it.
“Where,” they said in unison.
“Out there,” I said.
“Listen soldier,” said one of the officers turbulently, “don’t be funny.”
I didn’t argue with them. I hate that Discipline and I don’t like officers.
I ran up to my bed, I took off my civilian clothes. I didn’t feel as the rest of
the boys did. Someone said:
“Get your Mess Kit and prepare for Chow.”
I couldn’t find my Mess Kit. Someone knew what I was looking for and
told me it was under there. So it was. My Mess Kit and all. I looked inside and there were the dirty clothes
all right. I couldn’t figure out how I got them dirty when I was only in the army one day. But there was every-
thing. I grabbed it and started to run like the other boys. I carried my Kit down the steps
and followed the others. I had a larger Mess Kit than theirs because I didn’t see where
theirs were. I wanted to get to the head of the line, but I remembered what the Discipline
said. “Don’t try to get ’head of the other fellow, it’ll cause trouble.”
I approached some food and a guy asked where my Mess Kit was.
“Here,” I said, holding it up so he could see it.
“Go to the Post Exchange and eat your dinner, Fm not fooling with you,” said the wise
guy-
“Okey, okey,” I whispered to myself and thought: If it’s time to eat I’ll go eat. I went
to the Post Exchange and knocked on the door.
“Come in,” a voice said amiably.
“Oh-o-o-o, get out of here immediately,” said a nurse.
I got out of there because I thought I had better get out. I went to the Lieutenant be-
cause I had not been treated right the whole day. He was doing some sweeping and he told
me that we were going to have a formation soon. He was right.
“Have any of you fellows ever made a parachute jump?” asked the Discipline.
I held up my hand because I had.
“Do you know everything about parachutes?”
“Yes,” I said hoping to redeem myself.
“Step forward. You’ll show these fellows how it’s done. Come with me,” said the
Discipline again.
He lead me to a Field Equipment—for what reason I don’t know.
“Get in there,” he said with a bang. “Put this on.”
I put on a thing that was a coat only it had a lot of blocks on the bottom. The
Field Equipment started to fly in the sky.
“When you drop be sure to pull the Rip-Cord,” a man said.


“Where’s my parachute,” I asked back at’m.
“You have it on,” he said with a grimace.
I was confused, but I thought—that’s the army for you.
“Now when you make the parachute jump there will be a car down there to pick
you up,” again the man said something.
“Do you see this iron handle on my ’chute?”
“Yes, I see it.”
“When you jump, pull the same thing on yours.”
Things were becoming too confused.
“Now jump,” he said pushing me off of the Field Equipment.
I jumped, but I could not find that iron handle which he was telling me about
—so I forgot about it.
I said to myself, “I bet when I get down there they wont even have that car
waiting for me either.
By that time I woke up.
SGT. JAMES GUILLAUME.




That you can’t mix alcohol with gasoline is an old adage. But that you can’t mix alcohol with horseflesh is a new one.
We have Jack Pendleton and Roscoe Wilson’s word for it ... as well as their appearance, which in this case speaks louder
than words.
After struggling for fully twenty minutes trying to climb on to the old critter, they were all set for a speedy ride from
“that pub” back to camp. However, with no bridle, saddle or spur, the job of directing the thing toward camp was a
problem in navigation itself. In short, it required another bottle of “Aussie plonk” between them in order to carry on the
strenuous operations. A reserve supply was carefully tucked inside buttoned shirts.
With the smell of plonk in her nostrils, the old mare was just what she used to be. With a jump she was off in a cloud
of dust. So were Jack and Roscoe.
The “bitchman” came up and slapped them both in so many places all at once, that they were still “Plonk Drunk” the
next day. But a trip to the dispensary and a slip marked “quarters” helped to ease the pain considerably.
CPL. LESLIE F. BECKER, 19039878,
81st A.D.G. Repair Squadron,
A.P.O. 923, Australia.


AND RUBY, DOCSAYS, ITS EITHER FOOD OR BEER
’YOU KNOW DAMN WELL IT AINT FOOD SPANKY"!!






DOtXT PARK VOUR
CfIRC ASS Q{\ m 6®.
'S. -- = ■
TROUBLED WITH
"POKER
PARASITES"
SITT’EN OM
VOUR BED
DAV AND NIGHT
THEN YOU'LL
WANT ONE OF
THESE GRAPHIC
IOTHEPOWr -
POSTERS
TO HANG
Above VOMQ
330
Si
//
V
(
/
ft
m
m
PRICED AT" THREPENCE
HIGHTNY"-••/=»/? TWO-308
WELL PUT T//£ /?£AL WHO
ON SOUP BED / -


"DIGGER SANDERS "
"ORIGINALLY A GEORGIA YANKEE" AND THE LAST PERSON IN THE WORLD
YOU'D SUSPECT OF TURNING AUSSIE." BUT, TOORIGHT—HE DID .
A SHIELA-LOUSP, MUTTON EATER, IS THIS DINKUM DIGGER !




"Are You Remembering".
Are you Remembering the task to be done,
The cause and the honour that has to be won;
It’s the Man at the Wheel who shall guide us to win—
When the day comes to the end with the dying sun
Are you Remembering!
Don’t let your faith fade away with the wind.
It’s trouble they’re after, so on with the fight—
With the stride just ahead, and honour to be gained
The fight must be right and right must Prevail.
Are you Remembering the hearts that have been torn from
the dust of the earth,
With treasures which dear to us cling;
We’re Remembering the deeds that They’ve done
So let’s pull for the stride and Victory to win,
So this Earth can be ours and our task
Worth while spent —Are You Remembering!
The flag still flies over land and sea
With Planes soaring the skies with watchful eyes.
God as our Protector, Our Helper and King
Will be with us till we finish the task
Are you Remembering!
When the dim of the night that last comes to an end,
When the sweat of fear and toil is no more;
We shall hear the shouts of gladness and loud song of joy,
With hearts that are wakened with Remembrance of
Peace so dearly bought.
Are you Remembering!
PFC. W. G. DAVIDSON,
81st Headquarters


INSTRUMENTS REPAIRED —BRISBANE AREA


ENGINE COMPONENT OVERHAUL —BRISBANE AREA


Motor Supply Company
This firm was originally an Automotive Repair
Shop, with no working knowledge of aircraft
mechanics. In the commencement they experienced
much difficulty in acquiring authentic information
—especially pertaining to Tachometers —as no tech-
nical data was obtainable, but upon the receipt of
this information, operations went ahead in leaps
and bounds. Test benches were set up for the test-
ing of carburetors, hydraulics and all aircraft in-
struments.
An air-conditioned dustproof instrument room
was established and special apparatus constructed
to carry out the work. This room alone has tested
and repaired 4,000 instruments in approximately
live months.
From September 1942 to March 1943, the output
of overhauling and repairing carburetors has in-
creased from one per day to fifty-five per week.
At the present time all work carried out by this
company is for the U.S. Army—the 81st Air Depot
Group in particular. The work being handled en-
tirely by civilian personnel.


De Haviland
Propeller Shop
The work of overhauling and recon-
ditioning of all types of propellers is
carried out by a branch of the De Havi-
land Company, who in September 1942
sent representatives up from Sydney to
set up and organize a plant capable of
carrying out this specialized work. They
took over a section of a Bus Depot and
commenced training personnel, as ex-
perienced tradesmen were not obtainable.
By October this plant was functioning
competently and their first consignments
were completed.
The Propeller Shop is set up in true
assembly line style—at the present time
turning out an average of twenty pro-
pellers per week. There are forty civi-
lians employed, men and women who
have been trained in this work shop.
They also overhaul and repair all pro-
peller accessories—such as governors
and electrical equipment.
115


CLEANING
Left to Right
MR. STONE, Works Manager, QANTAS
MR. CROSSETT, Wright Factory Rep.
MR. BROWN, Manager of QANTAS.
MR. STANKIEWIEZ, Wright Factory Rep.
MR. AVERY, Foreman—Sup.
Lt. WILSON, Engineer of Archerfield.
MACHINE SHOP
QANTAS
This Company is also doing splen-
did work—a reiteration of the prob-
lems faced and overcome by the
firms previously mentioned is ap-
propriate here
These action shots show the men
at work “Really on the job."’
ASSE MBLY


MAGNIFLUX AND PRECISION
INSPECTION
ASSEMBLY LINE
SINGLE ROW
DIS-ASSEMBLY
FINAL TEST


Paul and Gray
A local firm takes on a new task —
work with plexiglass. It’s definitely an
innovation —the first attempt to do work
with plexiglass in Queensland
Successful? Quite. Starting with a
personnel of ten this firm now employs a
staff of nine men and sixteen women. All
were apprentices at first, but now nothing
is too tough for this skilful group.
Work is being done for the B-17, B-25,
and the P-38. Cockpits, doors, gun tur-
rets, etc. Models made of clay form a
basis for the plaster of Paris molds
which is the necessary first step in this
process. Pictured here is the final step —
that of heating of a sheet of glass to 250°
F. and stretching over the previously pre-
pared mold. The glass is shipped from
the States in sheets averaging in size
three feet by four.
Modification —B-25 gun turret now
made completely of plexiglass, even to
the extent of dispensing with the alu-
minium gun mount openings.
Repair section does patching—huffing
and sanding out of distorted and dis-
colored glass.
Waste material —there is none. Glass
bits are melted down, ethyldichloride is
added and the result is a glue paste to
be used in mending and repair.


Elphinstones
This firm mainly deals with the
testing and reconditioning of car-
buretors, magnetoes, and genera-
tors, also the testing of vacuum hy-
draulics. Magneto and generator
test blocks and other necessary
machinery have been set up, occupy-
ing an entire floor. The output of
this department is 200 units per
week.
Their greatest problem was staff-
ing, owing to the shortage of ex-
perienced men. In the commence-
ment six men were employed in this
department, now sixty-two men are
engaged on this work.
Another important part of the
work of this company is the testing
and reconditioning of spark plugs.
This department commenced with
six girls and one man, now thirteen
girls and four men are employed—
turning out 15,000 plugs per week.


King & Katts
Pictured here is the work
being done by King & Katts —
the repair, rebuilding and ser-
vicing of oil tem-
perature regula-
tors and radiators.
Three hundred
and fifty regula-
tors have been put
out with 800 more
to be serviced.
Tooling has been
and still is a large
task. Here we have
an Automobile Re-
pair Shop being
adapted to service
the War Effort.
Hudson's
This firm has indirectly played an im-
portant part in the inauguration of the
Repair Squadron, as they were instru-
mental in making it possible for over-
hauling to be carried out by the 81st Air
Depot Group in Brisbane. In the incep-
tion there was but one set of tools which
had been recalled by A.S.C., Melbourne.
Hudson’s were approached and they
worked night and day to reproduce
twelve complete sets of overhaul tools
suitable for Wright engines, and twenty-
five sets suitable for cowling repair.
This firm handles very few repairs,
most of the work being the manufactur-
120


Hudson's
ing of new parts. The list below will give you some idea
of the work turned out by this firm since June 1942. Gun
mountings 250 sets, gun charges 250 sets, machine gun
fore and rear sights 1,000, bomb aiming sights 1,000,
carburetor sights, towing bars, and thousands of special
bolts and screws, etc.
ALLISON PACTORY REPRESENTATIVES


AIRCRAFT COMPONENT OVERHAUL—BRISBANE AREA


"The C-2 Wrecker"
I
A grinding and a grumble,
When you hear a mighty rumble,
Thai sounds like pounding thunder in (he sky;
‘‘Booin’’ riding at "half-mast.'’
With air-horns on full-blast,
The €-2 Wrecker proudly flashes by.
On the telephone they say:
“Need a Crash-Truck right away.”
So "Cosy,” Boyd or Knittel work all night
To load motor on a truck.
Pull out vehicle when stuck
Or pick-up planes that didn’t land just right.
You will never hear a story
Exaulting them in glory,
But to win this war they’ll always do their
best;
For when the job is done
And the. battle has been won.
Unsung heroes, with no medals on their chest.
Submitted:
COMBAT VREM TRUCKS-BRIEFING TRUCKS
25ft. TRAILER-35ft. TRAILER-40ft. TRAILER
Sgt. BOYD
Cpl. KOSCIUSJKO
Pfc. KNITTEL
Eagle Farm Motor Pool.
FEDERAL C-2 WR ECKING TRUCK
L-2 OIL SERVICING TRUCK-A-1 REFUELING TRAILER
ROUST-ABOUT TD14 2 TON CRANE
ORDNANCE TRAILER 1 TON
PHOTOGRAH TRAILER-A-2


Special Service
Motor Pool
This unit originated at Archerfield in
May 1942. Its beginning, a pool of
twelve types of vehicles, was microscopic
when compared with the present set-up at
Eagle Farm—with eighty types. The
pool moved to Eagle Farm in September
1942 with a complement of twenty-five
types of vehicles.
These various vehicles are constructed
both in the States and here in Australia.
Many different improvements were in-
stituted here for example: Briefing
trucks, tractor with winches, troop car-
rier van, crash wagon tractor cranes, and
many others.
They are serviced and kept in condi-
tion for delivery at a moment’s notice
by a crew of four soldiers and seven
civilians. In addition the services of four
local concerns are called upon for this
work.
A list of a few of the types at the pool
will give ample proof of the magnitude
of this undertaking.
BOMB SERVICE TRUCKS
CLETRAC TRACTORS
JEEPS
AERIAL GUNNER TRAINING TRUCKS
CRASH WAGONS
45-TON AUTOCAR TRACTORS
ALLIS CHALMERS TRACTORS
CRANES AND CRANE CARRIERS
1,000 GALLON TANKERS.
BRIEFING TRUCKS
MACHINE SHOP TRAILERS




Ascot Garage
All repairs for the Motor Pools
of the 81st are effected here, ex*
cept those of the Heavy Duty Pool.
Lower Shot —Gasoline Tankers


Town Motor Pool
This unit had its inception in part
of Headquarters Squadron’s build-
ing on Church Street. Growth of the
unit necessitated a change—early in
October the new pool was opened at
its present location, providing faci-
lities for greater efficiency of opera-
tion.
Soon after the beginning of this
unit, nine W.N.E.L. drivers were as-
signed to staff cars. These women
drivers showed great spirit in sur-
mounting many difficulties in the
early days of operation, and we pay
tribute to the excellent teamwork
and the fine job they have done and
are still doing. At present there are
twenty staff car drivers and twenty-
seveli staff cars.
POOL HEADGUARTERS
EFFICIEN T SE RVICING
PRECIOUS P ETROL
WNE L DRIVERS


HEADQUARTERS
81st AIR DEPOT GROUP
Office of the Group Commander
ARMY POST OFFICE 923
RLF/m
24 December, 1942
Memorandum :
To: All Military and Civilian Personnel of the
81st Air Depot Group.
Tomorrow we celebrate Christmas Day, and with it comes my heartiest greetings to you all. To
many of us it is a different kind of Christmas than we have ever experienced before, for we are
spending it thousands of miles from those loved ones who made this day mean so much. That part is
unfortunate, but it should not dampen the spirit of the day, for actually we are here to ensure that
the true spirit of Christmas may live forever.
With the close of the year comes the opportunity of commending you on a job well done. With
confidence for our future success, I extend my sincere appreciation to all members of this Command
for the enviable record of the 81st Air Depot Group in its first year of service. For your wholehearted
co-operation, for your initiative, your enthusiasm, and for your hard work and earnest effort, I am
deeply grateful. You may be sure we have contributed in no small degree to the success of our allied
efforts in this field.
It is our job to furnish the fighting men with every possible tool necessary to do the most effi-
cient job. We must not fail. We cannot fail. How well they do their job depends on how efficiently
we do ours. We cannot rest on past laurels. We dare not even be content to do just as well again next
year, rather we must work hard and reach our highest effort, so that we may ensure lasting peace in
our own Christian way of life.
I would also like to wish each of you the best of New Years. If we work through 1943 with
all the energy and initiative we possess, it cannot help but be a year filled with good news and success,
which will send us far along the road towards final peace, and which will make even more worthwhile
those things of which we are now deprived.
R. L. FRY,
Lt. Col., Air Corps
Commanding.


A2 0 FISRT PROLECT EAGLEFARM
SECOND FROM LEFT COL. BENNER, A4
INFORMAL SHOT GENERAL CONNELL
AERIAL SHOT SHOWING DOME SHAPED STRUCTURE
OF ALLISON "IGLOOS"


HEADQUARTERS
81st AIR DEPOT GROUP
Office of the Group Commander
ARMY POST OFFICE 923
RLF/emr
201.22 7 March, 1943
Subject: Bismarck Sea Victory.
To: Officers and Enlisted Men Connected with
Depot Supply.
1. It is a real pleasure to sit down and
write you men this note of commendation for
your part in the smashing Allied Victory off
the coast of New Guinea. True, none of you
were pilots, nor were you members of the
crews, but a part of each of you rode through
combat with those planes. The stirring success
of the B-25, along with the other Bombers and
Fighter Aircraft, is ample proof of the good
work you men have bepn doing.
2. Working long hours and under unfav-
ourable conditions, you sometimes no doubt
figured “What’s the use.” Today you have your
answer. None of us could have predicted
what those long hours would mean in a future
battle. Now we know ... a smashing victory!
3. We, who are far behind the actual battle
lines, have a big job to do, namely, furnishing
the fighting men with all the tools that they
need to do the best job. What happened the
other day proves how important that job is.
4. In the near future you will probably
be called on for some jobs just like the last,
but I am fully confident that they will be just
as successful and yield just as great a return.
C.O. SUPPLY SQUADRON
R. L. FRY,
Lieut. Col., Air Corps
Commanding.
STOCH RECORDS
1st Se rgeant ANDREWS


Supply
Supply was organized here with a full
complement of 121 men. As a group it
was transferred from the 4th A.D.G.,
forming a basis to give immediate func-
tioning as an 81st Supply.
The beginning was in the Main Ware-
house, plus a few small reserve ware-
houses. Immediate demand for expan-
sion necessitated getting more ware-
houses. Today—still expanding—supply
has twenty-two warehouses and storage
buildings. The main warehouse, for-
merly carrying all live or moving stock,
now is the Depot Supply Office housing
administrative personnel (including
Lt. FRAZIER- WAREHOUSE OFFICER
Lt. HUNT-SHIPPING & RECEIVING
SH IPPING & RECEIVING
Lt. TRUMBULL —ASST. DEPOT SUPPLY OFFICER
Lt. BRIGHTON, LOCAL PURCHASE.
LO CAL PURCHASE DEPT.
Mr. CHAPMAN IN BACKGROUND, WITHOUT COAT


Supply
stock records), local purchase and con-
tracting, civilian personnel office, signal
corps, and ordnance.
Civilian personnel today numbers ap-
CL
proximately nine hundred, with about
one hundred and fifty soldiers.
This group has had to and still is over-
coming seemingly unsurmountable prob-
lems or, if you wish, headaches. Trans-
portation, warehouse space, personnel,
and the task of moving from one ware-
house to another are just a few of them.
Diligence, hard work and long hours
have built the 81st Supply into one of the
largest overseas supply units. It is no
small credit that is due the officers and
men of this group for the success of our
combat forces in the North. It suffices to
say that Supply has not let them down.
Lt. ÈVANS, CIVILIAN PERSONEL OFFICER
INSPECTION OFFICER
INSPECTION DEPT.
ISSUE DESK
INSPECTION


Shipping and Receiving
The Shipping and Receiving Depart-
ment commenced operations on or about
April Ist, 1942. The Department, as
such, existed only when there was some-
thing to ship and this necessitated the en-
tire Supply Squadron calling a halt in
their regular routine to aid in the job to
be done.
Early in the piece a civilian, Mr. W.
0. Barber, was hired—records now be-
gan to enter the scene —more civilians
Mr. BARBER—SHIPPING & RECEIVING DEPT.
were hired as packers, clerks, and bull-gang (labourers). With these and many other far-reaching
developments the section became a self-operating unit.
Goods are received and shipped by air, boat and rail. Many and great were the problems in these
methods of transportation: By air—a lack of airplanes and personnel; by rail —need for more cars,
loading facilities and space. Gradually, intuitive measures ironed out these difficulties, until to-day
we have an efficient handling of supplies.
Supplies upon arrival are segregated into their respective warehouses and duly classified —all
parts being sorted, checked, and allocated into their proper bin spaces. Reserve Warehouses are used
for those supplies not in immediate demand and held there for later call.
Air ferry shipments from the U. S. receive special treatment. Supplies thus shipped are given
immediate attention and despatched by air to the requisitioning organization—with A.O.G. orders
getting full priority. This service often requires less than two weeks for delivery from the States to
the point of requisition.
Alacrity and accuracy are the watchwords of the Shipping and Receiving Section. Supplies
needed by the combat forces must be dispatched quickly and without error as to type and quantity of
parts.
The slogan of this section, which is the
entire Supply Squadron’s feeling, is—
“lt is our responsibility from the time
we become aware of a need until that
need is satisfactorily supplied.”
In one year’s time the Shipping and
Receiving Section has grown from scratch
to the point where there are 162 people
employed in only shipping and receiving
of Air Corps Supplies. The present pro-
gram is to double this number in order
to keep up with the demand of our fight-
ing forces.
In Receiving: A Record. —Receipts
from January Ist to May 11th, 1943,
were 25,195,575 pounds.
Mr. GILBERT—CVILIAN PERSONEL MANAGER


Local Purchase and
Contracting Department
This Department had its beginning in
a small office in the Main Warehouse?
with a personnel of three soldiers 1 ,1.
Brighton as the unit's officer, aided by
Sgts. Ross and Poole.
Today the Department consists of six
soldiers and thirteen civilians, occupying
most of the front section of the Main
Warehouse.
Early in May Mr. Chapman became a
member of the group, assuming the
duties of local purchasing manager —at
present there are eight outside purchas-
ing agents.
This department purchases any and all
supplies available here in Australia —
general purpose being to conserve space
on boat shipments from the States and to
provide orders for A.O.G. requirements.
The first few months the unit made
monthly purchases worth $30,000 —but
by March 1943 had increased to ap-
proximately 1100,000 per month. About
600 local firms are contacted in making
these purchases.


Supply
We tell about 81st Supply,
T largest organized o’erseas today.
The original Group came from 4th Supply
With 121 men as their main stay.
At t’ present time they’ve lots more men,
Having 121 soldiers and 912 civilian.
Of Warehouses they have twenty-two,
Where stocks are kept of all things new.
Of all things most import for war
Which they check and stack and ship galore.
1, 7 and 14 has fuel, paint and chemical,
Photographic, commercial and aerial.
No. 2 has t’ instruments and dry goods,
As clothes and silks for parachutes.
No. 3 it is the Carpenter Shop.
No. 4 have parachutes to repair and stock.
No. 5 it has the special tools.
No. 6 all stuff for Signals.
No. 8 has engines and office supplies,
Also the rubber and tubes and tyres.
No. 9 has all commercial hardware.
No. 10 they store miscellaneous goods there.
No. 11 receive shipments boat ’n plane.
No. 12 and 13 stock all parts for airplane.
No. 15 keep spares for overhaul plants.
No. 16 t’ guns and parts for Ordnance.
No. 17’s the Clete-tractor parts storage.
No. 18’s the store for local purchase.
No. 19 has equipment for Chemical Warfare.
No. 20 store Signal Corps equipment “With
Care.”
No. 21 has appliances electrical,
Photo equipment ’n cameras aerial.
No. 22 stores aircraft accessories.
As propellers and all necessities.
Now t’ Main Warehouse holds t’ offices
Of Administrative Officers.
For from here all sections are controlled
And records of great expansion told,
For there really is great credit due
Tot’ boys who have but one end in view.
And make the 81st Supply
A respected Group with record high,
Who keep supplies right to the fore,
For every South Pacific Corps,
And help all our Air Corps Chaps
To do their damnedest to beat the Japs.
135


Supply 81st Supply
Supply 81st Supply,
A Group with record high,
Who slave both night and day
To send goods front line way;
For they ever heed the cry,
Supply Air Corps Supply.
They’ll send the goods and planes,
Till the U. S. A. reigns.
Up to our boys in front
Who’ll beat the yellow skunk;
For they ever heed the cry,
Supply Air Corps Supply.
This Group deserves all praise,
As their records they raise,
For on Victory’s great day
U.S.A. will praise and say,
They e’er heeded the cry,
Supply Air Corps Supply.


DEPOT SUPPLY OFFICE
SUPPLY SQUADRON BARRACKS—CAPT. ATTWOOD, C.O.


FIRST SERGEANT ANDREWS
First Row
M/Sgt. McELWEE
Sgt. KAISER
Sgt. SHANDOR
Pfc. SPEAR
S/Sgt. HIGHMAN
Sgt. GAST
Pvt. WITOS
S/Sgt. BURKEPILE
Cpl. WARMER
Pvt. REID
Cpl. VOGAN
Cpl. NEVILLE
S/Sgt. PENDELTON
Sgt. FINK
Cpl. ANGROVE
Pfc. NOVAK
Cpl. MEKEAL
Pfc. WALDRON
Pfc. JACOBS
Pfc. AMMON
T/Sgt. DAVIS
Second Bow
Cpl. REILLY
Sgt. BOCK
Pvt. JOHNS
Pfc. SCHEEL
Cpl. ZALAR
Sgt. SUDHOFF
S/Sgt. KOCUNIK
T/Sgt. REORINAL
Cpl. NEWBURGER
Cpl. HOLLARS
T/Sgt. RAYMOND
Sgt. BAILEY
Sgt. VAUGHAN
Sgt. CUSHWA
Cpl. EVANS
Pvt. LESSER
Pvt. MATHIS
Pfc. WAMBSGANSS
Sgt. DUDZIAK
Cpl. SCIARETTA
Pfc. MACKOWIAK
CAPTAIN ATWOOD. C
SUPPLY


SQUADRON
Third Row
Sgt. BRICKER
Pfc. FRASER
Cpl. YOHO
Sgt. STULL
Pvt. FEYEREISEN
Sgt. VOGES
S/Sgt. RATLIFF
Sgt. SCOVEL
Pfc. MARTIN
Pfc. GEARRIN
Cpl. WOOD
Sgt. CAVRICH
Sgt. PRITHAM
Cpl. WHITMORE
Cpl. G ALLIAN
Pvt. LEWIS
Pvt. WHALEN
Pvt. TETLEY
Pfc. HINEMAN
Pfc. HARDING
Pvt. FREELAND
Fourth Row
Cpl. HAUSER
S/Sgt. CAVEN
Pfc. HARVEY
S/Sgt. SMITH
Pfc. WEAVER
Pfc. KIPNER
Pfc. JEPPSEN
Pfc. NAGINEY
Pvt. McCARTER
Sgt. SCHUTTE
Pvt. SPEER
Pfc. BRANCHICK
Cpl. BEAUREGARDE
Sgt. DODSWORTH
Pvt. WESTBERG
Pfc. KNOWLES
Pfc. RINE
S/Sgt. WINGET
Cpl. HARRISON
Pfc. HANCOCK
Pfc. STRANAD
Fifth Rom
Pvt. DOROSHOW
Sgt. BROWN
Pfc. RAINVILLE
Pfc. MUECK
Cpl. TERRENCE
Clp. DAVIS
Pfc. SHERIDAN
Pfc. ROTH
Pfc. STIFFLER
Pfc. SHOAF
S/Sgt. FISSEL
Pvt. COOPER
Pvt. ZEIDLER
S/Sgt. WESR
T/Sgt. BAUMAN
Cpl. ROMSHE
Sgt. POOLE
Pvt. McCOLLUM




AIR CORPS SUPPLY SHIPPING REPORT


Odds In Verse
THE REPAIR FLARE
Now we’ve talked a lot about supplies,
But what about the other Guys
Who you’ll admit do have a flare
For doing a good job of repair
Which helps to keep planes in the air.
Their Faces covered with grease and grime
They slave and work to make the line;
They pull down and replace spent parts,
And sweat and swear until she starts,
With but one resolve within their hearts.
To get the planes ahigh and flying,
And give the boys the chance of trying
To blast Japan right off this earth,
That’s the great obsession of the 81st.
NON-DESCRIPT.
We have a smart Colonel,
As everybody knows,
And it really doesn’t pay
To step upon his toes.
His one obsession as we know,
Is to do his best against the foe.
And so it does not pay we find,
To do your work without a mind.
For if to him you once should say,
I’ll leave it to another day.
He’ll say, “My Boy, we’ve a war to win,”
And cause a most unholy din.
If some request you should decline,
To act upon at proper time.
You’ll find yourself upon a boat,
In khaki pants and khaki coat.
Well on your way to do your bit,
Where things are tough and you need grit.
URGENT: Wanted one tin hat.
The 81st as we boys know
Do not go out to fight the foe,
But in our activities we guess
We help our fighters do their best.
Sure some of us —we will retort
That the job we do—is of small import,
But believe you us—when we say this
Things surely would go all amiss,
If these small jobs were left undone.
No matter how small—it’s important one
So all buddies—we do contend
That our job well done—assists the end.
For those boys up there on us depend
For planes and gear and all that stuff
That will assist them hold their bluff.
So let’s keep chins up and make the best
Of that job which sure is such a pest;
For when we meet the folks back home
They’ll say—the 81st sure deserves a throne;
For some day soon we’ll be on our way
Back to the States—Boy! what a day.
A TOAST
Here’s to To jo’s adversities,
May they be long and many;
Here’s to the boys of the 81st,
Who keep the supplies up ready.
Here’s to the men in command,
Who work persistently;
To see they keep up the demand,
Of supplies consistently.
Here’s to all who work
To end this dire turmoil;
Who their duties never shirk,
As they do their daily toil.
And last but not least, let’s all
Take off our hats and cheer,
The boys who are in the brawl,
As they know not defeat nor fear.
A. NONDESCRIPT.


One of the boys in the Armament Shop,
Cpl. Stanley C. Trizinski, who has been
an Armorer for more than two years and in
that time has handled all types and sizes of
guns, including .30 cal. guns, .50 cal. guns,
and 20 mm., 37mm., and 75 mm. cannon,
etc., and never as much as got a scratch on
his finger, was recently seen with a large
bandage on his right index finger. When
asked what had happened, he explained that
he’d cut his finger while spraying flies in the
barracks, with a Flit gun.
Submitted by CPL. PETER T. PORETTI.


WELDING SHOP


CPL. BECKER SAYS — SHE IS "EYETEEN"


Whatszat? You say we’re going to get our “shots” again? Damn it! Already I’m getting weak. For an hour I’ll think
about it, getting more unnerved all the time, before I wobble over to the bulletin board to find out for myself. Sure enough,
there it is. “Report to the dispensary at 1 p.m. without fail.”
Well its chow time now and I eat mechanically. Everything tastes the same, where food ordinarily gives me strength
at this time of day—this makes me all the weaker! After eating I want to lie down and rest. My head aches, my back is
tired, I’m worn out.
As the “Zero hour” draws near I’m struck with hot and cold flashes alternately. That food for dinner seems but a hard
knot in the pit of my stomach. Ironically, it feels as though it were chewing me!
Well, I gotta go now. There is some relief in this thought. At least it will soon be over.
I walked over with “me cobber” Jake, He talks about “Shielas,” but I know he’s thinking about the same thing what I
am. I’m quiet while waiting in line. Jake makes a comment now and then, I never hear him.
Strip to the waist! It won’t be long now, I reckon. My skin is moist, there is no turning back. I unconsciously shuffle
ahead as the line moves. That damned odour: Why does that stuff have to smell like that? Here is the open door. A guy
swabs both my arms with iodine. He’s got a funny smirk on his face. I grin sheepishly and half stumble through. There
are four or five more ahead of me. Jake’s right behind me ... at least he was! Oh! Oh, I shouldn’t have looked. “They”
shoved that needle clear into the hilt on that guy! That makes me sick! I knew better than to watch that. Did it once
before when I first got in the army. I’ll read the things on the wall. A chart tells me that these two shots are the first
of a series of three each. No consolation there. Gee, me cobber’s as white as a sheet. We’re both sweating now, no one says
a word . . . except to answer the brief questions of the doctor. I’m next, my arm is rubbed with something. Then there’s
that long pause while he reaches for it. This is the shot for cholera. I’ve heard it was terrific. Never had it before. In fact
I thought it was for hogs. Oh! —I got it now. Seems like a minute before the Doc. says “next.”
The assisting corporal is handling the typhus shots. He’s having to refill something and has held up three guys ahead
of me. The Dr. started to shoot Jake’s arm, then stopped to help the corporal. He’s sweating good now, Jake is. I wonder
how much experience this corporal has had. Damn it, how much longer is he going to be? Me bloody left arm hurts like
hell! , Both arms do now. Mighty glad that’s over ’till next week anyway.
Jake and I walk on back toward camp. He talks about women. Too right, I agree!
CPL. LESLIE F. BECKER, 19039878,
81st A.D.G. Repair Squadron,
A.P.O. 923, Australia.


ALRIGHT, I'M GONNA POP THE NEXT ONE THAT SAYS IT'S
QUICKER TO JUMP OVER ME THAN TO GO AROUND ME!


Soldier's Discourse—To "My Old Barracks Bag"
In days of yore, when the world was black,
To thee old shrew, to thee old sack,
I clung and carried thy burdensome weight,
And oft cursed thee in pangs of hate.
As my river of memory flows by me now,
I remember the days of old, and how
I used to cram in all my war gear,
Which to me was never then dear . . .
Off to the war, ye howling sons of peace,
To fight our enemies, till he will cease
His atrocities against our humans dear,
Whose blood cries out in voice so clear.
Over continents I’ve dragged thee, bag.
Behind the rest of the tireless forms;
Thou wast my cross, Ye caused me to lag.
Thou brought down on me a sergeant’s storms.
Packed to the brim, on a shoulder raw,
How oppressive with my other gear —thou claw,
Which made my right shoulder ache in pain
And you, you miserable sack, thou didst stick to
me in the rain.
Like some old lover, long cast aside,
Thou hung’st on my back, my shoulders astride,
I would gladly have flung thee overboard,
If it were not for thy belly’s item hoarde.
A cartridge belt, a rifle so near,
A field hag that caused my right side to sear.
As if that were not enough to make me moan.
Thou, thou shrew! Caused me to fairly groan!
When I’d shift thy 80 pounds weight or more,
My rifle poked my eye and made me sore,
My field bag would slip a strap.
And my cartridge belt would drop, what a sap!
I, a mere boy of tender years, so to speak—
Under such a strain could scarcely squeak
As off the boat I fairly rolled.
Thou it was who pushed me —bowled.
And then in the train “Thou Prude,”
With other gear and others —I was subdued;
I couldn’t —not a damn inch I swear,
Everywhere I turned, thou wast there.
Grimly, to remind me of the moment when
The train stop would herald the journey’s end,
Yes, my aching body, my, oh so frail frame
Would take more oppression from thee —Oh Shrew.
Long since now, thou hast lain in dust,
It’s been awhile, since you, I cussed.
But, bag, when I get mad as hell
I’ll heap on ye —miserable sack, that fell,
All my pent up wrath.
CORPORAL JOHN HARRISON,
81st Supply Squadron.
Drawing by
PFC. DAVISSON


To the Boys—
Thanks for your co-operation and help—first to the Photo. Lab. boys
for their splendid effort; to Sgt. Guillaume, who submitted the first article
for the book; to Cpl. Harrison for the poems —“For America” and “My
Old Barracks Bag”; to Sgt. Hubbard for his timely advice and suggestions
—we couldn’t use them all —but thanks just the same; to Cpl. Harvey Luck
for his infectious humor, which lessened the tension at the right times; to
Eagle Farm boys—they’ve shown keen interest in the book all the way
through; to all of you who have helped in any way in this publication, we
say “Thanks a lot.”
HISTORIAN DEPARTMENT.


Officers of the 81st Air Depot Group
HEADQUARTERS AND HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON
Ist Lt. Anderson, Dorvan K. St. Louis, Missouri
Major Barnes, Robert H. Camden, Arkansas
W/O JG Blots, George A Lawton, Oklahoma
Ist Lt. Brown, Raymond M
Capt. Chins, Marcus ... .... .... . .. .... West Covina, California
2nd Lt. Clark, Robert M Dallas, Texas
2nd Lt. Clocksin, Albert J. Aberdeen, South Dakota
Capt. Cocanougher, Harold F Lubbock, Texas
2nd Lt. Cox, John W., Jr
Ist Lt. Davit, Paul E. .... .... .... Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
W/O JG Engle, Loy F. Osborn, Ohio
Capt. Frazier, John R. Rushville, Indiana
Lt. Col. Frt, Ralph L. . .... ... ... ... Pocatello, Idaho
Ist Lt. Garheh, Donald L. Cheyenne, Wyoming
Capt. Griffin, John A Sacramento, California
Major Grover, Percy Los Angeles, California
Ist Lt. Hayes, Hal F. .... .... Marion, Ohio
Ist Lt. Holloway, Kenneth H Hardin, Missouri
2nd Lt. Lingenfelder, Charles E. Memphis, Tennessee
Ist Lt. Malkan, Arnold G. .... ... New Haven, Connecticut
W/O JG Marlin, Paul E. South Bend, Indiana
Capt. May, Paul C Des Moines, lowa
2nd Lt. Mayer, James B .... Fresno, California
Major McNelly, Fred W Anoka, Minnesota
Lt. Col. Moray, William H Salt Lake City, Utah
Capt. Petersen, Burton E Joliet, Illinois
2nd Lt. Schuller, Phil H Ontario, California
W/O JG Stralik, Jonn J Greensburg, Pennsylvania
Ist Lt. Thomas, Donald R
Ist Lt. I Riiriiart, Kenneth S. .... .... Fairport, New York
2nd Lt. Wilson, Ralph S Olathe, Colorado
OFFICERS —REPAIR SQUADRON
2nd Lt. Cupp, Walter E. Newberry, Pennsylvania
Ist Lt. Duehst, John W McMinnville, Oregon
Capt. Faerioh, William O Fort Deposit, Alabama
Capt. Hamilton, Earl E
Ist Lt. Handley, James J Greenville, Texas
Ist Lt. Landers, Ted R. .. . .... .... . .. Champaign, Illinois
2nd Lt. Lueck, Darwin D. Arcadia, Nebraska
Ist Lt. Rupp, Frederic J Oakland, California
Ist. Lt. Schantz, Glenn H. ... .... .... Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Ist Lt. Selman, Rupert L. Hazelhust, Mississippi
Major Simpson, Donald A Carrollton, Illinois
Capt. Tompkins, Tom R Lansing, Michigan
Ist Lt. Worthington, William J., Jr
1912th QUARTERMASTER
2nd Lt. Austin, Robert R Bluefleld, West Virginia
22nd ORDNANCE
Capt. Bird, Harold H Passaic, New Jersey
2nd Lt. Logan, Robert F
Ist Lt. McNeal, Yester L Bossier City, Louisiana


OFFICERS—LOSSES
Ist Lt. Armstrong, Frederick M.
Major Bradford, Wm. R.
2nd Lt. Bret, Louis E.
2nd Lt. Beeu, John A.
Capt. Brown, Joseph M.
Capt. Golovin, James E.
Ist. Lt. Corey, Merle T.
2nd Lt. Grill, Otto D.
Capt. Dale, Jack D.
Capt. Dimon, Horace E.
2nd Lt, Dodds, Wm. E.
Capt. Edwards, Robert W.
Capt. Erickson, Arnold C.
Ist Lt. Fletcher, John R., Jr.
Ist Lt. Gertnee, Joseph
Ist Lt. Gies, Carl P.
Capt. Gilmore, Edwin B.
2nd Lt. Haemer, Alan G.
2nd Lt. Haines, Earl P.
Capt. Haines, Lewis M.
Ist Lt. Hiatt, Nathan
Major Hoffman, Frederic G.
Ist Lt. Hunt, Melvin R.
Ist Lt. Keefer, Jackson M.
Ist Lt. Laibstain, Alter
Capt. Lambert, Curtis L.
Ist Lt. Lancaster, John D.
2nd Lt. Laughlin, John R.
Capt. Laughlin, Lacey B. .
Capt. Landry, Norman S.
Ist Lt. Lawson, Robert M.
Ist Lt. McKinnery, Wallace L.
2nd Lt. Morse, Alan D.
Major Muller, Marcus H.
2nd Lt. Ozer, Irving
Capt. Parnelle, Samuel W.
Ist Lt. Person, Rufus M.
2nd Lt. Pierce, Robert L.
2nd Lt. Ramsay, Julius N.
Capt. Roth, Carl W.
Ist Lt. Sheran, James K.
2nd Lt. Shoup, Wayne A.
Major Spears, Charles A.
Capt. Villamor, Jesus A.
Capt. Zinck, Robert E.
OFFICERS—SUPPLY SQUADRON
2nd Lt. Anders, Paul L. .... .... .... .... .... Marietta, Ohio
Capt. Attwood, John C. Arlington Heights, Illinois
Ist Lt. Brighton, Gerald D. Weldon, Illinois
2nd Lt. Calloway, Howard F. .... .... .... .... Rossvillc, Indiana
Capt. Cox, Kenneth E.
2nd Lt. English, Frank C. .... .... .... ... .... Knoxville, Tennessee
Ist Lt. Evans, William K Lowellville, Illinois
2nd Lt. Finger, Carl J. .... Bedford, Indiana
2nd Lt. Paden, William D Columbus, Ohio
W/O CH Renfroe, Edward E. Wisner, Louisiana
Ist Lt. Sullivan, Paul E. .... .... .... .... .... Lowell, Massachusetts
Ist Lt. Trumbull, John R Clayfleld, Brisbane
2nd Lt. Young, Vernon L. .... .... .... .... Potlatch, Idaho


Rank
Cpl.
Pvt.
Name
Bacciarini, Michael J.
Badouito, James
Date of
Assign,
to 81st
6—4—42
9—12—42
Home Address
Modesto, California
St. Louis, Missouri
Years
of
Service
1—4
1—5
T/6.
Barnes, Elford H
1—11—43
Woodland, California
1—3
T/Sgt.
Benda, Paul
1—11—43
Flemington, West Virginia ....
3—4
Pfc.
Blackwell, James W.
12—8 ■ 42
New Orleans, Louisiana
2—1
Sgt.
Blaske, Edward G
9—19—42
Sacremento, California
1—4
Sgt.
Botd, Max W.
5—24—42
Dayton, Ohio
1—11
Pfc.
Burke, Eugene E
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
0—11
P|c.
Cord, Robert C.
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
0—11
Sgt.
Cutler, Harry G., Jr.
5—15—42
Dayton, Ohio
1—11
Pfc.
Davidson, Wm. G
9—17—42
Midway, Pennsylvania
1—0
Pfc.
Davisson, Royden K.
9—12—42
Gilman City, Missouri
1—0
Pvt.
Delopf, John L.
9 —17—42
Waterloo, Iowa
1—0
Pfc.
Dickens, Ralph E
9—12—42
Hamilton, Ohio ....
1—10
Pfc.
Driskill, Jesse T
10—12—42
Greenbrier, Arkansas ...
0—11
Sgt.
Epperson, Roy E
6—15—12
Ensiey, Alabama
1-4
Pvt.
Everett, Francis 0
9—12—42
New Richmond, Wisconsin ....
1—0
Xst/Sgt. Freeman, Ray E
9—5—42
Seattle, Washington
3—7
Pfc.
Fritz, Michael J
6—4—42
Hamtramck, Michigan
1—3
S/Sgt.
Fulara, Francis J
1—13—13
St. Charles, Michigan ....
2—1
Pfc.
Gillespie, Sidney L
5—24—12
Lewisville, Indiana
1—10
Pvt.
S/Sgt.
Greipenstein, Frank
Grimes, Mack A
6 4 — 12
5—15—42
Cleveland, Ohio ....
Piqua, Ohio
1—3
1—10
Pvt.
Guckert, Harold 0
5—24—42
Marietta, Ohio ....
1—9
Cpl.
Guoala, Alfred J
9—12—12
Hamtramck, Michigan .
0—10
Sgt.
Guillaume, James E.
5—15—42
Hamilton, Ohio
2—0
S/Sgt.
Guinn, Lester L
12—16—42
Rural Hall, North Carolina ....
7—5
Pvt.
Haddad, Adeeb
10—22—42
Methuen, Massachusetts
1—3
S/Sgt.
Hall, Curtis C.
5—24—42
Franklin, Indiana
1—9
T/Sgt.
Hamner, Ralph F
5—15—42
Columbus, Ohio
9—6
Pfc.
Hanson, Walter E
9—12—12
Hennepin, Minnesota
1—0
Cpl.
Pvt.
Harris, Daniel L
Hawkins, Murland C.
6—1—42
10—22—42
Valrico, Florida .
Cleveland, Ohio
1—6
1—4
Sgt.
S/Sgt.
Henderer, Elmer H.
Hinton, Donald O. ....
5—26—42
5—15—42
Cincinnati, Ohio
Woodstock, Ohio
1—10
2—0
Pvt.
Horsey, Norman V
11—20—42
San Jose, California
3—1
Cpl.
Cpl.
Ivey, Joseph D.
Jones, Harold J
6—4—42
5—24—42
Springfield, Missouri
Charlotte, Texas
1—4
1—4
Pfc.
Kalamajka, Martin J.
9—12—42
Milwaukee, Wisconsin ....
0-^15
Cpl.
Keister, George M
9—12—42
Lansford, Pennsylvania
1—0
Sgt.
Pfc.
Kelly, Donald M
Kloss, Vincent S
5—14—12
5—24—42
Attica, New York
Wheeling, West Virginia
2—1
1—3
Cpl.
Kosciusjko, Alphons E.
5—24—42
New Castle, Pennsylvania
1-4
Pvt.
Krajweski, Stanley J.
10—22—42
Manchester, Connecticut
1—4
Cpl.
Krause, Earl E
6—14—42
New London, Wisconsin
1—9
Pvt.
Lagala, Louis N
1—H—43
Middlevillage, L. L, New York
1—1
Cpl.
Le Due, Donald K
6—4—42
Duluth, Minnesota
1—4
Sgt.
Leone, Joseph F.
9—23—42
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
1—9
Pfc.
Lines, George J
10—22—42
Burlington, Vermont ....
1—3
Pfc.
Luck, James H
9 — 12 — 42
Cedar Falls, North Carolina ....
1—3
Cpl.
Lukes, James P
9—12—42
Cicero, Illinois ....
0—11
Pfc.
Lundberg, Sten P
9—12—42
Brooklyn, New York ....
1—0
Pfc.
Madigan, Francis T. ..
9—12—42
Albany, New York
1—0
Pvt.
Mahoney, Robert S.
9 —12 — 42
Mpls., Minnesota
1—0
Cpl.
Maier, James S
9 — 12 — 42
Bryn Maur, Pennsylvania
1—0
Pfc.
Martin, James N
9—12—42
Kansas City, Montana
1—0
Cpl.
Mayfield, Elbert L. ....
9—12—42
Goodman, Montana
1—0
Pfc.
Mazzocchi, Erminio E.
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
1—0
Pfc.
McCann, Wm. H
10—15—42
Etiwanda, California
1—8
Cpl.
McCarvill, James P. ..
9—12—42
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
1—0
Pfc.
McCloskey, Charles M.
9—12—42
New York, New York ....
1—0
Pfc.
Cpl.
McCormick, Paul J
Medalie, Yale M
6—4—12
9—12—42
Carbondale, Pennsylvania
Mpls., Minnesota
1—4
0—11
T/6.
Meehan, Thomas A.
8—19—42
Denver, Colorado
1—2
S/Sgt.
Monday, Joseph P
8—19—42
Ponca City, Oklahoma
2—1
Pfc.
Mudy, Valerian J
5—24—42
Hammond, Indiana
i—ii
Sgt.
Neikes, Edward 0
6—14—42
Taylorville, Illinois
2—7
Sgt.
O’Brien, Walter
8—19—42
Enumclaw, Washington
1—2
Pvt.
Owens, J. D
1—11—43
Spur, Texas
1—3
Headquarters Squadron


Rank
T/5.
Name
Parsons, ffm. R
Date of
Assign,
to 81st
1 — 11—13
Home Address
Bell, California
Years
of
Service
1—3
Pfc.
Peelmutter, Charles
6—4—42
Leavenworth, Kansas
1—5
Pfc.
Cpl.
Poulsen, Clarence M.
Raef, Charles E
1—15—43
9—12—42
Midvale, Utah
Van Buren, Arkansas ....
5—10
0—11
Pfc.
Robb, Alan J
9—12—42
Detroit, Michigan
O—ll
Cpl.
Robison, Edward E. ..
9—12—42
Portland, Oregon
1—3
S/Sgt.
Sgt.
Rye, Wm. S
Salter, Earnest B. ...
6—4—42
5—11—42
Fort Wayne, Indiana
Goose Creek, Texas
1—
2—
Cpl.
Schaeringhousen, Elgin W.
42
Belleville, Illinois
0—XX
Pvt.
Seiidon, Wm. H
1—22—43
Salt Lake City, Utah
1—10
Pvt.
Sensiba, Robert T
9—12—42
Iron River, Michigan ....
0—11
Cpl.
Simpson, Isaac C
9—12—42
Newton, Iowa
1—0
Cpl.
Shell, Aran B
6—4—42
Myrthle Point, Oregon
1—4
S/Sgt.
Smii.ee, Edward
1—11 — 43
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ....
1—10
Pvt.
Smith, Chafin L
1—11—43
Forsyth, Georgia
1—6
Cpl.
Smith, Vincent R
5—11—42
Fort Wayne, Indiana .. .
1—10
S/Sgt.
Snideb, Jack C.
5—14—42
Huntington, Indiana
7—3
Pfc.
Snyder, George C
10—22—42
Pennsylvania
0—11
Pvt.
Spahb, Wm. G.
5—24—42
Independence, Missouri
1—6
Sgt.
Stalcup, Gerald T
5—24—42
West Yellowstone, Montana ....
1—4
Pfc.
Steele, Jack K.
9—12—42
Wayne, Michigan
0—11
Pfc.
Taloe, Joseph
5—24—42
Baltimore, Maryland
4—6
Pfc.
Tonn, George A.
10—22 — 42
Science Hill, Kentucky
1—0
S/Sgt.
Todd, Leon C
5—14—42
Straughn, Indiana
3—4
M/Sgt.
Wessman, George H.
5 — 15 — 42
Brisbane, Queensland (Aust.)
7—7
Sgt.
Whitacre, Lewis D
7—25—42
Lebanon, Ohio ...
1—9
Pfc.
Wilczinski, Harold E.
9—12—42
Detroit, Michigan
0—11
Cpl.
Williams, James L
9—19—42
Dallas, Texas
1—4
Cpl.
Williams, Wm. D
11—26—42
Utica, New York
1—0
Col.
Wolf, Luther M
6—4—42
Pomona, California
1—3
Sgt.
Sgt.
Pvt.
Obbien, Hobart P
Hubbaed, Fred. B
Greathouse, Harry G.,
6—4—42
6-4—42
2—10—43
Salt Lake City, Utah
Glencoe, Illinois
Slaughters, Kent
1—4
1—7
1^4
Pvt.
Messier, George J
2—11—43
New Bedford, Massachusetts
7—8
Cpl.
Pfc.
Cass, Robert M.
Myerly, John T
6—4—42
9—12—42
Gallon, Ohio
Washington, D. C.
1—3
1—4
Pvt.
Little, Don E.
2—10—43
Hastings, Nebraska
1—3
Cpl.
O’Connor, Daniel R. ..
9—12—42
Willard, Montana
1—4
Cpl.
S/Sgt.
Pfc.
Carnal, James H
CoNGELTON
Brykala
1—3—43
6—4—42
2 —24 —43
Beattyville, Kentucky
Utica, New York
1—10
1—1
Sgt.
Marshall
3—3—43
Tonowanda, New York
5—6
T/4.
Heath
2—25—43
Preble, Ohio
1—4
Cpl.
Arnold
2—24—43
Columbia, Missouri
1—3
Cpl.
Westbrook
2—24 — 43
Greenboro, N. C. .
1—4
Cpl.
Weaver
2—24—43
Jesup, Georgia
2—3
Pfc.
Pfc.
Knittel
Kulin
6 — 4 — 42
3 — 5 — 43
St. Louis, Missouri
Wellsburg, West Va
1—4
1—4
Pvt.
Doucette
2—10—43
Lawrence, Massachusetts
7—7
Pvt.
Lindsay
2—24—43
Sasakwa, Oklahoma
0—9
Pvt.
Luna
2—24—43
Reedley, California
0—9
Pvt.
Lynch
2—16 — 43
Cameron, N. C
1—1
Pvt.
Madab
2—24—13
Swayerville, Pennsylvania
0—9
Pvt.
McKee
2—24—43
Cleveland, Ohio
0—9
Pvt.
Pvt.
Roberts
Yannes
1—21—43
Nurenhurg, Pennsylvania
1—5
Pvt.
Brown, Robert D
7—4—42
Dallas, Texas
6—4
Pvt.
Pvt.
Mentzer
Bell
3-19-43
Detroit, Michigan
1—4
Pvt.
Hoffman
3—19 — 13
Washington, D. C
1—6
Cpl.
Freidman
3 — 13 — 43
Brooklyn, New York
2—2
Pfc.
Small ....
3—13—43
Many, La.
1—11
Pfc.
Bowdish
3—13—43
Long Beach, California
1—10
Cpl.
Baekdme
3—13—43
Los Angeles, California
1—10
Cpl.
Whitney
3—13—43
Sidney, Montana
1—3
T/fi.
Allen
3—13—43
Santa Paula, California
2—0
Pvt.
McLain
3—13—43
Tacoma, Washington ....
2—0
Pvt.
Shelby
3—13—43
Lauderdale, Missouri
1—11
Pvt.
WlGGENS
3—13—43
Appleton, Wisconsin
1—2
T/Sgt.
Pachanik
3—13—43
New York, New York ....
17—1
Sgt.
lOMMI
3—5—43
New Brighton, New York
2—1
HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON —Continued


Rank
Pfc.
Name
Airfares, Robert M. ....
Date of
Assign,
to 81sl
.... 8—26—42
Horae Address
Seattle, Washington
Years
of
Service
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Browning, Forrest C.
... 8—26—42
Columbus, Ohio
1—2
Pvt.
Call, Marvin R
... 8—26—42
St. Louis, Missouri
.... 1—2
Pvt.
Camden, Dallas P
.... 8—26—42
Martins Ferry, Ohio ....
.... 1—2
T/S.
Chard, Darrel W. ...
.... 8—26—42
Pomeroy, Washington ....
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Franich, Louis
.... 8—26—42
Seattle, Washington
.... 1—0
Pfc.
Heegard, Luverne B.
.... 8-26—42
Albert Lea, Michigan
1—5
Cpl.
Hilla, Matthew J
.... 8—26—42
Green Bay, Wisconsin
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Jarrett, George R
8—26—42
Kokomo, Indiana
1—2
S/Sgt.
Kurtz, Edward T.
8—26—42
Marchalltown, Iowa
1—2
Pfc.
T/4.
Kutzler, Donald W.
Miller, Harold H
.... 8—26—42
.... 8—26—42
West Concord, Minnesota
Naperville, Illinois
1—2
.... 1—2
Pvt.
T/6.
T/5.
T/4.
Morton, James B.
Mrusek, Carl A
Ooaed, Earle D.
Olson, Lester E
.... 8—26—42
.... 8—26—42
.... 8—26—42
8—26—42
Little Rock, Arkansas ....
Norwood, Ohio
Ada, Minnesota
Redmond, Washington
... 1—2
.... 1—2
1—2
1—1
Cpl.
Ahbin, Alex N.
.... 8—26—42
Davenport, Iowa
.... 1—2
Pfc.
Cpl.
Sampson, James R
Schweitzer, Elroy J.
8—26—42
.... 8—26—42
Cameron, West Virginia
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
1—4
.... 1—2
T/3.
Pfc.
Sterry, Norman E
Watkins, Floyd M. ....
.... 8—26—42
.... 8 —26—42
Fort Peck, Montana
Whitefish Bay, Wisconsin
1—1
.... 1—1
Pvt.
Welchel, Thomas P.
.... 8—26—42
Kings ML, North Carolina ...
1—5
T/5.
Woracek, Frank
.... 8—26—42
Bothel, Washington
.... 1—1
Sgt.
Zongrone, Henry A. ....
.... 8—26—42
Concerete, Washington .
.... 1—1
ATTACHED TO HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON
Pvt. Duke, Woodrow P 11—14—42
Pvt. Peeet, Charles A 11—14—42
Sgt. Dinneeman, Norman A. T/4 Gotelli, Frank R.
T/4 Muephy, Walter R. T/5 Hazelton, Robert E.
T/5 Saegent, Thomas E.
LOSSES TO HEADQUARTERS SQUADRON
S/Sgt. Leathebman, Frederic D
S/Sgt. Rothaae, Robert D., Jr
M/Sgt. Stealik, John J
M/Sgt. Hills, Chancey M
W/O Anderson, Dorvan K.
T/Sgt. Beackeen, William S.
Pvt. Dills, Milton Y.
Pvt. Everett, Francis O.
Xst/Sgt. Gamble, Carlton K.
S/Sgt. Beimes, Mack A.
Cpl. Johnson, Carl A.
Pvt. Kinsella, Wm. C.
Pvt. Lynch, Wade L.
Pvt. Maetin, Elmer T.
Pfc. Mitchell, George M.
Dayton, Ohio
Dayton, Ohio
McKees Rock, Pennsylvania
Tacoma, Washington
Pvt. Moss, Wm. F.
Sgt. Newton, James M.
T/Sgt. Quick, Fred M.
Pfc. Robb, Alan J.
Pvt. Roche, Henry E.
Pvt. Rollins, Wm. E.
Pvt. Rosselle, Gasper
Sgt. Routjh, Albert R.
S/Sgt. Rye, Wm. S.
Pfc. Tatoe, Burton
Pfc. Jasky, Stephen
404th Q.M.C. Attached


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
Pfc.
Adolphson, John A.
9 —12—12
St. Augustine, Illinois
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Albanese, Angelo
1—21 —13
Ansonia, Connecticut ....
1—S
CpI.
Andersen-, Olaf Jr.
6—1—12
Melrose, Massachusetts ..
.... 1—8
S/Sgt.
Anton, Edward B. ....
10—22—12
Louise, Texas
.... 2—1
Cpl.
Arnold, Wm, R
8—19—12
Columbia, Missouri
i—y
Pfc.
Atkins, John W
9—12—12
Andubon, New Jersey
.... 1—5
Pvt.
Bartnick, Anthony A.
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
.... 0—11
Sgt.
Bateman, Warren V.
6—t—12
Randolph, Iowa
... 2—9
Pfc.
Bates, Hubert R
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
.... 0—11
Cpl.
Battaglia, Joe L
6—1—12
Cleveland, Ohio
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Beaver, Gilbert J
8—19—12
Loyal, Wisconsin
.... 1—2
Cpl.
Becker, Leslie F
6—1—42
Colton, California
.... 1—4
Pfc.
Beier, Alvin H.
9—12—12
Regal, Minnesota
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Berg, James J.
1—21—43
Chicago, Illinois
1—4
Cpl.
Bivee, Cletus L.
9—6—42
Belleville, Illinois
.... 1—4
Sgt.
Blanchard, Frank E.
1—2—43
Peoria, Illinois ....
.... 2—1
Cpl.
Blum, Wm. C. ..
9—12—42
Grand Rapids, Michigan
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Boateight, John F
6—4 —42
Prescott, Arizona
.... 2—3
Pfc.
Bobo, Wm. G
e—4 —12
Baltimore, Maryland
.... 2—0
T/Sgt.
Bond, James D.
6—1—12
Arlington, Kansas
3—4
Sgt.
Borinstein, Harold J
6—3—12
Chicago, Illinois ..
1—6
Pfc.
Bowman, Clyde A
9—12—12
Duluth, Minnesota
.... 1—0
Cpl.
Bboadstone, Paul H. ..
6—4—12
Lawrenceville, Illinois
.... 1—3
Sgt.
Brown, Burnell T
6—1—12
Peoria, Illinois
.... 1—8
Cpl.
Beunk, Eugene W
6—1—12
Marguelte, Kansas
1—3
T/Sgt.
Bunnel, Ted J
5—4—12
Freeport, Illinois
3—5
Cpl.
Bussiebe, Joseph
6—4—42
Leurston, Maine
.... 1—9
Pvt.
Butler, Louis A
12—8—12
Judsonia, Arkansas
.... 0—11
Cpl.
Byers, Eugene Wm
6—4—42
Warren, Ohio
1—3
Cpl.
Byers, Harry F.
6—4—42
Hendersonville, North Carolina
1—3
Cpl.
Cain, Raymond E. ....
6—1—42
Tamms, Illinois ....
.... 1—8
S/Sgt.
Campbell, Charles W.
1—3—43
Staunton, Virginia
5 —W
S/Sgt.
Carpenter, Harold W
6—4—12
Chicago, Illinois
2—8
Cpl.
Carter, Elmer D.
6—1—12
Kansas City, Missouri ....
I—10
Cpl.
Cass, Robert M.
6—1—12
Gallon, Ohio
1—3
Sgt.
Cernkovitch, Albert
6—1—12
Johnson City, Illinois ....
1—3
Pfc.
Chapman, Joe D.
8—19—42
Greenville, Tennessee ....
1—2
Cpl.
Charity, George W.
6—4—42
Plattsburg, New York
.... 1—9
Pvt.
Chittenden, Charles L.
12—8—42
Kansas City, Missouri ....
1—0
Pfc.
Chitttm, Ralph M
9—6—42
Springsfleld, Missouri ....
.... 1—5
Sgt.
Christiansen, Richard
4—4—42
Ozone Park, New York
1—9
Pvt.
Christoff, Verne L. .
6—1—42
Decatur, Illinois
.... 1—8
Pfc.
Churchill, Harold J.
6—1—12
Maiden Park, Wisconsin
1—9
Pvt.
Clark, John W.
10 —22—12
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
1—6
Cpl.
Clotfelter, John E. ..
6—4—42
Monett, Missouri
2—3
Pvt.
Coleman, Morton D.
12—8—12
Orange, Virginia
1—3
Pfc.
Combs, Elbert F
9—12—12
Tariff, West Virginia ....
.... 0—11
Cpl.
Conrad, Glenard J
6—4—42
Whitellsh, Montana
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Cooke, Robert M
12—8—12
Astoria, L.I., New York
.... 1—1
M/Sgt.
Cooper, Ray R
7—28—12
Sidney, Montana
.... 13—11
Pvt.
Cooper, Raymond L
1—3—13
Reno, Nevada
.... 2—1
Pvt.
Cornelius, Francis E
9—12—12
Springfield, Illinois
.... 0—11
Sgt.
Chacken, Lonis W
6—4—42
Flagstaff, Arizona
.... 1—5
Cpl.
Craig, John E.
6—4—42
Norphlet, Arkansas
1—8
Cpl.
Cheson, Prather S
9—6—42
Irvington, Illinois
1—4
Pfc.
Gumming, Mervin A.
9—12—42
Bristol, Connecticut
1—5
Pvt.
Cummins, Martin A.
9—12—42
St. Louis, Missouri
.... 0—11
S/Sgt.
Curry, Gaylord R.
6—1—12
Dawson, Illinois
.... 2—8
Pfc.
Curry, John T.
9—6—12
St. Joseph, Missouri ....
1—6
Sgt.
Daly, Donald V
6—18—12
Cheetowaga, New York
.... 2—2
Pfc.
Daniels, Morris A
9—12—42
Grand Rapids, Michigan
1—0
Pvt.
D’asta, John
12—8—42
Los Angeles, California
.... 1-1
Pvt.
David, Carroll B
12—8—12
Lansing, Michigan
.... 1—0
Pfc.
Davidson, Dewe F
6—1—12
Summerfield, Louisiana
1—9
Cpl.
Davis, John B.
9—6—12
Springfield, Missouri ....
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Day, Curtis C.
9—12—42
Conway, Arkansas
.... 0—11
Repair Squadron


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
Cpl.
Decker, Hayden L
6—4—12
Farminton, Arkansas
1—8
Sgt.
Dietz, Edward R
11—23—42
Clarion, Pennsylvania .. .
2—2
S/Sgt.
Chilton M. ,
6—4—42
Oblong, Illinois
1-9
Sgt.
Dottle, Robert M
6—4—42
Grand Rapids, Michigan
7—4
Pfc.
Dubrod, Edward F
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
0—11
Pfc.
Dunseth, Harold J
9—12—42
Dixon, Illinois
0—11
Pvt.
Dvorak, Victor T
8—19—12
Shiner, Texas
1—2
Pfc.
Dysart, Archie L
6—4—42
Drumright, Oklahoma
1—3
S/Sgt.
Eckert, Gilbert C
6—4—42
Toledo, Ohio
3—5
Sgt.
Egbert, James E
6—4—42
Dayton, Ohio
2—9
Cpl.
Ehlers, Louis N
fi—4—42
St. Louis, Missouri
..: 1—8
Pfc.
Eiserman, Gerald W.
9—12—42
Lansing, Michigan
1—0
Pvt.
Elliott, Henry D
1—21—43
Detroit, Michigan
0—11
Cpl.
Estes, Clyde E.
6—4—42
Enid, Oklahoma
1—4
Cpl.
Etheridge, Ralph W.
6—4—42
Bald Knob, Arkansas
1—8
Pvt.
Fahey, Edward J
6—4—42
Minneapolis, Minnesota
1—7
Cpl.
Fatla, Casimer J
6—4—42
Chicago, Illinois
1—9
Pfc.
Fincher, Wm. T
6—4—42
Jonesboro, Georgia
1—3
Pfc.
Finley, Richard L
6—4—42
Lincoln, Arkansas
1—8
Pvt.
Fisher, Roland J
12—8—42
Cheyboygan, Michigan
0—11
Pfc.
Fitzgerald, Lawrence J
6—4—42
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
1—4
Pfc.
Fleming, Maurice E.
6—4—42
Knowlton, Montana
1—4
M/Sgt.
Flynn, John M
7—4—42
6—7
Pfc.
Fort, Dale H.
9—12—42
Omaha, Nebraska
0—11
Pvt.
French, Kenneth E.
9—12—42
Mattawau, Michigan
0—11
Sgt.
Fuller, Donald V
6—18—42
Dayton, Ohio
2—1
Cpl.
Garcia, Ted E.
6 —4—42
E. St. Louis, Illinois
1—8
Pfc.
Gerolamo, Girado
6—1—42
Belmont, Massachusetts
1—8
Sgt.
Glasford, Everett S
7—4—42
Balmat, New York
2—2
T/Sgt.
Gray, John H.
6—4—42
Dayton, Ohio
6—0
Sgt.
Gregg, Norman L
6—4—42
Omaha, Illinois ....
1—9
M/Sgt.
Griffith, David R., Jr
6—26—42
Nanticooke, Pennsylvania
8—0
Sgt.
Hafft, Arthur L
6—4—42
Versailles, Indiana
2—7
Pfc.
Hahn, Raymond H,
6—4—42
New Albin, Iowa
1—3
Sgt.
Hall, Wilbur E
6—4—42
Dayton, Ohio
2—2
Sgt.
Hampton, Ray W.
6 —4—42
Montrose, Colorado
1—4
Sgt.
Hanlon, James V.
7—4—42
New York, New York . ..
2—6
Pfc.
Hargis, Fred O
6 —4 —42
Houston, Texas
1—4
Pvt.
Haeig, Leo R.
9—12—42
Alden, Minnesota
0—11
Cpl.
Harriman, John W.
8—19—42
Hawthorne, Nevada
1—2
Pvt.
Harris, Theron J.
12—8—42
Bockport, Mississippi
2—8
Cpl.
Hawkins, John W
9 —12 —42
Detroit, Michigan
0—11
Cpl.
Heine, George D
6—4—42
Jiren, Wyoming
1—3
M/Sgt.
Henderson, Richard E
1—4—43
Ojai, California ....
9—5
Cpl.
Hendricks, Clarence E.
6—4—42
Akron, Ohio
1—3
Pfc.
Hero, Carl R. ..
6—4—42
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
1—9
Pfc.
Herring, Glen W
6—4 —42
Hastings, Nebraska
1—10
Pvt.
Herron, Wm. H.
12—8—42
Atlanta, Georgia
0—11
S/Sgt.
Holder, Richard E
11—23—42
Fairhaven, Massachusetts (also
Noombah, Long-
reach, Queensland)
6—0
Pvt.
Horn, Jessie L
9—12—42
Center, Missouri
0—11
Cpl.
Howard, Carl H., Jr.
6—4—42
St. Paul’s, North Carolina ....
2—10
Pvt.
Hrones, Nicholas G.
9—12—42
Chicago, Illinois
0—11
Cpl.
Hyman, Joseph
7—4—42
Brooklyn, New York ....
2—6
Pvt.
Jacobson, Walter F.
9—12—42
Henning, Minnesota
0—11
Pvt.
Jacciues, Joseph E
9—6—42
Belleville, Illinois
1—4
Pvt.
Jensen, Hans .
9—12—42
Milnor, North Dakota
0—11
Sgt.
Jochems, Wm. T
8—19—42
Atchison, Kansas
1—6
Pvt.
Johnson, Albert C
9—12—42
Overly, North Dakota
0—11
Pvt.
Johnston, Thomas E.
9—12—42
Paris, Missouri
0—11
Pvt.
Jordan, Albert J
9—12—42
Winnebago, Minnesota
0—11
Pfc.
Jontow, Samuel S
9—14—42
Yonkers, New York
1—3
T/Sgt.
Judkins, Paul L
10—23—42
Los Angeles, California
1—4
Cpl.
Kadingo, Alex
7—4—42
St. Clair, Pennsylvania
3—7
Pvt.
Kahl, Edward L
6—4—42
Greenville, Tennessee
1—3
REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign,
to 81st
Home Address
of
Service
Pfc.
Kasuboski, Harry R.
9—12—42
Berlin, Wisconsin
0—11
Sgt.
Kataja, Robert G
7—4—42
Grand Rapids, Michigan
2—4
Pvt.
Keaster, Edward A. .
12—8—42
Great Falls, Montana
1—5
Cpl.
Keen, Charley C.
6—4—42
Parsons, Tennessee
1—4
Sgt.
Kennedy, Frederick C.
7—4—42
Massena, New York
2—2
Pvt.
Kelsey, Carl D
9—12—42
Alma, Michigan ..
0—11
Cpl.
Keplikger, Alfred .. .
6—4—42
West Haven, Connecticut
1—8
Pvt.
Kettner, George C. .
1—21—43
Pine Island, Minnesota
1—5
Pvt.
Kiciiik, Michael J
0—12—42
Detroit, Michigan
0—11
S/Sgt.
Kindle, Charles W
6—4—42
Houston, Ohio
2—2
Sgt.
King, Hugh G.
6—4—42
Nashville, Tennessee ....
1—3
Pfc.
Kineey, Wm. W
9 —12—42
Davenport, Iowa
0—11
Pvt.
Kinseth, Myron A
1—21—43
Eau Claire, Wisconsin
1—5
Pvt.
Klein, Lloyd F
1—21—43
Bemidji, Minnesota
1—5
Pvt.
Klutts, Maurice M
11—18—42
Dallas, Texas
1—2
Pvt.
Koehl, Eldon E
1—12—43
Fairbury, Illinois
1—5
M/Set. Kolb, Samuel G.
5—14—4,2
Fort Benning, Georgia
16—1
T/Sgt.
Koval, Albert O
7—4—42
Windham, Montana
3—4
Sgt.
Kovatch, Daniel F.
6-4—42
Seattle, Washington
1—4
Pvt.
Krueger, Wayne G. .
9—12—42
Pardeeville, Wisconsin ..
0—11
Pvt.
Keyza, John A
10—6—42
Detroit, Michigan
1—0
Pvt.
Kuciiae, Jacob J
12—31—42
Highland, Wisconsin
1—0
Pvt.
Lachowicz, Chester ....
10—6—42
Detroit, Michigan
0—11
Sgt.
Lacota, Michael
7—1—42
Owego, New York
5—6
Pvt.
Langdoc, Lloyd L. ....
12—8—42
Chicago, Illinois
1—5
Pvt.
Layigne, Bernard H.
12—8—42
New Orleans, Louisiana
1—7
Pvt.
Leaby, Daniel
12—8—42
Portland, Oregon
1—5
Pvt.
Le Fuegey, Lamar W.
12—8—42
Cedartown, Georgia
1—5
Pfc.
Lebschen, Joseph P. .
9—12—42
Granite Falls, Minnesota
0—11
T/Sgt.
Lippeet, Charles B
6—4—42
Barnesville, Ohio
6—8
Pvt.
Lobehg, Oliver S
1—21—42
Thief River Falls, Minnesota
1—5
Pfc.
Loeds, Wallace H
9—12—42
Jackson, Michigan
0—11
Pvt.
Lovell, Lee M.
6—4—42
Cloverdale, Indiana
1—4
Pfc.
Lovett, Steve A
1—21—43
Augusta, Georgia
1—5
Cpl.
Lubitz, Louis A
6—4—12
Perham, Minnesota
1—4
Pvt.
Lutgring, James H. .
1—21—43
Abbeville, Georgia
1—6
Pvt.
Macy, Anson T
1—21—48
Arlington, Florida
1—5
Cpl.
Marchant, George V.
6—4—42
Polk City, Iowa
1—4
Sgt.
Marchesini, Albert D.
6—4—42
West Wyoming, Pennsylvania
2—2
S/Sgt.
Marx, Francis E
9-9-42
Streator, Illinois
2—8
Cpl.
Melton, Sidney R. ....
6-4—42
Lupton City, Tennessee
1—4
Pvt.
Merkel, Bernhard ....
9—12—42
Geraldine, Montana
1 —4
Pvt.
Messenger, Eugene F.
9—12—42
Fresno, California
1—4
T/Sgt.
Metzingee, Clarence B.
6—4-4,2
Caldwell, Kansas
2—9
Pvt.
Meyer, Frank W
9—12—42
Tllden, Nebraska
1—4
Pvt.
Mikkelsen, Alvin B.
9—12—42
Coon Rapids, Iowa
1—4
Pvt.
Miller, Evan A
9—12—42
Pacific Junction, Iowa
1—4
Pfc.
Moffett, Newton I. ..
9—12—42
Leupp, Arizona
1—4
Cpl.
Mog, John R
6—4—42
Ellsworth, Kansas
1—4
Pvt.
Mont, Wm. J. .
1—22—43
Manticoke, Pennyslvania
1—4
Pfc.
Monte, Pete J.
9—12—42
Benton Harbor, Michigan
0—11
Pvt.
Montgomery, John L.
9—18—42
New Orleans, Louisiana
1—5
Pvt.
Montoya, Albert A. ..
9—12—42
Springer, New Mexico
1—6
Cpl.
Mooney, Daniel C
6—4—42
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ....
1 —5
Cpl.
Moretti, Peter T
9—12—42
Union City, Pennsylvania ....
1—0
Cpl.
Morgan, James H.
7—4—42
Colorado Springs, Colorado ....
2—h
Sgt.
Morris, Homer E
7—4—42
Wichita Falls, Texas
2—6
Pvt.
Mouda, Lester E
9—12—42
Fresno, California
1—4
Pvt.
Muirhead, Vernon B.
9—12—42
Ennis, Texas
1—4
Sgt.
Murdock, Harry P. ..
11—27—42
Eagle, Idaho
3—7
Sgt.
Murphy, James H
8—4—42
St. Albans, New York
1—9
Pvt.
Murray, Francis E
9—12—42
Washington, D.C.
1—4
Sgt.
Mutter, Ralph
6-4—42
Detroit, Michigan
1—3
Pvt.
McAdams, Earl
1—21—43
Livingston, Montana
1—5
Pvt.
McCreary, Frank R.
1—21—43
Altoona, Pennsylvania ..
1—5
T/Sgt.
McEntee, Frank T
6—4—42
West Lake, Ohio
2—8
Cpl.
McIntire, Van C
6—4—42
McKinney, Texas
1—4
M/Sgt.
McLain, Ben
6-4—42
Jackson, Missouri
21—4
REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
Sgt.
McNinch, Joseph E.
6—4—42
Glen Easton, West Virginia
.... 1—3
Sgt.
McPhail, Donald R.
7—4—42
Jamaica, New York ....
1—9
Sgt.
Nellis, James G
6—4—42
Wooster, Ohio
1—3
Cpl.
Nettles, Willie H
9—12—42
Texarkana, Texas
1—4
T/Sgt.
Niebub, Louis C
6— i —42
Wheeling, West Virginia
.... 10—8
Pfc.
Newman, Ezekiel J3. .
7—4—42
Holbrook, Arizona
.... 2—4
Sgt.
Newt, James E
6—4 —42
Longview, Washington
1—4
Cpl.
Nichols, Jim 0.
6—1—42
Longview, Texas
1—4
Pvt.
Nichols, Willis L
9—12—42
Gould, Arkansas
1—4
Pvt.
Norland, Gilbert E
.... 9—12—42
Galva, Kansas
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Nuss, Claude H
6—4—42
Louisville, Kentucky ....
.... 1—4
Pfc.
O’Brien, Louis M
6—4—42
Chicago, Illinois
.... 1—3
Pfc.
Oehly, Earl A.
9—12—42
Prairie Home, Missouri
.... 1—5
S/Sgt.
Oldham, Robert W.
9 0 42
Wheeling, West Virginia
1—10
Cpl.
O’Leary, Stephen W.
6—4—42
Harlem, Montana
1—4
Pfc.
O’Habe, Lawrence B.
9—12—42
San Francisco, California
1—4
Pvt.
Opgaard, Allen R. ....
.... 9—12—42
Ft. Ransom, North Dakota
1—0
Pvt.
Orchard, Gordon E.
12 —8—42
Warwick, North Dakota
1—0
Pfc.
Ott, Harry A.
9—12—42
Waukesha, Wisconsin
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Owen, James H
.... 12—8—42
Anniston, Alabama
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Palculick, John J
6—4—42
Perthamboy, New Jersey
.... 2—1
Pfc.
Papacek, George J
12—30—42
LaCrosse, Wisconsin
.... 2—1
Cpl.
Parsons, Vernon
6—4—42
Moundsville, West Virginia
1—4
Pvt.
Payne, Harry C
9—12—42
Mountain View, Missouri
.... 1—0
Pfc.
Payne, James C
6—4—42
Dallas, Texas
.... 1—3
Sgt.
Pazak, John P.
6—4—42
Detroit, Michigan
... 1—3
Pfc.
Pehlke, Raymond A.
9—12—42
White Water, Montana
1—4
Pvt.
Peltekis, James
7—4—42
New York, New York ...
.... 2—9
Pfc.
Pendelton, Jack L
6 4—42
Shreveport, Louisiana
1—8
Pvt.
Petak, Alfonso A
12—8—42
Newark, New Jersey
1—0
Pvt.
Peterson, Stanley T.
10—6—42
Waukesha, Wisconsin ....
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Peterson, Wm. G
6 —4—42
Euclid, Ohio
.... 1—4
Pfc.
Phare, Roy T.
.... 9—12—42
Port Huron, Michigan
.... 1—5
Pvt.
Piaskowski, Harvey J
9—12—42
Sheboyan, Wisconsin
1—4
Pvt.
Pille, Arthur C
.... 9—12—42
Havenhill, Iowa
1—4
Pfc.
Pitcher, Wm. P
6—4—42
Baltimore, Maryland
1—3
S/Sgt.
Pitt, Donald J.
9—12—42
Topeka, Kansas
1—3
Pvt.
Pollard, Arthur C
6 —2—42
Marion, Virginia
.... 2—8
T/Sgt.
Powelson, Clifford F.
7 —4 —42
Columbiaville, Michigan
.... 3—5
Pvt.
Pratt, James W
.... 12—8—42
Bristol, Tennessee
1—0
Pvt.
Pridlides, James
7—4—42
Woodside, L.I., New York
.... 2—6
Sgt.
Provorse, John A.
7—4—42
Barnsfall, Oklahoma
.... 2—6
Pvt.
PRUTSMAN, A. L
9—12—42
Spearman, Texas
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Pcetz, Henry L
.... 9—12—42
Watertown, Wisconsin
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Quandt, Herbert W.
9—12—42
Fairland, Oklahoma
.... 1—4
S/Sgt.
Queen, Wm. W.
6—11—42
Belmont, North Carolina
.... 3—8
Sgt.
Ramey, Alvin D
7—4—42
Colmesneil, Texas
2 —6
Pvt.
Rasmussen, Raymond A. ....
.. . 12—26—42
Omaha, Nebraska
1—0
Pvt.
Reinhardt, Frederick H
1—1—43
Belleville, Illinois
1—0
Pfc.
Retmanski, Walter S.
7—4—42
Brooklyn, New York ....
.... 2 —5
Pvt.
Reynolds, Henry W.
12—8—42
Houston, Texas ....
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Rice, Virgil A.
.... 9—12—42
Ferguson, Missouri
.... 1—0
Pfc.
Rickard, Richard W.
.... 9—12—42
Hurontown, Michigan ....
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Rickert, Warren H.
.... 9—12—42
Gridley, California
.... 1—4
Sgt.
Roberts, Leo M
7—4—42
Conway, South Carolina
.... 2—6
M/Sgt.
Robinson, Tyra 0
6—4—42
Dayton, Ohio
.... 20—2
S/Sgt.
Romanowski, Joseph A
7—4—42
Newark, New Jersey
.... 2—5
Pvt.
Robvik, Allan W
.... 9—12—42
Glasgow, Montana
.... 1—4
T/Sgt.
Ross, J ames
9—9—42
Riverside, California
.... 18—7
Pvt.
Rouleau, Joseph E
.... 12—8—42
Waterville, Maine
0—11
T/Sgt.
Ruch, Walter R
5—14—42
Akron, Ohio
.... 6—8
Pvt.
Rudinskt, Vernon E.
.... 12—26—42
Elgin, Illinois
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Rurup, Delbert I
.... 12—26—42
Omaha, Nebraska
.... 1—0
Pvt.
Russel, Clyde A
.... 9—12—42
Fruita, California
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Russel, Harold D
.... 10—14—42
Sullivan, Missouri
1—4
Cpl.
Ruzsas, Louis F
.... 12—8—42
Dearborn, Michigan
.... 0—11
REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
Sgt.
Sanders, Andrew J
6—4—42
Lyons, Georgia
1—4
Pvt.
Sartain, Dean A
11—18—12
Midland, California
1—2
Sgt.
Schafer, Bernard E.
S—4—12
Riverdale, New Jersey
1—5
T/Sgt.
SCIIAUMLEFFEL, Roy F.
6—4—12
Cincinnati, Ohio
2—4
Pvt.
Schell, Guy W
12—8—12
Kansas City, Missouri
2—0
Pvt.
Shoemaker, George J.
12—8—12
Bellevue, Pennsylvania
0—11
Cpl.
Schnell, Sidney
7—4—42
Brooklyn, New York
2 —8
Pvt.
SCHOENLEIN, Wm. F.
T—1—12
Saginaw, Michigan
2—10
Pvt.
SchuttloffeLj Robert W. ....
11—16—12
Walnut, Iowa
1 —0
Pvt.
Scott, Carl W.
12—26—12
Hastings, Iowa
0—11
Pfc.
Seale, Richard H.
6-4-42
Spring City, Tennessee
1 —3
Sgt.
Shields, Gordon L.
6 —4—42
Sycamore, Alabama
1 —6
Cpl.
Shields, James O
6—4—42
Wolfe City, Texas
1—J
Pvt.
Shore, Isadore L
12—29—12
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
1 —
Pvt.
Shrader. Archie C
3—26—12
Sioux City, Iowa
0—11
Ist/Scrt. Simmons, John J.
5—13—21
Fairfield, Ohio
4 f —11
T/Sgt.
Simpson, George N. ...
6—1—12
Cleveland, Ohio
5 —4
Sgt.
Skinner, Virgil L.
, 6—4—42
Birmingham, Alabama
1 —4
Sgt.
Skutnick, Walter
7—4—12
Bayonne, New Jersey
2 —2
Cpl.
Slavin, Robert H.
5—14—12
Dayton, Ohio
1—9
Pvt.
Smith, James A
11—26—42
Lumberton, North Carolina
1 —6
Pvt.
Smith, Seymour M.
9 —12 —12
Grand Rapids, Michigan
1 —u
Pvt.
Sorden, Melvin E
10—22—42
Webster, Iowa
1—4
Pfc.
Sorrell, Gerald C.
6—4—42
Cincinnati, Ohio
1—4
T/Sgt.
Sosnowski, Adolph J.
6—4—42
Wendel, Pennsylvania
5—1
Pvt.
Sparger, John I,.
11—18—12
Durant, Oklahoma
1 —2
Pvt.
Spencer, John 0.
11—26—42
Akron, Ohio
1—1
S/Sgt.
Spivak, David R.
6—1—42
Chicago, Illinois
2—9
Pfc.
Stafford, Ernest
6—4—24
Hulbert, Oklahoma
1—4
Cpl.
STAFFOan, Robert K.
5—19—42
Detroit, Michigan
5—U
Stone, Delbert P.
6—4—42
St. Franeisville, Illinois
1—4
Sgt.
Stone, Dennis L.
6—4—42
Conway, Arkansas
1—8
Sgt.
Stovall, Glenwood
6—4—42
Lamesa, Texas
2 —1
Pvt.
Studman, Aaron
12—8—42
Brooklyn, New York
0 —11
Pvt.
Sumner, Wendell E.
11—16—42
Buckingham, Illinois
1—2
Sgt.
Sweeney, Jessie F
6—4—42
Nashville, Tennessee
1—4
Sgt.
Szmioiel, Joseph E
7—4 —42
Brooklyn, New York
1 —9
Sgt.
Szuchy, Jacob T
6—4—42
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
2—7
Pvt.
Talon, Louis W
9—12—42
Old Town, Maine
1—4
Pvt.
Tatro, Joseph J.
9—12—42
New Bedford, Massachusetts
x—4
Pvt.
Tehray, Walter A
1—21—43
Madison, Connecticut
1—4
Cpl.
Thayer, Harold V
6 4—42
Rochester, New York
1—8
Pvt.
Thomas, Glen C.
1—1—43
Lansing, Michigan
6—3
Cpl.
Thoma, George W
7—4—42
New York, New York
1—9
Pvt.
Thomas, Zack G.
9—12—42
Canton, Ohio
1 —7
Pvt.
Thompson, Donald A
12—8—42
Chicago, Illinois
1 —0
Cpl.
Thompson, Morris F.
9-12-4,2
Moscow, Ohio
1 —5
Pfc.
Thompson, Raleigh A
9—12—42
Richmond, Virginia
1—6
Cpl.
Thorson, Kenneth R.
6—4—42
Siebert, Colorado
1—4
Sgt.
Tittle, Burton L
7—4—42
Covington, Indiana
6 —4
Cpl.
Trahan, Rudolph R.
9-12-42
Pawtuket, Rhode Island
1—4
Pvt.
Tricon, Alfred J.
6—4—42
New Orleans, Louisiana
1 —4
Cpl.
Teizinski, Stanley C.
7—1—42
New York, New York ....
2—6
Pfc.
Tropeii, Harry
12—8—42
Dorchester, Massachusetts
1 —0
Pvt.
Texjmmel, Forrest G.
11—16—42
St. Maries, Idaho
1—2
Pvt.
Turner, Clyde W
12—8—42
Onawa, Iowa
1—2
Pvt.
Tuessing, Dalton A
12—3—42
Alexandria, Virginia
0—11
Sgt.
Ulczynski, Joseph
6—4—42
Dillonvilie, Ohio
2—7
Pvt.
Uydess, Harry J
1—18—43
New York, New York
1—9
Pvt.
Valachotic, Wm. M.
9—12—42
Johnstown, New York
1—4
Pvt.
Van Bueun, Lester E
1-21—43
Marion, Kansas
Cpl.
Vaughn, Tollie K
6—4—42
Leesburg, Alabama
1—3
Pfc.
Vazquez, Frank
9—12—42
Revere, Massachusetts
1—4
Pvt.
Vee Heul, Forrest G
1-21—43
Mitchelville, Iowa
I—4
Pfc.
Vickrey, Arthur W.
9—12—42
Pensacola, Florida
1 —4
S/Sgt.
Vyskovsky, Ladislaw
6—4—42
Detroit, Michigan
3—10
Cpl.
Wagner, Edward T
6-4—42
Subiaco, Arkansas
1—8
REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
T/Sgt.
Walker, Grady E
.... 5—19—42
Florence, South Carolina
.... 8—6
Pfc.
Wareham, Holland N.
6—4—42
Warren, Ohio
1—3
Pvt.
Warehouse, Wesley C.
7—4—42
Manson, Washington
.... 2—2
Pfc.
Warrex, Leo C.
6—4—42
Sandoval, Illinois
1—3
Pfc.
Wasik, Eugene S
6 —4— 42
Detroit, Michigan
.... 1—8
Pvt.
Wassil, Andy
.... 12—10—42
Terre Haute, Indiana ....
.... 1—5
Sgt.
Watkixs, Wm. C
6 —4 —42
Lorena, Texas ....
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Weakley, Paul R. ....
1—21—43
Indianapolis, Indiana
1—4
Pvt.
Webster, Allen W. ...
7—4—42
Gerber, California
.... 2—4
S/Sgt.
Wells, Jack W.
6—4—42
Bakersfield, California
1—10
Pvt.
Wells, Maryln L.
1—21—43
Fonda, Iowa
1—4
Cpl.
West, Martin C.
6—4—42
Luling, Texas
1—4
Pfc.
Westerman, Don H.
6 —4—42
Texarkana, Texas
.... 1—11
Cpl.
Williams, Paul A
6—4—42
Ivanhoe, California
1—4
Cpl.
Williams, Wm. H. ....
6—4—42
Carthage, Illinois
.... 1—4
Cpl.
Wilsox, Roscoe S
6—4—42
Coffeyville, Kansas
.... 2—0
Pvt.
Withem, Robert B
.... 11—16—42
Mondamin, Iowa ..
1—4
Cpl.
Wohlford, George L.
6 —4—42
Oregon, Missouri
1—4
Sgt.
Woody, Arthur D.
7—4—42
Crossville, Tennessee ....
,... 2—7
Pvt.
Worwa, Joseph F
9—12—42
Minneapolis, Minnesota
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Wright, Robert J.
11—16—42
Oakridge, Oregon
.... 1—1
M/Sgt.
Sorenson", Richard J.
S/Sgt.
Berk, Louis H. F
S/Sgt.
Frazier, Howard K.
S/Sgt.
Parkis, Wm. W.
7—1—42
S/Sgt.
Runyan, Wm. B.
9—10—42
Sgt.
Carlton, Charles E. ..
.... 10—24—42
Fellows, California
Sgt.
Edwards, Hugh V
7—4—42
Oswego, New York
Sgt.
Shields, Gordon L
6 —3 —42
Sycamore, Alabama
Sgt.
Stegmax, Theodore J.
2—11—43
Cpl.
Callahax, Gordon P.
9—18—42
Detroit, Michigan
Cpl.
Chandler, Vibart A.
6—3—42
Cpl.
Craxe, Joseph S.
6—3—42
Cpl.
Johnson, Guy L
6—3—42
Cpl.
Johnston, Walter E,
9—17—42
Cpl.
Vinson, James B. ....
6—3—42
Pfc.
Halliox, James T.
10—6—42
Pfc.
Jusko, Edward A. ....
10—6—42
Pfc.
Mattsex, John
10—6—42
Pfc.
Saxd, Bertel 0.
10—6—42
Pfc.
Silyerthoex, Cecil R.
10—6-^42
Pvt,
Heil, Robert F
.... 10—6—42
Pvt.
Kraxuxg, Curtis G
.... 10—6—42
Pvt.
Benser, Arthur E
.... 10—22—42
Clayton, Wisconsin
.... 1—3
T/Sgt.
Hyxek, Lawrence B.
.... 3—29—43
Wilber, Nebraska
.... 15—10
S/Sgt.
McMillox,
.... 3—30—43
Pvt.
Lawsox, Robert F
.... 2—27—43
Andes, Montana
.... 0—9
Pvt.
Earxest, Arman S
3—3—43
ATTACHED TO REPAIR SQUADRON
M/Sgt. Evans, Jack T 1—12—43
Sgt. Howd, Floyd W 2—12—43
Sgt. Miller, Clarence R. ... ... .... 2 —12—43
Sgt. Tanner, Sam I)., Jr. 1 —5—43
Pfc. Jenkins, James L., Jr. .... 1—5—43
T/Sgt. Clark, Moring P .... ... .... 2—3—48
T/Sgt. Gtjetterman, Joseph J 12 —30—42
T/Sgt. Hemus, Benjamin F. .... .. . 2—4—43
T/Sgt. Mollett, John D. 24 —34
T/Sgt. Smith, Oscar D. .... .... .... 12—30—42
S/Sgt. Allred, Lyle E. 12—30—42
S/Sgt. Beaudry, Edward L. .... .... .... 12 —30—42
S/Sgt. Carlson, Harold J 12—30—42
S/Sgt. Huxmann, Walter H. 1 —4—43
S/Sgt. Manning, Louis I. .... ... ... .... 12—30—42
S/Sgt. Muetux, George C 1 —3 —43
S/Sgt. Nolen, Lloyd K. 12—30—42
S/Sgt, Pigott, Colman T. .... .... .... 12—30—42
S/Sgt. Stafford, Thomas W. 23 —43
S/Sgt. Slaughter, Robert K. 12—30—42
Sgt. Bainbridge, Cyril D. .. .... 2 —9—43
Sgt. Beam, Wm. N. J. • ••■ 12—30—42
Sgt. Goodrich, Richard W. •••• 12—30—42
Sgt. Gbadt, Otis L. .... 12 —30—42
Sgt. Herman, Everett R. 1—16—43
Sgt. Moore, Claude E 2—9—43
Sgt. Morgan, Charles A 1—8—43
Sgt. O’Neil, Ernest O 2—4—43
Sgt. Pevler, Wm. H. .... ... 12—30—42
Sgt. Pratt, Robert G .... ... .... I—B 43
Sgt. Ray, Ovid S 2—3—43
Sgt. Schauss, Ralph L 1 —8—43
Cpl. Benedetto, Michael R ... .... 1 —8—43
Cpl. Eliot, Harley B 2—3—43
REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Cpl. Golay, Doane M 12—30—42
Cpl. Gordon, Norman J 2—9—43
Cpl. Hoag, Walter R 2—9—43
Cpl. Hollingsworth, John W 1 —9—43
Pfc. Bookting, Clarence 2 —9—43
Pfc. Guth, Buenos .. .... .... .... 12—30—42
Pfc. Harris, Frederick C. 1 —8—43
Pfc. Hodgdon, Ralph A 12 —30—42
Pfc. Price, John 1 1—4—43
Pfc. Samuelson, Conolt 2—9—43
Pvt. Boie, Maynard J. 2—9—43
Pvt. Mcßride, Austin E .... .... .... 11—22—42
Pvt. McFarland, Kenneth M 11 —22—42
Pvt. McMubeay, Stanley .... ... .... .... 10—16—42
Pvt. McVav, John F 11—2—42
Pvt. Merichel, John W 11—22—42
Pvt. Metzner, Harry W 10 —16—42
Pvt. Milani, Joseph J 10 —16—42
Pvt. Mollberg, Melvin A. .... .... .... 11 —22—42
Pvt. Moore, Jock J. 11 —22—42
Pvt. Mueller, Joseph F 10—16—42
Pvt. Norwood, Wm. A .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Alufson, Gene E 12—9—42
Pvt. Arns, George L .... .... 11—28—42
Pvt. Pfister, Eldridge J. 10—16—42
Pvt. Rusiewizz, Theodore 10—16—42
Pvt. Stone, George M. .... .... .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Symonds, Everett P. 10 —16—42
Pvt. Tagliaferei, Charles P .... 11—28—42
Pvt. Thomas, James F 10 —16—42
Pvt. Tuma, Frank J. 10—16—42
Pvt. Volpi, Anthony J .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Weight, Elmer L
Pvt. Bouzis, Walter 2—9—43
Pvt. Bower, Donald W 1—8—43
Pvt. Budeeau, Freeman P. 2—9—43
Pvt. Caudaux, Stanley H. .... .... ... 2 —9—43
Pvt. Cantrell, Alton M 12—30—42
Pvt. Gilmabtin, Edward M 2—9—34
Pvt. Holwitz, Victor J. 1 —9—43
Pvt. Joblonowiz, Henry S. .... .... 2—9—43
Pvt. Kannapell, Raymond J .... .... 12—30—42
Pvt. Kohlmann, Levi V. 2 —9—43
Pvt. Schultz, Russell M. .... .... 2 —9—43
Pvt. Spariosu, Theodore 12—30—42
Pvt. Stoehh, Raymond J. 2—9 —43
Pvt. Telford, Sterling W. .... 2 —9—43
Pvt. Wood, Wm. S 12—30—42
Pvt. Zangrilli, Charles 2—9—43
T/Sgt. Davis, Thomas J .... .. . 1 —8—43
S/Sgt. Burns, James P 1 —8—43
S/Sgt. Pooley, Kenneth W. .. .... .... .... 1—8—43
Sgt. Eliopoulous, Aristomenes 1 —8—43
Sgt. Holmes, Cecil F . . 1 —8—43
Cpl. Brittain, Dale C .... .... 1 —8—43
Cpl. Diden, Stanley R 1 —8—43
Cpl, Johnson, Walfred G. .... .... .... 1—8—43
Pfc. Coyle, Gene 1 —8—43
Pfc. Peeples, Jeffe E 1—8—43
Pvt. Ceannell, Murray A. .... .... .... 2—1—43
Pvt. Foerster, Edward F. 1 —8—43
Pvt. Mauhan, W. W 1—8—43
Pvt. Aldhoyd, Edwin W. 1—8—43
T/Sgt. Cooley, Latroy .... .... 1—11—43
T/Sgt. Cowand, Jack . .... .... .... 1—11—43
T/Sgt. Thompson, Arnold M. 1—11—43
S/Sgt. Hastie, Charles V 1—11—43
Pfc. Teafoed, Floyd W 11 —28—42
Pvt. Anderson, Robert E. .... .... 10 —30 —42
Pvt. Baldwin, Robert S . .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Behring, Nicholas A. 10 —16—42
Pvt. Beening, Marion M. . . .... 11 —22—42
Pvt. Beown, Charles F. .... .... . .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Hares, Lionel J. .. . .... .. . .... 11—28—42
Pvt. Hastings, Frank W .... ... .... 11 —22—42
Pvt. Healy, Robert D 10 —30—42
Pvt. Hoffman, Norman .... .... . , .... 10 —30—42
Pvt. Joelson, Phillip W 11—22—42
Pvt. Johns, Jay S .... .... .... .... 11—22—42
Pvt. Johnson, Arthur J 10—23—42
Pvt. Johnson, Harold J 11—22 —42
Pvt. Johnson, Warren Y. 11—22—42
Pvt. Kedzioeski, Wm. P 10 —16—42
Pvt. Konschak, Earl R .... .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Kwiatowski, Andrew A .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Leblanc, Wm. M 11—22—42
Pvt. Macßueney, Perry . .... .... 10 —16—42
Pvt. Madsen, John S 11 —28—42
Pvt, Mallon, John B 11—22—42
LOSSES TO REPAIR SQUADRON
Pvt. Bennett, Julius A .... .... .... 6—3—12
M/Sgt. Heabd, George A .... 9 —18—42
M/Sgt. Kem.ov, John S—l 4—42
Pvt. Munoz, Florentine M. .... .... 63 —42
Sgt. Schultz, Kenneth C. .... .... .... 6 —3—42
S/Sgt. Stuart, Leonard F .... .... .... 11—27—42
S/Sgt. Zanchuk, Daniel .... 1 —12—43
Pvt. Kelly, Thomas R. 11—18—42
Pfc. Kotishion, George 7—4—42
Pvt. Levine, Henry 10—29—42
M/Sgt. Habile, Wm. R. 10—29—42
Pvt. McCormick, Richard J. .... .... .... 10 —29—42
Pvt. Robbins, Miles H 12 —8 —42
Cpl. Übbanski, Conrad 7—4—42
S/Sgt. Moeitz, August J 12—24—42
Sgt. Feonzowiak, Ralph J. .... .... .... 6—3—42
Pfc. Donohue, Wm. J .... .... .... 6 —3—42
Pfc. Fischamn, Seymore S 9 —18—42
Pfc. Hineman, Jack J 9—17—42
Pfc. Windmiller, Paul E. 9—18—42
Pfc. Finch, George M 9—18—42
Pvt. Thrush, Melvin J 9- —18—42
Middleport, Ohio
New Brunswick, N. J
San Antonio, Texas
Clyde, Texas
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 3—6
Wolf Point, Montana I—2
McAdoo, Pennsylvania 3—B
Fairport Harbor, Ohio I—4
Knoxville, Tennessee 11 —-10
Belmont, Massachusetts I—3
Scranton, Pennsylvania I—3
Schenectady, New York 2—2
Brooklyn, New York
ATTACHED TO REPAIR SQUADRON—Contowerf


Pvt. Amundson, Albert G.
Cpl. Abtis, Evan J.
Cpl. Bagley, Berry
Pvt. Babthick, Anthony A.
Pvt. Bebnstine, Abraham
Pvt. Blades, John D.
Pvt. Bloom, Harold J.
Pvt. Bluj, Andrew P.
Pvt. Boal, James C.
Pvt. Boebnee, Russel V.
Pfc. Boettcher, Ronald H.
Pvt. Bobinstein, Harold J.
Pvt. Boyer, Guy H.
Pvt. Bhendle, Fred R.
Cpl. Bboadstone, Paul H.
Pvt. Brown, Roy E.
Pvt. Bushman, Leonidas
S/Sgt. Byers, G. A.
T/5 Chapman, Joe
Pvt. Collins, Charles E.
Pvt. Collins, W alter
Pvt. Colson, Lawrence E.
Pvt. Conway, John R.
Pvt. Conaway, Paul E.
Pvt. Cook, Clyde
Pvt. Cooper, Chas. B.
Pvt. Cooper, Ervin
Pvt. Cooper, Raymond
Pvt. Crim, Harold L.
Pvt. Dean, John D.
Pvt. Dewalt, Robert P.
Pvt. DiGrovanni, Joseph P.
Pvt. Deliberti, August
Pvt. Deahos, John W.
Pvt. Duckworth, Herman W.
Pvt. Earnest, Arnon
Pvt. Emerson, Glen E.
Pvt. Evans, Phileman L.
Cpl. Pfizer, Frederick J.
Pvt. File, Charles
Pvt. Fbancetic, James L.
S/Set. Frazier, Howard K.
Pvt. Gallagher, James J.
M/Sgt. Gilbert, Jessie W.
Pvt. Gbanshaw, Donald F.
Pvt. Griffiths, Robert L.
Pvt. Gudykunst, Lawrence
Pfc. Hall, Lawrence F.
T/Sgt. Hayden, Willard
Pvt. Heil, Robert F.
Pfc. Hobeb, Wasyl
Pvt. Hobson, Brady
T/Sgt. Hopkins, Albert M.
Cpl. Hoppeeton, Norman E.
Cpl. Jacques, Joseph
Pvt. Jenkins, Earl L.
Pvt. Johnson, Chas. G.
Pvt. Johnson, England C.
T/Sgt. Joseph, Orville
Pvt. Killingsworth, Kistler
Pvt. Khanuno, Crutis
Pvt. Keyza, John A.
Pvt. Lacov, Erving
Pvt. Langfeldt, Erwin E.
Pfc. Lowthee, Paul D.
Cpl. Lyons, Roderwick F.
Pvt. Maxnwaking, George
T/5 Handel, Jack
Sgt. McKennan, Rayford
S/Sgt. Miller, Harry R.
Pvt. Mobeiiouse, Daniel T.
Pfc. Naginey, John D.
Pvt. Nixon, Winford
M/Sgt. Novak, Louis W.
Pvt. Noyes, Arthur R.
Pfc. O’Bbien, Louis M.
Pvt. Parker, Oscar E.
Cpl. Parsons, Vernon
Cpl. Pierce, Paul R.
T/Sgt. Powelson, Clifford
S/Sgt. Queen, William W.
Pvt. Radke, Walter D.
Sgt. Riley, William A.
Pvt. Roche, Thomas W.
Pvt. Saling, William J.
Cpl. Sas, Joe
Pvt. Smith, Davey
Pvt. Sonnabend, Harold
Pvt. Stafford, Earnest
Sgt. Stegman, Theodore
Sgt. Stone, Delbert
Pvt. Tanney, Nicholas
Pfc. Tieeman, James J.
Pvt. Turner, Clyde
Pfc. Way, Cnarles R.
Pvt. Wintebmute, John
S/Sgt. Woods, Herbert P.
M/Sgt. Wuppenfeld, John
LOSSES REPAIR SQUADRON —Continued


Date of
Years
Rank
Name
Assign.
Home Address
of
to 81st
Service
Sgt.
Allan, Jones R
5—14—24
Cynthiana, Ohio
... I—10
Pvt.
Ammon, Waldo J. ....
.... 5—14r—42
Waterville, Ohio .
.... 1—9
Ist/Sgt. Andrews, John S
.... 5—14—42
Dayton, Ohio
.... 2—6
Cpl.
Angove, Douglas E.
.... 5—14—42
Virginia, Minnesota
.... 2—8
Pfc.
Bagley, Perrv W.
.... 5—24—42
Shiprock, New Mexico
1—3
Sgt.
Bailey, Harold E.
.... 5 —11—42
Van Wert, Ohio
.... 1—10
T/Sgt.
Bauman, F. Lee
... 5—14—42
Sterling, Ohio
... 10—3
Cpl.
Beauregard, Lloyd J.
.... 5—14—42
Vestal, New York
.... 2—9
Sgt.
Bock, Earl A.
5—14—42
Hamilton, Ohio
.... 2—8
Pfc.
Branchick, Joe
.... 5—11—42
Lakewood, Ohio
1—9
Sgt.
Bhickeb, Alvin G.
.... 5—11—42
Toledo, Ohio
2—1
Sgt.
Brown, Howard E
.... 5 —14—42
Peru, Indiana
.... 3—4
S/Sgt.
Burkepile, Ivan W.
.... 5—14—42
Springfield, Ohio
.... 2—11
S/Sgt.
Caven, Howard S. ....
.... 6—14—42
Conover, Ohio
1—11
Sgt.
Cavrich, Louis S
.... 5—14—42
Fairmont, West Virginia
... 2—9
Pfc.
Clifton, Russel L. ....
5-24—42
Englewood, Colorado
1—3
Pvt.
Cooper, Jake J.
.... 5—14—42
Kansas City, Missouri
2—6
Sgt.
Cushwa, James E.
5—14—42
Dayton, Ohio
.... 1—10
Pvt.
Daniel, Clarence
.... 5-24—42
Foster, Ohio
.... 1—3
T/Sgt.
Davis, Eli T
.... 5—14—42
Nelsonville, Ohio
.... 19—10
Cpl.
Davis, Walter T
.... 5—14—42
Charleston, West Virginia
2—0
Sgt.
Dodsworth, Frank E.
.... 5—14—42
Phoenix, Arizona
2—1
Pvt.
Doroshow, Aaron J.
.... 10—22—42
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ....
.... 0—11
Pvt.
Duckworth, Herman W
.... 5—24—42
Jacksboro, Texas
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Dudjiak, Frank J.
.... 5—11—42
Newburgh Heights, Ohio
.... 1—10
Pvt.
Edwards, Wm. R.
.... 5—24—42
Chagrin Falls, Ohio
1—4
Pvt.
Elder, James W
.... 5—14—42
Louisville, Kentucky
.... 3—8
Cpl.
Evans, Roy S.
5—14—42
Greenland, West Virginia
.... 1—11
Pfc.
Fagundes, Lionel A.
.... 5—24—42
Atwater, California
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Feyereisen, John E.
.... 10—21—42
S. St. Paul, Minnesota
.... 1—0
Sgt.
Fink, John J.
.... 5—14—42
Rochester, New York ....
2—1
S/Sgt.
Fissel, Zeno M.
.... 5—14—42
Mt. Gilead, Ohio
2—2
Pfc.
Fraser, Clifford R.
5—11—42
Petalumia, California ....
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Freeland, Roy M
.... 5—24—42
Capitan, New Mexico
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Gallian, Clyde S.
.... 5—14—42
Ironton, Ohio
.... 2—7
Sgt.
Gast, Frank E.
5—14—42
Ripley, Ohio
3—4.
Pfc.
Geaebin, Roy L
5—24—42
Rising Fawn, Georgia
.... 1—3
Pfc.
Harding, Bernard B.
5—11—42
Stockton, California
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Harrison, John P. ....
.... 5—24—42
Schellsburg, Pennsylvania
1-^4
Pfc.
Harvey, Glen L
.... 5—24—42
Cowley, Wyoming
1—5
Cpl.
Hauser, Charles M. ...
.... 5—24—42
High Point, North Carolina
1—4
Sgt.
Highman, Leland L.
.... 5—14—42
Tell City, Indiana
.... 2—0
Cpl.
Hollans, Howard L.
5—11—42
Amarillo, Texas
.... 2—8
Pfc.
Jacobs, Jack ....
.... 5—24—42
Chicago, Illinois
.... 2—1
Pfc.
Jeppesen, Harvey D.
5—24—42
Marion, Oregon
1—4
Pvt.
Johns, W. H
2—4—42
New Kensington, Pennsylvania
... 1—5
Cpl.
Kaiser, Harry
5—11—42
Brooklyn, New York
.... 1—3
Pfc.
Kawecki, Stanley F. ..
5—14—42
Meriden, Connecticut
.... 2—2
Pfc.
Kipner, Nathan
.... 5—14—42
Dayton, Ohio
.... 2—0
Pfc.
Knowi.es, Wm. L.
5—24—42
Bucklin, Kansas
.... 1—5
S/Sgt.
Kocunik, John D.
.... 6—14—42
Syracuse, New York
.... 2—2
Pvt.
Lesser, Rowland H.
5—24—42
Freeland, Pennsylvania
1—3
Pvt.
Lewis, George
2—4—43
Heflin, Louisiana
1—5
Cpl.
Lynn, Garland D
.... 11—26—42
Marion, Ohio
.... 1—10
Pfc.
Mackowiak, Leo R.
5—24—42
Gaylord, Michigan
.... 1—3
Pfc.
Martin, Henry A
5—24—42
Butte, Montana
1—4
Pvt.
Mathis, Johnnie M.
12—1—42
Ona, Florida
1—3
Cpl.
Mekeal, Wm. M.
6—14—42
Akron, Ohio
2—11
Pfc.
Mueck, Joe P.
5—24—42
Cameron, Texas ....
.... 1—3
Sgt.
Murphy, Leo K.
5—14—42
Springfield, Ohio
1—11
Pvt.
McCarter, John W. ....
5—24—42
Fountain Inn, South Carolina
1—4
Pvt.
McCollum, Albert E.
5—14—42
Granville, Ohio
.... 1—7
M/Sgt. McElwee, Charles K.
5—14—42
Johnstown, Ohio
5—7
Pfc.
Naginey, John D. .
5-14—42
Johnstown, Ohio
.... 1—11
Cpl.
Neville, Thomas Jr.
5—14—42
Lebanon, Ohio ....
.... 1—7
Cpl.
Newbubger, John J
5—14—12
Davton, Ohio
.... 1—6
Pfc.
Novak, Julius L
5—24—42
Deford, Michigan
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Parker, Oscar E
5—24—42
Wilmington, North Carolina
.... 1—6
S/Sgt.
Pendelton, James H.
.... 5—11—42
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma ....
.... 6—4
Supply Squadron


Rank
Sgt.
Name
Poole, Robert S.
Date of
Assign.
to 81st
.... 5 —24—42
Home Address
Grove City, Pennsylvania
Years
of
Service
2—1
Pvt.
Prather, James M
.... 5—24—42
Dallas, Texas
1—3
Sgt.
Pritham, Leon E. ....
.... 5—14—42
Freeport, Maine
.... 2—6
Pfc.
Rainville, Howard F
.... 5—14—42
Naugatuck, Connecticut
.... 2—2
Sgt.
T/Sgt.
Ratliff, Stanley C
Raymond, Ralph E
... 5—IX—42
.... 5—14—12
Chesterfield, South Carolina
Altoona, Pennsylvania
.... 1—9
9—6
Pvt.
Reid, Robert E.
.... 5—24—42
Eureka, Kansas ..
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ....
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Reilly, James J
9— 1—42
1—3
T/Sgt.
Reubinall, Oliver
.... 5—14—42
Springfield, Ohio
... 19—6
Pfc.
Rine, Paul M.
5—14—42
Moundsville, West Virginia ....
.... 1—10
Cpl.
Rom she, Waldon C
.... 5—12—42
Springfield, Ohio
.... 1—7
S/Sgt.
Ross, Eddie
.... 5 —14—42
Elwood, Indiana
... 3—4
Pfc.
Roth, Charles P., Jr.
5—11—42
Cos Cob, Connecticut ....
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Rucki, George
.... 5—24—42
Wyarno, Wyoming
.... 1—5
Pfc.
Scheel, Donald N
.... 5-24-42
Omaha, Nebraska
.... 4—4
Sgt.
Schutte, Joseph C
.. . 5—11—42
Louisville, Kentucky
1—10
Pfc.
Sciabeetta, Harry E.
.. . 6—24—42
Lynn, Massachusetts
1—4
Sgt.
Scovell, Paul D
5—14—24
Johnstown, Ohio
.... 1—11
Sgt.
Shandob, Michael
6—14—42
New Middletown, Ohio
.... 2—9
Pfc.
Shoaf, Donald E
.... 5—14—42
Delaware, Ohio
.... 1—10
S/Sgt.
Smith, Julius G
6-14—12
Caldwell, Ohio
.... 1—11
Pvt.
Speek, Raymond J
.... 5—24—42
Henryetta, Oklahoma
.... 1—10
Pfc.
Spear, Harry B.
5—14—42
Terre Haute, Indiana
.... 1—10
Pvt.
Stevens, Wayne A. ....
... 6—11—42
Belpre, Ohio
.... 2—7
Pfc.
Stiffleb, Eugene
.... 5—24—42
Jackson, Ohio
.... 1—3
Pfc.
Stranad, Wm. J
.... 6—24—42
New Buffalo, Michigan
.... 1—4
Sgt.
Stull, Donald K
.... 6—14—42
Howard, Ohio
.... 1—11
Sgt.
Sudhoff, Lester C
.... 5—14—42
Cincinnati, Ohio
1—11
Cpl.
Tabence, Benjamin A.
.... 6—24—42
Anthony, Kansas
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Tetley, Roland, E
11—27—42
Sikeston, Missouri
.... 1—3
Sgt.
Vaughan, Wm. W. ....
6—14—42
Marysville, Ohio ..
.... 1—10
Sgt.
Yevebka, Lewis
.... 5—14—42
Cleveland, Ohio
.... 2—2
Cpl.
Vogan, George S
.... 5—11—42
Washington, D. C.
1—4
Sgt.
Voces, Harvey L
.... 5—11—42
Boerne, Texas ....
.... 1—4
Pfc.
Waldron, Neal W. ...
.... 5—11—42
East Cleveland, Ohio
.... 1—9
Pfc.
Wambsganss, Elder J.
.... 5-24—42
Elmdale, Kansas
.... 1—3
Cpl.
Wabneh, Frederick E.
.... 5—24—42
Eaton, Ohio
.... 1—11
Pfc.
Weaver, Arnold M
...11—27—42
Sparta, Tennessee
1—3
S/Sgt.
West, Harold E.
.... 5—14—42
Dayton, Ohio
.... 2—7
Pvt.
Westberg, Harry A.
5—24—42
Castana, Iowa
... 1—3
Pvt.
Whalen, Joseph V
5—24—42
Shamokin, Pennsylvania
.... 1—3
S/Sgt.
WlNGET, Wm. A
5—14—42
Lima, Ohio
.... 2—2
Pvt.
Winters, Lee ....
2—4—43
Coal Grove, Ohio
1—3
Pvt.
Witos, Benjamin J
.... 5—24—42
Sugar Notch, Pennsylvania ....
.... 1—5
Pvt.
Cpl.
Wittick, Andres H.
Wood, Robert J.
5—24—42
.... 5—24—42
North Bend, Oregon ....
Brooklyn, New York ....
.... 1—3
.... 2—7
Cpl.
Yoho, Hazen G
.... 5—14—42
Moundsville, West Virginia ....
.... 1—10
Cpl.
Zalar, Philip J
.... 5—14—42
Barketon, Ohio ....
.... 2—1
Pvt.
Zeidleb, Herbert J
.... 5—24—42,
St. James, Minnesota ....
.... 1—3
Pvt.
Kerlin, Charles W., Jr.
Tyrone, Pennsylvania ....
.... 1—4
Pvt.
Maher, Robert F
... 1—15—13
Brooklyn, New York....
1—0
Pfc.
Sheridan, Robert F.
.... 10—25—42
Syracuse, New York
.... 0—11
Sgt.
Pfc.
Pfc.
Pfc.
Pfc.
Pvt.
Pvt.
Feontzowicek, Ralph J
Donahue, Wm. J
Pischman, Seymour S
Hineman, Jack J
WlNDMILLEB, Paul E.
Finch, George M
Hancock, Lester J
.... 3—15—43
Detroit, Michigan
.... 1—0
SUPPLY SQUADRON —Continued


ATTACHED TO SUPPLY SQUADRON
M/Sgt. Cartin, Harold L 12—7—42
S/Sgt. Leodoha, Anthony 1 —9—43
Sgt. Oja, Ernest W. .... .... 2—2—43
S/Sgt. McDonough, Robert F 11 —25—42
T/5. McNeill, Chester A. 1 —29—43
Cpl. Milles, Joseph C 1—22—43
Cpl. Weiss, Ben M. .... 1 — 29 —43
Pfc. Maliglowka, Theodore .... .... - 1—14—43
Pfc. Ahmundson, Wm. M. 1 —14—43
Pfc. Schmeling, Delton F. .... .... .... 1 —14—43
Pfc. Smith, Byron L. ... ... .... .... 2 — 2 —43
Pvt. Brown, Howard A 2 — 2 —43
Sgt. Oja, E. W.
T/4 Smith, B.
T/5 Judd, L.
T/5 McAlea, B.
Pfc. Meinhahdy, W. C.
Pvt. McNeill, C. A.
Pvt. Brown, H. A.
Pvt. Diehl, D.
Pvt. Duff, F. R.
Pvt. Evans, R.
Pvt. Herba, J.
Pvt. Kinder, E.
Pvt. Malstead, L.
Pvt. McMain, J.
Pvt. Ondrejkovic, S.
Pvt. Seibel, C. W.
Pvt. Jacuuet, E. W.
Pvt. Bury, I. J.
Pvt. Heyden, L. W.
Pvt. Leßoy, F. M.
Pvt. Ross, C. R.
Pvt. Schwarz, J. A.
Pvt. Thumb, G. F.
Pvt. Traylor, N.
Pvt. Whitesel, R. I.
Pvt. Kee, M. H.
Pvt. Diehl, Delos F. 2—2—43
Pvt. Duff, Frank R. .. . .... .... .... 2—2—43
Pvt. Evans, Robert .... .... .... .... 2—2—43
Pvt. Geiger, George M .... .... .... 2—11—43
Pvt. Hebda, Joseph J 2—2—43
Pvt. Kayse, Alfred N 1—22—43
Pvt. Kinder, Eugene 2 —2—43
Pvt. Malstead, La Vern A .... .... 2—2—43
Pvt. McCain, James B 2 —2—43
Pvt. Ondrejkovic, Steve S. 2—2—43
Pvt. Russel, Harold D .... .... .... 2—15—43
Pvt. Seibel, Conrad W .... .... .... 2—11—43
Pvt. Hickey, G. J.
Pvt. Morey, F. T.
Pvt. Liddle, G. A.
Pvt. Fryer, J. C.
Pvt. Girard, E. M.
Pvt. Dumas, M. A.
Pvt. DeCamp, C. A.
Pvt. Dodson, A. F.
Pvt. Doughtery, W. F.
Pvt. Keller, R. A.
Pvt. Golden, H.
Pvt. Gallagher, J. E.
Pvt. Hebro, J. W.
Pvt. Scheiteh, O. A.
Pvt. Stewart, J. H.
Pvt. Ramires, A.
Pvt. Smith, J. R.
Pvt. Spencer, J. A.
Pvt. Rayla, J. B.
Pvt. Sharrock, L. W.
Pvt. Smith, W. N.
Pvt. Schueren
Pvt. Tfmpleman, L. D.
Pvt. Pruett, R. L.
Pvt. Spinden, R.
LOSSES TO SUPPLY SQUADRON
Pvt. Pierce, Paul R Andover, Virginia I—l1 —1
Pvt. Brumbaugh, Richard F. Pvt. Speer, Raymond J.
Pvt. Edwards, Wm. R. Pvt. Stevens, Wayne A.
M/Sgt. Engle, Loy F. Pfc. Stifpler, Eugene
T/Sgt. Hall, Charles F. Pvt. Strawbridoe, Thomas
Pvt. Keelin, Charles W. Pvt. Stroh, Harold O.
S/Sgt. Ross, Eddie


22nd ORDNANCE COMPANY AVIATION
M/Sgt. May, Otto T.
T/Sgt. Black, Clarence R.
S/Sgt. McFee, Charles W.
S/Sgt. Crowley, Norwood W.
S/Sgt. Goode, George L.
S/Sgt. Baker, Richard F.
T/4 Carpenter, Elwin F.
T/4 Cooper, Alvin H.
T/4 Daudt, Harry A.
T/4 Geoogar, Larry W.
T/4 Machelett, William C.
T/4 Morgan, Howard W.
T/4 Mayhow, Chesley M.
Cpl. Butler, Harry L.
Cpl. Gunnell, James R.
Cpl. Green, Willie M.
Cpl. Biddle, Clyde S.
Cpl. Lionette, Joseph
T/5 Martin, Claude H., Jr.
T/5 Willis, Eugene D.
T/5 Vik, Robert F.
T/5 Capehton, Cecil R.
T/5 Gardner, John G.
Pfc. Wegat, Carl H.
Pfc. Mcßroom, Ervin
Pfc. Bowebmastee, Harper G.
Pfc. Comins, Alfred B.
Pfc. Alleman, Arthur M.
Pfc. Nett, John L.
Pvt. Tract, James O.
Pvt. Muldowney, James
Pvt. Hansen, Myles D.
Pvt. Agostinelli, James V.
Pvt. Cannon, Linwood
Pvt. Capecci, John
Pvt. Fuerey, Earl B.
Pvt. Grant, Robert C.
Pvt. Mociler, John N.
Pvt. Platte, Paul F.
Pvt. Raphael, Irving
Pvt. Seale, William A.
Pvt. Andrews, James R.
Pvt. Wernert, Clarence
T/4 Fisher, Morris E.
DETACHMENT Ist PLAT., 1912th QUARTERMASTER COMPANY (AVN), T.
S/Sgt. Romano, Joseph F.
Sgt. Flanagan, Joseph
Sgt. Robbins, Daniel W.
T/4 Alley, John F.
T/4 Morgan, Lloyd C.
Cnl. Cioffi, Michael A.
Cpl. Deveney, James C.
Cpl. Johnson, Carl E.
Cpl. Maeecki, Anthony P.
Cpl. Moyers, Clyde J.
Cpl. Packard, Charles J.
Cpl. Wigman, Abraham
T/5 Barlow, Albert F.
T/5 Belisabio, Frank P.
T/5 Dingman, Roger H.
T/5 Drugan, Owen J.
T/5 Gubliaccio, Alexander J.
T/5 Fee, Thomas
T/5 Monday, Ophir
T/5 Pawuk, Nick
T/5 Ward, Albert J.
T/5 Battisti, Frank J,
T/5 Caravella, Dominico
T/5 Chabest, Joseph F.
T/5 Guthrie, Norman M.
T/5 Koenig, Ralph E.
T/5 L’Heureux, John B.
T/5 Perry, Joseph L.
T/5 Quint, Theodore
T/5 Rupard, Luther D.
T/5 Taylor, Joseph F.
T/5 Treadwell, Nellis S.
Pvt. Beede, Leon L.
Pvt. Bereelli, Louis A.
Pvt. Candaux, Stanley H.
Pvt. Fleming, Charles G.
Pvt. Griffith, Ross W.
Pvt. Jaskierski, Joseph S.
Pvt. King, John P.
Pvt. Kohlmann, Levi U.
Pvt. Lind, Donald M.
Pvt. Marks, Nathan W.
Pvt. Zanghilli, Charles
LOSSES
Sgt. Yak Wilgen, John
Pvt. Budbeau, Freeman P.
Pvt. Noel, Edward H.


Civilian Personnel
Abel, Bert
Adams, Evelyn M.
Aimer, James
Albrecht, Albert G.
Alcorn, George
Alder, Herbert S.
Alderson, Ronald
Ali, Thomas J.
Allen, John C.
Allen, Lewis F.
Allen, William H.
Alley, William S.
Selby H.
Allwhight, Allan D.
Amundsen, Alf.
Amundsen, George P.
Anderson, Douglas
Anderson, Harry C.
Anderson, John B. H.
Anderson, Margaret
Anderson, William 1,.
Andrea, Nasi
Andrews, Miles D.
Andrews, Ronald M.
Appleby, Thomas J.
Appleyaed, Thomas V.
Armanasco, Julius E.
Ahmitage, Harold
Aenesen, William J.
Arnold, William E.
Aeundell, Douglas M.
Asm ah. May M.
Ashmore, George W.
Astle, Charles P.
Atkins, Louis
Atkinson, Ebenezer DeW.
Atkinson, Gilbert W.
Austin, Thomas
Baaetz, Lawrence N.
Bailey, Frederick W.
Baird, William
Baker, Charles E.
Baldwin, Frank H.
Ball, Fred
Ball, John W.
Banks, Ronald J.
Barbeler, Bernard T.
Barber, William
Bardwell, Frederick J.
Barker, Frederick C.
Barnard, Maud E.
Barnes, Cyril C. P.
Barnes, Jesse J.
Barrett, Ellen M.
Barrett, Mona
Barrett, Thomas
Barrington, Fred.
Barron, Robert
Bassett, Jack
Bassett, Thomas G.
Batson, Hector
Batten, Reginald J.
Battersby, Stanley
Bauer, Edward J.
Bauer, John W.
Bauman, David H.
Baxendell, Cedric H.
Baxter, George
Beaedmore, Albert E.
Beatty, Clive A.
Beaven, Harold E.
Beaver, George W. J.
Beck, Solomon
Beck, Solomon (Jnr.)
Beckman, Roy D.
Bedford, Arthur
Beech, George
Beetham, Edwin F.
Bedford, Allan H.
Beil, David T.
Bell, John A.
Bell, Keith G.
Bell, Ruby McG.
Bennett, Ailsa
Bennett, Harold
Bennett, Arthur S.
Bennett, Horace
Bennett, Jack R.
Behgin, Michael
Best, Keith D.
Best, Norman T.
Best, Roy C.
Bioas, Arthur H.
Bignell, Henry H.
Black, Beryl J.
Black, John M.
Blake, Alexander O.
Blanchard, John A.
Bliss, Howard J.
Bliss, Owen V.
Bliss, John
Bliss, Louis
Bliss, Marjorie
Block, William
Blind, Kevin
Blumson, Arthur E.
Blyth, George H.
Boaedman, Ernest
Boatfield, William T.
Bonoees, Albert F.
Bonsey, William
Bott, Pearl M.
Boueke, Kevin J.
Bouene, Reginald C.
Bowman, Hugh
Boyce, John H. W.
Boyle, Henry T.
Boyle, John J.
Boyle, Terence W.
Beadfoed, Samuel W.
Beady, John
Beady, Reuben
Beaes, William M.
Beainwood, Charles S.
Beandon, Alan H.
Bbasch, Leslie O.
Beennan, Francis J.
Beetheeton, Daniel
Beett, John J.
Beettell, Archibald J.
Beickwood, Gilbert
Bright, Frank N.
Beoadfoot, Alan H.
Beody, Violet
Beohan, Bernard
Beoodbank, Arthur W.
Beook, Arthur E.
Brooks, Lawrence H.
Brooks, William A.
Beook, Sidney G.
Beouoh, Harry
Brown, Eric
Beown, John C.
Brown, Leonard
Browne, Rae
Beownhall, Leslie J.
Bryant, Alfred J.
Buckley, Brian P.
Buckley, Desmond J.
Buckley, Syd. G.
Budd, Lionel R.
Budgen, Royden R.
Bull, Edward J.
Burgess, Francis C.
Burgess, Francis W.
Burgess, Leonard
Burke, Bessie M.
Bueke, James P.
Burke, Jeremiah
Bueke, John W.
Burke, Kathleen G.
Buenett, John K.
Burnett, Ralph
Burns, Charles R.
Burns, John
Buehows, Jack
Burrows, Leslie H.
Bueton, George R.
Burton, Leslie R.
Butler, Jack
Buttnee, Francis D.
Byrne, James
Byrne, Kenneth B.
Byrne, Robert E.
Byeon, Stewart
Caffeey, Teresa C.
Cameron, Donald J.
Campbell, Henry
Campbell, James D.
Campbell, Neil A.
Campbell, Russell F.
Campbell, Thomas C.
Cameeon, Kenton T.
Cannon, Alfred J.
Cannon, Mavis I.
Cannon Mervyn W.
Cannon, Ruth
Carmichael, Alex. H.
Carmichael, Andrew G.B.
Carlyle, Richard
Caro, Lorna
Carr, Miles
Care, Norman
Caeeigan, Clarence
Carrington, Percival G.
Carroll, Gerard T.
Carroll, John V.
Carroll, Lilian A.
Carroll, William J.
Caestens, John
Casey, John E.
Cashfoed, John R.
Castner, John
Caton, Robert E.
Cavanough, John J.
Cecil, Douglas H.
Chadwick, Samuel P.
Chalmers, Alexander T.
Chamberlain, Albert E.
Champ, Cyril J.
Chandler, John L.
Chapman, John
Chapman, Hubert V.
Chapman, Wally
Chapple, Brian D.
Chablson, George H.
Chennells, Frank
Cheyne, Andrew R.
Christie, Emilious F.
Christiansen, Christian
Christie, Laurel Y.
Cheistison, William J.
Clark, Bertie T.
Clark, William R.
Clarke, George E.
Clarke, John B.
Clark, Hubert E.
Clarke, Percy H.
Clark, Walter S.
Clayfield, William A.
Clews, William F.
Cloake, May J.
Clifton, Robert V.
Clulow, Edmund F.
Cochrane, William J.
Coch, Doreen H.
Cocking, John N. P.
Coe, Teresa
Coffey, Joseph J.
Colahan, Frances
Colahan, John T.
Cole, Thomas
Coles, Russell
Collier, Robert
Collins, Alice M.
Collins, Hilary H.
Collins, Maurice
Collins, Nelson
Collins, Patrick
Collins, Thomas W.
Collins, Thomas
Condie, Violet V.
Condon, Maurice M.
Condrin, Charles P.
Connelly, Beryl G.
Conochie, Allan F.
Cook, Colin R.
Cooke, Arthur W.
Cooke, Ruby A.
Cooke, Wesley J.
Coombs, Arthur E.
Coombs, Henry W.
Cooper, Henry C.
Cope, Charles A.
Corbett, lan L.
Corelli, Ronald
Cohlan, Arthur
Coemac, Mabel J.
Cosgrove, Henry C.
Costin, Adrian M.
Cott, Amos B.
Cottam, Frank
Cotton, Dulcie J.
Cotton, Philip
Cowen, Denzil L.
Cowled, James H.
Cowling, Cyril H.
Cramer, Roland R.
Crane, Joseph C.
Cranitcii, Matthew
Crawford, Lillian V.
Crawford, Reginald W.
Crawford, Ronald J.
Ceipps, Sidney
Croaker, Gloria O.
Crockee, Harold
Crompton, Walter J.
Crow, Edward
Cbuikshank, Edward


Cuddihy, James J.
Cullen, John A.
Cullen, Lorraine
Cunningham, Leslie A.
Cunningham, Robert I.
Curll, Francis
Curean, June
Currell, George J.
Curhen, Philip R.
Currie, John '
Currie, Norman J.
Curwen, Dudley
Cushing, Ronald
Cutmore, Munro A.
Cutmore, Norman S.
Cutmore, Vernon D.
Dale, William T.
Daloleish, George L.
Dalgleish, John F.
Dai.t, Leslie J.
Daniels, John J.
Daniells, Richard.
Darlington, Thomas G.
Daeragh, Hugh
Davidson, Alan
Davidson, Kenneth J.
Davidson, Thomas B.
Davidson, Willie L.
Davies, David E.
Davies, David L.
Davies, John H.
Davis, Evelyn C.
Davis, George A.
Davis, John
Dawson, Ernest L.
Day, Dorothy D.
Day, Allen
Day, Mary J.
Deegan, Laurence
Deering, Albert
De La Cruz, John P.
Delahaye, Lucien H.
Dempster, John D.
Detane, Cornelius
Devine, Isabel E.
Devlin, Edward
Dicconson, Stanley W.
Dick, Graham S.
Dickson, Bertram B.
Dickson, Emily
Dillon, Francis P.
Dillon, Hugh
Dikon, Alexander A.
Dobby, Jack
Dobson, Douglas J. W.
Dodson, Richard G.
Doessel, Ellwyn V.
Dolan, Henry
Donald, James
Doneley, John T.
Donnelly, William
Donlen, Edward
Donovan, Joseph
Doran, Elizabeth A. R.
Dougan, Ernest J.
Dougherty, R.
Douglas, Fred.
Dower, Michael
Downie, John C.
Doyle, Alfred H.
Doyle, John L.
Doyle, Joseph
Dower, Eileen A. M.
Drake, Lex.
Drew, George
Drysdale, Robert
Dumayne, Arthur
Duncan, Hector E.
Duncan, William
Dunham, Edward A.
Dunleavy, Joseph
Dunleavy, Maxwell J.
Dunlop, Andrew
Dunn, Robert B.
Dunn, Walter
Dunne, Charles P.
Dux, George E.
Dwyer, Robert M.
Dwyer, Colin J.
Dyer, Gail L.
Eadie, Frank N.
Easton, Arthur F.
Easterby, Lionel F. A.
Eaton, Harold M.
Eaton, James
Eaton, John S.
Eaton, Lester T.
Eckersley, Kevin
Eddington, Thomas
Edgar, George W.
Edwards, Colin W. J.
Edwards, John H.
Edgar, Henry T.
Egan, Dennis J.
Eklund, Berenice C.
Ellis, Timothy
Elliott, Edward
Elliott, Richmond
Ellis, Albert B.
Ellis, Bartholomew B.
Ellsmore, Percy
Ellwood, Clifford A.
Elmes, Malcolm J.
Emzin, Charles W.
England, William V.
Erikson, Myra J.
Estall, Amy
Etherington, James R.
Evans, Aubrey C.
Evans, Betty
Evans, David O.
Eyre, John N.
Ewin, Ernest W.
Fabricato, Michael J.
Fahy, Edward J.
Fanning, Laura M.
Farley, Reginald A.
Farley, Thomas J.
Farrell, Thomas D.
Fedrick, Edward G.
Fenton, Robert
Ferguson, R. William
Fernan, Robert L.
Ferry, Marjorie M.
Few, Frederick
Fiedler, Joseph D.
Fiedler, Joseph F.
Fielding, William H.
Filey, Tom
Finch, Richard
Finlay, Barbara M.
Finlayson, Doris
Fisher, Victor
Fitchett, George
Fitzgibbons, John
Fitzoibbon, Joseph J.
Flaherty, Leonard
Flanagan, Frederick W.
Fleming, Shirley P.
Fletcher, Archibald
Foley, Cornelius E.
Ford, Charles J.
Forsyth, Joan M.
Foster, Frank E.
Foster, Sidney
Poxwell, Arthur W.
Francis, Reginald D.
Fraser, Robin
Prawley, Brian C.
French, Andrew J.
Freney, Patrick
French, James R.
Fulton, Sidney E.
Purnell, James H.
Gadd, Almon M.
Gaffney, David
Gagen, Lloyd G.
Gaileb, Benjamin F.
Gallagher, Benjamin D.
Gallagher, John R.
Ganley, Patrick J.
Gardiner, William O.
Gardner, Alan H.
Gardner, James C.
Garland, Herbert
Garner, Ray M.
Garnham, Kenneth D.
Garry, Kenneth J.
Garsden, Henry S.
Gaude, Erik G.
Gauvin, Louis H.
Gavenlock, Francis J.
Geck, Frederick A.
Geheman, Ernest B.
George, Dudley
George, James
Georoouhas, George
Gibson, Roy G.
Gilbert, Charles E,
Gilbert, Ronald S.
Gilby, Malcolm G.
Gilchrist, Audrey W.
Giles, Charles
Giles, Colin W.
Gill, Albert
Gilland, Walter R.
Gillespie, Roy
Gilliland, John R.
Gillim, Albert E.
Gilmore, William P.
Ginn, Guilford H.
Ginns, Daphne N.
Glass, William S.
Gloster, Susanne V.
Glover, Joseph T.
Goddard, Anthony
Godfrey, Charles
Godfrey, Kevin J.
Godfrey, Lawrence G.
Goldino, Morris
Gomehsall, Robert C.
Goodino, Bertrude J.
Goodwin, Francis
Gooding, George H.
Goodwin, Samuel
Goodyear, Robert G.
Gordon, William C.
Gorman, Patrick J.
Goss, Arthur H.
Gough, Sidney A.
Gould, Thomas J.
Gourgaud, Ernest
Govan, John
Gowans, Joan
Gower, Ernest S.
Graham, Archibald C.
Graham, Charles J.
Graham, Coral
Graham, John
Graham, Lancelot F.
Graham, Owen D.
Graham, Stanley J.
Graham, Sydney W.
Graham, Walter S.
Ghalton, Austin S.
Gray, Francis G.
Greaves, Oliver
Green, Daniel
Green, Gilbert H.
Green, Hedley W.
Green, Henry E.
Green, Irene L.
Green, William H.
Greenham, Henry J.
Greenleaf, Prank
Greenough, Walter C.
Cribble, James L.
Griffin, Thomas J.
Griffith, Kenneth L.
Griffiths, Mona
Grimley, Frederick E.
Grimwade, Edward R.
Grogan, David J.
Gumley, Franklin
Gunterman, Heinrich
HjOjdock, Albert C.
Haffenden, Stanley J.
Hagan, Patricia L.
Haines, Edward J.
Hall, Alfred W.
Hall, Henry G.
Hall, Henry W.
Hall, Sylvester N.
Hallam, Albert E.
Halliwell, Ronald A.
Hally, Edward J.
Hamilton, Anne
Hamilton, Gilbert
Hamlet, Cecil S.
Hamson, Francis C.
Handley', Ellen
Hanlon, William L.
Hansen, Colin W.
Hansen, Fay L.
Hansen, John A.
Hanson, George J.
Harding, Francis E.
Harding, Silas
Harding, William G.
Hardwick, Baden E.
Hardy, Clifford E.
Hardy, Mercia A.
Harper, George A.
Harper, William G.
Harris, Elfie C.
Harris, James
Harris, Joseph T.
Harris, P. Samuel
Harrison, Dudley C.
Harrison, George A.
Harrington, John K.
Harvey, Jasper J. (Jnr.)
Hastings, Alexander
Hastings, Clive M.
Hastings, James
CIVILIAN PERSONNEL —Continued


Havens, Amy May
Hawkins, Ena
Hay, John S.
Hay, Peter W.
Hay, Roderick
Hay, Victor Thomas
Hayes, John E.
Hayes, Thomas H.
Haynes, E. W.
Heaps, Thomas H.
Hearnes, Vincent J.
Hearsch, Joseph
Hebbard, William J.
Hedley, Harry J.
Heenan, Percival A.
Hefferman, John M.
Heilbronn, Charles A.
Helner, Maurice H. C.
Heke, Frank
Hendry, Alexander B.
Henry, Richard
Herlihan, James T.
Henderson, Andrew
Henderson, Percy M.
Hendy, Albert W.
Henneberry, Albert
Henneberry, Keith A.
Hennessey, Francis
Hepton, Albert
Herd, Thomas
Hill, Aubrey
Hill, Lawrence R.
Hines, Leo D.
Hixon, William B.
Hockings, Arthur O. J.
Hockinos, Leslie A.
Hodel, Ella L. D. (Mrs.)
Hoffman, Albert C.
Hoile, Arthur J.
Holmes, Rene M.
Holmes, Elsie J.
Holness, Herbert V.
Holohan, Maurice
Honan, Vincent J.
Hood, John
Hood, John R.
Hood, Ralph D.
Hood, Raymond M.
Hooper, Albert W. H.
Hopkinson, Albert R.
Horan, Stanley Herbert
Hordern, Cecil C.
Horn, Jacob
Horton, John R.
Houghton, Ernest H.
Howard, George E.
Howarth, Benjamin F.
Howarth, Benjamin J.
Howarth, Gilbert J.
Howlett, James P.
Hughes, Albert L.
Hughes, James W.
Hughes, Ronald G.
Hughes, William M.
Hulcombe, George S.
Hunter, Jane V.
Hutchings, Gladys T.
Hunter, Norman
Hutchinson, April S.
Hyland, Morris W.
Hynch, Thomas H.
Ikin, Harry T.
Iredale, Tom G. W.
Itzstein, Malcolm J.
Jack, William H.
Jackson, Howard M.
Jackson, William H.
Jager, Jack
James, Harold
James, Lester T. L.
Jarvie, Alexander J.
Jarvis, Leslie G.
Jefpcoat, Esmond S.
Jeffrey, Charles S.
Jeffrey, Zebulon
Jeffries, William
Jennings, George E.
Jeppesen, Frederick
Johnson, Edmund H.
Johnson, Hugh
Johnson, Harold G.
Johnson, James D.
Johnson, Margaret B.
Johnson, Rene
Johnston, Alexander H. T.
Johnston, Clarence S.
Johnston, Charlie E.
Johnston, Elizabeth F.
Johnston, Herbert K.
Johnston, Thos.
Johnstone, James
Johnstone, John F.
Johnstone, Richard
Johnston, William B.
Jones, Benjamin
Jones, Nora
Jones, Thomas
Jones, Walter
Jorgensen, Kerrod V.
Joss, Ronald S.
Jowett, Alfred J. N.
Just, Leonard M.
Kadel, Walter R.
Karrasch, J. G.
Keane, Denis A.
Keary, Andrew
Keats, Richard
Kehm, Ernest H.
Kelly, Mary P.
Kelly, Vivienne J.
Kelly, William J.
Kemp, Thomas E.
Kendall, Henry P.
Kendrick, Ernest
Kennedy, Ed. V.
Kennedy, Joan M.
Kennedy, Mary
Kennedy, Thomas
Kenny, John J.
Kent, Kevin
Kent, Samuel C.
Kenyon, Charles J.
Ketchion, James A. E.
Khan, Dawson
Kibble, Elsie M.
Kiepe, Charles H.
King, James E.
King, Noel
Kino, Richard
Kirby, Edward
Kirkpatrick, John
Kitchener, Adelaide
Kleinhans, Malcolm W.
Koch, Betty L.
Kohler, Louis
Kooymans, Henry
Kreutzer, Laurence J.
Krome, Eric J.
Kropp, Sevan E.
Laing, Jean
Lake, Frederick
Lake, George K.
Lake, Neville G.
Lamb, Leslie C.
Lambert, Martin
Lambert, Stephen H.
La vc, William
Langley, Charles
Langley, Earle W.
Larkin, Gloria M.
Larkin, Patrick T.
Larkin, Thomas A.
Larsen, Edward M.
Larsen, Gilbert
Larsen, Moreton A.
Lauder, Chas. R.
Lawler, Francis J.
Lawlor, Gordon E.
Lawson, John
Lawson, Joseph
Lawson, Katherine E.
Lawton, Charles
Laxton, Robert A.
Laxton, Thomas D.
Leach, Denis
Leacock, Alexander
Lear, Cyril W.
Leather, Raymond N.
Lee, Jack M.
Leigh, Keith
Leigh, Percy W.
Leigh, Thomas C.
Leisegang, Walter V.
Lenihan, Mary A.
Leonard, Ruth
Leonard, Joseph M.
Lent, William S.
Leslie, Horace L.
Levitt, Sydney
Lewis, Eric
Lewis, John M.
Lewis, Stanley N.
Lewis, Wilfred A.
Lewis, William J.
Ley, Charles D.
Liddle, Harry
Liddy, Melda M.
Lindsey, Gordon
Linton-Cobb, Walter
Little, Frederick G.
Livermore, Douglas
Lobegeiger, Colin
Lobston, Louis E.
Locker, Leonard
Logan, Flora
Logan, Thomas E.
Long, Herbert C.
Long, Victor A.
Lorraine, Arthur
Lovell, Maurice
Lowe, Bertie C.
Lowe, Norman F.
Lowjen, Stanley
Lowrey, Francis G.
Luby, Patrick J.
Lucas, Reginald A.
Lutvey, Nudrah E.
Ltitzow, George A.
Lymbery, Jesse W.
Lynam, Patrick
Lyons, Austin J.
Lythall, Arthur H.
McAuliffe, Cornelius K.
McCallum, Jeffery
MoCallum, Nigel R.
McClurg, William J.
McCorkell, Gilmour
McCormack, Charles D.
McCracken, Muriel E.
McCbeath, Raymond
McCulloch, David
McDonald, Albert
McDonald, Dorothy L.
McDonald, Edward
McDonald, Edward F.
McDonald, Hugh
MacDonald, Oscar J.
McDonald, William E.
McDonnell, Kevin A.
MoEnery, Thomas P.
McFarlane, David S.
McFarlane, Sidney N.
McFee, Stewart P.
McGill, James C.
McGill, John Me A.
McGrath, Desmond J.
McGuire, Owen A.
McHugh, Francis D.
Mclnerney, Michael
Mclntyre, Francis R.
Mclntyre, Jas. C.
Mclver, Florence
McKay, James L.
McKay, Jas. McAl.
McKay, Kenneth H.
McKee, Harold C.
McKeering, Eric J.
Mackenzie, Elsie
Mackenzie, Evan J.
McKenzie, Hector R.
McKenzie, Percy J.
McKeown, James P.
McKinley, Charles
McKinnon, Noel Amos
McLachlan, Leslie J.
McLean, Donald G.
Mac Lean, Gordon R.
McLean, Keith L.
McLean, Thomas J.
McLennan, Allan Cameron
McLeod, Clarence R.
McManus, Patrick
McMahon, Lawrence J.
McMahon, Leo J.
McMillan, Keith
McNeil, Mary
McPhail, Francis
McPhail, John K.
McPhee, James A.
McPherson, John C.
McQuillan, Charles
Macrae, Adam A.
McSw'eeney, Rita
Mclnerney, Michael
McWilliam, Thomas H. F.
Mackay, Kevin
Madden, Patrick F.
Maddock, Russell H.
Maddox, James D.
Maike, Robert E.
Male, John W.
Male, Joseph N.
Malone, Leslie P.
Maloney, William J.
CIVILIAN PERSONNEL —Continued


Malouf, Michael
Maltman, William
Manfield, Walter W.
Manley, Cecil F.
Manthey, Joseph F.
Marks, Marie
Marsden, William A. E.
Marsh, Edward A.
Marshall, Joycelyn
Marshall, William G.
Martin, Ethel M.
Martin, Horace G.
Maslen, James
Mason, Albert H.
Mason, Denis J.
Mason, Walter
Mathers, George A.
Maunsell, Ed. M.
Mayor, Harry A.
Maxwell, Henry
Mayers, Henry J,
Maynard, Walter E.
Mayos, Frederick W.
Mead, Walter R.
Mee, William J.
Mehonoshen, Jno.
Meikle, Eileen E.
Mellor, Martin H.
Melvold, Reynold J.
Merlehan, Alexander
Merritt, Henry
Meyer, Thelma J.
Michael, Neil G.
Middleton, Clifford P.
Middleton, Bruce
Middleton, George
Miles, Percy T.
Miles, William A.
Miller, Arthur W.
Milligan, George E.
Milliner, John
Mills, Albert
Mills, Harry E.
Mills, John W.
Mills, Joseph W.
Milne, Charles S.
Milne, George N.
Minshull, Herbert A.
Miscampbell, Archie
Mitchell, Cecil
Mitchell, William A.
Mitchelson, Douglas V. A
Moase, William E.
Moffat, Merle
Mogg, William E.
Moisey, John J.
Moleas, Jordan
Moloney, Ronald J.
Moltmann, Mervyn W.
Monaghan, John P.
Monahan, Albert M.
Montgomery, Robert F.
Moodie, John
Moore, Cyril J.
Moore, John G.
Moore, Kenneth
Moore, May
Moore, Ronald V.
Moorehouse, Martin L.
Morgan, Albert E.
Morgan, Edward E.
Morgan, Trevor L.
Morris, Donald G.
Morton, Walker C.
Moss, Leah F.
Moss, Reginald E.
Mott, George T.
Moy, Alfred
Muir, Douglas C.
Muir, William A.
Mulder, Thomas
Mullavey, Ella M.
Mullen, Harold J.
Muller, Keith
Mullins, James P.
Munro, Alex John
Munro, James K.
Munro, William S.
Munt, James J.
Murdoch, James
Murphy, Charles T.
Murphy, Patrick S.
Murray, Charles H.
Murray, Doreen J.
Murray, Jas.
Murtagh, William P.
Musgrave, Bert C.
Mutton, David William
Myers, Desmond N.
Nantes, Theo H.
Nash, Charles H.
Nash, Stanley G.
Nasmyth, Leonard C.
Nation, Thomas R.
Neill, James
Neilson, Arnold T.
Nelson, Kenneth L.
Neish, Rhelma (Mrs.)
Neumann, Joseph F.
Neville, Leslie E.
Nevin, Francis M.
Newbold, James
Nichols, Stanley L.
Nichols, Stanley
Nicholsen, Joe
Nicholls, Mavis E.
Nightingale, Doreen M.
Nightingale, Henry John
Nissen, Jean
Nixon, Arthur
Noreiks, Neville
Norris, Donald A.
North, Frank
Noyes, Arthur C.
Nunn, Gilbert J.
Oberhardt, Valerie M.
Obebthur, William
O’Brien, Joseph P.
O’Brien, Mark J.
O’Brien, Rupert L.
O’Brien, Vincent G.
O’Connell, Charles
O’Connor, John
O’Connor, Michael
O’Donnell, Victor F.
Ogden, Albert T,
O’Gorman, Herbert S.
O’Grady, Ronald A.
O’Hagan, Patrick
O’Kane, George B.
Oliver, Erin J.
Olsen, Gloria M.
Olson, Peter J.
O’Neil, Jessie A.
O’Rourke, Maurice J.
Orr, Robert L.
O’Sullivan, Timothy E.
Ottaway, Reginald
Outten, Henry J.
Ovens, James M.
Owen, Charles N.
Owen, Harry
Padget, Eric B.
Page, Charles E.
Page, Douglas O.
Page, Ernest
Page, Thelma M.
Parker, George S.
Parker, Thomas
Parkinson, Jessie
Parks, George S.
Pascoe, Betty M.
Paton, George
Patterson, Frank
Patterson, Raymond L.
Payne, Frank A.
Payne, Thomas G.
Pears, George
Pearson, Leonard J.
Pedersen, David A.
Pelting, Albert C.
Pembroke, Doris Ella
Pemboke, Leslie J.
Penderoast, Albert C.
Pendergast, Keith B.
Peppler, Ronald L.
Percival, William G.
Peterie, John L.
Petersen, Alfred
Petersen, Hans L.
Petersen, William
Petterson, Ferdinand
Pettigrew, Margaret J.
Phillips, Gertrude
Phillips, John H.
Pickard, Walter J.
Pickering, Edwin J.
Pierce, Frederick
Pierce, Lucy M.
Pierce, Russell H.
Platt, Arthur J.
Platt, Eric
Poacher, Charles
Poacher, Harry W.
Podlick, Norman A.
Pollock, Robert (Jnr.)
Pool, Mervyn C.
Porter, Christopher
Porter, Leslie
Porter, Matthew
Post, Thomas
Powell, Lance I,
Power, Thomas M.
Pownall, Ralph
Poynting, James B.
Prackert, Percy C.
Pring, Harry W.
Pritchard, Ernest C.
Pbotheroe, Sydney D.
Provost, Lachlan D.
Punter, Edward W.
Purkiss, Ellen M.
Quane, Letty M.
Radtke, William H.
Rafferty, Clementine B.
Ralph, Charles L.
Ramsay, Robert B.
Randall, Alfred H.
Rauchle, Mervyn C.
Rebebgeh, Gerald F.
Reed, Alan
Reed, Frederick
Reed, Thomas F.
Reid, Harry A.
Reiken, Leslie C.
Rennie, William
Retschlag, Harold
Revis, William A.
Reyment, Noel R.
Rickards, Percival
Richardson, Albert
Richardson, Ellen M.
Riddel, Robert
Riddle, Joseph
Riddle, William
Ridgway, Raymond F.
Rigby, James H.
Rigby, Stanley J.
Risen, Esther G.
Ritchie, John D.
Ritchie, Owen K.
Roberts, Cecil S.
Roberts, Thomas J.
Robertson, James (a)
Robertson, James (b)
Robertson, Marion
Robinson, David
Robinson, James F.
Robinson, John H.
Robinson, Leslie A.
Robinson, Percival J.
Robinson, Rene
Robinson, William R.
Roche, Thomas
Roessley, Harry A.
Rogers, Josephine C.
Rogers, William G.
Rohan, John J.
Rolfe, Henry L.
Rolfe, Herbert S.
Rollinson, John
Rooney, Alan J.
Rose, Albert J.
Rosin, Ashley G.
Ross, Allan C.
Ross, Annie C.
Ross, Maude D.
Rothwell, Harold
Rowe, Irene M.
Rowntree, John J.
Russell, Charles W.
Russell, Harry W.
Russell, Maurice
Ruutz, Duncan
Ryan, Brendan J.
Ryan, Daniel J.
Rycroft, William
Rye, William G.
Sadlier, Herbert R.
Sage, Norman
Salmon, Alfred A.
Salmon, Rodney
Sancho, Demetrio
Sargent, Bertram H.
Scanlan, Norman
Scells, Edna E. M.
Schleusfner, Haidee
Schlort, Douglas W.
Schoeck, Frank .
Schultz, Edward H.
Schumann, Stanley L.
Schwede, Douglas T.
Scopes, Albert G.
Scott, Bernard J.
CIVILIAN PERSONNEL —Continued


Scott, Marjorie M.
Scowen, Joseph J.
Scruton, William H.
Sharpe, Robert R.
Sewell, Reginald C.
Semmens, W. Henry
Sharpe, Robert G.
Sharpen, William F.
Shaw, Jack S.
S heard, Beryl M.
Sheard, William H.
Sheeht, Sydney T.
Sheehy, Walter R.
Shelper, Thomas
Sheppard, Brian C.
Sheppard, Mavis J.
Shergold, William J.
Shoobridge, Edwin
Silk, Thomas
Simpkins, George
Simpson, Thomas S.
Simpson, Victor F.
Simpson, William H.
Sims, Lester M.
Sinclair, Dudley E.
Skinner, William
Slack, William S.
Slade, Alfred
Small, Stanley J. W.
Smiley, Ernie J.
Smith, Alphonsus
Smith, Colin H.
Smith, David A.
Smith, Edward G.
Smith, Elizabeth S.
Smith, Frederick R.
Smith, Harry G.
Smith, John L.
Smith, Keith A.
Smith, Leslie G.
Smith, Matthew E.
Smith, Robert C.
Smith, Roy W.
Smith, Sydney P.
Smith, Thomas
Smith, Thomas A.
Snee, James
Sondergard, David
Sorensen, Charles H.
Sorrensen, William A.
Southerden, Theodore
Souvlis, Constantine
Spence, James M.
Spink, Thos. C.
Spratt, Cyril
Sprengee, Eric L.
Sproule, John J.
Spur way, Benjamin
Stacey, Thomas J.
Stage, Charles H.
Standish, Eric A.
Stanley, Austin
Stanley, Yvonne
Staples, Loreley K.
Stebbings, William F.
Steel, Frederick N.
Steele, John
Steer, Kenneth
Stein, Albert
Stephens, John
Stehry, Thomas N.
Stephens, Frank
Stephensen, Gladys
Stevens, Thomas A.
Stewart, Charles J.
Stewart, Colin
Stewart, Donald
Stewart, Keith D.
Stichbury, Harold A.
St. John, Leonard
Stone, Margaret
Stott, Albert E.
Stracey, Eric
Stroyan, Harold G.
Strutt, Stanley E.
Stuart, John S.
Sullivan, Jeannie
Sullivan, Laurance F.
Sullivan, Patrick
Sutcliffe, George W. J.
Sutton, George
Sutherland, Oliver J.
Svensen, Oscar J.
Switzer, Robert C.
Talbot, James E.
Tanner, Albert E.
Tanner, Ambrose G.
Tanner, Joseph J.
Tannock, Sydney
Tansey, George H.
Tanwan, Edward
Taylor, Andrew
Taylor, George E.
Taylor, Herbert J.
Taylor, John B.
Taylor, Leonard
Taylor, Ross
Taylor, Stanley J.
Tchuein, Peter J.
Telfee, Alexander
Temple, Earl
Templeton, Gilbert J.
Tessman, Frederick E.
Tew, Arthur H.
Thatcher, John A.
Thiele, George
Therkelsen, George B.
Thomas, Ernest H.
Thomas, Kevin E.
Thomas, Norman L.
Thomas, Sydney G.
Thomas, Vera
Thompson, Maurice R.
Thompson, Joseph S.
Thompson, Ralph J.
Thompson, William F. G.
Thomson, Archibald
Thomson, Jane
Thomson, William J.
Thorn, Alexander S.
Thornton, Harry W.
Thorpe, L. H.
Thrush, Rowland G.
Tomlinson, David M. G.
Tomlinson, James
Toomey, Patrick T.
Tootill, Richard H.
Topley, John W.
Tovell, Timothy W.
Towers, Hazel
Treloar, Henry C.
Trevethan, Walter
Trim, William F.
Trinkoon, Thomas J.
Trower, Gordon A.
Tucker, David
Turpin, Robert
Turner, Reginald
Unwin, Benjamin H.
Valentine, Frank W.
Vandenbeeg, Conway G.
Varley, Claude R. G.
Vaughan, Reginald L.
Venamore, Rowland E.
Verner, Alfred J.
Vicary, William A.
Vickers, Alfred
Vickers, Norman E. G.
Vines, Roy J.
Volker, Victor
Von Senden, Alfred L.
Waddell, John
Waddell, William
Walker, Beryl J.
Walker, Dudley D.
Walker, Robert G.
Walker, William
Wall, Egbert H.
Wallace, Douglas
Wallace, Rowland
Walmsley, Adam E.
Walters, Ernest F.
Walters, George
Walters, Frederick G.
Wands, Alexander
Wands, Robert
Wanless, Raymond A.
Wanless, Thomas Walker
Ward, Frank J.
Wardrop, Robert A.
Warlow, Stanley D.
Warner, Lloyd G.
Warren, Reginald W.
Waterhouse, Charles A.
Waters, Marjorie C.
Watson, George F.
Watson, Rubina M.
Watson, Kenneth N.
Watts, Harry C.
Wayne, William
Webb, Hugh G.
Welch, Albert E.
Welch, Aubrey C.
Wells, Clive
Wells, William
West, Tom
West, William A.
Wharton, Leslie J.
Whear, Edward T.
Wheatley, William H.
Wheeler, Frank
Wheeler, Morris W.
Whitby, Lionel J.
White, Alfred A.
White, Frederick J.
White, Gordon V.
White, Paul
Whiteford, Sydney
Whitmee, lan S.
Whyte, Thomas J.
Wicks, David J.
Wiggins, Harold L.
Williams, Adrian
Williams, Arthur G.
Williams, Edward L.
Williams, Joan N.
Williams, Keppel C.
Williams, Reginald
Williams, Reuben W.
Williams, William
Williamson, Ronald G.
Wilmot, Hubert E.
Wilmot, James R.
Wilson, George L. M.
Winter, Heather
Winter, Margaret K.
Winter, Reginald J.
Winzar, Frank W.
Wolfe, Elijah
Wood, Albert W.
Woodbine, Owen B.
Woodman, Walter R.
Woodroffe, Harold B.
Woodrow, Clifford A.
Woodrow, Morris A.
Woodward, Harold V.
Woods, Harold B.
Woolgar, Jack B.
Wrafter, Denis P.
Wren, Christopher
Wright, Roy H. L.
Wright, William H.
Wynn, Samuel T. W.
Young, Alexander
Young, George B. J.
Youngson, William S.
Yow, Charlie H.
Yum, Gregory W.
Zahner, Albert H.
Zielke, George R.
WILLIAM K. EVANS,
Ist Lt. Air Corps,
Civilian Personnel Officer.
CIVILIAN PERSONNEL —Continued


Autographs


<tAutographs


<tAutographs


<tAutographs


£Autographs
