

THESE
HUNDRED
YEARS






THESE
HUNDRED
YEARS


This is a success story.
It is the story of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited, of Adelaide,
South Australia, and its Associated Companies in Australia
AND OVERSEAS
In ONE HUNDRED YEARS, AS WILL BE SEEN, G. & R. WILLS & Co. LIMITED
HAS TRAVELLED FAR FROM SMALL BEGINNINGS.




These
HUNDRED YEARS
THE STORY OF G. & R. WILLS & CO. LIMITED
DURING ITS FIRST CENTURY
1849-1949




CONTENTS
I
ALL OVER THE WORLD
n
CHANGING METHODS
m
SERVING AUSTRALIA
IV
FROM ADELAIDE TO LONDON
V
IN “THE WEST”
VI
FROM SAIL TO STEAM
VII
LONG SERVICE




I
ALL OVER THE WORLD
The centenary of g. & r. wills & co. limited this year sets the seal on a
• I » record of development which can have had few parallels in the history of
I commercial enterprise.
Many successful companies have started in London and subsequently extended their
activities to Australia and other parts of the world. To G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited
belongs the distinction of having reversed this familiar process.
From Adelaide, South Australia, the firm has spread not only throughout Australia
but also to England. The Adelaide business of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited has been
the parent of a world-wide trading and shipping organisation.
Principal members of the family are: —
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited, in Australia
Wholesale Softgoods Distributors and Manufacturers
George Wills & Co. Limited, in Australia
Shipping Agents and Merchants
George Wills & Sons Limited, in England
Buying Agents and Merchants
George Wills & Sons (Inc.), in the United States
Buying Agents and Merchants
George Wills & Sons (India) Limited, in India
Buying Agents and Merchants
It is fascinating to trace the development of the Wills Companies, to see how one new
concern after another has sprung from the original business. It is all the more fasci-


nating when it is remembered that the whole enterprise began in a Rundle Street shack,
stocked with the small supply of goods the brothers George and Richard Wills brought
with them from England in sailing ships 100 years ago.
George and Richard Wills arrived in Adelaide from Devon in 1849, established the
firm of G. &R. Wills & Co., importers and wholesale softgoods warehousemen. It was
in 1858, less than 10 years later, that the partners set the business on its future course
by opening their own buying organisation at the London end. This business was
launched under the direct control of Mr. George Wills, who returned to England
for the purpose.
Establishment of the London organisation was followed by expansion within Aus-
tralia. A branch was opened at Fremantle, Western Australia, in 1866. Branches
at Kalgoorlie (Western Australia), Broken Hill (New South Wales), and Melbourne
(Victoria) followed.
In Adelaide, G. & R. Wills & Co. developed to such an extent that in 1881 its shipping
department was formed into a separate firm, as George Wills & Co. This firm —now
George Wills & Co. Limited —has become one of Australia’s most important shipping
agencies.
The next big move came in 1913, when the London organisation, which had been
handling business for both G. & R. Wills & Co. and George Wills & Co., was formed
into a separate concern as George Wills & Sons Limited, a company conducting both
export and import business, with a world-wide field of trade. All classes of goods
are handled by a firm which links England with the Far East, Australia, New Zealand,
South Africa, the West Indies, South America and the United States.
In this same year, 1913, G. & R. Wills & Co. and George Wills & Co., in Adelaide,
were converted into private limited companies.
Besides members of the founding family over three generations, many other able
businessmen have helped in the establishment of the wide-flung Wills organisation.
But a point of major interest is that the active Wills connection has been maintained
throughout. Mr. George Wills, in England, lived until 1906. Three grandsons are
now on the Board of George Wills & Sons Limited, and a fourth, Mr. G. P. Wills, is
Manager of Wills, Gilchrist & Sanderson Pty. Limited, Brisbane.
Mr. Richard Wills, the joint founder, who remained in Adelaide to supervise Aus-
tralian interests when Mr. George Wills went to England, died in 1862, aged only 33.
His son, Mr. Richard J. H. Wills, later entered the Adelaide business, and in the last
years of his life, 1900/1901, was managing partner of George Wills & Co.


Mr. K. A. Wills, son of Mr. R. J. H. Wills, and grandson of the joint founder, is
present chairman of the board of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited.
And now, in this centenary year, the fourth generation of the Wills family is
entering the employment of the Wills organisation in Australia. The newcomer is
Mr. W. J. A. Wills, a great-grandson of the original Richard Wills, and a son of the
present chairman.
Vision and boldness went into the planning and creation of the Wills undertakings.
Vision and boldness have reaped their reward. Leaving aside the world-wide turnover
of George Wills & Sons Limited, it is enough to mention that G. & R. Wills & Co.
Limited and George Wills & Co. Limited to-day handle nearly £7,000,000 worth of
business a year in Australia alone.
And the old spirit of enterprise persists. Since the second World War, G. & R. Wills
& Co. Limited, foundation member of the whole great organisation, has opened a new
branch at Singapore with a manager and a staff of seven. This branch is handling
import business into Malaya, Burma and Siam from England, Australia and the United
States.
In November, 1946, the Company was registered as a Public Limited Company and
its shares were listed by the Stock Exchange of Adelaide. To-day the Company has
about 1,000 shareholders resident in all States of the Commonwealth, in New Zea-
land, the United Kingdom and other countries.
The broad outline given above is a necessary preliminary to more detailed consid-
eration of the growth and progress of the Wills organisation, component by component.
Starting-point for this is, of course, the 100-year-old firm of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited.




M
CHANGING METHODS
For the first 60 years or more, the business of G. & R. Wills & Co. expanded
naturally and steadily, growing in pace with the growth of South Australia.
But by 1913 it was becoming apparent that changing conditions would require
new methods.
At this stage Australia’s national economy was far less balanced than it is to-day.
The nation was still almost wholly concerned with the production of wool, wheat and
other primary products for export. - There were few substantial manufacturing indus-
tries. Because of this, G. & R. Wills & Co., like other wholesale softgoods ware-
housemen, depended almost entirely on overseas supplies for their stocks.
But importation meant large and irregular shipments of goods—mainly from the
United Kingdom—and an uneconomic rate of turnover. At the same time, there were
signs of increasing interest in the possibility of establishing or extending secondary
industries in Australia. And the slow but ever-spreading development of rural areas,
particularly in the territorially larger States such as South Australia and Western
Australia, meant there were many calls for financial assistance to tide over country
storekeepers and settlers. In the case of country storekeepers, at all events, this
support came in the main from the wholesale softgoodsmen, grocers and hardware
merchants.
These factors had a cumulative effect which was to be sharply felt when the
depression hit Australia.
Throughout the first World War there was no effective form of price control in
either Australia or the manufacturing countries. As a result, the end of the post-war


boom period and beginning of the depression found importers holding huge stocks of
goods at inflated prices. It was obvious that any further decline in world trade could
mean ruin for the Australian wholesaler, whose resources were already strained, and
that some change of policy had become essential.
By now Australia’s manufacturing industries were growing healthily, under new
protective tariffs. Directors of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited were quick to appraise
the situation. They realised that Australian factory products would reduce the market
for imported goods, that the old system of handling large, slow-moving stocks would
have to give way to quicker service and turnover.
From 1928 G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited based operations on the new principle.
Distribution of goods for selected Australian manufacturers, as well as overseas
manufacturers, on an agency basis, was undertaken. And as time went on, the com-
pany entered the manufacturing side of business on its own account, producing milli-
nery, furnishings, shirts, pyjamas, women’s wear, and other lines.
This far-sighted policy proved of first importance in assisting G. & R. Wills & Co.
Limited to weather the depression, which was disastrous to many of the firm’s com-
petitors. It is noteworthy that many country storekeepers—and farmers, too —were
helped through this period by the generous treatment they received from a business
which was encountering serious difficulties itself.
The years 1936 to 1939 found G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited making steady profits
from its warehousing, manufacturing, and agency businesses. During the second
World War effective price control, although it produced many minor difficulties,
enabled the company to maintain steady if reduced rates of gross profit.
All in all, G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited emerged from the war in an even more
stable position than before, and well equipped to make the further progress which
has since been recorded.






111
SERVING AUSTRALIA
IN the wholesale field the Company’s activities convincingly demonstrate that the
middleman still has an indispensable place in the general structure of trade and
business.
The wholesaler provides the most effective means of channelling goods from
manufacturer to retailer. The wholesaler keeps in touch with manufacturers’ pro-
duction programmes on the one hand, and with retailers’ seasonal requirements on
the other.
In effect, wholesalers become stock-holders for manufacturers. By accepting full
responsibility for the enormous task of distribution to the thousands of individual
retailers in city and country, they simplify what would otherwise be an extremely
complex, slow and wasteful process. And in the wholesaler’s showrooms the retailer
can see a great variety of merchandise which no other system could bring to him
under one roof.
But this, as already shown, is by no means the full measure of the activities of
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited, or the full measure of the Company’s value in service
to the community.
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited has played an important part in rural development
in South Australia and Western Australia. And the firm now, in conjunction with
George Wills & Co. Limited, is doing its share to meet the expressed desire of the
Federal Government to expand Australia’s export trade. The Company is developing
an export trade to many parts of the world —establishment of the Singapore branch
is one illustration of this.


Apart from developing its own workrooms, G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited is taking
a vigorous hand in the general expansion of secondary industry in South Australia.
The Company is currently interested in, and partly financing, several of the State’s
newer manufacturing industries.
The Company’s own manufacturing activities call for special mention. More than
200 operatives are already engaged in the Adelaide workrooms, and more than 100
in Western Australia. As part of a general development programme, the busy
Adelaide workrooms are now being re-equipped with the most modern machinery.
Shirts and pyjamas are among main production lines in Adelaide. Besides mak-
ing shirts for its own requirements, G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited is sole supplier for
some of the city’s biggest retailers. The output of shirts has now reached 12,000
dozen a year, and is to be increased considerably.
Perhaps the most interesting section of the Adelaide workrooms, for the visitor,
is the one in which gloves for industrial purposes are manufactured.
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited supplies gloves of many different types for the pro-
tection of workmen in a wide range of Australian mining and factory industries, in-
cluding glass works, tube mills, chemical works, foundries, dockyards and munition
works. Motoring gloves are another special line in which G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited
has gained a national reputation.
Women’s and children’s underclothing and dresses, and women’s hats, are among
goods manufactured in other sections of the Company’s extensive Adelaide work-
rooms.
On the importing side, an important feature of the activities of C. & R. Wills &
Co. Limited is that the Company holds sole agency for Australia and New Zealand
for the Bombay Dyeing & Manufacturing Co. Ltd., one of the largest cotton spinners
and weavers in the world. In spite of heavy defence commitments in India, the
Bombay company made a fine effort to keep Australia supplied with its ducks, tick-
ings, towels, sheetings and kindred lines during the second World War. Sales since
the war have been limited only by Export/Import quotas.
Mr. Kenneth Agnew Wills, C.8.E., M.C., E.D., now chairman of the board of
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited, became a director of the Company in 1924, and manag-
ing director in 1928. The other directors are Mr. Charles Roland Rischbieth, Sir
James Gosse, Mr. Frank Turner Sellick, and Mr. Vernon Arthur Taylor.


In both world wars, staffs of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited and George Wills & Co.
Limited, in Australia, and George Wills & Sons Limited, in England, readily an-
swered the call to service. Enlistments from G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited in Ade-
laide, Western Australia and Broken Hill totalled 98 in the 1914-18 war, and 166
in the 1939-45 war. Corresponding figures for George Wills & Co. Limited, in all
States, were 69 and 50.
Thirty-four members of the staff of George Wills & Sons Limited in England were
in national service during the 1914-18 war, and 17 in the 1939-45 war.




FROM ADELAIDE TO LONDON
m
lthough prospects of the young Adelaide firm of G. & R. Wills & Co. were
, calculated as carefully as possible, establishment of the London office in 1858
/~\ \ must none the less have been something of a gamble for the partners. It was
a big thing for two young merchants in a young colony to seek a foothold for them-
selves in the greatest commercial city in the world. It is testimony to business acumen
and tenacity of purpose that they succeeded.
The first London office was in Budge Row. Some time later the partners bought
3 Chapel Street, London. This was head office until it was destroyed in the blitz of
December, 1940, when the Nazis used incendiaries on a large scale for the first time,
and nearly a square mile in the neighbourhood of St. Paul’s was devastated.
Since October, 1945, London headquarters has occupied a floor in a modem build-
ing at 25 City Road. These premises—leased by the foresight of the board in 1942
—are actually too small for the growing business of George Wills & Sons Limited.
But the firm can count itself fortunate, compared with many others in war-scarred
London.
From 1858 to 1881 the London business was concerned solely with softgoods.
Later, coke, iron, and so on, came into the ambit of Wills operations when George
Wills & Co. was formed in Adelaide.
Before long it was found that to give best service to Australia in cottons and
woollens, the buying must be done in Manchester. A Manchester office was accord-
ingly opened for G. & R. Wills & Co. in 1886. In recent years this office, besides
buying textiles for Australia and South Africa, has supplied large quantities of
cotton goods to the West Coast of Africa, and to India and the East.


In 1891 a separate department was formed in the London office to handle buying
for George Wills & Co., the Australian shipping firm, which had branched from
G. &R. Wills & Co. Besides handling coke, rails, cement, fertilisers, and the like,
George Wills & Co. obtained the agency for the Lund Line of steamers. Chapel
Street proved to be too far from the Baltic Exchange for the shipping side of the
business. In 1896 a separate office was opened in Leadenhall Street to handle
shipping, and wheat and other produce. This office was put under the control of
Mr. F. W. Braund, who went to London from Adelaide.
Under the leadership of Mr. W. H. Ayres, George Wills & Co. in London, as
agents for Broken Hill South Silver Mining Co., were responsible for starting im-
portation of lead concentrates from Australia into England and the continent of
Europe. In addition to lead concentrates, George Wills & Co. handled large quanti-
ties of silver lead, zinc concentrates, and other forms of Australian metals.
George Wills & Sons Limited, final and present form of the London organisation,
was formed in 1913. The outbreak of World War I severely curtailed activities at
Chapel Street, but greatly extended the work of the Leadenhall Street office.
The British Government bought the whole of the Australian wheat crop, and ship-
ping arrangements to get the grain to England were entrusted to George Wills & Co.
Limited. As many as 100 steamers at a time were engaged in this service.
In 1924 George Wills & Sons Limited was instrumental in forming a company
known as McLean, Harrison & Co. Ltd. The shareholders were A. Cameron & Co.
Ltd., one-third, George Wills & Sons Limited, one-third, and the directors, one-third.
Formation of this company was the start of the successful South African business of
the Wills organisation. Mr. J. McLean eventually joined the board of George Wills
& Sons Limited, and is now managing director of that firm. South African connec-
tions were further strengthened when the firm of Fowlie & Boden was taken over, and
a new company, Fowlie, Boden & Wills Ltd., was formed. In 1935 Robert Reid &
Co. Ltd., of Australia, became associated with this company, which is now Fowlie,
Reid & Wills, Ltd.
When the danger of war became evident in 1939, the directors of George Wills &
Sons, Limited, took steps to protect staff and records by securing the lease of a large
Wimbledon house belonging to Mr. Arthur W. Wills, one of the four sons of the
founder. An underground reinforced concrete shelter was provided in the grounds.


Since it was expected London would be bombarded from the air for a fortnight
immediately war broke out, the transfer from Chapel Street to Wimbledon was made
on September 1, 1939, when it was known the Germans had invaded Poland.
For a considerable time most members of the staff slept on the premises. Bombs
fell in the grounds on two occasions, but no one was injured.
In the early days of the London business, Mr. George Wills had under him as
manager Mr. W. E. J. Brocksopp, who ultimately went to Australia as a partner.
Mr. George Wills died in 1906. In the meantime three of his sons, Messrs. G. T.
Wills, J. H. Wills and C. P. Wills had come into the business, carrying on the family
tradition. Mr. C. P. Wills died in 1931, and Mr. J. H. Wills in 1932. This threw
heavy responsibility on Mr. G. T. Wills, the chairman, who had practically retired
from active service. Although 73, Mr. Wills took up work again, assisted by his
nephews, Messrs. P. L. B. Wills and P. A. Wills, and carried on until his death in
1938.
The present chairman is Mr. P. S. Hale, who joined George Wills & Sons Limited as
a boy in 1883. Other members of the board are: Messrs. J. McLean, C.B.E. (Man-
aging Director), L. Donegan, H. W. Walker, P. L. B. Wills, P. A. Wills, C.8.E., and
R. L. J. Wills, M.C.
Mr. McLean, who assumes the chairmanship of the Company this year, is presi-
dent of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce, and chairman of the
Federation of Chambers of Commerce of the British Empire. He is also a member
of the Council of the International Chamber of Commerce.




IN “THE WEST”
| hronologically, next aspect of the growth of the Wills enterprises
'to be considered is the establishment of the Western Australian branch of
G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited in 1866.
The firm has the oldest wholesale softgoods business in Western Australia. Busi-
ness was begun at High Street, Fremantle, as a sample room only, operated from the
Adelaide end. In 1889 a stock-carrying branch was opened in Fremantle, in two
converted cottages, and in 1891 the business was transferred to a two-storey building
in Leake Street. Five years later, a move was made to the premises still occupied by
the company in Hay Street, Perth.
The branch office at Kalgoorlie was established in the early ’nineties.
Activities of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited in Western Australia cover an immense
area, representatives of the firm visiting country districts up to 800 miles from Perth.
The branch also caters for the far North-West of Western Australia, and regular
visits are made to Darwin in the Northern Territory, 2,000 miles from Perth, where
extensive business is done.
Modem transport has brought about a vast change in conditions for members of
the Western Australian staff whose duties require them to visit the more remote parts
of the State. In early days, the Company’s representatives commonly travelled
long distances in the bush on horseback, and often faced shortages of food and
water on their journeys. Today, they can travel in swift comfort by air on long-
distance business trips.


Directly and indirectly, the Company has sponsored considerable manufacturing
activity in the production of underwear and clothing in Western Australia. The Com-
pany also contributed to the general development of Western Australia when, in
the early 1880’s, it helped initiate construction of the 243-mile Great Southern Rail-
way from Beverley to Albany, and showed its faith in the undertaking by taking up
a large parcel of debentures.
The Great Southern Railway represented a most important advance in Western
Australia’s railway communications. Up to 1881, the only railways operating in the
State were the Geraldton-Northampton and Fremantle-Guildford lines. The West
Australian gold rush then gave railway building a needed stimulus. Within the
next six years, the West Australian Government extended the system by the con-
struction of lines from Perth to Beverley, Spencer’s Brook to Northam, and Clack-
line to Newcastle.
It was in 1884 that Anthony Hordern, of Sydney, brought forward a concrete pro-
posal to build the Great Southern line, connecting Albany with the terminus of the
Eastern Railway at Beverley.
G. &R. Wills & Co. joined the syndicate sponsored by Hordern. The contract for
the railway was signed in October, 1884. Construction did not begin until 1887, but
was pushed on so rapidly that the line was ready for traffic in June, 1889.
The Great Southern Railway was the means of opening up a very large area of
valuable primary producing country. Many substantial and flourishing towns,
owing their existence to the railway, stand along the route today.
The Great Southern Railway was taken over by the West Australian Government
in 1896, by purchase from the controlling company.
Present premises are inadequate for the expanding business of the West Australian
branch of G. &R. Wills & Co. Limited. Extensive properties have been bought in
the City of Perth, and it is intended to build the most modern business premises in
the State as soon as conditions permit.
First manager of the West Australian branch was Mr. S. P. Saphir, from 1889 to
1896. He was followed by Messrs. J. W. Weidenhofer (1896-1902), D. Macpherson
(1902-1907), A. L. Parker and A. E. King jointly (1907-1913), F. H. Searcy and
H. E. Martin jointly (1913-1924), H. E. Martin (1924-1925), M. A. Goode (1925-
1930). Mr. V. A. Taylor has been manager since February, 1930.






FROM SAIL TO STEAM
m
[ailing ships still carried a large part of the world’s seaborne commerce when
the shipping and merchandise business of George Wills & Co. Limited was
fy V established in Adelaide nearly 70 years ago. The Company was formed by
the existing Wills interests in association with Mr. W. Herbert Phillipps, later Sir
Herbert Phillipps, who was the first managing partner.
In the initial stages, George Wills & Co. Limited was largely concerned with load-
ing cargoes of grain and concentrates for London into sailing ships at Port Adelaide,
and later at Fremantle in Western Australia. Other sailing ships bound for the
United Kingdom loaded wool from South Australia at Port Adelaide, Port Pirie, Port
Augusta and the small South-East port of Kingston, now largely disused.
Since those days, George Wills & Co. Limited has extended its activities, directly
or indirectly, throughout Australia.
In shipping the Company conducts its own business in South Australia and West
Australia. The office in Adelaide controls branches in Port Adelaide, Port Pirie and
Wallaroo, and in West Australia under the control of Perth office are branches at
Fremantle and Bunbury, while at Albany its interests are attended to by a subsidiary
company, Henry Wills & Co. Limited.
Shipping associates of George Wills & Co. Limited in the Eastern States are John
Sanderson & Co., Melbourne; Gilchrist, Watt & Sanderson Pty. Ltd., Sydney; and
Wills, Gilchrist & Sanderson Pty. Ltd., Brisbane. George Wills & Co. Limited holds
an interest in these Sydney and Brisbane companies. This group of ship agents,
known generally as “The Syndicate,” has filled an active and important role in Aus-
tralia’s overseas trade for 60 years.


The Syndicate were agents for the Lund Blue Anchor Line, which instituted the
first regular cargo steamer sailings between London and Australia, loading wool and
Broken Hill ore, and subsequently ran passenger vessels also. Since 1898, the Syn-
dicate have been agents for Holt’s Blue Funnel Line, which has sailings of passenger
steamers to the United Kingdom via South Africa, as well as cargo vessels taking
wool, general and refrigerated cargo via South Africa and via Suez. The Glen Line
Ltd. vessels are run in association with Holt’s.
Recently, the Syndicate have been appointed agents for Lloyd-Triestino, operat-
ing passenger and cargo vessels between Italy and Australia, for the W. R. Carpenter
Line across the Pacific Ocean, and for the Scindia Steam Navigation Company
operating between India and Australia.
In past years the Syndicate has been associated with other lines, including P. & 0.
Branch Service, Federal Branch Service, Hamburg-America Line, North German
Lloyd, and Canadian National Steamships.
George Wills & Co. Limited are booking agents for the principal Air Lines operat-
ing internally in Australia, and from Australia to other countries.
In Adelaide, George Wills & Co. Ltd. is passenger booking agent for the Mel-
bourne Steamship Co. Ltd.
In South and West Australia it is agent for Lloyds, the well-known corporation
of London underwriters.
George Wills & Co. Limited helped materially in the early establishment of Broken
Hill, and acted as agent for some of the mining companies. It was interested in the
experiments which led to the sulphide ore becoming a marketable proposition and
assisted in opening up overseas markets.
The company was interested in the earliest shipment of frozen lambs from South
Australia, and until 1912 bought wheat through the country for shipment overseas.
Until the outbreak of the Second World War, George Wills & Co. Limited shipped
apples from Adelaide to the United Kingdom and Europe, and also shipped barley as
agents for the Y.P. Barley Producers Ltd.
Since the end of the war its export business from all States to the United Kingdom
and other parts of the world is being developed and extended to a number of com-
modities.
George Wills & Co. Limited has built up an extensive merchandise business
throughout Australia.


Considerable quantities of timber are imported from North America and Scandi-
navia, and oak staves for casks from many countries.
In South and West Australia the Company acts as distributors of cornsacks and
superphosphate to farmers. In South Australia it acts as distributors for the South
Australian Portland Cement Co. Ltd. Throughout Australia it represents Palestine
Potash Ltd., which has supplied requirements of this commodity from the Dead Sea.
Trade is also done in mining and industrial chemicals.
It sells lanterns and toys manufactured by Colton, Palmer & Preston Ltd., and
represents many other manufacturers of hardware and fancy goods. A substantial
trade is also done in building materials of various kinds.
A business is done in groceries and the canned fruits, canned peas and jams pro-
duced by Glen Ellen Cannery, which are sold throughout Australia. Other commo-
dities sold in certain States are sauce, frozen fish, carbide, matches, wine and
spirits, and various other lines.
In the Eastern States, the Company sells softgoods on an agency basis. These include
the products of the Bombay Dyeing and Manufacturing Co. Ltd.
George Wills & Co. Limited has substantial shareholdings in the South Australian
Portland Cement Co. Ltd., Colton, Palmer & Preston Ltd., Timbrols Ltd., and other
shipping and industrial companies.
The Company was largely responsible for the erection of Ocean Steamers wharf
and Birkenhead wharf at Port Adelaide, and the Barrier wharf at Port Pirie in con-
junction with Charles Geddes & Co. These wharves were taken over by the Harbours
Board at the time when all South Australian wharves were acquired by the State
Government.
Mr. Phillipps retired from the partnership in George Wills & Co. in 1900, and was
succeeded as managing partner by Mr. R. J. H. Wills. Mr. C. F. Rischbieth succeeded
Mr. Wills and continued as managing partner until 1913, when the limited company
was formed.
Mr. C. F. Rischbieth was the first managing director until 1916, when Mr. J. H.
Gosse (now Sir James Gosse) took over the office.
Mr. C. F. Rischbieth was chairman of directors until his death in 1937, since
when Sir James Gosse has occupied the chair. Mr. C. R. Rischbieth was appointed
managing director in 1936.
The other directors at present are Messrs. K. A. Wills, H. S. Bickford, A. F.
Lukis, F. T. Sellick, A. C. Garland and W. H. Matthews.




m.
LONG SERVICE
IT is appropriate, at the end of this review of a world-wide business concern, to
deal with another of the factors which have contributed to its success.
The Australian Companies, with a total staff of nearly 700, are important em-
ployers. Directors and management have consistently aimed at maintaining good
staff relations. The Companies have, in iact, been pioneers of happy employer-
employee relationships. They have instituted generous superannuation, pension and
health schemes, together with staff social, welfare and sporting activities. Latest
amenity introduced is a cafeteria inside the main Adelaide warehouse seating 150
and supplying light meals.
The total sum assured under the Staff Superannuation Schemes is now in the vicin-
ity of £500,000. They are contributory schemes, providing for retirement at 65, with
an option of earlier retirement if desired. Under the Health Scheme, contributions
by married members are subsidised on a 50-50 basis.
Before the 1939-45 war, the Companies were among the first to encourage their
employees to join the Citizen Forces by granting leave, making up pay and, in addi-
tion, giving full holidays on pay. From the first day of the war, they announced
their intention of making up pay to all employees who served. They also paid all
servicemen’s superannuation contributions.
The fact that many of the employees have become shareholders is testimony to the
effectiveness of the policy toward the staff. On latest figures, one shareholder in six
is an employee.


Equally significant is the record of long individual service among employees. A
considerable number have spent more than 50 years, the whole of their working life-
time, with the organisation. And one, the late E. J. LePage, was on the payroll for
no less than 75 years.
The writer of this survey spent an hour in the company of seven retired employees
of G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited, whose combined service totalled 370 years. Most of
them joined the firm in the ’eighties, retired within recent years.
The talk of these veterans was interesting. They recalled old days when plush was
the rage, when imported untrimmed hats sold at 23/9 a dozen, when white moleskin
trousers were favoured wear with most workmen. They spoke of packing goods for
transport, not only by rail and road, but also by river steamers on the Murray, and
by packhorses and camel trains in the more remote areas of the State.
They showed, after the manner of old-timers in general, a fine scorn of modern
hours, saying that in busy periods they worked through from early morning until
late at night, sometimes on Saturdays and Sundays too, “and felt none the
worse for it.”
And behind all this talk, one thing stood out. If the seven veterans had their choice
again, they would still have worked 370 years for G. & R. Wills & Co. Limited.
And that, the writer feels, is a fitting note upon which to end this chronicle of 100
years of progress.


G. & R. WILLS & CO.
LIMITED AND GEORGE
WILLS & CO. LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED PROFIT AND LOSS ACCOUNT FOR
YEAR ENDED 19th JULY, 1948.
1947
1948
1947
1948
To Preference Dividends:
34/848 By Balance Brought Forward ...
31,960
Dividend for Half-year,
„ Surplus Taxation Provision,
4,040
19th January, 1948
4,040
George Wills & Co. Limited
6,000
Proposed Dividend for
i
„ Net Profit From Trading
Half-year, 19th July,
4,040
after providing for Direc-
mo
1948
8,080
tors’ Fees (£2,450), Staff
8,0S0
„ Ordinary Dividends:
54/851
Superannuation (£9,474),
Depreciation and Taxation 86,654
Interim Dividend of 9d. per
19,408
„ Income From Investments ... 21,286
Share on 520,019 Shares
19,501
5/934
„ Sundry Receipts 7,529
10,400
paid 4th May, 1948
Special Tax-free Dividend
80,193
„ Net Profit for the Year
115,469
of l-4/10th pence on
520,019 Shares paid 4th
—
May, 1948
Proposed Final Dividend
3,033
of 6d. per Share on
1,040,038 Shares, pay-
15/801
able 30th October, 1948
26,001
26/901
„ Transfers to General Re-
48,535
49/000
serves
55,000
81/960
„ Balance Carried Forward ...
41,814
£115/041
£153,429
£115,041
£153,429


G. & R. WILLS & CO. LIMITED AND GEORGE WILLS & CO. LIMITED
CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET AS AT 19th JULY, 1948.
1947
1948
1947
1948
Share Capital
Fixed Assets:
Authorised:
Freehold and Leasehold
200,000 Preference Shares
Land and Buildings at
200,000
of £1 each
200,000
219,193
Valuation
212,751
1,609,583 Ordinary Shares
Plant, Furniture and Fit-
402$96
of 5/- each
402,396
tings at Cost, less Depre-
25,009
ciation
36,158
602$96
602,396
Issued:
244202
Total Fixed Assets
248,909
146,900 5J% Cumulative
Investments:
Preference Shares of £1
Henry Wills & Co. Limited
146,900
each
146,900
5 $29
at Cost
5,229
1,040,038 Ordinary Shares
Shares in Other Companies
130,005
of 5/- each
260,010
325$49
at Valuation
345,324
Paid in Money £128,679
50,045
Commonwealth Loan
—
Otherwise 278,231
380,623
Total Investments
350,553
406,910
Current Assets:
276$05
406,910
Stock on Hand at or below
Surplus and Reserves:
457,712
Cost
635,082
350J900
General Reserves
400,000
Sundry Debtors, less Provi-
160 $78
Assets Revaluation Reserve
30,973
348,898
sion for Doubtful Debts
507,578
50,000
Stock Equalisation Reserve
50,000
110
Henry Wills & Co. Limited
—
31 $60
Profit and Loss Accounts ...
41,814
435
Gish in Hand
473
592,938
522,787
S69&43
Shareholders’ Funds
929,697
807,155
Total Current Assets
1,143,133
Current Liabilities:
25,000 Goodwill:
—
84,655
Bank Overdraft
205,629
60$89
Deposits
66,151
283,736
Sundry Creditors
427,384
—
Henry Wills & Co. Limited
1,489
138,116
Provision for Taxation
82,204
(Ihere is a Contingent Liability
Provision for Final Divi-
in respect of certain guarantees
dends:
amounting to £13,005.)
Preference £4,040
Ordinary 26,001
19,641
—
30,041
587,137
Total Current Liabilities
812,898
£1,456$80
£1,742,595
£1,456,980
£1,742,595
