

They shall not pass
A PRELIMINARY PLAN
FOR A PEOPLE'S DEFENCE


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
THE PUBLISHERS desire to
express their appreciation, of the
valuable assistance given them in
compiling this pamphlet to: “Pro-
gress,” Mr. Ted Jones, of the Manly
Returned Soldiers War Emergency-
Auxiliary, and Mr. W. Woods.
—CURRENT BOOK DISTRIBUTORS..
2
Published by
CURRENT BOOK DISTRIBUTORS
318 Rawson Chambers, Sydney.


General McKay, in a message to Aus-
tralians, called for a greater spirit of SELF-
RELIANCE and independence.
He declared: “A spirit of reliance on others had
been detected, even amongst business firms, who
expected the army to protect their buildings—this
is a spirit of helplessness,” he said . . . “Attitude
and spirit is everything. A greater spirit of SELF-
RELIANCE and independence is ivhat we want. We
have shown independence of thought in other direc-
tions. Noiv is the time to show it when called upon
to defend our country. IN TOTAL WAR EVERY-
ONE HAS A PART TO PLAY—NOT ONLY
SOLDIERS. Everybody in the community will have
to bear hardships,” General McKay said.
(“Mirror.”)


w E wholeheartedly support these remarks of the General.
Why is it that we find not only in our own suburb but also
throughout the Commonwealth, a considerable number of people
who are doing little—if anything—to assist in the defeat of the
Fascist Axis powers—to assist in keeping the already bloody hand
of the lustful Japanese War Lords from mauling the homes, the
lives and liberties of our own Australian people?
Surely it cannot be that the Australian will admit that he is
less desirous or less able to defend himself than are the peoples
of China and of Russia, both of whom have acquitted themselves
so magnificently in handling the aggressors.
We believe that the Australian people will respond, fight and
sacrifice just as bravely, with just as much determination, as the
Chinese and Russians, as soon as our leaders prove themselves
more capable of convincing our people that this is indeed a People’s
war in action and not merely in words.
It must be apparent to ail, that the defeat of the Italian, German,
Japanese destroyers, plunderers, torturers, rapers of women, must
be in the interests of the Australian people, and no doubt the
average Australian is prepared to become an active and sacrificing
defender of Australia, provided again that he can be CONVINCED
that it is indeed, a People’s war and that his sacrifice is not going
to be used for the aggrandisement of certain publicity-seeking or
war profiteering individuals.
Therefore, we must have an absolute ringing SINCERITY in
the whole of our war effort and also from our leaders. We have
no doubt that with this SINCERITY, plus the ability of our leaders
to so organise and stimulate the people, that they successfully draw
the vast majority of them into active participation in the defence
(run by the people, for the people, and not by a few bureaucrats


who want to run everything and
usually succeed in doing very little
and that very badly and ineffici-
ently)—then the Australian
people will sacrifice and fight as
willingly as any other people.
This is the time for straight
speaking and not honeyed words.
THIS IS THE TIME TO RE-
TEST ALL OF OUR LEADERS
—TO TEST THEM NOT BY
WHAT THEY SAY, BUT BY
WHAT THEY DO. People who
have led us in peace time are
NO QUESTIONS PLEASE
not necessarily effective leaders in war time —in time of probable
invasion. NEW CONDITIONS DEMAND NEW TREATMENT,
AND IF OUR PRESENT LEADERS DO NOT STAND UP TO
THE HARDEST TESTS IN THE NEW CONDITIONS CON-
FRONTING US, THEN THE PEOPLE IN ACTION WILL THROW
UP NEW AND MORE EFFECTIVE LEADERS MORE SUITED
TO SUCH NEW CONDITIONS.
If we face the cold realities of our present situation then we
must admit that our Australian people are suspicious. They are
suspicious of war profiteers who loudly cry for greater sacrifices
whilst their balance sheets show greater profits; they are suspicious
of those in high places who have soothed them with honeyed words
about Norway—Holland—Belgium—Greece—Crete—Libya, and
now Malaya—the Phillipines and even our own Australia. They
are suspicious of those who have sabotaged the production of the
Owen gun —who have used the cost plus system to slow up the
production of equipment so badly needed by our men overseas;
they are suspicious of Australian politicians who flew overseas and


returned with assurances that our A.I.F. had all the equipment they
needed when subsequent disasters proved this incorrect; they are
suspicious of high military generals who tell them that the rifle
and the bayonet are still the main weapon, when thousands of our
boys have died, been wounded and taken prisoners because of lack
of more modern tommy guns, aeroplanes and other modem equip-
ment. They are suspicious of those who lied to them about the
strength and condition of our Russian Allies. They are suspicious
of those “property before life”-minded officials in high executive
positions, who persistently refused to bomb the Rumanian oil wells,
who refused to apply scorched earth policy at Penang and else-
where, and who left valuable materials behind for the Japanese to
use against our brothers in Malaya. They are suspicious because
anti-Russian Fascist sympathisers occupy high executive positions
in the Australian army; officers such as Major Archie Cameron,
Major Campbell, of the New Guard (ill)-fame, Major De Grool,
and others who have openly and publicly proclaimed their pro-
Fascist sympathies time and time again. They are suspicious of
those who have assured them from time to time that “we now have
air and equipment parity with the enemy”—“our troops no longer
will go into action without planes”—“within six months our planes
will darken the skies over Berlin,” when these and many other such
similar statements have proved to be lies. Could Australians be
expected to be other than suspicious in view of all these things?
THIS SUSPICION MUST BE REMOVED, FOR WHILST IT
EXISTS THE UNITED EFFORT OF THE AUSTRALIAN PEOPLE
CANNOT BE EFFECTIVELY MOBILISED FOR OUR DEFENCE.
We must remember that it was similar lying, similar honeyed
words! by the Petains, Lavals, Quislings, etc., of France, and other
countries of Europe, which so greatly helped to create a state of
affairs in those countries, that made it easy for the fifth columnists
in important positions to sell their country to Hitler and the Axis
powers.


Our first and biggest task then is to overcome this dangerous
suspicion, and it can be done and it will be done most efficiently
and most quickly in accordance with the extent to which we create
the suggested People’s Local Defence movements, in which we or-
ganise, unite and activise the people along the lines of the sug-
gestions outlined in this report.
Dangerous rumors —fifth
column lies and rumors,
and fifth column actions
would be more quickly de-
tected and more efficiently
handled by such local or-
ganisation, and furthermore,
the People would have great
articulation of their doubts
and fears —greater oppor-
tunity for revealing danger-
o u s, suspicion - creating
matters with which they
come in contact in their day-
to-day life. These facilities
RUN THE WAR CONFIDENTIALLY
would unquestionably assist in overcoming defeatism and gener-
ally stimulating public morale and unity. We must not toler-
ate those bureaucrats who try to “run the war confidentially,” but
rather we must see that we get the fullest and frankest information
concerning our war effort. The people must be taken into our
leaders’ confidence much more than has been done in the past.
OUR LEADERS MUST PROVE THAT THEY ARE AS CAPABLE
—WHATEVER THE DIFFICULTIES—OF ORGANISING AND
ACTIVISING THE VAST MAJORITY OF OUR PEOPLE INTO
ACTIVE AND EFFICIENT PARTICIPATION IN AUSTRALIA’S
DEFENCE, AS THE CHINESE AND RUSSIAN LEADERS HAVE
PROVED CAPABLE OF SO DOING WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE
PEOPLES.


It is the task of all truly patriotic organisations to assist in
every possible way a total mobilisation of the huge war potential
that ,at present remains comparatively untapped in the People, and
we suggest the following points for action as a basis upon which
to build.
But let us first point out that we exist in a real world and not
in a vacuum —we are not insulated against the effects of happenings
in all other parts of the world. We must not forget that what
happens in Europe or Malaya, and elsewhere, vitally affects the
people of our suburb as well as the people of Australia. Let us
then not think and plan along narrow, parochial, municipal lines,
but let us enlarge our horizon, thus enabling us to view matters in
their true perspective and with due regard to their relations with
all other matters that affect them. (“Splendid Isolation” is another
wishful myth that has been exploded by events.) Planning thus,
we will be better able to plan for our respective suburbs along
lines that can be dovetailed efficiently into a National plan;—
POINT 1:
For every, say 25, consecutive homes, one man or woman to be
democratically elected by the residents thereof as their section’s
leader (or warden), and as general information officer for that
section on such matters as :
(a) What to do in the case of an air raid.
(b) What to do in the case of invasion of locality.
(c) What to do in the case of general evacuation.
(d) Each person’s task in carrying out a retiring action in
association with the troops.
(e) Each person’s task under guerrilla warfare and/or a
scorched earth policy.
(/) Each person’s task in the carrying out of a People’s Defence
of their suburb in association with the troops,
[ (g) How to manufacture “Molotov Cocktails,” hand grenades,
8


and whatever other “home-made” war weapons that would
be helpful.
( h ) Times, places and suitability for training of individuals
in marksmanship, bomb-throwing, tank pit digging, and
all other training suitable for a People’s Defence Force.
(i) Arranging and advising of rehearsals of all the above
matters.
(;) Collection of all salvage material metals, etc., in the dis-
trict, for making of munitions, aeroplanes, etc., together
with .all other matters of concern to the people.
SUCH SECTION LEADER TO BE SUBJECT TO RECALL
AT ANY TIME BY A MAJORITY VOTE OF ALL THE PEOPLE
IN HIS OR HER SECTION. Meetings of all people in the section
to be held by the section leader at least once weekly for the purpose
of giving and receiving reports, and generally checking up.
N.B.—Note no conflict but extension of activity relative to
wardens.
POINT 2:
From the ranks of the above section leaders, one area leader
to be appointed for each, say 10, sections of the suburb. We would
then have ,an executive council of the suburb’s People’s Defence
League who would, together with a delegate from, say, the Muni-
cipal Council, the local V.D.C., the N.E.S., and a liaison officer
from the A.I.F. and/or Militia, form a truly democratic and ef-
ficiently People’s organisation for the area (professional, technical,
women’s and youth leaders, etc., could be co-opted), one in which
the people were actually participating; one in which they would
be enabled to take a really active, planned and co-ordinated part
in the defence of their country; ONE WHICH WOULD PROVE
CONCLUSIVELY THAT IT WAS INDEED A PEOPLE’S WAR
AND ONE WHICH WOULD ACCORDINGLY REMOVE THEIR
DANGEROUS SUSPICIONS AND PLACE THE ONUS OF MAK-
ING IT A PEOPLE’S WAR ON THEMSELVES.
9


The area leaders, like the section leaders, would be SUBJECT
TO RECALL AT ANY TIME by a majority vote of the citizens in
their respective areas. NO WAITING FOR TWELVE-MONTHLY
OR THREE-YEARLY ELECTIONS. Facilities such as these must
he provided for the INSTANT REMOVAL of any elected leaders
who let down on the job. The danger to our lives and the speed
of happenings make this imperative. We must keep our leaders
close to the people, not removed from contact with them.
From such a form of organisation, whatever difficulties or sus-
picions that .arose, would be much more quickly exposed and
corrected than they can be at present, and the enthusiasm, co-
operation, morale, and active participation of the People would
improve accordingly.
POINT 3:
We must, through our section leaders, obtain the COLLECTIVE
IDEAS of the whole of our citizens for the carrying out of a more
efficient war effort by providing every facility and encouragement
for THE FULLEST EXPOSURE AND CORRECTION OF ANY
MATTERS THAT ARE ADVERSELY AFFECTING THE WAR
EFFORT AND THE SAFETY OF THE PEOPLE.
To do this we must provide suitable boxes for suggestions and
criticisms in every section, and we must appoint a people’s com-
mittee to carefully consider and report back on all such suggestions.
We must also provide a Citizens’ Defence League Paper for the
district, open to all its citizens for the most free and fullest critic-
ism and suggestions. The paper would, of course, help to dis-
seminate valuable information of interest to all.
POINT 4:
We must do all in our power to mobilise the whole of Australia’s
vast war potential; switch to war-time production every factory
or organisation now making luxury goods. We must do our share
to see that instead they produce planes (to keep the enemy away
10


from our suburb, and from Australia), tanks, guns of all kinds,
especially tommy guns, and all other equipment needed by both
our boys abroad in Malaya, etc., and our people here. There are
parts of fighter planes and anti-tank guns that could be made in
garages in every area.
POINT 5:
We must demand the immediate cessation of the iniquitous
cost-plus system, which puts a premium on inefficiency, costly delay,
and high costs generally. We must, instead, set up “Production
Committees” through Shop Committees consisting of workers and
employers in all factories.
POINT 6;
We must obtain the removal of the “ancient incompetents” of
the Munitions Board —the monopoly appointees who have “gum-
med-up” the war machine. We must replace them with competent
industrial executives and practical trade unionists who are much
closer to the job.
POINT 7:
We must demand the continued purging of blimps and brass
hats of the High Command who continue sending our boys into
battle ill-equipped, and we must continue the policy of replacing
them by experienced officers from the Middle East.
POINT 8:
We must ring each suburb and every important and heavily-
populated area in Australia with anti-aircraft guns; we must provide
barricades in our streets and make all preparations to defend our
area street by street, house by house, and factory by factory, if
necessary. We must guard against cowardly “open town” policies
in Australia.
POINT 9:
The Volunteer Defence Corps must be extended to include every
man, woman and youth capable of bearing arms, including those
11


who work for their living. Modern arms must be provided for
all these people and training must be given in the use and manu-
facture of “Molotov Cocktails,” home-made grenades, and all mat-
ters essential to the carrying out of the only type of warfare we
could wage, namely, guerrilla warfare, along the lines waged so
successfully by the Chinese and Russian peoples.
POINT 10;
A realistic and co-ordinated defence plan must be prepared for
each district: preparations for the flooding of local dams, the blow-
ing-up of bridges, also the use of tank-traps or any other natural
or artificial impediments to the enemy’s progress on our shores.
This would provide also for the shifting inland of our valuable
coastal industries as Russia’s were shifted from her Western
frontiers.
Strong defence zones must be built up inland; we must learn of
the Russians’ methods of defence in depth; we must be ready to
follow China’s and Russia’s scorched earth policy, if necessary.
POINT 11:
We must see to it that full equipment is supplied to A.R.P.
Wardens with all possible speed. We must make certain that suf-
ficient and efficient air raid shelters are placed in the most suitable
areas for them, irrespective of whether they be in parks or private
gardens.
Gas masks and respirators must be issued to all.
POINT 12:
Families whose breadwinners are worried by economic difficul-
ties cannot be expected to play their part in the war effort and the
People’s Defence as efficiently as they could. Therefore, full
economic protection must be given to the people. Price control
must be tightened to prevent the profiteering which incenses the
people, and a general moratorium should be introduced without
delay.
12


POINT 13:
Every consideration must be given
to utilising the services of our women-
folk, and where women are employed in
industry they should be employed at
the same rate as the males whose work
they have undertaken. The Australian
women are prepared to play just as
big a role in Australia’s defence as their
Chinese and Russian sisters have done
for their countries.
POINT 14:
The opening up of a second front
in the West of Europe is of vital im-
portance to the whole of the people of
Australia and their soldiers in the East,
for the following reasons: —
(1) The sooner Hitler is defeated
the sooner the battle of the Atlantic is
won by us, thus releasing very strong
American and British naval forces for
the Pacific, for Singapore, AND THUS
FOR OUR DEFENCE. Hitler’s defeat
would also mean the defeat of Musso-
lini and this would also release very
large British naval forces from the
Mediterranean for the Pacific and
again aiding the defence of our shores.
(2) The defeat of Hitler and Mus-
solini would release the mighty Russian
Army, the 4,000,000 highly trained
and equipped soldiers THAT ARE
13


AT PRESENT IDLE IN BRITAIN, the Red Air Force, the
British and Dominion Air Forces, and, indeed, the whole of the
British, American, Russian and Chinese forces against the Japanese;
and what earthly chance would they stand against such uncon-
querable forces?
Therefore, the opening of a second European front becomes
all-important to us right here in our suburbs, and with Hitler now
in such desperate straits on his Eastern front, we have a perfect
set of conditions to establish this second front in Europe.
We must strongly urge that this policy be strenuously represented
to England as one of the most urgent requirements of the defence
of our shores.
POINT 15:
We must strive for complete confidence and co-operation between
our Government and the mass of the people. This can be made
possible by the Government making full use of professional and
local government bodies, trade unions, shop committees, public
and commercial executives, and citizens’ organisations such as we
outline in this article.
A strict watch must be
kept for Quislings and pro-
Fascist fifth columnists, re-
membering that they have
appeared in every other
country so far attacked by
the Axis.
We must remember Hit-
ler’s two secret weapons :
(1) PEOPLE IN IM-
PORT ANT POSI-
TIONS: Hitler said
he wanted names not
numbers, realising
that one man in an —m
important executive
position can help him (Hitler) more than half a million
ordinary men could. (Example-. The generals of France who
sold the French people, kept ammunition, aeroplanes and other
equipment from millions of Frenchmen when the Germans
advanced, thus clearing the way for them.)
14


(2) RED-BAITING: Hitler is the biggest red-baiter in the world,
and uses this trick both to distract people’s attention from the
true and often embarrassing facts, and also to divide his
enemies before he destroys them.
Such a programme as we suggest is a practical one, is a minimum
one, is one which lends itself to the active participation of all
members of the community in the defence of our country, of our
homes and of our loved ones. A FEW MEN AT THE TOP CAN-
NOT ORGANISE AND OPERATE A REAL PEOPLE’S MOVE-
MENT—IT IS ONLY THE PEOPLE THEMSELVES WHO CAN-
DO THIS. THIS HAS BEEN PROVED BY RECENT EVENTS.
Where a few blimps and inefficient bureaucrats have tried to run
everything from the top, the Axis have had victory after victory, but
where the People have been mobilised and organised for a People’s
Defence, as in China and Russia, the enemy has been outmatched.
When Japan declared war, our War Minister, Mr. Forde, said:
“Sydney may be our unconquerable Leningrad.” It is only the
people who can make it so, and to make it so we will have to act
as Leningrad’s defenders did.
Unquestionably our present methods have failed, and of neces-
sity we must therefore remould them. /
We bring forward these suggestions sincerely believing that their
adoption will be in the best interests of the Australian people. If
we are not blinded by prejudices and narrow-mindedness, we learn
from successful people, therefore we offer no apologies for lifting
most of these ideas from the plans and methods used by the gallant
Chinese and Russians who have, so far, proved the most successful
in standing up effectively to the onslaughts of the Axis powers.
To adequately defend our country and our people demands
sacrifice from us all. The future will prove whether we, the people
of Australia, are too selfish, too soft, or too “property-minded”
to be capable of making the necessary sacrifices, or whether we are
content to leave the defence of our country to the men of our
A.1.F., who have not only offered their property, their jobs, but
also their lives in our defence.
Let us get behind them, not with brave honeyed words, but
by courageous, positive ACTION through a People’s Defence Move-
ment and a truly united and armed Australian People against the
Italian, German and Japanese barbarians.
15


CURRENT BOOK DISTRIBUTORS
318 RAWSON CHAMBERS, SYDNEY.
Phone: MA 5663. Post: Box 44, Haymarket P.O.
The Socialist Sixth
of the World
(SLIGHTLY ABRIDGED EDITION)
BY
THE DEAN OF CANTERBURY
PRICE, 11-
NOW OFF THE PRESS
ORDER EARLY!
Printed at 4 Brisbane St., Sydney, by Consolidated Press Ltd., 168-174 Castlereagh
Street. 40-Hour Week—(l4l7)
