

i “ THINGS THAT ARE DESPISED ”;
Cbc MLboimiAljis ®ark
JOHN MAC DONALD.
SYDNEY, N.S.W.,
GEO. LOXTON AND CO., PRINTERS, B
1884.




tkt ai|il Ijiji
LTHOUGH the subject of the work which it is
our object to describe, and the instrument by
which it was accomplished, may by many per-
sons be classified among the “weak things of this
world, and things that are despised,” the
work itself rises in all its grandeur and im-
portance when we consider it is essentially
His who claims it as His own ; while the subject
of it, obscure and unknown to the world, takes his place
amongst that vast number out of every people and tongue, o
whom it is said, “ Ye are His workmanship.”
We shall endeavour in the first place to furnish a descrip-
tion of the instrument, then of the subject, and afterwards of
the work referred to. To those who know the instrument
—for he is still living, and delighted to be engaged
in similar work in a distant part of this colony, the meie
mention of his name will render any such description
unnecessary, for they will at once recognise one for
whom they entertain a well-merited respect; to those who
do not know him, the particulars we give may perhaps be
regarded as exceeding the extent required merely for illus-
tration —but we venture to hope they will prove interesting
to and enlist the sympathy of all who peruse them, especially
those of our readers who were best acquainted with him.


John Yambo, or, as he was more familiarly known all over
Balmain, “ Black John,” was a native of Lifu, in that group
called the Loyalty Islands, in the South Pacific, eastward ot,
and in a clear day within sight of, New Caledonia. In his
way, John was a rare character. Cheerful and humourous,
possessing a power of observation and an amount of common
sense that often made him appear to advantage among men of
a fairer complexion and more favourable training than Ins own,
he not unfrequently caused surprise by his sensible remarks
and wise advice; while the originality of his illustrations,
given with characteristic cheerfulness, never failed to provoke
irrepressible humour. .
It may be said that during John’s long residence in bydney
his head-quarters were at Balmain ; and there is scarcely a man
woman or child in that large suburb who was not acquainted
with him, and who did not afford him a high place in their
esteem. An industrious cultivator of household vegetables, on
some spare ground I placed under his control for his own use
and benefit, and a diligent seller of the same, his cheerfulness
and hilarity won for him a ready entrance into all the houses
of Balmain, while they proved a valuable aid to his transactions.
Wherever his black curly head, his smiling face levealing
a regular set of teeth that his complexion showed to great advan-
tage—appeared, the very sight of Black John awoke the interest
of his customers and acquaintances. _ _ , . _
According to the limited opportunities of his native island,
John had been well trained. His father, Yapichi, was a man
much respected where he lived, and as a Deacon occupied an
office of responsibility in the Church to which he belonged,
under one of the missionaries of the London Missionary Society,
whose successful labours in the cause of Christian Missions are
known throughout the world. As one instance among many of
the blessed effects of Missionary labours, this man, himself
subdued by the power of the Gospel, brought up his children in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord —of which John is not
the only evidence. One of John’s sisters went with her hus-
band, a native Teacher, to carry the Gospel to the inhabitants of
the large island of New Guinea —among the first messengers of
peace who volunteered to engage in that perilous enterprise
but they both fell victims to heathen hatred of Christianity, like
many other noble persons in the cause of Christ elsewhere, both
before that time and since.
It would be interesting to relate the many stories he nar-


rated to me during the twelve years of my daily intercourse
with him—incidents of domestic life ; of his own adventures in
the South Sea Islands, which were frequently attended with
considerable peril; and of missionary work ; but on this occa-
sion the principal object is to set forth a remarkable instance
of the success that followed his own efforts for doing good.
When the F ree Presbyterian Mission at Ebenezer Chapel, Riley
Street, was started, at the close of 1879, John attached himself
to the cause with gi’eat earnestness, and accomplished no small
amount of work in the way of tract distributing and visiting. His
limited knowledge of the English language formed no barrier to
his efforts: on the contrary, it acted as a stimulus, and he was
often to be found visiting in the neighbourhood of the Mission
Chapel, inviting persons to attend the services who were not in
the habit of going to any place of worship. But John’s
favourite work was amongst his own countrymen, as he called
them —natives of the various islands, each with a smattering of
English, of very small extent, as the only vehicle of mutual
intercourse : for it may not be generally known to the readers
of this little narrative that the variation in language here dis-
covered extends not only to almost every island in the South
Seas, but also to different districts in the same island.
In connection with the Sabbath School of Ebenezer Chapel, a
class of these natives was formed, though for the sake of conve-
nience they used to meet, as they still do, at AYynyard-square,
in the house of Mrs. Hamilton, who not only has generously
afforded them accommodation, but also with her son, Mr. James
Hamilton, one of our first helpers in the Mission work at
Eiley-street, devotes great personal efforts to their temporal as
well as their spiritual good. There was also established at
the same place, and is still carried on, a weekly prayer-meeting
attended by these natives ; and John was most useful amongst
them, labouring diligently according to his opportunities to
induce them to attend the Sabbath Afternoon Class and the
Tuesday Evening Meeting, and giving valuable help in the
work of imparting instruction to them. But his labours did not
end here ; he xised his influence to obtain employment for any
of them who were out of work, in doing which he exercised a
wise discrimination between those who were deserving of his
attention and those who were not.
In his way, too, John endeavoured to promote the cause of
Education amongst them. What knowledge of reading and writ-
ing he possessed was for the most part imparted to him by my-


self; and whatever the extent of that knowledge was, he
certainly made the best use of it.
Let us visit him while instructing his class. Place—the kit-
chen ; pupils—some half-dozen swarthy young lads from vari-
ous islands, living at service in the neighbourhood. John is
sitting at the head of the table, and his pupils around it, each
with a primer, or other easy guide to reading, provided by John
himself, before him. The subject of study is the pronouncing
of syllables of two letters, the next step in advance after the
alphabet. All are looking at the lesson, and John is proceeding.
“ Now, Joe, what name that one ?”
Joe has his book open before him, and is looking intently at
his lesson.
“ I forgot it,” says Joe.”
“Well, I tell you now ; no forgot ’nother time. Joe.”
“ All right,” replies Joe.
“That one A,” says John, emphatically.
“A,” says Joe, repeating after him.
“Now neckust (next) one, Joe.”
“ Yes,” says Joe.
“P,” says John, repeating his emphasis.
According to the methods of instruction to which we are
accustomed, the next exercise would be the pronunciation
of the vowel and consonant now mastered: but John had
constructed a different method of his own. Having made pupil
No. 1 spell the syllable, he does not wait to teach him how to
pronounce it; for his system is to do the spelling first all round.
He then proceeds to No. 2, who is carefully scrutinising his
open book.
“ Well, Jack, you lookin at it?”
“ Yes,” responds Jack.
“ What name that one you got it ?” (He means to say,
“ What’s the name of that one you’ve got ?”)
“A,” says Jack.
“ Oh, that’s right, Jack, now then neckust one.”
“P,” says Jack.
“ Look at that, now ; I never see before (he means he never
saw the like before). You forget it, I s’pose ? That one -D.”
“.D,” says Jack.
And thus he goes over the remaining syllables with the
remaining pupils. Having completed this process, he comes
back to pupil No. 1, and makes him pronounce the syllable he
had spelt five minutes ago.


“ Now then, Joe.”
“ I forgot it,” says Joe. ....
•« That one ab," says John, correctly pronouncing it with em-
phasis.
“Ab,” repeats Joe, in exactly the same tone and manner as
his preceptor.
By this time I venture to interfere, and point out that it
would be better to make the pupil pronounce the syllable imme-
diately after spelling it. X attempt to illustrate this by taking
Joe in hand for a few minutes; meanwhile, John retires to a
standing position in front of the fireplace, with his hands clasped
together behind him, and I observe a pen behind his ear, fore-
shadowing the exercise in store for the pupils when their
industry shall entitle them to engage in that higher branch of
study. I proceed to explain
“ John, no good that way; you see me what way Ido it, then
you do all-a-same (an expression used among the natives to
mean ‘ all the same
John is all attention. Scare all the pupils.
“ Now then, Joe, are you looking at it?”
“ What name first one ?”
“ A,” says Joe.
“ That’s right, now then, next one ?”
Joe hesitates and says, “ I forgot it.”
Here John interposes, in a half-despairing tone —“ That’s the
way, Joe; Joe always forgot it.”
“Never mind, John; by-and-by he learn quick, wo’nt you,
Joe ?”
“Yes,” says Joe, rather modestly.
“ Now then, you no forgot s’pose I tell you.”
“No.”
“ Well then, that is B.”
“B,” says Joe.
“ Now then, Joe, A and B, say them together, ab."
“Ab" says Joe triumphantly, and repeats it several times.
“ That’s the way to do, John, now you do like that ” —and
forthwith he proceeds on the new plan.
It is astonishing what was accomplished by John’s persever-
ing effort, and though it must be seen he could not do much,
yet he did what he could. He kept these young fellows
together, and exercised a great influence over them for good,
availing himself of the opportunities thus afforded to bring
betore their minds the things which belong to their peace.


Whatever his deficiencies were in reading and writing, he had
fewer in speaking. He could address a Sabbath School without
difficult} 7 , and 1 must say that in an address to the Riley-street
children he expressed himself in a manner that kept up their
interest throughout, The flow of language was uninterrupted,
and although his English was broken, it made his homely illus-
trations all the more impressive, and fixed the truth he endea-
voured to bring out all the more securely in the minds ot his
hearers, who always gave him willing audience.
John could administer a seasonable rebuke to scoffers. On
one Saturday evening, while bringing up the rear ot our house-
hold party on the way to a prayer-meeting, a young man with
whom he was acquainted—known as Jim —attempted to raise a
laugh among his companions at John’s expense by calling oiit
his name audibly, and in somewhat derisive tones drew their
attention to John’s going to the prayer-meeting. But the quiet
answer of John silenced them all. “Very good, you go home
Jim, if you not got no sennes (sense).
The foregoing will convey a better idea of the messenger of
Truth in the incident which it is the principal object of this
narrative to furnish, as well as of the recipient of the message.
'When any of John’s counti’ymen became sick, he never failed
to visit them as far as he was able It happened that four or
five were laid up in Sydney Infirmary at one time ; and having
no opportunity of seeing them during the week, John devoted
the Sabbath afternoon to that purpose. The result of the visit
was related to me by himself at the close of the Mission labours
of the day, just before retiring to rest; and I think I cannot
do better than to give his own description, as near as I possibly
can.
He had gone through the rooms of the Infirmary, from one
to another, speaking a word of sympathy as best he could,
until at last he was at the bedside of a native of an island near
his own, called Mare. This man, like John himself, had been
trained in the knowledge of Christian truth and duty, but after
leaving home, like many a son of more favoured upbringing he
got into the society of the careless and ungodly, both on
board trading vessels and in the ports he visited, which had
a disastrous effect upon the teachings and habits of his early
life. He had heard quite enough of the Gospel necessary for
him to know for salvation, but he had not embraced it for him-
self; he had lived for himself, for pleasure, alas ! sometimes
forbidden pleasure, and had grown quite callous and indifferent


to the instruction imparted to him by his missionary, his teach-
ers, and his home. For, be it remembered there are Christian
homes, in which the godly training of youth is cared for, by the
inhabitants of these distant islands of the sea—dwellings of the
righteous, where is heard the voice of joy and melody, in these
uttermost parts of the Earth which are a portion of the great
possession of Him to whom the heathen has been given for an
inheritance. Weak, emaciated, and disconsolate, poor Udaroi
lay in his bed in the Infirmary, where everything that medical
aid could furnish was provided for him. His power of intercourse
was limited to the little broken English he had acquired, and
even John, who could not speak Mare, had no other means of
conversation.
But let John tell his own story.
‘•Well, John,” sdTid I, “what have you been about to-day ?”
“ I was Hospital,” he replied ; “ Five native there. I spoket
to all of it (all of them). One man very sick, poor fellow—l
never see (never saw the like)—oh, very sick, poor fellow.”
“ Well ?”
“ I commin up to him, and I lookin at him. I tell him, ‘ You
very sick, I s’pose.’ He tell me, ‘Yes.’ ” John repeated this
word in a whisper, in imitation of the weak voice in which it
was uttered.
“Ah well, I suppose you all right,” meaning, he hoped he
was prepared for the great change that seemed so near.
“ He tell me ‘ No —too late ’ ” —repeating the man's words in
a whisper, and evidently imitating his manner,
“ I tell him, ‘No—no say too late. Two thing I gom a
tell a you. One—you no ’member dying thief on the cross—no
too late for him—that one. ’Nother thing I tell you—you very
sick now, you can’t speak now—very good a you lift up your
heart to God, suppose you no speak, He hear what you
think —you say, Lord, merciful for me, I’m a sinner.
By this time the tears had begun to course fast down the
poor invalid’s cheeks ; the words of the unpretending mission-
ary had discovered their fountain ; and the emotion tliey had
awakened caused them to flow. Far from his home, from the
scenes of his childhood, and the influences for good in which he
had been brought up; a wanderer, in a strange land, and
amongst strange people, poor Udaroi bethought him of privi-
leges and meicies slighted, and Gospel offers rejected or made
little of, and now, in the near prospect of eternity, where was
he to look ?


He remained quiet for some time, while John remained beside
him, quite absorbed in the interest he now felt for him.
John’s words had evidently been carried home with power,
and a work was silently going-on during that eventful silence.
Presently the poor invalid languidly stretched out his hand
and touched John ; he was too weak to speak. John leant for-
ward, and putting his ear close to his mouth, thinking he wanted
something—perhaps a drink—said, “What you want—can I
get anything for you ?”
“No,” he whispered, “me no want anything now. What
you tell me, very true. Thank you—thank you because you
come tell me that. Me believe that— vert true.”
I felt deeply interested in the labourer and his work. Learn-
ing that Udaroi was a Mare native, and having acquired
sufficient knowledge of that language to converse intelligently
with him upon the great truths John had so clearly put before
him, I said to John, “Ah well, John, we must go to see him
tomorrow morning, because I can speak to him in Mare, The
gentlemen at the Infirmary will let me in when I tell them,
although it may not be the right time for visitors, and you come
with me.”
„ Next morning we went to the Infirmary as arranged, to learn
he had died during the night.
Poor Udaroi! the grace of God that bringeth salvation and
hath appeared to all men, reached thee. Thy tears showed thy
repentance ; thy words, few and broken ’tis true, expressed thy
faith, and amid the darkness surrounding thy dying bed, there
shine out the beams of Gospel hope ; thou hast been snatched as
a brand from the burning, to illustrate the far-reaching mercy of
God which followed thee all thy days to the very end, and in
the hour of thy extremity raised up His own chosen instrument
to convey His message of mercy, with the blessings that fol-
lowed.
Is not this as a brand snatched from the fire ?
And was not the humble instrument made effective for the
purpose ? Things that are despised hath God chosen, yea,
things that are not to bring to nought things that are, that no
flesh should glory in His presence.
We will be glad and rejoice in His mercy, and to Him we
ascribe the kingdom, the power, and the glory.
Geo. Loxton & Co., Printers, Sydney.




■
