

(Kljurdj nf jKilirreir, IBwaft
hutb Jst. JEargartt JHagses
THIRD ANNUAL
COMMEMORATION
SERVICE
IN HONOUR OF
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP,
R.N.
Patron:
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF KENT, K.G
President
ALDERMAN THE RT. HON.
THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD OF HYTHE, C.B.E. LL.D.
FRIDAY, nth OCTOBER, 1935


©rber of Service
3 p.m. Organ Music.
Concerto in B flat. [Handel).
All standing.
Minister : I was glad when they said unto me, we will go into
the House of the Lord. Our feet shall stand in thy gates, O
Jerusalem.
O Lord, open Thou our lips.
And our mouth shall shew forth Thy praise.
O God, make speed to save us.
0 Lord, make haste to help us.
Glory be to the Father and to the Son and to the Holy
Ghost.
As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be,
World wdthout end. Amen.
Praise ye the Lord.
The Lord’s Name he praised.
Psalm 67 Deus Misereatur.
God be merciful unto us, and bless us : and shew us the light
of his countenance, and be merciful unto us :
That thy way may be known upon earth : thy saving health
among all nations.
Let the people praise thee, O God : yea, let all the people
praise thee.
O let the nations rejoice and be glad : for thou shalt judge
the folk righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.
Let the people praise thee, O God : yea, let all the people
praise thee.
Then shall the earth bring forth her increase : and God, even
our own God, shall give us his blessing.
God shall bless us ; and all the ends of the world shall fear
him.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son : and to the Holy
Ghost;
As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be : world
without end. Amen.
Let us Pray.
The Lord’s Prayer and Collects
Prayer for the King
and ail in Authority under him.
Almighty God, the fountain of all goodness, we humbly
beseech Thee to bless our Sovereign Lord, King George, the
Parliaments in all his Dominions and all who are set in authority
under him ; that they may order all things in wisdom, righteous-
ness and peace, to the honour of Thy holy name and the good
of Thy Church and people; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.


Prayer for the British Empire.
Almighty God, who rulest in the kingdom of men, and hast
given to our Sovereign Lord, King George, a great dominion
in all parts of the earth : Draw together, we pray Thee, in true
fellowship the men of divers races, languages and customs, who
dwell therein, that, bearing one another’s burdens and working
together in brotherly concord, they may fulfil the purpose of Thy
providence and set forward Thy everlasting kingdom. Amen.
Prayer for Australia and the Homeland.
O Almighty God, whose Divine Providence ordereth all
things and guides and rules the destinies of Nations and Peoples :
We thank Thee that out of much toil and heroic struggles our
beloved and honoured Australia has become a great and dis-
tinguished Member of the British Empire and Commonwealth.
We honour Australia, always loyal and in times of danger
ever ready to give her full offering of Life, Strength, Means and
Resources to serve and help the Motherland in the day of trial.
We pray that every blessing spiritual and material, may by Thy
Divine Grace, follow her in the path of Honour, Loyalty, Peace,
Fidelity and Manly enterprise.
Bless O Lord and strengthen for their high duties the
Ministers and Governments of the Commonwealth of Australia
and grant that all therein may be united in the bond of brother-
hood, in prosperity and peace and in the Fellowship of the Faith.
Forgive, O Lord, the faults, neglects and errors of the past
in the course of our Empire development and grant us wisdom
to fulfil Thy laws of Eternal righteousness, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.
psalm 100
Jubilate; Stanford
O be joyful in the Lord, all ye lands : serve the Lord with
gladness and come before his presence with a song.
Be ye sure that the Lord he is God : it is he that hath made
us and not we ourselves ; we are his people and the sheep of
his pasture.
O go your way into his gates with thanksgiving, and into
his courts with praise : be thankful unto him, and speak good
of his Name.
For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is everlasting : and his
truth endureth from generation to generation. Amen.
e Xesson
Epistle to the Romans, Chapter XII.
to be read by
THE VISCOUNT WAKEFIELD OF HYTHE.


Advance Australia Fair.
Australia’s sons, let us rejoice,
For we are young and free ;
We’ve golden soil and wealth for toil,
Our home is girt by sea.
Our land abounds in nature’s gifts
Of beauty rich and rare,
In history’s page let every stage
Advance, Australia fair.
Beneath our radiant Southern Cross
We’ll toil with hearts and hands,
To make our youthful Commonwealth
Renowned of all the lands ;
For loyal sons beyond the seas
We’ve boundless plains to share,
With courage let us all combine
To advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.
REFRAIN.
In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia fair.
Australian Patriotic Songs.
The Revd. JOHN WILLIAM WARD,
Rector of Newdigate, Surrey ; formerly Archdeacon of Monaro,
and Vice-Dean of St. Saviour’s Cathedral, Goulburn, N.S.W.
HYMN 281 Lead us Heavenly Father, lead us.
National Anthem.
Official Peace Version, 1919.
God save our gracious King,
Long live our noble King,
God save the King !
Send him victorious,
Happy and glorious,
Long to reign over us ;
God save the King !
One realm of races four,
Blest more and ever more
God save our land !
Home of the brave and free.
Set in the silver sea.
True nurse of chivalry,
God save our land !
Of many a race and birth
From utmost ends of earth,
God save us all !
Bid strife and hatred cease,
Bid hope and joy increase,
Spread universal peace,
God save us all !
Benediction.


B>. iWtlbreb’b Cfjucdj & Jlreab Street OTlarb.
A d mira 1 Artk ur Pfcillip M emonal
patron:
H.R.H. THE DUKE OF KENT
iPresrtfcent:
Col. and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield of Hythe
Uice-Prestoents;:
The Rt. Hon. The Lord Mayor of London
The Rt. Rev. The Lord Bishop of London, P.C., K.C.V.0., D.D.
The Primate of Australia
The Prime Minister of Australia
The Rt. Hon. The Secretary of State for the Dominions
His Excellency The Governor-General of Australia
The High Commissioner for Australia
The Rt. Hon. Lord Denman, P.C., G.C.M.G., K.C.V.O.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Forster of Lepe, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.L.
The Rt. Hon. Lord Stonehaven, P.C., G.C.M.G., D.S.O.
Admiral Sir Dudley De Chair, K.C.8., K.C.M.G.
Sir Archibald Weigall, K.C.M.G.
The Chief Justice of Australia
The Chairman of the Royal Empire Society
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company
The Master of the Curriers’ Company
The President of the Australian Pioneer Club
The President of the London Australian Society
Committee:
Col. and Alderman The Rt. Hon. Viscount Wakefield of Hythe
Rev. J. Richardson-Eyre, M.A., Rector Chairman
Mr, T. G. Devas |
Mr. W. L. Taylor [Churchwardens
Mr. Herbert E. Hill, C.C. j
Mr. Deputy J. H. White, C.C. Mr. A. Mackenzie Hay, C.C.
Mr. J. Northcott, C.C.
Mr. E. F. Donne, C.C.
Mr. F. B. Coates, C.C.
Mr. H. Meldrum, C.C.
Mr. S. Parkes, C.C.
The Official Secretary of Australia House
The Master of the Cordwainers’ Company
The Master of the Curriers’ Company
Mr. Hanbury Davies
Mr. D. Hope-Johnston, M.A., F.R.Hist.S.
Mrs. D. Hope-Johnston
Secretaries;:
Mr. F. W. Mander, M.A., Ward and Vestry Clerk,
7 Cannon Street, E.C.4
The Official Secretary, Australia House, Strand, W.C.2
The Secretary, The Royal Empire Society,
Northumberland Avenue, W.C.2


jHilbrefc, Preat Street
THE ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP COMMEMORATION
Friday, October 11th, 1935, at 3 p.m.
Admit
to attend the
THIRD ANNUAL SERVICE IN COMMEMORATION
Admiral Arthur Phillip
(born in Bread Street Ward on the 11th of October, 1738)
Founder of Sydney and Australia, 1788,
to maintain and strengthen our good and cordial relations
with Australia.
And aftervoards at Cordnvainers' Hall, This ticket to he given
7 Cannon Street , E.CA on entering the Church.


A.D. 1935
Jflilbreb, Preab Street
THE ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP COMMEMORATION
Friday Afternoon, October lit It, at 3
The President, The Viscount Wakefield of Hythe, and the Committee
cordially invite
and Lady
to attend
The Third Annual Service in commemoration of
ADMIRAL ARTHUR PHILLIP
(horn in 13 re ad Street Ward on the 1 ith of October, 1738)
Founder of Sydney and Australia, 1788,
to maintain and strengthen our good and cordial relations with Australia.
cAnd afterwards
at Cordwainers 3 Hall.
F-S-dJ.P. to F. IV. Mander, M.A.,
Cordwainers 3 Hall, 7 Cannon Street, E.C.4
