

Thirteen Years
OF AN
AUSTRALIAN PIONEER’S
LIFE:
WITH
A Brief American Interval.
01 Ze't &ouZ'ne :
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
Howev Street, off Little Collins Street.


THE LATE HON. J. G. DOUGHARTY, M.L.C.


THIRTEEN YEARS
OF AN
AUSTRALIAN PIONEER’S LIFE.




Thirteen Years
OF AN
AUSTRALIAN PIONEER’S
LIFE:
WITH
A Brief American Interval.
9TC<T Sout-ne :
A. H. MASSINA & CO., PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
Howey Street, off Little Collins Street.




PREFACE.
In deference to the oft-expressed wishes of not
only the members of his own loving and sorrowing
family, but also of the many intimate friends of
my late dear father, I have essayed the compilation
of some of his initial Australian experiences. In
this work I have been materially, nay, mainly,
aided by the letters on the subject he wrote in
1853 to a medical friend in Glasgow. May I
venture to hope that this slight souvenir of one to
whom I owe so much will prove acceptable ? My
own individual effort pretends to no merit beyond
that contained in loving remembrance—of deep
and enduring filial respect. The reminiscences,
fragmentary as they are, contain—as I feel sure


will be admitted—some valuable lessons on the
virtues of and Perseverance. How
necessary these were to our earlier settlers Colonial
History has made apparent. That these virtues,
coupled with an integrity so strict as to earn for
him the respect of all his business contemporaries,
should have been found combined in my dear
father is a source of the highest gratification, not
only to his family, but also to his friends, “ whose
name,” I am proud to say, “ is legion.”
J. D.


[Compiled from Letters written in 1853i\
THIRTEEN YEARS
OF AN
Australian Pioneer’s Life
WITH A
BRIEF AMERICAN INTERVAL.
APPOINTED A MANAGER.
the first months of my arrival
this colony (New South Wales) I
often intended to write to you, my
dear Glasgow friend. As time rolled
T on, a sense of shame at my own
procrastination withheld my pen from pouring out
my thanks, and it is only now that I can muster


courage to recall my name to your remembrance
with some feeling of pride that your kindness
was not wasted on a worthless object. After a
voyage characterised by little worthy of note —
saving your uncle, Dr. Daniel King, being long
laid up with fever, when I had to act under his
guidance in the attendance of the sick, dispensing
medicine to the bold Highland men and their wives
in sickness, brought about by the rich pork and
beef fare to which they were so unaccustomed —and
a sojourn of some days at the charming city of
Rio de Janeiro, I arrived at Sydney. My first
offer of employment was that of a dresser in the
Sydney Hospital at 4s. 6d. a day; but ultimately,
on the recommendation of your uncle, I was
appointed to the management of “ Warrah,” a large
freehold property on Liverpool Plains, belonging to
the Australian Agricultural Company, whose affairs
were managed by Captain Phillip Parker King,
R.N.
For some weeks I remained at Port Stephens, the
head-quarters of the principal officers in the com-
pany’s service. There I enjoyed the countenance
of the chief surgeon, Dr. Inches, R.N. Living
amongst his well-educated and agreeable family, I
had an opportunity of rubbing off much of the


rusticity of my demeanour, and of familiarising
myself with the forms and graces of refined society.
To Dr. Inches I owe many a lesson which has been
useful to me in after life.
GAINING VALUABLE EXPERIENCE
It may not be uninteresting to you to learn
something of the company in whose service I
acquired a knowledge of pursuits the mastery of
which has led to my present elevation. About
thirty years ago a million acres of the waste
lands of New South Wales were granted to a
body of London merchants and others, incor-
porated, I think, by Royal Charter, which gave
them a monopoly of the coal mines of the
colony and other immunities, under which they
were bound to expend a million of pounds in the
improvement of their grants—which were taken at
Port Stephens on the coast, and at Peel’s River on
Liverpool Plains, the waters of which run into Lake
Alexandria in South Australia—also in the intro-
duction of the best breeds of sheep, cattle, and
horses.
The company obtained abundant labour by assign-
ments of convicts, and in course of time large tracts
of country were cleared and cultivated, producing
wheat, maize, and other cereals in profusion; so


much so, that, in a plenteous year, tons of maize
could be taken away for the plucking of the
ears—with pumpkins profuse, the chief food of the
inhabitants of Australia then. The company’s stock,
when I joined, numbered about 120,000 sheep, 8000
cattle, and 1200 horses. Gradually the land assumed
the appearance of an English estate, with a semi-
tropical gorgeousness from the profusion of vines,
oranges, limes, and peaches. The houses of the
numerous superintendents were remarkable for the
display of flowers and fruit, as also the comfort of
the homes and genuine hospitality which reigned
within—Stroud, the capital, being a veritable model
village. After three months spent in the improving
I have alluded to, I started for Liverpool Plains,
where were 5000 West Highland cattle, of which
I took charge, having under me the requisite
number of stockmen, drovers, and hutkeepers—all
convicts.
I shall not weary you with the details. Suffice it
to say, I took extreme delight in the strange, wild
life I was now leading, galloping on horseback
over vast plains, through tangled bush and brake,
in search of stray cattle or horses, rapidly acquiring
dexterity in my vocation. For years I was con-
tented with my lot, and care knew me not. ’Tis
true my income was small, but that mattered little


to one who had no expensive habits. My little
savings were invested in brood mares or remitted
to my mother. As time wore on I became intimate
with many young men of education who had left
home, with small capital, to become squatters. I
eagerly seized every opportunity of improving
myself in their society, and by perusal of their
books. To Dr. Robert Mackintosh, my closest
friend, I owe much in this way He is a son of
the late John Mackintosh, a lecturer in the Edin-
burgh School of Medicine, author of “ Practice of
Physic,” and other works, which, no doubt, you are
versed in. Robert was for some years assistant
surgeon in the company’s service; then was married
to a Miss Wilkinson, whose brother-in-law, Dr.
Andrew Diddle, was in the Hope-street Dispensary,
now a surgeon in large practice in Maitland, a town
of some size on the Hunter River. On Mackintosh’s
marriage he went to Sydney to practice, and from
that time I dated my misfortunes. I had lost my
Mentor.
A TURF ADVENTURE POINTS A MORAL.
The only amusement which brings bushmen
together is that of the annual race meeting.
Having bought some fine brood mares from Mr.


William Gordon, formerly of Milrig, in Ayrshire, now
living with his beautiful wife, one of the Campbells
of Jura, at an estate on the Hunter, called
“ Tallisker,” and being in the position to obtain
the service of the company’s imported blood horses,
especially a Scotch one called “ Callander,” bred by
Sir James Boswell, of Auchinleck—familiar name
to all us Scots—l bred some fine colts, which I was
induced to race, and proved very lucky, carrying
off some of the best prizes. About this time a Mr.
Patrick David Lander, from the Carse of Gowrie
(whose sister is married to John Hill Burton, an
Edinburgh advocate of some eminence as a literary
man, the Historiographer Royal of Scotland), died,
and bequeathed to me a horse famous as a racer in
those parts, yclept “ Gumbo.” I won many times
with him, and ere long found myself master of
£7OO. This was in 1847. A Mr. James Blane Reid,
from Greenock, proposed to me to give up my
situation and join him in forming a station on the
Burnett River, called “ Gayndah ” since, north of
Brisbane or Moreton Bay. The capital was £ISOO
—my share to be one-third. Before I took the
necessary steps to intimate to Captain King my
desire to resign my charge at “ Warrah,” a race
meeting was to be held on the company’s land at
Tamworth. Mark me, up to this time I had never


betted. In an evil hour I resolved to stake my all,
double my capital, enter the partnership on an
equal footing, and leave the Turf for ever. [I may
here remark, par parenthese, that my dear father
did not adhere to his determination. In later days
he was one of the founders of the Victoria Racing
Club, for which, for many years, he acted as
trustee and judge. —J. D.] The day big with my
fate arrived, “Gumbo,” alias “Wee Willie,” never
looked better. I ventured my all upon him with
some officers of the 99th and others. My horse
and myself broke down together. Thus vanished
from my sight the bright vision of being disen-
thralled and of being my own master. My folly
cost me five years’ toil. The moral is plain—
James Reid, my intended partner, is a man with
£20,000, and before long will go home independent.
Chagrined, mortified, and humiliated, I deter-
mined no longer to remain in a part of the country
where I had perpetrated such an act of madness.
I requested leave to resign. Captain King was
pleased to compliment me on my past efficiency
during nine years’ service, and wished me to recall
my resignation. My mind was made up, however, so
he did me the honour to appoint as my successor a
young Frenchman whom I recommended, and the
reward for my zeal for him was —he paid me for


the horse stock I had and sold to him in bills, which
proved so much waste paper. Tis an oft-told tale.
I have since learnt, as a rule, how little his
countrymen’s professions and caresses are worth.
FIGHTING WITH BLACKS AND FLOODS.
Uncertain which way to turn my steps, I
received a letter from the firm of Gilchrist and
Alexander, Glasgow men, and now merchants in
Sydney, to whom I had rendered some service on
the death of their manager at “ Wee Waa” —my
lamented friend, Patrick D. Lander. (Here let me
digress for a brief space to tell you of him. He
was handsome, clever, in the prime of life, a dear
and loved companion, with a voice like Wilson’s,
and sang the Jacobite Ballads in the same heart-
stirring manner. One night he came to “ Warrah ”
pale and ill. The old Scotch deerhounds whined
and looked sadly at him, usually so glad and joyous.
He had introsusception of the bowel. I did all I
could for him, far removed from skilled medical aid,
even to the application of a suppository. But, alas !
he died in my arms on Christmas Eve of ’47.
Alone in the little house, on the same stretcher,
the dead man, whom I loved so well, and myself
lay side by side. When morning came, my hut-


keeper—Old Doughy—and myself dug his grave
and laid him therein. Never will he he forgotten
while life lasts with me). The letter apprised me of
their having heard of my resignation, and enclosed
an offer of the management of the Redfern
Estate in N.S.W. and Port Phillip, of which they
were the agents. I proceeded to Sydney, matters
were quickly arranged, and after an affectionate
leave-taking with the Mackintoshes, I set off on
my journey to the Murray, some 800 miles, my
goods and chattels, comprising old “ Gumbo ” and a
mare, carrying my spare duds. With hut little
money in my purse I reached my new home in
safety, situated on the banks of the Murray, the
boundary stream between New South Wales and
Victoria, and about the only river of magnitude
in Australia. For two years and upwards I toiled
through with a herd of 8000 cattle, fighting with
blacks and floods, my great source of gratification
being that by dint of care and economy large
profits were returned to my employers.
IN SEARCH OF EL DORADO.
About the end of 1849 wondrous tales began to
reach the ears of the colonists of a new El Dorado
■California—from which Australia is distant about


two months’ sail. In his letters to me Dr.
Mackintosh dilated glowingly upon the brilliant
prospects now open to adventurers such as myself,
and urged my going to San Francisco with him.
Struck with auri sacra fames, I gave up my
situation, and embarked with him and another
friend in the good ship Johannes Sarkies, teak
built, with a Lascar crew, a Joint Stock Company,
armed with all the known implements for digging—
tools, tents; with a caravan like a wild beast show,
fitted up with sufficient shelves for physics to form
a compact peripatetic medical establishment; in
short, everything we could think of to carry on
vigorous operations amongst the Yankees.
With the exception of daily squabbles with the
old bilious skipper —with all the pepper of all the
curries he had ever swallowed (backed up by an
out-and-out termagant of a wife) concentrated on
his tongue, and a passing visit to Pitcairn Islands,
where, in primitive simplicity, dwell the mild
descendants of the Mutineers of the Bounty —a
small community gifted with a natural polish,
of cheerful aspect, chaste, and content —nothing
transpired to break the monotony of a protracted
voyage through the Tropics. As we neared the
land—the haven of our hopes —and beheld ships
crowding from every quarter of the globe towards


a like destination, then did we feel the reaction,
and begin to speculate on the future. Time can
never efface from my memory the scene which
presented itself as we entered the passage—the
Golden Gate—which leads to San Francisco. On
either hand a bold, rocky coast, crowned with
dark, cypress-like trees. As we rounded the
grinning battery we beheld a sight which filled us
with astonishment and awe. A thousand fine ships
floated in that noble harbour, presenting a very
forest of masts. And high over that city of a day
hung a mass of fire and flame and smoke. We
landed on the following morning, and took our
places amid the throng of the densely crowded
place. Nothing struck us so much as the
surpassing energy with which the Americans,
undaunted, set to work amongst the yet
smouldering embers to rebuild the city, fated
again and again to be consumed, still rising ‘Tike
the Phoenix from its ashes.” We gathered that
sickness was very prevalent at the diggings, and
as the rainy season was setting in, our prospects
as diggers were not of a nature to cheer us. My
friend the Doctor and myself still determined to
persevere, get the caravan out of the hold of the
Johannes Sarkies, with its stock of medical
comforts, and try our luck on the goldfields. We


had money enough to buy a team of mules, and
the agreement was—l was to be teamster, cook,
and dispenser of drugs, my mate to doctor the
miners, and we were to divide the spoil, having a
secret locker wherein to hide the gold-dust got in
fees. “ Alas! the schemes of mice and men gang
aft agley.” The skipper, Gillane, when we boarded
his ship, forgot not the grudge he had against his
unruly passengers. We set to work hoisting the
great green-painted waggon from the hold to lower
into a scow or shore boat. The captain crept out,
unobserved by my mate or myself, to the yard-
arm, and just as we swung to it, out came his
knife, he severed the rope, and splash into the
Bay of San Francisco went our peripatetic home
and drug store, crammed with all our parapher-
nalia, heavy enough to sink ten fathoms deep. We
had no shooters, so we went mournfully ashore.
But the fiendish face and derisive yell are too
deeply marked in my remembrance ever to be
forgotten whilst memory holds a seat.
What a strange and motley scene was that
presented by the streets of the town founded by
the old Spanish Monks! Drawn thither by the
irresistible power of gold were men whom I knew
in Australia as barristers, physicians—yea, ministers,


engaged in the menial offices, some vending fruit,
others selling baby-linen, nursing the sick, shouldering
planks wherewith to build Montgomery-street ; in
short, anything to obtain the means of subsistence.
Because without money you must starve, unknown,
unheeded! One of my companions and myself
paid a visit by invitation to the Hacienda or
Rancho of an old hide drogger skipper—a
naturalised Irishman, yclept Don Timothy Murphy.
Here we had wild cattle hunting, lasso-throwing,
grizzly bear and deer shooting, to our great
delight.
A TRADING CRUISE.
Returning down the Sacramento to ’Frisco, we
met Captain Phil Milner, owner of the clipper brig
Lalla Rookh, a genial Englishman, whom we had
known as a squatter in Victoria. With him we
went on board the Cornwall, one of Green’s clipper
ships, which had arrived from China with a cargo
of frame houses. We assisted Captain Green in
landing these. His crew, like all other crews, had
bolted. In the course of conversation Green men-
tioned that there were 20,000 Americans on the
Isthmus of Panama waiting for shipping to bring
them to San Francisco; and, further, that salted
provisions and so on were at an enormous price.


Milner was regretting his inability to take his brig
on such a trip, as his Lascar crew had levanted,
leaving him with his mate as the crew all mustered.
It was hinted what a good thing it would be for
self and companions (one of them a brother of
Alexander Cheyne, who was a consulting physician
about 1840 in Glasgow) to buy a cargo of pork,
beef, and breadstuff, work the Lalla Rookh our-
selves, and share and share alike, sell our venture,
and return to ’Frisco with a load of Yankees, in
time to go to the mines when the rainy season
would be over. Meanwhile, Mackintosh and a
brother chip—Dr. N., from Dublin—were to begin
practice pending our return, although every street,
as the Chinese and other edifices were run up,
showed on every door, nearly, doctors, surgeons
simply; operative ditto; dentist ditto—indeed, every
grade of the healing art hanging out a sign.
In consideration of the profits to accrue from the
spec., we found the brig and determined, to work
her down the coast, though none but the mate,
poor Charlie Ogilvie, knew aught of the seaman’s
craft. We ladened her, and away we sailed; but
got nearly wrecked at the very outset by our
awkwardness and a drunken pilot. Nothing
daunted, we carried on, calling at Monterey and


Acapulco. Baffling winds, light airs, and calms
protracted our voyage for nine weeks. At length
we sighted the lovely Bay of Panama. Our feeling
of joy at the charming prospect was soon fated to
be dispelled in the rudest manner, however, for
on landing we found most of the Americans had
returned to the States, panic-stricken with the
tidings that cholera had broken out and was
raging in California. We found ourselves but one
of seventy lots of unfortunate bottoms which had
come on the same errand. Our provisions were
valueless, the New Granadians eschewing salt pork,
etc., most religiously.
We were nonplussed, as our every shilling was
invested in the cargo. Milner would by no means
consent to return to San Francisco sans money,
sans crew, sans everything. Until we should
deliberate upon what was to be the next move, we
moved the brig over to a pretty little gem of an
island called Taboga. The widow of a sergeant —
a deserter from his regiment, stationed at Jamaica
many years before —reigned sole mistress of the
island, her only rival being the priest, who, in
broad sombrero, used to —absolution being over—
strut past where our brig was moored with a
game-cock over his shoulder to do a match with
the sergeant’s widow in cock-fighting.


My great chum whilst there was a youth who
had been interpreter to the Comanche Indian tribe.
He had an old monastery fitted up as a hoarding-
house and bar, the accommodation being grass
hammocks—swung in every direction —Monagahela
whisky and peach brandy in profusion. He was a
rare youth, and was ready to take me into partner-
ship and share the business with me, and that
without a maravedi, and the old Glasgow widow
ready to back me because I came from near her
native town, Glasgow —a Hamilton laddie. In con-
sideration of my birthplace I was treated right
royally—pineapples, bananas, mangoes galore, and
my modest wardrobe bleached white as driven
snow.
ON THE MAINLAND.
We frequently visited the mainland, where the
bold Buccaneers delighted to hold their revels.
The wealth of the place seems to have been
lavished upon the adornment of their churches,
rich services of silver and gold —a striking contrast
to the bare and rugged pavement, and ragged,
kneeling penitents. The priests frequently preside
at the monte table and the cock-fights. The only
good feature about Panama and the people was
the children being taught to read—black, white,


and brown without distinction. By parting with
some of our valuables we raised enough money to
hire mules to make an excursion to the crest of
the range, the great backbone of the country,
whence, by ascending trees, we saw the Atlantic
and Pacific on either hand. The sight of the broad
Atlantic filled us with regret to think that we
were within about fifteen days of home, of our
native land, and had not the wherewithal to get
there. We saw Chagres, renowned for mud,
miasma, yellow fever, and alligators. In returning —
oh, horrible recollection! —we passed many dead
and dying Americans, great Green Mountain boys,
stricken down by the fell fiend cholera on their
way from California, on whom huge vultures were
feasting. Faugh! Others were pacing along on
their mules, carolling gaily “ Carry me back to Old
Yirginny.”
BACK TO AUSTRALIA.
It was now resolved amongst us to continue in
the brig, carry her to Lima, sell the provisions,
get a cargo for Australia, and return to the land
we had left on our gold-seeking excursion. We
topped our boom one fine morning and stood to
the south, threading our way through the numerous
little islands, green as emeralds, which stud the


Bay of Panama. Luck seemed to set in against
us —the wind blew dead in our teeth for many
days.
Excepting a little trade with the New Columbians,
some sport —terrapin (land turtle) catching—on the
Gallapagos group, and a visit to Guayaquil, famous
for the manufacturing of Panama hats, we did
nothing, and at last bore away in despair for the
Marquesas. From here we had to run for our
lives, having become embroiled with a French
Commandant, who blamed the captain and crew of
the Lalla Rookh for aiding and abetting the
Native King in an attempt to get possession of
the French fort. A shotted gun fired across our
bows made us trip our anchor in double-quick time.
Steering through the Georgian group, trusting in
Providence and the smallest chart in the world as
a guide, we at length sighted Tahiti, narrowly
missing the fate of a French brig-of-war which
was wrecked within biscuit throw of us.
ALMOST BECOME PIRATES.
Rounding Captain Cook’s Point, we dropped our
anchor in Papatee, in the midst of a fleet of
Yankee whalers, two French frigates, and a war
steamer. During the latter part of our cruising


the captain had behaved in a most rascally manner,
secretly devouring tins of salmon and other deli-
cacies, guzzling claret in his cabin, leaving us, who
had done so much for him, to make the best of
pork rotted by long keeping in the Tropics, and
biscuit that would crawl off the table of its own
accord—a mass of weevils. So mortified were we
at the change in the man, together with his intense
greed and selfishness, that more than once we
determined to arm ourselves, seize the brig, and
land on some small island, subsisting upon our
provisions and cocoanuts until relief came. The
rainy season was at its height. And such rain!
Poor Cheyne took seriously ill, or assuredly we
would have put our design into execution. Thank-
ful I am we did not!
We ultimately resolved to leave the Lalla Rookh
at Tahiti, and, as we had become tolerably expert
seamen, ship before the mast to Sydney.
TAHITI, THE BEAUTIFUL.
Let me linger a moment to give a glimpse of
Tahiti, for it is indeed the green spot in the waste
of my existence. One might almost venture to say
one had realised the most glowing descriptions of


Paradise. Huge pinnacles of rock, pyramid-formed,
lost in fleecy vapour. Tiny waterfalls, like threads
of silver glancing from the sides of hills, mantled
with rich green climbing creepers of the tropics.
Lower down, groves of oranges, bread-fruit, and
banana. Bright red clusters of mummy apple,
and the graceful cocoa palm bending over the
tideless water. Luscious fruit, gorgeous flowers,
the many-coloured shells and branching coral, with
a soft, balmy air stealing through the deep cool
shade, inviting the wanderer to rest and refresh his
weary frame, and forget for a while the battle
of life.
Here we were fortunate enough, by the aid of
Mr. Gray Brown, the American Consul, to dispose
of our provisions at about a fifth of what they
had cost, and after hawking them over a goodly
portion of the globe! We took a chief’s house, and
resolved to enjoy ourselves till Cheyne recovered.
Dr. Johnston, from Dumfries, who practises on the
island, and the French surgeon of the fleet, came
daily to visit him. From everyone we received
kindness, with the exception of Mr. Miller, reputed
British Consul, a man from whom we sought
redress against Milner, the owner of the brig.
"H* “H” "H* “H* •H*


[Here my fathers Diary ends. I have it in
contemplation, however, to bring down his later
experiences to the date of his death. Covering as
these do some of the most sensational incidents in
Australia’s history, I do not feel justified in
entering at present on a work requiring the fullest
and most careful research.—J. D.]


A. H. MASSXNA AND CO.,
GENERAL PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
HOWEY STREET, MELBOURNE.


'
m


