

i-,., v " *.
: V THIRTY-FIVE YEARS' I
£ . ~ , . ■ fy *
I *&■■ ~ i : ’ 'f>\
;;' *4, on the
t $ MEW SOUTH WALES $
■- =_==
I :M Pt>?
If: RAILWAYS %
£W, ‘ l*fl
:*3 ■ -■ ■ - fi
|4 Work of-the late ■ l/fyj
* 'l&4 ‘
$j ■ MR. JOHN WHITTON, CE.
f -
t. f4i “ of New South Wales- - : #i
■j?\ m
;^i = _ .-
t Jr t4i
By JOHN RAE, M.A.
M' ■ W
(E/ Under-Secretary for Works and' Commissioner-for Railways)
U ■ I
if., fiXi
[( T : SYDNEY.: £
BUILDER PRINTING WORKS. 527 KENT STREET. . -
* j 1898. 1
4||| |||^
-j v |§|
■ r ” ■ " * ■*• *• "■ i -■■*••* *• ■*■ *
r“♦ ' . % m*’
# slp
V ±
rr i
kj•.' • ;
-Art :




HIRTY-FIVE YEARS
NEW SOUTH WALES
Tige Work of the late
nuu uiu itt au r r
MR. JOHN WHITTON, C.E.
Eqgiqeer-in-Cf|ief of tfje Railways
of New South Wales.
By JOHN RAB, M.A.
(tx Under-Secretary for Works and Commissioner for Railways)
SYDNEY:
BUILDER PRINTING WORKS, 627 KENT STREET.


THE LATE MR. JOHN WHITTON, MJ.CE.


The hate JVIf. John Whitton, f/I. Inst., C.E.
ENGINEER-IJN-CHIEP of the railways
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
By John Rae, M.A , Ex Under-Secretary for Works
and Commissioner for Railways.*
ON several occasions, during the last few years, Mr.
Whitton, who felt that his services on the railways of
New South Wales for so many years were unknown to the
present generation, and unappreciated by the public, told me
that he should like, before his death, to put in writing a short
narrative of what he had done for the Railways of the colony r
but was at a loss for dates and documents. To remedy this,
in some measure, I sent him a copy of my railway reports,
which give a history of our railways for 32 years, from the
first movement on the subject in 1846, to 1878. He was
much pleased to have them, and at once commenced his
statement. Almost the last time I visited him, at his private
residence, “ Montrose,” North Sydney, he showed me the few
sheets he had written ; but he commenced his work too late
in life, and had frequent slight attacks of illness, which inter-
fered with the progress of his writing, and, unfortunately he
was not destined to finish it.
Before his arrival in the colony, in the prime of life (35),
Mr. Whitton acted as Engineer for the Worcester, Oxford,
and Wolverhampton railway, and also for the Manchester,
Sheffield, and Lincoln lines, and held high testimonials of
his engineering ability, and the value of his services, copies
of which are now in the Railway offices ; but it was the
following letter of Sir Mereton Peto to Lord Stanley that
led to his appointment in the Colony. It is dated 12th
March, 1856. “My Lord, it having come to my know-
•From the N.S. Wales Railway Budget, Nos. 71, 72, July and
August, 1898.


ledge that an engineer of ability is required in New South
Wales, to superintend the construction of railways there,
under the direction of the Government, I have taken the
liberty to address your Lordship on behalf of Mr. Whitton,
a thoroughly practical engineer of considerable professional
attainments, a gentleman of unquestionable principle and
integrity, and, in my opinion, in every respect qualified
to fill the important position for which I have ventured to
recommend him.’'
Soon after Mr. Whitton’s death, Mrs. Whitton sent me
the notes —imperfect as they were—as she knew that such
was her late husband’s intention ; and I consider it a sacred
duty, in memory of my esteemed friend, to do what I can to
supply any omissions in the narrative.
The notes are in his own handwriting. In March, 1856,
he was appointed by the President of the Board of Trade in
England Engineer-in-Chief to lay out and superintend the
construction of railways in New South Wales, and to confer
with Col. Dawson, R.E., to select such assistants as he might
consider desirable to take out with him to the colony. The
gentlemen selected were Messrs. Mason, Drewett, Barton, and
Bridgeman.
He arrived in Sydney in December, 1856, and on the 10th
of that month had an interview at Government House with
the Governor General, Sir Wm. Denison, and was introduced
by him to Captain Mann, Chief Commissioner for Railways-
The other Commissioners at the time were Mr. Thomas
Barker and Captain Hawkins, R.E.
At a Board meeting of the Commissioners, on 18th January,
1857, Mr. Whitton was appointed Engineer-in-Chief for
Railways at £1,500 a year, the appointment to date from the
day of his embarkation from England, and he at once entered
on his duties.
At that time, only 23 miles of railway had been opened for
traffic, viz., from Sydney to Liverpool, on the Southern line,
while on the Northern, from Honeysuckle Point, the works
for a distance of 17 miles were in progress.
The first important matter to which his attention was
naturally directed was the extension of the railway from
Redfern into the city. Early in 1857, he had a consultation
on that subject with Mr. S. A. Donaldson. Colonial Treasurer,
Mr. J. Hay, Minister for Lands and Works, and Captain
Mann, Chief Commissioner, and, after a careful survey of the
localities, they were unanimously of opinion that the best and
most central position for the city station was in Hyde Park,
carrying the railway up to King-street, taking down the
Supreme Court and St. James’ Church. The Registrar-
General's office was not then built. This line would have
crossed over the lower part of Elizabeth and Goulburn streets
on the level, under Liverpool-street, and carrying William-


street over the railway, terminate at King-street, the main
entrance to the passenger station being from that street.
Various lines have since been proposed ; but the one just
described is, in Mr. Whitton’s opinion and that of the
Ministers and Commissioner at the time, the only site upon
which a satisfactory station for Sydney could be erected.
Before leaving the colony for England, in 1889, he had a
model constructed showing the arrangements for a terminal
station, and this model, I believe, is still in the Works offices.
He ridiculed the agitation recently got up against this
scheme, believing it would be well for the citizens if it could be
utilized in the way suggested,and thus be the means of conferring a
great public benefit, and at the same time ornamenting the city.
It is noteworthy that the late Mr. Eddy, another of our
great railway experts, with his brother commissioners, soon
after his arrival, also selected the Park as the best site for the
station ; but, in spite of the advice of such high authorities, the
station still remains at Redfern, causing much congestion of
traffic, much unnecessary expense, and a constant danger to
railway officers and the travelling public.
Before leaving England in 1856 for the colony, papers were
sent to Mr. Whitton from the Board of Trade, stating that
Sir W, Denison, the Governor-General, had made a proposal
to construct 4,000 miles of tramways in the Colony, at a cost
of £4,000 per mile, the rails to be laid on the existing roads
of the Colony, and to be worked by horse power. Mr.
Whitton, on his arrival in Sydney, had many interviews with
His Excellency on this subject, and it is well for the interests
of the Colony that, with all his professional experience, he
had a strong will of his own that would not yield to Minister
or Governor, when he felt that his judgment was right. He
pointed out to Sir W. Denison (who also had a will of his
own) that as there were many instances on the Western line
of grades of 1 in 8 it would be impossible to satisfactorily
work a traffic on such conditions, and suggested that a line be
selected over the mountains, and worked by the ordinary
locomotive engines. His Excellency replied that careful
surveys had been made by a company of sappers and miners
belonging to the Royal Engineers, under the direction of
Captain Hawkins, R.E., and a line of the kind sug-
gested by Mr. Whitton was proved to be thoroughly
impracticable. So, as neither of the strong minds would
give way, the subject was left in abeyance for some time.
During the first year of his service, Mr. Whitton discovered
that the method of keeping the accounts, and the regulations
for working the various branches of the Department, could be
much improved, and, at the request of the Chief Commis-
sioner, he took them all under his charge. They included the
Locomotive and Carriage Branches, Maintenance of Perman-
ent Way and the Workshops generally, and he also assisted


in the general management of the railways. He instituted a
proper system of time, pay and appropriation)sheets, so that
the cost of each separate work could be ascertained, and the
charges against capital and revenue properly distributed.
These accounts were all kept in his own office. He went
through them carefully every month and certified all accounts
for payment. This, of course, involved a considerable amount
of extra labor which was not included in the terms of his
engagement with the Government, but he received no extra
pay for these extra duties.
At this period, wood was being used as fuel in the loco-
motive engines in getting up steam, and almost daily com-
plaints were made by passengers of the destruction of their
dresses, and by owners of property alongside the railways of
the injuries they suffered by the sparks from the engines.
After considering the matter for some time, and trying
several experiments, he had alterations made in the tubes of
the boiler and exhaust pipes, so that coal could be used instead'
of wood. In his journal of 4th February, 1861, he finds the
following entry :—“ Took out 10 a.m. train to Campbelltown
with engine No. 9 burning coal. Experiment quite success-
ful. Ordered all the engines to be altered in the same
manner.” This was the commencement of burning coal in
locomotive engines on these railways, and wood was not after-
wards used, except for lighting the fires.
In January, 1861, I was appointed Under Secretary for
Works and Commissioner for Railways, and was henceforth/
more immediately connected with Mr. Whitton, and in daily
and friendly communication with him.
In giving evidence in January and February, 1857, before-
the Select Committee on ,l Sole Commissioner for Railways
Bill,” Mr. Whitton called attention to the difference of gauge
on the railways in Victoria and New South Wales (the
former being 5 ft. 3 in. and the latter 4 ft. in.) and
pointed out the serious difficulty which would be occasioned
by having a break of gauge when the lines should meet at Al-
bury, the boundary of the two colonies. The members of the
Committee, however, I presume, considered the prospect of ;
the lines meeting at Albury a very remote contingency, and
as the gauge had already been changed, from sft, Sins, to 4ft.
BJins. they did not consider another change desirable. Short-
sighted policy. At this time, the railway rolling stock consisted
of only four locomotive engines, 12 passenger carriages, and
40 trucks, and by laying down an extra rail from Sydney to
Liverpool, the uniformity of gauge could have been effected at
a comparatively trifling cost. But now, I fear it must remain
for many years with all its inconvenience to the traffic on the
various lines, as it would be difficult to estimate the enormous
sum that would be required to correct the fatal error that was
then made. In my railway report of 30th September, 1865*


MR. JOHN RAE, EX-CUMMISSIONER FOR RAILWAYS.




there is a full account of the battle of the gauges and its un-
fortunate result.
The Act 17, Vic. No. 11, fixing the gauge of 4ft. B£in.,
'was forwarded on 15th January, 1853, to the Secretary of
State for approval; but, on the Bth November following,
Earl Gray sent a despatch to the Governor, enclosing a report
from Captain Galton, Assistant Secretary to the Board of
Trade, strongly advising the retention of the Irish gauge,
sft. 3in., on the ground of its superiority,
Mr. Whitton, like Captain Galton, was in favor of the Irish
gauge of sft. 3in., and naturally wished to assimilate the New
South Wales gauge to that of the neighbouring colonies of
Victoria and South Australia ; but since our colony preferred
the 4ft. gauge, he manfully fought in defence of it, and
succeeded in preventing any break of gauge in our own colony,
by the introduction of cheap horse tramways of 2ft. or 3ft. 6in.
gauge.
Surveys had, in the meantime, been made in all directions,
one up the Grose River from Richmond to its source, at
Darling's Causeway by tunnels, through that range down the
river Lett to Hartley. A survey was also made from
Richmond to the Kurrajong along the Bell’s line of
road over Mount Wilson to Hartley’s Causeway, to the
point where the station named Bell has been erected.
Indeed, surveys were made in every direction where it appeared
probable that an easier line would be found than by following
the course generally of the old road from Emu Plains to
Mount Victoria.
Sir W. Denison and his sappers and miners under Captain
Hawkins were not singular in their predilection for horse
tramways with narrow gauges of two or three feet. It was
the general belief that no locomotive railway could penetrate
the rugged ridges of the dividing range, and the people of
Bathurst, we are told, offered a premium of £l,OOO to anyone
who would carry a working railway carriage to their town.
Well, Mr. Whitton succeeded at last in carrying the railway
into and through the city of the plains ; but I never heard
that he received the promised reward. As in the person of
Sir W. Denison, Mr. Whitton found a foeman worthy of his
steel in Mr. W. McLeay, with his cheap and narrow gauge
tramways ; but no advice from Governors or Parliamentary
Committees could prevail on him to give up railways for
tramways, and a uniform gauge of 4ft. for 2ft. or 3ft. 6in.,
and a consequent break of gaaige in our own colony ; and
surely the country ought to thank him for the firmness of
purpose in which he prevented our traffic being carried by
narrow gauge tramways, instead of by the iron horse.
The Railway Commissioners and Mr. Eddy, their Chief,
shortly after his arrival in this colony, very properly took into
consideration the question of grades and curves, and consulted


with Mr. Whitton on the subject, before his departure for
England in June 1889, and afterwards, in July of the same
year, with Mr. Deane, now Engineer-in-Chief, who entirely
agreed with the views of the Commissioners, and took
steps to carry them out; but neither the Railway
Commissioners nor Mr, Deane ever imagined that this re-
flected discredit on Mr. Whitton, as they knew the circum-
stances under which he had to labor in the pioneer days of
railways in the colony, so different from those of the
present time. But Mr. Whitton, before he left the colony,
had commenced the task of improving grades, and, before the
Commissioners took office, had sent an engineer to the pro-
posed route for the Njngan and Cobar line to look into the
matter of improving the grades. It was then shown that a
ruling grade of 1 in 60 could be obtained, without difficulty,
and at little expense. But Mr. Whitton’s working days
were drawing to a close, and the present Commissioners very
properly continued the process after Mr. Whitton was struck
down with age and infirmity.
Those who now travel so easily on these railways, at express
speed, have little idea of the difficulties that existed of finding
a path for travellers through the Blue Mountains. It is well
known that the first explorers were repeatedly baffled in their
attempt to find a track across the dividing range. At last,
after many trials, they succeeded in their efforts, and the
present road was laid out. But, when the question of railway
extension had to be considered, grave doubts generally existed
as to the possibility of getting a railway across the mountains
at all, except at a prohibitive cost. To work out this question,
in the opinion of Mr. Deane, the present Engineer-in-Chief
for Railway Construction, no better engineer could have been
found than Mr. Whitton, with his intimate experience of rail-
way construction and locomotive work, on English lines and
in the colony, and, it may be added, his indomitable perse-
verance and pluck, as already detailed in his encounter with
Sir W. Denison, who assured him from careful surveys,
that his idea of taking a locomotive over the Blue Mountains
was an impossibility ; but there was no such word in Mr.
Whitton’s vocabulary, and he waited for the arrival of a new
Governor, in the person of Sir John Young, in the hope of
being able to convince him of the superiority of railways with
4ft. 8-Jin. gauge worked by steam to tramways of 2ft. or
3ft. 6in, moved by horse power.
Mr. Whitton had evidently no predilection for second-class
cheap railways. In October, 1860, he submitted proposals
for an extension of the railways from Penrith to Bathurst at
£25,211 per mile, and from Picton to Goulburn at £18,270
per mile. These were for first-class lines, with the best avail-
able curves and grades and permanent way. But they were
rejected as too costly. Cheap horse tramways had been.


suggested as the only way out of the difficulty, and had many
and strong supporters. But Mr. Whitton, to get rid of what
he considered a blemish to the country, gave up, with a
grudge, his proposal for first-class railways—and on 31st
July, 1861, at the instance of His Excellency Sir John
Young, through Captain Ward, R.E., submitted a further
report, showing how cheaper lines—to meet the circumstances
of the time—could be constructed, between Picton and Goul-
burn on the south, and Penrith to Bathurst on the west, the
cost of haulage on the western line by locomotive, and by
horse traction ; but the task imposed on him was a severe one.
He was asked to mark out a line from Campbelltown to
Goulburn (a distance of 80 miles) that should not cost in
construction more than £300,000, the same to be adapted for
carrying a locomotive engine of 13 tons weight, including
water. Gradients not to be steeper than 1 in 20 nor the
curves sharper than 200 yards’ radius, except in positions
where it may appear more economical to surmout slopes by
horse traction , or stationary engines, or by zig-zags. The
italics show clearly that every known expedient had to be
adopted to carry out the works in the most economical man-
ner, with due regard for the public safety, or to abandon them
entirely. Mr. Whitton, in the proposed new lines, adopted a
gradient of 1 in 30, instead of 1 in 20, as suggested by
Captain Ward.
In concluding his elaborate report, he says ;—“ Having
carefully considered the advantages of the two systems—horse
and steam power—and the great reduction which can
be made in the cost of working, by the adoption of better
gradients than those on the existing roads, I have no
hesitation in recommending the lines described by me to the
South and West, as well as the proposed extension to the
North, be constructed and worked throughout by steam
power. The result to the colony would be greater expedition
in transport, greater economy and regularity, and ‘ (what
he always kept in view) * greater safety than by any other
means of locomotion.”
Attached to this report are tables of the routes adopted,
and the gradients on every mile of the road between Penrith
and Bathurst, and Picton and Goulburn, with the number of
horses required, and their tractive power in pounds, &c.
But with every desire to economise, he showed, by carefully
prepared estimates, that the amount of £300,000, or £3,703
per mile, was totally inadequate to construct any description
of railway, which could be serviceable to the colony. His
reduced estimate of the cost of a line from Picton to Goulburn
was £6,500 per mile, and from Penrith to Bathurst £IO,OOO
per mile.
This estimate was for first-class lines, but in order to meet
the general desire for cheap lines and to get rid of the eye-


sore of horse tramways, he could reduce the cost per mile,
without altering the present gauge of 4ft. by reductions
in the width of formation, the weight and quality of the rails
and sleepers, and by the use of timber instead of masonry in
bridges and culverts. With such alterations in the first
expense, to be improved hereafter when the lines were opened
for traffic, he believed that a good railway for locomotives
with the present gauge of 4ft, B£in. might be constructed for
£7,000 per mile. ; and, in a subsequent report, he revised
this estimate, and by a further reduction in the quality of the
works, —considered that inferior lines could be constructed at
£6,000 per mile, —which he believed would be quite safe at a
speed of 20 miles an hour ; but he strongly recommended
that the Southern line, which would ultimately be the through
line to Melbourne, when speed would be an element of im-
portance, should be extended to Albury, the border of the two
colonies, as a first-class line at £7,000 per mile.
In the inferior lines, which he was reluctantly compelled, by
the circumstances of the times, to adopt, he dispensed with
the steel rail of 70lbs. per yard for an iron rail of 60lbs. per
yard. The sleepers were to be the best the district could
afford, but 8 instead of 9 feet long, the fencing to have tw r o
rails only, and to be formed of saplings. The gate houses,
where necessary, to be of timber and constructed in the most
economical manner, but none to be used at public road level
crossings. The formation width of cuttings and embank-
ments to be reduced to 15 feet, to dispense with brickwork
for timber in culverts and bridges, to use bottom ballast only
of such material as may be found in the district, the boxing
up of the sleepers with ballast to be performed afterwards.
He adds that the estimate could be still further reduced by
using an iron rail of 401bs. to the yard ; but this would
necessitate new locomotives, as a 401 b. rail would not carry
the present engines. He does not, however, advise the use of
any rail under 75lbs. per yard, as extreme cheapness in the
first construction, means a heavy charge thereafter upon
revenue for maintenace. So there was plenty room for im-
provement in his cheap railways, in gi’ades, and curves, and
rails, and ballast, when the country could afford the expense,
without any imputation of his ability as a first-class experi-
enced railway engineer.
When Mr. Whitton arrived in the colony in 1856, only 23
miles of our railways had been opened for traffic on the
Southern line —Sydney to Liverpool, and 17 miles were in
progress on the Northern. On 30th June, 1889, when he
left office, there were controlled by the Commissioners
2,171 miles of railway, in full working order, involving an
expenditure of nearly 30 millions sterling. With the above
exception, the whole of this length from Sydney to the borders
of the neighbonring colonies of Victoria and Queensland


was constructed under Mr. Whitton’s supervision ; and a
perusal of his journals from 1857 to 1889 will show the
nature and extent of his lifetime labours in the service of
the Government ; while his valuable reports give a minute
and lucid description of every mile of the routes followed on
each of the lines, their gradients, the different contracts, the
number and names of the contractors, and the amount of
each contract ; in short, the definition of the routes, and the
cost of working the railways, during the 33 years they were
under his charge ; and, in addition to these duties, he had
charge, for many years, of the permanent way, locomotive and
rolling stock branches, and acted as general adviser in most
matters connected with the traffic branch, without receiving any
•extra pay for these extra duties.
Personally, Mr. Whittou would have much preferred the
high-class railways which he first proposed, from Penrith to
Bathurst at £25,211 per mile, and from Picton to Goulburn
at £18,270 per mile, with steel rails and the best available
grades and curves ; but they were rejected as too costly for
the times, and the cheaper lines adopted ; and yet, in spite
of the adverse criticism by persons in recent times, who knew
nothing of the early history of our railways, these cheaper rail-
ways have been carrying, for a quarter of a century, the
whole of the traffic on our lines, so largely increased since
they were started ; and it was something for him to be proud
of that during the whole progress of these important works
and running of the railways, no accident had ever occurred,
from any defective design or imperfect construction of the
works.
It was, perhaps, unfortunate for Mr. Whitton, though very
fortunate for the colony, that he was brother-in-law to Sir
John Fowler, Bart., an engineer of high professional standing,
who acted for many years for the Government as Inspector of
the railway materials obtained from England ; as this connection
led to suspicion, in certain quarters, that the country was de-
frauded in the prices paid for the material supplied ; and it
was referred, on the 22nd October, 1864, by Mr. Holroyd,
then Minister for Works, to Mr. Edward Hamilton, Repre-
sentative Agent for New South Wales, and subsequently to
Captain Mayne, in the same capacity, to investigate into and
report upon all the circumstances connected with these pur-
chases, and the actual value of the rails and chairs so pur-
chased, After a lengthened and careful inquiry. Captain
Mayne, on the 24th April, 1865, forwarded his report, the
conclusion of which was as follows. After paying a high
tribute to Sir John Fowler, for the faithful discharge of his
professional duties as Inspector, he adds :—“ I have to report
that I consider it beyond doubt, that in the purchase of per-
manent way material during the period in question, the colony
was zealously, faithfully, and efficiently served ; and was


not charged for the material supplied prices in excess of the fair
current rates of the periods, for materials of the quality ob-
tained under the particular specifications in force.” A full
account of all the letters and reports on the subject will be
found in the appendix to my first railway report, dated 30th
September, 1865, and will be found to exculpate Sir John
Fowler and Mr. Whitton from all blame in the matter.
Sir John Fowler, in the conclusion of his letter to the
Agent Genera], 22nd August, 1870, says : —“ I think that
occupying the position 1 hold in England, my public character
claims for me some consideration and weight to the replies
that I make, and I must be permitted to express my regret
that censure should have been based upon evidence obviously
exaggerated, and which I fear was influenced by some personal
feeling.”
In July, 1873, when Mr, Sheilds was Consulting Engineer
for the Government, after the retirement of Sir John Fowler,
tenders were accepted for rails of the Parkgate Company,
which, on arrival in Sydney, were examined on the
wharf, and at the Redfern Station, by Mr. Whitton, who
stated that, from their appearance alone, he would not
have passed one rail in fifty. The matter was submitted to
the Cabinet, and a board appointed, who reported “ that the
iron was of a very inferior quality, and very few of the rails
would last twelve months if laid down on the permanent way
of our existing lines ; but we find that the specification has
been carefully drawn up, with a full knowledge of all the
requirements in the manufacture of this class of rail ; and,
if it had been strictly adhered to in this case, there could
have been no possibility of any cause of complaint, either as
regards the make, or the quality of the iron of which they
were composed,” thus clearing Mr. Whitton from any re-
sponsibility in the matter.
Although Mr. Whitton, in order to get rid of horse tram-
ways with narrow gauges, was prepared to accept a cheaper
class of railway, with the prevailing gauge of 4ft. BJin., he
was not negligent in improving them, when opened for traffic,
and the country could afford the expence. In 1872, some 20
miles of the permanent way had been renewed, the half-round
sleepers removed, and relaid with proper ones, and new ballast;
and from 1872 to 1875 the same renewals to permanent way
sleepers and ballasting were pursued, and a portion of the
western line of 2,004 feet was laid in 1875 with steel rails ;
and their wearing power was so satisfactory that he de-
cided that all our rails in future should be of steel, either
for traffic or renewals. On the Northern line early in 1872,
near to Newcastle, where the traffic is exceptionally heavy,
100 tons of steel rails were laid down, and on the 31st De-
cember, 1875, not one rail had been renewed or turned, after
having been in use for nearly four years. Though Mr. Whitton


was still unable from want of funds, to do much in
improving grades and curves of his cheap railways, he was
not neglectful of the state of the permanent way and rolling
stock, but handed the railways over to the new Commissioners
in good working order.
The most difficult parts of the Western line are the ascent of
Lapstone Hill, and the descent from Dargan’s Creek into Lith-
gow Valley. If tunnels could have been adopted at the time, it
is not likely that Mr. Whitton would have undertaken the heavy
task of forming the zig-zags at Emu Plains, and Lithgow
Valley ; for, in the construction of these works, in addition to
some millions of cubic yards of excavations, two gigantic
masses of rock of 40,000 and 45,000 tons respectively, were
blasted by electricity. A full description of the whole pro-
ceedings will be found in the pages of the Sydney Morning
Herald of 7th January, 1867, and 18th September, 1868.
A feat so startling, by which, in two blasts, upwards of
80,000 tons of rock were torn from the solid mass and
shattered to pieces, is worthy of record, as showing the nature
of the country through which Mr. Whitton had to carry our
railways, when the low state of the country’s finances com-
pelled him to adopt zig-zags, instead of tunnels, or to abandon
the work entirely.
Zig-zags, though not so convenient for traffic as tunnels,
are more picturesque in appearance ; and, since the opening
of the line to Bowenfels, numerous visitors from different
lands have expressed unbounded admiration, both here and in
their own countries, of the rugged grandeur of the scenery,
and the engineering skill and pluck displayed in designing and
constructing these great works, which, probably, are not sur-
passed on any railway in the world. From the Clarence
tunnel to the bottom of the valley, there is a descent of
470 ft., through a deep and rocky ravine, where formerly there
was scant footing for the mountain goat, and where the
surveyors had occasionally to be suspended by ropes, in the
performance of their perilous duties ; but human skill and
labor have opened a pathway through these mountain ranges
for the railway train, which now moves along the sides of the
mountains, in perfect safety, on a gradient of 1 in 42. And yet,
some people of the present generation express surprise at the
steep grades and sharp curves on our trunk lines, compared with
those on English railways, without considering the different
conditions of the two countries. For instance, from Sydney
to Orange, on our Western line, is a distance of 192 miles,
and almost the same distance from London to Manchester or
Leeds, But the gradients on these English lines would have
been somewhat different if, as in the case of Orange, there had
been two ranges the passes of which are of tbe height of
Snowdon, and the terminal point nearly 3,000 feet above sea
level. English methods have to be modified to suit the


different circumstances of a new and mountainous country ;
and, in the construction of our railways, no one knew this
better, nor followed it more successfully than Mr. Whitton.
He was a highly intelligent, honorable, and well trained
railway engineer, when he arrived in the colony, as certified
by the testimonials of Sir Moreton Peto and others, now in
the railway department, and he preserved the same high
character during his whole career in the Government service.
Though older than he by a few years, I always regarded him
as of superior intelligence and matured judgment, and looked
up to him as my guide, philospher and friend, through some
20 years of almost daily communication with him, and never
was deceived in the high opinion I had formed of his character.
He had a vigorous understanding and was rather Conserva-
tive in his views. He never courted popularity, and the
stern justice of his decisions may have given offence to some
persons ; but he was a great favourite with all who acted with, or
under him, in the railway department, and was most admired
by those who knew him best.
An instance may be given of his successful resistance to
Ministerial pressure. On one occasion when the Minister for
Works, without consulting him, appointed two officers, fixed
their salaries and sent a minute to him stating what he had
done, Mr. Whitton, as head of the Railways, and responsible
for the proper working of the Department, declined to receive
officers whose services were not required, and as the Minister
refused to withdraw his minute, Mr. Whitton, at once
resigned his office as Engineer-in-Chief; and though the
appointments were subsequently cancelled, there was much
difficulty in inducing Mr. Whitton to withdraw his resigna-
tion.
Another case may be stated where Mr. Whitton’s integrity
and firmness of purpose put a stop to what he considered a
suspicious scheme, and which, if carried out, would have been
injurious to our railways, and a heavy loss to the country.
On 22nd June, 1880, a minute was prepared, and submitted
by the Minister for Mr. Whitton’s opinion, suggesting that,
as 100,000 tons of rails would be required on our rail-
ways during the next ten years, they should be of iron
manufactured in the colony from its native ores—
and that tenders be invited for their supply at Lithgow at
£lO 5s per ton. Mr. Whitton expressed his surprise that
iron rails should be suggested at £lO 5s per ton. when steel
rails, with six times their life and value were quoted at £7
per ton, but taking the steel rails at the same price as the
iron, £lO ss, he assured the Minister by careful calculation
that the transaction, besides being injurious to the permanent
way, would cause a loss to the country of at the least
£3,500,000. So we heard no more of the iron rails, but went
on with the steel rails as before.


He was perhaps better known, and his great services more
appreciated by the last generation than the present. On 11th
June, 1873, he wrote a letter in The Sydney Morning Herald
in answer to one from Mr. Fairlie, another of the advocates
for cheap lines and narrow gauges, whom he had to fight and
dispose of, before being able to proceed with his rail-
ways of 4ft. gauge. In this letter, he playfully
referred to Mr. Fairlie’s duplicate engine as “ constructed on
the Siamese principle of two ‘‘single gentlemen rolled into
one,’’ and showed that it was totally unsuited for the Railways
of New South Wales, or Queensland, or anywhere else. Re-
ferring to this letter, the late Mr. Thos. Mort, a well-known
philanthropist and benefactor to the colony, whose statue now
looks down on us from the corner of Macquarie Place, con-
gratulated Mr. Whitton on the admirable justification of his
opinion in respect of the Fairlie Engine enquiry ; and, at the
same time, as a colonist, he congratulated the colony in hav-
ing an engineer at the head of its Railway Department, who
has not permitted his judgment to be interfered with by any
external pressure, or popular attempt to mislead.
The late Sir Henry Parkes, who had known Mr. Whitton,
from his arrival in the colony, soon after the advent of re-
sponsible Government, and had watched him closely for years,
soon become convinced that he was no ordinary man. The whole
of our railway system, he says, is attributable to this eminent
engineer, who was in reality the father of the railways of New
South Wales. In fact, every Premier and every Minister for
Works with whom he acted as engineer expressed themselves
as conscious of his high ability and integrity ; and, on his re-
tiring from office, Mr. Bruce Smith, then Minister for Works,
desired to take the opportunity of placing on record—as the
Cabinet had already done—his high sense of the loss which
the Department and the colony would sustain by his resigna-
tion of the office which he held for upwards of 38 years. He
will be followed to his retirement, he adds, with the best wishes
of the Government and people of the colony, whose interests
he had so sedulously guarded, during the whole period of his
official career ; and the late Mr. Eddy, a man of like mould
as himself, both physically and intellectually, after a thorough
examination of the lines handed over to him, was of opinion,
that the country would never know how much it was indebted
to the genius and pluck of this great man, in the pioneer days
of our railways.
There was no Public Works Committee in the old days.
Mr. Whitton had the whole labor and responsibility of deter-
mining the routes of the different lines and controlling the
expenditure of millions of public money ; and Sir Henry Parkes,
and other Premiers, and the Ministers for Works with whom
he a£ted, and a majority of the people who knew him best,
were of opinion, that, if we ever had, in the Public Service of


the Colony, a high minded officer, who was subjected to so
many difficulties and opposition in the discharge of his duties,
and to so much responsibility in the expenditure of millions
of public money, and on whose integrity and honor the shade
of suspicion never rested, his name was John Whitton. And
so convinced were the Government of the great value of the
services he had rendered to the colony, that, in May, 1889,
when broken down in health, and unfit longer to continue at
work, he asked for a twelve months leave of absence, to revisit
the mother country, in the N pursuit of health, it was granted
by the Executive, on the full pay of £l,BOO, the salary which
lie had enjoyed since January, 1875.
It is sometimes asked by persons of the present generation,
who know nothing of the early history of our railways, or the
financial state of the colony half a century ago, what Mr.
Whitton has done to give him such a prominent place among
the benefactors of the colony. Well, for one thing, with the
exception of the short lines first mentioned, he was the father
of our railway system, the designer and constructor of all our
trunk lines from Sydney to the borders of the neighboring
■colonies of Victoria and Queensland —a distance of upwards
of 2,000 miles, involving an expenditure of £29,839,167.
Indeed, it may almost be said that he gave his life for our
railways ; for he reached the colony in 1856, at the age of 35,
in the prime of life and vigor of manhood, and remained in
office till 30th May, 1890, when after passing the Scriptural
limit of three score years and ten, he felt that his working
days were drawing to a close, and retired from the service,
trusting to the generosity of the country and Parliament,
for a retiring allowance, somewhat commensurate with his
important services, and sufficient to keep him and his family
in easy circumstances during the remainder of his life ; but,
after a few years of broken health, and a constant feeling of
unappreciated services, he has passed away and left his bones
among us, and for a monument his name indelibly stamped
on the work of his life—the Railways of New South Wales.
If his advice had been taken, when in 1857 he strongly
recommended the removal of the Sydney station from Redfern
to Hyde Park, a large saving in money would have been
effected, and the trouble and danger to the public from the
congested traffic—which has existed for 40 years, and still
exists, would have been removed. The estimated cost of the
removal in 1857 was £47,044, but the cost of its removal
now, with the large increase of our railways, is estimated at
£650,000, which will, no doubt, be increased by further delay.
And, if the Parliamentary Committee which sat in 1857,
•on the sole Commissioner’s Bill, had listened to his far seeing
urgent advice, the break of guage between Victoria,
South Australia, and New South Wales could have
■been remedied, at a comparatively trifling cost.


The late Mr. Eddy had the same opinion on the
subject as Mr. Whitton, and no doubt the present Commis-
sioners have inherited the views of their late able chief, who
considered that the change must eventually be made at any cost,
each of the Colonies contributing their proportionate share.
The estimated cost of rectifying the break of gauge in 1857
was £64,000, and from an extract from the reports of the
present Commissioners, it appears that the cost of converting
dhe lines from the 4ft. gauge to the sft. Sin. would
amount to £4,260,000, and increase by delay till the
federation of the colonies is an accomplished fact, and the
unification of the railway gauge an absolute necessity.
Such is the consequence of leaving things as they are, in spite of
the warning voices of the far-seeing makers of our railways.
And what was Mr. Whitton’s reward for all the great
things he had done for the Colony ?
If ever there was a case which came under the 60th section
of the Civil Service Act of 1884. for a special allowance for
distinguished services, surely Mr. Whitton’s was one of the
strongest. Under this section of the Act, Mr. Bennett and
Mr. Moriarty, officers of the same department, each received,
on retiring from the service, substantial gratuities for extra
services in addition to their pensions, and Mr. Goodchap,
another officer in the same department, after acting for 10
years as Commissioner for Railways, retired, in the prime of
life, on an allowance of £9OO per annum, fixed by the
existing Railway Act ; while Mr. Whitton, after 33 years’
services as Engineer-in-Chief, and the father and constructor
of the main lines of our railways to the borders of the neigh-
boring colonies of Victoria and Queensland, was allowed to
retire, in his old age, on a statutory pension of £675 per
annum, without an allowance for the distinguished services he
had rendered to the colony.
The Government of Sir Henry Parkes were not to blame
for this ungracious treatment of Mr. Whitton, When he
retired from office, at 70 years of age, they granted him a
retiring allowance of £l,BOO per annum, the full amount of
the salary he was then receiving, and paid him at that rate
till the amount was placed on the supplementary estimates for
I was not present at the Assembly on 18th De-
cember, when after a stormy discussion the slaughter look
place ; but litera scripta manet , and we can still peruse the
account of the debate in the pages of Hansard.
It would seem at this period, unfortunately lor Mr. Whitton,
that there was a strong feeling among many of the younger
members against pensions of any kind ; but among the older
members who had known him longest, and retained a high
opinion of his services to the country, Sir Henry Parkes
stated that though he was a decided opponent of pensions in
general, yet there were exceptions to all general rules, and


surely, if there can be a call upon the patriotism of the-
country for a generous acknowledgment for splendid services,
this is a case where we should not haggle about pounds or
hundreds of pounds. If Mr. Whitton is to be pensioned,
pension him in that handsome manner that becomes so
great a servant. To vote him for the few remaining years of
his life a retiring allowance of £l,BOO a year, Sir Henry con-
sidered a wise and legitimate economy, which would be ap-
proved by the community at large.
The late Mr. Garvan, a highly honorable and intelligent
gentleman, I find was also in favor of the full sum of £l,BOO
being granted. To cut down this sum, he says, by ono
shilling would be an insult and an outrage upon one of the
best men who had ever served this or any other country-
Mr, Lyne, the Leader of the Opposition, had as high an
opinion of Mr. Whitton as Sir H. Parkes, but declined to
vote for the full amount of £i,Boo. He was prepared, how-
ever, to move for £1,200 as the retiring allowance, and did
so ; but the Government declined to accept any reduction ; so
the anti-pensionists prevailed, the amount of £675 was
carried, and Mr. Whitton may be said to have suffered from
the mistaken kindness of his friends.
Having thus fulfilled, however imperfectly, the promise I
made to my departed friend, to assist him in making a short
statement of all he had done for the good of the colony, I
will leave it to the Country and the Parliament to consider
whether full justice has been meted out to Mr. Whitton and
his family, for his lifetime services to the Government in
the constuction of our railways—for the millions he saved the
country by his upright determination to prevent what he
considered an unwise scheme, in regard to the use of iron for
steel rails in 1880, being adopted, and for the other large
amounts that would have been saved, if his far-seeing recom-
mendations in 1857 had been carried out, with reference to
removing the Sydney station from Redfern to Hyde Park, and
altering the break of gauge of our railways at a trifling cost,
instead of the enormous amounts that will have to be expended
by the introduction of a uniform gauge on all the railways of
the colony, which must be effected some day, at any cost—
and last and not the least—his firm and successful attempt,
through evil report and good report, under numerous financial
difficulties to prevent the introduction of horse tramways with
narrow gauges, instead of the 4 ft, 8$ in. gauge of the rail-
ways we now possess, which have been improved from time to
time, with the improving state of the colony, till they are now
equal in every respect to any railways in the world.
Hilton, Darlinghurst, JOHN RA.E.
Sydney, N.S.W.
Builder Printing Works, 527 Kent-street, Sydney




