





r *
‘




“Weep, Queensland, weep! and with your tears keep green
For aye, the memory of your glorious son.”
— J. Brunton Stephens.




IMPRESSIONS
Thomas
SToseph
JBurnes
1860-1898
Brisbane :
Alkx. Mdir & Co., Printers and Publishers.
3




PREFATORY.
The Public Memorial in the form of a Statue
would he incomplete without some record of the
prominent incidents in the short life of a man whose
career is one of the most suggestive in the annals of
Queensland. The record, as presented here, consists of
hut a few brief “ Sketches and Impressions ” of its salient
periods, written by various hands. The only unity of
design in them is the expression of a strong appreciation
of a life ever inspired and directed by the highest ideals
which dignify and ennoble humanity.
It may he that we can but place Byrnes in the
ranks of the “ inheritors of unfulfilled renown.”
But the suggestion and the inspiration to be derived
from the record of his life remain. There is this central
fact: the nation that produced such a man has in
itself the elements and the materials of greatness. The
history of his life when written, and even the short record
contained in these “ Sketches and Impressions” should
point, like the lode star, to the paths by which alone
it may be sought and attained.
Both the form and the design of this Becord prevent
anything like that continuity of literary narrative which
a formal biography naturally requires. With all its
imperfections, however, it is offered as a deserved tribute
to the memory of a man, who, throuqh all his life ,
subordinated desire and purpose to the ends of his
Country, his God, and Truth.




Boyhood and primary School Career
By A. St. Lkdgrr.
career of Thomas Joseph Byrnes has been
described by an almost unanimous assent of
his contemporaries at the University, the
Bar, and in Parliament as an exceptionally
brilliant one. There seems to be no other term
which so justly and so accurately describes it, and
a critical study of it still further confirms the justness
of a verdict, which, at first sight, might seem but to
be the gracious offering of that form of eulogy which
usually is tendered to careers followed by success,
and which does not closely scrutinise nor discrimi-
nate the means by which success has been achieved,
nor weigh the difficulties that have been confronted
and surmounted. The uniform success which
crowned ail his efforts at every stage of his career
is, in itself, an irrefragable proof of brilliant work,
and our admiration for and at the result, is neces-
sarily heightened when we further consider the diffi-
culties and, from some points of view, the adverse
circumstances under which that career began.
Wordsworth has reminded us that “ The child
is father of the man.” The paradoxical form of
the observation, rather than its truth, has obtained
for it an almost universal currency, which bids fair
to confer on it an immortality of acceptance. It is,


however, true to the lives of many of the world’s
best and greatest geniuses. Their manhood preserves
the mould of childhood, and time but sets form,
polish, and definiteness on those energies and traits
of character, which, in so many cases, are unmis-
takably displayed and foreshadowed there. It cer-
tainly is true to the life of Thomas Joseph Byrnes.
His manhood was but the reflection of his child-
hood, and, in a manner, a replica, in which every
feature and line in the miniature of his childhood
may be traced again. It is difficult to say whether
or not adversity is a nurse under whose care the
budding talent or genius is not oftener nipped than
ripened and matured to a gorgeous flowering. But
this is certain, that nothing so warps the youthful
mind, nor sets the currents of its genius so fatally
awry, both for its possessor, and in the after-time
for the world as well, as that in childhood’s days,
it should be set amidst surroundings where apprecia-
tion is lacking, and opportunity and wise discretion
of the strong bent of inclination are denied to it.
Where these exist, then is childhood happily placed
when it comes within the hallowing influences of
their environment. Fortune may, from its lap, pour
out rich gifts in after life, but it has nothing to be-
stow richer or more fruitful for good than this.
His mother, the type of so many who
make us feel the dignity and sanctity
of motherhood, vividly appreciated the precious
gifts in her child; gifts which she tended as not


less precious to her herself that they should be fos-
tered and guided by her to all that may ennoble
manhood, than that they should be used by its pos-
sessor as a sacred trust during his life. She lived to
see the fruits of that wise and patient care. She
sacrificed much, in order that in childhood, he might
have the opportunity to develop every talent with
which he had been gifted. And this appre-
ciation, which she bestowed on the child, was re-
warded with a life-time of devotion and affection
by the man who so richly profited by it, and to which
he owed so much.
In another respect also his childhood was hap-
pily surrounded. He had the advantage of a good
sound Primary School education. The pioneers of
newly-settled countries have often, consciously or
unconsciously, laid the foundations of their future
destinies by some simple definition and
the patient working out of some great
principle. The pioneers of our State
did some such similar service to Queensland when
they established by law the principle of State Pri-
mary instruction for its youth. This system may
almost be said to have been inaugurated with the
inauguration of the State of Queensland itself. The
State’s separate existence from N. S. Wales dates
from the roth of December, 1859, and shortly after-
wards it began to plant Primary Schools amidst every
knot of settlers. These were being extended every-
where, and the system strengthened and perfected as


time and opportunity afforded, and, happily for
Byrnes, one of the very best was at hand when the
time arrived for him to begin his schooling. It is
not too much to say (rather may one say too little
about it) that from the care of his mother and the
instruction in the Primary School he derived, if not
the best, the most far-reaching and powerful in-
fluences and incentives which determined his career.
He strongly acknowledged the benefits which he had
derived from his Primary School training, and during
his political career the education of the people in
all forms had his warmest sympathy and advocacy.
It is on such formative influences of childhood
that one naturally dwells in a chapter devoted to
that portion of his life, and especially so in his case,
because during the rest of his life he displayed, both
in his moral force of character and intellectual
power, only the developments of the strong tenden-
cies of his early years. As will be seen later on in
this chapter, the high ambitions and the powers he
exerted to attain their honourable achievement, were
but the working out and the realising of the dreams
and imaginations of a precocious childhood, then
dimly appreciating all that the lives of great men
mean to a country and to the people.
Thomas Joseph Bymes was born on the nth
November, iB6O, at Leichhardt Street, Brisbane. It
is somewhat a remarkable coincidence that this year
marks the opening of the first Parliament of


Queensland. On the 10th December, 1859, the
northern district of New South Wales, then known
as the Moreton Bay District, was formed into a sepa«
rate State. On the 29th of May, iB6O, its first Par-
liament was opened by the Governor. Sir George
Bowen. A further coincidence may be noted. In
the same year, and only a few months before his
birth, Warwick, which he lepresented in Parliament
at the time of his death, was proclaimed a Munich
pality. Towards the end of 1861, the family re-
moved to Humpybong, a watering place on Moreton
Bay, a few miles distant from Brisbane, where they
remained till 1866. In that year they removed to
the town of Bowen, situate on Port Denison. The
Cape River Goldfields had been discovered in 1866.
The attraction of the goldfields and the natural capa-
bilities of a port affording great facilities for ship-
ping, gave promise then of making the town of Bowen
one of the most prosperous and busiest centres
on the coast of Queensland. Bowen had
been founded in 1861 by Dalrymple,
and even before the goldfields “ broke out’'
(to use the common expression) the natural capabili-
ties of a harbour having a country at its back emi-
nently suitable for cattle and sheep, had attracted
a considerable population to a place which then, and
long afterwards, was regarded as likely to become
the capital citv of North Queensland when its separa-
tion from South Queensland should be determined
upon. When the Byrnes family arrived there in


1866 the town possessed many of the advantages
of much longer established settlements. It had
anticipated a great future, and had begun to make
some provision for it, and amongst other means, set
to work to establish a Primary School, which was in
excellent working order under Mr. D. C. Macgroarty
(now one of our District School Inspectors), at the
time that the family removed there. Byrnes was
then about years old, and was immediately sent
to school. Mr. Macgroarty has been kind enough
to give me a short description of the pupil who was
then placed (and, no doubt, with some anxious care)
under his charge, and has added some impressions
which naturally arise on calling up such recollec-
tions. He says : —“ Tom Byrnes, a thick-set, chubby,
bright-eyed and intelligent-looking lad, was admitted
to the Bowen Primary School on the 3rd July, 1866,
and was then about years old. From the very
first, his progress at his lessons was very marked and
rapid, he outdoing all his compeers in the race for
first place in class, though many of them were much
his seniors, the school being a new one, and not a
few of the pupils having had their early education
(neglected. In those good old days teachers were
not hedged in by regulations and schedules, so that
they had plenty of latitude and liberty to give their
teaching the direction that to them seemed most
likely to develop the tastes and leanings of their
pupils. Byrnes, even early in his Primary School
life, showed a very decided bent for literature, his-


tory and biography, and took in with evident gusto
any incidents in history, travel, or the lives of great
men related to him; and one could not help noticing,
even at this early stage, that, should the opportunity
offer itself to him, his great forte would be languages,
and in a less degree mathematics. During his
school life in my time in Bowen —July, 1866, to
October, 1869 —only two pupils could come near
him, one of these being of German parentage, and,
strange to say, a boy of Danish parentage from Gym'
pie, and now a solicitor in Brisbane, beat Byrnes
at the end of their first year at the Grammar School,
taking the Lilley Gold Medal, Byrnes, however,
beating him at the end of the second year, when the
Gympie boy left school. Even at mechanical work
Byrnes was not behind, as I well remember, during
my first year in Gympie, after leaving Bowen, Mr.
Anderson, who was then our only District Inspector,
showing me a map of Ireland drawn by Byrnes, and
which he was exhibiting in all the southern schools.
The last occasion on which I met poor Byrnes was
at Gympie on his return from the north after becom-
ing Premier, and during a walk with him round the
Bend, he reminded me of some incidents of his early
school life, which I had quite forgotten—he was
always noted for a splendid memory. On visiting
his old school during his tour over the north, many
of the Bowen “ old hands” met him there, and one
(Mrs. Hall Scott) brought to his recollection his
achievements at a public examination conducted by


Mr. Anderson during one of his visits to the school—
I had no hand or part in getting up this show—men-
tioning specially his marvellous answering in geo-
graphy, history, and mental arithmetic, Mr. Anderson
telling those present that he never witnessed any-
thing like it before. Another incident he put me
in mind of was that I occasionally called on him to
show some big boys how to do their work, and for
him, this sometimes turned out a bit awkward, as
those big boys, among whom were two or three of
his own brothers, used to turn a bit “ rusty” on him
after school. After visiting a mine in Gympie, and
as we were about taking leave of the Hibernian
mine manager, Byrnes clapped me on the
shoulder, and said to the manager, ‘ This
is my old schoolmaster!’ the latter’s prompt
reply being ‘ Begor then, he hasn’t made a
bad job at all of you,’ the upshot being one
of his heartiest laughs, the last of them I shall
ever hear in this world. Had I remained
longer in Bowen, I would have taken up Latin with
him, but after I left Father McGinty commenced
to give him lessons in this subject.”
Mr. Macgroarty’s opinion on the strongly
indicated bent of his pupil’s talents was
confirmed by the opinion of the Rev.
Father McGinty, whom he mentions. The
Rev. Father McGinty was an excellent example of
those Irish priests who have made themselves so
familiar with the classics as to make them


a second mother tongue. They could cap
quotations, however unexpected, and made acquain-
tance with the text (what German critics make of
their dissertations) the test of their classical scholar-
ship. At about the age of twelve years, Byrnes had
so far progressed in his study of Latin as to begin
Virgil, and in commemoration of the progress he
had made, and, no doubt, as an augury for the
future. Father McGinty presented his apt pupil with
a rare copy of an old edition of Virgil. This little
volume was suitably inscribed in memory of their
association, and was one of his pupil’s most cherished
possessions. The book spoke to him the history of a
past civilisation, and even at that early age he began
to gather some glimpses of the meaning of that rich
heritage in which the classics have made us not only
successors, but its partners. At school he out-
stripped all his comrades, and passed an examina-
tion as a pupil teacher, though he was too young to
be placed on the school staff. In 1873 the Govern-
ment established a system of scholarships in order
to connect the Primary Schools with the Grammar
Schools, which had been founded for the purpose of
developing a system of secondary education. The
scholarships were then accompanied with a grant of
to enable the successful competitors to attend
at one of the two Grammar Schools which then
existed in the State, at Ipswich and at Brisbane.
Byrnes entered for the competition and, as was ex-
pected. headed the list of successful candidates. He


had been for some time under the charge of Mr,
Wall, who succeeded Mr. Macgroarty to the head-
mastership of the Bowen school. Mr. Wall was
strongly impressed with his talents, and urged his
mother to let him have the full opportunity for
further study at the Brisbane Grammar School. For
a little time there was some hesitation as to whether
he should begin the pupil teacher’s course or be al-
lowed to attend the Grammar School. His mother
took time for consideration, since to give
him the latter opportunity meant either that
the young lad should be sent away
from home associations and its watchful care, or
that the family should return to Brisbane in order
that he might have the full benefit of both home
and school. Mr. Wall never wavered in his opinion
that the boy’s talents were such as to justify some
sacrifice for the benefit of his future; and secure in
the unanimous opinion of each teacher with whom
her son was associated, she determined to undertake
the task. It was a sacrifice of the present and its
needs, to the possibilities of his future, for if he had
entered on a pupil teacher’s career he would be
supporting himself amidst a young family,
where such aid was valuable. It was well that the
choice and the sacrifice were thus made, and for this
wise forecast of the future much credit is due to
Mr. Wall’s judgment. He thus describes his
pupil: —“ As I remember him he was a bright-faced,
earnest-looking boy, slim tall for his age, noth-


ing of the sneak or the prig about him, fond of all
kinds of games—entering into them heartily. Par-
ticipating also in the usual boyish scrapes of a harm-
less sort, but always owned up promptly, truthfully
and fully. In all things he was honourable and
straightforward. He was a splendid worker, and at
twelve years of age was top of the school. Extra
lessons—beyond school hours —were given to willing
pupils; Byrnes was always eager for them. His
attention while lessons were proceeding was evi-
denced by the searching questions which he put to
me about anything which he did not thoroughly
understand. He was much liked by his fellow scho-
lars, and constantly gave assistance to the more back-
ward of them in his spare moments, especially to the
girls. In his thirteenth year he passed the local
examination for pupil teacher; he came out a splen-
did first; was too young for full appointment, but
succeeded in getting permission to do the work
as a probationer. In the same year, 1873, he com-
peted for the Grammar School scholarship, of the
annual value of and was top of the list for all
Queensland. Byrnes’ success is all the more credit-
able when it is remembered that his mother was a
widow, and life in those early years was a struggle,
in which he was willing and able to render his daily
share of help. He was a thorough Irish boy, de-
lighted to draw maps of Ireland, and chose for his
school motto, ‘ Hibernia.’ ”


In 1874 he began his course of education at
the Grammar School, Brisbane, and his career there
is elsewhere recorded. This step proved to be the
tide in his affairs, taken at the flood, as he was able
to pursue the bent of his literary tastes, which, thus
oarly, indicated that the Bar was to be the arena in
which he was likely to win his fame. He had the
opportunity of continuing a scholastic career without
interruption or distraction to its full completion. He
owed much to the opportunities thus afforded him,
and the manner in which they were grasped and
utilised was referred to in graceful and significant
language by the late Hon. W. H. Groom when
speaking in the Legislative Assembly on the 28th of
September, 1898, to a motion for the adjournment
of the House on the occasion of the Premier’s death.
He said :—“ And now, sir, as we stand in this Cham-
ber gazing upon the vacant seat, may we not ask —
What are the lessons to be learned from the life just
terminated? When, in years gone by, some undis-
criminating member has asked the Minister for Edu-
cation what has the colony gained by the thousands
of pounds which have been spent on Grammar
School Scholarships to the Universities, my answer
has invariably been, ‘ Look at the career of the Hon.
T. J. Byrnes, and tell me whether the money has
not been well spent!’ I say, that although we may
have spent large sums of money on higher education,
if the profit was only one genius like the late Premier,
that money would have been well spent. And, more-


over, I say, he has left a brilliant example for all
the young men of our colony to follow, and has
shown that our Constitution is so elastic that any
youth, no matter how lowly his origin, may rise to
the highest position that this House and the Crown
can confer upon him.”
As may naturally be supposed, a boy of such
brilliant natural talents did not feel nor show the
slightest difficulties in compassing the Primary
School course, which, for a time, was directed to*
wards making him a teacher and was towards the
end of it, fortunately, directed to a scholarship. His
Primary School career was not burdened with the
innumerable and almost intolerable minutiae of
scheduled work and the long and harassing special
“ grind” and preparation which now distinguishes
our Primary Schools, and particularly those classes
which, in some schools, are devoted towards the win-
ning of a scholarship. Under the present condi*
tions, both of the course of study and the competi-
tion itself, it may be doubted whether the possession
of exceptional talent on the part of the young pupil
is not a misfortune to its possessor, since it affords
both teacher and examiner an almost irresistible
temptation to strain enormously the mental and phy-
sical powers of the candidate in the race for pass
and place. Fortunately, no such strain was imposed
upon him, and the result was that Byrnes had ample
leisure to indulge that almost insatiable appetite for
miscellaneous reading, which is characteristic of


youths of his mental temperament. He was fond
of joining in school games, unless there was the
attraction of some new or interesting book at hand.
He would rummage the family book shelves, having
a keen scent for historical or literary works. The
history of Ireland was well-represented there, and
from a very early age he had a fair grasp and mas-
tery of the principal events and the biography of the
principal heroes of Irish history. Then, as in after
life, to read was to retain. With some favourite
work in history, or biography, or fiction in his hand,
he would retire to some quiet corner of the house or
retired spot outside, and pore for hours over its pages.
Such constant dipping into such strengthening and
stimulating literature naturally gave a serious tone
to his youthful thoughts and ambitions. It gave him
a thoughtfulness of manner and a somewhat strange
but subdued elevation of thought, which often be-
came a source of wonder to his mother and the elder
children of the family. He was quiet and reserved
in his manner, and gentle but clear and decisive in
his language at all times, both at home and at
school. As a child, he had a charming attraction
of manner and expression, which won the affection
and confidence, not only of the home circle, but of
his teachers, who felt that there was something of
greatness in him. He had little of the boisterous-
ness or restlessness of ordinary childhood in his dis-
position. He possessed a gentleness and calmness
of manner somewhat unusual . and strange


in the childhood of a precocious boy. These quali-
ties often degenerate in after life into a priggishness
or conceitedness of manner, or into more or less
odious airs of superiority which so often repel the
ordinary mortal when it is driven into association
with that too common pinchbeck substitute
for culture and refinement. Not so with
Byrnes. All his short life he almost invari-
ably displayed that attraction in a man
which we call winsomeness in a child. He was a
winsome child, and its charm seldom deserted him.
even when he had realised his ambitions and had
his world at his feet. The pressure of a busy life,
and often the sense of public duty, made him at
times irritable when he suspected that he was
being unduly presumed upon. But, as a child, he was
the spirit of candour and straightforwardness; he
was generous and forgiving. These qualities never
left him; rather they were often his saving charac-
teristic; and if ever he had wounded either friend
or acquaintance by an aloofness of manner, or an
indication of a desire to repel an advance, he was
ever ready on perceiving, or having been pointed
out the error, to express his regret and atone with
all that spontaneity and whole heartedness which is
the distinguishing element of magnanimity
of character. His manhood was, in this
respect, but the development of the
charming traits of childhood. And, per-
haps, it is because he preserved during all his life


much of that generous frankness and unheeding
freshness and simplicity of childhood which, like
charity, “ thinketh no evil,” that in his home and his
public life he was so respected and admired by all,
and loved best by those who knew him best.
22


grammar School Career.
By Reginald H. Roe.
£T was in the first days of February, 1874, that
the connection of T. J. Byrnes with
the Brisbane Grammar School began,
when at the age of thirteen
he was enrolled in the First Form for Latin and
French, the Fourth Form for Mathematics, and the
Fifth Form for English. This classification is
worthy of note, as showing that even in his young
days his knowledge of his mother tongue and his
facility of expression therein gained him a high
standing in this subject above the new boys who
entered with him.
His arrival at the school is thus described by
one of his contemporaries:—“The advent of T. J.
Byrnes had no special mark to distinguish it from
that of the ordinary school boy. I remember him
at first as a quiet boy, with no inclination for play,
but much for reading; he was generally to be seen
with a book in his hand, and at first was reserved,
and confined his intercourse to a few, but as he
gradually mixed more freely with others, he made
many friends.”
At the end of his first year he established his
reputation as a promising scholar by coming first
in the examination for the Upper School Lilley


Silver Medal, but was disqualified from taking it
by the shortness of his stay at the school. His
name, however, appears in the Honour List as the
winner of prizes for Latin and French.
In 1875 he won, with many other prizes, the
Lilley Gold Medal as the head of the school; which
distinction he gained a second time in 1876, and a
third time in 1877. No other boy has secured this
distinction more than twice; but it is only fair to
later winners to mention that the altered conditions
of the competition have made it practically impos-
sible for his successors to enter more than twice for
the examination.
The University successes gained by him during
his school career were remarkably brilliant. In
October, 1876, he won the Sydney University Junior
Prize (there were no silver medals for special sub-
jects then) against the candidates of Queensland
and New South Wales, and in the following month
he was at the head of the boys from Victoria and
Queensland in the Melbourne University Matricu-
lation Examination, passing with six “ Wells,” which
was an unusual record in those days. When it is
remembered that these two examinations, within a
month of each other, required accurate knowledge
of distinct authors in Latin, Greek, French, and
English, and in different periods of History, the great
merit of the achievement will be better understood.
This year he gained the first of the Grammar
School Extension Scholarships, which enabled him


to continue his school career for another two years.
It is not claiming for him too much to assert that
the splendid work of Byrnes and his class at this
time was a prime factor in the initiation both of
these scholarships and of the University Exhibitions
of the following year; for their successes had irm
pressed upon the authorities the necessity for pro-
viding the final as well as the initial steps of the
ladder to lead on from Primary School to University.
At the close of 1877 he passed the Sydney
Senior, creditably enough indeed, but without his
usual brilliancy, for he was beaten in the examina-
tion by his schoolfellow, J. G. Cribb, who had fought
with him for supremacy obstinately in all parts of
his school career, and was now mentioned as pro-
xime accessit for the Senior Prize, and this
prize itself was won by J. H. P.
Murray, a Sydney Grammar School boy, who
had gained the Junior Prize in 1874, and had,
therefore, had three years interval between Junior
and Senior for the development of his powers, as
against the one year of Byrnes and Cribb. At the
school examination in December, Byrnes, however,
recovered his leadership, by winning the Lilley Gold
Medal for the third year in succession.
In 1878 his work was confined to preparation
for the Queensland University Exhibitions, which
were first awarded in December of this year, and
for which a special examination was held in Bris-
bane, the papers being set by the Professors of


Sydney University; for the standard of the Sydney
Senior of those days was not sufficiently high nor
its subjects wide enough to embrace all the work of
a good secondary school. Having won the first
place in this examination (the other successful can-
didates being R. P. Francis, well remembered as a
Grammar School master in after years, and Ernest
Black, now Public Service Commissioner in Western
Australia), he proceeded in January, 1879, to Mel-
bourne University, where he obtained on entrance
the University Exhibition for English and History.
This brings to a close the honourable record
of his school examination successes. No less honour-
able are the memories which his life and character
at school have left in the minds of his masters and
comrades.
In the course of his five years’ stay at the Bris-
bane Grammar School, his remarkable powers grew
gradually to maturity, and in the full flower of his
latter school years it was easier to discern his most
striking characteristics than in the earlier days when
his reserve and quiet ways made him comparatively
unknown beyond the small circle of his intimate
friends. But his good temper and cheerfulness were
noticeable from the first. “ I never remember seeing
him lose his temper,” writes one of his most constant
comrades, “ not even when I ran an inky pen into
the fleshy part of his hand in a friendly scuffle in
the Laboratory.” “He was always frank,” says
another, “ and genial and merry in his talk, and


singularly free from any approach to priggishness,
being, in spite of his intellectual prominence, always
modest and unassuming in his demeanour.” Another
old comrade, now a leading doctor in Melbourne,
testifies to the same spirit. “For a boy who took
no part in the school games, it was remarkable how
'well-liked and popular Byrnes was; the fact is to be
accounted ibr by the entire absence of pettiness or
selfishness that was displayed, whilst at the same
time he was generous, straightforward, happy and
fond of a joke. My memories of him at school are
quite unmixed with any disagreeable feeling. He
presents himself to my remembrance always with a
smile or a laugh, with his ready tongue, and his keen
appreciation of any joke or smart remark, and above
all with that kindliness which never allowed him to
do a nasty thing.” He never seemed in any way
oppressed with the burden of his school work, but
was always cheery, and a source of cheerfulness in
others.
Another feature which has impressed itself
upon his contemporaries was his absolute purity of
mind. “ I have no hesitation in saying,” declares
one who was with him constantly in his classes,
11 that he had a wholesome mind and a clean ton-
gue ; I do not think I ever heard him utter an angry
word, certainly never an impure one.” “He had
great moral courage,” writes the most intimate friend
of his earlier school days, and though he did not
preach much by word, his example gave many a


wholesome lesson.” But later on, as his position in
the school placed more responsibility upon him, he
spoke out if necessary. Here is the testimony of
a comrade in the sixth form :■ —“ Byrnes used to back
me up more than any one else when we argued about
moral questions, as we often did under the pine trees
in the lunch hour.” High principles were firmly
rooted in his heart, and he remained throughout his
life faithful to and enthusiastic foi the ideals of his
youth, nor could anything shake him in the warmth
of his deep affections, such as those which he held
for Australia, for Ireland, and for his Church.
But, probably, the thing about his boyhood
which was even more striking than his good-nature
and purity of heart was his intellectual ability. The
letters of his contemporaries are full of references
to this. “ Byrnes, says one, always knew his
home-lessons, and, furthermore, was sure of
them. The power and correctness and truthful-
ness of his memory was always in evidence,
and on more than one occasion quite surprised
his masters.” Another writes, “It was only yesterday
that I remarked to a friend that Byrnes was the
cleverest person I have come across. Endowed
with a splendid memory, when once he had acquired
a thorough knowledge of a subject, he retained that
knowledge. Always confident, he held very strong
opinions on any subject with which he was well
acquainted, and, if not convinced, submitted to cor-
rection with much hesitation, frequently after hours-


discussing the master’s views with the boys until
some satisfactory determination was arrived at.”
“ He was very argumentative,” writes yet another,
“ and delighted to talk about questions that cropped
up in the school work, but his arguments were always
carried through in the best of tempers.”
This habit of argument was, as Socrates taught
both by example and precept, the soundest method
of acquiring true knowledge, and gave him a
thoroughness and clearness of view most unusual in
a boy of his years. “He was always ready to break
a lance with Mr. Crompton during the history lesson,
and was about the only one in the class who could
hold his own against the odds,” writes one who well
remembers the excellence of the teaching in these
same history lessons, and the keen interest
displayed in them by the members of
the class. He was ready with quotation
and repartee, and his English style was
embellished with a richness of imagination and apt-
ness of quotation quite remarkable in a school boy.
There was also a facility of expression both in his
spoken and written thought, which marked him out
even in his school days for early political distinc-
tion. “ I remember,” says one of his class, “ how
Mr. Crompton had promised him his watch and
chain if he secured four ‘ Wells’ in the Melbourne
Matriculation Examination, and in making the pre-
sentation, in fulfilment of his promise, Mr. Crompton
asked Byrnes to get him a good billet when he was


Attorney-General. Byrnes laughed heartily with
the rest of us, but Mr. Crompton insisted that he
was serious, nor was it many years before his pro-
phecy was fulfilled.”
His ability was rather literary than mathemati-
cal, though he attained a creditable standard even
in mathematical subjects. But the Classics and
above all History were most in accordance with his
natural tastes. “ His favourite recreation was read-
ing historical novels,” is said even of his school days.
He read a great deal outside of his lessons, more
especially historical novels, and in the zenith of his
political life he assured his old master that his
greatest mental refreshment was found in the read-
ing of well-written history.
The confidence which was derived iVom the
thoroughness of his knowledge was never offensive
either to master or comrade, but was merely the
first exhibition of that certainty about his own opin-
ions which was afterwards to him so great a source
of political strength; it was the beginning of that
independence and freedom of judgment which, later
on, enabled him, when receiving congratulations
and chatting over his appointment as Solicitor-Gene-
ral, to say to his friends that his actions would be
still unfettered, and though keenly appreciating the
compliment conferred on him he felt under no obli-
gation, for had the Premier not been satisfied with
his ability to uphold the position, it would not have
been offered to him.


Such was T. J. Byrnes as he appeared to his
comrades at school; his head-master’s opinion was
delivered at the annual prize giving of 1898: —“It
was with feelings of pride that, in the middle of the
year, we witnessed the elevation to the Premiership
of one who, in his earlier days, over twenty years
ago, had carried off the Lilley Medal, as head of this
school, for three years in succession. It is possible
that with his remarkable abilities the Hon. T. J.
Bymes would have won his way to the front under
any system of education, but it is beyond all ques-
tion that the steps of the ascent were made sure and
certain for him by the graduated succession of
scholarships and exhibitions which led him from the
Primary School to the close of his University career.
The carriers ouverte has been for the last twenty
years an accomplished fact for young Queens-
landers, and any one who has the brains and the
character can climb to the highest positions in the
State, and arrive at the summit with a mind stored
with knowledge and refined with culture as befits
the leader of a civilised people. Of the school
days of T. J. Byrnes, his old masters and school-
fellows will ever retain vivid and happy recollec-
tions ; his brilliant work was such as to render his
future eminence a matter of confidence to all of us;
but, besides brilliancy, he showed, even as a boy,
an attitude of trustful affection towards his masters,
a cheerful spirit of comradeship towards his school-
fellows, and a courage in standing on the side of


honour and right, which may well be taken as an
example for all future leaders of the school to fol-
low. The outburst of sorrow from the whole people
upon his untimely death, fitly expressed their sense
of the national loss; but to us who had watched the
growth of his powers from boyhood, who also had
confidence that he would repay many fold the debt
he owed to higher education by his services in its
cause, there is an element of personal grief to which
I shall not now attempt to give fuller expression.
The name of T. J. Byrnes should stand prominently
on the walls of this school, and it is my hope that
honour boards, on which will be recorded the names
of all boys who have won distinction for us, will be
erected in this hall by his schoolfellows as a fitting
memorial of him.”
The hope thus expressed has since been rea-
lised, and a handsome honour screen, bearing at the
head the words “ Dignis detur honos” and at the
foot the inscription “ In Memoriam, Thomoe Joseph!
Byrnes,” stands in the School Hall, containing a re-
cord of the most prominent intellectual successes
won by pupils whilst in attendance at the school.
Amongst these the name of T. J. Byrnes still stands
out as the most distinguished.




AT THE AGE OF 19 YEARS.


£ater years
By G. W. Power.
BARLY in the year 1879 there matriculated
at the University of Melbourne a student
who was destined to become one of her
most distinguished alumni. He was also
destined to play a foremost part in the history of
his native colony of Queensland; to rise rapidly like
some brilliant planet to the zenith of the Australian
political firmament; and then to flash meteor-like
to his setting amidst the tears and regrets of a nation.
He went up to the University at what was then
about the average age of the freshman, having at-
tained his eighteenth year on the preceding nth
of November. He was a stranger in Melbourne,
and quite unknown to his new associates. Queens-
land students have since become recognised as a
distinct and ever-increasing class amongst the under-
graduates, able to take a respectable place in the
class lists, and in the arena of sports. But at the
time referred to, only four representatives of the
Brisbane Grammar School owed allegiance to the
Southern Alma Mater-, and those four had not yet
(although some of them have since) done anything
to warrant in Melbourne candidates a fear of one who
described himself as an ex-pupil of the same school.


When, therefore, the honour lists for the February
matriculation examination were posted, and it was
discovered that the exhibition for History, Geo-
graphy, English, and French was awarded to Thomas
Joseph Byrnes, some chagrin was felt that the metro-
politan candidates should have suffered defeat at
the hands of an “ outsider.” But as time wore on,
and his fellow students became familiar with the
personality of the winner, his genial spirit of cama-
raderie, united with an abundance of talents and
an excellent grounding in a variety of subjects, dis-
pelled any feelings of vexation or surprise, and the
Queenslander became first favourite for the classical
exhibition, which was eventually appropriated by
him at the end of the year.
Thomas Joseph Byrnes achieved in his short
life such success as it has been permitted to few to
attain in a like period. His success was due in the
first place to his own natural qualities of mind and
heart, supported and strengthened by a sound
mental and moral training and practice; in the next
place, to a family’s devotion; and finally, to the
Queensland educational system. That system
operates very unfairly in regard to the children of
those who consider religious instruction to be a sine
qua non in the school curriculum; but it has un-
questionably the merit of giving every opportunity
for self-advancement to those who take advantage
of its provisions, and are able to bear the strain
of severe competition.


In the year 1873. Byrnes, then a boy of thir-
teen attending a State School at Bowen, in Northern
Queensland, had won a scholarship of the value of
per annum (the amount was afterwards reduced
by two-thirds), to be held for three years at a Gram-
mar School. His widowed mother, though poorly
circumstanced and having a large family of girls to
support, made every effort to give her clever young
son a superior education, and sent him down to the
Brisbane Grammar School. Before the three years
had expired, he won a scholarship awarded by the
trustees of the school, and this entitled him to free
tuition for the remaining two years which were re-
quired to complete the usual five years course of
secondary education. It fortunately happened that
in the year 1878, the Douglas Ministry, in which
the present Chief Justice of Queensland held the
offices of Attorney-General and Secretary for Public
Instruction, placed on the Estimates for the
first time a sum sufficient to cover the first
year s cost of three exhibitions tenable for
three years, of the value of each
per annum. These exhibitions were intended to
enable Grammar School boys to complete their edu-
cation at some British or Colonial University.
Byrnes was by this time well known in scholastic
circles in Brisbane as dux of his school and winner
of the “ Lilley Gold Medal” for three successive
years. His friends expected him to secure the
highest place in the examination for exhibitions, and


they were not disappointed. He may, therefore, be
truly said to have owed his excellent education to
the far-sighted policy of the governing body of his
colony, which in the matter of education had exer-
cised more paternal care than that of any other of
the Australian colonies.
At the University he retained the characteris-
tics which had distinguished him at school —an
even temper and well balanced mind, a thorough
interest in his fellow-men, a sturdy common sense,
relieved by a keen appreciation of humour, and a
tendency to show brilliance rather than industry.
He was physically, perhaps, lethargic rather than
energetic; although he liked to attend football and
cricket matches as a spectator, he never took an
active part in field sports. In the Arts Schools he
obtained a first-class in each of the three years, but
in the second and third years he was beaten for first
place by more zealous workers. In the first year
of the Law course he secured first place in the honor
list; in the second year he was content with a pass.
He made excellent use of the five years spent in
Melbourne, with a view to his future career as a
lawyer and a man of the world. He developed a
strong innate taste for classics and literature, which
enabled him in later years to take amongst cultured
persons a place suitable to his talents and position.
In the study of history and political economy he
laid the foundation for his future statesmanlike
qualities. He did not reside in college, but he be-


came a prominent member of the Trinity College
Dialectic Society. As I write there lies before me
a copy of an address delivered in the Athenaeum
Hall “ at the fifth annual meeting of the Society,
on Friday evening, 17th August, 1883, by the
Prelector, T. J. Byrnes, 8.A.” The address opens
with an expression of thanks for the honour con-
ferred upon its author by his election to the respon-
sible office of Prelector; and he assured his consti-
tuents that he felt the honour doubly when he re-
membered that he was the first alien from beyond
the walls of the college who had been thus distin-
guished. The incidental expression of regret that
two of the proposed group of four denominational
colleges remained unbuilt, that “ two gems were
still wanting to complete the rich circlet that was
to adorn the fair mother,” will be re-echoed by those
of my readers who know that even to-day one place
in the setting remains vacant. The address had
no title, but it might have been styled “ A Plea for
Closer Union.” The non-collegiate student evi-
dently felt the need for greater intimacy amongst
undergraduates than that which flowed from casual
meetings in the lecture-room and quadrangle; and
he suggested the establishment of a University Union
for social purposes, a University periodical, and a
University Athletic Association. It is per-
haps significant of Mr. Byrnes’ influence amongst
the undergraduates that three such institu-
tions were actually established in the follow-


ing year. The University Union, The
University Review , and the University Athletic As-
sociation all date from about June, 1884. But the
Prelector went further: he advocated the founding
of a “ Pan-University Club,” which would embrace
members of all the Universities of the Continent.
Those who were in touch with our late Premier during
the last year of his life on the subject of a Queensland
University know that he looked forward to the possi-
bility, under a Federated Australia, of a single Aus-
tralian University, which would confer one set of
degrees only, and would absorb the existing Universi-
ties so as to make them local colleges affi-
liated to the central body. In this con-
nection the following passages from the
address may be found of special interest: “It
Would be an inestimable advantage to establish an
Intercolonial Union in such a way that no Univer-
sity man in the capitals of Australia need feel that
he was a stranger, but would be a guest and member
of scientific and social societies. The Univer-
sities ought to be amongst the first to encourage the
tendencies to a Federated Australasia, and by this
means they would contribute not a little towards
that happy end.” This more extensive proposal
did not meet with the general acceptance of the
audience, and I can well remember that Bishop
Moorhouse, the chairman of the meeting, in that terse
and vigorous style of which he was a master, advised
the Prelector “ to drop the Pan.”


Of course, Mr, Byrnes did not attain the posi-
tion of Prelector at one bound. He had necessarily
made many appearances at the Society’s meetings,
and became recognised as one of its ablest debaters.
It is interesting to learn from the appendix to the
address that on the preceding 18th April he had
supported the proposition—“ That the action of the
Redmond Brothers in undertaking their mission to
this colony is perfectly justifiable.” It is also amus-
ing, in the light of his subsequent career, to learn
that at the following meeting, on the 22nd May, he
had introduced the subject, “ That the Coalition
Ministry is an unholy alliance.”
During his student days he took great interest
in the proceedings of the Sodality established in
connection with St. Patrick’s College; and at its
“ Academia,” sometimes presided over by Sir John
O’Shannassy, he frequently employed his debating
powers. In all departments of social intercourse
the young graduate became well advanced, and his
powers as a conversationalist and raconteur under-
went . rapid development He had two very
attractive natural attributes: his eyes and his voice.
His eyes approached most nearly to the most expres-
sive eyes I have ever seen —those of a portrait—Sir
John Millais’ portrait of Gladstone. Through those
painted eyes the whole soul and intellect of the great
man appeared to look. Mr. Byrnes’ speaking voice
was strong and musical; and when he sang, though


of late years his voice had partially lost its clearness,
there was a pleasing union of tenderness and
strength.
He was called to the Victorian Bar in July,
1884, and to the Queensland Bar in the following
month. He had never lost touch with Queensland
during his student days, for he always returned to
the family circle during the Long Vacations. Any
privations to which his mother and sisters had cheer-
fully submitted on his account were now about to
be amply repaid by the tender solicitude which he
always exhibited towards them, and the strenuous
endeavours on their behalf, which probably, as much
as personal ambition, supplied his motive power.
Though admitted to the Bar he did not
begin practice for some twelve months,
which time he spent in reading law in the
chambers of the present Mr. Justice Real,
who then occupied a position in the front rank of
the practising barristers. Between master and pupil
there arose a bond of friendship as between an elder
and a younger brother, which was broken only by
death. Byrnes had no social influence, and came
with no credentials to the legal fraternity, except
the respect retained for him by those who had been
his schoolmates. I remember, however, a conver-
sation in June, 1885, in which,* on the eve of com-
mencing practice, he showed a spirit of great con-
fidence, arising from his capacity to see and appre-
ciate both sides of a question, and from the fact


that on the score of preliminary education and train-
ing he felt inferior to none of his future competitors.
His success at the Bar was rapidly accomplished.
It is true that when he started, briefs were numerous
and counsel comparatively few. But before litiga-
tion began to decline, his position was firmly es-
tablished ; and when Mr. Real was raised to the
Bench in July, 1890, few counsel had a larger prac-
tice than his former pupil. In the following month
Sir Samuel Griffith, having been sent for by the
Governor, formed what became known as the Co-
alition Ministry. He retained for himself the posi-
tion of Attorney-General and leader of the Bar, as
well as that of Chief Secretary; but he was desirous
of securing a subaltern to administer the Department
of Justice. His choice fell upon Mr. Byrnes, then
a practising barrister of only five years standing.
The office of Solicitor-General was thus filled for
the first time in the history of the colony, and a seat
was provided for the young man of nine-and-twenty
amongst the grey-beards of the Legislative Council.
His elderly confreres soon admitted that knowledge
of the parliamentary novice compelled respect for
his character and talents. He did not act as Leader
of the Government in the Council, that task being
reserved for one of his colleagues who had more
political experience; but he introduced within a
short time of his first appearance many important
Government measures, and made many valuable
contributions to the debates. He found little diffi-


culty in learning the forms of the House, and with
his previous forensic and dialectic experience the
rest of his task was easy.
The next two years were fraught with many
political and professional cares —chief amongst
them the two most celebrated cases that have yet
engaged the attention of Queensland tribunals. On
the fifth of November, 1891, began the action of
the Queensland Investment Company versus Grim-
ley, and certain ex-directors of the plaintiff company.
The ex-directors, who included the then Treasurer,
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, were represented by a strong
Bar. led by the Solicitor-General. The case was
tried before the Chief Justice, Sir Charles Lilley,
and a jury of four, and was ultimately decided in
October, 1892, on appeal to the Full Court, which
consisted of Justices Windeyer (temporarily ap-
pointed to a seat on the Queensland Bench), Cooper
and Chubb. The final result was a complete vic-
tory for the ex-directors, largely contributed to by
the skill, ability, pertinacity, and eloquence of their
leading counsel, who won golden opinions through
his conduct of the case.
Shortly afterwards began the great arbitration
case in connection with the Cairns Railway, between
Mr. John Robb and the Railway Commissioners.
It was heard by three arbitrators, of whom the pre-
sent Judge Mansfield, then at the Bar, acted as
Chairman. The proceedings lasted through 78
sitting days, and the legal expenses were enormous.


The Attorney-General was leading counsel for the
defendants, and he was assisted by the Solicitor-
General and Messrs. Drake and Shand. In this
case also, Mr. Byrnes added lustre to his established
reputation.
The Robb Arbitration Case was the last case
in which Sir Samuel Griffith appeared as counsel;
for upon the resignation of Sir Charles Lilley as
Chief Justice, early in 1893, he was appointed
to the vacant position. Sir Thomas Mcllwraith
succeeded him as Premier; and the office of At-
torney-General fell into the hands of Mr. Byrnes.
One of his first duties as leader of the Bar, was to
tender the congratulations of himself and his brethren
to the new Chief Justice, and his speech was worthy
of the importance of the occasion.
It has been customary in Queensland for the
Attorney-General to occupy a seat in the Legislative
Assembly. Mr, Byrnes, therefore, determined to
abandon the serener atmosphere of the Council
Chamber, and to seek a position which would bring
him directly in contact with the more combative ele-
ments of the Legislature. He had little difficulty
in securing his return to the Elective House as mem-
ber for Cairns, at the General Election of March,
i 893-
During the three Sessions which followed, the
Attorney-General was busily engaged in Parliamen-
tary debates. He was one of the strongest members


of a strong Government; but opposition and criti-
cism, from one quarter at least, were persistently
maintained. The Labour leader had come back to
the House with a following of sixteen. His party
was compact and pugnacious, and caused the Go-
vernment considerable trouble. Perhaps the best
known measures of those with which Mr. Byrnes
became concerned, while sitting as member for
Cairns, were: The Peace Preservation Bill of
1894. and the Suppression of Gambling Bill of 1895.
Of both these Bills he was, rightly or wrongly, re-
garded as the responsible author. By his strong
and successful advocacy of the former, he incurred
the odium of many of the Labour members, seven
of whom were suspended in one day for improper
behaviour in the House, while the Bill was in Com-
mittee. The passage of the Suppression of Gamb-
ling Bill was resented by a certain section of the
community, whose opposition was subsequently in-
strumental in securing the defeat of Mr. Byrnes when
he sought election to Parliament as the representa-
tive of Brisbane North.
The Attorney-General’s speech on the second read-
ing of the Peace Preservation Bill is a fair example
of his style. It is clear, forcible, and well-arranged,
and shows to advantage his powers of memory, as
well as his extensive knowledge of the colony, gained
from travelling over almost every portion of it. The
reader of Hansard will notice that his longer


speeches are seldom interrupted, the reason being
that he had a formidable power of repartee. One
or two examples of his quickness in debate may,
perhaps, be fitly quoted. When one of the Labour
Members described a tour over his own electorate,
made during the recess, and declared that amongst
the Irishmen whom he had met not one had a good
word to say for the Attorney-General, on account
of his connection with the so-called “ Coercion” Act,
Mr. Byrnes immediately retorted —“ It shows what
company you have been keeping!” A member for
a mining constituency having suggested that the
Gambling Act might be evaded, owing to the defi-
nition of the word “place” in the interpretation clause,
by a sweep-promoter conducting his operations at
the bottom of a mine, the appropriate answer came
from the Attorney-General: “ I am afraid he would
find himself in a hole.” It may be truly said that
his memory could be trusted for facts and his ima-
gination for wit.
Upon his entrance into the Lower House, Mr.
Byrnes became more devoted to politics and less
to law. During the whole of his political career
he was given as much professional work as he would
take; but it is probable that, notwithstanding the
comparative dearth of litigation in Queensland
during the last six years of his life,
he suffered a loss of income by his
attention to political duties, which was not


entirely compensated for by the salary attached to
his office. He appeared less frequently in jury-
cases, which involve a greater loss of time than cases
in Banco. The Attorney-General was specially in
request for the latter class of work; and was always
to be seen in his place at the Bar at the monthly
sittings of the Full Court, where his lucid, relevant,
and suggestive arguments on points of law were
greatly appreciated by the judges.
I have already mentioned his congratulatory
speech on the occasion of Sir Samuel Griffith’s ap-
pointment as Chief Justice. The following pas-
sages are extracted from a speech to which, in
view of the speaker’s own death, a doubly
sad interest now attaches. It was delivered
at a time when the Bench were mourning the sudden
loss of one of their most honoured brethren, and
their grief was re-echoed from the Bar, to whose
feelings apt expression was given by their leader.
It is a good example of his capacity as an orator,
though to the reader it lacks that weight and dignity
which were added to the words by the voice and
utterance of the speaker. It is necessary to explain
that Mr. Justice Harding, at the close of the evi-
dence in a jury case on the afternoon of Wednes-
day, 29th August, 1895, suddenly stricken with
mortal illness; but that strong sense of duty and
determined courage which had distinguished his life
did not desert him in his last hours, and on the fob


lowing morning he insisted on summing up the evi-
dence to the jury as he reclined in his Chambers, in
the intervals between paroxysms of agonising physi-
cal pain. His sole motive was to save the suitors
the considerable expenses attendant upon an abor-
tive trial.
“ It is my most melancholy privilege.’ said Mr.
Byrnes, “ to express our deep sense of grief at the
death of Mr. Justice Harding. The passing away
of one whom we all looked upon as a leader, as a
personal friend, and as a brother in
the profession, would at any time have
been a matter for the sincerest sorrow;
but a keener edge is set on our sense of de-
privation, when we have for ever present in our
minds the overpowering and peculiarly sorrowful
circumstances attending what I may call the public
calamity of his loss. We know that he was stricken
down in all the power and strength of body and
intellect which he possessed, and that he passed
away in the halls where he had so long been a faith-
ful servant in the cause of justice. And we know,
as the Chief Justice has pointed out, that before
his death he summoned to his bedside the jurors,
his lay coadjutors in the administration of justice,
and gave them his last exhortation, as was his wont,
to decide according to their consciences between
the parties before their God. But, ere he could
enter judgment in the case, he himself had been
summoned to his own. These circumstances are


the most tragic and the most pathetic recorded in
the ordinarily tranquil annals of the Australasian
Bench. . . . Some one had said that the na-
tion’s chiefest possession is its men, and surely the
first of these possessions should be the leaders of
men; and in a country like this, I think the nation
should be most careful in choosing its judges, and
proudest in upholding their reputation and honour.
Mr. Justice Harding had all the qualities which go
to make up a true public servant. He had courage,
patience and industry. He combined in himself all
those fine qualities which go to build up the Anglo-
Celtic race, and which have made that race in truth
the masters of mankind. Still may his example
shine to guide us in our voyages! I believe myself,
that though sad was his passage, if he had had to
choose his way of taking-off, he would have chosen
none other. If ever a soldier died at his post, he
did. Having done his duty, he laid himself down
to die. No judge could, I think, ask any worthier
nunc dimiitis than that. May his soul rest in
peace!”
I should have mentioned that Mr. Byrnes had
lost his mother in the winter of the previous year;
but her memory ever remained with him, and her
name was almost the last which he uttered.
His political and professional duties did not,
during this period of his life, absorb the whole of
his energy. He was a welcome guest in social cir-


cles; and his services were constantly requisitioned
as a patron of athletic sports. Would that he had
allowed himself time for their healthful practice!
The claims of literature were not ignored. He
was for some years President of the Brisbane Liter-
ary Circle; and he read before its members two
papers of high merit—the first, in 1893, on the sub-
ject of the great French preacher, Lacordaire; the
second, in July, 1894, on the Avorks of the Queens-
land poet, James Brunton Stephens, whose loss we
so lately have mourned.
Early in 1896, the Attorney-General returned
with renewed vigour from a trip to Honolulu, made
in company with the then Premier (Sir Hugh Nel-
son), and the Treasurer (Mr. Philp). Another Gene-
ral Election was appioaching, and he decided to
abandon his Northern constituency in favour of a
Government candidate, and seek election for North
Brisbane in the room of Sir Thomas Mcllwraith,
whose continued ill-health had driven him to Eng-
land, and prevented his return to the colony.
Mr. Byrnes only succeeded in reaching
the third place on the poll, and was
therefore defeated. He was never seen or heard
to greater advantage than in his platform speeches
during the election campaign. He was greatly dis-
gusted at his defeat, but quickly recovered his equa-
nimity, and obtained a seat in the new Parliament
as the representative of Warwick.


In 1897 Mr. Byrnes added the finishing touches
to his education and culture by visiting England at
the time of the Jubilee celebrations, and subse-
quently travelling for a period of some months
through the United Kingdom and Europe. He saw
and heard so much in the space of time at his dis-
posal, that when he returned his friends in Brisbane
became partakers of an inexhaustible store of narra-
tive and anecdote. He was presented to His Holi-
ness the Pope, and to the Prince of Wales. His
interview with Gladstone he must be allowed to de-
scribe in his own words. He was entertained both
in London and at the country seats of many English
noblemen and gentlemen, and carried away from
their hospitable homes many family legends dating
back into Elizabethan times and into the Middle
Aces. He had many letters of introduction to deli-
ver in Ireland, and came awav with an additional
regard for that fair land and its people. His know-
ledge of French was frequently requisitioned during
his travels on the Continent; some of his best stories
related to the mannerisms of Italian waiters; and
he brought back from Athens a copy of the Greek
National Anthem, which added to the variety already
imparted to his stock of music by a number of
Hawaiian songs purchased in Honolulu.
He arrived in Brisbane in January, 1898.
and was received in so enthusiastic a
manner by the representative citizens, that some re-


paration was made for the blow dealt him by the
city two years before. On the occasion of a trip to
Moreton Bay organised by them in his honour, his
auditors were charmed with the tone of the principal
speech delivered by him, which breathed a spirit of
reconciliation, and announced his intention of for-
getting all that was bitter in the past.
In April, upon the death of Sir Arthur Palmer,
the President of the Legislative Council. Sir Hugh
Nelson, became his successor; and on the 13th of
that month it was announced that the Governor had
sent for Mr. Byrnes. Eight days later the new Pre-
mier addressed his constituents at Warwick in an
elaborate speech in which he unfolded the policy of
the Government. It was an utterance showing that
blend of progressive enterprise with manly indepem
dence and professional caution which was charac-
terise'' of all Mr. Byrnes’ best work both in politics
and law.
He now determined to visit the Northern and
Central districts so as to renew in his official capa-
city his acquaintance with their inhabitants, and to
learn their needs and aspirations at first hand. He
made a kind of triumphal progress through their
chief towns, starting at Bowen, the scene of his boy-
hood (now, alas, visited for the last time!) and paus-
ing in turn at Townsville, Charters Towers, Hughen-
den, Mackay, St. Lawrence, Rockhampton, Mount
Morgan, Barcaldine, Longreach, Clermont, Glad-


stone, Bundaberg, Maryborough, and Gympie. This
tow occupied about two months, and the native-
born Premier met everywhere with an enthusiastic
reception from people of all opinions. Several of
the towns above-mentioned are strongholds of the
Labour Party; but the guest was treated with the
same courtesy and respect in all quarters. There
is, however, such a thing as “ killing with kindness,”
and the strain of the tour must have been enormous.
Not only were there public receptions and political
gatherings and banquets; but the Premier was ex-
pected to be present, and was present, at concerts
and “ social evenings”; he visited hospitals and or-
phanages, and granted holidays at State Schools,
making speeches on almost every occasion. I will
quote from one only of the speeches delivered by
him during the tour. It happened that the news
of Gladstone’s death, which occurred early in the
morning of the 19th May, reached Mr. Byrnes just
as he was about to deliver an address to the people
of Mackay. The event had of course been daily
expected, but falling as it did, it caused a change
in the Premier’s plans. He took some little time to
recollect himself; and then proceeded upon the plat-
form and addressed the audience as follows :
“ I have not the heart to address you to-night
on matters of mere local interest. I think I will
be excused if I touch for a few moments on the
event which has caused me, and indeed the whole


world, such a pang of regret. As you doubtless
know, I was privileged to interview Mr. Gladstone
when in England last year. There is something
touching about that interview now; and I think you
would like to hear about it. . . . Through the
kind offices of Mr. John Morley and Earl Spencer,
I received a letter from Gladstone asking me to come
up to Hawarden Castle. Nothing could take that
letter from me now, and I have put it away, as one
of my most valued treasures. I count the inter-
view as a great privilege, because in Mr. Gladstone’s
old age it was difficult to see him in private. If I live
a hundred years, I can never forget the great honour
and distinction conferred on me by that interview
with the Grand Old Man. On my visit to Hawar-
den Castle, when ushered into that great presence,
I was at first absolutely awed. I saw before me a
man of great intellect and culture, a man whose
learning is recognised by every living critic, and who
has taken a foremost part in the events of our
nation. I can never forget the tone of his voice,
and recognising that he was then fast approaching
ninety years, I can imagine what he must have been
as an oratot, when he swayed the masses of Eng'
land. I can compare that voice to nothing but the
undertone of a mighty sea. It has been said that
the Liberal Party took very little interest in these
colonies, but a falser statement was never uttered,
for it was Mr. Gladstone who conceived the autono-
mous constitution under which we live, and which


is the envy of all foreigners. I had gone to see
him as a young Australian; and I believe I lis-
tened to some of the inmost confidences of the great
man’s soul. In my first remarks I presented the
homage of all my countrymen, and, though I was
awed on meeting him. the courtesy of Mr. Gladstone
soon put me at my ease. On the subject of Queens-
land, as on all other subjects, he was conversant;
and he .spoke particularly of the colony. He knew
that there was in it a town bearing his name, and
showed a lively interest altogether in the working of
Parliamentary and other affairs. The feeling of
awe melted away as the old man assumed an air as
if he was desirous and happy to be instructed by so
young a man. Mr. Gladstone sat at a table with
one eye closed—the result of an accident—but the
other bright and sparkling; with one hand behind
his ear to form a sort of ear-trumpet; and in that he
showed the only signs of infirmity which his age
should have otherwise indicated. ... It was
only natural that we should converse about Ireland;
and Mr. Gladstone said that the state of Ireland
was one of which no Englishman had reason to be
proud, the country being in a backward state, so
as to be the reproach of foreign nations. . . .
We conversed on many subjects, and, when I said
good-bye, he gave me this parting message: ‘ I
wish you, Mr. Byrnes, in your future career, both
politically and professionally, all the success and
honour that should be credited to a career that has


opened so brightly and auspiciously. Take back
from me to the people of Australia a message of full
sympathy with them, and my desire for their con-
tinued progress and prosperity. They have my very
good wishes. I cannot say they have my best, for
they are reserved for the country that is nearest to
my heart, and that is Ireland.’ You can fully under-
stand why on an occasion like the present, when
recollections of the past are crowding upon me, I
should feel disinclined to mention anything conten-
tious. By the graveside of such a man as the na-
tions of the earth now mourn, all differences should
be laid aside in the contemplation of the life of the
man who has been laid low, a contemplation which
should lead us to aspire to something nobler and
better than each one of us has hitherto conceived.
We ought all to revere his memory; and in conclu-
sion I will entreat you, as almost in the presence of
the dead, to let the past bury its dead, and to look
forward to the time that is coming when all dif-
ferences shall be laid aside.”
Oh, the irony of that speech at Mackay! Oh,
the bitter mockery of it! “ l ln your future career V
‘A career that has opened so brightly and
auspiciously /’ .... l lf / live a hundred
years! /’ ” Surely some evil spirit sat grinning at
his elbow, as, in a voice broken with emotion, he
quoted Gladstone’s words! How soon was he, too,
to be lamented in like fashion! How soon were thou-


sands to be plunged into grief by his own death,
infinitely more sad and pathetic than that of the
great man whom he mourned, and who had died
full of years, as well as full of honours!
Parliament met on the 26th July, and at the con-
clusion of the debate on the Address in Reply, the
Premier arranged to visit Sydney for a week, in order
to confer with the Premiers of New South Wales
and Victoria on the question of the New Guinea
Concessions. In Sydney he caught the cold which,
with its subsequent complications of measles and
pneumonia, resulted in his death.
On the afternoon of Sunday, 21st August, the
passer-by might have noticed in Queen Street, Bris-
bane, what is on Sunday an unusual sight— a crowd
gathered outside a shop window, the contents of
which they eagerly scrutinised. The window con-
tained seventeen addresses, beautifully inscribed
and ornamented, presented to the native-born Pre-
mier during his Northern tour. The crowd mingled
praises of the recipient with expressions of envy at
his good fortune! He was then in Sydney, whence
he returned on the following Thursday.
On Thursday, 29th September, at nine o’clock
in the morning, the priests of the Archdiocese of
Brisbane were chanting a Mass in St. Stephen’s
Cathedral, for the repose of the soul of one who
had died in perfect peace, strengthened and com-


forted by the last consolations of his religion; while
men and women of all creeds and opinions sobbed
as they gazed upon the coffin covered with crosses
and wreaths of flowers, in which lay the noblest pro-
duct of Queensland, and one of the sturdiest pillars
of the Catholic Church. Four hours later, while
the end of the funeral procession was still in the
streets of Brisbane, three miles away the coffin was
lowered into the grave at Toowong, where he now
rests beside the mother whom he had loved so well.
Such was the life, and such the death of
Thomas Joseph Byrnes; and even in this imperfect
sketch some future Australian Juvenal may find
material for a new satire on the Vanity of Human
Wishes. If there be amongst us any Milton, hither-
to mute and inglorious, he may be induced to con-
sider the late Premier of Queensland at least as
worthy of tribute as the person whom we only re-
member as the text of “ Lycidas.” Nor would I
yield his claims to be glorified in verse to those of
the dead youth, who furnished the inspiration for
Tennyson’s noble elegiac. But perhaps we should
look for a vales sacer amongst those who knew and
loved him in his life. Some of them, in the first
shock of grief, expressed their sense of deprivation
in metrical form; it may be that ere long the Muse
will make some more considerbale effort to keep his
memory green.


Those who knew him intimately cannot forget
him while memory endures. And all who have the
interests of their country at heart will ever set a
black-letter mark against the 27th of September,
the day when the brightest intellect that Queens-
land had produced was, by the mysterious will of
Divine Providence —at an age when death seems
to us to be premature, and at what appeared to be
the mere outset of a brilliant career —called upon
to resign the gifts with which it had been so plen-
tifully endowed.
58


Byrnes’ last Sour.
Bv J. J. Knight.
PEAK that I may see thee,” wrote Ben
w ./ 1 Jonson, “Language most shews a man;
no glass renders a man’s form or likeness
so true as his speech.” Taken generally,
Jonson’s dictum expresses a great truth. In my
opinion, at all events, it has a special appropriate-
ness in regard to the late Thomas Joseph Byrnes’
public life. We, who knew him intimately, need
nothing better than his home life, his scholastic
achievements, his success at the Bar, to guide us
in determining that Byrnes was a man among men.
But to those who knew him less intimately, it was
his speech that revealed his great personality. The
people of Queensland had more than begun to rea-
lise how much he towered above his predecessors,
although he had but just stepped upon the threshold
of public life; so much so that when death claimed
him, those people truly felt that Queensland had
been robbed of a man who would undeniably have
won a high place in Australian Statesmanship. As
one whose privilege it was to record his utterances
on his great tour, which alike heralded his entrance
as the head of the State’s Executive and his exit
therefrom, I can say that when Byrnes spoke, truly


did the people see him. I had travelled with Pre-
miers and Ministers before, but I never saw any man
draw to him such universality of sympathy and sup-
port. You could not listen to Byrnes and believe
that there was anything superficial about him. One
felt that he spoke his thoughts, irrespective of whet-
her they might be palatable or not, and his power was-
manifested in the fact that everywhere his listeners
gave him credit for it. Few men have set out as Pre-
mier of a colony under such unfavourable auspices
as he did; none so speedily achieved popularity as
he. I well remember the state of public feeling
when we set out in 1898 to tour Queensland. With-
out going into details, I think I may say that had
Byrnes been an opportunist or political adventurer,
his labours would have been cast on easier lines.
Some there were who would not believe that anything
good could come out of Nazareth; others there
were whose conduct did not say much for their judg-
ment. There were, indeed, not a few—and amongst
these were counted his staunchest friends —who
considered that Byrnes would have done better had
he cut himself off totally from any alliance with
past administrations. However, be this as it may,
when he became Premier he had not only to blend,
as it were, all these conflicting elements, but he had
also to fight a political cabal, which secretly at-
tempted his overthrow almost before he got into-
office. Let me not be misunderstood by “ political
cabal.” I make no allusion to any constitutional


Opposition, such as is found in the House sitting
opposite to the Government, but to a small associa-
tion of politicians who might reasonably have been
expected to be found fighting on the side of the
Byrnes’ Government. 1 mention this here, not with
a view of resurrecting any painful reminiscences,
but as showing the immensity of the task the late
statesman had imposed upon him. Why, we found
as the tour progressed, that in places elaborately
planned attempts had been made to prevent his
being heard, and in, at least, one town we were
warned that to be safe we could not stay the night
in the place! It is a tribute, alike to the deceased
statesman’s power and personality, that before the
termination of the tour the leaders of the cabal had
sworn allegiance to the Byrnes’ Government, while
many who attended meetings to hoot, if not to curse,
remained to pray. The people were attracted to
him as steel to a magnet, and those who politically
differed with him were constrained to do so silently.
Frequently, incipient disorder and electioneering
buffoonery was converted into hearty applause or
wild enthusiasm. The vast audiences quickly re-
cognised that they were face to face with a man of
broad and sympathetic views; a man possessing the
power and the will to grapple with everyday pro-
blems. Truly, there was nothing parochial about
the late T. J. Byrnes—nothing narrow —nothing
mean; indeed, if there ever was a man of the people
in Queensland, that man was Thomas Joseph Byrnes.


At the outset of his political career Byrnes
showed a masterly grasp of public affairs; still it
was evident that in the little world of Queensland
politics he was cramped. The danger seemed that
he might mould himself to his environment, and,
after all, develop a stunted growth. Like all colo-
nials he hardly grasped the fact that Queensland
was not the universe, although there never was a
doubt but that, given the opportunity, he would
readily respond to the influences of a wider sphere,
and make his mark no matter how great the com-
petition. That opportunity came when he took
his trip to Europe with Sir Hugh Nelson. The T.
J. Byrnes, of June, 1897, was not the T. J. Byrnes,
of January, 1898. The relative dwarf grew into
a giant in those few months. His big mind quickly
seized the situation, and contact with the great men
of the Old World was the means of developing it
to an extraordinary degree. That trip taught him
much, and, perhaps, the greatest lesson of all
was that he had to unlearn much. His pre-
conceived ideas of men and matters underwent a
radical change ,and I do not think I am doing him
a wrong when I express the belief that it first opened
his eyes to the absolute supremacy and power of
the people. I do know that he confessed to me
on the very day he returned to Brisbane that he had
had no idea of what true Democracy was until he
had associated with some of the Peers of Great
Britain. His associations, too, with the many lea-


ders of public thought in Great Britain had a
broadening influence on him. and in this connection,
I should say, that the greatest achievements in this
direction were traceable to his association with “ the
Grand Old Man”—the late W. E. Gladstone —and
the Countess of Warwick. And speaking of Mr.
Gladstone, I should just like to say that Byrnes felt
his death keenly. The sad news came through just
as he was stepping on the platform at Mackay.
Without a moment’s hesitation Byrnes dropped his
original programme and delivered a eulogy of the
Libera] Leader, which was a masterpiece of
oratory. He moved more than one man to tears,
and at the conclusion little knots of people could
be seen at the street corners in Mackay discussing
whether, great as Gladstone was, he could be very
much greater than Byrnes. I had meant to quote
this speech, but as I understand portions of it have
been given by Mr. Power, I shall omit it.
To a student of men, as a journalist must be,
Bymes was of absorbing interest. While one was
never in doubt as to his natural ability, one felt that
he lacked some of the essentials which are unfor-
tunately considered to be necessary in the present
day politician. For one thing, he had not the
faculty of saying one thing and meaning something,
very different, neither could he bring himself to ex-
cuse a distortion of fact on the plea of diplomacy,
or even on the ground of expediency. One need
not have a long association with Australian politics-


to show him just how far these faculties enter into
a politician’s qualifications; and since this sort of
thing has almost come to constitute the standard
of parliamentary morality, one cannot help sympa-
thising with the intelligent elector who positively
refuses to take a neophite parliamentarian at face
value. One felt, therefore, that he could not be
surprised if electors had at the outset
looked with suspicion upon T. J. Byrnes.
Indeed, among those who had never met
him prior to the tour, there were many who had
publicly voiced their suspicions. But personal con-
tact quickly removed all possible doubt.
And yet, it would have been so easy for Byrnes
to have masqueraded! He could have acted a part
to perfection. As a mimic he was exceptional; his
fund of wit had no limit; he was a perfect encyclo-
paedia of anecdote and incident; and his memory
was such as would have permitted him, had he
cared to do so, to have equivocated or manoeuvred
with absolute safety. In addition, he could have
adapted himself to any class. But Byrnes was one
of a very limited class of public men
who hold that in the serious things
of life the actor is out of place; he
was a man who had set himself a high standard.
Politics were, with him, a very serious business.
The trust of the people was a sacred one. I could
quote many instances where he might have saved
himself much trouble, and at once have guaranteed


himself many henchmen had he cared to straddle
the rail. With him a straight-out question merited
a straightforward answer, and he gave it. His views
were always well thought-out before they were ex-
pressed, and having thus satisfied himself as to the
soundness of his reasoning, he was firmness itself.
At the same time he was not an immovable auto-
crat. Let anyone show him that he was wrong, and
T. J. Byrnes would not consider it weakness to admit
it If he had one weakness —and I must say I
always felt that he had one —it was the unbounded
confidence he manifested in everybody. Had he
lived, I verily believe that this blindness or failure
to examine the motives of many who paraded as his
friends would have had evil results. Men could
plan his overthrow, and he would not suspect it, so
long as they kept up their guise of friendliness.
He trusted as he would be trusted. As
a matter of fact, we have an example of this in the
political cabal of which I have spoken. It took a
very great deal of persuasion on the part of those
who had his welfare at heart to make him thoroughly
understand what was going on.
Byrnes’ trust of the people was absolute; their
supremacy with him was unquestionable. He was
very fond of an evening “ constitutional,” whether
it was pacing a deck or a walk through the outskirts
of a town, and more than once when discussing the
day’s events and turning over some question which
had been vigorously threshed out, I have been sur-


prised to find how he would reiterate his observa-
tion that, whatever his own opinion might be, he
was determined not to set it against the will of the
people. Only he must be satisfied as to that will.
Take, for instance, the matter of woman suffrage.
Byrnes was one of those who could not bring himself
to believe that woman desired to engage in the
scramble of an election. At any rate, until she so
declared herself, she could not be said to want it.
A most influential deputation of ladies waited on
him at Rockhampton, and vigorously set forward
their claims. And they so impressed him that he
decided that it was only fair to test the question,
and this he said he w r ould do by referendum. “ I
do not think,” said he, “ It is for a Premier to say
what the people should have. It is for the people
to declare, and I, as a loyal Queenslander, will obey
their mandate. The Statute Book of the country
should be a faithful mirror in which the
wishes of the people are reflected.” The
same thing happened in regard to one-man-one-vote.
Had he lived he would have taken the voice of the
people, and had that voice been against him he
would have abided by the result.
When he conceived it his public duty to pursue
a certain line of policy, he neither spared himself,
his colleagues, or his friends. As I have said, if it
were shown that he was wrong he did not deem it
any humiliation to admit it. Equally, if any acts
of faulty administration on the part of his Ministers


were made manifest, he would not quibble, but
would freely acknowledge them. I remember how,
on one occasion, I think it was at Charters
Towers —he astonished a deputation and staggered
the Minister involved, by telling his interviewers—
they having, of course, proved their case —that had
he heard them as a stranger in Queensland, he would
have supposed he had struck a type of Chinese
administration of a century back! On another occa-
sion, some persons who might be supposed had a
more than usual influence with him, clamoured for
an amendment of the Education Act in certain essen-
tial details. But these, friends though they were,
had not estimated Byrnes’ high sense of public duty.
They were well-meaning, though lamentably short-
sighted. Having patiently listened to them, he
said, “ Gentlemen, as one who owes his position to
the facilities afforded by the educational system of
this colony, I have a high appreciation of it—too
high to permit me to kick away the ladder which
has helped me up. As Premier, I may tell you that
I will never interfere with it, or the Department
which administers the Act, so long as it does ad-
minister it. Parliament, which represents the People,
passed it; Parliament, as the mouthpiece of the
People, must alter it. Until the people do so de-
mand it, I shall take no course which can even be
suspected as tending towards any alteration of the
principles laid down in the Statute.’’


Byrnes had one thing in his favour —he was a
Queensland native and the first to ever have reposed
on him the honour of Premiership. Yet, as I write
this, I am impelled to ask whether, after all, this
was really in his favour. Indeed, now I come to
reflect, I remember that several times during the
tour he was reproached with having too great a
sympathy with the Australian-hom and all too little
with the parents of Australians from across the seas.
But all this was very unfair. As a matter of fact,
I do not believe Byrnes once alluded to his “ nation-
ality” without being compelled by those who were
doing him honour. The Australian Natives were
naturally proud of his achievements, and everywhere
he went they would “ bob up”—to use a colloquial-
ism—and claim him as their own. And he
was not ashamed to be so claimed. From my note
books I have selected a few of his references to his
birthright.
The first place he met with the native element
was at Townsville, where we arrived late in the night.
The Mayor (I think it was Alderman McCreedy)
broached the matter in proposing the toast of Mr.
Byrnes’ health. “We talk much of our timber, our
sugar, our wool, and other products, but when we
produce such men as the Hon. T. J. Byrnes we have
just cause to feel proud.” Mr. Byrnes’ reception
on rising was something to • be remembered. He
replied:—“ The Mayor has announced like many
others present: I am a native of the soil. Well,


lam proud of it. When I sometimes hear in these
latter days of the extreme disabilities that are put
upon youths in the colony, I, without desiring to in-
troduce a personal matter, always think of the faci-
lities that have been given me and others in a mode-
rate sort of way, in what was then an extreme portion
of the colony. And, notwithstanding our trials, we
have been able to move along in the path of success
and achieve whatever success we have attained. 1
think it is a hopeful lesson to those youths living
in what is now the extreme north of the colony. I
am, of course, glad you have welcomed me as a
native of the soil, and as one who has had associa-
tion with North Queensland, but I am also glad
that you have welcomed me as representing the
Government, because I believe that whenever a man
holds executive office it is a good thing for the com-
munity, apart from party politics, to pay some degree
of respect to that office.”
The same thing happened at Cairns, when Mr.
Byrnes replied:—“ The Mayor has alluded to the
fact that lam a native of the country. Of that fact
I am, of course, extremely proud. I do not, how-
ever, intend in my political career to raise any ques-
tion of native-born against others, but I do say I
think there is an especial sympathy between those
born here and the soil on which they have been
raised. The spirit of loyalty to country is growing
among the native-born population, and that spirit,
when it receives its full fruition, will make this Aus-
tralia a great Nation and a mighty Empire.”


It was due more to the magnetism of Byrnes’
power than to anything else —it was certainly not his
politics—that he was able to count among his friends
more Labour advocates than any other Premier.
Several of these publicly expressed their admiration
of Byrnes. I well remember, for instance, the pre-
sent member for Ravenswood so declaring himself—
and it did credit alike to his heart and his principle
that he so delivered himself in the dead centre of
his electorate. Coming as they did from an oppo-
nent, Mr. Jackson’s remarks are certainly worth
quoting. He said: —“ I believe it has been said
that Mr. Byrnes is touring the north for political
purposes. Well, I for one, do not believe that.
(Hear, hear). I believe he is simply touring the
north to see the people, and to interest himself on
their behalf. (Cheers) I think, too, that I may be
permitted to say without danger to my party or my
political principles, that Mr. Byrnes is the best
Premier Queensland has ever had. (Cheers). Of
course, we know that the Labour Party has never
had a Premier, so there is no danger in my making
an admission of this sort. (Laughter). There are
many thousands of people who have great respect
for Mr. Byrnes’ great ability; but it is only a few,
comparatively speaking, who have been permitted
to enjoy social intercourse with him and note his
geniality, his ready wit, and his great ability; and
these not only respect and admire him, but they
love him as well. (Cheers). Mr. Byrnes, in my


opinion, is the first orator in Queensland, if not in
Australia.” (Cheers). Referring to Byrnes’ early
day, Mr. Jackson further went on to say:—“ When
at Bowen he won his scholarship, and thus seized
the first rung of the ladder. He has been climbing
ever since. Some there are who think he has now
reached the topmast step. There is one rung still
higher, however, and it is not improbable that he
will reach that. I refer to his Premiership of Fede-
rated Australia.” (Prolonged cheering).
But, perhaps, one of Byrnes’ happiest utterances
on the subject of his nationality—that is, of course,
outside of what may be called his set speeches, al-
though, to be sure, he always spoke extempore —was
at Charters Towers. The Australian Natives there
presented him with an address, which, having con-
gratulated him on his elevation, went on to say:—
“ Being Australians by birth, we are naturally in-
terested in the great question of Federation, and we
trust that with the assistance of those splendid abili-
ties with which you are gifted, you will be able to
devise a satisfactory arrangement whereby Queens-
land may join the sister colonies in that grand con-
solidation of the British race in Australia, and help
to build up a Greater Britain under the Southern
Cross.” Mr. Byrnes, in replying, said: —“Fellow
countrymen and comrades—fellow countrymen by
birth and comrades, I trust, in every movement that
makes for the advancement of our great Australia —
I thank you most heartily for this evident proof of


your kindly feeling towards myself. Ever since I
accepted the high and onerous post of Premier of
this country, I have received on many sides mes-
sages of congratulation and epistles expressing good
wishes for a prosperous career of myself in that par-
ticular post. They are all valuable to me, because
they bespeak goodness of heart on the part of those
who have put themselves in communication with
me. But I assure you that there are none I value
so highly as the messages that come from those who,
like myself, are natives of the soil. We do not in
the expressions of comradeship that we make one
to another wish to reflect in the slightest degree on
those who have not the great privilege to be Aus-
tralians—and it is a great privilege, not because,
perhaps, of any particular influence we may have
had in the past, so much as we may look to place
in the future. After all, we know that our fathers
who came from the other side of the world —to
whom we owe our being and to whom we owe the
foundations of settlement in this country —have not
had the privilege we have of being natives of Aus-
tralia. But lam sure they will forgive us if we
can meet in a spirit of greater friendliness, because
we do happen to be natives of one Great Territory.
In a family there is an association that is respected.
No one blames a brother because he loves his
brother or sister better than any other in the family.
We know full well that with the native-born popu-
lation of Australia rests in a great degree the shape


which the destinies of Australia are to assume. The
importation of members of our race from abroad
keeps no pace with the great increase of those in-
digenous to our soil. I visited the schools to-day,
and have seen evidences that the production of a
native population has well kept pace with the output
of gold. (Laughter and applause). Let us hope
that it may continue so, because we know full well
that on these young Australians, whom we see on
every side, rests the responsibility for the future of
this great country. (Hear, hear). You have alluded
to the great subject of Federation. That is a ques-
tion in which we are all deeply interested. But it
is one based not merely on sentiment; it is one that
we must see is based on common interests, common
advantages, and common prosperity. I am always
delighted at the enthusiasm that is manifested by
Australian natives in the cause of a United Australia.
I have been wrongly accused of being somewhat
lukewarm on this question, though it has been either
by those who do not know me or know nothing
about the particular subject. Men, who are at the
head of a Government, Ministers and Members of
Parliament, too, have a greater responsibility than
the general community. A man who sits by his fire-
side in his arm-chair may lose heart and may think
that Ministers are not sincere because they fail in
all respects to share his enthusiasm; but we are
trustees for the country. We are actuated by a
desire to see Australia become a great Nation, nay


more than that, a great Empire. We, of course,
have to take care that nothing transpires in the
course of the negotiations to bring about dire results
to the cause of those who are in our safe keeping.
You will not fail to understand me when I put it in
this particular way. One thing is certain, the ques-
tion of the Federation of Australia must for its ulti-
mate decision depend upon the vote of the Austra-
lians themselves. (Applause). What we want to
see is that every phase of the question is put before
the Australians before they come to that ultimate
decision, because that ultimate decision is one to
reverse which is not possible. lam proud to think
that this question is one that is receiving your atten-
tion, as it is receiving mine. 1 may not say much
on the subject, but myself and all Parliamentarians
are keeping it steadily in view. I think the natives
of this country need be in no fear; and in the hands
of Parliament, aided by your opinions, I think the
question may be safely left.”
The broadness of view which characterised the
-deceased statesman was made manifest at Cairns
where, among other things, he said: —“ In some
wider sense than as a member for one electorate I
stand before you now. I do not stand here as the
member for Warwick, or as an ex-member for Cairns,
but as representing the whole of the people of the
colony. Only in that spirit have I come North. 1
am not here in any sectional interest; I am mere
representing in the widest degree the interests of


Queensland, to listen to the wants, the wishes, the
grievances of all. I want this to be clearly known,
because I have had an inkling that there is a grave
misunderstanding as to my mission. I view with
absolute contempt any feeling on the part of a sec-
tion of the community who declare I am here to
make political capital out of my visit; and the elec-
tors should severely visit those who seek to raise
differences between people who, with no dishonour*
able wish, desire to do honour to one who, for the
time being at any rate, holds the position of chief
adviser to the crown. Let us, when a man is on the
hustings, who holds views we do not agree with,
oppose that man honestly and openly; but when
chosen by the majority then, for the time being, he
is entitled to all the honour attached to the particu-
lar position he holds. This has been one of the
safeguards and one of the factors in the continuity
of the British Constitution. Men at home strive
earnestly, each in his own particular interest, but
when their own political interest for the time being
does not happen to be crowned with success, they
honour the post filled by their political opponents.
I am pleased to find the Cairns people in such hope-
ful circumstances and prospects, both as regards
agriculture and mining. What is wanted is, as the
chairman has put it, an influx of capital. That
is the want of the whole colony. Queensland has
the resources of an Empire. It has outlets for every
form of human energy. All it wants is some of that


stored-up wealth of the Old World which awaits-
investment, provided reasonable security is given it.
No lesson impressed me so much as this when I
was in England. I am not ashamed to say that I
learned a great deal by my trip to Europe; nor am
I ashamed to say that I have unlearned much. I
do not care how much a man may read to broaden
his views, it is impossible to prevent some sort of
parochialism getting into his mind, no matter how
he strive in the opposite direction. The remedy
for that is contact with the larger world that lies
outside Australia. I came back very proud of the
people from whom I originated, and no less proud
of Queensland, but what fills a man with pride and
astonishment when he visits England is to see the
vast things and the great population that has been
reared up there on what would appear to be very
slender resources. When a man travels through
England and Ireland (and especially a man from
Australia) and contrasts the climate, the soil, the
situation, and the natural resources, two feelings
seize him —one is a feeling of native pride in the
race from which he came, and the second that if
our people have done so much on such a small area,
what can we not look for in the future in the free
condition of this vast Empire, rich in minerals, rich
in climate, soil, and temperature. It is then that
a man feels there is a mighty destiny awaiting this-
continent. This is the thought we should have with
us at all times, morning, noon, and night; this is-


the thought I hope to bear in mind when I come
to address myself to the larger affairs of the country.
Queensland is a country small in population, yet on
account of the extent and vastness of her resources,
she presents many trying problems to men who have
the conduct of affairs. They have very little prece-
dent to guide them under those circumstances. This
may not be travelling along on sentimental lines, or
as one newspaper has put it, on lines calculated to
stir the democratic bosom, whatever that might
piean. Still, it is possible to forecast a policy
which may have a greater object —a policy which
may fill the democratic stomach, which, I believe,
is to be devoutly wished for. It may also feed the
aristocratic stomach —and that of the “ no-cratics”
as well. I believe in a policy that turns up at the
breakfast table, at the noon-day meal, and again in
the evening. That is a policy which will commend
itself to the great majority in Queensland, because,
after all, it satisfies the wants of the first wish, the
wants of common humanity. Not that I hold in
slight regard the intellectual advancement of the
people; the one follows the other. If we help to
make prosperous the people, they will have all the
more to devote to moral advancement
I thank Queensland for her assurances of loyalty.
The receptions which have been given me and the
messages I have received while in the North give the
greater pleasure, because you have known me longer.
Therefore, when you say to me “ God speed you on


the path you have to pursue/’ I follow that path
with the greater reliance in the endeavour to achieve
tne results which I feel you, as my well-wishers, well
desire me to achieve.”
A bit from Mr. Byrnes’ speech at Hughenden
is perhaps worth giving. He had been speaking
on the pastoral industry, “ the Industry,” as he put
it, “ which forms the basis of livelihood and wealth
production of so many of the citizens of Queens-
land,” when he referred to some remarks made by a
previous speaker anent himself. He said: —“ I
may perhaps fall short of the standard of politics I
myself have set up. But I think we are right in
setting up a lofty standard. If we do not reach it,
that is no proof that the standard is wrong or that
those who endeavour to reach it are hypocrites.
The thing that wants to be brought home to the
public mind is that Ministers and Governments may
represent in some respect ideas which conflict with
those of other members at the community. Yet
thete are broad general principles on which all Go-
vernments must be conducted, and those principles
should be not merely the possession of one party,
but should be the common possession, the common
pride, and the common heritage of every right-
thinking man in the community.”
Several of the speakers had, as usual, referred
to the fact that he was native-born, and these re-
ferences prompted this prophetic reply: —“ The feel-
ing of Australian patriotism is very strong within us


all. We have not yet in this country had an oppor-
tunity of giving collective expression to that feel-
ing, but I know that when the occasion arises the
sons of no country in the world will exceed in
patriotic efforts those of the sons of the good old
mother country, who were bom under the Southern
Cross, who are imbued with the ennobling idea that
they are now laying the foundation, not of a mere
province, not of a mere State, but of a mighty Em-
pire. This standard is higher, perhaps, than even
our thoughts now reach, but let us place the stan-
dard high. Let our aspirations be above the medi-
ocre. Let our foundations be deeply laid, and be
assured that the nation built by the sons of Australia
will be one whose very presence in the world will be
an emblem of hope to all nations, and, I trust, a
pledge of peace to all the peoples of the earth.”
It is interesting at this date to recall one of his
speeches at Charters Towers. It was a speech which
gave to his opponents an opportunity of declaring
that he was anxious to cut the painter with England.
In view, however, of the present feeling as to the
result of Federation, and the fact that Queensland
has taken part in an international war, the utterance
is of historical value. Referring to the part Austra-
lians would play in the future, he said :—“ Our
fathers in the old world have struggled in many
ways. They have struggled against caste and pri-
vilege and the spirit of exclusiveness, which do so
much to warp the finer sensibilities of warm and


generous mankind. We can say, as the men said
of old to whom the promised land became far more
than a promised land—an actual realisation: —we
can say, without in any sense reflecting on our fore-
fathers, that we mean to do greater things. We
lean to higher hopes, because our fathers came out
of Egypt, and we have the privilege to be desert-
born. Upon Australians and upon those who are
by their associations practically the same as us, de-
pends much that goes to make the nation. We
intend to establish a constitution in this country on
a broad and deep democratic basis. Above all
things in this country we must prize equality of citi-
zenship. There were some members oi* our com-
munity— not of our race —alien to us in every way,
who may be sojourners for temporary purposes. I
look upon them as mere incidents to industrial de-
velopments. With these, so far as citizenship is
concerned, we would have no truck whatever. But
w'hen our citizenship is given, it must be clearly
understood to be unqualified--that the rqen who
enjoy it do so to the fullest degree and in every post
in the land. These are ideas w’hich, lam sure, all
native-born Australians will carry to their fullest
completion. We have much of a grave nature be-
fore us. We have among other things to consider
what final shape the constitution of Australia is to
assume. The native-born must be largely in-
terested in this great problem. We in Queensland
have sometimes been twitted with being cold or


averse to the movement of Australian Unity. Well,
let me say that no imputation was ever based on
less tangible grounds. Queensland has always, so
far as practicable, been in the forefront of every
question that has tended to a higher development
of the Australian people. Take New Guinea. It
was really her action that annexed that island to
Australia to make it a portion of British dominions.
If we did not succeed in securing the whole of it,
it was not our fault, but the result of the timorous
policy of statesmen in the old country, who seemed
afraid of their own shadows, and afraid of every
extension proposed in that particular way. Then,
again, this is the first colony which, by its laws,
enacted that men who are members of its military
forces may be asked to serve not only within the
limits of our own colony, but in any part of Australia.
We he.ar a great deal about practical Federation,
but I ask you what greater proof of practical Fede-
ration is in operation in Australia than that act of
Queensland which places her citizens, her treasures,
her very life’s blood at the disposal of any portion
of Australia that may be subject to the attack of
any foreign foe. And so it has been right through-
out. lam sure that the people of this country when
the question of Federation is put forward in a prac-
tical form will not balk it. I know my countrymen
too well, I know Parliament and the country too
well, to doubt but that they will be found ready for
the emergency. We have to consider not merely


the question of Queensland within Australia, but we
must begin to address ourselves to the greater ques-
tion of the position of Australia within the Empire
itself. Queensland cannot be accused of want of
loyalty if she merely insists that her ever-growing
responsibilities demand that the position shall be
clearly defined before she takes a step she cannot
retrace. And let me here say that I do not think
Australia holds that position in the councils of the
Empire that she should hold. This is a portion of
the British dominions which may be plunged into
all the horrors of war without its people having any
voice or say as to whether such war should be waged
-or not. If Queensland is prepared to take that posi-
tion now, I am quite sure those who will come after
us will not submit to such an ignoble position. We
must look forward to the time when the population
will be reckoned tenfold what it is now, and what
position that people will then take up. The people
then will demand that their fortunes, so far as foreign
parts of the world are concerned, shall not be de-
cided by people who, though allied by kinship and
interest, yet live sixteen thousand miles away, and
are no part and parcel of this Australian community
of which we are part and parcel. I believe that
great things can be achieved in a quiet, steady, pro-
gressive manner. Australia, so far as the Depart-
ments are concerned, is included in the Colonial
Department. India has a branch of government
entirely for herself, but we self-governing colonies


are put exactly in the same category as the West
Indies and the South African Crown colonies, which
have large coloured populations, and many of which
have no powers of self-government at all. I be-
lieve this is a position we cannot much longer brook.
I think that Australia instead of being tamely in-
cluded in the colonial departments should either
ask to be put into the foreign department, which is
presided over by the Prime Minister himself, or that
a department shall be created in England which shall
be called the Department of Australia. . . . How
long I shall occupy my position I know not. I have
had to take up the reins of the stage coach at, per-
haps, an unfortunate time. The driver has got off his
box, and I have been put in his place. The roads
are rough and pretty heavy. They have been cut
up by the traffic that has gone along them already,
and there are muddy places and bog-holes cut by
that traffic, which I shall do my best to avoid. 1
am sure if I get into one of these tremendous
caverns, I shall come to grief, but by adopting the
policy of Western drivers, I hope to be able to
straddle the ruts. If Ido I know there is a fair and
broad way ahead. If I am permitted to travel so
far, I may be able to show something of the quality
of the driver and something, too, of the mettle of the
steads I have to drive.”
As in other places Mr. Byrnes’ reception at
Townsville was particularly striking. Speaking at
the banquet tendered him, he immediately got into


dose touch with his hearers per medium of an ap-
propriate simile. He said that when he arrived
there from the south to start practically a new branch
of business, he hardly thought he would have met
with such a hearty reception. They knew that poli-
tical affairs, as well as commercial affairs, were con-
stantly changing hands, and there was a party in the
south who thought they would call themselves
Byrnes, Philp and Co. Their head office was at
present in Warwick. (Laughter). They wanted to
open in Brisbane, but were not allowed (laughter),
but they had a strong, well-decentralised directorate
with a well-established business in Townsville (loud
applause), and he trusted as a result of his commer-
cial peregrinations that the business would be a
growing one in the north. (Applause). “ I know
full well,” he went on, “ that my countrymen will
appreciate to the full extent the difficulties which
beset the man who has to administer, for ever so
short a time, the affairs of a great and changing
country such as Queensland is; and I know enough
of my countrymen will see when the conflict arises
and my political pledges are to be tested, that their
fellow-Australian Premier will get a fair and decent
show. lam not going to attempt to build up a
political reputation on mere profession. I attach
no weight to politics based on such influence as that.
I am not going to say I believe in this or that, but
when a proposition is made to me (and I do not
care which side it comes from) I shall deal with it


in a broad, tolerant prompt, and, I trust, decisive
frame of mind. That, after all, is what you electors
would ask for in the man you elect as your leader.
I do not think that it is in any large degree due to
my personality that you welcome me, but rather you
welcome me as chief of the Executive. Our political
system is, indeed, a complex one, and one that the
learned foreigner gets into a serious difficulty about.
We recognise that by the voice of the people alone
shall the laws and the Government of the country
be carried on. But the voice of the people does not
express itself in practical terms every day in the
week. We have a system where periodically the
nation commits its judgment to Parliament. From
that Parliament is evolved a body of men dependent
on Parliament for their existence. Though not the
servants of Parliament, they are servants of the
Crown, which, in itself, is the emblem and token of
the great universality of the people. And so the
head of the Executive, for the time being, has at
once the confidence of the people through its Par*
liament, and in being the choice of the Crown he
occupies a position that any prince of royal blood
or any king or emperor may envy. It is a position
that depends not on trappery, or on the exercise of
any local conviction whatever. It is a position that
a man who occupies it feels he must occupy with
honour, that he is trusted by the people; and at the
same time he feels he has the confidence of the head
of the State who in herself and himself is the em-


blem of the historical continuity of the nation or
country. In welcoming me then you hold out your
hands to me as the chief of the Executive of' the
country. You cannot emphasise too frequently the
necessity of a strong Executive. You want an
Executive that is trusted for its honesty and integ-
rity, and, I believe, its ability. What failures there
have been when the power of the Executive has been
undermined by contentions which have resulted in a
direction opposite to that intended! France, more
than a hundred years ago, sat vastly at the head of
the European gathering of States. She at that
time set herself upon a course of political reform and
revolution. There was ample reason why France
should rise, because of the tyranny which had eaten
to the very vitals of nation. The men who desired
to change that country evolved three watch words
that were the very noblest ever conceived by human
ingenuity. The words which set forth the lines on
which the country should be run were Liberty,
Equality, Fraternity. They meant well, but we
know that in the disorganisation which set
in Liberty became Tyranny, Equality was a mere
farce, and as for Fraternity —how could there be
fraternity in a country in which the guillotine was
the only symbol of honour? And why was France
tom away from the true path of reform ? And why
was the whole French life merged into a military
despotism ? It was due to the fact that French genius
had never evolved an Executive which, though de-


pendent on Parliament for its support, could not at
the same time deal with the mass of public opinion
in a broad, tolerant spirit as opposed to parochial
consideration. All this may, perhaps, seem out of
place when raised by the Premier at a social gather-
ing given in his honour, but, I believe, we get much
guidance from the lessons of a past, which,* after all,
is not far distant from us. I say in this country we
require a Central Executive that can be trusted.
That Executive may change its personnel, but there
must always be a body of men willing to take up the
role of Government when it is the will of the people
that those who rule shall rule no longer. In addi-
tion to the personal considerations that attach to
myself, I know that it is in this spirit that you have
assembled to greet me. And after all, Ido not
know any reason why any man in the community
should not be quite ready to come forward and greet
me in my present post. If there ever was a man of
the people, I am of the people, and whatever hap-
pens I intend to remain one of the people. Men
may point to this, or point to that, but 1 say that
by every tradition and every instinct of my nature
I am pledged to support a course of conduct that
Queensland will have for herself the old watchwords
produced in the revolution of the past, and so basely
departed from. I want to see Queensland liberal,
tolerant and free. I want to see equality reigning
in every phase of the political and social condi-
tions of the country. I want to see fraternity, the


spirit of conciliation and moderation, the desire to
do good above all for the poor, suffering, and toiling
who have the greatest claims on our sympathies,
and who have no possibility of helping themselves.
In developing the progress we hope to see achieved,
I trust we shall all be found marching along like
brothers, shoulder to shoulder, I have, indeed,
found here the sympathy of good nature, and. above
all, I have found fraternity. I can truly say with
that Eastern Sage, ‘ I met a hundred men on the
road to Delhi, and they were all my brothers.’ ”
Byrnes found it necessary 7 a night or so later at
Townsville to indulge in some straight-out hitting.
It will be observed from his remarks that he desired
only a fair field, and that in claiming that was not
afraid to expose himself. He said : —“ The mem-
bers of the Government are not where they are by
any divine right or by any malign right—we are here
for the time because we represent the voice of the
people and the country. I do not care two straws
how long my tenure of office may be, but I tell you
this most plainly, and through you I tell the people
of the colony, that I will never consent to submit
to any proposition that I shall be ruled by cabals
or parties or of any section of Parliament. I recog-
nise no master but the people of Queensland. When
I was called upon to take office there were some
who wished that I would not accept. But, gentle-
men, I considered the question, and after consulta-
tion with friends, I felt perfectly sure I did the right


thing at the particular moment.’’ Byrnes next
touched on Federation, declaring for caution and
slow movement, and in the course of his observa-
tions he made this significant remark: —“ We have
no right to give away, or barter, or exchange the pri-
vileges of the Constitution we already possess. In
this I am not going to be swayed by any mere ques-
tion of sentiment. There are men, and influential
men toOj who think that the mighty problem may
be solved by results. But when I deal with such a
question, I do so not merely on the ground of senti-
ment, nor do I leave anything to chance —I must
have before me a very live presentment of what is
best for the people I represent. The question can
well afford to be discussed for many years, for I
would rather see a thorough determination on the
the part of the people to possess an accurate know-
ledge of it before they definitely pronounce. . . .
And here let me express the opinion that the fabric
of Federation can only be raised in a spirit of mode-
ration, compromise and conciliation, and with a re-
cognition of what a great and at the same time
varied country Australia is. It must be remem-
bered that a vast portion of this continent lies abso-
lutely within the tropics. No Federation, so far as
I know, has been accomplished except in countries
which lay wholly within temperate regions; and I
w'ould impress upon you, and upon the legislatures,
that any failure to recognise this fact will mean a
grievous w'rong to our people. I want those in the


south to recognise that every portion of this conti-
nent —its climatic conditions and other circum-
stances —must be duly considered before a Constitu-
tion can be formulated that will be readily accepted
by the whole of it. Mr. Philp has said
what is true when he stated that I do not intend in
the last session of Parliament to present an ambi-
tious or far-reaching policy. lam a strong believer
in the necessity for a broad, general, and compre-
hensive scheme of railway extensions, because I look
to the fact that in providing means of communi-
cation with the lands we are doing our very best to
develop the resources and to settle the people. But
such a policy is one involving increased liabilities,
and must depend for its mandate and confirmation
on the views of the electors, which will be pro-
nounced by this country at the end of the present
session. I claim the absolute and inviolable right
of the country to make its freest choice; I urge the
necessity for preserving free and equal citizenship.
The claim of the country upon a man is the strongest
feeling that can be exercised. What is summed up
in patriotism and love of country is the most in-
fluential form of political faith any man can assume.
On that is based our claim and our right to equal
citizenship. I believe myself in the voice of the citi-
zens of the country being completely heard when-
ever matters are presented to them for decision. I
claim the right of every man to exercise his right
without dictation of any kind. (A Voice: ‘ And


without coercion. ) Yes, without coercion. And
above all I object to anything that savours of eccle-
siastical coercion. Whenever a war like that is
being waged, the electors can depend on finding me
on the side of liberty of conscience. I dare any
man to dictate to me how I shall vote, and I will
resent to the fullest any attempt to introduce here
from the old country one of the most debasing forms
of influence, such as that which seeks to affect an
election on any ground such as religion.”
From such of his speeches as I have given, it
will be seen that however much he might regard
the Empire generally, he was first of all an Austra-
lian. He was on the side of a United Australia,
raised on secure ground, and was most jealous as to
the right of the continent to control its own affairs.
During his tour the question of New Guinea cropped
up owing to certain reports as to the intentions of
a wealthy syndicate, and he several times alluded to
Papua. At Rockhampton he remarked that he had
given the subject much consideration, because he
always said in the present arrangement there were
possibilities of difficulty and diversity of opinion
with regard to its administration, and even possible
conflict between ourselves and the European autho-
rities. We had not really such control over the
affairs of New Guinea as he thought that in its true
interests we should possess. If the Imperial autho-
rities wanted to run New Guinea on their own ac-
count they could do so, but if Australia was to run


it on her account (and he thought she should) the
Imperial authorities must not interfere too much.
At present we, in a certain form, only had a voice
in the administration of its affairs, and quite re-
cently we had heard that a large syndicate had
secured, or was about to secure, a large tract of land
in New Guinea. Neither he nor his Government
were any party to that bargain. He had never
heard of it in an official way. Generally, in London
he had heard there something on. but the Go-
vernment had a controlling hand, and what he
asked was that the country would remember this
when passing judgment. He could promise them
that if he had any power to stop the syndicate’s
operations, they would be stopped. If the syndi-
cate acquired this land they would do so, he was
sure, in a way that was entirely alien to all Australian
sentiment. He personally was strongly opposed to
any attempt being made to lock-up the lands of New
Guinea in the way proposed. He himself looked
to New Guinea as largely an outlet for our mining
population in years to come, and it must ultimately
be brought well within the conditions that pertained
to all Australian States. Any attempt to make it
a ground for exploitation of syndicating speculators
would devote it to a purpose other than that for
w r hich it was intended. He wanted to see New
Guinea developed on the lines we had laid down for
the development of Australia generally.
It was a noticeable fact that in every speech
he delivered there was an expressed desire to raise


the standard of politics in this country. There was
never anything which could be interpreted as an
attempt at electioneering; even in the matter of
deputations he refrained from making promises
which could easily have been given, and which
would assuredly have won him much support.
Byrnes studiously set his face against the making of
political capital by any such means. In this respect,
apart from the matter of his speeches. Byrnes made
a great impression. His view of politics was rather
well set out at Barcaldine, where among other things
he said :—“ I have been eight years in politics, which
represents one-fifth of my life, and that, I think,
is sufficient to satisfy the ambition of any human
being. But there are many subjects of grave interest
to be dealt with, and I felt that I would not be doing
my duty by the country that bore me and the country
that had done so much for me, unless I offered my
services, so that the people might accept or reject
them. I have not taken office by the wdll or wish
of any Parliamentary party. I do not look on that
as leadership in the true sense. The moment I took
office I decided to place myself in touch with the
country, and in a short time I came before the elec-
tors, because I know enough of the politics of Aus-
tralia to understand that the man who really should
rule the country is the man who has the confidence
of the masses of the people of the country. I de-
clined to accept the leadership on any other terms.
The only master I will submit to is the voice and


will of the people of Queensland itself. Although
in this country we are small in numbers, we have a
country of great possibilities, and we want to see
established on a firm and broad basis a true Consti-
tution—the freedom under wffiich the British Empire
has grown up. And after all what a magnificent
thing it is to be the free choice of a free people! In
the very sad and tragic story that we read in the
cables during the last few days relating to the death
of the great leader of the English Liberals (Glad-
stone), there is no incident that appeals more to
the imagination and touches the hearts at the same
time than the scene of that graveside when the coffin
was being lowered. The Prince of Wales, the son
of a hundred kings, the successor to the throne and
heir to the Empire and of India, knelt with reverence
and kissed the hand of the woman who had been
the faithful and loyal wife of the man who had been
the leader cS the English people. In that incident
there is a very great deal indeed. It shows that
the monarch, in the embodiment of the heir to the
throne, was doing honour to one who had been the
leader of the people. This is the model we should
aspire to. I would set up before the people a stan-
dard which would continue to grow higher and
higher. We have, indeed, a great responsibility in
this country of which we are the present possessors.
We have inherited the past with all its glories,but
the future is our patrimony, and it is the concern of
every man to see that the standard of politics is


maintained to the highest pitch, so that those who
come to rule the destinies of the people shall be
worthy of the choice of the people of the country
which has its origin on British foundations.”
We were at Mount Morgan when the first vote
was taken in New South Wales on Federation —a
vote which negatived it. The telegrams came
through while Byrnes was on the platform, and in
respect of them he said, —“ These figures are par-
ticularly interesting, because they illustrate the fact
that on great and broad subjects there are many
points that require discussion. And some of us
are blamed in this connection for not declaring our-
selves without consideration as being entirely in
favour of this movement, the object of which we
may be entirely in favour of, but which requires
elucidation. Our action is justifiable, however, by
the fact that the vote given in New South Wales
shows that its people are almost evenly divided on
the question. I do not take this vote to be against
Federation. It is largely in favour of it, but the
people have asked for further time in which to con-
sider the matter. 1 believe there exists a deep-set
feeling throughout Australia in favour of Australian
Unity. We, as practical men. may differ as to de-
tails, but on the broad question there can be no
doubt the people have shown their desire for some-
thing bigger than parochial politics—that they may
live in a broader atmosphere than has hitherto been
their lot. I believe that if New South Wales throws


its lot into the Commonwealth, Queensland will be
prepared to do the same under a somewhat similar
constitution. Queensland will not agree to isola-
tion, but on honourable, free, and generous terms
of union she will be perfectly prepared to throw in
her lot with Australia. At the same time we in
Queensland are less in need of Federation than the
other colonies, and this is due to the diversified con-
ditions of our territory. We are different in regard
to climate, to resources, to situation. We are not
hemmed in on the one side or the other—we have a
great coast line, and in all these various points we
are able to live and trade even though we may not
be incorporated with any body of States. This
assures Queensland quite an independent position
in the question of Federation.' 7 I have
quoted so much from Byrnes on Federation
at the risk oif being monotonous. But my
excuse is the desire to pourtray the far-reaching eye
of the dead Statesman. His words, read in con-
junction with the present position of Queensland in
respect of Federation, have an historical significance
which, I think, warrants their being set down here.
And now I have finished. 1 feel that there is
much even yet that ought to be recorded, but I have
more than reached the limit of space allotted me.
What Byrnes might have accomplished had he been
spared cannot be estimated. The aim he had set
himself, however, is well foreshadowed in the
speeches, my last quotation from which was thus


delivered at Rockhampton almost at the close of
the tour: —“ Whatever my future may be, I pledge
myself during my political life entirely to my country
as a whole, and to the service of the Great Australia
that lies beyond the confines of Queensland, and
even further to the Great Empire of which we all
feel proud to be a part. On occasions like these (it
was a gathering of Australian Natives in his honour)
it may perhaps be considered by the too hypercriti-
cal to be a slight on our forefathers whose pioneer-
ing and courage causes our assemblance here, but
I am sure Australian patriotism can accede with full
recognition all it owes to the men who have gone
before. Here in this great Democracy that is grow-
ing up in Australia, we, although proud of our insti-
tutions and of the universality of the freedom of
this country, are also proud of the older lands in
which our forefathers struggled and died for free-
dom. but which at the same time are models of
chaste political conduct.”
97


D\on\as Joseph Byrnes
God gave him gifts ; nor gave in vain
The great heart and the master-brain
To dream, to battle, to attain ;
To storm the height
The power that all men strive to gain
Was his by right.
O saddest spring in all the land!
O mystery, hard to understand
When, at the stern, unknown command,
With icy breath,
Fate placed within his fearless hand
The gift of Death !
Calm be his sleep who lived to dare.
Go; say a patriot slumbers there
Whose brows were never bent to wear
His loftiest fame.
Yet wrote on Queensland’s page a rare
A fadeless name
He fought his fight; he won his goal.
His life is on the battle-scroll;
And, whilst beyond your w eak control,
The tears ye shed,
Well deep within a Nation’s soul,
He is not dead.
GEO. ESSEX EVANS
29th Sept., 1898.


.


