

THOMAS
BRACKEN
A CRITICAL
APPRECIATION
LOUIS H. VICTORY




THOMAS BRACKEN


WORKS BY LOUIS H. VICTORY
(All out of Print).
Lady Rosalind, a romance (1891).
Fate, the Blind Avenger, a romance (1893)
Collected Verses (1893)
Flowers, Birds, and Children (1894)
Symbolistic Sonnets (1894)
Poems (1895)
The Higher Teaching of Shakespeare
(1896)
The Eve of the World’s Tragedy (1898)
Imaginations in the Dust (1903), 2 vols.
Essays for Ireland (1905)
The Inwardness of Shakespeare (1905)
Essays of an Epicure (1905)
The Soul of Nero, a drama (1907)


THOMAS BRACKEN
A Critical Appreciation
LOUIS H. VICTORY,
Fellow of the Boyal Society of Literature.
WELLINGTON
WATKINS. TVER & TOLAN LTD. PRINTERS




THOMAS BRACKEN.
“ In the future will not the labours of
the writer be ranked as high as the work
of the statesman or the warrior ? ”
That is the pregnant question with
which, over a quarter of a century ago,
Sir Robert Stout concluded his essay on
The Rise and Progress of New Zealand,”
which formed an introductory historical
sketch to Thomas Bracken’s “ Musings in
Maoriland,” published by Arthur T. Keirle,
in the year 1890.
Notwithstanding the flight of a quarter
of a century, Sir Robert Stout’s question
may be asked with equal force to-day, not
only in New Zealand, but throughout the
British Empire. It goes to the root of our
progress in art and civilisation. It touches


the whole fabric of our advance in culture
and refinement. It measures the height of
our spiritual development.
If we observe the fate of some of the
foremost British poets we shall find, in our
treatment of them, a strong condemnation
of the popular attitude towards native
genius, and a strong argument for the con-
clusion that our best men receive no just
measure of recompense, or appreciation, for
the work which their genius accomplishes.
The stories of Chatterton and Keats, John
Davidson and Stephen Phillips (to mention
only a few in a long list) make sad reading,
and a deplorable commentary on our treat-
ment of men who should be enshrined in
the hearts of the people, and whose merits
and mission should place them, among all
who possess a due sense of relative value,
not only as high as statesmen and warriors,
but infinitely higher. There is “ something
rotten ” in that State which heaps all its
honours on soldiers and statesmen and
scorns its bards —“ The unacknowledged
legislators of the World.” Woe to that
country which lauds its Premier and whips
with scorn its Poet! The music-makers
and the dreamers are the fine flower of th&
nation ; without them we sink into a soul-


destroying materialism. As one of their
number has sung :
“ We are the music-makers,
And we are the dreamers of dreams.
Wandering by lone sea-breakers,
And sitting by desolate streams.
World-losers and world-forsakers,
On whom the pale moon gleams—
Yet we are the movers and shakers
Of the world forever, it seems.”
“ The movers and shakers of the world.”
That is what all great poets have been in
all the ages in which great bards have
sung, great dreamers dreamed.
When the pages of literary history in
the Old Country are strewn with the wreck-
age of neglected bards, it would be scarcely
just to condemn with sweeping denuncia-
tion a young and growing Dominion like
New Zealand for failing to appreciate fully
the value of her native singers. In a coun-
try whose population has been chiefly
engaged in the practical work of hewing
out homes and settlements from the wilder-
nesses of wild and magnificent Nature, it
is not to be expected that we should find
any very keen appreciation of the relation-
ship between the Doer and the Sayer. Action
has been the paramount necessity for
dwellers in the Dominion, and the Power


of the Word has been, consequently, lost
sight of.
But we shall learn that the Word comes be-
fore the Action ; that actions have always
grown from the dynamic force of words
skilfully arranged to stir the imagination
and the emotions of men. We shall learn
that words are things. We shall learn
that;—
“ A word is a gem, or a stone, or a song.
Or a flame, or a two-edged sword ;
Or a rose in bloom, or a sweet perfume.
Or a drop of gall, is a word.”
We shall learn that words are everything
that man can do, and think, and dream.
We shall know that every ideal of civilis-
ation, in every age of the world’s history,
has been based on the written word of
poets and moral philosophers, and that the
structure of all civilisations has grown there-
from. We shall know, too, that the greatest
war in the world’s history came to pass
because the teachings of the poets and moral
philosophers were cast aside, and their high
spiritual ideals replaced by the doctrine
that physical Might is Right; because the
world bowed down in adoration before the
Calf of Gold, given over to the orgies of a
humanitarian Materialism.


When that day arrives we shall think
more of our poets ; we shall think more in
this Dominion of the work of such men as
Thomas Bracken—a genius whose con-
tribution to our poetic wealth must be
more and more esteemed with the passage
of years. I confess that until I was asked
to write this essay, my knowledge of
Bracken’s verses was confined to “ Not
Understood,” and one or two of his lyrical
poems. An examination of his “ Musings
in Maoriland,” however, has led me to a
keen appreciation of his outstanding poetical
endowments, an analysis of which I shall
proceed to present.
In every considerable poet there are
certain qualities, or characteristics, which
I always look for as deciding the value to


be attached to his work. In regard to his
spiritual equipment, I probe for :
(1) Moral Philosophy;
(2) Sincerity ;
(3) Sympathy ;
(4) Imagination ;
(5) Depth of Vision ;
(6) Fundamental Brain Work (Ross-
etti’s essential).
On the technical side I seek for :
(1) Verbal Power and
(2) Metrical craftsmanship.
There are other desiderata, though this
list may be said to cover essentials. Let
us see how Thomas Bracken stands when
measured by these tests :
Moral Philosophy.- —Every poet worthy
of the name is a moral philosopher ;he
represents a moral influence. Every man
who writes verses represents a moral or an
immoral influence: to be non moral in
literature is an impossibility. Every great
poet is didactic. That does not mean that
every time he writes he sets himself the
task of producing a homily, as Pope did
when he wrote his “ Essay on Man.” It
means that his work, generally speaking,
exercises an elevating influence cn the
mind and soul of man ; it means that it


possesses an uplifting power. It means
that, no matter what the subject-matter
may be, it is permeated by “ the light that
never was on land or sea ” ; it lifts us
into the realms of Beauty and Truth ; it
is an alembic that purifies the mind and
spirit. The theory of “ Art for Art’s Sake,”
is immoral, because it permits the unbridled
treatment of any subject, however de-
praved ; and that which does not elevate,
degrades. Men like Dean Swift, who write
verses saturated with the canker of im-
morality, are not poets, but pestilences.
When a great poet portrays evil, he does
so to show its snares and pitfalls, not, as
the pornographers do, to gloat over it.
When Thomas Bracken wrote his verses
entitled ; “ Annihilation,” he voiced a
burning condemnation of a “ philosophic
lie,” and a magnificent confession of faith
in the immortality of the Soul: —
“It is not true ! Great Sire, it cannot be
That this bright ray of life we call
the Soul—
This quenchless flame of immortality
Emblazoned on Thy grand eternal
scroll—
Was kindled in its mortal lamp by Thee,
To find within the grave its final
goal! ”


In “ De Profundis ” the poet gives us
verses which recall the beautiful trust that
Newman expressed when, from the depths
of the “ encircling gloom ” he cried out :
“ Lead, kindly Light ” :
“ Souls are sighing for peace, O Lord,
Hearts are lifted to Thee ;
Wails for mercy to Thee, O Lord,
With many a plaint and plea
Out of the depths and darkness go :
* Father, O Father, we nothing know t
Open Thy children’s eyes below,
As yet they cannot see ! ”
In these materialistic days, when it is
the fashion to doubt the existence of every-
thing that cannot be seen and felt ; when a
greedy discontent agitates men with the
feverish lust of evanescent gains and pleas-
ures, it is good to scan such lines as those
in “ The Soul’s Treasury,” to hear a “ poor ”
man singing of “ the precious wealth God
gave to me ” :
“ Warm beams of Love, and rays of Truth,
And gleams of Hope, and sparks of
Thought,
And echoes of the songs of Youth ;
And music in the Springtime caught
From warblers wild that waked the heart
To Nature’s purest minstrelsy :
Such blessed gifts are but a part
Of all the wealth God gave to me !


Amid the scoffings of sordid doubt it is
well to be reminded that :
“ Each Soul has coffers of its own.
Wherein man’s better nature lives ;
Let worldlings hug their earthly gains
They come and go, they fade and flee,
Imagination still remains
To guard the wealth God gave to me.”
Amid the multiplicity of vain strivings,
the modern fret and unrest, the craving
for fresh excitements and sensations, it is
a tonic to the soul to find a poet who can
sing with humble content :
“ Great minds may climb to Nature’s
throne,
And pluck the secret from her breast ;
The jewels on her azure zone
Bold giant intellects may test :
But I will act my humble part,
Though clouds may come and Fate
rebuff ;
Refulgent joy-beams gild my heart ;
When she is near I’ve light enough.”
Another facet of the poet’s spiritual
attitude is shown in his recognition of the
ennobling influence of the beauties of
Nature as when he sings of “ withered
buds ” in the lines entitled, “ Not Dead ” :
“ Why are ye precious, then sweet flow’rets
why,
If those poor faded leaves alone remain


As dear mementos of your transcient
reign ?
Because to me, sweet buds, ye cannot die !
A gentle hand has made ye part of me ;
For here below, our selfish spirits cull
All they can gather of the beautiful,
To clothe themselves for immortality.”
It is a task of love to follow such beauti-
ful thoughts, but I have said enough on
this aspect of the poet’s work to indicate
his opulence in this essential of the true
poet’s equipment.


Sincerity. —Oscar Wilde, in his “De
Profundis ” (which, with his “ Ballad of
Reading Gaol ” are about the only sincere
things he ever wrote) declares : “ Most
people are other people. Their thoughts
are someone else’s opinions; their lives a
mimicry ; their passions a quotation.”
Sincerity is one of the essential attributes
of the poet. The versifier who is not sincere
is doomed ; he is never likely to be mis-
taken for a poet. The poet must write
from his heart. He must realise that:
“ You may work on your word a thousand
weeks ;
But it will not glow like one
That all unsought leaps forth white-hot,
When the fountains of feeling run.


You may hammer away on the anvil of
thought,
And fashion your word with care,
But unless you are stirred to the depths,
that word
Shall die on the empty air.”
‘ Thy soul must overflow,
If thou another’s soul would reach.
I knew a poet years ago who was so
carried away by feeling that he wept over
the composition of his verses. The result
was that his poems were always powerful,
his words were always the words “ that
sway, and stir, and stay.” The power of
a poet’s work is always in proportion to
the depth of his feeling. This quality of
sincerity is always an outstanding feature
of the poetry of Thomas Bracken. The
spirit of sincerity breathes from every
section of “ Musings in Maoriland.” It
is unnecessary to labor a point which will
be obvious to all readers of his poems.
Sympathy. —The poet must be a man
with sympathy wide and deep. It is not
enough that he feels his own joys and suf-
ferings ; he must be in sympathetic re-
lation with everything that lives and
breathes. He is, in his perfection, a man
who “ by means of an unlimited compre-


hension of ail the manifestations of Nature
by an appreciative sympathy with the
tastes and thoughts of those who differ
from him in temperament, by a kind of
intuition into the sources, growth and effect
of feelings which he himself has not actu-
ally felt, by means of those transcendent
imaginative gifts, rightly named Inspira-
tion, so vividly and correctly describes all
the processes of Nature that we can never
discriminate what he relates from his own
personal experience from what he invents
by throwing himself into the position of
others.” This great gift of sympathy is
the possession of all poets, in greater or
lesser degree. Shakespeare possessed more of
it than any other poet who ever wrote.
Bracken, of course, was not a Shakespeare,
but his work bears the hallmark of sympathy
on every line of it. Whether he sings the
triumphant “ March of Te Rauparaha,”
the grandeur of “ Tarawera,” the tender
story of “ McGillivray’s Dream,” the
“ narrative of sorrows and of sighs ” re-
corded in “ Waiaronui,” the sad tale em-
bodied in “ Only a Miserable Wretch,” the
wistful reminiscence of “ A Paper from
Home,” or the childlike innocence of.:
“ Lays of the Little Ones,” Bracken ex-


hibits everywhere a fine sensitiveness to
the feelings that dominate humanity, and
make of life the wonderfully-coloured fabric
that it is.
Imagination. —The poet is “of imagin-
ation all compact.” :
“ The poet’s eye, in a fine frenzy rolling.
Doth glance from heaven to earth, from
earth to heaven :
And, as imagination bodies forth
The forms of things unknown, the
poet’s pen
Turns them to shapes, and gives to
airy nothing
A local habitation and a name.”
It would be idle to contend that Thomas
Bracken possessed the transcendent imagin-
ative gifts of a Shelley, a Milton, or a Dante,
or even the imaginative faculty of a New-
man or a Francis Thompson. Yet it cannot
be denied that he had sufficient imagination
to stamp him as a very considerable poet,
and to lift him far above the average merit
of the hundreds of versifiers whose effusions
flood the papers and magazines, and occas-
ionally attain the dignity of book-form.
His narrative poems and lyrics are full of
delicate turns of fancy. His Nature-poems
especially, possesses this imaginative charm,
which casts a faery glamour over such


delicately turned verses as those in “ v The
Waterfall,” the “ Spirit of Song,” “ The
Winds,” and “ April Here and April There.”
Depth of Vision. —It is one of the pre-
rogatives of the poet to look into the springs
of human action, and to bring therefrom,
and from the moods and manifestations of
Nature, meanings and messages hidden
from the view of ordinary minds and eyes.
Bracken possessed this deep vision in no
common degree. And nowhere does he put
his finger more definitely on the human
heart and its foibles than in that masterly
poem—the best-known of all his verses—
“ Not Understood.”
“ Not understood: We move along
asunder,
Our paths grow wider as the seasons
creep
Along the years ; we marvel and we
wonder
Why life is life ? And then we fall
asleep—
Not understood.
Not understood : We gather false im-
pressions,
And hug them closer as the years go
by,
Till virtues often seem to us transgres-
sions ;


And thus men rise and fall, and live.
and die—
Not understood.
Not understood: Poor souls with
stunted vision
Oft measure giants by their narrow
gauge ;
The poisoned shafts of falsehood and
derision
Are oft impelled ’gainst those who
mould the age—
Not understood.
Not understood : The secret springs of
action
Which lie beneath the surface and
the show
Are disregarded ; with self-satisfaction
We judge our neighbours, and they
often go —
Not understood.
Not understood: How trifles often
change us!
The thoughtless sentence or the
fancied slight
Destroy long years of friendship and
estrange us,
And on our souls there falls a freezing
blight :
Not understood.
Not understood: How many breasts
are aching
For lack of sympathy ! Ah, day by
day,


How many cheerless, lonely hearts are
breaking !
How many noble spirits pass away—
Not understood.
Oh, God ! That men would see a little
clearer ;
Or judge less harshly where they
cannot see;
Oh, God ! That men would draw a
little nearer
To one another —they’d be nearer
Thee —
And understood ! ”
Thomas Bracken’s depth of vision is not
confined to his insight into the springs of
human action “ Which lie beneath the
surface and the show.” To Bracken, Nature
herself was a book of symbols, from which
he gleaned many messages.
Fundamental Brainwork. —There are
critics, and poets too, who hold that the
life of a poem may depend on its music ;
that mere melodiousness alone is all-suf-
ficient ; that the amount of thought in
a poem may be negligible, provided the
verses have a singing quality. They, rather
illogically, point to Swinburne and Shelley,
and say that these music-makers live by
their melody and nothing else. But there
is nothing in Shelley or in Swinburne to


prove this. On the contrary, there is
everything to show that these masters of
song possessed, and live mainly by, the
quality of their thought. Their thought is
their mainstay. As with every other not-
able poet, they fulfilled the test which
Dante Gabriel Rossetti applied to all poetry
—Does it provide food for thought ? Does
it possess “ fundamental brainwork ? ” A
very good test of the ultimate value of a
poem is to turn it into plain prose, so as
to arrive at its basis of thought. The verses
that will not bear such analysis may be
set aside as of very little value. And, as
a matter of fact, some very fine poetry
indeed has been written in prose form,
such, for instance, as the “ Tragic Romances,”
“ Spiritual Tales,” and “ Barbaric Tales ”
of Fiona Macleod. But, in the common
acceptance of the word, we look to the
“ poet ” also for metrical merit. In every
one of Bracken’s poems there is a core of
vigorous thought. And so in this respect
also he fulfils the requisite of a valuable
poet.


“ Each Art,” says Oscar Wilde, in his
“ Intentions ” (a book that contains some
sense, and quite a lot of nonsense) “ has
its grammar and its materials. There is
no mystery about either, and the incom-
petent can always be correct. But while
the laws upon which Art rests may be
fixed and certain, to find their true realis-
ation they must be touched by the imagin-
ation into such beauty that they will seem
an exception, each one of them. Technique
is really personality To the great
poet there is only one method of music—
his own.” Few poets are great, and that
is why so many of them imitate the music
of other people. They wear the cloak of
other poets, because they have no person-


ality of their own ; and their work, con-
sequently, has no vitality. It is correct
without being creative. But the poet who
Is really sincere, who has his own fountains
of feeling, while he necessarily adheres to
the recognised grammar of his art, is never
merely imitative. His own personality
shines through and illuminates his technical
accomplishments. And so it is with Thomas
Bracken. If he imitates Tennyson to a
large extent, he is saved from the fate of
the mere imitator by the strength of his
own personality. For example, his poem
entitled : “ Pax Vobiscum ” is very like
Tennyson’s “ Airy, fairy Lilian ” ; but his
own personal feeling, which permeates the
lines, dispels the thought of imitation, and
gives the verses an individual charm of their
own. Their emotion transforms them into
a personal threnody. And so with other
verses which suggest other poems.
I have said that I look in the work of
every poet for verbal power. Ido not mean
that 1 look for a very extensive vocabulary.
There are many poets whose very simplicity
constitutes one of their greatest charms,
especially to the multitude who like to
run as they read. Verbal power may be
attained with a very limited range of words.


Whst is required is a fine selective sense,
a faculty for using the right word in the
right place, a keen feeling for the color
and texture of language, the power to
make the word conjure up a vision of the
thing, the faculty of making language stir
people to tears, or laughter, or rage, or
fear, or pity, or scorn, or love, or hate.
Thomas Bracken was dowered with this
verbal power. It is not necessary to give
examples ; they can be found in profusion
throughout his pages.
A man may have verbal power and still
not be a poet ; and so we seek in his work,
not only verbal power, but the outward
form of poetry, metrical craftsmanship ;
although poetry can exist without it. And
Thoma;s Bracken had this craftsmanship
also in an unusual degree. He was in the
truest sense a music-maker. Every one of
his lyrics is stamped with musical crafts-
manship. He even shines in that most
difficult of all metrical forms—the sonnet.
Humour and satire are not essential to
the equipment of the poet, but they are
useful auxiliaries. And here, in conclusion,
I may note that Bracken, in the poems
in which these qualities are requisitioned,


was a humourist and a satirist of consider-
able parts.
Thomas Bracken was worthy of hs
monument, and of any other possible di;-
tinction which the people of New Zealand
can confer upon him.




•
’
■
*
-
