







THOMAS WATLING
LIMNER OF DUMFRIES


By the same author:
THE BIRDS OF DUMFRIESSHIRE.
A CATALOGUE OF THE VERTEBRATE
FAUNA OF DUMFRIESSHIRE.
MARIA RIDDELL THE FRIEND OF BURNS.
BIRDS AND THE WAR.
BIRDS MENTIONED IN THE ACTS OF THE
PARLIAMENTS OF SCOTLAND. 1124-1707.
RECORD BAGS AND SHOOTING RECORDS.
SHOOTING WITH SURTEES.




cf
03
&
tO
o 3
JS
H
>»
Xi
t-
C
oT
>
o
Q
»
O
c
>»
m
«+-i
&
+j
c
03
Oh


THOMAS WATLING
LIMNER OF DUMFRIES
BY
HUGH S. GLADSTONE
M.A., F.R.S.E., F.S.A. Scot.
DUMFRIES:
REPRINTED. FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION, FROM
THE TRANSACTIONS OF THE DUMFRIESSHIRE
AND GALLOWAY NATURAL HISTORY AND
ANTIQUARIAN SOCIETY: 19th FEBRUARY. 1937
1998


CONTENTS
Page
Thomas Watling’s Career 9
Thomas Watling’s Book 38
Thomas Watling’s Paintings 41
Documents in re Thomas Watling’s trial for forgery, 1789 65
Index 73


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Facing Page
Painting of Sydney Cove, in 1794, by Thomas Watling— Frontispiece
PL I—Advertisement1 —Advertisement of Watling’s Academy 14
PI. 2—Convict Hulk: possibly the “ Dunkirk ” .... 19
PI. 3— Title Page of Watling’s Book 38
PI. 4 —Painting of “ Ciliary Warbler ”by Thomas Watling 41
PI. s—Autograph5—Autograph of John White 57
PI. 6 —Guinea Note of Bank of Scotland circa 1788/9 . . 65


THOMAS WATLING
LIMNER OF DUMFRIES
It is known that Thomas Watling was one of the earliest
artists to portray the fauna of New South Wales and he
was also the author of a book entitled Letters from an exile
at Botany-Bay , to his Aunt in Dumfries which was printed,
at Penrith, but published anonymously and without date.
In 1932 I received a letter 1 from Mr K. A. Hindwood 2
of the Australian Museum, Sydney, Australia, in which he
asked me for any information I might be able to obtain as
regards Thomas Watling and, amongst other questions,
Mr Hindwood propounded the following :
(1) Who was Watling and what was his status in Dum-
fries ?
(2) What was he transported for?
(3) Did he return to Dumfries after being in Sydney?
The “ letters ” in Watling’s book 3 are addressed to
his Aunt and are dated : “ Sydney-Cove, Port-Jackson,
New-South-Wales, May 12th, 1793 and “ Cape of Good
Hope, African-Coast, Tuesday, Dec. 13th, 1791.” From
these we learn that, after being convicted by a Scottish
tribunal, he was sent out from England in the “ Pitt
that he arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, via Rio de
Janeiro, that he escaped at the Cape but was recaptured
after about a month and kept in prison seven months, and
that finally he reached his destination in the “ Royal
Admiral.”
It was surmised that Watling’s trial must have taken
1 12th April, 1932.
2 Honorary Ornithologist, Australian Museum, College
Street, Sydney, Australia.
* Letters from, an exile at Botany-Bay, to his Aunt in Dum-
fries,


place in 1790, and the assistance of the officials of the
Justiciary Office, Edinburgh, was accordingly invoked but
without result. I then inserted a query in Notes and
Queries 4 which bore fruit in the shape of a reply from Miss
Ida Leeson (Mitchell Librarian, The Mitchell Library,
Sydney) stating that “ original convict indentures in this
library show that Watling was tried in the spring of 1789
at the Circuit Court of Dumfries. He received a life
sentence, but the indentures do not state the offence for
which he was convicted.” 5 This valuable information was
supplemented by another reply from Mr T. C. Kinniburgh
to the effect that “ Brief particulars of the trial, conviction,
and sentence of the above are to be found in the Caledonian
Mercury, an Edinburgh newspaper, under date 18th Apr.,
1789. He was a limner of Dumfries and was transported
for fourteen years for forging notes of the Bank of Scot-
land.” 6
It was now with greater confidence that the Justiciary
Office, Edinburgh, was again approached and I should
like here to express my warmest thanks to Mr Alexander
Rae for his very great kindness in making the most full and
careful enquiries into the case.
In due course Mr Rae sent me the following :
“ Excerpt from Circuit Minute Book re Trial of
Thomas Watling. At Dumfries, 14th April, 1789, before
i Notes and Queries, sth August, 1933, Vol. 165, pp. 80-81.
s Notes and Queries, 29th December, 1934, Vol. 167, p. 461.
It was not till some eighteen months later that Mr K. A. Hind-
wood told me (in litt., 19th November, 1935) that Miss Leeson
had informed him that farther search in the Mitchell Library,
Sydney, had revealed fuller details of Watling’s conviction and
that she was of the opinion that the term “ life sentence ” (above
quoted) was a mistake in the hand-written list.
6 Op. cit., 12th January, 1935, Vol. 168, p. 32. (It has not
seemed necessary to give the quotation from the Caledonian
Mercury, 18th April, 1789, in full, since official documents will
be quoted. The Dumfries Weekly Journal, 2nd December,
1788, and 14th April, 1789, also gives a short account of Thomas
Watling’s conviction.)


Lords Braxfield and Hailes, Thomas Watling, sometime
painter or limner in the Town of Dumfries, present prisoner
in the Tolbooth of Dumfries. Indicted at the instance of
the Crown and the Governor and Company of the Bank
of Scotland with concurrence of His Majesty’s Advocate
of the Crime of Forgery in manner mentioned in the
criminal libel raised against him thereanent. The libel
being read over and the Pannell asked if he was guilty or
not, he answered that there was a Petition given in for him
submitting to a sentence of transportation. The Petition
was read over and judicially adhered to by the pannell and
to which the Advocate Depute gave the consent on the
part of the Crown and the Governor and Company of the
Bank of Scotland. He was sentenced to be transported
to one or other of His Majesty’s Colonies or Plantations
in America or to such part or place beyond seas either
within His Majesty’s dominions or elsewhere out of the
same as His Majesty by and with the advice of His Privy
Council shall declare and appoint for and during the space
of 14 years from and after the date hereof.”
Shortly afterwards Mr Rae sent me a copy of all the
“ Documents in re Thomas Watling ” 6a and when doing so
he wrote:
“ There is not much in any one paper, but linked
together they may be of use. They are certainly very
interesting. As Watling pleaded guilty no evidence was
led, but the Declarations etc. give some indication of the
evidence that would have been led. I enquired at the
Crown Office in case any of the precognitions prepared
for Watling’s trial might still be in existence, but a
close search revealed nothing.”
It is not easy to epitomise these papers but the follow-
ing items are of interest. Watling was first “ judicially
examined,” at Dumfries, before John Welsh the Sheriff-
Substitute of the County, on 27th November, 1788. He
was charged with forging “ Guinea notes upon the Bank
6a These “ Documents ” are printed in full in an Appendix.


of Scotland ” and he declared “ that he has lived in the
Town of Dumfries all his life and has for some years past
been employed or employed himself as a painter.” On
28th November, 1788, in course of a further examination,
he mentioned the name of “ his own Aunt May Kirkpatrick ”
and this is not only interesting as revealing the name of the
person to whom his Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay
were addressed but is also important as a clue in subsequent
developments. On 29th November, 1788, he presented a peti-
tion to His Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for the County
of Dumfries, asking them to authorise his liberation : in
this petition he states “ what answer he gave to the charge
made against him he cannot recollect, but now that his
mind is calm and his recollection clear he says the answer
he meant to give was to this effect that he was not directly
or indirectly guilty actor or art and part in the crime alleged
against him, nor did he, or in justice could he, criminate
any other person; And if anything to the contrary hereof
fell from him while under examination and while his mind
was in agitation and his Recollection deranged, he in justice
to himself makes this application for having it recalled, that
neither he himself, or any person may thereby come to any
further trouble. He does not know what proceedings have
taken place in consequence of the information exhibited
against him. But he is advised that the crime of forgery
consists not simply in the attempting an imitation of a piece
of writing, but in putting the imitation to use with a fraudu-
lent intention, he has not heard of any proof being got upon
this head, and as his innocence makes him conscious that
no proof can be brought either of his forging the notes of
any Banking Company or individual person, or issuing the
same; or causing them be issued by any interposed person
or his issuing or causing be issued any notes whatever know-
ing them to be forged; so he is led to consider his imprison-
ment as being without good grounds; and seeing his
Informers will not undertake to bring a proof of what con-
stitutes the essence of the crime imputed to him, viz., the
putting any forged notes or other writings to a fraudulent


use. He humbly apprehends your Honours will be justified
in recalling the Warrant for imprisonment and restoring him
to his liberty that he may not be longer injured through a
false Information.”
On 15th January, 1789, however, Thomas Watling re-
fused to say whether this petition was written at his desire
and on 14th April, 1789, he presented a petition in the
following terms :
“ UNTO The Right Honorable The Lords Justice Clerk
and Hailes one of the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary
on their Circuit Court at Dumfries.
The PETITION of Thomas Watling, Limner, present
Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Dumfries.
HUMBLY SHEWETH
That the Petitioner stands charged at the instance of
Hay Campbell, Esqr., His Majesty’s Advocate for His
Majesty’s interest and of the Governor & Company of the
Bank of Scotland with concourse of His Majesty’s Advo-
cate for the Crime of Forgery, as particularly mentioned
in the Criminal Letters raised against him thereanent and
upon which he is to be tried before your Lordships this
day.
That tho’ the Petitioner does not mean to admit his
being guilty of the crime libelled, yet he foresees that,
after being suspected and accused of such a crime he
cannot remain longer in this country with any degree of
credit and hope of satisfaction and comfort, therefore
instead of standing trial consents to be transported forth
of this kingdom for such time, in such manner and under
such certification as to your Lordships shall seem proper.
May it therefore please your Lordships to accept of
this Offer of Transportation and to banish him accord-
ingly; and the Petitioner shall ever pray.
(Signed) Thos. Watling.”
It may be noted that the “ criminal letters ”
equivalent to an Indictment of to-day charged Watling


with forging, in the year 1787 or 1788, “ certain promissory
notes—at least to the number of 12 —for the sum of one
pound one shilling stg., or one guinea each.” If he had
been convicted, Thomas Watling would probably have been
sentenced to be hanged but his petition was granted and —
as has already been stated —he was sentenced on the same
date—l4th April, 1789 —to fourteen years’ transportation.
It had been hoped that these papers in the Justiciary
Office might have furnished the names of some of Thomas
Watling’s friends who are referred to—only by initials—in
his book Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay : a list of
forty-five witnesses to be adduced against him is extant
and it could hardly be expected that these would include
the names of friends whom he might have cited had he pled
not guilty. It was also hoped that these papers might have
given some information as to Watling’s age and parentage
but this was not forthcoming. It is, however, remarkable
that, amongst the documents exhibited at his trial, was a
‘‘ Drawing Sheet announcing classes for teaching and
terms ” as follows : “ Ladies / and / Gentlemen / taught /
Drawing / at / Watling’s Academy / Admission per month /
One Guinea.” This document was probably put in as evi-
dence of Watling’s ability as an engraver and possibly to
show the similarity of the paper on which the document was
written to the paper actually used in the making of guinea
notes of the period. 7 So far as this biographical sketch of
Thomas Watling is concerned the document is of interest as
7 I had hoped that I might have been able to give a repro-
duction of the actual forged guinea-note of the Bank of Scot-
land which must have proved the most inculpatory evidence
against Watling at his trial in 1789; this, unfortunately, is not
available. Mr Rae (Clerk of Justiciary) and Mr William Angus
(Curator of Historical Records) have, however, most kindly
supplied me with a photograph of his advertisement of his
Drawing Academy (see Plate 1) which was produced at his trial
—doubtless as evidence of his caligraphy—and, through the
courtesy of the Bank of Scotland I am able to reproduce a photo-
graph of one of their guinea -notes of the period (see Plate 6).


Plate
-- , > .V ... .. / ).
t -—v
p
«]fd£f'j|' iT h! ;nT hi V
\
* *
J
< H tijrJi t w ,
1
■' V :rf ( i "
V
///s/S/s; ,/>' > ■ ,
;<•(imlsion ju<r j-uonih, «.,
' S *., (» t •*•
\
4k . ■
N
JA*
i.
Advertisement of Watling’s Academy.


indicating that he could not only draw but that he also
taught (or was prepared to try to teach) drawing.
In the absence of information as regards his date of
birth a professional searcher of records was employed to
examine the appropriate Dumfries registers in Edinburgh
and he reported as follows : “I have made search in the
Parish Register of Dumfries baptisms 1750 to 1775 and
marriages 1750 to 1762, for the birth, or baptismal entry, of
Thomas Watling and the marriage of his parents; the only
entry found, however, is as follows, viz. :
1762 September' 19: Thomas, lawful son to Ham
Watlin, soldier, baptised. Witnesses John Hepburn
and William Donaldson.
There is no trace of any other children baptised to this man,
nor any trace of Ham’s marriage in Dumfries.” 8
It is to be noted that, in the papers relating to Thomas
Watling’s trial, his surname is occasionally spelt without the
final g and in view of certain statements which will be
quoted as regards his age confirmation of this baptismal
register was most desirable. This is forthcoming in a
document in one of the convict volumes, in Sydney, which
has been transcribed by Miss Leeson and sent to me by Mr
K. A. Hindwood. 9 The document referred to is the certificate
of the Sheriff-Substitute of the shire of Dumfries of the male
convicts under sentence of transportation, to be sent to
Edinburgh for the purpose, dated 4th June, 1789. The
entry for No. 7 is as follows :
“ Thomas Watling, by trade a painter or Limner in
Dumfries, aged about 25 years, accused of the crime of
forgery at the Spring Circuit held at Dumfries in Anno
1789, but who petitioned submitting himself to a sentence
of transportation, and who was by the judges decerned
and adjudged to be transported for 14 years from the date
of his sentence, being 14th April.”
It will be noted that this document gives his age as
“ about 25 ” but it is clear that Thomas Watling was over
8 John Macleod; in litt., Bth April and 3rd July, 1935.
* K. A. Hindwood; in litt,, 16th July, 1935,


twenty-six and a half years of age at the time of his being
sentenced to transportation.
I have already referred to the material assistance
rendered by Mr T. C. Kinniburgh who has studied the con-
temporary files of the Caledonian Mercury with unexpected
results. The following extract which he sent me refers to
Thomas Watling and six fellow prisoners : “ Saturday
night [6th June, 1789] seven convicts, under sentence of
transportation, arrived here [Edinburgh] from Dumfries, and
were lodged in the Tolbooth :” 10 but it came as a surprise
to be furnished with extracts from the Caledonian Mercury ll
giving an account of a mutiny, on board the ship “ Peggy ”
of Leith, in which a “ lad named Watling ” had played a
conspicuous and —be it noted a commendable part. It
appeared that the captain of the vessel was so much im-
pressed by his good conduct and that of one Paton that he
interested himself on their behalf with the result that Paton
was granted a free pardon.
It seemed certain that some official record of this
“ pardon ” would be extant and that possibly some mention
of Watling would be made therein. A professional searcher
was therefore employed at the Public Record Office, in
London, and amongst certain papers dealing with Scottish
Affairs, in the Criminal Section, she found full details of the
mutiny as contained in a letter from Robert Smith, Captain
of the “ Peggy ” to Mr Peter Crewden, Ship Master, Leith.
“ On Board the Peggy At Spithead ye sth July 1789.
Mr Crewden,
Sir,
I wrote to you Yesterday but being in haist As there
was A Officer from the Admerals Ship waiting on me I
could not Inform you particularly of Our proceedings, what
Indewced me to Come in here was perfect Needsesity, will
you belive me when I tell you that the Convicts Came
10 Caledonian Mercury, Bth June, 1789.
11 Op. dt., 11th and 13th July and 10th September, 1789.
(It has not seemed necessary to give the quotations in full, since
official documents are quoted in the text.)


to that Lenth of deffiance as to- either cut their lorns or
take them off with the lose of the skine of their Hands. I
was Oblidged to have 5 of the ring-leaders of them Chained
to the Learge Cadge in the hold, but it was of No Use
As they cut their lorns in the Night time, and they Tryed
to Weary us out for want of Sleap by Singing and
hurraing the whole Night their Intention As I told You
before was to Murder us All but two to carrie the Ship
into A harbour and Escape, Judge than whither or Not 1
had good reason to come in here, I no sooner Applyed to
the Admeral but he sent Orders for a Corporal and six
Men to go on board as a Gward, and to the Southamptown
frigate to Convey us down the wind is now westerly but
she sails to morrow and taks us in towe so that I am
freed from A Charge I would not again take in hand for
Any Money the Marines are Vitualed from their Own
Ship so that we are At no Expence on their Acctt. I must
not forget to Inform You that the reason of their not
getting their wicked And Crewal plote put in Execusion
was Owing to Information Received from the lad Named
Watling who was Acceused of forgery which from his
beheavour since he Came on board I belive to be false.
I was also Much Oblidged to Mr Paton for what Informa-
tion he could give Me, it will be An Act of Gratitude in
Me to do all in my pouer in their favour At Plymouth.
As I may trewly Say it is to these Men and their parteners
I am indeted for My Own life and those of the Ships Com-
pany. The principal Men in the Plote were that raskal
Anderson the two Irish men and seven Others. I shall
write to you on My Arival At Plymouth and you May
depend that no time shall be Lost there.
I remain Sir Sincerly Your Humbl. Servant
Robert Smith ” 12
Captain Smith’s letter was forwarded to the Lord Advo-
cate —Ilay Campbell 15 —together with a letter from Messrs
12 Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.
13 Hay Campbell; b. 1734; Lord Advocate, 1784; d. 1823.


James Morrison & Co., merchants in Leith, who stated that
they had, for a considerable time past, carried on business
satisfactorily with Paton: and another letter from A
Somervail, who—“ as an Insurer of the Transport, to Ply-
mouth, against the hazard of the Convicts running away
with the vessel ” —had seen the convicts put on board and
had conversed with some of them. He had been particularly
struck with Paton’s demeanour, and he writes :
“ I became so far interested in his fate, as to beseech
of Capt. Smith to show him as much indulgence, on
board, as his duty to his trust could safely warrant him
to do. . . . Watling I had but very little conversa-
tion with but—from the Captain’s letter —he appears to
have been equally useful in saving the ship’s company as
well as preventing the whole convicts from being again
loose upon the country.” 14
This correspondence was duly forwarded by Ilay Camp-
bell to Evan Nepean 15 with a covering letter, dated 20th
July, 1789, as follows :
“ Dear Sir,
From the enclosed Papers you will see that when the
Convicts from this Country were lately on their way to
Plymouth, a very daring attempt was made by them to
rise upon the Master & Crew of the Transport, & probably
to murder them. Their plan was frustrated chiefly by
means of Andrew Paton, one of their Number, for whom
the enclosed applications are made. Upon enquiring into
his history I find that he was reputed to be a Man of very
decent Character till the Necessities of his family led him
to the Commission of the Crime for which he was sentenced
to Transportation, viz., stealing or driving off two Cows
from a neighbouring pasture to his own Cowhouse. He
has a wife and family, and I am apt to believe that if his
1* Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.
is Evan Nepean; b. 1751; Under-Secretary at the Home
Office; Secretary of the Admiralty, 1795; created Baronet, 1802;
Governor of Bombay, 1812-19; d. 1822.


<s*
■w
£i
Convict hulk of the period: possibly the “ Dunkirk.”


Majesty’s mercy is extended to him on acct. of the Service
lately performed, he may still make a good & useful
Member of Society.
As to Watling whose name is also mentioned, his
Crime was deeper, viz., Forgery. He is a young Man,
unmarried, & an ingenious Artist; he will be an acquisition
to the new Colony at Botany Bay, tho’ perhaps it may be
right to recommend him to the attention of those in Com-
mand there on acct. of the merit he has had in this late
affair. The others ought to be narrowly watched, particu-
larly the two Soldiers from Aberdeen, who were very
unruly there & Anderson an old offender.
I have the honour to be
Dear Sir your most obedt.
humble Sert.
Ilay Campbell.” 18
As a result Andrew Paton was granted a free pardon,
dated sth August, 1789, 17 but Thomas Watling received no
such reward.
On 3rd October, 1790, he addressed the following peti-
tion, from “ Dunkirk; 18 Plymo. Harbour,” to Sir James
Johnstone, Bart., of Westerhall, Dumfriesshire: l9
“ Most Honoured Sir,
I am truely sensible that this my last poor address,
and humble petition, tho’ not drawn up with the accuracy
it demands yet notwithstanding, it will, I hope, appear
excuseable from the situation of the writer, A tale of woe,
even tho’ founded on ignominy, I have been induced to
imagine your sympathetic bosom can beat responsive to
—if so, this will not need unnecessary apology.
Ilay Campbell.” 18
i« Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.
17 Loe. cit.
is Thanks to the courtesy of the Trustees of the Maritime
Museum, Greenwich, I am able to reproduce a woodcut of a
convict hulk of the period, which might well be the “ Dunkirk ”
(see Plate £).
19 Sir James Johnstone, 4th Bart, of Westerhall; 5. 23rd
January, 1726; M.P., Dumfries, 1784-90; d. 3rd September, 1794.


In duty to the solicitation of my helpless Aunt & the
salvation of myself, I assume the freedom. Such is her
simplicity of heart as to imagine the great will stoop to
relieve the distressed; upon that anchor do I at present
lean. She tells me your honour will not hesitate to stretch
out your helping hand to' save me; may kind Providence
experience to me that there is such a good remaining still
as Philanthropy upon earth.
Alas ! my story is long and complex; nor, tho’ inno-
cent, and I master of sufficient language to tell it to my
advantage—Possibly your honour would hear it in unavail-
ing Dumfries, which makes me shudder to think of it.
The imputed crime is dreadful ! its present situation has
made the very sound to carry deadly awe with it; but do
not —in kind compassion do not let the sound only cut
me off while the tender mercy of your honour can redeem
it and me.
If then, your honour, on the other hand, has ever
heard of your humble Petitioner from charitable uninflu-
enced mortals, by their character be the decision. Neither
a single witness, or a single action suborned against me,
could trace me guilty, for my innocency rendered the
search vain; but over-ruling destiny that blinded me to
listen to cruel dissimulation brought me to this unhappy
period, & to implore your compassion towards me the
child full of real sorrows and misery.
Gratitude shall ever be my glory and my boast: if
your honor should save me, it would make me the happiest
of mankind; yet I cannot but confess my poor glory and
boast never could make an adequate retaliation for such
redemption—still the little all in my power shall be sacri-
ficed in return and my prayers extended in behalf of my
very enemies.
Hence, most honoured Sir, if indigence and distress
ever had a claim upon humanity, I think from my aching
heart your humble Petitioner claims a right to it. Cut
off too much, in early life, and rendered incapable of every
good and laudable pursuit, whilst I barely exist. The


dreadful vista of my future existence has drawn upon my
depressed mind, that none who see me but would imagine
I was fitter for the grave, than to hope for farther health
or happiness in this world; indeed, the perturbations that
possess my soul damps every gleam of joy, and almost
hope the last remaining little left, either for myself or
giving a helping hand to a poor decrepid and declining
good and loving Aunt.
If your honour restores me back we would together
lead the residue of our days in obscurity from the follies
and vices of this transitory and wicked world —and every
dawning day and setting sun, offer up to the Father of
Mercies, a sincere prayer for your disinterested charity
towards us your humble petitioners : now
May the great God fill your Soul and incline your
heart to continue as he has hitherto done in all that
is truely brave and good, is, and ever shall be the
prayer of your ever faithful and humble Petitioner
Thomas Watling.
Most Honoured Sir,
Should your famed humanity influence you in my
favour, I have the pleasure to say that no help will be
a wanting that is in the power cf my kind overseer to
minister. Captain Groundwater is not more my Governor
than friend & confidant—were I happy enough to have my
liberty resting upon the decision of him, or Mr Bradley 1
would be one of the happiest mortals.” 20
Probably Captain Groundwater and Mr Bradley were
two of the officials on board the “ Dunkirk ” convict hulk
and there is nothing of any interest in this petition except
its sanctimonious style which identifies it as a typical piece
of work of the author of the book Letters from an exile at
Botany-Bay.
Sir James Johnstone received another petition on behalf
of Thomas Watling, from his Aunt Marion Kirkpatrick,
dated 24th November, 1790 :
20 Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.


“ Unto the Honble. Sir James Johnston of
Westerhall Bart.
The Petition of Marion Kirkpatrick residenter
in Dumfries.
Most Humbly Showeth,
That the Petitioner is Aunt by the mother’s side to
the Unfortunate Thomas Watling who was lately on his
own Petition at a Justiciary Circuit Court held at Dum-
fries, Banished to Botany Bay for a term of Years, on
the Bare Suspicion of Forgery without the least pro-
bability of any guilt being adduced against him in the
event of a Tryal.
That the said Thomas Watling is at present a very
young man of unripe Years and was so when he rashly &
imprudently without the advice of Council and friends
signed the aforesaid Petition he being then a minor at
least within the Anni Utiles And the fact is both his
Parents died poor and left him in infancy under the care of
the Petitioner a woman never married and in low circum-
stances, now near Fifty years of age And she was
induced to educate and instruct him purely from motives
of relationship and Humanity far above her abilities And
gave him the best Opportunities in her power to gain
bread for himself, and as soon as he acquired any Capacity
he on every occasion showed a sense of gratitude and a
strong inclination to the Outmost of his power to be the
supporter and Comforter of the Petitioners old age.
That the Petr, is well informed her innocent Nephew
is not yet entered upon his exile, But is on Board the
Dunkirk lying at Plymouth Harbour.
In these very distressing Circumstances afecting both
age and youth The Petitioner with humble hopes of Success
for relief of both the aunt and the nephew now looks up to
your Honour long distinguished for Gracious acts to the
public and individuals in expectation that your Honour
will be pleased to exert and use your powerful influence
to save the Youth who may be the instrument of Comfort
on her declining life.


May it therefore please Your Honour to consider the
situation of an aged woman and the unhappy situa-
tion of her nephew and to give her and him such
relief as to Your Honour in your great wisdom and
benevolence shall seem proper and Your Petr, will
ever pray &c. Marion Kirkpatrick.
Robert Thomson.
P.S. This my humble petition is agreeable to your
honours request of reminding you when in
London. ’ ’ 2l
This petition affords a few items of information. It
tells us that Marion [previously termed “ May ”] Kirkpat-
rick was an unmarried woman and was [in 1790] nearly
fifty years of age : also that she was Aunt by the Mother’s
side to Thomas Watling whom she had educated as both his
parents died poor and left him in infancy under her care.
Thomas Watling is described as “ at present [1790] a very
young man of unripe years and at the time of his making
his petition for transportation [l4th April, 1789] is said to
have been “ a minor at least within the Anni Utiles. 1,22 It
21 Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.
22 This designation is thus explained in Latin Phrases
and Maxims, by John Trayner, Esq., Advocate, as follows:
“ ‘ Anni utiles.’ —Literally, years which can be used; years in
which a right can be exercised. Both these phrases are most
frequently to be met in cases where a question of prescription is
at issue. Against any one fully able, during the whole period,
to assert and defend his right, the years of prescription are
anni continui; but as the loss arising from the currency of pre-
scription is considered as the penalty of negligence, the pre-
scriptive years are not so regarded in the case of one under a
legal incapacity to sue. If an heritable right is being acquired
by prescription against the proprietor of lands, or if a title,
questionable in itself, is becoming valid through prescription,
and a minor becomes entitled to that right against which pre-
scription is running, the currency of the prescriptive period
ceases until the minor is valens agere, i.e., in a position to
defend his right on attaining majority, although, therefore, the
Continued on Next Page.


will be remembered that Watling is described as a “ lad ”
in Capt. Smith’s account of the mutiny on the “ Peggy ”
and these juvenile descriptions cast doubt on the applicability
of the baptismal certificate of Thomas Watlin (baptized on
19th September, 1762) until this was confirmed—or at least
strengthened—by the document already referred to 23 in the
convict volumes in Sydney. Having now ascertained that
Thomas Watling was an orphan in 1789, the services of a
professional searcher were employed to see if an entry of the
death of his father and mother could be found in the Death
registers of Dumfries between the dates 1762 and 1789, but
this search was made with a negative result. 24 The only
other item of interest in this petition lies in the postscript
which seems to indicate that Marion Kirkpatrick had been
in communication with Sir James Johnstone on the subject
prior to her actually sending him her petition which it
will be noticed bears, in addition to her own name, the name
of Robert Thomson whom it may be supposed was her legal
adviser.
From endorsements on the documents it would seem
that Sir James Johnstone gave these petitions to Lord Gren-
ville, 25 the Home Secretary, who asked the Lord Justice
Clerk to report on them, which he did as follows :
“ Edin., 25th Decern. 1790.
My Lord,
I have the honor of receiving Your Lordship’s letter
Note 22 continued.
prescriptive period may in reality have expired, yet as there
were some years which were not anni utiles to the minor, pre-
scription does not take place. On the succession of the minor
the currency of prescription ceases, and only resumes when he
has become valens agere.” A legal luminary has informed me
that the term, “ a minor at least within the Anni Utiles,”
might be translated as “ almost a minor,” and he would not take
exception to its application to a man of Watling’s age in similar
circumstances.
23 See p. 15, antea.
24 J. Macleod; in litt., 10th July, 1935.
23 William Wyndham Grenville; b. 25th October, 1759;
created Peer 25th November, 1790; d.s.p. 12th January, 1834.


with the petition of Marion Kirkpatrick in behalf of her
Nephew Thomas Watling both which I herewith return.
As I was entirely ignorant of the Merits of the case I not
being upon the Circuit at which he was tried Vizt. Drum-
fries Spring Circuit 1789. I applied to Lord Hailes be-
fore whom he was tried for information & from him I
learn that in place of being adjudged to transportation
upon his own petition without the least probability of
guilt being proved agt. him as set furth in the petition, he
pled guilty no doubt in the view of his Majesty’s Advocate
restricting the libel to an Arbitrary punishment & which
was done accordingly. Lord Hailes says that the peti-
tion in behalf of Watling has more assurance in it than he
had met with even in petitions of that Nature where much
liberty is wont to be taken with matter of fact & he thinks
that the only error in his sentence was that he had made
the term of transportation (viz. 14 years) too short—The
proof upon which he was convicted viz. his own confes-
sion is of all others the most unexceptionable. The
punishment that naturally fell to be inflicted was death &
when that is the case he has good reason to be thankfull for
the lenity he has already met with & he has no reasonable
grounds to expect more—forgery of late years has be-
come very frequent in this Country & it is certainly a
most dangerous crime to Society especially in a mercantile
country where paper credit must of necessity be much
used.
I have the honour to be
My Lord
Your Lordship’s most
obedient & most humble Servt.
Robt. M’Queen.” 2^
These petitions failed despite also the recommendation
by the Sheriff of Dumfries (referred to in a marginal note to
Certificate by him, dated 4th June, 1789) for his “ good
26 Public Record Office; Home Office; Scotch; Criminal;
H.O. 102/52.


conduct and Behaviour during confinement ~26a in Dumfries
Tolbooth. A document endorsed “ Certificate of Caution
being found for the Transportation of Alexander M‘Donald
& others—Convicts 1791,” (in the Mitchell Library, Sydney,
N.S.W.) shows that Thomas Watling must have been trans-
ferred from the “ Dunkirk ” to the “ Lion Hulk ” at Ports-
mouth; as, on 23rd May, 1791, he was committed thence to
the custody of “ Edward Manning Shipmaster of London
Commander of the Good Ship Pitt.”
The next evidence we have as regards Thomas
Watling’s career is derived from a publication on
his behalf which was issued from a press at Penrith.
The title of this publication is Letters from an exile at
Botany-Bay and with it I shall deal later on : from it we
learn that he left England in the “ Pitt ” and this is con-
firmed in a “ List of Persons transported as Criminals to
New South Wales in the ‘ Pitt ’ in June, 1791,” where the
entry occurs :
“ Thomas Watling convicted in Dumfries Court of
Justiciary in the Spring 1789: for life.” 27
It is, perhaps, worthy of note that his sentence is given
here as “ for life ” and that Miss Ida Leeson has explained
a similar term —as recorded in “ original convict indentures ”
in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, N.S.W. 28 —as a mistake in
the hand-written convict list: her decision is confirmed by
the official documents which have been quoted above and
which show that he was actually sentenced to but fourteen
years transportation.
Referring again to his book, Letters from an exile at
26a This “ Certificate by the Sheriff Substitute Dumfries
Shire ... 4th June 1789” is in The Mitchell Library,
Sydney, New South Wales. There is a dubiety as to whether
the above marginal note refers to Watling or to a fellow convict
Robert Ligget: as does also another note —in a different hand—
almost indecipherable: “He saved the . . . when attacked
by the . . . prisoners attempting their escape.”
27 Public Record Office; Convict Transport Registers;
H.O. 11/1, p. 171.
28 Notes and Queries, 29th December, 1934, Vol. 167, p. 461.


Botany-Bay, it is learned—from a letter dated “ Cape of
Good Hope, African Coast, Tuesday, Dec. 13th, 1791 ”
that the voyage to the Cape was made via Rio de Janeiro
(a route adopted in order to avoid the calms on the
African coast) and that he had made his escape
from the “ Pitt ” : he cautiously says: “ I hold it
imprudent to commit to paper how I have obtained
emancipation. I will only say, that the ship Pitt lyes op-
posite my window, and means to sail by Sunday next; after
when, should any other vessel here tend to Europe, if poss-
ible, I will procure a passage—and be happy.” 29 In a letter
dated “ Sydney - Cove, Port-Jackson, New-South-Wales,
May 12th, 1793,” he writes: “ My first letter per the
Atlantic, 30 I hope you have received before,” and, in the
course of his letter, he says that he was re-captured 31 owing
to his betrayal “ by the mercenary Dutch ” : his special men-
tion of the date—“ 28th of December, 1791 ” —may indicate
the actual day on which his short term of liberty was ended.
I had hoped that investigations, at Cape Town, might have
led to the discovery of details of his escape and recapture
but I have been informed that “ enquiries made in the
proper official quarter regarding Thomas Watling have been
made but no trace of a person of that name can be found
in the documents dealing with the period 1791-1792.” 32
Watling—in his letter —goes on to state that, after seven
months’ imprisonment, he was shipped in the “ Royal
Admiral ” which eventually landed him at his destination, 33
29 Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay, pp. 4-6.
30 « The Atlantic ” was a vessel engaged, at this period, in
the transport of convicts to Australia and presumably carried
letters home on her return voyage.
31 Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay, p. 2.
32 The Earl of Clarendon (Governor-General of Union of
South Africa) in litt., 10th August, 1935. The Cape of Good
Hope did not become a British possession till 16th September,
1796, when it was surrendered by the Dutch: it was restored
at the peace of 1802, was retaken in 1806, and finally ceded to
England in 1815.
3* Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay, p. 2.


and it is known that the “ Royal Admiral ” left the Cape on
30th August, 1792, and arrived in Sydney on 7th October
of that year. 34 The incident is referred to as follows by David
Collins in his An Account of the English Colony in New South
Wales : “ On the 7th, [October 1792] The Royal Admiral
East Indiaman, commanded by Captain Essex Henry Bond,
anchored in the cove from England . . . Capt. Bond
brought on with him Thomas Watling, a male convict, who
found means to get on shore from the Pitt when at that Port
in December last, and who had been confined by the Dutch
at the Cape town from her departure until this opportunity
offered of sending him hither.” 3411
His book — Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay —affords
meagre details as to his fortunes in New South Wales but
he states “ My employment is painting for J. W ,
esq. 35 the non-descript productions of the country.” 36 These
“ paintings,” being the basis of Watling’s claim to fame,
will be discussed later as will also the tenor of his book
which from its very rarity merits particular attention. In
an endeavour to follow Watling’s career chronologically it
can only be pointed out here that of the two “ letters,”
printed in his book, the latest is dated “ Sydney-Cove, Port-
Jackson, New-South-Wales, May 12th, 1793,” but, at the
34 Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian His-
torical Society, Sydney, 1920, Vol. V., p. 227. According to
official papers the “ Royal Admiral ” sailed from England in
May, 1792 (Public Record Office; Convict Transport Registers;
H.O. 11/1 and reached her destination in October, 1792
(Public Record Office; H.O. 10/1) ; it may be noted that this
last-quoted document shows that the “ Pitt ” had arrived in
February, 1792. The actual dates of arrival are semi-officially
given as “ Pitt ” 14th February, 1792, and “ Royal Admiral ”
7th October, 1792 (David Collins: An Account of the English
Colony in New South Wales, 1802, Vol. 11., p. 317).
34a David Collins: An Account of the English Colony in
New South Wales, 1798, Vol. 1., pp. 236/7.
35 [Probably John White, Surgeon General to the Settle-
ment, who was much interested in its fauna; author of Journal
of a Voyage to new South Wales, 1790. H. S. G.]
36 Letters from an exile at Botany-Bay, p. 20.


end of the book, a proposal for a projected book is dated,
from the same address, 20th May, 1793. Mr K. A. Hind-
wood has been so obliging as to send me a photograph 37 of a
landscape of Sydney, in oils, in the Mitchell Library there,
which is signed by Watling and dated i 794, 37a and
amongst a collection of his paintings of birds, in the
Natural History Museum in London, a description of
his picture of the “ Semi-palmated Duck ” is dated
“ 2nd Jany. 1794.” An account of Watling’s paintings
will, however, form a separate chapter, and the above are
only mentioned here to maintain the chronological sequence
in his career so far as it can be followed. As regards his
sojourn in Australia, Mr K. A. Hindwood has informed me
that —in the Mitchell Library, Sydney—there is a record that
Watling was granted a “ Conditional Pardon ” 37b in
September, 1796 : it is to be regretted that this “ pardon ”
gives no farther particulars. 3B Mr Hindwood has also drawn
my attention to a “ Landscape of Sydney in 1802 ” which
“ some critics are of the opinion is by Watling ” 39 and it is
to be regretted that the painting itself bears no signature.
Thomas Watling can almost be regarded as one of the
pioneer convicts to undertake the journey to Australia, for
the First Fleet of Australian convict ships only sailed from
England to New South Wales in March, 1787, and reached
Botany Bay in January 1788. 40 It might, therefore, have
been expected that his book —Letters from an exile at Botany-
Bay —would have furnished some interesting details as re-
37 K. A. Hindwood; in litt., 19th November, 1935.
37a (See Frontispiece).
37b A “ Conditional Pardon ” contained a declaration by
the Governor, under his hand and seal, that the unexpired term
of the convict’s sentence was remitted on the condition of his
continuing to reside within the territory of New South Wales
during the term of his original sentence.
38 K. A. Hindwood; in litt., 19th November, 1935.
39 Loc. cit.
40 P. Cunningham: Two Years in New South Wales; 1828,
Vol. 11., pp. 59-60.


gards convict life in Australia but these are meagre in the
extreme.
The letters, addressed to his aunt, dated 1791 and 1793,
which are the principal contents of the volume, more
than hint at his hopes for emancipation and it is cer-
tainly remarkable that they should contain no reference to
his good conduct in the mutiny on the “ Peggy ” in 1789
of which, however, his aunt would be aware. One would
have thought, nevertheless, that in a publication of this kind,
Watling would have laid all his cards (especially the good
ones) on the table.
The Letters are also remarkable for Watling’s pro-
posal to publish an illustrated book on the Colony and this
falls to be dealt with later. This proposal is not known to
have been realised and it only remains to be noted that the
volume is interspersed with references to friends or persons
which might have been helpful but—unfortunately for pur-
poses of present-day recognition—these persons are only
designated by initials. It is of no interest to give a complete
list of these here but the following identifications have sug-
gested themselves :
Title page (and elsewhere in the book) “ Aunt in Dum-
fries.” Marion (May) Kirkpatrick : who educated Thomas
Watling and who is described (24th November, 1790) as
unmarried and “ now near fifty years of age her address,
in 1794, is given as “ near the English Chapel, Dum-
fries ” ;40a s h e was alive in 1806.
p. 18: “ governor P ,” probably Arthur Phillip
(h. 1738: d. 1814), first Governor of New South Wales :
founded, 26th January, 1788, the convict settlement on the
harbour of Port Jackson which he named Sydney after
Thomas Townshend first Viscount Sydney : returned to Eng-
land in 1793.
p. 20: “ /. W , esq.” Watling states: “ My
employment is painting for J. W , esq. the non-
40a The Dumfries Weekly Journal, 25th March, 1794. The
English Chapel at that date was situated on the south side of
English Street; one wall of it still stands.


descript productions of the country ” and it is generally
accepted that these initials designate John White (fl.
1778/1824), principal surgeon in the First Fleet under Arthur
Phillip: Surgeon General to the Settlement: Author of
Journal of a Voyage to new South Wales, published in
London in 1790: he left Sydney, in the “Daedalus,” on
17th December,
p. 22 : “ Sir ]. ] /’ probably Sir James John-
stone, 4th Bart, of Westerhall, Dumfries ( b. 23rd
January, 1726: d. 3rd September, 1794), M.P., Dumfries,
40b Documents in the Public Record Office, London, show
that John White served as Surgeon’s Mate, “Wasp,” 26th June,
1778 to 27th February, 1779: “ Chatham,” Ist March, 1779 to
23rd July, 1780: “ Orford,” 24th July, 1780 to 13th October,
1780: [seniority as Surgeon is dated 9th October, 1780 but later
is shewn as Ist April, 1780]: Surgeon, “ Sulphur,” 20th October,
1780 to 19th February, 1783: “Cyrus,” 28th February, 1783 to
12th June, 1784: “Ariel,” 13th June, 1784 to 29th November,
1785: “ Irresistible,” 26th June, 1786 to 27th November, 1786:
recommended (by Sir Andrew Snape Hamond, Commander at
the Nore, in litt. to Evan Nepean, 16th October, 1786) as
Surgeon to the Settlement in New South Wales: his commission
as such is dated 24th October, 1786: as principal surgeon in the
First Fleet left Spithead, on the convict-transport “ Charlotte,”
13th May, 1787: arrived in Botany Bay, 20th January, 1788:
[his Journal published, in London, 1790]: applied, from Sydney,
N.S.W., 11th December, 1792, for permission to return to
England on Half Pay: leave of absence granted and left Sydney,
in “ Daedalus,” 17th December, 1794: arrived at Cork 28th June,
1795: on 29th July, 1795 was in England: restored to Half Pay
sth September, 1795: appointed Surgeon, '“ Spanker ” (Hospital
Ship), 21st December, 1795 to Ist July, 1796: “Princess
Augusta” Yacht, 15th August, 1796 to 29th November, 1796:
“ Royal William,” Bth December, 1796 to 12th December, 1799:
Sheerness Yard, 13th December, 1799 to 23rd September, 1803:
Chatham Yard, 24th September, 1803 to 15th January, 1820:
superannuated 15th (warrant dated 16th) January, 1820:
[superannuation for Surgeons was very unusual; they generally
went on Half Pay only; White’s superannuation was presumably
on account of his long service—seventeen years—in Chatham
Yard]: his name remains on the Navy Lists until 1824 but after
that date is omitted; no cause for removal being shewn.


1784/90: to whom Thomas Watling, and his Aunt,
addressed petitions in 1790 for his release.
p. 25 : “ Your new bridge and theatre I have already
heard of, from a soldier who had wrought as a gardener
with the M , and P. M , of D ; and
who called upon me to see whether I could promote a little
cause for him with his commanding officer.” It would seem,
from the context, that “ D ” indicates Dumfries
and I have been sorely puzzled, without solution, by the
references to “ the M , and P.M. thereof.
The foundation stone of the Buccleuch Street Bridge, over
the Nith at Dumfries, was laid on 19th August, 1791, but
the bridge was not finished for traffic until 1796. The date
of the opening of the new Theatre Royal was 29th Septem-
ber, 1792.
p. 27 : " my present condition is chiefly owing to the
low revenge of a certain military character, now high in
office lt has been suggested 41 that this " military
character ” may have been David Collins, Judge-Advocate
and Secretary to the Governor of New South Wales; he left
the Colony, for England, in September, 1796, and was the
Author of An Account of the English Colony in New South
Wales : 2 Vols. : 1798/1802.
p. 28 : " If there be a friend of mine that can yet
recollect me, I would thank him or her for a letter .
directing it to the care of E. L , esq. surgeon, at
Sydney, N.S. Wales." It has been stated that “E. L.”
must have been Edward Laing, Surgeon’s mate in the
N.S.W. Corps, who was granted a piece of land at Camp
Cove, and whose name is still preserved in Laing’s Point,
Watson’s Bay. He left Sydney for England, together with
Surgeon General John White, in the “ Daedalus,” on 17th
December, 1794. 42
There can be no doubt that had Watling stood his trial
in 1789 and called witnesses for his defence several of his
41 Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian His-
torical Society, Sydney, 1920, Yol. V., pp. 227-9.
42 Tom eit., p. 229.


friends, mentioned only by initials in his book, could have
been identified.
I have already gratefully referred to the assistance
rendered by Mr J. C. Kinniburgh; I now have to thank him
for what is perhaps the most unexpected discovery and that
is that Thomas Watling, on 10th January, 1806, was charged
in Edinburgh, with forging and uttering five pound notes in
imitation of those issued by the Bank of Scotland. 43 I again
solicited the good offices of my kind friend Mr Alexander
Rae of the Justiciary Office, Edinburgh, who sent me a copy
of the papers connected with the case, which may be
epitomised as follows :
“At Edinburgh. 10th Jany. 1806. Before Lord
Hope of Granton, Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Craig of Craig,
and Lord Cullen of Cullen.
Thomas Watling, sometime Painter or Limner in
the Town of Dumfries, present, Prisoner in the Tolbooth
of Edinburgh : is charged :
“In the months of November and December, 1804,
and of January, February and March, 1805, in the house
or lodging in the Town of Dumfries, then occupied by him-
self or in the house or lodging occupied by John Nilson,
then residenter in the said Town of Dumfries, forge or
cause to be forged certain promissory notes at least to
the number of 7 for the sum of Five pounds Sterling,
each in imitation of issues by said Bank (Bank of Scot-
land) and the said Thomas Watling in order that he might
be able the more exactly to imitate the said promissory
note did procure from Janet Walker, wife of the said John
Nilson, one of the genuine notes issued, viz. :—No. 32/6275,
and did by means of Anne Fining, then servant to him or
to Marion Kirkpatrick residenter, in Dumfries, his aunt —
feloniously did— ‘ utter or send ’ one of the said forged
notes No. 32/6275, which note he gave to said Ann
Fining and sent her with directions to get it changed for
Bank Notes of £ l, or one guinea each, or cash. Anne
43 Caledonian Mercury, 11th January, 1806.


Fining presented the note to William Brand, Teller or
Clerk, in the said Bank of Scotland’s Office in Dumfries,
who gave said Anne Fining in exchange therefor five Bank
Notes for £1 each. A second note was tendered to said
John Nilson which he uttered to William Law, Innkeeper,
in Rickergate, Carlisle. Law having discovered the note
to be a forgery, and the said Thomas Watling in order to
prevent detection did write as follows :
‘ Dear Sir,
Your goodness to me respecting the note which you
accredited and which by your account seems not valid, I
am thankful to you for; but if you will be pleased to remit
it to me by some hand that you can confide in, I will not
only acknowledge it by a certain signature I have put upon
it but remit you its sterling value, with the most respect-
ful thanks.
I am, Sir,
Your most obliged and obedient servant,
(Signed) John Neilson.
Dumfries, Wednesday forenoon.’
He uttered the 3rd note charged, himself, in the
Office of the Branch of the British Linen Bank established
in Dumfries. The 4th note he uttered by vending to some
person—(unknown) —in Dumfries, which came afterwards
into the hands of Thomas Blaylock, Grocer in Carlisle,
and the three remaining notes which were found—on a
search being made—in the room or house in the Town of
Dumfries, in which the said John Nilson then resided, con-
cealed in the same and ‘ wraped ’ up in 3 pieces of waste
paper within the foot of a worsted stocking.
On 9th April last (1805) he did emit a Declaration
in presence of Nicol Shaw, Esq., J.P. for the County of
Dumfries, but refused at that time to sign or subscribe,
but later before said Justice of the Peace he did then
acknowledge and subscribe above Declaration and also
subscribed another Declaration together with the genuine
note of the Bank of Scotland and the 7 forged or counter-
feited notes and also subscribed the foresaid letter.


A jury of Fifteen Assizers having been lawfully
sworn; the Counsel for the Prosecution proceeded to
adduce the following witnesses in proof of the libel, who
emitted their depositions viva voce in presence of the Court
and Jury, without being reduced into writing in terms of
the Statute :
1. Robert Forrester, Esq., Treasurer and formerly
Accountant to the Governor and Company of the
Bank of Scotland.
2. James Fraser, Esquire, Principal Secretary and
formerly Treasurer to the said Bank of Scotland.
3. William Brand, Clerk or Teller in the said Bank of
Scotland’s Office in Dumfries.
4. David Staig, Esquire, Agent for the said Bank of Scot-
land at Dumfries.
Whereupon His Majesty’s Advocate represented
that from the turn the evidence already adduced had taken
he perceived that he could not bring home the issuing of
the forged notes libelled, to' the pannel and therefore he
did not mean to examine any more of the witnesses.
The Lord Justice Clerk then shortly addressed the
fifteen assizers, who were immediately inclosed and in a
short time returned a unanimous verdict finding the libel
Not proven on which the Pannel was dismissed from the
bar.”
It is certainly a pity that the depositions of the witnesses
for the Prosecution should have been emitted " viva voce
.. . without being reduced into writing, ” 43a as one cannot
help feeling that Watling was remarkably fortunate to get
off as he did. It might have been expected that his previous
conviction in 1789 would have proved disastrous to him and
it is surely noteworthy that both on that occasion and in
1806, one of the witnesses against him was David Staig 43 * 1
43a The recording of evidence in trials—except in murder
cases—ceased after 1748.
43b He was for forty years representative of the Bank of
Scotland in Dumfries and Provost of the Burgh almost con-
tinuously from 1783 to 1817.


agent for the Bank of Scotland in Dumfries. That it was
the same Thomas Watling is definitely proved by the men-
tion in each case of his Aunt, Marion Kirkpatrick.
What happened to him after his acquittal is unknown
but his baptismal record of 1762 shows that Thomas Watling
would only be forty-four years of age in 1806 and he may
subsequently have made good. It is, perhaps, worthy of
mention that there is a Watling Street in Dumfries but it is
not likely that this has any connection with our hero (if hero
is the right word) as from cartographical records it is known
that this street was not in existence till 1886.
EPITOME OF DATES.
19 Sept., 1762 —Baptismal record of Thomas Watlin.
1787/8 —T. W., in Dumfries, forged guinea notes
of Bank of Scotland.
27 Nov., 1788 —T. W. first “ judicially examined ” at
Dumfries.
14 Ap., 1789 —T. W. sentenced, at Dumfries, to fourteen
years’ transportation.
6 June, 1789 —Seven convicts (including T. W.) arrived
in Edinburgh, from Dumfries.
5 July, 1789 —Account of mutiny on “ Peggy,” convey-
ing convicts from Leith to Plymouth, in
which T. W. acquitted himself well.
3 Oct., 1790 —Petition for release from T. W. dated
“ Dunkirk ” [Hulk] Plymouth Harbour.
24 Nov., 1790 —Petition from Marion Kirkpatrick (Aunt
of T. W.) showing that T. W. was still
on board the “ Dunkirk ” [Hulk] lying
at Plymouth Harbour.
23 May, 1791 —T. W. transferred from “ Lion Hulk,”
at Portsmouth, to “ Pitt.”
June, 1791 —“Pitt” left England with T. W. on
board for the Cape, via Rio de Janeiro.
13 Dec., 1791 —Letter from T. W., dated Cape of Good
Hope, African Coast, stating that he had
escaped.
28 Dec., 1791 —T. W. mentions this date so significantly
that it may indicate the day of his recap-
ture and commencement of his subsequent
seven months’ imprisonment.


30 Aug., 1792 —“ Royal Admiral ” left Cape with T. W.
on board.
7 Oct., 1792 —“ Royal Admiral ” arrived Botany-Bay,
with T. W. on board.
12 May, 1793 —Letter from T. W., dated “ Sydney-
Cove, Port-Jackson, New-South-Wales.”
20 May, 1793 —Proposal for a projected book: dated
“ Sydney-Cove, Port Jackson, New
South Wales.”
2 Jany., 1794 —Description of “ Semi-palmated Duck,”
by T. W., so dated.
1794 —Landscape of Sydney, by T. W., so
dated.
Sept., 1796 —T. W. granted a “ Conditional Pardon ”
in New South Wales.
1802 —Landscape of Sydney, so dated, which
may have been by T. W.
Nov., 1804 —T. W., in Dumfries, alleged to have
forged five-pound notes of Bank of Scot-
land.
10 Jan., 1806—T. W., tried in Edinburgh, obtained ver-
dict “ Not proven.”


Thomas Watling’s Book
Reference has frequently been made to Thomas
Watling’s book of which the following is the description :
Letters/from an exile/at/ Botany-Bay,/to his/Aunt in
Dumfries;/ giving a particular account of the settle-
ment/Of New South Wales. /With the Customs and
Manners of the/Inhabitants./ [Price — sixpence.]/
Penrith :/ Printed by Ann Bell.
i Vol. Bxs ins. : pp. iv, +2B.
This book would appear to be very rare and I only
know of two copies: the one in the Mitchell Library,
Sydney, New South Wales; the other in the British Museum
Library in London. 43 ® From this latter I had two photostatic
copies made, in 1935, one of which I gave to the Ewart
Library, Dumfries, as a token of gratitude to my friend
Mr G. W. Shirley for all the assistance he has given me in
this compilation.
Although the title page does not bear the name of the
author, the last page (28) ends with the words : “ your most
unhappy but most affectionate nephew T. Watling ” : and it
has now been ascertained that his “ Aunt in Dumfries ”
to whom his letters were addressed was Marion (May)
Kirkpatrick.
The book is undated but it has been stated that it was
published in 1794 44 and it is certainly one of the earliest
books on New South Wales. The four preliminary pages
include the title page (pp. i/ii) and an introduction
(pp. iii/iv) as follows :
“ The Publisher of the ensuing Production, sends it
into the World for the two following Reasons. First: he
Me plate S.)
m G. B. Barton: History of New South Wales, Sydney,
1889, p. 585: who gives the pages wrongly as 128 instead of 28.


Hfe L S3J RS **
- ■' * -
I B O TAN Y-B AX,
■- . - t. • - ' t
'■ ; *s> kit ' *
' ’
AUNT in PUMFRIE^.
■ - V • , ''
ifcIVIHC A iCCOUK-j <Jf «TTUMBHJ
Of SOUTH WALES.
if . ■ # */
4.: .* ■ With(hj^CjgmiattiMtmri*/*&*■ . - /
/ v
*VwM* ' JNH W? A ' NI^
: ■ i • '. i
4 i • ' .--1 i H
* .1
r . **, #'.
, V: */\ V. * V'f
■ uu-wTH* *
• ■->,< f, ‘ ♦
Title Page of Watling’s Book


hopes it may contribute a little to the relief of an old,
infirm, and friendless woman, to whom it is addressed.
And Secondly : he imagines, the account here given of a
country so little known, may be interesting to some, and
amusing to ALL. With the original, which is now in his
hands, he declines taking any liberty, but leaves the
unfortunate exile to tell his story exactly in his own
words, and how he acquits himself, the public must deter-
mine.
The publisher has several letters from the same author
still in his hands; and should these meet with a favourable
reception, they are intended to be published, together with
a life of the author on some future occasion.”
There is no mention of the publisher’s name and had
his intention been fulfilled a great deal of research and
speculation to-day would have been avoided.
The first letter in the volume (pp. i /$) is dated:
“ Sydney-Cove, Port-Jackson, New-South-Wales, May 12th,
1793.” The second (pp. 4/6): “ Cape of Good Hope,
African-Coast, Tuesday, Dec. 13th, 1791.” These letters
which reveal a certain amount of education—couched in a
somewhat repentant but aggrieved tone and irritatingly
sanctimonious—mainly refer to Watling’s personal experi-
ences and have already been laid under contribution : they
are followed (pp. 6/21) by several extracts —possibly from
other letters—giving a brief account of the nature of the
country, the natives, the convicts, the method of governing
the Colony, etc. My object, however, is not to criticise
Watling’s book either as regards its general observations
or its literary merit: its early date of publication endows it
with the glamour of originality, but it must be confessed that
I have only considered it bibliographically in so far as it has
afforded details regarding Watling’s life.
The title page shows that the book was printed at Pen-
rith by Ann Bell but enquiries have elicited very little
information about the printer or the establishment. The
Clerk of Penrith Urban District Council—Mr C. H. Huntley
—has most kindly interested himself in the matter and from


him I have learned that Dr. J. F. Haswell (Hon. Secretary
of the Parish Register Society for Cumberland and West-
morland) has informed him that there is in existence a
Directory for the year 1782 which contains the name of
“ Ann Bell, Printer,” under the heading of “ Traders.” 45
Canon F. Byard has informed me that the Register of the
Church of St. Andrew’s, Penrith, contains the two following
entries of burials :
1788 : Aug. 6. John Bell, printer, aged 45.
1799 : Nov. 9. Ann Bell, widow, aged 98. 46
This is all the information I can obtain but it is not
altogether valueless for—if “ Ann Bell, widow,” was its
printer—it would indicate that Watling’s book was printed
before her decease on 9th November, 1799. That her name
occurs as a “ printer ” in a directory of 1782 is not of so
much moment since, from its contents, we know that
Watling’s book must have been printed after 1793 and it
has been definitely stated that it was actually printed in
[794, but this, I think, is simply conjecture except that a
portion (pp. 26/27) of the book —the prospectus of a pro-
posed “ Picturesque Description ” of New South Wales—
appeared also in The Dumfries Weekly Journal on March
25th of that year.
As I believe that books from this press are scarce, it
may be of interest to add that I have a copy of The Moralj
Instructor;/ consisting of miscellaneous / Essays , Anecdotes ,/
Poems, Maxims, &c./calculated to/Inform the Ignorant,/
Reform the Reprobate,/Expose the Follies of the Age,/
Create Cheerfulness,/Dispel Melancholy,/Promote Charity
and Affection,/ Encourage the Improvement of Agricul-/ture
and Commerce; and/Discourage Indolency and Extrava-
gancy. /Penrith:/Printed by Ann Bell, for the Author,/
1795 ■
<5 C. H. Huntley; in litt., 11th April, 1935.
Canon F. Byard; in litt., 23rd May, 1936.


Plate Jf.
“ Ciliary Warbler,” painted by Thomas Watling.


Thomas Watling’s Paintings
The basis of Thomas Watling’s claim to fame rests on
his portrayal of the “ non-descript productions ” of New
South Wales. The subjects are remarkably varied; pre-
senting birds, beasts, fishes, insects, shells, flowers, plants,
and the natives and scenery of New South Wales. Some
of the drawings only bear his initials but others are signed
in full. They were obviously intended as faithful repre-
sentational depictions and succeed remarkably in that, for
naturalists, primary requisite : their artistic value may not
be high but especially where scenery is the subject they
display character and have, of course, the merit of originality.
The illustration which I am able to give through the
courtesy of the Trustees of the British Museum (Natural
History)—of his painting of the “ Ciliary Warbler ” re-
veals his delicacy of execution. 47
Paintings by Watling, or otherwise associated with him,
have been found in three separate collections and the draw-
ings in a fourth collection are closely connected with his.
The unacknowledged utilization of Watling’s work by early
writers on New South Wales, the long-delayed gradual re-
vealing of its locus and of its importance in the establish-
ment of types of species, as well as the errors committed in
the course of that process, form a confused but fascinating
chapter in ornithological research.
It will be useful here to gather together such refer-
ences as Watling himself makes to his work. In his Letters
from an exile at Botany-Bay he says (pp. 8/9) when writing
about the country : “ My worthy friend, Mr. H , may
reasonably conclude, that these romantic scenes will much
(See Plate It.) “Ciliary Warbler”: The Rusty-sided
Warbler Sylvia lateralis Latham (Index Omithologicus Supple-
ment: 1801, p. LV.): the Australian White-eye Zosterops
lateralis (Latham): the Grey-backed Silvereye,


amuse my pencil; though therein he is mistaken. The
landscape painter, may in vain seek here for that beauty
which arises from happy-opposed off-scapes. ... I,
however, confess that were I to select and combine I might
avoid that sameness, and find engaging employment.” He
says (p. 13) “ The natives are extremely fond of painting,
and often sit hours by me when at work and (p. io)
“ My employment is painting for J. W , esq. the
non-descript productions of the country.” On p. 26 he
proposes that the following prospectus 47 * 1 of his work should
be issued : “ Thomas Watling, Principal Limner in New
South Wales, Extremely anxious to deserve better of his
Country, proposes, with due Deference, under the Patron-
age of an impartial Public, The Execution of a Picturesque
Description of that Colony; In an highly-finished Set of
Drawings, done faithfully upon the Spots, from Nature, in
Mezzo, Aqua-tinta, or Water Colours. That the subjects
attempted shall be partial and general views of Sydney, Par-
ramatta, and Toongabbe; romantic groves, or native groups,
and that, if possible, in the course of the work, curiosities
in ornothology and botany shall be interwoven.” He further
agrees (p. 27) that the views shall be submitted to a com-
mittee of the subscribers before engraving. Almost at the
end of his book (p. 27) he adds : “ My present condition is
chiefly owing to the low revenge of a certain military
character, now high in office.”
The ” J. W. ” whom Watling names as employing him
in painting has been identified as John White, Surgeon
General to the Settlement and, as will be seen, there is sub-
stantiating evidence for this in addition to the identity of
the initials of the name.
John White sailed for Australia with the First Fleet on
board the “ Charlotte ” which arrived in Botany Bay on
20th January, 1788. He acted as Surgeon General to the
Settlement till his departure, in the “ Daedalus,” on 17th
December, 1794. Though he obviously took a keen in-
♦7a This prospectus also appeared in The Dumfries Weekly
Journal, Tuesday, 25th March, 1794.


terest in natural history it seems that he collected specimens
for scientists and friends in England rather than for his own
satisfaction. White’s Journal of a V.oyage to new South
Wales was published in London in 1790, and it has been
frequently surmised that the illustrations were drawn by
Watling. The plates are all dated 29th December, 1789, and
it is clear that the book had been issued from the press two
years or so prior to Watling’s arrival in New South Wales
in October, 1792. 471> .
This point was demonstrated by Mr William Dixson in
a most interesting article in the Journal and Proceedings of
the Royal Australian Historical Society in 1920. 48 Mr
Dixson also suggests a solution of the final statement quoted
above from Watling’s Letters. David Collins, a Lieutenant
of Marines in 1770, had served at Bunker’s Hill, 1775, and
at the Relief of Gibraltar, 1782, and, during the first four
years of Watling’s term in New South Wales, was Judge-
Advocate and Secretary to the Governor, which appointment
he held from 1787-1796. 49 Collins published in London, in two
volumes, in 1798/1802, his An Account of the English Colony
in New South Wales. Mr Dixson, comparing the plates
in Collins’ book with Watling’s projected advertisement,
suggests that Collins may be “ the certain military
character ” who indulged in a “ low revenge ” on Watling
and declares : “ The description of the views Watling in-
tended to attempt is so exactly in accord with the plates in
Collins’ Account of the English Colony in New South Wales
that it would be foolish to ignore the coincidence.
Especially when we learn that Collins held the positions of
Judge-Advocate and Secretary to the Governor; positions
47b White states [p. I.] that his “ Journal was undertaken "
at the request of Thomas Wilson to whom he addresses it [p. ll.]
in a letter dated, from “Port Jackson, 18th November, 1788”:
the “Journal” only deals with the period sth March, 1787 to
11th October, 1788: it is not known who was the Editor of the
published work.
4* Sydney, 1920, Vol. V., pp. 227-9.
49 David Collins: 6. 1756; Governor of Tasmania from
1804-10; d. 1810.


that would enable him to set Watling to do the work or
calmly appropriate any pictures that took his fancy. With
the above information at our disposal, we may reasonably
assume that Watling drew or painted the ‘ series of rough
sketches ’ that were re-drawn by Dayes 50 and fix the date as
prior to September, 1796, when Collins left for England.” 51
Mr Dixson also indicates—as shown by the following extract
—that Watling may have been primarily responsible for the
illustrations in The Zoology of New Holland 52 by Dr.
George Shaw and in Dr. James Edward Smith’s Specimen
of the Botany of New Holland. 53 Of the latter Mr Dixson
states : “ In the preface to this book Dr Smith says : ‘ The
figures are taken from coloured drawings made on the spot
and communicated to Mr Wilson, F.L.S., by John White,
Esq., Surgeon-General to the Colony, along with . .
dried specimens, with which the drawings have in every
case been carefully compared.’ The preface is dated
December, 1793; and the title page of the botanical section
is also dated 1793; yet there are two references in the text
to the following year, viz., (p. 31), February, 1794, and
(p. 36), April, 1794. There are further discrepancies in the
imprints on the plates. Two are dated October 1, 1793;
three, January 1, 1795, while eleven have neither date nor
imprint. In the Zoology section, by Dr. Shaw, the title
page is dated 1794. One plate is dated 1.8.1793; two,
1.10.1793; one 1.9.1794; and two 1.11.1794, while five have
neither date nor imprint (in one case it has been erased).
One plate was ‘ communicated ’ by Major Ross (p. 46), who
left New South Wales on 13th December, 1791. White
50 [Edward Dayes (1763-1804), water-colour painter and
engraver in mezzotint; exhibited miniatures, landscapes, and
classical and Scriptural subjects at the Royal Academy,
1786-1804. H. S. G.]
51 The Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, Sydney, 1920, Vol. V., pp. 228-9.
52 Zoology of New Holland. . . . The Figures by James
Sowerby; 1 vol. 4to; London, 1794.
68 A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland. . . . .
The Figures by James Sowerby; 1 vol. 4to; London, 1793.


must have sent the drawings to England, as he left Sydney,
in H.M.S. ‘ Daedalus,’ on 17th December, 1794.” 54
It is extremely disconcerting to find that a careful
examination of Collins’ Account of the English Colony in
New South Wales fails to reveal any evidence of “ Dayes ”
having “ re-drawn ” any “ series of rough sketches ” either
by Watling or any other artist and the selection of illustra-
tions is so unexceptional that no proof of a Watling con-
nection can be deduced from it. The evidence quoted from
Dr. James Edward Smith’s preface to A Specimen of the
Botany of New Holland which duly mentions White fails to
indicate Watling definitely as the originator of the
“ coloured drawings.”
We now come to the next publications and the most
important of all in which use was made (as I hope to show),
howbeit indirectly, of Watling’s work. They are John
Latham’s Second Supplement to his General Synopsis of
Birds 55 and his Supplement to his Index Omithologicus s6
both of which books were published in 1801. Investigation
as to the source of information used in these Supplements
will involve a description of the three portfolios which have
been alleged to contain Watling’s drawings and of another
collection which contains, I believe, re-drawings of Watling’s
originals.
Two of the three portfolios are in the British Museum
(Natural History) the third is in Australia.
The first, which had once been in the Library of Sir
Joseph Banks, is described as follows in the Catalogue of
the Books, Manuscripts, Maps and Drawings in the British
Museum (Natural History) :
“ Watling (Thomas) [7l foil, of Water-colour
54 The Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Australian
Historical Society, Sydney, 1920, Vol V., pp. 228-9.
55 A General Synopsis of Birds; 3 vols., in 6; 4to; London,
1781-5; Supplement, 4to, London, 1787; Second Supplement, 4to,
London, 1801. (I have seen editions of this latter with title
page dated 1802.)
56 Index Omithologicus; 2 vols., 4to, London, 1790; Supple-
ment, 4to, London, 1801.


drawings of Natives, Animals and Plants from the
neighbourhood of Port Jackson, New South Wales.] fol.
Forming Banksian MS. No. 34, Vide Dryander’s Cat.
Bibl. Banks, Vol. I. p. 253. Some of these are the
originals used in drawing the plates for John White’s
‘ Journal of a Voyage to New South Wales,’ 1790.” 57
These drawings are not by Watling. The fact that
fifteen of them were utilised in John White’s Journal of a
Voyage to new South Wales is a proof of this as all
the plates in the book are dated 29th December, 1789,
and Thomas Watling did not arrive at Botany Bay till 7th
October, 1792. Moreover it is stated, in an advertisement
of the book, that “ the drawings have been copied
from Nature, by Miss Stone, Mr Catton, Mr Nodder and
other artists; and the Editor flatters himself the Engravings
are all executed with equal correctness The
Birds &c. from which the drawings were taken are deposited
in the Leverian Museum. ” 57a
A careful scrutiny of these “71 foil, of Water-colour
drawings ” reveals that they do not resemble those in the
collection next to be described—which has been somewhat
loosely termed the “ Watling drawings ” —with the excep-
tion of three, one of which (the only one in the volume which
bears a signature) is signed “W.T. ” It is certainly curious
that these should be Thomas Watling’s initials but reversed;
I do not think, however, that this is anything more than a
coincidence. The volume simply contains a collection of
water-colour drawings and is without any manuscript descrip-
tion, title page, or any details to guide one to its provenance
It has been fully described by Messrs Gregory M. Mathews
and Tom Iredale as comprising “ seventy folios, but each
side is numbered so that the first painting is numbered 1,
67 Catalogue of the Books, Manuscripts, Maps, and Draw-
ings in the British Museum (Natural History); 1915, Vol. V.,
p. 2271.
57a John White: Journal of a Voyage to new South Wales;
1790, p. [vii.J,


the second 3, the third 5, and soon ” t 5B making a total of
137 pages : there are, however, two figures on pages 1,5,
7, 11, and 65. It is known that John Latham frequently
described birds from sketches by one General Davies, 59 and
Messrs Mathews and Iredale state : “the volume contains
figures of birds described as from the drawings of General
Davies. It is possible that these are copies, or more probably
simultaneous paintings from the specimens from which
General Davies’ drawings were made. . . . The paint-
ings call to mind some of the ones included in the Watling
drawings as if they had been painted by the same artist.
That would negative their ascription to General Davies him-
self, but they could have been copied by him.’’ 60 It is be-
58 The Austral Avian Record; 1920, Vol. IV., Nos. 4 and 5,
pp. 114-122.
6» Thomas Davies; of the Royal Regiment of Artillery;
Cadet, 17th March, 1755; Fireworker, Ist April, 1756; 2nd
Lieut., 2nd April, 1757; Ist Lieut., Ist January, 1759; Capt.-
Lieut., 10th March, 1762; Captain, Ist January, 1771; (Brevet-
Major, 7th June, 1782); Major, Ist December, 1782; Lieut.-
Colonel, 21st November, 1783; (Brevet-Colonel, Ist March,
1794); Colonel, 14th August, 1794; Major-General, 3rd May,
1796; Colonel Commandant, 13th July, 1799; Lieut.-General,
25th September, 1803. Lieut.-General Davies saw much service
in North America during the operations connected with the con-
quest of Canada. At one time (while a Lieutenant) he com-
manded a naval force on Lake Champlain, and took a French
frigate of 18 guns after a close action of nearly three hours.
Lieutenant Davies hoisted the first British flag in Montreal.
He served as Captain of a Company in the most important
actions of the American Revolutionary War. During his long
service he had command of the Royal Artillery at Coxheath
Camp, at Gibraltar, in Canada, and at Plymouth. He was also
two years Commandant of Quebec; he died at Blackheath, 16th
March, 1812 ([John Kane] List of Officers of the Royal Regi-
ment of Artillery; Woolwich, 1869, pp. 7 and 167.) How far
Lieut.-General Davies is to be regarded as an ornithologist may
be questionable, but he certainly supplied John Latham with a
considerable amount of material information from distant lands.
00 The Austral Avian Record; 1920, Vol, IV., Nos. 4 and 5,
pp. 120-1.


lieved that it was Mr James Britten who jumped to the
conclusion that these drawings were by Watling under
circumstances which will be narrated later [see page 50] —
and his conclusion has been shown to have been wrong.
The second portfolio in the British Museum (Natural
History) is catalogued thus :
“ Watling (T.) [512 Original Water-colour drawings
of the Natives, Animals, Plants and Scenery (with maps)
in the neighbourhood of Port Jackson, New South Wales. ]
fol. [c. 1788-92.]
Some of the figures of the Birds form the types of
J. Latham’s descriptions in the ‘ Supplement ’ to his
‘ General Synopsis of Birds,’ 1802. ” 61
This collection comprises several paintings which are
not by Thomas Watling and the works of at least three
distinct artists are included. It is therefore unfortunate—
not to say misleading that the collection should be so
generally known as the “Watling drawings.” In many
instances more than one painting (often closely alike in
composition and execution) illustrates one particular bird
and only one painting, or rather its description, is dated :
that of the “ Semi-palmated Duck,” which bears date
“ 2 Jany. 1794.” I agree with Messrs Gregory M. Mathews
and Tom Iredale in their statement that: ‘ ‘ The paintings
made by Watling himself are nearly all signed T. Watling
or Thos. Watling, whereas none of the others have any
signature whatever. Moreover, in connection with many of
Watling’s paintings notes concerning the birds are given,
but none appear on the ones not painted by Watling.”
[This is not correct: many of the paintings which are not by
Watling are annotated.] “ The workmanship is quite
different, so that the pictures can be separated with ease
without reference to the signatures.” 62 In this collection
the pictures of birds alone are indexed to the number of 295
61 Catalogue of the Books, Manuscripts, Maps, and Draw-
ings in the British Museum (Natural History); 1915, Vol. V.,
p. 2271.
62 The Austral Avian Record; 1922, Vol. V., No. 1, p. 23.


but some of these are now missing. It must be added—or
rather emphasized —that this collection is the only one which
contains any paintings bearing Watling’s signature.
This volume was acquired after the receipt of the fol-
lowing letter :
“ 14th May 1902.
The Director 78, Warwick Gardens,
British Museum. Kensington.
Sir,
I have a portfolio of drawings in color of the natives,
animals, birds (about 270) fishes, insects &c. and plants
and flowers of Australia made by an artist Thomas
Watling in the years 1788 to 1792, which I now wish to
dispose of & thinking it might be of interest to the
Museum I shall be happy to send it for your inspection
should you think it worth while.
The Artist was sent out by my gt. grandfather, James
Lee, 624 of the Vineyard Nursery, Hammersmith (the
author of Lee’s Introduction to Botany) with a view to
publishing a work on the subject but owing to his death
this was never done & the portfolio has remained in my
family ever since. It also contains a few drawings of
Sydney consisting of a few huts, the Governor’s house, &c.
I am, Sir,
Yours obediently,
James Lee.”
62a [James Lee; b. 1715; nurseryman, introduced many
exotic plants, including the fuchsia, into England, correspondent
of Linnaeus whose works he translated into English 1760; d.
1795. He is mentioned as follows in The Voyage of Governor
PkiUip to Botany Bay; with an Account of the Establishment
of the Colonies of Port Jackson & Norfolk Island; compiled from
Authentic Papers, which have been obtained from the several
Departments, &c., London, 1789, at pp. 294-5 : “Of the plants
in general which have been brought from Botany Bay, and the
adjacent country, no notice has been taken in this work, as it
would have led to such a detail as must too considerably have
extended its limits. Many of them are now to be seen in the
Continued on Next Page.


Dr Sharpe, when describing the National collection of
Birds, writes as follows :
“ Of additional interest to Latham’s published works,
which give us an idea of the contents of the bird-cases in
the British Museum in the latter half of the eighteenth
century, is the naming of certain Australian birds in the
Supplements to the Synopsis and to the Index Ornitholo-
gicus. Up to the present time, it has never been known
where Latham obtained the material for describing so
many Australian, or, as they were then called, ‘ New
Holland ’ birds.
In 1902 the Museum acquired from Mr James Lee,
a grandson of the famous horticulturist of Hammersmith,
a large volume of paintings executed for the latter by one
of his collectors, Thomas Watling, between 1788 and
1792. These drawings had evidently been shown to
Latham, who named most of the birds, and seems to have
referred to these pictures as ‘ Mr Lambert’s Drawings.’
They do not seem, however, to have been Lambert’s pro-
perty at any time.
The types of Latham’s species are, in fact, founded
on these drawings of Watling’s.
The collector was sent to New South Wales by Mr
Lee, and some of the illustrations in White’s Journal of a
Voyage to New South Wales in 1790 were drawn by
Watling, who refers to White in his volume of paintings.
Cf. Hist. Coll. Brit. Mus. ( N.H. ), i., p. 52 ( Libraries).
Mr James Britten, who has examined the series of
drawings, has published the following interesting note
(Journ. Botany, xl., p. 302 (1902)) : ‘ The British Museum
has lately acquired a very interesting volume containing
drawings in colour of the animals and plants of Australia,
Note 62a continued.
highest perfection at the nursery gardens of that eminent and
learned botanist, Mr Lee, of Hammersmith: who still retains
enough of zeal for his favourite science, to regret that the dis-
covery of those countries was not made at a period of his life,
when he could have gone personally to reap the glorious harvest
they afford.” H. S. G.]


made by Thomas Watling in 1788-1792. Watling was
sent out by James Lee of Hammersmith (from whose
great-grandson, bearing the same names, the collection
was purchased), with a view to obtaining material for a
book on the natural history of the country.
Apart from its contents, the volume is interesting
on account of the light which it throws upon an entry on
p. 253, vol. i., of Dryander’s “ Catalogue of the Banksian
Library ” : this runs. “ Volumen foliorum 70, continens
figuras animalium et plantarum pictas quas in Nova
Cambria prope Port Jackson delineavit Edgar Thomas
Dell.”
In Banks’ copy 63 the last four words are struck
out, and a comparison of the volume with the one acquired
from Mr Lee shows that it is the work of the same artist.
Watling was acquainted with John White (‘‘ Surgeon-
General to the Settlement ”), who sent plants to Smith, and
published in 1790 his Journal of a Voyage to New South
Wales; one or two of Watling’s drawings were executed
for White.
The newly acquired volume contains several views
of Sydney, which are of great interest.’
Attached to the drawings of birds is a list of the
species, with the following announcement, probably in the
handwriting of Mr James Lee himself: ‘ This catalogue
was wrote by Dr Latham, author of the General Synopsis
of Birds.’ ”«
In view of our present information the version of the
origin of the volume given by Lee must be discounted.
Lee’s great-grandfather, it may be noted, died in 1795, about
two years after Watling’s arrival in Australia as a convict.
os [This is in the Natural History Museum (Department of
Botany) South Kensington, London. The printed octavo cata-
logue—Catalogue Bibliothecas Historico-Naturalis: J. Banks—
has been inlaid to folio and bears additions and emendations in
the manuscript of the cataloguer, Jonas Dryander. H. S. G.]
64 History of the Collections contained in the Natural
History Departments of the British Museum; 1906, Yol. 11.,
pp. 107-109.


I have already dealt with Mr James Britten’s erroneous note
as to the provenance of the “ Volumen foliorum 70 ” from
the Banks Collection. With Dr Sharpe’s speculation that
Latham had seen this volume and referred to the contents
as “Mr Lambert’s drawings ” I shall deal later. At a
later stage also the deletion of part of the entry in Sir Joseph
Banks’ copy of Dryander’s “ Catalogue of the Banksian
Library ” will receive attention.
The third portfolio which has returned to the country of
its origin and is in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, Mr K. A.
Hindwood designates the “ Sydney ” set and states it
“ was purchased by the Public Library of New South
Wales from a London bookseller, in 1887, for twenty-five
guineas. Nothing definite is known of their earlier where-
abouts ; no signatures appear on the drawings which are
certainly by several artists, and only two of which bear
dates. One, the eightieth in their present arrangement,
is dated December, 1791; the other, the third in the volume,
June, 1792. Most of them are annotated with brief
pencilled notes in several handwritings, which differ from
those of the artists, who rarely gave more than the relative
size of the painting. ’ ’ 65
I now revert to the question of Mr Lambert’s drawings
over which a considerable amount of confusion has arisen,
due, it would appear, to a lapse of memory on the part of
Dr. R. Bowdler Sharpe.
So long ago as 1843 it was recognised that Latham
used what are known as “ Mr Lambert’s drawings.”
These have been described as “ comprising 214 paintings of
birds, one landscape of Norfolk Island, and ten illustra-
tions of mammals, [which] have never been completely
catalogued. In 1842, G. R. Gray ( Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist.,
Lond.) 66 , whose brother supposed the artist to be White,
determined 115 species. A further examination was con-
65 The Emu; Melbourne, 1931, Vol. XXXI., p. 100.
66 Annals and Magazine of Natural History; London, 1843,
Vol. XI., pp. 189-194. [G. R. Gray's communication was dated
14th December, 1842.]


ducted by H. E. Strickland, assisted by John Gould.
These very important paintings are mounted in three
volumes, and were at one time in the possession of Aylmer
Bourke Lambert, 66a then Secretary to the Linnean Society of
London, from whom they passed to the Earl of Derby, in
whose library they are to-day.” 67 Mr N. B. Kinnear, of
the Natural History Museum, London, has informed me
that all these paintings are unsigned and include four paint-
ings which are not in a similar collection —of what have
been referred to as the “ Watling drawings ” —in the
British Museum (Natural History) London. 68 At this
juncture I should like to express my special thanks to Mr
Kinnear and to Mr H. W. England who is in charge of
the books in the Zoological Department at the British
Museum (Natural History) not only for their patience in
dealing with my queries but also for their expert assistance.
Much confusion has been caused by Dr. Sharpe’s
inaccurate presumption that Latham “ referred to these
pictures [the ‘ Watling drawings ’] as ‘Mr Lambert’s
66a [Aylmer Bourke Lambert; b. 1761; botanist; educated
at St. Mary Hall, Oxford; an original F.L.S., 1788; and vice-
president, 1796-1842; contributed papers on zoology and botany
to its Transactions; F.R.S., 1791; A Description of the genus
Cinchona his first independent work, 1797; chief work a mono-
graph of the genus Pinus (Vol. 1., 1808; Vol. 11., 1824; Vol. 111.,
1837); d. 1842. H. S. G.]
67 [Aylmer Bourke Lambert’s library was sold, in London
by Mr Sotheby, on 18th/20th April, 1842, and realised £llO5 4s
Od. “Lot 444: New South Wales; 225 most beautiful draw-
ings in colour, of the Quadrupeds and Birds of New South
Wales, with the names of the Birds inserted in pencil by Jo.
Latham and an Autograph letter from him to A. B. Lambert,
Esq., concerning the Collection; in 3 vols. fol. calf, N.D. sub-
sequently became the property of the Earl of Derby and is now
at Knowsley; this is the collection known as “Mr Lambert’s
drawings.” Another lot, “ 683: Autograph letters (upwards of
100),” was bought for the Earl of Derby and was presented to
the British Museum in 1870: it contains the letter from John
White later referred to. H. S. G.]
68 N. B. Kinnear; in litt., 17th July, 1936.


drawings,’ ” 69 and it will be of interest to quote some of Dr.
Sharpe’s notes on this point. He writes : “It is curious
that Watling’s name is not mentioned, as many of the
drawings bear his signature; nor is that of his employer,
Mr James Lee.’ 70 If it seemed curious to Dr. Sharpe that
Latham should not mention Watling’s name it is certainly
significant that Latham should repeatedly mention that of Mr
Lambert: as—for example—when describing the Turcoisine
Parrot, Dr. Sharpe’s note reads : “ Although Latham says
that he described this Parraquet from the drawings of Mr
Lambert, and apparently from a specimen in the collection of
General Davies, he makes use of Watling’s note,” 71 and,
when dealing with the Blue-headed Cuckow, Dr. Sharpe says :
“ Latham gives the substance of [Watling’s]
note, but gives credit for it to Mr Lambert.” 72
It is, I think, obvious that “ Mr Lambert’s drawings ”
—as they are termed—is an entirely different collection to
that of the “ Watling drawings.” It should, perhaps, also
be emphasized that these drawings were not actually by
Lambert but that they have been termed “ Mr Lambert’s
drawings ” because they formed part of his library and not
because he was the draughtsman. Dr. Sharpe—excited by
the idea that Watling’s paintings had provided Latham’s
types —expresses surprise that Watling is never even men-
tioned by Latham—his actual words are : “ He [Latham]
says not one word about Watling or James Lee in the text
69 History of the Collections contained in the Natural
History Departments of the British Museum; 1906, Vol. 11.,
p. 108.
70 Tom cit., p. 122.
71 History of the Collections contained in the Natural
History Departments of the British Museum; 1906, Vol. 11.,
p. 115. Dr. Sharpe’s use of the phrase “ Watling’s note ” is
misleading; it imputes to Watling a knowledge of ornithology
sufficient to enable him to write critical notes whereas the fact
is that the annotations on some of his paintings (for not all
are annotated) are in the hand-writing of persons other than
Watling.
72 Tom. cit., p. 121.


of his book, nor can I so far find any evidence of his giving
credit to either of them as the source of his information, ” 75
but such mention is the last thing one would expect to find
in material if such had been cribbed. Dr. Sharpe goes on
to point out that Latham has transferred a long note by
Watling into his account of the Channel bill in his General
History of Birds,™ but attributes the last sentence of his
note to “ Mr White.” 75 If Watling’s paintings were being
used surreptitiously it is hardly likely that open acknow-
ledgment would be made of any information which might
accompany them and it is hardly guessing to presume that
“ Mr White ” was none other than Surgeon General John
White. Finally, Dr. Sharpe quotes Watling as stating:
“ The pride and vanity of the draughtsman has induced him
to put his name to all the drawings, but should you publish
them I think the name may be left 0ut.” 76 The wishes of
the poor “ draughtsman ” seem to have been all too literally
obeyed.
Mr K. A. Hindwood has suggested that “ the hand-
writing of the notes on the ‘ Watling Drawings,’ in the
Natural History Museum, South Kensington, does not
appear to be by Watling; possibly the notes are by Surgeon-
General White for whom Watling painted birds.” 77 It had
73 History of the Collections contained in the Natural
History Departments of the British Museum; 1906, Vol. 11.,
p. 109.
74 John Latham: General History of Birds; 1822, Vol. 11.,
pp. 300-302, pi. 32.
75 History of the Collections contained in the Natural
History Departments of the British Museum; 1906, Vol. 11.,
pp. 117-118. The note which is written on the back of the
picture (signed “ Thomas Watling ”) of the bird has been used by-
Latham in his Second Supplement (1801), p. 96. It may here be
observed that many of the paintings in the “ Watling ” collection
have been trimmed to such an extent that the notes on their
backs have been cut into. These notes were, however, copied
out before trimming took place and these copies have been
inserted alongside the appropriate paintings in the collection;
who was the copyist of these notes has not been ascertained.
76 Op. cit., p. 143.
77 K. A. Hindwood; in litt., 19th November, 1936.


also occurred to me that it was possible that Watling might
not have been primarily responsible for the annotations on
his paintings but that these might have been provided by his
employer. It seemed to me remarkable that the note on the
painting (signed “ T. W.”) of the Red-breasted or Blue-
bellied Parrot should read : “ Native name Goevil. This
Parrot has a fine white tongue like the drawing No. 300
Psittacus haematodes variety; called the Blue-bellied Parrot,
see Latham, Syn.” 7B This note indicates that the writer—
whether it was Watling or his employer—had a knowledge
of Latham’s General Synopsis of Birds which was published
in 1781/5. My main reason, however, for countenancing
the idea that Watling might not have been primarily respon-
sible for the notes attributed to him is the tone of some of
these annotations. For example, the note on the painting
(signed “ T. Watling ”) of the Brown Plover reads : “ One
fifth the natural size. This is a water bird, though put on a
perch ” : 79 and as regards the New Holland Tern the note
on the painting (signed “ Thomas Watling ”) is as follows :
“ This almost half the natural size, and a pretty good
resemblance, with this exception—only the bill not just so
much bent. ’ ’ BO It occurred to me as strange that an artist
should thus criticise his own work which—one would have
thought —it would have been preferable for him to have
corrected.
It was, however, not till I discovered a letter —in the
Manuscripts Department of the British Museum —from John
White (of date nth March 1797) to Aylmer Bourke Lambert
that I was able to compare this with the inscriptions on
Watling’s paintings. I then found that many—but not all—
of his paintings were unquestionably annotated in White’s
78 The “ Watling ” collection in the British Museum
(Natural History) London; No. 35.
79 Loc. cit., No. 253.
80 Loc. cit., No. 274.




autograph 801 and it was, indeed, a revelation to discover
that the suggestion to leave out Watling’s name—should
his paintings be published—was actually in the hand-writing
of John White. 80,1
The letter referred to is as follows :
“ My dear Sir
Herewith you will receive a large rude Manuscript,
just as it was taken from my common place book by a
young man who was my Hospital Clerke, which my
present situation prevents me being able to throw into
any kind of form, or even to copy fairly so as to make it
legible or understood.
It contains many remarks as well as the progress
made in Colony, which probably you may be able to hit
upon some plan of getting put into a shape not expensive,
& still worthy of being given to the World. This you
must take with you, many pages of it were written when
80a The paintings, referred to in footnotes 75, 76, and 88,
namely of the Channel bill, “ Ciliary Warbler,” Chattering Bee-
eater, and Coach-whip Bird (Nos. 57, 209, 96, and 127 in the
“Watling” collection) are all annotated in the autograph of
John White. The other paintings, referred to in footnotes 71,
72, 78, 79, 80, 84, and 88, namely of the Turcoisine Parrot, Blue-
headed Cuckoo, Blue-bellied Parrot, Brown Plover, New Holland
Tern, Emu-Wren, and Needle-tailed Swallow (Nos. 47, 72, 35,
253, 274, 184, 185, and 216 in the “ Watling ” collection) are
annotated but not in White’s hand-writing.
sob (See Plate 5.) This painting of the “ Ciliary Warbler ”
(No. 209 in the “ Watling ” collection) has been trimmed so that
only part of the original inscription, in the autograph of John
White, now remains. Before trimming a copy of this inscrip-
tion was made (which is inserted by the side of the painting)
and which reads: “ This little Bird is the only one of the kind
ever seen, the white round the Ciliary process of the Eye is
composed of the most beautifull small white Feathers. The
pride and vanity of the draughtsman has induced him to put his
name to all the drawings, but should you publish them I think
the name may as well be left out.” The inscription, as trimmed,
reads: “ghtsman has induced him to put his name/ drawings,
but should you Publish them I thin/ me may as well be left out,”


Hunger was very pressing, & may cast some reflection on
Government from the distress of the moment: all that
part I wish to suppress as well as many remarks not very
favorable to the Settlement as I now trust from change of
Men (I mean Governors) measures will be pursued that
will very soon make it in a great degree independent of
the mother country. I am just about to set off for the
Royal William at Portsmouth, where I shall at all times
rejoice to hear from you.
I am
Saturday My dear Sir
nth March Yours most Sincerely
1797 John White 80 ®
I wish you would recommend to me what is best to be
done with the drawings, for to have them all engraved
would be so expensive that I could never carry such a
work into execution
Aylmer B. Lambert Esqr.
26 Lower
Grosvenor Street.”
The foregoing letter, dated nineteen months after
White’s return from New South Wales, demonstrates that
he was in familiar correspondence with Aylmer Bourke
Lambert. The “ large rude Manuscript ” and the collec-
tion of “ drawings ” may, or may not, have been the handi-
work of Watling but it is clear that Lambert obtained from
White drawings from New South Wales.
In spite of Messrs Gregory M. Mathews’ and Tom
Iredale’s papers on the subject Bl (which I have already
quoted) it was again stated in 1926 in the Check List of the
Royal Australian Ornithologists’ Union 82 that the names of
many Australian birds are based on Watling’s drawings.
80c (See Plate 5).
81 Austral Avian Record; 1920, Vol. IV., Nos. 3 and 4, pp.
114-122; and 1922, Vol. V., No. 1, pp. 22-32, with 7 col. pis.
82 Royal Australian Ornithologists’ Union: Check List;
1926, Intr. p. iv.


If, at this point, a summary of my ideas is permissible
I would say that I have formed the opinion that Watling, a
convict in New South Wales, was employed in drawing
“ the non-descript productions of the country ” : these draw-
ings were being sent home by his superiors, with annota-
tions by them, as opportunity occurred : thereafter they—
notes or pictures or both—were copied, or utilized, by those
to whom they were sent but always with a total disregard
of Watling. It is however not to be supposed that Watling
was the only person in New South Wales, at that time, who
was endowed with artistic ability and it will have been
gathered from preceding statements that other artists were
at work in the Colony before him.
I must now refer the reader to p. 51, where I draw
attention to the fact that in Sir Joseph Banks’ copy of
Dryander’s “ Catalogue of the Banksian Library ” the last
four words of the item catalogued as ‘ ‘ Volumen foliorum 70,
continens figuras animalium et plantarum pictas quas in Nova
Cambria prope Port Jackson delineavit Edgar Thomas Dell ”
are struck out. These words were apparently erased by the
compiler of the catalogue, Jonas Dryander, and if it is
difficult to guess why they were struck out it is not easier to
surmise why they were ever printed. I have already pointed
out that the volume of water-colour drawings is simply a
collection of such and contains nothing to indicate that they
were drawn by Edgar Thomas Dell. When, and why, they
were attributed to him remains a mystery.
As regards Edgar Thomas Dell it has been ascertained
that, as chief mate of the “ Shah Hormuzear,” he first
reached Port Jackson on 24th February, 1793. The owner
and master of the “ Shah Hormuzear,” which had come
from Calcutta, was William' Wright Bampton, and he con-
tracted with the local authorities to supply the settlement
with certain cattle and provisions. In part fulfilment of that
contract he despatched Dell on their return to India in
‘‘ the snow ” or brig “ Fancy,” 150 tons; this vessel,
presumably, was either purchased or chartered by Bampton
in India. She arrived at Port Jackson on 9th July, 1794,


and sailed again on 29th September. Dell was very
secretive concerning his destination but it was generally
believed that he was sailing for New Zealand to obtain a
cargo of timber suitable for spars, etc. : this proved correct.
The “ Fancy ” lay for three months in the River Thames,
New Zealand, during which period her crew had one
encounter with the Maoris, and reached Port Jackson again
on 15th March, 1795. She was then chartered to take pro-
visions to Norfolk Island and on her return paid another
visit to New Zealand, in company with the “ Endeavour,”
aboard which was Bampton; the latter ship had to be scuttled
on arrival at Dusky Bay. A boat which had been com-
menced by some of the crew of the “ Britannia,” some time
earlier, was completed and launched by the “ Endeavour’s ”
crew. She was aptly named “ Providence ” and, with the
” Fancy,” sailed for Norfolk Island; on 31st January, 1796,
both vessels left there for China. 83
The above details show that Edgar Thomas Dell was at
Port Jackson in 1793, 1794, and 1795 : this is of no assistance
in identifying him with a volume of water-colour drawings
some of which it has been shown must have been drawn prior
to 29th December, 1789. I have, however, strayed from my
subject and if I have only discovered a fresh problem as to
the provenance of the “ volumen foliorum 70 ” from the
Banks Collection, I think it is now abundantly clear that this
has nothing to do with Thomas Watling.
Mr Hindwood—from whose paper dealing with The
Historical Associations and Early Records of the Emu-
Wren I have already quoted —goes on to state that “ there
are five known paintings of the Emu-Wren co-eval with the
settlement of New South Wales —one in the ‘ Sydney ’ set,
83 Notes and Queries, Vol. 171, p. 393; and David Collins,
An Account of the English Colony in New South Wales, Vol. 1.,
1798; Vol. 11., 1802. Search through the Colonial Office Corre-
spondence (1788-1798) in the Public Record Office, London, and
printed Historical Records of New South Wales (1788-1808)
merely confirms the above summary of Capt. Dell’s visits to
New South Wales,


three in the ‘ Watling ’ collection, and one among the
‘ Lambert ’ drawings. A comparison of these paintings
discloses an interesting fact—a fact, moreover, which
establishes a definite correlation between the three collec-
tions. Taking the ‘ Sydney ’ painting as the original,
mainly because of its excellence, it will be observed that
* Watling ’ painting No. 184 84 is a copy; furthermore, the
‘ Lambert ’ drawing is copied from this particular
‘ W’atling ’ painting, or vice versa. While the three
illustrations in question are by different artists, they are
identical in posture, each having five instead of six tail-
feathers, with the same variation in their lengths. This one
instance, showing that there are similar drawings of the
same species in the three sets, can be multiplied many times.
The probability is that the artists working on the drawings
often copied from the finished paintings of their colleagues.” 85
I have already ventured to suggest the possibility that some
of the “ Lambert drawings ” may have been copied from
Watling’s originals. This suggestion is strengthened by the
opinion expressed by Mr Hindwood when he draws attention
to the probability that artists of the period copied the paint-
ings of their colleagues : it is, of course, possible that Wat-
ling may have copied the pictures of other artists con-
versely, others may have copied his originals—at any rate
he was —by reason of his enforced residence in New South
Wales —in a position to do original work.
It would seem that there must always be some dubiety as
to who were the original artists who supplied Latham’s types
that, at some date, he utilised Watling’s actual drawings
there can be no such doubt. Mr K. A. Hindwood, in his paper
already so much laid under contribution, states: “We
si [There are three paintings of the “Emu Wren” (Soft-
tailed Flycatcher) in the “ Watling ” collection in the British
Museum (Natural History) London, numbered 184, 185, and
186. Only No. 185 is signed by Watling; No. 186 certainly
bears a resemblance to his style but No. 184 does not seem to
have been his handiwork. H. S. G.]
86 The Emu; Melbourne, 1931, VoL XXXI., pp. 101-102.


discover, in his account of the Soft-tailed Flycatcher, evidence
of Latham’s having used the ‘ Watling ’ paintings after the
publication of the Second Supplement in 1801. He quotes
in the General History of Birds (1823) his remarks which
appeared in the Second Supplement, and then continues :
‘. . . . Another name for this bird is Mereangeree . . . .
It is called Emue or Cassoway Titmouse It
is also called Mureanera in another drawing.' All of this
information appears on ‘ Watling ’ paintings Nos. 184 and
185, 86 together with other facts, which Latham uses. Had
he access to the ‘ Watling ’ collection when compiling the
Second Supplement, he would certainly have included the
remarks appearing on the drawings. It is obvious that they
are not the type drawings of most of the Australian birds
described in the Second Supplement. Latham used the
‘ Lambert ’ series, most of which paintings are similar to,
and, of course, contemporaneous with, the ‘ Watling ’ set.” 87
Mr K. A. Hindwood is correct as regards his statement
that some of the information on Watling’s drawing of the
Soft-tailed Flycatcher was not used by Latham till 1823 : his
presumption therefrom —that Latham did not have access to
Watling’s drawings when compiling his Second Supplement
is not so free from criticism. Several of the pictures
bearing Watling’s signature, in the “ Watling ” collection,
have notes written on them and a recent perusal of the
Second Supplement has revealed that many such notes have
been freely used therein by Latham. Why then did he
always refer to Mr Lambert? “Mr Lambert’s drawings ”
are not annotated though, of course, it is possible —if
indeed it is not likely that if they were copied from
Watling’s originals the notes thereon were copied too but that
later these may have been lost. It seems unnecessary to
belabour the point but as examples it may be pointed
out here that the notes on Watling’s pictures of the
86 [See footnote 84, where it is stated that painting No. 184
does not seem to have been the handiwork of Thomas Watling.
H. S. G.]
87 The Emu; Melbourne, 1931, Vol. XXXI., p. 106.


Channel bill, the Chattering Bee-eater, the Coach-whip Bird,
and the Needle-tailed Swallow have all been utilised—if not
wholly then in part —in Latham’s Second Supplement .*® The
fact that in some instances (as in the case of the Soft-tailed
Flycatcher) information derived from notes on Watling’s
paintings has not been utilised in the Second Supplement,
but has been used in The General History of Birds, may
indicate either that these notes were not available in 1801 or
that Latham may only have thought it necessary to incor-
porate them in his major work twenty years later.
Reference has already been made (see p. 29) to Thomas
Watling’s landscape of Sydney in 1794. 88a Mr K. A. Hind-
wood, when obligingly sending me a photograph, has
informed me that “ the size of the painting, inside the
frame, is 51 inches by 36 inches. The painting is done on
two separate pieces of canvas stretched on board frames.
I may add that the landscape painting is in oils and
does not show a very well developed sense of composition or
colour harmony. The legend, on the back of the painting,
reads : ‘ A direct North general View of Sydney Cove the
chief British Settlement in New South Wales as it appeared
in 1794 being the 7th year from its Establishment. Painted
immediately from Nature by T. Watling.’ ’ ,89
Mr Hindwood has further informed me that there is
“ another painting of Sydney in 1802 [in the Mitchell Lib-
rary, Sydney, New South Wales] which is very similar in
execution and style: some art critics here state that it is by
*8 Second Supplement to A General Synopsis of Birds; 1801,
pp. 96, 154, 222, and 259.
88a (See Frontispiece.) Among the paintings—it is No. 20,
in the “Watling” collection —in the British Museum (Natural
History) is one which is inscribed: “A direct north View of
Sydney Cove and Port Jackson, the Chief British Settlement in
New South Wales. Taken from the North Shore, about a Mile
distant, for John White, Esqr. It must be observed the Masts
of the Ships are out of all proportions.” This painting is an
earlier view than that reproduced here as the Frontispiece but
it is similar in many details.
89 K. A. Hind wood; in litt., 19th November, 1936,


Watling and the caption reads ‘ Sydney in 1802, probably
by T. Watling ’; however, Watling usually signed his work
and considering the fact that he was very anxious to return
to Scotland, it is hardly likely that he would still be in
Australia in that year.” 80
The painting bears no signature but, no matter how
anxious Watling may have been to return to Scotland, it
is to be remembered that on 14th April, 1789, he was
sentenced to fourteen years transportation. His sentence
therefore would not have expired till 1803 and, unless part
of his sentence was remitted for good conduct, he would pre-
sumably have been in New South Wales in 1802 and could
have painted the “ Landscape.” The actual date of his
return is, however, not known but official documents have
already been quoted which show that he was in Dumfries,
for certain, in November, 1804.
Little did I think—when Mr K. A. Hindwood first wrote
to me on 12th April, 1932 —that I should find it so difficult
to ascertain facts about Thomas Watling. I trust 1 have
not omitted to thank all those who have assisted me in my
search and —though I experience a certain sense of satisfac-
tion in the result of my five years’ investigation—l feel that
there remains much more that I should like to know about
one whom I have long since come to regard as the elusive
Watling.
»0 k. A. Hindwood; in litt., 12th April, 1932, and 14th
April, 1937.


Genuine guinea-note of the period 1788/9,


APPENDIX
DOCUMENTS IN RE THOMAS WATLING
TRIAL FOR FORGERY, 1789.
1. Declaration of Thomas Watling, dated 27th November, 1788.
AT DUMFRIES, the twenty-seventh day of November, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-eight.
lu consequence of a Petition in the name of William Lawson of Girth-
head, Agent for the British Linen Company, and David Staig Esquire, Agent
for the Bank of Scotland and Warrant indorsed thereon THOMAS WATLING
complained upon was brought before me and being judicially examined on
the facts set forth Declares that he has lived in the Town of Dumfries all his
life and has for some years past been employed or employed himself as a
paiuter and being specially interrogated if he by himself or any person
within his knowledge has issued or caused issue any forged note or notes
on the Bank of Scotland or the British Linen Company DECLARES that he
has never by himself or any other person issued or past any forged notes
upon either of the said Banks nor does he know or suspect any person or
persons who have been guilty of such offence and all this he declares to be
truth.
John Ferguson, Witness/* “ Thomas Watling.'*
*' John Welsh, J.P.**
27th November, 1788.—The before designed Thomas Watling having been
again examined declares that in the month of March last he the declarant
finished off two Guinea notes upon the Bank of Scotland and after the form
and tenor of the Bank of Scotland Guinea notes; That the said two notes were
marked with the letter C. and when finished off and completed were by the
declarant delivered to John Roberts, Ingraver in Dumfries, from whom the
declarant received half a guinea for each note. That in the month of July
last the declarant finished off Three Guinea notes in imitation of the Bank
of Scotland’s Guinea notes marked with the letter G. which three notes were
in the dusk of the evening delivered by the declarant, at his own door, to a
person who Roberts made him believe was John Kerr but who the declarant
verily believes was Roberts himself and the declarant received from the per-
son to whom be delivered said three notes a Guinea and a half, the Guinea
in a Bank of Scotland note, the very Guinea note this day found in the de-
clarant’s repositories, and half a guinea in gold. That about a month ago
the declarant finished off another note in imitation of the Guinea note of the
Bank of Scotland which was also in the dusk of evening delivered at the
declarant’s own door to the person whom he then believed to be the said
John Roberts but for which last note the declarant got no payment; and the
last note was marked with the letter D. Declares he received the afore-
said six notes, in the situation the one was this day found in, from the said
John Roberts and afterwards done off and finished by him. Declares that
he never at any period finished off any notes in imitation of the Bank of
Scotland other than the six before mentioned and the one this day found,
nor did he the declarant ever finish off or attempt to finish off any note or
notes in imitation of any other Banking Company’s notes in Scotland. De-
clares that the aforesaid six notes never would pass or be circulated in the
Country as they were done with virmilon both on the body and the names
and all this be declares to be truth. Three words in the preceding page
delete before signing. In Witness Whereof the declarant has subscribed this


declaration upon this and the two preceding pages in presence of Simon
Mackenzie, Writer in Dumfries, and John Ferguson, Writer, there, and writer
hereof.
“ Sim. Mackenzie, Witness.” “ Thomas Watling.”
“ John Ferguson, Witness.” “ John Welsh, J.P.”
2. Declarations of Thomas Watling, dated 28th November, 1788,
and 15th January, 1789.
AT DUMFRIES the twenty-eighth day of November, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-eight years.
THOMAS WATLING, Painter in Dumfries, being again brought before
John Welsh Esquire, Sheriff Substitute of Dumfries, one of His Majesty’s
Justices of the Peace for the County of Dumfries, and further examined
DECLARES that he went from the Town of Dumfries to Glasgow about the
beginning of March last—That previous to that time the declarant and John
Roberts were often in company together, were in the use of going to one
anothers rooms, have gone together to several publick houses in this Town,
particularly to Ehe houses of John Maxwell, William Bryden and Thomas
Welsh. That they were in use of walking together in the garden of Robert
Wilson younger Gardner in Dumfries and also in use to go in evenings to
the Episcopal Chappel in Dumfries where Roberts was in use to practise upon
the organ and to hear the Clerk, James Strong, wheelwright, sing; and that
John Hannay, Cabinet Maker in Dumfries. Edward Knight, the Chappel Bedal,
were for ordinary in the Chappel on said occasions—that is, these people
might be once or twice present and see the declarant and Roberts together
in the Chappel. That about last Saint John’s day Roberts and William
Chalmers sent for the declarant about some mason-aprons to said William
Chalmers’ shop in Dumfries, and Mrs Chalmers knows of the intimacy which
subsisted between Roberts and the declarant. And further declares that
Roberts’ father and his family must have often observed the Declarant come
to young Roberts’s room. That Roberts had been twice or thrice in the
Declarant's room since he came from Glasgow, and doubts not but some of
his neighbours have seen him, but cannot say particularly as to any of them
excepting bis own Aunt May Kirkpatrick. And being specially interrogated
Declares that when doing off the six notes mentioned in his Declaration
emitted yesterday he did not apply any stamp or seal before delivering them
to Roberts. And further Declares that when Roberts gave him the first two
unfinished notes he at that time mentioned to the declarant that they were
not for circulation but for an experiment he wished to try. Being interro-
gated as to the eighteen pieces of paper found in one of his drawers De-
clares they were cut for sketching out attitudes of Heads and for sundry
other purposes in the way of drawing and that more papers of the same
size were and he believes may still be found in his room with sketches or
drawings upon them. And this Declaration being read over to him he de-
clares the same to be Truth in presence of John Aitken senior and Simon
Mackenzie, Writers in Dumfries, Lieutenant Rollo Gillespie, late of the one
hundred and fourth Regiment, residing in Dumfries, and Samuel Clark, Clerk
of the Peace for the County of Dumfries.
” Rollo Gillespie, Witness.”
“ Sim. Mackenzie, Witness.” “ Thomas Watling.”
‘‘Samuel Clark, Witness.” “John 1 Welsh, J.P.”
AT DUMFRIES the fifteenth day of January, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-nine years.
THOMAS WATLING before designed was again brought before John
Welsh Esquire, One of His Majesty’s Justices of the Peace for this County
and being further examined Declares he went to Glasgow in the Month of


March last andi was employed in Coach and Chaise painting by Stonehouse
M'Clellan Dunbar & Scott, Coach Makers there during all the time he was
in Glasgow, and was paid at the rate of one Guinea per week and the Com-
pany also agreed that the Declarant while in their employment should have
time to do anything he might be employed to do as a Likeness painter.
Declares he had no money transactions with any person or persons in Glas-
gow except with the said Company in receiving his wages. That he lodged
and boarded in the house of John Lamont, Head Waiter in the Black Bull
Tavern in Glasgow at seven shillings and sixpence per week. That the De-
clarant going from Dumfries to Glasgow rode upon horse back to Moffat and
took the Diligence from Moffat to Glasgow. That he rode to Moffat as afore-
said upon a horse belonging to William Brand, Horse hirer in Dumfries, the
hire for which he paid on his return from Glasgow in silver. That the
Declarant staid all night in the house of James Eae Vintner in Moffat and
paid the fare for the Diligence there being eighteen shillings and eight pence
in silver and copper. That any little money he carried from Dumfries with
him was in silver excepting one Guinea Note which he borrowed from Thomas
Johnston, Auctioneer, but doth not recollect of what Bank the said note was.
That the Declarant when returning to Dumfries came in the Diligence from
Glasgow to Moffat and walked from Moffat to Dumfries and that he paid the
same fare at Glasgow for returning in the Diligence to Moffat. And being
interrogated if he ever lent or offered to lend any money to William Bell,
Writer in Dumfries, Declares he is acquainted with the said William Bell,
but doth not recollect his ever having lent or offered to lend him any money
nor doth he recollect his having lent or offered to lend any money to George
Bryceson, Barber in Dumfries. That Bryceson was once in Jail when the
Declarant prevailed with James Finlay, Shopkeeper in Dumfries to became
Bail for Bryceson. And being interrogated where he got or purchased the
paper upon which the unfinished note is sketched and what quantity of such
paper he bought. Declares he doth not incline to answer that question.
Declares he doth not know Benson & Company or where they live although
he thinks he has seen the name or heard of such a Company. And Declares
that he never noticed the maker’s name upon any paper he was using. And
being interrogated from whom he got the Giiinru Note he first attempted to
imitate Declares he is not inclined* to answer that question. And being in-
terrogated when he first began to finish off Notes, what time he took to so
finish them off, and whether they were so finished by Pen, Pincil or plate?
Declines giving any answer to these questions. Being further interrogated if
when he imitated any Bank of Scotland Notes they were marked with the
letter C. and D. and from whom he got such real notes of the Bank of Scot-
land? Declines giving any answer. Being interrogated if he knows a man
of the name of Ker and what is his character and business? Declines giving
any answer. And being interrogated how he came to get one guinea note
and half a guinea in gold for three notes done over with vermilion? Declines
giving any answer. Being interrogated if any note or other writing done with
vermilion can be wiped off or altered with black lead, china ink or any other
materials so as to have the appearance of a real Bank Note? Declines giving
any answer to that question or to any other question that may be put to
him about this business. The Declaration of this date which is written upon
this and part of the preceding page being read over to the said Thomas
Watling he hath subscribed the same in presence of the Justice Examinator
and Simon Mackenzie one of the Town Clerks of Dumfries and Samuel Clark,
Clerk of the Peace for the said County and writer hereof, but thereafter de-
clined to sign this Declaration and the same is subscribed by the Justice
Examinator and by the said Simon Mackenzie and Samuel Clark in presence
of the said Thomas Watling.
“ Sim. Mackenzie, Witness.” “ John Welßh, J.P,"
'* Samuel Clark, Witness,”


3. Petition by Watling to the Justices of the Peace for County.
1788, November 29.—T0 The Honourable His Majesty’s Justices of
the Peace for the County of Dumfries.
The PETITION of Thomas Watling, Limner in Dumfries.
HUMBLY SHEWETH
That the Petitioner finds himself confined in prison in virtue of a War-
rant from your Honours proceeding upon an Information exhibited to you
against him for being guilty Actor or Art and part of the crime of forging
the notes of the Bank of Scotland and other Banking Companies or issuing
forged notes knowing them to have been forged.
He being summarily seized upon and charged with a crime which if really
committed and proved must ultimately endanger his life and in the mean time
materially affect his Character and credit, could not fail to make a very
sensible impression upon the Petitioner’s mind and occasion a temporary
agitation and a derangement of his recollection.
The rest of this petition has been already printed (see pp. 12-13.) and it
concludes:
MAY it therefore please your Honours to authorise his liberation accordingly.
(Signed) Thomas Watling.
Dumfries, 15 January, 1789.
The Petition written upon the two preceding pages signed by Thomas
Watling, was in presence of John Welsh, Esquire, one of His Majesty’s Justices
of the Peace for the County of Dumfries exhibited to Thomas Watling,
Painter, at present prisoner in the Tolbooth of Dumfries and he being called
upon to say whether or not the said Petition was wrote at his desire, is
subscribed by him and was given in also at his desire; He the said Thomas
Watling declines giving any answer thereto and refuses to subscribe this
Minute.
(Signed) John Welsh, J.P.
Sim. Mackenzie, Witness.
Samuel Clark, Witness.
Dumfries, 17th January, 1789.
In preference of John Welsh, Esquire, before designed, appeared Thomas
Brown, Clerk to Robert Ramsay, Writer in Dumfries, who being examined and
the Petition written upon this Sheet of paper exhibited to him Declares the
said Petition is of the Declarant’s handwriting and that he copied the same
from a scroll or draught made and delivered to him by the said Robert
Ramsay—That after the Declarant had wrote the said Petition he carried the
same into the Tolbooth of Dumfries and gave it to Thomas Watling who after
perusing the said Petition said it was right and subscribed the same in the
Declarant’s presence. That the said Petition was lodged in the office of the
Clerk of the Peace by the Declarant at the desire of Mr Ramsay and that
it was made out and lodged in a, hurry as Mr Ramsay had heard a precogni-
tion was to be taken on the very same day the Petition was lodged. That
the said Petition bears date the twenty-ninth day of November last but
the Declarant thinks it was not lodged or presented till a day or two there-
after. That the Declarant cannot recollect if any other person was present
when Watling subscribed the said Petition.
(Signed) Tho. Brown,
( „ ) John Welsh, J.P.
Robert Ramsay, before designed, being called appeared and Declared he is
Watling’s man of business at present, and being interrogated whether pre-
vious to his being employed either by Watling or any other person on his


behalf he of his own motive advised Watting to Retract his Declarations before
the Justices he declined answering the question or any other alleging he is not
obliged.
(Signed) John Welsh, J.P.
4. Petition of Watling to Lords Commissioners of Justiciary.
1789, April 14.—UNTO The Right Honourable The Lords Justice
Clerk and Hailes one of the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary on
their Circuit Court at Dumfries.
The PETITION of Thomas Watling, Limner, present Prisoner in the
Tolbooth of Dumfries.
This petition has been already printed in full (see p. 13).
5. Petition by Lord Advocate re forged notes, etc.
14th April, 1789.—UNTO The Right Honble. The Lord Justice Clerk
and Lord Hailes one of the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary.
The Petition of His Majesty’s Advocate for His Majesty’s interest
and of The Governor and Company of the Bank of Scotland with con-
course of His Majesty’s Advocate.
HUMBLY SHEWETH
That a Criminal Prosecution was brought at. the instance of the Peti-
tioners against Thomas Watling sometime Painter or Limner in the Town of
Dumfries accusing him of forging Notes of the said Bank of Scotland and
along with the libel the Petitioners produced and lodged in the hands of the
Clerk to this Circuit Court Eleven of the said Forged Notes and an unfinished
counterfeit note together with a bible belonging to John Johnston, Butcher
in Dumfries.
That the said Thomas Watling in place of standing trial for the said
Crime presented a Petition to the Court submitting to a sentence of trans-
portation which was granted and he was sentenced accordingly.
The Petitioners are therefore desirous to have up the said Eleven forged
Notes and the said unfinished counterfeit note that the same may be des-
troyed and also the foresaid bible that the same may be restored to the
owner thereof.
May it therefore please your Lordships to grant Warrant to the Clerk
of Court to deliver up to the Petitioners the foresaid Eleven Forged Notes,
the unfinished note and the said Bible for the purposes foresaid.
According to Justice, etc.,
(Signed) Ar. Campbell, A.D.
Dumfries, 14th April, 1789.
Having considered the foregoing Petition Grants Warrant to the Clerk of
Court to deliver up the Notes and Bible mentioned in the Petition.
(Signed) Dav. Dalrymple.
6 and 7. Criminal Letters against Watling [ abstracted ].
These “ Criminal Letters ” are equivalent to an indictment of to-day.
Thomas Watling is designed as sometime Painter or Limner in the Town
of Dumfries present Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Dumfries. The letters run
in name of Lord Advocate Hay Campbell “ Our Advocate for our interest ”
and by the Governor and Company of the Bank of Scotland with concourse of


our said Advocate. The Letters charging Watling with forging in the year
1787 or 1788 “certain promissory notes at least to the number of 12 for
the sum of one pound one shilling stg., or one guinea each . . . .” narrate
as productions to be lodged “ a Bible belonging to- John Johnston, Butcher in
the Town of Dumfries, in which the names of the said John Johnston and of
Margaret Johnston his wife are written by the said Thomas Watling, and
likewise a half penny on which the word 'D. Crosbie ’ are engraved by the
said Thomas Watling, a Letter and a Card both written by the said Thomas
Watling to Francis Shortt, Writer in Dumfries, the letter dated the twenty-
seventh day of May, Seventeen hundred and eighty-eight, and an Advertise-
ment relative to the Teaching of Drawing by him made out by him without a
date and likewise the eighteen pieces of paper found in his repositories."
The remainder of the “ Criminal Letters ” is purely formal.
8. List of Witnesses to be adduced against Watling.
1. James Fraser, Secretary of the Bank of Scotland.
2. Robert Forrester, sometime Clerk in the Accomptant’s Office of the Bank
of Scotland, at present Banker in Edinburgh.
3. William Dickie, sometime Secretary’s Clerk in the said Bank, at present
Merchant in the town of Dundee.
4. John Fergusson, Writer and Messenger in the town of Dumfries.
5. Simon Mackenzie, Writer there.
6. Thomas White, Mathematician there.
7. William Lawson of Girthhead, Agent for the British Linen Company at
Dumfries.
8. John Brown, Clerk to the said William Lawson.
9. David Staig, Agent for the Bank of Scotland at Dumfries.
10. James Gracie, Accomptant in said Bank of Scotland’s Office in Dumfries.
11. William M'George, Shopkeeper in the town of Dumfries.
12. George Bryson, Hairdresser there.
13. John Kennedy, Writing Master there.
James M'Clure, late Shoemaker in Dumfries, now in Edinburgh.
14. John Ramsay in Nether Risks.
John Newall, late Bookseller at Langholm, now at Glasgow.
15. William Bell, Clerk to Hugh Maxwell, Writer in Dumfries.
16. Robert Richardson, Butcher in Dumfries.
17. John Johnston, Butcher there.
18. Margaret Johnston, wife of the said John Johnston.
19. William Bryden, Innkeeper in Dumfries.
20. John Grindall, Senior, Clockmaker there.
21. John Grindall, Junior. Clockmaker there.
22. James Strong, Wheelwright there.
23. John Roberts, Engraver there.
24. John M’Kenzie, Residenter there.
25. James Findlay, Shopkeeper in Dumfries.
26. John Welsh, Esq., Sheriff Substitute of the County of Dumfries.
27. Samuel Clark, Clerk to the Peace for the said County.
28. Rollo Gillespie, late Lieutenant in the one hundred and fourth Regiment
of foot, presently residing in Dumfries.
29. Thomas Brown, Clerk to Robert Ramsay, Writer in Dumfries.


30. John Gordon, Clerk to the said Bobert Ramsay.
31. Francis Shortt, Writer in Dumfries.
32. Robert Clugston, Stationer there.
33. William Boyd, Stationer there.
34. Robert M'Lachlan, Stationer there.
35. John M'Lachlan, Papermaker at Tongland in the Parish of Tongland and
Stewartry of Kirkcudbright.
36. John Boyd, Foreman to the said John M'Lachlan.
37. William M'Connell, Agent for the Bank of Scotland in Wigton.
William M'Crakan, Writer in Dumfries.
38. Andrew Douglas, Clerk in the said Bank’s Office in Wigton.
39. William Crosbie, Sailor in Dumfries.
Mary Broughton, Residenter in Dumfries.
40. Margaret Crosbie, alias Sewell, wife of the said William Crosbie.
41. Deborah Crosbie, Daughter to the said William Crosbie.
42. John Kerr, Merchant in Ecclefechan.
43. Edward Hyslop, Writer in Dumfries.
44. John Gourlay in Whiteside.
45. James M'Lune, Innkeeper in Gatehouse.
William Duncan, Candlemaker in Dumfries, and Janet Fairies, his spouse.
*' Ar. Campbell, A.D.”
9. Letter; Watling to Francis Shortt, Writer ? Dumfries; dated
27th May, 1788.
GLASGOW, 27th MAY, 88th.
Miller Street—at Messieurs Stenhouse, M'Lellan, Dunbar & Scott’s &
Co.
Sir,
I have this moment received a letter from Mr Hyslop, informing me
that lam to pay my rent to you or Mr Gass. I believe I told you I never
had the least objection to pay it to either, at least I am assured I gave Mr
Gass my reasons for prevaricating, and at the same time begged him not to
think it was either through pique or ill will to him that I did not pay it—
only to oppose a certain person who is blessed with more assurance than
wisdom.
Pardon me for troubling you with this letter, I would solicit the favour
of your indulgence for two or three weeks (as I mean soon to be in Dum-
fries) when I will repay you. If you can supersede any diligence that may
be used against me in my absence it will be itemed also to the above and if
ever in my power shall be happy to make a retaliation.
Your Answer would greatly oblige.
Sir,
Your Humble Servt.,
(Signed) Thomas Watling.
The following name and address appear on the back of the letter:
Mr Francis Shortt,
Writer,
Dumfries.
Dumfries, 21st March, 1789,—Produced upon my Declaration of this date
before Hugh Maxwell, Esquire.
(Signed) Fr&s. Shortt.
( „ ) Hu. Maxwell, J.P.


10. Letter; Watling to Francis Shortt, Writer, Dumfries;
undated.
Mr Watling’s Compts. to Mr Shortt—lf he could favour him with his
company in any house most agreeable it would be esteemed an obligation.
If not convenient this night Mr Watling will wait upon Mr Shortt by to-mor-
row at breakfast time ten o'clock.
The following figures and address appear on the other side of the letter:
7
4-16
2—4 Mr Francis Shortt,
4 Dumfries.
2
On the back of the letter there appears the following Declaration:
Dumfries, 21st March. 1789.
Produced upon my Declaration of this date before Hugh Maxwell, Esquire.
(Signed) Frans, Shortt.
( „ ) Hu. Maxwell, J.P.
11. Drawing Sheet announcing Classes for teaching and terms.
This production has been reproduced (see Plate 1).
The remaining papers are formal, viz.: Executions of Citations
to Witnesses, List of Assize and Executions of Service on Watling.


INDEX.
Page
Aitken, John, writer, Dumfries .... 66
Angus, William, curator Historical
Records, Edinburgh 14
“ Atlantic “ convict ship 27
Australian convict ships 29
Bampton, William, owner “ Shah
Hormuzear ” 59-60
Bank of Scotland.. 10, 13, 33-6, 65-70
Banks, Sir Joseph 45, 59
Bell, Ann, printer, Penrith 39-40
William, clerk to Hugh Maxwell,
writer in Dumfries 67, 70
Blaylock, Thomas, grocer, Carlisle.. 34
Bond, Essex Henry, Captain, “ Royal
Admiral " 28
Boyd, John, foreman to John M’Lach-
lan, papermaker, Tomgland 71
William, stationer, Dumfries 71
Brand, William, teller, Bank of Scot-
land, Dumfries 34, 35
William, horse-hirer, Dumfries ... 67
British Linen Bank, Dumfries 34
“ Brittania ” 60
Britten, James 48, 50, 51
Broughton, Mary, residenter, Dumfries,
71
Brown, John, clerk to British Linen
Company, Dumfries 70
Thomas, clerk to Robert Ramsay,
writer, Dumfries 68, 70
Bryceson (Bryson), George, barber,
Dumfries 67, 70
Bryden, William, publican, Dumfries, 66
Byard, Canon F., Penrith 40
“ Caledonian Mercury ” 16
Campbell, Ilay, Lord Advocate,
13, 17, 19, 69
Gape of Good Hope 27, 38
Catton, Mr 46
Chalmers, William, Dumfries 66
“ Charlotte ” 42
Clark, Samuel, Clerk to the Peace,
County of Dumfries .. 66, 67, 70
Clugston, Robert, stationer, Dumfries,
71
Collins, David: “ Account of the Eng-
lish Colony in New South Wales,"
28, 32, 43, 45, 60
Craig, Lord, of Craig 33
Crewden, Peter, shipmaster, Leith.. 16
Crosbie, D„ Dumfries 70
Margaret, daughter of William C.,
sailor, Dumfries 71
William, sailor, Dumfries 71
Page
Cullen, Lord, of Cullen 35
“ Daedalus " 32, 42, 45
Davies, Gen. Thomas, R.A 47, 54
Dayes, Edward, water-colour painter,
44, 45
Dell, Edgar Thomas 55, 59-60
Dickie, William, merchant, Dundee.. 70
Dixson, William 43
Doaaldson, William 15
Douglas, Andrew, clerk, Bank of Scot-
land, Wigton 71
Dryander, Jonas 51, 52, 59
Dumfries, Circuit Court, 1789, 10, 25,
26; Episcopal Chapel, 30, 66;
Ewart Library, 38; English Chapel,
30, 66; New Bridge, 32; Theatre
Royal, 32; Tolbooth, 26, 68;
Watling Street 36
Duncan, William, candlemaker, Dum-
fries 71
“Dunkirk," Hulk, Plymouth.... 22, 26
Edinburgh, Justiciary Office, 10, 33;
Tolbooth 33
“ Endeavour ” 60
England, H. W., British Museum (Nat.
Hist.) 63
Fairies, Janet, wife of William
Duncan, candlemaker, Dumfries, 71
“ Fancy ” brig 59-50
Fergusson. John, writer and messenger,
Dumfries 65, 66, 70
Finlay (Findlay), James, shopkeeper,
Dumfries 67, 70
Fining, Anne, servant, Dumfries .. 33-4
Forrester, Robert, treasurer, Bank of
Scotland 35, 70
Fraser, James, principal secretary, Bank
of Scotland 35, 70
Gass, Mr , Dumfries 71
Gillespie, Lieut. Rollo, 104th Regiment,
Dumfries 66, 70
Gordon, John, clerk to Robert Ramsay,
writer, Dumfries 71
Gould, John 53
Gourlay, John, in Whiteside 71
Gracie, James, accomptant, Bank of
Scotland, Dumfries 70
Gray, G. R 52
Grenville, William Wyndham, Home
Secretary 24
Grindall, John, senior and junior,
clockmakers, Dumfries 70
Harles, Lord 13, 25, 69


Page
Haswell, Dr. J. F., hon. secretary,
Parish Register Society, Cumberland
and Westmorland 40
Hannay, James, cabinetmaker, Dum-
fries 66
Hepburn, John 15
Hindwood, K. A., Australian Museum,
Sydney, 9, 15, 29, 52, 53, 60, 61,
62, 63, 64.
Hope, Lord, of Granton 33
Huntley, C. H., clerk, Penrith Urban
District Council 39
Hyslop, Edward, writer in Dumfries, 71
Iredale, Tom 46, 48, 58
Johnstone, Sir James, of Westerhall,
19,-25, 31
Johnston, John, butcher, Dumfries,
69*70
Kerr, John, merchant in Ecclefechan, 71
Kirkpatrick, Marion (May), aunt of
Thomas Watling, 12, 22-5, 30, 33,
36, 38, 66.
Margaret, wife of John Johnston,
butcher, Dumfries 70
Thomas, auctioneer 67
Kennedy, John, writing master, Dum-
fries 70
Kerr, John, Dumfries 65
Kinnear, N. 8., Natural History Museum,
London 53
Kinniburgh, T. C 10, 16, 33
Knight, Edward, chappel bedal, Dum-
fries 66
Laing, Edward, surgeon's mate, N.S.W.
Corps 32
Laing’s Point, Watson’s Bay, Camp
Cove, N.S.W 32
Lambert, Aylmer Bourke, 50, 52-4,
61-3; Library 53*4, 56-8
Lamont, John, Black Bull Tavern, Glas-
gow 67
Latham, John, 51-3, 61-3; “Supplement
to General Synopsis of Birds,” 45,
47, 48, 50, 51, 62, 63.
Latham, John: “ Supplement to Index
Ornitbologicus ” 45, 50, 62
Law, William, innkeeper, Rickergate,
Carlisle 34
Lawson, William, of Girthhead, agent
for British Linen Company at Dum-
fries i 65, 70
Lee, James, 78 Warwick Gardens,
Kensington 49, 51
James, Vineyard Nursery, Hammer-
smith 49-50, 51, 54
Leeson, Miss Ida, Mitchell Librarian,
Sydney 10, 15, 26
Leverian Museum 46
62, 63, 64.
19,-25, 31
36, 38, 66.
Page
Ligget, Robert, convict 26
“ Lion ” hulk, Portsmouth 26
M'Clure, James, late shoemaker, Dum-
fries, now in Edinburgh 70
M'Connell, agent, Bank of Scotland,
Wigton 71
M'Cracken, William, writer, Dumfries,
71
M‘Donald, Alexander, convict 26
M'George, William, shopkeeper, Dum-
fries 70
M‘Kenzie, John, Dumfries 70
Mackenzie, Simon, writer and town
clerk, Dumfries 66, 67, 70
M'Lachlan, John, papermaker, Tong-
land 71
M'Lune, James, innkeeper in Gatehouse,
71
M‘Queen, Robert, Lord Justice Clerk,
24-5
Manning, Edward, shipmaster, London,
26
Mathews, Gregory M 46, 48, 58
Maxwell, Hugh: J.P., writer in Dum-
fries 70, 71, 72
John, publican, Dumfries 66
Nepean, Evan, Secretary to Admiralty,
18
New South Wales Public Library .... 52
Newall, John, late bookseller at Lang-
holm, now at Glasgow 70
Nilson (Neilson), John, Dumfries, 33, 34
Nodder, Mr 46
“ Notes and Queries ” 10
Paton, Andrew 16-19
“ Peggy ” ship 16-19, 30
Penrith: Printing Press of Ann Bell,
39-40
Phillip, Arthur, Governor, N.S.W. .. 30
“ Pitt ” ship 26, 27, 28
“ Providence ” 60
Rae, Alexander, Clerk to Justiciary,
10, 14, 33
James, vintner, Moffat 67
Ramsay, John, in Nether Risks 70
Robert, writer, Dumfries.. 68, 70, 71
Roberts, John, engraver, Dumfries,
65, 66, 70
Ross, Major 44
“ Royal Admiral ” 27-8
“ Royal William ”
Sewell, Margaret, wife to William
Crosbie, sailor, Dumfries 71
“ Shah Hormuzear ” 59
Sharpe, Dr 50, 51, 52, 53-5
Shaw, Dr. George: “Zoology of New
Holland ’’ 44
Nicol: J.P., Dumfries 34
Shirley, G, W., Dumfries 38


Page
Sbortt, Francis, writer in Dumfries,
70, 71, 72
Smith, Dr. James Edward: ** A Specimen
of the Botany of New Holland,”
44, 45
Robert, captain of the ” Peggy,”
16-17, 18
Staig, David, agent, Bank of Scotland,
Dumfries 35-6, 45, 70
Stenhouse, M'Lellan, Dunbar & Scott's,
Miller Street, Glasgow 71
Stone, Miss 46
Stonehouse, M'Oellan, Dunbar & Scott,
coachmakers, Glasgow 67
Strickland, H. E 53
Strong, James, wheelwright, Dumfries,
66, 70
Sydney, Thomas Townshend, Ist
Viscount 30
Sydney, N.S.W., Landscapes, 29,
Mitchell Library, 10, 15, 26, 29, 38,
63; Name 30
Sydney-Cove, Port-Jackson, N.S.W.,
9, 27, 28, 39, 70
Thomson, Robert 23
Walker, Janet, wife of John Nilson, Dum-
fries 33
Watlin, Ham, soldier 15
Page
Watling, Thomas: Aunt, 12, 22-5, 30.
33, 36, 38, 66; birth (age), 16-16,
22-4; Drawing Academy advertise-
ment, 14, 70, 72; epitome of dates,
36-7; escape at Cape Town, 27-8;
father (?), 15, 24; *' Letters from an
Exile at Botany Bay,” 9-10, 12,
26-33, 38-40, 41-2; arrival New
South Wales, 27, 43; departure from,
28-9, 64; paintings, 28, 29, 41-64;
annotations on, 55-8; pardon, 29;
part in mutiny on ship “ Peggy,”
16-19, 30; petitions to court, 12*13,
25, 68, 69; petition to Sir J.
Johnstone of Westerhall, 19-21;
prospectus of book, 29, 30, 40, 42;
trial, 1789, 9-15, 65-72; (second),
1806 33-35
Welsh, John, J.P., Sheriff-Substitute,
County of Dumfries, 11, 65, 66, 67,
68.
Thomas, publican, Dumfries 66
White, John, Surgeon-General, N.S.W.,
28, 30-1, 32, 42-3, 44, 45, 46, 55,
56-8.
Thomas, mathematician, Dumfries.. 70
Wilson, , F.L.S 44
Robert, gardiner, Dumfries 66
