

ON THE
RESURRECTION
©f tf)e Heal),
WITH REFERENCE TO THE
MILLENNIUM.
“The Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised.’’
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLE ANK,
BRIDGE STREET.
1856.




“ The Trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall bejaiaed.’’
SYDNEY;
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.
1856.


1/ *
QVRJ
Blesset
so by
aifectic
andth{
of dee f
who are
of Thy
jsus Christ,
}ur corrupt
with Him;
id the gate
our joyful
resurr. who died,
an( l w ■ gain for us,
ThyS /2uj. Amen -
'tu. TU***" 1 Amen -
&n&Ji


fy 33 SS'/'P g fS/
The writer’s medical attendant, for his
better health, having recommended him during
a short interval, not to officiate in the Public
Services of the Church, he considered that
he ought not to be altogether unoccupied;
therefore, with a desire to promote the edifi-
cation and spiritual welfare of his beloved
Parishioners, he thought that he might pre-
pare a small Tract, upon a subject, which for
years past, has engaged his attention, and
afforded him strong consolation and sacred
pleasure.
The Resurrection of the dead and other
matters connected therewith, if rightly under-
stood, will, indeed, by the grace of the Holy
Spirit, impart much comfort and heavenly
mindedness to the believing soul. By


PRAYER.
0 Lord, that we who are
baptized into the death of Thy
Blessed Son our Saviour Jesus Christ,
so by continual mortifying our corrupt
affections we may be buried with Him;
and that through the grave, and the gate
of death, we may pass to our joyful
resurrection; for His merits, who died,
and was buried, and rose again for us,
Thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


The writer’s medical attendant, for his
better health, having recommended him during
a short interval, not to officiate in the Public
Services of the Church, he considered that
he ought not to be altogether unoccupied;
therefore, with a desire to promote the edifi-
cation and spiritual welfare of his beloved
Parishioners, he thought that he might pre-
pare a small Tract, upon a subject, which fox-
years past, has engaged his attention, and
afforded him strong consolation and sacred
pleasure.
The Resurrection of the dead and other
matters connected therewith, if rightly under-
stood, will, indeed, by the grace of the Holy
Spirit, impart much comfort and heavenly
mindedness to the believing soul,
devoutly meditating upon the Resur:
the Millennium, and a future fetatc, +nuc[i
inward and elevating peace and *Dy will be
experienced.


The writer would not presume to dictate
to any, who may be better acquainted with
Holy Scripture than himself, nor hastily to
decide, that he is perfectly correct in all his
views and expressions; yet, he would beg
leave to observe, that he has not advanced
any sentiment without very serious and godly
consideration; and he would now kindly and
affectionately entreat other persons, who desire
to know the holy plans and gracious purposes
which God has provided for man’s happiness,
piously and prayerfully to meditate upon the
all-important matters in question : besides the
atonement of Jesus Christ and the renovating
and sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost, there
is no other subject for the exercise of the mind,
so heavenizing to the soul, as the contemplation
of the risen and glorified believers in Jesus, and
the felicities which they are called and
qualified to enjoy for ever and ever.
“ Blessed is he that readeth, and they that
hear the words of this prophecy, and keep
those things which are written therein; for
the time is at hand,” Rev. c. i. v. 3.
-tz


THOUGHTS
ON THE
Hratrratinn af tjit
“ There shall be a resurrection of
the dead.” (Acts xxiv. 15). This
doctrine St. Paul preached to the
learned Greeks, in the far-famed
city of Athens, as well as to the
people in other cities, and for the
hope which this doctrine afforded
himself, he was willing to be bound
with a chain and to suffer the loss
of all earthly things. This doctrine,
as immediately connected with the
all-sufficient atonement of Jesus
Christ, when rightly applied by the
Holy Spirit, produces the strongest


consolation; because, as Christ was
delivered unto death for the offences
of mankind, so was he raised again
for the justification of all who be-
lieve in him. And in the Gospel by
St. John, it is recorded, that the
Lord Jesus declared (vi. 40) “ this
is the will of Him who sent me, that
every one which seeth the Son, and
believeth on him, may have ever-
lasting life; and I will raise him
up at the last day.”—Again, Jesus
declared —“ He that rejecteth me,
and receiveth not my words, hath
one that judgeth him; the word
that I have spoken, the same shall
judge him in the last day.”
This doctrine, the apostle Paul
affirmed, “the Jews themselves al-
low,” and even Martha, in her con-
versation with' Jesus, hesitated not
to proclaim her belief therein ; with


reference to her deceased brother,
Lazarus, then in the grave, she
declared—“ I know that he shall
rise again, in resurrection, at the
last day.” This belief afforded her
the greatest comfort under her afflic-
tive bereavement. We may here
observe, that the expression—“ the
last day,” is not to be understood as
absolutely and exclusively signify-
ing a day of twenty-four hours, or
only one revolution of the Earth
round its axis ; but according to the
meaning of the word translated
“ day,” in many other places, some
particular portion of time in the
present dispensation.—Vid. Luke, c.
ii. 36 ; —c. ix. 51 ; —xxiii. 7
Acts viii. 1; 2 Cor. vi. 2; 1 Thes. v. 8.
For the proof of the doctrine in
question, before we proceed to other
scriptural statements, we will refer


to the Book of Common Prayer, to
ascertain what confirmation or coun-
tenance the Creeds and Liturgy of
our Church may give to the doc-
trine. In the Apostle’s Creed, we
say—“ I believe in the resurrection
of the body and the life everlasting.”
—ln the Nicene Creed, we say—“ I
look for the resurrection of the dead
and the life of the world to come.”
—ln the Athanasian Creed, we say
—“Christ shall come to judge the
quick and the dead; at whose com-
ing all men shall rise again with
their bodies.”—ln the Collects for
the first and third Sundays in Ad-
vent, we pray —“ That in the last
day, when Christ shall come again
in his glorious majesty to judge both
the quick and the dead, we may rise
to the life immortal.”—Also in the
Collect for Easter Eve, we pray—


“ That through the grave and the
gate of death, we may pass to our
joyful resurrection.”—And, in our
Burial Service, for “ every one who
dies in the Lord, we have a sure
and certain hope of the resurrection
to Eternal life, through our Lord
Jesus Christ.”—We also pray, “ that
at the general resurrection in the
last day, we may be found accept-
able in the sight of God, and may
receive the kingdom prepared for
us, through Jesus Christ our Medi-
ator and Redeemer.”—Wherefore,
we may most clearly perceive, that
the Church of England teaches and
affirms, that there will be one gene-
ral resurrection of the dead, and that
of all mankind, who shall have de-
ceased previously to the coming of
the Lord; that whensoever the
Lord Jesus shall come the second


time, all men shall be raised from
the dead, and in that “ last day,” or
last portion of time, under the pres-
ent dispensation, he will judge the
whole world in righteousness.
We will now search and consider
what is written in Holy Scripture
upon this very important subject.
“ That the dead are raised again,
said the Lord Jesus, even Moses
shewed at the bush, when he called
the Lord the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; for he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living; for all live
unto him.” Again, it is declared
(Matt. xii. 41, Luke xi. 30) the men
of Ninevah and the queen of the
south shall rise up in judgment
with this generation and shall con-
demn it.” Again, (Acts, iv. 2) it is
recorded, “ the Apostles, through


Jesus, preached the resurrection from
the dead,” and (1 Cor. xv. 42, 43) it
is manifest that the bodies of all
believers in Christ, shall be raised in
incorruption, in power, and in glo-
ry.” In the’ same chapter it is
written, “By man came death, by
man came also the resurrection of
the dead: as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive.”
(1 Cor. xv. 23, 26) “But every man
in his own order; Christ the first-
fruits ; afterwards they that are
Christ’s at his coming. Then, the
end, when he shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the
Father; when he shall have put
down all rule and authority, and
power; for he must reign till he
hath put all enemies under his feet.
The last enemy, death, shall be de-
stroyed.” “ Marvel not,” said our


blessed Lord (John v. 28, 29) “ the
hour is coming in the which all that
are in the graves shall hear the
voice of the Son of Man, and shall
come forth; they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life ;
and they that have done evil unto
the resurrection of damnation.”
St. Paul preached to the Athenians
—“ Jesus and the resurrection of the
deadalso, before Ananias in the
council at Jerusalem, he declared—
“of the hope and resurrection of the
dead, lam called in question also,
before the Governor Felix, and all
his accusers, the Apostle further de-
clared —“ I confess unto thee, that
after the way which they call heresy,
so worship I the God of my fathers,
believing all things which are writ-
ten in the law and in the prophets ;
and have hope towards God, which


they themselves also allow ; that
there shall be a resurrection of the
dead, both just and unjust.” Like-
wise, in his Epistle to the Thessalo-
nians, the same Apostle has assured
us, that “in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last
trump, for the trumpet shall sound,
the dead shall be raised.”—“ The
Lord himself shall descend from
heaven, with a shout; with the
voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first (1 Thes. iv. 16).
Then we, which are alive and re-
main, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air;” and (2 Cor. v.
JO) the Apostle also affirms—“We
must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ ; that every one may
receive the things done in his body,


according to that he hath done,
whether it be good or bad.” The
Apostle John said, “I saw the dead,
small and great, stand before God;
and the dead were judged according
to their works.” (Rev. xx. 12). Again,
in the Gospel by St. Matt. (xxv. 31,
32, 33, 34, 41, 46) we find it written
—“ When the Son of Man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy
Angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory; And
before him shall be gathered all
nations, and he shall separate them
one from another, as a shepherd di-
videth his sheep from the goats:
and he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, but the goats on his
left; Then shall the King say unto
them on his right hand, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the


foundation of the world ; Then shall
he say also unto them on the left
hand, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil and his angels.—These shall go
away into everlasting punishment;
but the righteous into life eternal.”
We may further observe, from
Scripture, that when the Lord shall
come in power and great glory with
all his Saints who shall have been
in the heavenly places, then shall
the bodies of the dead in Christ be
raised first, or be of the first, or chief
resurrection, or before those who
being accepted in Christ and living
upon earth, shall be changed ; Then
shall these, having been changed,
and their vile body made like unto
his glorious body, see him as he is,
and shall be caught up to meet the
coming Lord and saints in the air ;


so shall they ever be with the Lord.”
“When Christ, who is our life, shall
appear, then shall we, who may be
risen with him, and seeking those
things which are above, appear with
him in glory.” Wherefore, we con-
clude, that the whole multitude of
saints, or all who shall have been
accepted and justified and sanctified
in Christ, from heaven and from
earth, shall be with their Lord and
Saviour, blessed and glorified through
endless ages.
Thus, it evidently appears from
Holy Scripture, that there will be
one general Resurrection of the
dead ; this includes two descriptions
of persons, “the just and the unjust,”
“ they who shall have done good
and they who shall have done evil,”
or the righteous and the wicked.
Both shall rise at the same moment,


or hour, or simultaneously, as may
be possible ; their shall the wicked,
as vessels of wrath, go away into
the place for which they have un-
happily fitted themselves, into cease-
less torments. The righteous, or
the justified and sanctified in Christ,
will be divided into two classes; —
(I) The martyrs, or the devoted and
most zealous, most self-denying and
self-sacrificing witnesses for the
Lord Jesus, and (2) The faithful
and exemplary believers in Christ,
bringing forth the fruits of right-
eousness, as the evidences of a holy
and purifying faith, yet not as
those before-mentioned. In Lev.
xx. 4, John informs us that he saw
“ the souls (or according to Acts xx.
37, the persons) of them who had
been beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and


which had not worshipped the beast,
neither his image, neither had re-
ceived bis mark upon their fore-
heads, nor in their hands; and they
lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years.” But, in Rev. xx.
5, and part of verse 6, St. John far-
ther informs us that “ the rest of
the dead lived not, until the thou-
sand years were or shall be finished.
This is the first resurrection; blessed
and holy is he that hath part in the
first resurrection.” These last men-
tioned, it is here said, “ lived not
again,” or, according to the most
approved original (Scholz), “ they
lived not.” Nevertheless, having
been raised from the dead, they will
then most assuredly be alive ; still,
we admit they may not live in the
highly honored and exalted position
or peculiar circumstances as those


described in the preceding verse.
Those in the 4th verse are most dis-
favored and glorified ;
yet these in the sth verse are de-
clared to be of the first, i.e., the
primary or chief Resurrection ; and
consequently they are alive, yea,
more, they are truly and eternally
blessed.
If any person find a difficulty in
understanding the language of the
Apostle John in verse 5, we can
refer to several expressions in other
parts of his writings, wherein his
words are not to be taken absolutely,
but comparatively, or in a qualified
and limited sense. How can they,
it may be interrogated, who (in v. 5)
are described as raised from the
dead, or of the first resurrection, and
at the same be not alive 1 In the Gos-
pel and first Epistle of John we find


other instances of apparent contra-
dictions or discrepancies, which are
capable of being reconciled and
made perfectly intelligible and satis-
factory. In John iii. 26, it is said,
“ all men come to himbut in ch. v.
40, Jesus declared—“ ye will not
come to me.” Again, in John ix. 41,
the Lord said,“ If ye were blind, ye
should have no sin ; but now ye say
we see ; therefore, your sin remain-
eth.” And, in John xv. 22, 24
“ If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin ; but
now they have no cloke for their
sin.” “If I had not done among
them the works which none other
man did, they had not had sin;”
Again, (1 John i. 8) “If we say
that we have no sin, we deceive
ourselves, and the truth is not in
us.” In 1 John iii. 9—“ Whosoever


is born of God, doth not commit
sin.” Yet in chapter i. 10—“ If we
say that we have not sinned we
make him a liar, and his word is not
in us.” From the above expressions*
it is quite evident, that, while our
Lord, in his address to the same
people, openly declared, “ Out of the
heart of men proceed evil thoughts,
wickedness,” &c, (Mark, vii. 21, 22),
he could not intend his audience to
understand, that they were without
sin ; but rather that naturally they
were born and were living in sin ;
and in the special cases above men-
tioned, and in other cases of a like
description, he assured them that
in their peculiar circumstances their
sin was greatly aggravated. Thus
it plainly appears that with such
explanation, both parts of the sen-
tences quoted are true and correct;


and hence, although in Rev. xx. 5,
it is written, “ they lived not,” yet,
having been “ raised from the dead,”
they certainly did live; nevertheless,
during the Millennium they lived
not in the peculiar sense in which it
is stated (v. 4) the most eminent
saints and martyrs lived; or they did
not enjoy the superior felicity and
honor which the most eminent saints
and martyrs enjoyed.
While these believers in Christ, (v.
4) who shall have suffered and en-
dured the most cruel and horrible
persecutions for their devoted at-
tachment and stedfast adherence to
him, shall be most highly and
publicly honored for one thousand
years, or a long period ; those also
(v. 5) who shall have been found
holy and zealous in their Christian
vocation, as the chosen and called,


and faithful, shall assuredly live, and
be recompensed with great spiritual
blessings.
When Satan shall be removed and
cast into the bottomless pit, also shut
up and bound for a thousand years,
or a very long period, the inhabitants
on earth shall be much more at
peace: no satanic influence shall
then be exercised amongst mankind.
Then also shall a more abundant
effusion of the Holy Ghost be vouch-
safed. The Lord Jesus himself, more-
over, shall be God of the whole
earth, —and Prince over all the kings
on earth; then, as after his own
resurrection, the Apostles did eat
and drink with him, and he, through
the Holy Ghost, gave unto them
commandments and instructions in
matters pertaining to the kingdom
of God; even thus will he order and


rule and guide his tweWe apostles,
and his martyrs, and other distin-
guished characters whom he shall be
to employ to direct, admonish,
and comfort the inhabitants of the
new earth. Thus, the people under
that dispensation will be more highly
favored in all these particulars than
the people under any previous dis-
pensation since the fall of Adam.
In the time immediately subse-
quent to the second Advent of
Christ, when, according to promise,
there shall be a new Heaven and a
new Earth, wherein righteousness
verily shall dwell; when the surface
of the earth shall have been com-
pletely renovated, the atmosphere
shall have been throughly purified,
the prince of the power of the air
and all the agents of darkness and
of evil shall have been removed;


when the Saviour shall have
gathered out of His kingdom all
things that offend, and which do
iniquity; then, the Holy Spirit,
dwelling and abiding with man
and working in him omnipotently
both to will and to do whatsoever
is holy and just and good, and Jesus
being the Resident Governor over all
the Earth, very rarely will there be
any transgression ; —yet indeed some,
it would seem sufficient to show, that
man by nature will even then be
a sinful creature; and whensoever
an offence shall be committed, God
will visit the offender with speedy
judgment, and immediately consign
him to everlasting burnings, or end-
less torments. —Vide. Gen. xxxviii.
4,7; Num. xxvi. 19; Levit. x. 2;
Nurn. xvi. 29, 33 ; also ver. 46, and
ver. 49 ; and many other passages.


All those accepted in Christ, who
by the renewing and sanctifying
power of the Holy Ghost shall be
enabled to walk humbly with God,
and in holiness of life grow up into
Christ Jesus, until they shall have
fulfilled their appointed period upon
earth, shall then, as were Enoch and
Elijah, be translated into the new
Jerusalem, or celestial Paradise.
Some persons may interrogate—
If in the millennium there be no
death, then of course there can be
no second resurrection; but is it
not said, or intimated, that deaths
will occur'? How then is this ap-
parent discrepancy to be explained X
—Can it be shewn, that neither
during, nor after the millennium,
there will be no Resurrection'?
In this sentiment, by the words of
the Prophet Isaiah —we seem au-


thorized to rest, for in Chap. Ixv.
17 —20, the God of truth has pro-
claimed, “ Behold, I create new
heavens and a new earth, and the
former shall not be remembered,
nor come into mind. But be ye
glad and rejoice for ever in that
which I create; for, behold, I
create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and
her people a joy, and I will rejoice
in Jerusalem, and will joy in my
people, and the voice of weeping
shall no more be heard in her, nor
the voice of crying.—There shall be
no more thence an infant of days,
nor an old man that hath not filled
his days; for the child shall die an
hundred years old; but the sinner
being an hundred years old shall be
accursed.”—Whence we may infer,
that although in the millennial
period there may be cases of delin-


quency, or offence, yet in all such
cases there will be inflicted a sum-
mary, or instantaneous judgment
with which the survivors will be
satisfied, and in which God himself
be justified, and no future tribunal
will be required. There will then
be no such mortality, nor burials, as
we now ordinarily have, under the
present dispensation; of this we
have sufficient proof in Rev. xxi. 4 ;
there cannot therefore be any
second Resurrection from the dead,
nor any public tribunal, subsequent
to the one at the second advent of
the Lord Jesus. Here it may be
expedient to remark, that the word
translated “ die,” according to the
most approved Lexicons, as the
circumstances connected therewith,
may require, or admit, signifies—to
die, or be caused to die, to kill, or


be killed ; to put to death, or to be
put to death ; and in Isaiah xxvi.
21, which is allowed to refer
directly to the same period, it is
written, “ Behold, the Lord cometh
out of his place to punish the in-
habitants for their iniquity; the
earth also shall disclose her blood,
and shall no more cover her slain.”
In some such manner, did not God
visit the inhabitants of Sodom and
Gomorrah ? also,Lot’s wife"? Gen. c.
xix. In the millennium, however,
it is declared there will be no more
death, for, according to 1 Cor. xv. 26,
54, that last enemy will have been
destroyed, or swallowed up in
victory, then there will be no more
sorrow, no crying; neither shall
there be any more pain; for the
former things are passed away ; God
shall wipe away all tears from their


eyes; He will dwell with them, and
they shall be his people; God
himself shall be with them and be
their God.” Rev. xxi. 3, 4.
After the writer had thus far pro-
ceeded with his own reflections and
meditations upon the Resurrection,
and the matters connected there-
with ; although nearly at the Anti-
podes, and without any communica-
tion with, or knowledge of, the writer
in the Quarterly Journal of Prophecy,
vol. ii. p. 66, he, found the like
sentiments there stated. His own
conclusion was the result of much
and anxious thought, and patient
yet pleasing investigation; search-
ing and comparing those portions of
scripture which seemed to have
reference to the edifying and heaven-
izing subject. In the Journal above-
mentioned are these words: —“At


Christ’s appearing, we hold, that
not only will the church be clothed
with incorruption and immortality,
those who are in the grave being
raised, and those who are alive
being changed ; but also, that death
will then be so prostrated or paralyzed,
that it will have no power whatever
to kill even those who are converted
during the millennium; after the ad-
vent, none of Christ’s people shall
ever be in the grave. So thoroughly,
in reference both to the Church of th e
first born, and to the millennial
saints, Jews and Gentiles, will death,
at the advent, “be swallowed up in
victory.”—lsai. xxv. 6,7, 8 ; Ixv. 19,
23 ; Rev. xxii, 28.”
From the observations now kindly
and candidly offered for the perusal
of those who desire information upon
the great and essential doctrine


which lies at the very foundation of
Christianity, for, as Jesus Christ was
delivered unto death for our offences,
so was he raised again for our justifi-
cation, and thereby he insured to us
our own resurrection; the writer
would affectionately entreat those,
who have not yet given the thought-
ful attention to this very important
subject which it deserves, now
seriously to consider how much and
how deeply they are interested
therein ? From long and happy ex-
perience the writer can assure them,
that they will be amply repaid by the
spiritual edification, and the unspeak-
able comfort, which it will afford
every sincere believer in the Lord
Jesus Christ.
Being now fully persuaded, agree-
ably to the opinions of many learned
and truly pious men, that the second


advent of our Lord is drawing nigh ;
we are not indeed privileged to
know the day, nor the hoift, wherein
he may appear with all his departed
saints; yet, assuredly He will come
with the voice of the archangel and
with the trumpet of God, and at the
same time the saints on earth shall
be changed, and be taken up to meet
the Lord in the air; therefore,
let the reader think how piously
and humbly; how faithfully and
zealously, he should now prepare
to meet the Lord of all, as his
God and his judge. Let all who
profess to believe in the resurrection
of the dead, agonize and continually
pray, that they may be found of him
in peace and holiness ; or, that they
may be “ washed and sanctified, and
justified in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.”


Then will the Lord Jesus fulfil his
cheering and faithful promise which
he made ft) his disciples, when he
said unto them, (Matt. xxvi. 20,) “ I
will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the vine until that day when I
drink it new with you in my
Father’s Kingdom.”
It appears that our own Church
teaches, also the Holy Scriptures
declare and affirm, that there will be
one, and only one, general resurrec-
tion of the dead ; moreover, that this
resurrection will be when the Lord
Jesus, who was once offered to bear
the sins of many, shall appear the
second time without sin unto the
salvation of all them who look
for him ; that then also he will j udge
the whole human race; but when
this, to some fearful, and to others
joyful and glorious event shall be,


we are quite unable to state ; yet,
now certain foreshowings are given,
whereby we may very clearly
perceive, that the day is verily ap-
proaching in which the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed, and
each individual of mankind shall go
to his own place; “as a vessel of
wrath, fitted for destruction, or as a
vessel of mercy, afore prepared unto
glory.” But first, the gospel of Christ
must be preached for a witness unto
all nations, yet, even then, when all
that shall have been done, scarcely
shall any saving faith be found upon
earth ; for, notwithstanding all that
shall have been attempted through-
out the world, the love of many shall
wax cold, and unbelief shall most
awfully prevail. Then shall man-
kind be as in the days of Noah and
in the days of Lot; then shall ini-


quity abound, and men will be lovers
of worldly pleasures, more than lovers
of God ; they will be without natu-
ral affection, also despisers of those
who are godly; they may have the
form of godliness, but will deny the
power thereof. Then shall there be
wars and rumours of wars. Then
shall the Israelites be humbly dis-
posed to return to their own land,
and there anxiously to wait for the
coming of the Messiah. (Isai. xxv.
All these things the Almighty
could very soon accomplish; “where-
fore, be ye ready; for in such an
hour as ye think not the Son of Man
cometh.”
The earnest and daily prayer there-
fore of the writer is, that the God of
all grace, for the sake of Jesus Christ,
by the power of the Holy Ghost may
be pleased to incline the heart of


every one who shall read this little
tract, to meditate much and seriously
on “ the Resurrection and the life
everlasting,” that thereby his affec-
tions may be raised up to high and
heavenly things, and places, and per-
sons; also, that he may be made quite
meet to be a partaker of the inheri-
tance of the saints in light; like-
wise, be enabled with John the
Divine, truly to say, in reply to the
words, “I come quickly,”—“ even so,
come, Lord Jesus.”
Seeing that we look for such
things, changes, and events ; persons
and places ; infelicities for unbe-
lievers, and joyous glories for them
who love the Lord Jesus ; what man-
ner of persons ought we to be in all
holy conversation and godliness ; la-
bouring to be approved of God, and
to be found of him in peace, and in a


state of preparation for the coming
of the Lord, when he shall take full
possession of his kingdom. This
grand event may indeed fill the un-
pardoned sinner with dismay and
alarm ; but the humble and penitent
believer in Christ, can triumphantly
say,—“ I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand, at the
latter-day upon the earth; and though
after my skin, worms destroy this
body ; yet, in my flesh shall I see
God ; whom I shall see for myself,
and mine eyes shall behold.”—Then
may he also with holy exultation ex-
claim, —“ O death, where is thy
sting \ 0 grave where is thy victory 1
The sting of death is sin; and the
strength of sin is the law; but thanks
be to God, which giveth us the vic-
tory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brethren,


be ye stedfast, immovable, always
abounding in the wmrk of the Lord,
for as much as ye know that your
labour is not in vain in the Lord.”
Throughout the millennial period,
it seems, there will be a blessed and
joyful peace, and holy intercourse,
or inter-communication, between Je-
rusalem upon earth and Jerusalem
above.—Vide—Gen. xxviii 12; Luke
ix 28 et seq. ; and John, i. 50, 51.
At the termination of the millen-
nial felicity, prosperity and peace, as
if to prove more manifestly, than in
any previous age, that still man by na-
ture is an imperfect and peccable crea-
ture, Satan will be permitted to come
abroad on the earth, to tempt and in-
stigate mankind to disaffection and
envy, to hatred and murder; then,
after a short period of much evil-
doing against God and man, Satan


shall be cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, therein to be tormented for
ever and ever, (Rev. xx. 7, 10) and all
the wicked being removed, shall then
cease from troubling. The inhabi-
tants will then uninterruptedly enjoy
a lasting,—it maybe an interminable
peace upon earth, as in the very
presence and under the special pro-
tection, favour, and guidance, bless-
ing and love, of God the Father, God
the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.
Yet, let it be observed, that the
most favored state on earth, will be
vastly inferior to the celestial Para-
dise in which they, who from time to
time shall have been translated from
earth to heaven, and shall there be
perfectly holy and happy, and be
filled with joy unspeakable and be
crowned with glory for evermore.
Respecting the inhabitants of


this earth, subsequent to the Millen-
nium, and the condition of mankind in
that age, all that is written in the
sacred volume shall assuredly be
accomplished in God’s own way and
time; but at present, the writer is
unwilling to offer any decided opi-
nion. In Rev. xxii. 6, et seq. it is
declared—“ The Lord God of the
holy prophets sent his angel to shew
unto his servants the things which
must shortly be done; and he said
behold, I come quickly: Blessed is he
that keepeth the sayings of this book.
And the angel said—Seal not the
sayings of the prophecy of this book,
for the time is at hand. He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; and he
that is filthy, let him be filthy still;
and he that is righteous, let him be
righteous still; and he that is holy,
let him be holy still. And, behold, I


come quickly, saith the Lord, and
my reward is with me, to give unto
every man according as his work
shall be.” Whence, the writer
would conclude, that although there
may be transitions or translations,
yet in the distant future, there will
be no such changes as in former
times. Beyond the above declara-
tions and statements, there does not
appear to be any special or distinct
information concerning the divine
government of this earth; neverthe-
less, from the great events which have
already occurred, and the numerous
changes which have been employed
in the past ages, with a view to
man’s restoration to the image of
God, without fully accomplishing
the desired effect, it seems reasonable
to infer, that some other plan and
measures will be adopted. (Heb. viii.


7.) The first dispensation may be
considered as from the creation of
man unto the fall of man ; the second,
from the fall of man unto the deluge;
the third, from the deluge to the
call of Abraham ; the fourth, from
the call of Abraham to the promul-
gation of the law ; the fifth, from
the promulgation of the law unto
the first advent of Christ; the sixth,
from the first unto the second advent
of Christ; and the seventh, from the
commencement to the termination
of the Millennium.—Through which
blissful and joyous period, the Lord
Jesus will reign and rule over all the
earth; and, throughout all subse-
quent ages He shall be the Prince
and Sovereign of all mankind for
ever. “Of the increase of his govern-
ment and peace, there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David, and


upon his kingdom, to order it, and
establish it with judgment, and
with justice from henceforth, even
for ever.” —Isa. ix. 6. “ Jesus shall
be great, and shall be called the Son
of the Highest; and the Lord God
shall give unto him the throne of
his father David; and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob for ever ;
and of his kingdom there shall be
no end.”—Lukei. 32, 33. With re-
gard to each of these dispensations,
peculiarinstructions, revelations, and
promises have been given; but all
these have hitherto failed to re-
store man perfectly to his original
purity and piety ; it seems therefore,
more than probable, that infinite
wisdom, power, and goodness have
devised a plan, whereby this earth
shall always be inhabited, even by
the offspring of Adam; for God


made it not in vain, (Isa. xlv. 18) and
all his gracious designs will be finish-
ed in righteousness. When every
external hindrance and every outward
evil shall have been taken away from
mankind, and the eternal Trinity
shall hold continual, uninterrupted,
holy, and heavenly intercourse with
the whole human family, then shall
they all be righteous by holy faith in
Jesus, and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, and be growing into a meet-
ness for the highest state of honor,
felicity, and glory, throughout all
the ages to come.
PRAYER.
GOD, whose blessed son was mani-
fested that he might destroy the works
of the devil, and make us the sons of God,
and heirs of eternal life ; Grant us, we


beseech thee, that, having this hope, we
may purify ourselves, even as he is pure;
that when he shall appear again with
power and great glory, we may be made
like unto him, in His eternal and glorious
kingdom ; where with thee, O Father, and
thee, O Holy Ghost, he liveth and reign-
eth, ever one God, world without end.
Amen.
READING AND WELLBANK, PRINTERS, BRIDGE STREET.




