

THREE INTERESTING NARRATIVES
Illustrated by Lantern Slides, also standard 35 mm. Cinematograph film where facilities are available
Dr. W. D. WALKER,
B.SC., M.8., 8.5., (Adelaide), F.R.P.S., F.Z.S., F.R.G.S., F.R.A.T.
THE FLYING DOCTOR IN AUSTRALIA
The World’s First Civil Aerial Medical Service.
GLIMPSES OF AUSTRALIA AND ITS WILD LIFE
From Coast to Coast.
THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES
Stone Age Man and his Customs to-day.
Wild aboriginal about to »pear a kangaroo.


X- ''J
' f : - ruM t
; : I.-’. -■„ ■■* L ' ••*' "jiifel
.* . ,V •*>. . ,TÖ» Ä , ‘ * . “ '*■*', ». \~~Z
, _, / Jfy/J 1
ÄkÄÄ t.(*P®’® * f
HÊÊÊ ~ im *‘ ~~ Â.: ff ')tm
§f, «.;®|:|
i[IS w '
«y- %* I
Palm Valley—Central Australia.
Medical Aid —Past and present.—
“The Flying Doctor in Australia”
The world’s first Civil Aerial Medical Service.
Illustrated by Lantern Slides, and standard 35 mm. cinematograph film.
For the past five years “ outback ” settlers in nearly half a million square miles of
some of the most isolated country in Australia have had the services of a Flying Doctor.
His practice extends over an area larger than that of Germany, Austria, Switzerland and
Denmark all put together. He is called by wireless, with power produced by small
foot-pedalled generators and transmitted in Morse by the tapping of a typewriter.
It is as though the Doctor were stationed in London, and liable to be called to Inver-
ness, Belfast, Marseilles, Paris, Amsterdam. Berlin or Copenhagen.
This Service has annihilated distance and banished isolation and is making happy
home life possible where never before. It has been described as one of the greatest
advances in Public Health in this century, comparable with the work of Gorgas in
Panama, Antle in British Columbia and Grenfell in Labrador.
Aviation owns no finer distinction than the misery averted and the lives saved by this
Service, which owes its origin almost entirely to the vision and energy of one man —
The Rev. John Flynn.
Dr. Walker describes vividly and with many humorous anecdotes, the life in the
Interior of Australia with its vast distances, sun-drenched plains and rugged mountain
scenery, which in parts is of a beauty almost unsurpassed. He tells -with sympathy
and understanding of the joys and the dangers, the discomforts and difficulties, the
pathos and humour associated with life in this “Outback Country,” where dauntless
courage and unconscious heroism are commonplace. He explains the need for, and
the evolution of this unique Service, and outlines its future possibilities.
The Air has added to the terrors of mankind. It is fitting that it should minister
also to its sufferings.
Aerial Medical Service Map of Australia.
Alfred Tracger with his “ Baby” Combination Set,
Head-dress,
Kangaroos in Humbug Scrub.
Sir Peter Chalmers Mitchell, C.8.E., M.A.,
D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S., Secretary : Zoo-
logical Society, London.
“ Your lantern slides were of very unusual
interest, and the Fellows of the Society, who
were an expert audience, were delighted with
the way you gave your lecture.”
Professor J. P. Hill, D.Sc., F.R.S., Vice -
President, Zoological Society, London.
“ Your recent lecture on the Life History of
the Kangaroo before the Zoological Society was
a distinct success and greatly appreciated by the
large audience.
We appreciated very much the excellent
lantern slides and cinematograph film which
you showed.”
Dr. Walker.
Olaf F. Bloch, Esq., F.1.C., F.R.P.S.,
You have had a wonderful experience in the President of the Royal Photographic
Interior of Australia . . . and moreover, your Society of Great Britain,
collection of lantern slides , illustrative of all phases of life in “ I have had the pleasure of hearing Dr. Walker lecture,
that little known region is unique , and by itself would ensure the His matter and his manner are excellent. His Natural Histori /
success of any course of lectures.” irork is unique and for it he was awarded the Society’s Medal
Lieut-General Sir William Purse, K.C.B. D. 5.0., Director of at our International Exhibition last year.”
the Imperial Institute, South Kensington. Highgate Literary & and Scientific Institution.
“ We are very much indebted to you for the lectures you gave in “ The lecture was followed by all present with intense interest
our Theatre. They were alive with interesting facts and of great and the lantern slides, especially those of the ‘ Never-Never' Land,
educational value. Your slides were most attractive and original.” were very highly appreciated.”
City Temple Literary Society — March, 1933.
“He told of the development of a Flying Medical Service in the Interior of Australia, in which the Doctor is frequently called 500 miles
or more by wireless, and visits by aeroplane, bringing the patient back with him to hospital if necessary.
Dr. Walker has travelled extensively in the Interior of the Continent by camels, on horseback, and by car. His experiences, very happily
told and illustrated by lantern slides made from his own photographs, were both interesting and amusing, and evoked a warm response from a
large audience. He has a first-hand knowledge of the Australian aborigines and members will look forward to hearing Dr. Walker again before
he returns to Australia.”
At its conclusion, this lecture was described by the President, Dr. Norwood, as one of the most interesting he had ever heard.
Journal of the Royal Photographic Society — September, 1931.
The President said the lecture was very fascinating and everyone would wish that Dr. Walker would come back in the Autumn and give
another lecture on this wide and remarkable subject. Certainly they had learned a good many wonders that evening.
With uncanny intuition the untouched native mind, was able by the exercise of senses almost unknown to civilisd man, to discern
phenomena of which others had not the faintest conception.
At the present day, we lived in the midst of things as marvellous as any that Marco Polo or de Mandcvillc ever told.
He asked the audience to accord a very sincere and hearty vote of thanks to Dr. Walker for his witty , instructive and wonderful lecture.
West London Observer 17th March , 1933.
Dr. Walkers lecture, “Glimpses of Australia and its wild life,’ held his audience enthralled, and surpassed all previous lectures of
its kind.
Wild Aborigines with their quarry.
Professor W. W. Jameson, M.A., M.D.,
D.P.H., F.R.C.P., Dean of the London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.
“ I should like to express my sincere thanks
for the lecture you gave in this School on ‘ The
Flying Doctor.’ The subject matter was most
interesting and your method of presentation
altogether delightful.
Tree Burial—North Australia.
Coastal Fauna.
Glimpses of Australia and its Wild Life.
This lecture depicts 10,000 miles by car, and another 1,000 each on horseback and
on camels through the vast Interior of the Continent and still another!,ooo miles
by water. Life is vividly portrayed on the huge sheep and cattle stations, which are
frequently as large as Devon or Yorkshire.
Wild aborigines are seen with their weapons and customs ; also strange yet fascinating
birds and animals, some of which—the monotremes, which lay eggs and yet suckle
their young in a pouch—are to be found nowhere else in the world.
Visits are also paid to dangerous islands, where the fauna are still as undisturbed and
unafraid as in the days of the early explorers.
Three actual baby kangaroos . at birth . arc shown to the audience. The lantern slides include those made from
photographs . awarded, the Royal Photographic Society's Medal in 19,31, and described by the Zoological Society of
London as unique.
An exciting film of wild kangaroos, bounding 18-SU ft. at a jimp and clearing 6 fool fences at 30-7,0 miles an hour
can also be shown.
The Australian Aborigines.
Dr. Walker has spent several years in the Australian Interior ; and in the little-
known and less frequented parts of the Continent he has had unusual opportunities
for studying the Australian Aboriginal —-untrammelled as he was, and also as he is in
civilised settlement to-day.
In this lecture, Dr. Walker speculates as to their origin ; and gives a description of
some of their superstitions and ceremonies, their weapons and customs. He de-
monstrates the weird and awe-inspiring noise produced by the twirling of a “ bull-
roarer,” instances the uncanny intuition of the so-called “ untrained native mind, ”
and discusses the problem of the survival of this Stone Age people—said to be the most
interesting race at present on earth.
Gramophone Records of their Ceremonial Songs and a 35mm. Cinematograph film are also available.
Native


'*• i c - - *L V *
!>° *' • •' 'ÉSk' Ife* Î*“ ' ■'•>*<-■■
- K
■?■ • : ■ ° ■ ' ,J’1l>® • ; ;
■ '
j, ~' 7' : -' *4 1’ ' . ', ■* ;• -
.IK
10,000 miles of the Australian Interior was traversed in this car.
A wedge-tailed eagle’s nest.
A camel stampede.
IP" ' 1
Bull Seal enraged,
Dr. Walker extracting one of his own teeth.
Lightning at Goober Pedy Opal Fields.
A “ Sleepy ” lizard —aroused.
All three Lectures are profusely illustrated with Lantern Slides made from Dr. Walker’s collection of over 11,000 of his own Photographs.
His Lectures are enjoyed by young and old alike and he is equally at home with either an academic or a popular audience.
All Photographs Copyright Dr. 11 .D. Walker, Australia House, Strand, London, W.C.2.
Address Applications re Dates and Fees :
THE LECTURE AGENCY LTD.
(GERALD CHRISTY)
The Outer Temple, Strand, London, W.C.2.
State whether facilities are available for projecting standard 35 mm. Cinematograph film.
Telenhone- CITY 4178 (2 Lines). Telegrams: LECTURING, ESTRAND, LONDON. “ward tann, printer,
i eiepilUllt:. Oil i -r-L/u & 75, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON, W.C.2
