

THREE WEEKS
IN THE
Kew Lunatic Asylum
BY
DR. PAUL WARD FARMER
(AN EX. PATIENT).
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE:
JOHN J. HALLIGAN, ALFRED PLACE, COLLINS ST.
1900.


THREE WEEKS
IN THE
Kew Lunatic Asylum
BY
DR PAUL WARD FARMER
(AA T EX-PATIENT).
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
MELBOURNE ;
JOHN J. HALLIGAN, ALFRED PLACE, COLLINS ST.
1900.




To the
Insane and Suffering of Victoria
this feeble effort is
Dedicated,
With the earnest hope that
it may do them good.




Three Weeks in the Kew Lunatic
Asylum.
In •writing my experiences, combined with a few theories, I have
only one idea in view—namely, the desire to, if possible, ameliorate
suffering and point out rocks upon which others may be split up.
At the present time, when so much that is untrue is written and
spoken, one is forced to rely almost entirely upon his own personal
observations in drawing conclusions, so that must be my excuse for
bringing the ego so much into evidence; and it will be interesting
to show how a man in the present day—and in this history simply
repeats itself—may get into trouble through marking out a course
for himself and keeping to it, even if that course be a little
heterodox. It must be evident to every observer that fashion plays
an important part in every walk of life, even in disease, but it may
not be so evident that much that would be good to the world is
lost because we often have not the courage to announce our
opinions to other people in the face of opposition, lest we be
regarded as abnormalities and held up to our fellows as objects
for ridicule by the powers that be.
On the morning of the 23rd September, 1899, I drove up to
my house in Oollins-street in my carriage at noon, and noticed that
the blinds were down. A friend of mine handed the coachman
a piece of paper with an address on it, and immediately jumped
in on one side and shut the door, while his groom jumped in on
the other side, and did likewise, and on the carriage moved. This
proceeding seemed unusual, and I at once asked my friend for
an explanation. He said : “You would not take a holiday, and
now we shall see whose will is the stronger, yours or mine. We
are going to take you to Kew.”
1 said, “ Surely you do not mean that,” and saw at a glance
that resistance was useless, as he weighed some 15 stone, and his
groom about 12 stone.
On the road out he said, “ I did think of sending you away
with your nurse.” I at once .jumped at the straw, and replied,
“ Do, for goodness sake ; it will mean utter ruin to place
me in a lunatic asylum, and you will regret this step.” I asked
him what my wife thought of such a procedure, and he said the
poor woman scarcely knows what to think.
He then said something about my bad family history, and how
sad the whole thing was, but promised at last that I should


only be detained till Monday ; and here he made a mistake, because
he did not release me on Monday, and I naturally did not believe
anything he told me afterwards.
On arriving at Kew the papers were produced, and even then
I could not believe that it was anything more than a sham busi-
ness to frighten and compel me to submit to the wills of other
people whose judgment I did not consider superior to my own.
However, I soon found myself locked in amongst a lot of other
poor fellows, and still could hardly believe that what was going
on was a reality.
On leaving me I ‘begged my friend to call upon my nurse and
ask her to come out and see me, as I knew my wife had been
talked over, and it was useless to appeal to her at that stage.
This wish, like every other, was misconstrued, and came back to me
from my wife in different form a few days after; e g., she told me
“ the last person you asked for was your nurse, so you did not
want to see me.”
While waiting in the yard one man, a Jew, came up and said,
“ You are a ‘ Yid,’ ” which I believe means a Jew. I said, “ You
are wrong,” rather sharply, I fear, for he departed promptly. We
afterwards became great friends, and he always called me
Beaconsfield. During this time the attendants were arranging as
to my place of abode, and when they returned I asked them where
I was to be put, and begged to be placed by myself. They said,
“ We shall give you the best place we have.” Here, as all through*
I was struck by the kindness of the officers, and indeed shall never
forget it.
I was then taken up to a long ward, with cells off it, and was
shown my room, but I replied : “ I shall not sleep here to-night,
because lam nob mad. My friends will come for me later on.
They have shut me up for a few hours because they think I am
going to address a meeting to-night, which I do not intend now
to do.” I then had dinner, and, after being accustomed to having
everything daintily served, did not care for the rough way of
eating. However, this did not worry me, and I tried to content
myself as well as possible, and, I hope, succeeded. I forget how I
passed the afternoon, but after tea the Deputy Medical Officer
came around, and I told him that my friends could not surely
mean to leave me there all night, to which he replied : “Your
papers are all in order, and we cannot discharge you for a week
by the law, unless we get a judge’s order.” I then turned out my
pockets at his request, and he took away some of my things ; e.g.,
a knife, hypodermic syringe, and certain other things which might
be dangerous in the hands of a lunatic. I did not like this, but
submitted to discipline. He allowed me my watch and chain as a
great favour. This afterwards became a troublesome subject for
argument, as I shall relate further on.
6


At eight o’clock I was told to go to bed, and then realised that
I was undoubtedly booked for that night, but still hoped that
some friend would come along and take me to my home; but,
when the lights were turned down and I was locked in, that hope
vanished, and I was left to reflect and toss about. At intervals
during the night the door was unlocked and a bull’s-eye lamp
shot into the cell by the watchman, who asked me if I were
all right, and after a time I gave up answering, when he concluded
that I was asleep. ‘Next morning the Deputy Medical Officer
said, with a knowing air, “ You slept well the latter part of the
night.” Being a lunatic, consequently a nonentity, I did not
argue the point, but thought of our crude methods of arriving
at conclusions as to when a patient slept.
At an early hour, I believe about seven, my door was
unlocked, and I was told to come along for a bath. The weather
was rather cold, and as I had been accustomed to a warm bath
and cold shower tor some time, because I did not get warm after
the cold bath, I felt that the cold bath would be severe. How-
ever, I quickly told myself that conditions had altered, and
that I must adapt myself to the altered state and maintain
discipline, so I walked off with my towel and had a bath. The bath
was a shower one, and I did not feel happy being exposed to the
gaze of a number of fellow-patients and warders. However, this
was soon got over, and then I had to put on my button boots. As
button-hooks were not supplied I had to make a piece of string do
duty, and this struck one again as an example of the many things
which one could do without if necessity demanded. The Inspector
was to see me during the morning, so that I was most anxious to
appear as like myself as possible, because an unshaven beard or
any other little departure from one’s ordinary neat method of
dressing would, I knew, be regarded, if the wish were father to
the thought, as a bad sign. At last my luggage arrived, and how
my hopes sank as 1 saw my large travelling bag with crowds of
clothes and changes of underclothing. I insisted, however, upon
wearing the clothes in which I came—namely, frock coat, button
boots and silk hat, and it certainly seemed a bit incongruous
amongst those poor fellows, some of whom were not too
well cared for by their friends, and others had apparently
been forgotten altogether. I felt determined to maintain my
self-respect, and stuck to this mode of dress for some
days.
On Saturday night, wishing to remunerate those about me for
doing little things, I gave the warder a sovereign to change for
me ; but on Sunday morning this was returned, and when the
Deputy Medical Officer came around he took charge of all the money
I had. Another irksome searching process ; but I was determined
to submit to any and every indignity calmly, as I knew that to


lose one s temper would be fatal, and destroy all hopes of getting
out.
Later in the morning the Inspector came and examined me, in
company with the Deputy Medical Officer. I asked him why I was
there, and hoped he would release me. I said : “ I have no
hallucinations, no delusions or illusions; am not dangerous or
violent ; and my business affairs are in order. Why do you
detain me 1” I said my wife is ill, and I wish to get home.
We had a long talk, and he remarked that I seemed very well
up in the terms.
The Deputy Medical Officer informed him how I had worked
very hard for nearly twenty years, sitting up half the night, and so
on, and had finally gone up for two degrees together. But I said
work is a relative quantity, and one man can stand more than
another. Then the Inspector said : “ How do you account for
Dr. sending you in ; he is a careful man 1 ” I said he
wanted to know my theory. I would not tell him and made him
angry, and his anger deranged his judgment. He then asked me
about my theory, and I said that as I was a lunatic I had better
not discuss it, and, moreover, Professor - had advised me
not to be in too great a hurry about it, so I preferred to wait and
get more facts. I also told him among other things that I had
been setting myself hard tasks in self-control, as I considered this
the highest possible form of human development. He appeared
to agree with this view.
Then he asked me if I were comfortable. I replied that I
always tried to adapt myself to altered conditions, to which
he replied that was what Herbert Spencer said. Indeed, one’s
reasoning power helped wonderfully to keep one calm. He left
me in an unsatisfactory state of mind as regards a release, after
asking me if I took morphia or cocaine or alcohol, or whether
I had any monetary troubles, to which I replied in the negative.
So much for the interview to which I had looked forward, and
from which I had expected so much. It was hard to settle down
to read or, in fact, do anything, and all this day (Sunday) I lay
about and reflected upon my altered condition in the space of a
very short time. One day a sane man, respected by a fair number of
people, and the next a lunatic whose every utterance was received
with doubt. However, late in the afternoon I was delighted to
see an old medical friend and teacher walk in with a junior
medical officer, and enjoyed a talk with somebody I had known.
I implored him to get me out, and he left promising that he would
see what could be done. I was told afterwards that he said it was
a great mistake to have put me in Kew, but that it would be a
still greater one to take me out. The junior medical officer with
him asked me about declining to practise. I said there are many
things connected with practice at the present day which are
8


wrong, and it was these methods to which I referred on speaking
of practice. I told my friend that I was not mad, and that this
was no place for me, and he appeared to concur. I said I suppose
the authorities must keep me here for a while in order to white-
wash the doctors who sent me in. Nothing more of consequence
happened this day.
On the following day (Monday, 25th September) I again inter-
viewed the Deputy Medical Officer on his rounds, and asked about
my release. He, as* usual, advised me to write to the Inspector,
By-the-way, this system of putting one off from one to another is a
peculiarity of the place, and so each in his turn refersyou to a senior.
For instance, the warder refers you to the senior warder, who in
turn refers you to the Deputy Medical Officer, who says, “ Well, I
cannot help it, but write to the Medical Superintendent.” This
makes it difficult to get information.
On the morning of this day I was told my wife wished to
see me, so I was escorted up to a room for that purpose—a
large room, with very little to make one feel at home, and with
the idea that possibly someone was watching or listening. Natur-
ally I did not feel very kindly disposed towards her, and at once
took her to task for having given me into the hands of the Philis-
tines. She, too, had been misinformed about thfngs which I had
said ; i.e., the meaning of words as uttered by me had been twisted
round by others so that they bore quite a different interpretation,
and so the interview was not as happy a one as it might have been,
thanks to kind but injudicious friends. I asked her how long the
present farce was to be kept up, but got very little satisfaction.
In the afternoon my chief friend came out to see me, and
brought my overcoat, pipe and cigarettes. He said to the Deputy
Medical Officer, who accompanied him ; “ Why, this man is
all right now !” and asked me about all my financial engagements,
which I told him in every case but one, and as this date was in
my letter-book at home there was no necessity for me to remember
it. Indeed, I knew too vividly that my rent, interest and life
premiums were about due, and felt only too keenly that owing to
my absence and the fact that nobody manages one’s business as
well as one’s self, these payments might not be met, and that my
solvent estate, owing to mismanagement, might easily be made
insolvent, and so bring me into disgrace. 1 believe my friend
thought he would be able to get me out about this time, but he
afterwards told me that the doctor said : “ Oh, you do not know
what may develop.” He naturally bowed to the decision of a
medical expert, and dropped the matter ; but, I feel sure, not will-
ingly or without some feelings of compunction.
I distributed the cigarettes among my poor, suffering
brothers, and cigarette smoking became most fashionable
for a day or so, until supplies ran out. In the evenings we


had concerts among ourselves, and I must say that I never
dwelt with a better-conducted lot of men as a whole. About this
time the Deputy Medical Officer began to worry me about leaving
my watch and chain about. “You know,” he said, “they will
put it down the sink or smash it.” I informed him that there was
no cause for anxiety, and insisted upon leaving everything about,
with the result that nothing of mine was ever injured or taken. I
feel sure that bts of people are made to thieve by the suggestion
of it.
My great trouble was that each patient took too much care of
what one had. For instance, it was my custom to leave my songs
on the piano downstairs after singing. On one or two occasions
I went to find them, and they were not there. Then some patient
would come forward and say : “ Oh, 1 was afraid they would tear
them, doctor, so I planted them.” I always said, “ That was not
necessary.” However, it was pleasant to feel that they felt
kindly towards one. It seems to me that it is best not to hold
one’s worldly possessions with too firm a grasp, as if you offer and
share what you have with other people the desire to possess it
goes, and there is no necessity for people to steal from you,
In the afternoons we used to play tennis on a very nice court,
and it was a great treat to see one’s friends coming to look one up,
for, in spite of the extreme kindness which one received on all
sides, I did not feel very happy being locked away from all my
friends, and particularly felt keenly the separation from my
family and the discomfort of not knowing what was being done.
At my request, the Master in-Lunacy came out to talk about my
affairs, and very kind and considerate he was. We discussed the
different business matters, and again I was at a loss when the
disposal of my effects was talked of, as I could not think that I
would be detained for long, and there was no pressing necessity to
realise, and so I began to wonder what was going to happen
and whether I was there, like many other poor fellows, for all
time.
I believe it was on Tuesday morning that the Medical Agent
came out with my books, and got me to post them up and instruct
him as to accounts owing to me. This I did, and it struck me
at the time as a strange procedure that a lunatic should be
entrusted with business transactions, because, if able to conduct
any transaction, I take it that I should have been allowed to
transact all, and there should have been no necessity for the inter-
ference of the Master-in-Lunacy.
All along I begged that my horses should be kept, and was
told that my wishes in this respect would be respected, but they
were not, as was afterwards shown.
The Medical Agent assured me that he was certain I would only
be at Kew for the week, but again I was misled. I was after


wards told that when the agent arrived home from his interview
there was a message telling him not to worry me with business
matters. Of course, it was recognised that an error had been
made, and that to allow me to be consulted at such a time was a
distinct official error. However, the questionable worry of
doing my books and seeing someone I knew was a respite from the
continual worry of feeling that I was unjustly locked up as a
lunatic when there was not a sign or symptom of insanity as
ordinarily meant abort? me.
It is strange to note how things come about. A few days
before being taken to Kew I asked a friend—a member of Parlia-
ment—for an order to visit Kew, and also the gaols, so that I
might inspect and examine the lunatics and prisoners; and now I
had the opportunity of gratifying my wish, and made as good
use of it as was possible, but as I had neither pencil nor paper the
facts are produced from memory, and are rather imperfect. How-
ever, here is the first case : —The first man I met in the yard on
being received was a Jew, and a very good fellow he turned out.
He was, I presume, rather a trouble to his people by his original
ways of conducting himself, but 1 should not by any means regard
him as of unsound mind. He had been on the stage, and
possessed some ability as a reciter, and he used to entertain us
occasionally in this way, but he was most amusing when “ taking
off” the Medical Inspector examining a new case. Something
after the following (our Jewish friend as the doctor) ;
Doctor, to new patient (somebody was selected for the new
patient).—Hear sounds'!
New Patient.—Yes.
Doctor. —Now, rattle those keys, Mr. . (This was to a
supposed head warder who accompanied the Inspector, and the
rattling of the keys was supposed to be part of the examination.)
Doctor.—Do you ever sleep?
New Patient.— No.
Doctor.—See things ?
New Patient.—Yes.
Doctor.—Yery bad case (with a shake of head). Put out your
tongue.
The doctor then addressed the head warder, and ordered him
to place the patient in a certain ward, in this way he used to
keep us from thinking too continuously of our imprisonment.
We are usually told that Jews are tricky and deceitful, but
this man was one of the most willing and hard-working in the
establishment, because he was treated kindly and not oppressed,
except by being kept at Kew, which he really did not object to.
In fact, I was informed that he was in the habit of going out
periodically and alter a time returning. When he wished
to get out he would give up the funny business, lose his


usual hilarious tone and stand by himself with head down-
cast. Then his friends came and took him out for a while, but he
always turned up smiling, and was glad to get back. One could not
help reflecting upon this man’s case, and wondering whether
oppression had made the Jews as a class cunning. I believe that
when people adopt unfair means to obtain a point they have
generally been badly treated, and have had to resort to questionable
methods.
Case 11. A. man I had seen in Melbourne, and I believe a case
in which insanity was feigned. This was a pathetic case, and I
believe one in which he was the odd man out. His wife I have seen
in Melbourne in company with another man, and it is probable
that the supposed insane man (for I doubt his insanity) had centred
the whole of his affections on her, and had given her everything
money would buy. Then after a time the lady changed, as they
not infrequently do, and transferred her affections to another
man ; the poor husband would no doubt then become aggrieved at
her conduct and cause trouble, and then, of course, would require
to be put away. Possibly he might have certain ideas, quite
truthful; but these would be represented as delusions to the
doctors signing him up, and he would be packed away to Kew,
well out of the way. Add to this a natural peculiarity of manner,
or an individuality, because people must not differ from the
majority in these days, and the picture is complete. Then he feels
indignant at his wife’s treatment, is angry with her when she
comes to see him, probably accuses her of immorality, in which
he may be quite right, but this is a very grave sign in the eyes of
the Asylum authorities (I suppose because immorality never
occurs in Melbourne), and he is marked down as very bad. He may
persuade his friends to take him out on probation, but he is again
troublesome outside, because the lady likes a free hand. What an
inducement to a woman who has a regard lor another man to do
wrong. I very much fear that this is not an isolated case. The
poor man after a time feels disgusted with everything, and either
assumes a delusion or copies somebody else in what is considered an
insane act, and so he goes on, and after a time is quite forgotten
and relegated to a living death.
In the meantime she lives on his estate, and probably supports
a male friend, and this in our enlightened days. What would
have cured this man in the early stages, and probably might now?
The restoration of this woman’s society and affection (if he care
for her, and 1 believe he did once), which is his by right. But
everything tends to keep them apart, and so the thing goes on
from bad to worse. She, poor woman, is not happy either, and in
her quiet moments no doubt suffers acutely, and yet if these
people could have been talked to separately and brought together,


how different things might have been. I believe this man could
pay for treatment, and such a case should be taken in hand
separately by a physician with a strong will and time to reason
with him.
The idea of herding men of all grades together is wicked, and I
wonder that the system is tolerated by the public. There are two
courses open in a case like this: Ascertain from the patient
what he is longing for ; and often it is a sexual desire. Then
either gratify it can be accomplished— i.e., if it be his wife,
who for some reason denies him his marital rights—or, if this be
not possible, simply insist upon his developing his will power and
overcoming his desire.
There is no doubt whatever that unsatisfied sexual desire plays
an important part in mental disease, as it does in all other
diseases, and Dr. Balls-Headley was quite right when he stated
that a large number of women’s diseases was due to unsatisfied
sexual desire; but it also applies to men, as I shall prove later on,
and is one of the results of our lack of self-control.
Case lll.—Here is a musician, once a prominent figure in Mel-
bourne. Poor fellow ! What a transformation. I hardly recog-
nised him, with face bandaged up. For some reason he has become
dirty in his habits, and this, no doubt, has caused the warders to
deal a little harshly with him. They told me that he never played
the piano now, but simply strummed. He looked the picture of
neglect, and somehow his misery appealed to me, so I was deter-
mined to see what could be done.
Accordingly, I got him to come to the piano and play my accom-
paniments. The first day he did not get on very well, because he
had been persuaded, I suppose, that he could not play ; but after
a day or two I managed to counteract this impression which he had
got into his head, and he played very nicely, simply because I
assured him that he could. Then, after a time, whenever he was
at the piano the warder would call him away. No doubt his dirty
habits had made the poor man an object to be despised, but
probably if his sad history had been gone into there would
be quite sufficient to make him careless about himself, for
when we come to analyse our actions the bulk of us perform them
for some sort of approval from somebody we respect; but if nobody
encourage us there is no incentive to do what is expected of us.
He brightened up wonderfully, and I am sure that by continual
supervision I could pilot this man back to his old normal condi-
tion ; but he seldom saw anybody he knew, and I know that his
wife could never get to see him, although she frequently wished
to. On talking to me one day, he said : “ You know, when my
wife and I married, we promised to keep absolutely to each other,
which is a very unusual thing in the present day.”
This set me thinking, and I again began to look for causes and
13


wonder whether there might not be some sexual misunderstanding
here, too. It may be that the man had been fighting over-
whelming odds, but I feel sure that something could be done if
one could get at the whole truth of the case and isolate him. I
believe the warders can say whether a man is fit to see visitors or
not, and it might quite easily happen that such a man would
be more troublesome after a visit from his wife, and that her
visit would be considered injurious. Such being the case, he is
rarely seen. This man had some sores on him, and it appeared to
me that he was never so happy as when his wounds were being
dressed by a warder or fellow-patient. I suppose the fact of being
touched gently soothed the poor fellow, and might we here not
have an explanation of his dirty habits, the idea being that he
would be tenderly washed, for really the warders were sur-
prisingly forbearing under the most trying circumstances.
I have often been struck in practice with a class of patient who
has very little wrong with him, but comes for sympathy, and thus
it is that the sympathetic man gets the practice. We all crave
for love and sometimes we think we are not receiving it; then we
try to obtain what is akin or first cousin to love, namely,
sympathy, and so it is with these poor fellows.
He took a fancy to my pipe and I at once gave it to him. but
he was not allowed to keep it by the others, who took it from him,
washed it, and brought it to me, saying, “ Ho will break it, doctor
so it was washed again and another patient got it. I hoped that
by showing him a lot of attention one might set the example and
he might become popular, but it is easy to understand that dirty
habits are more likely than anything to repel people, especially
when we do not get back to primary causes. This is a very sad
case, as he has a wife and family. It was thought that his disease
was communicable. To show how little I thought of such a theory
I smoked the pipe after him, to everybody’s surprise, and have
not developed any skin disease.
Case IV.—Here is another case. Again probably some little
domestic squabble, He is certainly peculiar in his manner at times,
but I doubt whether he should have ever been put in a lunatic
asylum, and I am certain that he should not be there with a
crowd of others. On talking to this gentleman, I find that he
and his wife decided not to have children, because they could not
afford it, with the usual unhappy result. The woman does not
bear her burden by performing her natural functions, and nature
exacts her penalty by making her uncertain, possibly unreason-
able; she is easily put out, and the man does not get the
sympathy he craves for, and seeks it elsewhere. Then a nerve
storm follows, with the result that something has to go snap, and
the woman is persuaded, or by this time does not want to be per-
suaded, that her husband is mad, and in her jealousy gives her


consent to a course of treatment which she will live to regret; but
she does not always admit this, and gets some consolation for the
loss of her husband and comforts in the sympathy of what are too
often false friends, who will persuade her that she is a heroine, and
so the thing goes on ; and yet how different it might have been if
that couple had little ones,which always act as a strong connecting
link between husband and wife; and it is highly probable that if
Nature had been allowed to take her course such a catastrophe would
never have come to pass ; but we defy her and she punishes us.
Case V. — Here is an unfortunate medical man, remarkably
quiet and sadly neglected by his friends. He knew me again, but
was not inclined to discuss old times. From enquiries I found that
his friends seldom asked for him, and I suppose the poor fellow
has settled down there for the rest of his days. Probably here
some charming lady has played with the man’s affections, and
thrown him over after getting tired; and I only regret that one
could not get him to ralk openly about things. Why he should
be kept locked up I do not know, as he certainly would not hurt
a fly—but probably his relatives are ashamed of him.
Case Vl.—This man refuses to eat, and is fed with a stomach
tube. The chances are that if he were left alone he would eat his
food, but the regulations decree that if a patieart refuse food for
twenty-four hours he is placed on his back and fed. He was very
quiet, and although I assured him that I wished to befriend him,
be did not become communicative. Perhaps if this man were
tried with a little moral suasion he might have eaten, but the
Medical Officer has not time for this. Here there must be some
cause operating, and why not try to get at it 1 My experience in
practice is that people who decline to eat openly will frequently
do so secretly, and I very much doubt whether he would
die from want of food. But, you see, it is the rule to feed them
artificially after twenty-four hours’ refusal, and such an argument
in the eyes of a government official is unanswerable.
Case Vll.—Here isawell-known cricketer,whom we once treated
as a hero ; but, alas ! like everything else, times have changed,
and he is almost forgotten. He stands about, and is very reserved.
Probably he has been badly treated, or thinks he has been, by
some person or persons, and is one of the many disappointed men.
Surely such a man as this might be tended by somebody more closely
related to him, and give him his only chance of being restored
to health. If he have gone mad in the cause of cricket, then the
cricketers should see that he gets a few of life’s comforts and look
him up occasionally, for although that man may appear indifferent
to attentions he is not so.
Case Ylll.—Here is a case— a young man from Yorkshire,about
twenty-seven or twenty-eight years of age of nice appearance and
of gentlemanly bearing. The history he gave me was this ; He fell
15


in love with a young woman in his own county beneath him in
station, and did not like to tell his people about it. He thought
her a very fine character, and was surprised at this in the face of
her social surroundings. However, sooner than offend his people
by gratifying his strongest earthly wish, he came out to Melbourne.
He is not well, and consults a surgeon for sympathy and moral
support, and the surgeon recommends a surgical operation. He is
sent to a private hospital, is operated upon, but does not get better.
A physician is called in. He is treated for a time—l do not know
how long. He does not get on with his nurse, and altogether feels
dismal and depressed. Finally becomes to the conclusion that he
has nothing to live for, throws himself off a staircase, fractures his
skull, and in due course is sent to Kew. How easily all this
might have been prevented. I said, “ Well, you are a fool, and
the best thing you can do is to get back as soon as possible to your
home, and marry the girl if she is fond of you. You have to choose
and live with your wife and not your people, and probably this
woman is just as good as you are, or if not you must lift
her.”
Some little time after leaving the Asylum I was at a private
hospital, and a physician called to see another patient. He asked
me how I was. I replied, “ Quite well.” He then asked me about
patients at Kew. I said, “ There are several sent there by you;
but one in particular—a countryman of your own—should be sent
back to marry the girl he is in love with in Yorkshire, and it is
wrong to keep him locked up.” I was delighted to hear a few
weeks after that this man had been sent back to England.
This gentleman and I used frequently to discuss the inconsis-
tencies of Asylum life. For instance, he would say : “I am here
because they fear I may take my life outside, and yet if I wished
I could easily do it with the knives or forksand he was quite
right. This, indeed, is only another instance of our many medical
incongruities so apparent to any thoughtful patient.
We all agreed that the methods for taking life were many if
there were the wish. Then he would say : “You know, the best
way to get out of here is not to appear anxious to leave,” and there
was a lot of truth in this, but I never disguised the fact that I
wished to get away. However, after a time I found that if I
wished for a thing particularly the best way to bring about my
desire was to ask for the opposite to what I wished, and I then
usually obtained it. Human nature is very peculiar in this respect.
For instance, one day when I was tired and lying down, one of the
warders came in and awoke me to sing. Probably if I had wished
to sing they would not have cared for it, for frequently when one
would want them to play an accompaniment nobody would do it,
and it was most interesting to watch this conflict of wills going


on, and the only treatment for such a state is to exercise forbear-
ance consistently, as indeed one had to do, for in such a place it
was necessary to have the good word of everybody in order to get
out ; and to thoroughly control one’s actions and words under all
kinds of trying conditions was no easy task. For instance, I
knew that if inclined to be thoughtful and lie about, it might be
regarded as a sign of melancholia ; and if inclined to be happy and
cheerful, as a sign of excitability, and in discussing this point
with the warders they quite agreed with me. However, these good
fellows treated me with a kindness and consideration which I
shall never forget, and materially helped in bringing about my
comparatively short stay there.
Case IX.—Here is another case. A man simply put there for
epilepsy. He gets periodic attacks and somebody outside thought
that something might develop, and so the poor man is locked away
from bis wife, of whom he appeared to be very fond. He, too,
found that it was much easier to get in than out. So much for a
few individual cases.
I used to wonder why my wife did not come oftener to see
me, and was not told that her visits were thought undesirable
for me at this time, so that I concluded that she did not want to
come.
On the Wednesday evening (27th September) a ball was held
as usual for the patients, and surprise was expressed by the
attendant when I elected to go. The men were arranged on one
side of the room and the women on the other, and I must say
that on entering I was struck by the number of intelligent faces,
and could not help thinking, as I had thought before, of the
wickedness of keeping some 4500 people locked up in this fashion.
This loss of available energy to the State is a very serious matter,
and one which will have to be reckoned with. Then, in addition
to these, there are the attendants, who, I am sure, are not happy,
for I questioned some of them on this point, and they all admitted
that they did not like the work. The ball was very nicely con-
ducted, and towards the close of the evening coffee and eatables
were served out. I had not danced for some time, but determined
to do so on this occasion, and it was most enjoyable. One man
was rather prominent, so I questioned the attendants as to the
nature of his disease, and was told that he had a delusion to the
effect that he was a connection of a certain celebrity. “ Indeed,’
I replied, “ he is not at all unlike the statues one sees of that man,
and he might quite well be speaking the truth.” Then there was
a poor little deformed woman, I was told, about thirty-five years
of age, who carried a doll, and exemplified in a striking degree the
womanly instinct to possess a child. Then I saw a pinched, pale-
faced little woman, with whom I had a dance. Her story was
a pathetic one. It appears some two years before she had puer-
B


peral fever. Her husband had put her into Kew, and there she
remains, although quite sound in mind as far as I could see.
She informed me that she had told her husband that she had
been fond of another man in England and had not quite got over
it, and he, instead of helping her for speaking the truth, had, I
suppose, in vulgar parlance, turned rusty, possibly glad of an
excuse. In any case, if there were any trouble the law courts
should have been the place to test the matter, and she should not
have been separated from her children to pine away and perhaps
die prematurely.
I could not question many, and next day the Deputy Medical
Officer told me that these women were uncertain and might
slap me in the face ; of course they would if one approached them
with the thought in one’s head that they might. However, it
would be quite impossible for these poor creatures to be shut away
from all their friends in this fashion without developing some
peculiarity in manner, and then there is this imitative process
going on, so that if a man or woman is inclined to follow in his or
her own track to begin with, he or she at last succumbs quite
unconsciously and follows therest. About teno’clockwe were taken
back to our cells or rooms and locked up for the night.
I believe it was on Thursday afternoon that 1 had my first
interview with the Superintendent, which, I had hoped, was to
produce so much, but my hopes were again shattered, as after a long
talk he said : “lam not going to decide in a hurry, Farmer, and
I must keep you under observation for a time, so you must just
settle down.” I could not get anything definite from him as to
how long. During this interview he said ; “ Your instructions
have been so unusual of late that your nurse has declined to carry
them out, and you were going to do some large'surgical operations.”
“ Oh !” I replied, “ 1 know what you refer to,” and proceeded
to tell him how on one occasion, not long ago, a case of mine was
suffering from intestinal obstruction and I could not get a
passage through her. I was talking to one of our best
gyncecological surgeons (Dr. O’Sullivan) about it, and he suggested
that I should wash out the stomach with warm water, then pour
an ounce of sulphate of magnesium (Epsom salts) dissolved in six
ounces of water into the stomach and leave it there. I did this,
but my nurse objected very strongly to it, and I could never get my
stomach tube again, so that I knew that she was displeased,
although the patient recovered. I said to him ; “ I suppose you
would not allow your subordinates, say a warder, to overrule you
in carrying out your work V’ As a matter of fact they were doing
every day in the Asylum what I did outside. Regarding the opera-
tion—one day I cut down in a cancer case with the object of remov-
ing a piece of intestine, but found the disease involving the abdo-
minal wall, and, of course, desisted. This operation was new at the


time, but had been done by others. However, I suppose my nurse
had not heard of it. I said to the Superintendent : “It is absurd to
suggest that I am a reckless operator, for no surgeon has a keener
desire to save life or worries so much over a death as I, and do
you know that I have never lost a case after a surgical operation
yet, although I have done some very large work J”
However, my reasoning was useless, and I now began to think it
was better to leave my case in the hands of a Higher Power since
my fellow-men seemed so unjust or so stupid —I did not know
which.
Of course, after I was removed from my house, ladies called and
talked, and I suppose wept, etc., etc. My friends would come
out and describe to me all sorts of absurd peculiarities in my
manner of late. One of my medical friends took me to task
rather for thinking that Melbourne was immoral. I told him I
would be glad to think this a delusion on my part. At this inter-
view the Superintendent suggested that any clothes sent to me
should be addressed under cover to him, so as to avoid publicity.
I replied that this was absurd, as everybody in Melbourne who
knew me had by this time heard that I was at Kew. If they had
thought of this before sending me to Kew, instead of rushing me
off as they did, it would have' been more to the ppint.
They would say : “ This will be a good rest for you, Farmer;
you know you have worked too hard.”
A nice way to give a man rest —practically ruining his pros-
pects from a worldly point of view, and if I had not possessed
unusual will power,l should never have come out again; but I was
determined to upset their silly, puerile theories.
The Deputy Medical Officer would often on his rounds ask me
to diagnose cases, but I kept away from this, as I knew that if
one dared to suggest anything original he. would make a note of
it, and I wished, above all for my family’s sake, to get out again.
I was talking to this gentleman one day, and one of the
patients announced to him that he was a Mohammedan, at which
the doctor smiled. I said, “May not a man be a Mohammedan
and still be sane 1” and he replied, “ Not in Victoria, Farmer.”
This same patient had a game by which he stood to win
thousands and could not lose anything. I believe he used to,
vulgarly speaking, ‘‘ have them on toast,” for I strongly suspect
he did not believe what he was saying, but liked to fool them,
and I could not help thinking of our land-boomers and compar-
ing them—but they are not in asylums. I at last got hold of him
and begged him to stop these pranks, and he did ; and I was told
that for some time after I left he had improved greatly, but he
will probably lapse from lack of somebody to keep him him up to
the mark ; and, really, where no hope of release is held out there
is not much inducement for him to hold himself together.


On another occasion I was talking to the Deputy Medical
Officer, when the same patient came along with the Argus, and
read out a notice calling for applications for my position at the
Women’s Hospital. This was one of the few occasions on which
I lost my temper, and I had a feeling at the time that it was a
put-up affair between the patient, who was a medical man, and
the Deputy Medical Officer to see if 1 would get angry. Possibly
a test of insanity—in fact, by this time I had been so misrepre-
sented and tricked that I hardly knew what to think or whom to
believe, and it hurt me to read of my practice—built up by years
of hard work—going to pieces from no fault of my own.
There was considerable method in this gentleman’s madness.
He was great on compressed air, and one day there was an
amused audience listening to him in a rather patronising fashion.
I told the warder that there was a good deal of truth in what
he said, and that compressed air was of use. Then the warder
replied : “ Don’t you tell the doctor so, or you will not get out.”
On another occasion this same patient said, “Wounds of the
heart could be sewn up.” This produced great merriment, but as
a matter of fact the heart has been repaired in this fashion, and
after leaving Kew I read of two or three cases.
This man is supposed to be going in for general paralysis of
the insane, and probably if he stay there long enough he
will develop it. For, in the first place, he knows something of
the signs and symptoms, and, secondly, he will hear from some-
body that he is a general paralytic, and, thirdly, has plenty of
time to think about his ailments. This question of suggestion is
a far greater factor in the profession of medicine than we have
any idea of.
For instance, it is, or was, a very common thing for medical
students to imagine that they had each disease as they studied it.
However, I shall have more to say later on about this.
I asked the warder how he diagnosed general paralysis. He
said, “The tremulous tongue is the most important sign.” The
fact is, that many of our diseases are simply names, and the sooner
this is recognised the better. We have all heard of paralysed
people suddenly getting up from a bed where they have lain for
years and walking
Here is another case. A grown-up man who used to “no
savee,” and all he would do was to poke out his tongue and say,
“ Bridget, little baby naked.” I used to tell him he was a hum-
bug, but this heathen Chinee business caused him to be fed and
attended to by his brother patients in a manner that was pleasing
to behold. This was a case of a child having been neglected, and
this neglect of parents to educate their children is undoubtedly
the cause of much imbecility.
The steps of Drs. M'Crery and Fishbourne in this direction are


deserving; of all praise. A child is born with a deformed head
and it is at once concluded that it cannot be educated, which, in
many cases, is an erroneous conclusion, and it is our duty to care
for every child so as to fit it for the struggle of life. It is now
admitted that the weight of the brain, or the size of the brain,
has no great bearing on the intellectual capacity of the individual.
I believe that the idiots now do a considerable amount of useful
work, thanks to the gentlemen aforesaid.
In reference lo meals. There were, I think, three tables in our
ward, and at our table there were six, i e., five beside myself. It
was a little rough, but one could not complain of this. What I
did not like was to see Lunatic Asylum in blue letters upon every
cup and plate, so that we were never able to get away from the
fact that we were lunatics.
I was most careful to obey discipline in every way, but as we
did not sit down together we did not get up together, and one
day I got up as soon as finished and, I suppose, before the others.
The Deputy Medical Officer was not in a good humour, and as
he could not find any other fault, gave me a lecture upon my
bad manners in getting up before some of the rest, which I
thought extremely unjust, but said nothing.
One incident amused me greatly. A table companion, the first
day I was there said : “ You know, Farmer, these lunatics
gobble up everything, and you will have to look after yourself.”
The next meal I nearly laughed outright to see his lordship take
almost the whole of the butter and jam at one helping. There
are plenty outside like him. Then I felt inclined to “ grab,” but
desisted and persuaded myself that dry bread was just as nice as
bread and butter. However, there was one poor fellow who used
to come in late and when everything was cleared out in the shape
of butter and jam. I suggested to the warder the advisability of
dividing the butter up into six parts, but he said that they wished
it to be as much like home as possible. Nevertheless, he did this
eventually, and I took care to see that our late friend had his
share put on his plate. The coffee was a tasteless fluid, resembling
the usual decoction only in colour, and the vegetables were of a
very coarse, rough nature. I suppose in all Government institu-
tions the things must be weighed out.
One morning I thought I would try to bounce my way out, and
had a strong argument with the Deputy Medical Officer and head
warder about the iniquity of keeping me there. As usual, he
referred me to the Superintendent. After they had gone, an
elderly warder, who was very good to me, came along with some
sago. I said : “ I will not eat anything more in this place, so
you had better discharge me.” And, for a time, thought
of carrying out my threat, but a barrister friend said,
“ They will let you alone for twenty-four hours and then feed


you by force,” so I saw the absurdity of trying to carry out my
threat.
Then I was told by some visitor from outside that I was
extravagant. This arose entirely through my desire, at all times,
to remunerate people for services rendered ; for instance, when-
ever a medical man rendered me or my family a service it was my
custom to send him a present, as he would not accept a fee, and I
often made my nurses presents for helping to pull a bad case
through.
Then, in connection with my cases, it was my custom to get
any instrument or appliance that was necessary for their benefit,
quite regardless of cost.
These little things, however, considered with other trifles
helped to form a picture which the learned people regarded as
sure signs of insanity. However, I fear that I shall always give
presents if I wish, and it would be better for us if everybody were
afflicted with a similar disease.
On Sunday, Ist October, I looked forward to seeing visitors,
and was glad to be remembered by an old patient and friend, who,
on seeing me, expressed indignation at my imprisonment and
wanted to get a lawyer at once to set me free, but I said : “ No.
I have no belief in law, and if we start it will only prolong
matters; let ns wait and see what they mean to do.” So he
reluctantly agreed, saying that he would see if he could get me
away for a sea trip with him. I sang him a song, and we had a
smoke together. He suggested the sea trip to my friends, but it
did not come to pass.
I was in the exercise yard one morning, and, as I turned my
head, saw a heavy man fall. He had apparently been pushed by
another patient, but I did not see him in the act. On examining
this man it was discovered that his leg was broken, and he was
put up in splints. I always kept away from surgical work, as I
did not wish to advance any theory with which the medical men
might disagree, even when invited.
The man who was supposed to have knocked the other one
down was of uncertain temper, and I always kept a keen watch
upon him. He told me that a fair lady had jilted him, and this
made him reckless, so he took to drink, and, I suppose, becoming
troublesome to his friends, they locked him up away from every-
body—an excellent way of aggravating his mental condition.
Another little incident is worthy of note here. One morning
I was going towards the bath, and heard a rather noisy quarrel
going on between an attendant and a patient. The patient
exclaimed, “ I will rip you up with this knife.” The warder
walked him away to his cell, and shut him up. In a very short
time we heard a crash of glass, and he was brought from his cell
with his hand all cut. He had thrust it through a window. The


warder bound it up, and he went about his work. Some little time
after I approached him and said, “ Look here, I quite know that
it is very trying to be locked up here, but don’t lose your temper
like you did this morning ; you know, we are friends in distress."
The poor old fellow promised me he would not, and so far as I
know he did not while I was there. He would follow one round,
and always seemed delighted to do anything for me. I think he
used to offer to clean my boots, but I usually preferred to do this
myself, as I did not see why these men should work for me.
In relating the above incident, I do not wish for a moment to
reflect upon the conduct of the warders, and the only wonder to
me is that they keep their tempers, and are as forbearing as they
are, for the constant action of the mind of a man who thinks
himself wrongly imprisoned—as they do in many cases, and with
good cause, too—upon those about him must try the tempers of the
attendants very much. An attendant who had been 30 years
in the Asylum, and who was the personification of kindness, told
me that on getting home at night the strain upon him during the
day had often been so great as to make him feel inclined to strike
his children and break up the chairs in his house.
This poor old patient had been nearly 30 years in the Asylum,
and I suppose has been almost forgotten by his friends. He was
formerly a bank manager. Undoubtedly in both these cases, if the
causation of trouble had been looked into, and they had been taken
in a kindly fashion by their friends, the locking up in Kew would
have been quite unnecessary; but we are so ready to shift respon-
sibility on to other people’s shoulders.
Here is another case.—A quiet, well-behaved medical man who
has been there some twenty years, and is now a comparatively
young man. lam sure he would be a useful member of society,
but he washes up dishes and wastes his valuable life in sundry
other ways.
Here is another case of a bank clerk, as sane in every respect
as possible. He says, “You know, I am tired of asking to be
taken out, so shall not do so again.”
On visiting a patient one day I was much struck by a book he
was reading—“ The Other Man’s Wife.” From what I could
gather of this case it seemed particularly appropriate, for I
strongly suspect this man was in the way outside.
Taken as a whole, it seemed to me that sexual desire played a
very large part in the matter, for some of the worst cases would
expose themselves, and others would give indications that this
matter worried them, and I firmly believe that if this desire were
regulated, as it can and should be, there would be very little of
what is known as insanity. One man was not allowed to go to
concerts because he persisted in kissing the lady accompanying
the singers. Could anything tell us more plainly what is on his


mind 1 But we aggravate his case by shutting him away from all
female society, and causing him to become peculiar or altered in
his manner from lack of the sympathy to which he has been
accustomed. Why not take this man and reason with him and
try to get his will-power to work, so that this desire may be con-
trolled ? It is positively cruel to torture people in this way, when
every book and newspaper he reads is suggestive of sensuality.
One day I noticed a case here which struck me most forcibly,
and that was the desire of one man to embrace another. I fear
this is a crime not unknown outside from something I saw on
visiting a patient in Bourke-street a little while ago. The idea of
such a thing to a sane man is, of course, revolting, and I devoutly
hope is not common in our midst; but, going ahead as we are,
there is a real danger of it becoming so, in conjunction with other
kinds of moral perversion. Said a supposed sane man to me in
town some time ago, “ I have experienced every sensual delight. ’’
This contained a lot, and set me thinking, and if such a thing be
performed we deserve to suffer the keenest possible punishment
from Nature.
In the evenings I used to talk to the warders, who, by-the way,
did not by any means conform to the Factories Act, but seemed
to go on for hours at a stretch beyond the time arranged by
Parliament. I suppose because they were servants of the Crown;
such are the inconsistencies of the law. I would say, “ You surely
are not happy at this work, and would feel more satisfied on a nice
little’farm,” to which they invariably replied, ‘‘ Yes;” but they
did their work with a devotion and consideration and patience
gratifying to see, and I shall never forget how they all apparently
worked to get me out of my sad fix. Thus about ten days passed by,
and, in spite of kind attentions on all sides, I began to feel pretty
wretched, and wondered how long it was going to last. It was not
difficult to adapt oneself, but I did not lose sight of the fact that
I had a wife and family. Speaking about suggestion, I found
that when my tobacco ran out I could quite comfortably do
without, and I noticed, too, that smoking strong black tobacco,
which outside would have made me feel ill, could be smoked
without discomfort, when I persuaded myself that it would not
upset me.
What I did not get over was having my bath in public, and the
fact that the closets were open, and usually very dirty. These
two matters worried me more than anything else, and it must
worry other men accustomed to delicacy in the same way, for it
is not pleasant to do all things before an audience.
One morning when lying on the green I said to myself, “ I
wonder whether I can get a temperature voluntarily %" and when
the Deputy Medical Officer came around it came to pass in some
way that he took my temperature. I believe I asked him. It


was above normal, and I was ordered to bed. This surprised me
a little, but I shall always think that my will had something to do
with making the mercury rise. There were, of course, a given
set of emotional conditions at work, and if I had the same set I
believe I could do it again. There is no doubt whatever that we
frequently get temperatures when very little is the matter, and
there was very little wrong here except a feeling of keen grief
that one could be so cruelly treated in a civilised country.
I remained in becl until the morning I was removed —about
ten days—and have before me the chart supposed to be that of a
man suffering from influenza—-utter nonsense. But we have to
give things a name, and the thermometer, like many other appli-
ances in modern medicine, is relied upon too much. During
this time they persisted in dosing me with medicine, and I was
visited by the doctor, who was extremely kind, twice daily. But it
was not influenza, and all I wanted was sympathy from the proper
quarter, and when I heard that I was going to be removed from
Kew my temperature considerately went down and stayed
there. I only regret that I had not a thermometer to see whether
I could influence it at will again, as it would have been interest-
ing. However, the facts are as I have related them, and I verily
believe that it is possible to in some measure get a tempera-
ture by suggestion.
On the Sunday morning, Bth October, 1899,1 received a visit,
to which I had been looking forward, from the two doctors who
sent me in, accompanied by the Inspector and the Superin-
tendent. The Inspector remarked, “ You do not seem glad to see
us.” And I must say I did not feel too affable, because the con-
ditions were hardly conducive to cheerfulness with temperature
of 103, etc. Then one of the men who sent me in, and of whom
they all seemed afraid, gave the Superintendent to understand
that he need not stay, and he and, I believe, the Inspector
departed for a time. This same little man examined my chest, for
I had a cough, and as there was a history of tubercle in my
family, my younger sister having died of it, it was feared that I
might be suffering from, or about to suffer from, consumption.
However, contrary to expectation, my chest was pronounced
sound. He said : “What is your theory!” I told him we should
have to regulate our Marriage Laws. And he said; “Is that all V
Then he gave me a lecture about beating my wife, I said; “Well,
I have no recollection of having done such a thing, but I am a
lunatic, and of course my word goes for nothing.” Then the other
little physician who had “ signed me in” chipped in, and gave me a
lecture upon my evil ways, at which I felt amused, but said
nothing. I asked this gentleman how long I was to be left there,
and he said : “ Well, you know, Farmer, I don’t know much about
insanity, and you are now in the hands of the Medical Super


intendent.” This struck me as being extremely cool, as, if he were
too ignorant of the subject to sign me out, surely he had no right
to sign me in, and I began to wonder whether there was such a
thing as justice in the world.
Thus the interview passed, and I got very little satisfaction.
It was not surprising that they formed rather a grave view of
my case, and thought me not as good-tempered as usual on this
occasion, or “ changed.” I now realised, as I had thought all
along, that my wife was the one to move most in the matter, and
it was a good thing for me that she did begin to exert herself,,
otherwise I might have been there still; and given a wife who is
indifferent or fearful of her husband, or pretends to be so, and
the man may remain there. This is a very grave defect in our
Lunacy Laws.
One unfortunate gentleman in there is considered to be dangerous
because he had carried a pistol in his coat pocket, and so had
frightened his wife and friends. He assured me he never did,
and I firmly believe him.
I believe it was at the Sunday’s interview that one of the
medical men said : “ It is a question of expense moving you from
here, and there is no money for a private place." At this I felt
indignant, and said the idea is preposterous, for if I had no effects
my pocket has always been open to other people, and surely some-
body would lend me a little in such a case; but my estate, if pro-
perly managed, is not only solvent, but there should be enough
money to keep me and my wife and family for some time. These
absurd speeches were quite enough to turn the head of any man.
I afterwards found that nearly £3OO could have been borrowed
on my life assurance policies alone from bonuses ; and there were
plenty of other ways of getting money. I remarked that it was
most essential that I should get better soon, in order to again
earn money, and that I would not get better there. I pointed out
to them at this interview, too, that the sooner I was out the less
people would think of my trouble, but if left there for long every-
body would shun me as a madman.
My wife afterwards told me that it was fully arranged to take
me out of Kew on the following day (Monday, the 9th), but it
was Saturday before I left. There is so much red-tape nonsense,
and she was afraid to worry the Superintendent lest he might get
angry and change his mind, as, like all other men in power, he
liked to have his own way ; but I do not wish to accuse him of
harshness or unkindness, and he was only following out his usual
routine practice.
What I suffered during this week I am not keen to recall, as
there was the uncertainty of not knowing what was going to-
happen, and when my wife came on the Friday, and I was told
that on the following day I was going to leave, I thanked God as


1 had never done before; but this week had its bright sides. One
striking feature was the universal kindness I received from every
patient. They were never tired of doing things. One would
come in and make my bed, another would do something else, and
they one and all did their best to alleviate my suffering. The
attendants, too, were most attentive and considerate. One day I
nearly got a man into serious trouble. I had become so tired of
lying in bed, and was too busy with my thoughts of how to get
released to settle to read, so I got up on my own account and sat
in the dining-hall, or long ward. The doctor heard of this, and in
due course the warder received a formal communication, calling
upon him for an explanation for allowing a patient with a tem-
perature to get up without instructions. He said, “ I fear I shall
have a mark against my name for this ; I have always had a clean
record.”
This worried me, and when the doctor came round I said, “ You
must not punish the warder for an offence for which I am entirely
responsible ; punish me, I am the guilty party, but please do not
annoy him and so the matter dropped, and he was not fined, as
he at first expected. Of course, discipline has to be maintained
in these large institutions.
When I had been at the Asylum for a few days the Deputy
Medical Officer asked me if I would like to come up to the office
and lpok over my papers, as I seemed to rather doubt their right
to detain me, and on reading them I hardly knew whether to
laugh outright or dance with rage. I did not note every particular,
but in one of the papers the medical man had stated as a sign of
insanity something to this effect; “He asks me and my family
to go to England with him next week. Says that all medical men
are rogues.”
The first passage was easily explained, and was the result of a
statement made jocularly to him in my diningroom one day. I
said : “I am going to London next week ; you had better come,
and bring your wife and family.” And I believe that in order to
test his patriotic spit it I did say : “ Supposing there were too many
doctors, and we found it was necessary for some of us to adopt
another calling, would you be willing to give up your practice
for your country’s sake 1” I believe 1 had also said that some
of our medical friends did not live up to the higher ideals of their
profession, but appeared to regard it purely as a money-making
affair. Thus you see how every statement was twisted round.
Then a lot of capital was made out of the statement that I
would hold a meeting in the Athenaeum Hall to lecture on the
“ Decay of Nations.” Surely any man might do such a thing and
not be insane. This arose entirely through my discussing the
matter of a cure for some of our grave diseases with a friend of
mine, who suggested this course.


However, on this point I had decided that it would not be wise
to hold even a semi-public meeting, but would be better to get a
few representative professional and level-headed laymen at my
house, so that the matter might be discussed impartially.
Medical men, you know, are often prejudiced, and especially if a
young man dare to advance a new theory; in fact, some time beforel
had written a short paper, and was told that the University men
thought it very good, but that 1 was too young a man to write
such a paper. Now I was desirous that any theory I might
advance should be openly and fairly received, as I felt that if it
were not quite orthodox they might put me in a lunatic asylum—
which they did—and so I declined to discuss it except with a repre-
sentative committee ; and this made my more intimate medical
friends angry. What a sad thing it is that we do not trust our
fellow-men, and the distrust unfortunately is usually caused by
gossiping friends, who are so careful to tell us what people say
to our detriment.
Then another statement among causes of insanity was : “ He
thinks all his medical friends are against him.” Of course they
all loved me for abusing at every opportunity their shameful
electioneering methods. As a matter of fact, several of my
colleagues had treated me unjustly, and I had good reasons for
considering them inimical; but I knew then, as I know now, that
lam not without friends in my own profession. Then followed
a shameful falsehood to the following effect, “ He hands me a large
book of French statistics, and expects me to go through them all
in a few hours.” This arose in the following way. A couple of
days before my committal to Kew I was at the office of the
Government Statist, and Mr. Fenton and I had been going into a
few of the statistics for different countries. I said, “ Could you
lend me some French statistics 1” He lent me a yellow book of Paris
statistics. I had not read any French for some time, and thought
it would save time to get Dr. , who is reputed a linguist, to
look them up for me. My object was to prove that immorality
had something to do with causation of disease and crime. So
taking him the book I said : “ Will you look up the birth-rate,
death-rate, causation of death, crime-rate and insanity-rate of
Paris for the last ten years V’ We had hunted these up in English
in a few minutes, and surely it was not unreasonable to assume
that a brilliant linguist could at all events do the same thing in
French in an evening. These mis-statements will show how easy
it is to misunderstand a man if there be a biassed mind at work.
Then somebody told me that somebody else said that I was mad
on morality, simply because I said what appeared to be true, and,
judging from what Archbishop Carr said a little time after, is not
utterly false.
After my release I was having lunch with my chief friend, and


he said this little doctor, of the statistic episode, described to him
how I would, before going to Few, be just about to do things and
then not do them. Now, is this a sign of insanity 1 I take it that
every man of character often is about to do things which his
higher will controls, and he desists ; and this, in my opinion, is
not a sign of a weak, but a strong will. In Euclid it is very com-
mon, after following up a wrong track of reasoning, to say, “ But
this is absurd.” And some of us think aloud, because not afraid
of the world’s opinion.
It reminds one very much of the quack advertisement describ-
ing all the symptoms a medicine is good for, and giving every
sensation which a person experiences in the best of health. But,
again, it is easy to find signs of disease if you first decide that a
man has it.
Another little incident will tend to show how unreliable and
changeable is human nature. A friend of mine visited me one
day, and, after I had been sent back to the ward, the Superin-
tendent said : “It is very hard that Farmer should be herded
together with all classes, and I do wish I could do something to
make his lot less hard,” etc., etc.
When I became ill, what troubled me most was the lights being
put out, and having to remain in darkness and atvake for so long.
My friend got to hear this, and, going out to the Superintendent,
said : “ You said the other day that you would be glad to do any-
thing to relieve Farmer that you could, and he complains of want
of light at night.” The Superintendent was not in a good humour,
I suppose, and said : “ I cannot make any distinction for him ; he
must be content and comform to rules.” My friend hurriedly left,
saying: “I would not have bothered you, only that you
expressed a wish to do what you could at our last interview.”
We were usually put to bed at 8 o’clock, and the lights were
out shortly after. I had abundance of time for reflection, and
when things were darkest always felt that somehow all would
come out right in the end; and one used to argue, even if these
little people here armed with brief authority do their worst, they
can only worry me to death ; but I did not at all feel like dying.
Then, sometimes, I would feel angry at the indignity of being
locked up and dominated by men undoubtedly my inferiors-
mentally, but I would ask myself what does it matter what my
fellow-men think of me, since their good or bad opinion is of no
consequence, and the despised man of to-day is the hero of
to-morrow, and if you do what you think to be right you will get
all you deserve in this world. I cannot tell you what a comfort
it was to fall back upon this simple belief that I would be taken
care of ; but, of course, liberty is always sweet. Then, sometimes,
I would say to myself, “ But even if you were away from here, yon
«till have a controlling powerin the shape of a conscience dominating


your actions j” but this is not the same as being controlled without
any appeal to one’s reasoning power, and although a certain
amount of check is good, it is not desirable that a man should be
treated like a child.
On the 14th October I got up from my bed of sickness, and,
after saying good-bye to my fellow-patients and warders, was con-
ducted to the office. Here the Deputy Medical Officer gave me my
temperature chart, and I left in the company of my future
attendanttfor a private hospital in great state, namely, a waggonette
drawn by a pair of chestnut horses. It was a wet morning, and in
this respect the weather conditions coincided with my entrance
to Kew for it was a dull, wet day when I went there.
“ Liberty is sweet,” was the phrase of the Head Warder, Jand I
now realised this to the fullest extent, and was glad to be able to
breathe the air of partial freedom again, for I was still under the
control of an attendant. You see, mine was such a violent case,
and this was deemed necessary. However, he happened to be an
elderly man, who had spent thirty years in the asylums, and was
pensioned off according to custom, although fit both mentally and
physically to do his work. What an amount of money we squander
in pensions in this fashion. Regarding his qualities for the post,
all I can say is that I could not possibly have improved upon the
Superintendent’s choice, as he performed a disagreeable duty in the
kindest fashion, and we became fast friends, and I hope will
continue so.
I determined on leaving Kew to take the earliest opportunity
of doing something for the poor sufferers with whom I had been
associated for the last three weeks, and trust this little effort may
have that effect. Once more I did not know what my position
was, as to whether discharged on probation or not, but was thank-
ful for small mercies, and glad to arrive at a civilian’s home
again, and felt that I was on the borderland of civilisation. It
was a most comfortable home to which I was sent, but here again
there was the annoyance of, firstly, having my attendant sleeping
in the same room ; and secondly, being locked in at night, both
of which precautions were quite unnecessary, as I had no idea of
escaping. However, this passed, as I knew that he was acting
under instructions. Then my friends began to look me up after
a few days, and I wanted to ask them to meals, as I used to in
the olden times, but this little game was soon stopped, as instruc-
tions came from the Superintendent that I was to be limited to
two visitors a day of ten minutes each, and that the same visitor
was not to see me more than once or twice in the same week—l
forget which. Sometimes I would not have a visitor far daysj
and then more than two would come on the same day, and this
led to a little trouble.
My attendant carried out all instructions to the letter, but we


went to bed at ten instead of eight, and I had to get up at 7
or 7.30, willing or unwilling, and often wished he would
let me sleep all day so that I might forget the business as much
as possible. After breakfast I was taken for a walk by my aide-
de-camp, and it was interesting here to note the peculiarities of
frail human nature in this way. My good friend had his times of
•contrariness, or feeling out of sorts, and I would be walking along
when he would say, “ A little faster, doctor.” Then, after a time,
he would say, “You are walking too fast”. This used to get
on my nerves a little. However, I knew that I was on my trial,
and so put my own will out of the case and did exactly as I was
told.
On one occasion I said, “ You have a good report to make to
the doctor, have you not ? ’ He replied, “ You looked a little
‘ sulky ’ this morning.” Can anybody imagine how hard it was to
keep steady or know what was best to be done.
The Superintendent very kindly came over from the Asylum to
see me, and on the first occasion I said, “ What is my form of
insanity, doctor 1” He said, “ Dr. says it is a form of
‘ excessive cerebration.’ ” However, I did not argue the point.
After a few days one of my medical friends who had signed me
in came to see me, and again told me that ifow I was in the
Superintendent’s hands his duty ended as he did not know much
about insanity. He said, “ I asked your wife about your striking
her, and she says you never have done so " so that is cleared up.
Thus you see I was again wrongly condemned, as this fact had
been brought forward to prove that I was dangerous, when there
was no truth in it whatever; and thus we have an example of the
fashion in which many unfortunate men have been sent to gaol for
crimes never committed by them.
He said, “You will not get another chance, and if you are again
sent to Kew will not get out.” I resented this speech and thought
it cruel.
Before leaving I said, “ Surely, I may see my wife and children,”
and he said he did not see any objection to that course. I said,
“ Who should be near a man when he is ill but his wife 1” He
promised to send her down, so the next day—or two days after—
I was delighted to see my wife and two children coming
from the railway station. I had not seen my bairns for
a month, and it was a happy re-union ; but my attendant
was always with me, and this spoilt my pleasure to a certain
extent.
On interviewing my wife she said she was afraid of me.
Tnis speech made me angry, and I said, “ Mad or not mad, this
farce must cease, and I will not stand it any longer, and, what is
more, shall institute proceedings if the thing do not soon come to
an end.”


However, fortunately for me, she kept her counsel in this matter.
Next day, the other medical man who had signed me to Kew
came out, and, smarting under the interview with my wife the
previous day, I was rather upset, and I think I had had enough
to make me so. He took good care to inform my wife on his
return to Melbourne that I was “ very emotional and not fit to be
released,” which was another bad feature of my case.
Then the Medical Superintendent again visited me, and I asked
the nature of my disease. He said : “ You have been suffering
from mental inflation for some time.” This struck me as another
new disease. The next time I asked it was “ mental elation,” but
the last time on being questioned he said : “I have asked a lot of
your colleagues and fellow-students about you, Farmer, and they
all say that since you came to Collins-street you have been very
‘hoity-toity.’” This was the best of all, and I really began to
wonder whether I was perhaps on a stage taking part in some
burlesque.
This conclusion by my fellow-students I suppose was ex-
plainable on the ground that I had worked eighteen hours a
day while they had worked perhaps four or six, and, as they had not
got into as good a position as I, they had become a little jealous ;
and so this petty life drags on. Eegarding the justice of this last
charge, I do not think my manner at any time was rude or over-
bearing, but I unhesitatingly condemned anything of which I
disapproved, and am afraid shall do so to the end of the chapter.
For instance, my utterances in connection with the Hospital
election system were always decided and, no doubt, gave offence,
but they were absolutely true and sound, as they must all
admit.
Because a man will not conform to the customs of a system
which everybody knows to be a disgrace to the profession—indeed,
I doubt whether one’s coachman would stoop to some of the
practices —surely he should not be made an outcast of, especially
when in vindicating his principle he himself is the sufferer. Thus
the annoyance persisted, and I do not think I should have been a
very odd man if I had become excited under the circumstances ;
but this, of course, would have been fatal and I should have been
instantly put back in Kew as a dangerous lunatic. Ic required a
strong effort indeed to preserve one’s equanimity under all these
trying burdens.
Then I saw by the papers that my horses and carriage were
being advertised for sale, likewise ray house to be let, and when
my wife told me that they had sold my brougham and pair and
harness for a little more than half their value I again expressed
myself strongly, for I was now admitted to be convalescent and
might soon require my horses; but for some reason the wish was
that I should not resume work in Oollins-street. I would say to


one of my medical friends, “ When am I to get away from this
Kew business and be a free man again V’ He would say ; “ Well,
if you will say what you intend doing it might help matters, and
it you announce that you will go to another country I am sure
your discharge will be granted.”
I sa'd ; “ I cannot possibly decide upon anything until I know
how my money affairs stand, and the point is—Am I sane or
insane 1 If sane, you must release me unconditionally ; if insane,
then you must keep me in custody. The idea of dictating my
cpurse of life is absurd. I have a wife and two children to keep,
and it will be hard enough to get a practice together again without
being checked in this way.”
I afterwards saw from a document that the Kew doctors stated
that I would never be able to do a Collins-street practice again,
but Ido not know why. Surely even if I were insane, which
I never was, that is not a crime lor which one should leave his
country.
On another occasion the Medical Superintendent, when visiting
me, referring again to my operating, said, “ I hardly know how to
define your operation ; I snould call it guttectomy. 1 asked him
it he had reaa the latest edition of Jacobson’s “ Operative
Surgery ;” but he could not do this, because heTias not the time,
and his work must consist largely of routine office duties; but he
nevertheless will give an opinion on any subject which may come
under his notice, and perhaps against a man who has a greater
knowledge of the subject than he; but the man has been
labelled mad, so that anything he may say is discounted or
laughed at.
At last, after four weeks here, and when I was really contem-
plating taking strong measures for my release, the Superintendent
of Kew appeared, and I am sure was glad to tell me that I would
leave my present place of abode with my wife and children at the
end of the week ; but he said : “ Although you have the Kew
chain off, you will still have the Kew collar on—that is, you will
be one of my boys on probation —and I am sure Mrs. Farmer
prefers it this way,” which was not quite true. However, I
suppose he thought she would. It gave me great pleasure to
notice that he brought down a load of female patients in his
waggonette, with a nurse, which struck me as a very kind action.
It was a charming- Sunday morning. I have it on good authority
that this good fellow does not like the work, and this does not
surprise me, as he must see a lot of the iniquities of the present
system.
On one occasion my wife came to see me, and told me that my
father was not expected to live, and he wished me to come to
him. She said: “I telephoned to the Superintendent; but he
will not let you go.” So I spoke out my mind freely. The lady
c


who conducted the private hospital said something, and I said,
“Now, do tell the doctor that my wife’s visits upset me, and must
be discontinued,” but I do not think she did. Of course, every-
body obeys the doctor.
Naturally the fact that my father was lying ill and asking for
me did not improve my peace of mind, and it annoyed me to think
that I was willing and able to go, and yet in this, as in everything
else, was crossed. Then, again, another thing used to disturb my
mental calm, and that wag the fact that I would be told half that
was going on by one friend, and when another friend came down
I would question him, and often the stories would not piece
together ; then I would infer that an untruth had been told, and
consequently would accept everything else told me with doubt and
distrust; and this sign of “suspicion"’ is another grave one ; but
you see how a very clear-headed sane man miuht with some
reason be proved suspicious if his friends regarded him as of weak
intellect and thought it better to suppress things. What a dread-
ful thing is this want of faith in one another and how harmful to
our peace of mind ; in fact, it makes life a most unhappy business
altogether.
The trouble with me was that I could pretty well tell what was
going on, and knew that they were bungling over little matters
which one could have straightened up in no time. Well, in spite
of all doubts and suspicions, I was glad to see my wife arrive at
the private hospital with a waggonette full of luggage and two dear,
little sunny faces on a delightful, bright, sunny morning, and, as
I was eager to grasp at any straw, regarded this as a good
omen.
My good friends at the hospital, who had all been as kind and
considerate as possible, put my luggage in, and off we went for a
trip to the hills, but again there was the Kew sword dangling
over my head, and I did not even now know whether somebody
might not be watching me to see that I did not perform some
insane act. However, we spent a most pleasant month, but I had
to get money from the Master-in-Lunacy, and the cheques were
quite enough to make me feel that I was still a Kew patient, as
they bore the signature of Mr. Webb, and Master-in-Lunacy
underneath. Not only that, but everybody else knew. Of course,
one does not bother much about this, and I always have objected
to trying to conceal anything, because it cannot be done, and is
not worth bothering about.
The trouble in all cases is not what has happened, but what is
said to have happened. It was encouraging to receive at this
stage letters from the Master-in-Lunacy saying what he was doing
in connection with my business affairs, and it is interesting to note
how this kind gentleman does unpleasant duties in the most
agreeable fashion. The people of this district wanted me to com


mence practice, but I could not act, as I had no idea when I was
to be released, and to a man who has always decided for himself
this was particularly annoying.
Then we got to three months since the day of my arrest, and as
I had been told that three months had been spoken of as the time
I wrote to the Superintendent asking him to release me, as my
wife was not well, and it was necessary to be settled, to which he
replied that I had better rusticate a little longer, and in order to
be released it would be necessary to present myself at Kew for
examination ; but I had quite enough unpleasant recollections of
Kew, and was not anxious for another visit, and did not feel too
happy at the receipt of such news.
However, we decided to come back to Melbourne, and saw the
Master-in-Lunacy, who said, “ The Superintendent does not care
to release you, so you had better get an outside certificate,” which
I at once did, and after two days I received a note of discharge
to our great relief, as my wife was beginning to feel as disturbed
as I about it.
On interviewing the Master in Lunacy the day after my release,
he told me how it had got about that the day before this was
granted I had been seen going to two patients in Carlton. I said,
“ Who told you ?” and he said, “ Oh, I will not tell you, but it was
a medical source.” It struck me that they might now, at all events,
leave a poor fellow creature alone, for they had broken up my
practice and deprived me of many things that I prized; but it is
useless to dwell upon such trivialities, and it is only the reflection
of our poor, weak human nature in the nineteenth century.
Thus closed the most eventful year of my life, with three
months of pretty acute sufiering, and if I had not stuck manfully
to my guns 1 should not have been here to tell the story,
but condemned to a life of punishment, as so many
have been, and lit is surprising how one’s nearest and dearest
will sometimes hurt him unintentionally. If one did not regard
these little lapses as results of our over-civilisation, or, in a word,
as pathological, it would be hard to forgive those who had got us
into such trouble. However, everything happens for some good
purpose, and this, I feel sure, was no exception to the rule.
New let us briefly pass over the circumstances which led up to
any committal to Kew.
In the first place, great stress has always been laid upon my
family history because my sister died in an asylum and my brother
is in one. What are the facts 1 My mother died when we were child-
ren ; my eldest sister was eight years, I was six years, my brother
was four years and my younger sister was fourteen days old. A
sister between the last two died from “ teething,” I suppose. My
father kept the home together for a while, with the help of a good
housekeeper, but eventually it was broken up and we were scat


tered about with different friends ; then we were brought together
again.
After a time, my elder sister, who was a girl of some spirit
became a little unmanageable, and my father, being a widower,
had no means of controlling her. She used to escape from home,
so, after being found one day miles from home, she was put in the
Ararat Asylum. I was then only a boy about eighteen, but did
not feel happy about it and took her out on probation myself;
but there was no mother to look after her, and she was sent back
to Ararat to pine away and die, as many other poor people have
done from sheer, often unintentional, neglect of their friends. I
remember she was always treasuring up eggs, and have no doubt
that had she been married to the man of her choice, who was
thought to be beneath her, she would have been not only a useful,
but a bright and happy member of society ; but we are such an
enlightened people that Nature’s dictates are quite too com-
monplace to follow. However, there will come a time, and
that before long, when some thought will have to be given
to her wishes, and although I should be very sorry to get
back to a savage-like way of living, I feel sure that we are over-
civilised in some respects, but barbarians in other.
In reference to my brother, his education was neglected, and he
was not up to the standard of a boy, and later a man, in his 1
station. My father could not manage him, and so he, too, was
sent to an asylum. A medical friend said to me one day, “ Bob
has probably just missed being a genius.” His head was a little
deformed, and it was supposed that this was due to the bones
uniting too early ; and it was suggested that had these bones not
united in this fashion he would have had a large head, conse-
quently a large brain, and therefore would have been a clever
man. But his head was small and mis-shapen, and therefore it
was’thought that he could never develop mentally.
What dreadful harm these theories of ours bring about. For
instance, a child is born with what we think is a deformity of the
head. The friends call the doctor’s attention to it. He looks
grave, measures it, and says you must be careful; and at once
sows the seeds of doubt in the parents’ minds, and so from his
suggestion the child is not taught. He or she grows up, and,
being a little behind other children of the same age in learning
or worldly cunning, is regarded as abnormal, or imbecile, or
simple; and in the present day will probably get into a Lunatic
Asylum unless very fortunate.
There is no doubt that if we would only take our responsibilities
on our shoulders, and try to train every case to be of some use,
instead of pushing the responsibility on to the State, a consider-
able amount of available energy could be utilised which is now
wasted; and it is gratifying to know that something is being done
in this matter by philanthropic medical men.


You see it is the suggestion which does harm, and this, too,
plays a very large part in connection with what is called
“heredity.” Take a patient with a cough. The father or mother
has died fiom consumption, and in the present day everybody talks
of his and her family’s ailments, so that the doctor of course
gets to hear of it and discusses the dangers with his patient;
perhaps tells him he has a patch at the apex of one lung. He
concludes that he has consumption ; has been told that it is an
incurable disease’ throws up the sponge and gradually pines away.
We have no idea of the great part suggestion plays, not only in
medicine, but in every walk of life, and we should, one and all,
try to make people develop their will power and throw off many
ailments of a trivial nature too often absurdly magnified by the
nervous physician into a serious case. The trouble, of course,
arises through our thinking too much of our petty ills through not
having sufficient healthy occupation to employ ourmindsand bodies.
Thus I start with a bad family history, Then one has not as much
money as others in the same station ; he prefers to buy books even
at the risk of his dress appearing shabby. He commences his
medical course without any means; he does not go out because he
cannot spend as others, and does not like sponging on fellow-
students, so keeps to himself, and is regarded as a little bit odd;
perhaps he is made a butt of, but that does not worry him, becausehe
has his goal ahead, and is determined to get there by any fair
means if possible. Later he marries as a medical student because
he has a “ faith ” that all will go well if he work honestly, even
though he has not a large banker’s account.
A fellow-student once said to me : “ I suppose you are afraid
to go out much lest the knowledge you are always cramming into
your head may fall out.” I said: “Yes.” And he thought I
was quite serious, and repeated it to the others as a great joke.
However, it afforded him amusement and certainly did not hurt
me. Then time goes on and your determination to keep to a
marked-out course again makes you peculiar or eccentric in the
eyes of your fellows, and in doing this one sometimes gets in other
people’s way, and, no matter how absolutely just, he makes
enemies, because he gets position or goods which they want. This
jealousy is an interesting business, and one sees it poking its vile
head out in all sorts of unexpected places. Of course it is another
evil result of our present mode of living and want of Christianity.
Then from leading a life of moderation you are enabled to do
more work than the average man, and if others cannot do it they
start the suggestion that you will break down ; e.g., I happened to
be busy at some mental work a little time ago and could not
attend a patient. The medical man who did attend informed my
patient that he was sure I would have a serious breakdown in
health from overwork some day. The suggestion catches on, and


if the subject happen to be of weak will he is at last forced by his
friends to his bed or into an asylum. They do not seem to recog-
nise that people are not all alike, and that the quantity of work
people can stand without going to pieces is purely relative.
In my case a theory had been formulated, and it was concluded
that I must go mad.
Then one gets a large practice; is successful with his work; thinks
it quite enough to occupy his mind, and is enthusiastic perhaps to
a degree not understood by his colleagues. He sits up all night
with his cases if he think it necessary, and this is thought to be
a rather silly thing, and again the report goes abroad that he must
collapse mentally. No man can stand it. Then I go up for
examination for higher degrees, as 1 consider it my duty to have
them, seeing that lam doing senior work ; but do not pass. In
connection with these examinations, I remember one day remark-
ing to a University man in a joke that 1 was going in for General
Paralysis of the Insane. I said, “ You see how my hands tremble
and my face twitches.” It struck me after that it was a silly joke
because all these matters are remembered. But even this had a
purpose apparently.
After my examinations a well-known surgeon remarked:
“ Farmer must have been mad to attempt the two degrees.” Ido
not suppose he meant the speech to be taken literally, but, re-
peated by a man or woman anticipating or possibly desiring such
a consummation, it weighs, and the suggestion “ catches on.”
Then the Hospital elections came on, in which 1 had a consider-
able amount of discussion with my fellow - practitioners, and
annoyed some of my closest friends because I refused to hang
about the polling-booth and ask for votes, or to buy votes or to
vote for myself. Of course, I was defeated, but did not expect
anything else, and merely wanted to vindicate a principle. I had
still been reading hard and following up all the trains of thought
in connection with pathology, bacteriology, medicine, surgery, in-
sanity, &c., and was disappointed in many instances at the theories
regarding causation of disease.
Then I began to look for something original, and two cases I
had conclusively pointed out to me that our methods were not
satisfactory.
One was a man. He had been to several surgeons, and came
to me complaining of pain in the region of the vermiform appen-
dix. I cut down, and was surprised to find so little trouble,
which was not at all in proportion to the urgency of his symptoms.
The appendix was removed, and he improved wonderfully—in fact,
pronounced himself well.
However, some three months after he came to me with a pain
in some other part of the abdomen, and I questioned him as to his
mode of living, and found out that he wanted to get married to a


CPi tain young woman, but had to keep some members of his family.
What this man wanted was what is usually styled love from this
woman. As he cannot get this, he comes to me for the next thing
to it, namely, sympathy and advice. I told him there was
nothing in the way of disease there, and to get married, when he
would be well, his present discontent having been set right.
Another case about the same time. Aboy had acute pain in the
same region, and, although the surgical interference was not great,
he got better, and 1 hear is now very well. He had been suffer-
ing for a considerable time from this abdominal pain, and in both
these cases the mind had more to do with the cures than the
surgical operation.
Then I began to think and go into my cases, and suddenly it
struck me that I had discovered something which, if put forward
in a proper fashion, might do a lot of good, and it was my enthu-
siasm in this matter that got me into trouble, for, on asking on©
medical man about a committee to whom I might propound my
views, he said, “ So-and-so is not to be trusted,” etc., etc., and
then on the advice of a lay friend, I thought of getting a mixed
committee together, i.e., some medical men and some repre-
sentative citizens, as I wished to have a fair Rearing and knew
that any new theory would be opposed by my medical brethren, if
they could not see things as I did.
Then I called upon a University professor and teacher of my
own, whose industry and attention to duty have always impressed
me strongly. He wished to know what the theory was, but I told
him that 1 preferred to wait and discuss the matter at my own
house, when I should have all the facts. I fear he did not like
this, because it showed want of faith in him or his judgment. I
talked to him about seven years of plenty and seven years of
famine, and said that I feared we were not very happy at the
present time on account of our want of foresight and moral control.
Hitherto I had implicitly done as he had told me, and, no doubt,
he felt vexed because I now dared to think for myself. However,
this gentleman, after I left him, took a cab down to Collins-street,
and said I was dangerous, and must be locked up ; but I was by
this time “ signed up.”
I believe this idea took its origin in the following
way ; —“ I had often said that the sacrifice of a few Jives
was nothing in the building up of a nation, meaning that my own
earthly comfort Was nothing to saving lives and building up the
nation, and even if it cost me my life that would be nothing if
my fellow-men were to reap any gain.” This was twisted about,
1 suppose quite unintentionally, to mean that several lives of
patients would have to be sacrificed in carrying out my theory.
Then my interviews with the gentleman who signed me up
were amusing. The first time I saw him was in consequence of


receiving a note from him, type-written, asking me to see him
about my theory, as he would like to publish my views in the
Intercolonial Medical Journal. Then he came over to my house
and asked me what I thought of the Hospital elections, to which I
replied that I was quite indifferent about them, and I believe he
said, “You consider them too trifling to bother about?” I said,
“Yes.” Then he showed me a letter a medical man had
written, which we agreed was difficult to understand. Then he
touched upon the morality of Victoria, and I said, in answer to a
question about “incest,” that I believed it did occur occasionally
in country districts, but knew nothing about it. I said that I
feared there was a good deal of immorality in Melbourne at
present. Then touching upon my theory he said, “ Have you
written it out?” I said, “No.” But he said it would take a
great mind to discuss a large theory without notes. I replied that
I was willing to make statements first, which could be proved or
disproved by the ordinary methods of observation and inquiry,
and that all I wanted was a fair and impartial hearing.
How he got his facts for committing me I can never understand,
but probably these had come from others. I believe it was on this
day that I took him over the book of French statistics which
figured in my papers at Kew.
Then after I was pronounced a lunatic every little thing was
brought up. For instance, two or three patients of mine com-
plained of the pain produced by transfusion under the breast, at
the time the fashion among surgeons. So I said, “ Oh, I will try
it on myself and see if it does hurt.” This was considered a very
queer procedure, and I was told that I might get an abscess or
something else, although I am not by any means the first surgeon
who has punished himself for his patients.
You can see from the foregoing how easily a man may be
wrongly put away in an asylum or oven in a gaol, and I venture
to assert that if every case in these places were gone into, there
would be a surprising amount of injustice discovered.
It is surely wrong that a man’s wife can put him away and
keep him there if so inclined, especially as the woman of the
present day is too often quite irresponsible at times, and does
things one moment which she would gladly cancel the next, if it
were not that her self-love prevented her.
In reference to asylums I verily believe that :
Firstly.—A large proportion of the patients are quite sane, and
would be judged so by any reasonable man or body of men, but
are very often there to whitewash some outside person or persons,
or because they are a nuisance or a drag on their families, who
are orthodox people, and they are heterodox, or because they have


been sent in by some great physician, who never can make a
mistake —o tempora, 0 mores 1
■Secondly. —Another group, quite glad to remain where they
are and avoid working outside, assume signs and symptoms of
insanity.
Thirdly.—Another group assume signs and symptoms of
insanity because they have been badly used by the world outside.
Fourthly.—Another group, although complying with the ordi-
nary signs and symptoms of brain disease, could be cured if proper
treatment were adopted.
In nearly every case I believe some kind of work could be done,
but we prefer to keep them a drag on the State; and we have all
these asylums and their officers, and they, like our gaols, must be
kept filled and the officers employed, in much the same way that
diseases must be found for doctors, and wars to maintain large
armies. “The supply creates the demand.”
In reference to my own case, I have no ill-feeling towards
anybody ; in fact, am now glad that circumstances afforded me
such an excellent opportunity of observing for myself. I believe
that the whole affair was the result of a mistake. r lhe saddest
feature of the whole business was the manner in which my children
suffered, and this is an aspect which we all ought to regard before
punishing a parent.
Are the people in Kew very different from those outside at the
present time 1 I think not. For if one pass through town he
sees people rushing about newspaper offices devouring supposed
facts too often not based upon truth, and drawing inferences
therefrom. These people know all about the war, although
possibly quite ignorant of the geography of Africa, and they talk
and disseminate all sorts of wrong impressions which the
■cable notices on the following day contradict. But they have
served their purpose by affording temporary gratification to a
section of people who live on what is called excitement; but
excitement is closely allied to passion, and passion is one of the
manifestations of insanity, and there the thing goes on, so that we
outside are not so very different from the unfortunate people whom
we punish by depriving of their liberty.
If we were to question the masses of people whom we see daily
■rushing about, all very busy they will tell you, 1 wonder what
percentage could toll you the object of all the fuss. Too often I
fear their movements are quite purposeless. They persuade them-
selves by some extraordinary process of reasoning that they are
■doing something towards building up the Empire, but they are not.
Speaking of newspapers. Some time ago I took a letter to one
of our leading papers. It was not inserted, and on enquiring from
one of the men on the staff the reason why, he said, “ Your


letter was truthful hut not expedient.” This paper takes up
several lines daily in informing its readers that it speaks the
truth.! And so the farce proceeds. We gather our supposed facts
from the papers and draw inferences from these facts, and too
often they are not true, but are what a certain section of the
people for their own selfish ends wish us to think are true. But
in addition to this conscious perversion of the truth, we have
unconscious fallibility (if I may use the expression). For instance,
a medical friend of mine had been to call upon a sick colleague.
He told me of it and said : “ Dr. is going to the Falls of
Niagara for a trip.” As this gentleman had been kind to me and
my family I sent him a walking-stick with a note saying that I
hoped he would find it useful in climbing the Niagara Falls. On
meeting him some time after, he said ; “ Who told you I was
going to the Falls ?” I told him, when he said : “ Well, he must
have imagined it, for I never had any idea of going to the Falls,
and certainly never told him.”
This is only an example of what goes on hourly in our midst,
and the mistakes made will be in direct proportion to the excit-
ability of the people.
The truth can never be wrong for the majority, my newspaper
friend to the contrary ; and the sooner this is recognised the
better. Indeed it is the lack of truth which is destroying our
peace of mind.
Again, just look at the cables of to-day ; the incapability of the
people entrusted with transmitting the news, or those receiving it,
is striking, for we rarely get a correct message as to casualties,
and as a result numbers of people suffer unnecessary suspense and
pain. All part of the bustle, excitement and purposelessness of
our actions. Again it will not do.
I take it that we have chosen good men in whom we have every
confidence to defend us, and, such being the case, we should pro-
ceed quietly and steadily with our work, and wait until we are
called upon to assist if necessary, and not allow an outside trouble
to affect us and throw all our machinery out of gear ; and the
greater the strain the calmer should we become, so that clear
thought, which means sound judgment, should direct our actions.
But is not the war the outcome of quarrels among ourselves? Of
course it is. We fight among ourselves —indeed, I did hear the
other day that one brother had been trying to put another in gaol
and then attack our neighbours. But we usually consider that
happiness is not possible without peace, and although we all wish
for happiness, we are never satisfied except when attacking some-
body else. Oh, the inconsistencies of man. We were never sent
here to fight oae another. Of that I feel sure.
As a matter of fact, it is just as hard to steer one’s little ship
clear of rocks outside of the Kew Lunatic Asylum as it was in it.


because as a class we have not the one interest at heart—namely,
thought and consideration for our fellow-man ; but are ail
struggling for our own ends, and yet are consistently opposing
our own interest by not considering the majority. “No selfish
man or woman can possibly be happy.” I spoke just now of our
want of confidence in those above us, but does anybody trust his
neighbour nowadays 1 I think not.
Here is an example :—A man comes into your consulting
room ; you give a*certificate saying that he requires rest. After
a few days the patient brings a letter saying that the Board for
which he works would like to know the cause of illness. Asa
matter of fact I had not decided at the first visit. But, apart from
that, it ought to be quite sufficient for a physician to say a man
requires rest from work, and there should not be any question
about it.
Here, again, the want of faith is brought about by physicians
standing up in courts and talking nonsense, which the average
layman can see through, or giving certificates for a fee. So that
we who are the guardians of people’s health and happiness are no
longer trusted as we should be. Another factor, too, is this, that
when people are not sufficiently occupied they have more time
to meddle with matters which should be left to those who are
admitted to know best.
We are pickling a nice lot of rods for our own backs—or those
of our children—and shall some day feel their strokes.
It is interesting to note how easily a man can be put into an
asylum. His wife may be ill—and nearly every woman is in that
state nowadays, or thinks she is—as a consequence she is irritable
and unreasonable. She perhaps worries her husband, who in turn
gets irritable and cannot or is not allowed to sleep. Than he
“ changes” in his manner; perhaps is a little unreasonable him-
self and absents himself from home. The busy female friend (1) of
the wife now anives on the scene, and she fans the wife’s jealousy.
Then the nerve-storm before described comes on. All sorts of
things are said and done ; the physician is called in by the wife,
who tells him of the husband’s peculiarities of late. He meets the
husband, and by this time has made up his mind that the husband
is mad, or, possibly for selfish reasons, chooses to think so. He
treats the husband in a patronising fashion, different to his usual
custom, which enrages the unfortunate husband and gives this
wise physician plenty of “ facts as observed by myself” to go on.
This physician calls upon another physician, a friend of his, and
describes the facts, with considerable retouching, especially if the
individual be a prominent man and the affair is creating a sensa-
tion. Ido not say that he intentionally exaggerates, but he is
excited, and so his tongue runs away. The second physician calls
upon the patient, who thinks it strange, and is reticent. No facts
43


are observed by tbe second doctor indicating insanity, except the
patient’s reticence ; but he has heard enough, and the patient has
perhaps annoyed him, so that his judgment is in abeyance, and the
man is duly signed up and sent to a lunatic asylum.
He will now be made insane by the manner in which he has
been tricked and cheated, and if he openly rebel will remain there
for all time, or if, under all the strain, he maintain his mental
equilibrium, he may still remain there, unless his wife wants
badly to have him out. So that practically this man is put away
upon the word of his wife, who may be a little ofi the normal line
herself from jealousy or some other cause, too often the result of
interfering friends.
I shall now run through a few of my own illnesses during my
term of insanity. A friend of mine remarked the other day
“ Farmer, I thought you had too much will power to get influenza.”
I replied I never had it.
“ Well,” he said, “ I am glad to hear it, because I thought you
were too strong a man for that.”
As I told you before, it was sympathy that I was craving for
and did not want to shake otf my trouble, as I wished to get away
from Kew.
After leaving Kew I progressed favourably in health, until
again worried about mv family not coming to see me as often as
desired, because my good little wife was forbidden by the doctor,
when I developed attacks of what my attendant called
“ asthma,” and it quite agreed with all the symptoms and signs of
that disease.
Then, later, I developed a pretty acute pain in the region of the
liver, with throbbing, and regretted that I had no thermometer
to take my temperature, and was not anxious to make a fuss
lest a surgeon might be called in to operate, and although I did
not fear this operation, it was my one desire to keep well and get
released.
Then, again, sometimes after my wife’s visits—indeed, nearly
always—l was upset because it annoyed me to know that she was
transacting business with all sorts of people, as I think that this
is not a woman’s role in life, and it had always been my desire to
keep her out of business concerns. It was sometimes hard to
conceal this, and I used to get uneasy lest they would stop her
visits altogether, as even now I did not hesitate to express
disapproval in one’s usual fashion.
Well, sometimes I would get an acute attack of vomiting after
such interviews, and was jaundiced. Now, acute pain and throh-
ing in the neighbourhood of liver, and jaundice and vomiting, and
in addition a temperature, would have meant possibly surgical
interference. My good friend at Kew sent down a brother
practitioner to see me, but by the time he came I had gr


the above enemies in subjection, and was thus saved an illness
which at this time would have delayed my release.
I did suffer from bodily ailments, but did not want medicine, as
I knew that if back in my old positron surrounded by my
family I should soon get well, but the discontent and longing for
something in the way of sympathy from those near and dear to
me caused me to have asthma, jaundice, pain in my side
and vomiting, and in all probability a temperature (which I could
not take).
Nearly all our bodily ailments can be traced to such a cause, and
while such is the case, why not treat the cause either by
persuading ourselves that we must conquer this feeling of
discontent, or, if the desire be reasonable and right and such a one
as our consciences approve of, gratifying it ? And here it is that the
true physician should come in and give us moral courage and
support, but somehow in the present day he so seldom can get at
the absolute truth that his advice is often useless, or he unfor-
tunately gives advice which is of advantage to himself primarily
and to his patient secondarily. My cough was a source of
considerable anxiety to those about me.
At this time influenza was raging, and it, like so many of our
diseases of the present day, presented many phases, but the
physician must give a name to things. Indeed, the patient
usually insists upon it, and if it be the fashion to have influenza,
of course everybody gets it, except those who through superior
will power, or through being too much occupied with their work,
have not time to think about illness.
It is interesting to note that there is very little typhoid this
year. Why? Because everybody almost has had his disease, which
is influenza, and is not due for another bout of illness yet ; and we
too often encourage people in these foolish notions ; some of us
in a perfectly conscientious fashion, because we believe in all we
read, and others because money is our god, and we must make
large incomes and encourage people to remain sick, because they
like it. And nowadays it is often more necessary, from a selfish
point of view, to please people than cure them, and if you say their
ailment is a slight one they do not like it, but prefer the
gloomy individual, who, by giving a grave outlook in each
and every case—in sporting parlance, stands on velvet—because if
the patient recover he has made a great cure, and if he die he has
diagnosed the case accurately, which another better type of
practitioner has made light of, often purely in his patient’s interest,
and at the danger of being considered a fossil or fool, or both j
but they say, “ We like Doctor So-and-so because he tells us the
worst.” Yes, and panders to the whims of his patients.
A short time ago a young man consulted me with a slight cough
and wheeze on his chest. He had led a really good life, and was
45


about to be married, but, being conscientious, he consulted me lest
he might not be well enough to marry. J, after an examination,
cheered him up, and begged him to get married, telling him at the
same time that there was nothing to worry about in his chest, and
assuring him that the comfort and sympathy of his future partner
would soon lift him out of his despondent condition. However,
he goes to an up-to-date specialist, who, after examining him, tells
him he is in consumption, with the result that he very soon spits up
blood and does not sleep, has a racking cough and cannot eat,
loses weight, has night sweats and is packed off to the country,
and will in all probability die of consumption from nothing more
than “suggestion.”
Bother such practitioners. They kill more people than a foreign
invasion would, but we are told “ how advanced we are and how
things are discovered now which were not known before.” As a
matter of fact, they never existed until medical men put the
ideas into the heads of people.
I have had all the symptoms above stated, and had I been an
idle man should no doubt have often consulted a specialist, and
might have been frightened to death many times. However, I have
escaped. Of course, the übiquitous tubercle bacillus was also found
in the sputum of the above case. The man above will read all
about consumption, and will develop every symptom.
Again, take the case of a lady who has been confined. She may
be the wife of an influential and well-known man. After three or
four days the nurse discovers a temperature ; then the specialist
is called in. He discovers something septic ! Delightfully vague.
The good general practitioner who has confined her is alarmed.
He transmits his fears quite unintentionally to the patient, who
now knows all the moves on the board, and often goes from bad
to worse, and dies from sheer fright; whereas if left alone to
nature she would have got well.
I have often had the greatest fights to keep a patient alive
when my nurse has thoroughly decided that he or she must die ;
and the moment my back has been turned, by thought or
sometimes word, has given the patient to understand that it is
impossible to live. Here one is fighting not one will but several.
We have no idea what part suggestion plays not only in medicine
but in every walk of life, and I should think that, if we could get
at accurate statistics, the number of people annually frightened to
death would be considerable—because we know so much.
“ Oh, the dear old days
And the simple ways.”
The dear old practitioner who plodded along and helped wee
babies into the world was a good type, and we shall have to get
back to something like him. We have progressed too fast, and
46


much that has been built up will have to be pulled down,
because many of our theories are not beneficial to mankind in
general. I take it that the true physician is oue whose sole
desire is to help people by supporting them, and giving them
moral courage to face the ills which flesh is heir to, not to
frighten them with all sorts of theories, which too often will not
bear analysis.
Take as an example the remedy for septicoemia—antistrepto-
coccic serum. Thts is used for a time, and then the trusting
physician is told by the bacteriologist that in all probability the
streptococci are not the cause at all, but the staphylococci and
several other poor little things with long names. Such inexactness
as this will never do, and points to our gross inaccuracy in a
matter which even to an intelligent layman is hard to under-
stand. But again, L say we must have a sensation, and every
practitioner has his own little bag of tricks to show the patient’s
friends.
There is another reason why certain of these individuals adopt
the grave outlook, and that is because it is so pleasing to their
vanity to find something which another practitioner has not been
able to find. Again, this mean self-love and victory at the
expense of another practitioner, perhaps a mucli better man in
reality.
Regarding epidemics, how interesting it is to watch their pro-
gress. A disease starts possibly in Jlngland. The symptoms,
thanks to our ready means of communication, are sent out here
perhaps by cable. Everybody reads them; then, after a reason-
able time, because somebody must bring it, a person on a ship or
in Melbourne gets it, and very soon everybody follows the leader,
simply because we are always thinking'of our bodily ailments and
sensations, and are not fully and healthily employed. If it arrive
here very soon the air has carried it.
We are imitators to a degree, even to the extent of taking our
own lives ; for instance, how often do we find several people
copying one person in this. Take again the case of appendicitis.
A surgeon discovers that there is a certain spot where pain should
be felt if this disease be present. The patient goes to several
surgeons, who cannot find reasons for his anomalous abdominal
symptoms. Then he goes to a man who devours everything that
is written greedily; he points to the spot with his finger and says :
“ There is your pain with which the patient concurs ; and I
believe this causes a determination of blood to the part, and, if he
be handled, he will get congestion of this part, and in time there
is an exudation of blood cells and the patient is said to have an
abscess, for which we operate, and be is persuaded he is cured.
Here the proper treatment would have been to have gone into the
history, found out what was worrying him and get.his mind off


the disease, and the man will not only think he is better, but will
be better.
Now, since suggestion plays such an important part, it is surely
our duty to suggest what we know to be best not only for our-
selves, but also for the future benefit of our dear country; and the
first thing for us to insist upon is to get those women who can to
bear children, and to place as far as possible all those other unfor-
tunate people who cannot, through some physical defect, in the way
of doing so— i.e., correct the defects produced by our over-
civilisation.
Large families mean busy and happy mothers and industrious
fathers, who will not only spend enough energy for the support of
their families, but will probably do a little more, and this is an
asset to the country in which they live.
Small families too often mean over-indulgence to father, mother
and children, with all the instability connected therewith, and
general decadence, which we are now experiencing, because this
desire to have more pleasure or money grows with feeding, until
we hardly know where we are, and are never satisfied.
The objection to having children at the present day is a grow-
ing evil, and hardly a day passes that one does not have an argu-
ment with a patient about it; and, unfortunatelypmedical men too
often pamper women, and tell them that they cannot carry a child
on account of a displacement, or that they are too delicate ; and that
abominable curette is brought into requisition, to be followed by
a real illness in the shape of diseased ovaries and tubes, which in
time are removed, often resulting in a great alteration to the
woman’s mental and moral condition and the complete destruction
of a once happy home. Better to have a dozen children than a
delicate wife continually on the growl about something. Here
again Nature punishes us for our sins, because in such a case the
man and woman both know that they are doing wrong, and it is
a sin in the truest sense.
It is so easy to persuade ourselves that a woman will not
carry a child to full term if there be a large fee, because
money is our god ; and hero one cannot help regretting that the
doctor ever fixes a fee. It would be better for him if it were
possible to be supported by the State, and quite independent of
fees; and, indeed, the same might be said ot the church, for too
often the clergyman would like to speak his mind, but on reflec-
tion it occurs to him that in doing so one of his parishioners might
be annoyed, and as this gentleman contributes largely to his
stipend, he has to curb his tongue, to the detriment of the com-
munity at large and to his own dishonour. Again Mammon rules.
I do not know, but should think that the idea of a clergyman,
or doctor, or lawyer being a money-making machine is quite a
modern one.


These gentlemen, I take it, existed in the past for adjusting
and regulating people’s mental and bodily conditions, and were
the highest and most respected in the land ; but if we pander to
people’s vices, then we are the most despicable, because we all
know the evil effects of such practices.
Indeed, this greed for money is lowering the tone of the pro-
fessions more than any cause, and while every man who works
has a right to expect that he will be supported by his fellow-men
the accumulation of money should not be his sole aim.
Now, what is the cause of most of our present trouble? The
answer is the fact that women have got out of their sphere, and
are dominating men and ruling, or trying to rule, the world; and a
nice mess they are making of it, because, no matter what may be
said to the contrary, women as business people or leaders are
not a success, because she will get her way regardless of everybody
else; and I firmly believe that many of the littlenesses in man
are traceable to her influence.
In business she firstly craves consideration because she is a
woman ; and, starting with this advantage and concession granted
by the man, takes every opportunity of bettering her position in
her business transaction, and systematically lies or practises
deception of any description. Indeed, the business woman is a
dreadful monstrosity, and does much to frighten many of our best
men from entering into the married state.
Her place, of course, should be at home with her family, but
she prefers to be “ free,” and so she does not marry, often because
she prefers variety and to break up other happy homes, or if
married she bosses her husband and leads him a dance, perhaps
make him jealous by accepting attentions from other men. There
may not be any'sinful action, but simply a disregard for the feelings
of her husband, at whom she laughs and calls a silly old fellow for
being jealous ; and yet if he were not jealous she would not be
satisfied, because her vanity would not be partially appeased.
The unfortunate man, perhaps, hears another man quoted as
against himself, at which he “ performs,” and as the family is
usually under the wing of his wife, who is always with them, they
side with her, and the poor fellow is simply a nobody in the home,
which is entirely kept up by his own hard work. Thus he is
disgusted. He seeks company outside, takes to drink and neglects
his business, because the object for which he was working—
namely, the support of his wife and family—has been removed,
and he has been rather badly treated. Mind you, Ido not excuse
a man for such a course, but he is deserving of some consideration.
Eventually he gets into bad circumstances, and is turned out or
asked to shift for himself. The woman is then regarded as a
heroine, and has to take a shop or engage in some business for
herself and daughters, which brings them into the notoriety which
D


they have been seeking for, and enables them to try their
charms upon the different species of man —and nice sport
it is. She boasts of her conquests, and is envied by her
less attractive female friends, which is another phase of what we
call vanity. All this is the result of evolution—the growing
discontent of women—fed by the unwholesome novel of the present
day, which she greedily imbibes, and which suggests to her the
utter impossibility of any love affair running on without a break,
or any marriage being a happy one without the electrical business
so disastrous to the peace of mind of a man at all nicely adjusted.
They must have admiration, and will get it at any price ; it is a
pathological state, the result of suggestion and want of healthy
occupation. And yet to look and talk with a woman of this
nature she appears to be an ill-used, charming, sweet, kind, good-
natured person. How different to the ideal one imagines and does
sometimes see—namely, the quiet, peaceful mother with her large
family and devotion to her husband’s every thought and wish.
The man mentioned in the foregoing has by this time become
an outcast, and perhaps will get into a lunatic asylum or gaol, or
if he stay at home will have a very rough time.
Not long ago a young woman was abusing her father to me, but
I said : “ Your father is a man of very high principle.” “ Oh, yes,
he is that, but he is a wretch.” I said : “ Why She
replied: “He had no right to bring a lot of children into the
world he could not support.” Butl replied; “ You are all well
and happy and your father has probably become poor through
striving to keep you children in a pure atmosphere, perhaps
against great odds.” I know that this good man had considerable
trouble with his wife in order to insist upon her bearing children
in Nature’s way. And I believe that it is probable that if he had
been left to quietly pursue the even tenor of his way that he
would have been a successful man, but discontented women
interfere very materially with the tempers of men and un-
doubtedly unfit them for thinking clearly and sometimes make
the most just man unjust.
Only a short time ago, talking to a woman in the country who
wanted to get to the city to live, I asked her why 1 She said :
“It was so dull.” But 1 replied : “ You have your husband and
family, and surely that is enough for you?” She likes the
excitement of seeing people bustling about. She prefers to live
in lodgings, because a house is a nuisance to keep up, and she
cannot live far out because she “ loves ” the theatres, and so on
ad nauseam. In every case of this kind the comfort of others is
quite a secondary matter. And why do men not marry % Because
nearly every trusting man has been deceived at some time or
other, and is afraid to take on the contract; or he reads of the
matrimonial squabbles in our law courts, or he sees the numerous


couples in our midst who pull their own ways, or possibly he has
read of some man being kept in an asylum for his lady’s pleasure ;
and now that every woman must dress better, live better, keep a
larger house and cannot hear of starting life without a servant or
staff of such, he often has not the means.
But every male should take a wife, keep her and rear a family ;
and at the present time this is just as necessary, or more so, than
rushing off to war. It is interesting here to note man’s incon-
sistency. He wilt go off with all the noise and gush to fight for
his country, but he will not deprive himself of any comforts or
stifle desires for his country’s good when at home. "W hat we require
here at present is to struggle persistently and steadily with our
own weak natures, and, if possible, progress slowly and surely
without reverses.
We often hear of a woman sticking to her husband when in
trouble, for which she is praised, but too often it is her want of
head or heart that has got him into this fix. However, it is useless
to blame anybody in particular, as it is all the result of a process or
disease due to an unhealthy imagination, which has been running
on for some time: and what we, as true men, have to do is to be
patient, strong and very kind to women, and get them to have
perfect faith in us, for, of course, there is man
who struts about Collins-street, smokes expensive cigars, goes to
the races, backs horses and lives at his club. He cannot afford to
keep a wife, but prefers to destroy the happiness of a comfortable
home by leading the wife astray, or ruins a chaste woman, or
pushes one already ruined further down the ladder. This creature
will tell you that he pays his way, but he does not, and possibly
some unfortunate hard-working man is bearing patiently a burden
which is not his, while the first-named gentleman !—save the mark
—is strutting about his club, and looks with contempt upon his
victim because he has to work, or possibly holds him up as a fool
to the ridicule of his club friends. But you must not think that
these patient sufferers will not have a reward, or imagine that
they are blind to all that is going on. They know more than we
suppose, but their manliness restrains their tongues.
And here the man about town is not happy, nor can he per-
suade himself that he is, because the Power above who gets at us
through our own consciences hits very hard at times, and the
unfortunate woman in such a case suffers, too, and this, too, often
again reacts upon the patient, industrious husband, who, if lower
in the social scale, because he has not command of money, is
higher in the spiritual scale than his friend at the club who laughs
at him. How many women find out perhaps too late that they
have sadly injured a really good man by a little want of thought.
No, we are reverting to the barbaric custom of the female going
forth to engage in the chase and fight the battles of life, leaving


the male at home to take care of the house. This cannot go on ;
if it do for a while longer we shall all be engaged in hand-to-
hand warfare, for the nervous disturbances will get greater and
greater, and women and men will become more and more excit-
able, unreasonable, unjust and untruthful, so that we shall not
respect law or order or other people’s rights, and I believe solely
because women will not bear their children as Nature dictates; and
if I had anything to do with granting earthly rewards I would see
that the bearers of large families were looked after.
The present stage seems most opportune for bringing forward
a few ideas which have been running through my mind lately.
There is absolutely no doubt that we are at present anything
but contented, and I fear that our want of morality or absence of
self-control is a considerable, if not the chief, factor in our trouble.
Some time ago I had been working at pathology, and had read
that sarcoma of the ovaries was a rare disease. Then in my work
at the Women’s Hospital and elsewhere I saw eight cases in a very
short space of time. This worried me greatly, for the trouble was
that it seemed to be carrying off our young women considerably
under forty years—indeed, some not more than twenty years old.
We had already experienced the ravages of that other malignant
disease, namely, carcinoma or cancer; but here it was usual to see
women over forty the victims, and it was not quite so striking a
picture as that of seeing young women carried off by an incurable
disease.
Well, I at once saw that either the fact that it was a rare
disease was an erroneous impression or that it was very much
on the increase, and I fear that the latter is the correct inference
to draw.
Then I began to look for a cause, and, after considerable thought,
formulated certain theories, which seemed of such benefit to us all
that I became very enthusiastic and felt like a man who, having
climbed a great hill at considerable discomfort, had seen some-
thing interesting ahead, and was eager to get everybody else to
come and look, but still wished to have the thing fairly judged,
as I was afraid, if the matter were laid before a few of one’s
colleagues, the theory might be thrust aside if a little heterodox,
or, which is worse, if it happened to be considered an undesirable
theory, i.e., one interfering with our ordinary human desires of
the present day. Well, on discussing it with a friend, a public
meeting was suggested as the most desirable channel for giving the
idea a fair show, and it had occurred to me that a lecture on the
“ Decay of Nations,” to a semi-public meeting comprised of repre-
sentative citizens, would be a good idea. This suggestion was a
large factor in getting me into the trouble which I have described.
To proceed with the theory. I was impressed by the pale faces
of these women, and, indeed, this applies to most women of the


present day, and at once asked : “ What has become of the blood 1
It must be somewhere, because their faces do flush sometimes.”
Now, to begin with, I doubt very much whether menstruation
is a normal function, and I have a strong suspicion that it has been
brought about by our over-civilisation. It is a subject upon which
I have never been able to get any satisfactory information, and I
have no knowledge of its occurrence in what we are pleased to call
the lower and if the lower mammalia do not menstruate,
why should woman! I believe it is Nature’s way of pointing out
to us as strongly as possible that the femak is now fit to bear
children or perpetuate the race. Then you will say, “ But how
dreadful it would be for girls of the tender age of twelve or four-
teen to bear children !” Well, I believe this can be regulated,
and it is largely brought about by parents and friends,
who continually draw s the child’s attention to the matter.
For instance, girls discuss the matter with one another,
and their mothers watch them for this discharge to come on, and
if it do not come on after a reasonable time the child is perhaps
taken to the doctor by the over-anxious mother. As a matter of
fact, some girls remain perfectly healthy up to nearly twenty
years of age without it ; and if some can, all 1
What is the explanation 1 The girl’s attention is directed to
these parts by her mother, girl friends or the doctor. Possibly
she is examined if a little late in becoming “ unwell.” Then there
is a determination of blood to the generative organs by the mental
effect on the girl or by the examination. The organs become
congested, and there is an eseape of blood, which it is usual to
have once a month. The girl follows the fashion even in this, and
is then said to be a normal, healthy girl. I feel sure that many of
what we call normal functions are really abnormal, and that many
of what are called diseases are normal conditions ; but this is such
an age for discovering things. Take, for instance, the case of post-
nasal growths. Operations for this affection were so rife a little
while ago that one specialist suggested in a joke the advisa-
bility of insisting upon every child being operated upon, and
having them removed, and it is probable that these bodies are
quite normal ; but we must have our nine days’ wonder in surgery
and medicine, as in all other walks of life in the present day.
Assuming that blood is necessary for our existence, it seems to me
that any discharge of it is undesirable, and one cannot but regard
it as an abnormal function.
We are told that climate has such a lot to do with influencing
the menstrual flow, and that in warmer climates it comes on earlier.
May this not be the result of our suggestion, and too close atten-
tion to this function, or to the fact that women on going out to
these parts do not work, and, lying about, have more time to think
of it ? Then, again, women are often scarce, and they are influenced


in these ways to wish to marry earlier. I believe that if girls were left
alone by mothers and friends that this flow would not come on so
early, and I think that in all cases when it does come on it is an
indication that the girl should be married. In fact, I believe that
it should never be regarded as a normal condition. Once married,
it should never be seen, and here Nature points out to us this
fact by the woman ceasing to menstruate while she is carrying and
suckling, at the end of which time she is supposed to be
again ready for bearing children. Now what a boon it would be
to females to have this objectionable function banished, and if
they would carry their little burdens I feel sure that it might be.
Now mark what happens. When the girl arrives at a
marriageable age she obeys Nature’s dictates and has desires for
union with the opposite sex ; if she does not, then there is some-
thing wrong with her organisation.
Eudyard Kipling says, “ Man must go with a woman.” But
oftener than is usually supposed “woman must go with a man.”
But it is considered immodest to admit this, and she lies and says
she does not care for the act.
The art of deceit in woman by continual coaching has become
a very fine one, and she succeeds admirably in deceiving a good
number of people. This desire causes the flow of blood to the gener-
ative organs. If she is married at this time and does her duty by
bearing children, and has a reasonably large family, she will
probably pass through life a happy woman because healthy, and
will bring peace and comfort to her husband in his efforts to
earn the necessaries of life for his wife and children. If,
on the other hand, she does not marry then and abstain from
sexual indulgence, she goes on for a time ■ perhaps the dis-
charge from the congested generative organs escapes for a
while in a fairly satisfactory state, but oftener the blood
remains in the neighbourhood of the ovaries and tubes or
womb. Then mark what follows—we firstly get the congested
ovaries, so often seen and which give women such pain ; later
there is an exudation of blood serum, and we get what is called
cystic ovaries, or we may get an abscess—and here let me point out
that it is not decided quite satisfactorily as to whether germs are
necessary for the formation of an abscess or not—or we may get
tubercular disease, or cancer (carcinoma), or sarcoma, or cedema-
tous myomata, seen in women usually between thirty and forty
who have not married.
Now, I am going to launch a large theory, and that is that
simple inflammation, cysts, abscesses, tubercular deposits, cancer,
sarcoma or large oedematous myomata are all much the same in
nature, and that they are all products from the blood ( i.e ., serum
fibrin or cells), and that the cells seen in these different diseased
products are nothing more than altered blood cells ; and I want my


colleagues to examine this theory fairly. I believe that suggestion
alone has marked off these into different diseases, because in the
present day when physicians are manufactured at such a rate
theories are continually being manufactured also, and too often
they are not thoroughly looked into, but are blindly followed. In
this, as in all other things, we have run wild, and nothing is any
good unless complicated or difficult to understand.
Before leaving ihis subject, just ask yourselves where could
these cancer cells come from but the blood.
To prove what suggestion has to do with things, I will relate a
case as I heard it. A gentleman consulted a specialist in Collins-
street for a growth in his throat; he removed a piece of it and had
it examined microscopically by a capable pathologist, who pro-
nounced it malignant, i e., cancerous. The patient was told of this
and naturally thought his days were numbered, and if he had
allowed his mind to be ruled he would have pined away and died
of cancer in the throat. However, he consulted another specialist,
who assured him it was an innocent growth, and whom he believed,
with the result that it was removed and he was cured.
It he had believed the first doctor, the cell infilliation would
have gone on and invaded the parts, but h# did not believe
him and is alive to-day. In this case nobody was to
blame, because the difference between, for instance, irritated
epithelium and epithelioma (cancer) is so small that I believe
suggestion does everything. For instance, take the man, a
smoker, who gets a sore lip. He goes to the young surgeon, who
says, “ You have a sore there, and may develop a cancer.” The
man’s mind dwells upon it. There is a determination of blood to
the part and exudation of cells. Then everybody he meets talks
to him about it, and recommends his own pet surgeon, until the
man gets no peace until the knife has been brought into requisition.
And why is all this 1 Because we think so much of our ailments.
Now let me get back a little. Some time ago I was at the
Government Statist’s office looking up a few things, and a gentle-
man who had been working with Mr. Coghlan, of Sydney, showed
me some figures in reference to malignant disease in women. He
pointed out the increase, and I said, “Now, if you will produce
the birth rate you will see that as the disease rate has gone up
the birth rate has come down,” or I should put it the other way
about. This was shown to be the case, and it is not a coincidence but
cause and effect, and so surely as women neglect or refuse to
carry out the duties imposed upon them by Nature, so surely will
she punish us, and there is absolutely no doubt that*the bulk
ofthe misery in our midst—and there is plenty—is simply due to
our refusal to do what we know through our consciences to be right,
but what too often public opinion votes too hard or difficult to
carry out.


Now, what is going to happen with the birth-rate not increasing
as it should be and disease rife amongst us ? I take it
that population is necessary in order to maintain a sound
nation, but we seem to be content to live in the present and totally
disregard the future; and yet we call ourselves a patriotic race,
when we have very little national or patriotic spirit in our midst.
It must be altered, and surely the history of France, so often before
our eyes, should serve as an object lesson of our dreadful folly.
But not only is there this loss of people through our absurd
over-civilisation ; but the human beings who do struggle into
existence, usually under great protest, must deteriorate mentally,
morally and physically, and with disease so rife it would be
reasonable to assume that if the present state of things continue
we shall be swept away altogether.
It will not do, and there is no doubt whatever that in the present
war we are greatly handicapped by the fact that the Boers have
lived quietly and naturally, which enables them to stand more
hardship and offer such a stubborn resistance, and as we are
following Franc 3 in other matters, so we are in that of tempera-
ment, and the once cool Britisher will in time, in all probability,
become excitable, and not as responsible as he once was.
I repeat, scarcely a day passes that one does not have an argu-
ment with a patient about bearing children, but she says, “ I can-
not stand all the pain and misery of it, The sickness is so bad," &c.
(Speaking of this a lady some little time ago said, >l I am never
sick during pregnancy/’ Why 1 Simply because she has too
much will power to follow the fashion.) She has been schooled
into this idea by some lady friend, who prefers to shirk
her natural duties. There is prevention of conception and
tinkering after the woman has conceived, and all the hideous
business which too often breaks up a happy home and causes
the husband to lose the respect he has for his wife, and to
regard her as a machine for gratifying his low instincts.
Then watch the train of events. She, as the result of this, be-
comes irritable, hysterical, perhaps unreasonable, and drives him
away to seek sympathy elsewhere—at the hotel or club. They
each pull their own way, and finally drink is resorted to by one
or both, and they find their way to the court, to the lunatic
asylum, to the gaol, or, perhaps, the gallows. Thus a couple start-
ing out under the most favourable conditions comes hopelessly to
grief.
Take the other side. The woman has her dear, little children;
the husband arrives home after his day’s work to a little circle of
happy, beaming faces, and all are anxious to help him. He forgets
the anxieties of his business or work, and next morning goes
forth to work again, not in order to gratify his own selfish desires,
but to earn food and necessaries for his family. Then they grow


■up, and the father and mother find that they are surrounded by
strong hands, willing and glad to look after them. I suppose one
of the causes of lack of veneration or want of respect for the old
here is due to the fact that small families are apt to bring this
about by being made selfish through getting too many worldly
comforts and wanting more, or trying to eclipse somebody else who
is a little higher in the social scale. In the struggle the poor old
people are too often forgotten, and because they have some
deformity, often the result of a battle on their children’s behalf,
they are kept in the background, or possibly are not on speaking
terms with their children ; and yet the fathers will tell you that they
must educate their children and bring them up well, so can only
have two or three, which often means to educate them above their
station and receive in return the grossest ingratitude for their pains.
How often one hears, “ I cannot afford to bring up a large family,”
or “My wife is delicate.” What has made her so? There is usually
an answer. It is a significant fact that large families often do
flourish remarkably.
A few days ago I was riding on a tram with a friend who had
been looking about for a small farm. In the course of conversa-
tion he remarked, “You know there are only the two of us and
our little girl; it is a pity we have not a family to work a place
■with us.” He had married rather late and had seen the mistake,
for undoubtedly children nicely and properly brought up must be
lacking in something if they will allow their parents to be in
want. But, as a rule, in the case of large families the parents are
able to provide for themselves and have a little over for their
children, because there has probably not been the dissension and
family quarrels so often brought about by our refusal to obey
Nature’s laws.
But, again, apart from our own selfish considerations, what
is to become of our country if we go on as at present ? We shall
become bankrupt, because we shall not be able to develop our
resources and industries, and there will come a time when we shall
bitterly regret our self-indulgence ; but it may then be too late.
What should we think of a farmer who took his seed wheat and
■threw it into the sea or down a shaft, or after allowing the seed to
grow for a time on his farm, destroyed it ? I fear we should call
him insane and lock him up, and yet we are daily doing our best
to break the neck of our country by pandering to our vices and
doing things which any man who thinks knows to be wrong.
I tell you that every bit of energy has to be conserved, that
every life is an asset to the State and must be preserved if possible,
no matter how young or how old. Indeed, how often have we
seen a baby appear to keep a couple from drifting apart while it
was alive, but after its death disaster to the home setting in ?
And so with old people, you will see the confirmed old invalid,


■who never gets out of her bed, exercising an influence for good
merely by her existence in the house, and keeping a family together
which becomes demoralised as soon as the mother is dead. They
are instructive pictures and striking object lessons. Too often we
hear, “ Oh, he or she is a drag on the family, and is of no use
but I tell you that these despised elderly people are of use.
I sometimes think that many elderly people die of sheer heart-
ache or disappointment. We move at such a rate, and are so
inclined to'kick away the ladder that has helpedus up; and itisnot
the cancer or other disease they are said to acquire which kills them,
but the craving for sympathy which they want, but too often do
not get, from their children or others whom they have befriended.
Then, again, in the case of younger people, it is not the disease
which kills, but they are tired of things in general, and have
possibly been deceived in some way. More people die of what
we call broken hearts than is ever dreamt of.
No, we must take care of the young and old, and if every-
body would take a true pleasure in seeing his fellow-man not
only as happy as himself, but if possible a little bit happier, what
a difference there would be, and I am sure that the greatest
pleasure in life is in seeing after other people’s happiness and
comfort.
In connection with old people, it is often a repudiation of
debts, for you will see the young man, who has been helped by his
father to a great extent, calmly turn his back upon him when there
is“no more money, or give him to understand that he is a drag upon
him, or a disgrace to his “lordly” son. Such a one I would
punish ■ but no, he will be punished, never fear.
We are told that three-score years and ten is the age to which
man attains, but I do not see why people should die so early if
we were to live reasonably, and no doubt here suggestion has a lot
to do with the killing off of our elders. It is just probable, too, that
the year as described above is not the same as the year of the
present day, because everything is continually changing, and names
for duration of time have probably changed also.
But why are so many of our young people dying? Simply be-
cause they have no desire to live. Too often they have beem
deceived by their fellows, and find life a weary business. And
what makes the privilege of living a questionable one in the
present day ? The answer is the utter lack of truth, and,
consequently, want of faith in each other, which prevails, and the
desire to get to the top at any cost, at anybody else’s expense, and
in any way so long as the world does not see through our little
tricks. But it is so absurd to suppose that concealment is
possible for an indefinite time even from our fellows, and is very
much on the principle of the ostrich sticking its head in the sand
and imagining that its body is concealed.


The woman of the present day, too, is nomadic. Of course she
is, and must be on the move, because she is unsettled, and does
not know what she wants. It would be absurd again to abuse
her for this, as it is purely the result of evolution ; but the unfor-
tunate part is that too often she unsettles a staid, industrious
man by making him roam about with her, and the State loses his
services as a factor in building it up.
Then, again, look at this city of Melbourne, and think of the
number of men of my own type, e.g., lawyers, doctors, brokers,
agents of all descriptions, who are nothing more than parasites.
We do not produce anything, and the number is out of all pro-
portion to the requirements of the colony. Many of us are not
sufficiently busy, and have consequently more time to hatch the
vices which are not seen or heard of in country districts, but will
gradually find their way as the disinclination for work spreads to
these places.
It is interesting to note how professional men and other city
people so often resort to farming as a recreation, and here is the
natural instinct asserting itself. I know you will say it is the
desire for change, but I do not believe it. But Nature again
points out the necessity for expending energy by insisting upon
our taking exercise in order to be healthy. lam now using the
everyday argument adopted by most people. This, again, is nothing
more than pointing out in the strongest fashion the necessity for
expending energy ; but, again, we go for a walk or a ride ; it
never occurs to us that we might do some useful work, and amuse
ourselves at the same time.
A few weeks ago we could not get a servant, and my wife was
rather distressed about it. I noticed my little ones displaying
considerable intelligence, and expending energy in the playroom
in order to amuse themselves, and at once asked myself—Why
can they not help while we are without a servant 1 For instance,
make beds, sweep their room, etc., with the result that it was
suggested, and they readily did it, and were pleased to be of use,
and so it is with plenty of older people, who would like to be of
service, but hardly know how to proceed.
Another striking feature is our general selfishness ; for instance,
a person is running for a tram with a heavy bag, the weight of
which he has underrated, and consequently he has been retarded.
The conductor does not see him, but half-a-dozen passengers do;
but they will not bother to stop the tram. Why 1 Because it is
too much trouble, or because by delaying the tram it might
make the people a minute late for business. It does not occur
to them that this unfortunate person might miss his train
Up country, and so be kept in the city for hours.
And why this hurry 1 Simply to accumulate more money than
others, in order to more fully gratify our every wish and desire,


and so produce a weak, unreliable and unmanly race of people
with no moral control.
No, we simply grab for ourselves, and it is so absurd to suppose
that such conduct can lead to the formation of a stable nation, the
great essential of which is unity. What should we think of a
cricketing team in which each man plays for himself, and disre-
gards the averages of the other ten men, or tries to spoil them in
order to come out on top himself?
Some little time ago a politician, in addressing a constituency,
said, “ Australia for the whites.” I would say, “ Australia for
the whites, blacks or yellows,” and cannot see why because
custom or climatic conditions have altered people’s complexions
they should be different to us. I hope that the spirit of
Federation going on now between adjoining colonies may go on
until the world is federated and we are all one people, dwelling
together in brotherly love. There is plenty of room for everybody,
and it is a sad thing to read of human beings killing one another.
We are told that it is necessary, but I doubt it.
Again, what is one of the great troubles of the present age 1
The lack of truth, which in its turn brings want of faith
in one another, and, what is still worse, in a still higher Power,
who is always directing us through our consciences. But we think
it better to disregard this ; it is a nuisance to be corrected and set
right, and so easy to go our own way. But I tell you that power
to rule is a very grave charge and one not easily well carried out,
because man in the present dav is so apt to abuse his power and
be overruled by his own selfish desires, unless he give a very
attentive and ready ear to the voice of his conscience.
Now, one of the strongest desires is the sexual one (indeed, we
were taught that it is only second in strength to that of the pre-
servation of life), but at the present day we are simply placing it
before the preservation of life, while we are nullifying, as far as
possible, the object for which it was created, namely, the perpetua-
tion of the race.
It is absurd to raise a common animal instinct to such an
apotheosis, and is, I fear, another result of our over-civilisation
in one direction, which really means the gratification, to the fullest
extent, of every present earthly desire, quite regardless of all con-
sequences as to our future state or happiness; while, in other
directions, we are barbarians in the extreme, because we have no
sort of self-control, which is generally believed to be one of the
highest forms of development.
We eat in order to live, and do not live to eat, and in the same
manner we should use the sexual appetite—not to gratify our
morally perverted desire, but solely for the purpose of producing
a healthy and prolific race, and for no other purpose. It was never
introduced for any other reason.


If this be done a high sense of well-being and peace of mind will
take its place. We shall have to work for our offspring, and shall
become a happy, contented and good race of people in the truest
sense of the word ; and nobody will deny it. I often think of that
passage which is gabbled over by us so often but seldom analysed,
namely—“ We have erred and strayed from Thy ways like lost
sheep. We have followed too much the devices and desires of our
own hearts, and there is no health in us.” There can be no
happiness without Christianity in its highest sense, which causes
us to sink our own wishes and desires as much as possible for
the benefit of others.
I could prolong this discussion indefinitely, but must now draw to
a close, and in doing so shall again point out, firstly, that population
has always been considered necessary to develop the resources of
a country, and, secondly, that it is necessary that the people of a
country should do some kind of useful work in order to maintain
their own families. Man has, however, decided chat the first
statement is probably not correct, and has taken the reins
out of the Creator’s hands by interfering in a matter which
is ultra vires, and in doing this is bringing upon us all kinds of-
disease, with disinclination to work. When man yan
“ Instruct the planets in what orbs to run,
Correct old Time and regulate the sun ” (Pope)
he may dictate in such matters, but until then he had better not
go beyond his last, but take his proper place in the social scale.
Discontent is the disease of the present day, and it is a desperate
one, which will require a desperate remedy. Hence my reason for
speaking out.
There is no doubt in my mind about the remedy. It is to see
that every woman has as far as possible a husband who will
support her under all difficulties and trials, and a family of
children. Without the latter she cannot be a normal, healthy
woman ; and with discontented women we shall have plenty of
lunatics, criminals, and unhealthy people, as they have all
originated from the one source, namely, internal discontent, on
which follow excitement, then passion, then crimes, wars, etc.
Because if people fight among themselves they must carry the
quarrels outside, and so it is that men go to war.
A month ago I was visiting a male patient very much under
petticoat government. Standing at the foot of the bed with arms
akimbo the wife proceeded to tell me how he wanted to smoke
and she would not let him, and then related how two men she
knew had gone off to the war simply to get away from their wives.
1 could not help smiling and thought that if I were bounced in
this fashion I should feel inclined to do likewise. There are
many instances of this kind, but there is no doubt whatever that


if people are happily married there is no desire to separate,
because his wife and family are his first care.
There is another point. Some time ago several gentlemen,
whose word I can rely upon, said, “ You know man is polygamous ”
“Well then,” I said, “ if man is polygamous, woman has every
right to be polyandrous.” It strikes one as a calm procedure to
see a much-injured (Ijjman suing for divorce if his wife have made a
slip, whereas he may have sinned numbers of times. Then it is
surely wrong that one man who is poor should be imprisoned for
bigamy,while another who has money may have two or three wives
if he please. Of course, so long as divorce is possible, so long will
people take advantage of it in order to gratify some passing
desire, and one cannot help regretting that such a separation is
possible, as I feel sure that real happiness cannot be a consequence
of such a procedure, i really believe that every man starts out
upon his married career with the purest intentions, and if the
woman give him the full measure of her sympathy, and is not always
thinking of some other man whom she might have married,
or longing to be friendly with some man in a higher worldly posi-
tion than her husband, she need have no fear about being sup-
ported ; but if she do not stick to her husband through thick and
thin, and regard him as her king, she must not be surprised if he
is not all that he ought to be. Once married she should not have
a thought for any other man, but must devote herself to him with
all her will. 1 believe if this were the rule there would be very little
trouble, because the unseen psychical link is a firm one, and once a
man feels that he has a true woman to support, he has a very
strong incentive for work and does not care what he sacrifices for
her comfort and the comfort and happiness of his children, and if
a man work hard he will be healthy if contented. But he cannot
be otherwise than contented if his wife do her duty well and faith-
fully. This contentment will bring peace to those about him
with progressive prosperity.
If, on the other hand, there be anything wrong with his
domestic arrangements, and little quarrels are frequent, he
will start out from home in a temper ready to fight and to
induce others to fight; and so from small quarrels we get larger
ones, and I am strongly of opinion that the cause for our present
general world-wide disturbance can be traced to the instability or
want of control in individuals and families.
But you will say we have always had wars. That may be ; but,
all the same, they may not be necessary, and it does seem an
anomalous state of things for one generation to smash down what
the previous one has built up ; and if we are really progressive this
should not be. But we should move on steadily and surely. lam
a strong believer in peace, and think that kindness will accom-
plish more than brute force, and it would seem that Great Britain


could do a lot to bring about peace when this war is finished,
which I hope may be soon.
I feel sure that our good Queen would rejoice over such a con-
summation, and it might be the means of granting this sovereign
lady a longer term of life to rule over us as she has done in the
past so well.
Regarding the wonderful strides we are said to have made in the
past century, it is open to doubt as to whether the progress has been
real or imaginary in‘many cases. The discovery of anaesthesia was
regarded as a great boon at the time ; but may not it have tended
to make people think too much of pain, and so lessened their
moral courage, and caused the surgeon to undertake enormous
operations, the advantages of which are doubtful in many cases;
or possibly the necessity for such a remedy was a sign that
casualties were more frequent and operations more necessary,
owing to our unsatisfactory social conditions. We have now, of
course, become used to it, and it would be hard to cut it off at
once; but Ido think that the physician could judiciously and
gradually get people back to a healthy mental and physical
condition if he were patient and firm. But we must not treat
effects, but causes, and if we can regulate our marriage laws, and
live according to the dictates of Nature, instead of thrusting her
aside, we shall become a contented, peaceful, progressive and
prosperous race of people.
To exist as we are doing at present and thrive on our neigh-
bour’s downfall or extinction can hardly be desirable, and certainly
cannot last, as it is a fictitious prosperity; and when one reads the
newspapers with their lists of crimes of all descriptions, and thinks
over the thousands of poor fellow-men looked up in our gaols and
asylums, happiness, I take it, is impossible. Then examine the
faces of our fellow-men and women, and note how pale and drawn
they are from suffering ; and note also the numbers of people in
old clothes whom we despise, and we lift our frock coats or silk
dresses in passing them, lest we become contaminated by their
touch ; and yet these very same dirty, despised people may be the
salt of the earth if their correct histories could be obtained. One of
our best judges once called attention to the fact that some of our
citizens, dressed in purple and fine linen, rode in their carriages
and splashed the mud on those whom they had ruined in obtaining
their position or maintaining it in society. The picture is a sad,
sad one, and quite impossible from a permanent point of view.
Then we have the war and rumours of war, and at night if one
be awake he is thinking of the good fellows whom he sat with
*n class, or attended as patients, or met in some other way, or has
seen in town—their faces are missed. But, again, each man who
has gone has broken some tie and left somebody near and dear to
long for him, and this increases the individual and collective misery


Surely all this could be stopped in our enlightened, civilised
days, for as a rule the things about which we fight are trifling,,
and I doubt whether anything is worth fighting over. We should
realise that our earthly goods are simply lent to us, and should
not hold them with too tenacious a grasp; if we do somebody
will want to take them from us. This fact came home to me
very strikingly when in a few minutes two of my fellow-prac-
titioners made me out to be insane and practically took away all
my earthly possessions. We are simply stewards, and should use
our wealth in order to make others happy as far as we possibly
can, and in doing this we shall become happy ourselves.
Disease is simply the expression of suffering, whether the disease
be cancer, consumption, crime or insanity. We usually put it the
other way about. Suffering again comes from some discontent,
and this is the cause which has to be got at and treated, and it is
useless to attempt to treat the disease, or signs, or symptoms of
disease without any regard to its causation. And remember that
it is possible to kill people in other ways besides those noticed by
the unobservant, so that it is in the highest degree necessary that
we should regulate our social conditions, and make it possible
for us to live as truthful men and women and not as shams or
scaremongers.
With truth will come faith, love in its purest sense, and a feel-
ing of well-being and peace of mind which passeth all under-
standing.
Without truth we shall go on doubting, worrying, fighting,,
and drag out a miserable individual and collective existence which
in time will surely bring us to ruin.
We are not happy, and must get at the cause before attempting
the cure, and if in the adjustment some little temporary sacrifice is
necessary let us face it like men, and prove ourselves patriotic
citizens in the purest and highest sense of the word. One thing
is certain, and that is that we cannot have progress and prosperity
without individual and collective peace, and I am positive that we-
arenow beginning to see that this is desirable for one and all of us-
It would seem that towards the close of each century we have-
an ebullition in the shape of a large war. Surely with all our
civilisation we might alter this, for war does seem one of the relics
of barbarity, and let ua pray that this may be the last.
Finally, remember that the greatest battles of life are not
fought and won on the battlefield.
JV J Halligan, Printer, Alfred Place, Collins-street East, Melbourne.
64
