

rt»
PISS




THREE VALEDICTORY
SERMONS
PREACHED BY THE
REY. G. M. DRUMMOND.
ON THE OCCASION OF HIS RESIGNATION OF THE
CURE OF WILLIAMSTOWN.
/BWfcoum:
LUCAS BROTHERS, PRINTERS, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
MDCCCLIV.




PREFACE.
The full benefit which the Word of God, preached by a faithful Minister
is capable of bestowing, is too often withheld by not being, by some,
means, perpetuated in the memories of the hearers ; either by the con-
tinuance of the preacher among his congregation, or by the publication of
his discourses. We often hear, at the close of a soul-awakening exposition
of some portion of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, many hearers
exclaim “ that was a very striking sermon—it has made a deep impression
on me.” Such and more were the remarks of many after the delivery of
these sermons, but how superficial too often are those impressions! Where,
let me ask, can they be now traced ?
That the good effects produced on hearing them may be from time to time
revived in those who read them, the author was requested by one who
feels continually his need of “line upon line, and precept upon precept,”
to allow these his farewell words to his flock to be left for publication,
but the very limited leisure which he had in this country after they were
preached prevented his attending to the request until his arrival at his des-
tination (Batavia), from whence he has kindly forwarded them. They are
now presented to the public generally, but to the late congregation
of the author in particular, -with humble prayer that in so far as the. work
is consistent with God’s holy will and word it may obtain His sanction,
and be blessed to those to whom it is sent.
Williamstown, October 10th, 1854.




THE END OF ALL THINGS—AN INCENTIVE TO
CHRISTIAN WATCHFULNESS.
“ But the end of all things is at hand—be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.”—lst Pet. iv. 7.
The reason we apprehend why the compilers of our Liturgy made
selection of this portion of Scripture as the Epistle for the day is—
because the Church has j ust led our thoughts to the consideration
of one great class of events ended, the work and ministry of
Christ, and to the anticipation of the final effects of that work in
his re-appearance.
With the ascension of our blessed Lord into heaven in the pre-
sence and sight of his adoring disciples was closed the whole of
that awful, mysterious, humiliating and triumphant transaction
which constituted the business of the Son of God upon earth.
Whether they were aware, like the servant of the Hebrew pro-
phet, that their master was to be taken from their head that day?
when for the last time in his company they scaled the summits of
Mount Olivet, does not appear. The Law even had given a pre-
paratory type of his removal in the translation of Elijah—and of
the bitter feelings of bereavement that should be left on their
minds in the taunt addressed to his faithful minister, “ Knowest
thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head
to-day V ’
Possibly it may have been with some such feeling as this—a
feeling that they were soon to be left by him in a state of orphan-
age, that they accompanied him as far as the summit of Olivet on
his way to Bethany ; thus recalling the many occasions in which
they had in company with their beloved master, whom they now
felt to belong more to heaven than earth, traversed the same
ground in the days of his flesh.
Arrived however at a well known spot in his course, probably
the same whence he had looked down and descried Jerusalem,
while he poured forth for her his bitter but unavailing tears, —a
wondrous change pervades his aspect—a mysterious splendour
irradiates his countenance —he lifts up his hands over hi.s beloved
ones in the attitude of giving them his last benediction—and while


the gesture of blessing was expressed by his hands and the accents
of blessing were upon his tongue, he vanished from their sight.
The curtain of the invisible world which shuts out the world of
sense from the world of spirits was slowly and impressively
dropped : the communication between the realms of time and eter-
nity was cut off—the children of mortality may not pry into the
secrets of the unseen world—the cloud receives him out of their
sight. Fain would their anxious and aching gaze follow him in
his glorious career through the vast empyrean—like him who
strained his gaze after the horses and chariots of fire that had
severed him from his beloved master.
The Hebrew prophet “ went up by a whirlwind into heaven,”
Scripture asserts. His mode of translation therefore corresponded
to the nature of the dispensation with which he was identified,
whose characteristics were, the fire, the earthquake, the tempest,
and the whirlwind. But the translation of the prophet like unto
Moses was by a calmer, a holier exit, which corresponded too with
the dispensation with which he too was identified and whose char-
acteristic is—not the fire and the whirlwind and the tempest —but
the “ still small voice.” In both translations however natural
agents are mentioned. In the one it was a whirlwind —in the
other it was a cloud of glory which slowly and imperceptibly con-
cealed their divine master from his beloved disciples. Can we
doubt whether or not the eye of sense can penetrate the secrets of
the unseen world 1 Can we question whether it did or did not
contain agencies which the eye of sense could not solve lor can
we doubt that the cloud which severed the Lord from his sorrow-
ing disciples contained within its bosom agencies which the eye of
sense could not resolve into its actual constituents ? Can we
doubt but that if that which was externally the whirlwind, was
internally the chariot and horses of fire—so while the cloud was
the external drapery which shrouded from the eye of sense the
triumph of the Lord, the inward and secret agencies that even
then, were the “ chariots of God which are twenty thousand, even
thousands of angels, the Lord being among them as in Sinai, in
the holy place ?” But as in some grand and imposing pageant,
some royal procession, where the eyes of the admiring spectators
gaze with entranced feelings on the gorgeous spectacle, and where
they look on some glittering horsemen or splendidly caparisoned
men at arms who close the cavalcade and bring up the rear—so
while the engrossed powers of the disciples strove and strove in
vain to penetrate the pathway of glory whereby their departed
J ord ascended to his Father and their Father, to his God and


their God, two out of the number of that splendid train which
were marshalling the King of Glory within the gates and ever-
lasting doors of heaven yet lingered behind on earth, and adapting
themselves to the grossness of material vision, stood before them
as two men who said “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing
up into heaven 1 this same Jesus which is taken up from you into
heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go into
heaven.” Acts i. 11.
With the triumphant ascension of our risen Lord to glory then
was closed one vast class of events which had been set in progress
from the foundation of the world—with that event was terminated
the whole of that mighty and momentous transaction which
formed the purpose of his earthly mission. Thus the work and
ministry of Christ upon earth had its end.
But we are concerned to shew with the apostle that other
things besides the work of human redemption are coming to an
end—that the universal character stamped and written upon all
;arthly things is—that they are all coming to an end—and that
that end is at hand.
Let us then depending on the grace and teaching of the Holy
Spirit endeavour to set before you—
I. The fact stated by the apostle, that all things are coming to
an end, and that that end is at hand, and
11. The moral and religious conduct that ought to flow from
the knowledge of that fact, sobriety, watchfulness, and prayer.
1. The fact noticed by the apostle—that “ the end of all things
is at hand.” Some expositors have endeavoured to limit the
apostle’s meaning in the “ end ” refei’red to the termination of the
Jewish system and national polity. They infer this from the
same expression being so often used by our Lord in his remarkable
prediction of that historical event, as for example when he says in
one place, “ but the end is not yet,”—in another, “ but he that
endureth unto the end , the same shall be saved,” or again—“ and
then shall the end come.”
Now it is very true that the Jewish system and polity were
among the things which came to an end, and a very fearful and
instructive end it was : but it would surely be a very unnatural
and a very unnecessary abridgement of the force of the apostle’s
words to limit his meaning to that end, awful and impressive as
it was ; for it is plain that the apostle is speaking not of one thing,
but of many things; nay not only of many things, but of all
things.


It would be plainly impossible to notice “ all the things whose
end is at hand,” but we may notice some of these by way of sam-
ple of the rest.
Among the things therefore which the apostle had in view,
whose end was at hand was undoubtedly, “ the present Dispensa-
tion under which we are now living .” It has been so with all the
preceding dispensations. The patriarchal ran its appointed course.
The legal too received its appointed measure. None of the former
dispensations under which men have lived have been permanent
or eternal—they have always been temporary. Why then should
we think that it should be otherwise with the present or gospel
dispensation \ The present period in the divine economy is
emphatically the “ last times,” or “ the times of the Gentiles ,”
meaning we conceive the period during which the gospel should
be given to the Gentiles, the times therefore that shall wind up
the grand designs of God with the human race, that shall close
the annals of time and introduce the unmeasured duration of
eternity. It is highly probable therefore that compared with the
important position they hold in the history of man, and the rela-
tion they bear to preceding dispensations, they may be proportion-
ally lengthened out and enlarged.
The times we know may seem long to the successive generations
that pass aw r ay, and the apostle notices in this very epistle the
abuse that infidelity would make of the apparent delay in the
fulfilment of the divine promises, saying. “ Where is the promise
of his coming V’ for since the fathers fell asleep, all things con-
tinue as they were from the beginning.” 2 Pet. hi. 4.
But do you suppose that the time did not appear long to Israel
during the 480 years in which they groaned in Egyptian bondage!
and yet as if to mark the certainty of the divine fulfilment of his
promise, it was when that fated period was measured out to a year,
a month, and a day, that the deliverance took place—in the self
same day the Lord led forth his hosts out of Egypt.
And can you suppose that the time did not seem long to Israel ?
when the people groaned under the Babylonish captivity I or can
you suppose that the time did not seem long to those who waited
for the coming of Messiah, the promised salvation in whom all
nations were to be blessed, before he actually came a “ Light to
lighten the Gentiles and to be the glory of his people Israel.”
Why then should you think it strange that the present times
should seem long seeing that upon them are dependant the last
and most awful events which shall be the final consummation of
fill God’s dealings with the human race.


Let us attend then to some reasons which seem to indicate the
filling up of the times of the Gentiles —in other words—the close
of the present dispensation.
Our Lord, among others, gave one very significant token of the
duration of these “ times of the Gentiles,” when he stated that
Jerusalem should lie desolate until “ these times should be fulfil-
led,” that is, we conceive, the times within which the gospel
should be given to the Gentiles, before it is again restored to the
Jews. Many features in the history of the world as well as of the
Church of God would, particularly when viewed through the
light of prophecy, lead to the conclusion that these “ times of the
Gentiles” are being rapidly filled up.
If, as many masters in Israel have concluded, we have reached
that era in the emblematic history of the future indicated by the
pouring out of the sixth vial on the great river Euphrates, then, if
this be the conjuncture at which our lot is cast, we may well infer
on the threshold of what vast events we stand. And it is not a
little remarkable that there is a striking similarity between the
exhortation of the apostle in the text, “ But the end of all things
is at hand, be ye therefore sober and watch unto prayer,” and the
warning which follows hard upon the pouring out of that vial on
the river Euphrates, “ Behold I come as a thief. Blessed is he
that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, lest he walk naked, and
they see his shame.”
It is certainly a most remarkable fact that the eyes of the whole
civilized world are at this moment directed to the Euphratean
kingdom, for such we consider the dominion of the Turk. The
fate of that kingdom seems at this present moment to tremble in
the balance. If commentators be correct in assigning the former
symbol, the sixtli trumpet to this power, and to denote the rise,
progress, and conquests of the Turcoman empire as closely follow-
ing upon the fifth or Saracenic kingdom, then the corresponding
symbol of the sixth vial would lead to the conclusion that the same
main class of events are intended, and that as the former seemed
to indicate the rise, power, and progress of that Anti-christian
empire, so the latter as clearly seems to denote the decay and
dissolution of that power under the figure of the drying up of what
was once a mighty river. And can there be a doubt as to the
drying up of that stream, or dismissing the emblem, the decay
and dissolution of the Turkish dominion 2 Unquestionably the
Ottoman empire, at this moment the head and centre of Mahome-
tanism, stands in a great measure shorn of her power. That
ruthless scourge of Christianity has long been confined as it were


within her proper banks, and has pursued her course with a
dwindled and still decreasing [stream. She who had been the
scourge of Christianity, she who had been the terror of Europe
and threatened at one time to swallow up entirely the kingdoms
of Christ, has long since ceased to he an object of alarm to the
Christian nations. Her time of decrepitude has come, and she
has become the pity and the taunt of Christendom : and a most
remarkable fact it is, and one which being so manifestly providen-
tial should engage our warmest admiration—that a Power, thus
raised up as a scourge for faithless and apostate Christianity,
should now in the revolution of centuries be only upheld in being
and prevented from being swallowed up in her turn by those very
Christian nations which in former ages escaped her all but univer-
sal sway. Most remarkable and instructive it is to see a Power
religiously the object of aversion to all Christian nations, politically
conserved by those very nations that outlived her sway.
Whether the emblem signifies the total extinction or only the
decay of that Power, coming events alone can shew. Unquestion-
ably the decay of a Power which is only conserved by the inter-
vention of its neighbours might well be compared to a flood whose
waters were dried up : and that political system must indeed be
effete and worn out, from which, like the carcase which has fallen,
and is ready to be devoured by vultures, the great Northern Eagle
that was ready to swoop upon its prey, has to be scared from by
arbiters of its fate still more potent than itself.
And, my dear friends, remember that however politically right
these nations may be in upholding that Power, however just and
righteous that intervention may be, —remember that there is a
Judge in the earth, an arbiter of the nations. Remember that
there is an unseen arm which guides the destinies of nations no
less than the private histories of individual Christians, and remem-
ber that all the scourges of the Christian Church, like those of
Israel of old, are reserved for a most righteous retribution. When
Jerusalem was razed to the ground by the proud Chaldeans, there
was an eye which saw and a hand which prepared haughty Baby-
lon’s fall : and there was a voice of prophecy which foretold a
blessing on those who dashed her infants on the stones. Even, so,
we may politically prop up that which is doomed to destruction ;
hut the day of haughty Mahometan superstition’s overthrow is
surely coming, the day when the Mosque of Omar shall no more
usurp the place of the Temple of the Living God—the day of
retribution must come, and a day of fearful and awful retribution
it must he on a Power which has withered, blighted, and blasted


some of the fairest fields of what was once a prosperous Christi-
anity. Jerusalem shall he trodden down of the Gentiles, but
only “ until the times of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled.”
Did time permit, we might shew from other concurrent symp-
toms, such as the Papacy, the present condition of the Jewish
population, the high probability that the times are rapidly draw-
ing to a close. But enough has been advanced to shew that
among the things whose end is at hand, we must reckon the
Dispensation under which we live.
But again—among the things whose end is at hand, is the end
of Time itself. On the subject of time, we must adopt either of
two opinions—Either that the world is to go on “ ad infinitum,”
or that its annals must come to a close. The indefinite progression
of time implies its having had no beginning. If it had no begin-
ning, then its endless progress may be legitimately argued—but if
it can be plainly proved to have had a beginning, then it must of
necessity follow that it must also close. Whether of the two
opinions is the more rational, the more probable 2 To expect that
the world shall go on for ever, that men shall be born, marry, and
die ad infinitum, is about as rational as it would be to suppose that
the world has always been—that the race of men has always
lived—that neither the world nor mankind had a beginning—
whereas the certainty that each had a beginning is capable of
being proved to a demonstration.
If the earliest records of our race can trace human history no
further back than the Egyptian, Chaldaean, and Assyrian empires,
and if we find in the present day facts and monuments coming to
light abundantly proving that the annals of the human race go
no further back than those primaeval empires—then we may with
utmost confidence conclude that mankind had a beginning.
It is true that some of these ancient empires, as Egypt and China,
have put forth claims for a high antiquity beyond the usual chro-
nology—but these claims have been examined and disproved by
learned men : and almost all authority on the subject concurs in
the opinion, that the race of men could not have been in existence
for a period exceeding 6000 years. In this opinion the chronolo-
gist, the historian, the geologist all agree. If this be so then, —if
the race of mankind evidently had a beginning, which opinion is
the more credible, that which supposes that it is to continue “ ad
infinitum,” or that which supposes that as it had a beginning, so
it must also have an end ? It will be perceived that we have been
arguing the point independently of Scripture and on human reason-


ings only. It is superfluous to say, that if Scripture testimony be
taken, that testimony is at once conclusive and complete.
But again—take another view of the subject—Take the moral
as well as the historical view of the subject, and again say —
whether of the twain be the more rational opinion, that the pre-
sent state of things shall continue or come to an end ? For what
is the moral aspect which the world presents \ If it could present
the same moral aspect to its Creator that it once did, when he
surveyed his workmanship and blessed it, and pronounced it
“ very good,” then the question might be looked at in the reverse
point of view—then the inference would be, that all things might
go on as they were at the beginning ; but when we know that the
very reverse of all this is the case—when we know that the moral
aspect of the world must present to the Benevolent Creator, the
most painful and revolting scene—when we are told on the con-
trary, “ that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and
« that the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
“ continually, and that it repented the Lord that he had made
« man and that it grieved him at his heart,” Gen. vi. 5, 6, —and
when we know that “ the same wickedness still prevails,—the
same imaginations still only evil continually,”—and the great
remedial measure that was for the healing of the nations only
seems in a very partial measure to counteract that evil, and still
has but half done its work—Can we suppose that the Divine Being
has come to look upon evil with more complacency than before,
or are we to conclude that he has ceased to concern himself with
the human race 1 Can we suppose that a state of sin, of misery,
and of death, can possibly be one pleasing to God to contemplate,
and if not, can we suppose that it can continue in his sight ?
Can we expect the present state of things to be for ever 1 How
certain then from its very nature that it must come to an end !
From all that we can gather, this seems to be the exact state of
the matter. God is at present gathering to himself a people out of
all nations and all generations —a people that shall resemble him
in character, reflect him in image, and share in his happiness and
glory. Israel was a type of this. She was distinctly gathered out
of all nations to be the recipients of the Divine favour, the deposi-
taries of the Divine commandments, the monuments of the Divine
mercy. So, are you not distinctly told, that “ Jesus Christ gave
« himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
“ nurifv unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.”
Tit. ii. 14.
When shall we say that the number of that peculiar people


should be complete 2 We pray indeed in one of the most impres-
sive services of our Church that it would “ please him of his
gracious goodness shortly to accomplish the number of his elect
and to hasten his kingdom (Burial Service) but who shall say
when that number is accomplished—who shall say when that
kingdom ought to come 2 It is not tor man to know the times
and the seasons which the Father hath put into his own power.
(Acts i. 7.)
Again—another of the things whose end is at hand is—the end
of life. The end of the present dispensation —the end ol time
even, are events so vast, so comprehensive, so universal, that our
individual participation in them seems lost in the magnitude ol the
interests involved and in the universality of their extent; but it
is not so with the end of life. That is an end which each man
feels to be peculiarly his own. It is an end which 'is to stamp his
eternal being, and to determine “ the lot in which he is to stand
at the end of the days. (Dan. xii. 13.;
Whatever doubts an objector might urge as to the end of the
present dispensation, or the end of time, no antagonist can be found
to dispute the position—that human life has its end—that life in
reference to eternity is as it were a span long—a vapour that
vanisheth away. Youth, health, and beauty, no less than age,
decrepitude, and deformity, bow to one and the same stern decree.
Where was the fortunate exception that ever escaped the universal
law 1 No frame so robust, no health so strong, no constitution so
sound, but it must be brought down at last, prostrated in weak-
ness, humiliated before God and man, and lowered into the dust
of death !
We add one item more of those things whose end is at hand—
the social combinations of men. How perpetually are they
changing, and yet how perpetually are our hearts struggling to
make them permanent. - No domestic circle however endeared can
calculate long on its present exemption from dissolution. Sick-
ness, disease, casualty, death will thin the circle and break it up
within a few years. The smiles that gladdened, the gaiety that
cheered, the warm hearts and warm looks of those that constituted
man’s greatest earthly paradise, his own fire-side, shall soon be
dissipated like a dream of the night: and the shadows of evening
shall not more certainly close over the dawn and brightness ol the
noon-day sun, than shall the shadows of closing life steal over the
human heart and shut man’s brief day of life.
But as in the domestic circle, so also in the wider associations of
life, whether those of business, neighbourhood, or the many


interests which group men together in social combinations. If
the closer and more intimate relationships of life are so liable to
change and decay, how much more those which are more loose
and general.
Perhaps of all these social combinations that which is consti-
tuted by the ministerial tie is the most sacred and the most
solemn : because the doctrine and the life of the minister most
seriously affect the people among whom he laboui’s, and their
connection either for good or evil must affect their eternal well-
being. If the ministerial connection be such as to have an injuri-
ous tendency, who can overcalculate the extent of that injury ;
or if it be such as to exert a beneficial tendency, who can overes-
timate the extent of that benefit ?
11. But we pass on to consider very briefly, the moral and
religious conduct that should flow from the knowledge of that
fact, viz. sobriety , watchfulness , and prayer. If these things be so,
then what maimer of persons ought ye to be ! The apostle has
himself anticipated this improvement of the subject, when he says
in his second epistle—“ Seeing then that all these things shall be
“ dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
“ conversation and godliness.” (2 Pet. iii. 11.) What frame,
what habit of mind becomes those who stand every moment on
the very threshold of the vastest events and the most momentous
private interests ? Does gaiety, does frivolity, does excess, become
those who look for such things I Does the habit of blindfolding
our eyes to these truths become us ? the habit of putting the
remembrance of them away from ns, of seeking to drown the
recollection of them either in the hurry of business, the occupation
of our thoughts with worldly objects, or the madness of intoxica-
tion and guilty pleasure ? Is that the habit of mind becoming
those who may be said every day to walk on the very verge of
the vastest events involving their most momentous interests ?
How truly does the word of God suggest the only conduct suitable
for persons so situated when it says—“ Be ye therefore sober, and
watch unto prayer.” The first moral and religious duty here
recommended is sobriety. Sobriety is in common language used as
synonymous with temperance —but the apostle is evidently speak-
ing here not of the habit of temperance as opposed to intemperance,
but he is speaking rather of sobriety of mind. Sobriety considered
with reference to the body is so essential to its well-being ; and
the contrary is so fearful and appalling to its best interests, that
we are unwilling to enter upon the gigantic evil with all its
dreadful progeny of corporeal and mental, temporal and eternal
woes.


Were this the proper time and place much might be said on this
monster evil, this gigantic vice. But we must stop short with the
single remark, that fearful as it is in the lands that gave us birth,
that evil has magnified itself tenfold in the land of our adoption.
Whether it be the severance of home ties or the removal of certain
restraints that may have controlled our worst passions under a
more settled system of things at home—or whether it be the
recklessness consequent upon a fluctuating and unsettled state of
things, or whether it be the stimulating and exhausting nature of
the climate, or the sudden changes whereby the poor man becomes
a rich man and the comparatively rich man becomes a poor man—
whether it be one or all of these causes combined, it is not for us
to say—but the fact is beyond all question that the prevalence of
this vice in this colony is most appalling, and one which of all
others is most ominous of its future prosperity and well-being.
One fact alone speaks volumes, which is this. It has been
calculated, and there seems no reason to doubt the fairness of the
calculation—that the allowance of intoxicating drinks in England
is at the rate of half a gallon per head in the year—in Ireland
nearly a gallon—in Scotland two gallons and a half—while in
Victoria the consumption is in the fearful ratio of 8 gallons per
annum to each individual.
Aye, and without wading into the depths of this fearful and
appalling subject, let me tell you that the cases which have come
under my own observation while Chaplain to the Hospitals at
Melbourne, and the premature deaths that have glutted your own
cemetery, —the youth that has been cut down in its prime through
this fearful evil—the rush that has withered while it was yet in
its greenness, has been such as to fill the mind with the most over-
whelming emotions and painful forebodings of the future.
But we leave this fearful incidental view of the subject, to
dwell rather upon the mental than the corporeal aspect of it—the
sobriety of mind which we think the word of God is here inculca-
ting from the solemnity of these mighty facts which are pressing
upon us. It seems then, as if by sobriety the apostle was specially
inculcating seriousness of mind, calmness, reflection, preparedness
for those great and momentous things that are coming upon the
world and upon ourselves—in a word, a frame of mind the very
reverse of that feverish, excited, tumultuous state that every where
prevails here where every one is hurrying to be rich, and calm
reflection is lost in the vortex of pressing and overwhelming
worldly concerns.
Again—the word of God seems to sound its salutary note of


warning, when it says not only “be sober ” in anticipation ot these
coining events, but “ watch.” “ Watchfulness” is most becoming
and essential to our maintaining any thing like vital Christianity
It seems to represent and stand at the head of all those virtues
which constitute the Christian’s “ self-continence ,” his collected-
ness, his self command, his supervision of himself, his scrupulous
self examination, his anticipation of things to come, his circum-
spection on things and persons around him, his careful oversight
of his own soul. No part of the Christian’s preparation was more
pointedly and strenuously laid down by Christ himself than this,
“ Watch.” Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your
Lord cometh. Therefore be ye also ready ; for in such an hour
as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” Watch and pray that
ye enter not into temptation, and what I say to you, I say to all,
“ Watch.”
The Christian watchman ought ever to be upon his watch-
tower. He ought to listen to the question—Watchman, what of
the night ? and be ready to say—“ The night cometh, and also the
morning.” (Is. xxi. 11.)
He must keep an eye over the events of the Church and of the
world. He must be ready to blow the trumpet of alarm. An
unwatchful Christian is a most unsafe Christian. And why is
watchfulness so often inculcated ? Is it not a time of danger ?
Have we no enemies to dread? Have we no devices of that enemy
to withstand ? Have we no need of the whole armour of God ?
And if the Christian be rightly compared to a soldier, is any part
of a soldiers duty more essential and indispensable than watchful-
ness 1 It is the very secret of his strength and of his success.
Is it not a time of responsibility too? Is it possible for
higher interests to be at stake than those now pressing upon us \
Can we possibly have a time of greater responsibility than a brief
life-time, in which we may be the means of saving ourselves and
others, or of destroying ourselves and others ? Every Christian
has a certain charge, a certain sphere of influence, for which he is
responsible—how iucumbent then upon all the duty of watchful-
ness. Is it not a time too of expectation, as well as danger and
responsibility \ The Lord is absent. The Captain of our salva-
tion is not with us, but he has warned us that he is coming ; and
he has commanded us to wait and watch for his coming. He has
laid down the expectation of his coming, in the strongest induce-
ment to his servants to watch.
“ Watch, therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the
House cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or


in the morning, lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping ; and
what I say to you, I say to all, watch. Lastly, not only watch ,
but “ watch unto prayer”—that is—watch in a prayerful spirit,
combine with watchfulness a spirit of prayer. There is a strong
bond of connection between these three moral and religious
duties. They mutually react upon one another ; but the crown-
ing exercisd of them all is the habit, and spirit of prayer. It is
the chain which links Heaven and earth together, it is the ladder
on which the communications between the words of sense and
spirit are kept up —it is the mysterious medium whereby the
longings of the creature are borne with the most infallible cer-
tainty to the very footstool of the Creator himself. See then what
a high privilege the Christian possesses “by access through one
Mediator, by one Spirit unto the Father.” See that you avail
yourselves of and exercise that privilege. I have, in the course of
these observations, alluded to the dissolution of our social combi-
nations, and among others, to that of the ministerial connection.
This day brings to an end the connection hitherto subsisting
between us. It is always a solemn moment for the minister of
Christ to feel that he is for the last time addressing those, whom
week after week he has been in the habit of exhorting, with
whose faces he is familiar, with whose families he has become ac-
quainted, and of whose spiritual state he has been enabled to form
some opinion—to feel that his appointed period of labour among
them has closed ; and that his influence over them, either for good
or evil, is stamped upon them for ever ; and it is, perhaps, not too
much to say also, that it is an equally solemn moment for those
among whom he has been accustomed to minister, to know that
they shall listen to the voice of his admonitions no more.
Let the present occasion then be improved by us, as a time for
serious reflection for both parties—for you, whether you have
profitted and benefitted by the word preached, as you ought to
have done, and for me whether I have fully declared to you my
message, the message of reconciliation to our offended God,
through the blood of the everlasting covenant.
You must have perceived, that in our public addresses, we have
almost uniformly addressed you from some passage taken from the
Gospel, most frequently from the Epistle for the day ; and as I
conceive that these selections from the Word of God contain some
of the most important points of Christian Doctrine and practise ;
I am well pleased to think that no inconsiderable portion of the
word of life has within the last year passed in review before you
—with what success, must be left to others to judge—but for


myself, I may truly say that my anxious desire has been rightly
to divide the word of truth, and to urge it faithfully, honestly,
and affectionately on your souls.
When I look for the results, I am constrained to notice with
thankfulness to God, an increasing attendance on the means of
grace, an increasing devoutness and seriousness of deportment in
the congregation. At the same time, lam bound dlso to notice
that with this increase of attendance in the congregation, I do not
find a corresponding increase of attendance at the table of the
Lord.
I have I think on former occasions, expressed to you my con-
viction that I look upon an increase of communicants as a true
index of a growing and prosperous Christian community rather
an increase of more hearers.
Attendance in Church does not indicate any thing further than
a respect for religion, and a desire to hear the truth. Now a re-
spect for religion only will never save any man : and if a man
knows so little of religion, and feels so little of its power, as
habitually and systematically to neglect the plain ordinance of
Christ, I put it to you, as reasonable men, can that man’s
religion be any thing else than vain *
Another thing I have remarked and that with regret, and that
is—the almost systematic discontinuance on the part of many of
attendance on the second service. Now if I can understand at all,
the principle of action here, it must be something of this sort. We
are willing to give a portion of the day to the service of God—the
remaining portion, we may well give to ourselves. Now lam
willing to allow that in this over worked and over tasked com-
munity, a day of even bodily rest may in some measure be need-
ful, and be really a boon; and still such a settled acquiesence
in absence from the worship of God, indicates a low and
apathetic state of religious feeling. If there was a really earnest
desire felt for the Salvation of your Souls, there could not be
this settled indifference, and acquiesence in absenting yourself
from the House of the Lord.
A third point has concerned me deeply. I have never during
the year, and over, in which I have ministered among you
been applied to by any one who manifested a concern for
his soul —and painful though it may be publicly to own it, I am
constrained to admit that though I hope there is an increasing
attention to the subject of religion, I cannot specify one in-
dividual in this community, whose conversion may be traced
to our instrumentality !


Is it so then that my ministry has not been blessed of God
to the convertion of a single soul ? Shall no souls be given to
me as the seals of my ministry among you ?
Perhaps, it may be expected that I should assign some reason
for resigning my present charge, especially after so kind a
disposition j;o retain my services has been so generally expressed.
I beg at once to state that the grounds of my removal are not
from any merely wordly motive ; and that nothing would grieve
me more than the idea, that I had resigned through dissatis-
faction with any one thing or any one person. I have many
strong wordly motives to induce me to remain among you ; and
I have again and again tried, if there were any means whereby I
could do so consistently; but having been unable to deivse any
such means, I am bound to abide by my resolution.
The facts of the case are simple these. The destination to
which we are going, is one that was presented to us and was the
subject of many prayers when in England, and before we came
to this Colony.
It was again offered to me on the departure of the present
minister ; and having been made at a time when we could
not but regard it as presented in the providence of God, we con-
sidered it our duty to accept it.
In resigning this charge, you are aware that I am relinquishing
my connection with the Colony also, after nearly three years re-
sidence in it. I hence like many amongst yourselves had to in-
dure my share of its difficulties and privations—yet I can truly
say that having come to this Colony in obedience to the Saviours
promise. “If any man shall for my sake forsake home, and
country and lands, to preach the Gospel in distant lands, he shall
receive manifold more in this life present,” and truly may I
say that the manifold more has been fulfilled to me in the kind-
ness and friendship, and hospitality and Christian regard which I
have received from so many brethren in the Lord.
If then my dear friends—you have by God’s grace received
any benefit from our ministry, will you repay the benefit by
bearing us upon your hearts and minds, and by praying for us
that it may please God to bring us to our future sphere of
labour in the land whether we are going.
“Finally brethren—farewell—be perfect—be uf good com-
fort—be of one mind—live in peace—and the God of love and
peace shall be with you.” 2d. Cor. xiii. 11.


ON THE PRESENCE OF THE SPIRIT WITH HIS
CHURCH.
“Nevertheless I tell you the truth : It is expedient for you that I
go away, for if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto
you : but if I depart, I will send him unto you.”—John xvi. 7*
Being unexpectedly detained amongst you a little longer : and
there having been no assistance provided for this day, I am
happy to have the opportunity of ministering to you again
and breaking bread with you once more before we part in the holy
solemnity of this day.
There were three great annual Festivals among the Jews, each
of which lias its counterpart or fulfilment in the Christian Church.
These were, the Feast of the Passover —the Feast of Weeks or
Pentecost —and the feast of Ingathering or Tabernacles. All
these Feasts, the devout Israelite observed with the utmost re-
verence and care, coming to there due observance from their ut-
termost coasts.
The first of these, the Feast of the Passover was it is well known
instituted in remembrance of that most remarkable event in
Israelitish History, the deliverance or redemption of the people
from Egypt. The appropriate and expressive symbol of that
Feast, was the slaughter of a lamb, and a Feast upon that sacrifice.
The typical institution of the Law Church had its fulfilment
and realization on that same night in which Jesus was betrayed,
when he took bread and brake it, and called upon his associates
to eat to that which was the memorial of his broken body and
shed blood—there Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us
“ the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the world,” and
then was the Feast of the Eucharist instituted upon that sacrifice.
The second of these great annual Festivals—the Feast of Weeks
or Pentecost was instituted in commemoration of the giving of the
Law from Mount Sinai. It was called the “ Feast of Weeks,”
because they were to reckon seven weeks from the Feast of the
Passover —and therefore the day on which it was held was called
Pentecost or the fiftieth day. The appropriate symbol of this
Feast was a sheaf of the first fruits which was presented to the
Driest and received before the' Lord. This Festival too had its
terpart or fulfilment on that day when the new law of the
Spirit was given at Jerusalem. St. Paul tells us that this new


law of the Spirit has set us free from the law of Sin and Death.
When then the day of Pentecost was fully come, and when the
first gifts of the Spirit were poured down upon the Church, and
the first fruits of the Spirits power gathered into the Church,
then was the purpose of this typical Feast fully answered in the
Church of Christ.
One Festival still remains to be noticed—the Feast of In-
gathering or Tabernacles. The former of these names indicated
the occasion on which it was held; viz.: by the close of the harvest
—“ the end of the year, when thou hast gathered in thy labours out
of the field.” The latter name was taken from its appropriate
symbol, by the dwelling of the people during its continuance in
tents or booths.
With reverence be it said, that this Festival of the Jewish
Church has not yet received its counterpart or fulfilment in the
Christran Church.
It is looked for : it is waited for—but the time is not yet. We
anticipate the time when it too shall receive its final accomplish-
ment with no less certainty than the two former in the history of
the Christian Church, “ when the harvest which is the end of the
word shall be gathered in,” when the command shall go forth
“ thrust ye in the sickle—for the harvest of the earth is ripe”—
and when too a faithful keeping with that ancient type, the great
voice shall be heard saying—“ behold the tabernacle of God is
with men : and they shall be His people : and God himself shall
be with them and be their God.”—Rev. xxi. 3.
It is of the second of these aunual Festivals and of its counter-
part in the descent of the Holy Spirit as the Feast of Pentecost ,
that we are now to speak.
The Epistle appointed for the day says that “ when the day of
Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one
place.”—Acts ii. 1.
Observe how exactly the times and seasons are measured by
Him in whose hands they are. They are never a day too soon nor
a day to late.
When the Lord delivered his people from Egyptian bondage,
though centuries of oppression had rotted over the chosen people,
yet it came to pass when the fated period of 430 years were
finished, “ that on the self same day the Lord delivered His
people on that night of the Lord which is much to be observed.”
—Exod. xxii. 42.
When the Lord delivered his people from a still heavier
bondage and by a much greater Salvation—the day and the hour


was still kept—“ unto you is born this day in the city of David,
a Saviour who is Christ the Lord.” When the Lord brought that
great Salvation with power to the hearts of his people, it was
“ when the day of Pentecost was fully come.” You see much of
this majestic ordination of vast cycles in the ways of grace as
well as of Providence—the measured tread in the mighty march
of time. You have an example of this in the exact measurement
of the great aeras in the history of the ancient Church. “So all
the generations from Abraham to Divid are fourteen generations,
and from “ David to the carrying away into Babylon are fourteen
generations”—and from the “ carrying away unto Babylon to
Christ are fourteen generations.”—Mat. i. 17.
God’s times and seasons therefore are never at random. They arc
never capricious nor of a miscellaneous character. They are in-
variably measured out with that exact precision which we should
expect from Him who is the author of the mechanicsm of the
Heavens. And when we look upwards to that magnificent
framework, that stupendous mechanism—that vast chronology
which is measured out by the revolutions of suns and systems,
that ever silent, but ever moving universe, which indicates cease-
less progression—l say, that to doubt the certainty of the fulfil-
ment of these mighty aerea in the history of the Church and of
the world, is as much as to doubt the hand that launched these
mighty measures of time and of eternity into being.
Now it is of the approach of the next of those stupendous
seras that the Saviour warns his followers in the text. The
whole tenour of his valedictory discourses tended to convince
them that a mighty sera in the dealings of God with his people
was at hand—that his appropriate work was preached—and that
another was thenceforth to imdertake the supervision of his
Church.
“Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is expedient for you
that I go away : for if I go not away, the comforter will not come
unto you : but if I depart, I will send him unto you.”
It is evident that the hearts of the disciples were overwhelmed
with sorrow at the prospect of separation from their beloved
Master ; and that not only on account of the severance of that
holy companionship in which they had so long walked hand in
hand together ; but because they were now made aware that to
them the future working of the Christian cause was committed
and because their minds now came to catch a glimpse of the re-
sponsibilities and consequences which their position entailed upon
them.


It is a remarkable fact, but nevertheless it is the truth, that in
certain conjunctions, the absence of the individual most concerned
may be more for the benefit of the cause with which he is identi-
fied, than his presence would have been. Of all persons, doubt"
less the Disciples considered the presence of their Divine Master,
the most needful to secure the success of the common cause in
which they were engaged ; and yet He tells them : and they
themselves no doubt were not long of discovering the truth for
themselves, “ that it was expedient for them that He should go
away”—for that the success of the scheme truly depended not
upon His presence, but on his departure.
In order to see the force of these remarks—suppose for a
moment, that He had not departed—then how could God’s pur-
poses as to His Church be ever answered ? Then indeed, the
gift of the Spirit which was wholly and entirely consequent
on the departure of Christ could not have taken place, then the
whole scheme would have been baffled and frustrated, and defeat
and not success would have crowned the work of the Lord.
Very different from the coming of Christ into the world, was
the coming of the third person of the Godhead, the Holy Spirit.
In an obscure town of Galilee, in the most despised and pro-
verbially immoral of cities first rose the glimmering dawn of that
Light, which was destined in the fullness of time to robe the world
in meridian splendour. It was by the way of the Sea beyond
Jordan, in Galilee of the nations, that the people who walked in
darkness first saw the Light. No visions of glory, no supernatural
powers heralded forth that coming ; if we may except that Star
in the east which conducted the Chaldean Sages to the manger of
Bethlehem, or that midnight choir of angels that pealed into
mortal ears the glad news of the advent of the Saviour of th e
world.
The beginning of the Christian Church, was indeed as its
author represented it, like a seed dropped into the ground, the
smallest of seeds—but it was not to remain so —to flourish and
expand was its destiny, until it should embrace all the nations of
the earth and cover them with its umbrageous shadow.
The coming of the third person of the Godhead was however
very different. The author and the cause of Christianity had
been manfested to men. It was patent to the world. It was no
longer to be nursed in obscurity. The time was come when the
Christian name, and the Christian cause, and the Christian reli-
gion were to take their place among the facts of human history.
The coming of the third person of the Sacred Trinity was thus
foretold in the sublime language of ancient prophecy. “ And it


shall come to pass that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh ;
and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy ; your old men
shall dream dreams and your young men shall see visions : and
also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will
I pour out my Spirit. And I will show wonders in the heavens
and the earth, blood and fire and vapour of smoke. The sun
shall he turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the
great and terrible day of the Lord come.”—Joel ii. 28. 32.
These were the portentous and significant tokens whereby the
coming of the third person was foretold ; a series of awful splen-
dours which the Apostle Paul declares to have been fulfilled when
the day of Pentecost was fully come, when a mysterious and un-
earthly sound was heard, as of a “ rushing mighty wind, which fill-
ed the house where they were sitting: and there appeared unto them
cloven tongues like as of fire and it sat upon each of them.”—Acts
ii. 2, 3. But unlike any earthly wind that was ever before or since in
this lower world was that mysterious and unearthly afflatus of the
Spirit that breathed at this time on the hearts of the members of
the Church of God—and unlike any earthly fire that was ever
kindled was that fire of Divine energy and all-important truth
that was thenceforth kindled in the hearts and minds of his chosen
witnesses, as the external symbol of it encircled each of their brows
with a halo of celestial glory. “ And they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with tongues, as the Spirit
gave them utterance.—Acts ii. 4. But this thing was not
done in a corner : when it was noised abroad, and the mul-
titude of those foreign Jews who had come up to keep the feast,
had come together, they were struck with the liveliest convictions,
because that every man heard them speak each in his own
language in which they were born—“ Parthians and Medes,
and Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, and
Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, in
Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of
Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians—we do hear
them speak in our tongues the manifold works of God.” Acts*
ii. 9, 12.
It is plain then from these considerations—that the Gospel
period is the Depensation of the Spirit ; and that when Christ
promised to be with his Church to the end of the age, he did not
engage to give it his personal presence, but his presence by the
Spirit. We have therefore to consider how far the Church of
Christ may be said to be under the superintendance of that
Spirit. When we call the Gospel period, the Dispensation of the
Spirit, we mean that it is He who is the real though unseen


agent in all that concerns it whether those effects be miraculous
or ordinary, that it is He who is ever evolving the wondrous
history of the Church and of the world ; and though invisible
is the certain and sure agent in all that concerns the Church of
the living God.
The Law was a Dispensation of carnal ordinances. It was
given to show the fullness of the Divine requirements, and the
inadequacy of human power to meet these requirements unaided
by a higher power. Being therefore one which from its very
nature could never give life : but on the contrary tended only to
condemn the world, and to convince mankind of the impossibility
of saving themselves, it was well and justly called, “ the Law
of Sin and Death”—the Law that made Sin clear and Death cer-
tain. But the Gospel has opened up a new and spiritual sera to
mankind. It is called, “ the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus which sets free from the Law of Sin and Death.” Rom.
viii. 2.
If then the Gospel be a Dispensation of the Spirit, and its
Law, “a Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus,” it becomes a
proper question how far it has appeared so in times past and what
reason we have for supposing it to be so still. Now it is evident
that when this Dispensation of the Spirit commenced, its author
evidenced his personal superintendance more palpably at first
than he has seen fit to do since.
The proofs of the Spirits personal presence and superintendance
of the affairs of the Church in the first ages are many and mani-
fest.
You find for example that He spoke to them, counselled them,
told them where they were to go and what they were to do.
Nay more than this, He accompanied their ministry with many
remarkable gifts and poured upon the baptized converts various
prophetic and miraculous powers. All this betokened an active,
lively, personal participation in the labours of the Church. But
after a few years, and not much after the first century of the
Church’s history, we look in vain for any such proofs of the
Spirit’s personal superintendance. We find on the contrary in
many places a rapid decline : in others, temporary revivals, in
general an aspect considerably different from what the Church
presented at its outset.
What are we to infer from these facts? Are we to infer
from them that the Spirit has withdrawn Himself from any
further personal superintendance of the Church ? Arc we to
infer from them that He has ceased to concern Himself any
more with its interest, and that the Church of the Living God


is abandoned to its fate ? Surely we must pause before we cai
admit such conclusions as these. There are two consideration*
that seem at first sight to render questionable the continued
superintendance of the Church by the Spirit and these are—
the absence of any one uniform and universal Church—and the
absence of miraculous gifts.
On the first of these points, the absence of one uniform and
universal Church ; it must at once be conceded that the Chris-
tian Church does not present the same success, the same out-
ward and inward unity that it did in the first ages. There were
many Churches ; but as far as we can learn, one uniform order.
There were the Churches of Rome in Jerusalem, of Macedonia,
Asia, and Achaia ; but we do not read or hear of such diversities
as an Episcopalian Church in one quarter, a Presbyterian
Church in another, an Independant Church in a third, or a Bap-
tist Church in a fourth. So far as we can learn, they were all
constituted according to one uniform order and regulated by one
apostolical superintendance.
But granting that there was this uniform order characterizing
the Church in the purest and earliest times ; it does not therefore
follow that the absence of this outward uniformity is symptomatic
of the absence of the Spirit of God from the Church : it does not
therefore follow that because the visible professing Church of
Christ is broken up into so many antagonistic sections, that there-
fore the Spirit of God has abandoned his work and left the Church
as it were to its fate.
For first we observe—that the Gospel is not a religion of cere-
mony but a religion of spirit. The Jewish religion was decidely
a religion of ceremony : and the minuteness and exactness of that
ceremonial left no room for the slightest deviation. But it was
plainly peculiar in its nature. It was adapted to one people ; and
was a grand antecedent system of typical ordinances introducing
the spiritualities that were to come. It must be plain to every
understanding that the Gospel is something very different from
the Law. It has nothing exclusive in it. It is plainly intended
as a great spiritual univex-sal system, capable of adapting itself to
all nations, and all ages, and whose obvious aim and tendency is
the moral, and spiritual, and intellectual renovation of the whole
human race.
For example : how instructive is it to notice in the letters of its
first teachers, how full they are of doctrinal and practical truth ;
but how meagre in what might be termed the details of a Church
system ! How little is positively stated on such subjects as the
number, order, practise of its ministers ! how utterly bald and


scanty are they on such points as religious ceremonies, dresses, func-
tions, times of prayer, modes of conducting public worship, and a
hundred other considerations which enter as leading points into
the constitution of the Churches of modern times ? as an instance
of what we mean, how remarkable is it that even the Lord’s day,
or the worship that is to be observed on that day, is nowhere
definitely laid down. There is much said on moral and religious
points, much on matters of doctrine and practise ; but very little
indeed on matters purely ceremonial and ecclesiastical. So much
is this the case, that it is only by very careful examination and
collation of Scriptures that we can find out what their ceremonial
practise was at all: and even when we do, how much of our
knowledge is after all only inferential, not positive. From all
this, therefore we conclude that a perfect uniformity in the details
of the Church was not perhaps contemplated by the Spirit; and
that as Christianity is a religion not of the letter but of the Spirit ,
it has allowed a latitude on points of detail, which the differing
conditions of nations, and the changes which the revolution of
of time causes, render necessary.
We believe that it will be an utter figment, to endeavour to
coerce the whole human race into one uniform order of Church
government; and reduce the whole world into one unvarying
standard of Doctrine and Discipline.
The Church of Rome stands pre-eminent in her endeavours after
uniformity : and it must be confessed that she has in a great
measure succeeded. From pole to pole, from the frozen regions
of the north to sunny climes of the south ; from the haunts of
civilized men to the deserts of the wandering savage ; go where
you will, you will find that gigantic system perfectly uniform in
itself. In all her churches throughout the world, you will find
the same ritual, the same order of ministers, the same outward
form and discipline.
Yet after all what does that uniformity amount to 1 Uniformi-
ty is only valuable as the index of something better—and what is
that ? Unanimity —a perfect unity of mind, of soul, of spirit—a
perfect harmony and concord of all that is within—a far more
difficult task to be accomplished than outward uniformity. But
will you find this inward unanimity, this harmony and concord
of the inner man coextensive with the outward uniformity of
this communion? Will you not on the contrary find the grand
and distinctive features of the Gospel of Jesus Christ obscured
by traditions about the Virgin Mary, and saints, and angels, and
relics ; so that the poor bewildered devotee scarcely knows what


he holds, but lays the onas of his faith on his priest and on his
church.
On the other hand, among our loose and divided ranks, let me
see men brought together who have been trained in the same
school and under the same teacher, the school of Christ, and the
instruction of the Holy Spirit; and it is wonderful how soon
party distinctions disappear, the points of disunion are forgotten
—they fade into utter insignificancy before the grand, essential,
saving truths, which all feel to he their common heritage. One
man thinks he can find in the New Testament Scriptures, authori-
ty for keeping certain fasts and festivals in the Church—another
man thinks he finds in it, that every day is alike ; and that the
Sabbath is the only holy day—well! what then ? Both may be
equally conscientious and equally approved of God. “He that
regardeth the day, regardeth it unto the Lord ; and he that
regardeth not the day, to the Lord he doth not regard it.” (Rom,
xiv. 5.)
One man thinks he can discern Scriptural authority for the
order of Bishops—another man thinks he can as clearly discern
the elements of the Presbyterian form of Church government—
one man prays according to a prescribed form of words ; another
prays, leaving the words to be selected by the moment —one man
prays standing ; another man prays kneeling : one man baptises
adults only : another dedicates his child to the Lord from infancy:
one man preaches in a white gown, another man in a black gown,
and another man without any gown at all. What then * are they
all equally right, or are they all equally wrong ? Does Scripture
authorize or does Scripture condemn one and all of these opposing
views! By no means. It neither approves nor condems. We
may think perhaps that Scripture ought to have prescribed all
these things with a distinctness and precision that could not be
mistaken nor departed from. But we find that Scripture has
done no such thing : and therefore we conclude that perfect
uniformity is not apparently according to the mind of the Spirit:
and that Christianity being a religion not of the letter nor of
ceremony, but of spirit and of truth, its author has wisely left it
with a power of adaptation in its minor details to the varying
views, ages, and tastes of mankind. It is plain that the reality of
religion is something quite independent of the external form in
which it is clothed.
We question much whether the dull and dead uniformity of
Romanism be a “ prima facie” evidence of the Spirit’s presence
with that communion ; and on the other hand, we are not sure
whether the disunion of Protestants with all its acknowledged


evils may not be more congenial with His mind. True it is that
the passions of men will be more or less mixed up with these
matters ; but we put it to you whether the antagonism of Chris-
tian sects by the sifting and scrutiny of Scriptural truth which it
calls forth, has not done more for the intellectual, moral, and
spiritual advancement of the human race, than the dull, unchange-
able, infallible uniformity of the Church of Rome.
It is not then we conceive either in the Church’s uniformity
nor in the Church’s ecclesiastical details that we are to look for
or find the proofs of the Spirit’s presence: but in the moral,
spiritual, and intellectual effects of the Church’s institutions.
If the question then were, what do you then consider as the evi-
dence of the Spirit’s presence with his Church? We would reply,
that the evidence now is not the mighty rushing wind, nor the cloven
tongues of fire, nor the miraculous gifts of tongues and prophecy,
nor the accuracy of any ecclesiastical system. But it would be
this—what are the effects 1 Shew me a heart from which the
undue love of the world has been expelled—shew me a soul that
has found peace with God through a crucified Saviour—shew me
a soul in which the love of God is shed abroad by the power of the
Spirit of God—shew me a spirit burning with love for the souls of
men, devoted to the good of mankind, the advocate of the oppress-
ed, the friend of the friendless, the sympathizing, active, practical
Christian—shew me such a spirit, and bring him into contact with
other congenial spirits, differing it may be on points of ecclesiasti-
cal detail, but are with him in the Lord Jesus, and see how one
uniform spirit would pervade them all; one uniform appreciation
of saving truth, one uniform spirit of love teaching them to con-
secrate their whole power to the cause of God and of humanity ;
and we would say—here is the work of the Spirit—here is the
proof of the Spirit’s power, presence, and energy. I care not
from what sections of the Church universal the different specimens
of our common Christianity be called.
But another thing besides the absence of uniformity which
might be assumed as a presumption that the Spirit was not with
the Church, is the acknowledged “ absence of miraculous gifts"
Certain it is that the Spirit on his first personal administration
of the Christian Church did manifest himself as more unequivo-
cally present with his Church than he has seen fit to do since.
Certain it is that he poured out upon the first converts to Christi-
anity effects which he does not now display. It is said “ They
spake with tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.” “And
when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came


upon them, and they spake with tongues, and prophesied.” A
considerable portion of one of his letters, that to .the Corinthians,
is taken up with directions for the proper regulation of these gifts.
Now the question at present before us is this. As the Spirit
undoubtedly indicated his presence by such signs in former times,
and as certainly does not manifest it by such in present times, are
we to conclude from this, as some have done, that the withdrawal
of these gifts indicates unfaithfulness on the part of the Church,
and, consequently, being under the hiding of his countenance ; or
are we rather to resolve the change in the mode of the Divine
dealings towards his Church into more general and philosophical
principles.
We are of opinion and are now about to prove that the absence
of miraculous gifts from the Church must not he assumed as proof
of the absence of the Spirit, but rather that the change in the
Divine dealings towards his Church admits of a solution on more
general and, we conceive, philosophical principles. Now these
gifts were decidedly miraculous. And what is miraculous ? It
is a temporary departure by God from his fixed and general
laws, in order to establish some vast and important end. Now it
is evident, that to accomplish some very important design, such
deviations may be justified by the necessity of the occasion. Yet
it may be observed that God’s parsimony , so to speak, in miracles,
is a proof that they never could be, in the very nature of things
general, universal, or continued, When God would quarry, so to
speak, a people for himself out of the rude rock, when he would
dig them, as the prophet says, “ out of the hole of the pit,” he
signalized this mighty transaction by a series of the most stupen-
dous miracles, the first and most impressive that the world ever
beheld—to attest the fact that it was his hand which was in
operation in producing this momentous result—there was a case
worthy of such intervention —here was an end commensurate
with the means employed : yet it is evident how gradually the
fountain of the supernatural dried up, and at last ceased altogether.
In like manner when God had another and a still higher object
in view, which was not the temporal deliverance of a chosen people
from foreign oppression, but the spiritual and eternal emancipation
of the people of God from the thraldom of sin and tyranny of
satan, he did so by a series of wonders, the grandest, the most
affecting, the most sympathizing, the most benevolent, that the
world ever saw. But you perceive in this case too, as well as in
the former, when the designs of God had been answered—when
the respective systems, each of which had been so augustly intro-
duced, had been once planted and taken root, then you find that


there is a gradual drying up of the supernatural: and that he leaves
to be effected by the ordinary operation of His Spirit what His
ordinary operations are competent to accomplish. It is plain that
what God does in nature, he does also in grace. In depositing the
seed into the ground, an amount of extra labour is necessary on
the part of the husbandman. But after the seed has been once
deposited and taken root, it needs little more than the operation
of the ordinary influence of nature to bring that seed to maturity,
by the sun, and rain, and temperature of the heavens. In like
manner when the seed of the Gospel, the grain of mustard seed
had at first to be deposited in the soil of the lower world, it re-
quired a considerable putting forth of energy on the part of the
Heavenly Husbandmen, before it could strike its roots into the
hearts of men—but once fairly deposited and rooted, it required
little else than the ordinary influences of the Holy Spirit to bring
the seed soon to maturity. Nothing can be more than that
miracles never can be universal, never can be continued through
all ages, else they would cease to be miraculous, and become only
a source of confusion and aberration to the general and universal
laws which God has imposed upon natural things, Therefore
since as we have seen, judging from the general analogy of the
Divine dealings, God has been thus parsimonious or sparing of
having recourse to miraculous interposition, we are not, I think,
to conclude from the absence of his miraculous gifts to the
Church, that the Spirit has withdrawn himself from the care and
administration of his Church.
The greatest of all miracles is the miracle of a changed and
converted heart, when the “ heart of stone” becomes “ an heart of
flesh”—when the heart that was the abode of all uncieanness
becomes, by the grace of God and the power of his Spirit, a
temple of the living God—an habitation of God through the
Spirit, and this is the best and most convincing of all miracles.
We would conclude then with what after all is far more
important than any general speculations on the subject can be, by
putting the great doctrine of the day before you, as a question of
practical experience.
When Paul visited Ephesus for the first time, and found certain
Disciples there, he put to them this important question—Have ye
received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? Would it be out of
place for me to put the question to you—Have you received the
Holy Ghost since you believed \ What Paul meant when he put
the question was, whether they had yet received by baptism and
the imposition of apostolic hands, those miraculous powers by
which the Spirit at that time was wont to seal the members of the


Church. In that sense of it our question can have no meaning
nor meet with any reply. But in another sense of it, it has a most
pregnant meaning, and merits a most heart- searching reply—Have
you received the Holy Ghost then since you believed, if not in
the wonders of his supernatural agency, at least in those which
are more essential and more demonstrative of his presence and
power with his Church in his converting, enlightening, purifying,
comforting, and quickening influences \ Have you experienced
the conversion of your heart, the illumination of your understand-
ings, the purification and cleansing of your conscience, the com-
forting and pacifying of your spirit, or, in general, the quickening
and spirituality of your whole soul ? How am Ito judge of this
you may say ? Thus. Do I feel, know, and believe that my
heart, which was once a heart of stone, has become a heart of
flesh ? that my mind, which was once dark, ignorant, and unen-
lightened on the great points on which my present and eternal
happiness depend, has been opened, enlightened, taught of God
to receive the vast, the humbling, sanctifying truths of his word—
that my soul, which was once immersed in the world, and things
of the world, that cared only for the things of time and of sense,
which was in one word, “ carnally minded,” has become by the
grace and operation of God, “ spiritually minded,” which is life
and peace—that my soul, which was once cold, cheerless, hope-
less, reckless, has become warmed, comforted, cheered, by the
presence of the Heavenly Comforter—that my whole inward man,
which was once callous, indifferent, if not hostile, to the truth of
God, has come to submit itself under the holy teaching and
quickening influences of the Spirit of truth. Do I feel, know,
and believe all this—then I may without presumption reply to
the question in the affirmative, and say—Yes—we have received
the Holy Ghost; because then, “ the Spirit itself beareth witness
with our spirit, that we are the children of God,” (Rom. viii. 16,)
“ and it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is
truth.” (1 John v. 6.)
May he then, as on this day, come down into all your hearts
in his quickening converting, purifying, comforting influences*
May He make you feel that He is not a God afar off, but near to
you all ! May he come down into your souls as by a mighty
rushing wind, clearing away every impediment overthrowing all
obstacles, and bearing every worldly, every Satanic influence be-
fore it. May he come down into your souls not only in his
resistless energy but soft breathing into your souls, the balmy
sweetening, comforting breath of his power, calling forth your
hidden fruits and righteousness.


“ Awake oh ! north wind—and come thou south—blow upon
my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Song. iv. 16.
May He come down into your hearts as in a flame of Holy fire,
quickening your dead and drowzy soul, spreading abroad the love
of God in your hearts, diffusing the odour of Christ’s name in your
spirits, burning up your souls with unquenchable love and zeal
for the Master whom you serve, “ burning but not convincing
you.” May He descend into grateful, humble, believing, contrite
hearts—hearts prepared and made ready to receive their Heavenly
guest! May He make each of you a temple fitted for His honour,
an habitation of God through the spirit! May He bless the
youth of this congregation and early move their hearts to Divine
things. May He strenghthen the weak among you, enlighten
the ignorant, confirm the wavering, support the strong ! May He
come down in rich and full abundance on all this congregation !
May He quicken the Ministers who may be over you in the
Lord ! May He give them many souls as tokens that there labour
has not been vain in the Lord !
May He increase the number of communicants in this congre-
gation ; and may He especially be with us at this time on the
celebration for the last time with some of us of that hallowe
memorial of our humbled and glorified Lord that it may be to us
all a season of holy and joyful communion—a blessed foretaste of
those better joys which are at Gods right hand for evermore.


THE TRINITY IN UNITY.
“ For in Him dwelleth all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are
complete in Him, which is the head of all principality and power.”—
Col. ii. 9 10.
I feel, my dear friends, as if an apology were almost due to you
for addressing you once more from this place, having already on
the two preceding Sundays addressed you, as I supposed for the
last time. Having been, however, in the Providence of God
detained here by illness, and not knowing what provision might
have been made for the service of this day, I yesterday, on
recovery, threw together a few thoughts on the important
doctrine, suggested by the recurrence of the day, which I now
submit to your consideration.
There is a natural tendency in man towards a belief in superior
powers and beings. This religious clement, though perverted,
still continues to hold a place in fallen man. He is so often
taught by experience his helplessness ; he is so often reminded by
Providential interpositions that he is not left to himself in this
world, but that other and higher powers exercise an influence
over him, that it would be next to impossible to discard all
religious belief, and to adopt the infidel persuasion that there is
no God, no Providence, no hereafter.
Reason unassisted by revelation, when directed to the subject
of religion in the sense of belief in powers superior to man, leads
the way to superstition, and peoples every element, every river,
grove, mountain and sea, with a host of imaginary beings. It is
rare to find man even in his lowest state of degradation, in
the moral and intellectual scale, altogether destitute of some
glimmerings of the existence of other and higher powers. It is
plain that man in his savage state cannot by any means discern
the nature of the Being who made him. He is so degraded and
brutalized, so sunk in the moral and intellectual scale as to be un-
able to rise above the grossness of material things and the animal
—like pursuit of the daily objects of sense. It is true that the
word of God tells us it should be otherwise. It tells us that the
works of God themselves sufficiently declare the glory of their
great original. It tells us that the “ Heavens declare the glory
of God, and that the firmament sheweth his handy-work.”
Ps. xix. 1. It tells us “that the invisible things of God are


clearly seen from the works of creation, being understood by the
things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead”—
“so that man failing to discern him from his works is without
excuse.” Rom, i. 20. But it is plain that to draw this just
and rational conclusion requires the eye of 'intelligence, the
faculty of reasoning, the habit of observation—in a word, a
cultivated mind. But the argument has no power over the mind
that has lost or never possessed the power of appreciating it; and
you might just as soon expect a blind man to judge of colours,
or a deaf man to judge of sounds, as you might hope for savage
and uncivilized man to draw this conclusion, however just,
however rational, however self-evident. Hence, when the in-
ability to draw this inference exists, and yet the religious element
of feeling continues, it follows, that the mind in place of drawing
this just conclusion, can only frame to itself such gloomy or
fantastic notions, as superstition never fails to create ; nor can we
be surprised to find in half civilized men, the almost constant
prevalence of belief in magic, sorcery, and the wildest and most
extravagant notions and forms of belief.
It is plain that man, notwithstanding the favourite dogmas of
would-be philosophers, did not come from the hands of his
maker, a savage, but a civilized Being ; that it was only to such
a being that God could reveal the knowledge of himself. While
then it is true that man, in his savage state, can never rise to the
contemplation of the Being who made him ; and that even
civilized man requires intelligence, reason, and observation before
he can draw from natural objects the conclusion of the Being of
a God ;it is plain that with these difficulties in the way of man’s
attaining this end, he could not of himself acquire correct
notions of the Being who made him, unless that Being had him-
self vouchsafed a revelation of himself and of his will. The
grand distinction then between what is called Natural and Re-
vealed Religion consists in this—that the former, natural religion,
may discover the truth of an intelligent author of created things,
and may discern even from thence his “ Eternal power and
Godhead;” but that it cannot discover the truth of the divine
nature itself, nor what may be called the moral perfections of the
divine Being. The unity, for example, which natural religion
might justly conclude to be the nature of the Being God, is still
something very different from, and tar short of the “ Trinity in
unity,” which is the doctrine of revealed religion; and the
wisdom, power, intelligence, and even goodness, perceptible in the
works of creation are something very different from the divine


faithfulness, the divine truth, the divine holiness, the divine love,
which can only be learned from revealed religion.
Now we take it that the peculiar glory of revealed religion
above what is called natural, consists in this, that it makes
known to us not only the abstract idea that the divine Being is
one, hut the concrete idea that the divine unity involves a trinit}
of persons. To this exalted theme, as specially brought before
us this day, we now invite your attention, praying that Almighty
Being, whose province it is to guide us into all truth to assist our
consideration of it.
I. We would first then observe that the doctrine of the
Trinity sets before us the glory, excellency, and the fullness of
the Godhead.
The task we have p roposed is a difficult one—to investigate the
nature of the Being who made us. It is an impossible one for
any to attempt who discards the lights of Revelation, and refuses
to avail himself of that light and help which God has vouchsafed.
He that in the pride of his nature rejects that arm, will only
wander on in the mists of ignorance and error, till lost in the
depths of infidelity. If the attempt be made in a presumptuous
way, in a purely rational way, as it is called, that is, depending
in human reason only, then the attempt is dangerous and difficult
—then the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity, if viewed as an
abstract dogma, seems almost revolting to proud human reason.
Under this plausible philosophy how many have fallen, and
robbed religion of its life, of its essence, of its very substance,
and reduced it to a shadow, a system of ethics, instead of a system
of saving, substantial truth. If, on the contrary it be approached
in an humble spirit, and learnt as scripture teaches it, then we
shall not go away unfed, unrewarded ; but if in any other spirit
than that we pretend to draw near to scan the throne on which
God sits, he sure, we shall be sent empty away.
That the creator of all things is one , is a truth which revealed
religion enunciates, not less clearly, not less emphatically, surely
than natural religion does. To multiply quotations to prove this
would be tedious—let one solemn announcement alone suffice.
“ Hear, oh Israel, the Lord thy God is one Lord. (Deut. VI. 4.)
But revealed religion informs us no less clearly that in the
unity of this divine nature, there is a personality or individuality
too ; and that in condescension to human weakness, that person-
ality has been revealed as consisting of Father, Son, and Spirit.
Now while natural religion sufficiently declares the unity of the*
divine nature as an abstract truth ; Revelation presents it to us


as the concrete form—it tells us that in that Trinity there exists
a personality or individuality termed. Father, Son, and Spirit.
Let us suppose, for the sake of argument, that the unity of
revealed religion was the same with that of natural religion,
namely, an abstract unity—a unity that was absolute, undivided
—then what would be the consequence of this truth? The
consequence would be that He who is seated on the throne of the
universe, must be one so immeasurably removed above all with
which he is associated ; that he must feel alone in the midst of
myriads, solitary in the midst of society, bound to the beings
around him by no common tie, by no community of interest.
Now what a cold and cheerless view of the divine unity does not
diis give ? how completely severed from all association with the
beings around him!
There is something almost apalling in the idea of one so ab-
solutely alone, as the abstract idea of unity would suggest —one
so infinitely isolated from all other beings as to stand for ever
aloof from them ; to be unable to sympathise with them, or
;o have any community of interest or feeling with them. Such
in abstraction or isolation might be compared, as small things
with great, to that feeling of solitude which gifted minds feel
when thrown into social combination, with which they cannot
sympathise, and therefore feel alone, even in the midst of
numbers.
Or it might be compared to what Adam’s state might have
been, had he been the sole intellectual inhabitant of this lower
world. What would it have been to him, though Eden’s para-
dise had been decked with all that could delight or gratify the
senses 1 What would it have availed him that the brute creation
had recognised him as their sovereign Lord ? What would it
have been to him, as the poet says, “ that the bear had daudled
the kid,” or “the huge elephant had made him sport with his
little proboscis” ? Would he not have walked through these
scenes of loveliness with a sad, because a solitary mind, a feeling
of being alone in the universe, a feeling of being surrounded by a
multitude of inferior creatures, with whom, from the gulf inter-
vening between intelligence and non-intelligence, it was impos-
sible for him to sympathise ; God saw this, and felt this when he
had made man. Among all the beasts of the field there was not
found an help meet for him. And the Lord God said, “It is not
good that the man should be alone. I will make him an help
meet for him.” Would it be presumptuous to say that such a
feeling of loneliness, such a feeling of oppressive solitude, such a


feeling of eternal isolation from all other beings, must have
pressed for ever in the mind of the eternal, had that unity, which
forms the basis of his nature, been an abstract, absolute, undivided,
in place of being, what we affirm it to be, a concrete unity.
So, though God be one , yet there may be, and according to
scripture there is such a personality or individuality in that unity,
as must dispel for ever that idea of awful and solitary grandeur
that must otherwise have removed the creator for ever from the
things and beings created. Nay, on the contrary, in such a unity
as that which we have supposed, which is not an abstract, not a
concrete unity, there may exist such a community of interest,
such a oneness of will, and such a unity of action as may give
birth to the highest of all happiness. Something of this nature
seems indicated by such passages as these : 4 For the Father
loveth the Son, and hath committed all things into his hand.’
John v. 20. “ All things are delivered to me by my Father :
and no man knoweth the Son but the Father : neither knoweth
any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son
will reveal him.” Mat. xi. 27.
Nay, is there not something still more sacred, and still more
wondrous, as indicating the breaking down of this awful barrier
of separation between the creator and the creature, in such
passages as these. “ That they all may be one : as thou, Father?
art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us : that the
world may believe that thou hast sent me.” “I in them, and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one : that the
world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as
thou hast loved me.” John xvi. 21. 23.
Whaf a glorious glimpse do not these remarkable words give
us into the future designs of God, and the future destinies of the
human race !
Do not you perceive here, the evident breaking down of that
wall of separation, which had hitherto severed the Creator from
the creature 1
Do not you perceive by his participation with the human
nature,, a wondrous and glorious design of drawing together in
one, in himself, the whole vast body of his creatures, linking
them to himself, through the humanity of his own Son, cement-
ing the whole vast family of his creatures in one bond of brother-
hood, of which He himself is the head and centre ; and thus
therefore, these must even circulate a community of interest,
a oneness of feeling, a participation of spirit that must consolidate
the whole family of Heaven in the bonds of everlasting love and
companionship.


The great point, as it appears to us, respecting the doctrine of
Trinity in Unity, as taught in scripture, is, that it is never
profounded to us in the form of an abstract dogma. It is never
presented to us in the abstract, but in the concrete. It is never
stated as a naked, abstract truth, to which the understanding is
commanded to give its assent; but it is never-failingly accom -
panied by those spiritual and moral associations, which give it at
once a tangible and practical bearing in human conduct and
feeling.
It is invariably stated in combination with such spiritual truth
as the following. “ God so loved the world, as to send his only
begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believeth in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life.” John iii. 16.
“ But God commandeth his love to us, in that which were yet
dnners, Christ died for us.” Rom. v. 8.
Hence, as it appears to us, the failure of all those attempts to
dogmatise in a scholatic and logical form, as a great truth con-
fessedly so deep, and so far removed from all human research,
which, though doubtless useful as a safeguard against error, and a
bulwark of divine truth (and this is the best view to take ot such
formularies), can never bring us a single step nearer the true
solution of the difficulty, than if they never had been propounded
at all. We might ask for example, whether the definitions and
distinctions laid down in the Athanasian creed tend to bring the
subject a whit more intellibly to the mind, than the simple
announcement of scripture, “ God so loved the world, <&c.”
From the fullness and completeness of the Godhead, which the
doctrine of the Trinity in Unity serves to teach, the mind almost
naturally turns to the glory, excellency, and fullness of that work
upon mankind, with which the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity
is thus graciously associated—and this is the
11. Division of our subject, on which we now enter.
That work in regard to man, with which this sublime truth of
the divine nature, has been revealed and associated in the work of
salvation, which had its preparatory steps in the general redemp-
tion of mankind.
Before the work of individual salvation, that is, each one’s
personal participation in the benefits designed for him by God, in
the gospel, could be accomplished, it was necessary that a general,
or ail but universal benefit should be bestowed, in consequence of
which, the work of individual salvation takes its rise. That
previous or preparatory work was the work of human redemption.
That was the work specially undertaken by the Son ; and it was
the successful issue of that primary work that procured the end


for which it was wrought, individual salvation. All the blessings
flowing to individuals, though not immediately originating from
him, but primarily and properly flowing from another divine
person, namely, the Holy Spirit, are nevertheless ultimately
referable to Him, and resolvable into his vast and original scheme.
There were, so to speak, obstacles in the way of man’s recovery
and restoration to his place in the family of Heaven, which had
to be removed, broken down, and taken out of the way, before
the great end could be accomplished. The obstables in the first
instance, lay on the part of God. These obstacles were not any
disinclination or want of love on the part of God to man—but
they lay rather in some of those high and mysterious principles of
His nature, that required to be met and vindicated, before he
could lawfully extend to man the benefits of that salvation, which
it was all along His object to give him. Such were the require-
ments of His law, and the perfections of his character, which
imperatively demanded of Him some such atonement as that
which was actually made.
That grand introductory, and indispensable work once accom-
plished by the Advent of the Son into the world, by his In-
carnation, Doctrine, Crucifixion, Resurrection, and Ascension,
cleared the way for its personal and individual application to the
souls of believers, so as to render it the means of their salvation.
It has, so to speak, opened up the fountain of divine love. It has
broken open “ the fountain designed for the House of David and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and uncleanness.” It has
removed the mighty and ancient barriers that intervened between
the Father and Spirit, and the return of his repentant children.
It has introduced a new a;ra, a new dispensation, a glorious latter-
day period, wherein the salvation of believers, as the work of the
Holy Spirit, is successfully accomplished.
We have spoken of the difficulties that lay in the way of God,
which prevented his pouring his benefits on man. But there is
another class of difficulties altogether, which opposed themselves
to the same happy result ; and these difficulties lay not across the
path of God, but in the way of man. And what were these
difficulties ? They were the obstacles, which the fallen, carnal
nature of man presents to the good designs of God. It is plain
that however willing God might be on his part to commu-
nicate his best blessings to man, such as His forgiveness, His
pardon of sin, His holiness, His happiness, His eternal life. I say
it is plain that God could not confer these blessings, while the
nature of man was inveterately opposed to them, while the heart
of man shut itself up against them, and denied access to the


grace of God’s Holy Spirit, while it resisted God’s call to
repentance, and hardened itself against the overtures of His grace.
Until, therefore, the heart of man could be subdued, until it
could be changed, softened, touched by the spirit of God, it is plain,
that however willing God might have been to impart spiritual
and eternal life to the soul, while it was determinedly opposed to
God’s intentions, it was impossible that he could receive the gift
of life. Now this is what the Spirit of God does for the soul
whom God designs to save. He brings the work of Christ, with
peculiar power, to the heart of the believer. He teaches him to
see in the atonement of Jesus Christ, the exceeding sinfulness of
sin. He teaches him to see in it the holiness of God, the means
he has provided for man’s recovery and the infinite love which
prompted and effected that recovery. This touches the heart of
the sinner—this teaches it—this turns it—this softens it—this
subdues it—this brings the heart of the rebellious back to God.
It is when the soul learns to look by faith on Him, whom he has
pierced, that the heart of man is pierced in return. The spirit
of grace and of supplication is poured forth upon him. Anguish
and bitterness seize upon him ; and he “ mourneth as one that
mourneth for his only son, and is in bitterness as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn”—but ere long the season of heaviness
passes bye, and he finds in that day that “ there is a fountain
opened to the House of David, and to the inhabitants of Jeru-
salem, for sin and for uncleanness.” Zech. xii. 10. 13.
Now, then we are able, clearly, and fully, to appreciate the
work of these two persons of the sacred Trinity in Unity ; the
Son and the Spirit ; but what of the third person or individual in
this divine and sovereign unity ? Does he take no part in this
mighty work I Does he hold no office and discharge no part of
the believers salvation ? He sent, it is true, the Son, He applies,
it is true, the Spirit—but is it only remotely and indirectly that
he has anything to do with the individual work of salvation ?
He has no immediate and direct part in it ? We think he has ;
and what, therefore, is the part which he fulfils ? When the soul
of the believer is made conscious of that great change having
passed upon it, whose issue is Life Eternal ; when it is made to
feel the truth of that mighty transaction, which the word of God
calls, “being called out of darkness into light, and from the
power of Satan unto God ’or the being “ translated from the
kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of God’s dear Son.” The
soul almost naturally and necessarily enquires, whence is this ?
What is the origin of this saving change ? What has so totally
and materially altered all my prospects, all my hopes, all my


principles of action 1 lam the same man outwardly, that I was
before—but inwardly I am not the same. My whole inner
nature has undergone an entire revolution in all its sentiments,
feelings, hopes, motives, and principles of action—whence this
change ? Can it be the result of my own reason, or the work of
my own conscience, or the power of my own will, that has
wrought in me this momentous change ?
Surely, a very little experience will suffice to teach the child of
God that the work of salvation which has taken place in his soul,
cannot be traced to man as its author, but must be traced up to
that Parent of all good, who see’s all things from the beginning,
who draws his chosen one’s by the cords of love to his dear Son,
and who, in fulfilment of that end, breathes upon them with the
breath of his Holy Spirit.
Do you shrink from avowing the doctrine of election, which is
the peculiar work of the Father in the salvation of the believer,
as redemption and conversion are peculiarly those of the Son and
the Spirit ? Then, remember, that you shrink from Christ him-
self, for he it was who first taught it, when he said—“ All that
my Father giveth me shall come to me : and he that cometh to
me, I will in nowise cast out: my Father which gave them to me
is greater than all: and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Father’s hand.” John x. 28. 29. Then must we honour God
in all his offices in the work of our salvation : and we do not
honour him aright, if we do not honour him as the God of our
election, as well as the God of our redemption and salvation.
111. and lastly, with this doctrine terminates the fullness, ex-
cellency, and glory of those doctrines, which the Church has in
succession made to pass before us, since the commencement of the
ecclesiastical year.
With its commencement we were led to consider that happy
and glorious event, the advent and nativity of our blessed Lord,
with the corresponding doctrine of regeneration with which it is
identified. With the manifestation of Christ to the Gentiles, we
were led to consider that remarkable feature of the Gospel ; that
“ Christ was preached unto the Gentiles”—with the return of
Lent, we were led with the period of Christ’s fasting to associate
the necessity of bringing our bodies unto subjection to the law of
Christ—■“ the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, triumphing
over the law of sin and death.”
With Passion week we were led to comtemplate the consum-
mation of the Christian sacrifice, with the Resurrection, the
successful issue of the atonement, and the pledge which that
restoration gives of our own—with the Ascension, we have


lingered in the last steps of the Son of Man ; and caught a
glimpse of his entrance into glory ; and, lastly, with the effusion
of the Holy Spirit at the feast of Pentecost, the successful issue of
the work of human redemption, the opening of the floodgates of
the divine love and favour to the human race, the grand and final
dispensation of the spirit. And now we sum up the whole of
their great and leading themes with the doctrine of the Trinity in
Unity ; as that grand and final doctrine in which the fullness of
the Godhead is identified with the completeness of our salvation
in Him, who is the head of all principality and power.
The Church of which we are members, has thus, within the last
sacred year, taken her members by the hand, and presented to
them as large and comprehensive a body of instruction as perhaps
any Church on earth could give to her children. She does not
leave her ministers and members wholly to their own choice in
the selection of their yearly themes. She has, to a certain extent,
tied them both down to an annual survey of the grand leading
doctrines of Chistianity. This we have always considered to be
one of the peculiar excellencies of our Church ; that she does not
leave her ministers wholly to miscellaneous teaching, hut thus
inculcates a wholesome cycle of public instruction. She thus, by
setting before her members the grand outlines of the Christian
faith, does as much for the spiritual well-being of her children as
any such institution can do; and the practical result of this judicious
arrangement, to which other sections of the Church universal
have borne witness, is, that there is a chasteness, a beauty, a
consistency in the religious character of the living members of
our Church, that may well bear a comparison with those of any
members of the Christian Church. Perhaps our remarks last
Sunday may have been thought to savour too much of ultra
liberalism ; and an impression may have been unintentionally
given, that it was a matter of no consequence to what section of
the visible Church we belonged, provided only we belonged to the
true Church of Christ. We do not mean to encourage that
opinion. We do not undervalue the privilege of membership to
the Church to which we belong. But we are no bigotted ad-
mirers of her, who can see nothing but beauty in all her in-
stitutions, and nothing but deformity in those of other Churches.
We are not blind to her defects—but we are always happy to
have an opportunity of rendering her the feeble tribute of our
praise, and saying of her with the voice of wisdom —“ Many
daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.”
Prov. xxxi. 29.
Perhaps if she errs, she errs in attempting too much, or does


not in practise sufficiently act up to her theory ; and hence at
times her apparent failure.
With this attempt to close my public effort to illustrate, the
the glory, excellency, and completeness of these doctrines ; but I
am jealous of the admiration due to the doctrines being trans-
ferred from the word to the Church , of which she is only the
handmaid. This would be much the same, as if on some great
state occasion or pageant, we were to think more of the handmaid
than of the Queen, in all her royal beauty, when clad with Gold
of Ophir.
Having in the Providence of God been detained amongst you by
sickness, I could not refrain from once more tendering my
humble efforts for your edification, and co-operating with my
brother in the ministry, who has been temporarily appointed here,
until your regular pastor is appointed over you. I rejoice to
think, and be able to say, that there is every prospect of your being
committed into the hands of a worthy and suitable pastor, who, T
pray God, may build you up in our most holy faith, and carry on
the work of grace in your souls. My work is now finished, and
I must shortly give an account of my stewardship, for I may no
longer be steward. May I give it, in as far as you are concerned,
with joy and not with grief. It would be ungrateful and un-
graceful in me, now that I have unexpectedly had an opportunity
of once more addressing you, not to notice with grateful feelings
the testimonial of your favour and approbation which you have
bestowed upon me. May I consider the feelings that prompted
that testimonial as an evidence that my labour has not been
altogether in vain—that some few hearts may have been touched
through my feeble instrumentality, and then it will indeed be a
testimony that will cheer my heart far more than silver and gold.
And now, my dear friends, for the third and last time, I seem to
say to you, “ finally, my brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of
good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace be with you.”
If I might be permitted to conclude with something like a
poetical idea, it would be with the following comparison :
My residence among you, delayed by unforeseen events in the
good Providence of God, seems to resemble, in some degree, that
beautiful object in nature, with which most of you are familiar,
and which you may have witnessed in the land that gave us birth.
I mean the windings of some noble river, before it leaves some
lovely and fertile valley, and loses itself in some estuary of the
sea. Often from some of the lofty peaks which mark the land of
my nativity, have I marked such a majestic stream, doubling and


winding, seeming to make for its outlet, and then returning
apparently almost to the very point from which it started, till
after adorning the aspect of nature, and clothing the valley with
beauty and fertility, and gladdening the landscape with one of its
most picturesque features, slowly, and as it were reluctantly
mingling its waters with the mighty ocean. Even so, I have
thought, in some slight degree, might my course, though brief,
among you be compared to such an object in nature. May it he
mine to have watered in my course some trees of the Lord’s
planting. Having watered others, may my own soul he watered
from above. My course has lain through many a sunny hank,
and many a little green and fertile valley has, I trust, been
watered in my path ; and though like the magnificent object in
nature, to which I have alluded. I seem as it were to have
returned again almost to the point from whence I started, as if
unwilling to leave those scenes of loveliness and beauty, yet
slowly as it were reluctantly, I must be prepared when my
earthly course is run, to mingle my waters with the great ocean
of eternity.
Thus with a slow and somewhat meandering step, I once more
bid you adieu ; and if my spirit may have been the means of
fertilizing any of your spirits, calling forth your hidden virtues,
and causing you to bud and bloom in the garden of the Lord, as
trees of the Lord’s planting, let the praise be due, not to him
“ that plants, nor to him that waters, but to God, who alone
giveth the increase.”


APPENDIX.
Williamstown, — 7th June, 1854.
The departure of a faithful minister of the Gospel from our shores
should be a subject of regret to the Colony in general, as it is to
the Parish in which he has labored, in particular.
In a fluctuating population like that of Victoria, scores of any
profession, calling, or class in the community, with the exception
of the clergy, may migrate without their absence in any way
affecting the mass they leave behind : but it is different with the
ministers of God’s Holy Word. They, alas ! are so few and
scattered that, if called from the charge of any souls, they are at
once awakened to their loss, and have often too good grounds for
self-reproach, that the past services of their late Pastor have not
been appreciated, and that the Bread of Life, which had been so
repeatedly offered to them, had been rejected ; so that they feel
the Lord’s wrath to be justly upon them, giving them “ The
bread of adversity and the water of affliction” by the removal of
their teacher, as so plainly described by the prophet Isaiah c. 30.
On the departure of Mr. Drummond, the strongest feeling of
affection and esteem was manifested by all classes of his parish-
ioners toward both him and his excellent wife. The former was
presented with a purse of One Hundred Guineas ; and the ladies
of the parish presented the latter with a Gold Watch, bearing a
suitable inscription.
« We never shall look upon their like again.”
Williamstown 25th June , 1864.
Williamstown, —7th June, 1854.
Dear Sir,
It is with the deepest regret that we find ourselves called
upon, thus early, to take leave of you ; which we cannot do
without tendering an expression of our sincere and affectionate
regard for you, as well as the high sense we entertain of your
worth as a Christian Pastor.
When you came amongst us sixteen months since, we hoped
that your services were permanently secured to us ; and that
desire has only grown in strength by the uninterrupted harmony
which has happily marked that period.
We desire to acknowledge the earnest zeal you have ever evinced
in the faithful discharge of your sacred duties, and we heartily
pray that those labors may not have been in vain, but that here-
after you may be abundantly rewarded.


The example of your beloved wife, as evidenced alike in your
well-ordered family as in her untiring co-operation in your
parochial visitations, has not, we trust, been without a due in-
fluence on the morals of this district.
We trust that you will not fail to remember the spiritual wants
of this congregation in your prayers at the throne of grace, and
especially that the Lord will in mercy raise up a faithful minister
of his word to succeed you, who will, by God’s blessing, be enabled
to build up on your foundation, and water the seeds of your sow-
ing.
That the Lord’s presence may graciously be vouchsafed to you,
dear Mrs. Drummond, and your family, during the voyage, and
that His Holy Spirit may sanctify your future labours, will be the
fervent prayer,
Dear Sir, of your affectionate Friends the Trustees of the
Episcopal Church at Williamstown.
To the Rev. G. M. DRUMMOND.
Geelong, —June 18th, 1854.
My dear Friends,
I received your parting letter with feelings of gratitude and
thankfulness. The kind manner in which you have been pleased
to notice my imperfect services has been most gratifying to my
feelings, and leads me to encourage the hope that my ministry
among you may not have been unprofitable.
The pleasure which your letter conferred upon me, being an
authorised expression of approbation on the part of my people as
being represented by you as their trustees, has perhaps exceded
even the gratification afforded me by the handsome testimonial
lately presented to me, inasmuch as it indicates more deeply the
spiritual effects of my ministry, and it will ever be the faithful
minister’s principle, “/or I seek not yours , hut you.”
The kind manner in which you have been pleased to notice the
concurrent labours of my dear partner are also most gratifying to
my mind ; and I trust that our humble labours, with all their
defects, may ever be held in remembrance : and I am not without
hope that they may yet bear fruit to your future and eternal
profit.
I thank you for the kind wishes respecting the future sphere
of our labour. I can but trust that the same Almighty Hand
which has hitherto guided me in all my ways may continue to do
so to the end.
May I reciprocate the same wishes and prayers for you, that
you too may be upheld and edified ; that you may be united in
mind and spirit, that you may strengthen each others hands and
not weaken them by diversion and differences of opinion ; that you
may act for the benefit of the congregation whom you represent,
and especially, by God’s blessing, finish the work now in progress.
It will give me the most unfeigned happiness in the distant land


to which we are going to hear that you are strengthened and
prospered, edified, and built-up by my successor ; and I pray
that you may strengthen his hands ; and by your example, pro-
fession, and communion with the Church, encourage him to labour
among you hopefully.
Accept, my dear friends our united most grateful acknow-
ledgments for your kind remembrance of us and of our labours ; and
praying that the Almighty Spirit may ever continue to govern
and rule our hearts, leading us into all truth, and keeping us in
our most holy faith until we come to His glorious kingdom.
Believe me ever to remain your most affectionate friend and
Brother in Christ.
G. M. DRUMMOND.
To the Trustees of the Episcopal Church at Williamstown.
It may be interesting to the members of the Rev, G. M. Drum-
mond’s late congregation at Williamstown, to learn that most
pleasing accounts have been received from him and his family at
Batavia, where, through great mercy, they arrived in perfect
safety and good health.
It is a subject for much thankfulness to Almighty God that
our friends passed in safety through their voyage in the most in-
tricate navigation in the world (Torres Strates.)
Let us remember that on setting out they were committed into
the care of our covenant keeping God, who having heard and
so abundantly answered those prayers—encourages us continually
to place our trust in Him—according to the measure of our faith
in prayer we practice and experience one of two doctrines set
forthin Gods word. Our Lord Jesus Christ says, “ Whatsoever ye
ask the Father in My name He will give it you,” and St. James
saith, “ Ye ask and receive not because ye ask amiss.”
C. P.
Lucas Brothers, Printers, 72, Collins Street, East, Melbourne.




