

THREE YEARS
WITH
THUNDERBOLT.




COPYRIGHT.
A. C. ROWLANDSON “MONTANA,” HARBOUR STREET, MOSMAN.
Sydney, New South Wales.


Frontispiece.] WILLIAM MONCKTON.
Present Day.


Three Years with
Thunderbolt.
(Being the narrative of William Monckton, who
for three years attended the famous outlaw,
Frederick Ward, better known as Captain
Thunderbolt, as servant, companion, and
intimate friend : during which period he
shared the bushranger’s crimes and perils,
and was twice severely wounded in encounters
with the police.)
EDITED BY
AMBROSE PRATT
AUTHOR OF
The Great Push Experiment. Franks; Duellist.
Vigorous Daunt; Billionaire. The Counterstroke , &c., &c.
THE STATES PUBLISHING CO.,
861 George Street, Sydney.




ILLUSTRATIONS.
PAGE.
William Monckton, Present Day ... Frontispiece
A Man Bareheaded, who lay among the
Grasses 15
Thunderbolt’s Leap 94
Thunderbolt Bowed Dow to the Dadies ... 151
Combo was Hurled against the Rock ... 233
William Monckton, age 21 —13 ... ... 247


CONTENTS
Chapter Page
I—The Meeting x
ll—The Compact . . . . 17
lII I Start Bushranging ... 32
IV — My First Robbery Under Arms 48
V—The Bushranger at Home . . 61
Vl—The Biter Bitten ... 68
Vll—Thunderbolt’s Leap . . .88
VIII —The Ups and Downs of Bushranging ioo
IX—I Save Thunderbolt’s Life . 115
X— Turning the Tables . . .123
Xl—The Rift Within the Lute . 128
XII— An Eventful Meeting . . .132
XIII— In the Mire 140
XIV — The “Dummy” Pistol . . .150
XV— An Alarm, False or ? . . 155
XVI — The Plucky Hawker . . . 163
XVII— A Brush with the Police . . 167
XVIII —A New Career 174
XIX—A Curious Adventure . . . 186
XX—The Race ...1... 194
XXI—An Interlude .... 206
XXII— Outwitted 213
XXIII — A Dastardly Trick . . . 219
XXIV— Wounded 228
XXV —The Beginning of the End . 241
XXVI—The Last . 253


PREFACE
It is within the memory of many living Australians
that a lad named William Monckton was tried in the
year 1869 at Armidale, N.S.W., before Mr. Justice
Meymott and a jury, charged with having committed
numerous robberies under arms in company with the
famous outlaw, Captain Thunderbolt. Monckton
made no serious effort to defend himself, and was con-
victed. But the youth of the culprit (he was under
18 years of age), and the fact, attested to by a clergy-
man and several other respectable witnesses at the
trial, that parental cruelty had driven him to the bush,
operated to secure for the lad the comparatively
trifling sentence of three years’ imprisonment, with
hard labour, in Darlinghurst Gaol, Sydney.
Monckton, however, was released after having
served only fourteen months of his sentence, for good
conduct in prison; and from that day forward he led a
life of such exemplary rectitude that he has long been
regarded by all who know him as a worthy citizen of
the Commonwealth.


PREFACE.
He is at present a well-to-do farmer, resident at
Howell, N.S.W., and the head of a large family much
respected in the neighbourhood. An easily intelligible
delicacy of feeling has during the last thirty years pre-
vented Mr. Monckton from publishing any record of
his lawless and romantic youth. Lapse of time, how-
ever, and the persuasion of his friends, have combined
of late to overcome his long habit of silence, and in-
duced him to lay his experiences before the world. In
the work of editing his memoirs I have received
valuable assistance from Mr. F. Herbert Gall and from
Mr. M. O’Shannessy, of Howell, two acquaintances of
Mr. Monckton, who have been at pains to verify
wherever possible, the more important details of his
narrative.
AMBROSE PRATT.
VIII


THREE YEARS WITH
THUNDERBOLT
BY
AMBROSE PRATT
CHAPTER I.
THE MEETING.
My name is William Monckton. I was born at
Mr. Dangar’s station at Gostwick, in the year 1853.
My father died when I was six years old, and from
that time forward my childhood was excessively un-
happy. Soon after my father’s death, my mother,
who was very poor, married a Yarrawick selector.
She took that course, I believe, less for her own sake
than in order to provide a home for my brothers and
sisters and myself. Unfortunately for me, however,
my stepfather conceived a dislike for me, almost from
the first. I was the youngest of all our family, and
on that account, perhaps, he considered that he had a
A


right to demand from me implicit and unquestioning
obedience. Looking backwards now across the long
stretch of intervening years, I am fain to acknowledge
that there were faults on both sides. He was a stern,
hard-natured man, capable of genuine kindness to
those who did not cross him, but of a disposition which
opposition always rendered obstinate and even brutal.
It was my duty, perhaps, to have submitted my will
to his, but even when a very young child, I was ex-
tremely proud and passionate, and the least injustice,
real or apparent, stung me to revolt. A kind word
had more effect with me than the most intemperately
uttered command. My father, moreover, had ever
treated me with kindness, and my first experience
of ill-usage came from the hands of the man who had,
it seemed to me, usurped my father’s place.
I well remember our first quarrel. I had been so
tenderly attached to my father that when my mother
married again I felt, in a vague, childish way, that
some wrong had been done to the dead, and I could
not, try as I would, bring myself (as did ray brothers
and sisters with facility) to treat my stepfather as a
real parent To me he was a usurper, and ever he re-
mained so. Ido not wish it to be thought that I be-
haved to him with the remotest resemblance of in-
solqnce. On the contrary, he inspired me with fear,


and while I kept out of his way as much as possible,
when we unavoidably met, I showed him the utmost
deference. There was one thing, however, in which
I could not obey him. I could not call him “ father.”
The word stuck in my throat whenever I tried to use
it, and planted a burning pain in my breast. For
a time I escaped addressing him by name, but at
length he remarked a disposition which had long been
obvious to the others, and which had already cost my
mother a deal of pain in unsuccessfully striving to
overcome. She, poor woman, would have had us all
at peace, and very frequently had she reasoned with
and tried to persuade me to look upon her husband in
the way she wished. But I was unable to yield to her
first entreaties, and the passing of time only made
matters worse. One evening he' called me to him
and coldly commanded me to call him “father!”
I was afraid to refuse, and yet I could not obey.
I stood silently before him. A little wise kindness
then—a few persuasive words —might have altered the
whole course of my life. But they were not spoken.
I was half overcome, and on the verge of tears. My
stepfather repeated his command. I turned with
brimming eyes to my mother, who stood by, trembling
like a leaf.
“Mother 1” I cried piteously, “I can’t!”


My stepfather caught my arm in a sudden rage
and began to beat me. The first blow made my heart
as hard as stone. I cried no more, despite the punish-
ment, and I did not speak, but sullenly and silently
defied him. He beat me until he grew tired, and then
permitted me to slink away, a bruised but unbroken
thing, to bed. From that hour we hated each other
with remorseless bitterness, and neither lost a chance
in the years that followed to make the other suffer.
But he was a powerful man—l a child. It was
only natural that I should have suffered the more. I
was my mother’s favourite. For that reason he in-
cluded her in his bitterness, and on the smallest pre-
text he beat me cruelly before her. He forced me,
moreover, to do work about the selection—work that
was more properly fitted for a grown man. As I
grew up I was obliged to plough, to split rails, to herd
the cattle, to break in and ride wild young horses; in
fact, to do everything that his ingenuity could devise
which might weary my limbs or bend my stubborn
spirit. The immediate consequence of his treatment
was to increase my hate for him; but a more indirect
yet enduring result was that I outstripped my years
in physical development and hardiness, and by the
time I was fourteen years old I was noted all over the
district as an expert rider and backwoodsman.


For my part, I lost no opportunity to torment and
outwit my tyrant. Whenever I could I disobeyed
him, and cheerfully suffered the consequent beating
he gave me. I can, however, remember no act of
open or covert malice which I committed for which
he did not brutally requite me, and I cannot claim to
have ever gained the smallest advantage over him.
This was neither because he was extraordinary clever
in detecting my pranks, nor because I was dull-witted
in devising them. The reason was that I was nearly
always directly under his supervision, and he must
necessarily have been a fool or I a genius had I suc-
ceeded in escaping the reward of my misdeeds. While
still very young I was supported with the hope of one
day becoming strong enough to repay his cruelty in
kind. But as I grew older I perceived how very long
I should have to postpone my revenge, and the pros-
pect of suffering his tyranny for long years sickened
and dismayed me. One day he gave me a particularly
savage thrashing for an offence so trifling that I felt
I could not any longer endure the life he led me.
That night I ran away from home, and walked some
twelve miles through the bush to the house of another
selector. My stepfather pursued me next day on
horseback, and caught me as I was just preparing to
set out in order to increase the distance between us.


He gave me a beating on the spot, and another before
my weeping mother when we had arrived at the home-
stead.
Three months later I ran away again, and was
similarly ill-used when caught. I was by then nearly
15 years of age. My resolution to escape from my
cruel stepfather was intensified by the punishment my
failures had met with. Watching my chance, I soon
ran away again, but he suspected my intention, and,
having discovered the direction in which I had de-
parted, he chased me on horseback through the bush
and overtook me before I had .covered five miles. On
that occasion he tied my hands together with a rope,
whose other end he fastened to his saddle. He then
set off at a round trot for home, and, in order to save
myself from being dragged along the road, I was
obliged to run the whole way at his horse’s heels at
the top of my speed. Well was it then for me that
I was strong and toughly fibred, for I believe that the
tyrant, had I fallen, would have disdained to check his
horse’s pace.
When we arrived he bound me, worn out and pant-
ing as I was, with my face to the trunk of a tree that
grew a few yards from the house, and he gave me so
terrible a flogging with his stockwhip that for three
days afterwards I lay a groaning wreck in my bed,


unable to move a muscle without shrieking aloud with
pain. My purpose, however, was neither broken nor
changed. I determined to escape or die trying.
Hitherto I had been compelled to run away on foot,
so close a watch did my brutal stepfather keep over his
horses. I resolved that when I recovered I would
make a great effort to steal one. He frustrated me,
however. Anticipating my design, he sent all the
horses away. But that arrangement gave me a chance
that he had neglected to consider. He would have had
to follow me on foot did I fly again, and I felt confident
that I could outpace him. Fearing lest he might per-
ceive and repair his error, I scarcely waited to get
well before I was once more in the bush. This time
I made for Casher Creek, a direction which I believed
my tyrant would consider the least likely for me to
pursue, and when daylight broke I was fifteen miles
from home. I was tramping along, feeling very
hungry and footsore, when I came of a sudden to the
edge of a small treeless plain and saw, not a hundred
yards away, a lad of about my own age, seated on
horseback mounting guard over a herd of cattle.
I knew him by sight. His name was Charley ,
and he was the son of a selector who had been a friend
of my father. I had never spoken to him, however,
for my stepfather seldom permitted me leisure to make


acquaintances; he preferred to work me like a bullock
on the farm.
The boy perceived me as soon as I saw him—other-
wise I should have darted back among the trees and
endeavoured to conceal myself—so much did I fear
and distrust my kind. As it was I stared at him de-
fiantly, and I fiercely envied him the half damper
which he had been munching when I came upon him,
and which he now held in his hand, poised in mid-air
between his knee and mouth.
“ Hello!” he remarked. “ Will Monckton, ain’t
it?”
I nodded.
“ Not run away from home again, have yer?” he de-
manded.
I was so surprised to learn that any strangers had
heard of my previous attempts that I could not reply.
“ Have yer ?” he repeated.
“Yes!” I answered. “But don’t put me away,
Charley, will you?” I added imploringly.
He shook his head “ Not much!” he cried. “ That
stepfather of yours is a brute beast, he is. I’d a’ killed
him with a tommy axe long ago if I’d been you—and
he’d treated me like they say he has you. Why the
whole district has him set.”
“It would be murder!” I replied.


“My troubles!” cried Charley. “He deserves it.
Where are you making for. Will ?”
“ Anywhere to hide from him, Charley. I’ll die
before I go back.”
“ He’ll make you if he catches you! You look
pretty dead beat, Will.”
I shuddered. “ I’m done!” I gasped, and sat down
weakly on the grass, suddenly conscious that I was
very weary.
“ I’m that hungry,” I said presently.
Charley gazed at me for a moment, then leisurely
swung himself to the ground and approached me,
stretching out his half-eaten damper, and looking away
as he did so, I thanked him and ate it ravenously.
I had never enjoyed a meal before one-half so well.
I washed it down with a draught from Charley’s water
bottle, and then arose, refreshed and re-invigorated.
“ Say,” said Charley. “ I know a place where you
can hide if you want to!”
“ Where ?” I asked excitedly.
“ ’Taint fur from here. Just over by Casher Creek.
I found it one day when I was after a stray steer.
If you like to go there I’ll fix you up for vittles. As
for your stepfather, he’d never catch you where I
mean.”
I immediately agreed to his proposal, whereupon the


boy invited me to mount his horse behind him, and we
set off at a canter, regardless of the cattle in Charley’s
charge. A smart ride of half-an-hour brought us
to the edge of a ravine, where we dismounted. A
rough scramble thereafter down some rocks soon dis-
played to view a long flat grassy ledge, that overhung
a small spring of fresh water, and which had been
shielded from observation from above by the hollow
walls of the ravine.
“ Not a bad camping ground, eh?” said Charley.
“ It’s magnificent!” I cried in admiration. “No
one would ever find me here.”
“ Not without a tracker, at all events,” said Charley.
“ Well, Will, you’d better stay here to-day, and this
evening I’ll bring you some tucker and a billy, if I can
sneak one, so you can boil yourself some tea. It’ll
be like playing Robinson Crusoe, won’t it?”
With that he left me and I lay down upon the grass
and soon fell into a deep sleep. When I awoke it
was late in the afternoon, but I had not long to wait
before Charley arrived, bearing with him, in fulfilment
of his promise, a billycan and a fair store of provi-
sions. For the next three days I lived very happily
in my secluded little nook, undisturbed by a living soul
except Charley, who brought me all my meals and
spent with me whatever time he could snatch from


his occupation. I had lost by then so much of my fear
of being discovered by my stepfather that on the
fourth morning I strolled out upon the plain and made
my way to where Charley was minding his cattle. The
boy was delighted to see me, and I assisted him at his
task for the remainder of the day. That very night,
however, he brought me news that made me shake with
terror. It seemed that Charley had been foolish
enough to boast to one of his acquaintances, a stock-
man, that he knew of my hiding-place, and this man in-
formed my stepfather.
“ You must change your camp at once,” cried
Charley. Your stepfather has been searching the dis-
trict for you, and he is bound to get a black-tracker
to help him before long if he can’t find you himself.
Wild horses wouldn’t make me split on you. But he
knows pretty well where you are now; so come along.”
As may be imagined, I followed him with alacrity,
and I slept that night in a hollow tree not far from the
house where Charley lived. The boy came to me
early on the following morning and advised me to go
with him after the cattle, promising to show me later
in the day another hiding-place.
We had scarcely covered half a mile when a man
who was mounted on a magnificent chestnut horse pas-
sed us at a gallop.


“ What a lovely horse, Charley,” I cried. “ I have
never seen such a beauty—have you ?”
Charley shook his head, but when horse and rider
had disappeared he turned to me and said, “ That was
Captain Thunderbolt on his horse Combo. He is
going down to see my father. They are friends!”
I was both surprised and excited, for I had heard
a great deal of the famous bushranger; indeed, his
name was at that time ringing through the whole
country, and only a day or two before I had run away
from home for the last time he had stuck up a coach
and robbed a store in our own district. But my step-
father had always spoken of him in such terms of fear
and abhorrence that it astonished me to learn that
Charley’s father regarded him as a friend.
“ It’s funny your father would be friends with an
outlaw!” I remarked.
Charley gave a peculiar laugh. “My dad helped
him to stick up ’s store the other day,” he replied;
“ and he did pretty well out of it, too. You take my
tip for it, Will, there are worse sorts than Thunderbolt,
—your beastly stepfather, for instance!”
“Your father must be a robber, then!” I gasped,
much shocked.
“ Bah!” said Charley. “ We’re all robbers in some
way or another if it comes to that, so Dad says at all


events. Why, the very land we’re walking over be-
longs by right to the blacks!”
We exchanged no further remarks just then, but all
that forenoon I thought of Thunderbolt, and wondered
if he could be as brutal a man as my stepfather. I
did not think he could be. I had only seen his face
for a moment, but I fancied it was a kind one. Early
in the afternoon Charley left me, riding home for
lunch. On his return he reported that my stepfather
had called at his father’s house only a few hours be-
fore, making inquiries for me. The news threw me
into a panic, and scarcely knowing what I said I im-
plored Charley to tell me where I might find Thunder-
bolt. At first he refused, but at length taking pity
on me, he asked me why I wanted to know, and I re-
plied that I wished to beg Thunderbolt to protect me
because I believed that my stepfather was afraid of
him.
Charley then directed me to the fork of a certain
creek about four miles away, whereupon, so sharp was
my fear, I set off, running at full speed without even
thanking him for the information, or taking the food
he had brought for me from his home.
At that moment I had no idea in the world except to
escape from my stepfather’s clutches, and no criminal
impulse was in my mind. My plan was to reach


Thunderbolt as soon as possible, and throw myself
upon his mercy for protection. Terror had taken
hold of all my faculties, and there was no room in my
brain for another sentiment. Heedless, therefore, of
both past and future, and governed only by a blind
fear of the man who had for so many years made my
life a hell upon earth, for half-an-hour without a
pause I fled through the bush like one pursued by
furies, and with every step I took I fancied that I heard
the hoof-beats of my stepfather’s horse galloping in
chase of me; or that I saw his stern face glowering
at me from behind each tree or bush I passed. Obliged
by failing strength, however, to slacken pace at last,
I paused in the very heart of the forest, panting and
almost spent. I was still fighting for breath when of
a sudden at no great distance from where I strode
unsteadily along a male voice burst forth in song.
The notes were sweet and mellow, yet thrillingly
distinct.
I stopped abruptly, spellbound, at first with astonish-
ment, and then with a quick ensuing rapture. In one
second I had forgotten my stepfather and my terror
—everything in the world, indeed, except the wild,
sweet music of the unseen singer’s voice, which poured
forth in an unbroken stream of harmony, growing,
nevertheless, momentarily more pathetic and melan


choly. It seemed to me that the singer’s own heart
was wistfully vibrating in tune with the touching little
story that his song unfolded.
“ Oh, don’t you remember sweet Alice, Ben Bolt ?
Sweet Alice with hair so brown,
Who wept with delight when you gave her a smile.
And trembled with fear at your frown!”
The tears started to my eyes as the verse approached
its end:—
“ In the old churchyard in the valley, Ben Bolt,
In a corner obscure and alone,
They have fitted a slab of granite so grey,
And sweet Alice lies under the stone!”
To the last deep, vibrant note a heavy silence suc-
ceeded, during which I could hear my own heart-
throbs, but nothing else. I was profoundly moved,
and for a long while I did not even wish to stir from
my position. Curiosity at length, however, mastered
me, and, eager to discover who the singer might be,
I stole through the forest with the noiseless caution
of an aboriginal. In fifty paces I came upon the edge
of a little glade, whence, peering from behind the
trunk of a gnarled old red-gum, I beheld, within a
dozen feet of me, a man bare-headed, who lay among
the grasses, upon the broad of his back, gazing steadily
up into the sky’s cloudless blue. Quite near him was


a saddle, a silver-bitted bridle, and a swag.
A magnificent chestnut horse, evidently a thorough-
bred, stood nosing at his hobbles at a little distance off.
At a glance I recognised the horse. It was “ Combo,”
Thunderbolt’s famous steed.
Was, then, the man lying so still before me
Thunderbolt himself? The question flashed into my
mind, and involuntarily I sighed, whereupon whatever
doubts I had entertained were rapidly resolved.
With a speed that dazzled me, the man sprang from
his recumbent attitude to his knees. One hand plucked
a revolver from his belt, and, before I could move or
speak I was looking over the muzzle of a
cocked six-shooter into a pair of keenly watchful dark-
brown eyes.
“ Hands up!” he commanded curtly.
I obeyed him instantly, and yet, boy as I was, I ex-
perienced no fear. Some instinct told me that the
man who could sing as I had heard that man sing a
moment since would not harm one so friendless and
miserable as I.
“Are you Thunderbolt?” I asked.
“I am Thunderbolt!” he replied. “ Who are you ?”
“I am Will Monckton,” I answered quietly. “ I
have been looking for you, sir 1”


A Man Bareheaded, who lay among the Grasses. [Page 15


CHAPTER II.
THE COMPACT.
Thunderbolt got slowly to his feet and leisurely
surveyed me, without, however, ceasing to keep me
covered with his pistol. I returned his regard respect-
fully and yet curiously, for I was more than anxious
to discover what manner of man he might be from
whom I had been driven to seek help and protection.
He was about five feet nine or ten inches in height,
strongly and yet gracefully built. He wore a full
dark beard, but his head was a little bald, which made
me think him older than he was. He seemed to me
very good-looking. His nose was straight and
shapely. He had a kind, yet grave expression, and
I thought his mouth resembled my mother’s, and I
was glad; also his eyes, although they were larger and
darker than hers.
My poor mother 1 I know now that Thunderbolt’s
expression resembled hers merely by reason of its sad-
ness. But I was too young then to understand that
B


melancholy marks even traces on its victims, although
their fates be as widely separated as the Poles.
“ I have heard of you,” said Thunderbolt presently.
“ I saw you this morning with Charley , didn’t I ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“ Did he tell you where to find me ?”
“ Yes, sir.”
“You are alone, of course?”
" Yes, sir.”
“ What do you want with me ?” he demanded.
“ I have run away from home, sir. If my step-
father catches me he will half kill me. Even if he
didn’t I would not go back to him. He is a brute,
and I hate him.”
“ Well ?”
“Let me stay with you, sir—will you, please?”
Thunderbolt quietly uncocked his pistol and re-
turned it to his belt. He looked me up and down for
another full minute, and then, without saying a word,
he sat down upon the ground. Leaning backwards,
he put his hands behind his head and rested thus
against his saddle, staring up at me.
“ Please let me stay with you, sir,” I entreated.
“ Do you want to be an outlaw ?” he demanded.
“ Anything!” I cried. “ Anything rather than let
my stepfather catch me.” Such was my reply to bis


question, and I was sincere in what I said. But in
very truth, at that moment I had never even dreamed
of becoming a bushranger.
“ Rob coaches ?” asked Thunderbolt.
I nodded, feeling myself grow pale.
“ Fight the police ?”
I felt completely frightened at that prospect, but the
die was cast, and I nodded again.
“Risk hanging, Will Monckton? You’d be hanged
if you were caught, boy.”
“So would you,” I cried. “ But they have been
after you for years.”
“ Bah! they’ll never take me —alive,” he retorted
fiercely. “ But with you it would be another matter.
I have had two boys already. The first—poor young
Thompson—was shot last April twelve months near
Bathurst in a fight with the police. The other—
Mason—was taken a month ago, and he is now in
gaol. You had better go home, Will.”
“ I will never go home. I’ll die first," I said
desperately.
He shook his head. “ I’ve heard a good deal about
the way your stepfather has treated you,” he said
quietly. “ But tell me your story, Will, and we shall
see.”
Nothing loth, I poured out the full history of my


wrongs, and did my best to prove to him how despe-
rate I felt, and how utterly impossible it was that I
should go home.
He listened to me very gravely without once inter-
rupting, but when I had finished and was silent, he sat
up, and pointed a finger at my breast. “ Your step-
father is a cruel ruffian,” he said quietly, “ but listen to
me. Will Monckton ” he paused.
“Yes, sir,” I said anxiously.
“ You are in the right of it now, lad,” replied the
bushranger. “ But you’ve no excuse to become a
criminal. A few beatings more or less, what do they
matter to a hard young rip like you? Why you’ll
soon grow too big to beat—big enough to beat your
stepfather, in fact. Take my advice, Will, and go
back home. Remember, you have a mother to think
of. How would she feel if you turned bushranger?”
I was silent, for mention of my mother had brought
a lump to my throat.
“ Let me tell you my own story,” went on Thunder-
bolt, after a little pause. “ When I was a boy, not
much older than you, Will, I got mixed up with some
bad companions—cattle-thieves they were, though I
didn’t know it then. One day I was with them in the
bush, and the police came on us, and arrested us all.
We were tried for stealing cattle, and though I tell


you before God, Will, that I was innocent, I was con-
victed with the others, and sentenced to a long term of
imprisonment on Cockatoo Island. I think I felt
then pretty much as you do now—just as if the whole
world was against me, and I against the world. Well,
boy, I swore to be revenged on the world that had
treated me so badly; and I have. You have heard,
no doubt, how I broke out of gaol, and swam from
Cockatoo Island to the mainland, and how I made
good my escape. Well, that was years ago, and I’ve
been a criminal ever since. For the last four years
I have been outlawed —every man’s hand against me,
I alone against them all. I’m not denying I have had
a pretty fair time—and the life is full of pleasure and
excitement to a man of spirit. But I tell you this,
Will Monckton —if I had my time to come over again,
I would serve out my sentence on Cockatoo Island,
and try afterwards to lead an honest life. I would,
so help me, God!”
He spoke with such solemn earnestness that I was
deeply impressed. But at the same time I felt such
a sympathy for him, and admired him so much, I did
not wish to leave him at all. Beyond and above that,
I was of a very stubborn disposition, and I had always
bad a great pride in sticking to my word.
“ I have left home, and for ever,” I muttered.


Thunderbolt gravely shook his head. “Be guided
by my advice, boy, and go back!” he said.
“ I have left home for ever,” I repeated doggedly.
The outlaw shrugged his shoulders and got to his
feet. Paying me no further heed, he took up his
bridle and strolled over to where his beautiful horse
was feeding. Two minutes later Combo was saddled,
and Thunderbolt had climbed to his back.
“You are not going to leave me?” I cried out in
alarm.
“ I am going to my camp,” replied Thunderbolt.
“ It is about a mile and a half down the creek.”
“ Let me go with you.”
“ No, not now. Think over what I have told you,
Will, for a few hours, and then, if you are still in
the same mind, come to my camp. I like your looks,
boy, and I’d be glad to have you for a partner, for I’m
cursed lonely sometimes. But, for your own sake,
and for the last time, I advise you not to look me up
again. Go home, boy! Goodbye.”
He touched Combo with his heels, and the horse
bounded away at half a gallop through the trees.
I shouted out to him to wait, to stop for one mo-
ment, but the outlaw did not even turn his head. I
watched until the trees had shut him from my view, and
then, my brain whirling with excited thoughts, I threw


myself down in the grass where Thunderbolt had been
lying, and buried my head in my arms.
I did not stir until the sun went down. When I
finally arose, my mind was firmly resolved. “ Better
Thunderbolt than my stepfather,” I thought. “ For
even if I do become an outlaw and am caught and
hanged, I shall not be beaten every day like a dog, as
I would be if I went back home.”
An hour later, as I stole along through the bush,
I saw glimmering among the trees a hundred yards
ahead of me the light of a small camp fire.
I made a good deal of noise as I approached it, and
shouted out my name, for fear lest Thunderbolt should
shoot me by mistake. He, however, was seated be-
fore the fire on a log, looking as careless and indiffer-
ent as though he were a respected citizen at his own
hearth-side.
A billy swung on a forked stick above the flames,
and the outlaw was toasting some chops as a woman
might toast bread, by means of a long wire fork.
“You haven’t taken my advice then, Will?" he
observed, as I halted beside him.
“ I want to stay with you,” I replied.
He nodded, and glanced up at me. “ You have
fully considered the consequences?”
“ Yes.”


“ All right, my boy. We’ll eat first, and then talk.
Sit down.”
I seated myself upon the log beside him, and the pair
of us presently made a hearty yet silent meal. When
it was over, Thunderbolt washed his billy and panni-
kin in the creek, and then spread out a large rug on
the ground, upon which he cast himself.
“ Now for a talk,” said he. “ They tell me you are
a good rider, Will.”
“ I can ride anything that was ever foaled,” I
answered boastfully.
“ Can you handle a revolver ?”
“ No.”
“ I’ll soon teach you,” he said. “ But our compact
first. Do you understand what an oath is, Will?”
“ Yes.”
“ You wouldn’t break one if you took one.”
“ No, nor my word either.”
“ Good. Now kneel down and repeat what I say.”
I obeyed, wondering what was to follow.
“ I, Will Monckton,” said he, “ swear by the most
high God that I will be true to Captain Thunderbolt to
the death.”
I repeated the words solemnly, and waited for more.
But Thunderbolt smiled, “ That’s all, Will,” he said
gently. “ I want no more than truth from you. Truth


contains everything. Now, listen to me.” He got
upon his knees, and raised his right hand.
“I, Frederick Ward, known as Thunderbolt, call
God to witness that I shall be true to Will Monckton
to the death.”
“ Thank you, sir,” I muttered gratefully.
“ You may call me Fred,” he said. “We are
partners now, Will —full partners in everything. You
have nothing to fear from your stepfather any more.
We’ll stick up his house to-morrow if you like.”
“No, no,” I cried. “ There is my mother.”
“ True,” said he. “ I forgot your mother. Say,
Will, there are one or two things I want to tell you.
Things I want you to remember.”
“ Yes, Fred.”
“ I’m against bloodshed,” he said very gravely. “ I
have never killed a man yet, and I hope I never shall.
While you are my partner you must follow my ex-
ample, and I always make a point to run rather than
fight when the police are after me. Of course, if we
got into a tight corner, and it meant our lives or some-
one else’s, I’d shoot to kill, and expect you to do the
same. But not unless. Do you understand me ?”
“ Yes, Fred.”
“ And you agree ?”
“With all my heart, Fred!”


“ That’s all right. Another thing. I’ve never
robbed a poor man or a woman yet, and never shall.”
I thrilled all over when he said that. “By jove,
Ido like you, Fred,” I stammered. “ You are a real
noble man!”
His face flushed at my boyish praise, but he looked
pleased, I thought, and I liked him all the more be-
cause of it.
“ How is your pluck ?” he asked presently. “Do
you think you’d be afraid if we struck the police and
they took after us ?”
“ I don’t know, Fred,” I answered doubtfully. “ I’ve
never been afraid of anyone except my stepfather.
But then that is different. I never had any chance
with him.”
“ I guess you are game enough!” said Thunderbolt,
after eyeing me thoughtfully a while. “ You only
want a little practice and self-confidence to make a first-
rate bushranger. I don’t mean a bushranger like
that brutal ruffian, Morgan, boy. That fellow is a
bloodthirsty murderer, and if I ever met him I’d shoot
him like the dog he is!”
He spoke those words with such savage energy that
I was quite startled. “How do you mean, Fred?”
I asked.
“ Why,” said he, more calmly, “a fellow like Morgan


is nothing better than a mad dog, and it would be a
good act to kill him. Brutes like him destroy all
public sympathy with our profession. I want you to
be like me—a gentlemanly robber —like some of the
English highwaymen I’ve read of. They were rogues,
but lots of good people liked and admired them, be-
cause they were chivalrous to women, and only stole
from those who could afford it, and were kind to the
poor. I have always tried to act up to their standard,
and I want you to do so too.”
“ I’ll do whatever you tell me, Fred,” I answered
warmly.
“Then you’ll never hang,” he cried, “whatever other
fate attends you, and, by Gad, you’ll not have very
much to be ashamed of either, whatever the priests and
parsons say. Why, Will, I tell you I have staunch
friends dotted all over the country, who would rather
lose their hands than see me caught. Many a time
I’ve given the police leg-bail through a timely warn-
ing given me by as honest men as ever breathed.”
“ Good luck to them!” I cried. “ But wouldn’t
they be arrested if the police knew.”
“Like a shot, but you don’t think I’d give them
away do you ?”
“ Not likely, Fred.”
Thunderbolt filled his pipe and began to smoke.


Presently he asked me if I drank, and he produced a
bottle of gin from his swag. I took a little, but he
drank half a pannikin at a draught.
“ That’s the right stuff,” he remarked, his eyes
glistening. “It puts new life into a man. I’m afraid,
though,” he added, with a sigh, “ I like it too well.”
“ Do you make much money, bushranging ?” I ques-
tioned presently.
“At times,” he replied. “ I’m well supplied just
now. I have about £2OO in notes in my swag.”
Such an amount appeared to me an immense fortune.
I had never had more than a shilling in my hands in
my life.
“ Good Lord!” I cried, “ why, that’s a fortune,
Fred!”
“ Not bad,” he said, smiling. “We won’t starve
for a bit, at all events.”
“ Why, Fred,” I cried, of a sudden, “ it would bo
enough to take you out of the country, and give you
a clear start in some other land, where you would not
be known.”
He averted his face, but did not reply. In the
silence that followed I could not help wondering if he
had been really sincere when he told me that if his
time were to come over again he would lead an honest
life. The doubt irritated me so much that I had to ex-
press it.


“You don’t truly wish to lead an honest life, do
you ?” I muttered. “If you did you could easily
escape out of the country, couldn’t you ?”
“ Easily,” he said, quietly.
“Then, why don’t you? I’d go with you, Fred!”
“ Ah, Will,” he answered very softly, “ you don’t
know all about me yet. I’m married, boy.”
“ Married!” I gasped.
“Yes, and I have some kiddies, too, that I’m very
fond of. I couldn’t leave them, Will.”
“ But why not take them with you ?”
“ Impossible. The police are always watching my
wife. They would have imprisoned her long ago
as my accomplice only they know that she is
lawfully married to me —and that would be against the
law.”
“ But why not escape first, and send for them after-
wards ?”
“He shook his head, and smiled mournfully. “ I
would have done that long ago, Will, if it had been
possible. But my wife won’t leave this district, let
alone the country, on any account. You see (his
voice fell, and he looked steadily at his pipe)—you see,
Sunday has always lived here, and she has—she has
black blood in her veins!”
“ Oh!” I gasped.


He looked up defiantly, evidently offended at my
tone. “ I’m not ashamed of her!” he declared harshly.
“ She is as good as any white lady in the land, and as
true as steel besides.”
“ I’m sure of it, Fred,” I said quickly. “ Is—is
she pretty, Fred ?”
“ I think so, Will.”
‘ And —do —do you love her, Fred?”
“ Yes!” He sighed, then smiled. “ Are you
superstitious, Will ?” he asked, of a sudden.
“ I wouldn’t kill a spider for anything,” I answered,
much surprised at a question so irrelevant. “ But
why did you ask?”
“ Because I am superstitious—and because when
Sunday and I were getting married a very strange
thing happened. It showed me my fate. A man
can’t fight against his fate, Will!”
“ What was it, Fred?”
“As I kneeled down before the minister, my re-
volver fell out of my pocket to the floor,” he answered,
very gravely.
“ But I see nothing in that, Fred,” I cried.
He shook his head. “It was an omen,” he mut-
tered, “ an omen that showed me as plain as words can
speak that my marriage must be ended by the pistol.
I’ll die by a bullet, Will. I’m sure of it. But, there


let us stop this talk—it’s too grisly. My grave clothes
aren’t spun yet. What say? Shall I sing you a
song?”
I warmly agreed, and a moment later his full, rich
voice was poured forth in a quaint old song, “ Her
Bright Smile Haunts Me Still.” I listened entranced,
and when it was over I begged him for another. But
his mood had changed, and he declared that it was
time for a little boy like me to go to bed. I protested,
but he commanded, and I yielded at once, so great a
mastery had he already acquired over me. Giving
my hand a close, strong grip, he bade me good-night,
and pointed to his rug, which he directed me to share.
I thereupon lay down, with my feet to the fire, and
before many minutes had passed I was sleeping as
peacefully as though my mother’s care encompassed
me.


CHAPATER III.
I START BUSHRANGING.
Next morning when I awoke I had utterly forgotten
what had happened on the previous night, but as I
drowsily turned over on my side I caught sight of
Thunderbolt’s sleeping face, and, with a rather pain-
ful shock, I remembered, and I realised, moreover,
that I had pledged myself to a career of crime. A
thrill of fear shot through my breast, and I asked my-
self was it yet possible for me to turn back. Could
I not, while Thunderbolt still slept, steal away from
his side, and plunge into the bush? Next instant,
however, a thought of my stepfather stifled the
awakening impulse, and before I could answer my own
questions Thunderbolt and I were looking into each
other’s eyes.
“ Will, my boy,” he said, smiling kindly, “ I see you
are here still. I dreamed that you had cleared out,
and I can tell you I feel quite cut up about it.”
“ No fear, Fred,” I answered, with a little guilty
shiver, “ I’ll not leave you like that.”


He got up and produced two cakes of soap from his
swag. One he tossed to me, and with the other he
strolled off towards the creek, saying he would take
a bath. I followed suit, and a little later we were
splashing in the creek, shouting and singing like a
pair of blithe-hearted children. The hot morning
sun served us for a towel, and when we had dressed
again Thunderbolt directed me to prepare breakfast
while he looked after his horse. He was away for
so long that I began to feel quite anxious about him,
when of a sudden I heard distant hoof-beats, and he
soon appeared, approaching me at full gallop, mounted
on Combo, and leading another horse by a bridle. The
led horse was by no means such a fine animal as
Combo, but he looked speedy, and did not lack breed-
ing, as I perceived at a glance.
“ Hello, Fred!” I shouted. “ I thought you had
cleared out. Where did you get that horse?”
“ Oh, not far off. I had him stalled in Clarke’s
paddock. What do you think of him. Will ?”
“No slouch,” said I. “He looks as if he could
both run arid stay.”
“ I’m glad you like him,” replied the outlaw, “ for
from this moment he is yours!”
I shouted with delight, and darted forward to ex-
amine my prize more closely. The more I looked at
c


him the more I liked him. He was an upstanding
grey with black points. His head was small and
beautifully shaped, and although his barrel was a trifle
long his chest was broad, and he was ribbed up like
a greyhound. “ I annexed him from a station down
south about three months ago,” said Thunderbolt.
“ Fortunately, he is as quiet as a lamb, for you’ll have
to ride him barebacked until I can steal a saddle for
you.”
“ That won’t trouble me,” I cried, and a second later
I was astride the animal, and off at a smart canter
through the bush to try his paces. When I returned
Thunderbolt was half through his breakfast, so
tying my horse I joined him, and made a hearty
meal During that forenoon Thunderbolt gave
me my first lesson in pistol shooting, and so
apt a pupil did I prove that the outlaw pre-
sented me with his spare revolver.
After lunch he decided to shift camp, as his habit
was never to stay in one spot for any length of time,
lest the police should get wind of his whereabouts.
We mounted, therefore, and set out towards the house
of Charley ’s father, at which place we intended
to call for news. We had not proceeded for more
than three miles, however, when we came upon the


selector himself and a mounted trooper, with whom
the former was in animated converse.
“ Shall we run for it, Fred?” I muttered excitedly.
Thunderbolt smiled. “ Not much,” he replied.
” There is not a policeman in the country who would
dare to tackle me single-handed. You watch!”
He set spurs to his horse and approached the pair
at a slow trot. I close behind him.
The policeman looked at us very sharply, but he
made no attempt to interfere with our progress, and
he even returned a surly, “ Good morning,” in answer
to Thunderbolt’s genial greeting.
Nothing had ever so thoroughly surprised me, for
in my boyish innocence I had until that moment be-
lieved a policeman to be the incarnation of stern and
reckless bravery. I confess, however, that long after
we had passed the talking pair I had a curious cold
feeling in my back, just as though I expected a bullet
to pursue and strike me.
Thunderbolt made very merry over the trooper’s
cowardice, and when I explained my old opinion to
him, he laughed until the tears rolled down his cheeks.
“ Why, Will,” he cried at last, “ policemen are human
beings like ourselves, and they don’t care about court-
ing bullets any more than other men do. Did you
think they were made to order like machines?” I


recognised then the folly of my previous impression,
and I never_afterwards felt much fear of the police.
Late in the afternoon we reached Carlisle Gully, but
while we were still half a mile away from the public-
house there Thunderbolt explained to me a plan that
he had formed to procure me a saddle. Acting on
his instructions, I dismounted and walked to the Car-
lisle Hotel, leaving him to follow later on leading my
horse.
I found the landlord standing in the bar-room.
“ Good-day,” said he.
“ Good-day, sir,” I replied. “ Have you seen a
drover riding a chestnut horse and leading a grey ?”
He shook his head. “ None that I know of, my
lad.”
“ Dash it!” I cried. “He should be here by now.”
“ Where are you camped?” asked the landlord.
“ Down the road a bit, with a cart,” I answered,
carelessly.
Just then Thunderbolt rode up. “ Hallo, Jack!”
he cried to me. “ Where is the cart ?”
“ About a quarter of a mile down the road,” I re-
plied. Thunderbolt then asked me if I had any feed
in the cart for the horses. I replied that I had none
left, and he pretended to be very annoyed.


“ Why not feed them in my stables ?” suggested the
landlord.
Thunderbolt hesitated a bit, but finally agreed. The
landlord called the groom, and our horses were led
off, whereupon Thunderbolt entered the bar and in-
vited the landlord to drink. When the groom re-
appeared Thunderbolt shouted for him, too, and they
kept on drinking for the next couple of hours, by
which time both the landlord and the groom were very
drunk. Thunderbolt, however, although he took
quite as much liquor as the others, did not seem to
be affected, and at a nod from him I stole at length
away from the bar, and made my way to the stables.
There were four saddles there on the rack besides
Thunderbolt’s. I chose the best of the lot, and strap-
ped it upon my grey horse. I then saddled Combo,
and returned to the hotel.
“ All right!” I said to the outlaw. “ What about
getting back to camp, Harry?”
“ Net yet,” replied Thunderbolt. The Bende-
rneer coach will be here soon, and, as I’m expecting
a parcel, I reckon we will wait.
“ I want to see if there are any police aboard,” he
added, in an undertone. “If there are not, we’ll
stick it up!”
I felt very excited at that, and had to walk about in


order to keep control over my nerves. Thunderbolt,
on the other hand, was as cool as possible, and he kept
on shouting for the landlord and the groom for the
next hour, when both fell asleep in their chairs. He
then went behind the bar and emptied the till into his
pockets. We were still counting the money (it
amounted to about £3) when we heard the mailcoach
coming in the distance. We at once slipped out of
the house and darted for our horses, which we led out
from the stables to the side of the hotel, which was
darkest. Peering from the shadows, we watched, un-
seen, the coach draw up before the hotel. It had
scarcely stopped before the driver and five policemen
climbed down on to the road and began to stretch
their cramped limbs.
“ The odds are too great,” said Thunderbolt, in a
whisper. “ Come on, Will!” We very quietly
mounted, and when the police had gone into the bar
we walked our horses out upon the road, and slipped,
unnoticed, away. A few minutes later we were gal-
loping along in the direction from which the coach
had come, and we made our camp that night a few
miles further on, and not 50 yards from the main Bene-
meer-road, so frank a contempt had Thunderbolt for
the police.
For the next few months we led a very quiet life,


and did not commit a single crime. When we needed
provisions we rode into a village, after reconnoitring
for police, and bought what we required at the stores.
The police were after us the whole time, it is true;
but we never once encountered them, for among the
settlers all over the New England district Thunderbolt
had many staunch friends, and these kept us informed
of all the plots formed by the police to trap us or track
us down. Our life during that time was extremely
pleasant, although uneventful. Thunderbolt was a
most charming companion to me. He had read a
great many romantic novels in his younger days, and
he had so wonderful a memory that he could repeat
them almost by rote. Moreover, he liked relating
these stories as much as I did listening to them, so we
were mutually entertained. We occupied the hours
of daylight shifting camp, roving about leisurely from
place to place, far through the lonely bush, so that
we might never be located by our hunters. I loved
the evenings best, however, for then we always lazed
by the camp fire, and Thunderbolt either told me excit-
ing stories of adventure by flood and field or sang
sweet songs to me with his pathetic and melodious
voice. I had never been so happy in my life before,
and I grew to like my outlawed partner more and more
with the passing of each day; aye, and respect him,


too. Thunderbolt was doubtless a bad man in the
sense that he was a law-breaker and lived by the crime
of violent theft. But in most other ways he was as
good a man as I have met before or since. For one
thing, he was exceptionally clean minded, and in all
our intercourse I never heard him use any foul langu-
age, nor say a thing that a woman would have blushed
to hear. He hated meanness of any sort, and all the
small vices bred of bush life and ways of living. In
his personal habits he was almost finickingly particu-
lar, and if deprived by force of circumstances of his
morning bathe in a creek or stream, he was out of
sorts for the rest of the day. He was as careful of
his hands as a city gentleman, and on one occasion
when I broke his nail scissors he obliged me to ride
with him 30 miles out of our course in order to visit
a town where he could procure another pair. His
worst fault was his temper. It was quick and fright-
fully passionate, and once aroused he stormed like
a fury until the fit passed. Then, however, he was so
full of remorse for what he had said and done that it
was impossible not to forgive him. Our first quarrel
occurred when I broke his scissors. He saw me do
it, and although he must have perceived that it was by
accident, he lost his self-control on instant. His face
turned scarlet, and he advanced upon me with clenched


fists, shouting and cursing like a madman. I was so
terrified by the suddenness of the attack that I fell
back until I was brought up by a tree. I thought he
meant to kill me. Next moment, however, he stop-
ped short, his face white as a sheet, and in a trembling
voice he began to ask my pardon, calling himself in-
termittently by all the evil names that he could think
of.
On another occasion, late one afternoon, on which
it was my turn to prepare our evening meal, I inad-
vertently allowed the damper to burn, whereupon he
broke out into another fit of ungovernable rage. I
was better prepared for him then, however, and I re-
turned him as good as he gave, for I thought to my-
self that the best way to cure him would be to show
him that I had a spirit equal to his own. Seizing a
brand from the fire I whirled it in his face, and I
swore that unless he withdrew his threats at once I
would mark him for life. The affair ended very
curiously. He burst out on a sudden into an im-
moderate fit of laughter, which was so infectious that
soon I was laughing too, and we shook hands on a
common impulse. But he told me afterwards that he
was very glad I had shown so much pluck, and he
begged me, if ever he lost his temper again, not to
give way to him. “ For,” said he, “ I would not hurt


you for the world when in my senses, Will, my lad,
and if you were to strike me I’d calm off quickly, since,
whatever else I am I’m not a coward, and I’d shoot
myself before I’d strike a young ’un like you!”
The encounters that I have related, instead of breed-
ing bitterness between us, rather sealed our friendship
than otherwise, and for my part, before three months
had gone by, I felt such a lively affection for my com-
panion that I was ready to lay down my life for him.
This was not such a strange thing as it might appear
to some of those who read these pages, for it must be
remembered that since I was a child of six I had been
treated by my stepfather with the utmost brutality,
and seldom had a day passed while I was at home in
which I was not kicked or thrashed —often quite un-
justly.
Thunderbolt, on the other hand, treated me with
the greatest kindness and courtesy. It was within
his power to have made me his servant had he liked,
and to have obliged me to perform the major portion
at least of the rough work attendant upon our gipsy
wandering life.
The man was, however, too fine a gentleman at
heart to take advantage of my youth, even despite the
fact that he was naturally of an indolent disposition.
He shared what work there was to do equally between


us, and, although I was more than willing to perform
the lion’s portion, he never allowed me to do more
than his sense of justice had originally allotted me.
Beyond that, he invariably displayed an affectionate
consideration for my health and comfort, and when
we camped for the night he always took care to see
that I was “ snugger,’ as he called it, before he lay
down to sleep himself.
It can, therefore, scarcely be wondered at that I, a
boy of 15, with such a past as I had to look back upon,
should have become speedily reconciled to a life which,
however lawless, seemed infinitely preferable to that
which I hated to remember. It is true that I often
pined to see my mother, and sometimes, too, I felt
apprehensive of the future. But I cannot claim that
I was more reflective than other bush lads of my age.
I lived for the most part from day to day, and it only
required that Thunderbolt should sing me a song, or
tell me one of his stirring stories, to banish from my
heart all traces of dull care.
By the end of the period I have named we had
wandered as far north as the Queensland border. I
thought that the outlaw intended to cross the line, but,
to my surprise, one morning as we were riding along
be pulled up, without giving me a previous hint of his
intention, and pointed south.


“ Look!” he cried.
I peered for a moment or two in the direction indi-
cated, but, although I strained my eyes, I could see
nothing unusual—only road, sky, and plain.
“ What is it, Fred?” I asked at last.
“ The Moonbi Ranges,” he replied.
“ What nonsense,” I gasped. “ You cannot see
them, I’m sure —they are nearly 200 miles away!”
“ I can see them!” he protested. “ Ay, and I can
see my wife and kiddies, too. Will, lam homesick.”
“ Homesick!” I repeated, stupidly.
“Yes, laddie; lam homesick. I want to see my
wife again, and the kiddies. And now is the time.
I’ve been so long away from the Moonbi that the
police will have grown careless by this, and they won’t
be watching out for me. Besides, we have had a good
holiday. We must get to work. My wife will be
wanting money.”
“ All right, Fred,” I replied. “ But I thought you
had plenty of coin left yet.”
“ No, Will, only enough to last us on the road. I
left a hundred with a friend at Barraba to give Sun-
day before we started, and we have lived like fighting
cocks since then. Come on!”
Without more ado we forthwith began our journey
back towards our starting point, and we reached the


Moonbi less than a week afterwards without having
met with any adventure worthy of note. On the after-
noon of our arrival we pitched our camp in a big gully
situated a few hundred yards from the main Barraba
road, and about four miles from the cottage in which
Thunderbolt’s wife and family resided. All that day
the outlaw had been hilariously rejoicing at the pros-
pect of seeing his wife again so shortly, and the nearer
we approached our destination the more like an ex-
cited schoolboy he behaved, shouting and singing as
blithely as though he were the happiest man in the
world, rather than a robber, with a price set upon his
head. As soon as dusk fell he mounted his horse,
and would not even wait to partake of the supper that
I had prepared for him. Indeed, I fancy that he had
had to fight himself to wait for the dark, necessary
as such a precaution was.
With a cheery “ Good-bye, Will. I’ll be back when
you see me!” he swung off down the gully at a reck-
less pace, and I soon lost sight of him. It was the
first time that I had been alone for several months,
and I felt miserable. But, fortunately, I was very
weary, and before long I fell asleep.
When I awoke the sun was shining, and Thunder-
bolt was standing over me, holding Combo by the
bridle, a black frown upon his face.


“What, Fred!” I cried, “back already? Is any-
thing the matter?”
“ The police! Damn them!” he replied. “ I hadn’t
been in the house two hours before a sergeant and two
troopers came along. I had to slip out of the back
and take to the bush.”
“ Did they see you ?”
“ No,; but they are watching Sunday as if she was
a mouse, and they were cats. They never let her
alone for a day at a time. They would arrest her as
my accomplice if they dared. But, thank God, they
can’t do that. Its against the law, as she is my law-
fully wedded wife.”
“ Did you wait till they went?”
“ I waited a bit, but the swine camped on the
verandah, and I had to sneak away at last. Never
mind, I’ll fix ’em. I’ll give ’em something to do be-
sides terrorising women. And I’ll see my wife again
as well before two days go by, if I die for it—by God!”
“What will you do, Fred?”
“ Rest ourselves, and let the horses rest to-day; but
to-night we’ll light out for the Moonbi, and to-morrow
morning we’ll stick up the mail coach. And then,
Will, I’ll show you how to outwit the police. But
I’m tired out, laddie, now, and I guess I’ll take a
sleep.”


Suiting the action to his words, he handed over
Combo to me, and crept beneath a ledge of the gully
that was shaded from the sunlight. There he spread
out his rug, and, casting himself down, was soon
slumbering in a fashion that showed me how utterly
worn out he must have been.


CHAPTER IV.
MY FIRST ROBBERY UNDER ARMS.
Thunderbolt slept for about six hours without mov-
ing, and he awoke in a much better temper. He was,
however, still bitterly incensed at the action of the
police in keeping his wife so strictly under espionage,
and he vowed that in revenge he would make them
the laughing-stock of the country. After supper that
night we collected our belongings and mounting our
horses, we set out under the outlaw’s guidance to a
spot known as “ Poison Swamp,” where we arrived,
after a hard ride, just before daylight on the follow-
ing morning. The place was badly named, for the
swamp was quite dried up, and the road passed
through it. The timber was very thick thereabouts,
and we discovered without difficulty an excellent
hiding place for our camp. Thunderbolt began to
give me a lecture as soon as we were settled, and he
told me that my career as a bushranger depended upon
the manner in which I should bear myself during that
day. “ For,” said he, “ much as I like you, Will, if


you want to continue as my mate and partner, you
must show me that I can rely upon you at a pinch to
behave with pluck and resolution. You see, I don’t
want to die before my time, and a man like I am can-
not afford to carry a coward about with him. There
is nothing so dangerous in the world to those who
trust him as a coward!”
I assured him that I was not a bit afraid, and that
I would do my best, whereupon he shook his head
rather doubtfully, and told me not to make too sure,
as I had never yet been under fire.
I was a good deal nettled at that, and I retorted,
with an oath, that I was as brave as he.
He laughed heartily, and cried, “ Boast away, Will;
boast away, my boy. I’ll never stop you, for this
reason; boasting will sometimes force even the
whitest-livered coward to try and make his words
good.”
Seeing, however, that I had lost my temper at his
jeering, he vowed that he had been only half serious,
and that he believed thoroughly I would prove a credit
to his teaching. He then gave me most particular in-
structions concerning the plan that he had formed to
rob the mail, and the part I was to play, after which
we both turned in to enjoy a few hours’ sleep. We
arose about 9 o’clock, and made all our preparations.
D


Thunderbolt, who knew the district like a book, in-
formed me that the coach would reach the swamp
about ii a.m.
At a little past ten, therefore, we concealed our
horses some fifty yards from the road behind a big
rock, and planted ourselves not far away in a spot
where we could watch for the coming of the coach.
Thunderbolt had taken the trouble to change his
clothes and disguise himself as a swagman. He
wore a blue jumper and a pair of white moleskin
trousers, while he had strapped his swag across his
back. For the next hour neither of us had much to
say. I was too painfully excited to wish to talk,
although I did not feel afraid. In any case, I deter-
mined that I would rather die than allow Thunderbolt
to see me show the white feather. The outlaw, on
the other hand, was just as calm as usual, but he was
too occupied in watching the road to converse. He
was anxious that we should have no interruption, and
at the same time much exercised in mind lest there
might be police aboard the coach. He offered to bet
me that there would be, half a dozen times; but I did
not reply to him. That, however, did not prevent
him laying the odds to himself, and he concluded
several jocular wagers between his right hand and his
left. The day was very hot, and a warm wind sent


clouds of dust along the road. It was very unpleasant,
waiting and keeping still under such circumstances,
but Thunderbolt did not move, so I did not either.
To my immense relief, at length, however, after a
period that seemed to have lasted a century, we heard
the noise of shrieking wheels in the distance, and next
moment Thunderbolt stepped out upon the road.
“ It’s a cursed shame to starve axles like that,”
cried the outlaw to me. “ That driver ought to lose
his billet.”
They certainly needed greasing, for we could hear
the squealing and wailing distinctly, although the
coach was not yet in view. It soon appeared, how-
ever, and Thunderbolt waited patiently in the middle
of the highway until it was within fifty yards of him.
He then took a square piece of paper from his pocket,
which he had previously prepared for the occasion,
and waved it aloft in the air. There were three men
seated on top of the coach, besides the driver. All
were dressed in civilian’s clothes, but that was by no
means proof that they were not constables, for ever
since Thunderbolt had taken charge of the New Eng-
land district the police had tried every trick they could
think of to secure him; and as often as not they wore
mufti. When the driver saw Thunderbolt waving
the paper, he evidently mistook the outlaw for a tramp


who wished to post a letter. Pulling up his horses
at once, he stopped the coach.
“ I want you to be good enough to take charge of
a letter for me,” said Thunderbolt, approaching him.
“ It’s to a fellow who owes me some money, and I
want to raise the wind!”
The driver said, “ All right, mate, give it here!” He
put the reins and whip in his left hand, and bending
down from the box-seat he stretched out his hand to
take the supposed letter.
Next instant, however, he uttered a sharp cry of
fear, for Thunderbolt had cleverly substituted for the
paper a cocked revolver, and the driver snatched his
hand back with a shudder from the ugly muzzle.
“Up with your hands, the lot of you!” shouted
Thunderbolt. They obeyed him, with ludicrous haste,
but as that cry was also a signal to me, I sprang from
my lurking place and rushed out on to the road, my
revolver in my hand. Acting upon pre-arranged in-
structions, I darted to the door of the coach and
looked inside, but only a lady was seated there. I felt
a good deal disconcerted on seeing that I was matched
against a woman, and I scarcely knew what to do.
Thunderbolt, however, soon came to my relief. I
heard him sternly command the male passengers to
dismount, and a moment later he touched my arm.


“ Take charge of the men, Jack!” he said curtly,
“ I’ll attend to the lady!”
“ She is blind!” observed the driver.
I stepped aside, and saw the three gentlemen pas-
sengers standing in line by the roadside, holding their
hands above their heads, and gazing upwards at the
sky, their chins high in air.
I covered them with my revolver, and announced in
loud tones: “ The first one that drops a hand or looks
down I’ll plug through the heart!”
Thunderbolt gave a chuckle of amusement, and
immediately assisted the blind lady from the coach,
making her all the time a very handsome apology for
the trouble he was giving her. When he had led her
up to where the men stood he searched their pockets
while I kept all covered with my pistol, and he relieved
them of their valuables, not one of them saying a word
nor daring to resist.
When he came to the lady, she produced her purse
of her own accord, and offered it to him. Thunder-
bolt, however, swept off his hat and bowed to the
ground. I think he must have forgotten that she was
blind for the moment.
“ Madam,” said he, in a curiously stilted fashion,
“ oblige me by putting your purse back into your
pocket. I never war with women!”


The lady smiled, and did as she was bid. She did
not seem at all frightened I thought, and I could not
help but admire her calmness, so great a contrast did
it offer to the trembling terror of the men.
The outlaw’s next act was to rip open the mail-
bags, and toss their contents out upon the dusty
ground.
“ I was not intended by Nature for a letter-sorter,”
he remarked, “ but practice makes perfect, and I am
not too proud to take on any useful occupation.”
There were over a hundred letters in the bag, many
of which were registered. In five minutes he had
torn them all open, and had pocketed whatever cheques
and bank-notes they contained.
That done, he courteously assisted the blind lady to
climb back into the coach.
He then turned to our prisoners.
“ I’m Thunderbolt,” he began, addressing them very
quietly, with a broad smile on his face. “ I dare say
you guessed it before, but I want you fellows to be
quite sure, so that no one will give an innocent man the
credit of my doings. When you get to Tamworth,
or if you meet the police before you get there, you can
give them my love, and tell them that if they want me
I’ll be staying for the next four-and-twenty hours with
my wife.”


“ All right, Captain,” said the driver, winking hard
at the outlaw. “ I’ll give ’em your message. But
do you fancy they’ll swallow a yarn like that ?”
“ I don’t care a hang whether they do or not,” re-
torted Thunderbolt. “ Anyway, I’m off now —and
if you fellows don’t want to stop a bullet you’ll stand
to attention for the next ten minutes. Good day to
you!”
“Come on, Jack!” he added to me, and without
another word or backward look, and in the most
careless fashion in the world, he strode away in the
direction of our horses. I followed him, doing my
best to imitate his reckless swagger. A couple of
minutes later we had mounted and returned to the
road. The driver and three gentlemen passengers
remained just as we had left them, their arms above
their heads, gazing up into the sky. They looked so
funny that I burst out laughing.
Thunderbolt, however, told me to “ shut up,” and
setting spurs to our horses we set off at a wild gallop
towards the Manning River, which lay in exactly the
opposite direction to the place in which the outlaw’s
wife lived. But we had not covered a mile before
Thunderbolt gave me the word to slacken speed, and
at the first bend of the road we left the track and took
to the bush. An hour’s brisk riding brought us to


the foot of a range of hills, at a point only about hve
miles equidistant from the outlaw’s home and from
Poison Swamp, we having executed a big half-circle
through the forest in the meanwhile.
“ There,” said Thunderbolt, pulling up and dis-
mounting as he spoke. “ I reckon we have done
enough work for one day. What do you say, Will?”
“ I don’t know,” I answered doubtfully. “It seems
to me that we are in none too safe a place, Fred. The
police could find us here easily enough!”
“ If they knew where to look for us,” he retorted,
with a laugh. “ Safety, my lad, lies less in distance
than in throwing the hounds off the scent. The
police will never dream that we have doubled on our
tracks. You mark my words, they will be chasing us
to-morrow thirty miles away in the opposite direction.’
“ I only hope so,” I replied.
He shrugged his shoulders, and having unsaddled
and hobbled Combo, he cast himself down upon the
ground, and began to count the spoils, while I pre-
pared our midday meal.
“ Come here, Will,” he called out presently.
I strolled over to where he was lying.
“We netted £3O by that deal, partner,” he said smil-
ing. “ Here is your share. Fifteen notes. Count
and sec that it is right!”


I took the money and stuffed it into my pockets,
trying to appear indifferent, but in reality I was tre-
mendously excited, for I had never even held so much
in my hands before at one time. I felt very grateful,
too, for I scarcely ventured to believe that Thunder-
bolt would really keep his word and go “ halves ” with
me.
“ Thanks, very much,” I said, or rather stammered.
“ You are as red as a turkey cock 1” observed the
outlaw, looking at me with a twinkle in his eye. “ Feel
like a young Nabob, don’t you, Will? Want to go
straight off to town and blue it, eh, lad ?”
“ Well, I do need some clothes pretty badly,” I re-
plied shamefacedly.
He laughed outright, then getting to his feet of a
sudden, he seized my hand, and said very earnestly,
“ Don’t mind my chaff, Will, my lad. I’m proud of
the way you behaved to-day, and after this I’d trust
my life to you without a care.”
“ But,” I objected, “ after all there was no danger
to-day, Fred, and remember I’ve not been under fire
yet.”
“No matter,” he retorted. “ I have eyes in my
head. I watched you to-day, and I saw you are a
plucked ’un through and through. But enough of
that. What’s for dinner?”


“ Cold corn beef and damper. You’ll have to take
your gin neat, Fred, there’s no water.”
He nodded and sat down. We made a good meal
despite of our lack of water, and all that afternoon
the outlaw sang his favourite songs to me. But be-
fore nightfall we caught our horses and saddled up.
“ We’ll have beds to sleep on to-night, Will.” said
Thunderbolt, as he mounted. “Think of it, boy,
beds!”
“ Where ?” I demanded.
“ At my wife’s place.”
“ Are you going to take me with you, Fred?”
“ Most certainly. There is not a spark of danger,
come along!”
For the next six hours we rode slowly through the
darkness, for the ground was rough and our steeds
had to pick their way with care. By that time, how-
ever, we had crossed and left the ranges far behind,
and were in country with every step of which the out-
law was familiar. Increasing our pace to a smart
canter we made good progress, despite the gloom, and
Thunderbolt at length exultantly informed me that we
were nearly at our journey’s end. He was very
excited. He had been drinking gin at short intervals
during the journey, and the liquor had increased his
natural recklessness. Uttering a sudden shout, he


urged his horse to a gallop, and there followed the
wildest ride I had yet known. The night was pro-
foundly dark, for there was no moon and the sky was
overcast with clouds. The country was rugged,
hilly, and thickly grown with timber. Moreover a
storm was brewing, and the wind blew half a gale,
making a great noise as it tore through the trees.
Thunderbolt had said never a word to me as he started
off, and the gloom swallowed him up in a second.
There seemed nothing for it but to follow him, how-
ever, or lose myself, so I gave my horse his head and
struck the spurs into his sides. How it came to pass that
we escaped without injury I cannot tell. The ghostly
trunks of trees passed me like flying phantoms, some-
times almost brushing my legs. Giant rocks loomed
up straight ahead, and only swerving rushes, hard to
sit, saved us from destruction time and again. My
horse frequently leaped chasms that I did not see be-
fore I was aware, and only a desperate knee clutch
held me to the saddle. Nay, more than once I found
myself clinging round the neck of my half-maddened
steed. But by a miracle we came through uninjured,
and at length I found myself racing along the hard
high road fifty yards behind Combo’s thundering heels.
It had begun to rain by then in a steady, driving down-
pour, and in a few minutes I was drenched to the skin.


A quarter-hour later Thunderbolt’s voice came to me
most welcomely, raised in a shout. I saw a gleam of
light, and in another moment my tired horse carried
me through a broken sliprail into a big paddock, in
which I saw dimly outlined a cottage and a row of
sheds.
I rode up towards the light, calling out “ Fred, are
you there?”
“Right, oh! Will!” he replied, with a loud laugh.
“ A messenger came here for the police two hours
ago, and they went off like the fools they are to Ben-
demeer. What did I tell you? But get down and
come right in, Will. Peter will see to your horse.”
Nothing loth, I sprang to the ground, and a grin-
ning blackboy, who held a lanthorn in his hand, seized
my reins.
Thunderbolt was waiting on the verandah in the
open doorway. He took my hand at once and led
me, all dripping as I was, into the house.
“ Sunday!” said he, “ let me introduce you to my
new partner and very good friend, Mr. Will Monck-
ton!”


CHAPTER V.
THE BUSHRANGER AT HOME.
“ I am very glad to meet you, Mr. Monckton,” said
a woman’s voice, and I felt my hand caught and
warmly pressed. “ You must change your clothes at
once, and you too, Fred, or nice colds you will get,”
proceeded the speaker.
My eyes were at first too dazzled by the light to see
clearly, but in a moment or two I perceived that I
stood in a rather showily-furnished room that only
needed a carpet to make it perfect, in my opinion. It
looked too good to me, and made me ashamed of my
shabby and dripping garments.
Thunderbolt’s wife next claimed my attention. I
had been very curious for a long while to see her,
and now that we stood face to face I confess I was dis-
appointed, for the outlaw had told me that she was
pretty. Perhaps his affection for her made him be-
lieve that; he certainly was sincerely attached to her, as
his whole life proved, for it was his regard for her, and
no other consideration, that prevented him from leav


ing the country and beginning life anew, far removed
from any danger—as he might easily have done at
almost any time he wished. To my mind she was
plain, and everything about her showed her hybrid
origin. Her features, it is true, were fairly well-
shaped and regular, but her hair resembled an aborigi-
nal’s, and her skin was quite yellow.
Thunderbolt slipped his arm round her waist and
gave her a hearty kiss before I had been able to find
a word.
“ All right, my dear,” he said, with a laugh, as she
stepped coquettishly away from him. “ Will doesn’t
mind. We’ll change our clothes in a jiffy, and then
we’ll be ready to eat you out of house and home, I can
tell you!”
He led me to another room at that, and showed me
a chest that was full of suits of clothes belonging to
himself.
“ You can take your pick, Will,” he said, and he
began to tear off his wet things as he spoke.
I followed his example, and was soon dry-clad, but
looking like a scarecrow in clothes much too big for
me. Mrs. Ward laughed heartily at me when we re-
turned to the living room. No doubt I did look
funny, but I did not like her any the better for giving
way to her mirth. She was very kind to me, however.


and I soon got over my first bad impression. Thunder-
bolt was in most extravagant spirits at his success in
outwitting the police, and he drank a great deal more
gin than was good for him, and behaved otherwise in
the most reckless fashion, considering our proximity to
the high road—shouting, laughing, and singing lustily.
His wife, to my surprise, showed no desire to check
him. On the contrary, she seemed as delighted as
he was, and she applauded his outbursts with shrieks
of laughter. I have often wondered since if she was
as fond of him as he was of her. That she liked him
well was very evident; but it seemed to me that she
entertained some little fear of him, or else she was
a woman destitute of caution. At any rate, boy as
I was, I considered that she should, if she truly loved
her husband, have tried to restrain him for his own
sake, and I have not altered my opinion since. My
protests were simply laughed aside. The pair were
so excited at Thunderbolt’s latest feat that they were
ready to commit any excess, and the outlaw even went
so far as to open the window and shout, “ Help!
Murder! Police!’ at the top of his voice. But Mrs.
Ward, at that outrageous act of folly, at last began to
exhibit signs of possessing a little commonsense. She
called in the black boy Peter, and bade him, in a whis-
per, to go up the road a bit, and keep watch. She


moreover declared to her husband that it was time to go
to bed, and signed to me to back her up in her sug-
gestion.
Thunderbolt, however, point blank refused, and he
would not move until after midnight, by which time
he was almost intoxicated, and more amenable to per-
suasion. Well was it then for him that his cunning
had thrown the police entirely off the scent, for I was
quite tired out, and slept as soon as my head touched
the pillow, and I do not believe that Thunderbolt
would have been able to either fight or fly if our
hunters had appeared.
He turned up for breakfast next morning, however,
as fresh as paint, and not a bit the worse for his carouse,
in either health or spirits. He was, nevertheless, more
subdued in manner, much to my satisfaction, and he
informed me that we must hold ourselves in immediate
readiness for a bolt. It was still raining so steadily, that
I was sorry to think it might be necessary to leave our
comfortable quarters to fly for our lives through the
bush; but determined not to neglect any precaution,
I went out myself after breakfast to the stables, and
gave both our horses a careful grooming. When I
returned to the house I found Thunderbolt playing
with his children, three queer little towselled black-
haired beggars, who seemed as passionately fond of


him as he was of them. He was creeping about the
floor on all fours, acting as horse for them, and they
climbed and tumbled all over him, with shrill outcries,
like a pack of squirrels. Thunderbolt invited me to
join in the game, but I considered it beneath my
dignity, and made some excuse to get away to the
kitchen, where I spent the morning chatting with
the outlaw’s wife. I soon discovered Mrs. Ward
was very proud of her husband, and that she was
not all all ashamed of his occupation. I have read in
books since then that very few half-castes have much
moral sense, and I believe that to be the truth, for the
only half-caste I have had much to do with, a cham-
pion runner, stole my watch from me at Armidale.
Mrs. Ward told me a number of stories of Thunder-
bolt’s achievements that I had not heard of before, for
the outlaw was never a man to boast about himself.
She also declared that wherever he went women fell
in love with him, a fact that seemed to please her im-
mensely, to my great astonishment. “He wouldn’t
give me up for all the ladies in the land,” she ex-
plained. “ I’d trust him anywhere!”
I thought her very vain and foolish then, but I knew
better afterwards, for I had good reason later to know
that Thunderbolt kept true to his wife through many
a temptation which would have overcome most men’s
powers of resistance.


Altogether I passed a very entertaining morning.
Mrs. Ward and I became very good friends, and it was
a happy little party that sat down to luncheon. We
had scarcely finished, however, when the signal for
which we had waited arrived. Peter, the black boy,
came running up to the house at full speed to tell us
that Mr. Gibson, a neighbouring squatter, had just
passed, and had told him that the Tamworth coach was
coming along a mile or two behind him with an escort
of seven mounted troopers. For an instant all was
commotion, Mrs. Ward uttered a scream, and flung
herself weeping into her husband’s arms, while the
children began to howl in concert. Glad to escape
the noise, I slipped out, and ran to the stable to saddle
the horses. They had had a fine rest, and as much
corn as they could eat, and they looked fit to run for
a kingdom. I gave them half a bucket of water
apiece, and led them to the front of the house where
Thunderbolt stood waiting for me, looking very
gloomy indeed.
“ Can I say good-bye to your wife ?” I asked.
“ No, boy,” he answered, with a queer catch in his
voice. “ Poor Sunday is all broken up. Come on!”
He sprang on Combo’s back, and headed at once for
the bush, nor did another word pass between us until
we stopped some hours later at the foot of a big moun


tain, some twenty miles nearer the Manning River.
After turning our horses loose to feed,l left Thunder-
bolt to light a fire while I climbed down to a creek
with the billy in order to procure some water. When
I returned, I found the outlaw leaning up against a
tree with his face hidden in his hands, and a glance
around showed me that he had not even attempted to
collect wood for a fire. His breast was heaving up
and down, and if I am any judge of signs, strong, big
man as he was, he was crying as if his heart would
break. I felt so ashamed to witness his weakness,
and so very miserable myself, that I stole away on
tip-toe into the scrub, and sitting down on a rock half
a mile away I burst out crying, too, in sheer sympathy
for my friend’s grief. I stayed there for quite an
hour, by which time the earth was wrapped in dark-
ness, and the rain, too, which had given over since
midday, began to fall again. A little later, I crept
back towards the camp as wretched and bedraggled
a figure as ever crawled through the bush. Con-
ceive, then, my astonishment, to see on turning an
angle of the mountain’s knee, an immense fire blazing
near where I had left Thunderbolt, and the outlaw
himself standing before it, carolling at the top of his
voice an absurd old comic song which he never sang
except when he was in the best of good humors.


CHAPTER VI.
THE BITER BITTEN.
We remained hidden in the bush in the mountains
at the head waters of the Manning River for about a
fortnight, in order to allow the sensation caused by
our sticking up the Moonbi coach to fade a little from
people’s memories. During that time Thunderbolt
gradually recovered from the melancholy state in
which his last visit to his wife, and their sudden en-
forced separation, had thrown him. His abrupt tran-
sitions of mood, from black gloom to hilarious excite-
ment, had at first given me considerable uneasiness.
But his fits of depression became rapidly more infre-
quent, and I was soon made to feel that my old care-
less and light-hearted companion had returned to me.
As may be guessed, I welcomed the change with a
blithe heart, for no one could be more charming than
the outlaw when he liked, and I am by nature too
sympathetic ever to feel happy while those I care for
are miserable.


Thunderbolt, growing tired of inaction, ordered a
move at last towards the northern coastal districts,
where he was not known, and where he fancied that
we might find a chance to improve our fortunes. For
precaution’s sake, it was determined that we should
undertake the journey in the role of honest pilgrims,
lest our ill-fame should precede us and kill the geese
which we hoped would lay us golden eggs. He, there-
fore, assumed the name of Fred Blake, and bade me
remember that henceforth I must be his son “ Jack!”
It would occupy too much space to recount our ad-
ventures by the road. Suffice it to say that we ac-
complished our journey without mishap, and had a
very jolly time indeed, despite the fact that we were
obliged by lack of funds to proceed very slowly.
Indeed, it was over a month before we reached our
destination, and during that time we often had to earn
our bread by the sweat of our brows. Once we took
on a job of fencing that kept us hard at work for
several days, and we both prodigiously enjoyed the jest
of toiling to earn what we might have demanded,
had we chosen, at the point of the pistol. But such
short spells of honest labour provided us with just
that necessary spark of variety in our lives of vaga-
bond villainy which was necessary to season the dish
to our liking; and I never remember having been so


merry, nor to have seen Thunderbolt so entirely good-
humored and at peace with all the world, as when we
were splitting rails and digging post holes side by side
together on the clearing of a poor selector, who would
have swooned in sheer terror if he could have known
that the man whose clever axe work he often praised
was the reckless outlaw who had so long terrorised the
northern colony, and set the police at defiance. It
was most entertaining, too, to sit by our camp fire of
nights (when we were always joined by the other hands
at work on the selection), and spin yarns. Curiously
enough the conversation almost invariably turned on
bushranging, and many a quiet smile did Thunderbolt
and I exchange when some unsuspecting storyteller
would dilate extravagantly upon his host’s misdeeds,
little dreaming that two of his smooth-faced listeners
could have set him right in his exaggerations.
We entered the Grafton district about the middle
of the month of May, but, rather to our disgust, we
soon discovered that it was not the class of country
in which we cared to transact our usual business. It
was, in fact, too settled, and although it contained
plenty of forest land and thick, impenetrable scrub, it
would have taken us more time to get the hang of it
than we liked to spare, before it would have been in
any wise safe for us to commence operations. The


place, moreover, was so thoroughly well patrolled with
mounted troopers that Thunderbolt resolved, although
reluctantly, to allow discretion to rule his valor. 1
think, however, that his longing to return to Barraba,
in order to see his wife again, had some influence with
his decision. He was never really at ease when far
away from her, poor fellow. At any rate, he artfully
suggested that our long absence from New England
must by this have allayed the public fear of us, and
so persistently did he bring the matter up that at last
I earned his gratitude by myself suggesting our re-
turn. I stipulated, however, that we should just have
a look at the town of Grafton, a place of which I had
heard a great deal, and wished much to see; for I
had never yet visited any town of consequence, except
Tamworth. Thunderbolt having agreed to my pro-
posal, thitherwards one fine morning we rode. A
trifling circumstance altered our plans. We passed
the Taraldal Hotel, a place situated some 25 miles
north of Grafton, soon after daylight, and before any
of the inmates were awake. Thunderbolt’s keen eyes
were immediately attracted by a small placard fastened
to the trunk of a tree that was growing before the inn
door. Bidding me ride on, he walked up to read the
contents, which we both of us half-suspected might
prove a proclamation offering a reward for our arrest.


Much to our relief, however, it was merely a notice
of a race meeting to be held on a course near the hotel
on Queen’s Birthday, just a week ahead. When
Thunderbolt overtook me his eyes were glittering with
excitement. He had formed a plan to enrich himself
and me on instant, and he could hardly wait to tell me
what the placard had to say before he began to ex-
plain his design.
“ These clod-hoppers can’t possibly have a horse
that could beat Combo 1” he cried. “ See here, Will,
you ride on to Grafton, and enjoy yourself as much as
you want. You have a few pounds in your pockets,
so you ought to put in the time all right. As for
me, I’ll put up at this pub., and see how the land lies.
Then I’ll enter Combo for the race, and engineer the
betting market. By Gad, if I know what’s what,
we’ll make a pot over this deal!”
“ But where do I come in?” I asked.
“ You —lad. Why, you must come back the night
before the races —and see the thing through. I don’t
want you here with me, as your presence might make
me suspected. The police know that Thunderbolt is
travelling with a boy, and they have our descriptions,
though they have never seen us. Another thing, Will,
don’t recognise me or claim my acquaintance until


after the races. We can’t be too careful, as I shall
be quite a public character, you understand!”
I agreed, and after a few more instructions, and a
close hand-grip, we parted—l for Grafton, Thunder-
bolt returning to the inn.
As this narrative concerns Thunderbolt’s doings
rather than my own, I shall dismiss my sojourn in
Grafton with the remark that I spent a pretty lonely
time in that little riverside city, although I made a
few boyish friends there who made part of my stay
at least agreeable enough. My last act was to pur-
chase a suit of smart store clothes, clad in which I re-
turned to the inn of our rendezvous the day before the
races. I cut quite a figure in my new apparel as I
rode up to the place early in the afternoon, on my
showy horse, whom a week’s rest and corn-feeding had
made very skittish. There was a crowd of loungers
gathered before the “ pub.” as I appeared, and very
little to my liking (for I had hoped not to attract at-
tention), my horse must needs take it into his head to
start bucking viciously at the moment when I was
about to dismount. I discovered afterwards that a
fly had stung him. He almost unseated me, but I just
managed to stick on, and slipping back into my seat
I gave the crowd quite involuntarily an exhibition of
rough riding that astonished them so much that they


greeted me with a loud hand-clapping when I finally
mastered my truculent brute. Thunderbolt saw it all,
for he was standing among the others talking to the
inn-keeper. He pretended not to recognise me, how-
ever, and I took care to follow his example.
The innkeeper was loud in his praises of my feat.
He declared he had never met a better rider, and he
invited me to drink at his expense. I accepted the
offer, and we went inside the inn. He asked me my
name, and where I was going? I replied that my
name was Jack Ford, and that I had come there to see
the races, and wished to stay at his house. He seemed,
very pleased at that, and led me at once to a room.
“You ride well enough to be a jockey,” he ic-
marked, as I sat down on the bed and prepared to take
off my riding boots.
“ I am a jockey,” I answered, lying on the impulse
of the moment, for that seemed a good excuse to offer
for coming to so out-of-the-way a place.
“ The devil you are!” cried the landlord. “Do you
want a mount, boy ?”
“ I don’t mind,” said I.
He shut the door, and came up close to me. “ See
here, my lad,” he said, with a cunning look. “ I’ve
taken a fancy to you, and for two pins I’d mount you
on my own horse for the big race to-morrow.”


“ Haven’t you got a rider ?” I demanded, thoroughly
surprised by so curious a proposition.
“ I have, Jack, but he is not up to much, and I can’t
depend on him for a hard race, as I’m afraid it’s like
to be.”
“ How is that ?”
“ Well, I’ll take you right into my confidence.” He
sat down on the edge of the bed, and eyed me like a
hawk. “ You look honest,” he declared.
“ Right oh!” said I.
“ It’s this way,” he began. “ I’ve got a horse here
named Skinner, that I’ve been keeping for this big race
for months past. No one knows what he can do but
me. He’s ugly and rough, but he has a good drop of
blood in him, and he can run like a machine. I
reckoned he was a dead cop until a day or two ago,
and I’ve backed him for a pot on the quiet—you
savvy?” he winked.
I nodded.
“ But,” he proceeded, “ about a week ago a drover
chap named Fred Blake turned up here one morning
on a chestnut, and as soon as he heard of the races
he stays on, and what does he do but enter his bloom-
ing chestnut for the big event.
“ What of that ?” I demanded, trying hard to look
unconcerned, for of course Fred Blake was Thunder-
bolt,


“ Well,” replied the landlord, “ I’m if I like
the look of that chestnut. He’s a rank outsider in the
betting, but Blake takes all the wagers that offer, and
I smell a rat, and a stinking rat, Jack!”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ That chestnut is a dark horse as well as mine,
boy. That’s what I mean. I haven’t seen him run,
but I’m afraid of him. I had a good look at him at
about 2 o’clock this morning, while Blake was asleep,
and I’m ready to bet a heap that he’s a thoroughbred.”
“ You don’t say!” I gasped, trying hard to look
astonished.
“ That’s why I want a good boy to ride ‘ Skinner,’ ”
said the landlord, “ and I believe you are the one for
my money.”
“ I’ll ride him,” I replied.
“ It will be worth £5 to you,” said the landlord, “ and
ten if you win, money down!”
I nodded, and we shook hands on the bargain, after
which my host left me, saying that it would not do for
us to be too much together, but that he would see me
later, when no one was around.
I did not understand what he meant then, but it was
not long before I discovered the fellow to be a
scoundrel, and a mean coward. It was about mid-
night, and I was in a deep sleep, when of a sudden a


light was flashed into my eyes, and a man’s hand was
pressed over my mouth.
I woke up with a start to see the landlord bending-
over my bed.
“ Hist!” he muttered.
“ What’s up ?” I stammered, considerably startled
by the apparition.
“ It’s that race,” he whispered. “ I must win it,
Jack, or I’ll be broke.”
“ It’s too early to ride it yet,” I grumbled angrily.
“ What on earth did you wake me up for?”
“ Not so loud,” he replied with a fierce frown.
“ Look here!”
He opened his hand and showed me five sovereigns.
“ Do you want to earn those ?” he muttered in my ear.
I nodded, full of wonder.
He pressed a key into my hand. “ It’s the key of
the feed-loft,” he whispered. “ Slip on your clothes,
and sneak downstairs into the shed. The horse-boxes
are just underneath the loft. I want you to shove
an armful of barley into that infernal chestnut’s
trough. Do that, and the quids are yours!”
“Do it yourself!” I muttered, very angry by then.
But in a second I realised that I had made a mistake.
He might take me at my word, and in that case
Thunderbolt’s chance of winning the race would be
spoiled utterly.


“ I daren’t!” said the landlord. “If I were spotted
I’d be ruined. But a kid like you could do it and
never be caught. Even if you were caught you could
easily clear out, and I’d always act a friend to you!”
“ It’s worth more than five quid!” I protested.
At that he began to haggle, but we finally made a
compromise on seven pounds, money down, and ten
minutes later I crept stealthily up into the hayloft. A
match cautiously struck and held downwards showed
me dear old Combo’s face, and in another box near by
“ Skinner ” —the dark horse of the rascally innkeeper,
that I was to ride upon the morrow.
They snorted when they saw the light, but I spoke
to them soothingly to calm their fears, and soon they
were quieted. I then collected a good armful of green
barley and threw it down the shoot into “ Skinner’s ”
feed trough. He gave a low whinny of delight, and
began to eat it at once; whereupon, stifling a
chuckle, I slipped down the steps and out of the
shed back to the house. None observed me, and I
got back to my room without arousing a soul. In-
deed, I made so little noise that I doubt if even my
villainous employer heard my return. At any rate,
he was far too cowardly to venture near my room
again, and I was soon sound asleep; nor was I dis-
turbed for the remainder of the night. In the morn


ing I wrote a short account of what I had done on a
piece of paper, which I contrived to slip into Thunder-
bolt’s hand unnoticed by any other as we were all
trooping into breakfast. Quite a number of the sur-
rounding settlers were stopping at the inn in order to
see the races, and they all had fancies for the main
event. The consequence was that during the meal
many wagers were concluded, and Thunderbolt was
one of the foremost gamblers. Each speculator paid
his money into the hands of the landlord, who it
seemed had been elected public stakeholder some days
previously. The rascal took an early opportunity to
ask me, in a guarded manner, if I had succeeded in my
undertaking overnight. I felt no remorse in deceiving
him, and nodded in answer to his query, whereupon he
began to back his own horse, “ Skinner,” quite reck-
lessly. Thunderbolt was the first to leave the table;
doubtless he wished to read my note. The others
soon followed him, however, and an early start was
made to the course, which lay about a quarter of a
mile from the hotel. There arrived, I anxiously in-
spected the various horses entered for the big race.
In a very short time I felt satisfied that none of them
was a match for “ Combo ” except “ Skinner,” who,
although an ugly brute, had the look of a racer. Re-
membering the barley that he had eaten during the


night, however, I entertained no fears for the result,
and I prepared to enjoy myself to the top of my bent.
Looking round for Thunderbolt, I perceived him,
much to my surprise, conversing with a very pretty
girl, with whom he appeared to be on intimate terms.
I was not able to watch him long, however, before a
man came up to me, and asked me point blank if I was
going to ride “ Skinner ” for the big event.
The man’s name was Jack Holmes, and I had been
introduced to him at the inn overnight.
Not caring to deceive him, I answered “ Yes.”
He shook his head at that, and moved off, muttering
angrily, to a group of his friends who stood some dis-
tance away. Ten minutes later a large crowd had
collected to see “ Skinner,” and they seemed very an-
noyed as they examined his points. One man shouted
out in a loud voice that the innkeeper had rung in a
“ dark horse ” on them, and called upon the crowd to
hoot him. The groans were given with such a hearty
goodwill that the wily landlord slunk into his beer-
shed, without offering a word in explanation.
“ Skinner ” immediately went up in the betting, and
before the bell rang for the first race he was a hot
favourite at 3to i on. Just after the third race Jack
Holmes came up to me again, and asked me what I
wanted to ride his mare for the fourth race, the
“ Maiden Plate.”


“ I’m only a poor ' splitter/ ” he declared, “ and I
can’t afford to give you much unless you win, for I’ve
put every shilling I have on the mare.”
I had taken a good look beforehand at the filly, and
I liked her cut —so I replied that I would ride her for
nothing if he would give me five pounds if I won.
He delightedly agreed, so I went up and saddled the
mare myself. A bystander asked me if I would back
my mount. I asked how much he was worth, and he
replied, amid roars of laughter, that he guessed he
could buy a kid like me. At that I turned out my
pockets and produced nineteen pounds,
“ Cover that!” I cried, “ and if the mare loses you
can take it 1”
I’m sure he had had no idea of making such a big
bet, but the jeering of the people nettled him so much
that he fished out the money. We handed our stakes
to the innkeeper over the bar, and a moment later I
was in the saddle, cantering towards the starting-post.
When the flag fell I got well away to the front at once,
and stayed there. Indeed, the mare was so superior
to her competitors that I did not need to call upon her
powers, and she galloped home an easy winner, the
only excitement provided by the race having been a
hard-fought-out battle for second place. Poor Jack
Holmes was so delighted at his win that he made me
F


take seven pounds instead of five, which, with the nine-
teen pounds I had won on the wager, brought up my
little fortune to the respectable sum of forty-five
pounds.
I had hardly collected the money, and was still stuff-
ing the notes into my pouch, when the bell rang for
the principal event of the day.
A glance showed me that eight horses would com-
pete, two having been scratched a short time before.
Thunderbolt, who had been leading his horse about
among the crowd and freely discussing with the by-
standers the chances of the race, carelessly swung
himself into the saddle, and rode out upon the course,
first of the field. I mounted Skinner in his stall,
having to be lifted upon his back, while two men held
his head, for the brute was a vicious biter. When he
felt the bit, however, he calmed down, and as I rode
towards the course a dozen speculators were shouting
the odds and freely offering four to one in my favour.
The landlord, who had left his bar in order to watch
the race, looked thoroughly delighted, and he shouted
out to me to ride for all I was worth.
We had a very good start, and the whole eight got
away well together. But after we had settled down
to real work several fell back, and quite a procession
was formed, the field thinning back for almost half of


a furlong, Thunderbolt, on Combo, in the lead, I riding
at his quarter. I heard the crowd begin to speak,
about just then, for they could already see that the
fight was to be fought out by only two or three, and
each horse had his supporters. As we swung round
the turn Combo dropped back a little, whereupon a
mighty yell went up, “ Skinner wins—Skinner,
Skinner!”
I was so excited that I quite forgot I wanted
Thunderbolt to win. Indeed I had only one thought
in the world, to win myself. But the barley had done
its work! Skinner was blowing like a grampus, and
before we came to the straight he was labouring
frightfully. I plied whip and spur, however, and
Thunderbolt and I began the run home locked to-
gether. The roar that greeted our approach was
simply deafening. It looked as though the race would
end in a dead heat, and perhaps it might have, if
Skinner had not eaten the barley, for the beast was as
game and good a runner as I have ever ridden, and
I am not sure but that he was a trifle faster even than
Combo. Fifty yards from the winning-post, how-
ever, he was done. I felt him falter, swerve, and
totter in his stride. I had only just time to kick my
feet from the stirrups and made ready for a spring
when he plunged forward, and fell to the ground stone


dead. I jumped clear of him, and with the luck of
a cat escaped scathless. But within a minute I was
surrounded with an excited, yelling crowd, and up
came the innkeeper with a face as white as chalk. A
glance at the dead animal showed him what had hap-
pened. Frantic with rage, he clenched his hands,
and screaming like a madman rushed at me. No
doubt he would have killed me had he caught me, but
right in the nick of time Thunderbolt galloped up on
Combo, and riding in between us thrust a pistol into
the furious landlord’s face. “ Stand back!” he com-
manded very sternly.
“ Stand back, yourself!” shrieked the fellow. “ That
cursed boy has stiffened my horse. Look at him!”
“ Bah!” said Thunderbolt. “ The tin you wanted
to tie on my dog’s tail has been tied on your own, that’s
all. It would have been all right though if my horse
had got the barley, you skunk, eh?”
In the breathless silence that followed the outlaw’s
words, I slipped through the transfixed crowd, and
darting up to the bar, quickly mounted the well-fed
hack which the innkeeper himself had ridden to the
course. A moment later I was by my leader’s side.
The innkeeper stood before Thunderbolt’s pistol, livid
and speechless with fear and rage commingled.
Thunderbolt eyed him with a savage sneer for a mo


ment longer, then seeing that I was safe and ready
for anything, he cocked his revolver.
“ Now hand over the stakes,” he commanded.
“ Perhaps by this you have guessed who I am. If
you have not, I may tell you that I am Thunderbolt.
So don’t you fool with me if you want to save your
skin!”
The fellow without more ado, and trembling like a
leaf with terror the while, produced a big roll of notes
which he handed to the outlaw, saying never a word.
Thunderbolt slipped the notes into his shirt, and
gathered up his reins.
“ Come along, Will,” he said to me, and turning his
horse he rode leisurely off, still, however, holding his
pistol well in view, in case of accidents. The crowd
parted before us like water, in a silence deep as death,
and although a loud murmur began to rise and swell
behind us, no hand was raised to bar our progress.
Thunderbolt rode straight up to a group of women
who had been watching the proceedings from
a distance, and he halted before them, swing-
ing off his hat with the grace of a foreign
chevalier.
“ Ladies,” said he, “ I beg you to pardon me for
having in some measure perhaps spoiled the pleasure
of your day. I shall, however, atone for my fault


by ridding you of my presence. I have the honour to
wish you a long good-bye!”
He bowed again and would have departed. But at
that instant the pretty girl with whom I had seen him
talking earlier in the morning, stepped of a sudden
from among her companions, and tripping forward
caught at Combo’s bridle. “ Stoop down to me,” she
said in a low tone, “ I have something to tell you!”
Thunderbolt bent over his saddle bow at once.
“ I have heard all that passed over there,” muttered
the girl, and it seemed to me that she had tears in her
eyes, as she spoke. “ But I knew who you were from
the first,” she proceeded. “ You are a bad man, Fred.
But, never mind, I must give you this warning. Young
Bourke has just told me that two policemen camped
at his place last night, and they are bound to be here
soon.”
Thunderbolt took her outstretched hand, and stoop-
ing still lower, he kissed it. “ You are a brick, Nelly!”
he cried, very earnestly. “ Bless you for the hint.
I’ll never forget you for it.”
She stepped back, her face red as a peony. “ Good-
bye, Fred. Ride for your life!” she said. I don’t
want to see you caught, bad as you are!”
Thunderbolt smiled at her, and for a last time raised
his hat.


A moment later we were going at full gallop
across country, and although we afterwards heard
that the police were soon in chase of us, it is almost
needless to say that with the start we had secured,
we gave them the slip with ease. Indeed, they were
still searching for us through the coastal districts with
black trackers and special constables when we had
safely returned to the New England, and lay in a
snug hiding place near Armidale.


CHAPTER VII.
“ THUNDERBOLT’S LEAP.”
Having been informed by one of Thunderbolt’s
many friends (at whose house, by the way, we spent
a very pleasant week), that the police still kept Mrs.
Ward under constant surveillance, the outlaw came
to the conclusion that it would be unsafe to visit his
home until he had done something which would lead
our hunters to believe that they were taking needless
trouble in that direction.
We therefore cut our holiday short and moved off
to Ben Lomond, where we stuck up the Glen Innes-
Armidale coach. The affair, however, was most un-
exciting, for there was not a single passenger aboard,
and all we got for our pains out of the mailbag was
one bank-note for £i and a number of crossed cheques,
which were valueless as far as we were concerned.
Thunderbolt waxed quite eloquent on that occasion
about what he described as the “ pernicious system
growing up with the public of preferring common
paper currency to notes and gold!”


Next day we rode to Wellingrove, where we met
with equal ill-fortune, for after going to the trouble
of sticking up the store there, our labour was only
rewarded with the small sum of twopence, the owner
having gone to Armidale to bank his money on the
previous day. Thoroughly disgusted with our bad
luck, we beat a hasty retreat to the Queensland border,
where we kept quiet for a full month. By that time,
however, we were delighted to receive news that
public attention had been distracted from our misdeeds
by outrages committed by another gang of bush-
rangers in the south-western part of the country.
We therefore prepared to return to the New Eng-
land, feeling pretty confident that our advent would
not be expected. It had been our intention not to
act the highwaymen upon the road, but when we ar-
rived at Merrylands (near Tenterfield), Thunderbolt’s
purse and mine gave out, and it was necessary to re-
plenish our stores. We therefore determined to bail
up the first person we encountered, and fate sent us
a German Band of five performers, who were upon
their way to the Tenterfield races.
The poor Germans were horribly surprised when we
ordered them to bail up, but they instantly obeyed.
Conceive our disappointment, however, when, on
searching them all, we could discover no more than


thirty shillings. Thunderbolt was at first very angry,
but his love of fun soon got the better of his bad
humour. The musicians looked so funny standing
in the road with their hands above their heads, and
their instruments lying at their feet, that presently he
burst out laughing, and declared that as they could
not fill our pockets they should, at all events, show
us what talent they possessed.
He thereupon obliged them all to sit down upon
the roadside and play to him selections from all the
operas, the names of which he had ever heard of.
They were disinclined at first to follow their new
leader harmoniously, but he reduced them to sub-
mission with his revolver, and soon they were play-
ing more earnestly, I think, than they had ever played
before. We both enjoyed the music very much.
Thunderbolt was particularly delighted with an air
out of “ Traviata,” the name of which I have forgot-
ten, and he made his victims repeat it more than five
times. They performed for our benefit for nearly
three hours without a break. But they were then so
worn-out that Thunderbolt took compassion upon
them, and, handing them back their thirty shillings
with the air of a grand seigneur, he commanded them
to proceed upon their way. Some two hours later
we overtook a horseman, who gave us “ Good-day!”


and seemed quite willing to enter into conversation.
He told us that his name was “ Steve Hart,” and that
he owned a racehorse which was to compete at the
Tenterfield meeting on the following day. He was
just advising us to back his horse, when Thunderbolt,
of a sudden, whipped out his revolver, and ordered
him to “ bail up.” Hart did not willingly obey. He
began to protest, and when a second time, and more
sternly addressed, he attempted to get off his horse
upon the wrong side.
Thunderbolt, however, intercepted his purpose, and,
riding up very close to him, thrust the muzzle of his
cocked revolver within an inch of Steve Hart’s face.
The victim thereupon gave up the struggle, and a mo-
ment later I drew from his pockets a revolver and a
hundred pounds in bank-notes. Taking his horse
with us, we left him to brood upon his loss, and rode
at a gallop to Jennings’ Hotel. There we bought
the provisions we needed, and two bottles of gin, with
which we escaped to the Mod Ranges, and remained
there in a secluded spot for the next three weeks.
Tiring of inaction, we made our way next to Emma-
ville, at that time a thriving little mining town, which
we intended to raid.
When we came to the Tenterfield Creek, however,
we found it in flood, and were obliged to ride along


its banks for some miles in search of a safe crossing-
place. We discovered a spot at last which looked
negotiable, and I, wanting to show my pluck, at once
drove my horse into the stream, while Thunderbolt
watched me from the bank. I had hardly entered
the water, however, when glancing at the opposite
bank I saw two men seated there silently observing
me.
“ Look out, Will!” Thunderbolt called out to me
in low tones. “ Those men are police. I know them
both, and they know me!” I was much frightened,
but I managed to conceal my fears. “ I’m afraid the
current is too strong, Fred!” I shouted, “ we’d better
go further down.” Saying which I turned my horse,
and after a heavy flounder, for the stream was very
strong, I regained my leader’s side.
At that one of the police put his hands to his mouth
and called out, “ Come up this way, mates, there is a
good crossing here. We have just come over and are
spelling our nags!”
“No thanks!” cried Thunderbolt. “ I know a bet-
ter place a bit further down!”
The police, however, not perceiving that they had
been recognised, pressed us to cross, and followed
us, walking along the bank. Thunderbolt answered
them very civilly, but presently on turning a bend of


the creek we saw that the stream was growing quickly
much more narrow.
“ The game is up!” he said to me. “ Come on,
Will,” and setting spurs to his horse he trotted away
at right angles to the creek.
The police knew then that the “ dingo had scented
the air,” and they abandoned all disguise, calling upon
us by name to stop and surrender. We returned
them no reply, but set to work to escape. The
ground before us, however, was so hilly and rugged
that we had to proceed very slowly, and we were still
well in view when the police had crossed the creek on
their horses and were in full chase of us. That they
were well mounted, too, we saw at a glance, and it
thrilled me to think that they might possibly effect our
capture. Choosing to chance the dangers before us
rather than the peril behind, Thunderbolt set the
way, at a pace that made my blood turn cold consider-
ing the nature of the ground over which we passed.
The troopers, however, seemed to the full as reckless
as he. On they came at the top speed of their horses,
and they even gained upon us. Soon they were with-
in range. I heard the sharp crack of revolvers, and
the bullets began to fly about our heads. Twelve
shots in all were fired, and then we seemed to creep
ahead. At the end of a furious gallop of perhaps


four miles we reached the top of a jagged hill. There
Thunderbolt pulled up to breathe his darling Combo.
We had a drink of gin apiece, and the outlaw then
turned to view the situation. The police were already
beginning to climb the hill.
“ Curse them!” cried Thunderbolt. “ What say,
Bill; our horses are tired. Shall we dismount and
fight it out here to a finish ?”
“ No,” said I, “ let’s ride for it first. We can
always fight if we have to. Besides, it’s down-hill
now, and we know the country!”
Thunderbolt nodded, and without another word we
set off again. A wild, plunging gallop down the
hillside brought us to a deep creek, the banks of which
were sheer and vertical, nearly thirty feet apart. To
cross it by any other means than a leap was impos-
sible, and yet the leap seemed too great for mortal
horse to undertake. Thunderbolt was far in advance
of me. As he approached the chasm, he turned in
his saddle and called out, “ Good-bye, laddie!” His
face was chalk white. I shouted out, “Stop, Fred,
for God’s sake, stop!”
Next instant, however, he touched his horse with
the whip, and the gallant brute, gathering himself to-
gether, sprang into the air like a veritable Pegasus.
I lived a lifetime in the ensuing second, but in a sort


of breathless wonder I saw Combo land safely on the
opposite bank. The shock, however, was so great
that the noble animal went down under his rider.
He struggled up again before my eyes, but I had not
time to mark more, for my own trial was at hand.
Setting every nerve on strain, I pulled my horse up
and sent him at the leap with spur and whip, uttering
a loud yell as I did so. But the task was too great.
He leaped short. His forefeet struck the turf, but
his hind legs doubled under him beneath the bank, and
we fell rolling over and over, with a sickening crash,
into the bed of the creek. By marvellous good fortune
the horse fell undermost. He was killed instan-
taneously, but I escaped with a bad shaking and a
broken ankle. I dragged myself to my feet and stood
for a moment with the world swinging around me.
Then I heard Thunderbolt’s voice, “ Quick, Will.
Up the bank with you, quick, and dimb up behind me.”
I looked up and saw his face peering down at me
over the chasm’s edge. “My leg is hurt,” I mut-
tered. “Don’t mind me, Fred. I’m safe enough.
I can hide if you take off, for the police will be sure
to follow you!”
“ All right 1” he answered quickly. " But don’t
go too far, Will. I’ll soon give the hounds the slip,
and then I’ll come back for you 1”


The world ended for me then for a while, because
I fainted. When I recovered consciousness, it was
to see Thunderbolt kneeling beside me, rubbing my
hands, and calling upon me to wake. He shouted
with joy when he saw my eyes open, and very soon
he was telling me all that had happened while I had
been insensible. It appears that the police had
reached the top of the hill just as Thunderbolt was
disappearing round a bend of the valley. Never
dreaming that one of their quarry had met with a mis-
hap, they did not doubt but that both of us had suc-
cessfully accomplished the frightful leap I have de-
scribed. But they were not brave enough to follow
an example so desperate, and they contented them-
selves with standing for a while near the edge of the
chasm, and marvelling at the outlaw’s wonderful
horsemanship and daring; after which they gave up
the chase in disgust and rode away. Thunderbolt
had examined their tracks out of curiosity, and he as-
sured me that they must have halted within twenty
paces of where I lay. But apparently neither had
troubled to look down into the creek, for had they
done so they must have discovered me! Never was
there an escape so narrow in my experience! To
this day that spot is known as “ Thunderbolt’s Leap!”
and hundreds of people have journeyed thither from far


Thunderbolt’s Leap. [page 94


afield, to gaze wonderingly at the scene of an exploit
unrivalled in the annals of this country’s adventurous
spirits. I myself once revisited the place, after long
intervening years, and I almost doubted the faithful-
ness of my recollections, so wide was the chasm, so
terrible the leap. No longer then did I wonder that
the police refused the hazard. Indeed, I only marvel-
led that I had found courage to follow my desperate
leader as I did, even though unsuccessfully and to my
own undoing.
When I felt well enough to stand. Thunderbolt
made me take a strong nip of gin, and he half-led,
half-carried me down the bed of the creek, to a place
where the bank was less precipitous. There by dint
of much toil my leader at last got me to the top, but
not before I had again fainted with the pain of my in-
jured ankle, which had by then swollen so much that
he was obliged to cut off my boot. I shall never
forget his kindness to me in the agonising hours that
followed. Placing me on Combo’s back, and strap-
ping my bad leg over the pommel of the saddle, he led
me, walking beside the horse, all through the night in
the direction of Bundarra. The pain I suffered was
excruciating, and I am afraid that in my torment I
often bitterly reviled the poor fellow who was doing his
G


best for me. Sometimes, too, I implored him, for the
love of God, to shoot me, and put me out of my pain.
He tended upon me, however, as gently as a woman,
and he answered all my outcries with cheery, sooth-
ing words. Early next morning, while I lay sleeping
with exhaustion, Thunderbolt wandered from the
camp and stole another horse. After that we pushed
on more rapidly, but I knew very little of what pas-
sed, for I was half the time either delirious or in-
sensible. We came at length, however, to the selec-
tion and house of a Good Samaritan, a friend of
Thunderbolt’s, named Clark. This kind fellow took
me home to his mother, who put me at once to bed,
and there I lay for several weeks, waited upon by
the whole family with the utmost sweetness, until I
was entirely recovered. I shall never forget those
people, nor cease to remember them with heartfelt
gratitude. They did not know I was an outlaw,
it is true, but neither did they know anything else
about the waif that fate had brought to their door.
It was sufficient for them to perceive that I was a
suffering human being to unlock their hearts to my
necessities, and never did one more undeserving than
I find such kind and charitable friends to minister to
him in his hour of sorest need. I learned to love them


all, and when at last I took my leave of them, and
rode away, it was with tears in my eyes, and a feeling
in my breast impossible to describe, but which it still
aches me to remember.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF BUSHRANGING.
Our escape from the police at Tenterfield Creek
had, curiously enough, disarmed the pair of us.
Thunderbolt lost both his revolvers during the ride
for life, while mine had been damaged beyond repair
by my fall over the chasm. It was, therefore, with
considerable nervousness that we approached Cope’s
Creek, since we were weaponless and nigh penniless
besides. A friendly selector, however, sheltered us
for the night, and supplied us with the information
that two Chinese gold-diggers were in the habit of
passing his place every Saturday, on their way to Ben-
demeer, to sell the gold that they had won during the
week. That day being Saturday, we determined to
waylay the celestials, and for that purpose we cut
two stout cudgels from the bush, and ensconced our-
selves under cover beside the road. After a weary
wait of two hours, our victims hove in view, and
when abreast of our hiding-place we pounced out upon
them, brandishing our clubs, with awe-inspiring yells.


The Chinamen understood at once what we wanted,
but when Thunderbolt requested them to fork out their
gold, they replied in chorus, “No sabbee gold. Alice
samee we go alongum get um lashions on cl edit. No
sabbee gold!”
Thunderbolt winked at me. “ What charming in-
nocence !” he cried. “ They ‘no sabbee gold,’ Will!”
“ Strip!” he commanded, grimly, turning to the
smiling Chows.
With amazing docility they immediately obeyed,
and presently stood upon the road barefooted and as
naked as when they were born. We searched their
motley garments inch by inch, and even pried into
their boots, but we discovered not so much as a half-
penny. Thunderbolt, convinced at last that they had
told us the truth, threw them back their clothes, which
their were glad enough to resume, for the day was
bitterly cold; after which we permitted them to go
about their business.
The artful Celestials, however, had, with the cun-
ning of their race, actually outwitted us, despite the
keen and thorough search to which we submitted
them, for two days later we were informed by a friend
that they had sold twenty pounds’ worth of gold im-
mediately after, on their arrival at Bendemeer, which
said gold had been all the time bound up and con


cealed in their pigtails. Thunderbolt was very much
laughed at over this affair, and we both were subjec-
ted to a lot of chaffing by our friends, for news of it
spread over the district like wildfire. It put the police
on our trail as well, and we were soon obliged to make
tracks for Bundarra. We came just after dark one
evening to a Chinaman’s hut, about two miles from the
town. I was for passing it, but Thunderbolt said,
“ No, Will, not till we have examined its owner’s pig-
tail, at all events!”
He was, in fact, still sore at the trick that the Ben-
demeer Celestials had played upon him, and I think
he wanted to get his revenge. However, as we were
riding up to the hut the Chow came running out, and
going straight up to the outlaw he muttered in a low
voice, “Me know you. You Mistle Thundelbolt.
Two pliceeman in-si my housee. You lun away
quick!”
A glance showed us two police horses tied up at a
neighbouring fence, so with a word of hearty thanks
to our friendly saviour, we turned tail and set off at
a gallop. The troopers were soon in hot pursuit of
us, but we knew the country so well that we easily
eluded them, and by daylight we were well on the
way to Armidale. Thunderbolt said to me that night,
“ I’ll never try to rob a Chow again. Will, as long as I


live, just for the sake of that kind-hearted beggar that
warned us. I feel really ashamed of myself when I
remember that I intended to rob him. But I’ll show
my gratitude by respecting his countrymen for the
future!”
On the following afternoon we broke into a selec-
tor’s house whose owner was absent, and secured
about two pounds in gold and silver. This was a
boon, for it was absolutely necessary to supply our-
selves with firearms, and owing to our weaponless
condition we could only procure such things by paying
for them. After a deal of cogitation we decided to
ride boldly into Armidale, and visit a store. The risk
was sharp, but so was our necessity. We had not
tasted food for twelve hours, and we dared not ply
our usual trade without the requisite implements.
Thunderbolt declared that it would be better to enter
the city from the Uralla side, and we therefore made
in that direction. As we passed the Rocky River we
were fortunate enough to find a pick and shovel lying
by the side of the road, that had probably been left
there by some maintenance man. Thunderbolt took
the pick and I the shovel, armed with which novel
weapons we soon afterwards trotted into Armidale,
trying hard to look like conventional diggers. In order
to help along his disguise my leader slyly caused Combo


to become restive, whereupon he allowed himself
to bump up and down in the saddle like a new-chum
rider, greatly to the amusement of the passers-by,
some of whom called after and jeered at him.
We rode straight to Richardson’s store, and there
pulled up. Thunderbolt got off his horse from the
wrong side, and said aloud to me, “ I don’t know how
I’m going to ride that beastly brute back home, Jack!”
Entering the store, he told the shopkeeper that he
wanted a gun because the native dogs were getting
frightfully daring and troublesome about his claim
at the Rocky Diggings. The storekeeper showed him
several guns, but Thunderbolt artfully complained that
their price was beyond him. “ I can’t afford more
than a couple of pounds!” he declared.
“Then,” said the storekeeper, “I can’t fix you up
I’m afraid, unless you buy a revolver instead, for the
cheapest gun I have is £4 10s.”
“ What are your revolvers ?” asked Thunderbolt.
“ Thirty shillings.”
Thunderbolt looked at one or two, and after a lot
of pretended hesitation he allowed the man to per-
suade him to buy one. With his remaining ten shil-
lings he purchased a supply of ammunition and some
food, whereupon he got to horse again, and a few
minutes later we were safely back in the bush. The


very next morning we were informed by one of
Thunderbolt’s many friends that the authorities had
decided to strain every nerve to effect our capture, and
in that behalf had already despatched from head-
quarters a large body of mounted troopers to reinforce
the New England police. This bad news decided
Thunderbolt to “ light out ” for “ fresh fields and
pastures new.” We therefore headed south, and
made our way as quickly as possible to Bathurst,
where we lay for the next six weeks in close hiding, at
the house of a farmer to whom Thunderbolt had once
rendered a signal service. I believe he had saved
the life of the man’s daughter. Our sudden disap-
pearance caused the greatest astonishment in our old
haunts, and many speculative theories were advanced
to account for the phenomenon. At first the Syd-
ney papers (with which our host regularly supplied
us) declared that Thunderbolt was lying “ perdu ” in
the Moonbi Ranges, waiting for an opportunity to per-
petrate some new crime in safety; but as time wore
on and nothing fresh was heard of us, they seemed
to believe that he was attempting to repeat a former
experiment that he had made to settle down in some
place where he was unknown, and live honestly.
Curiously enough, this hypothesis made my leader’s
critics quite venomous in his regard, and the journals


solemnly warned the police who guarded outlying and
secluded districts to keep the strictest possible lookout
for strangers, with a view to securing us at the earliest
possible moment. Thunderbolt became so angry
when he read these articles that I thought he would
completely lose his head and do something reckless
that would betray us into the hands of our hunters. He
vowed that the whole world was against him ;that every
attempt he had ever made to reform had only made
society more surely his enemy; and he took a frightful
oath that he would make the world repent the cruelty
with which it had pursued him. I did my best to per-
suade him to a calmer mood, but he would not listen
to me.
“ I must do something or burst,” he cried. “ I’m
off this minute. As for you, Will, if you don’t care
to come with me, stay behind! It will be the best
thing for you in the long run!”
But I had not the heart to desert him, and a hour
later we were both galloping towards Mudgee like a
pair of maniacs. Next morning we stuck up the
Mudgee mail coach. No opposition was offered to
us, and the affair passed tamely. We earned, how-
ever, very little for our pains, for the passengers had
no more than £5 between them, and the letter bag,
although full of registered letters, proved almost


valueless. The fact is that particular district was in-
fested with bushrangers, and the mails were so often
overhauled during transit by thieves that people who
wished to send money from place to place had ac-
quired cunning from experience, and their custom was
either to transmit bank notes on separate occasions,
half a bank note at a time, or to do all their business
by means of crossed cheques. On the occasion in
question we obtained so many half one-pound notes
and five-pound notes, that Thunderbolt grimly de-
clared there were enough to make a rug for his horse;
and he actually began to put them to that use by pin-
ing and sticking them together soon after we had left
the scene of the robbery. They were, after all, how-
ever, insufficient for that purpose, so he made a flag
of them and tacked it, as his banner, to a sapling in
the heart of the forest. I have often wondered if
any person ever found his peculiar ensign, or whether
it was suffered to rot to pieces at the instance of the
weather, where he left it. The robbery I have last
described was, strange to say, for we had not attempt-
ed to disguise ourselves, attributed by the authorities
to Morgan’s gang of bushrangers, and when Thunder-
bolt heard of that he was mightily pleased. He had
long been pining to see his wife again, and he declared
the present a favourable opportunity. We, therefore,


headed for home, and journeying by easy stages we
soon passed Moree. One morning as we were
leisurely jogging along a very quiet patch of road we
noticed two men riding in our direction about a
quarter of a mile behind us. Thunderbolt gave them
a good look, and then remarked to me, “ I believe they
are hawks, Will!”
“ Shall we run for it?” I asked.
“ Not yet,” said he, “ we don’t want to kill our nags
for nothing. They may be pigeons, too, and our
pockets are not over full!”
The cavaliers overtook us a few minutes later, and
at once slowed down, so that we were soon all riding
together.
“ Good morning!” said they.
We answered their civility in kind, and the four of
us furtively began to size each other up. I must
confess that I could make nothing of our fellow-
travellers. To me they seemed ordinary chance way-
farers, and not different from a dozen others we had
passed that very morning. One glance at Thunder-
bolt’s face, however, informed me that he held other
views. We exchanged a quick look, and then I knew
that I must be prepared for the worst. We traversed
perhaps a mile in thoughtful silence. By that time I
was sure that the police —for they were police —were


aware of our identity, and even now I cannot under-
stand what they could have been waiting for. Per-
haps they were working up their courage to the strik-
ing point. Thunderbolt was the first to make a move.
Bending forward of a sudden over his saddle, so that
the police could not see what his game was, he slipped
his revolver out of his belt, and stuck it in his riding
boot. He then sat upright again, and looked as
though nothing had happened. I meanwhile stuck
closely to his side. Another hundred yards were
covered in the most absolute silence, and I was feel-
ing as if I could shout out or go mad, when one of
the troopers unexpectedly fell back a few yards, and
then spurred his horse forward, trying to come be-
tween Thunderbolt and myself. Thunderbolt, how-
ever, was not to be outwitted so easily. He touched
Combo on the shoulder with his spur, and the clever
animal responded with a pig-root, so nicely timed that
the wily trooper was obliged to resume his former
position in the cavalcade. This little incident, instead
of bringing matters to a crisis, seemed to make the
police more than ever cautious, and the former
nervous silence repeated itself. Thunderbolt, how-
ever, grew weary at last of a game so horribly pro-
tracted.
“ Bob, old man,” said he to me, “ you ride on to the


camping-place, and get our breakfast ready. I’ll
soon come up!”
The bolt was shot! The police saw that they must
act, but it seemed to me that they disliked their task,
for both were pale as ghosts.
“ Don’t move!” cried one. “ We’ll all camp to-
gether, and have breakfast!”
But I paid them no heed. Setting spurs to my
horse I sent him forward at a gallop, and at the same
moment Thunderbolt uttered a wild yell, and charged
into the bush. “ Follow me if you can!” he shouted,
and threw himself at full length along Combo’s back.
Within a second the police were replying to his chal-
lenge with their revolvers; but although their bullets
whistled all about us, not one took effect. The trees,
I think, confused their aim; or perhaps they were too
excited to shoot straight. However that may be, we
escaped unscathed, and although they followed us for
a mile or two, we soon outpaced them, and left them in
the bush to con the last failure which they had
to add to their long score against us.
Well aware that the Moree district would shortly be
full of police, we proceeded without delay towards
Drake, our intention being to double about for a while,
and then cross over the border into Queensland. We
had just selected a spot for a camp two evenings later.


when our enemies were once more upon us. I had
my leg over the saddle, and was in the act of dis-
mounting when Thunderbolt muttered, “ ’Ware hawks,
lad!” and an instant later three mounted troopers came
crashing out of some underbrush close at hand, where
they had been lying in waiting. We had actually been
about to camp within fifty paces of their ambuscade,
and had they waited for a couple of minutes, they must
have taken us at complete disadvantage. As it was,
they had surrounded us, and a desperate expedient was
required in order to escape. But Thunderbolt was
equal to the occasion. Whipping out his revolver, he
fired point blank at the nearest trooper’s horse, and
disregarding the summons of the others to surrender,
he dashed past his discomfited adversary like a rocket.
I followed him, and another wild chase ensued, two
of the police hot on our heels, and firing steadily as
they came. We had not covered two hundred yards
when I felt a burning pain in the calf of my right leg.
Glancing down, I saw that my trousers were stained
with blood, and I sang out to Thunderbolt that I was
wounded. “ Cheer up!” he shouted back to me.
“Hang on for a bit, Will; we’ll soon outpace the
hounds, and then I’ll attend to you!”
I did my best to obey him, and trying hard to
disregard the pain, I urged on my horse with whip


and spur. The bullets were still hailing about us, but
on turning an angle of the mountain, we presently
escaped that danger, for a time at least, and I noted
with satisfaction that we had already gained a com-
fortable lead from our pursuers. A moment later,
however (I should explain that we had been galloping
along the edge of a deep mountain gorge) we turned
another angle of the hill, and were brought to an
abrupt halt by an immense bluff of high rocks. It
looked as though we were in an unescapable trap, for
we could not go back, and if we had attempted to
climb the mountain its side was so steep that we could
have gone no distance before the police would have
come upon us, and shot us down with all the ease in
the world; Made quite desperate by so grave a peril
I forgot all about my wound and hastily dismounted;
leading my horse up to the edge of the chasm I
shouted with joy to discover that there was a narrow
ledge between the bluff and the precipice. It was
scarcely three feet wide, and one false step would have
meant instant death, through being precipitated to the
rocks a hundred feet below. With never a thought
of that, however, I hurried along the dangerous path,
leading my horse behind me. I had barely negotia-
ted the pass when I turned to see Thunderbolt riding
along in my wake at a brisk trot. Such daring held


me spellbound. I had thought myself sufficiently
brave to try the pass on foot! “ For God’s sake be
careful, Fred!” I gasped involuntarily. He uttered
a reckless laugh and raised his whip. He almost paid
for his temerity, however, with his life. Combo,
startled by the shadow of the whip, swerved aside and
slipped. I screamed with fear and horror, for I saw
Combo’s hindquarters hanging over the precipice, and
I believed that all was lost. I never wish to live
through such another dreadful moment. Thunder-
bolt’s wonderful horsemanship alone saved him from
destruction. With the rapidity of lightning he threw
his weight on one side of the horse, using whip and
spur on the other. Combo made a supreme effort,
and although his hind legs were over the cliff he strug-
gled a little forward and there fell on his side against
the perpendicular wall of the bluff. As for Thunder-
bolt, with incredible coolness he merely swung one
leg over the saddle when Combo fell, and then he sat
the brute with a smile on his lips until the noble
creature staggered tremblingly to his feet again. I
implored him to dismount, but he laughed and rode on,
and he had just cleared the pass when we heard the
thundering of the troopers’ horses as they galloped up
to the other side of the bluff. “ Quick, quick!” I
H


cried turning my own horse as I spoke. “ They are
on us, Fred!”
But Thunderbolt answered me with another of his
laughs. “ I’m not going any farther to-night, Will,"
he said, coolly swinging himself to the ground. “ Take
my word for it, lad, the police won’t follow us round
that ledge. As for the rest, this is not a bad camping
ground, and if we keep quiet for a bit the hounds will
never dream but that we are miles away from them by
this!” His assurance was justified by events. The
troopers did not venture to essay the pass, and we soon
heard them depart by the way they had come.
Thunderbolt then attended to my leg. The wound
proved to be painful rather than dangerous, for the
bullet had not lodged. It had merely torn its way
through the fleshy part of my calf, and although I
had lost a good deal of blood, I suffered no ill that a
week’s idling could not cure. As an instance of the
extraordinary and persistent kindness with which
dame Fortune protected Thunderbolt, I may mention
that as he unstrapped his oilskin coat that night from
his saddle, where it had been fastened before him, dur-
ing that, our latest ride for life, a bullet dropped from
it to the ground. A closer examination of the coat
revealed the fact that the bullet had penetrated its
every fold!


CHAPTER IX.
I SAVE THUNDERBOLT’S LIFE.
During the period that I was laid up in camp by
my wound, Thunderbolt once more placed me under
heavy obligations to him by his care and constant
kindness. He performed all the work of the camp,
and would not permit me to stir so much as a finger
if he could help it. He dressed my wound himself
with hot water several times a day, and if I had been
his brother he could not have more overwhelmed me
with affectionate attentions. Looking back to that
time I cannot wonder at the deep attachment that I
felt for him, and indeed still feel for his memory, poor
fellow! And I cannot help thinking that if the in-
scrutable Fate which governs men’s actions had not
over-handicapped his destiny with injustice at its out-
set, he would have led a life that must have won the
respect and affection of his kind; for whatever his
faults, Thunderbolt was at heart a brave and kindly
gentleman. His nature, too, was perfectly simple and
straightforward. I remember that I used often to


marvel at him as from my couch of suffering I
watched him cooking our meals or cheerily perform-
ing the other little tasks that camp life entails. And
when he lay upon his back staring up at the sky and
singing by the hour his quaint old love-songs for my
amusement, I used to ask myself was this gentle,
sweet-mannered nurse of mine the real man, or that
other, the bold and reckless ruffian of the world’s
opinion. Perhaps there were two spirits in him. I
cannot declare it was not so, but I still love to think
that the spirit I knew best and liked best was nearer
the man’s true heart and nature than the evil bent that
prompted him to crime. As soon as I was well
enough to sit my horse we rode off to Bundarra, and
the bushranger’s home, which we were fortunate
enough to find not in the occupation of the police.
There we passed two very pleasant days, Thunder-
bolt happy in the company of his beloved Sunday,
while I, waited upon by the whole family, rapidly re-
covered my health and strength. A timely warning
of the approach of a strong posse of mounted troopers
drove us to the bush again. Our horses were by that
time sorely in need of a spell. They were both in
such bad condition from poor feeding and over-work
that Thunderbolt, who loved all animals like a true
bushman, and horses in particular, declared that at all


costs we must give them a long and complete rest.
With that end in view we swooped down upon Ab-
bington Station, and, after sticking up the homestead,
we abstracted from its stables the two finest steeds
that they contained. We then repaired to the house
of a friendly selector, some twenty miles away in the
heart of the forest, in whose care we placed Combo
and Silver L,eg. The selector promised to feed and
look after them, and, as he was a man whom my leader
had good reason to trust, we left them with light
hearts, and set out for the Moonbi on our new mounts.
There arrived, we stuck up the Tamworth-Moonbi
coach in exactly the same spot in which we had rob-
bed it on the first occasion, but with better luck, for
we encountered no opposition, and the mailbags
yielded us £2B in bank-notes. With this booty we re-
treated swiftly to the Denison Diggings. After re-
connoitring the place, we discovered that the police
who should have guarded it were actually chasing us
some thirty miles away; so Thunderbolt, taking his
fortune in both hands, decided upon a carouse, and we
rode up boldly to the principal hotel. As the outlaw
took no pains to conceal his identity, word was soon
passed round the camp that the famous Thunderbolt
and his boy were drinking at ’s hotel. Quite
a mob of miners collected to watch us, and the bar


was soon crowded to excess. Thunderbolt, who had
already drunk a great deal, instead of appearing to be
alarmed, accepted the attention he received as a com-
pliment, and he invited everyone to drink at his ex-
pense. Not a soul refused, and very soon I was in
the midst of as lively and exciting a scene as I have
ever witnessed. Thunderbolt “ shouted ” drinks
again and again, and the fun grew fast and furious.
The miners declared that Thunderbolt was a jolly
good fellow, who robbed the rich to give to the poor,
whereupon he made them a speech, which they ap-
plauded vociferously. He then sang them a song,
“ Home, Sweet Home,” which brought the tears to
many of those rough diggers’ eyes, and I verily be-
lieve that, had the police come up at that moment,
half the town would have fought to the death for
Thunderbolt. There was, however, one snake in the
grass among the merry-making company. A big,
strong Scotchman named M'Guiness had secretly con-
ceived the idea of achieving fame by effecting, single-
handed, the capture of the noted outlaw. Cherishing
his purpose, he pressed close to Thunderbolt’s side
and pretended the greatest affection for him. Thunder-
bolt, who was by that time incapable of differentiating
between sincerity and affectation, responded to
M'Guinness’ advances with effusion, and the pair were


just about to swear eternal friendship, when of a sud-
den the burly Highlander flung his arms around the
outlaw’s breast and pinioned his hands to his sides with
a grip of iron. “ I arrest you in the name of the
Queen!” shouted M'Guinness, “ and I call on all law-
abiding citizens to help me hold this scoundrel!”
Thunderbolt struggled vainly in that giant’s clutch,
while I looked on almost stunned with surprise. Only
for a moment, however, for my leader suddenly ceased
to fight, and, standing still, he looked at me over his
captor’s shoulder. “ Will!” said he, very quietly.
I was unarmed, for, as will be remembered, I had
lost my revolver when Thunderbolt took his famous
leap, and I had not been able to procure another since
that time. But when Thunderbolt looked at me in
that way, and seemed to call upon me to help him, I
felt as strong as a lion and most terribly angry. But
I must have some weapon. I looked around, and saw
a carving-knife thrust into the space between two
bottles of rum on the shelf behind the bar.
With one spring I gained the bar counter.
Stretching out my hand, I seized the knife, and with
a yell of rage I rushed towards M'Guinness, brandish-
ing the blade and swearing like a bullock-driver. The
Scotchman, however, was contented with one glance
at my scarlet face. Hastily releasing his prisoner,


he burst a passage through the crowd and rushed out
to the road. Thunderbolt snatched out his revolver
and followed him. A second later I heard the crack
of a shot and a loud shout of rage. Thunderbolt
then re-appeared at the door. “ Furies seize the
hound,” snarled the outlaw, “ I missed him, and he
has got away 1”
“ Friends!” he proceeded, in ringing tones, address-
ing the silent and almost stupefied crowd. “ That
is the first shot I have ever fired in anger and hoping
to take a man’s life. I hope it will be the last. But,
understand this, and mark me well. By the God
above us, if I can, I’ll kill at any time any civilian who
dares to attempt my arrest. With the police it is
different. I bear them no grudge. It is their busi-
ness to try and take me; and the trooper that does it
will have my best wishes. But there are enough police,
quite enough, and the man that wants to play the spy
or the amateur policeman at my expense, I look upon
as a damned blood-hunter, and I’d shoot him as I
would a dog! Good day to you!”
With that he swung upon his heel, and strode over
to where our horses were tethered. I followed him,
and a little later we were cantering quietly away to-
wards the bush. We did not exchange a word for
the rest of that day, for Thunderbolt was in one of


his taciturn moods, and I did not care to interrupt
his thoughts. When, however, we were about
to bunk for the night, Thunderbolt unexpectedly
stretched out and seized my hand.
“ You saved my life to-day, Will,” he said, quietly.
“ I say so advisedly, for although' most of those dig-
gers seemed friendly enough, and were glad enough to
drink my rum, they would have turned on me like
dogs if M'Guinness had been able to hold me!”
“ Oh! I guess not,” I muttered. “In any case,
Fred, I only did my duty.”
He squeezed my hand, then dropped it. “ Your
duty,” he repeated, and his brows met in a dark frown.
“ No, lad; if you had done your true duty—that is,
your duty to society—l’d be lodged in gaol by now.”
“ What bosh, Fred!” I cried, indignantly. “ Damn
society. Do you think I care a fig for society!”
For answer, he covered his face with his hands,
and groaned aloud.
“What is the matter with you, Fred, old man?” I
asked, in deep concern.
“ I’m thinking of you, boy,” he muttered, brokenly.
“ I like you as well as I like myself—and I’m giving
you the proof of my attachment by leading you with
me to the gallows!”
With that he heaved a big moaning sob, and throw


ing out his arms like one in despair, he rushed away
from the camp into the darkness of the trees, nor could
all my prayerful outcries induce him to return. That
night was one of the most miserable of my life, for
Thunderbolt’s passionate outbreak had aroused with-
in my breast a flood of painful memories and self-
accusing reflections. I had not been bred up for
a scoundrel, and the recollection of my poor old
mother and her gentle teachings contrasted with the
realisation of the sinful life I was leading (the know-
ledge of which I knew must be a constant agony to
her, whose favourite child I was), combined to drive
me nearly mad. I paced the lonely ledge on which
our camp was pitched for hours, in a veritable anguish
of dejection, and so sharp at length became my tor-
ment that I believe if I had been possessed of a
weapon, I would there and then have committed
suicide. As it was, I cast myself down upon the ground
at last, shaken with a benedictive storm of weeping,
and (I feel no shame in the confession), I cried myself
to sleep.


CHAPTER X.
TURNING THE TABLES.
When I awoke I found Thunderbolt in the merriest
possible mood. His fit of gloomy self-reproach of
the previous night was seemingly entirely forgotten.
He hailed me with a gay laugh and chaffing me upon
my having overslept myself, cheerily invited me to
the breakfast which he had already prepared. I was
so surprised at the change in him that I rubbed my
eyes to make sure he was the same man. But al-
though I felt out of sorts and still very unhappy, I
could not long remain proof against his spontaneous
jollity and infectious merriment. Indeed, so great
was the outlaw’s influence over me that before many
minutes had passed I was laughing and chaffing with
him, and my short-lived repentance had been smoothed
out of my memory.
We started that day for King’s Plains, where we
lived quietly for a week or two until the police once
more got upon our trail. On that occasion two young


troopers from Glen Innes, anxious to win their first
stripes, no doubt, essayed the feat which so many
others had failed to carry out. Having discovered
the locality of our retreat they stole upon us through
the bush, and almost took us by surprise. Thunder-
bolt, however, whose perceptive faculties were always
abnormally sensitive, caught sight of the top of a
helmet as one of them was peering at us from behind
the trunk of a tree a hundred yards off. Giving the
alarm, we had just time to mount when they came
charging down upon us at the gallop, for as soon as
they perceived we had scented them they abandoned
their cautious tactics and rushed for their horses.
With barely fifty paces start we set off at top speed,
crouching low over our saddles so as to offer less
mark for a chance bullet. The revolvers of our
pursuers soon began to bark, but fortunately for us
they did not bite, and although our horses were not
so fresh as those of the troopers they were better bred,
and we slowly but surely increased our lead. Anxious
to depart as quickly as possible from the plain coun-
try where the running was level and cover scanty,
Thunderbolt headed for a mountain about three miles
away. When we arrived at its base we were a good
furlong ahead of our hunters, but the mountain was
steep, and before we reached the top our horses were


badly blown. Once behind the crest Thunderbolt
pulled up and dismounted. “ There is only one thing
to do, Will!” he said, with a grim little laugh. “ Our
horses are spent, and the odds are they’d fall if we
rode them down the hill!”
“ What is the game ?” I cried.
“ Watch me!” he replied. Producing his revolver
he crawled up to the crest of the mountain on his
hands and knees, and threw himself flat upon the
ground. I crept after him, and for a moment we
lay there very still. Presently we heard the troopers
toiling up the hillside towards us, talking about us
as they came.
“ Never say die, Jack,” said one to the other. “ I
know the country on the other side, they can’t go far,
for its too broken, and the creek will stop them, any-
how !”
“Do you think they will show fight ?” asked the
other.
Thunderbolt replied to the question. Springing
suddenly erect he presented his pistol at the astonished
pair, who were within a dozen paces of the crest.
“ Hands up, or you are dead men!” he shouted.
One trooper immediately obeyed. “My God, he’ll
shoot me!” he cried out, and dropping his reins he
threw his arms above his head.


His companion, however, who was a little in the
rear, tore his horse’s head round and set off at a wild
gallop down the mountain.
“ Don’t shoot me! For God’s sake don’t shoot
me!” pleaded the prisoner. He was white to the lips
with terror.
Thunderbolt gave a mocking laugh. “ The hunters
hunted!” he sneered. “ But don’t be afraid, young
fellow, I would not hurt a hair of your head—only be
off with you—as fast as you can, and don’t try to
catch Thunderbolt again if you value your skin!”
The trooper uttered a great gasp of relief, and with-
out more ado he swung round and followed his
cowardly companion as fast as his tired horse could
go-
We watched them descend the mountain and cross
the plain, chuckling together like a pair of schoolboys
the while. But indeed it was very funny to see how
thoroughly the outlaw had terrified the foolish young
policemen. They rode away like a pair of
whipped children, hunched up on their saddles
as though they were afraid of being shot, and they
did not even dare to turn their heads until they were
separated from us by quite a mile. Thunderbolt de-
clared that he would never be caught if the authorities
continued to send such silly boys against him, and he


would not allow me to praise the clever manner in
which he had handled them and turned our peril into
a triumph.
“ I deserve no credit for outwitting kids!” he said.


CHAPTER XI.
“THE RIFT WITHIN THE LUTE.”
Our next feat of any consequence was the sticking-
up of the Barraba-Bingara mail coach. We accom-
plished it without mishap, and secured a fairly good
haul of notes and gold from the mailbags; but an
incident occurred in that connection which renders
the affair a landmark in my memory. We found a
letter in one of the bags addressed to “ Mr. Ted
Clarke, Bundarra.” Now, Mr. Clarke was the man
who had shown me so much kindness, and who had
so hospitably entertained me at his mother’s house
after my ankle had been injured by my fall into the
gorge which Thunderbolt had crossed in his famous
leap. For some reason or other Thunderbolt had
conceived a dislike for Mr. Clarke. He would not
tell me why, but I fancy he thought the selector a
canter, because whenever they met Mr, Clarke did his
best to turn the outlaw from his lawless way of living,
advancing moral arguments in support of his advice.
However that may be, Thunderbolt tore the letter
open, and when he saw that it contained a cheque


he said with a rather bitter sneer, “ I’m afraid, Bill,
that canting humbug Clarke will have to whistle for
his two quid!”
I was up in arms at once, for I liked Mr. Clarke
and all his family, and I felt, besides, deeply indebted
to them for their kindness to me.
“ Why, Fred,” I cried, “ the cheque is no good to
us in any case, and even if it was, he is our friend,
and we are bound to send it along to him!”
“ Bah!” snarled the outlaw. “Heis no friend of
mine; a damned amateur sky pilot like him! Not
much!”
He folded up the cheque and began to tear it across.
But I darted forward and snatched it out of his
hands. “Heis my friend!” I cried angrily; “ and
you are a cad, Fred, to think of injuring him! I
shall post it to him at the first town we come to!”
Thunderbolt turned purple with rage at my daring
to cross his will. “Give that back to me at once!”
he commanded savagely.
We confronted each other at that moment with
no love in either of our hearts, and the spirit of each
most thoroughly aroused. I think that mine was at
first the harder part to play, for although I felt myself
to be in the right, I had so long been accustomed to
j


yield to Thunderbolt’s lightest wish with the implicit
and unquestioning obedience of a child to its parent,
that the sudden break in our affectionate relationship
made me, angry as I was, feel cold all over and almost
sick. But once having chosen my course it was not
in my nature to turn back, whatever the cost, and I
faced him, tremulously no doubt, yet with a determi-
nation equal to his own.
Putting the cheque in my pocket, I folded my arms,
and, trying hard to speak quietly, I said; “ Fred, old
man, you are in the wrong, and you ought to know
it!”
He eyed me for a long minute, biting his lips, and
with both hands tightly clenched. He was so evi-
dently fighting for self-control that I felt a warm flood
of pity swell my heart for him, and, impulsively start-
ing forward, I placed my hand on his shoulder.
“ Fred, old man!” I muttered pleadingly. But he
shook me off with a gesture of contempt, and, swing-
ing on his heel, he marched away.
It was the first little rift within the lute of our
friendship. For, although we never reverted to the
subject,and soon to all appearances we were good com-
rades again, I could never afterwards bring myself
to feel quite the same to him. It was not that I liked
him less, but I did not, indeed, I could not, respect him


so much once I had discovered that he was capable of
committing a mean and petty act.
I may say that I posted Mr. Clarke’s cheque to him
about a week later at the Cobbadah post-office.


CHAPTER XII.
AN EVENTFUL MEETING.
For a long while after the Barraba-Bingara coach
robbery, it was quite impossible for Thunderbolt tc
visit his wife owing to the constant surveillance main-
tained by the police over his little homestead.
So greatly nevertheless did he wish to see her and
so much did he fret at his enforced absence from her
side that in very desperation at last he determined
upon a double outrage to be performed at Moonbi and
Ben Lomond, two places widely separated, within as
short a time as possible, calculating to confuse the
police thereby, and throw them entirely off his trail.
His plan necessitated a ride so far and fast that it
could only be accomplished by securing relays of
horses en route. Difficulties, however, Thunderbolt
delighted in, and once having conceived the idea he
was soon prepared to carry it out.
The first robbery was accomplished early in the
morning without an incident, for there were no pas-
sengers in the coach, and the driver yielded at the


summons with praiseworthy promptitude. We then
rode off as fast as we could travel to Balala station.
Dismounting there we left our knocked-up horses in
the bush, and boldly abstracted two well-fed thorough-
breds from the stables, mounted upon which we pro-
ceeded at a breakneck speed to Abbington station. We
arrived about nine o’clock in the evening, whereupon
cautiously approaching the homestead we soon got
hold of a Chinese cook, who informed us, under pres-
sure, that Superintendent Brown and another con-
stable had put up at the station for the night. We
gagged the Chinaman, and having tied him to a tree
for safety’s sake, we crept up to the house, and peer-
ing through the windows we soon verified our inform-
ant’s story. The two policemen were seated in the
diningroom, chatting with the squatter over a friendly
glass of whisky. Thunderbolt uttered a low chuckle
of amusement as he surveyed that peaceful little scene,
but after a moment’s contemplation he led the way
with great caution towards the stables, passing en
route the kitchen, where all the station hands were
gathered, smoking and yarning about the fire. We
found the policemen’s horses in the stable yard, and
so well did we like their appearance that we immedi-
ately resolved to apply them to our own requirements.
Having caught and saddled them, we led them 3S


softly as possible out of the yard, and away from the
station, without exciting in the act the least attention.
As we mounted, Thunderbolt remarked to me in a tone
of triumph, “ Well, Bill, old man, if the ‘ traps ’ don’t
soon catch us, we’ll have to turn and catch them!”
Our new mounts were so fresh and hardy that we
finished our journey as daylight was breaking, arriv-
ing at our destination in excellent time to stick up the
coach. The affair passed over very tamely, for once
again we encountered no opposition. But much to
our disappointment neither did we make much money;
for the mailbags were almost empty, and we were
obliged to be satisfied with a paltry four pounds.
After a brief halt to rest our fagged horses, we
doubled on our tracks (following Thunderbolt’s
original plan), and proceeded towards Barraba, but
very slowly in order that the news of our latest crime
might precede us. The consequence was exactly as
the outlaw had anticipated. The police, who kept
watch and ward over Thunderbolt’s home, did not
dream that he would dare to venture thitherwards so
soon, believing, as was indeed only natural (since they
were unaware of the full extent of his cunning and
temerity) that on the contrary he would be occupied
in putting as great a distance as possible between him-
self and them. We found, therefore, on our arrival


at Barraba that those of our hunters whom we wished
particularly to outwit had set off at a gallop for the
scene of our latest exploit immediately the news of it
had reached them, and we must actually have passed
each other on our several ways; perhaps, quite closely,
for although Thunderbolt had kept to the bush, we had
never gone very far from the road.
We put up that night at the outlaw’s house, where
we were received with expressions of the most ex-
travagant delight. The meeting indeed between
Thunderbolt and his wife, the poor half-caste, Sun-
day, was extremely affecting, for they had been long
apart. She threw herself, weeping with joy, into
her husband’s arms, and Thunderbolt’s eyes were not
free from tears as he responded to her embrace. Soon
afterwards, however, the usual wild merrymaking
and carouse, which ever attended his infrequent home-
comings, commenced, but, as I was feeling out of
sorts that evening, I took an early opportunity to
escape from the revellers, and strolled out to the gate
that opened on the main road. The night was very
dark and gloomy, strangely in sympathy with my
mood. The sight of Thunderbolt’s warm and affec-
tionate welcome by his family had previously de-
pressed me. It made me feel lonely and miserable,
and altogether out in the cold. I said to myself:


“Thunderbolt has a home, outlaw as he is, with a
price on his head; but I have none!” For well I
knew that did I venture to revisit the home I had de-
serted my stepfather would have gloried at the chance
of securing and handing me over to the police, while
of all the others my poor old mother alone would have
been even faintly glad to see me. The thought of
her brought an aching lump to my throat, and hot
tears to my eyes. I struggled for a while to sup-
press my emotion, but overcome with misery at last
I laid my forehead on the rail of the fence and wept
unrestrainedly. How long I stayed there Ido not
know. I was far too wretched to take account of time.
But at length I was aroused by the sounds of horses'
hoofs upon the road. I thought it might be the police,
and, hastily drying my tears, I waited with every nerve
on strain, ready to make a dash for the house to
give the alarm.
A moment later, however, a man came riding up
the track alone, and my fears evaporated. Dismount-
ing at the gate, he threw his bridle over the post, and
then, standing still, he struck a match, and began to
light his pipe. We were only separated by a yard,
and presently he saw me. With a little start of
astonishment, he held the match above his head, and
in that instant our recognition was mutual.


“Ted Clarke!” I cried.
“ Well, Bill, old man,” said he. “Is this where
you are? I have come over purposely to see you.”
“ What for?” I demanded, stepping back a pace, for
his manner was solemn, indeed almost threatening.
But he held up one hand. “ Don’t think for a mo-
ment, boy, that I came here to injure you,” he de-
clared, with earnestness. “ I would not hurt a hair
of your head, Will, as well you ought to know.”
“ You were very good to me when my ankle was
hurt,” I muttered. “ I’ve not forgotten that, Mr.
Clarke, and I’m very grateful for it.”
“ I did not know who you were then, my boy,” he
replied. “ But ever since I have known I have been
trying to get hold of you. You are wondering why,”
he continued, presently, “ Well, lad, I’ll not keep you
long in doubt. We all took a fancy to you when you
stayed at our place, and it was a great shock to us to
discover that you had taken —so young a lad as you,
Bill—to so cursed and wicked a life as bushranging.”
I hung my head before him, but, though I tried
hard enough, I could not find a word to say.
“ It’s an ungodly game you are playing,” continued
Mr. Clarke. “It must end badly, Bill. Give it up,
my lad. Your poor old mother is fretting her life
away about you. Your crimes are tearing her heart


to pieces. If you could see her day after day sitting,
worn away with the sorrow and disgrace you have
brought upon her, you would not hesitate, for I think
you have a heart. Give it up, lad. Give it up!”
I felt the tears trickling down my cheeks again,
but still I could not speak. Mr. Clarke put a kind
hand on my shoulder, and said, gently, “ Isn’t it better,
Will, to suffer a short term of imprisonment, as you
would if you gave yourself up to the police now, than
to keep on in this reckless way of yours. It can only
end in your being shot down like a dog in the bush
at last, or in dying a felon’s death on the gallows!”
A big sob tore at my throat, and all that he had
said of my mother made me wish to die there and then,
but in spite of my misery and a sudden wild longing
to follow this disinterested and good man’s advice,
the memory of Thunderbolt’s many kindnesses to me,
and the protection he had given me in my hour of
need, held me in chains. Moreover, I had vowed
never to leave him. “ I wish to God I was dead,” I
blurted out, half-choking with emotion. “ But I can’t
desert Thunderbolt, Mr. Clarke. I’d be a low coward
if I did. I can’t; I can’t, indeed.”
He would have continued his entreaties, and, per-
haps, who knows, he might have succeeded in per-
suading me to his wishes, but fate willed it that at


that instant the door of the house opened, and
Thunderbolt’s voice called to us.
“ Will!” he shouted. “ Will, where are you ? Is
that you talking out there?”
There was nothing for it, but to answer him, and
advance to the house, which we did. But Thunder-
bolt greeted my good angel so coldly that Mr. Clarke
did not care to remain very long, and we parted pre-
sently with a silent handshake, not to meet again—for
years. I can, however, truthfully aver that the
words addressed to me by Mr. Clarke that night were
never afterwards forgotten, and they planted in my
heart the seeds of a disposition which eventually bore
fruit in sincere repentance and atonement.
May God bless Ted Clarke wherever he may be,
and whether living or dead. I owe him more than I
can ever repay.


CHAPTER XIII.
IN THE MIRE.
Next morning, at break of day, we took leave of the
outlaw’s family, and set out for a tract of very wild
and rugged country, situated some twenty miles from
Bundarra, and in a direction in which we felt sure
that the police would not think of looking for us. It
was a melancholy journey, for Thunderbolt brooded
over his enforced separation from his wife, and I, for
my part, was unable to rid myself of the recollection
of my chat with Mr. Clarke on the previous night.
I kept thinking constantly of the future which lay
before me. Mr. Clarke had told me that unless I
gave up bushranging, I could only end in one of two
ways—either I must be shot like a wild dog in the
bush, or die upon the gallows! Neither was a plea-
sant picture to contemplate, and yet I could not deny
the truth that they presented; nor could I devise any
other escape for myself than was entailed in the de-
liberate desertion of a man who had treated me as an
attached father might treat his favourite child. Small


wonder then that I felt miserably dejected, for al-
though I had begun to detest a life of crime, and I
wanted to give up bushranging, I was tied to
Thunderbolt by a vow, and, moreover, I liked him so
well that I felt I would almost as lief die as desert
him.
We reached our destination before I had come to
any definite conclusion as to my future conduct, but
that night I determined that I would do my best to
reform Thunderbolt and induce him, if I could, to
lead an honest life. This resolution gave me great
comfort at the moment, but looking back upon it now
I cannot help remarking, between a smile and a sigh,
on my youthful self-confidence and vanity. As may
very easily be imagined, I failed signally in the task
I undertook so hopefully. It is true I set about it
as sincerely as possible, and for a couple of days we
spent most of our time in arguing and discussing
moralities and the hereafter. Thunderbolt, however,
was more than my match in such a contest. He had
read a number of atheistical books, and his memory
was so prodigious that he was able to reply to the
heartfelt, but stilted expression of my convictions—
with reams of finely rounded sententious sounding
periods, written by men who in their wicked pride
of intellect had dared to deny the goodness of God


and the truths of Holy Writ. It is with mortifi-
cation I confess that I yielded him the victory at last,
and even joined with him in scoffing at sacred things;
not because he had convinced me, but because I was
unable to answer him convincingly, and I was ashamed
to keep silence. That same false shame, moreover,
quickly betrayed me into deeper sin. I pretended to
agree with him when he declared for a short life and
a merry one; and because he had jeered at what he
called my “ silly fit of repentance,” I longed for an
opportunity to show him that I could out-Herod
Herod, even though in my heart of hearts the while
I was hating myself for my weakness and vainly sigh-
ing for deliverance from the pit into which I had
fallen.
On the afternoon of the third day of our conceal-
ment we roamed abroad and chanced upon a man
who informed us that the Barraba coach on the mor-
row would carry a large parcel of gold to Bingera.
Now as I had been bragging of what I would do in
order to prove to Thunderbolt how perfectly I had
recovered from my desire to reform I needs must
urge him to stick up the coach and steal the gold. He
pointed out to me that in all human probability the
gold would be accompanied by a police escort, but I
laughed at his fears and dared him to essay the deed.


A little while earlier I had been entreating him to
abjure crime. I still hated the thought of crime,
and yet I found myself its active and mischievous
agent, scarcely conscious of how the change had come
about, and certain of only three things in the world,
that I was a loathsome coward, a traitor to my con-
science, and the most miserably unhappy creature in
New South Wales.
Thunderbolt, however, was quite deceived. He
declared that I was a credit to his training, and he
gave me a lecture on recklessness, that was more than
half sincere. I answered him with taunts which
stung him to retort with deeds, and he forthwith led
the way to the “ Devil’s Elbow,” a place that seemed
to have been especially designed by Providence to
enable robbers to pursue their calling. It was perched
on the side of a rocky mountain, and overlooked a
creek into which the Barraba road dipped after de-
scribing a circuit of the hill. The country thereabouts
was, moreover, so wild and rugged that escape was
easy, and pursuit well nigh impossible once the depre-
dators had secured a fair start. We camped in the
pass that night, and early on the ensuing morning con-
cealed our horses over the ridge within a short dis-
tance of the road. We then hid ourselves among the
rocks that overhung the creek, and waited for the


coach to come along. It should have arrived at about
ii, but it was an hour late, and our patience was
strained to the limit when it finally appeared, toiling
round the mountain-side, enveloped in a cloud of dust.
A glance showed us two constables, dressed in plain
clothes, seated on the box seat beside the driver, and
two others inside the vehicle.
“ Hawks aboard, Bill 1” said Thunderbolt. “ I ex-
pected it. She is not ours!”
“ Nonsense!” I retorted. “ Police are just as easy
to handle as civilians. You have only to get the drop
on them. Come along, Fred!”
But he shook his head. “ You are a young fool,”
he remarked; “ those fellows have their pistols in their
hands. Besides, my rule is never to attack the police
unless I can’t help myself!”
“ Well, Fred,” said I, “ if I did not know you so
well, I’d call you a coward!”
What possessed me I don’t know. Some devil
seemed to be driving me on. Thunderbolt frowned
darkly, and muttered in an undertone, “ My courage
has been proved a hundred times!”
He assured me afterwards that he had not intended
to sneer at me; but I thought he had laid a jeering
emphasis on the word “my,” as though to insinuate


that it behoved me to rebut a less defensible charge of
cowardice than that which I had made against him.
In one second I had sprung to my feet, the blood
boiling in my veins with rage. The coach had by
then crossed the creek, and was lumbering noisily up
the opposite incline, nearly a hundred yards away. It
left as it proceeded a tail of dust so thick that even
the horses were hidden from our view. Leaping
down the road, withbut a word to Thunderbolt of my
intention I set off after the coach as fast as my legs
could carry me, and speedily caught up with it. In
another moment I had clambered up behind and rested
in spread-eagle fashion across the canvas covering of
the mail bags, clinging on for'dear life to the straps
that held them in place. I had so far acted without
premeditation, animated only with a. blindly angry
impulse to perform some desperate deed that might
put Thunderbolt’s caution to shame. I fancy that
I had half thought of climbing over the coach to the
box and clapping my pistol to the policemen’s heads.
If that were so, however, I soon changed my mind, for
when, as presently I did, I realised my dangerous
proximity to the accredited guardians of law and
order, I found my anger cooling, and my courage
oozing out of my fingers’ ends. The driver and the
constables (never dreaming that they carried such an
K


eavesdropper behind them, for the dust and the noise
of the wheels had covered my movements) were chat-
ting confidentially together about Thunderbolt the out-
law and William Monckton—my humble self. I
listened to them for two or three minutes, and although
I could not make out all that was said, I heard enough
to be sure that a trap had been laid for us, and that the
policemen were ardently hoping that we would mis-
take them for civilians and attack the coach. I
gathered, moreover, that there was in reality no gold
aboard, but that the police had spread such a report
abroad in order, as one of them remarked, “ to put salt
on Thunderbolt’s tail!”
By that time I was feeling pretty sick and heartily
sorry that I was where I was. But the idea of return-
ing empty-handed to my leader and submitting to the
jeers with which he would inevitably receive me, was
so unendurably revolting that between fear and rage
I was on the verge of despair. Of a sudden, how-
ever, a plan occurred to me by means of which I might
redeem my reputation for courage as far as Thunder-
bolt was concerned, even though I sank lower in my
own esteem. With a gasp of wicked joy I pulled out
my jack-knife and began to hack at the canvas that
covered the mails. Very soon I had made a big
hole, through which I pulled out one of the bags and


a sack of rations, which we afterwards discovered be-
longed to the police. These I threw down upon the
road, and I was just dipping in to get another mail-
bag when my revolver slipped out of my hand and fell
through the hole in the canvas to the door of the
coach.
I was so startled by the suddenness of my mishap,
and so frightened by the crash, that I slipped to the
ground, and darting to the roadside cast myself flat
upon my face behind a rock. I had taken needless
trouble, however, for the rumbling and groaning of the
coach had drowned the noise I had made, and the con-
stables, hearing nothing unusual through the din, did
not even turn their heads.
When the coach had disappeared behind a bend
in the hill, I arose, feeling very brave indeed, and I
marched up to inspect my booty with all the pride of
a peacock. The two bags were as much as I could
carry, but I made shift to cast them athwart my
shoulders, and I staggered along gaily beneath their
weight towards the spot where I had left Thunderbolt.
But he saw me coming from afar, and he advanced
to meet me with such an expression of wonder and ad-
miration on his face that I had my work cut out to
keep my countenance.
“ Bill, old man,” he cried heartily, as I cast the bags


at his feet. “ Give me your hand. You are the
pluckiest lad in Australia, and I’m proud of you!”
Miserable little wretch that I was, I accepted his
praise as if I had -truly deserved it, and not only that,
when he had finished lauding me, what must I do but
begin to brag and boast and puff myself out like a
Yankee Cheap Jack praising his wares, until it was
a wonder that Thunderbolt did not box my ears to
stop my vain and idiotic vapourings. I make this
confession reservelessly, because I wish all who read
it to understand how low a person may fall who allows
fear of ridicule and pride to be his guiding stars. The
one had prevented me from mending my ways, even
while wishing with all my soul to do so, and the other
had made me a liar. So that now as it were, in spite
of myself, I had become an infinitely worse and more
wicked lad than I was before Mr. Clarke had given me
the kind and wise advice that had so touched my heart
and stirred my conscience. Nor is this all, the know-
ledge of my evil case so hardened me that
for a great while thereafter I would not
listen to my conscience, because I knew how bit-
terly it would condemn me, and I was as one lost to
every good feeling, and ready to plunge into any
villainy, just so that I might drown thought in action,
and thereby lull my self-contempt to sleep.


In my opinion pride is the most damnable sin in
the calendar, for it makes its victims love themselves
too much, and when it can find no virtue in them to
feed upon, it drives them on to try and outstrip their
fellow beings in vice; since it requires for its susten-
ance pre-eminence of any sort. From that day, for-
ward it was my ambition to become a more notorious
bushranger than Thunderbolt—while the sun was up.
Of a night, however, after we had both retired, and
when I had either to shut my eyes or gaze up into
the star-spangled Heavens it was but seldom that I
could successfully defy the self-accusing reflections
that would arise to plague my mind in spite of all that
I could do, and often I cried myself to sleep.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE “DUMMY” PISTOL.
The mailbag yielded us £5 in cash, and the sack of
rations contained, as well as a good supply of pro-
visions, several delicacies to which we had long been
strangers, such as pots of jam and other tinned
dainties. We had quite a feast, therefore, at the ex-
pense of the police, and Thunderbolt paid me so many
compliments during the meal that for a time I was
intensely elated. Later in the day we turned our
faces towards the Moonbi, it being the outlaw’s inten-
tion to once more rob the Moonbi mail. When we
arrived at our point of destination (at an early hour
on the following day), Thunderbolt declared that it
would not do to stick up the coach unless we “ ap-
peared ” to be properly equipped for the enterprise.
He referred to my unarmed condition, for as I have
previously related, I had lost my revolver while sneak-
ing the mailbag from the Barraba coach. I did not
know how he designed to repair my want, but I was
soon to see. Strolling up to a currajong tree, he


cut a small crooked branch therefrom, which he soon
lopped and fashioned into the shape of a revolver.
While I was still breathlessly admiring his handiwork,
he approached the roadside fence and twisted away
from the rail a piece of wire. This he screwed into
my sham pistol so as to form a hammer, and so very
deftly that at a few yards’ distance it looked for all
the world as venomous as a real weapon held at full
cock. When the proper time came, we concealed
ourselves at either side of the road at a place where
it inclined gently upwards. The coach presently ap-
proached, whereupon, springing from our cover, we
darted up to the horses and brought them quickly to
a standstill, presenting at the same time our one real
and one “ dummy ” pistol at the driver, with the usual
command to bail up. He submitted without a protest,
and Thunderbolt, having directed me to keep him
covered, marched over to the door of the coach. Pre-
sently I saw five passengers—three gentlemen and two
ladies—descend to the road, and stand with their
hands above their heads. Thunderbolt bowed low
to the ladies, and addressed them in the kindest terms.
He assured them that there was no occasion for them
to be the least alarmed and that he would rather die
than steal the value of a pin from either of them. The
men, however, he searched closely, and then attacked


the mail bags, while I kept our victims awed with my
“ dummy.” The letter-sorting yielded such hand-
some results (about £2O) that the outlaw became
merry, and began to chaff his male victims.
“ You are really very foolish to be frightened of a
boy 1” he said to them. “ Why don’t you rush him ?
I don’t believe he has the heart to fire at you!”
“ Haven’t I?” I cried; “ let one of them move a
finger and he will see!”
“Bah!” retorted Thunderbolt, with a grin; “I’d
let you fire at me all day with that revolver of yours,
for sixpence an hour!”
“ Gentlemen,” he added, turning to my prisoners,
“ I’m going now -for our horses. Take my advice,
and while I am away, rush the boy; he is a poor shot,
and his pistol is of local make!”
With that he strode off, shouting with laughter
at his joke, to where our horses were tethered.
For a moment I was afraid that the passengers
would follow Thunderbolt’s advice, and turn his jest
into a tragedy. They were, however, far too alarmed
to do any such thing, and they stood like mutes until
the outlaw returned, leading our horses, with the
bridles over his arm. Just then an accident hap-
pened which gave us both food for subsequent amused
remembrance. The outlaw had almost reached my


Thunderbolt Bowed Low to the Ladies. [Page 151


side when one of the horses, startled by a fluttering
piece of paper (one of the letters from the rifled mail
bags) drew back violently. The bridle jerked the
outlaw’s hand in which he held his pistol ready for
use, and the weapon was inadvertently discharged.
The report was greeted with loud shrieks from the
lady passengers, one of whom sank to the ground,
swooning with terror. The driver of the mail, evi-
dently believing that my “ dummy ” had exploded,
shouted out in angry tones, “ Look here, Fred, you
ought to stop that d d boy; he’ll be shooting some-
one yet!” The tableau was curiously humorous, and
yet dramatic. Thunderbolt was so surprised at his
recognition by the driver that he stood bolt still, star-
ing at the man. I was startled, and a little terrified,
for I had not seen the accident, and for a moment I
fancied that the police had stolen up and fired upon
us. Our gentlemen victims, influenced by the driver’s
speech, imagined that I had fired at one of them, and
they all began to speak at once, imploring me to be
careful, and protesting that they had done nothing to
deserve being shot at. The lady who had retained her
senses, maintained a shrill outcry, waving and wring-
ing her hands, while even the horses were snorting
and trembling. Thunderbolt was the first to recover.
Uttering a gay laugh, he strode over to the lady who


had fainted, and kneeling beside her in the dust of the
road, he began to chafe her hands. She soon awoke,
and when he saw she was conscious, Thunderbolt
courteously assisted her into the coach, assuring her
the while that his revolver had only been discharged
by accident, and that no one regretted more than he
the shock she had received.
The pair of us then mounted our horses, and after
making a sweeping bow to the ladies Thunderbolt led
the way at a smart gallop towards Oaky Creek, where
we had decided to camp for the night.


CHAPTER XV.
AN ALARM, FALSE OR ____ ?
We camped that night within a mile of the Oaky
Creek Hotel, and in the morning we proceeded to the
house, in order to procure a bottle of rum. As we
rode up we saw two miners standing on the verandah
busily quarrelling with each other. We dismounted,
and watched them for a while, for it seemed to us that
the discussion would end in a fight, the men were so
angry. After a minute or two, however, Thunder-
bolt slipped into the bar, and made his purchase. Re-
turning to the verandah, he leaned against a post; and
surveyed the now furious disputants. Of a sudden
one of them appealed to him to give them a ring and
fair play.
“ Oh!” said Thunderbolt. “ I’ll be umpire with
pleasure, and see you both get fair play. Step out
on the grass, and fight it out like men!”
The men followed his direction at once, and the
outlaw was hard at work describing a ring on the turf
when the landlord appeared. He looked hard at


Thunderbolt, and making a peculiar sign with his
hand, said in a low voice.
“ Look here, you fellows, you’ll have to stop this
row. You know there are police in the house!”
Both Thunderbolt and I perceived at once the true
meaning of the landlord’s well-intentioned hint, and
after a quick glance at each other, we simultaneously
started for our horses.
At that moment, two constables in uniform came
out on the verandah, no doubt attracted by the row.
We mounted quietly under their very eyes, and
moved carelessly away. The police stared at us for
a moment, and then they must have suspected our
identity, for they shouted out, “ Hi! you fellows, don’t
go away!”
Thunderbolt winked at me, and turned in his saddle.
“ No more drink for me to-day, thanks, old chap!”
he cried back. “ I’ve had enough!”
“Ride for your life. Bill!” he added to me, in an
undertone, and in a second we were off at a gallop.
The police, however, did not follow us. Probably
their horses were not saddled, but in any case they
could not have caught us with the start we had
secured.
We held a conclave over our lunch that day, and
unanimously decided that, in consideration of recent


events, the New England district was a good place
to get out of as quickly as possible. We therefore
made our way to the mountainous region about the
head waters of the Manning River. There we re-
mained for about a month, wandering about like
gypsies, but doing nothing to attract attention. When
we ran short of provisions one of us would disguise
himself as a swagman looking for work, and visit a
settlement to buy the food we needed. Otherwise
we had no excitement, and we passed our time plea-
santly if tamely, yarning, singing, and frequently
carousing, for we took care never to go short of rum
or gin. Sometimes Thunderbolt, who was a first-rate
cook, would as an especial treat to me, make a huge
“ double decker ” in a big quart pot, or “ Jackshay.”
The “ double deckers ” are known as “ sea-pies ” now,
and much art is devoted to their construction. But
although I have tasted many since that time, made
by professed cooks in well-appointed kitchens, not
one of them could compare with the savory double
deckers which Thunderbolt used to bake for me, in his
old Jackshay over a greenwood fire in the wild, open
bush at the head of the Manning River.
One night we got a terrible fright. We had camped
on the banks of a small creek, and were enjoying a
reposeful slumber, when we were suddenly awakened


about 12 o’clock by sounds of leaves and sticks crack-
ling under the hoofs of horses. The darkness was
profound. After a whispered interchange of words,
to assure ourselves that we were both awake, we got
to our hands and knees, and peered about us. Pre-
sently, over a slope of rising ground I caught sight
of several dark, slowly-moving forms. Thunderbolt
perceived them at the same instant, and seizing me by
the shoulder he whispered in my ear, “ Up, Bill, the
hawks are on us!”
In a flash we got noiselessly to our feet, but for
a while we stood there stupidly, not knowing what to
do, for sounds now came to our ears from all direc-
tions that proved we were completely surrounded.
Thunderbolt, however, soon collected his wits, and
ordered me to take to the creek as our one hope of
escape. We had only to creep backwards a few paces
to reach the edge. We then slipped over and dropped
to the bed, which was about five feet deep. Scarcely,
however, had our feet touched the bottom when a
rush was made in our direction. The sounds in-
formed us that at least half a dozen horses were charg-
ing us, and we had no doubt but that the police had at
last cornered the quarry for whom they had so long
hunted in vain.
Thunderbolt gave my shoulder a convulsed grip,


and muttered, “ Good-bye, Bill, old man. I reckon
our time has come. It is fight or die now!”
He then stood erect, with his head and shoulders
over the bank, and fired four shots rapidly in the face
of our charging enemy. I had no revolver, but I
drew out my jack-knife and desperately resolved to
sell my life as dearly as possible. After Thunderbolt’s
last shot, there followed a second’s breathless still-
ness. Then we heard a wild, shrill neigh, and a
hundred dark forms whinneying loudly dashed along
the bank of the creek in a mad gallop towards the hills.
Our supposed enemies had been a mob of wild horses!
For several minutes neither of us moved. The
shock of our first fear and surprise had been so great
and painful that the relief also came to us as a shock.
I felt thoroughly unstrung, and so upset that I was
half-inclined to burst out laughing or crying—l
scarcely cared which. Then Thunderbolt’s voice
came to me, and it was so hoarse that I hardly recog-
nised it.
“ That is the first time in my life that I’ve been
beaten for a move!” he said. “ And, more than that,
it’s the first time in my life I have understood the
meaning of fear. Bill, old man, listen to my teeth
—they are chattering!”
But so, too, were my own. Presently we crawled


out of the creek, and, returning to our camp, we piled
up fresh wood on the fire until we had made a big
blaze, before which we sat down to try and recover
our composure. Neither of us could endure the
thought of wooing sleep again that night, so we sat
there side by side, until the dawn, talking over the
affair in all its aspects. Thunderbolt, who was a
superstitious man, was strongly of opinion that the
wild horses had been sent by Fate to warn us that we
should at once depart from that locality, under pain of
some dreadful calamity. He spoke so positively that
I was deeply impressed, and it did not take much per-
suasion to induce me to agree to set out on the fol-
lowing morning for Grafton. After that he began to
tell me ghost stories, which made the blood curdle in
my veins. I listened, shivering with terror, longing
for him to give over, and yet not daring to ask him to
change the subject lest he should laugh at me for my
fear. I shall never forget the joy with which I wel-
comed the rising of the sun. It dispelled the gloomy
phantoms of my imagination as by the touch of an en-
chanter’s wand, and I got to my feet and stretched
out my arms with a sigh of pure delight. Thunder-
bolt also arose, and, leaving his last grisly narrative
for ever unfinished, he cried out “ Thank God, Bill,
we are alive and free!”


Governed by a common impulse we turned and
exchanged glances, and into our minds flashed the
same thought, “ I never expected to see this day!”
We looked at each other furtively and sheepishly
for a moment, and then burst out laughing.
“ I was a fool, Bill!” said Thunderbolt.
“ So was I, Fred 1” I echoed heartily.
“ By heaven, it’s good to be alive,” said the outlaw
with a shudder.
“ One lives such a little while in any case, and one
is dead such a long time! But, Great Caesar, what
is that over there?”
I followed the direction of his pointing finger, and
saw about twenty paces from the camp fire the figure
of a horse lying apparently asleep among the ferns
near the bank of the creek. We crossed over at once
to examine it more closely, but it did not stir on our
approach, and to our surprise we found presently that
the beast was dead. It was one of the wild mob, a
finely-shaped animal, and it had fallen a victim to
Thunderbolt’s revolver on the previous night, when
we thought that the police were charging up. Two
of the outlaw’s bullets had found their billets in its
body. One had struck it on the shoulder blade, the
other had pierced it to the heart.
L


For a moment or two we stared into each other’s
eyes, and then Thunderbolt muttered very solemnly,
“ Bill, this is the seal on our warning. We must not
linger here even for breakfast!”
Five minutes later we were on the road to Grafton,
and just in time, for some three days afterwards we
learned that by an extraordinary coincidence a strong
force of police, guided by a black tracker, had visited
our deserted camp within a perilously short period of
our departure. We read the account of the affair in
a Sydney newspaper. It was headed in big letters,
“ Hot on the heels of Thunderbolt,” and it described
how the police had crept up on their hands and knees,
surrounded the still smoking camp fire of the bush-
rangers in the grey light of early morning, how they
had, on a given signal sprang to their feet and rushed
forward, only to find the birds once more flown.
Needless to say, after that experience Thunderbolt
grew more superstitious than ever— and I must con-
fess that I too for a long while thoroughly believed
that Providence had especially intervened to save us
from capture or destruction. I had heard but little
of the long arm of coincidence in those days.


CHAPTER XVI.
THE PLUCKY HAWKER.
Near Newton-Boyd we overtook a hawker, who was
journeying along from place to place in a waggon-
ette filled with goods. Thunderbolt rode up to him,
and thrust a pistol in his face. “ Bail up!” he com-
manded curtly; “I’m Thunderbolt!”
The hawker stopped his horse at once, but he did
not appear to be alarmed.
“ What do you want ?” he coolly demanded.
“ Your money or your life!” replied the outlaw.
The hawker shook his head, and said very quietly:
“ Oh, no you don’t. Captain; or, if you do, you belie
your reputation. It’s not the poor who are frightened
of you one little bit. I’ve heard a lot about you to
your credit.”
“No blarney!” snapped my leader. “ Out with
your purse, and be quick about it!”
The hawker shrugged his shoulders, and produced,,
after searching his pockets, ten sovereigns.
“ I’m disappointed in you, Captain,” he remarked,


as he passed it over. “ I never thought you’d rob a
poor man.”
“A poor man!”
“Yes, that’s all the money I have, and I need it
badly. Say, if you want to rob me, take what goods
you like out of the trap, and leave me my cash!”
“ I suppose you want the money for your poor
widowed mother, eh?” jeered Thunderbolt.
“I don’t!”
“ For your wife and six starving nippers, then ?”
“ I want it to buy a fresh stock of the things I’m
run out of,” replied the hawker, with great dignity.
“And, see here, Captain Thunderbolt, when I feel
like lying I can lie without your assistance, and be
damned to you!”
Thunderbolt looked hard at the fellow for a mo-
ment, and then he observed with a smile: “ You don’t
seem scared —and that’s a fact!”
“ Scared!” sneered the hawker, “ There’s only
one thing I’m scared of, and that is that we’ll be inter-
rupted before you hand me back my money!”
Thunderbolt laughed heartily. “ You’ll wait a
long time,” he declared, “ unless you give me a better
reason than you have found yet.”
“As man to man,” said the hawker earnestly, “ I
tell you I’ll be put in a hole if you keep that coin.


I can’t say more, and I wouldn’t if I could. If you
are the good fellow people say you are, you’ll act ac-
cordingly; if not, kindly allow me to proceed on my
way, and as well as the money, I’ll make you a present
of my contempt.”
“ You are a man!” cried Thunderbolt, “ and a good
sort besides. Here, take the coin!”
The hawker silently received the money, and tucked
it away in his pocket, his face as grave as that of a
judge.
“ What are you waiting for ?” he asked, a second
later, seeing that the outlaw did not move.
“ Thanks,” said Thunderbolt.
“Bosh!” retorted the hawker; “what thanks do
you deserve? The money was always mine, though
it had changed hands. Good day!”
He nodded to us both, then, .chirruping to his horse,
he leisurely resumed his interrupted journey, leaving
us petrified with astonishment.
“ Well, I’m d d!” gasped Thunderbolt, a full
minute later.
“Of all the cheek!” I cried, indignantly.
“ Cheek! Rubbish!” he retorted. “ The hawker
was right, and, damme, but I like the fellow for his
backbone. I tell you, Bill, I hate those d curs
who are afraid to speak out what they think, just


because I stick them up. That chap was a man to
his finger-tips, and I feel better for having met him!
But, I tell you what, Bill—l’m mighty glad he is not
a member of the police force. If he was, I guess
he’d catch me, or die trying!”


CHAPTER XVII.
A BRUSH WITH THE POLICE.
Three days later we reached Tamworth, where we
camped for four and twenty hours on the banks of
the Peel River, just outside the town. While there
we were approached by an emissary of Gardener’s
gang of bushrangers, who offered Thunderbolt the
leadership of that band if he would proceed to
Bathurst, and undertake a big gold escort robbery.
Thunderbolt declined the proposal with contempt, for
he held Gardener in poor respect; but the stories that
the messenger had told us of the rich plunder to be
found in the Bathurst district, soon induced him to
change his plans, and proceed in that direction. The
consequence was that a fortnight later we stuck up
the Mudgee-Bathurst coach, and obtained a fairly
good booty. I remember the incident very well, be-
cause we found in one of the mail bags, all of which
we took on that occasion with us into the bush, a gold
watch (that had been cunningly concealed in a round


hole cut out of the leaves of a book), and because an-
other of the bags was filled with parcels of children’s
toys, socks, and other clothes. The sight of those
tiny little garments deeply affected Thunderbolt. He
said to me: “ Bill, old man, I can’t bear to think of
these kiddies wanting their toys and things. I have
kids myself!” He thereupon restored the articles to
the bag, and, bidding me follow, he mounted and rode
off at a gallop after the coach, to the driver of which
he presently handed the bag, with his blessing. In
some things, Thunderbolt was curiously human and
soft-hearted. He loved children dearly; and all brute
beasts, particularly dogs and horses. On one occa-
sion, when riding through the bush, we chanced upon
a mare that had staked herself, and was hideously
wounded. How astonished his enemies would have
been could they have seen him then. Thunderbolt)
threw himself from his horse, and walked up to the
poor animal, speaking to it the while in a voice that
shook with feeling. The mare, with an intelligence
almost human, recognised a friend in him at once,
and instead of retreating from his advance she turned
her poor head, and looked at him in a way that wrung
my heart. Just as though she had tried to speak with
her eyes, and say: “ Help me. Put me out of my
pain!” When Thunderbolt saw that no skill could


save her life, he patted her nose with one hand, and
with the other he drew out his revolver, and pressed
it to her ear. As he walked away from her dead
body, he hid his face in his hands, and he muttered
to me in a voice that told me he was much upset,
“ I can’t help it, Bill. If it was a man, I wouldn’t
care; but the poor dears can’t help themselves when
they’re hurt. Think of it, Bill. They can’t help
themselves!” The attachment I felt for Thunderbolt
was nourished on experiences such as that.
On the morning after the Mudgee coach robbery,
while we were still seated before the camp fire having
breakfast, two men, dressed like bushmen, appeared
quite suddenly and close at hand, riding towards us.
Our horses were feeding, hobbled some distance off, so
that, although we immediately suspected the new-
comers to be police, there was no chance to escape.
But Thunderbolt had previously instructed me what
to do in any such event; and our rule was that we
should stroll to the nearest tree and set our backs
against the trunk, and against each other, so that we
might not be separated or outflanked without notice,
should we be attacked.
As the horsemen approached, I sauntered up care-
lessly to a large peppermint tree that grew near by,
and leaned against it as if I was tired. Thunderbolt


followed, but came to a halt about three paces in front
of me.
“ Good morning to you,” said one of the strangers,
as both pulled up. This man acted then and after-
wards as spokesman for the pair.
“ Good morning,” Thunderbolt replied.
“ Nice day?”
“ Not bad.”
“Any chance of rain, do you think?”
“ Not if it keeps on like this,” replied Thunderbolt,
with a grin.
“We want rain pretty bad hereabouts,” said the
stranger. “ I have a farm over there, a few miles
back, and my crop will spoil if it don’t rain soon.”
“You say you are a farmer, ay?”
“ Why, certainly.”
“ Then,” said Thunderbolt, smiling broadly, “ what
is that pair of handcuffs doing under the tail of your
coat?”
The fellow clapped his hand to his back with an
exclamation of surprise, looking at the same time
extremely foolish.
“ Police, aren’t you ?” said Thunderbolt, as care-
lessly as possible. “ I saw through you at once.
You ride too straight in your saddles to pass for
bushies with people who can use their eyes.”


“ You are pretty smart, I must say!” gasped the
trooper. “ Where do you come from, my man?”
“ New England way.”
“ What are you doing here?”
“ Young Jack there ” (he pointed to me) “ and I
are going to the shearing.”
“Ohl” said the policeman, looking at him very
hard. “ Have you heard that the Mudgee coach was
stuck up yesterday?”
“ Not a word!” cried Thunderbolt. “ You’re gam-
moning, aren’t you ? Who’d dare to stick a coach up
with smart coves like you about?”
“ Some scoundrels dare anything,” replied the
trooper, frowning darkly. I suppose he was not sure
whether he was being chaffed or not.
There was silence for a bit, then the trooper said:
“If you come from New England, you must know
Thunderbolt.”
“ I do,” replied the outlaw, boldly. “ Many’s the
time poor Freddy Ward and I have camped together.
He’s a good sort, Freddy, though you fellows want him
so badly. But there, give a dog a bad name, and you
might as well hang him!”
The trooper sniffed, and remarked very sourly that
if Thunderbolt had not so many idiotic sympathisers
he would have been laid by the heels years ago.


The pair then, with a surly “ Good-day,” rode off.
You may be sure that as soon as they had disap-
peared we wasted no time in getting our horses
saddled. And it was as well we did so, for just as
we were mounting Thunderbolt’s sharp eyes detected
troopers lurking in a belt of heavy scrub about 300
yards from our camp-fire. We pretended not to have
remarked their presence, however, and set off care-
lessly in the opposite direction, keeping the while a
sharp look-out behind us. But the country was so
thickly timbered that our task was difficult, and in
the end our ears gave us the necessary warning. We
heard the crash of horses’ hoofs chasing us at the gal-
lop, and we had barely time to get our own steeds going
when the troopers appeared, charging us at a break-
neck pace, like a pair of bloodhounds, their revolvers
in their hands. Thunderbolt fired two shots over
their heads, with the idea of checking their ardour, and
then we prepared for a long chase. We had not gone
more than a mile, however, when we found that we
could no longer hear our pursuers, and we soon after-
wards pulled up in order to make sure. But it was
as we had suspected. The police, whether afraid of
our pistols or suddenly inspired with charity—l dare
not say which—had abandoned the pursuit. The
poor police! They hunted us about a lot, I must con


less, but they nearly always paid us handsomely for
the trouble by providing us with a hearty laugh at their
expense when the chase was done.


CHAPTER XVIII.
A NEW CAREER.
For the rest of that day. Thunderbolt was silent and
preoccupied. He seemed to be thinking, and when-
ever I addressed him he answered so absent-mindedly
that I soon resigned all attempts at conversation. To-
wards evening, however, he brightened up, and as we
sat at our camp fire after tea, he asked me of a sudden
how I would like to give up bushranging for a while,
and take to riding races.
“ I’d like it well,” I replied excitedly, but presently
I pointed to Combo, who stood a few yards away, with
his head hanging dejectedly between his legs, and
added, “ There’s no hope for that, though, Fred,
Combo needs a long rest. He is as poor as a crow!”
“ That’s all right,” said the outlaw. “ I know a
place where we can get a first-rate racehorse, blooded,
too. We’ll make that way to-morrow, and when we
have collared the nag, we’ll travel up to Queensland,
and scoop every country race meeting we come across.
Shearing time is on us, too, so we’ll never want for a
match!”


So it was decided, and on the morrow we made a
start for Singleton. Ten days later we arrived at
our destination. Mr. M'Dougall’s station, which was
situated near the town I have named. We camped
out in a secluded part of the run, and for a few days
kept very quiet. Thunderbolt, however, found means
at the end of that period to chum in with some of the
shepherds, and from these men he learned that Mr.
M'Dougall was engaged in training a likely young
thoroughbred at the homestead, which he expected to
shortly win for him a big race. I was not with
Thunderbolt at the time, having, at his command,
kept to our camp, lest if we were seen together our
identity might be suspected. He did not need my
help, however. With his usual boldness, he made
some excuse to get away from the shepherds, and he
rode straight up to the station. Night had fallen when
he arrived, and the men were at supper. Tying up
his horse at the stockyard fence, he marched up to
the stables, and going from one stall to another, in-
spected their contents as calmly as though he owned
the station. Being a splendid judge of horseflesh, he
very soon hit upon the colt about which the shepherds
had informed him, and having satisfied himself that
the animal was really the best of the lot presented for
his selection, he coolly slipped a halter on the icolt, and


led him away. An hour later, just as I was beginning
to wonder if some accident had happened to him, I
heard the sound of hoofs, and presently up came
Thunderbolt to our camp fire, mounted on Combo, and
leading one of the finest young racehorses I had ever
seen.
A few words explained the whole affair, but while
I still stood there lost in surprise at my leader’s daring,
he had bolted his supper and made all preparations for
departure.
“ We’ll have to ride all night, Bill,” he remarked.
“ Get to horse, lad. The sooner we are off the better
for our skins!”
“ Where to ?” I asked.
“ To Queensland, as straight as we can go!”
Strange as it may appear, the robbery of the race-
horse was not discovered until the following day, and
by that time we were in the heart of the bush and well
on our way to Tam worth.
Near Currabubula we fell in with a farmer, who in-
formed us that a two-days’ race meeting was to be
held in Tamworth, starting on the morrow, which
happened to be St. Patrick’s Day. Thunderbolt at
once decided to be present, so we pushed on and
camped that night a few miles from Tamworth, and
not far from the Somerton-road. In the morning,


at the outlaw’s desire, I cut his full brown beard to a
point, lopping off a good four inches of its length.
The alteration and improvement this made in his ap-
pearance was simply amazing, and I assured him in
perfect confidence that I did not believe even Sunday,
his wife, could recognise him. I think I have re-
marked before that Thunderbolt was a very particu-
lar man in his habits, for a bushman, being extremely
clean in his person and so on; but I fancy I have
neglected to state that in most of our journeys he
always carried in his pack a change of clothes. Such,
however, was the case, and on the occasion in question
his second suit was almost brand-new. When he put
it on, he looked a cross between a city gentleman and
a “ flash ” stockrider. But perhaps I had better de-
scribe him more exactly. His sac coat and trousers
were city cut, and plain grey tweed. Vest he had
none, but he wore a black silk handkerchief around his
waist over a soft green-coloured shirt. In place of
collar, his neck was encompassed with a scarlet silk
handkerchief. His hat was a wide-brimmed grey
felt, and finally he wore high-topped riding boots.
Altogether his appearance was gay and splendid, and
I admired him immensely.
After breakfast we rode through the bush towards
the back of the racecourse, which was situated about
M


a mile from the town on the west side of the Peel
River. Having securely concealed our horses in a
patch of thick timber, we tramped over to the clearing,
and quietly climbed the race ground fence, this move
being perfectly safe on our part, for the course was
round, and, the track only having been cleared, quite
a little forest shielded us from the observation of those
who had collected about the grandstand to witness the
races. Having presently discovered a tree that suited
our purpose, we climbed into the lower branches and
prepared to spend the day there, for neither of us cared
about running into danger unnecessarily, and we
reckoned that we could obtain all the enjoyment we
required watching the proceedings from where we
were. Thunderbolt presently pointed out to me a
section of the track, about fifty paces from our vantage
post, which looked heavy. “ That’s a nasty half fur-
long,”.he remarked. “ See, Bill, it’s thick and muddy;
they must have had rain here lately. Look how it
glistens!”
“Yes,” said I; “it’s an ugly patch for a heavy-
weight.”
“ And if I know anything about racing, I guess it
will bring some of the cracks to grief to-day,” de-
clared the outlaw, “ unless they have first-rate jockeys
up!”


“ That will give some of the light-weighted out-
siders a chance, eh, Fred?”
“ Right, lad.”
A distant bell rang at that moment, and soon we
heard the bookmakers shouting out the odds, as some
racehorses appeared on the track. The first race was
not exciting, for a poor lot engaged, and one horse
had it all his own way from the very start. The
second race, however, aroused some enthusiasm
among the crowd at the stand, and seemed to wake
them up. After that, matters were quite lively, and
we enjoyed ourselves very much. Thunderbolt and
I had a little wager on each event between ourselves.
Each selected the horse he fancied from the batch as
they took their preliminary canter, and more than once
one or the other of us selected winners. I was the
luckier, for by lunch-time I had won £4. We ate
our midday meal where we sat, having brought provi-
sions in our pockets. Soon afterwards it was evident
that the big handicap, the principal event of the day,
was about to take place, for we observed a great stii
in the distant crowd, and the shouts of the bookmakers
echoed and re-echoed through the trees. When the
din was at its loudest we heard of a sudden the sound
of footfalls quite close at hand, and presently per-
ceived a man stealing cautiously towards us from the


direction of the town. Thunderbolt gave me a swift
sign for silence, and we watched him thereafter with
the anxiety of those who are obliged to suspect
enemies in every human being they encounter. This
man, however, was certainly not a policeman, for he
was no more than five-foot-three in height. Passing
quite close to the tree in which we were perched, he
marched over to the heavier piece of track which
Thunderbolt had remarked earlier' in the day, and
there he stood for some minutes, looking silently down
upon the ground.
“ Hum!” he said, at last, speaking to himself, but
loud enough for us to hear him distinctly, “ I reckon
I’m safe enough!”
“ Don’t make too sure of that, mate!” called out
Thunderbolt.
I was so surprised to hear my leader speak that I
nearly fell off my perch. But the little stranger was
even more amazed. He stared about him in every
direction, with an expression of face so ludicrous that
I longed to burst out laughing. Not dreaming, how-
ever, of searching in the trees, he failed to perceive
us, and when he had convinced himself he was alone
he seemed more alarmed than ever. Crossing him-
self, like a good Catholic, he muttered something or


other, and began to hasten of? towards the stand, as
though he fancied the devil was after him.
But at that Thunderbolt gave a loud laugh, and
swung himself to the ground.
“ It’s only me, Colin!” he shouted.
The little man stopped dead, and looked at the out-
law very keenly.
“ That’s my name,” he said presently, “ but who the
deuce are you?”
“ Thunderbolt!”
“Rubbish!”
“I am!”
The little fellow advanced, shading his eyes with his
hand.
“ Well, I’m biowed!” he gasped at last. “ It’s you,
Fred, sure enough; but what have you done to your
beard ?”
They shook hands, and Thunderbolt commanded me
to descend.
“ There’s two of you!” cried the little man.
“My boy. Bill Monckton,” said Thunderbolt. “ Bill,
this is an old school friend of mine, Colin Nead. As
white a chap as ever lived, and the best judge of a
horse Windsor ever produced.”
Mr. Nead shook my hand, and said he was pleased


to make my acquaintance. Thunderbolt then asked
him what game he was up to, looking at the track.
“ Oh,” said Mr. Nead. “ I don’t mind telling you
about it, Fred. The fact is there are only two horses
in the big handicap that have a chance —M'Dougall’s
and Dine’s. M'Dougall’s is the better, but his jockey
is a fool, and I just heard Mac. order him to go from
the jump. Now, as I went over the track last night,
I saw that mud patch yonder. I straight off backed
Dine’s horse for all I could spare!”
“ I see; but suppose Dine’s jockey sends his mount,
too.”
“He won’t. I gave him the tip this morning to
ease up over the mud. But there goes the bell; I
must get back. Come over with me, won’t you,
Fred?”
“ I guess I’m safer here, Colin.”
“ But I’ll see you again, ay ?”
“ I don’t know, Col.”
“ Oh, rot! No one could recognise you in that
rig out. See here, Fred, I’m staying over at the pub.
yonder; you can’t miss it, it is the first one you come
to between here and Tam worth, on the main road.
Come over .and see me to-night!”
“ All right, Colin; I’ll chance it, and hang the odds.”


“ That’s right, Fred. No danger, old boy. Your
own mother wouldn’t know you. By, bye!”
With that he set off at a smart run towards the
crowd, and we returned to our perches on the tree.
A few minutes afterwards five horses appeared on the
track, and we witnessed an excellent start. As the
flag dropped they sprang away in a bunch, running
nose by nose. The race was to be over a mile and a half.
For perhaps a quarter of the distance they kept to-
gether, but as they passed the judge’s box for the first
time, the field began to string out, and very soon the
two favourites forged to the front, keeping shoulder
to shoulder. When abreast of us the leaders had
a good five lengths’ advantage of the others, and were
still gaining at every stride, racing side by side. But
immediately they touched the heavy ground, Dine's
horse eased off, and allowed his competitor to plough
through the mud at top speed.
When Thunderbolt saw that, he uttered an oath,
and cried out, “ M'Dougall’s boy is an idiot! Had he
saved his horse in that mud it was a certainty for
him! Now his chance is gone!”
The result verified the prediction, for presently the
heavy ground having been left behind, Dine’s horse
caught and passed the other as though it were stand


ing still, and the race assumed the appearance of a
procession.
“Trust Colin to nose out a good thing!” muttered
the outlaw. “ I bet he has made a pot out of that
race, Bill!”
“Are you really going to the pub. to see him to-
night, Fred?” I asked, very anxiously, if the truth
be told.
“Why not?” demanded Thunderbolt. “We may
as well, Bill. It’s true there are a lot of chaps here-
abouts know me, but you saw for yourself that Col.
Nead did not recognise me until I told him my name,
and we were boys together.
“ But,” I protested, earnestly; “he hasn’t seen you
for years!”
“ Oh, shut up, do!” growled the outlaw. “ Where’s
the fun in living if one can’t occasionally have a good
time. You can stay behind if you like, but I’m going
if I hang for it!”
“ I’m likely to stay behind 1” I cried indignantly.
“ No, Fred, we’ll swing together!”
“We won’t swing, lad,” he said, with a laugh.
“ Trust me; I’m not such a fool as I look. I tell you
we’ll be safe enough—safer, perhaps, than in the bush.
For who would think of looking for Thunderbolt so


near Tamworth, with every second man you meet a
constable ? Answer me that!”
But I had no answer to give him, and two hours
later we were seated in the bar-room of the public-
house, drinking gin and water, while we awaited the
arrival of Mr. Nead.


CHAPTER XIX.
A CURIOUS ADVENTURE.
We had been there for perhaps an hour when we
heard a noise of steps and loud talking and laughing
outside, and presently the inn was crowded with
people, most of whom had followed us from the
course. They were far too occupied with drinking
and telling each other about their gains and losses to
notice us, and I soon got over the nervousness I very
naturally felt about being recognised. Thunderbolt,
who, I honestly believe, had never been afraid of that
at all, was not the man to rest long in a convivial com-
pany without making his voice heard.
Singling out the landlord, who was talking to two
other men, he caught his eye, and asked him in loud
tones what good he had done for himself on the day.
“ None at all!” replied the landlord. “ I won at
first, but I lost all I had won, and ten quid to boot on
M'Dougall’s bay in the big handicap; and, what’s
more, I was fool enough before the race came off, to
back the bay in his match to-morrow for a level


twenty! This d meeting is going to cost me
dear.”
“ Oh!” said Thunderbolt. “ The bay is going to
run again to-morrow, is he? What against? I’m
a stranger here and haven’t heard the news. I only
arrived this morning!”
“ Dine’s horse, to be sure,” replied the landlord.
“ But it’s no news! The match was made a month
ago; it is for fifty quid a side!”
“ Have a drink with me, and your friend, too, won’t
you?” said Thunderbolt.
The three agreed pleasantly enough, and when their
glasses were filled Thunderbolt threw down a
sovereign on the bar counter and remarked, “ I sup-
pose the odds are against the bay now ?”
“ Three to one,” said the landlord. “Do you want
to bet; if you do, I’m your man. I’m looking for a
chance to hedge.”
The others laughed, but Thunderbolt shook his
head. “ I saw the race,” he said, “ and, in my opinion,
the bay is the better horse; he was ridden badly
though. But, I tell you what, sir, I’ll lay you a level
five pounds he’ll win to-morrow, providing you can
arrange for me to put up another jockey.”
“What’s that?” cried the landlord, looking of a
sudden keenly interested.


Thunderbolt repeated his proposition.
“ Well,” said the landlord, “ I know Mr. M'Dougall,
and I have half a mind to tell him what you say. I
don’t think he is very pleased with the way his horse
was ridden. There may be something in it.”
“ There is a lot; all the difference between winning
and losing,” declared the outlaw earnestly. “You
tell him from me that I can find him a rider.”
“ Can you, where ?”
Thunderbolt smiled. “ That’s my business. But
he’ll be there when he is wanted. When will you see
M'Dougall ?”
“ To-night.”
“ The sooner the better.”
“ Well, I’ll go off and look him up at once, blowed
if I don’t. But what is your name, mister ?”
“ Wardhill, Fred Wardhill,” said Thunderbolt.
“ Where are you staying?”
“ I’m camped near by.”
“ How will I find you ?”
“ I’ll be here with the jockey first thing to-morrow
morning, on the off-chance that M'Dougall will fall
in with the idea!”
“ That’s right—and I believe he will, for the fact
is the boy who rode the bay to-day is a pick-up. He
brought his own lad up from Singleton with him, but


he broke his collar-bone, falling off the coach on the
way. If M'Dougall catches on, I’ll get him to meet
you here.”
“ Did you say that Mr. M'Dougall comes from
Singleton ?” asked Thunderbolt, with a fine assumption
of carelessness.
“ Yes,” replied the landlord. “Heis a squatter,
and owns a big station down that way. Why, do you
know him?”
“ I’ve heard of him,” said the outlaw, smiling in a
peculiar manner. “ Isn’t he the man that had a
promising young colt stolen out of his stable a bit
ago?”
“ The same. They say that scoundrel Thunderbolt
was the thief. But I must be going, if I want to catch
him. Mr. M'Dougall is a society man, and he’s bound
to be dining out somewhere. Good-bye till to-mor-
row, Mr. Wardhill.”
Thunderbolt said “ Good-bye,” and then giving me
a quick look, which told me not to follow him im-
mediately, he nodded to the men who had been drink-
ing with him, and strolled out of the bar at the land-
lord’s heels, to where our horses were tethered in front
of the house.
“ That’s a nice-looking young ’un you have there!”
observed the landlord, as Thunderbolt calmly mounted


the horse they had been talking about—the very horse,
indeed, that he had stolen from Mr. M'Dougall’s sta-
tion at Singleton. “ Can he gallop ?”
“ Not as fast as I’d like,” replied the outlaw. “ But
he’ll do better by-and-bye.”
The landlord mounted his own horse, and the pair
stood talking for a minute or two longer, when they
separated, the landlord riding towards the town, and
Thunderbolt taking the direction of Currabubula.
As soon as I judged it to be safe I slipped out of
the bar, and, getting quickly on horseback, set off after
my leader. I was aflame with excitement, and for
the life of me I could not wait even to get out of sight
of the inn before I urged my horse to his top speed.
I overtook Thunderbolt about two miles further on.
He was ambling along as leisurely as though there was
not a policeman within a hundred miles of him, or as
if he followed any other occupation in the world than
that of a highway robber.
“ My word, Fred,” I burst out excitedly, “what an
escape? Just fancy if we had unsuspectingly gone
into town to-morrow morning to meet Mr. M'Dougall,
and he had recognised his horse!”
“ It’s a dashed nuisance that he is the man he is,”
muttered the outlaw. “ But, as you say, it is cer-
tainly a lucky thing for us that we found it out in
time!”


We turned from the road at that moment into the
bush, in order to seek out our camp.
“Did Mr. Nead come after I left?” Thunderbolt
asked.
“ No, Fred.”
“ Hum!” said he. “ I’ll have to get hold of him to-
morrow, early, so as to put him fly to my assumed
name. I may have to call upon him for a reference
—as to character.”
“ But, great Lord!” I gasped; “ you don’t mean to
say you are going back to the pub.?”
“ Why not?”
“ Why, Mr. M'Dougall may be there!”
“Well, and what then? He doesn’t know me!
He has never seen me in his life!”
“ But we stole that horse from him!”
“ All the more reason why we should try and do him
a good turn now. If he lets you ride his bay, as I’m
going to try and persuade him to do and if you pull
off the race for him, I reckon we’ll be paying him
pretty handsomely for this colt!”
“By George, Fred, you are a game un!” I ex-
claimed, admiringly.
But Thunderbolt began to laugh. “ It’s the love-
liest joke,” he chuckled, “ the very loveliest I ever
had a chance of playing on anybody in my life, barring


the time I caught Sergeant F , and after taking
his horse and revolver from him obliged him to pad
the hoof with his tail between his legs for 18 miles to
the nearest town. But, see here, sonny!”
He grew serious of a sudden, and eyed me quite
sternly.
“ What is it, Fred?” I asked.
“Just this. If M'Dougall does give you the mount
you’ve got to win or burst. You’ll have to ride the
bay, ride him I say over every foot of the way, and
if you don’t save him properly over that heavy patch
of the track I’ll choke you.”
“ I guess I have ridden a race before!” I answered
somewhat heatedly, “ I’m not quite an idiot.”
“ Yes, but you’ve got a bad habit of always want-
ing to be in front. I’ve told you about it before, and
I tell you about it now again for the last time. Re-
member this, in a long race, and a mile and a half is
a long race, pace kills endurance, and its endurance
that always wins, other things being anything like
equal. I want you to just hang on to the other fel-
low’s girths the whole way till you get to the straight.
Let him break the wind for you! You can even fall
farther back over the heavy ground. Let him go to
H there if he likes, the faster the better, but he
won’t. Dine’s boy knows how to ride!”


“ That means I don’t, I suppose!” I snarled.
“ I’ll tell you what I think of your riding to-morrow
night!” said Thunderbolt. “ And it will be as well
for the two of us if I’m able to pass a good opinion,
for I like the look of M'Dougall’s horse so well in
spite of his beating to-day, that if you get the mount
I’m going to bet my last copper on him, and yours too.
You’ll have to hand me over all your cash after tea!”
“ Keep a shilling for a drink 1” I said disgustedly.
“ My word, you can be a bear when you like, Fred!”
“ Yes, I can, but you haven’t begun to feel my claws
yet. After tea, after you have shelled out your
cash, I shall make you go straight to bed, which is the
proper place for little boys who are thinking of riding
races on the morrow !”
“ I’ll see you hanged first!” I cried indignantly.
“ I’ll not turn in one minute sooner than I want to.”
But I did all the same; not because Thunderbolt
made or tried to make me, but because he bribed me
to do so by promising to sing me to sleep. And so it
came about that I slipped into dreamland that night
while listening to the sweet strains of the outlaw’s
voice as he sang over and over the quaint and pathetic
old songs which we both loved best, and which I still
love best.
N


CHAPTER XX.
THE RACE.
Next morning at an early hour, after having hid-
den the stolen colt in the bush, Thunderbolt mounted
his old favourite “ Combo,” and set out with me for
the hotel. The landlord was just opening the bar
when we arrived, and he welcomed us effusively. He
said that he had seen Mr. M'Dougall overnight, and
that although Mr. M'Dougall had not actually agreed
to the proposal he had promised to call at the inn im-
mediately after breakfast in order to meet Mr. Ward-
hill and have a chat over the matter.
Thunderbolt was delighted at this news, and he
readily accepted the landlord’s invitation to stay to
breakfast. While the meal was preparing, however,
he made inquiries for his friend, Mr, Nead, and got
permission to visit that gentleman in his room, as he
was not yet out of bed. I waited for him on the
verandah of the inn, where I made great friends with
a pretty little girl of about five years old, the landlord’s
youngest daughter. She had a pet kitten that was
very playful, and the three of us romped together for


about an hour, enjoying ourselves mightily. We were
still in the midst of this merry fun when Thunderbolt
and Mr. Nead came out and told me to go in with
them to breakfast. The little girl, however, seeing
she was about to lose her playmate began immediately
to weep, dropping her kitten and digging her tiny
knuckles into her poor eyes. I have said before
that Thunderbolt loved all children dearly; and he
gave an example of that disposition now. In two
seconds he had caught the girlie in his arms and he
tossed her up into the air again and again, talking
and laughing to her so merrily the while that in a
minute or two she was shrieking with delight. He
then gave her a handful of silver and told her to run
away and buy herself some sweets, whereupon she
trotted off perfectly contented. I have mentioned this
incident just to show what a curious mixture of a
man the outlaw was; at all times just as ready for
good as for evil. He would one day give every cent
he possessed to some poor beggar down on his luck (as
many a time I have seen him do), and on the next
he would atone for his generosity by robbing a coach.
While we were at breakfast he chatted with Mr.
Nead and the landlord about the chances of the race,
and the chances of my getting the mount. I came in
for a lot of attention from the others, because


Thunderbolt praised my riding so much. Indeed, he
told them lie upon lie about me, and to have heard him
one must have thought I was qualified to win a Mel-
bourne Cup on a cab horse! I had hard work not to
laugh outright at some of his inventions, they were
such wild falsehoods, and yet he told them so well
and he sprinkled them with such a lot of little details
that they sounded true, and it was easy to see the
others believed every word he uttered.
Mr. M'Dougall arrived before we had got up from
the table, and he came straight into the dining-room.
I saw at a glance that he knew Mr. Nead, but he
seemed surprised to meet him there. After he had
been introduced to Thunderbolt and me he addressed
Mr. Nead, saying: “I hear you won yesterday,
Colin!”
“ Yes,” said Mr. Nead. “ I won, Mac, and so
would you if you had come with me to look at the
track, when I asked you to the evening before the
race! As you wouldn’t come, you can’t blame me for
using the information I acquired to my own advan-
tage!”
Mr. M'Dougall looked angry, but he recovered in
a minute, and said to Thunderbolt, “ What is your
opinion, Mr. Wardhill?”
“ The bay is the better horse without a doubt,” re


plied the outlaw. “ But he needs a better rider. Give
my young brother, Jack, here the mount to-day, and
I’m willing to stake up £25 (which is all the money
I have in the world) that he’ll win in a canter!”
“ What do you think, Colin ?”
“ You can’t do better, Mac. Fred Wardhill is an
old friend of mine, and although I’ve never seen his
brother ride, I’m game to back Fred’s opinion every
time!”
Mr. M'Dougall looked deeply impressed. “ Money
talks!” he said, after a little thoughtful pause. “ But
you have had me before, Nead, and I want to be
sure ?”
“You doubt my word?” demanded the little man,
very haughtily.
“ No, no, Colin,” said Mr. M'Dougall, with haste,
“ Not if you pass it without reserve.
“ I’ve told you ”
“Yes, but —am I to understand that you will back
my horse if I allow young Wardhill here to ride
him?”
“ Certainly.”
“ Then,” said Mr. M'Dougall, “ all we have to do
is to fix terms. Mr. Wardhill, lam prepared to pay
your brother five pounds for the mount, and ten if he
wins the race!”


“Itis a bargain!” replied the outlaw. “ I accept
gladly, and I can assure you that you will not regret
your decision, sir. I advise you to get all the money
on your horse you can while he is still at odds, for he
is bound to even up when the public hears that you
have changed your jockey.”
“ Bother the public,” said the squatter. “ We’ll
keep them in the dark as long as possible. If you
have no objection, Mr. Wardhill, I’ll ask you and your
brother to keep out of the way until lunch at all
events. The race will not be run till three o’clock!”
“ Very good, sir. Out of sight, out of mind, as
the saying is. I guess we’ll get back to camp, and
not go near the course till about one. But naturally
I want to have an interest in the event. Who will
accept a commission for me. Will you, Mr,
M'Dougall ?”
The outlaw’s amazing impudence made me gasp,
but Thunderbolt had not a smile on his face, though
he must have been chuckling inwardly at his own as-
surance.
“You want me to back my horse for you?” asked
the squatter.
“If you will, sir. Here is my money—.£2s!”
Thunderbolt produced a handful of sovereigns and
a roll of notes, and extended them to the man whose


horse he had stolen scarcely a week ago. If only
the squatter had known 1
But Mr. M'Dougall did not know, and before such
convincing evidence of the outlaw’s confidence in the
result of the match, his own doubts fled. He took
the cash, and said heartily: “ I’ll do it with pleasure,
Mr. Wardhill, and I hope that I’ll have the pleasure
of returning you the money more than doubled to-
night.”
“ This afternoon, sir, after the race, if you don’t
mind!” said the outlaw. “Jack and I leave Tam-
worth this evening at latest, for we are on an import-
ant journey, and although we have broken it to attend
this meeting, we really ought to be much further on.
I can’t delay our departure a minute later than five
o’clock!”
“ If we win the race,” replied Mr. M'Dougall, “ I
shall settle up with you by four. I give you my pro-
mise 1”
With that we shook hands all round, and within
five minutes thereafter Thunderbolt and I were
cantering back to our camp. There arrived, we fixed
up everything for an immediate start in case of need,
and afterwards chatted away the time till about half-
past twelve, when we partook of a light lunch and then
set out for the race ground. We rode upon the


coarse as the hands of the stand clock were pointing
to 1.30, and we hitched our horses to the inner rails
of the outer paddock. Mr. M'Dougall, who had most
probably been anxiously expecting our arrival, per-
ceived us at once, and he beckoned us inside the en-
closure, where he was standing among a lot of his
friends, some of whom were women.
We were immediately surrounded, and introduced
all round. I kept very silent, for I was extremely
shy when a boy, in company; but Thunderbolt, with
his free, gay, and yet gentlemanly manners and his
ceaseless fund of chat soon made himself a general
favourite, and the ladies especially paid him a deal of
flattering attention. While we stood waiting there,
preparations were being made for a race—the Maiden
Plate —to be run, and the horses were already out
upon the track. In answer to a challenge from one
of the ladies, Thunderbolt, who had been bragging
about his ability to judge a horse, took a look at those
about to compete, and selected one, which he de-
clared would win. It lost, and he was much laughed
at, but he accepted his defeat so good-humoredly that
I could see they liked him all the better. At any rate,
the lady who had challenged him presently invited him
to attend a dance which was to be held at her house
that evening. He, however, told her that he thanked


her a thousand times, but he deeply regretted he could
not go, as he had a prior engagement. I guessed what
that prior engagement was, for at that moment two
mounted policemen rode up, and, checking their
horses, fixed their eyes curiously upon the outlaw. I
saw Thunderbolt’s hand steal quietly and carelessly to
his pistol pocket, but he never stopped his chatting for
an instant. The police, however, had really not sus-
pected his identity in the least, and presently
they departed, having merely come up in order to
satisfy their curiosity, for by then the public had got
wind of M'Dougall’s contemplated change of jockeys,
and everyone was talking about Mr. Wardhill, and
wanting to see both him and me.
At a little after 2 o’clock Mr. M'Dougall took me
off to the dressing-room, where he rigged me out in
his colours. I can tell you I fancied myself not a
little when I looked in the mirror and saw myself in
full regalia. I had never been such a swell in my
life before. And when I returned to the ground, how
the people stared and thronged about me. They sur-
rounded me, in fact, in such swarms that I had to
worm my way along to where Thunderbolt stood hold-
ing my mount by the bridle. The noise, too, was
simply deafening! The bookmakers were yelling
out, “ Even money ”at the top of their voices. It


was a scene of eager and seething excitement. The
crowd seemed simply bubbling over, and everyone
who wanted to talk had to shout to make himself
heard.
When I finally got up to him, Thunderbolt took the
bay by the head, and, giving me his hand for a step,
hoisted me with a swing into the saddle. The bay
was very nervous at first, and he trembled with terror
at the noise, but I spoke to him in a coaxing voice, and
soon got him in hand. Thunderbolt then darted
away, and a few minutes later he returned mounted
on Combo, whereupon we rode out on to the track
together.
“ There are too many police here for my liking!”
he muttered, as we left the crowd. “ I’ve counted
seven already, and four are old acquaintances. Be
prepared, Bill, my lad, and if any attack is made on
me, never mind the race, but ride off on the bay for
your life. Don’t wait for me; I can take care of
myself!”
I nodded, and he then said; “Remember what
I told you about the heavy part of the track!”
I nodded again, and he left me. My opponent came
out on the track a second later, and we took a pre-
liminary canter together, after which we were called
to the post,


It was a fair start, and we got away well together.
Acting on Thunderbolt’s instructions, however, I
secured a good hold of the bit, and pulled my horse
back until his nose was abreast of the other’s withers.
In that position we galloped along at a steady, even
pace for the first half-mile. By then I was thoroughly
in touch with the animal I rode, and I liked his action
so much that I felt all through me I could win the
race. As we approached the heavy ground I took
a hard pull and allowed my opponent to get a lead of
nearly two lengths. I heard the “ books ” yelling out
two to one against the bay at that juncture, but I did
not allow myself to be troubled, for he was going
like a train, and I had not once let him out. Next
moment, however, we were both ploughing through
the loose soil, and as I was in the rear I was quickly
smothered in mud. It was a beastly experience for
both horse and rider, for our opponent’s heels threw
up the grimy stuff in our faces at every bound, and I
had often to shut my eyes to avoid being blinded. I
got rather a shock, too, when we came through and
reached the firm ground, for I found that I had lost
another full length, and I felt it was time to creep
up. I, therefore, sat down to ride, and although even
then I did not call upon my horse, I managed to de-
crease the distance by half a length before we rounded


the turn into the straight. But, then, I made him run.
For the first time I lifted my whip. The bay re-
sponded to the call, and in a dozen yards I was on my
opponent’s heels. I could see that the latter was in
trouble, and I uttered an exultant cry, for the jockey
was using whip and spur as though his life depended
on it, while I had but given the bay one cut. A
tremendous cheer from the waiting crowd greeted my
advance. No doubt until that instant they had been
thinking to witness a repetition of yesterday’s per-
formance. At that idea I myself grew a little anxious,
for the judge’s box was looming near. I, therefore,
raised the whip again, and riding, riding, I crept up
on my opponent until at the end of another hundred
"ards we were racing neck and neck. But still I
crept on and now steadily I forged ahead. I was a
nose ahead, a neck ahead, half a length ahead. Then
a mighty outburst of wild shouts informed me that the
race was over, and looking back I saw that I had
passed the judge’s box.
I saw a thousand hats flung into the air. My horse
pulled up of its own accord, in the midst of a deliri-
ously excited crowd. I was plucked from the saddle
before I knew where I was and carried over to a bul-
lock-waggon, from which I was obliged to shake
hands whh a surging, yelling multitude of people, who


shrieked their congratulations into my ears. How
I escaped I do not know, but at last, it seemed to
me hours afterwards, I found myself in the dressing-
room with Thunderbolt and Mr. M'Dougall, who as-
sisted me, for I was quite exhausted, to change my
mud-bespattered garments, and who almost quarrelled
with each other for the honour of serving me. It was
really too funny! The squatter was almost beside
himself with delight. He paid me my fee for riding
the race, and he handed Thunderbolt- seventy-five
pounds, the money he had won for him. After that
we had a few drinks together, and finally parted with
mutual expressions of good-will.
Thunderbolt and I returned immediately to our
camp, whence, having collected our possessions,
we set out on the road to Queensland just as night was
falling, leading with us the colt that the outlaw had
stolen from Mr. M'Dougall.
So ended the most exciting day of my life, and,
perhaps, the happiest.


CHAPTER XXI.
AN INTERLUDE.
We travelled the whole of that night, and the next,
and we made such good progress that we pitched our
camp at dusk of the third day within thirty miles of
the outlaw’s home. Next evening we ventured thither,
and were lucky enough to find the place temporarily
untrammelled with the unwelcome attentions of the
police. We stayed there only a few hours, however,
for, although Thunderbolt, as usual, experienced great
pain in parting from his beloved wife, he was so bent
upon turning himself into a racing man that he feared
to spoil his plans by suffering the police to get wind
of our movements.
Just before we departed, he called me aside and
begged me to grant him a favour, the first favour he
had ever asked at my hands.
I replied that I would do anything in the world
for him.
Then,” said he, “ I want you to let me give poor
Sunday all our money except about ten pounds. It


may be many months before I see her again, and I
can’t bear to think that she and the kiddies should want
for anything while I am away!”
“ I’ll pay you back!” he added, earnestly.
My answer was to turn out my pockets and hand
him every farthing I possessed. He wrung my
hand, and said to me, with tears in his eyes; “ Bill,
old man!”—just that and nothing more. But I shall
never forget his look and tone, nor how my heart
went out to him as he said it. There are many people
who think that criminals are brute beasts, unworthy
the name of men. But my experience goes to prove
that they are softer-hearted and more truly human
beings than numbers who have not sinned. There is
an old proverb which supports me that occurs to my
mind: “It is human to err!” It is, indeed—most
human 1
Two days later we rode boldly into the town of
Armidale, and put up at one of the principal public-
houses, moulding our actions on the maxim that the
boldest course is the wisest.
The Armidale races were just about to come off,
and the town was full of horsey men and gamblers,
many of whom were staying at our inn. Thunderbolt,
therefore, wasted no time in arranging to replenish
our exchequer, and that very night he made a match


with one of our fellow-guests, to be run off on the
following morning, for £5 a-side, between a horse
owned by his opponent and the colt we had stolen
from Mr. M'Dougall, which colt, by the way, we had
previously christened “ The Chicken.”
I rode the race, and won easily, whereupon we im-
mediately resumed our Queensland journey, for so
many people in that district knew Thunderbolt that
we dared not remain to attend the public meeting.
I must not neglect to mention, however, that we left
good old “ Combo ” in the care of a trusted friend,
who lived near Armidale, so that he might enjoy a
well-earned holiday while we were working over the
border.
For the next four months we enjoyed ourselves as
perfectly, I think, as it is possible for human beings
to enjoy themselves, and during the whole of that
time neither of us committed a crime, nor was guilty
of a single shady or - dishonourable action. I like to
look back upon that period, for it is a comfort to re-
member that I did not spend all my bushranging
career breaking the laws of society. Beyond that, it
was a godsend to me in more ways than one. I mixed
with my kind more closely than ever I had done be-
fore, and I began to see, by observing the ways of
honest men, and contrasting them with the ways of


rascals, that it was only right and just that the former
should protect themselves and the fruits of their toil
with those laws which Thunderbolt despised, and
which he was always trying to teach me to despise.
But enough of moralising. My business is rather
to record our doings than the gradual process of my
regeneration.
We entered Queensland in the guise of shearers,
and everywhere we went we pretended to be brothers
—Fred and Jack Wardhill. We wandered about
from place to place, living the while like fighting cocks,
and having a really splendid time. “ The Chicken ”
turned out a grand racer, and a gold mine to us,
for he carried everything before him. At the Stan-
thorpe race meeting he won the two principal events,
and at almost every other place we visited he more
than paid our expenses. The result was that at the
end of the period I have named, Thunderbolt and I
carried in our belts the tidy sum of two hundred
pounds apiece. But then came the end. One even-
ing, feeling a little seedy, I retired early to bed at a
publichouse at which we were staying near Toowoom-
ba, leaving the outlaw to sit up carousing with some
boon companions. When I awoke next morning he
was seated on a chair beside my bed, looking at me
o


with an expression of solemnity that had long been
a stranger to his visage.
“ What is up, Fred?” I asked, starting up in sudden
anxiety— for my thoughts had flown at once to the
ever-present peril of discovery.
“ I have sold The Chicken!” he replied.
“Whatever did you do that for?” I demanded,
thoroughly astonished, and a little angry, too, for I
thought he should have consulted me in such a mat-
ter.
But Thunderbolt passed his hand over his brow,
and he answered in a low voice, “ It’s the home-sick-
ness, lad! I’m selfish, I dare say, but I Can’t help
myself!”
I could not find a word to say, and presently he
went on. “ It’s been coming on for weeks, Bill, and
I’ve fought against it all I know. But, Bill, do
what I will I can’t keep away from the New England.
There’s danger there —death perhaps—but I can’t keep
away. I know every hill and creek and turn and
twist of it, nearly every tree! And all my friends
are there—good friends some of them as ever a man
had. And then, too, there are my wife and the
kiddies! Don’t be angry, Bill.”
“ It means going back to the bushranging, robbing
coaches and the like!” I stammered. “ I think this
might content you, Fred. It’s a better life 1”


“ It’s hell being so far away from Sunday!” he mut-
tered, with a catch in his voice.
His emotion touched me, so I blurted out —“ All
right, Fred, let’s go back!” But on that he sprang
up and caught my hand, another man in an instant.
And he was so charmingly grateful for my consent,
and so delighted and happy at the thought of seeing
his wife again, that although I loathed the idea of
going back to the bushranging I had not the heart
to put a damper on his spirits by confessing to my
own gloomy feelings.
Three weeks later we rode into the paddock that
enclosed the outlaw’s home, and poor Sunday, near
frantic with joy, rushed out of the house to welcome
us.
She had a pleasing story to relate. It seemed that
the authorities, deceived by our long absence from
the district, and having heard no word of our doings
good or bad in the meanwhile, had come to the satis-
factory conclusion (to us) that we had departed alto-
gether from the country. Travellers had recovered
confidence in the roads, and now ventured freely
abroad, and the mail coaches performed their journeys
without escort. Above all, the police had for several
weeks past ceased to trouble Sunday with their espion-
age.


Thunderbolt was charmed with the good news, for
it enabled him to spend several happy days with his
family, unmarred with the old haunting anxiety. His
incurably restless and reckless disposition, however,
would not long allow him to remain eating the bread
of peace. Excitement was as the breath of life to
him. Without it, existence lost its savour and its
most potent charm. Knowing him as well as I did
I scarcely felt surprised when one evening he marched
straight up to me and said, “ Bill, old man, I’m pining
for a gallop. To-morrow morning you and I will
take a run up Uralla way.”
I knew what he meant. But argument was use-
less, protestation vain. He had dominated me so
long that my will was as a reed for him to bend as he
pleased. We came nigh to quarrelling that night,
it is true, for my conscience was awake again; never-
theless on the morrow we departed for the Rocky Dig-
gings.


CHAPTER XXII.
OUTWITTED.
It happened much as I had foreseen. Crime was
his motive! But Thunderbolt it seemed had even
planned a robbery before we started. Having heard
that a man named Weston, who kept a store at the
diggings, had of late been buying gold there, the
temptation to bleed the buyer had been too keen for
the outlaw to resist.
The store was situated on the road-side within a
quarter-mile of the police station; but a little circum-
stance like that only added zest to Thunderbolt’s
pleasure in carrying out such an enterprise as he con-
templated. Timing our attack, we rode up to the
place a little past midnight, and after dismounting and
fastening our horses to the rail, Thunderbolt knocked
at the door.
Presently a light appeared within the house, and
a man’s voice asked us our business.
“ Is that you, Mr. Weston ?” Thunderbolt called out.


“ I’m awfully sorry to trouble you at this hour, but
I’m going a journey and I want a pound of tobacco.”
The door was thereupon opened and Mr. Weston
himself unsuspiciously invited us to enter.
“What sort of tobacco do you want?” he inquired,
and as he spoke he put down the candlestick upon the
counter behind which he stepped in order to serve
us.
“ Queen’s Head, please,” replied the outlaw, with
a chuckle. Mr. Weston looked at him in a puzzled
fashion for a minute and then he said—“ I don’t keep
that brand. Never heard of it either. Won’t twist
do or plug? I have the very best.”
“ Not for Thunderbolt!” replied the outlaw, thrust-
ing his revolver in the storekeeper’s face. “ Pardon
my jest, Mr. Weston, I said tobacco, but I want your
money!”
“ For God’s sake!” gasped the other, falling back
apparently overcome with terror. “Is it really Cap-
tain Thunderbolt?”
“The same!”
“Oh! oh!”
“ Buck up, man, I won’t hurt you if you are sen-
sible. But I want your money, and your money I
will have!”
“As the Lord hears me, I have none!” whined Mr.


Weston, who was trembling violently. Indeed, he
shook so much that I thought his knees would give
under him.
“ Oh, yes you have!” said Thunderbolt, sternly ;
“ lies won’t avail with me, sir!”
“ Before Heaven ”he began. But the outlaw
grew impatient.
“ Bill,” he interrupted, angrily, “go behind the
counter and search the till!”
I obeyed, but the till was empty.
“ Nothing here, Fred!” I reported.
Thunderbolt cocked his revolver. “ Search the
house, then!” he commanded, “ while I keep this chap
covered. Look sharp!”
In five minutes I had examined the whole store, but
without success. I then went up to the door that
Communicated with the interior of the house. I tried
the handle, but it was locked, and from the inside.
I told Thunderbolt, who said curtly, “ Take the axe
yonder and break it open.
On that, however, Mr. Weston spoke up.
“ For heaven’s sake don’t do it!” he cried. “ Mrs.
Jackson is in that room!”
“ A lady!” said Thunderbolt. “ I don’t war with
women. It’s the worse for you, though, Mr. Weston.
I’m afraid I shall have to kill you!”


“ No, no, no,” gasped the gold buyer. “ Spare my
life and I’ll give you my money.”
“ Produce it, then!”
“ It—it isn’t here,” stuttered Mr. Weston, who
seemed by then on the verge of collapse. “ I—l keep
it in a safe in a room at—at the back of the house.
See, here is the key of the door. Come round with
me by the outside, and—and I’ll show you how to get
it.”
“Very well,” said Thunderbolt; “come along, and
no tricks, or I’ll put daylight through you!”
He strode to the door and stopped just outside the
threshold, motioning for us to go before him. We
followed, I just behind the storekeeper. When we
were within a foot of the door, however, we walked
almost abreast, and Mr. Weston seized the chance for
which no doubt he had been waiting. He turned of
a sudden, and clutching my shoulder, sent me spin-
ning forward against Thunderbolt. In another second
he had banged the heavy door, and before the outlaw
and I had well recovered from our collision, we heard
him shooting the bolts and laughing the while like
mad.
“Ha! ha!” he shouted presently. “You thought
to stick up old Weston, did you, my lads? But you
didn’t get up early enough. Try it again some other
time. Good night. Sleep well!”


“ Done, by Gad!” gasped the outlaw. “ And
beautifully, too!”
“ Can I sell you some tobacco ?” cried the mocking
voice from within.
“ I have a first-rate brand here —a new brand, brand
new. They call it ‘ Queen’s Head.’ ”
“ Oh, go and drown yourself!” snapped Thunder-
bolt, thoroughly enraged. “ For two pins I’d smash
your door down now just to even things up.”
“ Better not try, my lad. I have a revolver here,
and there are police about!”
It is possible, however, despite this warning, that
Thunderbolt would have carried out his threat, for
his blood was up; but at that moment we heard the
sounds of horses galloping towards us on the road
near by. He therefore cried a go, and, mounting
hastily, we set off at top speed in the opposite direc-
tion.
Next day the whole country was ringing with the
news of our return, and we were informed by certain
of our friends that the police had been ordered to join
hands all over the district to hunt us down and effect
our capture, dead or alive. We were a match for
them at that game, however, and although for the
next week we had a lively time, being chased about
like dingoes from point to point by different bands


of the force, we contrived to elude them all without
a single encounter; and finally we reached a place of
comparative safety, where we enjoyed a much-needed
breathing spell.


CHAPTER XXIII.
A DASTARDLY TRICK.
Early one morning, some time later, as we were
journeying through the bush, not far from Yarrowick,
we came somewhat unexpectedly upon the camp of
two men, who sat before their fire on the branch of
a fallen tree, eating their breakfast. They looked so
much like ordinary bushmen that we rode up to them
without fear, and gave them “ Good day!”
They replied civilly enough, whereupon Thunder-
bolt, who never robbed a poor man, offered to buy
some provisions from them, as we had run out.
The elder of the two, however, answered quietly;
“ Dog don’t eat dog, Mate! I reckon we’re all about
equals here. Get off your horses and have breakfast
with us!”
As we were pretty hungry, we gladly accepted the
invitation; but while in the act of dismounting I inter-
cepted a meaning glance exchanged between the two
men, which aroused my suspicions.
“ Can they be police in disguise?” I asked myself.


They looked like ordinary sundowners, it was true;
but I reflected that appearances are deceitful, and I
determined to watch them narrowly. When we had
found seats they handed us a pannikin of tea apiece,
and some bread and meat. I noticed, however, that
the one who poured out our tea sweetened it with
some sugar which he took from a bottle, and all the
time there was a big bag of sugar on the ground be-
side him. That seemed so strange a circumstance
that I sipped the tea at once from my pannikin, and,
as I had half-suspected, I discovered that it had a
most peculiar flavour.
I immediately put down my pannikin upon the
ground, saying aloud: “It’s as hot as mustard!”
Then I muttered very low, but without turning my
head: “ Lean over, Fred. Hawks!”
Thunderbolt, who was as quick as light in taking
a hint, stretched right across me, saying, by way of
explanation: “ Will, have you any mustard ?”
“ Tea is poisoned!” I whispered in his ear.
He sat up again without turning a hair, and, after
just touching his tea to his lips, he exclaimed: “By
God, boy, you are right. It is hot!”
“ It will soon cool,” observed one of the men.
Thunderbolt and I began munching at the bread
and meat, for we guessed it would be alright. We


did not look at each other, but I dare swear we were
thinking the same thought, “ What to do ?” It would
have been a hateful thing to accuse our hosts of try-
ing to poison us on mere suspicion, and yet I felt
certain they were guilty. Presently they got into a
political conversation with the outlaw, leaving me out
in the cold. But in any case I could not have spoken
to them had it been to save my life, I was so upset
and nervous. Perhaps ten minutes passed like that
when of a sudden their dog came up to me, wagging
his tail and begging for a scrap. In a flash I saw
what to do. I patted the poor brute on the head, and
then stooping over the log I quietly poured out some
of my tea into the saucer and offered it to him. As
fate had it, he was thirsty, and he lapped up every
drop.
Thunderbolt perceived what I had done, but he pre-
tended not to notice, and kept our hosts so busy talking
to him about the Government’s mistakes that they
never dreamed of the counter trap which I had set for
them.
They talked and talked. Heavens! how I did ad-
mire Thunderbolt then and wonder at him! He was
as cool as a cucumber. He kept steadily to the thread
of his argument, and he slated the Government with
the eloquence of a practised demagogue, with never


a break in his voice, and never a backward glance to
mark what was going on behind him. As for me, I
was cold and yet I perspired freely. I was in an
agony of suspense. I began to count the minutes
second by second. Two, three, four passed! I fell
to shivering at intervals try as I would to keep calm.
The dog meanwhile lay at my feet looking affection-
ately up at me out of his big brownish yellow eyes.
All at once, however, he got up and shook himself as
though he had just come out of water. You can
imagine how anxiously I watched him. But soon he
lay down again and rested his head upon his paws.
Again I counted the minutes. Four, five, six passed!
At last it came! The dog got up, and walked uneasily
forwards, then backwards, only a few paces each time.
Then he sat down and whisked a paw across his face.
A second later he sprang erect, his hair bristling like
a wild cat’s, and he began to run round and round in
a short circle howling like a soul in pain.
We all jumped to our feet and stared at him.
“Good God, what ails the brute?” cried one of our
hosts.
Thunderbolt gave me a look of intelligence and
whipped his revolver out of his pocket. There fol-
lowed a flash of fire, a loud report, and the dog fell
to the ground stone dead, with a bullet through his
brain.


“ What the devil did you do that for ?” demanded
our elder host in a voice of rage. “ That dog is mine;
I’ve had him for years, and he is a valuable animal!
You had no right ”
“ Stop!” said Thunderbolt, calmly, pointing his
pistol at the man’s breast. “ That dog was yours,
you say ?”
“Yes!” gasped the other.
“ He served you faithfully, I suppose ?”
“Yes.”
“ And you are sorry to lose him!”
“Yes —but what is the meaning of this? Put
down your pistol. I ”
“ Silence!” interrupted Thunderbolt, in a voice of
thunder. “ Listen to me. You are sorry to lose
your dog, but not half as sorry as I am, for the poor
brute has helped to save my life. He died in my
place. He drank some of the poisoned tea that you
served out to us. Now, do you understand?”
There was no doubt but that both the men under-
stood. Without attempting to deny the charge, they
fell on their knees before the outlaw, and in the most
abject and cowardly fashion began to whine for
mercy.
But Thunderbolt cut them short. “ Pray to God
for mercy!” he said, in a low, savage voice, “ for, as


sure as I live, I shall shoot the pair of you in exactly
five minutes!”
He took his watch out of his pocket with his left
hand as he spoke, and glanced at the time. “It is five
minutes to 7,” he remarked; “at 7 precisely you die!”
For a moment afterwards they gazed at him, spell-
bound with horror, but then, finding their voices, they
broke out into the most piteous entreaties and apolo-
gies. I listened to them like one dazed; I could move
neither hand nor foot.
Thunderbolt answered never a word, only he kept
them covered always, with his steady eye glancing
along the sights of the revolver. He was like a man
of stone.
You have three minutes to live!” he announced pre-
sently.
They redoubled their protestations.
“ You have two minutes to live!” said Thunderbolt.
The younger man uttered a piercing shriek and
threw himself full length, face downwards, on the
ground.
“As you hope for mercy yourself hereafter, spare
us now!” cried the older man, flinging out his arms
with a wild and tragic gesture. “You contemplate
a deed that will stain your hands with the blood of
fellow-beings, and which you will repent all the rest


of your life. As yet you are not a murderer, Cap-
tain Thunderbolt. I call upon you now, as though
we both stood before the throne of God, to forgive
us, and save your own soul. For as you treat us
your Maker will treat you!”
“ You have one minute to live!” responded the out-
law, in tones of ice, and, speaking, he raised the ham-
mer of his pistol.
But the sound of that click galvanised me into
action. I sprang to my leader’s side, and cried out
earnestly,
“ Fred, Fred! you must not do this thing!”
“ I shall!” He pushed me back with his left hand,
holding me in a grip of iron, so that I could not move.
“ You have about thirty seconds,” he said, address-
ing his victims.
“ For my sake, Fred!” I cried.
“ I shall kill them, by God! They are skunks,
unfit to live!”
“ Fred, I have saved your life twice now—once
within this hour. If you don’t grant me this favour,
I swear to you by God that we part here and now!”
My speech broke up his frightful, savage calm.
He gave me a terrible frown, and said in a voice
hoarse with passion,
p


“ Curse you to hell! Why do you plead for these
damned double-dealing hounds?”
“ Because,” I cried out, in a whirl—“ because in
their light they are justified in doing what they did.
Are we not outlaws, you and I? That means that
any law-abiding citizen has a perfect right to kill us
when and where and how they like or can. Besides,
these are poor men, and you forget the price on your
head —five hundred pounds. That would make them
rich. Moreover, they are strangers to us, not friends.
I
If they ever had been our friends, I’d help you shoot
them. But they are strangers, and they owe us no
duty. If they had succeeded, the world would have
applauded their act. We have no right to judge
them —we alone out of all mankind! We may regard
their trick as dastardly—but no one else would think
so! You must not kill them, Fred!”
“ Very well,” said Thunderbolt. “ Let us go,”
He put up his pistol, and without another glance at
our enemies, swung on his heel and strode over with
sullen visage to the horses. I, however, turned to
look at the men, and to my surprise I saw that both
were prostrate.
I walked up and touched the older with my foot.
“ Take my advice,” I said, “ and leave this district.


I won’t answer for your lives if Thunderbolt crosses
your path again!”
The fellow looked up at me. His face was ashen
white, and he was trembling like a leaf.
“ I will!” he muttered. “ God bless you, young
man, for what you did for us.”
I did not reply, for although I had prevented
Thunderbolt from killing them, I loathed and despised
them bitterly enough to almost want to kill them my-
self.
I may remark that we never, to our knowledge,
met either of those men again, and although we tried
hard to discover who they were we failed utterly to do
so. Thunderbolt ever afterwards suspected them of
having been police in disguise, but I did not share
his opinion. The force in those days contained many
fools, but few cowards—and such cowards, none, I
hope!


CHAPTER XXIV.
WOUNDED.
“ We seem to have struck a streak of bad luck since
we took up bushranging again. First came our un-
successful attack upon the store at the Rocky Dig-
gings, next the poisoned trap laid for us by the ap-
parent sundowners at Yarrowick, from which we so
narrowly escaped, and now—what next, I wonder?”
Thunderbolt made this speech to me as we were
riding along towards Carlisle Gully, where we in-
tended to stick up the Bendemeer coach.
“More bad luck, I suppose!” I replied, deject-
edly.
“ I hope you turn out a false prophet, Bill. But it
is curious, isn’t it?”
“What?”
“ Our bad luck.”
“ It’s a warning to us to turn from our evil ways,”
I ventured.
“ Oh! Rubbish!” he answered, laughing. “ All
the same, I wish it would end. We haven’t sixpence


between us, and unless we make a rise soon, we are
likely to starve.”
“ Let’s go back to Queensland, Fred,” I said,
earnestly. “We did so well there, and honestly too.
I, for one, was as happy as a king!”
“ I wasn’t,” he replied. “It was too safe and
dull. I’d rot if it wasn’t for an occasional brush with
the police!”
“ Suppose there are police on board the coach to-
day?”
“ In that case, we’ll go hungry for dinner, Bill.”
“ I wish you’d go back to Queensland, Fred.”
“Now, you’ve said that before; don’t harp on it!
Hang Queensland. Here, I’ll give you a song.”
In another second he had begun to warble, “ Her
Bright Smiles Haunt Me Still,” while I listened, think-
ing disconsolately to myself that there was no use
trying to wean Thunderbolt into leading an honest
life, and that if I wished to do so I would have to break
away from him. I hated the thought of such a thing,
and the vow I made never to desert him still had the
force of a ban, yet no longer an irrefragible one. The
fact is, I was just growing from a boy into a man, and
I was beginning to realise the change in myself from
the change in my ideas. The maxim, “ A short life
and a merry one,” no longer appealed to me as being


a desirable guiding rule. I wanted, on the contrary,
to live as long as possible, and reason told me that
in order to do so I must cease being a criminal. Self-
interest was my animating motive, of course, but I
am not ashamed of that, for I do not think a man ever
lived who worked his own reform for another being’s
benefit. Self-preservation is the first law of Nature,
and only unthinking fools despise selfishness when it
moves in legitimate channels. Besides, a man cannot
improve the world without, in the first place, he im-
proves himself, and, in my opinion, the noblest acts
ever performed by the heroes of history were inspired
by desire for glory, which is the purest and most per-
fect form of selfishness.
At exactly what period I came to question the
validity of the vow I had given Thunderbolt, I cannot
remember. But, at the time of which I write, I had
already concluded that I would sin more in keeping
than in breaking it. And all that held me to him
then was affection and the natural dislike of incurring
his contempt; perhaps, also habit. But yes, on re-
flection, certainly habit —most certainly! It requires
powerful resolution to break a habit long continued,
and for more than two years, I had been accustomed
to defer to Thunderbolt in everything, to accept his
opinions, to almost bow blindly to his desires, to


follow him indeed as though he were a superior being,
and I his petted bond slave.
The resolution I speak of was growing in my breast,
but, as yet, it was of feeble substance, wanting in
initiative, lacking in purpose. I knew what I wanted,
and I was conscious of the desire to obtain it—some
day—that was all. So it came about that, although
most unwillingly and, as it were, in spite of my better
judgment, I continued to participate in his crimes.
That day we stuck up the coach at Carlisle Gully.
No police were aboard, and we made a fairly good
haul.
Our wants being thus relieved, we rode over to the
McDonald River and camped there for the night, it
being Thunderbolt’s intention to make a raid on Ben-
demeer within a day or two, for we knew that a
great deal of gold had been of late stored in that
little town.
On the following morning, however, while shifting
camp in order to obtain better feed for our horses,
we met with an adventure that came near to ending
our career. We had left the river bank about a mile
behind and were riding loosely through some hilly,
sparsely-timbered country, when, of a sudden, two
policemen rode out of a clump of bushes a hundred
yards ahead of us, and charged us at the gallop. We


turned as quickly as we could and made for the near-
est hill, up which we urged our horses at full speed.
The police followed hot on our heels, firing as they
came, but we reached the top unhurt.
“ Make for the river!” shouted Thunderbolt to me.
“ We can get no cover on this side!”
“ It’s running a banker!” I reminded him, loudly.
“ Never mind!” cried he. “ It’s our best chance!”
We were down the hill in a twinkling and ascending
the next. The troopers fired across at us from the
hill we had left, keeping up a constant fusillade
as they advanced. I was struck in the leg just as we
reached the second top. The pain was sharp, but I
repressed the scream that came to my lips and rode
on for dear life. In another moment, however, we
were over the crest and under cover.
“I’m hit, Fred!” I cried.
" Badly ?” he demanded.
“ I don’t know!”
“Then, you are not. Carry on till we reach the
river, and I’ll attend to you there.”
I did as I was bid, and at such a reckless pace did
we travel that we had pulled up on the river bank
before the troopers had appeared over the hill.
Thunderbolt thereupon hastily dismounted, and,
having glanced at my wound, he tied his kerchief


Combo was Hurled against the Rock. [Page 233


tightly round my calf. “ The bullet has gone clean
through!” he said, cheerfully. “No danger, Bill!
Come on!”
The sight of the blood, however, with which my
trousers and boot were drenched made me feel very
sick, and if it was not that the horses quickly entered
the fast-flowing stream I believe I must have swooned.
But the cold of the water revived me, and Thunderbolt’s
voice, always raised in cheery encouragement, stirred
me on to renewed effort. The outlaw tried his best
to keep me above him, fearing the current would prove
beyond my strength to master, but, once we were
in mid-stream, such attempts were futile. My horse,
less manageable than dear old Combo, refused to obey
the bit, and I was swept down by the flood like a
straw. By wonderful good luck, however, a mo-
ment later my horse was stranded on a shoal, and,
urging him forward with the whip, I was soon stand-
ing on a spur of the farther bank. Turning to mark
my leader’s fate, I saw him still battling gamely in
the middle of the river, trying hard to avoid a huge
rock that reared its head over the surface of the swirl-
ing water. Even as I watched, however, the current
won the fight. Combo was hurled against the rock,
and completely overturned, while Thunderbolt
disappeared! But I knew him for a splendid


swimmer, and the circumstance did not alarm
me. I was far more alarmed to see the police racing
towards the river-bank, for I thought to myself, they
will come up and shoot Thunderbolt before he can find
a landing, or get out of the water. The situation
was desperate, and for a moment I gave up hope.
But then came a flash of inspiration. “ If,” thought
I, “ if I can only keep them away from the bank for
a while by somehow distracting their attention, they
will not know that Fred is struggling for his life in
the water, and, before they guess it, he will have
landed!”
Suiting deed to thought I spurred my horse along
the bank for about a hundred yards up the stream,
around the nearest bend of the river, whereupon the
police, marking my action from afar, foolishly
changed their course, and followed me. In another
few seconds it was impossible for them to see
Thunderbolt without leaving me and going down the
stream for some distance, but this they did not do.
Quite satisfied with the success of my ruse, I dis-
mounted, full in their view, and took shelter behind
some rocks. My leg was by that time stiff as a log,
and I was so weak from loss of blood that I could
hardly move. But, with a supreme effort I climbed
the rocks and peered over at the police. They were


just taking to the water. Much shocked, I whipped
out my revolver and fired at them point-blank. The
range was too great to hit them, but apparently they
did not think so, for they drew back as if they had
been bitten, and immediately darted for some trees,
behind which they took cover. For the next five
minutes I suffered tortures of apprehension, fearing
that my leader had been drowned. But the police did
not know of that, and they waited behind their trees
watching me as a cat would a mouse. In fact, playing
my game for me, the fools! At the end of that time
I heard hoof-beats behind me, and, turning, saw
Thunderbolt riding up.
“ It’s the third time you’ve saved my life, Bill, old
man!” he cried, as he swung himself to the ground.
“ How is your leg ?”
“ Bad!” I muttered, feeling of a sudden very sick
again.
He caught me in his arms, and, gentle as a woman,
lifted me on my saddle.
“ The police won’t follow us, I think. But I must
get you to some place where you can lay up as quick
as may be, laddie!” he said softly. “Do you think
you can stick on, Bill?”
“ I’ll try,” I groaned, for I was in great pain; and
off we sfartetj,


Thunderbolt was right—the police did not follow
us. Had they done so (and why they did not Heaven
only knows) they must have caught us, for so rapidly
did my pain and sickness increase that soon we could
only travel at a snail’s pace. Thunderbolt was obliged
to pitch our camp that evening within ten miles of the
river, so pitiful had been our progress.
It was a wretched nook in which we halted, and
a bitter cold wind blew across it, but better shelter
was not in sight, and farther I could not go. Thunder-
bolt made me as comfortable as he could with rugs
and coats, but I cared nothing except for the torture
of my leg. It was a long while before he could coax
a fire to light, for rain had been falling, and all the
wood was damp. Yet when the blaze finally sprang
up our situation was still desperate, for we had lost
all our provisions except a little meat, and even our
pannikins and billies; so that he could not even make
a cup of tea. He broiled me some meat, but I could
not eat it; indeed, I could do nothing but toss about
and groan.
Thunderbolt was concerned to the point of despair.
He saw me helpless and in agony, and we were thirty
miles from the house of our nearest friend. When
he failed in persuading me to eat, and found that he
could do nothing for me, his lamentations matched my


own. He cursed the day that he was born, and re-
proached himself so wildly for having brought me to
the pass I was in, that I was constrained at last to try
and cheer him, for it looked almost as though he were
going mad.
“ For goodness sake stop cursing yourself and do
something to try and help me!” I cried in pretended
anger. “ Oh, if only I could bathe my leg with hot
water! Couldn’t you ride somewhere, Fred, and get
a billy?”
“ There is not a house within a dozen miles, and,
besides, how can I leave you!” he replied.
“ I’d rather you left me, Fred, if it was for my ulti-
mate relief. Truly, I won’t be able to stand this
much longer!”
Thunderbolt looked at me for a moment with his
brows knitted, then of a sudden he uttered a joyful
cry. “The fool I am!” he said. “The fool I am.
Bear up, Bill, I’ll have some hot water for you in ten
minutes 1” With that he darted away into the bush,
but presently he returned carrying a number of big
smooth water-worn pebbles, which he cast into the
fire. Throwing himself then upon his knees he
scooped out a large round hole in the ground with his
knife, over which he spread a portion of his oilskin
coat, patting down thereafter the cloth into the hoi


low so that presently a basin was formed capable of
holding water. He next seized his hat and running
to the creek filled it with water which on his return
he poured into his impromptu basin. The scheme
was so ingenious that I exclaimed in admiration, and
again a few minutes later when as he began to drop
the red hot pebbles into the fluid, a cloud of hissing
steam rose up into the air. The water was soon suffi-
ciently heated to be of use, and then Thunderbolt acted
as my nurse, with a tenderness that I love to think of
now, but which I rewarded then with angry scoldings.
The worst and the best of us are beasts—in pain. The
bathing, however, gave me such ease that I snatched
some sleep, and when I awoke there was the outlaw
ready with fresh hot water to dress my wound again.
It was an inferno of a night for both of us. In
the morning I was half delirious. Thunderbolt’s
patience, however, seemed inexhaustible. He once
more dressed my wound, and then having swathed
my leg in bandages, sacrificing half his clothes for
the purpose, he bound me to Combo’s back in a re-
clining posture with my feet in the air. He then
straight away set out at a slow walk—riding his horse
and leading mine, for civilisation, determined to risk
everything so that I might receive proper medical
attention.


I do not care to speak of the period that followed.
Indeed, I have only mentioned my sufferings in order
to pay tribute to the outlaw’s powers of resource and
the self-sacrificing kindness and devotion that he
lavished so unweariedly upon me. By dint of travel-
ling very rapidly during my fits of coma or insensibility
Thunderbolt contrived to bring me late that night to
the house of a settler, a friend of his, who resided
some 34 miles from our starting point. This kind-
hearted fellow had me at once put to bed, and he
himself drove into town for a doctor, whom he
brought back in his buggy. The surgeon’s report was
serious. He declared that I must lay up for several
weeks if I wished to save my leg, and he strongly
advised me to go into the town and enter the
hospital.
This, however, was not to be thought of, and, bad
luck still pursuing us, it became necessary for me to
choose next day between my leg and my liberty. The
police had got wind of our whereabouts, and were
coming after us in force! Such was the news that
the settler brought us on his return from driving the
doctor back to town.
I made my choice very quickly, and an hour later
I was being carried on a bush log cart towards the
deep falls which lie to the east of Armidale. Thunder


bolt decided upon that retreat because he knew the
great gorges beyond the falls by heart, and he had
some years before discovered a secret path leading into
the big hollow, near where the town of Hillgrove is
now situated. By nightfall we had reached the foot
of the gorges, and early next morning we toiled up the
heights on horseback. I can remember nothing of
that climb, for I was unconscious throughout. But
I awoke to find myself lying in a camp the situation
of which was wonderfully beautiful. It was perched
on the side of a mountain, and it overlooked a pre-
cipitous and splendid valley, surrounded on all sides
with bold and rugged hills. The point is now known
as “ Johnson’s Failure,” and it lies only a little below
the “ Sunlight ” gold mine, which I believe is still
working and turning out payable ore.
There we remained for the next two months, enjoy-
ing an undisturbed rest in absolute solitude and
security. And there Thunderbolt, the outlaw, whom
the world regarded as a wolf, with more than the
goodness of a parent waited upon me every hour of
all the days until by dint of his unremitting care and
loving kindness I was finally restored to perfect health
and strength.


CHAPTER XXV.
THE BEGINNING OF THE END.
As soon as I was able to travel we cut across country
to Moree, where we stuck up the mail coach, a venture
that returned a profit of about £l5 apiece. Although
I did not guess it then, that was the last crime I ever
committed. We then headed for Queensland, and
near the MTntyre River we had another brush with
the police. This affair, however, so much resembled
a dozen others which I have fully described, that I
shall not trouble to relate it in detail, and the more
especially because the time approaches when I must
draw my long story to a close. Let it suffice then to
state that we escaped only by the skin of our teeth,
for so hot were the troopers on our heels, after a long
chase, that it was necessary, at the last, to blindfold
our horses and force them to leap over a precipice into
the bed of a deep sunken creek, in order to present
our hunters with a task which might prove too arduous
for their liking.
Q


They must have thought us mad, I fancy, when they
watched our desperate act, but, mad or sane, by some
miracle we accomplished it without mishap, and once
more we got clean away from our enemies, since they
were afraid to follow where he had led.
After that we wandered leisurely for several days
through the heavily-timbered country about the
MTntyre River, camping like gypsies, where the night
found us, ever ready for instant flight, and living like
the birds, from hand to mouth. Each of us was work-
ing out his own fate. Thunderbolt spent his time
intermittently singing sweet songs for hours together,
and planning fresh crimes. I mine in gradually ar-
riving at an understanding of myself, and in vainly
trying to make up my mind to do what I knew to be
the right thing.
My long silences and deep fits of abstraction often
excited Thunderbolt’s attention, and he frequently de-
manded to know what I was thinking about. But I
either gave him evasive answers or did not reply to
him at all, whereupon he would sullenly shrug his
shoulders and endeavour to amuse himself without
my assistance. One evening, however, when our
evening meal was finished, in a fit of irritation he at-
tacked me on the subject of my moodiness.
“Hang it all, Bill!” he suddenly exclaimed, “you


have not uttered a dozen words the entire day, and
yesterday you were the same. You are getting a
cursed poor companion, let me tell you! What is
the matter? Are you in love—or what?”
He spoke so angrily and looked so fierce that, wish-
ing to placate him, I made an effort, and resolutely
put my gloomy thoughts aside.
“ I have been suffering from a bad attack of the
blue devils, Fred,” I answered, forcing a smile. “ You
must help me to drive them away—will you?”
“ How ?” he demanded, shrugging his shoulders.
“ Well,” said I, an idea entering my mind as I
spoke, “ ever since I have known you—and that is
nearly three years now—you have been promising to
tell me the story of your early life, and how it was
you became a bushranger. But you have always
made some excuse to postpone the relation. Re-
deem your promise to-night, will you?”
“Bah!” said he. “You want to cure yourself of
the blue devils by passing them along to me!”
“ Is your story such a sad one, then ?”
“ Black, my lad—black as a starless night.”
“ Then, sing me a song!”
“ No!” said he, frowning heavily. “ I made you
the promise, as you say, and I might as well keep it
now as never, especially as you have made a point
of asking me.”


“ Not unless you wish to, Fred! I don’t want to
make you unhappy.”
“ Oh, hang the odds!” he muttered. “ The thing’s
in my mind, and it has put me in the dumps already.
I might as well go through with it. But pass me the
rum!”
He poured himself out half a pannikin of spirit,
and, having taken a few mouthfuls, he stared for
some time steadily into the fire. “ I was born at
Windsor,” he began at last, in low but uneven tones.
“My people were respectable folk—not rich, but
pretty comfortably off —and as good as God makes.
They gave me a fairish education, and until I grew up
to manhood I did nothing to disgrace their training or
ill repay their love. Indeed, I was one of the most
popular lads in the district, and steady, too, as boys
go. You see, I ” (he paused and shaded his eyes
with his hand) —“ I—l had someone to keep me
straight, even if I’d wanted to go crooked. There
was a dear little girl lived near us—the daughter of
some old friends and neighbours—Jess Anson was
her name. We’d been to school together, we’d
always ridden to and from together every day. Once
I saved her life, too, from a wild bullock. Well, we’d
been sweethearts since we were kiddies, and as we
I
grew up the liking grew. Our folks weren’t against


the match either, so at last it was fixed we’d marry
as soon as I could get a home for her. But, you see,
there wasn’t much doing in our little sleepy hollow of
a place, and I got impatient soon. It was so hard to
save money, and I wanted to make a lot, so we could
get married quickly. I ” (he paused again)—“ I was
miles deep in love with her,” he added huskily, a
minute later.
“ Poor old Fred!” I muttered.
He glanced at me with glistening eyes, and nodded
his head. “ You know I’m fond of Sunday,” he said,
*
pleadingly. “You know that, Bill; but the other
was different somehow—she was the first.”
“ I know, Fred!”
“ I got an offer at last to go droving,” he resumed.
“ The pay was good, and the prospects too. Jess
was against it, but I went.”
“Yes, Fred!”
“It was just Fate!” he said, in harsh tones. “ The
fellows I went with were scoundrels, and men, too—•
all twice my age. They were practised cattle-duffers
and horse-thieves. I was but a lad—and I had to
have money, I was so mad to get married! Well,
Bill, you can guess the result. I made about £2OO
on a cross deal on horses. We sold them in Windsor,
and then just before the wedding—came—Hell! We


were caught and tried! I got seven years with the
rest!”
“ Oh, Fred! What did your people say, and Jess?”
“ It broke them up, but they stuck to me, God bless
them, and Jess too. She, poor girl, couldn’t ever be-
lieve I was really guilty, though I was. She came
to say good-bye to me before they took me off to
gaol, and she swore she would wait for me for ever.”
“And did she?”
“ They let me out of gaol on ticket-of-leave after
I had served three years,” he replied. “ I went
straight home to Windsor.”
“ Yes, Fred.”
He looked at me with glowing eyes. “ There are
a lot of fine people in the world, Bill, if one only knew
where to look for them,” he said, earnestly. “ All my
old friends turned up in a body to welcome me, and
they made me see that they pitied rather than blamed
me. You see, I was so young that they thought I
had been led away by older scoundrels—as indeed I
was —and they made full allowances!”
“And Jess!”
“ She was the first. She threw her arms round my
neck, and kissed me, before them all!”
“ She was a true woman, Fred.”
)


“ She was an angel, my lad!” he answered, hoarsely.
“An angel. Well, well, to cut it short, Bill—and I
must, for this sort of talk is too damned racking—we
made it up that I was to go away for a bit, and try
and make a home for her somewhere else. Then there
came a good offer from an old friend to go up Single-
ton way and work on a station there. It seemed to
come right in the nick of time, and just then I thought
it was a heaven-sent opportunity. Now—now (he
repeated vehemently), I know it was a message manu-
factured in Hell! I said good-bye to Jess and the
dear old folks at home, and went up there. Well,
Bill, it wasn’t long before a kronk set got hold of
me. You see, there was a lot of racing going on up
there, and, as I was a pretty fair jockey, that sort
laid themselves out to make me think them the best
on earth. As I was a young fool, and easily won by
flattery, they succeeded quick enough! Not that
they made me do anything wrong. I declare to God
they never even asked me, Bill. In all good faith
I thought them straight-goers, but in reality they were
cattle duffers on the quiet, and so ill-reputed to the
authorities that I, with my gaol record behind me for
horse-stealing, was soon a marked man with the police.
Without my guessing it the law hounds were watch-
ing me like cats a mouse for a chance to scrag me,


and they got one pretty soon. Being a ticket-of-leave
man, I had to report myself to the police at intervals.
Well, like the young idiot I was, in those days I never
dreamed of dates and times, and after a bit I failed
to make a report when I should have done. Even
yet I can hardly understand properly what came after.
You see so many crushing blows were crowded on
me in such a little while, such a very little while.
“ I was arrested one day and clapped into prison,
just charged with neglecting to report myself when
I should have done. I laughed at the whole thing,
thinking it just police spite, and never fancying but
that I’d be let out in a day or two. Then before
I knew where I was, they had me before a judge,
and I was accused of frequenting bad company and
being guilty of cattle-duffing, and I’m damned if I
know what else. The whole thing was monstrous —
and I was near mad with rage. But I was alone,
and it was my word against a world of law. The
next thing I remember was hearing the judge sen-
tence me to serve out the four years of my sentence
that had been remitted for good conduct in gaol, and
condemning me to an extra seven years, hard labour
beyond that—for what? I don’t know, Bill. Only
God knows for what!”


Age 21, A ge 1 3 .
WILLIAM MONCKTON.


“ Fred!” I cried, utterly horrified. “ But it was
unjust, cruel, wicked, monstrous!”
lie gave me a melancholy smile. “ They took me
to Cockatoo Island,” he said quietly. “ For weeks I
was dazed. I went about and did my work like a
man in a dream. Do you know how I awoke from
that dream, Bill ?”
“ No.”
“ One day they allowed my poor old mother to come
and see me.”
“Yes! yes!”
“ She looked centuries old with grief—and there was
death in her face. Bill, she did not even cry over
me! Her tears had all run dry. She just cursed the
law—it was terrible to hear her—and then she told
me—told me ” He sprang to his feet and threw
out his hands—his face working frightfully.
“What, Fred?” I gasped.
“ She told me that Jess —my sweetheart—had gone
mad with grief; that she was a raving lunatic!”
“Fred!” I shouted, “Fred!”
“Yes,” he groaned, “and it was true! Do you
wonder that I turned outlaw then? I went mad, too,
for a time. No prison could have held me. I
escaped! You have heard of my fight with the
warders and the way I took to the water and swam


to the mainland. I made straight for Windsor—and
Jess! They—they would not let me see her for fear
the sight of me would kill her! Later, she died! No
policeman has laid a hand upon my shoulder since!
None ever shall!”
He gave a hollow laugh, and then, manifestly over-
come with emotion, he strode suddenly away into the
darkness, to fight with the miseries of memory alone 1
As for me, I sat on by the fire for hour on hour,
thinking, thinking. Thunderbolt’s terrible story had
worked in my mind, strange as it may appear, the un-
expected miracle of awakening to perfect vigor the
resolution which I had so long striven to call up in
vain. He had scarcely departed before I felt in my
soul that I would leave him, desert him if you will,
upon the first opportunity that offered. And yet I
had never liked him one-half so well, nor so pro-
foundly sympathised with him, as at that moment!
But I must describe the movements of my brain, as
afterwards I came to understand them, so that these
apparent contradictions may be explained.
My first thought, and it was a conclusion, nay,
rather an overwhelming conviction than a thought,
was this: “Thunderbolt has an excuse for being—
aye, and even for continuing to be, a bushranger! The
law ill-used him, and, from his point of view, he


rightly revenges himself upon the society which makes
the law!”
Then, very swiftly, my conscience put to me the
question: “ But you, Will Monckton, have you such
an excuse?”
I answered: “My stepfather’s cruelty drove me to
seek Thunderbolt’s protection!”
“ Granted,” said my conscience, “ and even for the
sake of argument let it be conceded that there is a
valid excuse for your past crimes. But you are
now almost a man. You no longer stand in awe of
your stepfather. Now, moreover, you know right
from wrong. What, then, of the future? -An indi-
vidual sinned against you it is true; but shall you con-
tinue to visit against the world the injuries you sus-
tained at the hands of one man? If society had
wronged you, you would be right to fight society.
But such is not the case. It is you who have been
wronging society. Your duty is plain!”
“ I would be a hound to desert Thunderbolt,” 1 re-
torted, “ more especially now, when he has shown me
his heart, and told me the story of his wrongs!”
“ Fool!” came the answer, swift and sure. “ Will
you damn your soul out of pity for one lost man. Hell
is full of lost souls, all of whom command our pity
because of their irretrievable damnation, but why


should we publish our sympathy by following them
into the pit? Two ways stretch straight before you.
You know whither they lead. You know your duty,
too. Choose your path, then—for good or evil ?”
It was the compelling gospel of selfishness which
my conscience preached to me, yet at that, the great-*
est and most poignant crisis of my life, I can honestly
aver my heart bled at my inevitable decision, and I
would gladly have welcomed death as a way out, so
that I might thereby spare Thunderbolt the stinging
pain with which I knew any other form of parting
would afflict him.
But death was not for me, and as all human beings
are at one time or another in their lives obliged to do,
I stood at the parting of the ways, in utter solitude
of soul. Destiny waiting to act upon my nod, for
once, and once only, my servant —nay, my slave.
I resolved to do my duty. Peace fell upon me
then, and soon came sleep, sleep, deep and dream-
less.


CHAPTER XXVI.
THE LAST.
When I awoke the day was just dawning, and the
eastern sky was blushed with many different and most
charming tints of rose. Thunderbolt lay at a little
distance, his head pillowed on his saddle, his feet
pointing to the dying fire, slumbering profoundly.
I got up very softly, and stood gazing eastwards,
watching for the sun; then as it rose above the green-
ish-purpled, tree-girt horizon, I quietly repeated over
to myself the determination I had come to on the pre-
vious night: “ Henceforth, come what, may, I shall
do no more bushranging!”
The words had all the force of a vow, but not such
a vow as I had given Thunderbolt, for this time I
passed my word to Heaven, instead of man.
Feeling wonderfully tranquil and comforted in
mind, I then went down to the river for a bathe, and
was soon splashing about in the limpid, swift-running
waters of the stream. But in the midst of my en-
joyment a trivial and commonplace little incident
happened to me, which was nevertheless destined to


bring about something resembling a tragedy, and ulti-
mately the realisation of my ambition. And in this
regard I cannot help remarking how often Providence,
as though in cynical mood, seems to delight in balanc-
ing large issues upon comparatively contemptible
events.
The accident which befell me was that I lost the
soap which I had used in cleansing my body, and
which happened to be at the moment the only piece
in our joint or several possession. It slipped out of
my hand as I was taking a dive, and the swift current
in a second bore it for ever from my view. In order
to explain what followed I must remind my readers
of two traits in Thunderbolt’s character, upon which
I have previously remarked. He was an extremely
short-tempered man, quick to take offence, and pas-
sionate to the point of fury in expressing his anger.
And again, of all the virtues he loved best, and prac-
tised most, was that of personal cleanliness.
With these facts in mind, it will be the easier to
understand the outlaw’s conduct when he became
acquainted with my carelessness.
I had just left the water, and was drying myself
with a towel, when he came along, intent upon a bath.
I noticed that he looked rather haggard, like a man
who had not slept either long or well.


“ Good morning, Fred,” I said.
“ Good morning. Give me the soap!” he returned.
“ I am awfully sorry, Fred,” I answered humbly.
“ I—l lost it!”
It was extraordinary to mark how instantly his
passion woke and blew to flame. He uttered an
angry oath, and with lowering brows and flashing
eyes he began to pour out such a flood of stinging
abuse on my devoted head as could only have been
deserved had, for instance, he caught me in the act of
betraying him to the police. In spite of myself I
grew angry too. But although I felt the blood boil in
my veins I managed to keep a still tongue in my head,
and as soon as I could I silently returned to the camp.
Thunderbolt followed me about ten minutes later.
But his swim had rather irritated than cooled his re-
sentment, and as soon as he saw me, he resumed his
complaints if possible more bitterly than ever.
I listened for a while, hoping vainly for him to
stop; but at length I was unable to endure any longer
the insults he heaped upon me. Moreover, I said to
myself, “ Here is such an excuse to leave him as may
not occur again. Far better too to part in hot blood
than in cold!”
I therefore strode over to where our saddles and
bridles lay, and picking up my own I faced him, say


ing, “That is quite enough, Fred. After this we
cannot be mates any longer. I’ll get my horse and
clear out on my own. Good-bye to you!”
His face turned simply livid! In one second he
had grasped his revolver and pointed it at my heart!
“ Don’t you dare move from here or I’ll drop you!”
he shouted.
The threat, however, made me recklessly infuriated.
It was now my turn to lose my self control.
Flinging down my saddle to the ground, I pulled
out my pistol, and levelled it at his head.
“ Fire!” I cried. “ Fire if you dare, and then if
there is life left in me I will drop you!”
For a long minute we stood thus, staring into each
other’s eyes over the sights of our weapons, our
fingers trembling on the triggers. Of course now I
know that Thunderbolt deliberately spared my life, for
he had held the drop on me all along and he might,
had he wished, have killed me long before I could have
armed myself. But then I thought of nothing, cared
for nothing, except the fact that our wills seemed
finally and desperately opposed. That minute seemed
an age; then all of a sudden Thunderbolt’s arm fell
to his side. His fury had fled!


“ It’s all my fault. Bill, old man,” he muttered in
a broken voice. “ I can’t keep down my stubborn
temper. You may shoot me if you like!”
How curiously we poor human beings are construc-
ted. All fire and wool. In one instant I had been
ready to take the outlaw’s life. The next I felt a
rush of hot tears in my eyes. Hardly knowing what
I did I hurled my pistol far into the river and stumbled
blindly forward to seize his outstretched hand. And
so we were reconciled with a silent hand grasp, for
neither of us was able for some time thereafter to
mouth a syllable.
After bravely pretending to eat some breakfast, we
caught our horses and prepared to change our camp.
By that time, however, my mind was in a chaotic
state. I felt that I had missed a grand opportunity
to do the right thing—namely, to leave Thunderbolt
—and that in some inexplicable fashion I had failed
in my duty, and would be punished for my failure.
Yet, though I blamed myself, I could not perceive
how I could have acted otherwise. Only I knew it
would be harder than ever now to do what I wished
to do. A mood of gloom settled upon me, and never
had the future looked blacker or more dismal.
Then, all unexpectedly, came the last straw. Just
before we mounted Thunderbolt walked over to me
R


holding in his hand one of his revolvers, a beautiful
silver-mounted weapon that he had treasured for some
time, and which he prized above all his other pos-
sessions.
“You’d better take this!” he said in a low, apolo-
getic voice. “It was my fault you lost your own 1”
He thrust it into my hands and strode away.
I was in despair. The gift called for gratitude.
Therefore it constituted another bond to chain me to
the outlaw’s side. How, then, could I immediately
desert him? You see, I liked him so much that the
idea of incurring his hatred and contempt was a pain
hardly to be borne.
I mounted my horse without speaking, my heart
aching with conflicting emotions. And as we started
on our journey I continued to hold the pistol in my
hand. I could not put it in my belt. I felt if I did
that I would be returning in some way to a life of
crime. Ido not know why I felt so. It was a
foolish thought, but I could not fight against it. So
I rode along, holding the pistol in my hand, staring
at it, and dully wondering what to do with it.
Thunderbolt believed, poor fellow; that I was unable
to put it away because of my delight in having it, and
he was pleased.
At last I hung it on the saddle before me, and with


a huge effort I obliged myself not to look at it any
more—to try, moreover, to forget it. After that I
became feverishly gay, laughed at nothing, talked
absurdities, and filled the bush with silly shouting.
Thunderbolt, delighted to see me so merry, grew
merry, too, and the forest re-echoed with the sounds
of our wild frolickings.
We travelled until the fall of dusk, whereupon the
outlaw cried a halt, and we dismounted to pitch our
camp for the night.
As we were unsaddling our horses, however, I
noticed with a gasp of astonishment that the pistol
had vanished. It must have fallen unnoticed from
my saddle by the way.
Thunderbolt remarked its absence at the same in-
stant that I did.
“ Hullo!” he cried. “ Where is the revolver I gave
you?”
Quick as a flash I replied, “ It’s all right; I have it
in my belt!”
It was the first real lie I had ever uttered.
Fear inspired me. Remember, for all my heroic
resolution to give up bushranging and lead an honest
life, I was still only a boy. In the morning I had
faced the outlaw bravely enough, it is true, and I had
defied him at the pistol-point. But then my courage


had been worked up to a point of desperation by rage
and insult. Now I was unarmed, and my blood was
cool. I was afraid to arouse his anger again, as I
knew it would be aroused if he discovered I had lost
the revolver. Therefore I lied to him.
But, before another five minutes had gone by, I was
reduced to the last stage of misery with self-contempt
and shame. I said to myself, “lam a detestable
coward —but, to-night later, after tea, I shall confess
it all to him!”
Thunderbolt noticed my dejection and gaily rallied
me. But I could not answer him in kind, although I
strove to do so, and soon he let me be. Being very
tired, he lay down by the fire immediately the meal
was done, and he seemed to be reflecting, for he did
not speak.
I passed some time trying to gather courage for
the ordeal of my confession. It was very hard, but
I succeeded at length, and, in a tremulous voice. I
broke the long silence.
“ Fred,” said I, speaking very quickly, for I was
afraid that I might break down and change my mind.
“ Fred, I told you a lie this evening. I lost the re-
volver you gave me. I’m very, very sorry.”
I had expected him to leap to his feet and hurl
his rage at me. Conceive then my surprise when he


continued to lie still, replying with never a word. I
held my breath in agonised suspense, for a while,
imagining awful things.
But, all at once, he sighed deeply and turned over
on his side. He was fast asleep! As for me, I
buried ray face in my hands and cried like a baby, for
I knew that there was a Providence directing me even
in the lie that I had told, and in my failure to confess
it; and I had a strange overpowering presentiment that
I had already looked upon Thunderbolt’s living face
for the last time.
For hour on hour thereafter, I sat, movelessly
gazing into the slowly dying fire, brooding and griev-
ing ; more miserable than I had ever been before. I
watched the last red coal expire beneath a covering
of ash, and then I said, “ The death of one life is the
beginning of another. It is time for me to go!”
The stars told me it was after midnight. I
was about to arise when the way of my escape was
made easy for me by an interposition of fate.
Thunderbolt unexpectedly spoke out of the darkness.
“ Will,” said he. “ Are you awake ?”
“Yes!” I answered; my heart beating wildly.
“ I’ve been listening for the horses for the last ten
minutes,” said he, “ and I can’t hear a sound of ’em.
You might go and have a look round, if you don’t
mind.”


“Alright, Fred,” I muttered, huskily. I could
hardly articulate, I was so intensely excited, so deeply
moved. My saddle lay beside me and my bridle.
Very [carefully I picked them up, holding the loose
metal parts to my side in order to keep them from
clinking, lest my purpose be betrayed. Then I
turned and, with never a backward glance, I stumbled
off into the bush, the tears rolling down my cheeks like
rain.
Five minutes later, I had caught and mounted my
horse, and was riding like a maniac through the dark
and silent forest—alone.
I never saw Thunderbolt again, for when next I
looked upon his face he had been for many hours a
corpse.
(The End.)


ENVOI.
After leaving Thunderbolt in the manner that has
been related, the lad Will Monckton made his way
by slow stages back to his native district, where, under
an assumed name, he for some time supported himself
by honest work, shearing, and so on, at the various
squatters thereabouts. At length, however, near Mr.
Campbell’s station, at Wellingrove, he encountered his
former good friend and adviser, Mr. Edward Clarke,
who persuaded him that It was his duty to surrender
to the authorities, and manfully suffer whatever
penalty the law might inflict upon him for his crimes.
Monckton laid this charge upon his conscience, and
a short time later he submitted to arrest.
He was tried at Armidale by a jury presided over
by Justice Meymott. But his case excited such a
great amount of public sympathy, that it was a fore-
gone conclusion that he would not be severely dealt
with. It may be remarked that a local and widely
respected clergyman, the Rev. Mr. Hungerford, who
gave evidence on his behalf at the trial, testified to the
main facts in Monckton’s earlier life and history,


which have been detailed in the first chapter of these
memoirs; and the reverend gentleman not only de-
clared that the lad had borne an excellent character
prior to his taking to the bush, but he unhesitatingly
advanced his opinion that Monckton’s stepfather’s
cruelty had driven him to seek Thunderbolt’s protec-
tion.
Monckton was sentenced to serve three years (with
hard labour) in Darlinghurst Gaol. At the end of
fourteen months, however, he was set at liberty, and,
by a curious coincidence, he was released on the very
day that Thunderbolt fell mortally wounded by Con-
stable Walker, near Uralla.
Monckton journeyed to that place in order to
identify his old leader’s body, and so the two met for
the last time —with the grave between them.


AN INCIDENT IN THUNDERBOLT’S
CAREER.
The following interesting account of an adventure
with the famous outlaw has been supplied me, and is
now published for the first time, by the courteous per-
mission of Wm. Pearse, Esq., of Plasketh, Jerry’s
Plains, N.S.W.— The Editor.
Plasketh,
Jerry’s Plains, via Singleton,
nth September, 1905.
AMBROSE PRATT, Esq.
My Dear Sir,
I was learning station life on my
father’s station, Collymongle, some time in the year
1863, when the adventure which I am about to relate
occurred to the manager of Collymongle, Mr. Hugh
Brydon, whom I knew very well, and who informed
me of it a few hours after it had happened. And it
is still so vividly impressed upon my memory that I
never hear Thunderbolt’s name mentioned but I think
of it. The facts are as follow:—


Mr. Brydon had been away from the station for
some week or two, and in the meantime a drover had
come for fat cattle, which I had given him.
When Brydon returned to the station, I was at home,
He greeted me with the words, “ It has come at last.”
I asked him what had happened, and he replied, “ I
have been stuck up at last!”
I may mention that some short time before this
Brydon had been out with the police in search of
Thunderbolt, and afterwards he always travelled with
two revolvers strapped to his saddle.
“ Well,” he said, “as a matter of fact I stuck
Thunderbolt up. I was coming along the Thalaba
(creek), and I saw two men riding and leading a
pack-horse off the road a bit, and I went over to in-
quire if they had seen any cattle (fat travelling), as
I wanted to have a look at the ones you (meaning me)
had started. When I got to them, the first thing I
knew was two revolvers pointed at my head; so my
revolvers were after all not of much use to me. One
of the men was Thunderbolt. They told me to dis-
mount, which I did, and then Thunderbolt began
searching my swag, and while he was in the act of
doing so his mate was flourishing his revolver about,
and the blessed thing went off, and might have hit
me or Thunderbolt, or himself, even; but, instead, it


killed Thunderbolt’s horse, the bridle reins of which
he had in his hand.
“ Thunderbolt remarked: ‘ Poor horse. lam sorry
for you; you have carried me many a day. That
will be my fate some day, I expect. However, I
would rather that than go back to Cockatoo ’ (old
name of Biloela, the severe prison at that time).”
As I said before, Brydon had been out after
Thunderbolt, and thereafter it had been currently
reported that if Thunderbolt ever did catch him he
would put him to unmentionable torture.
This must have come to Brydon’s ears, and he was
very frightened, hence the precaution of carrying two
revolvers.
“ Well," he continued, “ after seeing Thunderbolt’s
horse killed, the least I expected was having to walk
home; but after he had finished with my swag he said,* I
have a bottle of good brandy in my swag, you may
as well come down to the creek and have a nip with
me.’ I thought they Just wanted to entice me down
to the creek to make away with my body; but I did
not like to show the white feather, so I went with
them, and we began yarning. Amongst other things,
I asked him how he' got the name of ‘Thunderbolt.’
He said it was some drunken fellow in a public-house
who first called him by that name. And after a bit,


as they did not seem to want me any more, I got on
my horse to ride away, but before I had gone far I
turned back and asked Thunderbolt if he would return
me my watch, as I valued it more than he could;
and if he complied with my request I said I would
give him a cheque for whatever amount he thought
was the value of the watch, or I would send the money
to any third party he liked to name.
“ Thunderbolt remarked, ‘ Here is your watch, I
never take personal property,’ whereupon I rode away
without further molestation.”
The name of the place where this occurred on the
creek is called “ Brydon’s Point ” to this day, or it was
a few years ago, when I passed there; but I suppose
very few people now know why it was called so.
Yours faithfully,
WM. PEARSE
John Sani>s, Printer, George Street, and Druitt Street, Sydney.


A Record Sale has been secured for this Book.
Cbc 3apan of Co-day.
BY
r>clcn Jerome,
(Illustrated.) PRICE, ONE SHIELING.
Contents:
KOBE AND ITS PEOPLE.
THE LITTER OF BABIES.
SOME EDITORS AND OTHER MATTERS.
THE GEISHA. THE MIKADO.
SOME STREETS AND SLUMS. THE TEA
CEREMONY.
RAILWAY TRAVELLING IN JAPAN.
SOME THINGS IN TOKIO.
THE WOMEN OF JAPAN AND THEIR
COLLEGE OF MUSIC.
THE WOMEN’S PRISON.
NARA. THE CHERRY BLOSSOM DANCE.
THE NAVAL REVIEW.
AN OSAKA FESTIVAL.
THE MEN OF THE LAND,
EUROPEANS IN JAPAN.
WORLDLY WISE AND OTHERWISE.
Cbe States publishing Co*,
SYDNEY.
And All Booksellers.


BUY
The Coloured Conquest
How the Coloured Races Captured Australia.
CONTENTS.
June 1913.
Deals with the Affairs of Mabel Graham and Myself.
Mabel Graham’s Gift of a Bunch of Red Rambler Roses
to a Japanese Officer causes a Fracas in the Hotel
Australia.
What was learned on a Visit to South Africa.
My Strange Meeting with Sunotoko.
I learn of Major Matte Yoke's Threatening and Brutal
Letter to Mabel.
I endeavour to Warn the People of Australia, but fail.
Australia and Japan.
How the Japanese and Chinese Played a Game, and
arranged for Naval Demonstrations before the deluded
People of the Countries.
The People of Sydney Become Alarmed.
The Blow Falls.
Excited Meetings in Sydney, and a Run on the Banks.
Bennett Burleigh’s Story.
The Japanese Land in Sydney.
The Fair Lily Colonies.
I Tour the World, and Survey the Results of the Coloured
Conquest.
By RATA.
PRICE, 1/-
The States Publishing Co. Sydney
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


THE £6OO BOOK.
Sandy’s Selection \
■ —— By STEELE RUDD. — '
With 40 Illustrations by the leading Black and White
Artists ol Australia,
gW PRESS UNANIMOUS THAT THIS IS ONE OP THE BEST
AUSTRALIAN BOOKS EVER PUBLISHED.
To show the confidence with which the public regard
STEELE RUDD’S future, it may be mentioned that the
purchase-money for the rights of “ SANDY’S SELECTION ”
amounted to £5OO, which is a record price for any book
of fiction written by an Australian and published locally.
PRICE, 3/6; post free sd. extra.
“As a lively, crisp statement of the life of an Australian selector, it
rings true.”—The Daily Telegraph.
“ * Sandy’s Selection 1 will be read with interest by the many admirers
of this promising author.’’—The Sydney Morning Herald.
41 You can’t do better than to fill yourselves up with the adventures of
Sandy.”—The Queensland Grazier.
44 The reader will laugh almost to exhaustion over the absurdities
presented, but he will understand that there is something beneath the fool-
ing.”— Melbourne Leader.
44 Lionel Lindsay and other artists have contributed a number of illus-
trations as laughable as the text.”—The Australasian.
44 We hcartly recommend the book to young and old. Many a hearty
laugh will result from reading It.”— The Tasmanian News.
44 4 Sandy’s Selection ’ does 44 Steele Rudd ” credit, and is a worthy suc-
cessor to his earlier books.”—The Bulletin.
THE STATES PUBLISHING CO., SYDNEY
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


THE BOOK OF THE SEASON.
Sth Edition.
Steve Brown’s Bunyip
Price, 2s. 6d. Postage, 6d. extra.
The Sydney “ Bulletin ” says:—
So many “ Australian ” stories are just now seeing the light that it is a
real pleasure to welcome a collection of tales by an author who knows what
he is writing about. Sieve Brown's Bunyip and Other Stories is a book quite
good enough to stand alone without the introductory verses by Rudyard
Kipling. The Anglo-Indian story-teller has written worse rhymes ccr •
tainly, but he has also written ever so much better. Barry’s stories are by
sea and land, and, if there is a difference, we incline to the sea tales. They
are fully equal in picturesque detail to anything of Clark Russell’s, without
the somewhat ostentatious vulgarity which so often disfigures that author’s
works. Both in the land and sea tales there is what so few stories nowadays
possess, the pervading feeling of locality; the scenery, whether it be in the
township of Jillibegee, " frying in the sun,” 650 miles north-west, or in the
foc’sle of the Sardanapalus, is not a mere word photograph but a living
picture. Moreover, Barry’s bushmen and diggers are not cowboys or
Californians masquerading in Australian dress, but such Australian types
as are to be found. We have not yet, it is true, had time to develop any
striking national characteristics, and herein the Australian author lies at
some disadvantage; but such books as ‘f Steve Brown’s Bunyip” will help
to demolish the bastard imitations of Bret Harte’s creations which have
been so long inflicted on the world as typical Australian bushmen. The
best and most finished of the stories in this volume are the first and title
one, “Ex Sardanapalus," “The Shanghai-ing of Peter Barlow,” “The
Protection of the Sparrowhawk,” "Books at Barracaboo,” and a "Cape
Horn Christmas.” All the others are racy and interesting, although the
most ambitious one, in point of length, appears to lack a connecting link in
the narrative. We are also in a position to assure the reader that there are
neither convicts nor bushrangers in these stories. We quote the best two
verses out of Kipling’s introductory poem
The good wife’s sons come home
again
With little into their hands,
But the lear o’ men that ha’ dealt
wi’ men,
In the new and naked lands.
But the faith o’ men that have
proven men \
By more than willing breath,
And the eyes o’ men that ha* read
wi men,
In the open books of death.
And THOUSANDS OF OTHER PRESS NOTICES EQUALLY COMPLIMENTARY.
Che States publishing Co. Sydney
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
