

■■ ■ ■
fi ZJL-
nib
THREE
LITERARY PAPERS
READ BEFORE THE HAWKE'S BAY PHILOSOPHICAL INSTITUTE,
DURING THE SESSION OF 1882:
I. AND ll.— On NOMENCLATURE.
lII.— On “MACAULAY’S NEW ZEALANDER.”
W. COLENSO, F.L.S.,
Member and Honorary Secretary of the Institute.
(published with the approval of the council.)
“ So go forth to the world, to the good report and the evil!
Go, little'hook! thy tale, is it not evil and good ?
Go, and if strangers revile, pass quietly by without answer.
—For it is beautiful only to do the thing we are meant for.”
“ Da sapienti occasionem et addetur ei sapientia.”
Ancient Oracle,
Ntfa Ztalanh:
PRINTED AT THE “DAILY TELEGRAPH” OFFICE, TENNYSON STREET, NAPIER.




THREE
LITERARY PAPERS
READ BEFORE THE HAWKE’S BAY PHILOSOPHICAL INSTITUTE,
DURING THE SESSION OF 1882:
I. AND ll.— On NOMENCLATURE.
lII.— On “MACAULAY’S NEW ZEALANDER.”
W. COLENSO, F.L.S.,
Member and Honorary Secretary of the Imtitute.
(published with the approval of the council.)
“ So go forth to the world, to the good report and the evil!
Go, little hook! thy tale, is it not evil and good ?
Go, and if strangers revile, pass quietly hy without answer.
• —For it is beautiful only to do the thing we are meant for,”
“ Da sapienti occasionem et addetur ei sapientia.”
Ancient Oracle.
Neto Ecalanh:
PRINTED AT THE “ DAILY TELEGRAPH ” OFFICE, TENNYSON STREET, NAPIER.
1883.


THREE
ADDENDUM.
In sending you this printed copy of my three omitted Papers, (which you
will see are so printed as to correspond with the “ Transactions N. Z, Institute,”
and therefore could be bound up with them,) I would inform you, that I have by
me 2 other Papers of mine, read here before our Members in 1878, —giving an
account of my early explorations on the Ruahine mountain range and my cross-
ing it, in 1845, etc., with especial reference to its Botany. Those Papers were
also omitted at that time by the Board at Wellington ; although they did offer
to publish an abstract of them in the “ Transactions.”
If you should be pleased with the 3 Papers now printed, and would like to
subscribe (say, 3/., or 4/. at most, —those 2 Papers being larger,) for the printing
of those 2 Papers on the Ruahine, I will thank you to let me know early : for,
if a sufficient number of copies should be subscribed for by the Members of, our
Society to save me from heavy loss, I will also get those 2 Papers printed,—as a
memorial of early times in Hawke’s Bay.
William Colenso.
October 27th, 1883.
Ncfo Zealand:
PRINTED AT THE “ DAILY TELEGRAPH" OFFICE, TENNYSON STREET, NAPIER.
1883,


Paper I.
ON NOMENCLATURE.
By W. Colenso, F.L.S.
{Read before the Hawke's Bay Philosophical Institute, 10th July, 188^]
—“Never change barbarous names,
For there are names in every nation given from God,
Having unspeakable efficacy.” Zoeoast., Chald. Oracles.
Tins subject of Nomenclature in its entirety is a broad one possessing many
branches, some of them differing widely from others. I have long been desirous
of offering a few remarks upon this subject, hoping (or, may I not say, believing?)
that such may prove to be of service in time to come.
I shall divide my Paper into two principal heads ; viz., the first part, on
matters appertaining to the Maori tongue ; the second , on certain Colonial
alterations and innovations made in the English and other allied languages.
Part I.
On matters relating to the Maori tongue.
i. Of Errors on the part of Foreigners and Colonists, arising from their
ignorance of the Maori language } especially of Maori proper names for
persons, places, and things. —
That the Maori people had very many highly significant names for things
in general, is pretty well known to those who are well acquainted with their
language ; although, on account of their plainness, some could only be translated
into English by an euphemism. Just so it always was with their names for
persons and for places. It is not, however, with reference to the meaning, the
utility, or the beauty of such Maori names in their estimation, that I am now
about to write, —but of the errors of Europeans respecting them ; and these I
purpose showing in a few instances (some highly ridiculous) 1. In the Ortho-
graphy 2. in the Meaning of the words. These two subjects, though distinct
enough in English, go always together in the Maori language ; because (as I
have shown before in a former Paper*) the two languages differ so widely in
*Vide “Essay on the Maori Eaces,” Trans. N.Z. Inst., Yol. 1., $ 48 of Essay ■.—Trans
N.Z. Inst., Yol. XIII., p. 64, etc.


tlieir construction. Twenty, or more, orthographical errors may occur in the
columns of an English Daily Newspaper, without any one becoming or causing a
serious error, —that is, making an entire change in the meaning of the word, the
sentence, or the subject; or, even causing the word or words so spelt erroneously
to mean anything else, or to be wholly misunderstood ; but such is not the case
in Maori, —here every orthographical error is more or less of a serious one ; and
as it is in the writing, so it is in the pronunciation, and, consequently, in the
meaning and etymology.
For the present, however, I shall consider these separately : and, first, the
erroneous orthography.
This commenced early, in Cook’s time, as indeed might have been expected,
seeing the Maoris had then no written language ; the only marvel with me has
ever been, that Cook and his party on the whole managed so well as they did,
which must mainly be attributed to their having the Tahitian native Tupaea
with them as a quasi Interpreter.* Unfortunately, however, these errors still
continue ! notwithstanding their settled, plain, written and printed tongue. I
will give a few instances taken from the earliest and latest.
Although Capt. Cook was so very unfortunate in his first interviews with
the Maoris at Poverty Bay, still he managed to obtain pretty correctly the names
of two places there, which he has laid down in his chart, — Taoneroa (Te Oneroa=
the long sandy beach), and Tettuamotu (Te Tua Motu—the little island off the
N. head). A few days after, in anchoring and watering a little further to the
K, —first at Tegadoo (Te Karu, the headland at Anaura off which his ship
*ln the large 4to. original edition of Cook's Voyages , Capt. Cook has a few racy and
correct remarks on the N. Z. language, highly applicable here; he says, —“ It is the genius
of the language to put some article before a noun, as we do the or a ; the articles used here
were generally he or ko : it is also common here to add the word oeia after another word,
as an iteration, especially if it is an answer to a question; as we say, yes indeed; to be
sure ; really; certainly: this sometimes led our gentlemen into the formation of words of
an enormous length, judging by the ear only, without being able to refer each sound to its
signification. An example will make this perfectly understood: —ln the Bay of Islands there
is a remarkable one, called by the natives Mattiaro. One of our gentlemen having asked
a native the name of it, he answered, with the particle, Komatuaro; the gentleman hearing
the sound imperfectly, repeated his question, and the Indian repeating his answer, added,
oda, which made the word Komatuayodeia ; and thus it happened that in the log book I
found Matuare transformed into Cumcttkcarrou'cia: and the same transformation, by the
same means, might happen to an English word. Suppose a native of New Zealand at
Hackney Church, to enquire “What Village is this?” the answer would be, “it is Hack-
ney”: suppose the question to be repeated with an air of doubt and uncertainty, the
answer might bo, “it is Hackney indeed,” and the New Zealander, if he had the use of
letters, would probably record, for the information of his countrymen, that during his
residence among us he had visited a village called “ Ityshakneeindede." —Voyages, Vol. 111.,
p. 476.


anchored “sheltered by the little island* there,”) and subsequently at Tolaga
Bay,—he seemed to have misapprehended altogether the name of this latter place.
How he managed to get hold of, or to misconstrue that word of Tolaga , has
ever been to me a mystery,—and that too, after many enquires made early on the
spot. The nearest and most reasonable approach thereto (seeing Tolaga is given
as its Maori name) is TiuvraM— the IST.W. wind; (I and g having been often
confounded with r and It by Cook ;) which wind, the old Maoris said, was blowing
strongly at the time of his entering the bay,f and the name was given to him by
their fathers in answer to his repeated question of “the name” ; they supposing
he meant that of the wind then blowing : Maoris too, not generally having pro-
per names for open bays.
In Cook’s chart of Hawke’s Bay, the strait between Portland Island and the
Mainland is laid down as being called in Maori, Hauray ; now the proper Maori
name of that strait is the same as this here with us, —the strait, or channel, be-
tween the E. and W. Spits (Napier),—and significantly named by them Ahuriri
=(the) fierce rushing (water).
One of the latest misnamed notable places among us, is the present terminus
of the Railway, which has been named and written, and printed and painted, in
all manner of ways except the right one! viz. MaTtatoka , Maltatolto , Mahatohu ;
the right one being the expressive and simple word Maalwtuliu\=t\\(i stream of
the white heron; a name very likely given to it in ancient days, from one having
been seen or caught there. In the naming of this place (or, rather, the writing
down of its old Maori name,) nothing was easier, as there were plenty of Maoris
resident there who knew how to read and write, and could have given its proper
orthography ; and they have often since (when I have been in that neighbourhood,)
joined in a hearty laugh at the invincible ignorance of the palteha (=foreigner)
re Maori words.
These three errors in the spelling of that one word will serve as a simple
example of what I have just said, that “every orthographical error in Maori is
more or less a serious one” ; for Makatoha means, (to) cast a big stone; Malta-
toho=(to) cast a walking-staff, canoe-pole, &c. ; Mahatoku=(to) cast my
clothing-mat, or garment.
Another wrongly-named place, lately settled, and not far off from the last
one, is Talwraite; this Maori name, as it is now transformed by Europeans is
pretty nearly nonsense! whereas its proper name of Talwraiti, is a highly signif-
icant one, meaning, the little open wilderness, or, the little desert; which was very
* “Parkinson’s Island,” as laid down in the Original Map of the Voyage,
t This agrees with what both Cook and Parkinson say.
+ This word is also a contraction of its longer original name, — Maiujaicolukutuhi, having
the same meaning.


suitable for it; it being originally (when I first knew it in 1845,) a small open
Avild surrounded by dense forests. The error however, in the spelling of the name
of this place, has been often pointed out by me ; but, it seems, the settlers there
and others will have it so.
A similar error to this last noticed appears likely to be perpetuated in the
name of the ford (and newly-erected bridge) across the Ngaruroro river, at a wild
spot high up between the two mountain ranges—Te Kaweka and Ruahine, The
old and peculiar Maori name of this ford is Kuripnpango ; which (after running
a series of orthographical changes among the settlers, as usual,) has settled down
to Kuripapanga. Here, again, you will observe, the terminal voAvel is wrong,
and this error spoils both the word and its meaning. When I first Avaded this
river at this wild fording-place in 1847, (35 years ago !) and obtained its name I
Avas Struck AA r ith its peculiarity ;as it did not convey to my mind any thought
possessing a purely Maori derivation, (although the tAvo words of which it is
composed are pure Maori Avords,) —at all events, I strove hard and for a long time
to find out its original meaning, but down to this day I am not satisfied about it.
And, I may further say, that one reason is, the name seems to me to be closely
allied to a suitable Sandwich Island (Hawaiian) Avord, or phrase, (like several
other old and almost obsolete Maori Avords, —all tending to shoAv the ancient
oneness of this great and universal Polynesian language!) Kuripo , —is a pure
Sandwich Island word, meaning, deep dark Avater, as in pools among the moun-
tains ; which meaning would be highly suitable there for that Avater, Avith the
Maori adjective, pango= black, or blackish, added, to intensify it. Of course, I
know, that instead of Kuripo (in the present name) it is Kuripa ; that, hoAvever,
is a slight alteration, Avhich might have occured in the rare pronunciation of an
obsolete or little-used Avord through non-usage during a long lapse of years,—and
there are other known similar instances. In Maori, Kuri is a dog, and papango
is the little black duck, or teal; these tAvo Avords thus compounded, do not yield to
my mind a correct Maori meaning, and the old intelligent Maoris (to Avhom I
have formerly spoken about it,) have ahvays laughed at it as being far-fetched
and incongruous.* K(ripango=hlack dog, Avould have been a better Maori
term, but still not satisfactory.
Another curious error (not, however, the first of its kind,) is made in the
*1 may here mention in a note, that I have often enquired in years gone by of aged
priests and chiefs respecting the derivation of this, and of many other similar and peculiar
proper names, and have very frequently received the answer, —“ It was given by the men
of the olden time, and the reason is to us unknown.” Here it should also be borne in
mind, that in very many instances the ancestors of the tribe now dwelling in, or owning
those places, were not those who had originally named them; they had been early killed
and exterminated! and so it had gone on for ages in succession! See a very good Maori
letter on this subject translated by me.—“ Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” Yol. XII., p. 97, note.


dividing of the Maori name of the place, though spelled correctly, into two words,
each word beginning with a capital letter \—Onga Ongn: and it is pertinaciously
stuck to !! Why on earth those settlers, and others, should so choose to write
that common Maori word, Ongaonga (=Nettle) I cannot conceive. Is it be-
cause of its reduplication? Then, analogically, they should so write the English
words, —murmur, tar tar, pa pa, do do, &c., —beginning each fragment also with
a capital letter !
Some of the notorious old errors in the Maori names of places around us, I
regret to say, still continue, (though many, happily, have been corrected,) as, for
instance, the name of the rising township of Kaikoura , erroneously spelled
Kaikora (sometimes Kikora), here the difference in the European pronunciation
of these two words is not so great to the untrained ear, but the difference in the
two Maori words is extreme (as well as in the Maori and true pronunciation of
them) ; besides the commonly used one is simply ridiculous and unmeaning.
The old proper name, Kaikoura=(to ) eat fresh-water prawns, or, (an) eater of
fresh-water prawns,—arose from the fact of that crustaceous shellfish (Jwura)
being formerly found in the little stream there, where the Maoris used to go and
catch them for food ; whereas Kaikora literally means, to eat sparks of fire !
if indeed it can be said to mean anything at all in Maori.
Another place still nearer Kapler,—well-known in its modern history as
being notorious in bloodshed and in Law Courts !—is Omar'iinui , commonly
called Omai anui: the first and proper Maori name meaning,—the residence (or
cultivation) in old times of a Chief named Mamnui =Great Slayer (a common
and fitting name for a Maori chief) ; whereas the second and incorrect word
means, —the residence &c. of a chief named Great Cultivation ! which, according
to Maori customs, was degrading and impossible, and, as in the former case of
Kaikora, both wrong and ridiculous.—
Another place not far from the foregoing and nearer Napier, (and close to
the present rising township of Taradalc,) was called by the Maoris Taipo ; this
the settlers easily miscalled Taepo, —and then mark the consequence ! Taipo,
means the night tide, (or, no doubt in this case, from onomatopoeia,=the night-
sounding surf; as there, although 4 miles from the outer sea-beach, the surf
resounds loudly from its curvilinear range of hills on a still night, as I have often
heard it,) hence Taipo was, again, a highly suitable natural name. But Taepo,
means to visit, or come, by night,—a night visitant, —a spectral thing seen in
dreams,—a fancied and feared thing, or hobgoblin, of the night or darkness ; and
this the settlers generally have construed to mean the Devil!—and, of course,
their own orthodox one !!* ■
* See a similar European error re “ Hades ” and Hell, exposed, in “ Transactions N.Z.
Institute,” Vol. XII., p. 122., and note there.—As some who may read this paper may not


Worse still are the many errors concerning the names of two well-known
places near Napier ; both possessing rather long Maori names, which, while quite
easy and mellifluous to the Maoris, and to those few Europeans who well-know
then' language, are a real pons Asinorum to the many ! I could not take on me
to repeat or recount the several broken and twisted patois names I have heard
given to Kohinurakau and to its adjoining high hill Kahuraanahe. Perhaps I
had better give pretty fully the meaning of those two names (of places celebrated
in the olden time), as such is not only interesting, but will again serve to show
how correctly the ancient Maoris often named their localities. 1. Kohinurakau:
when I first knew this place it was a delightful spot; a small grove of fine trees
(some being pines), a perennial gushing streamlet of delightful water, and very
fertile soil, —all in a small open dell or natural terrace near the summit of a very
high hill (one of a long range), commanding an extensive view ; where, for
several years, the Maoris had their cultivations and a small village : Kohinurakau
=choice-fat-of-the-woods, —including Maori game-birds and delicious wood-
rats, fruits, and pure water.*—2. Kahuraanahe: the name given to this high
hill is a most expressive and very peculiar term, being really not a noun,
but a sentence including a verb, and meaning,—(lt-is)-only-by-it-rcvealed,
shown or made known ; or, The only, or pre-eminent, revealer. There are, at
least two derivations of this name :—l. The peculiar peaked and isolated broken
summits of this big and lofty hill are seen from the N. shore of Hawke s Bay,
60-70 miles distant, as well as from all the intervening country ; and towards it
the eye of the old Maoris was always directed in steering their canoes in a
Southerly direction across the Bay, or in travelling thitherwards from the N.
2. Whenever the summits wore a hood of mist or cloud, it was an unfailing sign
of rain and of bad weather coming on ; and so, with the old Maoris, It was the
great revealer, or indicator, of the place to which they were going ; and also of
the coming weather. A short time ago I received a letter from an old and
have access to Vol. XII. “Transactions,” I give here the European error alluded to above,
in an extract from the said note (omitting, however, from its length the very interesting
Maori legend). “A few years ago the Superintendent of the late Auckland Province
(Mr. J. Williamson) sought to have an interview with a Maori chief of note on political
matters ; this, however, the chief would not grant, ending with saying,—" you and I shall
never meet until we meet in the veiny a .” This, of course, was made much of. The dread-
ful bitterness of expression,—“never until we meet in hell ” ! —was intensified and dwelt
upon shudderingly with much Christian feeling, but all through ignorance on the part of
the Christian Europeans. The New Zealander had no such thoughts, and only made use
of an old Maori saying; the English having chosen this word (veiny a) as the equivalent
for hell; a meaning, however, which it does not possess.”
* With the old Maoris, the fat, or oil, of lands, forests, &c., meant their choicest and
plentiful fruits and productions; just as with the ancient Hebrews, —“ fat of the land,”
“fat of fruits,” &c.,—Gen. 45. 18: 49. 20. Num. 18. 12, 29. Ps. 81. 1G: etc.


respectable settler, in which the name of Kohinurahau was written “ Queen
Arata ”! which for some time, there being no clue in the letter to its true
meaning, puzzled me pretty considerably.
For a long time, and until lately, our Newspapers constantly erred in con-
fusing the names of two important seaports here on the E. Coast, viz, Turnnga
(Poverty Bay), and Tauranga (Bay of Plenty) : also, in the names of Waikari
(the river between Napier and Mohaka), and Waikare (the name of the lake in
the interior of the County of Wairoa), —and this latter still continues ! Some
even go so far as to laugh at the difference! But the etymological meanings of
those two names of waters are widely distinct, and, severally, are again very
suitable ; Waikari—vf&iQY running through a deep cut, narrow cliffs, or channel
(which that river does) ; and agitated, or surging water (which
that open exposed sheet of water, high up among the mountains, often is).
A similar error on the part of the Newspapers, and the Settlers generally,
was made in the name of the late principal Maori Chief of these parts,— Te Ha-
puhu—the Codfish, (par excellence!) and its common name throughout New
Zealand ; this name was by them lowered to Hapulta, —a most unmeaning word
in Maori, —with the further depreciation through the omission of the definite
article, — Te. Of course, from the time of his being so called, here, on this Coast,
another name was always used for that fish, viz. Kaumaeroa—lows* jaw ; and
time was when it would have been death to the offender if of Te Hapuku’s tribe
to have wilfully called this fish by its old name of Hapuku*
Just so it is, again, respecting a place of anchorage and shelter fx’om southerly
gales on the N. side of Table Cape, its Maori name being WTiangawehi=Fcar-
ing, or Apprehensive, Bay, or stopping-place, (a very good and suitable name,
indicating its being exposed and open) ; this, the Colonists, and the Government
too, have altered to Whangawhei! a word that has no good meaning whatever in
Maori.
Here I may also briefly notice two modern Maori names of lately settled
places near us, and that because of their ambiguity as those names are now printed
and set up ; viz. “ Tomoana," and “ Awatoto." By the Maoris of these parts,
who well know how to pronounce those two names, the orthography though in-
correct would be understood ; but any Maori coming from a distance, and not
having heard the true pronunciation intended, yet not shown, would be almost
sure to pronounce them wrongly,—and so, perhaps, be laughed at; at all events,
if not set right, he could not know their true Maori pronunciation and therefore
their meaning ; and this arises from their not being spelled as a Maori under-
standing their intended meaning would spell them. Sometimes the vowels in a
Maori word are long, and sometimes short, (as in Latin,) and if such are not
*Vide “Essay on the Maori Races,” Trans. N.Z. Inst., Yol. 1., § 43.


distinguished in the writing, an error in reading is almost sure to be made, —un-
less, as I said before, the meaning is previously known to the reader. Thus,
Tomonna should be Toomoana; and Amatoto should be Awatootoo ; for the
meaning of the word Tomonna (as it is now printed and painted up), is, To
enter a cave ; whereas, Toomoana means To be dragged or drawn from the sea ;
the true and intended meaning here.* So Amatoto means, the bloody river ;
but Awatootoo— the dragging river or passage;—which that little long and nar-
row winding creek was in former days truly enough! as I have known to my
sorrow in early travelling (toilsome canoe-voyaging, or dragging) through it.
As we travel further S. into other districts, such errors thicken; witness, —
the ugly and unmeaning “ Taourakira Head ” (the W. head of Palliser Bay), for
the old name full of meaning of Turahirne= Windy Head, (lit. Forcibly-throw-
ing-down-point):—the 'patois Petoni (near Wellington), for Pitoone=e nd of
the sandy beach, —another suitable and highly significant name : Wanganui
for Whanganui, &c., &c. In the Middle Island it is still worse! An appro-
priate well-timed modern example thence, we have at hand in the name of the
fine new steamer from Dunedin, which arrived here in our roadstead only yester-
*As this new township has been named after the present resident Chief and Maori
Member in the House of Representatives— Henare (Henry) Toomoana , and as his eldest
brother, lately deceased, Karaitaina (Christian) Takamoana, was the Maori Member before
him, and as both their compound surnames terminate with moana = Ocean; it may be well
to give in a note the origin of those names, or the cause of their being conferred on these
two (uterine) brothers; for, like in many other instances, those surnames were not those of
the family, nor their own earliest names. —
Some 50 years back, one of the then principal and powerful Chiefs of this place,
Tiakitai, (always miscalled by the early foreigners “ Jacky Ty” !) went on board of a ship
in this Bay; and, the weather changing, he was carried off in her to Port Jackson and
other places; he returned however safely to his home and tribe. Hence the name of Taka-
moana =to change, to roam, to go about from place to place by sea, was bestowed on this
then young Chief and relative, in commemoration of that event. Toomoana , was also con-
ferred as a name on the younger brother, on account of an insult or threat, spoken in the
old days of feuds and bloody fightings, (and but a very short time before that I came here
to reside,) in which the speaker threatened to drag up their canoe with its contents from
the sea, and, of course, to seize it, &c. Hence, to keep the insult (which was a gross one)
in remembrance among the sub-tribe, in order to its afterwards being fully avenged, this
name of Toomoana Dragged from the sea, was given to the boy. Such changes were
common, and cause great trouble in unravelling their history, legends, &c. (See “Essay
on the Maori Races,” Transactions N.Z. Inst., Vol. 1., §2B (2): and, Yol. XIV., p. 15, notes.)
In the last edition of the Maori Bible this has been in a measure obviated, by using
both long and short marks over the vowels where required; but this is more for the benefit of
the English reader. I have never known a Maori so to write, but, on the contrary always to
use the two vowels together to make the necessary long sound, which is also done by the
other Polynesians. And here I may also remark, that the syllable too (in the Maori words
above), is not pronounced as it would be in English, but as if written (in English) toe, or tow.


day; her patois name (it appears) is Mnniapori , (a most incongruous unmean-
ing compound name or term in Maori, which has been disputed over, and further
altered in the Newspapers of the day, to Manipori , Manapori , Manapouri , &c.,)
—whereas the same—being the name of a large S.E. lake of the South Island,
situated far inland among the mountains, —is Manamapore*—anxious, or appre-
hensive, heart. No doubt another proof of a highly suitable name once given to
that sheet of water, expressive of the feelings of those who might have had to
cross it in their small and frail fresh-water canoes, or rafts. Surely if it is deemed
right to keep up the ancient Maori name of any place or thing, such should be
spelled correctly according to the grammatical rules and construction of the Maori
language ? Such would prove of no small service hereafter in philological pursuits.
For, as I have said before, —“Language adheres to the soil, when the lips which
spoke it are resolved into dust. Mountains repeat, and rivers murmur, the voices
of nations denationalized or extirpated in their own land.”f But, in order to this
being done, care must be taken to transmit the same truly, whether by oral tradition
or in writing. Strange thoughts arise at times within me, when I contemplate,
on the one hand, the uncivilised unlettered Maori carefully handing down the
names of places and things obtained from his forefathers from time immemorial,
without error or change ; and, on the other hand, the civilised lettered European,
who, while apparently desirous of retaining the same names, neither speaks nor
writes them correctly, and, worse still, does not care about doing so! The great
Provincial District of Otago still adheres to its erroneously spelled Maori (sic)
name; (some, however, here among us, knowing that it is not Maori, might
think it derived from the Gaelic !) That is still further outdone by their keeping
to the horrid ungrammatical term of “ Maori Kaik!" for, Kaainga maori. And
worst of all, those errors (with many more of a like kind) are taught to our children
in the Colonial Schools throughout the land,|
And as I have here just touched upon the Colonial School-Books (Geography
of N.Z.) and their Maps in use in our Schools, one other great and glaring error
♦lt is worthy of remark, that this ancient term, now but very rarely used, was one of
those expressive ones spoken by Paikea, when swimming towards land, straggling far off
in the Ocean. (Transactions N.Z. Institute, Vol. XIV., p. 20, v. 1.)
f Essay “On the Maori Races,” § 51, par. 5; Transactions N.Z. Institute, Vol. I.
+ A few years hack when I held the office of Government Inspector of Schools for this
Provincial District, I was frequently sorely puzzled in my School visitations, owing to the
erroneous orthography in many places in the Maps and School Geography of New Zealand.
Veiy many Maori names of places I knew to he wrong, and others of places unknown to me
I supposed to be so, as they were not given in true Maori, (of course I am referring to the
edition of 1871 ; there may, however, have been subsequent editions with these errors
altered.) And this was the more to he regretted, for the outlines and execution of the
Maps were very clear and correct; and very much of the information given, (physical,
descriptive, and historical — modern,) was of a superior and useful character.


contained therein I feel bound to notice more particularly, and that is the Maori
name of the Southern Island. Ido this the more especially as its true and proper
name was early given correctly by Cook himself. Its old name is Te Wai
Pounamu, or Te Moana Pounamu ; meaning,—the water in which the Green-
stone dwelt. For with them, the Greenstone (their greatest valuable) was a living
being, and dwelt in the waters of the S. Island, whence it was obtained by the IST.
Maoris (through barter) at great expense and trouble, and believed to be only caught
at certain seasons, and then only by the powerful use of many prayers, &c.* In
our School Books, however, all this is set aside ; and we are plainly and unpoetically
told, that the S. Island is called in Maori, —“ Te Wain Pounamu, or the place
of the Greenstone.”f This name, however, is not of Maori origin ; it is another
attempt on the part of the Colonist to correct the Maori name, and then to give
to his own thought his own meaning! (supra, —Taipo, &c.)
Some of the errors in Maori nomenclature made by the early Naturalists and
Botanists in this Country are highly amusing if not interesting ; the more so be-
cause not unfrequently they also give their own safe (sic) deductions therefrom!
First, making the mistake themselves in the orthography, &c., and then (secondly
and consequently,) giving an erroneous meaning :—A few of them I will here
briefly notice.—
The French Naturalist Lesson, (who accompanied Adm. D’Urville in 1826-
1829,) gives the Maori names of several plants, a few of them are quite correct;
of some, however, it is impossible to know what was originally said by the Maoris
to him, or intended by the writer; one, in particular, has often made me to smile,
—it is the little seaside plant Spergularia marina, whose Maori name, Lesson
says, is u Notenoho."\ This, however is not the name of a plant, but a pure
Maori sentence, (given, no doubt in answer to a question,) meaning,—From the
sitting or resting-place ; i. e. (gathered by you) from the spot (where you were)
resting, or sitting.
Dr. Dieffenbach, writing of our N. Z, Birds, says,—“the Cormorants have
something solemn in their aspect, and are called by the New Zealanders Kauwau
or the Preacher;” (!!) § and, again, in his “Vocabulary,” appended, (not, how-
ever, wholly of his own collecting!) he has, “ Kauwau, a Shag ; preaching.”
This arises, (1) from his mistake in the orthography and pronunciation of two
words, here by him confounded, which widely differ; Kawau, being the common
name for the Shag ; and Kauwhau, to address an assembly, speak formally and
lengthily, as the old Maori orators and chiefs ; hence, to preach (modern). One
*The old legends respecting it are very interesting, of which more anon.
fNew Zealand Geography, page 3.
J “Voyage de L’Astrolabe, Botanique,” Yol. 1., p. 315.
§ “Travels in New Zealand,” Vol. 1., p. 77.


Owl -
Ruru -
- Herooroo.
Kingfisher -
- Kotare
Ghotarro.
Parson-bird -
Tuii -
Toi.
Bell-bird
Kopara
- Heghobarra.
Thrush
- Koropio
- Golobieo.
Fan tail Flycatcher
Piwakawaka
Diggowaghwagh:
Piouakaouaka, Less.
Robin - - -
- Toitoi
- Ghatoitoi.
Pigeon-
- Kereru
- Hagarreroo.
hiight as well say, that the two English words, Cat, and Cart, were alike, in sound
and meaning ! (2) but this notion (like very many others in Dieffenbach’s work) was
not original with him ; he had got it from Polack’s book on New Zealand, pub-
lished a few years before ; who of course, characteristically adds thereto ; and the
Doctor, having once got hold of the ludicrous'idea, (and not heartily liking the
Mission-body,) evolved, German-like! the added “ solemnity of the Shag’s as-
pect,” from the depths of his own mind !
Dieffenbach also, (passim,) delights in reduplicating common names of
birds, &c., — e.g. the Kiwi (.Apteryx sps.,) is with him Kiwi Kiwi; the Mura
(owl), is Murururu; the Weha (wood-hen), is Wekameka; the Paraoa (sperm
whale), is Paraparaua , &c., &c. Errors of this kind however wore very common
with most early foreign visitors, as I myself have often heard them used. The
worst was, that the younger Maoris (always apt imitators, especially in the olden
time,) not unfrequently copied from their visitors, especially if such were of some
note, and hence those errors became perpetuated.
In the List of Maori names of Plants appended to Sir J. D. Hooker’s
“ Hand-Book N. Z. Flora,” there are several errors ; some, no doubt, arising
from the writers jotting down the Maori name they had just heard, according to
their own foreign notion of writing it, —forgetting, that no Maori name or word,
ever ends with a consonant.* I will select one, Toumatou , because its pseudo-
* I have often been struck some 40 years ago with the close phonetic rendering of many
Maori names of Birds, Fishes, &c., by the two Forster’s (father and son) who accompanied
Cook on his second Voyage to N. Zealand, and with the large amount of patient toil they
must have experienced in taking them down; albeit their orthography, at first sight, a-
bounding in harsh double consonants, looks very barbarous, and is anything but tempting:
also, with those of Lesson (already mentioned) and other Naturalists belonging to the
French Discovery Expeditions of 50-60 years ago. Of course their orthography varies
much from the far simpler one adopted in rendering the Maori tongue into writing; still
it is such that I could have beneficially used in my early enquiries among the Maoris, which
is more than can be said of many (so-called) Maori names more recently written, above re-
ferred to. A few of those old Maori names of Birds I will give here from Forster, as a
curiosity. It will be seen that he, in many instances, adds the indefinite article (he =a) to
the name of the Bird, and uses g and gh, hard for k.
English Name. Maori Name. Maori Name from Forster.
Sparrow-hawk - - Karearea - - Kari-area.


Plover -
Tuturuwatu
Doodooroo - attoo.
Blue Heron -
Matuku
Matook: Matoucou, Less.
Paradise Duck
Putangitangi
Pooa dugghic dugghie.
Duck -
Parera
He-Parerra.
Tern -
Tara -
He-Talle.
Maori name has been unfortunately made into a specific botanical one for the
plant, by its describer M. Raoul, — Disc aria Toumatou. Now this, lam sorry
to say, is worse than rubbish! The correct Maori name of this plant is Tiema-
takum*= the demon-smiter, or striker of faces ; which name, from its thorny
structure and dense habit of growth, is very expressive, particularly to a Maori
of the olden time—almost naked ? Toumatou, however, is not a Maori word at
all, and scarcely even a grammatical phrase ; and if translated can only mean,
thiue-our, —or thy-we,—or albus-anus-ttcus ! But one of the grossest errors in
that List, is the (pseudo) Maori name of a small plant said to be obtained by
the Rev. R, Taylor from the interior, and given in full by him ; Taylor calls it,
“ Te-pua-o-te-reinga"; f and he translates it by “The flower of Hades (or hell)” !
[This, however, was nothing new for Mr. Taylor, his book abounds in such ! !]
I have made many enquiries after this plant (partly at the pressing request of
Sir J. I). Hooker,) which seems to be scarce, or, more likely, local and overlooked,
—being but a small leafless parasite on the roots of trees in the forests. Very
likely the Maoris who were with Taylor on that occasion, gave it the name of
“Pun reinga,"\ from noting his eagerness to get it, (which Taylor amplified into
Te pua ote reinga! adding thereto his own mis-translation). Now Pica reinga,
as given by them, means, —A (or the) flower eagerly laid hold of, grasped, sought
after, or desired : just as in the common Maori term “ Wahine reinga" ; —a (or
the) woman eagerly followed, sought, &c. No such idea as “the flower of
Hades,” —as we understand that term, —was ever associated by any Maori with
that, or any other flower. The error, or strange jumble of ideas wholly foreign
to the little plant, was evolved from Taylor’s mind.§
We meet again, in his book, with a conceit very like this, which it may be
well briefly to quote, as one will serve to illustrate the other: he says,—“A small
fish is also found in the Rotoaira Lake, and in the streams which gush out of the
sides uf Tongariro, called the fish of Hades, and is of a buff colour and spotted
English Name. Maori Name, Maori Name from Forster.
*This plant was originally discovered by myself in 1838, and again in 1841, at Poverty
Bay ; and sent by me to Sir W. Hooker in 1842, who published it, with its Maori name,
&c., in the “London Journal of Botany,” Vol. 111., p. 17, in January, 1844; it was also
published by myself in the “Tasmanian Journal of Natural Science,” Vol. 11. p. 232, in 1843.
t Loc. cit., p. 768.
JLoc. cit., p. 250.
§ See a simple European error re “Hades” exposed, in “ Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” Vol. XII,
p. 122, note there; and, note, p. 6of this paper.


like a Leopard’s skin,” &c., (loc. cit., p. 499.) That there is such a little fish
to be found there in that small lake, I well know, having dined on them, and it
is delicious eating. It is called by the Maoris, Koaro, and is only found in that
lake in the summer season. The Maoris say, that it comes out of the watery
recesses of the neighbouring mountain Tongariro, whose waters feed that lake
lying at its immediate base. But here, as before, the calling it a “Jish of Hades,”
—because, forsooth! the summit of Tongariro is an active crater—a burning
mountain, —is not Maori at all, but is wholly a foreign fancy ! another strange
aberrant one of Mr. Taylor’s ; with such, however, his book abounds.
A notable instance of a similar strange and far-fetched notion arising from
the same root ignorance of the true meaning of the Maori term or name, (accom-
panied with the dissonant English idea in the mind of the writer, or speaker, with
whom “ the wish was also father to the thought,”)—l find in the last volume of
the “Transactions N.Z. Institute,” (XIII., p, 440,) —where it is recorded, that
at a meeting of the Auckland Branch, —a Mr. Bates greatly interested them in
informing them, that in the Maori tongue, “ Wai meant water, roto meant lake,
7nof.ii meant an island, and puhe a hill,” &c., &c. ; and then the President, Dr.
Purchas, in the chair, said, —“ The derivation of some of the Maori names was
very interesting, Rangitoto, signified “red” or “ bloody” heaven, which pointed
clearly to a period when the Volcano was in active operation. The word ranga
was usually connected with Volcanic appearances,” &c., &c.
Here, as I take it, in the President’s remarks (as well as in what followed),
is an extra large amount of error, —or, rather, several errors !
1. I doubt if ever any Maori so understood, or so used the word, or words,
Rangi toto ; the whole conception or idea is utterly foreign !
2. There are several hills known to me scattered throughout New Zealand,
bearing this name, besides others, islets in the surrounding seas, which are not
volcanic ; but they are all rough and peaked, and more or less craggy at top, and
are isolated, and generally higher than their neighbours ; — e. g. four, at least, in
the neighbouring county of Waipawa,—one near Tamumu, one near Takapau,
one at Kairakau, and one near Black-head ; one at the Mahia the N. side of
Hawke’s Bay ; another in North Taupo ; two in the country N. of Auckland ;
one at Wairarapa ; and the Rangitoto islets in Cook’s Straits.
3. The word 11 toto” has other meanings besides blood; one of which is, to
ooze forth (as from minute leaks, and from pores of skin, rind, &c.,), to trickle
down ; another is, to arise in the heart or soul, to rise up within, to gush as
strong feelings,— e.g. “ Kata hi ha toto ahe te aroha o te ngahau!”— Then the
heart-felt love arose, or, gushed upwards.
4. With the ancient Maoris all blood was not only of a red colour.
5. The word toto was not commonly used by the old Maoris for red-colour,


—for which they had several proper names according to its hue ; they rarely ever
used “ toto ” at all in that way save figuratively.—
6. A red sky was never termed Rangitoto by the Maoris ; they have
several proper names for it, according to the time of the day, its peculiar appear-
ance, and the intensity of its red colour.
Having made those observations by way of preliminary, I would further
state, that, out of several archaic meanings pertaining to this word or phrase
known to me, I should select this that follows, as being what an ancient
thoughtful Maori might probably assign as originating that word or phrase ;
although there are others :
With the primitive Maoris, Rangi (=Sky) was a personal being, their
common Great Father. In their highly figurative early Myths, the Hew (To-
wm-mwsu=Hrawn-downwards-from-the-sky) was his affectionate tears, dropping
on his ever-parted wife Rapa (=the Earth) beneath ; and it was but a step
in the same direction with them to conceive, that when he lovingly descended,
seeking and grieving, and came nearer to his lost spouse, the jagged rocky hill-
tops, which they often saw separating the low clouds, and trickling with wet,
were so through his blood ; thus those ragged stony-crested hills bore the com-
mon name of Rangitoto, —or, the causing the blood of Rangi to ooze, or trickle
down. Moreover the ancient name of the blue sky was Nikorangi—the flesh of
Rangi.* And of this opinion it may be further said, that it is in agreement
with their old tapu or sacred customs on meeting after separation,—crying
largely with many tears, and cutting themselves to cause the blood to ooze forth
and to trickle down.
Moreover, in support and further illustration of what I have just stated, I
will here give an extract (translated) from an ancient East Coast version of
the Creation and Beginning of all things, (written many years ago by an intelli-
gent Maori tohunga— priest, or skilled man) :
—“ After the separation of the husband and his wife, Rangi and Papa,
(Sky and Land,) Rangi= Sky, the husband was (fixed) at a great distance off
(from her) ; then the loving heart of Rangi began to work strongly (w</rm=bite)
towards Papa, and just so did the feelings of Papa work towards her separated
husband ; and they were continually affectionately lamenting their separation
and each other’s absence. The lamentations of Rangi above descends in his
copious falling tears, namely, mists, heavy rain, showers, dew, and thick wet hazy
clouds ; these are given down by him as refreshment (Jkai) to her ; while the
usual rains are also sent down to moisten and comfort and feed Papa and her
*See “Trans. N. Z. Inst.,” Vol. XIV., p. 67, note. Here, also, the peculiar name of
the pink-flesh Kumara — Wairua-a-rangi , and its derivation, should be borne in mind.—
“Trans. N. Z. 1.,” XIV., p. 54, note.


numerous children (trees and plants) growing on her back, which she always
maternally carries without feeling the heavy load.”
For the present I make no remark on that other grave error ; that “ the
word ranga was usually connected with volcanic appearances ”; [which, how-
ever, I have yet to learn !] —only this, If it were so, what connection is there
between ranga and rangit Neither on what immediately follows, just as er-
roneous. I can only regret that such information (sic) respecting the ancient
Maoris should ever have been admitted within a volume of the “ Transactions of
the N. Z. Institute,” although not among the “ Transactions ” proper.
At the same time I would observe, that the study of ancient Maori names
of places , plants, and and animals, —with, in many instances, their metaphorical
meanings, is deeply interesting, and philologically useful; but it is a difficult
one, and should only be prosecuted by a person very well skilled in the general
Maori language, including old tribal or District dialects, (and that not merely
colloquially,) as well as in their History, both legendary and real, and who, also,
can think in Maori, — i. e. after the old Maori manner, —otherwise he would be
sure to make a mess of it; for, as Schiller remarks, —“Against stupidity even
the gods fight in vain.”
Having shown the error arising from the mistake made in the etymology of
the name of one of our noted hills, I may also briefly mention another, and a
similar case. It is well known that one of the high mountains in the N. Island,
and the only active volcano in N. Zealand, is called by the Maoris Tongariro.
On this, the Rev. R. Taylor having brought forward a few extracts from
“Mariner’s Tonga Isles,” respecting the natives of Tonga, and having summed
them up, says,—“ the identity of the Tonga natives with those of New Zealand
is evident,” (!) and then he goes on, characteristically, to state, as a clencher, —
“ Tonga is the name given by the Maoris to the S. wind, the highest (sic)
mountain is also honoured with the same, being called tonganro. Tonga riro
simply means, Tonga which has left or departed from its old position in the
Tonga islands, and gone to the South.”*—
Was such a far-fetched and utterly incongruous idea as this ever before
hatched ? It is far more likely that the said mountain got its name from the
snow often deposited by the S. wind on it, (by a figure of metonymy, so common
with the Maori,) — tonga being also commonly used by them for biting cold,
hence for snow, —the cause for the effect; and then, owing to the heat arising
from the crater, the fallen snow remained but a very short time on the cone or
* “New Zealand and its inhabitants,” p. 390. Moreover this idea is taken from
Lang’s strange book, “On the origin of the Polynesian nation,” p. 67, (London, 1834,) —
though there it is carried further and is still worse ! —but then Lang knew nothing of the
Maoris.


peak, and thus became rm?=gone ! So different, in this respect, from the neigh-
bouring and higher crest, on which the snow permanently remains during many
months of the year ; which crest also bears the highly appropriate name of
Pard-te-tai~tonga=k) irt (or dregs) from the Southern Sea. (N.B. The term
tonga is here again used.)
2. Of pure Maori names, and of their derivation, early given by the Maoris
themselves to introduced European novelties.
This of itself is a highly interesting theme, as showing their genius for
Nomenclature, and apt and fertile invention. Many of those names were highly
expressive, particularly to the Maori people ; and were most strongly shown, in
(1) fitting compound words; (2) in names of things utterly different, yet resem-
bling in form, or in their use, and so affording the idea and the name ; and (3)
in onomatopoeia. Enough might easily be brought forward to fill a pretty large
paper ; I-will, however, give a few pregnant examples, as many of them are now
become obsolete, or gone out of use, for the horrid unmeaning patois , or gibberish
brokcn-English !
And first, of that article on which their whole heart and soul was early set,
—a gun. This was named, in its entirety, a the hollow cylindrical
shape of its barrel; pu being their Maori name for the hollow and long stalks of
large reeds, and for their long cylindrical wooden horns or trumpets. A musquet,
and a flint and steel gun, were called a Ngutu-parera, (angl. Duck’s-bill,) from
the shape of its steel ; a double-barrelled gun, was called, a pmvahnrua=gnn
with two mouths ; the barrel, —Kamaha (N.), and powhatu (S.), —common
Maori names for stone (they not having metals) ; the stock, —rapa, —from its
flatness, &c., —this being the Maori name for the blade of a paddle, the thin flat
carved part of the upright stern of a war-canoe, &c.; the lock ,=Kati, and Katipu,
—this word being used for a catch, fastener, latch, &c. ; to be at half-cock, =
Kati'tu , —standing catch; for whole cock,—Kati-pnpuhi, —firing-off catch;
cock down,=.»m£, —at rest (lit. sleeping) ; to cock ,=Keu, —to fix, make ready ;
the ramrod was called, Ohaoha, —a reduplication from oh a, any long sharp pointed
instrument, as a fine dagger; to stab, &c.
2. Of a ship ,—Kaipuhe: seeing so much of error has long been prevalent
and held, respecting the origin of this word, I shall give as briefly as I may, my
opinion concerning it ; which I have only arrived at after a great deal of toilsome
research and study, extending over a very long period. A ship was early named
at the N. of the N. Island Kaipvhe (and Pulte, poetical), but at the S. of the
same Island it was called, —main tawhiti— island (from) afar, and moutere
=floating isle, it was also called, Paid; this latter word is the Tahitian term
for a large canoe, ship, &c.,* and it might have been obtained by the Southern
*lt is also the term for a ship in the Hervey Islands, by dropping the h, (not used
there,) —pai for paid.


Maoris from the Tahitian Tupaea who accompanied Cook on his first voyage to
New Zealand, —or from Cook and his European party themselves, as they would
be sure to use that (with them) known and accustomed term. A ship was also
called porn, (especially by the Ngaitahu tribe on the E. Coast of the S. Island,)
which name was very likely given to it on account of the flatness of the cielings
below decks, as pora in the Maori tongue is the proper name for a flat-roofed
house ; also for a foreigner, &c. # Now, whence is this somewhat strange name
of Kaipuke derived? Observe: (1) the word itself, though pure Maori, is not
that of any other thing ; —(2) the term is a compound one, kai and puke ;
(3) this particle, kai, is in extensive use, and has very many meanings ; one is,
that when prefixed to any word—noun or verb—it denotes the acting, or the
possessing that peculiar power, faculty, or thing, indicated by the word to which
it is joined,—and that fully, entirely, or intensively,— e.g. —
maki,— work, labour : kai-mahi,= worker, labourer.
hang a,— to make, build : kai-hang a,=maker, builder.
hoe,— a paddle, to paddle : kai-hoe, = paddler.
riri,— anger, to be angry : kai-riri,= an enemy.
rvaewae,— foot : bai-imewne,= footstep.
kahn,—strong, strength : kai-kaha,— a very strong man.
tokutohu,= to point out, direct : kai-tohutohu,=Si director, overseer,
manager.
wnmno,= to mediate : kai-rvawao= a mediator.
whakamarie,— to console, to make quiet: kai-whakamarie,— a con-
soler, a nurse.
—Another, and a very old meaning of kai, as a noun, is moveable property,
possessions, goods, treasures, chattels, —valuables in the estimation of the ancient
Maori.
(4) The word puke has also several meanings, but all derived from one
root:—1. a hill :—2. a heavy billow, or high surge at sea:—3. a great and
sudden flood, or rise of waters in the rivers, (often maipuke, note this word,) :
4. (fig.) for a chief : —5. for any great obstruction, moral or physical.
*ln writing on Polynesian nomenclature I may observe, that Pora {Polo.) is also the
term in the Sandwich Islands for the high platform seat for chiefs between a double
canoe:—in Fiji it is the name given to a war-canoe from another land ( Bola ): —in Samoa,
Pola is the name for plaited matting of cocoa-nut leaves, used to shut in a house; —also, as
a verb, to carry flat on such a piece of matting—as a cooked pig, &c. [Here we have
again in another form the Maori idea of flatness {supra); with the Maoris, also, a coarse
kind of platted matting for floors, &c., is called pora.~\ In the Tonga isles the same word
{bola) is used for the leaf of the cocoa-nut platted for thatching and other purposes; and
{bolavaka) for a similar covering for canoes, —which, I suppose, is extended horizontally
over them, as was formerly the case in N.Z. I mention all this briefly, as showing the
oneness of idea, root, or family connection existing between the several languages.


In the very old legend of the killing of the monstrous Saurian, Hotupuku ,
it is related, that when the enormous creature emerged from its cave, the rousing
cry was, — u Ano! me he pukepuke whenua ! ”=Verily !it was like a hill of
earth ! (IST.B. It was not considered sufficient to say, —puke, or pukepuke, =
hill, only ; but, pukepuke whenua= hill of earth.) *
Further, it is to be borne in mind, that in order to render any word in Maori
doubly emphatic,—whether adjective, or noun following in construction, —such
word is used out of its common position in the sentence, and instead of following
the noun, is placed before it : — e.g. —
nui exceedingly great good :
nui /dm#,—exceedingly great evil :
nui tohora,=Si very large whale :
nui tara,= a fish with remarkable spiny fins :
nui tangatn,=& great multitude :
wai puke, ==a great hill of water ; —a flood.
—So that kai puke may well have been intended emphatically to mean, —a
floating hill possessing valuables, —property of all kinds.
And here I may also add, that at the Sandwich Islands (and other places
in the Pacific), a ship is called a mo£w=island, (not unlike puke— hill, the main
idea being the same,) through its being taken when first seen by those Islanders
for an island. The old Maoris also had plenty of stories about floating and
voyaging islands, — e.g. Motutere in the Taupo lake.
Having thus given pretty exhaustively what I believe to be the true origin
of the word Kaipuke=Ai\\>, (which has long been a vexata qucestio,) I shall
not enter on her various parts, for generally they bore the same names as the
corresponding ones in their own big built canoes ; a few only of the additions I
shall notice.—
A man-of-war=&.f whawhai, or k. whai purepo, — lit. fighting ship, or ship
possessing cannon :
A merchantman =k. kawe taonga, — lit. ship carrying goods :
A patu, or wero tohora, — lit. a ship for killing, or harpooning, whales :
A passenger vessel=£. eke, or k. kawe tangata , — lit. a ship taking on board, or
carrying men:—
All sailing ships, in contradistinction to steamers, =k. maori,\ — lit. common, or
usual ship:—
A 3-master—/s. rakau-toru (N,), k. rewa-toru (S.), — lit. a ship (with) 3 trees, or
poles ; —a ship (with) 3 heights, or high poles, understood :
* See Transactions N. Z Institute, Yol. XI., p. 87, for this strange and complete legend
translated by me.
f K. here throughout, means haipuhe.
JSee “Trans. N.Z. 1.,” Yol. X. p. 151, for examples of this use of the word.


Standing yards —kurupae, — lit. cross-beams of a large bouse, platform, &c. :
A figure-bead=iAw whakapakoko, — lit. nose, or beak, having a carved image :
Outer stern and taffrail —paremata, from pare, an ornamental peak, frontlet,
border, for the face, and mata the full front of the face :
Upper &Qc\i,=paparunga, — lit. upper boards:—
Shrouds and ratlines, —arakirunga, or arupikikirunga, — lit. (the) climbing-way-
aloft:—
To sound with the lead ,—whakataatutu, — lit. to make touch the bottom (and)
stand ; a most expressive and fitting word.
3. Of common working-tools,—which, as Cook and others truly said, they
prized beyond everything ! most of the common ones, as the axe, hammer, chisel,
auger, gimlet, awl, knife, large spike nail, small nails, &c., took the names of their
own similar stone and bone implements ; a few others however obtained some
curious and striking names as—
An adz e,=kapu, — lit. palm of the hand, sole of the foot, &c,, so named from its
curvature.
A small axe, hatchet, and tomahawk, panekeneke, — lit. strike-and-keep-moving-
by-small-degrees!—a good expressive name, indicative of their manner of
using it in the woods, scrub, &c., clearing before them ; formerly no Maori
of any rank travelled or moved about without one strung to his wrist ; of
this little useful instrument they were very fond.
A saw, and also a fil e—kani, — lit. to cut stone by friction, rubbing to and fro ; as
they cut their Greenstone, &c.
A plane, —mam, — lit. to scrape, cut, &c., give a smooth surface to ; —as with
obsidian, a sharp shell, &c.
A pinchers, —kuku, — lit. the big mussel shell-fish.
A grindstone, hone, &c ,,—hoanga, the common name of their own sharpening
stones, of which they had several kinds ; the common grindstone very often
took the additional term of huri= to revolve.
A pick, pickaxe, =keriwhenua, — lit. earth digger.
A ho e,=karaone, — lit. to tear, roughen, pare the ground.
A spade, =puka, kaheru, karehu, hapara, &c.; this useful instrument bore
several names, according to the District and sub-dialects, but its general one
at the N. was puka. At first and for a few years this name to me was a
puzzler, for I could not find out why the spade had obtained this peculiar
name, (which was also the name given by the Maoris to the cultivated
cabbage,) I knew of nothing Maori that also bore it. At last I heard from
an old intelligent priest, that there was a tree bearing a large leaf named
puka , and thence their name for the spade (and cabbage) ! For a long time
X diligently sought this plant, offering rewards for it, no one, however, had


seen it; at length I found one (in 188 G), in a corner of Whangaruru Bay (S.);
—its leaves were large, 12-20 inches long, and 8-9 inches broad, oblong, plain,
entire, and stout, with a long thick stem.* I never saw another plant ; its
home was said to be on the Poor Knight’s Islets, a small group in the sea
just opposite. I suspect hapnra to be the Maori attempt at pronouncing
the word shovel
4. Of articles of food.—
The Potatoe bore several names, both what may be termed general , —each
one extending throughout a large district, as, umhi, parareka, kapana, rimai,
taema , &c,; —and particular , — i.e. of each variety or sort, of which they had a
great number, many being of their own raising. Umhi , is also the name of other
edible Maori roots, sometimes with a short inseparable affix, as umhipere=Gas-
trodia Cunninghamii, iimhikaho=ihe yam, &c. Parareka= sweet mealy
(substance), is a good Maori meaning name for the tubers of this plant; but all
their many names for them had highly significant meanings.
Maize, =Kopakipaki, —from a verb to wrap up, to envelope; from its large
spathaceous bracts of fruit leaves, closely clasping the fruit.
Bread, = Taro, from the large Taro root (Caladium esculentum) their
bread.
Biscuit, = Taro pakeke, — lit. hard taro.
Turnip, =Korau (K.), the name of the tree-fern ( Cyathea medullaris), whose
large white pith or heart is eaten, which also the large white root of the turnip
resembles in substance when cooked ; at the South the name for this wild Turnip
was rearea=greena, from its growing quickly with its large edible leaves and
succulent flowering stems ; rearea being the reduplication of the verb rea , to
grow as vegetables, to spring.
5. Sundries.—
A Horse, =Kararehe- or Kuri-m aha-tang ata, — lit. the man-carrying-
quadruped.
Sheep, —Pirikahu, from its fleece, like a garment to which all things stuck.
The Horn of a sheep, cow, &c ~= Taring a pihi (K.), — lit. budding ear; also,
(S.), Maire= hard-wood.
Iron pot for co6king=J£ohua, —so called from their own small circular
earth-ovens. (Here it may be noted, that by most early European residents, not
knowing this, it has been stated, that the term arose from the phrase “ Go-
ashore. ” (! !)
A Looking-glass, = Whakaata, —from the verb causing a shadow, reflection,
likeness : formerly the Chiefs used certain sacred pools near their homes for this
purpose, which bore the same name.
* Meryta Sinclairii, Hand-book N.Z. Flora.


Book, Paper, —Pukapuka, —the Maori name of the large white-leaved
shrub, Br achy glottis repanda. [Here it may be observed, that the name of
this shrub is pure Maori, being the reduplication and consequent lessening of the
word Puka (the large-leaved tree, supra): I mention this, as by many it has
been asserted, that this name was first given to the shrub by the Maoris from
the English word book, —which, however, was not the case.]
Spectacles, = Titoko-kanohi, and Karu-wha , — lit. eye-upraiser (as by the
sprit (titoko) of a canoe sail), and four-eyes.
Common green-black glass Bottle, Pounamu, (their greenstone), from its
colour, hardness, fracture, &c.
White Glass ,= Hauhunga, — lit. thin ice.
The wild Radish plant= Whakaruruhau, — lit. causing a break-wind, or
shelter; for which purpose and its quick growth, they commonly used it about their
huts at the North.
A Frenchman = Wiwi, from their own manner of saying Old, Yes.
I regret to say, that this pure and ingenious Maori nomenclature did not
last very long, it gradually died away, partly through the carelessness and the
ignorance of the foreign settlers, and partly through the clear capacious memory
of the Maori by which they were enabled to remember the patois names of common
things, &c., as used by the early settlers and visitors, and in doing so not un-
frequently escaped more or less of ill-words. Moreover the Maoris in the earliest
days of the Colony, and for some time previous, were very prone to abandon pure
Maori among themselves for the incorrect broken Maori of the settlers ; for as the
Maoris had considered them, atfirst, as being a superior race, they largely took
up their errors in common talk and pronunciation as well as in other matters ;
and had it not been for their obtaining a written language through the Church-
of-England Missionaries, and also had books printed in correct Maori by them,
the Maori language would have soon become irretrievably lost ; —even as it is at
present the loss is very great among themselves, more than most Maori scholars
are aware, and it is daily becoming more contracted and corrupt.
Paper 11. (in continuation.)
[Read before the Hawke's Bay Philosophical Institute, September 11 th, 1882.]
3. Of the unmeaning gibberish, or broken-English words and phrases, now
used by the Government and by the Colonists in their higher transactions with
the Maoris.
Although this is a very important branch of my subject, and very much
might be said, I shall not dwell long upon it. You will notice, that I have pur-
posely omitted referring to the common colloquial patois too often in use between


Colonists and the Maoris, which I not unfrequently hear in passing by them in
our streets ; the marvel is, how they manage to understand each other.
It is well-known that the Maori people are great talkers among themselves ;
indeed, formerly they had in every pa (town) their large whare-korero— house of
assembly, where they would often spend their nights (and days too, in wet or cold
weather, or on the arrival of visitors,) talking and debating. They also excelled
in minute description of every thing new they had seen. How the thought has
often occured to me, —would an intelligent Maori who had gone on board of
Cook’s ship,—or one who had in later times visited England,—be able on his
return to his people to describe clearly what he had seen ? and that, of course, in
pure Maori words, as his people at home knew no other language ; and I have
felt sure that he both could and would do so. Indeed we have a pretty good
proof of this at hand, in those celebrated letters written from Australia a few
years ago by Major Ropata, (a leading chief of the Hgatiporou tribe at the East
Cape,) who accompanied Sir Donald McLean thither. Those letters, in which
he gave a running account of the many novelties he had seen there, were very
long and interesting, and were published at the time in the Government Maori
Serial ( Waka Maori) —I read them with delight. The copious, fluent, flexible,
and euphonious Maori language, would make any description of that kind very
easy to them. Such being the case why is it that so many new words and phrases
in broken-English are constantly being thrust forward in official Maori documents
and papers as if they were proper Maori words? Very sure lam of three things
respecting such words and phrases;—l. they are not understood by the bulk of
the Maori people, if clearly by any among them :—2. they are not required :
and—3. the use of them is causing the sad deterioration of the noble Maori
language. When a Gazette or a Proclamation, a new Act or an Advertisement,
or perhaps a long Official letter, printed or written in “ Official ” Maori, reaches
a chief, or a Maori Village, the same is read over and over by the Maoris ; and,
at last, some one among them explains as well as he can each of those barbarous
patois words and phrases to the people,—and, of course, with many ekings out
of his own ! But why not have printed or written the same in simple and plain
Maori ?
It is positively refreshing to turn from such barbarism to notice what they
have done in the Sandwich Islands—the little Kingdom of Hawaii. There, all
such proper names of new things, including legal matters, Officers of Govern-
ment, etc., are in the pure Hawaiian tongue ; which, though very copious is not
so to such an extent as the Maori, partly owing to its possessing only 12 letters.
This, as I view it, arose from that Government being purely aboriginal, having
had good skilled Officers (and Interpreters when required) from the beginning,
who both well-knew and sought to keep up their Native tongue ; while here, the


contrary has been too often the case. But it is not only the broken-English
words and phrases that I see good reason to complain of, the very sentences
themselves, while consisting of (say) Maori words, are so long, so involved, so
utterly opposed to Maori idiom, (i might almost say Maori syntax !) that I my-
self can rarely understand or find out their meaning ; indeed I can not clearly do
it, if the same is a translation of some legal or official document, without I also
have that document in English to refer to. I am told, that this is mainly the
fault of the Lawyers and others, who will have their legal and official papers
(abounding in long involved obsolete and tautological phraseology) literally trans-
lated, line by line, or sentence by sentence, —utterly regardless of the so-called
translation being understood ! or having any connected or plain meaning ! !
Neither is that all ! for, as if it must be so, to have u Confusion more con-
founded, ” often in the Maori Gazettes and other Official and legal Papers, the
old Roman numerals (c.d.1.v.x.) are used, (though not to be found in the Maori
alphabet, and therefore not by them understood !) —and, in addition thereto,
other strange letters of the English alphabet,—merely for the purpose of marking
Government Surveyors’ blocks and that, too, when purposely surveying and
marking off the land of the Maoris !
Part 11.
On certain Colonial alterations and innovations made in the English
AND OTHER WESTERN LANGUAGES.
Of Modern Colonial changes in Nomenclature arising from innovations
on old-estahlished principles and rules m the English and the learned
languages.
In this, the last part of my subject, I would particularly bear in mind the
ancient maxim which as a motto I have prefixed to this paper. A celebrated
British Botanist, —who might truly be styled the Father of English Botany, and
who was for many years the President of the Linnsean Society (London),* Sir J.
E. Smith, says,—“ It is generally agreed among mankind that names of coun-
tries, places, or things, sanctioned by general use should be sacred : nor is it
allowable to alter such names even for the better f and I think that you will
also agree with him in that remark ; and further, that old established rules and
principles concerning Nomenclature in general, which are firmly upheld and
followed at home in the Mother Country, and among the nations of Scientific
Europe, should also be adhered to in a young Colony ; at all events such should
not be lightly laid aside. Just the same indeed, if not more so, as the "good
*lt is not generally known, that Sir J. E. Smith purchased the whole of the Museum,
Library, and Papers of Linnaeus, and made a present of them to the Linneean Society,
London.
t“ Introduction to Botany,” 7th ed., p. 192.


established Customs, &c., of the Old Country ; and such, if I mistake not, was
the practice of the Eoraans in founding their numerous colonies.
(1) Foremost among such (as I am inclined to view it) are the “ names
of places ” in new countries given to them by their first Discoverers ; more
especially when (as Sir J. E. Smith says,) such have been also “ sanctioned by
general use,” then, all such “should be sacred.” Unfortunately however this
very proper rule is not now observed here among us in its integrity ; and although
up to the present the alterations have been but slight, yet, as “ the thin end of
the wedge ”• has been inserted, I fear, unless a firm and early stand is made
against it, that it will soon become of wider application and grow rapidly worse.—
Standing prominently towards us among those alterations is the name of
our own Bay, Province, County, and Provincial District; which, instead of
“ Hawke’s Bay,”—the name publicly given to it by its illustrious Discoverer, —
who sailed round its shores, and entered its name in his log, so printed it in his
Voyages and Engraved it in his Maps,—is everywhere in the scientific Colonial
Publications (as the “ Transactions of the H.Z. Institute,” School Geography
and Maps,) altered to Hawke Bay ;* and “ Cook’s Strait ” is altered to “ Cook
Strait ” ! Apart from every other consideration, one would have thought that
the utter ridiculousness of this last-mentioned alteration would have been quite
sufficient to prevent it being made or even attempted ; [Cook strait ! Cook
crooked ! I] especially as in a few other cases the authors of these alterations
seem to have seen the impropriety of such changes, and so left them unaltered, —
as in “ Cook’s Tooth,” (the conical peak at Porangahau, although merely a local
and settler’s name,) this they have not altered to “ Cook Tooth ” I and so
“ Young Hick’s Head,” in Poverty Bay, this remains unaltered. The name of
the celebrated “Cook’s Well” in Tolaga Bay, would certainly be shorn of a
large portion of its pristine glory and charm, and at the same time convey a
widely different meaning to both ear and eye, if barbarously altered to “ Cook
Well” ! although such an alteration would be wholly in keeping with, and not
a whit more ridiculous than, Cook Strait 1
Other notable places in Hew Zealand, named by Cook and other celebrated
early Havigators and so laid down in the Government and in all Maps, have all
been altered in the same manner ; —as Queen Charlotte’s Sound, Tasman’s Bay,
Solander’s Islands, D’Urville’s Island, Lord Auckland’s Islands, Lord Howe’s
Island, Campbell’s Island, Macquarrie’s Island, Stewart’s Island, &c.
It is satisfactory however to know, that both our Colonial and Home
Governments, and the European, American, and Australian Scientific works, in
which Hew Zealand and her outlying islands are prominently mentioned have
not adopted it.
*And in the School Book the children are expressly told, that “ Capt. Cook named it
Hawke Bay. ” (p, 75.)


Fortunately our conspicuous nearer islets on this E. Coast, —as Bare Island,
Portland Island, White Island, Flat Island, the Mayor, &c., —were not named
after any person ; and therefore their names were not given to them in the pos-
sessive case by their Discoverer, according to the well-established and ancient
custom ; and we also know why they were so named ; Bare Island, “ on account
of its desolate appearance, ” and White Island, owing to its whiteness (as when
Jirst seen through a fog,—or, more likely, the vapours, and steam and smoke
arising from its burning craters, —of which, however, Cook knew nothing). But
supposing that two of those Islands had been named by Capt. Cook' after some
officers in his ship, whose names where White and Bare, (as the neighbouring
islets in Tolaga Bay, Sporing’s, and Parkinson’s were named,) and Were now
altered, according to this new-fangled mode, —who could ever know why they
were so named ? as the great distinguishing difference would have been eliminated.
To me there is great disagreement between White Island and White’s Island,
White Bay and White’s Bay, * Bare Island and Bare’s Island, Flat Island, and
Flat’s Island, Green Island and Green’s Island, Low Island and Low’s Island,
&c. ; —and more, —that great and correct difference is plainly shown at first
sight, even to a tyro in geography or voyaging.
In my opinion, the alteration in the name of our Bay partakes much of the
dubious or ambiguous character I have just mentioned ; for as “ Hawke’s Bay, ”
a stranger would know it at a glance or on first hearing that it was named after
some person of that name ; but as “Hawke Bay,” he would be led to suppose
that it got this name from its Hawks ; especially if he happened to know of the
organized destruction of that bird carried on here so ruthlessly during late years,
(and that notwithstanding the unphonetic e at the end of the word,) —for such
is also the rule with Seamen and Navigators, e.g, Whale Bay, Fish Bay, Seal
Bay, Duck Cove, Cormorant Cove, Gull Rock, Gannet Island, &c., &c.
All over the known world from the earliest times, such rule of Nomenclature
has been invariably followed by the Navigators and Discoverers of all civilized
Nations; the Maps of all parts of the World, and particularly the Sea-charts,
have ever abounded with such names ; and their number is daily increasing. In
the latest Scientific Voyages the same old rule has been observed ; indeed in very
many instances it could not well be otherwise, for to alter those personal names
in their bestowal (after the manner that similar ones have been pragmatically
altered here in New Zealand) would render them ridiculous.
Moreover I feel pretty certain, that our neighbouring Australian Colonies
would never allow of any such liberty being taken with some of their principal
and long-established names, as Queensland, King George’s Sound, &c. Here,
too, in this last name, (as I have before observed with reference to Cook Strait,
* Where the Cook’s Strait cable is landed on the S. side.


Cook Well, &c.,) there would be a most awkward and ambiguous play upori
words ; for King George’s Sound having been named after our present Queen’s
grandfather George 111., —who, in his latter years, was afflicted at intervals with
insanity,—the altered name might (and it no doubt would by some) be attributed
to the improved state of his mind, as opposed to that of being unsound or mad-
ness !
Following this new rule out to its logical conclusion, we should also drop
the terminal s, and call our Hawke’s Bay Churches—St. John Church, St. Paul
Church, St. Mary Church, St. Andrew Church, &c., &c,; but here, perhaps, it
may be said, —“Oh! but those buildings are to be exempt because they were
dedicated to certain persons.” “ True,” I would reply, “ but so were our Bays,
and Isles, and Straits, and Sounds, and Capes ; these were all publicly dedicated
to bear the names of persons given to them ; which names are also likely to con-
tinue theirs, long after those given to many of our wooden buildings are forgotten,
and their present sites occupied by other names.”
And here I may call your attention to an additional fact, that the names of
a few towns both N. and S. of us are still retained in the possessive case by those
modern Innovators, after the good old-established custom, —as St. Bathan’s, St,
Andrew’s, &c. Of course it would sound strangely and ambiguously to an Eng-
lish ear, to say (for instance), “I am going to St. Andrew” ! but why a town
should retain the terminal s, and not a bay or an island, a cape or a strait, is
beyond my comprehension, and smacks of pedantry. —
Therefore, on these seven following grounds, I am opposed to this modern
homespun alteration, viz.—
1. Long established and world-wide custom.
2. Honour and Memory of the Discoverer and Namer: also, of the Person
whose Name was bestowed.
3. Desecration.
4. So printed in all European and American Books, and so laid down in all
Maps and Charts.
6. Grammatically.
6. Euphony.
7. Clearness of Meaning,—at first sight or hearing.
And I both hope and venture to believe, that such a strange new and unauthori-
tative attempt to alter our old and prized National Nomenclature will neither be
sanctioned nor perpetuated in the Colony.
Since writing the last paragraph I find, that the settlers at Glendermid in
the Province of Otago, have actually petitioned Parliament to grant them the
restoration of the old and original name of their place Sawyer's Bay , which it
appears had been taken away from that locality ; and Parliament has properly
granted the prayer of their petition.


But far above all others in this Colony, the Settlers of Hawke’s Bay (and
the Members of the Hawke’s Bay Institute) should see to their District and
Institutions ever retaining its original name in its entirety. For of all the more
modern Provinces, Districts, and Counties, into which this Colony has been cut
up and named, — Hawke’s Bay is the only one that bears the name given to it
by its illustrious discoverer Capt. Cook ; who, also, had sailed leisurely around its
shores and had anchored within it.
(2) The disuse of a capital letter in the specific name of a plant or animal,
when the same is named after any person.
The rule for invariably using a capital letter when a species is named after
any Botanist, or person, is both an old and a good one. All our great Botanical
and Zoological Masters and predecessors, from Linnaeus downwards, have ever
observed it, and laid down strict rules for the carrying it out. And not only so,
but also in the case of the specific name being derived from any other genus
which it resembles, or with which it was formerly classed, (as Symphyogyna
Hymenopkyllum , Polypodium Grammitidis ,) —or from the name of the place*
where it was originally found, (as Gnaphalium Xeriense, Lecidea Domingensis,
Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense,) —or being the common vulgar name of it, (as
Podocarpus Totnra, Nesodaphne Tawa). Sir J, E. Smith says,—“ln such
a case the specific name stands as a substantive retaining its own gender and
termination, and must begin with a capital letter; which last circumstance
should he particularly observed if a species is called after any botanist , &c.”
(loc . cit. } p, 191.) Dr. Bindley, and Sir W. Hooker have also laid down the
same rule ; indeed all European botanists have ever followed it, and that not only
in the past generation but also in all their modern works ; e.g. —Sir J. Hooker’s
Antarctic, Hew Zealand, and Tasmanian Floras, and Hand-Book H. Z. Flora ;
Sir W. Hooker’s Species Filicum ; Baker’s Synopsis Filicum ; in the latest
complete work to hand, Bentham’s Flora Australiensis ; and in all the Linnaean
Society’s Transactions. Indeed the rule is, and has ever been, so universal, that
I never remember once seeing its omission in any scientific work, whether in
Latin, English, French, German, &c. I regret, however, to say, that its con-
stant omission is to be found in our Colonial printed works including the “ Trans-
actions of the H. Z. Institute,” —although in this last it was not in the earliest
volumes.
I have said, above, it is a good rule ; —that is, a useful one, a help and aid,
and the cause of being a great saving of time in running over an index for a
species so named, especially if the genus is a large one, (as I practically know,)
for the eye catches the capital letter immediately ; —and then it is also a great
help in another way, viz., that a naturalist (old or young) knows at once that the
* ‘ < But names derived from particular countries or districts are liable to much excep-
tion, few plants being sufficiently local to justify their use.” (Sir J. E. Smith, 1. c., p. 191.)


specific name is derived from the proper name of some person or place, and there-
fore its meaning, however strange or uncouth, is not to be sought for in any
Greek or Latin Dictionary.
(3) Having said thus much respecting the modern Colonial practice fol-
lowed in the beginning of some new specific names, I would also make a remark
on their endings: all those so named here in the Colony by their several des-
cribers bear the termination of the genitive singular,— ii; now this, according to
the good old rules is also incorrect, —in part at least. (a.) If a plant or animal
is so specifically named after its discoverer, then such a practice is (so far) correct;
but (b.) if after only a describer or writer on it, then the termination should be
a single i; but (c.) if the specific name is only given in compliment (as it very
often is), it should be rendered in an adjective form, with the terminations, —
- anus , -a, -urn*
(4) Another remark I would also make under this head is, —on the great
benefit to science arising from the giving of suitable generic and specific names.—
I have said both generic and specific,—but perhaps it is more with the latter
that we at present have to do. Nevertheless it is well worthy of notice, or rather
of some study, to consider the thoughtful well-chosen generic names given by
their early discoverers to many of our New Zealand plants. By way of example
I will mention a few of them, and as they are usually compounded of two Greek
words I will also give their meanings in English, for the benefit of the juvenile
portion of my audience. And you will see, that their names are generally highly
descriptive of the appearance, use, or property of the plant itself ; much indeed
after the common names at Home of many of our own British plants, derived
from our forefathers.
Aciphylla= needle-pointed-leaf.
: (as this plant is, perched, like the big
nests of crows, high up on the branches of tall trees).
.A/«?Wtf.smm=sweet-odour-of-forcsts : (from its fragrant flowers).
lirachyglottis= short-throat (flower).
Carpodetus— ringed-fruit.
Coprosma =stinking-smell (which the whole plant has).
(flower).
Dicera— two-horned (from its anther).
Dichondra= two-grains (from its seeds).
Drimys= pungent, biting, to the taste ; which this plant wholly is.
Geniostoma= woolly, or bearded, mouth (its flower within).
Lep tospermum= slender-see J.
* I may add, in a note, that I have always endeavoured to follow this rule, which has
also been closely observed in the Flora N. Z. and by others: e. g. Hymenophyllum Frank *
liniarum, Asplenium Hookeriamm, Clematis Farkinsoniana, $c. —


Melicytus=\ioney-\n-c2i\it\QS (in its anthers).
Metrosideros— iron-heart (from its hard wood).
Microtis= little-ears (from shape of its many small flowers).
Phormium— the ancient name of a plant used in platting and weaving :
our N. Z. Flax.
(the Supplejack).
Thelymitra=\xoo(\e(i-\?i(\y (from its flower).
Sir J. E. Smith observes very truly,—“Nomenclature is no less essential a
branch of methodical science than characteristic definitions ; for, unless some
fixed laws, or, in other words, good sense and perspicuity be attended to in this
department, great confusion and uncertainty must ensue.” And again:—“Ex-
cellent Greek or Latin names are such as indicate some striking peculiarity in
the genus ; as Glycyrrhiza, Amaranthus, Helianthus Hemerocnllis , &c. ;*
such as mark the botanical character of the genus, when they can be obtained for
a nondescript plant, are peculiarly desirable. The generic name being fixed,
the specific one is next to be considered ; these should be formed on similar princi-
ples to the generic ones.” (loc. cit., pp. 186-190.) Linnaeus, also, lays down as
a rule, that, —“ Genuine specific distinctions constitute the perfection of natural
science.” And when this is also further shown, either wholly or in part, in the
appropriate specific name, much information is obtained at the first glance, and
the gain is great indeed ! Some of our New Zealand plants bear truly delight-
ful specific names, so full of true meaning, given them by their original describers ;
as, Phormium tenax (tough-tying-up P.), Dichondra repens (creeping D.),
Areca sapida (good-tasted A.), Urtica ferox (fierce-stinging U.), Aciphylla
squarrosa (sticking-out-all-round A.), Cyathea medullaris (marrow-hearted 0.),
Cyathea dealbata (white, or silvery-leaved C.), Pteris esculenta (edible P.),
Pteris scaberula (roughish P,), Asplenium bulbiferum (little-bulb-bearing A.),
Myrtus bullata (blistered-leaf M.), Melicope ternata (three-lobed-leaf M.),
Melicytus ramiflorus (branch-flower-bearing M.), Leptospermum scopnrium
(broom-like L.), Parietaria debilis (weak P.), Trichomanes reniforme (kidney-
shaped T.), Hymenophyllum miens (shining H.), Hymenophyllum dilatatum
(broad-and-flat H.), &c. And here I may further observe, speaking from exper-
ience, that such genuinely descriptive names were of no small service to me, when
in my novitiate in N. Z. (nearly 50 years ago,) among a little known and new
Flora, and with very few scientific books concerning them and those few written
in Latin. Such highly suitable names are trebly pleasing, (if I may so speak,)—
to the working botanist, to the tyro, to the scholar, and to the outside general
lover of Nature ; and to all four pleasing alike, —as really communicating some
knowledge of the plant through its name.
*ln English thus:—Sweet-root (Liquorice), Everlasting-flower, Sun-flower, Beauty -
of-a-day (Day-lily).


Here I may be permitted to relate a keen observation bearing on this par-
ticular point which I once heard from the late Bishop of Hew Zealand, Dr,
Selwyn, in 1845 ; the Bishop had been looking over my MS. list of the then
known H. Z. plants, (which I had compiled out of the botanical works of several
authors, with my own few additions,) —his object being to obtain the names of
some of the more noted (timber trees especially) for his Church Almanac, —when
his eye caught Phormium tenax , Urtica ferox, and Pteris esculenta. “ How
this,” said the Bishop, reading those names, —“ this is what I like to see ; this
is easily understood, and is serviceable ; were such a rule as this more observed
by Botanists, the science would escape the opprobrium of being termed ‘ A dry
List of hard Names' ”
(5) I would yet offer a few remarks on wdiat I cannot but consider another
somewhat objectionable mode, which I fear is growing among us :—viz. the
adopting of barbarous words for new genera and species ; and, also, the too fre-
quent giving of the proper names of persons to new species. Here, however, I
would clearly state, in limine , —that it is the undoubted right of the describer of
any new species to give it what name he may please ; nevertheless, there are
certain good old rules respecting this which have generally been adhered to by
Botanists (masters in the Science), and which I cannot but think it would be
well to bear in mind.—“ Morihus antiquis stat Roma."
The old established scientific canons of Linnaeus hold good here also :—Sir
J. E. Smith, Dr. Bindley, Sir W, Hooker, and many others with them, our
Botanical Masters and Fathers, have assiduously taught and upheld them.
Linnaeus says,—“ Generic names that express the essential character or habit
of a plant are the best of all.” (can. 23.) “ Generic names derived from barbarous
languages ought on no account to be admitted.” (can. 7.) “Ho generic names
can be admitted, except such as are derived from either the Greek or Latin lan-
guages.” (can. 16.) But here, on these two canons, 7 and 16, Dr. Bindley
remarks, —“ That it is far better to convert the names by which plants are known
in countries called barbarous, into scientific generic names, by adding a Latin
termination to them. The advantage of this practice to travellers is known to be
very great, as it puts them in possession of a certain part of the language of the
country in which the plants are found.”—And with him I fully agree ; but then
the barbarous (or, say, Maori) name so given to the plant, must be the real dis-
tinctive and well-known name of that particular plant. What I object to, is the
using of any other barbarous name, —or the mis-spelling of the proper barbarous
name, and so making it ludicrous or worse ! * or the using of the barbarous name
of a class or family,—for a genus or particular species.
And then the so frequently bestowing the proper name of any and every
* See page 12 for an example in Discaria Toumatou.


person who may happen to stumble on, or obtain, or merely send, a plant or a
shell, to some one of our many modern Botanists and Naturalists : almost every
other new thing now-a-days is thus named ! Of course it is an easy and a pleas-
ing mode of business, both to the describer and to the finder ; but it is scarcely
the legitimate, or the wise, one. I have already, some five years ago, called your
attention to the very different mode pursued by the early and real Botanists who
visited New Zealand. They were skilled men, who had served their apprentice-
ship (so to speak) to the business, and they upheld the useful and scientific
Linnsean canons in their integrity. Hundreds of new plants were named by the
two Forsters (father and son), Banks, Cook, Solander, Sparmann, and others, in
this and in other lands during their long voyages of discovery, yet a very small
number (less than 3 per cent.) bore in their specific names those of their finders,
or their friends. Even the name of that devoted lover of Botany, Sydney Par-
kinson, —Sir Joseph Banks’ skilled botanical artist, who drew so many of their
flowers and fruits, and that too so wonderfully well, and coloured from Nature, —
his name was throughout omitted ! * and so was also the name of their scientific
collaborator Dr. Sparmann.
Another of the Linnsean canons runs thus :—“ Names ought not to be mis-
applied to gaining the goodwill or favour of saints, or persons celebrated in other
Sciences ; they are the only reward that the Botanist can expect, and are in-
tended for him alone.” {can. 21.) And Sir J. E. Smith observes, —“ In all
ages it has been customary to dedicate certain plants to the honour of distinguished
persons. The scientific botanists of modern times have adopted the same mode
of preserving the memory of benefactors to their science ; and though the honour
may have been sometimes extended too far, that is no argument for its total ab-
rogation.” And then referring to a genus which had been named Bonapartea,
he says,—“ this can possibly be admitted only in honour of the divorced Empress,
and not of her former consort, who had no botanical pretensions.” f ( loc cit., p.
188.) But even beyond this the careless naming of species is now carried ; hence
so many new species of late years found in New Zealand, bear the strange and
barbarous specific names of maori, maoriana, maoricum, maori-
cus, maoriella, maorinus, maorinum, maorium, &c., &c. And
to these, I think, should be also added, the following, dunedinensis , ra~
kaiensis, ternukensis, hokitense, otayensis, manitoto, &c. The
late President of the Linnaean Society very truly and discreetly remarks (on this
particular portion of my subject) :—“ Names which express the local situations
of different species are excellent, such as Melampyrum arvense, pratense, nemo-
rosum, and sylvaticum, Carex arenaria , uliginosa and sylm,tica,\ &c., &c.
*See “Trans. N. Z. Inst.,” Vol. X., p. 109: Yol. XII., p. 365.
f Written, too, at a time when Napoleon I. was in all his glory! How different now ! !
* In English thus: —meadow, field, wood, and forest, Melampyrum, and sand, marsh,
and wood Carex.


But names derived from particular countries or districts are liable to much ex-
ception, few plants being sufficiently local to justify their use. Thus Ligusticum
( Physospermum, Brit. FI.) Cornuhiense is found, not only in Cornwall, but in
Portugal, Italy, and Greece ; Schmenkia Americana grows in Guinea as well as
in South America. Such, therefore, though suffered to remain on the authority
of Linnasus, will seldom or never be imitated by any judicious writer.” (lo n . cit.,
p. 188.) Fortunately for us, until lately, we have had very few indeed of our
endemic plants so named, (just a couple, Gnaphalium Ker tense, and Jsolepis
Aucklandica,) though we also had the unfortunately-named Hymenophyllum
Tunhndgense (which seems to be übiquitous), Hypnum Sandrvichense , and one
or two others.
Not a few of those modern names so readily bestowed, serve painfully to re-
mind me of what many of our Surveyors and Gold and Gum Diggers, and other
pioneers in the forest and wild, have often accidentally done, —given trivial un-
meaning ludicrous and uncouth names to halting stations and camping-places,
little deeming that such would remain ; which afterwards, however, became the
common name of the place ! to the disgust of those who followed and settled
there. But in these cases, happily, such names, thoughtlessly given, both can
be and are altered ; this, however, can not be done in the naming of any plant or
other natural species, and therefore more care should be taken by the describer in
the naming it.
As I was one of those who, in the House of Representatives in 1861, spoke
and gave my vote in support of a sum of money being granted for the compiling
and printing of the “ Hand-Book of the New Zealand Flora,” (at a time, too,
when the Cblony was both poor and at war,) —and as I also assisted the eminent
author Sir J. D. Hooker in his arduous task of publishing it, —I may be per-
mitted to observe, —that while its publication has been of service and done good
to this young colony, it has (like all other good things) not been unmixed with
evil; for through it some in New Zealand have set themselves up for Botanists!
And, as may readily be supposed, our Cryptogamic Flora in particular—
the chief botanical glory of New Zealand !—has suffered the most in its nomen-
clature, and that in the pleasing Order of Ferns, those universal favourites ! The
other great natural Cryptogamic Orders— Musci, Hepaticce, Lichenes, Fungi ,
and Algce , have hitherto escaped ; being, fortunately, far too difficult a study, and
too unfruitful of pay ! Some, no doubt, think it a very easy matter to name
our N. Z. Ferns, —especially if provided with the “Hand-Book” and with
Baker’s “ Synopsis Filicum.” I have seen several collections of Ferns, made
both N. and S. of us, and not a few prettily and fancifully got up for sale by
professed Fern-collectors, (though too often composed of bit's and scraps,) with
printed labels, &c., &c., but I have never yet seen one such manufactured col-


lection correctly named throughout; even the very names of the Ferns are often
mis-spelt on the printed labels !
It should not be forgotten, that the useful “ Hand-Book ” is only a kind of
Claris, or Key, to New Zealand plants then known, (1864,) and to larger bo-
tanical works in which they were more fully described. Sir J. I). Hooker warns
his readers, and that frequently, against attempting great and new things, with-
out, at all events, much study of those larger works and microscopical research,
and a careful comparison of species with species,—these of New Zealand with
those of foreign countries. For my own part I have long firmly believed with
Mr. John Smith, one of our best living Pteridologists, (who was for more than
40 years the Curator of the Garden Ferns at Kew under Sir W. J, Hooker,)
in the absolute necessity of examining and comparing the living Ferns themselves
in their various stages of growth, and not merely dried herbarium specimens ;
which are too often mere scraps or portions of fronds, or, not unfrequently,
selected without judgement.
A remark of Mr. J. Smith’s bearing on this may be here properly adduced
and usefully studied ; he says, (in writing on the latest general work on Ferns,
the “ Synopsis Filicum ” above mentioned,) —“As might be expected from a new
writer on Ferns, many changes have been made in the nomenclature and syno-
nyms, as given in the “ Species Filicum,” (the immediately preceding and larger
work by Sir W. J. Hooker,) —“ and, judging from Mr. Baker’s view, it would
appear that many plants originally described as species, which successive authors
have acknowledged to be distinct, are, nevertheless, in many cases regarded as
synonyms ; thus Ferns long accepted by previous pteridologists cease to be so.
When I say long accepted, I go upon the evidence of Link, Kunze, Schott,
Mettenius, and myself, who have had for many years under their observation
living examples of species all well recognised as being different from one another
by some important characters seen only in the living state ; but Mr. Baker, with
herbarium specimens, makes no scruple of lumping many of such under one
specific name. For instance, under Polypodium, lycopodioides, there are no less
than twenty-two synonyms, and under P. brasiliensis eighteen. These examples
are additional proof of what has been already said of the confusion of the nomen-
clature of Ferns. Notwithstanding, there can be no doubt but that the
“ Species Filicum ” and “ Synopsis ” are highly valuable to students of Ferns,
possessing herbaria or cultivated collections, as also to travellers abroad.”
Historia Filicum, by J. Smith, 1875 ; pp. 58, 59.
In conclusion, I cannot do better than once more to quote from that groat
and good English Botanist—the Father of English Botany—Sir J. E. Smith :
—“ We are no longer in the infancy of Science, in which its utility, not
having been proved, might be doubted, nor is it for this that I contend. I have


often alluded to jits benefits as a mental exercise, nor can any study exceed in
raising curiosity, gratifying a taste for beauty and ingenuity of contrivance, or
sharpening the powers of discrimination. WRat then can be better adapted foi
young persons ? The chief use of a great part of our education is no other than
what I have just mentioned. The languages and the mathematics, however
valuable in themselves when acquired, are even more so as they train the youth-
ful mind to thought and observation.”
“ To those whose minds and understandings are already formed, this study
may be recommended, independently of all other considerations, as a rich source
of innocent pleasure. Some people are ever inquiring “ what is the use ”of any
particular plant, by which they mean “ what food or physic, or what materials for
the painter or dyer does it afford ?” They look on a beautiful flowery meadow
with admiration, only in proportion as it affords nauseous drugs or salves.
Others consider a botanist with respect only as he may be able to teach them
profitable improvement in tanning, or dyeing, by which they may quickly grow
rich, and be then perhaps no longer of any use to mankind or themselves. They
would permit their children to study Botany, only because it might possibly lead
to professorships, or other lucrative preferment.”
<< These views are not blameable, but they are not the sole end of human
existence. Is it not desirable to call the soul from the feverish agitation of
worldly pursuits, to the contemplation of Divine Wisdom in the beautiful
economy of Nature ? Is it not a privilege to walk with God in the garden of
Creation, and hold converse with his Providence ? If such elevated feelings do
not lead to the study of Nature, it cannot far be pursued without rewarding the
student by exciting them. ”
Rousseau, a great judge of the human heart and observer of human man-
ners, has remarked, that “ when science is transplanted from the mountains and
woods into cities and worldly society, it loses its genuine charms, and becomes a
source of envy, jealousy and rivalship. ” This is still more true if it be cultivated
as a mere source of emolument. But the man who loves botany for its own
sake knows no such feelings, nor is he dependent for happiness on situations or
scenes that favour their growth. He would find himself neither solitary nor
desolate, had he no other companion than a “ mountain daisy, ” that “ modest
crimson-tipped flower, ” so sweetly sung by one of Nature’s own poets. The
humblest weed or moss will ever afford him something to examine or to illustrate,
and a great deal to admire. Introduce him to the magnificence of a tropical
forest, the enamelled meadows of the Alps, or the wonders of New Holland, and
his thoughts will not dwell much upon riches or literary honours, things that
“ Play round the head, but come not near the heart. ”


I have made this long and pleasing extract from the talented and loving
Author’s preface to the 6th edition of his “ Introduction to Botany,”—published
nearly 60 years back, (which was also, subsequently, after his decease, republished
with very high approval by the late Sir W. J. Hooker,) —and I have done so for
two chief reasons:—(l) for the benefit of those who may hear (or read) this
paper, particularly the rising generation:—(2) to show the men of the closing
half of this restless never-contented money-hungering century, what a great and
good Englishman (not a cleric) once thought and wrote of common earthly
riches!


A FEW REMARKS ON THE HACKNEYED
QUOTATION OF
“MACAULAY’S NEW ZEALANDER. ”
W. Colenso, F.L.S.
[Read before the Hawke's Bay Philosophical Institute, 12 th June, 1882.]
For some considerable time I have been desirous of bringing this subject before
you,—Hew Zealand being now our Country and our home; and should have
certainly done so during past Winter Sessions of our Institute, but for two
reasons :—(1) that I had already written pretty fully about it, some 15 years
ago in the “ New Zealander ,” Auckland paper; and (2) that I had hoped the
quoting of it would die out, or that, at all events, some modern authors and
writers and public speakers (especially here in Hew Zealand) would just give
themselves the trouble to enquire whether Macaulay was really the author of
that saying,—whether the simile originated with him.
I should however, honestly confess, that I am again reminded (as it were)
to bring this subject before you, through my having lately read Professor
Hutton’s opening Address for 1882, given at the Canterbury College, University
of Hew Zealand, in which Professor Hutton says,—“ As individuals have a
limited period of existence, so also must it be with nations. This is the leading
idea in Lord Macaulay’s celebrated Hew Zealander sitting on the ruins of
London Bridge. ”
My task on this occasion will be a comparatively easy one, through my
having several years ago thoroughly worked the subject out; (and, as I have
said, published it in one of our first-class Colonial Hewspapers ;) I purpose show-
ing, I.—that the “idea” (to use Professor Hutton’s term) is of (at least) two-
fold origin,—l. general; 2. particular; and 2.—that both were used by authors
who preceded Macaulay; whose works, without doubt, Macaulay must have seen
and even read ; and that from one or more of them Macaulay gathered the
striking and famed similes, more than once used by him in his Works.
The radical idea seems to have been rather a favourite one with Macaulay,


as I find he has used it on several occasions; three of them I will quote from his
Works written at different periods of his life,—viz., in 1824, in 1829, and in
1845,—a period extending over 16 years. * His predilection for it may, how-
ever, (in part, at least,) be owing to the great noise which it made in the
daily literary world at the time of its first appearing in his writings (in 1824),
foi we read in the preface to his miscellaneous TVritinys, that “ the passage
in question was at one time the subject of allusion, two or three times a week,
in speeches and leading articles, ” And yet it does not appear that any one at
that time, or, as far as I know, since, has brought forward the originator.
The first of those three passages (and the one I have just particularly alluded
to,) occurs in Macaulay’s Review of Mitford's History of Greece , (written in
1824,) where, writing of “the gift of Athens to man,” (he goes on to say,)—
“ although her freedom and her power have for more than twenty centuries been
annihilated, her intellectual Empire is imperishable. And when those who have
rivalled her greatness shall have shared her fate ; when civilization and knowledge
shall have fixed their abode in distant continents; when the sceptre shall have
passed away from England; when, perhaps, travellers from distant regions
shall in vain labour to decipher on some mouldering pedestal the name of our
proudest chief ; shall hear savage hymns chaunted to some misshappen idol over
the ruined dome of our proudest temple; and shall see a single naked fisherman
wash his nets in the river of the ten thousand masts ; her influence and her glory
will still survive—fresh in eternal youth,—immortal. ”
Here we have the idea in its inchoate, more general and less defined state;
(but of this, too, anon).
The second occurs in his Review of Mill's Essay on Government , (written
in 1829.,) here Macaulay says:—“The civilised part of the world has now
nothing to fear from the hostility of savage nations. But is it possible that
in the bosom of civilization itself may be engendered the malady which shall
destroy it ? Is it possible that, in two or three hundred years, a few lean
half-naked fishermen, may divide with owls and foxes the ruins of the greatest
European cities, —may wash their nets amidst the relics of her gigantic docks,
and build their huts out of the capitals of her stately cathedrals. ”
Here, also, we have the same idea, but still inceptive, still in the rough.
The third is the more particular, the worked-up and finished simile of the
artistic Hew Zealander, of which the literary world has heard so much. This
occurs in his Review of Ranke's History of the Popes, (written in 1840,) —
where Macaulay, writing of the Roman-Catholic Church, says,—“ She (the
Roman-Catholic Church) may still exist in undiminished vigour, when some
traveller from Hew Zealand shall, in the midst of a vast solitude, take his
*Lord Macaulay was bom in 1800, died in 1859.


stand on a broken arch of London Bridge to sketch ’the ruins of St. Pauls. ”
I have found this simile, or idea, —both in its rough and in its more finished
state, —in no less than five authors of note who preceded Macaulay; four of
whom are English, and one French.
The first is Horace Walpole, the eminent virtuoso of “Strawberry Hill”
notoriety, and the author of the celebrated “ Letters. ” In a published letter of
Walpole’s to Mason, written in 1744, he says,—“ At last some curious traveller
from Lima, will visit England, and give a description of the ruins of St. Paul’s,
like the Editions of Baalbec and Palmyra. ” [Here it may be noticed, that
Macauley wrote a slashingly trenchant Review of Walpole’s Letters, in 1883.]
The second is by the equally celebrated Frenchman Volney,—who travelled
in the East (Egypt and Syria) in 1784, and wrote his able work, called the
liuins, or a Survey of the Revolutions of Empires; therein he gives us his
“ Meditations, ” written at the time, while musing among the ruins of those
famed and great ancient cities. And he goes on to say :
—“ What are become of so many productions of the hand of man ? Where
are those ramparts of Nineveh, those walls of Babylon, those palaces of Perse-
polis, those temples of Balbec and of Jerusalem ? Where are those fleets of
Tyre, those dock-yards of Arad, those workshops of Sidon, and that multitude
of mariners, pilots, merchants, and soldiers ? Where those husbandmen, those
harvests, that picture of animated nature, of which the Earth seemed proud ?
Alas ! I have traversed this desolate country, I have visited the places that were
the theatre of so much splendour, and I have beheld nothing but solitude and
desertion ! Thus reflecting, that if the places before me had once exhibited
this animated picture ; who, said I to myself, can assure me that the present
desolation will not one day be the lot of our own country ? Who knows but
that hereafter some traveller like myself will sit down upon the banks of the
Seine, the Thames, or the Zuyder Zee, where now, in the tumult of enjoyment,
the heart and the eyes are too slow to take in the multitude of sensations; who
knows but he will sit down solitary amid silent ruins, and weep a people inurned,
and their greatness changed into an empty name ? ”
The third is by one of our British poets, Henry Kirke White who, in his
poem entitled Time , says :
“Where now is Britain? where herlaurell’d names,
Her palaces and halls ? Dash’d in the dust.
—Oe’r her marts,
Her crowded ports, brood Silence ; and the cry
Of the lone curlew, and the pensive dash
Of distant billows, breaks alone the void.
*H. K. White, bom 1785 ; died, 1806.


Even as the savage sits upon the stone
That marks where stood her capitols, and hears
The bittern booming in the weeds, he shrinks
From the dismaying solitude.”—
The fourth is by another of our celebrated British poets, Shelley,* (though not
written this time in rhyme but in good English prose,)—in his Dedication to
Peter Bell, Shelley says :
—“ In the firm expectation, that when London shall be an habitation of
bitterns, when St. Paul’s and Westminster Abbey shall stand, shapeless and
nameless ruins in the midst of an unpeopled marsh; and when the piers of
Waterloo Bridge shall become the nuclei of islets of reeds and osiers, and cast
the jagged shadows of their broken arches on the solitary stream, some Trans-
atlantic commentator will be weighing in the scales of some new and now unimag-
ined system of criticism the respective merits of the Bells and the Fudges, and
their historians. ”
The fifth, and last, and strongest of all, (though doubtlessly written much
earlier in time than those two last quoted,)—the one in particular wherein the
very term of New Zealander is used; —is to be found in the able preface to the
English 4to edition of La Billardiere's celebrated Voyage to these seas in
search of the unfortunate La Perouse; undertaken in 1791-1794 ; and a trans-
lation of the Work published in London in 1800. f And as this work (the
large 4to edition, containing the Translator’s preface,) is scarce and little known,
and probably but few if any copies here among us, I shall take the liberty of
quoting the more largely from it; especially as some of the words used therein,
and that more than 80 years ago, seem to be already (in part) on the way to
their fulfilment, and, therefore, will prove to us, Colonists, very interesting.
The writer says :
Having mentioned Providence, a word not very common in some of our
modern Voyages, we are tempted to add a consideration which has often occurred
to our minds, in contemplating the probable issue of that zeal for discovering and
corresponding with distant regions, which has long animated the maritime powers of
Europe. Without obtruding our own sentiments on the reader, we may be permitted
to ask, whether appearances do not justify a conjecture, that the Great Arbiter of
the destinies of nations may render that zeal subservient to the moral and intel-
lectual, not to say the religious, improvement, and the consequent happiness, of
our whole species ? or, whether, as has hitherto generally happened, the advant-
ages of civilisation may not, in the progress of events, be transferred from the
* Shelley, bom, 1792; died (drowned), 1823.
fMore properly, this French Expedition of two frigates (Recherche and EsperanceJ ,
was commanded by General D’Entrecasteaux ; M. J. J. Labillardiere being the Naturalist
on board, who wrote the account of the Voyage.


Europeans, who have but too little prized them, to those remote countries which
they have been so diligently exploring? If so, the period may arrive, when New
Zealand may produce her Lockes, her Newtons, and her Montesquieus; and
when great nations in the immediate region of New Holland, may send their
navigators, philosophers, and antiquaries, to contemplate the ruins of ancient
London and Paris, and to trace the languid remains of the arts and sciences in
this quarter of the globe. Who can tell, whether the rudiments of some great
future empire may not already exist at Botany Bay ? ”
A few more observations and I close.
First, then, I would remind you, that the writings of all those Authors from
whom I have just quoted, must certainly have been well-known to Lord Macau-
lay, for they were among the chiefest and most notable Books of his early days ;
and that he was an extensive reader his works clearly show.
Second, that this last work I have quoted from, the French Voyage in search
of the unfortunate La Perouse, was one that made a great noise throughout
Europe. Not merely on account of the mysterious loss of La Perouse and his
ships, and the great amount of interest it had excited ; (following, too, so closely
as it did, the death of the French navigator Marion and 28 of his crew at the
Bay of Islands, and the killing of a whole boat’s crew of 10 men belonging to
Capt. Furneaux’s ship,—which was Capt. Cook’s consort-vessel on his second
voyage to New Zealand ;) but also owing to this very voyage of La Billardiere
being the next great Expedition fitted out by the French Government to these
seas after Capt. Cook’s latest discoveries.
Hence, like those other Voyages to the South Seas and to New Zealand in
particular of our celebrated English navigator Cook, the great French Voyage
(including that of La Perouse as far as it was known) was a new and fresh work
of surpassing interest to all Europe,* especially to Englishmen and the young
of Macaulay’s juvenile years;—much what some of us (elders) may remember as
to how thoroughly we enjoyed the Voyages of Capt. Cook; —and therefore must
also have been seen and read by Macaulay; and such being the case, it was im-
possible for him to overlook or forget the very striking simile of the New Zea-
lander.
* The narrative of the Voyage is excellently well written, it gives a pleasing account of
their interview with the New Zealanders at North Cape; and of their sojourn among
the hospitable Tasmanians, (indeed, it contains the best account that I know, of an early
visit to that unfortunate race !) —it contains many plates of new and interesting objects;
and it abounds in discoveries in many branches of Natural Science, particularly in Botany.
Several of our New Zealand plants bear the honoured name of this early intrepid Natural-
ist. He discovered and described the Blue Gum tree (Eucalyptus globulus), with other
species of that genus. His name is also perpetuated in his large work on the Botany of
New Holland, or Australia, then an unknown Country to Europe and the civilized world,
(Novae Hollandice Flantarum Specimen, 2 vols. 4t0.)


In conclusion, I may say, that in the letter I wrote to the Auckland Paper,
above alluded to, I had also mentioned my belief in the many plagiarisms of
Lord Macaulay, as shown in not a few instances in his Works, —patent to the
close and large reader ; and of which I firmly believe this idea culminating in
the travelling New Zealander, to be one. But, after all, it is difficult to say of
a learned and comprehensive reader, having also a capacious memory,—what
really constitutes a plagiarism. Be this as it may, one thing I think I have
pretty clearly shown in this my paper, that that simile of the New Zealander
visiting London, and sketching and meditating among her ruins, did not origin-
ate with Lord Macaulay ; and, therefore, should not be continually quoted as his.
Printed at the “ Daily Telegraph ” Office, Tennyson Street, Napier.




r iv v” 1 ■' :*v.: b
'
?' i^. : '. ;V 'b - ■ ’v^f-rrVJ
.
b-v'b*
’■ {■•' ’•//. ■' , , a.* / '. ■' ■ ■'
• '
■
,: i-^~v-•>,
’ ■ ’ - ' v : - . ' '' ' V; ' ,
KV-- y- ;
v;
§ x :'-4
V' : *, '■■ ■ : V ,'-.7-b ; Ob •' ' r v
b { -■■•.. .; V,' ■ • ■■'•1
:
•
1 ■ b v - ;■ : ■' ■ b r -'b; ( "
- , y'b :Pb-, y V. 4
-v.'tev
.
V, •** n) • •'. ‘.‘J f i ;
' '/ -•" ‘ jb' '& "
. ■
' v- • a .. :v • " •
b,£:" ib',;,'
*r? f i ‘J
• b',;'">bVI
■
v,.#bbvi
i \ -T/.'
vA !.
' '’.f-'' -r> b 'b 4 /b V, V ‘ K • if ■[ V'y, r*
;
i y '. '■ ■■ ' y ). kv ibV /b-bb
v: V V V---y' bt • -.b ’ - f ,/bbb
y#t-i ; T|b->vvb
■*
'
•> >;■ v - ;,
■ >■ b ' y$. > ' - - ■. b
,:b :
b: -> • ' ; ■ . ' , -y" bb . •,
TA- by
b b : ',.'' 1
. 4 1
/
• ; ’ ' . .
■■■'. v?/:' -ji;:
: v ;■ i' - >-<-
■
A -V" . -v ■ 'b' y I , ''
f ’ ■'• J l> ? ' L. : „ y,-:: ', 1 ,r->
,
b--, ■ ,/’• ;, , ;:■ j ■ V :■'■
v ‘'ib i'iivi'''b',,»;■• b.’'b';
. ■ ( b :■, b, - , "
■
S P/" V I; v
'- %
;
. ’ v, V , , ; 'b o>"
iby
"‘S •- -y. '•
■ L; ' ! 'j?
' b ' ' ''
,0 b.' v ' A*. s
■.
■
V. b'b^
‘-.b ,yp'/
bb b;::;.,;b
6 -?V ;
f‘' y ' r> - ■' '/>!, .
' ■ V
- J - i'- y’/h'y,
•
■S'*. y
by’b
• ..5
i,m ' s
• A? ■- )\, .
:i v Vv>- bb
' v>
.■• : ■' /b 1 . . - l.y b,b' l',,
1 ' , ' . . ,
■ *. * ♦. > . ' " \ " ' .;■! ' ••
' ' . ■■'•'• ' ’> ' • - , , b
byb ■
'/■ '#■ /■ ;
■ ;,i - '(vb'
:" •>' > Wl
r-. bb-: . ". ' i
:
■_ ',* i u » y
i ■ ■
.
'b • ,' . ■ ■>-• ■ ■> ;. b
r ': . • <, V, v ■ • - •• r > b
’•’■ 4 -by
*■;. < ■
yybb
*es :( b3?b
■
.■‘V^b* 'v
- I -. ./ p^VV’-
■
, ‘ ■/:- '.p p ./ T' -bv- .■>.)>■ b ;
" ' k ■' ‘ / b\ '
,\ V
':v: ; -- ¥\
' ' ' ' '■ \
:,-./ - '•.' *'.;• V ■ ’'• ■ : :> / ; p; ,' r.-'
/b'P Vpb l> '•‘f;
Ab,b.;?
■;• b f r ,; y;b
.
y : • rV’ '• ' c 1^'-
.
\\ V- - J i. A ; V?
b .. ".'■yy ’■ V b v -.'H- ?v '-v 'pb-.!*;
b- 1: ■ • .b , ■; •- b V ■
•
•
•
1 „ '/■ ■'-> -'•!
■
V / ''•
v ; / ' b ' i'f , !
b • ■ bybb ■'■•■ 1 '., b’v
; ■■’'■' ' • -i ■
* v -'v b 'b'bb 1 ' C'-
'V h "‘bt. ;
brb'
-> r b vb •; V'- bbbb ,V "
AbibbAb b
.*.-- *■■■ ' .r;-\ 1 - .:
y •
\ VI . f ■ ■ V
'
- s /ui %$~y,
.- ' • ‘,'y ,*;* I 4 -:' "■ r ;
: :
■b y'b-b//-b; ;;,: ,b ; ■, ;.,;
;■ Ai -y./ r : b b ? y ; / ’i ■
«* •.>-■;' .■ , .'■'. . 1 ' Ai" ' •./' ' ,J
py. -
■ ;. • (>■ -v y ' ■■■ r ;
yby^
.,•••.
b ybbybyl \b
.Vjo *■;* v:-M
■
•
.
■ .1 ,, IV b _
/ ',1 v'b b''; .:,.V:?bbb;r' ;
■-
/bb-'-bb. b ,:
■
MJ»Si
bb,„ >x'. by /b
t '(> (■ '/'./ !' v -
;• iix s ■> y, s P 1 ’s/. b ! j
.
>•'?■£ ’vb<€ : .bt .:/b‘. ; !
.
■ -
■■/'I v'l^
kb, .,Vb
y -; : yj : ’ ,
>7;, .'V'W, V -V;',;
flv£f C '■‘i.. 4* ,< *
’\\l, '■ ).c' 'iSM, '■$: '',V' V /"
v' ■ x b. . ;
, -vv,. ‘ ... . i. ", .. ('y >
J.y ,b' •>■,- ' vb';b ! b
<>b
■ ' ] .-.
b • , y, r b,“ #y,i -
' ■ ■ ' V ■
; ,■’■■ . ' 'i
<■■ ■’■■ ,;b b 1 ■ *
!
' '’a'.' ' ’
<- ; "i’>
.
P|| ;■>
*
- : J ./ • 'i-/
.
" ;P^b V : ; ;p
b
, 'V
r b : - > * '
' ; . ; r '/.', v . . -,J
*
'
1
7j\ ; b -b , > ’.y i ( 'b *. *1
:
vf i b; ' ■ / '■■’
;■ bbPpb : , ; :v r b V :• bf '
bb ; ;-v ' ■ b' b, ;■>■,
‘ vb b'-


