

THREE LECTURES
CONCERNING
THE SOCIAL EVIL:
ITS CAUSES,
EFFECTS, &
REMEDIES.
Delivered in the Lecture Hall of the Wesleyan Church,
Pirie-street, Adelaide.
BY J. C. KIRBY,
PASTOR OF THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH,
PORT ADELAIDE.)
PRICE, ONE SHILLING.




PREFACE.
To the Reader!
I make no pretence to originality in the following
lectures. I want to fight an evil, and do a good. I have used
the brain-work of Dr. Nevins, Mr. Stansfield, M.P., Mrs.
Josephine Butler, Dr. Morgan, Messrs. Logan, Edmondstone,
Shaen, and various others. The absolutely original idea is the
council for the protection of Women and Morals.
My soul was burdened w'ith this subject; and the
matter being brought to the knowledge of the Hon. D. Murray,
Hon. Jno. Colton and C. H. Goode, Esq. They met and con-
versed with me ; as the result, a conference was held, which
encouraged me to give a lecture. The authorities of the Wes-
leyan Church, Pirie Street, Adelaide, most kindly gave the use,
free of cost, of their noble Lecture Hall, where the lectures were
delivered.
At the close of the last lecture, the Hons. D. Murray and
John Colton, C. H. Goode, Esq., the Revs. Allan Webb, J.
McEwin, and J. C. Wood, M.A., E. G. Wilkinson, Esq., Drs
Curtis, and Hayward, D. Bower, Esq., M.P., and Mr.
J.P., were appointed a pro-tem committee to frame a constitution
for a Social Purity Society.
Mr- H. Bower has kindly offered to pay for printing
one thousand copies of the last lecture, and the pro-tem Com-
mittee of the Social Purity Society have guaranteed against
]oss for the other two lectures. May they be of use to our
country.
J. C. KIRBY.




THE SOCIAL EVIL: ITS REMEDY.
FIRST LECTURE.
The best and most thoughtful members of all the nations
of Europe and of European extraction have long lamented what
is called by common consent “The Social Evil.” Moved by the
spirit of compassion and of Christ, good people have supported
refuges, to which fallen women might fly if they wished to
escape from their impure life, and have used agencies to induce
them so to do. Governments also have enacted laws more or
less repressive of the evil, and at the same time both Govern-
ments and private charity have made more or less provision for
the cure of that pestilence which accompanies the unlawful in-
dulgence of passion. But, as yet, the whole question has never
been faced with boldness, nor thoroughly investigated, either by
rulers or their subjects, because of its inherent unpleasantness,
and the great difficulty there is in handling it effectively before
the public without offence to delicacy. Because, also, of an
unworthy feeling of despair of being able to better things, many
of our ablest and best minds have fought very shy of this
profoundly serious matter. Of this lam well assured, that until
the community gets itself informed on the Social Evil its
nature, causes, and likely remedies —and is resolved patiently,
but resolutely to apply remedies, and so vastly abate the evil, we
cannot attain that improvement of health, vigor, and happiness
for which we should aim. If we can initiate measures to
prevent, limit, or remove this putrefying sore, we shall go a long
way towards lifting the immediately future generations to a
loftier plane of life. But if this plague spot be allowed to
spread, to that extent there will be degradation of the national
health, industrial energy, happiness and religion —for sexual
vice is the deadliest of all foes to the home and the family life,
and these are the true fountains of peace, power, and joy to any
nation.
State Regulation no Remedy.
The greatest effort made in modern Europe to deal with the
prostitution which is the major factor of the Social Evil, is the
attempt which has been made to regulate and licence vice,
either by the municipal or central Governments.
As many good citizens, from deficiency of information, are
apt to imagine that such licence and regulation are beneficial,
and tend to the abatement of the evil, and as many are disposed


to make experiments in that direction, it appears to me very
necessary for it to be shown that State Licence and Regulation
are no remedy, but rather tend to the aggravation of the eyil.
When our excellent friend, the Rev. Mr. Woods, was asked
“ What remedy he would propose in place of the contagious
Diseases Acts ,” he might have answered —“ The C. D. Acts are
no remedy: they are rather an aggravation of the evil.” This is
shown by the consideration of
(1) The Object of State Regulation.
A certain disease of virulent nature is produced by and
accompanies excessive or promiscuous indulgence of passion.
This disease is very contagious, so that from the interlacing of
life many innocent persons are brought into much suffering
through the sin of others; and also under certain circumstances
it may become hereditary. Moreover, armies and navies lose
efficiency on the part of many men for considerable periods of
time, as a result of the same cause.
In view of the damage done to the innocent, and the loss of
efficiency in the State services, certain Governments have sought
by regulation to abate the amount and virulence of disease. And
as the hope of abating disease has been the principal motive
for tolerating State regulation and licence; it is very important
that it should be known that State regulation fails to cure and
abate the disease, and that theie is less disease where the State
does not regulate than where the State does regulate.
(2) The Origin and Domain of State Regulation.
State regulation and licence of vice springs from France. It
has had sway in the city of Paris for a century, thus giving
ample time to show its fruits, and they are —disease and death. It
also prevails in many of the large cities, of France, Italy,
Germany, Austria, Portugal, and Denmark ; but as all authori-
ties allow, the system is found in its greatest perfection in
Brussels. Within the British Empire it reigns at Hongkong,
Singapore, Malta, and Gibraltar. Likewise, in thirteen or
fourteen garrison towns of Great Britain and Ireland, there are
certain Acts in existence, named the Contagious Diseases Acts,
which have been in force more or less since the year 1866.
This date is important to remember.
(3) The Working of State Regulation.
In order to attain their end—the prevention of disease—all
the systems of State-regulated vice, whether British or Foreign,
strive to discover all the women in the localities subject to the
law who practice prostitution : not only those who do so con-
tinually, but those also who now and then swerve from the right
path.
Then—under penalty of prison, or beating with the rod—all
women suspected of immoral practices are obliged to submit to
medical inspection by surgical instruments.
If found free from disease, they are placed on the roll as
persons who may lawfully act as common women; but they


must come up every fortnight to the police-surgeon, for a fresh
instrumental examination, or they will, in England, be im-
prisoned, and in some countries beaten.
If found diseased, they are sent to a prison-hospital, and
there treated at public expense, till they have recovered health,
when they receive a clean bill of health, which enables them
(under Government authority), again to follow their vile life.
To carry out this system there is a special police, and a
special medical staff, and likewise special prison-hospitals, in
which diseased prostitutes (and such women alone) are to be
treated. As the Eight Hon. J. W. Henley, the conservative
and venerable Statesman, said—“ The British Acts are an at-
tempt to provide, at the cost of the State, sound prostitutes for
the Army and Navy!” The Continental laws go further, and
provide them for everybody. There are numbers, both in
America and Australia, inclined to endorse the Continental
idea.
Why I Deal First with Hygienic Failure of Regulation.
As, in any movement to deal with the social evil, it is quite
probable that some would bring forward the idea of State-
regulation of vice, I have desired (before presenting a positive
programme of remedies, which can, and ought to be applied to
this great evil) to show that State Regulation of vice is futile as a
means of preventing that disease which is the daughter of vice.
To establish this truth—
I—l1 —I shall refer to the British Navy.
Eecent returns, moved for by Sir Harcourt Johnson, M.P.,
and laid upon the table of the House of Commons, show so
far as the Navy is concerned, “that in the five principal ports
under the C. I). Acts, venereal disease has increased from 77 per
1000 (the average when the Acts were first put in force) to 106£
per 1000 during the last five years of their operation ! Before
the Acts came into operation the men were detained in hospital
on the average of eighteen days ; but since these Acts were
passed for regulating and providing sound courtezans, the
average has risen year by year, and amounted to twenty-seven
days, as shown in the last Navy Eeport.
Now I note a fact very creditable to Australia: Of all the
twelve stations of the British Navy, excepting the Cape of Good
Hope, Australia is the most free from venereal disease. For an
average of ten years, from 1860 to 1875 inclusive, the venereal
disease on the Australian station was 58 per 1000 ; whereas the
average on the Home station (England) was 86. In Australia
vice is not regulated, excepting in Brisbane ; in the chief naval
ports of England it is.
In the Mediterranean ports the Priestesses of Vice are
under the most severe regulation ; and in those ports the disease
among the men reached the astounding average for the ten
years of 113’6 per 1000. .In China, under the severest regula-
tion of vice at Hongkong which the world has ever known—l


say, advisedly, severe and infamous —the disease among the men
has reached for ten years the scandalous average of 162 per
1000. Australia has, in freedom from disease, beaten hollow
every station where regulation prevails.
2. —The British Army.
The English Army Eeturns are very difficult to deal with,
data being unreliable. The facts are —that in their examination
before the House of Commons’ Committee, Sir William Muir,
the Surgeon-General, and Surgeon-Major Lawson could not be
got to agree in their assertions. Then, again, in ’73" or ’74 the
Horse Guards issued an order that men in Hospital for primary
venereal disease should, while there, lose their pay, whereas this
was not formerly the case. Hence the soldiers now make much
more effort to hide the disease than they did before that order
was issued, and full reliable statistics are not to be had. More-
over, at the close of the Crimean War, Lord Herbert, Minister
of War, became aware that much disease and vice were pro-
duced in the Army by the wretched sanitary condition of the
barracks, the absence of pure amusement, and of good moral
influence. So that good man brought about very beneficial
alterations in all these respects ; and, among other benefits, vice
and its following disease began to decrease at an amazing rate.
Lord Herbert combined moral principle, science, and philan-
throphy; but when the C.D. Acts came into force, at once the
ratio of improvement decreased in those towns subjected to their
working.
To show the extent to which the medical men of the Army
differ, I may quote Dr. Cairn’s statement before the Interna-
tional Medical Conference —“That Surgeon-Major Lawson told
the Select Committee that there is a ratio of 2‘90 per 1000
constantly sick, while Sir William Muir had given the ratio as
3T4 per 1000.” While the workers and defenders of the Acts
belonging to the Army disagree in their figures, it is difficult for
outsiders to come to a conclusion; but Mr. Stansfield, M.P., says
that cross-examination brought out the fact that the proportion
of constitutional to non-constitutional diseases increased year by
year under the operation of the Acts. And Sir William Muir’s
tables show that the average duration of each case of secondary
disease in hospital has increased one day per case —showing the
constitutional disease to be more severe than before the Acts.
Professor Huxley sat upon the Eoyal Commission of 1871
to inquire into the working of the C. D. Acts, and he was the
one who moved the following resolution : —“ That the C. D. Acts
are absolutely worthless for the physiological purpose for which
they were intended.” The Eoyal Commission made this recom-
mendation —“ That the periodical examinations be discontinued.”
But this examination is the spinal marrow of the system of
regulation of vice by the State.
3 —Civil population.
On the whole, as the result of the very great attention
given to the subject by the friends and foes of State regulation,


England is in a better position now tban she was. But this
result is to be attributed to the efforts of philanthropists, and
to the pressure of opinion on the ordinary police, leading them
to enforce the ordinary laws of the land, and not to the Special
Acts and the Special Police.
The head constables of thirty-five of the great towns of
Great Britain recently declared that within the last few years
half the houses of ill-fame have been shut up, and in those
towns the C. D. Acts are not in force. Plymouth is the only
town under the Acts which claims to have done as well. But
the magistrates and the ordinary police affirm, and swore it
before the Committee, that they, and not the Special Police of
the C. D. Act, have done the good.
The Chief Constable of Glasgow has been examined before
the Committee of the Commons, and he has given the results
brought about by the police and the magistrates in that great
city, on the general moralization of the town ; and they far
exceed those brought about in towns where the C. D. Acts exist.
(Blue Boole, Vol. 111, page 370, Prof. J. Stuart, M.A.,
Trinity, Cambridge.) And mark, the Glasgow authorities say
that it is only by the operation of an intelligent public opinion
backing them up that they have been able to do what they have
done. Hence, we must create strong public opinion.
4.— Paris.
The Queen City of the World has regulated and recognised
▼ice for a century. Is the French system, once so much laudedl
a success, or a hygienic failure ?
Till lately M. Lecour was the Prefect of Police and Head of
the Department of Morals Police in Paris and all France, so
that what he says should have weight. M. Lecour, says, in his
work on Prostitution in London and Paris —“ Sanitary statistics
prove that prostitution is increasing, and that it is becoming
more dangerous to the public health.”
M. Lecour then shows how the disease rages in Paris, for he
states that there w r ere nine thousand four hundred and thirty
cases treated in the hospitals of that city. He says, “ Without
fear of exaggeration we may consider this number as repre-
senting the fifth of the number of patients treated privately. We
thus reach a total number of 47,500 cases —a formidable number
though it is below the truth.— (p. 81, Address to America.)
Dr. Jeannel, a late French writer, says (p. 684), ‘‘ The
number of diseased persons is greater in Paris than in London.”
Mark! London neither licenses nor regulates. Paris has but
two millions ; London, four millions of inhabitants.
Dr. Drysdale, of the Metropolitan Free Hospital, who atten-
ded the Venereal Congress of Paris, stated that on going over
the hospitals of Paris, he was driven to the conclusion that
there was far more syphilis in Paris than in London, and this
after above eighty years’ trial of the system of State-regulation,
and after exhausting every expedient to ensure success. Dr.
Drysdale challenged contradiction, and although M. Eicord and


almost all the great continental authorities were present, the
truth of the assertion was acknowledged. Indeed, Drs. Lefort
and Auzia Turenne corroborated Dr. Drysdale ; and the latter
owned that the Acts for regulating vice had turned French
women into white slaves. — (p. 81, Address to America.J
Dr. A. Fourneir, surgeon to the hospital Du Midi, the
Venereal hospital for men of Paris, in conjunction with M.
Pucke, traced 873 cases of disease to their source, and found that
635 came from the licensed women.
The late Pope Pius IX, during the occupation of Rm e
by the French (extending over many years), refused to allow
the regulation and recognition of prostitution ; and the result
was that the French Army was freer from disease at Rome than
any other station.
, Some six years ago the City of Paris Municipal Council
appointed a committee to enquire into the working of the morals
police. After five years of inquiry the committee presented
their report. As a result, by a vote of 48 to 7, the Municipal
Council refused to vote the funds for the maintenance of the
Morals Police, and affirmed in their resolution “that the exis-
tence of a Morals Police” endangers individual liberty, without
producing the results it was intended to realize in respect to the
maladies incidental to prostitution, or in respect to the surveil-
ance over violations of the common and public order, or out-
rages against morality.—(Extract from the journal of proceed-
ings of Council of Paris vide British Friend.') That Paris after
long trial, and as a result of long inquiry, should abandon State
licence of vice is a fact of telling moment.
Listen! In France generally the proportion of illegitimate
children to legitimate is 7‘4 ; in England, the illegitimate are
but 5-6 : nearly two per cent, in favor of England. In Paris
26 1 6 per cent, of the children are illegitimate, that is above one-
fourth ; but in London, where vice has never been under State
regulation, the illegitimacy was but 3 - 96—not four per cent.
London, with its vaster population, has not one sixth of the
illegitimacy of Paris. And shall London, so comparatively
pure, adopt the cast-off-system of licentious and diseased Paris,
whose soldiers could not march for her defence in the hour of
supreme peril, because whole regiments were incapable from
disease!
s.— Brussels.
I take you now to Brussels, because the system as worked
there is acknowledged to bo the most perfect existing, and has
been at work more than thirty years. How then do things
stand there ? M. Lenaers, the Chief Commissioner of the
Brussels Police, reported to the Burgomaster or Mayor in 1879,
“ that prostitution had so greatly developed in Brussels that
it called for new measures.” Ho actually made the following
proposals, all of which have been carried into effect, according
to the London Committee for the Suppression of State Regula-
tion. Nothing more atrocious than these regulations ever took
place in Sodom and Gomorrah! They are—


(1) Multiplication of tolerated Brothels and houses of
accommodation.
(2) Registration on the rolls of prostitution of minors
(children) and married women, without the pre-
vious consent of husband or parent.
Facility to young women, not prostitutes, as well as to
married women, to meet their lovers with perfect security in
houses of accommodation.
Brothers this is Satan let loose!
6. —Absurd Proposals.
The Continental upholders of State regulation of vice feel
that it is a failure, therefore they urge the following as the true
road of success: —In England those women who are under the
operation of the D.C. Acts are examined by surgical instruments
every fortnight. But Dr. Nevins informs us that all continental
writers of repute are agreed that once a fortnight is simply
absurd, if safety is the object, as there is a delusive impression
of safety, though there is ample opportunity for becoming
diseased in the interval; therefore Ricord and others say, the
examinations must be instituted every three days. Lancereaux
adds “ This interval is doubtless still too long. The examination
must be every two days, at least, and all that are suspected must
be detained. Moreover, multiplying the visits to the surgeon
is not enough; it is important to prevent deception, and to
avoid everything which may render difficult the medical diag-
nosis, which purpose can only be effected by keeping the parties
for some hours in a place devoted to that object.”
Mireur, a very recent French writer of great authority,
urges daily examination.
But the great continental doctors say that it is not enough
to submit known women to daily instrumental inspection. In
the International Medical Congress of Vienna, in 1873, they
officially resolved to make a proposal to all the Governments of
Europe, but they rather feared England would not consent.
Now these preposterous men passed a resolution that it ought to
be international law “ That all soldiers, sailors, policeman, civil
servants in the employ of the Government, men and women
working in factories, domestic servants, and all concourses of
people, such as at fairs and markets, pilgrimages, &c., should be
subjected to strict medical examination !”
Now, as M. Mireur says, it must be done daily, and as
Lancereaux says it is of no use, excepting the persons examined
are kept some hours, examinations would form the chief business
of life to the mass of the adult population. These absurd and
desperate propositions of the chief champions of State regu-
lation of vice, show it to be a gross failure.
7. —Hygienic Effects upon the Courtezans.
What now is the effect of the regulation system on the
health of the courtezans ? The Scottish National Association
says in a pamphlet—“ The statistics of disease in Paris, where


the regulative system has been longest in operation, disclose that
during the five years ending December, 1869, the proportion of
registered prostitutes who were found syphilitic had increased
from 100-35 to 139-12 per 1000 prostitutes.
Captain Harris, who has charge of the police who work the
C.D. Acts, in his official reports shows that on the average of the
whole period from 1866 to 1881, there has been an increase of
disease among the registered women of 24 per cent., and that
disease among them has been gradually rising in nearly every
station under the Acts.
Surgeon-General Lawson (Question 1803, House of Com-
mons’ Committee) answers-*-'* There is a little more syphilis
apparently amongst the females in the subjected stations than
among those not subjected.”
Dr. Nevin affirms also that there has been a large increase
of death-rate. As there is a dispute as to the of this,
I state no figures, but all sides admit increase of death-rate
among the fallen sisterhood as a result of the State Regulation.
I suppose these poor creatures are our sisters, and that the
Christ died for them. Horrible thought! State regulation
slaughters women in a futile attempt to make vice possible to
men without disease!
B. —Venereal Disease among the English as a whole.
As a whole, England has never had State regulation, and,
as a whole, and in comparison with many other nations, we are
a clean people ; especially so when compared with the countries
under State Regulation. Let us hold our present purity, and
seek to increase it.
In a return which has been ordered by the House o£ Com-
mons, of ail the Workhouse Hospitals in England and Wales,
there were 437 hospitals without a single case of venereal
disease of any kind in them, and two entire counties without a
single case. The ratio of deaths from venereal diseases of all
kinds in the whole year in these workhouses was only one death
in a hundred, in twenty thousand of population. Among the
classes of children working in the mills and manufactories in
the large manufacturing towns in England, a commission,
appointed on the motion of Mr. Mundella, M.P., examined
ten thousand children, and reported that there was an “ almost
entire absence of enthetic disease.” In the Children’s Infirma-
ries throughout England, Ireland, and Scotland, there was only
one child suffering from hereditary syphilis in every hundred
patients, and it was well known that such cases were easily
cured. Among 32,000 Custom-House officers, in an experience
extending over twenty-five years, the medical officer reported
that venereal disease was “ insignificant,” and there was only
“ one death in twenty thousand officers.” Among 18H official
reports made by the Medical Officers of Health throughout Eng-
land and Wales, only two even alluded to syphilis; and the
returns of the Registrar-General for twenty-five years showed
that less than one death occurred yearly, at every age, among
seventeen thousand of population.


In 1880, when 5,830 militia were examined at Aldershot,
men taken from all parts of the country where the C. D. Acts
were not in force, there was only one case of true constitutional
syphilis detected in the whole number, though each man w r as
carefully examined on assembling.
Third Main Division. — Why the attempt to regulate vice
hy the State so as to yiake the indulgence of passion by
the man safe from danger of disease has failed , and is
forever impossible.
I establish this, my final point, by quoting a portion of the
summary of Dr. Carson’s speech delivered on the International
Medical Congress in London last year, in the presence of lead-
ing physicians of all nations. (Vide Medical Inquirer) . I shall
intermix a word or two of my own, and use as much euphemism
as the case will allow —
I—ln the propagation of the venereal disease there must
be two distinct parties: the man and the woman. Mark it! of
these two the man is the most active propagator of the disease.
Now, in all attempts to regulate and licence vice, the man is left
untouched, and free to spread the disease, because men
refuse to be manipulated by doctors appointed by the Govern-
ment, and then to be placed upon public registers,
and confined to prison hospitals. No Government could
compel all the men to submit to examination every
and anything short of this is useless.
Now Lancereaux, (vol i,) says that “It was the sailors of
Columbus who brought syphilis to Europe ; English sailors took
it to Tahiti, Japan, Sumatra; Norwegian navies took it to
Holstein ; French soldiers to Algiers ; Portugese to Abyssinia ;
Danish to Iceland; Russian sailors to Norway; Norwegian
soldiers to Sweden ; and so on. All the great epidemics of
venerel disease have had a w T ar for the starting-point. The
aggregation of males, and their disproportion to females, with
all the horrors to ’which that gave rise, was the cause of the
great epidemic of 1495.
The Venereal Commissioners remark —“ Success in arres-
ting the spread of disease must be very imperfect, unless pre-
caution be adopted for preventing the men from carrying in-
fection to the women.
(2) Because all the courtezans who propagate the disease
cannot be brought under any regulations which could be
devised. _ ,
(3) The great difficulty of making the sisterhood under
the regulations attend regularly.
(4) The monthly reason of unfitness for examination.
(5) The impossibility of distinguishing one common form
of the disease from othei diseases incidental to the sex.
(6) That the initial lesion of the worst form of disease is so
small as to be constantly overlooked in examination made for
the purpose.


(7) That courtezans who have had the sickness, and have
recovered so as to show no sign of the disease, give infection to
others, and may do this constantly for years.
(8) Contagion is often passed on from man to man by visi-
tation of the same companion. (Let the sons of vice remember
the terrible fact of mediate contagion!)
(9.) That disease is spread among the women who are not
syphilitic by their close contact with those who are, during
months of hospital confinement, and by the speculum and
other instruments used by medical men.
(10.) That men deluded by the false security offered by
Governments who regulate and license vice become largely in-
fected, simply because they have been led by their rulers to
believe that the brothel is a safe place of resort whereas it is
the chamber of death and darkness.
In conclusion, the kings of the earth may set themselves, the
rulers may take counsel together, but vice cannot be made safe
from disease. The natural and the moral are but one law,
and express one holy will. The King of Kings has fixed the
decree; the people “imagine a vain thing” who try to break
it asunder. “He that soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap
corruption,”


THE SOCIAL EVIL; ITS REMEDY.
SECOND LECTURE.
The Policital Iniquity and Moral Injury of the State Regulation
of Vice.
Division I.— Political Iniquity.
The Right Hon. Benjamin Disraeli, in his inaugural address
as Lord Rector of the University of Glasgow in 1874, said, “ I
hold that civil equality —that is equality of all subjects before
the law, and a law which recognizes the personal rights of all
subjects —is the only foundation of a perfect commonwealth —
that is a commonwealth which secures to all liberty and order,
and justice .”
Speaking generally, the system of regulating tolerated vice
by the State, both in Great Britain and on the European Conti-
nent, is based upon principles diametrically opposed to those so
eloquently laid down by Benjamin Disraeli, the late Lord
Beaconsfield, at Glasgow. The system of State Regulation
denies the equality of all subjects before the law it confiscates
the legal right’s of all women.
Specific Accusations. y
These are the accusations made against State Regula-
tion :
(1) All the ordinary securities against mistaken or
malicious accusations of women are swept away (2) Thus,
perfectly innocent as well as guilty women are placed in the
power of practically irresponsible policemen, on a charge involv-
ing their character and future reputation more seriously than
any other charge which could be brought against them; and
(3) Instead of the accuser being obliged to prove the truth of
his accusation, the accused woman is obbged to prove her
innocence of a charge which, whether true or false, from its
very nature must be iujnrious, if not fatal, to her reputation;
and she is at the same time deprived of almost every safeguard
provided for the protection of other accused persons.
That the system of State Regulation can only exist in any-
thing like an effective form by abolishing the equality before the
law of the man and the woman, and by depriving women of
her dearest personal rights, is evident from the consideration of
(1) The object of the system.
Dr. Nevin says the object of the system, in the language
of the Erenchman, Dr. Didere, “is to make prostitution healthy,


or as a British Royal Commission on the subject stated, “ so far
to control the conduct of prostitutes, as to render the practice
of prostitution, if not absolutely innocuous, at least much less
dangerous.” This object is to be secured by selecting prosti-
tutes, and detaining in hospital prisons those that are diseased,
and allowing only the healthy to ply their evil trade. But as
there is no adequate legal definition of a prostitute, and disease
is often communicated by persons who are in no sense “ com-
mon ” or “ notorious,” the system is directed not only against
those who unquestionably belong to this class, but also against
every woman who may be suspected of practising prostitution.
Therefore, if this end of securing all the suspected women is to
be obtained, the amount of evidence required before enrolling
a woman on the register of prostitutes, and obliging her to
submit to examination, must (from the nature of the case) be
very slender.
All the Continental and English Acts agree in sweeping
away all reasonable guarantees against virtuous women being
enrolled as prostitutes on sufficient evidence, or of their being
enrolled in consequence of mistaken or malicions charges. Also,
they sweep away every legal guarantee which a woman who
may have lapsed from the strict path of virtue ought to have
against being forced into the ranks of common prostitutes.
Be it remembered that without all the suspected be secured,
the whole thing is useless. Most of the chief legislators of
Europe have considered this matter, and have concluded that
this cannot be done without putting the personal rights of all
women at the mercy of ordinary policemen, and denying to the
woman equal rights with men before the legal tribunals, when
nailed to defend her dearest treasure, viz., her personal honor.
(2) Summary of the Contagious Diseases Act. I r
It may help you to see the monstrous injustice to women
involved in the laws for the Regulation of Vice, if I quote a
summary of the powers of the C. D. Acts of Great Britain, by
E. C. Banks, of No. 2, Westminster Chambers ;
“ All the districts under these Acts for the purposes of the
Acts are taken out of the hands of the Local Police, and handed
over to a secret police from London. (Act 1866, Sec. 2.) To
those detectives (really spies in plain clothes) an unconstitutional
and despotic power is given over all women iu these districts, for
if one of them suspects, or in the words of the Act (1869,
Sec. 4) “ has good reason to believe ” a woman to be a common
prostitute, he may get her summoned before a Magistrate
(Second Schedule, Act of 1869, E), not to charge her with any
offence (immorality is not an offence dealt with by British law),
but for the purpose of ascertaining whether she is free from
disease. If she does not appear, the Magistrate, satisfied with
the mere “ belief ” of the police—no proof being required —
may order her, although innocent, diseased or not, to be
“periodically ’’examined by a surgeon (Act 1866, Section 16).


A woman has no right of appeal from a Magistrate’s deci-
sion, however unjust or severe it may be.
It is asserted that women submit voluntarily.
The truth is, they are called upon to sign a paper called a
“Voluntary Submission,” which is so worded as entirely to
conceal its real nature and effect (Sec. 17, Act of 1866, and 6,
Act of 1869); but should they refuse to submit voluntarily to
the Acts, and- to medical examination, they are told by the
police they will be compelled to do so.
This “ privilege ” of submission, therefore, is a bitter
mockery, and a snare and delusion to many hundreds of poor,
timid, and ignorant women and girls.
Concurrent statements of many women prove that they
have signed the submission under misapprehension, or without a
full knowledge of its meaning and effect. These statements, it
must be remembered, form the accumulated testimony not only
of women still subject to the Acts, but of women who, though
once subjected, have passed into respectable society, and who
could therefore have no motive to deceive.
Once under the power of the police by her “ submission,’’
or the Magistrate’s order, the girl or woman must undergo a
compulsory surgical examination, abhorrent to every womanly
feeling, degrading alike to herself and to the surgeon by whom
it is performed, and .too horrible to be described here.
This examination is not defined in the Acts, nor is its
nature explained to women when they are asked to sign a
"Voluntary Submission.” Indeed, some jurists believe the
examination to be a violation of all law.
In 1871, in a case of child-murder, a Coroner ordered the
suspected murderess to be examined by a surgeon. On this
point the of Sir Hardinge Giffard (Solicitor-General)
was obtained, and he declared—“ I entertain no doubt that the
order of the* Coroner for examination was illegal. No trace of
the existence of any such power as his order assumes is to be
found in any book of authority. Such an order is contrary to
the whole spirit and principle of our law. I need hardly say
that the law considers all persons innocent until found guilty,
and further, that the law invests the person of every one of
the Queen’s subjects with its protection against the merest
touch.”
The unfortunate woman, once under the power of the
police by her "submission,” must submit to■ this examination
whenever and wherever ordered by the surgeon or his assistant •
and if she fails to come, the punishment for the first offence is
imprisonment, not exceeding one month.; second offence, three
months; third offence, three mouths, with or without hard
labour, and so on over and over again. (Sec. 28, 1866.) And
yet the woman so treated may not be, in the words of the Act,
a “ common prostitute,” and may be free from disease from first
to last. If the woman is proved to be free from disease, she is
liberated, and a notice for her re-examination is made out from


time to time, and handed to the police (Sec. 19, 1866), The
woman is liberated, but not free ; she is healthy and must be
kept so. The Acts expressly contemplate the continuance of
her immoral courses, for they provide for her forced re-appear-
ance fortnightly, or as often as the surgeons think fit, for a
specified term which is, as a rule, twelve months, that she may
go through the revolting medical inspection, and so be thoroughly
supervised (Sec. 16, 1866.) She is recognised and registered
as a prostitute under medical and police regulation, sanctioned
by law. Though the term is carefully avoided, she is to all
intents and purposes “ licensed ”to pursue her trade. So long
as she cannot contaminate soldiers and sailors, the object of
the Act is accomplished.
The law takes no thought of the infection of women by
men, and so helpless female victims to lhe Acts come back to
the hospital again and again. How often —the Acts neither
ask nor care. Here is inequality : the woman who infects the
the man is punishable ; the man who infects the woman goes
scot-free !
(3) Cases showing t}ie working of the G. D. Acts.
The following case, taken from the police reports in the
West Kent Herald, April 28, 1870, relates to Canterbury, which
is under the Acts, and illustrates the manner in which the penal
clauses of the Acts operate even after the-woman has left the
neighbourhood and married respectably.
Jane Boodle was charged before the Magistrates at the Guild-
hall, in Canterbury, with being a common prostitute, and not
submitting to examination. John Whelan, the Inspector of
Police, swore to seeing her under circumstances which left no
doubt in his mind that she was a person of immoral character,
though in cross-examination he said he had never seen her solicit
men, and had never known her visit a bad house. Her counsel
therefore argued that no evidence had been adduced showing
that she was a “common prostitute,” (the only class of women
mentioned in the Acts.) Mr. Fielding, the Government prose-
cutor, said the Acts only needed the Magistrate’s receiving the
oath of the Inspector that he had good cause to believe the
woman to be a prostitute, and that the same be substantiated to
his satisfaction. The Mayor said the Magistrates were satisfied
that the requirements of the Acts had been proved, and an order
for her to be examined every fortnight for twelve months was
made. The woman declared she would not attend, let the con-
sequences be what they might; and she left the district and went
to the Rescue Society in London, which received her into one of
its houses, and ultimately provided her with a situation. After
remaining in the situation for some months, and gaining, the
respect of her employers, she accepted an offer from a respecta-
ble mechanic and married him. Meanwhile the Inspector,
anticipating that she might return to Canterbury, obtained a
warrant for her arrest. A week after her marriage she did
return to Canterbury, in company with her husband, and while


walking down the street,'; having ‘her [husband’s arm, she was
arrested by the police and carried to the police station, and placed
in a cell, it being about 9 o’clock on Saturday evening. Her
husband followed her, and produced her marriage certificate ;
but she was kept locked up all Sunday, and was'Jhurried off,;'to
Maidstone Gaol early on Monday morning, without giving her
a chance of appeal, as the Magistrates were not yet sitting; her
only offence being her refusal to submit to the examinations a
year before, having never been in the district again during the
interval, and having married respectably in the meantime. The
whole of the above treatment of this woman was all in accor-
dance with the provisions of the Act, and she and her husband
were entirely without remedy.
In the Autumn of 1880, on Major, and Mrs. Shaw’s removal
from Aldershot, a respectable, fatherless young woman left
their service with a good character. Finding it difficult to obtain
at once another situation at Aldershot, owing to the fact that a
great many officers go on leave in the autumn, and being
anxious to remain in the town, because she was engaged to a
young man in the 60th Hides, the young woman found employ-
ment at a laundry, kept by a Mrs. Fireball. Here she worked
and lodged till December 3rd. On returning home at 9
o clock on the evening of that day, she found the door locked
against her, and she took refuge in the house of a neighbour,
Mrs. Sadler. She found to her astonishment next day that a
policeman had threatened Mr. Birchall that if he did not get rid
of her, he would report him to his commanding officer for har-
boring a prostitute. The young woman thereupon obtained
employment at another laundry, Mrs, Sadler still kindly allow-
ing her to lodge at her house. But on the evening of December
7th, a man came and told the young woman that she must “be
at the Metropolitan Police Station to-mOrrow morning at 10
o clock.” She asked, “What for?” He replied, “You will
see when you get there;” and “ remember lam a policeman in
plain clothes.” She said, “ I shall not go. I have done nothing.”
To this he answered, “If you don’t come, I shall fetch
you in my uniform, and it will' nicely show you up; going
through the camp !” Mrs. Sadler said, “ You had better go and
see what it is all about; you know they can prove nothing
against you the policemen then remarking, “ I have brighter
girls than you talk in this way, and I have known them drown
themselves rather than come to our rules, and you can do the
same if you like: it won’t trouble me.” (He was probably
alluding to a respectable woman who drowned herself in the
canal at Aldershot, rather than comply with the provisions of
the Contagious Diseases Acts.) In consequence of the fore-
going conversation, Mrs. Sadler accompanied the young woman
to the Metropolitan Police Station on the following morning.
What now took place may be described in the young woman’s
own words. She says—“ The same policeman was waiting for
me at the door, and he took me into a separate room where the
Inspector was. The Inspector asked me my name, and whether


I lived at Farnborough. In answer to his questions I told him
whose service X had been in, and my home was at
and that I had a mother, but no fatherHe put two pieces of
blue paper before me and told me to sign them. I said ‘ Cer-
tainly not.’ He said ‘ Don’t speak to me in that way, but sign
the papers.’ I said, ‘ The policeman told me yesterday I should
know what I came for, and now T wish to know. He said,
‘ This is not the place for talking.’ I* then turned to the police-
man, and said ‘ You told me I should know what I was to come
here for, and now lam told this is not a place for talking.’ The
policeman did not answer, and I said, ‘ I am not going to sign
any papers. I want to know what lam called here for. The
policeman said, ‘I am not allowed to talk.’ The Inspector read
a statement the policeman had made, to the effect that he had
seen me talking to three different men of the 60th Rifles, and a
bandsman of the 82nd Regiment. I said to the policeman, Do
you really say that you have really seen these men talking to me,
now?’ I said, ‘You bring them forward.’ The Inspector told
me to be quiet, and to bring the men myself, and that I was to
sign the papers and go away quietly. I said I would not. He
said to the policeman, ‘ You must make a case against this
woman, and we ipust make her sign.’ Mrs. Sadler told them, as
they ordered me out, that I should not be wronged, and they then
said, ‘We will summons her.’ After this a message was sent
by the policeman, through Mr. Birchall, to Mr. Sadler, who is
a pensioner from the 60th Eifles, that a report would be made
against him if he did not turn me out of his house, and that he
would lose his pension for harbouring a prostitute.” One of the
papers which these policemen vainly tried to induce this virtuous
voung woman to sign, was a “submission” form under
the before-mentioned .0. D. Acts, the signing of which would
have placed her on the Government register of prostitutes,
and rendered her liable to three months’ imprisonment with
hard labor if she failed to attend every fortnight to undergo a
surgical examination.”
On December 16th, a summons was served upon the young
woman for her to appear at the Magistrate’s Court, that a Magis-
trate’s order might be issued to compel her to submit to periodi-
cal examinations or be committed to prison. But happily for
her, she was possessed of a courageous and defiant spirit. Under
precisely similar circumstances, many women have been terrified
into submission. But she determined to fight for her virtue, and
a barrister-was found to defend her. This legal aid led to the
disclosure of the foregoing facts, and the case was dismissed ;
but no apology or compensation was offered to the victim of this
cruel and systematic persecution. (From “ Ruined by Act of
Parliament.”)
(4) State Regulation deprives women of all just means of
legal redress , and especially so in England.
Lot it be borne in mind, that in flagrant defiance of the
British Constitution and of justice, a woman is dealt with a s


guilty unless she can prove her own innocence ; and she is also
rolled of her rights to trial by Jury. Under such a system,
serious mistakes are enevitable, and have frequently occurred.
A virtuous woman whose character is once damaged by any act
of the surgeons or police has little or no chance of redress,
because Section 42, Act of 1866, ordains that any action or
prosecution against “ any person,” for punishment or damages,
shall be commenced within three months and not otherwise ; that
the defendant shall have a month’s notice before action is commen-
ced ; that at the trial, the defendant may plead the “ execution
or intended execution of this Actthat, should the plain-
tiff lose, or be non-suited, she must pay all costs ; but (and this
is monstrous !) if the verdict is for the plaintiff, she shall not
have costs, unless the Judge approves of the action ! Ignorance
of the limit of three months for action, and the poverty and
timidity of many women, are reasons why surgeons and police
have so long escaped prosecution for wrongdoing.
Remember that while blocked from reddress in this tyran-
ical way, all women are denied right of appeal to a higher court,
and must be so if the system exists ; for the moment full scope
is allowed to the ordinary laws, .as administered by the Superior
Tribunals, the system would perish, as all its supporters allow.
But that being the case, there is conclusive evidence that State
Regulation is opposed to the just rights of the subject, and the
fundamental constitution of England.
Opinion of — Sheldon, M.A., Late Professor of Jurispru-
dence at the University of London.
“ Now, it is every woman (and not prostitutes alone) in a
subjected district whose personal liberty is invaded by the very
existence of the Contagious Diseases Acts. The degree of the
injury, indeed, is measurable by the poverty and loneliness of
the woman, but the injury itself extends to all. There is no
woman whatever, within the district, who is legally safe against
a police spy persecuting her when he pleases with a Voluntary
Submission Paper, and under threat of proceedings before a
Magistrate, procuring her ignorant or reluctant assent to be
examined once a fortnight, or oftener, for twelve months as
being a common prostitute ; or, if this fail, or is likely to fail,
making an information before a magistrate to the effect that she
is a ‘ common prostitute,’ and putting her to the proof that she
is not. It is a most frivolous and slippery notion of public
liberty to say that no honest woman need feel afraid, and that
skilled policemen do not make mistakes. England would be in
a very different condition from what she is at this day had
public liberty been left in the hands of Government agents,
however well chosen or accomplished. To render it so much as
possible for every woman to be put to proving she is not a
common prostitute, simply because a policeman chooses to say ho
believes she is one, is to commit an outrage on the very name of
liberty, and to undo the work which the great founders of the
English Constitution have so painfully -and so triumphantly


wrought. But, while the free, joyous, independent life "f every
poor girl in the district is darkened and hampered by the very
existence of the Acts, their effects on the personal liberty of
those actually brought under them as ‘ common prostitutes’ is an
anomaly in English law still more intolerable. . . . The
Acts offend against the leading principle of public liberty in all
its forms. A reckless imperilment of personal character on the
most momentous of all points is permitted throughout the
district; a system of organised bodily outrage is sanctioned and
kept in active operation ; a species of lengthened and irregular
imprisonment without preceding trial by jury, judicial form, or
other constitutional safeguards, is inflicted ; while, when once a
wretched woman has been finally gathered into the capacious
drag-net of the Act, it entirely depends on the good-will and
conscientiousness, or the medical intelligence of public officials,
when she shall recover her liberty again.”
Not only are milliners, shopgirls, young women working in
factories, &c., under fear of the special police, but the Rev, D.
GK Watt, M.A., of Maidstone, a town in which the Acts have
been put in force, said, in his speech at the Cannon Street Hotel,
in London, May 12th, 1875 :—“ Another serious effect produced
by the law is, that it- is not felt quite safe by our waves and
daughters to be seen in the streets at night. A teacher tells me
that there are those who would willingly come to his classes but
are afraid of being seen out regularly. If a young man and
young woman went home together, a detective might very likely
be upon them.” And the late Mr. Acton, a distinguished surgeon,
and one of the most influential originators and advocates of
these Acts in England, informed a large meeting of the medical
profession in Liverpool, in 1874, that no young woman dare go
out in an evening in Windsor since the Acts had been intro-
duced, for if she was seen by the police walking one night with
one man and another night with another, no matter whether he
might be her father or her brother, or whoever he might be, she
would be tapped upon the shoulder by the police—“My young
woman, you must go up for examination to-morrow.”
(7) Illustrations # of the extortion and personation to which
woman are subjected under State Regulations. (I age 19,
Address Amer. Lcgis.)
Berlin, 1872, —The Berlin correspondent of the London
Daily Telegraph, October 26th, 1872, says that arrests of virtuous
women are made there every day and night by policemen in
plain clothes, and they are threatened with being sent to prison
on the charge of being “ no better than they should be,” unless
they give the policeman a bribe to let them off. This is
peculiarly hard on the bourgeoise of a city, where it is the
custom for respectable girls and married women to walk to the
theatres and concerts by themselves to save cab-hire.”
Lille, 1873.—The London Daily News, February 12, 1873,
gives an account of a gang of ruffians who had just been dis-
covered in that city. They had assumed an official costume, and


under the pretence of being “ special police,” had during' four
years leaped black mail upon men, and compelled young women
to submit to their desires, under the threat of placing the
women on the register of prostitutes if they refused. At length
a German youth and his sweetheart resisted. The man was
killed, but the woman escaped and gave the alarm, and the gang
of about 20 men were eventually arrested. The leader boasted
that during these four years 500 Lille woman had thus submit-
ted to him and his accomplices.
England, 1872. —The Times, April 10, 1872, gives the
report of the conviction at Canterbury (which is under the Acts)
of a man for extorting money from a young man and his female
companion, on the threat of charging her with being a prosti-
tute, saying that he was a policeman under the Acts. The
Government prosecuted, because “ such cases were of frequent
occurence.” The prisoner was sentenced to five years’ penal
servitude.
Illustrations of the working of State Regulation in Pans.
In March, 1876, a young banker from Dijon (in France)
and his bride, visited Paris on their wedding tour. While he
looked after his luggage the bride waited for him, and being
alone was accosted by the police, and notwithstanding her state-
ment as to her husband’s name and position, and the cause of
her being alone, she was forcibly taken into custody, and sub-
jected to the personal indignities of the Bureau des Mcours, and
it was not until after hours of anxious search that her husband
discovered her. Even then, in order to furnish a pretext for the
police action, she was compelled to say that she was waiting
about for illicit purposes before she could obtain her release,
and her husband was totally unable to obtain any redress.
The following is the account of an outrage, from the
London Weekly Dispatch, November 12th, 1876. Madlle. Rousseil,
of the Theatre Francais, was going to the theatre, when a iflan
in plain clothes barred her path, and ordered her with menacing
arrogance to follow him to the next police station. She asked
him to let her pass, it being evident that he had mistaken her
for some one else! He said he had not, and mentioned her
name. As she refused to follow him, he laid hands upon her.
The gifted actress is a woman of high spirit and strong physique,
so she struggled with the aggressor, and pushed him on his face
into the gutter. A crowd gathered, but when it .was known
what the assailant was, nobody dared to interfere. At last two
city policemen came up. Madlle. Rousseil stated her case, and
they took upon themselves to release her for the evening. The
Prefect of Police, M. Le Coeur, in the interest doubtless of the
order, such as he understands it, now denies that it was one of
his subordinates who assailed the actress, though it is established
that the Agent des Mcours showed his medal of office to the
policemen, and that they did not question its authenticity.
This case was taken up by the newspapers one after
another; it was illustrated by other cases ; letters poured in from


th 6 friends of outraged women, and attention was pre-eminently
drawn to the total want of legal authority for the whole system.
The following are some of the facts which have thus forced their
way into the day light:—
A few months since, these agents arrested the nursery
governess of M. Naquet, when accompanying his son in the
street. Others arrested at a railway station, the wife of a rail-
way director, who, in spite of his high position, could not obtain
her release until next day. On the Boulevard Haussman, the
othet day a scandalous scene occurred. The agents were hunt-
ing a woman under the trees there to obtain her registration.
She refused to submit, and climbed up one of the trees, crying
out so loudly that the passers by stopped, and took her part
against the police. A struggle ensued, and the woman and her
defenders were taken into custody. The defenders were subse-
quently charged with outrage and rebellion against the agents
of authority in the exercise of their functions. Two were con-
demned to three months’ imprisonment, and the other two were
fined. On this punishment the Droits de V Homme remarks :
“ Now let it he known that when a woman is arrested she may
cry for help as long as she likes ; what matter ?
“ Do not go near her ; leave her in the hands of the person
who has seized her, no matter who he may he. It is but a
little misfortune. These men have been condemned for rebellion
against the agents of authority in the exercise of their functions.
Who gave these agents any authority whatever ?
“ Who created their functions, and in what do they consist ?
We trust the condemned will not be satisfied with this judgment,
hut will appeal to the Court of Cassation. The safety of all
women is too much involved in this question t 6 allow it to rest.
There is a legal question to be solved, and we trust that these
condemnations are the beginning of the abolition of the Police
of Morals, which serve only to corrupt morals.”
A French writer asserts that the operation of the French
laws was such that in Paris “ the modest workwoman unpro-
tected by male relatives has not where to lay her head.”
Division 11.
The System of State-Regulated and Tolerated Vice can only
he maintained hy Terror.
What a violation of all the purposes for which Government
exists it is to use its vast powers to terrify and torment women,
in a vain effort to make prostitution innocuous to men ! But
that only by horrible terror such laws as the C. D. Acts of
England, and the laws for Regulating Prostitution on the Con-
tinent can be maintained is evident from the following Mr.
W IT. Sloggett, Inspector of the Hospitals established under
the English Regulations, told the Select Committee of the House
of Commons in 1869, “ the Women would not submit without the
application of terror:' The needful terror is inspired by the
imprisonment which the regulation system always inflicts for
Continuous non-attendance at the ordeal.


But, says Mr. Edmundstone in “ Moral Forces,” the ideal
of the State Regulations is the “licensed brothel,” or inspected
house of debauchery, as it exists in Brussels and Hongkong.
There the terrors of the keeper of the house are added to the
terrors of the police, and resistance is at last utterly hopeless.
The Eegulationist of thorough-going type declares that “The
licensed brothel is the basis ’of all regulation of prostitution, and
it is his avowed object to drive all the woman into such houses.”
But Mireur has a terrible story to tell of the'condition of the
women when thus perfected. “ The girl in the licensed brothel
is the type par excellence of the prostitute. She is the modern
slave, who, having sacrificed her personality, has become the tool
of the brothel-keeper and the property of the public. It is
superfluous to say'how prejudicial to their health is the life of
these unfortunates. Death also strikes most of them in the
flour of their age. It is then, not without reason that it is some-
times said, in speaking of prostitution, that its last asylum is
the hospital. It is almost always the fatal end of the woman of
the licensed brothels. Debauchery supported them yesterday :
it slays them to-day. “ When once the girl enters the licensed
brothel, she bids adieu to heaven, to liberty, to honor, and to
the world.
Division 111. • . '
Another great evil upon which I cannot stay to speak, is
the way these Acts operate to engender a fierce class animosity
of the poor against the rich, both in Italy and France. The
very first act of the Commune in Paris was to close the licensed
brothels, and abolish the State Regulation of Vice. The Italian
feeling you will discover when I read, by and by, the address of
1,650 Working Men’s Societies of Italy to the Working Men of
Great Britain. The great Working Men’s Societies of England
are dead against the Acts as Class Legislation. However, I now
proceed to my second main division: the moral injury done by
State Regulation. But every man whose opinion is worth any-
thing knows that what injures a nation’s morality is politically
unsound.
(1) Hardening -Effects on the Women. (Page 44, Address
Amer. Legis.)
Miss Lucy Ball, the matron of the Royal Albert Hospital,
Devonport (the principal hospital for receiving prostitutes under
the Acts), says—“l think the periodical examinations have a
tendency to harden the girls and keep them in that life; they
are not reclaimed so readily, and the proportion of reclamations
is very much less now than under the voluntary system ; and the
reclamations are not real, for the ‘ reclaimed’ women return
again and again to the hospital.”
The Rev. James Metcalf, formerly Chaplain of the Royal
Albert Hospital, Devonport-says —“I think the examinations
tend to harden the prostitute’s character, and than she is more
likely to persevere in the course of life than a woman not subject
to periodical examinations.” The above is the testimony of


witnesses employed officially in carrying out the Acts, who might
therefore be reasonably expected to think favourably rather than
unfavourably of them.
Evidence Given to the Royal Commission by the leading
Executive Officer of the System.
“ The women are so fully visited now, they do not need to
solicit.” lam sorry to think their income is too large now ;
that is the only evil I see. Solicitation is decreased, in the first
place, by the numbers being very small, and in the second place
they are living in rather easy circumstances. They are too well
off now, in my estimation, and have too ‘much money, which
prevents their solicitation.” This evidence exactly corroborates
the observation of this Committee.
The streets in the subjected towns are now filled with
“ drabs in silks,” evidently thriving in their sorry profession,
instead of the half-starved wretches who infested the pavements,
and annoyed the passers-by in former days. Prostitution under
the oegis of the Acts has now an upward tendency, and members
of the Society have traced the career of particular girls from
rags and filth to ostentatious splendour of attire. Prom numbers
of independent sources the Committee have been apprised
that the vice of fornication is widely spreading.— ( Greatest Moral
Hypocrisy, Rages 11 and 12 .)
Another striking evidence of the demoralizing power ©f
the Acts is, that the principal Female Eefuges have been obliged
to refuse admission to the girls who have been in the subjected
districts and under periodical examination, as they find them too
hardened to reform; and as they are not adequately supplied
with funds, the managers of the Eefuges feel that they must
expend their money where there is good prospect of benefit.
It is a disgrace to fornicating and adultrous men that they
scarce ever subscribe sixpence to the female refuges.
(2) Effects on Practice and Opinion. (Batchelor, Page 9. )
Lord Sandhurst, who till recently (before the Eoyal Com-
mission sat) was in command of the army in India, distinctly
said that his feeling was rather strong that generally the opera-
tion of Acts of this kind, with reference to either sex, had
necessarily the effect of reducing the moral tone, etc. (Blue
Book, 15, 255); and he added that he held that opinion more
especially with regard to men, of whom he had some experience.
Mr. Wolferstan, again, House Surgeon at the Eoyal Albert Hospi-
tal, Devonport, for five years from January, 1865, and engaged in
administering the Acts, told the Eoyal Commissioner that the
men “ indulge more freely in fornication than they would in
places not subjected, because they think the Acts give them
security from disease.” (Blue Book, 3,251.) “ I think the effect
has been to increase the vice of fornication, among the male
population at any rate.” (3,252.) And even Superintendent
Wakefield, the head of the police engaged in carrying out the
Acts in Devonport, confessed that he did not think the decrease


of bad bouses and women was occasioned by increased morality
on the part of the men ; that he did not think the freedom from
considerable risk of catching disease likely to diminish the
amount of immorality on the part of the men ; or that the num-
ber of men who committed the sin was diminished at all. (Blue
Book, 71, 72, 75.) ' . ,
Continental Testimony to Immoral Effects. {Pages 48 and 49,
Address Amer. Legis.)
Dr. Despres, late head Surgeon to the Lourcine Hospital,
said in a speech, at a very large meeting in Pans: “ The efforts
of the police have been, at least in Paris, a complete failure.
They protect- nobody from the blood poison arising from the
class of maladies to which I allude, and they tread down a
sound principle. In Brussels, where prostitution is a hundred
times more severely regulated than in Paris, or any other town,
the number of marriages has diminished 8 per cent. Hence a
notable decrease of births among the classes having the means
to bring up their progeny decently, and an increase in the back
slums of the city. Pesth comes next to Brussels, and there
marriages diminish rapidly whilst prostitution fearfully increases.
Antiquity presents examples of the withering effect on population
of the luxury falsely called a high-comfort standard, and the kind
of vice which, I am bound to declare, police regulations stimulate.
The more the fallacious belief is inculcated that the contagion
can be stopped by police supervision, the greater disinclination
will men feel for marriage /ind the austere duties it involves.
They will become effeminate, and shrink from the burdens their
shoulders were made to bear. At the same time, the field for
the courtesan will be widened with the increasing demand for
her. Women brought up to earn their bread with the work of
thqir hands, will allow themselves to receive what will appear to
them to be the easy gains of debauchery. What must be —
looking facts steadily in the face —the great total of all this ?
National loss of vigour, industrial deterioration, physiological
poverty, the death of every noble sentiment, and social misery.”
—(London Weekly Dispatch, Feb. 11th, 1877.)
Dr. Eouth, at the International Medical Congress of
London in 1881, said, syphilis was less severe in England than
abroad. And why was this P Eor three reasons chiefly:—First
because persons, in so called protected places, committed forni-
cation under a sense of false security, and therefore intercourse
was more common. Second, the habit brought about the
hankering for impure women. Promiscuous copulation was just
like any other vice; it grew upon anyone who practised it; and
just as the drunkard was always craving for more drink, and
also went generally from bad to worse, beginning perhaps with
beer aud ending with the strongest spirits, so by and by, forni-
cators got surfeited with women, and sank to the commission of
the grossest vices. Speaking as he did to foreigners (and he,
himself half a Frenchman, was very partial to them), was it not
a fact that in Paris the bawds who accosted you at the doors and


streets’, often offered you boys, if you refused women ? Was it
not true that Tardieu, in his “ Attentat sur les moeurs,” gives
his medico-legal experience in 802 cases of unnatural crime
examined hy himself, whereas in England such cases are scarcely
ever heard of P He appealed to those present among foreigners
—was it true or false ? (A foreigner cried, “II faut dire ce
qui est vrai’’—one is obliged to acknowledge that it is true.)
Third, it tended to increase clandestine prostitution. This it
was which in Paris so disheartened and baffled those in favor of
the C. D. Acts. Whereas the number of registered women
annually diminished, that of clandestine prostitutes annually
increased. And why ? Prostitutes were tired of the severity
of St. Lazare and police cruelty 5 and the habit of wholesale
intercourse being on the increase, they found it more profitable
and agreeable not to register. Hence the system was admitted
to be a failure, and was to be done away in Paris next year.
Lastly, undue excess of intercourse was prejudicial to mind and
body. A mind perverted to regard vice with pleasure would be
sure to become the most atrocious communist and a worse
soldier. Had not continental history proved this over and over
again ? —(Medical Enquirer, Page 11.)
In Brussels, which is almost the beau ideal of the advocates
of this legislation, the shop windows in the most frequented
and fashionable streets exhibit engravings that would subject
any vendor of such things in England to a criminal prosecution,
and the debased moral tone which permits and encourages such
exhibitions is further shown by the entire absence of conceal-
ment about illicit connections.
“It is universally said by the principal and thoughtful
• inhabitants of Brussels, that immorality is universally diffused
throughout that city. ‘ The moral nerve has been extracted from
the people of Brussels,’ said one gentleman in conversation
with me. * Everybody has a mistress ; wives know their husbands
mistresses, fathers know their sons’ mistresses, sisters know
their brothers’ mistresses, said another. ‘ Immorality is so
cheap,’ said a third, ‘ that the Maisons Toleries are not well
attended.’ These are the statements not of one or another
person, but of every thoughtful person with whom I have
conversed in Brussels, and I have met persons there of all classes
in society, whose evidence is cumulative and not repetitive.
(Prof. Stuart, Eel. Trin. Coll, Camb., England, Medical Enquirer,
Nov. 15, 1876.) ,
The city of - Zurich, in Switzerland, after long experience
of regulated brothels, abolished them in June, 1874, and the
Municipal Council issued a proclamation that “ Toleration gives
rise to a fatal'confusion of ideas —men become accustomed to
regard what is protected as a permitted thing; the young lose
all ideas of good conduct —a moral confusion no less fatal is
produced among the police. To admit any sort compromise
with a trade fundamentally evil, is to enter upon a path fruitless
of every good result.


Memorial from 1,604 Working Men's Societies in Italy. (Page
64, Address Amer. Legis.)
“To the Working Men op Great Britain and Ireland. ’
“Fellow-workmen. The General of the
United Italian Working Men’s Societies, held in Genoa in
September last, resolved by a solemn and unanimous vote, to
co-operate with the British and Continental Federation in ™\3ir
holy working for obtaining the repeal of those regulations which
in many countries of Europe give State sanction to the infamous
trade of prostitution.
“The Congress resolved also to issue an appeal from the
United Societies to all the workmen of the various European
countries, inviting them to work unanimously together in fraternal
accord, so as to give to the moral crusade, proclaimed by the
courageous virtue of English mothers, the- mighty support of
their united strength. The universal conscience is now thoroughly
aroused to a sense of the deep dishonor and incalculable injury/
brought upon the people, and the working classes especially, by
this old Social Evil, and by sacrilegious negation of God’s law
and human justice which is expressed in the legislation of this
evil.
“The work, then, in which the working classes (the most
threatened and injured by the cursed institution) should unite,
consists, according to our opinion, in an incessant cry for
Justice, which the laws of prostitution shamefully violate, and
in an assiduous, persistent, universal propaganda against the
insidious arguments of materialistic science, which condemns to
infamy the sisters of man that he may find in that infamy safety
and impunity for his vices.
“ The Italian Societies will fulfil this duty with all the means
that the conditions of their country place at their disposal.
They mean to fight openly against the establishment in the
artisans’ districts of Houses of Infamy, and thus to oppose
opulent vice in its long-established usage of seeking hospitality
amidst the poor but honest dwellings*of the working classes.
They mean to stop this horrible insult to humbte virtue, so that
the shame aid responsibility of its own dishonor may wholly and
entirely rest on privileged vice.
« The world knows that no plea of antiquity, no arrogance of
science, will ever succeed in proving that the vice of the few is
useful to the many, or that it is possible to secure the health of
the body by the villifying corruption of the soul.
*“ Signed on behalf the Executive Committee.
“ CARLO LIZZANI.
“ B. FILIPPERE.
“ SIVO FAVA."
“ Home, December, 1876.”


Protest from 250 Ladies in 1870, headed hy Florence Nightingale
and Harriet Martineau.
“ We, the undersigned, enter our solemn protest against
these Acts, because, involving as they do, such a momentous
change in the legal safeguards hitherto enjoyed by women in
common with men, they have been passed, not only without the
knowledge of the country, but unknown to Parliament itself;
and we hold that neither the representatives of the people nor
the Press fulfil the duties which are expected of them when
they allow such legislation to take place without the fullest
discussion. Because, so far as women are concerned, they
remove every guarantee of personal security which the law has
established and held sacred, and put their reputation, their
freedom, and their persons absolutely in the power of the
police.”
Other reasons —religious, moral, and social —are given, and
thdn follow Mie signatures of 250 ladies, whose names are
“ household words ” in connection with all good and noble
works.
In a letter to the Daily NewslSQQ, Harriet Martineau says: —
“ The mothers of sons do not desire that the ways of vice should
be made easy and safe to men ; and further, they do not desire
that the victims of the vice of men should bear the whole
penalty of their common licence. The extension of these Acts
to the whole civil population would cover with the protection of
the law the brothel, as a brothel, as expressly as the school or
the church. The law lays hold of. the woman, for the purpose
of preventing her injuring the man: it nowhere propose to
protect the woman from precisely the same injury by the man.
If we would avert the utter loss -of the sacredness of person,
the corruption of the rising generation of citizens, who will
find the way of vice made easy, and the dens of vice thrown
open to them, and the aggravation of disease attended by
factitious horrors, which cannot be described —we must exert
ourselves to learn the precise position in which we stand, and to
face the difficulty, and to endure the pain of entertaining the
subject, and to stij; up the'Legislature—every member of it —to
undo the fearlul mischief wrought by its carelessness and
ignorance during the closing hours of a Session.”
Mdlle. J. V. Danbie, of Paris, a French authoress of
repute, says, on this subject: —•'* If you cannot withdraw women
from the batons of those policemen, who herd them like droves
of cattle in the interests of debauchery, you may abandon all
hope for the general elevation of your women of England. But
allow me to hope better things from the good sense of the
English.”




THE SOCIAL EVIL: ITS REMEDY.
THIRD LECTURE.
Suggestions for Abating the Social Evil.
I define the Social Evil to be the abuse of the sexual nature
by the male, the female, or by both in consort. The sexual
nature is the great foundation of earthly human society, and is
the means of our closest, dearest, and holiest fellowships; more-
over the working of the seeual nature deeply affects for weal or
woe the coming generations. Therefore, every abuse of the
sexual either directly or indirectly, injures society in
its vital parts; and, therefore, every abuse of sexual powers be-
longs to the Social Evil.
The more prominent forms of the Social Evil are (1) female
prostitution —that is the female making herself common to many
men for the sake of gain or pleasure ; -(2) male prostitution,
when a male, out of the lust which is in him, consorts with many
women, and is so vile as to consort with women whom he knows
to be oftimes visited by many other men. There are ten times
as many male prostitutes in the 'world as female, though male
prostitutes •pay money to the female prostitute, and often hold a
high head, do remember , in dealing with the Social Evil, the
existence and large porportious of the male prostitution, then
there is unnatural lust, of which nothing need be said. Onanism,
masturbation, or self-abuse, is another very grevious form of the
Social Evil, which fathers, mothers, and the keepers of boarding
schools, both male and female, should be very wary of.
Then there are seduction and illegitimacy, which are very
different things from prostitution, though full of shame and
sufferings, both to the sinning individuals and to society.
Now it stands confessed that this Social Evil when regarded
in its causes, its consequences, its wide extent, its vested interests,
its traditions, and its antiquity is exceedingly difficult to deal
with. Yet if the human race are to be lifted into a higher plane
of life, and are to enjoy longer, happier, healthier, stronger, and
holier years, all the friends of progress, all the workers for “ the
good time coming ” must join forces, face, and overthrow the
Social Evil; or else the Social Evil will overthrow us, and produce
moral, physical, industrial, and social degredation as ‘ well as
religious.
Gentlemen, you tell me that the Social Evil is an ancient
evil; then the more reason why we should attack it. You tell
me the Social Evil is a mighty evil, devastating families, states.


and nations. You tell me that he has destroyed some of the
grand races. Very well; all the more reason why we should
brace our energies to destroy this great destroyer. .
I pray you that in the consideration of such suggestions as
I am about to offer, you will keep in mind the nature and power
of the evil, and the vast gain of even material amelioration. I
do not expect that we are to destroy this thing a day, or by
one agency; but I think that by the diligent use of various
means, and by lengthened and sustained effort, we may do much
to rid the world of this source of sorrows, sufferings, and of
shame.
I now proceed to the first main division:—
Suggestions Legislative.
For I believe that the Legislature has a very considerable
work to do in connection with this grave business. I believe
that all Legislatures have been very remiss of their duty hitherto
on this matter, and that if Parliaments, and those who lead
them, had done what they ought, male and female prostitution,
seduction, illegitimacy, and the evil disease would never have
attained the proportions they have. However, the time has
arrived when all the Legislatures will be obliged to face the
matter. There is a mighty movement continually gathering
force in all civilized lands, having as its object the regeneration
of the laws so far as they affect the relation of the sexes. I
am proud to be a lowly worker in the ranks of this grand
party.
Gentlemen, I do not intend to suggest such cruel, degrading,
unequal, such pettifogging laws as the C. D. Acts of England,
or those of Hongkong, Singapore, and Brussels. Ido not pro-
pose that the Government should employ spy police in plain
clothes, or get young women to sign “voluntary submissions”
to they know not what; or deny to woman her legal rights ; or
pay married men out of Government money to commit frequent
fornications, as at Hongkong. I shall not rise to such moral
heights.
But, as a plain, homespun Englishman, I shall venture to
believe in Magna Charta and the Petition of Eight. Audacious
creature that lam ! I shall venture, with Lord Beaconsfield at
Glasgow, to believe in civil equality, that is, the equality of all
subjects before the law, and that a law which recognises the
personal rights of all subjects is the foundation of a perfect
commonwealth—that is, a commonwealth which secures to
all its subjects (women as well as men) liberty, and order, and
Justice.
Gentlemen, I shall stand or fall upon the principle of
equality before the law of men and women. I shall not be so
shameless as to propose the degradation of men in order that
women may gratify their lust without fear of disease. Nor will
I venture to infringe on the just liberties of either sex, but keep


sacredly in view the personal rights of both sexes. This is my
principle ; what is sauce for the goose must in law be sauce for
the gander!
Gentlemen, I have a great horror of the venereal disease,
and desire various measures in order to bring it to an end ; but
my aim will not accord with that of the C. D. Acts, which the
Royal Commission of 1869 said, “is to make the practice of
prostitution innocuous.” I propose to destroy the disease by a
much more root-and-branch policy. I propose to cut off the
supply of fresh female prostitutes, and so gradually make it
more and more difficult for male prostitutes to find means of
gratifying their propensities. According to the advocates of
State Regulation, female prostitutes are the great sources of
disease, and male prostitutes are the unfortunate victims of these
wicked women. Well now, if we stop the supply of women,
then these unfortunate males will not be able to get into mis-
chief ! I propose that the laws should be so amended as much
more effectively to shield the purity of young females ; and that,
in the issue, means the decrease of female prostitution, and the
purity and health of the male and eventually of society as a
whole. As this would come about gradually, we should pass
from the old to the new and better order of things without a
violent shock, which is to be deprecated.
My first proposition is to amend clause 65 of the Criminal
Law Consolidation Act, 39 and 40, Victoria, No. 38, 1876. The
clause reads—“ Whosoever shall unlawfully and carnally know
and abuse any girl, being above the age of twelve and under
the age of thirteen years, whether with or without her consent,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, being convicted thereof,
shall be liable to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding seven
years, with hard labor, and may be whipped.”
Now I have read, that the Code Napoleon protects the
female till fifteen years of age. Mr. Hardman, Chairman of the
Surrey Quarter Sessions, in his evidence before the House of
Lords’ Committee, page 92, said that “ he thought that the
power of consent ought to be taken away from young girls up
to a. much greater age than thirteen, the present limit.” The
London Committee for the exposure and suppression of the
Traffic in English girls for the purposes of Continental Pros-
titution, by their Chairman, Mr. B. Scott, Chamberlain of
London, suggested in writing to the Lords’ Committee that it
should be a misdemeanor to seduce any child under the age of
21 years. (Vide Report, page 69.) They further suggested to
make it a misdemeanor to act indecently to any child under 21
years of age, in any way that if attempted towards a woman
and resisted would be an indecent assault. They proposed this
upon this principle —a principle which lam bound to say cannot
be gainsaid with justice : protect person as much at any rate as
property. Person is at least as precious as property. Now a
statute, they go on to say, was recently passed to protect young
men from liabilities and debts while contracted under 21, and


even from ratifying after they have become 21, contracts made
before they became' 21. (Vide Hansard, ccix, 1225, 1668.)
Their argument is, “you very properly protect young men from
sharpers who would defraud them of their property; now
protect young women from villains who would defraud them of
their honor.”
Now, I believe that we should have as our. aim to reach the
age of 21 years, but I should oppose going so far at the present
time ; it is too great a leap. I venture to propose seventeen as a just
middle course. I should like it to be eighteen, so that the clause
would read —“ Whosoever shall unlawfully and carnally know
and abuse any girl, being above the age of 12 and under the age
of 17 years, whether with or without her consent, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and, being convicted, &c.”
The effects of this amendment, if firmly worked, would be
a very material reduction of juvenile seductions, and they form
a considerable proportion of the whole. Prostitutes under the
age of 17 could not exist, as no man would dare lie with one ;
and as seduction under 17 would practically cease, one of the
chief sources of new prostitutes would be abolished. It appears
to me impossible that any person who desires to rid society of
disease and degradation, and who would do even-handed
justice to women, can possibly object to raise the age of consent
to 17 years. • •
Second Legal Suggestion
Is but a deduction and legitimate corollary of the first, and
I cannot do better than use the phraseology of the London
Committee : —“ Make it a misdemeanor to act indecently towards
any child under 17 years of age, with or without her consent, in
any way .that if attempted towards a woman of full age and
resisted would be an indecent assault.”
Protection from indecent assault is an effectual shield
against seduction and from juvenile prostitution, as it would
prevent a collusive defence that there was no carnal lying
together, but simply indecent conduct which did not reach that
length.
Third Legal Suggestion.
Make the seduction of a female by the master in whoso
employ she is in any capacity —for example, such as a domestic
servant, a governess, a milliner, or shopwoman; make the
seduction of such by the master a misdemeanor, if the girl be
under the age of 21 years.
It is a grievous wrong for a master, who is virtually
entrusted by parents and guardians with the care and guardian-
ship of young girls, to use that power and prestige which
belongs to his position to lead those young girls to ruin. Such
conduct is a grievous wrong to society, and has as much
criminality in it as forgery, to say the least; and yet this is a
wrong for which at present there is no remedy if the servant be


over 13. It is then not a criminal offence; and as the parents
of the girl are not in the actual enjoyment of her services, they
cannot even maintain a civil action against the seducer.
Gentlemen, seduction by a master is not uncommon, as all
those who have to deal with such matters know. The annual
report of the Society for the Protection of Women and Children
for June last (Yide Sentinel, July, 1881, page 22) says—“ This
Society has rendered assistance to young females, many of them
of tender years, who have been ruined by their heartless
seducers. In many cases the poor victim happened to be a
member of the same household as the seducer ; indeed, often
has it been the case that the master himself has been the vile
seducer, . . . Servant girls have often been hired expressly
that they may be seduced.” Logan, in his work on the Social
Evil, in the chapter on Prostitution and its Causes,-says—“ Not
a few, I am sorry to add, who were excellent servants in respect-
able families have been seduced by sons; yea sometimes by vile
masters.”
As seduction by a master is a grievous crime against society,
I suggest to make it a misdemeanor, if the seduced female be
over 17 and below 21 years of age.
Fourth Legal Suggestion.
Give power to a jury, where a master is indicted for rape
upon his servant under. 21 years of age, and he is acquitted of
the charge of rape, to find him guilty of seduction, if the
evidence shall warrant such finding. This is one of the sug-
gestions made to the Lords’ Committee, and is supported by the
following note :—“lt frequently happens in cases of this des-
cription, there is a difficulty in proving a sufficient amount of
resistance on the part of the girl to convict the defendant of rape,
as the influence possessed by a master over a young girl prevents
that vigorous resistance which would be offered to a stranger,
and enables the defendant to escape any punishment.”
Fifth Legal Suggestion.
Give power to magistrates to issue search warrants for
children or wards, supposed to be concealed anywhere for
immoral purposes.
At present, in England and in New South Wales, and so far
as I can discover, in South Australia, “a parent or guardian
knowing, but not possessing legal evidence, that his daughter is
concealed in a brothel, has no legal means of recovering her.”
Two instances of very distressing character are known to myself
of mothers being baffled by brothel-keepers in their efforts to
recover their daughters for the lack of this power.
Sixth Legal Suggestion.
Enable any woman seduced by means of fraud or false
pretence to maintain an action for damages against her seducer,
in her own name if of age, and by her parent or legal guardian
if a minor.


It is a maxim of existing law that an action for seduction
must be an action for the loss of the woman’s services, and there
are consequently many gross cases of seduction where no
action will lie, and the seducer escapes all punishment. Abolish
the restriction to loss of service ; let the woman or guardian sue
for all the damage done.
Gentlemen, observe that the right of the erring woman to
damages is to depend upon proof of fraud find false pretence.
If the woman has wilfully erred she gets nothing, and may be
cast in heavy expenses. But I would not allow a minor to be
sued for damages who was under the age of 17 years, though he
did seduce a woman by fraud and false pretences, not even if
intitled to considerable estate on attaining his majority. Pro-
tection should extend to the youth of both sexes.
Seventh Legal Suggestion. •
I would make all men legally proved to be the fathers of
illegitimate children, responsible for reasonable expenses of the
mother’s confinement, both for nursing and medical attendance.
I would give the mother, or the doctor, or the nurse, or the
officials of any public institution where the mother is confined,
power to sue and recover the same, by the ordinary processes of
recovering debts at law. Why should fornicators and adulterers
saddle the public chest or private philanthropy with the conse-
quent expenses of their lust ?
Eighth Legal Suggestion.
I would make the effect of an affiliation order be to impose
upon the father the full duties and responsibilities of a parent,
so far as possible. For example, I would make him responsible
for reasonable medical attendance for his child, and answerable
if that child be medically neglected, in the same way and degree
that a married father is. I would make the father responsible
under the Compulsory Education clauses. And if illegitimate
children are placed in charge of public-boards or institutions,
the father shall, if able, be made to pay the full cost of main-
tenance, healing, and education. If men will inflict illegitimate
children on the community, let them pay for it, as married men have
to do. But I would not have the affiliation order carry all these
consequences if the father (and while the father) is under 21 years
of age.
Ninth Legal Suggestion.
Where there is legal proof that a man over the age of 17 has
seduced more than two women of any age, the same shall be liable
to be indicted for misdemeanor, and shall be liable to two years’
imprisonment; and if there be legal proof that he has seduced more
than five women of any age, he may be flogged.
Gentlemen, there is need of this law, for there are men who
glory in their shame, and actually glorify themselves in the number
of women they have led astray. I knew a young man who had


three girls in the family-way by him at one time. I knew of
another, a lawyer’s clerk, who had children by seven girls within two
or three years. I knew a man who had seduced a girl every few
months for many years ; I dare to say for twenty years. Now,
none of these persons reside, or to the best of my knowledge have
resided in South Australia : hence I allude to no one in this colony ;
but these men are found all over the empire ; and I maintain that
such conduct is a crime of the deepest dye, and that the community
which does not punish it severely does not do justice. No plea of
natural passions can excuse a man in the seduction of many
women.
Tenth Legal Suggestion.
Make it a misdemeanor to decoy, take, or cause to be taken,
any female of any age, whether possessed of property or not, and
whether under the care, apparent or not, of parents or guardians,
to go abroad or to another colony for the purposes of prostitution.
° The need of such a law has become very apparent from the
exposure of the system of decoy and traffic in English girls for
the brothels of the continent, especially those of Brussels.
When the existence of numerous agents in London as
procurers for the continental brothels came to light (who received
it is said £ls for each girl they sent away), it was found that
no English law could touch them, as the girls were not touched
on British soil or by British subjects. Moreover, by steam
inter-communication is easy and cheap, and a wicked inter-
national trade in girls is organizing. Girls are exported to
Brazil, to New York, to Bombay, and also imported from these
countries. .
Likewise, if we tighten our laws, and make seduction danger-
ous and expensive, attempts will be made to “ work the oracle”
by decoying into other colonies and territories.
Eleventh Legal Suggestion.
This is one which I hold to be of vital importance, and one
which, if carried out with wisdom will procure results of
enormous benefit.
Create by law a Board or Council for the protection of
women and morals, the Secretary of which shall be a man of
ability and receive a good salary. I would appoint also a lady
at high salary, as Assistant Secretary. The members for this
Council should be appointed for not longer than three years, by
the Governor-m-Council, but be removable by the Governor-in-
Council. The Governor should be at liberty to appoint ladies to
the extent of one-third of the Council. I would not have more
than six members of the Council, and Chairman, and they should
be persons of the highest repute in the country; they should
serve for cause of honor and pro bono publico. The work of this
Council should be as follows :
(1.) A girl who has lost her father should be deemed an
orphan. All orphan girls under 21, or girls who have no


parent or legal guardian in the colony, shall be deemed the
wards of this Council in all matters relating to their sexual
relations. So, for example, this* Council might on behalf of an
orphan girl sue a seducer for damages, prosecute a master, or
cause to be prosecuted a master who has seduced his female
employe, cause the man to be prosecuted who has seduced many
girls, or one who has sought to decoy a girl to another country
for prostitution. The proposal before the House of Lords’
Committee, says the London Echo, “ is to make the guardians
of a parish guardians of young girls under 21, who have no
parents or relatives to protect them.” But we have no guardians
of parishes, and a board for the protection of women is required
for many purposes.
(2.) The work of the Board should be to keep the ordinary
police up to the • mark in the execution of the laws with
reference to morals. The police in all lands are very apt to let
these laws go to sleep. They are afraid to execute them ; they
have but little effective support from goody goody people, who
lift their hands in pious horror at the Social Evil, but avoid to
battle with it. They shall remind the police of brothels, and all
other abuses, and shall have it as their duty to complain to
Parliament if needful. While thinking this power desirable for
the Council, I would express my admiration of the vigorous and
righteous administration of Mr. Commissioner Peterswald.
(3.) They shall have authority to prosecute all manufacturers
and shopkeepers who do not make decent provision for the
separation of the sexes.
(4.) They shall have authority to make provision for the
cure of venereal disease in cases of poverty, and also to ascertain
whether there be an absence of reasonable hospital provision
for the same. In certain leading population centres to be named
by the Governor-in-Council, and published in the Gazette, they
shall secure adequate provision of Lock Wards.
(5.) They shall keep an official record of all cases of seduction,
affiliation, &c., which shall come before the law courts, and the
officials of such courts shall send the needful information to
such Council; the Secretary may call attention to such cases as
it might be proper for the Council to prosecute ; but the record
shall not be open to public inspection, nor shall any official
divulge under penalty.
(6.) If in any of the cases which come before them, the
Council discover that they have good legal evidence that any
man or woman has the venereal disease, they may prosecute such
person and obtain their committal to a prison hospital, to be pro-
vided for such purpose, and the ordinary police may bring before
the Council any cases which they may think should be so dealt
with ; but there shall be no such prosecution without a special
minute of the Council for each case. This is a very different
proposition from the C.D. Acts, which seize on women and leave
men free, which authorize spies, and demand proof of innocence


from the accused, while they deny redress and appeal to the
superior courts, and allow all this against a woman at the in*
stance of spy police on a salary of a few shillings a week. I
propose one measure for each sex, only to he carried out under
all the usual safeguards of personal liberty, and with the
extraordinary safeguard of only being initiated in its individual
operation by a very high and trustworthy body of persons. I should
further propose that it shall be unlawful for newspapers to
publish the names of persons prosecuted by order of the Council
for this offence, or any details of the trial. It might be well to
consider whether persons might not be released from confine-
ment in the prison hospital on giving heavy bail to attend at
the prison hospital for medical treatment, and also to abstain
from sexual commerce during the period for which they are
placed under this sentence. But deceptive voluntary submission,
such as is in the C. D.Acts, I do not propose. I would allow, under
circumstances to be defined, a person so confined in a prison
hospital to employ at his or her own expense any duly qualified
medical practioner, if they would prefer one to the Government
physician.
But where persons voluntarily attend hospitals tor the cure
of venereal disease, they shall not be prosecuted, nor shall
attendance at a lock hospital or ward be used in evidence against
any one when prosecuted for being subject to the contagious
disease
This safeguard is necessary, or no one would voluntarily
attend hospitals for the cure of enthetic disease. They have
found in England that the use of knowledge obtained by
voluntary attendance at hospitals for the cure of the nameless
disease, for the purposes of prosecution, has tended to frighten
the diseased from attendance at hospitals.
A power such as the above, entrusted to such a body, must
be of hygienic benefit in compelling the medical treatment of
legally-known diseasq. It would also deter diseased persons
from illicit intercourse. And thus far I go with Eegulationists.
(7.) When one reads of the system of persecution which
prevails, the number who are thus nefariously ruined, and how
seldom procurers are brought to justice by the police, and how
unlikely the police are to bring procurers to justice, I ought to
add that it should be a great aim of the Woman’s Protection
Council to prosecute procurers.
(8.) The Council shall furnish an annual report to Parlia-
ment, and shall, through the Colonial Secretary, furnish an
estimate of the means required for carrying out their operations,
which shall be discussed and voted in the usual way.
Many other matters would fall to the Council in course of
time, when by experience add discussion fresh facts come to light.
But*l have indicated enough to show plentiful work for so
august a body.
I ask for this Council in the name of orphan girls, and of our


youthful sisters; I ask it for the sake of the public health, and
of the generations yet unborn ; I ask it so as to bring into
effective working the prevention which is ten thousand times
better than cure.
Gentlemen, you will observe that I aim at the protection
of women by the Government, and would institute for that end
a special department. I observe, that in protecting women we
protect the dearest interests of honorable men, and that as
women are without votes or seats in Parliament, it is only fair
that there should be an executive department of the Govern-
ment especially created to look after their chief treasure, their
personal honor.
Philanthropic Suggestions.
A moment’s reflection will convince you that if such amend-
ments of the law as I have suggested are carried into effect, and
if we establish the Women’s Protection Council, there will be a
very material decrease of the burden thrown upon private
philanthropy in connection with the sexual life. And so there
ought to be. Law should first do what is in its power, then
philanthropy and charity should step in and complete the good
work. It cannot be the divine and proper order that some men
should be at full liberty to seduce girls, to bring into existence
illegitimate progeny and propagate disease, and that another set of
persons should give means and labor to abate the misery produced
by the vile children of lust. Let law do her duty, and then charity
will easily overtake her part; but as things are, law shirks her share
of the weight, and the back ot Christian charity is nearly broken.
When gentlemen go to gaol for seducing girls under 17, and
masters go to gaol for seducing female employes under ai, when
the man who brags of many female conquests will be at liberty to ring
paeans of victory in Dry Creek; when the father of illegitimate
children will have full parental responsibility, when all women who
have been seduced by fraud and false pretence are enabled to
sustain actions for substantial damages, by themselves or their
guardians —seduction will be found too expensive a luxury for most;
illegitimate babies will be costly to- their papas, and some will
decline to be papas under the circumstances. When men and
women legally proved to have venereal go to prison hospitals till
cured, diseased men and women will not show the cruel and
brutal activity in spreading disease which they do at present.
But the glorious final earthly perfection of man is not yet for
many a day, and, suppose the amended laws at work, there would
still be seduced girls, and girls who cannot prove paternity, and
there will be girls who will not wait to be seduced, but will seduce
men. Philanthropy should so provide for these that they may not
be driven to prostitution, on the other hand not so as to relieve
from all stigma of shame and of expense. I believe that wise
laws would so minimise this, that the cases which occurred could
and would be dealt with chiefly by private and individual as distin-
guished from public philanthropic effort.


I would have no reception of foundlings on the sly, I should
be ready in certain cases to accept infants from the mothers, on
condition of proving paternity. But I believe that the need of
this would practically pass away with righteous laws, &c.
First. — Philanthropic Suggestion. —Adequate Main-
tenance of Female Refuges.
There are none in most places. Homes or Asylums to which a
girl wearied with the life of the prostitute may go, where they are
kindly cared for, and from which, after a time, they are
restored to some useful position in society. But these homes are
not adequately supported/ I read lately of a young girl who wished
to alter her life, who sat for 24 hours on the door step of a
Magdalene Asylum, and could not gain admission, as they were
already over-crowded. My reading shows me that much more
money is required, and also that the great multitude of fornicating
men have not enough manhood in them to subscribe sixpence to
support these Christ-like institutions which rescue the victims of
male lust. Philanthropy must support the Refuges better, so that
whosoever of the frail sisterhood will may escape the streets; this, in
conjunction with the laws suggested, and administered as suggested,
would soon minimise the number of our lost women.
Second. —Philanthropic Suggestion.
Educate the public mind upon the whole question. Make it to
be felt that without enormous improvement in our several relations
as a whole, there cannot be any true progress of our race, and that
by the purification and more wise and holy use of these relations
on the part of the whole community, more health, wealth, and
happiness may be obtained for all. Let it be understood that the
sexual power is a public trust, and that it is the sum of wicked-
ness to violate a trust so vital to the well-being of all. Let us
make the public realise the fact of hereditary transmission as laid
down in the Bible, and just beginning to be understood by modern
scientists, and, it is to be hoped, will some day be understood by
the directors of our systems of education. Let the public learn to
feel that it is shameful for confirmed consumpts to have children,
and learn to feel, in the language of Burns, that he is
A wretch ! a villain ! lost to love and truth I
That can with studied, sly, ensnaring art,
Betray sweet Jenny’s unsuspecting youth !
Curse on his perjured arts.
This can only be done by books, by meetings, conferences and
sermons. I take this opportunity of recommending to all interested
in this great subject a work written in the purest spirit, and which
will do much to educate the mind aright. It is The Sentinel , a
monthly journal devoted to the exposition and advancement of
public morality and to the suppression of vice. It is published by
Dyer Brothers, Amen Corner, Paternoster Row, England ; price,
one penny a month, to be had of all booksellers.
Q-entlemen, let us influence opinion, let us drive home upon the


hearts and consciences of the people, the shame, the sin and suffer-
ing of the Social Evil, and seducers and frequenters of brothels
will soon find themselves driven out of society, and will have to
consort with black-legs, whose natural companions they are. Logan,
in his work on Prostitution, well says, “ Place the supporters and
frequenters of brothels on the same level with the fallen women in
society.” Society should place the frequenters of brothels on the
same footing in society with the prostitutes; why not shun the
seducer as well as the seduced ? why show less sympathy to the
weaker than to the stronger vessel ? The Sacred Record represents
the strange woman’s house as “ the way to hell,” but whoremongers
shall have their part in the lake which' burneth with fire and
brimstone. Conversing with a clergyman one day about lapsed
women, he said, sharply, “ If one of these girls was to accost me I
would knock her down.” I asked “ Would you knock down a male
supporter of such characters if one of them accosted you on the
street?” The clergyman‘would give no satisfactory answer. Here
is the base hypocrisy and the cruel injustice of society; it visits the
woman with its utmost ban, and smiles a vile smile of toleration at
her companion, and, generally, her inducer to sin.
But, gentlemen, the policy I have just put before you to night, if
carried out, will administer a severe moral tonic to society and cause
society to change its ways to an enormous extent.
Society fears not God, nor does it regard the gravest and holiest
interests of mankind. A ball, a race, an opera, are more to society
than the shame that comes to the poor man’s home, the anguish and
the broken heart through the seduction of his daughter. What is
it to society that the illegitimate children of the wealthy man grow
up in public asylums, with the stain of bastardy upon them !
But, my sweet friends, there is one thing society more
than a holy saint fears God —society in all its members fears Mrs.
Grundy. This is the question of questions —What will Mrs.
Grundy say ? Put seducers of young girls under 17 into gaol.
Put the man who has seduced more than two girls of any age into
gaol, if it is only for one little week. Send diseased men to prison
hospitals to keep fit and proper company with the diseased women.
Let law arise, let her do her duty, let her brand the dissolute rakes
who curse the community, and then society will find male forni-
cators and seducers to be very vulgar, and the drawing, and the
ball-room doors will be shut in their faces. And so when law has
educated society; society, with that tremendous authority which it
exerts on the upper classes, will come to the help of law and
justice, and forbid seduction, and fornication, and will forbid the
Contagious Disease. Society now allows a man reeking with disease
to dance in the close embrace of the waltz with the fair flowers of
the land. Send a man three months to a prison hospital, and,
though he be cured of the disease, society will allow him no fair and
pure companion for the waltz.
Third. —Philanthropic Suggestion.
Parents and guardians of youth should take means of a wise


kind for instructing persons with respect to their sexual nature.
There is much grievous and wicked reticence by guardians of
youth about this subject. If instruction on any matter is required, it is
on this. Then there arises the question, how to do it ? Now, the
friends of the Social Purity movement have condemned this, and
there are works of pure tendency written, so that at a suitable age
a father may take one of them and give to his son, or a mother
take another and give to the daughter, there being separate works
for each sex. In these works, as I have read, all necessary know-
ledge is given, and youth are warned against all the forms of vice.
I think, too, that aged and wise ministers might now and then
invite young men for a talk, and wise and intelligent matrons might
do the same with girls.
Then, too, parents should show much more sense than they do
in the diet they give their young people. If you want to rouse the
passions of your young people give them plenty of pepper and hot
condiments, accustom them, also, to wine and beer j but if you
want them to keep their bodies in subjection, and to possess their
vessels in honor, avoid condiments, avoid stimulants in the diet of
your young people. When you choose amusements remember that
the waltz, the polka, and all the dances of close embrace, when
carried on in hot rooms, and under the stimulus of music and of
wine, have wonderful power to arouse sexual desire, as all seducers
of women —the miserable crew who boast of conquests —very well
know. I knew a company of men, who had good positions in
society, who instituted select dancing twice weekly for the express
end of seducing as many girls as possible. They happened to
think a friend of mine as vile as themselves, and asked him to join
the company. He used a little deceit—which Ido not excuse —but
he warned a few girls, and they found that seduction was the thing
meant, and they told the matter to their mothers, the mothers to
the brothers. There was a row, and the demoniac game of the
respectable men came to an end.
Sexual Purity Pledges.
When once the habit of fornication is formed, it is very
difficult to break, especially if the person remain unmarried. But
in society, as it is, young lads are exposed to a constant temptation
to visit the strange women, more especially as in shops, offices, and
warehouses there are some of Satan’s first-born, who take a fiendish
delight in leading young men in the way they should not go.
To shield and give strength to resist temptation, there are
societies of men in England who sign a pledge never to have
commerce excepting under the sacred bond of marriage. Just as
the pledge is found effectual against the drink, so is it against
fornication and seduction.
The working of these societies gives opportunity of bringing
the matter up, and causes a force to be at work among the young
antagonist to the temptation of women or of men.
I think similar societies might be worked by wise ladies for


the young women. Such institutions would soon create a most
stringent and powerful public opinion.
Gentlemen, these are the suggestions I have to offer. They
are the result of experience, of reading, of thought, and a burning
passion of hatred to the Social Evil, and a burning desire to lift the
community up. They are but raw ore, they require the furnace
and the hammer before they take fitting shape for effective work;
but I believe that they are the outline of an effective and working
policy. That these lectures may not end in barren talk, I hope
to move by-and-by that we follow the example of Great Britain,
and of Belgium, and form a Social Purity Alliance, which shall aim at
securing reasonable amendments in the laws, and reasonable
firmness in the administration of the laws which relate to sexual
fellow ship ; and, also, let this Alliance set on Government all the
forces of Moral Suasion and Social Influence in favor of purity. My
idea is a central society in Adelaide, with branches all over the
country. That there be two divisions : one for men, and one for
women, that by meetings and discussion we stir the country ; that
by petitions and by the pressure of opinion we stir the Parliament.
Time does not suffice for me to offer argument on all the
points I have suggested, but I have a small store of shot and shell
which I can use on those who fane) such things.
Men, brethren, and fathers, let us arise in our day and generation.
Let us band together, let us labor, and suffer, and pray for the
elevation of our country, and for the good of our race. South
Australia showed a lead to Australasia and to the whole British
Empire in the renowned Torrens’ Land Act. Let South Australia
show a lead resolute and effective in dealing with the Social Evil, and
in a righteous and honorable battle for Social Purity.
Now, gentlemen, my soul is delivered of its burthen, and these
lectures are ended.
•Derrington, Printer, Port Adelaide.






