

THREE LETTERS
ADDRESSED TO
LORD JOHN RUSSELL,
UPON THE SUBJECT OF
THE GOLD IN AUSTRALIA.
BY F. S. T.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




GOLD IN AUSTRALIA.
LETTER I.
17 Cornliill, January 24tli, 1852.
Mir Lord, —Will you permit an unknown individual to address you upon the
subject of the expediency of her Majesty’s Government immediately taking into
consideration the probable results of the present discoveries of gold in the Australian
colonies, and of the Legislature coming to a prudent decision upon how such influx
of wealth shall be made available for the benefit of the nation.
I have for many years been largely connected with mining operations, and have
had much experience of the ruinous results which are produced by the fluctuating
features ever attendant upon injudicious financial arrangements, and upon unskilful
operations in the production of the various minerals.
In the present indiscriminate hastiness for the formation of public companies,
proposing to take possession of the gold regions by bodies of men who have no pre-
tensions to geological or to mining knowledge, I cannot divest my mind of the
conviction, that the greater portion of the capital which will thus become extracted
from the pockets of the public, will soon be absorbed in needless outlay, and in
unprofitable operations; and that, without some salutary check from the Legislature,
the ruinous excitement of 1846 and 1847 will be reproduced, through which great
national calamities will be created, and absolute ruin will be entailed upon the many
by the incapabilities, and for the benefit, of the few.
This is the first of the baneful operations which may be contemplated from the
system which now appears to be obtaining its origin; but there are far greater pro-
spective evils which might be conceived as inevitably following in its train.
That there is an abundance of gold in the Australian colonies appears beyond the
shadow of a doubt. The only questions which now arise are—ls the attainment of
that gold to be made to be productive of good or evil ? and (as conducive to either
of these results) by that means, and by what parties, is that wealth to be realised ?
and bow is it to be disposed of?
The million, in the excitement of the moment, will perhaps contend that it is to
be obtained by private enterprise, and to be devoted to the individual advantage of
the producers, and, therefore, a general scramble will commence for its possession.
The object of this letter is to lead your Lordship (as the representative of the
Crown) to anticipate the results which must arise from so great a change as must,
almost instantaneously, be produced in the conditions of individuals introduced to, or
excluded from, this extraordinary property—to prevent the disorganisation of society,
the disarrangement of all commercial usages, and the danger to the Crown, which
must unquestionably ensue from so lax a mode of dealing with this important
subject—to show that it would be most unjust to the nation at large to allow this
easily-obtainable wealth to be in the hands of any individuals who had been trans-
ported for crime, who had been charitably sent to that colony, or to be appropriated
to any companies exclusively —that it would be highly dangerous to allow this
A 2


national wealth to be scrambled for, and obtained by the classes of persons who
will undoubtedly be enabled to obtain its possession, to the exclusion of all the well-
conditioned and' higher classes of society, and to propose to you to take such wealth
immediately and effectually into the hands of Government; and, by a judicious and
effectual mode of working, to secure whatever advantages might be derived there-
from for the benefit of the nation at large.
The gold which is obtainable in the Australian colonies is, at present, undoubtedly
the property of the Crown. Let it remain so, entirely-, and let the Crown adopt
the most immediate and effectual means of making it beneficial to the nation,
generally, rather than allow it to be dangerously placed in the hands of those
portions of the community, which, a moment’s reflection will show us, must become
the first and the greatest, if not almost the exclusive recipients of this providential
boon, or this ill-apportioned bane. The Crown has now an immense property, and a
most important mean of power at its disposal; if the exclusive attainment of such
(to itself) be lot slip, or if the wealth be misapplied, the evil cannot be remedied,
nor can the opportunity be regained.
It is true, that private enterprise wdll appear to be stayed in this one particular,
and, I admit, it is contrary to custom that Government should become adventurers
for the development even of the resources of its own property ; but this is a position
without a parallel, requiring a mode of procedure for which we have no precedent.
By a Government mode of working no prior nor private rights can be invaded ; for
none, in this instance, exist; no possibility of loss presents itself to constitute such
procedure a matter of speculation or of trade; the ease with which this peculiar
wealth is obtainable relieves the Legislature from all possibility of loss; whilst all the
wholesome commercial and industrial resources of the country would be encou-
raged and protected in a most eminent degree; and, if the anticipations of the
amount of gold which might be produced be only partially realised, great and
permanent blessings might be secured to the country.
In the possession of such wealth (which seems at the present time to be provi-
dentially placed in the hands of the Crown) it must not be forgotten that it holds such
property in trust for the nation —that an individual has no more right to pick up a
single grain of that gold, and to appropriate it to his own purposes, than would he
have to claim, and to use as his own, a parcel of bank-notes, or of sovereigns,
or anv other property upon which he might chance to stumble in our streets; and,
as there can be no right of such individual appropriation, so also can there be no
claim whereby any self-constituted companies can ask for an exclusive authority to
obtain or to withhold such gold—to parcel out their shares to their friends—to
exclude such as are not enabled nor inclined to make interest for their allotment,
nor to dictate that any individual in this realm, be his station what it may, should
be excluded from the benefits which might arise from this national property. It
appears to me, also, that such wealth now presenting itself in our British colonies,
not only should be protected by the Government from falling into unworthy or into
exclusive hands, to the shutting out of the more worthy, or to the denial of general
participation, but that it should be especially and carefully protected against
all such foreign participation as the present proposed indiscriminate adventure
must immediately let in, and is, at this time, encouraging and inviting; that the
simple charge of a per centage, in the form of a royalty, does not sufficiently provide
for the flow of this wealth into its legitimate national channel; that it leaves room
for the attainment of ninety parts out of every hundred of the very wealth which is
now decidedly in the hands of the British Government, by other and foreign powers;
and that it therefore offers the possible employment of this Vast excess of gold, at no
very distant period, for the subversion of our national interests, and for the destruc-
tion of our prosperity.
But, if we divest the subject of all these disadvantages which might arise from
without, by the operation of the system which now appears about to obtain its
birth ; and if w r e look only to the advantages which might arise from within, and
to our own community, by the gold deposits being secured and w’rought by a
perfect Government system, might we not hope that such discovery, and such mode
of realisation, might ultimately lead to many important national blessings, which
never can arise from any system whereby a few favoured individuals can alone
obtain the advantages ?


Is it not possible that such an influx of wealth might be obtainable by the Govern-
ment, that the oft-mooted project of a liquidation of the national debt might thereby
be realised? Or, is it not possible that the national gain, by gold-finding, might
extend to the accumulation of such a fund that the support of the poor might
thereby be provided for? Would not these inodes of applying any proceeds be
equally advantageous to every individual in this land, from the highest to the most
obscure ? Are they not just to all ? And might we not hope that, although we are
divinely assured the poor shall never be made entirely to disappear from any land,
yet we might provide that there be no more need for their begging for food at the
hand of private charity, and that there be no more cause for their complaining in our
streets ?
It will not, I think, be contended that these are not great benefits which might
possibh / be obtained under the Government system ; that such cannot be carried
out, either entirely or in part, according as the anticipations of quantities of gold
might be realised; it will not, I think, be denied, that such cannot result
from the indiscriminate mode of obtaining this newly-discovered national wealth ;
and, I think, it will be admitted, that the only course which can be adopted, so as
to produce any national benefit, and to avoid unparalleled evils, will be to retain
the gold districts intact, as a national property, and not to allow the precious
metals to be imperfectly obtained, to be contended for, and to be dissipated in
misdirected and injurious private adventure, connected with the pursuit of which
much misery, much ruin, and much vice will inevitably obtain their origin; and,
during the attainment of which, all the orders of society will become unhinged,
and will undoubtedly remain in a state of violent fluctuation and derangement.
It. is not my intention, my Lord, to intrude upon your time with any of the
details either of the present popular system—which is hereby repudiated as tending
to inumeruble evils; nor of the counter system—from which the probability, or at
least the possibility, of great national advantages might be predicted. I feel it pos-
sible that I might be found to be standing alone, and that this Government system
might not be universally palatable, in this period of gold-seeking excitement; but my
object is to convey to your Lordship a suggestion which might be profitably enlarged
upon and matured; to beg you to bring your great experience to bear upon this impor-
tant question; to intimate the necessity of your reflecting how soon the tide of opinion
might be changed, or might be calmed down into consistency; and how soon the
inquiry might come, in a constitutional form, whether or not due discretion had
been used by her Majesty’s advisers at this important crisis; and to consider
whether it is not absolutely needful that this anticipated wealth (be it what it may),
should first come to the coffers of the Treasury, to give-stability to the Crown, and
thence to he appropriated to public good, or to be disseminated, in wholesome
circulation, through all the legitimate channels of this favoured empire; for which
each properly-constituted mind will thankfully believe this providential supply
has been wisely ordained, and lias now, in duo time, been destined to be discovered,
and to be made justly and nationally available,
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your most obedient, humble Servant,
F. S. T.
To the Right lion. Lord John Russell.


LETTER II.
17 ; Cornhill, Jan, 30, 1852.
My Lord, —Being favoured with an acknowledgment that you are in receipt of
my letter of the 24th inst., relative to the finding of gold in Australia, and to its
probable results upon our national prosperity, I beg again to address you in con-
tinuation of such subject.
It is not my intention, in my present letter, to call your Lordship’s attention to
such geological features as are made manifest to us by such laws of nature as are
discernible in the formation of gold in the quartz matrix, with which our Australian
colonies abound; which formation determines the peculiar provinces which ever
have been, or which ever can become, the gold districts of the globe; which define
the probable geographical range to which such deposits will be found to extend ; and,
by the indicative peculiarities of which, some tolerable estimate can be made of the
probable expenditure of time and of means which would be needful (under a vigorous
and proper system of exploration and of working) to transfer all that is obtainable
of this valuable mineral, from its original and natural bed in Australia, into the
coffers of the British Treasury.
These questions of location, and of probable amount, are not the matters which, I
conceive, immediately press upon your Lordship’s attention; they, therefore, can be
safely left, whilst the subject of appropriation is receiving national consideration.
That which I propose more particularly, in this letter, is to take the features
which are forced upon our observation, independent of any such scientific research,
or of such illustration as would define the natural law by which such substance is
produced, and to show, by the concurrence of well-known facts, that gold is the
most superficial of all minerals —that it therefore becomes the first mineral treasure
which is usually discovered upon the occupation of any new lands—that it is the
most easily obtainable of all ores—that we find the aborigines of both the eastern
and the western hemispheres have always been aware of the existence—and have been
in possession—of greater or of lesser amounts of gold, and have converted such into
ornaments and into utensils long prior to their being aware of the existence, or being
capable of obtaining the other more deeply-seated minerals; and, further, that it is
capable of being more rapidly exhausted than any other of the minerals which a
bountiful Providence supplies.
These features, therefore, my Lord, together with the immense comparative value
which this metal has obtained, and which it must continue to bear, form the most
cogent reasons for the excessive care which should be taken by the British Govern-
ment in securing such supplies, without the slightest diminution, for the benefit of
the nation.
In confirmation of the foregoing points, I conceive I might be permitted to
observe, that there is abundant evidence, both in sacred and profane history, to
convince us that gold was obtained in large quantities in the very earliest times of
the populating of the earth, long before the knowledge of the more deeply-seated
minerals, or the means of obtaining them, came into existence; that it was con-
verted into shields—into weapons—into utensils—and into figures, upon a most
extensive scale; that it is a law of nature, which never will be reversed, that the
almost exclusive residence of gold is now amidst the superior strata of the earth;
that it exists as a component of the quartose substances which yet abound on the
surface of some portions of the globe, and is obtainable in the alluvium, in conse-
quence of its having passed into such stratum by a process of filtration and depo-
sition, in consequence of the decomposition of the matrix with which it was origi-
nally incorporated; that, then, comes another historical fact, which becomes
important in the consideration of the subject which is now before your Lordship, that
all experience shows us that gold does not penetrate to any of the more deeply-
seated strata, that it never has been obtained in any abundance at a greater depth,
and that it dies away, entirely, long prior to our reaching those lower strata in which,


beside the more regular lodes of copper, of tin, of silver, of lead, are the beds of iron;
to the discovery of which the possession of gold has paved the way, and for the
production of all of which the more easily obtained gold has created the desire, and
has supplied the means.
That the Australian colonies, at this later day, retain this most superficial and
this most valuable mineral, still to be collected, arises, not from any difficulty in
the process of procuring, but from that continent being one of the latest portions of
the habitable globe over which the foot of man, with the eye of intelligence, has
been permitted to roam ; and England now, with its full experience of all the good,
and of all the evil which accompanies the possession of such wealth, is permitted to
gather such harvest, and will be deeply accountable for the mode in which such
treasure shall become applied.
I trust, my Lord, it will not be assumed that I am one of those terror-exciting
persons who anticipate and declare the approach of a time of confusion, and the
overthrow of the present standard of value of the difterenkmetals in consequence of
the finding of gold in the British colonies. On the contrary, it is my opinion that
the obtainable amount of the different metals will ever be found to preserve some-
what of the same comparative quantities as at present assigns to them their relative
values. It is a fact that, in all old nations where gold has abounded, when the
first crop of gold has been gathered, and whilst the subsequent productions of all
other minerals have been greatly and continually on the increase, there have beeu
no new discoveries of gold ; and I do not believe that any reasonable conjecture can
be formed that the bulk of gold which remains to be discovered will ever tend to un-
settle such relative value, and that gold can ever become a more plentiful, and,
therefore, a baser metal. Its present relative value appears to me not to be depend-
ent upon the ignorance or the caprice of man, but to be based, judiciously, upon the
laws of nature, a knowledge of which our progenitors had obtained to a greater
extent than we are apt to give them credit for,
I am, therefore, inclined, my Lord, to look upon this new discovery of gold as a
great means of blessing to this nation (if properly used), and I am desirous of
showing that it presents itself to us at a time when it is most absolutely needed, and
at which it should be most thankfully received, as an increase to our circulating
medium, which is undoubtedly required to enable our means of payment to keep
pace with our increasing population, and with the rapid strides which are taken by
our manufacturing energies and by our commercial enterprise.
Of the insufficiency of our stock of gold, as a circulating medium, and of the
necessity of an increase, we were, I think, sufficiently warned, and most painfully
convinced, about four years ago, when the compelled payments in cash, for corn, in
consequence of one failing harvest, most speedily exhausted our coffers, and reduced
the nation to such an extremity of danger, and of absolute distress, that nothing but
the blessing of an ensuing most cheering spring, and a succeeding most plentiful
crop, could have kept us from consequences which must have been more fatal to the
nation, and more destructive to human life than we dare permit ourselves to con-
template.
From the recurrence of such sad disasters, it appears to me this supply of
gold is most providentially intended to protect us, provided we are led to deal pru-
dently and faithfully therewith in its attainment, and in its application.
It must not, therefore, be supposed that I am endeavouring to create terrors
from the simple influx of gold. That which I would wish to impress upon your
Lordship’s mind is, that gold in the hands of a wise and prudent Government, to any
amount, would, and must be, a great blessing; but that gold, being a commodity
somewhat lacking by the Treasury, and which the Government has been obliged to
borrow, and still continues to owe, upon the faith of its stability, being to an exten-
sive amount in the hands of such portions of its community as must soon possess its
greatest bulk (if the present proposed system of its attainment be permitted), has
within itself the elements of a great and national curse.
It appears to me, my Lord, that the exciting cry of “gold ! gold ! —in Australia
—to be had for the picking up”—has taken the minds of even prudent men by
storm—that designing people are availing themselves of this excitement to hurry all
classes of society into most dangerous speculative associations, which will be neither
beneficial to the individuals nor to the nation—and, I must therefore pray, that


may be held excusable (even if there be no other individual who is disposed to press
the subject upon your attention) in that I presume to say, that I believe it devolves
upon you, as the Minister of the Crown, to reflect deeply, and to call upon the
nation to consider calmly, lest they be hurried into pernicious systems of private
adventure, from which they will not have the power of withdrawing after they have
once been authorised and established —and, lest the Government permits an oppor-
tunity to pass of securing" a national benefit, which can never recur.
I will not deny, my Lord, that there might be some companies which are formed,
or which might he forming, by fair and honourable men, who (after they might
have secured certain exclusive advantages to themselves) would conduct their
researches with ability, and would manage their business with honesty and propriety;
there are, however, numerous companies starting up in every direction, wherein it is
evident that room only is made for the exercise of fraud and for the protection of
mismanagement; but I will exclude all these, and will take, as examples, the best and
the most honourable of private appropriation which can possibly be formed; and I
maintain that, even in these, there exists the elements of national wrong and of
injustice to the public; that they have no exclusive right to the attainment of this
gold; and that Government can give them no exclusive title, without doing a wrong
to all others who may thereby be excluded.
But, my Lord, let us now seriously consider who are the persons who will,
inevitably, obtain the largest portion of this national gold, unless the Crown comes
in to regulate its attainment by a more effectual restriction than a royalty of 10 per
cent, would afford. I conceive lam not far wrong in predicting that, although
companies might be chartered, the great masses of the gold will be obtained by the
individuals who, in consequence of their present or future residence in the colony,
are, or will be enabled, by personal exertion, either separately, or in promiscuous
groups, to seek for, and to pick up, such royal minerals.
Let us, therefore, estimate who those individuals are likely to be. Let us, my
Lord, adopt the descending scale, and see who are eligible to such employment,
and who are not.
The Crown cannot personally be found descending from its dignified position,
and seeking for the grains or the nodules of gold —nor can the Crown employ its
gangs of men to search for gold ; therefore, Royalty cannot be personally or
indirectly, enriched by it! The Lords of her Majesty’s Government cannot vacate
their high trust and rush to Australia to try their fortunes in a personal scramble ;
nor can they sell nor lease to themselves the gold-bearing districts, nor any portion
thereof; such an act would be most invidious, and would be looked upon with such
a jealous eye, that it would excite the utmost clamour in the country ; therefore,
the Administration, as a body, or as individuals, cannot become either directly or
indirectly advantaged by this great discovery! The aristocracy of this country can-
not desert the Crown, nor their ancestral halls, to become emigrants to pick up gold
in Ophir or in Victoria ; nor would it become their high station to appear as traders
or partners in this new adventure, scrambling for this new national wealth, in order
that they might be able to keep pace with a plebeian population, who were about to
become exclusively enriched ; —the military—the naval—or the civil servants of her
Majesty cannot throw up their appointments, and leave the nation unprotected to
join the tide w'ho might rush to the antipodes and become gold-washers and quartz-
crushers in this most interesting and exciting colony ! Our merchants—our pro-
fessional men—our literary and clerical bodies—our manufacturers—and our
tradespeople—all of whom have establishments in this country, who have been
the supporters of Government, the employers and the feeders of its population from
their forefathers downwards, through many centuries—cannot vacate their homes,
nor abandon their various avocations, to seek their fortunes in the Australian
diggings; nor have the mass of the respectable portion of the community the
slightest possible means whereby they can be permitted fairly to participate in this
newly-discovered national wealth, to, and for which, their labours and their energies
have paved the way, in the securing to the British Government the colony from
which it is now destined (if it deals faithfully with its own property) to obtain the
requisites for the protection and advancement of trade—for the conducting of a
stable and prosperous administration—and for the sinews of war, should our national
defence require such an alternative.


All the foregoing, my Lord, are the persons who must lie by and sec themselves
comparatively lessened in national importance, w hilst others shall have an exclusive
charter or opportunity to rise above them, or to place themselves above their beads!
Who, then, my lord, will be the majority of the indviduals who will be permitted
to obtain this gold—to revel in the luxuries—and to enjoy the advantages which the
possession of such wealth will undoubtedly bestow.
I hesitate not to say, without the fear of contradiction, that the persons who are
especially advantageously situated, and apparently destined to be benefited, if the
present system be adopted, must range from the worst and from the lowest classes
of society, and from the most indigent, formerly of this land, and now of the
colonies, upwards, until they obtain a semblance of such respectability as shall
include some few individuals of limited means, but of enterprising spirit, who have
not yet made establishments for themselves sufficiently lucrative, even in the
colonies, to be disinclined to be drafted oft’ from the cities into the creeks and
mountains of the gold-finding districts. They will commence at the lowest grade
of the liberated felon who has served out his time in our neighbouring penal settle-
ments; they will run up through the offspring of such offenders who have found
employment in the secondary grades of our colonial population; they will then
ascend to the emigrant, whom the exertion of private charity, or the aid of Govern-
ment, has conveyed to that assumed pastoral, but now mineral district; and they
will ascend until they embrace a sprinkling of more worthy individuals, who have
sought their fortunes boldly in a foreign clime, when England could no more afford
them a remunerative scope for their exertion ; and there the ascending scale will be
found, with a few exceptions, to end.
As, therefore, in the former category I named, I think justly, the persons who
must be excluded, even so, in the latter list, I conceive I define correctly the
persons who must be the first and the almost exclusively benefited individuals, who,
by the mode of appropriation which at present appears to be established, can walk
up into the hills, and take possession, in one lump, of a mass of national property,
capable of returning to the fortunate possessor a sum of £4,000! These latter,
therefore, are the persons who, formerly living in the lowest grades, and nurtured
upon the outskirts of society, will, ere long, be returning to this country to float
upon its surface, to overturn its usages, and to affect its morals by the immense
influence which the possession of this gold will bestow.
I feel, therefore, my Lord, that it is no visionary position which I now predict,
when I declare that the gold which is now being discovered in Australia is about to
become (and that shortly) the means of a great blessing or of a lasting curse to this
country; that it is a question which, fortunately, is at present perfectly open and
undisposed of; that there are two, and only two, courses which can be adopted—
that they are either an exclusively Government appropriation, to be made available
to the good of the nation generally, or an indiscriminate scramble, which will be
open more especially to the lower orders, in which there may appear to be some
groups of men in the form of companies, but all of which attempted anangemeuts
which propose to amalgamate the two distinct modes of treatment, must embrace,
more or less of partiality, exclusion, and injustice, and will tend to national disasters.
It will, perhaps, my Lord, be urged upon you by those who may be interested, or
who may hope to be interested in the popular or proposed system of working, through
charter or by private hands, that such affords an opportunity ot participation by all
who desire to exert themselves, or to speculate therein, as they have an opportunity
to purchase such allotments of shares as are made by the various companies.
This, my Lord, I do not hesitate to deny ; and to forewarn you that such an
argument can only arise where there exists a desire to cloak over the undue advan-
tage which must be gained by the few to the exclusion of the many. It is not
possible that all persons—that a ten-thousandth part —or that any computable
fractional part of our community can be admitted into participation, or can be
accommodated, or enriched, or relieved by any private schemes, however they might
be framed; and I know of no law, and of no system of justice, whereby any persons
can be made to stand aloof, content to be unenriched, whilst others are deriving
great and permanent advantages from our national property.
The system, or any system of exclusive grants, must of necessity become the
foundation for all that unwholesome speculation, or peculation , which consists in


giving free shares to some, and in purchasing shares, by others, at premiums to
which they might be wrought by the excitement which it becomes the interest of
private individuals to promote, but which it should be the object of Government to
prevent.
But—the system of fairness —which cannot possibly arise out of any private organ-
isations, or companies, can be made, most easily, to result from the Government
retaining its own property , and taking care that its benefits become equitably and
nationally applied. The advocates of private speculation will perhaps say—the
Government does take care of itself and of its own property, in that it reserves to
itself ten parts in every hundred as its royalty. I venture to assert that the great
interests of the country are abandoned if they do not retain the other ninety parts
of that which is already decidedly their own ; and which, if we take the prospectuses
of private speculators upon their own showing, allow such ample scope for all the
possible expenses of collecting, that it will admit of its being parcelled out into all
the thousands of private hands, who, as self-constituted directors, must and will be
amply provided for and enriched prior to the gold-accumulations finding their way,
in the shape of dividends, into the pockets of the purchasers of these shares; and
even then they are promised to be excessive.
I observed, rny Lord, in my former letter, that I believe it is a recognised prin-
ciple of Government tliat they do not trade; they leave the benefits of commerce
to the mercantile community. That they do not undertake the slow and expensive
process of mining for ores; they leave the attainment of all the baser metals to
mining adventurers, who therein employ their capital, and thereupon bestow their
energies. But I submit to your Lordship that this gold-collecting is neither trade,
nor mining speculation, nor adventure of any kind, and that the abandonment of
the 90 per cent, which is proposed to be given to private companies, will be a
manifest injustice to the country at large for the benefit of the few; and, above all,
it would not, as I have before observed, provide for the passing of this gold into the
only hands in which it can be safe, and where it can do national good—namely,
into the hands of Government, exclusive of private or of foreign participation.
Our forefathers well understood the necessity of this restriction as to the precious
or royal minerals; and thence arose the laic, which still exists (and which, you
will pardon mo for saying, I question if you have the power to violate, without
the express sanction of the nation), that, although all baser minerals could, and
ought to be, let upon a royalty, and could become the properties of those who were
entitled to the freehold, yet, upon the discovery of the precious metals, of gold or
silver, even though only in certain per centages, such became the properties of the
Crown, and were reserved to be wrought by, and for the sole advantage of the
Treasury (notwithstanding far higher dues or royalties were therefore paid than
those now declared to be imposed upon pure gold), and, in the preamble of such
law, it states that the justice and the necessity of the law, which takes away a part
of that which might have been considered a man’s own freehold, even though it
should have been purchased from the Government, consists in the absolute necessity
(which involves safety to the Crown and to the nation) of causing all the precious
metals to pass into the custody of the Crown, free from private working—from
private claim—or from private profit; and, more especially, protected against all
foreign engrossment, whereby it might bo injuriously intercepted, delayed, or
employed against us.
Have we fallen upon another law, my lord, for the appropriation of these royal
metals at the present important time? Can a deviation from such wholesome
restrictions be produced in favour of the grants which are now declared to be made
or to be promised to private adventurers? Have we, at present, any encourage-
ment to forego any prudent reservations in respect to our continental neighbours,
or in favour of any foreign powers ? It appears to me that the questions —which I
thus originate (presumptuously, perhaps, at the present time) —will be asked by the
nation, as soon as it begins to feel the mischiefs of the threatened position, and to
reflect upon the expediency of the measures which are now proposed to be adopted.
I do not consider that we are called upon to compute what might be the ultimate
profit which might be obtained from this gold-finding opportunity, or, we should
say, if private speculation be decided on, the royalty should be reversed, and the
90 per cent, should be obtained by the Government. We pay nearly an equal


royalty to the Duchy of Cornwall on the baser minerals, which have not one-hun-
dredth part of the value, and are to be obtained at a cost a thousand times greater;
and, I must say, there would be gross injustice to the Duchy tenants in retaining
such rates of dues upon the British ores of low value, which are excessively costly
in all their processes of attainment, if the one-tenth dues upon gold, which is picked
up on their lands, be the modern amended Government estimate. If this be a just
charge, the Crown should give us a premium for working, rather than impose any
tax upon our production of the baser, but no less needful, minerals.
But, whatever the influx of gold might be, if it be nationally applied, it must bo
productive of good. I consider the only question which now remains, resolves
itself into this—Who is to supply the capital which might be needful for the attain-
ment of this national wealth ?
I conceive, my Lord, the whole of the nation can find—will find—or has already
found—sufficient capital. The exciseable duties—the rateable taxes—which are paid
by every individual of the nation, according to the scale of their properties, are the
means by which such funds, or such needful capital is, or might be, raised. Such
is deposited in the treasury; the custodians of such property have the power to
apply so much thereof as might be needful to the collecting of this gold. Let the
public money be so applied, and let every atom of the returns of such operation be
appropriated to the reduction, or to the payment, of the national debt; or to the
reduction, or to the removal, of the rates for the poor ; and every individual in the
kingdom will become relieved, and thereby enriched, in the exact ratio with which
he has contributed; the requirements of prudence and justice will be thereby con-
stitutionally observed; a vast amount of money, which is now vested in our
national securities, will be released, to find employment in agriculture, in manufac-
tures, and in commerce; and, there is no doubt but, under such an appropriation of
the Australian gold, a most wholesome and extensive revival of the trade would take
place in every department of our national resources.
I therefore conceive, my Lord, you have before you, at the present time, a ques-
tion of the utmost importance, that the nature of the coming events are such that
they will not require any very lengthened period to develop the results of your
present decision. I trust you will not he led to overlook an existing law having
relation to the precious metals, which appears to me to be most needful to be most
stringently observed at the present time of doubtful continental harmony. I trust
also, my Lord, that you will not give a Government sanction, and consequent
encouragement, to the system of drafting away all the valuable commercial capital,
which system has now commenced in the already projected companies; which are
but so many further editions of the railway drainages; and which will, undoubtedly',
bring us into alike national difficulties, from which we have just begun to feel our-
selves emerging; that you will adopt the course which presses upon no man—which
will impoverish or ruin no man, but which will relieve and enrich every man—and
which (if we take the statements of the sure and enormous profits to which private
adventurers have pledged themselves, in putting forth their pretensions to public
support) will tend to provide every man in this kingdom with the necessary food;
which they will not obtain if the gold is made to travel, out of the hands of Govern-
ment, into the pockets of individuals, be they who they may.
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your most obedient, humble Servant,
F. S. T.
To the Right Hon. Lord John Russell.
P.S.—W hen this letter was addressed to Lord John Russell, it was presumed by
the writer that a royalty of 10 per cent, was to be fixed upon the gold-finders or the
gold companies; at present, it appears the dues to Government consist only in a
license of thirty shillings per month. This would but strengthen the former argu-
ment, as such royalty would probably be a per centage almost below such a fr actional
part of a pound as our lowest coin would give.


LETTER III.
17, Cornliill, London, February 2nd, 1852.
My Lord, — I am favoured with your acknowledgment of my former Letters
of the 24th and 30th ultimo. I consider I might therein have extended my com-
munications to as great a length as constitutional privilege would permit, or as
individual intrusion of opinion would authorise, without impertinence, upon their
respective and especial subjects.
1 desire, therefore, only to trouble your Lordship with a few further remarks
upon a different portion of the matters which have respect to the present position of
the Australian Colonies.
1 am desirous that these last intimations should obtain your consideration prior
to, or immediately upon, the re-assembling of the Legislature, and before any pledge,
upon the former system of the appropriation of the Australian gold, can be given
to the promoters of the schemes in which I conceive there are the ingredients of
ruin, both to the colony and to the mother country.
My object in this letter will be to bring before your Lordship, in a most curtailed
and hasty narration of facts, a retrospective outline of what Australia has been —and
what it has wanted ; a concise and rapid picture of what it now is—and what it
yet requires; and a prospective consideration of that which it is likely to become—
if its resources are duly appreciated, properly cultivated, and judiciously applied.
It is, comparatively speaking, but a few years since the vast continent of
Australia was perfectly unknown to the generality of the inhabitants of the British
empire ; since its hills, its valleys, and its plains were the alone resort of a scanty
race of indigent but peaceful aborigines; and since the extensive luxuriance of
its surface remained perfectly uncropped by any of the herds of domestic animals,
which usually form the substantial food of the more prolific and civilized races of
mankind.
The contiguity of Australia to the Island of Van Diemen’s Larifi (which
presented itself subsequently to the notice of the British Government as an
insulated spot whereto it could transport its convicts, and whereupon it could con-
veniently form its penal settlements) opened at length, and by slow degrees, its
advantages of climate and of soil to the attention of this nation ; and, from a few
adventurous settlers, it speedily grew up into an important colony, being attached to,
and recognising the authority of—the British empire; exhibiting its colonial seat
of government, around which shortly was formed the nucleus of, and beneath the
protection of which sprang up, the infant cities which are destined to accommo-
date a British population, and to perpetuate our Saxon names, tongue, and pro-
perties, in this important portion of the antipodes.
The features of encouragement which Australia then especially, and I might
say exclusively, held out to the British nation, appeared to be a desirable and
extensive outlet for its superabundant population, whereto, in connection with an
industrious people, we should bo enabled to transplant our stocks of sheep and
cattle; and in the rearing of such, to make room, and to provide for, the establishment
of commercial houses, by the consumption of our manufactured goods ; thus laying
the foundation (from a pastoral and an agricultural basis) for a valuable British
colony, which would require little from its mother country beyond the protection
of its arm, and the advantage of its councils. The Australian colony received
such protection, acknowledged that its laws were the constitution of the mother
country; and, in return, it sent us its repeated invitations to come and join them,
as many as we would (the more the better), and to partake of its abundance. They
assured us that a bountiful Providence had there undoubtedly spread a table of
plenty in the wilderness, for the support of thousands who were starving in this
laud ; and they convinced us that nothing was wanting but the industrial hand of
man to take gradual and peaceful possession of the hundreds of square miles of
beautiful and maiden soil, which exhibited the capabilities of instant and of easy
appropriation to the wants and to the conveniences ol man.


Thus, my Lord, we had held out to us the prospect of an extensive corn and
cattle growing land, capable of maintaining a vast amount of its own population, and
of assisting the mother country in rearing such for exportation thereto. Nothing
delusive, my Lord, was mixed up in this statement, nor with these invitations;
no disappointments have arisen from any unanticipated sterility of the soil; nor
has any excessive, nor even the ordinary mortality been manifested, from any un-
congenial temperature of this justly commended climate. On the contrary, if any
check has ever arisen to the most sanguine expectations of the colonists, it has only
resulted from the enormous increase of stock, which a trifling attention was enabled
to produce—from the paucity of the mercantile or the manufacturing population
to consume such produce —from the distance of all other densely populated king-
doms denying them a market for their immense increase of flocks and herds—and
especially from the want of sufficient capital, and a perfect mode of curing and of
preserving such meats, for the consumption of the mother kingdom.
We had then, my Lord, the strange anomaly (and yet the most gratifying
prospective feature) of avast continent, the chief affliction of the settlers of which
arose from the abundance of the means of subsistence, in the absence of a sufficient
population to undertake its consumption. Sheep were scarcely valuable, except
for their growth of wool, which, fortunately, was capable of being exported to the
mother country—the carcases of such, and of cattle, were scarcely saleable except
for the tallow and the hides which they produced ; and whole herds were destroyed,
or abandoned, because there was not a sufficient colonial population to consume the
bountiful supply, for which thousands in the parent land were languishing ,
if not entirely perishing !
To afford an illustration of these peculiarities of the features of Australia, at this
time, it would be needful only that I should -revert to the public journals of that
period; but as, through the kindness of a friend, 1 have the means of referring
to a very valuable and interesting diary which was kept by the brother of a well-
known professional gentleman of the metropolis, the only fault of which is, that
it still remains only in manuscript, and is not open to the public, I avail myself
of such kind permission to extract a few facts upon this especial subject.
In 1843, June 12th, Mr. Hobler, the brother of Mr. F. Hobler of Bucklersbury,
wr ites,—'“ So valueless has property of all kinds become, that no money engagement
can be met but at most dreadful sacrifices. Sheep are sold at Gd. and 7d. each,
stations, &c. given with them; horses £7 each, and cattle at any price; picked
cows for dairy, of good herds, two guineas each, and fat cattle fifty shillings, and
hardly to be sold at that price, A company has been started, in Sydney, for the
purpose of salting beef for exportation, aud is now putting about twenty-five per
day away ; many proprietors are also salting, and one establishment is now boding
fat sheep for the tallow. Wethers are sold in Sydney for 3s. to ss. each. The whole
community seems horror-struck, aud nothing that can be now foreseen can avert
general bankruptcy.” . . .
Again, on November 15th, same year— “ Bankruptcy has now overtaken or is
upon the heels of almost the whole community. Mr. S——, another Sydney
merchant, in the same predicament. His station in New England, 4 680 sound
sheep, with the wool (ready to be shorn) given with them, and 207 head of cattle,
sold for £505! Mr. P ’s sheep, about 9,000, tainted, sold at the rate of one
shilling per dozen. At this moment Mr. G has eighty-five head of fine fat oxen
from my late station in Sydney, they have been a few weeks there, and he writes me
275. 6d. per head is the only price he can get for them. Mixed heads have been
bought in at Bs. a-head ; they may be considered unsaleable , and I fully expect that
sheep will he adavdoned after being shorn. The meat contracts in Sydney taken
at three-farthings per lb.; millers offering 2s. and 2s. 6d. per bushel for wheat, just
now ripe. Some hundreds of acres in this district will be burnt, not being worth
' 85 head of cattle were sold for 255. each, and some fat cattle ruled from
17s to 225.
“ 1844 January Ist. —A melancholy opening of the year for this part of the world.
No business can be done to a profit, as far as rural matters are concerned Wheat,
3s Gd • barlev, Is. 4d. per bushel; maize, Is. 6d.; hay, unsaleable about here;
mixed cattle unsaleable; fat, 255. to 305.; mutton sheep, 4s. Mr. W ,of


Windermere, has established a large boiling concern (for tallow) to get rid of fat
stock; it is working 200 sheep daily, and boilers fixed for double the quanity to go
on with immediately. All the large proprietors of sheep and cattle are getting
down their stocks by this process; the destruction is immense. Mr. L , I
understand, is boiling down his fine five year old Durham heifers; his wether sheep
produce about 22 lbs. of tallow'. The destruction of sheep for the tallow will be
enormous this winter, as all are sick of sheep stock, and this seems to be the only
way of getting rid of them. The remaining cattle at the , about 300 head,
were sold for £6O ! ”
Here, then, my Lord, I close my quotations from the diary. Here we have
distress and ruin produced from a most extraordinary cause—from the excessive
capabilities of the country to supply the means of subsistence. Australia, at this
time, is brought before us with its extraordinary capabilities, and its value as a
pastoral country; giving evidences of its capability of maintaining a most extensive
population, but, at that time, lacking a sufficiency of mouths to consume its fast-
accumulating meats. Thank God, those capabilities still exist! It is true that, at
this former peculiar period, the abundance and the rapid increase of sheep and
cattle became disastrous and ruinous to many individuals; but, under the circum-
stances which now appear to be coming upon us, these features of the capability of
the country assume a very different complexion, and are full of the comfortable
assurance that all these opportunities will be made most profitably available, when
they shall be conjoined to an influx of gold (and an increase of population), which
the good providence of God is now about to produce, at the most fitting season,
for our thankful acceptance, and for our consistent use.
This brings us forward to the period when the continent of Australia began to
develop itself as a mineral district. The first discoveries of this character consisted
in the establishment of its copper mines. These, although at first, and even at
present, limited in their extent, gave a greater encouragement to emigration; afforded
new and extra employment for its population; supplied its merchants with greater
funds; gave necessity for the foundation, and for the extension, of some of its
cities; became a mean of the yearly increase, and of the confluence of its popula-
tion; and increased prosperity, in the rural occupations, began to develop the
advantage and the necessity of a well-regulated and corresponding influx'of con-
sumers and purchasers, to keep pace with the settlers and the cultivators of the
land, by which the balance was somewhat restored, and has been subsequently
more perfectly sustained. All this was wholesome and well conducted.
We are then, my Lord, brought up to the new feature which Australia discloses,
to the circumstances which now claim your peculiar attention, and which so urgently
demand the interference of the Government. In the former instance it was prudent,
and needful, that Government should refrain from interference, and should let the
scale adjust itself, content that the population of the colony should have the means
of being fed, although, by an indiscreet over-production, some parties should
suffer loss.
Just at the period when the balance appeared to be somewhat restored and
steadily maintained, the discovery of gold is made, and the fullest evidence is
obtained, both of its apparent quantity and of the facility with which it is to be
obtained.
The effect of this discovery is to turn the scale rapidly, and violently, the other
way. The pastoral interests are neglected, and suddenly are made to kick the
beam. Gold, strewed upon the surface of the ground, deposited in the streams,
and lodged in the alluvium—gold, for the gathering, and for the picking up,
now becomes a notable and an established fact; and now, this excitable and unstable
community are found rushing to the creeks, and to the diggings, with an eagerness
which leaves the cattle untended—the agricultural, the mechanical, the mercan-
tile, and the professional duties of the colony deserted and neglected—and presents
a want of foresight which must, if permitted to continue, bring the colony to a state
of ruin and distress, for which the attainment of gold cannot compensate.
In order to show the extent and the consequences of such excitement, I shall
now introduce merely one of the many paragraphs with which the public journals
abound; and I have no doubt it contains a most correct version of the facts :


“ New gold discoveries are announced in the letters from Australia. Port Philip, it
now appears, is likely to eclipse her sister colony of New South Wales. Letters from
Melbourne, to the 6th of October, state that deposits had been met with at Buninynog,
about eighty miles from that city and fifty from Geelong, apparently far exceeding in
value any that have been found within a similar space, either at Sydney or in California.
The whole population were moving towards the district, and it had already been ascer-
tained that the creeks and rivers, for many surrounding miles, were likewise rich. The
great production, however, had been at one particular spot, of limited extent, where the
supply was such, that the space of eight feet square to each man was considered by the
government commissioner a sufficient allotment. The number of persons already at the
place was upwards of two thousand; and careful calculations seemed to show that the
average to each man was at least an ounce a-day ! Many cases of individual success were
most remarkable. One man had obtained £1,500 in a week; and another, a blacksmith,
had got £l,OOO. A party of three men found 20 lbs. (£800) in one day; while another,
before breakfast, raised 13 lbs. weight (about £500) I The consequence was, a far greater
desertion from all ordinary occupations than had been witnessed at Sydney. Hundreds
of all classes were leaving daily, including labourers, mechanics, clerks, shopkeepers, mer-
chants, and professional men. There was hardly any possibility of getting ships’ crews; and
the ‘ Troubadour,’ which brought the present intelligence to Bombay, was only enabled to sail
by obtaining her complement of men from among the seamen confined on short sentences
in the Melbourne Gaol. Even that, however, appears to have been attended with difficulty,
since it is said only six would accept the offer, all the others preferring to remain their
time, for the sake of getting ultimately to the mines,” &c., &c.
Now, my Lord, it is to this new position that I earnestly invite your attention.
It appears now, that in the indiscriminate attainment of gold by a whole popu-
lation, who abandon the necessary agricultural and all other pursuits for its
possession, much present evil exists. The derangement of all pastoral affairs, and
the approaching consequences, are known to, and are complained of by, the better
portion of the colonists themselves; they tremble for the consequences, and they
deprecate the overthrow of all orders of society, even in a community where these
distinctions could not be minutely observed.
I have, in my former letters, my Lord, requested your attention to the injuries
which are likely to accrue in this country, provided immediate judicious restric-
tions are not laid upon the ingathering of this gold. I shall now more especially
attempt to premise the injurious effects which must be attendant upon such want
of system to the colonists themselves.
It is evident, my Lord, if the present abandonment of all the needful pastoral
pursuits is allowed to continue—if the rural population, the labourers, and the
mechanics are thus permitted to rush to, and to enrich themselves at, the diggings
—that a famine of bread and of meat must soon be felt in the midst of a harvest of
w'ealth, and that starvation and woe will be made manifest in the face of an abund-
ance of gold ! —that the new arrivals of emigrants, and of adventurers which are
now invited from this, and from all other countries, are intended to be devoted to
the same pursuits—that they will but swell the streams which rush into the same
course—and that they will hasten to the same gold-bearing districts. Neglect of all
the means of subsistence will but whet the appetite for gold—disappointment (if
there be such) in finding the treasures, will but produce the redoubled exertions of
despair—whilst success, and the rumours thereof, can but deepen the impending
ruin, which threatens them in every event, by the drafting away of the stock-
keepers and of the agricultural labourers, from every previously cultivated district,
or cattle-feeding station ; and absolute ruin to, and starvation in, the colony, in the
midst of their mines of gold, must be the result— unless the Government steps in,
immediately, to stay this current in its course.
Now, my Lord, it would be impolitic to raise the alarm, and to give the proof
of danger, without attempting to disclose the means by which it might be averted.
Hitherto, my Lord, I have presumed more especially to warn you against the
admission of certain injurious projects in this country, which seem upon the eve of
obtaining sanction, and of thereby becoming established : may I now be permitted,
in all humility, but in full sincerity, to intimate that system which appears to me to
be needful to be adopted.
I consider, my Lord, it to be essentially needful that every discouragement and
that every prohibition be given, by the colonial authorities, to prevent such drafting


away of all classes of the population as is now stated to be in progress —and as will
assuredly be found to be upon the increase, if not prevented. And 1 know of but
one mean—which is, to deny to them any right of possession in the gold which they
may obtain. I consider it to be needful that Government should claim and take
possession of every grain of gold as its own property, and enforce this law most
stringently. I consider, my Lord, that you must put an effectual stop to the drain-
age of gold from this country, by the companies which are now afloat for that
purpose—and to the drainage of the rural population of Australia away from their
necessary occupations. No distinction must be made. It will be quite easy to keep
all persons away ; if no individual or individuals have an advantage all will be
content to stand aloof, and let Government reap the advantage; hut, if one be per-
mitted to enter, all will rush in, and the consequences at home and abroad are
manifest. I also consider it to be equally essential that the gold should be gathered
in with the greatest possible expedition, with the greatest skill, and with the greatest
care; that Government should immediately organize and send out a sufficient
number of men, who would engage at certain fixed wages, and with rations from
the Government, to work in the gold regions, under the supervision of their agents,
for a certain number of years. These gangs of labourers could be employed by
Government, or could be replenished by others, as long as such description of
employment existed, and, after certain years, means of retirement, and plots of
ground, could be given; this country would be considerably relieved by such drafting
away of its abundance, and the colonies would, by such means, immediately and
permanently obtain the population which we do not need, but which they as
evidently require.
But, my Lord, I must not omit to state, that there appears to me to be many
most cogent reasons, from abroad, from foreign nations , why this Government
organization, and this provision of an extra and inexpensive force, to be resident in
the colony, and to be paid by its own exertions, should be immediately made. Such
powerful organization, embracing the two points of protection to the colony, and
the obtaining of its gold, is, I think, quite indispensable at the present moment.
Fears for the safety of England on our own shores are, I think, groundless and
inconsistent; they are, I consider, a mere bugbear for the amusement of the timid ;
but, due care for this especial colony, where seem to lie the sinews of war,-without
proper protection, is a point of the utmost importance. A new point to be effectually
covered has suddenly been revealed; and I consider it to be absolutely needful that
all the permitted gold-diggers, and the authorised gold-finders, should be an
organized body of servants paid by her Majesty, effective for the attainment of
such treasures, and for the protection of the land. An infant colony is always in
want of protection. Look well, therefore, my Lord, to Australia, with its present
temptations and its advantages.
The motto is, “ Advance Australia.” I believe such emblazonment is not
assumed from the supposition that it has, in itself, the power or the means of
security, of certain progression, or of success, but that it is the cry of an infant
colony to its parent government for protection, for advice, and for care; that it is
an appeal to England to protect, to foster, and thereby to “ advance ” Australia;
and that- the season is come in which its natural resources develop the extent to
which it needs both protection and assistance; and also, at which it exhibits the
mode in which that care will be repaid—in the vigorous growth of the infant colony,
and in the comfort and the stability of the parent state, when it obtains and protects
Australian wealth for the benefit of both.
I am, my Lord,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
F. S. T.
To the Right Honourable Lord John Russell.
W. Cathrall, 9, Crane Court, Fleet Street.
