

ree Australians
// Abroad.
B-sr
Jy LIVINGSTON, M.H.1R,.,
J. THOMSON, M.H.R.,
AKTD
D. LIVINGSTON, J.P.
BS &■ C 5
©ambier:
Laurie & Watson, Plain and Ornamental Printers.
1912.




Three Australians
Abroad.
J. LIMINOSTON, M.H.H.,
J. THOMSON, M.H.H.,
AND
13. LIVINGSTON, T.H.
s® fess-
(liount (Sambier :
Laurie & Watson, Plain and Ornamental Printers.
1912.


PROLOGUE.
The decision of the Bi'itish Government that
all parts of the Empire should be represented at the
Coronation of King George V., and the subsequent
receipt of invitations to attend the ceremony by Mr.
John Livingston, Hon. member for Barker, S.A.,
and Mr. John Thomson, Hon. member for Cowper,
N.S.W., resulted in their visiting the old country.
They were accompanied by Mr. D. Livingston,
J.P., of Burrandown Station, N.S.W., a brother of
Mr. John Livingston, and the following pages are
the result of jottings made by the way on their long
tour round the world.


THREE AUSTRALIANS ABROAD.
CHAPTER I.
Leaving his home at Tarlee, N.S.W., on Tuesday, April 11, 1911, Mr.
Thomson reached Sydney the following evening, and after spending a couple
of days giving final attention to certain matters connected with his electorate,
he took train for Melbourne on Friday, the 14th, and joined the “ Orvieto,”
leaving Victorian shores on the 19th.
The ship was under the command of Captain W. S. Shelford, R.N.R.,
and Chief Officer A. L. Owens, R.N.R., Mr. R. Watt, Chief Engineer, being
in charge of the machinery. A nearly full complement of passengers occupied
the saloons, and they received the usual farewells and God-speeds from
several hundred people who had come to take a parting hand shake with
their friends, all agreeing that no ship ever sailed under more favorable
auspices, and sincere hopes were expressed for her sate arrival at the other
side.
Accordingly at 3 p.ra. a start was made, and while steaming down Port
Phillip Bay there was time to look around and see who were the passengers.
Among many others the Hon. John Murray, Premier of Victoria, accompanied
by his daughter; Senator Sayers, of Queensland, and daughter; Senator Long,
of Tasmania ; Mr. and Mrs. A. H. Landale ; and Mrs. Young and family, of
Nhill, Victoria, were on board. After crossing the Bay, 6 p.m. found us in
the great South Pacific Ocean. A moderate sea was running, and we ex-
perienced but little of the discomfort generally inseparable from a sea voyage.
Dinner being finished at 7.30, it was decided that the fatigues of the day
would be best overcome by an early retiral to bed, thus completing our first
day’s maritime experiences.
On reaching the deck next morning we were greeted by a cold bitter
wind, although the sea continued calm, and similar conditions obtained all
day. We arrived at the Outer Harbor, Adelaide,at 6 p.m. on Friday. Train
was then taken for the city, where we found awaiting us Messrs. J. and D.
Livingston, the latter having travelled from New South Wales to meet his
brother from Mount Gambier, and thus our party was completed.
On returning to the Harbor we were delighted to see an imposing con-
tingent of young men from Mount Gambier dressed in Highland costume,
who, led by Mr. John Harrington, immediately commenced contributing
popular Scottish airs on the national pipes. When we asked what it all meant
we were informed that a send-off was being given to our Mr. John Livingston,
Chief of their local Caledonian Society, by his fellow countrymen, with a
message of fraternal greetings to their brethren in the old land.
After casting off at 1 p.m., we w 7 ere soon once more in the open sea,
where we found that a much heavier swell prevailed than when we entered
the port. This continued for three days, so when we reached Fremantle at
6 o’clock on Tuesday morning we were glad to again set foot on shore.
Our pleasure was materially added to when, among the many on the
wharf, we noticed the familiar faces of the Hon. John Fowler, member
for Perth, and W. N. Hedges, Hon. member for Fremantle, who with Mr.


Forrest, brother of Sir John Forrest, P.C., G.C.M.G., and another gentle-
man, conveyed us by motor cars to Perth, the capital city of Western Aus-
tralia, where we were joined by Sir John Quick, Hon. member for Bendigo,
and Lady Quick. Sir John had been busily engaged during the previous
week or two addressing the electors of the West on the subject of the
Referendum submitted by the Federal Government, the poll for which would
be held on the following day.
After visiting several points of vantage for sight-seeing in the city we
could not but be much impressed by Perth’s progressive character, its well
made streets, electric tram cars, and other evidences of up-to-dateness being
specially noticeable. We availed ourselves of an invitation to luncheon from
Mr. Acting Premier Gregory and other members of the Cabinet, and thus had
an opportunity of meeting a number of Perth’s leading citizens, including His
Worship the Mayor and Alderman Malloy, who, accompanied by his wife,
were travelling with us to England. A speedy return had to be made to
Fremantle to rejoin the ship, which, besides more loading, had added con-
siderably to her passenger list.
When leaving Fremantle we were able to appreciate the amount of skill and
money expended in furnishing the necessary harbor accommodation for ships
of the Orvieto class by the extension of the island and the quantity of
dredging constantly being carried out, and at 4 p.m. on April 25 we made our
departure from the last Australian port, and said good-bye to our native
shores, the ship heading straight for Colombo.
On the following day, although a discomforting swell prevailed, our
minds constantly reverted to the result of the Referendum vote then being
token throughout Australia, and speculation was rife on all sides regarding
its issue, as well as our chances of receiving the desired information.
However, consideration of such momentous questions did not prevent us
enjoying several items of music contributed during the evening by passengers.
On both Thursday and Friday the boisterous character of the sea
continued, thus trying the seafaring capabilities of all on board. The
fortunate ones decided to take steps for entertaining the company by elect-
ing a committee to promote amusements during the days and evenings we
were to spend together.
On the Saturday at 11 a.m. our anxieties regarding the Referendum
taken on the previous Wednesday were relieved by Marconigram received
from Perth, via the Cocos Islands, addressed to Sir John Quick, from Mr.
Gregory, Acting Premier, and from Mr. W. N. Hedges, M.H.R., intimating
that majorities had been obtained against the proposals in five out of the six
states, Western Australia alone giving an affirmative vote. Our friends
had also added to our already overflowing satisfaction by informing us that
in all the electorates represented by the politicians on board negative
majorities had been secured. Similar information had reached Mr. Murray
from his colleague, Mr. Watt, as well as from Mr. Hughes, Acting Prime
Minister of the Commonwealth. The good opinion we had previously formed
of the great value of wireless telegraphy in enabling ships to be in constant
communication with the shore was further enhanced by the speed and
accuracy of the system.
On Sunday, the 30th, the commendable practice of holding a religious
service on shipboard was maintained, the spacious lounge of the ship being
thronged with worshippers at 11 a.m. Many unable to obtain room were
perforce compelled to remain outside and listen to the prayers and hymns
through the open skylights and doors. The service was spirited and im-


pressive. An American organ, presided over by the ship’s purser, lead the
singing, which was hearty and good The collection taken up was devoted
to the Society for the Relief of Shipwrecked Mariners, a most deserving
channel for benevolence In due course we reached the splendid harbor of
Colombo at 5 a.m. on Thursday, May 4, having completed a journey of 3,132
miles from Fremantle.
Leaving the ship at 8 a.m. we took train to Kandy, an important town
70 miles inland from Colombo, and thus had a splendid opportunity to
observe the tropical vegetation characteristic of Ceylon. Tea, cocoa, cocoa-
nuts, rice, coffee, bananas, cinnamon, nutmegs, and a host of other products
met our gaze on all hands, the sides of the mountains being well irrigated
and terraced to obtain the most economic cultivation of the land. From
Kandy we drove to Peradoniya, and were delighted with the beauti-
ful gardens. The marvellous richness in color and variety of the flowering
plants and shrubs peculiar to tropical countries is beyond description.
Although the temperature of Kandy is a trifle reduced through its
elevated position, about 2,000 feet above sea-level, we found the heat some-
what trying, and after visiting the Temple of Buddha, in which is kept the
“ Sacred Tooth,” we were ready to return and escape the many pleadings
for alms from the halt, lame, and blind, both old and young. We were
pestered to buy curios of all descriptions, but did not succumb to the temp-
ters’ wiles. The methods of agriculture and implements used by the Cingalese
did not at all impress us, and Australians have nothing to learn from that
dusky race.
After a tiring day’s sight-seeing we were very pleased to get back to
Colombo, where we sat down at 8 p.m. to an excellent dinner, served in
good style, at the well-known Galle Pace Hotel. This hostelry is as familiar
to all oversea travellers as Menzie’s, in Melbourne, is to the average Victorian
citizen. Our ship being timed to leave at 11 p.m., we endeavoured to make the
best use of our leisure, so each of us engaged a rickshaw for a short tour of the
town. Whether it was the spirit of rivalry, or the hope of reward, that put
“ vim ” into our men, one can’t say, but the pace they made was particu-
larly good, and we were able to comply with the captain’s orders in ample
time.
Fine weather continuing, we had an opportunity next morning to make
the acquaintance of many fresh passengers, who had joined the ship at
Colombo, among whom was Judge Nair, of Madras. From one so compe-
tent to speak we were able to learn first hand of the complex conditions of
the “caste” system, the manners and customs of the people, and the poli-
tical and ethical conditions under which the white and colored races exist on
the mainland of India. Our information on these subjects was further sup-
plemented by conversations with the Hon. Sir C. Obeyshere, who, with
his family, was travelling home to represent Ceylon at the Coronation.
Our route for some time was confined to the Tropics, and we had the
customary hot weather, but the mechanical appliances for keeping the air in
motion helped to reduce the effects of the excessive temperature.
On May 9th we sighted Cape Guardafui, the easternmost point of
Africa, and shortly after entered the Red Sea, passing through the Straits of
Bab-el-Mandeb, and leaving behind us to the eastward the British garrison
town of Aden. A number of small islands were passed, and then Perim,
with its splendid lighthouse 250 feet above sea level, came in sight. This
island, also a British possession, guards the entrance of the Red Sea, and is
a very important strategic position from all points of view. During our


voyage up the Red Sea numberless places mentioned in the Bible were
sighted. Even the crossing place of Moses and the Israelites was pointed
out, but we reserved our opinion about this locality.
As we gradually drew northward the heat moderated, and by the time
we reached Suez the temperature was appreciably lower. Suez marks the
southern entrance of the Canal, and after waiting our turn, there
being a number of boats ahead of us, we entered M. de Lessep’s
marvellous engineering achievement. Our speed was now consider-
ably reduced, in order to prevent damage being done to the
canal banks through the wash of the ship, and we kept up the same
pace until our arrival at Port Said, the northern extremity of the “ Big
Ditch.” Although this great work has been completed many years, large
numbers of dredges are constantly employed in maintaining the neces-
sary depth of water, while along the shore many men and camels were kept
busy, some in removing the sand which had blown in from the arid plain on
either side, and others in erecting stone walls along the banks to prevent
erosion, or keep back the shifting sands, and, although it was Sunday when
we passed through, work had not been suspended.
The country on either hand is desert as far as the eye can see. On the
African side a railway runs parallel with the Canal, and between the two is
a fresh water channel, said to have been constructed during the time of
Pharaoh, and still in perfect condition. At intervals we were treated to some
splendid illustrations of that strange deception, the “ Mirage,” so familiar
to all those who have visited the “ plains ” country of Central Australia.
At 3 p.m. on the 14th we had completed our journey through the Canal, and
arrived at Port Said, some 103 miles from Suez.
The opportunity was taken to land by boat, when we again had an ex-
perience of the coloxcd races, and with no more satisfaction than at Colombo.
The town itself has some fairly good buildings, and considerable business
seems to be carried on, but as we were out to see all we could we hired a
vehicle drawn by a fine pair of Arab horses, and made ourselves as familiar
with the place as time would permit. It was painfully impressed upon our
senses that in those districts given over to the Arab population the purifying
sanitary arrangements customary in Australia were sadly wanting. One
could admire the traditional Arab steed, but when the owner shares
his domicile with all the animals belonging to him, it seemed a trifle peculiar,
and on returning to the ship made us feel glad we were bom Australian
Britishers.
We were now in the Mediterranean, and although the first day was fine,
the succeeding twenty-four hours showed us that even an almost land-locked
sea can make itself as unpleasant as any other. A most solid proof of this was
seen by the number of vacant chairs in the saloon. A glimpse of the island of
Crete was obtained for a moment, and the monotony of the voyage was
broken at 10 a.m. on the 17th when Cape Spartimento, the south-eastern
corner of Italy, hove in sight. The country presented a most barren appear-
ance, but on closer examination we found it thickly settled with towns and
villages dotted about on the steep mountain sides. A little later Mount
Etna, a volcano on the coast of Sicily, loomed up before us, and though at
present quiescent, its fires are still unquenohed. We now entered the Straits
of Messina, mythologically connected with Scylla and Charybdis, passing
numerous watering places dear to the Italian heart. The entire country
shows signs of recent volcanic activity, and Stromboli as we passed by gave
evidence of his power by belching forth volumes of lava at intervals of
about ten minutes.


Our next port of call was Naples, and after the usual medical examina-
tion and Customs formalities necessary on admission, we were permitted to
land, and as we had decided to break our journey at this point, we left the ship
to travel overland towards our destination.
We had now been twenty-nine days at sea, and completed a journey of
9,561 miles, consequently a long spell on dry land came as a welcome change.
The Bay of Naples is a marvel of beauty, but the town itself has little
to commend it —dirt and beggars being the most prominent features.
Our first trip, of course, was to Pompeii, a city which, together with
Herculaneum, was overwhelmed by an awful rain of lava and ashes ejected
by Vesuvius in A.D. 79. This was the second time of destruction, the
first occurring sixteen years previously, but the inhabitants, full of spirit,
rebuilt the city on a larger scale. A motor car carried us over the twelve
miles separating Naples from the buried city, and on our arrival we obtained
a guide, who introduced us to such of the ruins as were of special interest.
During the last fifty years an immense amount of excavation has been
carried out in order to uncover as much of the ancient city as possible ; the
work is still being continued, and every day some new feature is brought to
light. The Court of Justice and passages leading to the prisons has been dis-
covered, together with the market place. The latter occupies an immense
area, and has a large stage at one end from which important public proclam-
ations were announced. One feature of the streets was very noticeable, the
irregularity of the surface. This, of course, must be attributed to
the poor municipal arrangements obtaining in the first century. At
the intersections of some of the streets stepping-stones were placed
to afford foot passengers a means of crossing dry shod. This unfortunately
prevented vehicular traffic, and, therefore, cannot be recommended for
adoption by our own civic authorities.
Extensive remains of a palace are still to be traced, and in the grounds
attached ample evidence of a garden with a fountain in the centre is to be
found. A high wall, however, surrounded the premises, so our natural
curiosity was not satisfied, none but those accompanied by the caretaker
being permitted to enter.
Like all other tourists, we paid a visit to the tombs, and were somewhat
surprised at the excellent state of preservation they were in. The city
had a number of places of amusement one a theatre capable
of accommodating five thousand people; another, devoted solely to
Comedy, with seating for fifteen hundred, as well as an exercise yard for the
training of sixty-nine gladiators.
The Museum contains large numbers of human remains, preserved from
destruction by a covering of lava and mud. Evidence of the industrial life
of the inhabitants was supplied by the presence of bakers’ ovens and flour
mills close by. These latter consisted of two conical stones working one
on the other, and, contrary to modern usage, were placed in a vertical posi-
tion.
The country carts are of very peculiar construction, having long narrow
bodies, shafts in proportion, high wheels, and cranked axles, whilst the
means of traction are decidedly varied—horses, mules, and cows being
pressed into the service. We saw in one case a team consisting of a specimen
of each animal all yoked together, and drawing a heavily laden vehicle.
Naples has a population of 750,000, and is divided into two parts—the
old town with its extremely narrow streets and high buildings, and the new.


whose modern dwellings and well paved wide streets occupy the high ground,
from which a magnificent view of the ancient city may be obtained, the
beautiful harbor and Vesuvius forming a striking background.
Naples is provided with no less than 420 churches. One built before
the present era started was originally used for pagan worship, but now
the Roman Catholic Church has obtained possession, and dedicated it
to Saint Janeiro. Among its beautiful decorations is a representation in
mosaic of the baptism by Christ of St. John, the Saviour sprinkling the
apostle with water from a sponge. The ceilings were painted by Raphael,
while the genius of Michael Angelo is represented by a fine piece of sculp-
ture entitled “ The Madonna.”
Having done the “ lions ”of Naples, we departed for Rome. Imme-
diately after leaving the city rich agricultural country of volcanic character
was passed through, every foot of its rich black soil being subjected to
intense culture. The crops raised comprised principally wheat, oats, barley,
rye, potatoes, turnips and lupins. Large quantities of grapes of several
varieties are also grown. The farms are small, and divided by hedges,
mostly made of the white mulberry tree, the leaves of which are used for
feeding silkworms, the silk-growing industry being somewhat important.
Farming methods are very primitive, few implements being used.
What corresponds to our plough is of very rude construction, made almost
entirely of wood. These ploughs are drawn, as a rule, by bullocks, but
occasionally cows are employed. The cattle were of a very large type, distinct
from any kind we had seen before, pure white in color, with black muzzles.
A large amount of hand labor is, of course, necessary, and the services
of both women and children are enlisted.
As we journeyed north the land, although still rich, was not quite so
fertile as in the south, but the same crops and similar methods of cultivation
obtained throughout the peninsula. A journey of 160 miles brought us to
Rome, fairly tired out, and after making arrangements for the morrow, we
retired to our respective bed-rooms, and slept the sleep of the tired out.
Rome, whilst remarkable for its antiquity and history, is also a large
■centre of population, having 600,000 inhabitants. The chief attraction
of the city lies in its cathedrals and churches, of which there are over 500,
•occupied by more than 20,000 priests belonging to various orders. These
gentlemen attend to the spiritual requirements of the people, and are pre-
pared for similar work in other parts of the world.
Our guide, in taking charge of the party, which now included Mr. and
Mrs. Mac Kay, son and daughters, members of the esteemed Mac Kay family
of Dunjoy, N.S.W., conducted us to a number of places of interest, which
we cannot possibly enumerate. They included the Pantheon, with its open
roof, 75 metres from the floor; St. Catherine’s Church, whose beautiful
pictures, one of Christ by Michael Angelo, another of John the Baptist,
done in fresco by Domenico in the year 1500, >ve all greatly admired.
The most noted Cathedral in Rome, and most familiar to the majority
■of people, is that of St. Peter. Its beautiful architecture, immense size,
gigantic dome, and rich decorations are almost indescribable. The chapels,
altars, and monuments are the work of such great masters as Michael
Angelo, Raphael, Rosconi, Angelo de Rossa, Bernini, and countless others.
The marble columns supporting the gallery are specially worthy of
■mention, some of them being said to have originally formed part of King
■Solomon’s Temple. These and numerous other wonders all go to make up
•one of the most marvellous edifices in the world.


Our guide now took us to see all that is left of the Colosseum, once the
scene of many a fierce and bloody competition. It was built 60 years 8.C.,
on a site at one time an artificial lake, and could accommodate 85,000 spec-
tators. Although everything now left is in ruins, the building having been
destroyed in 500 A.D., sufficient remains to indicate its stupendous grandeur.
Its walls are over 80 ft. in height, and have five storeys or galleries, over
which large sheets of tapestry were stretched to protect the sightseers from
any unpleasant weather, the building itself not being provided with a roof.
Unfortunately, almost all the original linings and ceilings have been
removed for use in the many temples.
Situated on the Palatine Hill, and distant about three miles, is what
remains of the Golden House of Nero, from the tower of which the Emperor
watched Rome burning. This immense structure, originally containing
30,000 rooms, although now in ruins, gave us some idea of its one time
magnificence. A subway leading from the City is no less than six miles in
length, and still in good order and condition.
We next visited the Vatican, the Palace of the Roman Pontiff. It is of
immense size, and contains over 11,000 rooms. The Museum possesses
original works by most of the greatest of the old-time masters in painting
and sculpture, and copies of the majority of them are exhibited in Art gal-
leries of the principal cities of the civilised world. A beautiful and secluded
garden is connected with the building, where His Holiness the Pope takes a
customary morning walk in quiet seclusion, away from the fierce light which
always beats upon a throne, religious or otherwise.
The Catacombs were next visited. These curious tunnels or subter-
ranean passages have a length of 75 miles, their sides being chambered to
receive the bodies of early members of the Christian faith, who had died
naturally, or suffered martyrdom for conscience sake.
On returning to the city we were shown the Roman Forum, and walked
along the street whence Peter and Paul started on their journey to Jeru-
salem. This concluded our visit to the capital city of Italy, a visit never to
be forgotten.
HO*-


CHAPTER 11.
Leaving Rome at 9 a.m. on May 22, we decided to break the journey at
Florence, and after inspecting the different places of interest in that city,
walked out to the Piazzala, a lovely spot, designed by Michael Angelo, from
which the course of the River Arno can easily be traced. The city contains
many Art galleries, one of the most interesting, the Co-operative Art Society,
where works of the highest degree of excellence are exposed for sale.
Florence is the birthplace of a number of men distinguished in various
walks in life, such names as Dante, Galileo, Michael Angelo, and others too
numerous to mention, individually shed an unfading lustre on the city
whence they originated.
After dining at the Baglioni Hotel, we left for Venice at 9 p.m., and
arrived there next morning at 5 o’clock.
Cabs and trams are practically unknown in Venice, boats, called
gondolas, taking their place. We hired one of these affairs, and proceeded
to the Hotel Victoria, floating calmly along the water channels which serve
as streets.
Venice, a city with a population of 168,090 souls, occupies the site of a
number of small islands, and is unique in the fact that the traffic is prin-
cipally borne by means of the above-mentioned gondolas, a peculiar kind of
craft, shaped like a canoe, with a high bow. and propelled by a long oar,
worked in a curious description of rowlock fixed on the near side of the
boat.
One of the most interesting buildings is St. Mark’s Church, a magnificent
structure approached by means of a beautiful piazza, where are thousands
of pigeons, which perch on visitors’ heads and shoulders, waiting to receive
the grains of corn offered them which can be bought on the spot.
Whilst feeding the birds we met Messrs. Glasson and Crillen, fellow-
Australians, and after inspecting the church we visited the Doge’s Palace.
Among the various court rooms shown us were those used by the
Council of Ten and the Council of Three, whose functions were to investigate
charges brought against the unfortunate prisoners who were confined in the
dungeons connected with the Palace by the “ Bridge of Sighs,” and near to
the “ Lion’s Mouth,” a receptacle for the deposit of charges, mostly anony-
mous, against persons said to have offended, and whose removal by death
was desired.
The Rialto bridge was next visited, and we were interested in noticing
how every available inch of space was made use of, rows of shops being
built on either side. The remainder of the afternoon was spent at Lido,
a very charming watering place, where surf bathing and other amusements
common to such places, are enjoyed.
Our next move was to Milan, a thriving commercial city of 490,000
inhabitants. It is built on modern principles, and has splendid wide streets,
electric trams, and up-to-date business premises, the most noticeable of
which is a magnificent arcade, whose immense steel-framed glass roof
covers two rows of shops at right angles to each other. Milan’s grandest
sight is its Cathedral, from every part of the city it can be seen, and, it
is said, from anywhere seven miles distant.
Words fail to give an adequate conception of this marvellous structure,
whose every stone is the finest of pure white marble. One great steeple


stands out prominently, and myriads of smaller spires surround it, each sur-
mounted by a marble statue, the work of such wonderful sculptors as Michael
Angelo, Canova, Raphael, and others nearly as great.
Rank after rank of these fretted spires rise high in the air, and one
could simply gaze with wonder and rapture at the marvellous beauty of the
immense edifice.
Buried in the crypt of the Cathedral is the body of one of the greatest
and most beloved of human beings, St. Charles Borromeo, at one time
Bishop of Milan. No pen can write his good deeds, they are so many, but
all can feel that if ever a man lived whose heart, hand, and purse were ever
ready to help the poor, afflicted, and needy, Charles Borromeo was that man.
The treasures of the church are of very great value, not only intrinsically,
but on account of their antiquity and associations with celebrities who have
passed away.
Having now completed our tour of the principal cities and towns of
Italy, we felt the time at our disposal was not a hundredth part of that
required to fully appreciate all the beauties of painting and statuary which
were so lavishly displayed in the various Churches, Cathedrals, and other
buildings.
Leaving Italy and crossing the frontier into Switzerland, we were
charmed with the mountain scenery and lovely lakes nestling between the
hills. Lake Como was the first attraction ; it is bounded on one side by a
steep mountain 2,350 feet in height, with Lake House on the summit. This
is reached by means of a funicular railway on the hill side.
Travelling along the shore of Lake Lugano, with Mount Generoso
towering 6,000 feet above, the train sped along a stone causeway some 900
yards in length, and at last reached the town of Lugano.
Following the valley of Ticino, with its rich fiats, for a distance
of 60 miles we commenced to ascend the range of mountains by means of a
spiral railway showing tiers of four lines (three tracks each) one above the
other. After negotiating these we reached Airolo, 3,750 feet above sea
level, and entered the famous St. Gothard tunnel which pierces the Alps.
It is 9,| miles long, 25 feet wide, and 21 feet high, and the train takes 20
minutes to pass through. This magnificent piece of engineering was carried
out by the people of Switzerland, Germany, and Italy in conjunction, and
took eight years to complete, the cost being over €2,000,000. The tunnel
was started at both ends simultaneously, and the accuracy with which
the work was carried out may be conceived when, on the two parties
meeting at the centre, there was an error of less than an inch in their measure-
ments as previously calculated.
Some idea of the rugged nature of the country may be obtained from
the fact that between Como and Lucerne we passed through 73 tunnels,
many of which were over a mile in length.
Leaving the train at Fruelin we boarded one of the beautiful passenger
steamers travelling on Lake Lucerne, ftom the deck of which we had further
opportunities of admiring the lovely mountains whose wooded sides were
dappled over with patches of white snow, filling up the ravines, and after-
wards reappearing as pretty streams, which found their way to the lake’
the shores of which were dotted with nnraerous lovely residences, some on
the margin of the lake and others perched on the sides of the hills, a
funicular railway making access to these latter quite easy.


On the level ground dairying and agriculture occupied the attention of
the inhabitants, wheat, rye, oats, and potatoes being the staple crops, but
all hand-cultivated, the absence of modern farm machinery being extremely
noticeable. In cases where two horses were yoked together cine was ridden
instead of being driven, as with us.
The last city in Switzerland visited was Lucerne, where we arrived at
4.30 p.m., after travelling over 25 miles amidst most beautiful scenery.
The town is built round a small arm of the Lake, over which a splendid
bridge has been constructed, and few visitors to the Continent omit including
Lucerne in their programme of travel, and undoubtedly the glorious views
to be obtained in the neighbourhood fully justify their choice.


CHAPTER 111.
After leaving Switzerland and its Alpine beauties, we travelled into the
more level country of Germany, our first halting place being Frankfort, a
large city situated on the right bank of the River Maine. Previous to the
unification of the several Kir/gdoms, Dutchies, and States, now styled the
German Empire, Frankfort was a “ Free City,” that is, it was practically
independent, making its own laws, and acknowledging submission to none.
As a great banking centre Frankfort ranks high on the Continent, and
is the ancestral home of the Rothschild family, one branch of which still
making it their headquarters.
The modem portion of the city contains some very handsome buildings,
the Opera House being an extremely magnificent structure. The old town
includes the Jewish quarter, where some of the most ancient buildings in
Germany are to be found.
Frankfort has been the scene of numbers of great historical events, in-
cluding the holding of United Germany’s first Parliament, and the signing
of the Franco-Prussian treaty of peace after the war of 1870-71, which ended
so disastrously for France.
Goethe, the greatest of German poets, was born here, and his name is
still held in affectionate remembrance by the inhabitants.
The Cathedral is of very great interest, not only on account of its
antiquity and beauty, but because no less than fifty-three Emperors lie
buried within its walls.
Leaving Frankfort at 7.45 on the morning of May 20th, we trained to
Mainz, a big city situated at the junction of the Rivers Maine and Rhine.
Everybody has heard about or read of the magnificent scenery to be
witnessed on the Rhine, but unless one has had the pleasure of observing
for oneself, it is difficult to form any idea of its beauty.
The river meanders between ranges of mountains, the sides of which are
covered with vim yards. On the summits of some of these great hills old
feudal castles are to be seen, in every case some legend being connected there-
with. Boats of considerable size ply up and down the river, and if one is not
tied to time they form the best means of travelling, as the lovely views on
loth banks of the river can be enjoyed at leisure. Of course, if a person is
in a hurry, using the railway, of which there is one on each .side of the
stream, is the better way, but we chose the steamer from Mainz to Cologne, a
distance of nearly 120 miles.
The river between these two places is spanned by eight iron bridges and
a pontoon one, the boats of the latter being constructed in such a manner
that they can be swung apart to allow the passage of steamers and other
craft.
Cologne is justly celebrated for its Cathedral, a building only just com-
pleted after many centuries of labor spent in its construction
The character of the river scenery here undergoes a very marked change.
All the hills being left behind, the country on either hand as far as the
mouth is flat, and totally uninteresting from a sightseer’s point of view.


CHAPTER IV.
France
After leaving German soil, we journeyed through parts of
Belgium and sunny France, en route for Paris. The country traversed was
of a good agricultural quality, taking it all round. Numerous herds of
cattle, of the Holstein-Ayrshire cross, were to be seen on all sides ; and ano-
ther matter which considerably impressed us was the type of farm horse,
totally distinct from our own, they being clean-legged, thick-set, active
animals.
We entered Prance at the tow n of St. Quintin, having 102 miles to go
before reaching Paris, and this distance was covered in the scheduled time
of 100 minutes. By this we had the experience of travelling on one of the
fastest trains in the world, and found no inconvenience whilst dining aboard
the car, although travelling at the rate of over a mile a minute.
On quitting the train at 10 p.m., and engaging a taxi to convey us to
the Hotel St. Petersburg, we rushed through most brilliantly lighted
streets crowded with people, some in various kinds of vehicles, mostly
uibtors, and others hurrying along on foot, but all as intent on getting over the
ground as if it were mid-day, instead of twelve hours afterwards. Occa-
sionally we were compelled to halt, the crowd being so thick, but this we
discovered was but an ordinary occurrence under the circumstances.
So far as we could judge, there seemed to be no apparent control over
the traffic, but, no doubt, the authorities had rules of their own of which we
were ignorant. The general method of passenger conveyance is by motor,
no ordinary street oars being in use.
We were not long in finding our way to some of the sights of Paris, and
among the most notable is the Trocadero, an immense circular building in
which exhibitions, shows, &c., are held. From the balcony an excellent
view is to be obtained of the Eiffel Tower, one of the wonders of the world.
This lofty structure is ascended by means of an elevator, which carries
visitors up its 1,000 feet of height with ease and rapidity.
The “ Invalides ” next claimed our attention. It is a building origin-
ally intended for the reception of soldiers wounded in the Napoleonic wars,
but now its mission is more peaceful, veteran warriors finding a home within
its portals. . The last resting place of the greatest Emperor France has ever
had, Napoleon I , is under its dome, surmounted by a great block of red
porphry, the hags captured in battle from all European nations hanging
around the sides of the gallery above. The Cathedral of Notre Dame has
been so often described by others that comment on its beauty and grandeur
is superfluous.
The Civic Fathers have made excellent provision for public recreation
and breathing spaces, one park alone containing several thousand
acres of grounds beautifully improved with ornamental trees, shrubs, gar-
dens, lakes, &0., as well as a thoroughly, up-to-date motor track. Luncheon
and tea rooms are dotted about the park, giving the hungry and thirsty
visitor numberless opportunities for relieving his needs.
The French National races are held on the Long Champ course close
handy to the City, and the “Grand Prix,” corresponding to the English
Derby, creates as much excitement as our own Melbourne Cup.


One of the most interesting sights of Paris is the Market, in which all
kinds of foods are sold. Our attention was specially directed to the fish,
frog, and snail sections, the two latter being decidedly a novelty.
Leaving them we entered the flower department, where all kinds of
gorgeous blossoms met our gaze, every district of sunny France seeming to
have combined in making their greatest market a thing of beauty unsur-
passable in the country.
Being desirous of seeing the ancient Latin quarter of the city, our guide
conducted us through its narrow, evil-smelling streets, and on reaching a
more pleasant locality we partook of lunch at one of the best known of all
the old-time hotels in Paris—houses which have seen dynasties come and
go, houses to whom revolutions have been merely the turning of a page,
houses which will still serve the public when our appetites will have faded
away and ourselves joined the happy band to whom eating and drinking are
unknown. Before finishing our “slumming” expedition we were shown a
butcher’s shop for the sale of horse flesh. These establishments are dis-
tinguished we were told by the compulsory exhibition of the figure of a
horse’s head outside the building.
As we had previously arranged to go to the English Derby, we were
reluctantly compelled to curtail our stay in Paris, and left on the evening of
May 30 for Boulogne, from which watering-place we had decided to cross
the Channel for the shores of “ Old England.”
There is one thing about the railway systems of Europe which must be
copied in Australia, and that is unification of gauge. All the Continental
lines are laid on a gauge of 4ft. 8-Jin, the consequence being that, had we
so desired, we could have travelled without change of carriage from Naples,
in the south of Italy, to Boulogne, a town on the north coast of France


CHAPTER V.
England.
A short trip of about one and a half hours brought us to Folkstone,
where we were delighted to find people conversing in our own tongue, trad-
ing in our own money, and having similar ideals and ambitions. We felt
all that it meant to reach “ Home ” after having been so long among peoples
whose language we were not able to understand. After a journey of 72 miles
we arrived in London, and made onr way to the favorite Howard Hotel in
Norfolk-street, where we had the pleasure of Senator Vardon’s company.
As stated previously, we had made arrangements to see the English
Derby run, so we sallied forth to Epsom, and soon found out what was meant
by a Derby day crowd, the place being thronged with people from all parts of
the world. The course cannot in any way compare with either Randwick
or Flemiugton, and the Stand accommodation is shockingly deficient.
The race itself is hidden for a part of the way, the view being inter-
rupted by an intervening hill, and from even the best position on the Grand-
stand a full sight of the classic contest from start to finish is unobtainable.
A large number of people were unable to watch any of the horses, but we
were more fortunate, and saw Sunlight receive and carry away the
much coveted blue ribbon. Among the many notables present on the Grand-
stand were their Majesties King George and Queen Mary seated in the
Royal box. The day was one to be remembered, if only for the intense heat,
surpassing some of our summer days in Australia, and it culminated in a
tremendous thunderstorm with heavy hail, causing several accidents and
damage to persons returning home.
We began our next day, June 1, by calling on Sir George Reid, Aus-
tralia’s High Commissioner, from whom we received a most cordial welcome,
and were pleased to find our old friend as genial as ever and much improved
in health since leaving Australia. We also met Captain Collins and Major
Arkill, who are attached to the High Commissioner’s office, and they-assisted
in every way to make our visit pleasant and interesting. During the after-
noon we attended the sittings of the House of Commons, and listened to Mr.
Ure, Lord Advocate for Scotland, addressing the House. Being new to
London, we spent the following day trying to make ourselves acquainted
with some of the features of the city, and on Saturday availed ourselves,
together with other Australian visitors, of the invitation of the Earl and
Countess of Harrowby to spend a week-end at their country seat, Sandou
Hall.
We left Euston station, and reached Stafford at 1 p.m., where we were
met by our host and introduced to the Mayor, councillors, and other dis-
tinguished citizens, and were accorded a civic reception. We subsequently
motored to theHaU through streets lined with an enthusiastic crowd of people.
After luncheon we were welcomed by the tenants of the estate, an
address being presented to the Prime Minister, who, with Mrs. Fisher, w'as
among the guests. Mr. Fisher suitably replied, and his remarks were
supplemented by short speeches from the Hon. J. Murray (Premier of Vic-
toria), the Hon. W. Wilson (Premier of Western Australia), Sir Elliott Lewis
(Premier of Tasmania), Sir Geo. Reid, Mr. John Thomson, and Senators
Vardon and Long, of South Australia and Tasmania, respectively.
We were then taken out to view the farms on the estate, and found they
were worked on thoroughly up-to-date lines. On the return journey we paid


a visit to the parish schorl, both parents and children being present. The
educational work of the school is splendidly carried out, all the most modern
systems of teaching being employed, while a tine gymnasium and other
sources of amusement and benefit to the children are also provided.
On rising the next morning the beautifully clear country air offered special
inducement for us to join our host and family in a walk across the park lands
of the estate to the parish church, where we enjoyed a service under true
rural conditions in one of the most charming districts of England.
It having been arranged that we should lunch at Beaudesert, the seat
of the Marquis of A nglesey, we motored between lovely hedges, dotted with
rhododendrons and other flowers, and passing through fine woods, pretty
lanes, and quaint old-fashioned little villages. After reaching our desti-
nation we found ourselves seated in a house of the time of Henry VIIL,
and several relics of ancient origin were brought under our notice. The
present Marquis, being a soldier as well as a sportsman, was able to show
us a number of valuable trophies he had won, and presentations made by
his brother officers.
Our host being desirous that we should have every opportunity of seeing
as much of this part of the country as possible, next took us to Lich-
field, where the Mayor and Aldermen, in their robes of office, escorted us to
one of the most beautiful country Cathedrals it has been our lot to see.
After a full choral service, presided over by the Bishop, we were invited
to afternoon tea at Bishopscourt, and were informed by his Lordship that
the building was originally a royal palace, parts of the walls and the moat
still being visible. We then returned to Sandon Hall after spending a most
enjoyable and interesting day.
On Monday we were conveyed by special train to Stoke-on-Trent,
one of the principal cities of the Midlands, and in the heart of the Potteries.
We were met by Mayor Wedgewood, who, together with the Mayoress and
councillors, tendered us a civic reception, a number of prominent citizens
also being in attendance. We were driven through the city, and
received a hearty welcome from the populace, whose cheery faces
glowed with friendship and esteem for their Australian cousins.
For the sake of convenience our party ivas split up, some visiting the
pottery works of the Messrs. Wedgewood, and others inspecting those of
Messrs. Doulton & Co. The names of both these firms are almost house-
hold words in all English-speaking countries, in fact the original Josiah
Wedgewood is styled the “father of English pottery.” After having
been taken all over the premises and shown the working up of
the crude material into the magnificent specimens exhibited in the
museums, we obtained a much clearer conception of what is meant by being
“ as clay in the hands of the potter.”
We again enjoyed the hospitality of the civic authorities at a luncheon,
when over four hundred guests were present. In reply to the toast
“ Welcome,” Messrs. Fisher (Prime Minister of Australia) John Murray
(Premier of Victoria), Sir Elliot Lewis (Premier of Tasmania), and Sir John
Quick, M.P., spoke. The rest of of our afternoon was then spent in visiting
an exhibition of arts and crafts held in the local park.
Returning by train to Stoke, we motored to Sandon Hall, where we
made a close acquai ntance with the grounds, and were introduced to the
orchard and garden. Our host makes a feature of furnishing his table with
vegetables, fruit, and flowers all grown on the estate, and we were specially
interested in the cultivation under glass of grapes, peaches, plums, and


tomatoes, whilst carnations and numerous other flowers bore witness to the
value of the sun’s rays when judiciously applied to the vegetable kingdom.
An apple tree 136 years old and an English oak whose birth took place
over eight centuries back were brought under our notice, and we marvelled
at the sturdy and healthy appearance which both presented. In the
farm yards we found a very fine type of milking Shorthorns, the Earl’s
favorite breed, and greatly admired the care taken in selecting the herd.
Considerable attention has been paid to afforestation, certain areas
having been resumed and planted with young timber trees of the oak, elm,
and beech varieties.
Wednesday, the 7th, was a quiet day, the chief feature being a visit to
the Crystal Palace Exhibition. We naturally looked for the Australian
courts, which we found after having visited that of Canada, and were much
disappointed on making a comparison, Sydney harbor being represented by
a drawing on which we were unable to locate Circular Quay. We failed to
see how the interests of Australia were likely to be advanced by a picture
representing the Kelly gang, and the only attempt to show the value of
the Commonwealth was made by Tasmania.
Having received an invitation from Sir George and Lady Reid, we
attended a brilliant reception, held in the Imperial Institute, on Thursday
evening in honor of the Australian visitors, over 1,600 persons being
present. The Royal Family was represented by the Duchess of Teck, to whom
members of the Australian Legislatures were presented. Lord Kitchener
and Lord Tennyson (formerly Governor-General of Australia), together with
a large number of eminent citizens from the various states, being amongst the
guests, made us feel that though thousands of miles of water separated our
respective dwelling places, still we were “ at home.”
Friday was spent in viewing the City. We were much impressed with
the methods used by the London police for controlling the street traffic, the
immense volume of which requires extremely careful regulation. Motor
buses and cabs formed the principal means of locomotion, no street trams
being permitted in the city of London proper. During the day we visited
St. Paul’s Cathedral and the Tower, the latter being of special interest from
its intimate connection with so many momentous events in the early history
of the nation.
On Saturday we availed ourselves of an invitation from the Hon. W.
and Mrs. Harcourt to attend a garden party at their charming residence.
We took train to Nuneham, journeying through some of the most beautiful
parts of England. About 850 guests had assembled, and the afternoon
being bright the lovely costumes of the ladies, coupled with the scenery of
the Thames as a background, presented a most enchanting spectacle.
During the afternoon we took the opportunity of renewing our acquaint-
ance with Lord Brassey, (an ex-Governor of Victoria), Lord Chelmsford
(ex Governor of Queensland), and Lord Kitchener who was in Australia a
short time back in reference to the military affairs of the Commonwealth.
He expressed himself as being very pleased to hear of the success of the
cadet movement, and at the determination to proceed with railway con-
struction for defence purposes, especially the trans-continental line.
On Sunday, June 1. we attended service at the City Temple, the Rev.
R J. Campbell, of “The New Theology ” fame, preaching to a large and
appreciative congregation, and had a few minutes conversation with the
reverend gentleman in the vestry afterwards on various subjects.


We lunched with the Hon. Mr. and Mrs. Ryder at Slough, and they
further entertained us with a motor launch trip on the Thames during the
afternoon, The party consisted of Captain and Mrs. Ryder (a daughter of
C. H. Angas, of Collingrove, South Australia), Mr. Arch. Ryder, Captain
Fisher of the King’s Guards, Sir John and Lady Quick, and others. The
river winds close under the walls of Windsor Castle, thus giving a fine view
of that magnificent building. Afternoon tea was partaken of at the Guard’s
Club, where we left the party, returning to London by train, having spent
an extremely pleasant day.
On Monday afternoon we attended a garden party at Carnpden Hill as
guests of the League of the Empire, a great feature being some exception-
ally fine vocal and instrumental music.


CHAPTER VI.
Scotland.
All three of us being of Scottish descent we naturally had a leaning
towards the land of our forebears, so decided to pay a visit to the Laud o’
Cakes.
Starting from Euston station at 10 a.m. on Tuesday we travelled by the
North Western Railway to Glasgow, some 400 miles from London, and
reached the Central Station at 6 p.m., being met on the plat-
form by Mr. W. Thomson, of Rutherglen, an uncle of our Mr. Thomson.
This gentleman’s knowledge of commercial matters, together with his
experience as a traveller in Canada and Australia, was of great service and
interest to us during our stay.
Our Mr. Thomson having decided to remain at Rutherglen for a short
time, Mr. John Livingston proceeded to Oban, of which town his father was
a native. He soon made the acquaintance of several old friends and in
numerous cases relatives belonging to the Livingston clan, and was given
every opportunity to enjoy the magnificent scenery of the Highland hills
and glens. Ben-More, with its snow-clad summit, towered majestically
above all others, whilst Lochs Awe and Ettrick nestled at the feet of some
of the most picturesque mountains in Scotland.
Mr. Livingston now said farewell to the Highlands and visited Edin-
burgh. After a night’s rest in “ Auld Reekie ”he took train to Galashiels,
naving decided to make a fuller acquaintance with the “ Modern Athens ”
at some future period when all the members of the party should have again
assembled together.
Mr. Thomson, after spending a very enjoyable holiday with his rela-
tives at Rutherglen, continued his Scottish tour, visiting most of the prin-
cipal places of interest in the country.
It was decided that the party should rejoin in London, as it had
been arranged that we should meet the Committee of the Lords and Com-
mons during the afternoon, when we, with the delegates from Canada,
South Africa, Newfoundland, and our colleagues from Australia, became
their official guests, and were comfortably lodged at the magnificent Waldorf
Hotel, commencing onr pleasant relationship by a reception, followed by an
informal dinner, at which we were introduced to each other,
During the visit of Messrs. Thomson and J. Livingston to Scotland
Mr. D. Livingston desired to become further acquainted with the Con-
tinent of Europe, and ciossed the Channel to Ostend, which city has the
reputation of being the largest and most fashionable watering-place in the
world. During the summer months the King and Queen of the Belgians
make it their home, and naturally all the bon-ton of Belgium follow in their
train. On the way to Brussels a halt w r as made at Bruges, one of the most
ancient cities in the country, an' l he visited the Cathedral of San Salvador,
an historic fane containing vast quantities of ecclesiastical treasures of
great antiquity. On arriving at Brussels Mr. Livingston paid a visit to the
principal buildings and places of interest in and around the Belgian capital,
among them being the Palace of Justice (corresponding to our Law Courts),
the Wertz Art Gallery, a collection of the works by that great artist and
presented by him to the Government in consideration of his receiving an
annuity. The National Library and Museum and the Houses of Parliament


exhibited architectural features of great beauty, and were well worth a
longer time for inspection. The day of his arrival happened to be that on
which what is known as the “ Battle of Flowers ” is held, when every person,
animal, and vehicle has to be decorated with flowers, and promenade one of
the principal boulevardes. The purchase money of the flowers is handed
to the Queen, who distributes it to the charities of Belgium.
Mr. Livingston paid a visit to the scene of the Battle of Waterloo, and
at the little town of the same name was shown into the room where Welling-
ton slept the night before the combat. Immediately opposite stands the
village church, in which are displayed many of the flags taken during the
struggle, as well as a tablet giving the names of the officers who fell in the
historic contest. The battlefield is four miles distant from the village, at
the junction with the high road to Brussels, and is marked by a mound 250
feet high, the earth of which was carried by Butch women, as a token of
their satisfaction at the result of the war. The scene of the battle,
instead of suggesting anything in the way of carnage, is now
one of great fertility, being covered with crops of waving wheat,
grass, potatoes. &c. Particulars of the war having been furnished
to readers of history by hands more capable of doing the theme justice,
further details are unnecessary, except to say that this is one of the mile-
stones which mark the road to supremacy of the British nation. Mr.
Livingston now retraced his steps, and returned to London, in order to
again join his travelling companions.
♦


CHAPTER VII.
England (Continued).
On Saturday. June 17th, we all met once more in London, and put up
at the Waldorf Hotel, This, one of the latest built in the city, is replete
with every modern convenience. In the evening a dinner party was held in
order that all the delegates from the over-sea dominions should be intro-
duced to the Committee. The party proved a most brilliant function, and
speeches of a very high standard of merit were the order of the night.
Sunday, the 18th, instead of being an “off” day, proved a very busy
one. In the morning we motored out to Temple House, a most charming
residence on the Thames, where a garden party was given in our honour by
Mr. and Mrs. Norton Griffiths. A large number of England’s most
distinguished men were present, including Lord Charles Beresford, our
most popular admiral. His deeds at the bombardment of Alexandria in
the little gunboat “ Condor ” were the admiration of the naval world
of the day, and gained him what is most prized by all warship
commanders, the coveted honour of being mentioned in despatches.
Among the other guests were Mr. J. Austen Chamberlain, M.P., son of
the Right Hon. Joseph Chamberlain; Lord Midleton, ex-Secretary of
State for India, and Lady Midleton, together with several ladies and
gentlemen of note. We afterwards had the pleasure of a motor trip up the
river. The surrounding scenery, especially in the upper reaches, was
delightful.
Our evening was spent at the Automobile Club, of which H.R.H. the
Duke of Teck is President, and a reception was tendered us by the committee,
at which H.R.H. the Duchess of Teck was present. The building is one of
the finest in London, no expense or trouble having been spared to make it the
finest and most up-to-date club in the metropolis of Great Britain.
On Monday Westminster Hall was the scene of action. A luncheon
was given to the representatives. Lord Rosebery, supported by Mr. H. H.
Asquith, M.P., occupied the Chair. The Prime Ministers of the various
states, &c,, occupying seats right and left of the Chairman, the Premiers
of provincial Parliaments being similarly honored. The banquet was
attended by a very large number of the most distinguished men
in Great Britain, and the walls of the ancient and venerable
hall, could they but think, must have brought back to mind similar scenes
when England was practically in its infancy, and now in its manhood giving
forth sons and daughters to fight the battle of life in every quaxter of the
globe. Subsequent to the proceedings a photo was taken of the gathering,
each Dominion representative being presented with a copy as a memento of
a most important meeting, one that will be written down in the annals of
all the portions of the British Empire represented.
The afternoon also brought its enjoyment, we having the pleasure of
attending a garden party given by Mrs. Eckstein, and we finished up the day
by visiting the theatre and witnessing a fine performance of Shakespeare’s
Henry VIII.
The following morning was spent in viewing Hampton Court, a palace
built by Cardinal Wolsey. A portion of the vast mansion is now occupied
by the widows of men who have made their mark in the service of the
Empire, the remainder being open to the general public. Whilst there we
had the opportunity of seeing the celebrated vine now 143 years old, but


still bearing great quantities of magnificent fruit. The surrounding park is
of very great extent, and contains the finest avenue of chestnuts in the
entire world.
On returning to London we were entertained by the Worshipful Company
of Drapers at luncheon in the hall connected with their guild. The
Livery Companies of the city are associations consisting of the
principal members of the different crafts represented, and go back many
hundred years for their origin. There are altogether seventy-nine, the
twelve principal being those of the Merchant Taylors, Drapers, Mercers,
Grocers, Fishmongers, Goldsmiths, Skinners, Salters, Ironmongers,
Vintners, Haberdashers, and Cloth-wainers. They were originally some-
thing similar to Trade Unions, consisting of master craftsmen, apprentices
being admitted only after going through a long and arduous servitude, and
then not till they had proved themselves worthy tradesmen.
The Master and Wardens of the Worshipful Company of Vintners
honored us by a reception in their beautiful hall at half-past three on the
same afternoon. We attended a second reception at the Countess of
Ellesmere’s, whose historic home and glorious pictures were a sight worth
the journey to England.
Dinner at the Crystal Palace made a fitting close to a day brimful of
goodfellowship and enjoyment. The banquet, presided over by the Earl of
Plymouth, was graced by the presence of numerous ladies of rank and
fashion. The building, illuminated in a most lavish manner, presented an
extremely brilliant sight when the shades of evening had fallen.
Wednesday, the 21st, was again a long round of social functions, com-
mencing with lunch at the Mercers’ Hall, the Worshipful Master, the Earl
of Selborne, K.G., occupying the chair. The afternoon was spent at a
reception given by Sir George Reid in honor of Lady Denman, to say fare-
well on her departure to Australia. At eight o’clock we were entertained
at dinner by Lord Northcote. There was a most brilliant gathering of dis-
tinguished guests, including Lord Kitchener, a number of Australians also
being present. We subsequently, at 10.30, attended a reception by the Earl
of Derby.


CHAPTER VIII.
The Coronation Ceremonies.
The next day, Thursday, June 22, was the day of days—the day looked
forward to by millions of people of all nationalities. It was the day on
which King George V. and Queen Mary were to be crowned, by having placed
on their heads the symbol of Royalty and Power.
At seven o’clock in the morning we left the hotel for Westminster
Abbey, and on arrival at about eight took our seats. We did not
leave again till 3 p.m., but of all these hours not one seemed a minute too
long. The decorations of the Abbey were superb, every available means
being brought into requisition to do justice to the occasion.
Soon the great congregation began to gather, and Royal and foreign
guests, many in gorgeous dress, came in throngs.
Peers and peeresses, in the robes of their Orders, carrying their
coronets, were ushered to their various places, whilst military and naval
officers, representatives of the law, and many others who take a prominent
part in the national life, filled every corner of the great building, a building
which has been the scene of the Coronation of England’s sovereigns since the
days of Harold, the last of our Danish Kings.
At 9.30 the Princes and Princesses of the Blood Royal arrived.
First came the Prince of Wales, who, in his Garter Robes, marched up
the nave to his seat. He was followed by his brothers and sister, the little
Princes and Princess creating great interest, and all present rose as they passed
along. Prince George and Prince Henry were dressed in kilts, in compliment
to the Scottish nation, whilst the other Princes and Princesses and the
Duke of Connaught followed in their order of precedence.
When the King and Queen entered, and passed up the aisle, the whole
assembly rose in silent homage to X’eceive them.
Next came the formal presentation of the King and Queen, the congre-
gation responding with hearty cries of “ God Save the King.”
The Coronation service followed.
After King Edward’s Cro*wn had been placed on the head of the
Sovereign the impressive ceremony was closed with the Benediction.
The members of the Royal Family, headed by the Prince of Wales,
then paid their homage", and that portion of the ceremony was thus com-
pleted.
The Coronation of Queen Mary, a considerably shorter function, next
took place, and the crowned King and Queen left the Abbey, amidst a con-
tinuous roar of cheering, and proceeded to Buckingham Palace, the streets
en route being lined with enthusiastic crowds of loyal subjects.
The Coronation was over, but the rejoicing had scarcely begun. By 9
a.m. the innumerable stands and window seats were fully occupied. We
were in a good position on a stand provided for the Representatives of the
Oversea Dominions. The King and Queen were timed to leave Buckingham
Palace at 11 o’clock, the procession, headed by a naval detachment, having
left half an hour earlier.
The colour infused by the uniforms of the foreign officers added to the
immeasurable splendour of the scene, and the guns in the Parks announced


the fact that His Majesty the King had left the Palace, whilst the strains
of the National Anthem arose from a band composed of some of the finest
instrumentalists in the British Army.
The great procession, inclnding military detachments, Representatives,
of the Crown Colonies, and Colonial Premiers, passed along. Then came the
Indian procession, a brilliant one, for in it were several Princes in all the
splendour of their Oriental attire.
Very soon the hurricane of cheering announced that the Royal carriage
was approaching.
The famous cream horses appeared, drawing the State carriage in which
the King and Queen were seated. The King wore a Field-Marshal’s uni-
form, and acknowledged the tumultuous greetings shouted from every side,
the Queen bowing gracefully in acknowledgment. In a similar manner
Their Majesties passed through seven miles of London thoroughfares, en-
thusiastically greeted everywhere with the warmest of welcomes from hun-
dreds of thousands of loyal subjects.
In the evening all vehicular traffic was suspended, and the illumina-
tions started. All the principal buildings were a blaze of light, the spectacle
being a marvellous one, a sight never to be forgotten by all who had the
privilege of witnessing it. The designs of many of the illuminations were
most beautiful, the work of our greatest spectacular artists being lavishly
displayed. Hour after hour the streets were densely crowded with apprecia-
tive spectators, to whom the word fatigue was unknown. As night wore on
the bonfires, which had been erected on the hills and other high positions,
were kindled, and it is estimated that nearly 3,000 were alight at one time.
After a long day’s enjoyment, we retired home to rest, as we had
fatiguing journey to make on the morrow.
Portsmouth, a great maritime centre on the South Coast, was next
visited, in order to see the great naval review held in its gigantic harbour.
This harbour, although, of course, not to be compared with those of Sydney
or Rio de Janeiro for beauty, has claims of its own by possessing facilities
for the carrying out of all naval requirements second to none in the world.
Reviews without number have been held there in the past, but the march of
time has made such immense alterations in the armaments of the powers,
first-class ships of merely a decade past being practically obsolete, that the
scene at Spithead on Saturday was absolutely without precedent. No fewer
than 170 men-of-war of all descriptions were gathered together, constituting
the most powerful force fighting under one flag ever seen upon the water.
To an Australian looking across the harbour, the masts greatly
resembled an immense ring-barked forest, tall, gaunt, and bare, but we felt
that, should the dogs of war be let loose, the ships we saw before us were
able to hold their own with any hostile navy in existence, and we
could sleep ip peace on returning to our native shores. Words
can hardly express the magnificence of the sight presented by
this gigantic phalanx of British war-ships, interwoven with the long thin
line of their foreign counterparts. The decorations on all were on a most
elaborate scale, every ship carrying as much bunting as she could possibly
rig up. Let us hope that none of these vessels will meet in conflict. All
that the world wants is “ Peace.”
Now came the supreme moment. The Royal yacht “Victoria and Albert”
steamed out through the lines, and every heart throbbed tumultuously when
the mouths of 3,000 guns blazed out a Royal salute of welcome. The King


and Queen inspected 25 miles of battleships, and on passing each vessel they
heard the lusty shouts of the sailors, the bands playing the National Anthem.
King George now exchanged greetings with his foreign visitors, and the
ceremony was concluded at half-past five.
The evening had attractions of its own, the last feature of the Review
being that inspiring scene, a fully illumined fleet. Each vessel was outlined
in globules of light, so perfectly arranged that naval men were able to name
each ship without the slightest difficulty.


CHAPTER IX.
After the previous week’s festivities we decided to-day, Sunday, June
25, to take things fairly easy.
We lunched with Mr. Waldorf Astor, and in the afternoon paid a visit
to Lord Desborough, at Taplow Court, Maidenhead. This is a very charm-
ing residence on the banks of the Thames, and as the owner is one
of the most popular men in England, the house is always full of visitors.
Lord Desborough, when Mr. W. H. Grenfell, had a wonderful athletic
record ; in fact, Mr. W. T. Stead, the journalist, styles him “ The real Ad-
mirable Crichton of our time.”
After returning to town, and dining quietly at the hotel, we attended
service at St. Paul’s Cathedral.
The following day Mr. John Livingston and Senator Vardon left
Waterloo Station for Portsmouth, to assist at the presentation of the Aus-
tralian Plate to H.M.S. “ Commonwealth ” by Lady Northcote, wife of Lord
Northcote, for some time Governor-General of Australia. Sir Josiah
Symon, of South Australia, made a very interesting speech, in the
course of which he reviewed the history of Australia from the earliest
known discoveries ; after which several other gentlemen, including Prince
Louis of Battenberg, spoke on subjects appropriate to the occasion.
Among the sailors taking their parts at the unveiling ceremony, we
were very pleased to notice two young fellows from Beaohport, South Aus-
tralia, named Thompson and Corigliano. Their smart appearance showed
what a course of drill and discipline will do when one has good material to
work on, and we were glad to meet them again when they paid us a visit at
our hotel.
Whilst being shown the various sights of Portsmouth, one struck us as
standing out prominently above all others, and that was the big guns. An
idea of them may be formed by saying that some project a shot weighing 180
lbs. a distance of 15,000 yards, nearly nine miles, the firing charge being no
less than 120 lbs. of cordite.
On returning to London the following day we attended a luncheon given
by Sir George Reid to Lord Denman prior to his departure for Australia,
and in the afternoon were present, by command of His Majesty the King,
at a garden party at Buckingham Palace. The grounds were crowded, all
parts of the world being represented, and it was allowed to be the most
brilliant gathering ever held there. Their Majesties walked about
among the vast concourse of people quite unattended, and took their after-
noon tea in a marquee placed on an elevated position in full view of all
present. In the evening we had the pleasure of dining with the London
County Council at the Hotel Cecil, when we met the principal authorities
connected with London’s civic administration.
Next day, the 28th, was devoted to business, and at 11 a.m. we attended
a meeting of representatives of the over-sea Parliaments and the Executive
Committee of the House of Commons, in the course of which matters bearing
on the relationship between the Dominions and the Mother country were
deeply discussed.
In the afternoon we motored to Windsor, and spent several hours in-
specting the historic castle. The palace has for many centuries been the
principal residence of the English sovereigns, and was an important strong-


hold in very early Saxon times. The largest of the three chapels attached
to the castle is that of St. George. It contains the stalls of the Knights of
the Garter, and the magnificent banner belonging to each is hung overhead.
The Royal Library possesses a number of extremely interesting pictures,
among them being a fine series of paintings by Holbein of the principal
courtiers in Henry VIII.’s time. A history of the Peerage of Scotland is to
seen, included in which is an account of the Livingston family up to 1715,
when their lands and titles were confiscated.
We motored back to town, and dined with Canada’s Grand Old Man,
Lord Strathcona. This gentleman, though 92 years old, is as upright and
lively as a man of merely half his age. We ended the day by going to a
musical evening given by Lord Brassey.
On the 29th we paid a visit to the Royal Agricultural Show held at
Norwich. We saw some magnificent stock of all kinds, and an Australian
Court exhibiting our products was greatly admired. Lunch in honor of
the Dominions’ Representatives was given by the Agricultural So-
ciety, the Earl of Leicester presiding. Mr. John Livingston replied
on behalf of the Australians to the toast of “ The Oversea Representatives.”
Mrs. Stuart and the Misses Colman held a garden party at Carrow
Abbey at which we were present, and it was a great success. We left
Norwich by special train, and reached London at 8.30, having spent a most
enjoyable day.
On the morrow we went to Buckingham Palace to witness the presenta-
tion of medals to the Colonial and Indian troops, 3,600 being distributed by
the King in person. All the representatives were presented to Their
Majesties by the Rt. Hon. Louis Haroourt, M.P., Colonial Secretary. We
were sadly disappointed at not seeing any Australian troops present, and no
doubt others remarked their absence.
Another garden party, held at Richmond Hall by Lord and Lady
Farquhar, was the order of the day for the afternoon, and we were
presented to H.R.H. Princess Beatrice. Later on we dined at the Imperial
Institute, at the invitation of Lord Strathcona, High Commissioner for
Canada, after which speeches were delivered by H.R.H. the Duke of
Connaught and Sir Wilfrid Laurier, Premier of the Dominion of Canada.
On the following day we were present at a polo match, hold at Ranelagh,
between the Lords and the Commons. The game was very interesting, and
the ponies of a splendid stamp.
Sunday we made a day of rest, and visited the Presbyterian Church in
Russell-street to hear the Rev. Mr. Robinson preach.


CHAPTER X.
Ireland and Scotland.
At 6 p.ra. on Sunday, July 2nd, we left London for Holyhead, en route
for Ireland. We arrived there at midnight, and boarded the steamer
“Ulster,” reaching Kingston at 7 o’clock the following morning. We
motored to Dublin, and visited the Bank of Ireland, old Parliament House,
Trinity College, the Museum, and Phoenix Park, taking lunch with Lord
Aberdeen at the Vice-Regal residence.
The Glasnevin Model Farm was visited in the afternoon, and we found
it was carried on similarly to the Australian experimental farms. The culti-
vation of the potato was the most notable feature, no less than 102 varieties
being experimented with in regard to their blight-resisting capabilities. A
number of different methods of spraying were in use, and all the plants
looked remarkably well.
During our stay at the capital city we were most hospitably entertained
by Judge and Mrs Fitzgerald at their house in Clyde Road, and by Doctor
and Mrs. Horne. At 9.46 a.m. we left Dublin for Belfast, a large city in
the North of Ireland, famous for its linen manufactories, passing by well-
improved comfortable-looking farms all the way.
On arrival at Belfast we were received by the Lord Mayor, and partook
of lunch with the President and members of the Belfast Chamber of Com-
merce, when a group photo was taken. Dinner at the City Hall with the
Lord Provost ended a short, but very enjoyable, stay in the Emerald Isle,
and we embarked on the s.s. Puma for Gourock, in Scotland.
A reception was given us it Glasgow on Wednesday by the Lord Pro-
vost and Corporation of the city, after which we proceeded to Auchenden,
passing through the Garelock, Holy Loch, and Loch Long. From thence we
travelled by coach to Tarbet, some two miles distant. We here went aboard
another boat, the Duchess of Hamilton, on which we met Mr. and Mrs. W.
Thomson, uncle and aunt of Mr. John Thomson, who accompanied us across
Loch Lomond, and we greatly appreciated their company. The Lord Pro-
vost of Glasgow, the Councillors, and city officers were also on board, mak-
ing about 100 in all. We caught the train at Balloch, and went to Dumbarton,
where we again took a steamer, and came up the Clyde to Glasgow. As we
journeyed up the river we were welcomed with great enthusiasm by the
working people, who waved flags and shouted greetings. We replied with
a coo-ee, but it brought forth no answering call. We arrived safely at
Glasgow, after a pleasant trip up the somewhat dirty river. In the evening
a banquet was given by the Lord Provost and Corporation of the city, and
Mr. Thomson proposed the health of His Lordship and the Councillors.
Thursday, July 6, saw our stay in Glasgow come to a close, the final
function being the presentation of the Freedom of the City to the Premiers
of the Dominions. At 4 p.m. we left for Edinburgh, where we were enter-
tained at the City Chambers by the Lord Provost.
During the afternoon we paid visits to a number of the places of in-
terest near at hand, among which were Holyrood Palace, inseparably con-
nected with Mary Queen of Scots, and the Forth Bridge, an immense struc-
ture for both railway and foot traffic, which spans the Firth of Forth. The
Chui’ches of St. Giles and the Thistle, followed by a short inspection of
Arthur’s Seat, were the next items on our programme.


The city of Leeds, in England, followed, and on our way thither we passed
Kilmarnock, the land round about which was somewhat poor, though the
scenery was most beautiful. Dumfries was also left behind, the surrounding
country being of a better description. Large herds of cattle, mostly of the
Ayrshire breed, and flocks of black-faced sheep were frequently seen. We
then travelled on to Annan, thence to Gretna Green, near the English border.
This village is well known to everybody on account of the many runaway
matches fixed up by a blacksmith, who performed the marriage ceremony
presumably for a “ consideration.”


CHAPTER XI.
England (Continued).
The first town reached on the English side of the border was Carlisle,
the capital of the County of Cumberland. This city is noted for its cotton
manufactories and a very fine Cathedral, which, of course, through lack of
time, we were unable to visit. The next stopping place was Hellifield, in
Yorkshire, in the midst of poor, rocky country. Stone walls are mostly used
for fences, and they look rather picturesque on the sides of the hills. It
reminded us somewhat of the country round Allandale, in the South-East
of South Australia.
The train pulled up at the Leeds station at 2.40, the exact scheduled
time, punctuality being one of the features of English railway travelling,
especially on the Northern systems.
Leeds is a large manufacturing town, in fact, nearly the largest in the
•ounty. It has a population of almost half a million, the majority of whom
are engaged in the woollen trade. We attended a reception given by the
Mayor and Councillors, afterwards going by tram to the City Park, where
we had afternoon tea. As usual, a banquet in the Town Hall ended up a
rather tiring day. We heard some very good speeches here. Yorkshiremen
have not only the reputation for being extremely shrewd, especially over a
horse transaction, but for being good after-dinner orators.
The next day, Satui'day, was practically entirely spent in viewing the
principal mills, &c. First of all came the Cold Stores. We saw there a
quantity of Australian beef, mutton, and rabbits, but it stxnxck us they were
rather badly handled. We were now shown over the woollen mills and
clothing factories. The vast quantity of machinery of the most intricate
description was a decided surprise, none of us ever having seen anything of
the kind before. It takes no less than forty-one different individuals to
make a suit of clothes, each pei’son having his own part to finish. A century
ago the manufacture of clothing was on a totally different scale.
The Technical College was the next sight on the list, and it is most
complete, every art and craft required in the staple trade of the city being
taught in its entirety. We saw there in a glass case samples of wool sent by
Mr. C. B. Fisher, of South Australia, as far back as 1872,
Scarborough, the queen watering place of the east coast, next claimed
our attention, and after a compai'atively short train journey we reached the
not over handsome railway station on the Lancashire and Yorkshire line.
The Mayor gave us a good reception, after which we were conveyed in
carriages to the hotel, about a mile distant. The streets were thronged with
thousands of people, who cheered us continuously. Somebody gave a loud
Australian [ooo-ee, which, of course, we answered. The inevitable banquet
followed in the evening, and Mr. Fuller made a very good speech.
The next day being the Sabbath we took a stroll along the beach,
afterwards attending Church Parade, and during the afternoon were shown
over the grounds of Londesborough Lodge.
A band concex-t was held in the evening at the Floral Hall, a vexy large
building with an immense glass roof. Flowers were blooming on all sides
and formed a most magnificent sight. Close by the hall is a cave very
similar to the cave in the centre of Mount Gambiei - , in South Australia. A
relic of the olden days was brought under our notice in the form of a


•“ Ducking Chair,” a means of quietening scolding women by ducking them
into the sea. Our forefathers’ methods of dealing with shrews was emin-
ently simple but probably effectual.
The Scarborough beach is divided into two portions by a high rocky
promontory surmounted by a somewhat ancient tower, The lower or south
beach is the busiest, all the large fishing industry being there carried on.
A large fleet of boats is employed in the herring fishery, and during the
season over a hundred girls come down from Scotland to prepare the fish
for market. At the close of the sea-harvest they return to their homes, no
doubt considerably better off than on leaving.
On our way to Port Sunlight, not far from the mouth of the River
Mersey, on the Cheshire side of the water, we had to pass through York and
Leeds. Unfortunately time would not permit our visiting the former city, for
we should have received great pleasure in viewing all its historical spots and
buildings, especially the venerable Minster, a fane with memories hallowed
by time and ecclesiastical associations.
On our journey we found the country considerably improved in charac-
ter, some drained land, although not so good, greatly resembling that around
Millicent and Tantanoola, in the South-East of South Australia. On arrival
we were met at the station by Mr. Lever, head of the firm of Lever Bros.,
Ltd., the largest soap manufacturers in England, and were driven round in
carriages, afterwards visiting the Sunlight Factory. This gigantic establish-
ment covers no less than twenty-five acres of ground, and employs 5,000
hands, including 1,600 girls. The process of soap making and its attendant
industries was shown us, and we could not but admire the dainty way in
which that extremely necessary article soap is fixed up for sale to the public.
At afternoon tea Mr. Lever made a speech, and we gave him three hearty
cheers. The Hon. Sir James MacKenzie Bowell, K.C.M.G., a Canadian
statesman, and Mr. Gray, the works manager, also said a few words.
We were now ferried across the river to Liverpool, arriving there at 6
p.m. Again an evening banquet was held, the Town Hall, a splendid build-
ing, being the scene of festivity. Speeches were delivered by Mr. Haggard,
representing Canada, Mr. Archibald, South Australia, and Mr. Kuhn, South
Africa.
In the morning we went by train to see the ship “ Admanto ” launched,
and then inspected the shipbuilding yards, lunching afterwards with the
Mayor of Birkenhead, when speeches were made by Senator Watson, from
Canada, Senator Vardon, South Australia, and Senator Botha, South Africa.
In the afternoon we steamed over to Llandudno, a fine watering place in
North Wales. Llandudno is the fashionable summer resort for Liverpudlians,
and is most picturesquely situated in a deep bay enclosed by lofty hills ter-
minating at each extremity, with high cliffs called the Little and the Great
Orme’s Head, respectively. Unfortunately both these promontories have an
evil reputation for shipwrecks, numberless boats having been dashed against
them, and as there is deep sea to the very edge, the great majority of the
crews found watery graves. On reaching the pier we found hundreds of
people awaiting us, and in the evening a concert was held in which over 100
Welsh girls and 50 men took part. A first-class band of 36 performers dis-
coursed sweet music, and greatly helped the harmony of the performance.
On Thursday, July 13, we took train to Carnarvon in order to witness
the investiture of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales. On the way we passed the
historic Conway Castle, an ancient Welsh fortress still in perfect preservation.


We arrived at 12.15, and experienced one of the hottest days of our tour.
Thousands of people thronged the streets to see the Prince of Wales and the
King and Queen. The procession was a grand sight, marred only by the
intense heat. We had great difficulty in getting back to the train, and, tired
and thirsty, were glad to visit a tea shop, where we comforted the inner man
with some cups of delicious tea.
We now left the Principality and returned to England, our next visit
being to Birmingham, the commercial capital of the Midlands. It has a
population of over half a million, and is the centre of several branches of the
hardware trade. Whilst travelling in the train, another, going in the same
direction, ran side by side with us for several miles, much to the passengers’
amusement.
Friday saw us in Coventry's ancient city, which is a municipal and
Parliamentary borough. Lady Godiva is also supposed to have made her
celebrated ride through its streets. Bicycles and motors are the principal
manufactures, and the trade employs a very large number of hands.
On the way to Coventry we passed through some of the loveliest scenery
in the land. Comfortable well-tilled farms dotted here and there helped to
form a landscape of the most charming description.
Kenilworth Castle, the scene of the amours of the Earl of Leicester and
the ill-fated Amy Robsart, was also passed en route, and brought back
memories of Sir Walter Scott’s famous novel.
A little later in the day we inspected the Daimler Motor Works, which
turned out no fewer than two thousand cars last year, of which number three
hundred and fifty were sent to Australia. We were entertained at luncheon
by the Mayor, councillors, and citizens.
In the afternoon we motored to Warwick Castle, and had afternoon tea
with the Countess of Warwick, who was very pressing that we should again
visit the Castle before leaving for Australia.
A short journey brought us to Stratford-on-Avon, the birthplace of
Shakespeare, and we saw the room in which he was born. It is supposed to
be 450 years old, and now belongs to the Corporation, but is only used as
one of the exhibition places of the town. We were shown the Memorial
Theatre erected to the memory of the immortal bard, and a number of other
things connected with the greatest of England’s poets. A most delightful
motor trip back to Birmingham now ensued.
At the banquet in the evening Messrs. Austen Chamberlain, Amery, and
Steel-Maitland, Members of the House of Commons, were present and
spoke, whilst the Dotninions were represented by the Hon. G. W. Foster,
of Canada, Senator Quinn, South Africa, Senator Story, South Australia,
and Senator Warren, of Newfoundland. All these gentlemen made speeches,
that of the Hon. Mr. Foster being especially brilliant.
Saturday, J uly 15, was characterised by a complete change of weather,
it becoming far cooler, and a nice light rain fell.
In the morning we visited the University and Technical School. In this
latter there are over 1,000 students.
The well-known brand of cocoa advertised by Messrs. Cadbury is manu-
factured here, about 0,000 hands being employed—men and women in
about equal proportions. The factory possesses beautiful grounds, including
tenuis courts, cricket fields, and general recreation grounds, the use of which
is purely for the employes, some being for the men, and others for the


women. There is also a large swimming bath one chain long hy the same
in width. As a memento of our visit we were each presented with a box of
chocolates. The day was afterwards spent driving about the city in motor
cars seeing all the objects of interest. In the evening we left for the ancient
university city of Oxford, where we were met by Mr. R. W. Livingston,
M.A., of Corpus Christi College.
The next day we were tendered a banquet, the Warden (Mr. C. Wauber)
being in the chair. The usual speeches of welcome were made, to which
Senator Long (for Australia), Senator Sinclair (Canada), and Senator Botha
(South Africa) replied.
In the morning we went for a row upon the River Cherwell, a tributary
of the Thames, with Mr. Thomson, Mr. Johnson, and Mr. R. W. Livingston.
We were entertained at Corpus Christi, and afterwards at Lincoln
College, where our attention was drawn to the room once occupied by John
Wesley when a student.
Time compelled us to curtail our stay in Oxford, so on the afternoon ef
the 17th we took train to Newport, and afterwards coached through most
beautiful scenery to Dibden, Lord Strathcona’s home, where we visited the
family church, and met a number of celebrities from London.
On Tuesday we went by train to Hampton Court, where a farewell
luncheon was tendered to the representatives. It was a most brilliant
gathering. Mr. H. H. Asquith, Prime Minister of England, proposed the
toast of “ The Oversea Dominions,” seconded by Mr. Balfour. Speeches in
reply were delivered by Senators Spence (for Australia) Byron (South
Africa), Carvell (Canada), and Warren (Newfoundland).
In the afternoon we returned to the House of Commons to say good-bye
to the Committee af the Lords and Commons, who had made our stay so
enjoyable, and in the evening bade farewell to the Secretary (Mr. Degville)
and his assistants (Captain Jones and Messrs. Arnott, Wyatt and Prosser).
Mr. Warburton proposed a vote of thanks to them, which Mr. John Living-
ston seconded.
CHAPTER XII.
Scotland (Continued).
Not yet haying viewed any of the Highland scenery, about which so
much has been said and sung by thousands of other witters, we retraced our
steps northward, leaving London for Edinburgh on July 19.
We reached the Scottish capital in the afternoon, and found the city
richly decorated in honor of the first Royal visit after the Coronation of their
Majesties. The King and Queen had been holding a review of troops in the
grounds attached to Edinburgh Castle, |ind were making Holyrood their
temporary residence. They left Edinburgh on the following morning, the
streets from the Castle to the railway station being lined with a loyal and
enthusiastic crowd, who cheered vociferously as the carriage conveying Their
Majesties, escorted by the officers of the regiment stationed there, proceeded
on its way.
After their departure we made ourselves better acquainted with the city,
and especially admired the beauty of Prince’s street. This thoroughfare is
of considerable width, and has a row of handsome shops on one side, with the


Botanical Gardens on the other. Further on than this the railway lines
appear, and the two fill in the intervening space between the street and the
hill, on the summit of which stands Edinburgh Castle. After a walk nearly
amounting to a climb we were within the walls of the Castle, and in survey-
ing the different parts our minds could not fail to recall all that the old
buildings, whose safety at one time was largely dependent on their inaccess-
ibility, meant in the history of the Scottish people. We were the more
impressed when shown the Scottish Crown jewels, which, in accordance with
the treaty of union between England and Scotland, must at all times remain
in Scotland. The jewels consist of the Crown, the foundation of which was
worn by Robert “ The Bruce.” In later years it was built on by the addi-
tion of a second band, and still later was closed by the placing of bands over
the head, thus forming the usually shaped crown worn by most Monarchs.
The other jewels consist of a Ring, Sword, Sceptre, the jewel of the Order of
the Thistle, and the Mace. These have remained undisturbed in the Castle
for many years until they were used the previous day by King George when
holding a Court of the Order of the Thistle. When returning from the Castle
we visited the famous St. Giles Cathedral, our attention being drawn to
the colored paving stones in connection depicting “The Heart of Mid-
lothian,” said to be the exact centre of the City of Edinburgh. At the east
end of the Cathedral; let into the paved court-yard, is a metal plate marked
J.K., 1762, placed over the spot where the remains of John Knox were
originally laid to rest. They were afterwards removed to Fifeshire. On the
south side of this spot is the building known as the “ Library of the Cove-
nant,” in which is deposited the document signed by the Covenanting Fathers.
On the north end of the Cathedral is built a new chapel of the Order of the
Thistle, and facing Parliament Square. Further down the street a notice-
board points out the last residence of John Knox, well preserved and now
occupied, in which post-cards and other souvenirs of the Knox time are sold.
Still further down the street, known as the Canongate, stands the Parish
Church, the first Presbyterian church built after the Reformation. Other
places of interest are Holyrood Castle, the Academy, the Botanical Gardens,
and the monuments erected to the memory of Nelson and Robert Burns, which
are splendid tributes of the nation’s appreciation of victory in war and song,
and all go to make up one of the prettiest cities in the United Kingdom.
Our main purpose after visiting Edinburgh was to tour the Highlands
of Scotland, and deciding that in no way could we be so successful as travel-
ling by motor car we accordingly started out on the morning of the 23rd to
complete the itinerary we had prepared for that purpose. The weather
being beautifully tine, the roads in splendid order, and having a powerful
car, all contributed to our enjoying the lovely country we passed
through on our way to Perth. The fertility of the land as exhibited by the
heavy crops of wheat, potatoes, &c., along with the fine herds of milking
cattle, the well-conditioned Clydesdale horses, showed us that the thorough-
ness of the Scotch farmer is still a characteristic of the race. On our way
we halted to pay a visit to the field of Bannockburn, the site of one of many
contests between the English and the Scotch prior to the Union. The spot
from which Bruce directed his forces and where his standard was raised is
marked by a cairn of stone, with suitable inscription, and when looking over
the scene of the desperate struggle, upon which wheat now waves its golden
heads and cattle roam in luxuriant pasture, we could only think that as on
this spot the sword has given way to the plough-share under peaceful con-
ditions, how much better it will be when this can be said of the whole
world. A few hundred yards from Bannockburn field brought us to the
pretty town of Stirling, overlooked by the historic castle, with its imposing


and handsome Wallace Monument standing out conspicuously. After par-
taking of lunch we resumed our journey, passing a number of small towns,
including the Bridge of Allan and Dumblane, nariiea familiar to lovers of
Scottish song, and in the afternoon reached Perth in time to dine. The town
is built on either side of the River Tay, which is spanned by two fine bridges.
After a good night’s rest we pursued our journey, passing through Bank-
fort, Dunkeld, at the northern end of which is the residence of the Duke of
Athol. One of the sights on the estate is a grove of birch trees, about ICHf
feet high, whose height and surface were so uniform as to resemble a
well-trimmed hedge.
Passing through Blairgowrie, we commenced to get into the rising
country, having to negotiate the tortuous cuttings with skill until we reached
the favorite pleasure resort of the Spittal of Glenshee, where we took lunch,
the bracing air of the morning providing a good appetite. Another start
being made, we, in climbing up the steep gradients which follow the course
of the many streams, had an opportunity of admiring the lovely hill scenery
as we sped along through the pretty town of Braemar and on to Balmoral,
which, owing to its natural beauty, was one of the favorite homes of the late
Queen Victoria. At the time of our visit the Castle was being prepared for
the arrival of our present King and Queen.
Following the course of the River Dee, and passing through the towns
of Ballatter and Kincardine; through moor country, we reached Culter, one
of the hiding places of the famous thief Rob Roy, the spot being marked by
a figure representing that personage in full highland dress. The rest of the way
was closely settled with clean comfortable looking farms and villages, until
we reached the city of Aberdeen, where we had decided to spend the night;
but, taking advantage of the long twilight, we took a car to the beach, where
great crowds of people were enjoying the cool air, others surf bathing, while
every person of the well-dressed orderly crowd seemed to enjoy the outing.
Aberdeen is the third city in Scotland, its area is 6,335 acres, with a circum-
ference of about 7£ miles, and it has a population of about 170,000. The
principal schools of learning are King’s College, founded in 1494, and Marshal
College, founded in 1593. The city is well provided with street cars and
other modern conveniences.
The following morning, July 34, being clear and bright, offered iri'esist-
able inducements to tourists, and we again started on our journey.
The towns of Kintore, Blacktown, Elphinstone, Inverarie, and Auchter-
even are situated in the midst of some very rich agricultural land, and the
appearance of the surrounding crops gave promise of a bountiful harvest..
Further on we again came to more mountainous country with lovely
scenery, the sides of the hills being covered with heather in full bloom, its
beautiful bright color glinting in the sunlight. Huntley, Keith, Lochaber,
Elgin, Torres, and Nairn were passed in the order named, all being thriving
centres of agricultural activity. We were not long in reaching the splendid
and important town of Inverness with its 160,000 inhabitants. This is the
capital and centre of the Highlands, where the type of people, their
physique, manner, tongue, and names forcibly impressed upon us what kind
of man the Highlander of Scotland is and has always been. Crossing the
Forth of Murray on to Black Island we reached Dingwall, after passing
through another twenty miles of splendid agricultural country. We put up
at the Royal Hotel, and found in host Shaw a genial warm-hearted Scotchman,
who assisted so materially in seeing the most interesting parts of the town
and district. Among these we were shown the monument erected to the


memory of Sir Hector MacDonald, a native of Dingwall. It stands on the
top of a hill at the back of the town, and is in the shape of a square tower,
100 feet high, from the top of which a splendid view of the surrounding
country, including the Forth of Cromarty, is obtained. Pursuing our
journey north, we left Dingwall on Tuesday morning, 25th, passing through
the town of Strathpeffer, noted for its mineral waters, and before going far
were soon able to appreciate the beauties of Highland scenery, in its moun-
tain streams racing down to join the many lochs, and its rugged hills,
covered with rich Rooming heather. Our road led us past Loch Maree,
Black Water River, Strathbrand, Loch Colin, and Loch Ross, on to Achen-
sheen, the terminus of the Highland railway, the country being too precipitous
for further railway traction. After crossing the Kinlochie River, we passed
the falls of Kerry, and reached the seaport town of Gairloch, built on a
beautiful bay looking out towards the Isle of Skye and the Islands of Lewis
and Harris. After lunch we commenced our return, via Polu Bay, where we
had an opportunity of a chat with some typical Highland crofters, their
quaint little thatched roofed cottages having chimneys emitting wreaths of
curling white smoke from peat fires in the centre of the building. We next
reached Aid-bay, travelling along the edge of the cliff, and had a splendid
view of the rugged coast line with its many small islands, when, after de-
scending a very steep incline, we reached Dundonald. On the sloping hill-
side we had a view of a large flock of red deer, who, with a few black-faced
sheep, were the sole occupants of the place. Our next halt was made to
enable us to walk a short distance for a closer view of the waterfall of Brae-
rnore, which, owing to recent rains, showed a fine volume of water. Walking
on we got to our original track at Garve, and reached Dingwall in the even-
ing, quite convinced that all we had previously heard of the beauties of
Highland scenery was perfectly correct. The evening being fine, we
had the advantage of experiencing a north country twilight, and were
astonished to find people able to read distinctly outside until after 10 p.m.
An Agricultural Show being held at Inverness we decided to attend and
see for ourselves the type of stock exhibited, recognising that at Inverness we
were sure to find the best that breeders had. We were not disappointed,
as we saw fine specimens of Clydesdales, hackneys, and Highland ponies,
the latter being a thick-set, muscular, and active horse, one being
exhibited by His Majesty. This class of horse appealed to our Mr. D.
Livingston as suitable to produce a good type of stock horse, and he unsuc-
cessfully offered 200 guineas for a beautifully shaped grey stallion. The
Ayrshire cattle were well represented, but the Shorthorns were not up to
the quality we had previously seen at Norwich. A special feature was the
exhibit of Highland cattle, which are of a small type, weighing about 600
lbs., with long fine hair and mane, yellow-brindle in color, and long horns.
They are not milkers, but make splendid beef, and are particularly suitable
for the hard climate and conditions of the north country.
We were glad to notice the attractive display made by the Common-
wealth of Australia, also the States of Queensland and West Australia in an
exhibit of their products, which attracted considerable attention. En-
quiries were made by persons, intending emigrants, to whom literature
was freely distributed.
The national music of the country was supplied by 15 pipers dressed in
the MacKenzie tartan, and their splendid musical contributions brought
crowds of people around. Full Highland costume was much worn by those
attending the Show, while others were satisfied to don Tam-o-Shan ter caps


and tartan hose, and in no place did we see people of finer physique and
proportions.
Leaving Inverness in the afternoon and following the course of the
Caledonian Canal we wended our way to Fort William, and had not pro-
ceeded far before we reached Loch Ness. Following a tortuous mountain
cutting we went skimming along the margin of the lake, and soon arrived at
Drumnadrochit, where we halted for a while to learn something of the
features of the locality.
Proceeding on our way we passed the McDonnell of Invergarry monu-
ment, and after crossing the Spean Bridge were soon at Fort Augusta.
At one of the many homesteads we passed on the way we found several men
shearing sheep, and our natural Australian interest in wool prompted us to
stop and watch the process. Judge of our surprise when we saw the method
adopted. They had the sheep laid on its back on a table, its legs tied
together. A boy held its head whilst a man out the wool off with a pair of
hand shears. Our Mr. John Livingston tried to explain how it was done
with us, but his knowledge of Gaelic was not sufficient. To justify his
attempted criticism ho caught hold of a sheep, set it up, and in
a very few minutes had his sheep shorn in good Australian style,
leaving his confreres discussing his work in their native tongue.
We were now nearing Fort William, and were soon at that cheerful
town, having thus travelled 66 miles from Inverness. After partaking
of a well prepared dinner,, we walked out to make the acquaintance
of some of the residents. Mr. Thomson was especially interested
in this part, it being the birthplace of his mother, who, with her
parents, left for Australia when she was 6 years of age. Mr. Thomson having
decided to continue his enquiries, the Messrs. Livingston proceeded to Oban,
while Mr. Thomson drove to Banevie, on the east side of the Fort, crossing
the River Lochie by means of a suspension bridge, and through the district
of Lochaber until he reached the town of Corpach, where, through the
courtesy of the Rev. Alex. Marshall, N.F. Manse, Kilmallie, he was intro-
duced to two old Scotchmen, Mr. Donald McMaster aud Mr. John Cameron,
who were able to give the history of the old residents. Mr. Cameron having
a very good memory accompanied Mr Thomson and Mr. McColl, pointing out
the spot of the old home, which stood on a pretty slope facing Loch Lochey
and Loch Lennie, with the rugged peake of Ben Nevis on the other side of
the Loch. By the courtesy of the Rev. Kennedy Mr. Thomson was able to
visit the old family church. Taking steamer in the afternoon, Mr. John
Livingston was found waiting at Oban, where he had also been tracing his
ancestry, his chief purpose being to visit Dunstaffnage Cattle, the ancient
home of the Livingston clan.
Our journey from Oban to Glasgow was made by train, Mr. D. Living-
ston having returned by car to Edinburgh, through the beautiful hills and
barns, at times following the margins of the Lochs on the one side, with the
Trossachs on the other. This being one of the famous trips of Scotland has
been so often described, that we shall only say “ the half has not been told, ”
nor can it be appreciated without personal inspection. Frem Glasgow
several places were visited, including Rothsay bay, Greenock, and Ruther-
glen, while we also took the opportunity of becoming better acquainted with
the city, seeing the Stock Exchange, the large warehouse of Arthur & Co.,
and other centres of industry. When visiting the large suburb of Bridgeton
Mr. Thomson’s uncle pointed out the former residence of his father, and they
visited the church where his grandfather had been an active worker, the
mission school attached, which was his special care, and afterwards the old


churchyard where his remains were laid to rest. Prom here we travelled to
the town of Ayr, the birthplace of Robbie Burns, the Scottish national poet.
We saw the old home and the museum containing a quantity of relics con-
nected with the bard, among them was his Bible which had been purchased
for £1,700. We also visited the Brig o’ Boon and other places rendered
immortal by his pen.
Having now completed our tour of Scotland, we left for London, ex-
periencing one of the hottest days we had met during our journey. The
country looked very brown and dry, the people complaining that they had
been a whole six weeks without any rain. In conclusion, we cannot too
strongly recommend any future traveller to enlist the services of a good motor
car and a careful chauffeur.
CHAPTER XIII.
England (Continued).
Not having previously visited the south and west coasts, we decided, on
July 31, to journey to Plymouth, and, after passing through the large towns
of Reading, Taunton, and Exeter, soon reached our destination, a distance
of 260 miles from London. The latter part of the trip was through the
County of Devon, one ot the most fertile districts of England, dairying and
agriculture being the staple industries. Here is the home of the celebrated
Devon cattle, and some very fine specimens were to be seen. We first
visited Plymouth Hoe, overlooking the bay, where a number of ships were
lying at anchor. On the top of the headland is a monument erected to the
memory of Admiral Drake, who, it is said, was playing bowls on the spot
when the Spanish Armada was sighted. After finishing his game the Ad-
miral gave his attention to the intruders, with the well-known results.
Alongside stands the first Eddystone lighthouse, which has been removed to
its present position, and can be inspected on payment of Id. When return-
ing we had an opportunity of further seeing others of the many canals which
form a network of the whole country, and, although constructed for traffic
prior to the time of railways, are still largely used, goods being conveyed on
barges pulled by a horse walking along the bank. Many of the younger
generation were noticed bathing in the channel. Our return to London in
the afternoon completed a day’s travelling of 564 miles. Having but a few
days left prior to our leaving the metropolis for Canada, we spent the balance
•of our time in the city inspecting, in the company of Captain Collins of the
High Commissioner’s office, a number of sites placed under offer for the
offices of the Commonwealth of Australia. Not having previously been in
the House of Lords while the House was sitting, we spent a portion of the
afternoon in the historic chamber, and had the pleasure of listening to an
address from Lord Beauchamp, ex-Govemor of N.S.W.
Having made an appointment with the New Zealand Loan and Mercan-
tile Co. we had the opportunity of inspecting shipments of Australian frozen
beef, mutton, and butter, and comparing them with those of the Argen-
tine and New Zealand. The samples shown of mutton were not all that
could be desired. The sheep had evidently not been in the pink of condi-
tion, and were butchered somewhat roughly, while the general appearance
and get-up was not equal to the product of New Zealand, although the


sample was well frozen and thoroughly wholesome. The butter, which had
come from a number of factories, had arrived in good condition, and was
generally of good quality, superior to that from Siberia, which was put up
in casks. We were informed that in the different towns of England tastes
varied in regard to the color of butter, some places requiring a darker tint
than others, and that most people did not ask for a dry batter. We were
also assured that in no way does the Government grade stamp assist in
securing a higher price for our product. We now commenced to say good-
bye to our London friends, taking the opportunity to express our appreciation
of their many kindnesses which had given us the opportunity of seeing and
becoming acquainted with so much that was interesting and instructive, not
only in London, but throughout the United Kingdom, and which enabled
us to satisfy ourselves that the supremacy of the British nation as seen from
the centre of the Empire is well assured, and that in her people, her indus-
tries, her institutions, and general development of trade she shows no sign
of decadence. Everywhere we found a general disposition to bring all parts
of the Empire together for the benefit and advancement of the whole, and
although during the last Sunday of our stay, after attending the Presbyterian
Church in Regent’s Square, we saw evidence of industrial trouble by a large
but orderly procession of dock strikers, we have every confidence that the
people who have surmounted so many other difficulties will also be able to
settle their present worries so as to benefit all concerned. We intended
to have once more travelled to Ireland, but owing to the strike then pre-
vailing we had to take the earliest opportunity of securing passages to
Canada, fearing a general suspension of travelling facilities.
While the parliamentary members of the party were engaged during the
last part of their stay in England with public matters, Mr. D. Livingston
decided to revisit Ireland, his special reason for doing so being that he was
anxious to visit Killarney. Crossing the Irish Channel from Holyhead he
reached Rosslare, and thence, via Waterford, arrived at his destination. A
real Irish jaunting car brought him to the Gorge, where exhibitions were
given of the powerful echoes by means of guns, coo-ee’s, &c. At the
Cottage of the Colleen Bawn ponies were provided in order to ride through
the Gorge over the mountain till the lakes were reached. After a row of
some eighteen miles he arrived at the other side, and had a splendid oppor-
tunity of enjoying the lovely scenery sung of by every Irish poet known to
history.' On top of one of the mountains is a small lake or natural reservoir
always full, suggesting the crater of an extinct volcano, the town below
obtaining its water supply from this source. Leaving Killarney by rail Mr.
Livingston travelled homewards via Dublin, and once again the party
became complete.
We left London in August, and trained to Avonmouth, the port of
Bristol, where we were to join the R.M.S. Royal George en route for
Canada. The train is one of the fastest in the British Isles, 1231 miles be-
ing covered in 125 minutes. The heat was most oppressive, 96° in the
shade, and far more noticeable than 110° in Australia ; but as it seemed a
farewell effort we didn’t complain.


CHAPTER XIV
America.
After going on board our ship we had no misgivings as to her capability
for making us comfortable. She is of 12,000 tons burden, and only recently
built. Accommodation is provided for'342 first class, 256 second class and 572
third class passengers, together with 256 officers and crew, a total equalling
the population of a fair sized country town. Sailing at 7.30 p.m. we
watched the disappearing lights of Britain, and at 3 p.m. on the following
day we lost sight of the Skilliags, the extreme south-western point of
Ireland. The weather kept fine, and as we had an extremely agreeable
party of passengers we soon felt at home, and settled down with little or
no trouble. Sunday, however, broke very foggy, and the syren was kept
sounding nearly all day, but as the sun came out the mists were soon dis-
pelled, and a lovely morning was the result. During the afternoon we
noticed a whale, and a little later on several immense icebergs, the latter
presenting a most charming picture when the sun’s rays glinted on their
white sides.
On Monday morning we were very glad to again sight land, the coast
of Newfoundland appearing on our south side and Belle Isle on the north,
we having now entered the Gulf of St. Lawrence. Continuing on our course
we passed several more icebergs, one, exceptionally fine, resembling a large
white castle, its peaks appearing like chimney stacks. We completed 415
miles that day, the weather continuing perfect.
We steamed up the Gulf of St. Lawrence the whole of Tuesday, and
after passing a number of small islands, indicating that we were approaching
more confined waters, we were boarded by the pilot, who looked after us for
the next 52 miles, and dropped anchor in the bay of Quebec.
On the following morning the mails were landed and conveyed to Mon-
treal, but we unfortunately had to await the arrival of the doctor from
ashore, and were compelled to undergo a medical examination before being
allowed to enter into the Dominion of Canada. We had no sickness on
board, so were granted our clearance, and soon moved alongside the wharf
at Quebec. This city is one of the oldest in Canada, being the principal
town in the original French settlement, the present inhabitants being
nearly all of French descent.
The banks of the River St. Lawrence are closely settled with agricul-
turists, who occupy the land on the old French system. The original es-
tates were formerly conveyed to the settlers, who, as their families grew up,
were required to subdivide the land, the consequence being that at the present
time only small holdings exist. No bridge spans the river until Montreal is
reached, some 173 miles distant, though several attempts have been made to
erect one a few miles above the city, but without success.
As is usual with such rivers the land nearest the ocean is not of a very
rich quality, and in many cases low and swampy ; but higher up, extending
from what is known as the Three Rivers Junction, fine country with rich
pasturage is met with. We did not reach Montreal till the evening, too late
for the Customs officer to pass our cargo and other belongings, so anchored
in mid-stream for the night. However, at half-past seven the next morning
we moved up to the wharf and went ashore.


After breakfast we took a stroll around, and were not long in finding
out that we had arrived at a very busy commercial centre. The railway
station was an immense hive of activity, and the river presented a forest of
masts belonging to ships of all descriptions hailing from almost every port on
the globe.
We desired to visit as many places in Canada and the United States as
our time would permit, so called at the offices of the Canadian Pacific
Railway Company, where we met Mr. Bosworth, the Acting General
Manager, Mr. Usher, Secretary, and Mr. Stitt, Manager of the Passenger
Department. These gentlemen very kindly prepared for us a full itinerary
of the principal places of interest worth visiting, and we found it invaluable
during our tour.
On the 18th we left for Ottawa, arriving there about mid-day. This
city is the seat of government of the Canadian Federal Parliament, and as,
whilst in England, we had been invited to visit the two Chambers, we made
it our business to call at the earliest opportunity. The buildings are of a
very substantial character, and beautifully situated in lovely grounds. The
excellent internal arrangements for the convenience of members include a
fine library, splendidly arranged and catalogued, and thoroughly up-to-date.
Although it entailed a stiff climb, we reached the top of the tower, whence
we had a splendid view of the city and the river, down which immense rafts
of logs floated to the numerous saw mills situated on its banks. In company
with Mr. Ballard, we had the pleasure of going over Messrs. Booth & Co.’s
mills, one of the chief products of which is pulp used in the manufacture of
cardboard and paper, and were greatly interested in following the various
processes through which the raw material goes previous to developing into
the finished article.
After touring other parts of the city, and spending a pleasant evening
with Mr. and Mrs. Ballard, we boarded the train at 11.20 p.m., en route for
Toronto, where we arrived, after a journey of 255 miles, at 7.35 next
morning. Securing a motor vehicle, we went round the city, visiting,
among other places, the State Parliament House and the Hospital (not yet
completed) in which has been introduced the system of providing a ward
for each class of disease. All private residences are built in their own
gi’ounds, standing back from the street, with garden in front, and have no
fences enclosing the grounds, all being clear and open. A run of about four
miles brought us down to the pretty watering-place of Scarborough, where
hundreds of people were surf-bathing, boating, and patronising the many
places of amusement provided on the shores of Lake Ontario.
Our itinerary having fixed our departure from Toronto at 7.50 a.m. on
the 20th, we set out for Niagara, in order to see the marvellous waterfall we
had heard so much about. The town is built on either side of the river, and
consequently shared between Canada and the United States, and after
crossing one of the stupendous bridges, we found ourselves in the latter
country, and were mulcted in the usual poll tax of four dollars per head
levied on all visitors to the territory. After lunch we drove over to Goat
Island, which divides the river into two streams, the northern channel
following the Canadian, and the southern the U.S.A. side. The latter is-
about 400 yards wide, and before reaching the Palls is divided further into
two smaller rivulets, which, on arriving at the edge of the rock, drop pre-
cipitously 159 feet. The Canadian stream has much the greater volume of
water, which, before reaching the Falls proper, tumbles over what are
known as the Horseshoe Falls, owing to their shape. This concentrates the


water, and the whole seems to precipitate itself into an immense seething
caldron, afterwards flowing on to the main falls, which have the same depth
as the first mentioned, with a width of 2,500 feet.
Any attempt to describe the grandeur of this marvellous spectacle must
be hopeless without repeating what has been said hundreds of times by those
who have seen its marvels, and the immensity of the volume of water flowing
over the rocky edge, together with the spectacular effects of the clouds of
mist which rise from below, cannot be painted in words.
The Niagara falls, stupendous as they are, have been harnessed up for
the service of man, and all the mighty natural force running to waste has, by
the working of the human brain, been compelled to deliver up its power to
machinery which can be employed to crack a nut or forge an armour plate.
At the present moment, however, it is principally used in generating elec-
tricity. About one mile below the falls the river is confined between pre-
cipitous hills, thus narrowing its course considerably, with the result that
the rate of water-flow has been increased to 27 miles per hour ; hence it is
named The Rapids. To enable sight-seers to appreciate this part of the
scenery an elevator has been built which carries passengers down to the
water’s edge. It was on a rope stretched across from bank to bank at this
place that Blondin performed his feat of wheeling a barrow across.
Having exhausted the time at our disposal, we left this most interesting
place, and joined the train for Buffalo, where, after a journey of 23 miles
through good agricultural country, we were delighted to find so beautiful a
city, with its long straight streets and avenues planted with trees, which
gave a splendid effect, and added largely to the beauty of the place. The
excellent electric tram service enabled us to see a good deal of the city dur-
ing our short visit, and after having dined at the Arlington Hotel, we left
at 8.40 pan. for New York. On arriving at that city we put up at the
Grand Union Hotel, and as we had had a very fatiguing journey in the train
we decided to retire early, and defer our exploring New York’s vast area
until the morrow.
In point of population New York is surpassed only by London,
and very probably will outstrip the older metropolis in a few
decades. Naturally the city proper is small compared with Greater
New York, or as the inhabitants love to style it, “ New York City,” and
the same comparison may be made with equal justice about the English
capital, the city itself being only one mile square, but the suburbs and
municipalities attached make a gigantic whole which it will take New York
a considerable time to beat. There is, however, one feature to be found
in the American metropolis peculiar to itself, and that is its perfect system
of locomotion for tourists, called “ Seeing New York.” This is an amalga-
mation of several transportation companies, and owns an immense number
of coaches, automobiles, motor cars, and steam yachts, by means of which
the stranger can be taken to practically every place of interest desired.
Next morning an automobile carried us around to see the sights, and
they were not few nor tar between. One of the most noticeable features of
the place is the immense number of extremely high buildings, the most
lofty having no less than 52 storeys above ground and 7 beneath. The
total height above ground-level is 612 feet. The reason for building
these sky-scrapers is the high value of ground space, New York
itself being built upon such a small island that the room
necessary for business premises has to be obtained somehow,
so what they lack in surface area they have made up vertically.


Of course, a most elaborate system of elevation obtains in all these, build-
ings, there being express lifts from bottom to top, lifts stopping at all floors,
semi-express lifts for half way, and lifts devoted solely to goods traffic ; in
fact, a regular railway system, running up and down, instead of horizontally.
The office population of the building previously mentioned is a little over
5,000 souls. We were shown the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, which
is still in the course of erection. It has taken 20 years to bring it to its
present stage, and 25 more must elapse before its completion, when it will
be a marvel of modern ecclesiastical architecture. Seating accommodation
for 17,000 worshippers will be provided, and an organ larger even than that
in the Sydney Town Hall is contemplated. Having already used four
different means of transport, viz., automobile, electric car, overhead railway,
and underground railway, we decided to take a trip round New York by
boat. As previously stated, New York is built on an island named Man-
hattan, a long narrow strip of land at the mouth of the Hudson River. No
fewer than eighteen bridges connect Manhattan with the mainland, varying
in length as well as breadth, the longest, the famous Brooklyn suspension
bridge extending over a mile and a quarter. In the afternoon we walked
across the bridge, and had a ride in an electric car all round the city of
Brooklyn. Although on the mainland, it with ninety-one other cities and
towns are clustered around the city of New York proper and they constitute the
real metropolis. Our stay in New York was so short that had it not been
for the excellent means of locomotion we should not have seen half we did,
however, we hope our next visit will be more prolonged.
The following day we left the big city, and set out for Philadelphia,
some 90 miles distant. We started from the Pennsylvania railway station,
not only the first station in New York, but one of the finest in the world.
Our journey commenced by travelling through a tunnel under the Hudson
River so as to get on the mainland, and after that the country traversed
cannot be regarded as of first-class character for any agricultural operations,
the generality being somewhat similar to what is found round the district
of Gawler, in South Australia, and what we should call fair to medium
country.
After a good night’s rest we made a tour of the city in an automobile,
and had the principal buildings of interest pointed out to us. Philadelphia
is inseparably connected with American history, because here the memorable
Declaration of Independence was signed on July 4, 1776. Independence
Hall is a fine old-fashioned two-storeyed building situated in Church-street,
with a fine clock tower at the rear. The Masonic Temple, one of the finest
in America, like the City Hall, is of a very florid order of architecture.
Philadelphian streets are long and wide, kept beautifully clean, and form an
object lesson which some of the other cities would do well to imitate.
Fairmount Park is a large public garden on the side of the river, and
but a short distance from the city. It contains very fine examples of orna-
mental gardening, which in the season make a feast of floral beauty. A
shallow, swift-running and rocky creek, with the beautiful Indian name of
Wissahickon runs through the park, the banks being lined with acacia and
other tall shrubs. Some fine statuary is to be noticed round the big foun-
tain, but the relic prized most of all is the original residence of William
Penn, the founder of the State of Pennsylvania. It is situated at the Girard
Avenue entrance to West Fairmount Park, and is a splendid specimen of
the domestic architecture of a century and a half ago.
Leaving Philadelphia on Wednesday, August 23rd, for Washington, we
had a journey of 135 miles before us, travelling towards the south, and after


crossing the Susquehanna River by the suspension railway bridge, we en-
tered the State of Maryland, one of the original thirteen states of the Union.
The country is somewhat similar to that in the Adelaide district of South
Australia, the principal crop being maize. Baltimore, the capital, at which
we stopped for a short time, is a big seaport on Chesapeake Bay. with a
large export trade in grain, etc. We had no time to explore the city, but
noticed that all the roofs of the buildings were very flat. The country
still continued decidedly sandy and the soil poor ; still the farmers manage
to grow a fair quantity of tomatoes, but maize is still the staple product.
Resuming our journey, we reached Washington, the capital city of the
States, at 6.30 p.m. The site for the city was chosen by George Washing-
ton, who fully appreciated its natural advantages, the land not being of any
great agricultural value, and having a splendid water supply from the River
Potomac close handy. When the locality was finally decided upon each
owner surrendered his real estate to the Government with no restriction, ex-
cept that of retaining every alternate block for himself. Thus the Federal
Capital came to the United States as substantially a free conveyance of half the
fee-simple of the soil in consideration of the enhanced value expected from the
other half. Washington’s idea was to call the place Federal City, but his
friends decided that it should be named after him. We trust this will not
prove a precedent for our own Federal capital. Yass-Canberra, ugly though
it sounds, is infinitely to be preferred to Fisherton or O’Malleyville. We
stayed at the National Hotel, and had an excellent view of a great fire which
was raging in the city—an awful though a beautiful sight.
In the morning we made a tour of the city, and could not sufficiently
admire its great public buildings, superb hotels, luxurious clnbs, and private
residences. We called at the White House, the official quarters of all the
Presidents of the United States of America, and the Bank of Issue, the
latter appearing to be a large substantial block. Although we saw the
Washington Monument, we were unable to ascend it, time not permitting.
We next visited the National Capitol. This building contains both Parlia-
mentary Chambers, and is looked on as one of the architectural wonders of
the world. Some of the principal Courts are located in the building, the most
magnificent chamber being assigned to the Supreme Court, the marble columns
giving it a most majestic appearance. Next to the Capitol the Library of
Congress is the finest edifice in the city. Its internal decorations are on the
most lavish scale, and the most artistic in the whole of America, the grand
staircase being a marvel of beauty, which no pen can describe.
Washington does not confine itself, however, to the beautiful solely, the
Government printing office, a rectangular building seven storeys high,
having a most prosaic and business-like appearance. The time we had
allowed ourselves for this glorious city was unfortunately cut short all too
soon, Chicago being next on our list.
We noticed whilst passing through the State of Ohio that the quality of
the land had distinctly improved, well-kept farms and fine herds of cattle
being continually in evidence. We were delayed at Pittsburg through the
engine breaking down, and had to stay there a couple of hours, but that was
not an unmixed misfortune, because it gave us an opportunity to make a
cursory exploration of the city, another train carrying us on to Chicago.
The country passed through was for some distance drained land,
and forcibly reminded us of the reclaimed swamps round Millioent and
Tantanoola in South Australia, and we eventually arrived at Chicago, the
phoenix of cities.


Forty years ago all the buildings, with the exception of some of the
business premises in the heart of the city, were. entirely constructed of
wood, and on the evening of October Bth, 1871, a lire broke out. For a
long time prior to this evening a hot wind from the south west had been
blowing, rendering everything as dry as tinder, and it was upon a magg of
sun and wind-dried wooden structures that the fire began its work. It is
supposed to have originated in a cow-barn through the upsetting of a kero-
sene lamp. The fire kept on burning steadily towards the north, and didn’t
stop till it had reached the limits of the city, when there was absolutely no-
thing left to burn. Nearly 20,000 buildings were consumed, 100,000 people
rendered homeless, and, worst of all, over 200 human beings fell a sacrifice
to the devouring element. The grand total of damage done was estimated
at forty million pounds sterling.
It was believed by many that the awful conflagration had permanently
blotted out Chicago from the list of great American cities, but the undaunted
people at once set to work to rebuild, and within a year after the fire, infinitely
more substantial and, in many cases, palatial buildings rose up on the ashes of
the dead past, and to-day Chicago can proudly boast of being the second
city in the Union, with a population of considerably over two million souls.
Whilst in Europe we had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of
Dr. and Mrs. Brickenoff, and we were fortunate in again meeting them here.
They went out of their way to show us all the lions of the city, and the re-
sult was that very little of interest to strangers was omitted. The great
boulevard was, of course, one of the first to claim our attention. It is a fine
asphalt track, kept exclusively for motor traffic, and travelling on it is a
perfect pleasure instead of the reverse. One of the most novel and, at the
same time, most desirable methods for meeting the needs of the general
public for drinking water was greatly in evidence. Instead of having, as we
in Australia do, fountains provided with metal cups for the indiscriminate
use of clean and unclean patrons, the drinking apparatus in Chicago consists
of a pipe fixed in a vertical position, with the overflowing water forced up
some two or three inches above the orifice, so that no person’s lips can by any
chance come into contact with the fixture, all water unoonsumed running
away to waste by an underground channel.
Among the “ lungs ” of Chicago three large open green spaces take the
pride of place. These are Lincoln, Garfield, and Humble Parks. We drove
through them all, and admired the wisdom of the civic authorities in provid-
ing such fine means of recreation and enjoyment for the immense crowd of
workers who make up the vast majority of Chicago’s inhabitants, men,
women, and children, whose toil is the life-blood of the city. We finished
up a most enjoyable day by dining with Dr. Brickenoff at his private house,
after having been shown over the public hospital, of which he has charge.
Mr. W. Thomson, of Glasgow, had very kindly given us letters of intro-
duction to Mr. and Mrs. Laurie, of Jackson Park, and they did all in their
power to render our stay agreeable. Miss Laurie one morning took us to
Lake Michigan South, where the World’s Pair was being held. This, some-
thing after the style of our own exhibitions, was well patronised, and we
were told that the show was crowded both day and night. The Field
Museum was also visited, together with a number of other places of special
interest. As all the world knows, Chicago is the centre of the meat-packing
industry, and as this is a business of great interest to Australians we paid a
visit to the factory of Messrs. Armour and Sons. This is the largest in the
trade, and employs over 1,000 clerks and 6,000 other hands in the various
departments.


The number of animals slaughtered is gigantic ; 150,000 pigs,
3,500 cattle, and 10,000 sheep can he dealt with every day, and
so complete is the system that practically not an atom of the carcase
goes to waste. Everything is used up economically, and what may be called
the by-products of the business sell for nearly as much as the meat itself.
Over 000 tons of coal are burnt daily to keep the machinery in motion, the
latter being in evidence all over the huge buildings. The quantity of ice
turned out every day is enormous, over 11,000 tons being manufactured. In
fact, everything required in the factory is made on the premises.
The trade done by this one firm in packed goods is distributed all over
the world, and we saw oases labelled for cities and towns we had never even
heard of. The west coast of South America is supplied entirely by Armour
and Sons, and the quantity of meat in the tinned form consumed in that
district is almost incredible.
To a stockman the markets were a source of great interest. They are
the most perfectly equipped in the world, conveniences for feeding and
watering the stock being placed in every yard. To give an idea of the vast
scale on which the sales are conducted, we were informed that at one market
the day’s sales totalled 80,000 pigs, 60,000 cattle, and 70,000 sheep. Markets
are held every day in the week except Saturday and Sunday, and at one
which we attended the yardings were 24,000 cattle, 30,000 pigs, and 26,000
sheep. The rule of the market is that all stock shall be sold at per lb. live
weight. Cattle brought 7i dollars per 100 lbs., and sheep 7 cents per lb.
The weighing of the animals takes place after the sale on specially constructed
weigh-bridges, under the control of Government officials. As many as fifty
cattle or two hundred and fifty sheep can be placed upon the scales at one
time.
Chicago possesses one of the finest water supply systems in the world.
Situated as the city is, on the shores of Lake Michigan, water, of course, is
to be had in plenty, but to ensure its purity the pumping station is
erected five miles out, where the water is 30ft. deep, thus avoiding any con-
tamination by proximity to the land.
Our stay in the United States was now gradually drawing to a close,
and we left Chicago for Minneapolis, passing en route through some very
good country, with most beautiful scenery.
Minneapolis, a fine city of over three hundred thousand inhabitants, is
in the centre of an immense wheat growing district. Situated on the other
side of the Mississippi River is the Pillsbury Flour Mill, the largest factory
devoted to that industry in the whole world. Sixteen thousand bags of fiour
are manufactured daily, the wheat used arriving in railway trucks, from
which it is unloaded mechanically, and taken thence by an elevator 208 feet
in height, and deposited in huge bins, all connected with the milling
machinery, so that from the time of loading the grain into the truck at the
receiving stations to its issue to the public in the form of flour, it is not once
touched by hand. This concluded our visit to the land of the Stars and
Stripes, and we made our way across the border into Canada, and were once
more under the shadow of the Union Jack.
The wheat-growing areas of Western Canada have been so much written
and spoken about, that practically everybody interested in the subject must
have all the details at his fingers’ ends, so little description is necessary.
On our way to Dominion City we passed through some magnificent black
soil plains, apparently of a most fertile nature, and we were informed that
for another thousand miles east the entire country was of a similar descrip-


tion. The possibilities of the grain growing industry are simply illimitable,
and if every acre suitable for the culture of wheat were in use, Canada could
supply that cereal in sufficient quantity to fill the needs of the entire civilised
world.
Canada’s prime want is the same as Australia’s, population ; and she is
devoting an untold amount of capital and energy in bringing out settlers as
fast as she can to till her unoccupied lands. She recognises that every addi-
tional inhabitant is an asset, whether he has money or not, so long as he has
health and strength, and is willing to put his shoulder to the wheel. The
result is that the Dominion’s population is increasing by leaps and bounds,
and districts which but a very few short years ago were howling wildernesses
untouched by the hand of man, now contain the homes of industrious
settlers, whose fields of smiling corn testify to the energy and spirit of in-
domitable pluck which characterises these colonists of a cold and hard land.
We now travelled due east, passing over great rolling prairies, the ex-
tent of which, in many cases, is over a hundred thousand square miles. The
fine black soil still continued on every side, and crops of wheat, cut and
ready for carting, met the eye wherever one chose to gaze. As was stated
before, Canada is destined to become the granary of the world.
Whilst travelling the 90 miles to Sydney, our next stopping place, we
ran through sand-hills for about six miles, after which we came on to good
land again. The country generally is undulating as far as Brandon, a fair-
sized town, well built, and decidedly attractive.
Only light, scrubby timber is to be found, and easily cleared off, the
majority of the trees being similar to our familiar tea-tree. The district is
purely an agricultural one, no sheep being kept, only a few cattle, and these
have to be stall-fed during the winter months, when, as a rule, the cold is
decidedly severe.
The monotony of the rather slow travelling was unbroken at nightfall,
so we turned into our berths, and slept the sleep of the just till daylight on
the last day of August, when we arrived at a small town named Chaplin.
The soil around here is sandy, but showing a fair growth of good grass.
We in Australia would class it as “light ” land. One of the features of the
country was the tine farmers’ homesteads, everything bearing evidence of
carefulness and thi ift of no mean order. It seemed a trifle peculiar to ob-
serve a pair of bullocks harnessed to a wagonette, with two blacks walking
behind, presumably as escort. Wo here put back our watches one hour to
correspond with the local time. In order to compensate for the difference in
solar time between the Pacific and Atlantic coasts, Canada has been divided
into five zones or sections, the clock time of each differing by one hour from
its neighbour on either side. Travelling eastwards, the first section keeps
“ Pacific ” time, and extends from Vancouver to Field, both of which cities
are in British Columbia ; the second section, from Field to North Portal, in
the Saskatchewan district, has “Mountain” time; the third, from North
Portal to Fort William, Ontario, keeps “ Central ” time ; the fourth, from
Fort William to Vanceboro, observes “ Eastern ” time ; whilst the fifth,
comprising the district from Vanceboro to Halifax, Nova Scotia, regulates
its clocks by what is styled “ Atlantic ” time.
Of course, these changes of times necessitated the alteration of our
watches for each section, but it is a matter which admits of no reasonable


alternative, and when the Australian transcontinental line from Port
Augusta is completed, we shall be compelled to adopt a similar course of
procedure.
The train gradually climbed up the mountain sides until an altitude of
over 4,500 feet was reached, after which we somewhat more rapidly dropped
to a lower level. The country in general was considerably poorer in quality,
and not fit for agriculture. We passed several large cattle ranches, and the
stock were fairly good in most cases. A little later on in the morning we
met with a good flock of sheep, the first we had seen in Western Canada.
They were in good condition, but the type was totally different to our Aus-
tralian animals, the immense difference in climate no doubt having a lot to
do with the matter.
The soil continued to become poorer and poorer as we trundled along to
the end of the section. It is only tit to be divided into large holdings, and
round a siding named “ Walsh ” the country for miles was simply pure sand,
exactly like the hummocks we have on our Australian coasts. On either
side of the line trees are planted thickly together to prevent the winter-
snows from drifting on the track, and so stopping traffic.
After running through much better country devoted to the farming in-
dustry we reached Medicine Hat, a town of 6,000 inhabitants on the Sas-
katchewan River. It is celebrated for possessing an immense flow of natural
gas, which is controlled by artificial means. All the light, heat and power,
required for the use of the city and its people are derived from this gas, which
is sold to consumers at the low rate of 5 cents or 2|d. per thousand feet.
At 7 o’clock on the evening of the same day we steamed into Calgary,
the most important city between Vancouver and Winnipeg. It is charm-
ingly situated on a hill-girt plateau overlooked by the white peaks of the
Rocky Mountains. Twenty-five years ago Calgary was scarcely a mark upon
the map. To-day it is a city of over 100,000 inhabitants, and Sir Wilfrid
Laurier, one of our late companions at the Coronation festivities, prophesies
that within the next five years at least a quarter of a million souls will be
settlad within the city bounds.
The irrigation canal of the Canadian Pacific Railway Company takes its
water from the Bow River, and in company with Mr. Rankin we were con-
ducted over the works. The area embraced in this scheme of irrigation is
three millions of acres lying to the east of Calgary on both sides of the rail-
way line, the channels conveying the water being easily seen from the train.
After a long day’s sight-seeing we returned to the train at 11 o’clock,
and retired to our sleepers, although we were not due to leave the station
till 3 a.m.
At daylight on September 2nd Canmore was reached, a great coal-mining
centre, and thence further up the Rockies to Laggan, a station over 5,000
feet above sea level. The railway buildings are constructed of dressed pine
logs varnished, and they present a very picturesque appearance. Beyond
Laggan the railway leaves the Bow, and ascends a tributary to the west
which courses through a gap in the similarly named range. To the west,
towering up tier after tier, is a chaotic sea of mountains ; and beyond, stand-
ing supreme over this part of the range, is the prodigious isolated helmet-
shaped mountain named “ Temple,” 11,626 feet above the level of the sea.


The dividing range between the rivers of the Pacific Slope and those
which fall into the Atlantic attains its highest point, Mount Hector, within
a short distance, and we now found ourselves fairly in the heart of the
Rockies, the first tunnel through which we passed took no less than four
minutes to negotiate. Yoho, the station for one of the grandest mountain
valleys in the world, was our next stopping place, and great white glacier-
bound peaks surrounded us on every side.
The train then entered the celebrated Corkscrew, or figure-of-eight
tunnels, which, previous to three years ago, were unknown on the American
Continent. They have added immensely to the ease in working the line,
and, although the cost was, approximately, £300,000, the money was well
laid out.
In many places on the sides of the mountains snow-sheds have been
erected. These are wooden structures resembling outside tunnels, some-
times several miles long, their object being to prevent the avalanches of
snow which frequently dash down from the higher peaks, burying the rail-
road. The snow slides off the slanting roofs, and falls harmlessly into the
valleys beneath, thus causing no obstacle to the traffic.
Eventually the train halted at Rogers’ Pass, some 4,300 ft. above the
plains. The pass lies between two lines of huge snow-clad peaks. That on
the north forms a prodigious amphitheatre, under whose parapet, five or six
thousand feet above the valley, half a dozen glaciers may be seen at once,
and so near that their shining green fissures are distinctly visible.
A mile further on brought us to Selkirk Summit, the highest point in
the pass. Leaving the Summit we gradually worked downwards towards
the deep valley of the Illecillewaet River, passing on our way several water-
falls caused by numberless small mountain streams bounding over the rooky
ledges which lay in their path.
Twelve more tunnels were passed through, and we reached the beautiful
Albert Canyon, where the river is seen, nearly 150 feet below the railway,
compressed into a narrow boiling stream barely 20 feet wide. The river
travels under the mountain, and emerges as a lovely stream from the other
side. The train officials courteously gave us a few minutes to enjoy a good
view of the sight.
A run of twenty-one miles, in the course of which we reduced our alti-
tude by over 700 feet, brought us to Revelstoke, a town on the Columbia
River, a pleasing stream some hundred yards wide at this point. Revelstoke
is a great tourist resort, opportunities for sport of every description being
unlimited. In the town excellent hotel accommodation can be obtained, and
from what we could learn the entire district is an ideal one for anyone fond
of the rod or gun.
Vancouver, the western terminus of the Canadian Pacific railway, some
380 miles distant, was our next port of call. It is situated on the mainland,
and has a population of 115,000. We arrived there at half-past eight on
Sunday morning, September 2nd, and put up at the St. Francis Hotel.
Here we found letters from home awaiting us, and there is no need to men-
tion our delight at hearing from the dear ones so many thousand miles away.
We here met Mr. Thomson, a member of the Imperial Club, who most
kindly welcomed us, and made our party honorary members during our stay


in their city. In the afternoon we took a stroll round the Stanley Park
Gardens, where some of the largest trees we have yet seen were growing.
We also met a Sydney man viewing his countrymen, in the form of kangaroos
and emus which were kept in captivity. Church claimed our attention in
the evening, and we heard an excellent discourse from the famous evan-
gelist Mr. Wilson. Much to our surprise we found all the shops brilliantly
illuminated, but of course the shops themselves were closed. The spectacle
see med a great attraction to the people.
On Monday we spent a while in viewing the Agricultural Society’s show,
where we noticed some very fair stock. We afterwards paid another visit
to Stanley Park, and measured some of the big trees. One, a very large
specimen, was 66ft. in circumference a yard above the ground.
To-day we met a Mr. Endicott, who made us honorary members of the
Terminal Club, and during the afternoon had the pleasure of an interview
with Mr. Russell, of the Prince Rupert Meat Company. He pointed out
what a great advantage to us it would be if we had a regular line of steamers
trading direct from Australia to Vancouver, similar to what obtains now
from New Zealand. The price of meat at Vancouver is three times as great
as in Australia, consequently the business would show a large margin of
profit. In the evening we were introduced to Mr. H. McDonald, of D. A.
Smith & Co., who gave us a large amount of information on various subjects.
During the course of our journey we met a Dr. Vanstone, who was greatly
interested in the importation of horses from Europe, and he said that in all
probability he would send a shipment to Australia next year.
This was the last city we stopped at in Canada proper, and on Septem-
ber 6th embarked on the s.s. Marama, a fine vessel of 6,347 tons, for our
long journey across the Pacific Ocean to our Australian homes.
Shortly after leaving Vancouver City we called at Victoria, the capital
of British Columbia. It is charmingly situated at the southern extremity
of Vancouver Island, overlooking the Straits of Fuca to the Pacific and the
mainland beyond the Gulf of Georgia. All the way down the Gulf we were
never more thama few miles from the banks on either side, and the scenery
was most beautiful, trees growing down to the water’s edge.
Victoria is a city of 40,000 inhabitants, and possesses some very fine
buildings, notably Parliament House. In the evening we left Victoria with
our faces turned homewards, and on settling down discovered a great many
Australians as well as ourselves on board, among them being Mr. A. W. Dobbie,
of Adelaide ; Mr. and Mrs. Jamieson and sister and Mrs. Jamieson, jun.; Mr.
A. Sewell, manager of the Queensland National Bank in Sydney ; Mr. Plate,
manager of the North German Lloyd Coy, Sydney ; Mr. McMillan, editor
of the “ Stock and Station Journal Dr. and Mrs. Collins, of New Zealand ;
Mr. and Mrs. Robertson, of Brisbane ; and Mr. and Mrs. Stanley Living-
stone, bound for Honolulu.


CHAPTER XV.
Oceania.
We were again on the open ocean, the Pacific, and had to cover 2,312
miles before setting foot on land.
The Sandwich or Hawaiian Islands, a possession of the United States,
were our next point of call, and on Wednesday morning, September 13th,
we dropped anchor in the magnificent natural harbor of Honolulu, the capital
city of the group. These islands form the most important cluster in the
North Pacific, the inhabitants being practically pure Polynesians, and in
physique very similar to the Maoris of New Zealand. Originally they were
cannibals, but the white man’s advent has had its usual result, cannibalism
is defunct, and in a comparatively short period the native race will share the
same fate. The group consists of a large number of islands and islets, of
which seven stand out prominently in point of size and population. They
were discovered by Captain Cook in 1778, and his next visit in the following
year proved his last, he being clubbed to death by the natives. All the
islands are of volcanic origin, and at the present time two craters are in a
state of activity, Manua Loa and Kilauea Loa, the latter the largest active
volcano in the world.
After landing we took a tfip by motor car to Pallia, a gap in the moun-
tains, where some of the most magnificent scenery can be enjoyed. All
tropical fruits, such as bananas, cocoanuts, pau-paus, bread-fruits, and hosts
of others grow wild in the greatest profusion, and nature seems to have run
riot in exhibiting her powers of production.
Honolulu is a very pleasing town, the streets are laid out on the Ameri-
can plan at right angles, and are extremely neat and tidy. The city has a
population of some 40,000, and is decidedly up-to-date in every respect.
King-street, the main thoroughfare, being furnished with a first-class system
of tramways, as well as all other ordinary means of transit. An excellent
supply of water is provided from a neighbouring valley, and the usual
wharves, Custom House, and warehouses grace the margin of the harbor.
Sad to say, however, the scourge of the world is rife in these lovely
islands. Leprosy in its most virulent form is endemic, and although every
effort has been made to stamp out the fell disease, they have not been
attended with the success deserved. Molokai, an island some 9or 10 miles
distant from Oahu, has been specially set apart for victims of the curse, all
sufferers being deported there never to leave again. One of tire most pathetic
tragedies of recent times is connected with this awful doom. Over a quarter
of a century ago a young Catholic priest, a Frenchman by birth, voluntarily
went into this exile, an exile nothing better than a living death, in order to
satisfy the spiritual needs of the unfortunates driven from their homes and
all that they held dear. This man, whose name is above all praise, grew up
with his flock, shared their troubles, consoled the afflicted, and when death
claimed its own helped to soothe the spirit of the poor mortal about to make
his final exit from a world whose pleasures he had never known. Father
Damien died but a few years ago, and no man has ever earned the admiration
of all who had heard of his self-sacrifice more than this faithful servant of
his conscience and his God.
During our stay at Honolulu we took the opportunity of visiting the
Aquarium, situated about five miles from the city. It is considered by ex-


perts to be the finest collection of fishes in the world, and there ai'e constantly
on view from 600 to 1,000 specimens of approximately 100 varieties. On our
way back we passed through the duck farm. Originally the site was a big
swamp, but it is now drained, and artificial islands have boen built here and
there for the use of the ducks. We heard that the proprietors are making
very handsome profits out of their venture. *
As previously stated, rice is one of the principal exports from the
islands, Oahu growing the largest quantity. The cultivation is mainly in the
hands of Chinamen, who use the primitive methods common to natives of
that country. It is a familiar scene from the carriage windows on the Oahu
railway to see a Chinese agriculturist guiding some old-fashioned implement
through swamps a few inches deep, the tractive force being a slow patient
water buffalo When ripe the grain is brought down from the mountains,
where it has been transplanted when young, to the valleys by means of
mules, a long string cf which, each carrying a load of 2001bs. and in charge
of one man, may be seen any day during the harvest season.
On the evening of the day of arrival we reluctantly said farewell to
Hawaii and all its beauties, wandering whether it will ever be our lot to pay
them another and longer visit. We now had a stretch of nearly 2,100 miles
to travel before setting foot on land again, and during the eight days or so
we made ourselves very comfortable and happy in the usual ways common to
sea travellers.
Sunday, the 17th, was memorable on account of our crossing the Equator
for the second time, the first being during our voyage from Fremantle to
Colombo. Divine service was conducted by Mr. Grey, a Congregational
minister. On the following day we passed Bonni Island, a small uninhabited
isolated rock in the track of vessels travelling between Honolulu and Suva.
A beacon is established on the summit, the light of which is kept burning
by means of some very ingenious machinery. A visit of inspection to make
sure that all is well is paid every three months, and up to the present noth-
ing has been known to get out of order.
Later on Phoenix Island hove in sight, It is owned by Lever Bros., of
“ Sunlight” soap fame, whose large cocoanut plantations yield a fine crop of
nuts annually, all of which are converted into copra, from which the well-
known oil is extracted.
Hone Island was abeam at mid-day on the 20th, but of course we did
not get a close view of it. We crossed the 180th meridian the following day,
and consequently had to re-adjust our calendars and call the 21st the 22nd.
We sighted the Fiji Islands at daylight that morning, and anchored at 6
o’clock a short distance off the shore, in a small but beautiful harbor.
After the usual formality of medical inspection, we made fast to the wharf
and went ashore.
The harbor was crowded with sea-craft of all sorts, shapes, and sizes,
from the humble native canoe to the majestic man-of-war, three of which lay
at anchor —the Torch and Prometheus of British nationality, and the Comarant
flying the German flag. Suva, the capital, is a most picturesque town almost
buried amidst trees of every tropical variety. In company with Mr. A. W.
Bobbie, of Adelaide, we hired a carriage and pair, and started on a tour of
exploration. We found the town equipped with most modern conveniences,
and cable and wireless stations have been installed.


The Fijian group consists of about 250 islands in all. of which about 80
are inhabited. They have belonged to Great Britain since 1874, but only a
few whites are living there at present, quite 98 per cent, of the population
being colored. The two great islands Viti Levu and Yanua Levu are of
volcanic formation, and veiy mountainous, the highest peak standing over
5,0T0 feet above the plains. Streams and rivers are abundant, and on Yanua
Levu there are hot springs with a temperature of from 200 to 210 degrees
Fahrenheit. Most of the common tropical fruits grow in abundance, and the
principal exports are copra (the dried kernel of the cocoanut) and sugar.
Pine apples and bananas have been introduced, aaid a large trade is carried
on with Australia and New Zealand in both these products. The Fijians as
a race are well-built and able-bodied, but intolerably lazy. They seem to
carry out to the fullest extent the maxim of the man who was born tired,
“Never do to-day what you can put off till to-morrow.” After staying about
ten hours ashore we weighed anchor and started' for New Zealand, the last
stopping place before arriving at our destination.
To give a slight idea of the paucity of traffic between New Zealand
and British Columbia, the first ship we sighted since leaving Vancouver
passed us to-day, Saturday, the 23rd. The loneliness of the Pacific Ocean
is extremely marked when compai'ed with the Atlantic, where both north and
south of the line vessels are constantly met going either east or west.
On that same evening a fancy dress ball was held, and it proved an
immense success. Mr. John Livingston wore kilts, and the rest of the com-
pany were decorated in various unusual costumes. As we were losing some
of our fellow passengers at Auckland we had another night’s festivities. A
start was made with a grand distribution of the prizes won by the suc-
cessful competitors in the different games of skill (or otherwise) played during
the voyage. This was followed by a musical evening, when Mr. John
Thomson, M.H.R., rendered two Scotch songs, for which he received great
applause.
New Zealand appeared on the horizon on the morning of September 26,
and we quietly steamed up Auckland’s beautiful harbor, a bay studded with
verdure clad islands, which rise abruptly from the water on every side. As
our stay in the Dominion was to be very short we were compelled to make
the most of our time, and first of all took a tram to Mount Eden, an extinct
volcano about three miles from the city. At the bottom of the now closed-
up crater, slag lies in a heap and looks as if it had only just been ejected
and cooled down. From the summit a most extensive panoramic view of the
surrounding country can be obtained, as well as of the Hauraki Gulf on the
east, through which we had lately steamed, and the great harbor of Manukau
on the west. One was very forcibly reminded of the scenery in the High-
lands of Scotland in numbers of instances.
We again took tram to a small seaport town named Onehunga, about 9
miles distant, and then returned to Auckland, traversing some rich volcanic
country en route. The Museum, for which we had a short time to spare, was
very interesting, the collection of Maori canoes and weapons being unique.
One ancient war-boat was 82 feet in length by 7 feet beam, and had been
carved out of one single tree trunk by means of stone axes, in precisely the
same manner as our own pre-historic ancestors fashioned their canoes.
Another boat 2 feet 6 inches deep and somewhat narrow had 24 seats, and
Judging from the shape must have been very speedy.


We saw numerous specimens of the world-famed Kauri pine timber,
boards six and eight feet in >vidth, and a log 150 feet long and £4 feet in
diameter was a veritable giant.
Five o’clock in the afternoon saw us all aboard, and we reluctantly said
good-bye to the friends who had travelled with us so many thousand miles
on our ocean journey.
Cape Van Dieman and the Three Kings Islands were passed on the
morning of the 27th. The latter were the scene of a fearful wreck
some years ago, when the Elingamite went to her doom carrying with her a
number of valuable lives and treasure.
Next day Mr. Duncan Livingston was delighted to receive a wireless
message from Sydney reporting “ All well.” We travelled through belts of
fog alternate with short spells of fine weather, and similar conditions con-
tinued for the whole day. The captain told us he expected to pick up the
lights on Sydney heads at about two o’clock in the morning, but long before
that we were anxiously pacing the deck longing for a glimpse of our own
home land. At three o’clock the lights came in view, and as daylight broke,
the Heads showed themselves up in all their majesty. At 6.30 we anchored
in Watson’s Bay, and by 7.30 were berthed at the wharf and
HOME ONCE MORE.


EPILOGUE.
Our story is told, the long jaunt ended, and after spending some five
months in travelling round the globe, we are again at our own firesides.
When one looks back at all we have seen, the countries we have visited,
and the people we have mot, one can hardly realise that the world is so large
and its inhabitants so varied. Countries which to us were previously merely
geographical expressions have become actual realities. We have lived in
cities, made acquaintance with people, and studied their manners and
customs.
Our travels have extended over thirty thousand miles by means of
practically every mode of locomotion used in civilized and semi-civilized
lands, and on every hand we have met with nothing but the greatest
courtesy and a desire to be of assistance from all with whom we came in
contact. We have had the pleasure of being introduced to a large number of
ladies and gentlemen, meeting them in public and in their homes, and we
can only feel that they have treated us, not entirely as representatives of
distant lands, but as friends paying a visit to countries unknown except by
name and fame.
Where all were so kind it would be invidious to single out any indivi-
duals for special eulogy, but we must again, on behalf of all our fellow
voyagers, reiterate the words of thanks which were said at the farewell meet-
ing in England to the Committee of the Lords and Commons, and
their Secretary and Assistant Secretaries, who did so much to make our visit
enjoyable.
Our trust is that at some future time, sooner or later, we shall again
foregather either here or in the Motherland, and, if it be here, our friends can
look forward to as hearty a hand-shake as ever man gave man, and we will
do our utmost to let them see and feel what a real Australian welcome means.
Before writing the last and most [>ainful word in any l»ook, we must ex-
press the hope that all those who have accompanied us in spirit during our
world-wide wanderings, may have received some pleasure whilst reading
about them, and that some day they will go through the same or similar ex-
periences with a corresponding amount of instruction and pleasure.
VALE.




