



&H.'
Geelong Church of England Grammar School
Dorio, Victoria
< X. A>, P~ ,
ft* - ~7i -2C^*
<l<v <


• rx-C-’l
W f' ft •
C'fy B. A
C&XyCo, *
77. 3 •
r- * *—<*
//' a
' °' •
,y C<yy^f^ / l Ay ' i -£‘ /0
r a.) <x.<^i-gsb f w-£<P\ /A^uLsP^jr*-*-^
<tf-
■<UJt&AS *P~ L>a£&j>
/s 3 ?; r.^yjf'
f • •'
(zX&i/*
/ijuifUrudij-a-** Gy£*yt~*jw ' ' '
'* s ?\ a
-
4" J-"S
&£. l/U , 6"
e&0
he, 7-yPo






Engraved for "Three years Practical Experience of a Settler in New South Wales."


THREE YEARS PRACTICAL EXPERIENCE
OF A
SETTLER IN NEW SOUTH WALES;
BE INC.
extracts from letters to his friends
IN EDINBURGH, FROM 1834 to 1837-
WITH A PREFACE BY THE EDITOR, AND AN APPENDIX
CONTAINING NOTES AND INFORMATION POE ALL
CLASSES OF INTENDING EMIGRANTS, FROM
THE DATES'! AUTHORITIES, AND
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS,
Edition, wit*, a m ap.
EDINBURGH;
JOHN JOHNSTONE, HUNTER SQUARE.
BWCOBMOR TO WAUGH AND INMBS?
3, NIBBET & CO., AN» B. GEOOMBBtDSE,. LONDON.
uocccxxxvm.


.EDINBURGH:
JOHN JOHNSTONK, PRINTER, HHNTBR S<itU»E.


PREFACE BY THE EDITOR.
Emigration to Australia lias recently become an object
of intense and increasing interest with all classes of the
community. This is not to be -wondered at, when it is
considered how deep and general is the feeling, that this
country is peopled beyond its natural resources and re-
gular demand for productive labour—.that the prosperity
of the bulk of its population rests very much on an arti-
ficial basis, as liable to be injured and destroyed by sud-
den mercantile changes—that, in fact, the means of sub-
sistence, even in the most economical manner, among
persons in all the ordinary occupations of business, are only
to be barely attained by unremitting labour, with inade-
quate return on capital invested—and even that, not on!
with little enjoyment, but at the expense, of severe anxiety
and mental exhaustion ; above all, that the rearing, edu-
cating, and fitting out a family for active life, is daily be-
coming a matter of greater difficulty, especially in the
middle ranks of society.
In these circumstances it ha® boon natural to inquire,
where is to be found the remedy, if any, towards relief of
the pressure which such numerous classes experience in
a greater or less degree,—and it therefore ought to be
viewed as a special blessing under divine providence, that


the Government of Great Britain is possessed of a terri-
tory in another quarter of the world, with space ample
enough to contain the whole population of the parent
state, were even that requisite, lying under the most ge-
nial and salubrious temperature of climate, with a soil
rich and varied, abounding with the most useful minerals,
and equally adapted for pastoral and agricultural pursuits.
In fact, Australia, as hitherto colonized, is a country com-
bining every natural and rural charm on which the ima-
gination delights to luxuriate—with the splendid plants,
and fruits, and grains of the tropical regions, it unites all
the substantial produce of our own colder climate, and
though a winter is known there, it is only as sufficient to
mark the season, while for three-fourths of the year a per-
son may sleep in the open air.
The desire of information respecting this country, has
accordingly been very great and general, and numerous
works have been published, detailing its history civil and
political, its public revenue and expenditure, its progress
in wealth, population, and general improvement. It ap-
peared, however, that something was still wanting to con-
vey to inquirers intending to emigrate, a correct idea of
the every-day occupation of a rural settler, with its ad-
vantages and disadvantages, its enjoyments and priva-
tions, and above all, the prospect it holds out, and in what
manner, of progressive wealth and comfort. The follow-
ing extracts from letters, by a recent settler in New South
Wales, to different members of his family at home, as far
as relates to the nature and operations of rural life in that
country, were copied out in continuous order, for the
purpose of satisfying such numerous inquirers on the sub-
ject; and having ; been shown, at their earnest request, to
.many persons intending to emigrate, they appeared to


them to contain matter of so much interest, and to convey
such valuable information to be found no where else, that
a very general wish was expressed by the readers for the
publication of them.
The editor has therefore yielded to this wish so ex-
pressed, the more, as the requests for a perusal of them
in a MS. form, were too frequent to be easily and quickly
complied with; but in doing so, he claims it as but com-
mon justice in behalf of the writer, to state, that these
extracts are from letters written in unrestrained confiden-
tial intercourse to his nearest relatives, without the very
slightest expectation that they would be shown even to a
mall circle of friends, far less given to the world in the
shape of a publication. As they are, however, they cer-
tainly possess the interest of genuine feeling and of no-
velty, and bring before the mind of the reader a vivid and
accurate idea of what is described, so as to enable him to
judge for himself, as to his own future plans, better than
any general history of the country and its occupations could
possibly do.
The classes of persons to whom emigration to that country
seems most likely to be desirable, are those in the middle
ranks, with capitals from £5OO, or even less, to £l5OO or
£2OOO, —sums which it is now difficult to employ with a
proper return, either in or out of business, and which, in
the case of families, are inadequate to rear them with
advantage; whereas, as appears from the extracts now
published, the smallest of these sums is sufficient in the
course of a few years to secure to the individual compara-
tive independence, and to open good prospects for the
future.
Such persons as above alluded to, are either those en-
gaged in business, as shopkeepers or otherwise, where the


return of profits is inadequate to the capital and labour
employedj gentlemen with moderate fortunes invested
at‘ interest, but yielding a small and insufficient per cent-
age,—-young men in some of the departments of law,
whose prospects of success are distant and limited,. —
retired officers of the army or navy, who are properly-
allowed by the government superior advantages in the
purchase of land, —or the sons of country gentlemen, of
high standing in society, hut -with comparatively small
patrimonies.
Numbers of these different classes, all men of intelligence
and cultivated minds, have within the last few years emi-
grated to New South Wales; and, at present, more than
ever of the same description are preparing to follow them ;
of consequence, society is now assuming a highly improved
aspect in that territory, and a principal objection, at one
time naturally entertained against removal to it, may now
be considered as completely obviated. But as society con-
sists of two classes, it is of importance to mention, that the
system of convict servants, however'it may have answered
for the time, is now to be discontinued as quickly as the
convenience of the settlers can admit of, and that the atten-
tion of the government has, for Some time past, been power-
fully and unremittingly turned to the sending out married
agricultural labourers and mechanics, carefully selected, of
good character and in the prime of life, fi'ee of expense and
with every attention to their comforts* under the immediate
superintendence of government agents. A great number
are to embark from Scotland this year, from different ports,
and the system will be continued till the colony is sup-
plied with a virtuous population sufficient for its wants
which are great, 10,000 being reported as at present re-
quired.'


It is also of the utmost importance to state, that in con-
sequence of. a. representation'from the local government
there, approved and acceded to by Lord Gleuelg in the most
prompt and efficient manner, provision is now effectually
made for the endowment of-ministers connected with the
Church of Scotland, as well as that of England, and for a
system of general education, in consequence of which 3Dr
Lang, Principal of the Australian College, and senior mi-
nister of the Scots Church, Sydney, who was here last year,
and had many long conferences with the Colonial Commit-
tee, carried with him from this country in July last, a great
number of licentiates of the Church of Scotland, and school-
masters,-to fill situations in the colony, and many more are
preparing to follow.
After all these inducements and advantages, however,
it is obvious that objections may naturally occur to many
persons in regard to the nature of the transition, as being
too abrupt a change. It certainly is a transition of no
slight kind, from the in-door confinement and densely peo-
pled society, either of mercantile or professional pursuits,
in a crowded city, to the ample space and. comparative
solitude of such an occupation in a now and open country,
which will require, to insure success, a complete change, of
habits and feelings,—-n consideration which, ought to he
fairly taken into account by all intending emigrants, before
ultimately deciding.
But in this respect the Editor conceives that the ex-
tracts are valuable, as showing how quickly and completely
a person may adapt himself to the required change, and
how much enjoyment appears to accompany it.
The writer of the letters was bred to a branch of .the
law, —served an apprenticeship to a writer to the signet,
—had been for about a year thereafter a clerk j and in,


point of literary attainments and professional knowledge,
it may at least be said of Mm, that he was not excelled
by any of his contemporaries. He went out to Sydney
with strong recommendations from the highest quarters,
intending to prosecute the legal profession there, a plan
which, for the reasons mentioned in his letters, he subse-
quently gave up, and, following the advice of the first
persons in Sydney, embarked in a country life. The
energy he has shown in his new vocation, —the pleasure
he has experienced,—and the success he has attained in
it, with the prospects he cherishes, will appear in his
letters.
In addition to the sudden change from a crowded to a
secluded existence,—the want of much that tends at pre-
sent to stimulate and amuse, must also be expected. The
artificial, elegant, and, it may be, luxurious usages of
modern life, especially in large towns, conceived to be so
essential to comfort, —the varied and ample stores of liter-
ature, science, and art, which form the daily supply of
the mental cravings of the present refined stage of society,
must, for a time at least, be dispensed with; but with
all well-constituted minds, in such an event, that will
only excite a temporary regret. It will be seen from the
letters, that the writer received, at the distance of ISO
miles, three Sydney newspapers per week; and as the
communication with this country is now so much facili-
tated, both in respect of time and of frequency, and the
roads in the interior of the colony are undergoing such
daily improvement by the government, the periodical
literature of Britain, as well as that of the colonial capital,
where literary, scientific, and agricultural societies already
exist, will quickly circulate through the remotest quarters
of that extensive territory. The only other matter which


it may be of importance to advert to is tins, that it demon-
stratively appears from the letters, that every person who
expects to succeed in the colony, must resolve, for a time
at least, to submit to what in this country would be
deemed privations, and to engage in the prosecution of
his plans with all the energies of his mind, combined
with steadiness and perseverance. To those who do so,
success appears a moral certainty; but indolent and dis-
sipated habits will lead to ruin there, as speedily as in any
part of the Old World.
Several notes are added as an Appendix, containing re-
marks as to the country, extracted from the latest autho-
rities, on such points as intending emigrants, especially
those with families, may naturally wish to he informed
upon ; and if, upon the whole, this small and unpretending
publication shall be the means of satisfying, to a certain
extent, curiosity on a topic now become so interesting, the
purpose of the Editor shall be completely answered.
He cannot, however, close these remarks without asking
leave from his readers to say, in addition, that the present;
prospects of that colony have powerfully impressed Ins
own mind, and captivated his imagination. He considers
them as opening up to view a new, and in many of their
bearings, an. untried aspect of society, alike interesting to
the philanthropist, the political economist, and the man of
intellectual refinement.
“ Magnus ab integro seclorura nascitur ordo.”
An experiment has fairly commenced of a new creation
of the social system, in all the freshness and vivacity of
youth, tempered with the experience of age—of a return to
the simplicity and innocence of primitive life, without its
rudeness, but adorned and cherished by the “ benefits of
a 2


knowledge and the blessings of religion/'—in short, civi-
lization with its advantages;, but without its evils and
vices.
The enjoyment of existence will be incalculably pro-
moted in such a favoured clime, by the rural scenery and
progressively successful rural labours amidst which it will
be passed—scenes and labours on which the poetic minds
of the most refined periods of all ages, have ever delighted
to expatiate, and to the simplicity of which the most exalt-
ed in worldly power and worldly splendour, have in every
time eagerly recurred for solace and refreshment,—all
proving how congenial to human happiness, and how deeply
rooted in the human breast, is the love of Nature.
To such a country, then, may even the most elegant
scholar resort, for there he will enjoy in perfection the per-
sonal and delightful experience of the truth of the sweet-
est passage of the rural poet who sung such themes to
u Wide-imperial Rome by Greece refined."
Qh fortunatos nimiutn, sua si bona norint
Agricolas. &c. &c.
as well as that of the touching and ever occurring allusions
to the same topic hy Ms sprightly lyrical contemporary,—
and be able also to exemplify in actual and practical opera-
tion, the climax of the well-known splendid eulogium hy
the great master of Roman eloquence, on literary pursuits,
delectant domi — peregrinantur, rustioomtur*
Edinburgh, 24 th March 1838.


EXTRACTS, &c.
The writer left Loith in December 1883, on board the Isa-
bella, of 400 terns register, for Sydney, Now South AValcs.
The vessel reached Portsmouth in about fourteen days, but
was detained lor nearly six weeks with strong westerly gules
at that place, where an immense fleet of outward "ttduml
vessels for East and West Indies, America, &c., nearly 800
sail, was at the same time riding at anchor. The first of
these letters alludes to this detention, and describes his de-
liverance from it.
On Board (he Isabella,
Saturday, Ist March 1834.
My Dear Father, —As I am informed wo are near
reaching the latitude where homeward bound vessels are
to'he met with, I now commence a letter to he .ready for
the, first one we may meet. When, or on what day It may
terminate, you will see by the date I put on it when
I seal it. iust as we parted company with the Macqueen
(Indiaman) in doubling the corner of the Isle of Wight,
28 th January, Captain M { Cok; called up all his men, and
rve us three cheers, which we returned in regular order,
was considerably affected by thus bidding farewell to
those with whom wo had lived in strict intimacy for five
weeks. It was a most beautiful day; but at three in the
morning, the wind chopped ronnd right in our teeth, but
as it was moderate, rve beat against it all day: next night
at began to blow very hard, and the ship pitched most
dreadfully. I had great difficulty in keeping in bedj I


was not at all sick, however, and ate my breakfast as well
as I could with things being in such a state. The surgeon
lay in bed; all the apprentices were sitting here and there
most disconsolately ; William (his cabin companion) was
only a little squeamish at first, but as for all the Fishers,
(an overseer with his family going out to the property
of a gentleman here,) they lay tumbled on one another,
looking more like death than life. Finding it of no use
to persevere, at last we took in a fisherman as a pilot, and
got safely into Torbay. In Torbay we lay a week, and
there collected about twenty of our Motherbank friends,
including M‘Cole. I made two very pleasant excursions in
the neighbourhood during our stay there. On Saturday;
2d February, the wind blowing right into the hay, hut
otherwise favourable for us if once we got out, all hands
were called at four in the morning to weigh anchor * 1
rose at five, and helped like the rest. We made a long
stretch of a tack to heat out, and would have done it, but
when we went upon the other tack, intending to double
the point on the south of the bay, the tide running very
violently, sucked us in at one o’clock to the very place
we had left. The wind at this time had again changed
to contrary, and it blew very hard. We finally left the
hay on Friday, the 7th of February, with light wind, car-
rying us about a mile an hour. This, with fine weather,
■continued till Tuesday afternoon; we Were at this time
past the Eddyatone Light-house, which I saw on Sunday!
■quite distinctly about ten or twelve miles off. Tuesday
night set in with a very hard gale, so strong, that though
decidedly favourable, we could make no use of it We
lay-to all night, under only two sails, and these as close
reefed as cotdd be.' I was on the weather-side of the ship!
and every set that struck her I thought would have pitch-
ed me over against the door. Nay, I began at last to feat
that the whole concern of the bed would come down
bodily, so that after getting up three times in perfect feat
■of such a catastrophe, I rose at four, planted my bach
against the lowest side of onrroom, and with my clothed
tm, and propped up with pillows between two trunks, 1
got sleep for an hour. Many of the trunks in the dining*


cabin and elsewhere, I heard tumbling about, and the
Doctor’s sofa wheeled broadside oyer, and he in it. When.
I went on deck at six, the weather had moderated a little.
During the whole night, the boatswain, who said it was a
stiff breeze, declared that the vessel did nothing but plunge
her head into a hole, taking a sea over her every time.
My feeling on the matter was Just as if, every now and
then, some one had taken the ship bodily, and given
her a cruel shake, like a hull-dog with, another in his
mouth. This will give you some idea of it; the steers-
man was thrown clean over the wheel; one of the men
was washed from the forecastle upon the deck, and one
sea came two feet deep on deck, from the bow to the
cabin-door, while sometimes it splashed as high as the
foretop. I was much amused with one of the steerage-
passengers, a Portsoy-mau, who, when I asked him how
Ins fellow-passengers were, said that they were all telling
what wood the ship was made of. The explanation 1 got
was, that in their retelling they cried oak. fc>imre that
time, however, to the present moment, it has been entirely
a pleasure sail. Figure to yourself a dear sky, an almost
calm sea, hardly any motion, and going at seven, nine, and
ten knots an hour. Since that date, our daily average has
been about 180 miles, sometimes about 200; and unless
we art* becalmed under the line, after we leave tin* trade-
wind, and before we got the next, the surgeon says we are
pretty sure of a passage from Land’s End in little more
than 100 days. There are threatening symptoms of u
calm, however, although wo have been going all day at six
knots, yet for six hours yesterday and hist night, we were
hardy making one an hour. As for the heat you dreaded
so much, here we are 0° from the Equator, and the thermo-
meter never yet above 80 s , with a sea-breeze all the time.
The surgeon has been five times across, and, In a dead
calm and no wind, never saw it above 84°. I sleep on my
plain mattress with neither blanket nor sheet; putting on
my cotton drawers and my night-shirt, I am very comfort-
able. Igo also out at five or six eveiy morning, and get
three or four pailfuls of water thrown over me in the fore
part of the ship. The Isabella sails beautifully; we have


passed about twenty vessels, every one, except Haht-one
in ballast, tbe Somersetshire of London, bound fo*
who spoke us on 17th February, lat. 35 , long*. 17 o 45 '
On Tuesday, 25th February, we,.passed close enoogii to the
George of London, to read her name with the tel es3c on
the end of her boat hanging astern. On the 24th we
were eighteen miles from Antonio, one of the Oape de
Verd islands, and should have seen it well, but tho weather
was hazy. ,
Monday, %d jgg^
I understand there is a ship in sight, approaching-., sol
have to conclude. We have had almost a calm, all yes-
terday; last night it was very close, therm. S3O j-q J otir
room; we got the help of a friendly squall this morning,
which put us on ten or twelve miles in an and as
wc have a favourable wind, strong hopes are entertained
of our getting now into the S.E. trade-wind. Excuse
haste, I have just come in from looking at the-^approach-
ing vessel; it is still distant, but as both the Vessels are
sailing, it wih he here in. half an hour. It is the -thirdwe
have seen to-day. We have been surrounded with shoals
of porpoises, flying-fish, dolphins, and seen many of
Mother Cary's chickens, and the Portuguese men-of-war,
and a small blubber kind of fish, which carries n sail like
the nautilus.
Hobart Town, 28iA 3.834.
My Dear J., — I am afraid this letter will he shorter
than I intended, for the Clarence, which was not to sail til!
Saturday, has just fired a gun for a pilot, and hoisted the
Blue Peter for the passengers. We arrived here after a
passage of 102 days from Land’s End, on 22d MTay. We
should have been in 95 or 100; but, when within IDO miles
of land, we had first light, then contrary winds, and had to
beat about four days before we made it. The Bare aster of
Liverpool made it in 95, We had fine weather- till east-
ward of the Cape, hut then we had one gale after another.


but it was all fair for us, and we scudded riglit before it,
making 200 and 210 miles per day—one day we made 227.
During all tire time there was not much motion, except one
or two days when she rolled terribly, there being too little
sail on her; during the whole passage except half a dozen
nights, I have slept as comfortably as at home. We have
had very fine weather since we came here. I have never
suffered an hours illness since I last wrote, and have got,
if anything, stouter. Every thing is very dear here; 2lb
loaf, 0,1 d .; beef and mutton, Gd. to Bd. per lb ; milk, Bd.
per quart, &c. House rent of four rooms and kitchen,
L’SO, and so on. All our passengers are already provided
for. M—— had the option of .£l2O the moment he
landed. The Governor sent on board the first day for Miss
Tas nursery governess; and, in short, all who do not
intend commencing business, are either settled, or hang off
from offers, in expectation of better. The population of
the town is 13,000. The number of fine stone houses,
warehouses, &c., like any in Leith, is very great, and
fine shops are every where opening. One of our Sydney
passengers, a mason, has got work, during* our stay here, at
■l4s. per week.
I do not feel as in a foreign land at all, it is so like a
rising town at home, only more scattered ; for, I dare
say, it covers as much ground as North and South Leith.
I have been received with great kindness by many, and
have got invitations to several dinners. I send a news-
paper.
Sydney, 25th June IBM.
; My Dear L, —I wrote to you of my arrival at Van
Dieman’s Land, on the 25th May, per the Clarence of
London. I had just closed my last letter there, when Mr
to whom I had a letter of introduction, came on
board, and insisted on my going on shore with, him, and
living in his house, which I did for the fortnight the
ship lay at Hobart Town. On Thursday, a large party


of friends met me there. In 1824, a great number
of these relations, about 30, freighted a vessel and came
out to settle here. They are all in highly prosperous
circumstances, partly in Hobart Town, and partly through
the island. Mr M- ,Mr T———-’s brother-in-law,
showed me also the utmost kindness. I also saw Mr
C , who, I suppose, is now worth £IO,OOO, and spent
a pleasant day with him. We left Hobart Town on the
11th current, and had a nine days’ passage. On Saturday
last, this day week, William (his fellow-passenger,) and
I came on shore to Mr Barker’s, an extensive miller, Sus-
sex Street, to whom I had letters from Mr D. We
found him at home, in a splendid house. He is a much
respected and very influential man; he is considered one
of the richest men in the colony, and we have some worth
from £IO,OOO to £25,000 per annum. He received us
very kindly, asked me to dinner with him on Sunday,
which I accepted, and went home with him after church.
He keeps a kind of open house for all the respectable
young men of the town who are staying in lodgings. I
got, through him, most respectable board and lodgings
with Mr Bass, ship-builder, Darling Harbour; I pay
£5 a-raontb, and have a bed-room; and as they have two
parlours, I have one almost to myself. A young gentle-
man to whom Mr Barker was very kind, and for whom
he got a situation, lives in the same lodgings with me,
and is as sensible and judicious a man as is to be met with.
He is editor of one of the newspapers, and in comfort-
able independent circumstances. I have been at Mr
Barker's at least once or twice a-day by his kind invita-
tion. I have seen Mr M‘Leay (Colonial Secretary), Mr
Riddell (Colonial Treasurer), Mr Campbell, &c. &c., who
have been very kind to me; both Mr M c Leay and Mr
Riddell have been particularly so, and have been exerting
themselves for me. Mr MfLeay wished me to can
again that he might introduce me to his family, but he
has been so busy since, that I have not yet seen him.
Mr Riddell has most strongly advised me to go into the
country ; he says it is not only the speediest, but the
surest way of making money. He is trying to get me a


situation as overseer, and explained : to me how I might
Jay ou t; w hile holding such situation, what money 1 had*,
on sheep, to feed along with the principal's. In three or
four years, capital is returned from the wool* while the
increase of stock is equally great. All the settlers are
making money if they use common prudence. One Scots-
man, who has been here eight years, and came without a
shilling, cleared last year L. 1300 from his wool, and so with
the rest The law is not considered an eligible pursuit;
Mr M‘Leay advised me against it, so I have given up all
idea of that line.
There are a great number of our countrymen here, and
all very clannish. I have been introduced to almost all the
respectable part of the community. Ido not feel as hi a
foreign land at all, and am very comfortable in my* lodgings.
William, who lived with Mr Barker, went np yesterday
to his friends at Harrington Park, He was very sorry to
part with me, and felt it much as we passed along the
street, and had I not tried to keep up my spirits, I should
have felt it equally. I have never had an hours illness
since I left England. Tell mother that Mrs Bass 3s a nice
motherly woman.
Sydney, 14 th August 1834.
My Dear Father, — I wrote to J in June last, but
could say nothing almost of what I should do here. There
were three different professions that I could embrace, viz ,’
Legal, Mercantile, Agricultural.
With regard to the first, the Law, I was told at once by
several gentlemen to whom I had presented my letters, par-
ticularly Mr M c Leay, Mr Riddell, and Dr Mitchell, that
it was not an eligible business. This, however, was merely
general. I then saw Mr B—— of Leith, an old school-
fellow* who came out about ten months ago to fill the
office of under-sheriff here. Before he could fill that
office, he had to produce his testimonials of admission as
S.S.C., and after he had been in it for six months he gave
it up, and entered into partnership with his brothers as


a. merchant. He said that the difference of law was srteh
as to require almost a new apprenticeship of study, ancl
that as I had not passed W. S. at home, though entitle <3. to
apply for it, I must serve an apprenticeship here to he ad-
mitted to practise. This decided me against the Law - be-
sides, I had no situation in prospect, and did not lilce to
lose time in waiting for one. With regard to the mer-
cantile profession, I lay under great disadvantage's, ; m
having almost no introductions to mercantile men. One
great house to whom I got introductions from hoth Mr T
and Mr W—— are extensive merchants, it is true, but are
said to he reserved in their manners, though they were vqry
kind to me when I called.
The principal mercantile houses are almost all Liver-
pool or London establishments, and having little oar no
connection with, Scotland, they are well supplied -with
clerks from their own places. There has been a very-
extensive emigration of young men in the same circum-
stances with myself, within the last ten. years, and many
who brought out a stock of goods with them to commence,
have, after selling off, gone into the country, as settlers.
Mr J , son of Mr —— of the Australian Company,
Mr W of Edinburgh, have done this. In fact, there
are too many merchants for the number of settlers, the
town containing about a third of the whole population
of the colony; so that unless a person has a pretty strong
home connection, he need not set up in that capacity here.
Thus shut out from these two, I turned my attention to the
country. Almost the whole of my acquaintances here, high
and low, advised the country. There is not a man. in
Sydney, who can manage it, but has some capital invested
in the country, and it is looked npon as the surest way of
living and making money.
While I was in this state of uncertainty, Mr Barker;
who has the management of three most extensive farms,
said, with his usual kindness, X might go and live at
one of these as long as I liked; and while I should be
at no expense, I should have an opportunity of learning
the business. I accordingly went to Nonorrah, thirty-
three miles up, and lived there for a month. -Mean^


while, I was not content with these general advices, but
was anxious for a statement from some one who had ac-
tually been a settler. Mr S——ray former fellow-lodger,
accordingly wrote to a friend in the country,—a gentleman
about thirty years of age, who began eight or ten years ago,
with a very moderate capital, and drew last year a large
sum for his wool, —asking his advice, what a friend of his,
with a small capital, should do. The result was the follow-
ing letter, which I give verbatim
“ My Dear, S—l have just returned, after experienc-
ing four weeks bracing weather at Monaro, and have been
at this time of the year on the Australian Alps, walking
in two feet deep of snow, which is the reason of your let-
ter not having been answered. I now do myself the plea-
sure of acceding to your desires, in giving my opinion for
the guidance of your friend, which will contain no other
merit than what I believe to be the literal truth. The
same opinion I would give to another, and the same' I
would take myself, were I in his situation. In the first
place, I must acquaint you that £3OO is but a drop in the
bucket to-commence settling with, even if he understood
bow to make the beat of it; however, I think if he could
not employ himself profitably in Sydney, it; would do him
a service to see the country, but before be turns settler be
must know how to work. By the bye, I will explain
how he may invest his capital profitably while ho is sea-
soning his fingers. Ho must not be above soiling them
—lie must think it no degradation to load a dung cart,
and drive a team of bullocks j in fact, he must be a perfect
farmer, and he should and must learn, if he wishes to
prosper in this country, to bo industrious; lie must
plough his own ground, sow and reap, and afterwards not
be above grinding it. When he can do all this, and be
content that God has given him bodily strength sufficient
for it, then he will become a rich man. In seven years'
time, with his capital judiciously managed, he will be
worth L. 1500 per annum. But in the first outset he must
be frugal as well as industrious. He must do without
grog—such a thing must never be known to be in his


possession. He mtist be always content to lire on corn.,
beef, and bread, —bis industry will (give bim vegetables;
and if lie can indulge himself nine months in the year with
tea, be is a fortunate fellow. He will think this hard
quarters; but he will find many better ways of laying out
his cash than in living in luxury. He will have time
enough to do so when Iris fortune is made. He must also
be of a good disposition, to govern his men well; yet he
must he determined, and he must live himself as they live
. —only at arm’s length, and in their proper places of course.
Now for my advice. Let him purchase 300 good sound
ewes, and give them out to some honest man on the usual
conditions, viz., thirds of increase and wool. In three
.years’ time he may begin for himself, —he will by that
time, if ever, be acquainted with the customs of the coun-
try, and probably the management of his own establish-
ment. Now, let us see how our calculation will stand:—
INCREASE.
1834 ... 300 Ewes.
1835 ... 270 Lambs—thirds, 90
1836 ... 270 do. ... 90
1837 ... 350 do. ... 117
1190 297
Deduct . 297
893
WOOL ACCOUNT.
1835, Nov. 297 fleeces at 3 lb. per fleece.
891 lb. wool at Is L. -44 11 0
270 Lambs, 1| lb. 405 at Is. 20 5 0
1836, 560 full fleeces, 31b. 1680,... 84 0 0
270 Lambs, lb. 405....... 20 5 0
1837, 820 full fleeces, 3 lb. 2400, 123 0 0
350 Lambs, 11 lb. 525, 26 5 0
L. 318 6 0
Deduct 1-3 d for their keep, . 106 2 0
3j7212 4 0
Ditto wool bags, .. . . .20 0_ 0
Balance, L. 192 4 0


“ You see, in three years from November 1834, which
we will say is the time he will purchase, he will have 80S
sheep, and L. 192, 4s. returned to him for his L. 300. This
is a moderate calculation, and is most likely to he ex-
ceeded; but you will not he able to trace it, as I have
cut off for deaths, casualties, odd numbers, &c, &c.”
This letter, with the high character which Mr Barker,
and every one who knows the writer, gave him, has de-
termined me to adopt his plan; and Mr Barker having
made room for me, I go for good and all to Mummel,
Goulbum Plains, Argyleshire. It is 130 miles from Syd-
ney, S.S.W. It stands much higher, on table land, and
is consequently several degrees colder than Sydney. In
consequence of my utter unacquaintance with colonial
farming, for experience in other farming is a drawback
rather than an advantage, I could hardly expect any
thing for the first year,—l am to get L. 40, and hoard and
washing.
The farm is of about 6000 acres, and has about 4000
sheep, and 1500 cattle on it. There is another overseer
from Ayrshire, with a good salary,—he has been twelve
years here. He has, besides, a farm of his own, which he
manages with an overseer. I’ll not spend L. 5 a-year ;
and to save as much at Sydney, I would have required
L. 120 instead of L. 40.
Orielton, Cowpastures,
30 th Oct. 1834.
My Dear Mother, —The last letter I wrote was dated the
14th August. In it I gave an account of the general state
of matters here, and my new situation in the country.
I left Sydney on the 10th of August for the farm of No-
norrah, 6 miles from this, belonging to the same proprie-
tors both of this and the one in Argyleshire, called,
Mummel, whither I was bound. I took the coach to
Liverpool, and stopping at Nonorraix all Sunday, pro*


seeded on horseback, along with Mr M—-—, the mana-
ger at Mummel, for that place. I need not describe the
road till I come to Gonlbum Plains, as you will find a
good account of it in the New South Wales Calendar,*'
which you have.
We stopped three nights on the road, before reaching
Mummel, which is 12 miles from Goulbum township—-
once at an inn, and twice at private houses—we pass
through some very dreary ground on our road, particu-
larly Wombal Brush, an extensive ground of white sand
and tree, and shrubs so thick as to be nearly impassable,
with a road not much more than the breadth ol a dray
through it. At Goulbum, on the other hand, large and
extensive plains begin. I may here mention, that by
plains in this country, is meant not level ground, but
ground either partially or wholly clear of timber—they
may be real flats, and indeed generally are, but not ne-
cessarily so. The continuation of the great south road
lies along the Mulwaree ponds for 30 miles to Lake Ba-
thurst, over a splendid stretch of country, ' thousands of
acres ready for the plough, interspersed with clumps of
trees of 10 to 50 acres of openings, but instead of carry-
ing on tbis road, we turn -to the right, westward, along the
side of the Wollondilly. Twelve miles on, are the estates
of Mummel and Pijar of 8000 acres, on fine whinstone
and ranges of flats, with just as many trees as are requir-
ed for grazing, sometimes six, and sometimes twenty
trees to the acre, and sometimes more; though this is
all the ground actually belonging to the estate, yet our
cattle and sheep range over an extent of capital govern-
ment ground, fifteen miles one way, and twenty-five the
other. Pijar, belonging to it, being fifteen miles north
from us, and Gullan and Grahingullan twenty-five miles
west. The Wollondilly rises above Pijar, flows south till
it comes to Mummel, then it flows east to Goulbum, and
then turning northward, it gets the name of the Nepean
and the Hawkesbury, and falls into the sea at Brokenbay,
north of Port-Jackson.
* An annual Sydney publication.


. Mummel House stands upon rather highish ground
half a mile from the river, and looks down its course for
about two miles, on the river flowing, and the cattle feed-
ing on its banks, one of the richest scenes of pastoral life
you can imagine. The hills that bound it, none of them
-very high, sometimes come close to the water’s edge,
sometimes recede a mile from it, and they are much like
Braid Hills, for height, and so-on along the different bums
or creeks, as they call them here, that run into the Wol-
londilly, the Kibla, the Lisli, &c, &c.
Three miles above us, across the river, Captain Currie’s
farm is possessed by two Allans from Edinburgh.; two miles
below him, is Mr Kinghom’s from Tiviotdale, 5000 acres;
then next, is Oapt. Ross’s and house*
and Howie’s and J. J. Moore's bring us to the town of
Goulbum, in which there is a weekly post from Syd-
ney, and earners about a dozen in number ; on the same
side of the river that we are on, upwards of half a mile
from us, is Mr Miles, tenant of Dr Evans. Mummel
is entirely a stock farm. We mustered, this month, 1300
head of cattle, 2800 sheep, and 1100 lambs. We have
about thirty acres of wheat in for our own supply, and that
is all we have in the agricultural way.
I have two horses for my own use, and I have to keep
the stores, and ride out when I like, to visit the shepherds’
stations, and to see that they are all at their duty ; I have
also to keep the number of the cattle and sheep, and add
the increase, and deduct what are sold. I have fifteen
men under me, all Irish but two, of the strangest names
you ever heard. , Three-fourths of the prison population :
are Irish, most of them admirers of O’Connell, whose
name figures oyer a public-house in Sydne3 r , -where all the
Irish go to cash their orders and drink his health. There
is almost no cash circulated through the country; every
settler has his agent in Sydney, and he pays the wages,
&c., by an order upon him, which any dealer or publican
will cash; and they circulate like hank notes till they
come to Sydney and are paid. The manner of managing
sheep in this country is this'Where the country is much


wooded, each man Im* 40ft sheep, and if clear, from that
upwards to 1000. There are always two flocks at the
same station. They lead them out in the morning, and
bring them back at night to the hut, where they are
counted and folded, and a watchman sleeps in a box be-
tween the folds to keep away the native dogs, who some-
times pick up a straggler if the shepherds are careless.
With regard to cattle, mi the other hand, those that tire
bred on particular grounds, will never leave them unless
driven very far away; for I have known them find their
way back 100 miles to their regular beat. Estrange cattle
■require to be herded and yarded every night, for six
months before they become accustomed to Ihc plan-: there
are no regular fences, to keep cattle separate, yet they
always keep each drove by itself, however mixed limy may
have been. This is the general case, of course there are
exceptions that stray away, and it is the slockmans duty
to ride among them every day, mid go to the neighbour-
ing estates to see if any are gone .there, &c.they are all
branded on the skin with a hot iron. When accustomed
to be ridden among, they get tame, but if neglected, and
especial!}' in scrubby ground, they become like hares;
the moment they see yon, down go their heads, up their
fails, and unless you keep at the hardest gallop for some
time, you lose sight of them. The stock horses know
this as 'well as possible, and the moment tho cattle come
in sight, or begin to run, the horse appears to enjoy it ex-
ceedingly, and puts his mettle forth, —up or down is all
the same to him, at full gallop he goes, and nothing can
keep him in. Those accustomed to it arc remarkably
sure-footed; I never heard of *ono coming down. I was
out, the time we were mustering our cattle, one day from
eight till two, and I had the hardest gallop ever 1 had,
though I generally spend two or three hours on horse-
back every day at least, I blistered the bridle lingers
of my left hand, in vain attempting to keep in my
horse ; he went rip a hill, through thick brushwood,
where we only saw a tail sticking up now and then, us
steep as Duke Street with you, at the full gallop, until


the cattle were all turned by the dogs, and we got them
right. These wild Bushians, as they are called, are famous
leapers; a bullock, 900 or 1000 lb. weight, will go over a
five railed fence when put to it, as easy as look at it. You
would laugh if you were to see me in ,my fustian dress, with
a straw hat tied under my chin with a brim like an um-
brella, a pair of long spins, and a great whip, gallopping up
and down; I find it a most pleasant business, —it feels
more like play than work. I have the best health, and
when I weighed last, I was thirteen stone. All journeys
are performed on horseback; the meanest settler keeps
about a dozen of riding horses ; they are not very large ge-
nerally, hut all with a-touch of blood in them, for the chief
Stock was from some Mood-horses from India many years
ago, A man 40 miles away is your near neighbour ; one
thinks no more of going a journey of 300 miles, than you
would of going one of ten. We are above 130 miles from
Sydney, and there are settlers down the Morumbidgee, 250
miles beyond us. Regular carriers go from Sydney to Yass,
(nearly west,) 80 miles past ns.* When a convict is
out of his time, if industrious he will serve a year or two,
and buy twenty cows, which he will get for £l a-head up
with us, —though not the very prime ones; he then goes to
Burrawa Plains, 50 miles from us, or some open spot; he
builds a hut with an axe in a week,—-incloses two or three
acres, and breaks it up with the hoe for wheat,—-makes
butter and cheese,- —his cattle increase,—he pays no rent, —
Ms butter and cheese far more than pay his expenses, and
there he lives with every thing in plenty. One man who
served his time at Mummel, and began that way, has now
200 cattle, —and some, who have been longer, have more.
They sell their butter, &c., at Goulbum, buy wbat they
want, and go away again. It is that which holds out such
an inducement to men ; it is not the amount of wages, for
America will give higher for labourers, except good me-
chanics, who can earn their £2, 2s. a-week as fast as they
please; but all the labourers in Sydney have such a horror
at the hush, that they prefer spending their time for mere
* Yass is at the west end of the Australian Alps, where the Mo-
rumhidgee flows south-west.
B


subsistence there,-—when, for half the labour, and a little
rough living in the country, they would make themselves
comfortably independent in a short time. Sydney is over-
stocked with men, and the country is understocked, and
this will be the case for a hundred years to come. Sydney
is certainly not overstocked in comparison of Britain, hut it
is of the country here. I consider L. 40 as good in the
country as L.IOO or L. 120 in Sydney. One cannot, live,
quietly hut respectably, in Sydney under L. 90 or L.IOO,
including clothes; while in the country your clothes will
not cost L. 5. Every settler, gentle and semple, wears fus-
tian. You find men with from L.IOOO to L. 15,000 a-yebr
wearing the same as their overseers. Old Lawson, one of
the original settlers, got from London L,15,000, it is said,
all in gold, for his -wool this year. He has above 40,00(1
sheep, and 15,000 lambs, this season. The Macarthurs
have about as many. If men only pay the most common
attention, they get rich here without trouble, and almost in
spite of themselves, by the increase of their stock.
About the middle of this month, I got a letter from Mr
Barker to come down the country to assist at the harvest at
this form from winch I now write, where they have 150
acres in hay, and 050 in wheat; and here lam at present
furnishing stores to fifty men, keeping accounts, &c, I rode
down the 150 miles, the way I came, in four days,—l could
have ridden back next day with ease. I have just bought
a stock of 300 ewes, and 40 lambs, for L. 275. I bought
them from Mr Barker. About this time next year I expect
to have 200 lambs.
In the course of a few months I shall get the whole
management of the farm, with a corresponding rise of
salary; nay, I have received an offer from two gentlemen
in Sydney to Join them in settling,—they can command
the cash, and I the skill. In fact, any one with industry,
sobriety, and L.lO in his pocket, may succeed. The
question is not how to get a living, but where are the best
means of making a fortune. But rum—rum-—ram—is all
the go here, —kills many, and brings many to beggary or
mere existence. I have known a common fencer clear L. 60
or L.IOO in twelve months,—-resort to a public-house for


n week or a month,—-go bade to the fence-making without
a farthing ; and I have known similar instances of settlers,
with farm and stocking, that might have cleared a fortune
in two or three years. A sober man has a fortune at his
feet ; mind I speak of men who -mil work, not idle loung-
ers about the Sydney streets, with a gold ring and a cane,
insufferable puppies at home, and worse here. You ask
who is kind to me here ? ‘Why, every one is kinder than
another. Had I not got this situation, I would have gone
to Bathurst and seen Mr Eanken, or General Stewart, or
Mr Secretary M‘Leay, from all whom I had pressing invi-
tations ; hut as I had an object in view—to get experience
and cash—-I, went to MumuicJ, where I got both, instead of
there, where I could only have got the former for some
time, though I am sure in a month or two I should have
got a situation.
It would take a great deal to bring me back to the wait-
ing desk again. I tool such an expansion of mind,—such
exhilaration of spirits,—and such a complete freedom from
anxiety, except on your account,—that I feel quite a now
man. Often, often do I think on these words, Cast thy
burden' on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee." I have
endeavoured to do this, and Ho has taken away all anxiety
on my own account, as to my future prospects. Indeed,
after a short time in the country, to got over the strangeness
of it, all that goes away.
We had a cargo of 350 free women when I was in Syd-
ney a week ago. Borne of them are already married,—
almost all engaged either as wives or servants 11 Here is
encouragement for the 500,000 surplus females of Great
Britain ! T have engaged the blacks, of whom I know a
great many, and who are working about Mummel, when
they are hungry, to get me some opossum cloak's. I’ll send
you one a-piece, if I can,—l’ll get them for a little powder
and shot.
Mummel, Goullmrn Plains ,
10 th February 1035.
Mv Dear E——, When I went down to Sydney, I did


not sleep at Mr Barker’s, as I should hare done, as he has
removed from Ms house at the Mills to Rosslyn Hull, at
Wooloinoloo, about as far as Newington from Edinburgh.
His house is built of the finest white stone like marble, flat
roofed, commanding a view of the sea and all Sydney, and
is more like a palace than a private house. All the wood
is the finest polished cedar, fretted roof, Turkey carpets, and
crystal handles to the doors. I went to sleep at Mr Bass’s,
who was very glad to see me. I breakfasted at Mr Barker’s
next morning, at half-past seven. He has quite retired
from business, having let his premises to his brother for a
very large annual sum it is said, so you may see to what
extent the business was carried on. X had ridden nearly
forty miles to Sydney on the Friday preceding, and got in
before three, and left it on Saturday at two, on my return.
I left the Gowpastures (the farm where he was hist,) the fol-
lowing Friday, for this place. I rode nearly forty miles that
day; next day, set off to go to Mr P. Campbell’s, uncle to
W. Dunn, at Wingello, and rode good forty miles without
drawing bridle. There is an old road and a new one. He
is on the new, but by mistake I took the old line, and did
not find I was wrong till I came to Peter’s public-house, at five
in the afternoon. The other line rims nearly parallel to it,
at about five miles distance. It wanted two hours of sunset,
so, though I knew nothing of the hush, I took the direction of
the waiter to keep the sun on my hack, and sot off, right up
hill and down dale. I crossed seven ridges, some of them
very steep, and came in among Campbell’s cattle, and thought
all right, till I got entangled among the ponds of Paddy’s
river, and night came on. Finding nothing more was to be
done, I prepared to sleep in the bush, — took off the saddle,
and put on my night-cap,—disposed my saddle hags for a
pillow, and lay down at the foot of a tree. I lay there for
half-an-honr, till I got most desperately hungry, and it being
full moon, I resolved to try to get back, so off I set, and
after an hour’s riding, got, by good providence, on my own
track, and by the light of the moon reached Peter’s about
eleven o’clock, where I got something to cat for the first
time .since seven in the morning, having been on horseback
all the time, except that hall-hour. lam become very


tough, for I was not at all tired next morning. 1 crossed
the bush in the morning to Mr Campbell’s—all right—but
was very sorry to find both him and William away to Sydney,
having missed them on the road. I intended to have re-
mained all Sunday there; but in these circumstances, after
dinner I went on to Mr Bradley’s, twenty-two miles farther,
where Mrs Murdoch Campbell is staying, and stopped there
all night, and came twelve miles home next morning. Mr
Bradley’s house is about a mile from the township of Goul-
bum; he has about 8000 or 10,000 sheep. Now that 1
am on sheep, I must tell you of my own. I have got them
up here, and have got some vacant government land quite
convenient, about twenty-five miles from hence, and about
twelve from one of our own stations. ’
■ I engaged a squatter of the name of William Regan tit
take care of them and victual them, he gets wheat at ss. per
bushel, and beef, as required, at I|d. per lb. This Regan
milks about sixty cows every morning. I’ll get six rams
from this estate, and also six cows with calf. I’ll put them
all there, and besides the yearly income from them, I expect
in two years to have 1200 sheep, and above twenty cattle.
I’ll then can go and set up for myself, when I please and
where I please, for there is no necessity for buying land at
all, till I want some place I can call my own. I can get A
comfortable wooden house put up any where for £6 or £S’.
'You can see from this, how easy it is in this country to
make money. With my prospects here, I would not go to
live in Sydney for £3OO a-year; because, if 1 got a situa-
tion in a public office, there I would stick, with little hopes
of advancement, as so many new comers with high recom-
mendations step forward, and the last is always most thought
of, and popped into any place that is vacant; besides, the
expense of a Sydney life is very great. Now, my income
should he a constantly increasing one; so you see the rea-
sons of my choice. I cannot err in my calculations, for it
is nothing but what all others who got on here have gone
through ; for I believe it to be a true saying which I have
heard from many, that those who come with money lose it,
and those who have little or none make it. You may think
me sanguine, but I have cause for it. I have now been


eight months in this place, and lived among the people who
have done so,- —seen their calculations, and heard their his-
tories from their own mouths. Sydney has greatly deterio-
rated in money making for the last two or three years ; but
in the boundless tracts of the country, one docs not come
in competition with his neighbour,—there is plenty room
for all ,* and, oh, how I sometimes wish yon were here—
Low happy should we he ! The climate is very agreeable,
—rather warm in the heat of the day ; hut there is some-
thing in it that does not affect one as at home. I walked
two miles one day to church, and hack, then rode to the
other farm to dinner, when the thermometer stood at 140
in the sun, and 95 in the shade ; yet I am sure I have felt
more inconvenience at home. The evenings are always
comfortable ; and, except at Sydney one night, I never saw
a mosquito lam in most perfect health, —quite comfort-
able.
Mumviel, Goulhurn Plains,
March 1835.
My Dear M , I have never left this part of the
country since I wrote E- 10th February. X have now
the sole management of 1300 cattle and 3700 sheep, plough-
ing, threshing, building, &c., and of about twenty men. I
find it a very pleasant life ; lam so hardy that, two horses
cannot stand my riding. For a month after X came up,
though some days I did not ride at all, yet, on the whole, I
averaged about twenty miles a-day.
Hy sheep are doing very well, and have had about seventy
lambs since they went up to their place,—an increase I did
not expect. My mother asks in one of her letters, who is
kind to me ? Now I have a practical instance of this to
relate. About five weeks ago I was thrown from my horse;
and besides a severe bruise, the skin being stripped from
forehead to chin, and my nose laid almost flat, I put my left
elbow out of joint, and broke one of the small hones about
half an inch below the elbow. This took place about half a
mile from my own door., I was carried home, and the Doc


tor came soon after and bled me. He then tied my shoul-
der to the lack of a chair, and two men held it while two
others pulled till it went in with a crack ,* he then set the
other, and left me to sleep. As we have little aeeonmmda-
turn here for sick people, Mr M—— thought it best that I
should go to Sydney, where I might stay at Mr .Barker’s
and get the host attendance; so the gig being here at the
time, wo set off on Sunday morning for Sydney, and went
to Mr Campbell’s at Wingello for the night. When 1
got there, Mr and Mrs C. insisted that there was jio neces-
sity for going farther,---that the travelling in the heat In
ray weak state would do me more harm, and that the
Doctor could come there and see me, and that they would
nurse mo; so I staid a fortnight there, when they fed me
with restoratives till a fortnight set me on my legs again,
and I am now returned here in perfect health, amt my arm
restored, only a little stiff from being so long splintered up.
I was so weak at first that I could hardly walk across the
room, hut I am now riding about as well as usual, only 1
did not mount that horse again in a hurry ; go you see that
the stranger's friend has taken care of me. Mr C— «
house is more like a gentleman’s hue lodge than a farm
house; my face got quite well before I left him. I intend
to visit General Stewart and Sir Ranken when I can spare
time ; a week will do after we get the wheat Into the
ground.
A saddler from Dumhlaue, recommended to mo by M r
T— -v, got a place an Sydney in a few days. Are there
any of my acquaintances looking to this country for a
home ? I could not recommend a better place. As for
Van Dioman’s Land, of which all the talk is at home, it;
is a poor, miserable, expensive place, no more to ho com-
pared to New South Wales than Scotland is to England, as
tar as the natural fertility of the soil goes; every one who
has seen them both joins in this opinion; lust Man I hVman’s
Land being the place first touched at, the settlers there tel!
a parcel of lies about the place, and keep everyone they
can to themselves. One-third of the people in tins country
first tried Van Diman’s Land for a settlement, and left it.
We have no church near us, but there is to- be one at Goul


bum, ten. miles off; when built, if lam here, I will attend
it. Ido the best I can here on Sabbath, and find my books
of immense value in that respect.
Mummel, Goulburn Plains,
May 1835.
My Dear E , I have received a letter of 3d Sep-
tember 1834, but not a vestige of the packet of letters there
enumerated. I have to beg you will give me a post letter
once a-month. These, I believe, I can depend upon receiv-
ing; but as for parcels, unless one is at Sydney go on
board and ask for it, the delivery of so small a thing is of so
little importance compared with the cargo, that there are ten
chances to one against its safe delivery into my hands. I have
not.a scrap of news, so will tell you the rations of our convict
servants, that you may see how a Scotch ploughman or shep-
herd would do here; 1 peck wheat, 10 pounds beef, 2 ounce
tea, 1 pound sugar per week, a quart of milk every day,
pound soap, and 2 ounce tobacco per week; on some farms
they get less, but on most more than this; a freeman labourer
will get this, and from £l5 to £2O a-year, besides his
chance of harvest, which is cut down at 12s. an acre. A
rough carpenter or blacksmith will get about double this,
with half the labour as at home. In fact, neither high nor
low know what work is in this country. It is astonishing
how much tea and sugar is consumed in the hush; any free-
man thinks himself miserably off if he has not a quart of tea
to breakfast, a quart to dinner and to supper. When Igo
round our sheep stations, the farthest of which is thirty miles
from the house, I take a small bag of sugar in one pocket,
and a bag of tea in the other.* When I stop at our first
hut, fifteen miles, for my dinner, I take a great tea-pot, set
it on the fire till it boils, take a good handful of tea out of
my bag, and put it in to masb, add sugar to my liking; I
then pull out my pocket-knife, draw a damper (bread,) cut
off a whang, and put a bit of beef on it; cut and eat, and
Tea costs in the colony Is. and sugar 3d. per lb.


drink my tea, ditto breakfast, ditto dinner and supper. I
have drank a quart and u half at supper often, if the wea-
ther be either very hot or very cold. I have seen some con-
sume two at a meal. The mild wives who put a tea spoonful
to each person and one to the pot, would he astonished be-
yond measure to see a man put his hand into a bag and
bring it out full of tea for two or perhaps three. I always
stop a night at our station at Grabingullan, take my cloak
with me on the horse, and sleep either in my clothes before
the fire, or keep on my drawers and get one of the men's
beds. Igo once a fortnight to count the sheep and see how
they get on. I have got up in the morning and broken the
ice half an inch thick, to wash my lace in the creek before
the door; no person in this country thinks anything of that.
I have never slept in the open air, but I have often doin' so
in a slab-hut, whore you could put your hand through be-
tween every slab j it is to see when daylight comes in ; I
have seen the sun rise through a slit just before my eyes;
I never got the least cold by it ; I have, had a slight cold or
two since I came, but not so much as I have often had at
home in close houses and hot rooms j the other night it
snowed pretty hard, and drifted up under the edge of the
bark roof, and I awoke several times to wipe the snow oft'
my face as it was rather cold, yet I never felt the smallest
disagreeable effects from it.
The people of Sydney know no more about all this than
you do. If any person wishes to get real information about
the country, never ask a Sydney “ cove j” there is an im-
mense deal of slang in the language of the country—“ cove."
u gammon,” “ plant," are as familiar as household words.
The way sheep are managed here is this: A man has from
800 to 1000, according to the forest or open ground of his
ran j he takes them out in the morning, feeds them all day,
and brings them back at night to the fold, which is move-
able, and shifted every night to give them dry bedding. A
man watches all night; they are counted night and morn-
ing, Notwithstanding all this care, the native dogs some-
times break in and kill several of them in a night.
n 2


Munmel, Goulhurn Plains ,
1 5th July 1835.
My Dear Mother, — For my own part, I would riot
exchange my present circumstances, rough and solitary as
they are, for any thing I could have done at home.
Since I began to write this, William Dunn has been here
and stayed a few days, when we had many a chat about
home and all our friends. Mr Campbell’s, Wingello, is 33
miles from hence. He has another farm at Burrawa, 80
miles farther up, where most of his sheep are, so that either
he or William, when they go thither, make this a station.
William did not like this country at first, hut is become
quite reconciled to it. He now goes alone from Wingello
to Burrawa, 120 miles, musters the cattle, and orders the
men; Ms uncle trusts all to him, and he appears to get on
very well, I had a visit the other day from an old school-
fellow, William Eyrie; Ms father and the whole family
have been out here these ten years; he lives at Kurradue-
bidgee, on the Shoal-haven river, about 45 miles east from
this; he came here to buy sheep, and stopped for three
days: we had a pleasant time of it; he pressed me much
to come down and see him. I’ll take a ride some day; I
can go to Duncan Macfarlane’s on the Mulwaree, 16 miles,
to breakfast, and cross the hush to lake Bathurst, and get
there to a late dinner. If I can get time, I’ll call at Dim-
can Mackellar’s, Gongoning, and*<see all that country, as it
is likely I may settle in that district, or rather in some place
where the Murrozee river stretches down from the moun-
tains to Bateman’s Bay, for I like to draw near the sea if I
can. It is curious to contrast the state of manners and
customs in tMs country with home. If we ask, if such a
man is rich ? Oh yes, he has so many sheep, and so many
cattle ; some keep moving like Abraham, only drawing as
near home as possible, for they have all some head-quarter
to stow the sheep at. A man goes-and sits down, as it is
called, where he pleases, builds a hut in three days, and
lives there dor ten or a dozen of years before another pur-
chase the land, unless it be particularly attractive, and so
gets on, for he has no expense—he has fire and water—-gets


a crop of wheat in the rudest manner—milks his cows and
shears his sheep—and may clear c £looo a-year, and live in
a house that you would scarcely put a pig into in Scotland,
hut nobody thinks anything of a house here, if it only keeps
off the rain, and sometimes not that even; the hark of most
of the trees here is an inch thick, and comes oft in one
sheet, if properly cut. I have seen one of ten feet long and
six broad; of this the houses are often made, and always
covered, in the hush. I have seen a man with 1000 sheep,
living in a house made of sheets of hark put up like the
letter A, and the fire outside. I have seen the shepherds,
when the trees were small, erect two or three forked sticks,
put hark overhead, and some branches round the sides, put-
ting them thickest to windward, and so they live. There
is one specialty in this country, every thing is always im-
proving, and that rapidly, every year—houses, lands, gar-
dens. Men all improve, and become more civilized, as they
get on in the world.
Nonorrah, Cowpasiures f 'I..
February 18.%'.
My Dear Father,— You will see by the date of this,
that lamon my way to .Sydney, I have come down xo
conclude a bargain for the farm next to Mnmmel, called
Gatton Park. It has a good run for cattle and sheep, on
the government land behind it, is well watered, with fields
inclosed, and has been in cultivation, with a fair house on
it. lam to pay £—•— a-year for it, and get 62 dairy cows
given in along with it, so that I should clear more than
double the rent out of dairy produce, besides living in good,
country fashion. I have my wool on the way to Sydney.
I shear mine unwashed. I have near 1600 lbs. of it. I
expect Is, 2d. per lb., or at least Is. Id. If I had washed
it, 1 could only have had about 900 lbs., when I would
have got 2s. or Is. Xod., so that it comes to about the same
thing whether washed or not. I have 665 sheep, old and
young, and eight milk cows of my own, besides about ten
head of other cattle.


You send me some queries as to our mode of living.
Each, farm kills all its own meat; they rope and skin it,
hang it up on a gallows all night,—it is always at night for
coolness, it is killed ; and then at daylight, or sunrise next
morning, it is cut up, salted, and put into a cask, of which
every farm is possessed of two or three, then served out to
the men. Every farm keeps several steel mills, like a pep-
per mill, for grinding wheat; the men each grind their own
mess, and then sift it with a common sieve. They hake all
the bread into dampers ,■ it is done thus:—Make dough in
the usual way, hut no yeast, and make it into a round cake,
and about two or three inches thick; then take the hot em-
bers of the wood fire mixed with the ashes, so as not to
burn, and make a strong thick layer of them, and put the
cake into the ashes, and cover it over to about four or five
inches with the same, and let it stand till it is ready, about,
a half or three quarters of au hour; it makes a very good
bread indeed. The principal drawback in this country is
the want of good servants, Ido not think there is the least
fear of them as far as person is concerned, hut they will steal
all they can lay their hands on; every thing must be kept
tinder lock and key, yet, for all that, there are several men at
Hummel that I would trust with any thing. With fair and
proper management, you would wonder how quietly things go
on. I dare say you will think how horrible it would lie to
live as I have done, and as every settler does, the only, or
almost the only emigrant among a crowd of convicts serving
their lagging, or having become free by servitude; hut if
you lived a month among them, such an idea would never
enter your head.
When a man misbehaves generally, or refuses to work,
or insolent, &c., &c., the master gives him a pass to the
nearest magistrate, sends him off ; the man knowing he
will be punished, nevertheless goes sometimes ten or fifteen,
sometimes a hundred or two hundred miles, when the mas-
ter makes his complaint, and the man gets from twenty-five
to two hundred lashes, or is sent to an iron gang to work
in drains on the roads for one or two years. For more
serious offences he is sent for so long to Norfolk Island, or
Moreton Bay, which' is thus filled with double distilled


1. have heard ft man nr court, when sentenced
for life to Norfolk Island, ling to bo banged rather. He
was a shepherd who luul killed and eaten some of his nuis -
tors sheep. For my pari I like to have convicts better
than emancipists for servants, they are all of the same class,
and the former are so much more under control, that there
is more peace in ft lam among them than the others. I
have never had more than three or four coses at court out
of twenty-live men ; one took: the hush or absconded, was
taken, and got three years to an iron gang, the others got
twenty-live lashes and were returned. You never see in
the country a woman servant, except very rarely, all house
servants are men, and pretty servants they make sometimes,
but furniture in tin; hush Is not very plenty, nor is there an
encumbrance of dishes ; if a man can broil, fry a piece of
beef, bake a damper, and make tea, he is a jewel of a ser-
vant. The weather is so very fme that people live almost
in the open air; carriers ami hulloek-tlrivers lam sure
never sleep in a house for three-fourths of a year.
The country is in a state of progression so rapid, that
what Is true of it in one part as to civilization, &c., one
year, is not so the next. There aro a great many improve-
ments in our part of the country since I came, and so it is
in the other,.but, from recent discoveries, it is my opinion,
that the finest mid best part is just opening, and that had
they settled at Prestonport, and some part on the south
coast, they would have done infinitely better than in the pre-
sent colony. Some adventurous settlers have pushed their
cattle this year into new and splendid parts of the country
of enormous extent and fertile quality. Along the southern
side of the high table-land of Monaro Plains, there is a
range covered with perpetual snow, at whose foot runs the
Snowy River, a small stream in winter, hut a large river
during tire melting of the snow in summer. Two brothers
of the name of M>Farlanc, Argylcshire men, who have been
about ten years in the colony, after three weeks’ trying, got
across a shoulder of die mountains, and then one came back
to take their cattle into the fertile country beyond. He
kept his route a secret, only marking the trees at intervals,
but during the time, before he returned, there were about a


dozen different settlers searching for Ins tract to get out,
after his cattle were driven out, they-were followed, as their
mark was visible. On another wing of these Australian
iilps, a Mr L with pack-bullocks, was about six
months attempting to find a dray-road across, lie is a
Falkirk man, come, after ten years’residence in India, tor
his health ; he told me himself, that he was eighteen months
without sleeping in a house or in a bed—he was unsuc-
cessful ; but learnt that they must be tamed either close by
the sea, or round by Yass’s Plains, and keeping along the
west side of them, where for 300 miles, a dray might go
without once unloading, through an. open and fertile forest,
well watered, to the sea at Bass's Straits. Now, in all this,
there is not a single white man, or a four-footed animal.
If I had not got Gatton Park, I would have taken my
dray and tarpaulin, and gone with my sheep and cows out
in that direction till I got a good place, and there re-
mained till the land was sold, and then tarn out for
another, which would not he for two or three years, or 1
might purchase it from government. Tims you see what
a boundless expanse there is for industry to make rich.
Oh! if I had you ail out here, where you would have no
anxiety, and nothing to molest you, with every tiring to
make you comfortable. For every pound you bring along
with you, I promise you as much annual income the second
or third year. I grow my own wheat, MU my own meat,
have every thing hut tea and sugar; and I am sure, from
the waste of a farm here, any family would make rich, —
about half of the meat, and wheat, and every thing is lost,
through carelessness and fulness. Mr Kingliom told me,
that the year after he got his father and all the family liv-
ing with him, he was L. 50 in pocket, compared with the
year before, when living alone. Tire only thing to be
brought is a good stock of clothes and some books, and to
bring an old staid female servant or two. I have a house
and home for all till they can look around them,
Gatton Park, July 20, 1836.
My Bear Mother, — I received yours of the 9th of Feb


snmry, and E -s of the sth January, both by the same
post,-—they must have come by the same ship. Now, first
and foremost, you tell me of the loss of the Wallace. Most
of your things I got, though some very much damaged by
salt water. I got a few letters and papers; they were picked
up swimming about just as the vessel was going down. This
has been a very wet winter, and as most of the roads are
still in a state of nature, almost all intercourse by car-
riages has been stopped between tins and Sydney. There
are about 150 drays bogged along the road np to the axles,
and the men have run np huts at the road side, and there
they remain quite contented till the dry weather comes,
which will he in about six weeks. I have got none of the
packets, not even hy the N. Briton; and the Midlothian is
come too,-—hut I’ll get all when my own dray goes down,
in a couple of months, for wool-packs, &c., for sheep-shear-
ing. I have 680 old sheep to shear, and 200 lambs, drop-
ped in Juno; so you see lam getting on. I exchanged
twelve ewes the other day for a filly of eighteen mouths
oH ; I shall break it in for riding at Christmas. I have
not got into the farm yet. A law-suit, for the tenant’s ex-
pulsion, is going on at Sydney; but ! have nothing to do
with it; so I built a house for myself at the station, and
live there, and come down now and then ten miles, stop a
day or two with the Kinghorns, and see the news. They
have been very kind to me, and lent me what wheat I need,
on paying it back out of my first crop, I have four men
from government of my own, all good and civil fellows,
two English and two Irish; but, as Ido not need all till I
get into the farm, Mr Kinghom has got the loan of two; it
is a favour to him, as he is short of hands, and saves me
their rations. I expect to get the farm at Christmas, or,
at all events, next May, which is the regular term, and
some advantages for damages, as the landlord is a very fair
man. The only thing awanting is Christian communion ;
and it is to be hoped that it is not always to be the case.
Richard B—— has turned settler; but his cousin still
carries on the business in Sydney. Mr D—— sent his
letter by post. Ido not know what he is doing, or where
he is ; but I believe he has left Sydney, and I think he has


goqe about 60 miles from tbis, not far from Mr Ryne s and
Dr Reid’s at Inverary, between this and the sea. I have
just laid my hands on a letter of yours, asking a number of
questions, which I will answer in due order:—-Ist, Have
you got a woman-servant ? A., I had one for a little while,
a married couple ; but I was glad to get rid of them; she
would do nothing but dawdle about, and took a week to
wash my fortnight’s clothes, &c., &c. I had her five
months, and have never had one since,—nor am I likely
for a while to come; she was a Dubliner, The cook in a
house in the country, where there is no lady, is usually the
man that is least fit for ont-work, let him have been a sol-
dier, a sailor, a highwayman, or a London pickpocket, they
can do all equally well, broil, roast, or fry a bit of beet,
bake a damper, and boil the kettle, the utmost extent oi
cooking in this country; except now and then he must
wash, if a washer-woman is not nearer than twenty miles.
I send fifteen, and as she is the only one in the district,
sometimes it is a month or two before I get them hack, so
I make my man wash my stockings sometimes. Every one
except the favourite married few are alike. There is no
saying what a man will do till he is put to it. You would
be surprised at the way some bachelors do with their stock-
ings in the mending way,—if the hole is at the toe, they tie
a string round it; hut I don’t do that. As for cotton socks,
it is cheaper to buy new ones than get them washed twice;
you’ll get them in Sydney at Ts. 6d. the dozen, and I pay
4s. a dozen for washing.. You may he sure I get as little
washed as possible by her. My stockings have lasted well;
and will do so for some time yet. The best are mixed wor-
sted and cotton, as the -winter here is not cold (a good deal
like your March weather at home) up here, and not near
so cold down the country; the only cold place is near the
Snowy Mountains, where the snow is perpetual; and the
wind from that quarter brings a kind of snow storm per-
haps once a -winter to the neighbourhood. The usual win-
ter weather is a frost, which is off by ten o’clock, and then
a fine day; except it he rain, and that is not often. If it
rain for two days together, oh! the country will he drowned*
and a second flood is expected, for it is a very dry country,


generally speaking. Yon ask me how far I am from church ?
lam alvmt sixty miles. I have not heard sermon since last
down the country, that is our only drawback ; hut they are
building a church at Goulburn, and will hare a minister
within twelve'months, if there is one to he got ; but not a
man is filled with missionary zeal to come from the old
country to preach to his countrymen, who will all become
heathens in another generation or two,—and yet you boast
of the increase of the Gospel, while your own countrymen
cry and you hear not. Oh S if there wore but some who
would come, trusting in God’s promise that their bread
would be given them, and their water would be sure, to this
land of milk and honey, they would soon meet with a
right hearty welcome ; but they must be missionaries first,
for the congregation is to ho collected and formed, —but
where hospitality is freely given to every one who has -a coat
on his back, and a right hearty welcome, they need not de-
spond. They cry of the country is,—Come over and help us !
27th September 1836.
My Dear J— —All the income here comes on after
paying living. It is not as with you, where one must buy
every "thing he wants; here, when flour is wanted, go to
the stack and thrash a few bushels, send it to the mill, or
grind it on the steel mill, and eat to the full; if butcher-meat,
kill another wether or another bullock, and salt down the
remainder; plenty of milk, plenty of butter, &c,, the ex-
pense is almost nothing,—ground to grow any thing, and
any quantity.
Gmlhum Plains, iV. $. IF.
"28th December 1836.
My Dear M— — ■, I mentioned in my last letter that I
was sending down to Sydney for supplies for sheep-shear-
ing, when I would get ail your letters; I now must tell you
some of the disadvantages of settling, as I have told you
same of the advantages. I sent off two of my assigned set


?ants, one, a Yorkshire shepherd, farmer, manufacturer,
horse and cattle-dealer, See., &c., transported for life for
selling a stolen mare; and the other, a Norfolk ploughman,
transported for life for poaching, machine-breaking, or some
such thing; two very steady good working men. I say, 1
sent them with rations of flour, Beef, tea, and sugar, for one
month, to fetch all I wanted. They were to sleep in the
bush all the way, and go and come from Sydney for 4d. ot
toll dues, feeding their bullocks in the nninclosed land
where they could get grass. Well, off they set, and got
safe to Berrima, about fifty miles, and then lost the bullocks
in the night, took three weeks to seek for and then
came home, their bullocks having come to their old run
from whence I purchased them, viz., Gatton Park, before
their drivers; well, this put off the time so long that, to
commence at the regular time, I was forced to buy at the
townships some things to set me a-going, and pay an old
carrier, Joe Lee, to bring the rest up for me. In conse-
quence of this, I was obliged to put the letters for home
into the Goulbum post, and to get up only some of the par-
cels from home. I got eight letters, including Mr D ’s ;
but! believe Mr D stopped at Hobart Town, for I
never could find anything about him,—rmore fool he, for
Yan Diemans Land is no more to he compared to the
richness and boundlessness of New South Wales than Inch-
keith is to the Lothians.
Tell all who come away by no means to stop there. They
spend their money, and come hopping up here in a year or
two pennyless, or next door to it. The thing stands to rea-
son, that a comparatively poor and all occupied country
never can compare to a place, where, if all the population
of Scotland together were to come out at once, they could
be located on rich land ready for their ploughing, or at all
events grazing; and then room for all the population
of England and Ireland to come next year and do the same.
Just imagine the difference of a man having £SOO to lay
out, buying a farm, he toils away with Kis nose at the grind-
stone; and a man buying a flock of sheep, or a herd of
and going to land, free, gratis, for nothing, putting in
as much or as little wheat as he likes. In three years’ time.


the one would be worth ten times as much as the other, for
land, compared to sheep or cattle, is dead unprofitable stock,
and the other is doubling in value every year for the first
three or four years. He can then buy 1000 or 2000 acres,
and have all his stock into the bargain; three-fourths of the
stock of this colony are grazed on government ground for
nothing, and is it not easier, when some one Iniys the land, to
move ten, twenty, fifty, or a hundred miles, for that is no-
thing here, than to lay out money unprofitably. As for com-
fort, that is a different case; but people for the first three or
four years must suffer something, and then they can buy what
land they wish without encroaching on their capital stock,
and buiid and plan as comfortably as they please. The
parcel of books, &c., are still in Sydney, hut my sheep-shear-
ing is over and on the dray, which will start for Sydney on
Friday, and then Igo on Monday on my own horse. It is
130 miles, and I shall go in three days, thus; if you have
the map you can trace it.—lst day, Mr Campbell’s of "Wxn-
gello, thirty miles. 2d day, Mr Blackwell’s at Stonequarry,
fifty miles, stopping at Berrima or Bong Bong for dinner;
and then Liverpool, at Mr Muokle's farm, thirty miles, where
I leave my horsey and take the four o’clock coach and get
into Sydney about half-past seven. It is eleven months
since I was last there, and it may be as much again. Til
get all that’s there when Igo down. I get your post letters
regularly at Goulbum. Direct for me, Gatton Park, Goul-
hum, Sydney, New South Wales, if by letter; if parcel,
care of Mr George Rattray, agent, Jamieson Street, Sydney.
He is now my agent since B- retired. It is three years
and sixteen days since I last saw you all; God only knows
■whether we shall in time meet again. You may give me
credit for this letter, for I had lost some of my bullocks, and
went out between seven and eight this morning, and came
in after six afternoon, having never been off the horse all
the time, except to take a drink or lead it down a steep
place which I would not ride, and for three hours at least
at a hard gallop ; it was about one when we found part of
them among Mr Kinghom’s cattle about twelve miles
away ; one of them broke away three times, and after rid-
ing at as hard a gallop as we could for half an hour,,he


“beat us at last. The others we got about six miles away ;
one of them gave Mr Kinghorn s stockman a race, I do
not know how far, fox he went clean out of sight; while I
watched the moh we had collected, about forty, another ran.
me about a mile back, doubling me like a fox round and
round, and then when we had them four miles from home,
my racing friend bolted again, and kept me in play for about
an hour. I think I must have gone about forty-five miles
•without drawing bridle, and the thermometer at about 90°
in the shade. Igo loose clad, and perspire very freely, but
suffer no other inconvenience from the heat. I had tea, and
sat down to this letter. lam quite well, and as strong as
ever I was.
December 1836.
My Dear E ,I am always much pleased to receive
one of your letters ; if you can' by first ship send me six
striped shirts; and do write me fully of domestic matters,
for when I get one of your letters, I get into a quiet comer
and fancy myself at home again. You ask me to write you
something of a literary nature ,• that is quite out of my line
now, my wits are a-wool gathering, and my talk is of bul-
locks ; I am out of the intellectual world, and excepting
the three weekly newspapers, the Colonist, Herald, and
Times, published in Sydney, I have not, I may say, read an-
other book than those I brought with me ; my mind is get-
ting quite misted; I think if ever I was at home, I would
go day after day to the library, and, like a glutton, read till
I was satiated, I hare never lived in a house with glass
•windows except an odd week or so since I came into the
bush. The house of Gatton Park is plastered and floored,
but no glass windows; but I will get them when you come.
Gatton Park, Goulburn Plains,
Uth April 1837.
i M y Dear I have got into the farm now and have.


made things ready to receive you, if you will come about
harvest time or wool season ; and assistance would he of great
importance to me, aa I could get 1500 sheep tins year to
graze, on the thirds of profits, which would he worth some
hundreds a-ycar, if 1 had any mm to help me. There i*
country enough fur all the people of the three kingdoms
ready for the plough, lately explored not far from hence, to
the south-westand yet, of the people who arc pinching and
jostling one another at home, not one will come to enter
in it) pimemon .
31«< July imi.
My Bear Father,—-I received yours of the Kith Janu-
ary. You ask me about the accommodation. I have a
house of four rooms, a detached kitchen and stores j it is a
large house for a family in tins country; hut as for that, I
could build. as many rooms as I please in the month, quite
complete* from the day I first put the axe to the tree, with-
out any expense hut h 1 for two windows, and 30s, for sawn
timber for Jlooriug hoards.
1 can sell as much poultry, Butter, eggs, hams, «&c., as I
can raise, and all at Ooulbum, where, twelve months ago,
there was hardly a house. I send to Goulkirn, twelve miles
away, once n-week, on Saturdays, 20 to 30 lbs. butter, and
get Is. od. and Is. fid. a lh. for it. I will now tell you how
a fium goes on here. I have six convict servants, oneirei*
shepherd, three with the sheep, two ploughmen, two bullock-
drivers, one hoy who,looks after the .cattle, imdhelpsOo milk,
and one milkman, dairyman, overseer, and. house servant,
who sells the butter every week, a very honest faithful fol-
low he is, hut being a prisoner, I cannot use the authority
I give Mm, for much. I send my wheat, to Mr Kingbom’s
mill to grind, at Is. per bushel. I give the men t> lbs. flour,
and 8 lbs. beef per week, and as much skimmed milk as
they fairly can use; and 1 lb, sugar and 2 oz. tea when
at harder work, m splitting timber in the hush, &c. When
I want meat I kill. a bullock, or a sheep, &c., for i have
hardly enough to keep me of beef; I salt it down into a ,


cask, take the fat, sometimes 40 lbs., out of it, and melt it
into a cask, and having moulds, I make my candles as *
want them- If I require a rope, I take the hide to make
one; but.±he head, tripe, heart, liver, &c., me counted offal
in most places, only I grudged to see the dogs eat so much ,
I use part of the head at any rate for broth, but the cooks
here waste the half of every thing. I have sixteen acres
of wheat just coming up, and two acres of barley, twenty*
acres of oat hay, which fias grown a crop in that same field
every year, without ploughing or sowing for the last five
years, at least half an acre of pease, and two acres getting
ready to put in potatoes and turnips next September,
I have had to pay a>ushel for wheat for my estab-
lishment for this year; the money for the butter will just
keep me in it. Next year I shall sell 300 bushels at 7s. or
Bs., and have always a good stock; also about six or eight
tons hay at i-8, potatoes, barley, &c., if my harvest turn
out any thing good, as I trust in God it will, I shall owe no
man any thing, and have a little on hand to purchase what
comes across me, and receive you all comfortably. As I
am rather short of beef, I have fattened three pigs merely
on the milk, that weighed 170 lbs. each, and next year I
shall have a dozen to come in, and plenty waste wheat,
barley, potatoes, &c., so that I expect never afterwards to
buy beef as I have to do this year at 20s. F 100 lbs.; that
is, I killed the beast, got the hide, offal, fat, &c., and paid
for the remainder at tfyat rate. I hare some of my own,
but they are not of good age till next year, so I thought it
best to keep them till then. I intend to put in fifteen acres
more wheat next season, as I have the ground ail clear; if
you require more, why then I must make it fifteen more
the year after, for I can put in 200 if I like; when I want
firing I go to the bush, about half a mile, and get as
much as would last for 100 years, for nothing; as for
grates, they are unknown in this wood consuming country,
so that actually what is there to buy for a family ? 1 chest
{64 lbs.) of tea, £5, 10s,, Is. per lb., 4 cwt. sugar*
10s., 3d. per lb., a little mustard, pepper, &c. Now;
where is the expense, I would like to know, only clothing,
and that is not so dear as I thought it would be. If we


cannot live, and live well with as much beef, flour,
poultry, butter, cheese, vegetables, milk, fruit, &c., as we
can possibly use, I do not know how we are to live at all.
Land can be got as well now as ever, only one must go
farther away for it, but civilization goes on in the bush so
rapidly, that before one could get himself turned over in his
farm, he might find a town alongside of him.
There was only one house at Goulbum eighteen months
ago, and now I am sure there are 300 inhabitants, and
brick houses rising like mushrooms. There is a large
steam-mill and an Episcopal church building, and when
Dr Lang, whom I am glad you saw, comes, we shall have
a Presbyterian one also. (He next mentions wanting farm
servants, and desires a young man and wife from Preston-
pans to be sent out immediately, and will take two more
every year for some time to the extent of twenty-five in
all, to whom he will give <€2s u-year, and every thing
found them.)
Gailon Park, lltft August, 1837.
My Dear Mother, —I am sure that when here you
would be delighted with the country, and this farm, a
beautiful place, among sheep and cattle, and milking cows,
with plenty of fowls of all kinds, vegetables of all kinds,
and every plenty of a full superabundant country life, and
the climate here, on account of its high situation, is by no
means so warm as at Sydney,—altogether, it is as pleasant
a country as the heart of man can desire. There is a
church building at Goulbum, to which we could go every
Sunday in a gig,—for keeping ponies costs nothing here,
and I have one which goes thither in a light cart with
fresh butter every Saturday. Gigs are used in every
family in the country; and as brood mares are a very pro-
fitable stock to keep, it is only working one of them at
any rate. What is there to buy here for use except tea
and sugar? and these cost Is. Bd. and 3d. per lb. I get
land almost for nothing,—men from government for no-
thing,—no taxes,—none of the thousand things that take


away money continually at home. I have plenty of cattle
and sheep to keep the farm in abundance ; and as foi
wheat, I could grow 1000 bolls a-ycar, if there were peo-
ple to eat it, or to buy it. As for clothes, I have not
spent £lO oh them since I came to the colony,—-they are
very little dearer than at home; nay, if you like, I can
give you the wool, and you can mala! your own blankets,
and coarse woollens, as some fanners do. Nay, you might
grow your own cotton, sugar, and tea, for they are all
done here. We brew our own beer, tan our own lea-
ther, and make our own shoes. The house consists of
four rooms, plastered,, floored, and with glass windows,
which I was so extravagant as to pay 10s. each for, ox
rather six lbs. of fresh butter. I am just getting up a
barn of thirty feet long, fifteen broad, and ten feet high
the walls. It will take altogether about four weeks’ labour
of two men from first to last. The way houses and such
buildings are made, is this: a tree is cut down, and split
with wedges into boards, about six or ten inches broad.
These are set into a groove in a wall plate at top and
bottom, smoothed a little at the sides with the adze, to fit
square. The corner posts are sunk in the ground about
three feet, and the roof is made of saplings, and covered
with stringy bark. For a house it is only necessary to
leave openings for the door and windows, take an axe and
chop the inside of the hoards or stobs, so as to be rough,
and then plaster it with clay or lime, and whitewash,—>
get some flooring hoards, and lay down the floor. The
ceiling is generally made of bark laid on the tie beams,
and whitewashed, or often no ceiling at all but the roof,
where the flitches of bacon and hams hang to delight the
eye. The common bedsteads are what are called stretch-
ers, like camp stools, but six and a-half feet long. Bui
being ambitious, I cut down a sapling as thick as my
ancle, and made a four-legged bed, for posted I cannot
call it, as posts it has none. Few houses have
only one sitting room, opening right out, with the bed-
rooms opening off it, though sometimes they have a back
door, with a sort of passage,—the kitchen almost always
detached from the house; and as for the population, foi


tlio first two months after I came here, I had neither lock
upon the door nor bolt on window shutter, for I had no
window's then, and with not a free man but myself in the
place, yet I never missed a thing except a little tobacco.
I put a chair at the back of the door when I went to bed,
to keep the dogs from pushing it open during the night.
Show me the house in Edinburgh that you could do the
like. .For the first three months I lived at Mummel, the
house had no door at all.and the dogs ran out and; in all
night, yet I never knew of any thing being lost. There is,
nevertheless, a good deal of petty pilfering in some places,
but where there is a mistress that is seldom done,
Gatton Park, 25th Sept. 1837-
11Y Dear E , The country is looking most beau-
tiful at present, the wheat giving promise of a great crop
in Jairuiixy,* and I have just got my ham finished, and am
busy planting potatoes, and other garden stuffs, to have
plenty for you. I have just had about twenty new cows
calved, mid am making butter and cheese in lots ; one of
my swine has just had nine pigs, and I expect a brood of
ducks out in three days more,—so you see every thing is
making ready for you. Several people from Spencer’s Gulf
Colony (South-west Coast) have come here to buy cattle,
and jsome of them are to stop hero altogether. I see by the
papers the lamentable state of the Highlands and Islands of
Scotland; if we had some twenty or thirty thousand of
them, we could get on as fast again. A committee has been
sitting here for some time; ana upon the evidence given, it
is stated that 10,000 labourers are needed to fill up the pre-?
sent wants. Wages £2O to ,€3O, and every thing found
them; mechanics, €SO to €OO, and every thing found.
Several of the extensive settlers have sent home on their own
account for form servants and mechanics, principally from
Scotland.
Keep yourselves as separate as possible at first on board
when you come, for there are often some quarrelsome people
among the passengers.
• The seasons are exactly opposite to those of this country.
c


You will need some warm clothing for the voyage, for,
except right under the line, the weather never feels very hot,
and sometimes very cold. On this side of the line, you will
feel it very cold, as our winter begins in May,* and the transi-
tion from a vertical sun is a good deal felt; otherwise, it is
as pleasant a life on board as one can desire, there is so much
to be seen every day, between flying fish, porpoises, sharks,
whales, albatrosses, &c., &c., that one can hardly settle to
any thing.
Gatton Park, Bth November 1837-
My Dear A——, We have now got a minister for Goul-
burn, —Mr Hamilton from the west country, (son of Mr
Hamilton, one of the ministers of Kilmarnock,) who has
preached twice in the Court House. He had above a
hundred hearers. He has got above forty householders 0
names, all Scotch, to his call already. He is a young mail
of sound evangelical principles. The ministers get *lOO a
year from Government, and the settlers make up as much
more as they can. There is as much society here as in most
country places in Scotland, —the ordinances of religion and
every thing that can conduce to worldly comfort. As to the
distance, it is quite the same, when one steps on board a ship,
whether they reside there six days or six months. I liked my
voyage so much, that I was sorry when it ended. Purchases
of cattle are now making here for the South Australians.
Gatton Park, Goulburn, Bth January 1838.
My Dear E , I have had about 2000 lbs. of wool
this year, and am in the middle of my harvest. I have
a good crop, and have about the half of it in my yard. I
commence reaping the late wheat to-morrow. I have wheat,
hay, barley, potatoes, and vegetables. We have now two
ministers at Goulburn, —Mr Hamilton, whom I like the
better the more I see him, and Mr Sowefby, an English
Episcopal clergyman. The churches will cost L.lOOO each,
and the money for both is nearly all got. The Government
always double the amount subscribed for.
Dr Lang arrived in December, with the ministers and school-
masters under his charge, who have now begun their operations.


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS,
FROM THE
LATEST WRITERS ON AUSTRALIA.
geography;
This vast continental island is in extent nearly equal m
Europe—New South "Wales forms the eastern portion of if.
The situation of this district is one of the most favourable
that can be found on the earth, both for agriculture, com
merce, and maritime enterprise. From the river Boyne.,
near Moreton Bay, on the north, to Purr, Philip on" the
south, it embraces a coast line of more than 1500 miles,
with numerous safe, capacious, and convenient harbours,
communicating with a country of diversified aspect, abound -
ing with coal and iron, and.intersected with numerous rivers.
About the 35th degree of south latitude,-or nearly one-third
of the distance from Sydney to Bass's Straits, the country is
intersected by a range of mountains, called the Australian
Alps, winch stretch from near the sea to the Yass Plains,
about 100 miles. In no country are there greater facilitieslfor
making roads, and for railways it seems peculiarly adapted.
CDIMATE AND INDUCTIONS.
The climate is proverbially mild and salubrious, which k
indicated by the general health of the colonists. For eight
months, from Ist March to Ist November, the climate’of
New South Wales is particularly delightful,—the sky is
seldom clouded. In ordinary seasons, refreshing shower;*
are not unfreejuent, but there are no periodical, but .some-
times heavy rains. It seldom freezes in Sydney, and never
snows; but fires are requisite during the day in the winter
months, and for a time in the mornings and evenings. The
thermometer may be said to range in summer from 80 to


05, and in winter from 40 to 45. The longest da t y is f rom
5 a.m., to 7 p.m.; shortest, from 7 to 5.
The plains of Bathurst and Goulbum are both table-lands,
being 2000 feet above the level of the sea, and are remark-
ably dry as to the atmosphere, and favourable to pulmonary
complaints. They are very productive in wheat, and pro-
duce also the oat, which does not suit so well the lower and
warmer districts.
The soil is productive, yielding every grain and vegetable
useful to man, with fruit in the highest perfection, and of
all varieties, from the currant and gooseberry of colder climes,
to the banana and pine apple of the tropics.
Even within the immediate vicinity of Sydney, apples,
peal's, plums, strawberries, cherries, raspberries, mulberries,
medlars, apricots, peaches, nectarines, tigs, grapes, melons,
oranges, lemons, citrons, loquots, olives, pomegranates, and,
m sheltered spots, the guava and banana will be found
growing intermingled, and producing fruit, each in its, kind,
abundantly, and of the richest flavour. Of vegetables* the
same holds good. So mild is the climate, that green pease
are gathered in winter as well as summer; and the potatoc
produces two crops-in the year. This, however, is near the
sea^coast; in the interior the winters are more severe. Sharp
white frosts are of frequent occurrence in that season, and
even snow in the upland districts, —the climate varying more
from difference of elevation than of latitude.
Wheat on good soils, with proper cultivation, averages
from twenty to thirty bushels to the acre, weighing from
sixty to sixty-four lbs., and occasionally sixty-five lbs. the
bushel. In the county of Argyle, one of the more ele-
vated and colder districts, (where the writer of the letters
is situated,) forty bushels per acre have frequently been
obtained, and in some instances, it is said, even more,—
though with the slovenly system of the small settlers, fifteen
bushels are the average. The seed-time for wheat is from
March to June, the harvest in November and December ;
lor oats and barley the same.
Maize, the most luxuriant of grain crops, is sown in Oc-
tober and November, and ripens from March to June, pro-
ducing, from -.twenty to forty, fifty, and even seventy bushels.


nett, to the acre,—according to the quality of the soil, and
the carefulness of the culture, so that there are two <c»-d-
---times and two harvests in the same year, at differentescusuiw,
and rarely have both been known to fail The climate and
soil are well suited to the vine, the olive, and the mulberry.
Vineyards and olive grounds have already been planted, and
very palatable wine produced.
Silk, and dried fruits, with other useful and valuable
articles, as opium and indigo, for the growth of which■ tin*
climate is favourable, will doubtless by degrees he produc -
ed. A short distance ■west from Sydney, a large orange
grove has been formed, from which upwards of 100,000
dozen have been sent in to the market there in a year, ami
an immense quantity of fine grapes are sent by a steamer
from Hunter’s River, every day’in the season, to'the Sydney
market.
To produce all this, however, time and labour is requir -
ed ; the forest must he cleared, and tin* ground cultivated,
but the encouragement is great—order, utility, comfort, en-
joyment, luxury, follow each oilier step by step—and tin;
charms of culture and civilisation deriving increasing beauty
and power from their being of our own creation, replace the
wilder aspect of nature.
There are, indeed, in many parts of the colony, tortile
meadows, free from timber, and ready at once for the plough;
hut even in such situations, the first steps towards a settle-
ment arc attended with privations which the young settler
must make up Ms mind to endure with patience and forti -
tude.
On the Camden estate, the princely domain belonging to
Messrs Macarthurs, the extensive gardens are a model to
the colony. The vineyard, at Camden is the most extensive
and most forward in the territory.
ANIMALS.
Australia possesses no large animals, and few varieties ;
and it is remarkable, that except some wild dogs, which
sometimes worry the sheep, there are no beasts of prey—-
neither lions, tigers, nor tears—nor.: - are there


elephants. It is also fee from mosquitoes and annoying
insects, and serpents except some small snakes in the low
and damp grounds. The kangaroo is a wild timid annua..
‘ FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The Government of the country is vested in, Ist, Gover-
nor of the territory ; 2d, An Executive Council; 3d, ALe -
gislative Council.
There are regular courts of law, including General and
Quarter Sessions; a Yice-Admiralty Court, and a Court for
clerical matters. Civil as well as criminal cases are tried by
jury. There is also an extensive mounted police, which is
well managed.
CHURCHES.
/Here, as in the mother country, there is a variety of
forms of religion. The Episcopal Church establishment in.
the colony, comprises a bishop and eighteen chaplains. Of
the Presbyterian communion, in connection with the Church
of Scotland, there are five ministers ; but in consequence of
the new arrangement of an endowment from the govern-
ment, Dr Lang states, there will be room for the immediate
settlement of not fewer than twenty additional Presbyterian
ministers, fifteen of whom would obtain salaries of £l5O
each, from government, in addition to what they may re-
ceive from their congregation, the rest having.£ 100 each,
with certainty of augmentation to 60150 in a year or two,
and that in at least fifteen of the new Presbyterian appoint-
ments, there would be no difficulty whatever of raising at
least £3OO for erection of a church and manse, so as to se-
cure a similar sum from the colonial government.
The arrangement was, that whenever 100 persons sub-
scribed a letter that they will attend on the ministry of
a pastor, he will receive an endowment of ,£IOO per an-
num, and if 200 persons, £l5O, and that whatever sum
is raised to build a church, tbe government will give ,an
equal one. On the character and conduct of the Presby-
terian ministers, says Dr L,, who may he sent forth to sup


ply the present demand in the Australian colonies, and there-
by to form the nucleus of a Christian church, in one of the
most, important centres of moral and religious influence iu
the world, will depend, in a far greater degree than can pos-
sibly be conceived at present in Scotland, the welfare of
large portion of the future inhabitants of the southern and
eastern hemispheres.
EDUCATION.
The attention of Government has been turned to the
establishment of schools throughout the country, which are
now multiplying, and for which provision has been made*
Of a higher description is the Australian College, established
by.”*the exertions of Dr Lang, says Mr Macarthur, upon,
principles calculated to insure extensive and permanent
utility,—the Sydney College, and the King's School at Para-
matta. A mechanics’ school of arts was instituted in March.
1833, in Sydney; and there is a female school of industry
also there.
COLONIAL TRADE AND PRODUCE.
The principle and grand staple article is fine wool. Por
this, the colony has been indebted to John Macarthur,
Esq., who, upwards of thirty years ago, introduced the
pure Spanish Merino breed, as a cross on the sheep of the
colony, and by incessant attention, improved them so
much, that the wool now commands the preference in the
English market. Sheep in New South Wales generally
double their number every four years, in many instances
in less than half that period. The cjnantity of wool ship-
ped in 1831 was 1,401,284 lbs., and in 1835, 8,776,191
lbs., in value about L. 380,000 sterling. An intelligent
merchant in Sydney calculates that the export of this
article will realize half a million sterling in the year 1840.
Australian wool is much used for combing purposes in the
finer branches of merinos, schalles, &c., &c. It is a re-
markable fact, that in the year 1820, at which period the
wool of the colony first began to assume a character of
importance in the English market, yarn spun from the
finer descriptions of combing wools first also became an


article of export from Great Britain to the Continent of
Europe. The import of wool from Australia in 1820 was
99,416 lbs., the export of yam from Great Britain 3294
lbs. Progressively increasing with each other, the import
of wool from the Australian colonies in 1835 was 4,347,840
lbs., the export of yam the same year was 2,357,336 lbs.
The sperm and black whale fishery is another most im-
portant branch of the trade of New South Wales, in which
upwards of forty square rigged vessels are now employed
out of the port of Sydney.
The rearing of cattle is also carried on to a great extent.
The increase has been so rapid and great, as to have in-
duced, within the last few years, the extensive cattle pro-
prietors to attempt salting the beef for exportation. It is
not improbable, therefore, that colonial beef will eventually
be exported to London in return for manufactures.
The climate and pastures are also peculiarly favourable
to the rearing of horses, and great pains have been taken
to introduce the best breeds. Horses, both for the saddle
and the draught, are plentiful in the colony, and are fre-
quently exported to India. Salt provisions and cheese are
likewise becoming articles of export.
Coal and iron are met with in inexhaustible abundance.
Limestone is still more abundant, and in some parts of the
territory, as in Argyle, it passes into marble. Coals are now
exported from a place north of Port Jackson.
ADVICES TO EMIGRANTS.
The land is sold by the Government Office in Sydney by
the following regulations :
When a survey has been made of a parish, a chart will
he exhibited in the Surveyor-General’s office showing its
boundaries, divided into sections of one square mile, or
640 acres.
If any person shall he desirous of purchasing lands so
notified as disposable, application must he made through
the Surveyor-General, in a printed form, copies of which may
be obtained at his office, on payment of a fee of 2s, 6'd. for
each.
If the spot applied for should contain less than 640 acres,


the reason for the applicant’s wishing to obtain it must be
explained, as to the particular circumstances.
All lands, for the purchase of which application shall be
made, will be advertised for one month, and will then be
sold by auction to the highest bidder, in lots of one section,
or 640 acres, as nearly as practicable, provided that the
price offered shall at least amount to the sum of five shil-
lings per acre.
Before the bidding is accepted, a deposit of ten per cent,
must be paid down, and an engagement signed to pay the
balance in a month, and if not then paid, the deposit is for-
feited, and a new sale takes place. '
Such are the regulations for the purchase of land; and
the following letter to Dr Lang, from the Surveyor-General,
contains a valuable enumeration of the various districts
where there is much unoccupied land. There is a map of
the country, from the Government Survey, published by the
Society for Diffusing Useful Knowledge, a reduced plan of
which is hereto prefixed,'—which will enable the reader to
understand this, as well as the other parts of this work :
u I shall subjoin the names of such places as seem most eligible,
and where the waste lands are of very good quality, and in general
extensive. •
“ To the southward, the .limits of our present colony terminate
on the borders, of one of the finest regions I suppose in the world
for the establishment of an agricultural population,.—l mean the
banks of the Yass, the Boorowa, and the Morumhidgee, consisting
of rich open plains, watered by copious never-failing streams. To
that country level roads may be made the whole of the way from
Sydney, and in time the sea coast nearest to. it may he also ren-
dered accessible by the same means. To enumerate particular
parts of that extensive country is needless at present.
“ The upper parts of the Shoal-haven river, are' also, in general
very good, from Kurraduebidgee southward. There are many parts
of the banks and valleys opening on this river which might main-
tain a very numerous agricultural population.
“ The shores of Bateman Bay, and the lower part of the river
called the Clyde, are still very little taken up, and contain much
very superior land for cultivation.
“ To the westward of Burra-burra lagoon, is a tract of beautiful
land ; the situation is isolated, but to a small community it would
prove perhaps eligible enough ; it is watered by some fine monn-
c 2


tain streams, and is in the immediate vicinity of the sheep stations
of Messrs M‘Arthur, M‘Alister, &c.
“ Goulburn Plains are still but thinly peopled, although consist-
ing in general of good wheat land, and in every respect a good
situation for a farming population. Northward of these is Tarlo,
where some good land is still vacant.
“ Bungonia, where a township has been hud out. In this vici-
nity there is much land very eligible for small farms. A few miles
nearer Sydney, at Bumhalla, near the Shoal-haven river, there is
much good land still unlocated; and at Camhewarra, an extensive
portion of table-land south of Illawarra, which consists of about
sixteen square miles of the richest land wholly unlocated, although
overlooking the sea, and very near Jervis Bay, which is likely to
become in a few years the port of Argyle, &c.
“ The Kangaroo river, a branch of the Shoal-haven river, flows
in a secluded valley, where the land is of au excellent description;
this river is immediately behind Camhewarra; the Shoal-haven
may be rendered navigable to within a few miles of it.
“ Illawarra—there is a tract of laud still vacant, very eligible
for a small agricultural community.
“ East Bargo—some good land vacant, were'it accessible by the
road proposed.
“ West Bargo consists of much land fit for cultivation still
vacant.
.Burragorang—(the bed of the Nattai and Wolloiulllly rivers)
where the land is excellent, and capable of maintaining a very
numerous population. ■
“ Lake George (various parts of the shores of this lake.)
“ Breadalbane Plains Lake Bathurst,
“ Sutton Forest (about Nundialla, Black Bob’s Creek.)
“ Paddy’s river (near the new line of road.)
“ Westward. —The heads of the river Lachlan Bathurst (nu-
merous fine valleys in this county.)—Capertee.—Mudgee Tid-
hragar—-Vale of Clywd—Solitary Creek New road to Bathurst
(beyond Gray’s station.) —Do., neat Stoney range.
“ Northward. —Brisbane water,—Wyong Creek (the upper part;
terminating in rich cedar ravines.)—Southern shore of Toggerah
Beech Lagoon.—Lake Macquarie —Watagan, or Sugar Loaf Creek
(a branch of the Wolombi.)—Valley at the head of Ellakmg
Head of Wallis’Creek—-William’s river (upper part.)—.Kingdom
Ponds (ditto.)—Head of Page’s river (on the road to Liverpool
Plains.) —Banks of the higher tributaries to the Goulburn river.—
Jerry’s Plains.—Liverpool Plains, the numerous valleys at the head
of these, situatedbetween them and Sydney, contain land of excel-
lent quality, and are well watered—Port Macquarie.
“ I fear these situations will not he all intelligible to you with-
out the map, but the list may serve to point out the variety and


extent of eligible places to which, bodies of agricultural emigrants
might be led.”
These regulations for purchasing, and the list of eligible,
situations, will be of importance to those who wish to pur-
chase at once on arrival; but it may suit others better either
to lay out their capital entirely on sheep and cattle, and
have them grazed under a trust-worthy person, paying for
such management the usual allowance of thirds on increase
and on the wool, or to buy an already improved and inclosed
farm, though at a much higher price, even four times that
of the government rate per acre. This last plan is, in more
passages of his book than one, recommended by I)r. Lang,
and ho gives the following instance as an example:—
<£ In the district of Illawara, near the sea, a retired mili-
tary officer has lately settled with his family, on a farm or
small estate, which he purchased within the last two years,
and I am happy to add, with every prospect of enjoying a
high degree of comfort and moral independence. It con-
sists of 500 acres ; a considerable part of it had been cleared,
fenced, and in cultivation, and there was a good commodi-
ous cottage built of cedar, besides other farm buildings upon
it. He purchased it for £SOO. I called on him, aha found
him busily employed in superintending his horticultural
operations in a new garden he had formed. He was fully
occupied, contented, and cheerful.”
Dr Lang observes, in another passage, that an emigrant
family, with a comparatively small portion of their capi-
tal, could purchase a farm of moderate extent, partially
improved, Hko the one above described, probably for little
more than the cost of these improvements in one of the
settled districts of the colony, and near good society, if
they choose to embark in sheep faming or grazing spe-
culations, they could either purchase or rent a tract of
land from the government in. the distant interior, •where
their sheep and cattle could range in safety under charge
of a paid overseer; or if they lent out their money, they
could obtain at least ten per cent, for it on good security.
Were a family of moderate capital, he adds, to purchase
a nartially improved farm, like the one to which I hart*


referred, either at Hunter’s River, at Bathurst or at Av-
gyle, they would scarcely experience any of the inconve-
niences to which emigrants of all classes are uniformly
exposed on settling in the wilderness. Besides finding in
their immediate neighbourhood respectable and well edu-
cated society, they would he much nearer a market for
their produce, and would find the expense of carriage to
and from the colonial capital comparatively inconsiderable.
If they had children requiring instruction, they would find
it less difficult to get them well educated than in the distant
interior, while they would he much nearer the house of
God, and the harmonizing influences of religion.
Mr MArthur, in his work, observes,-
“ The difficulties of a first establishment are now sensibly
diminished by the labours of those who have gone before him.
Domestic animals of all kinds, fruit trees, vegetables, seeds,
whatever is most necessary for his purpose, have been al-
ready collected, and are easily procured throughout the
colony. Should he possess capital sufficient, he may even
rent or buy a property already cultivated and improved, for
his home-stead, or he may fix his residence for a time in
one of the towns, leaving to the management of an agent;
the difficulties and hardships of a first settlement on the
more distant estate purchased from the Crown.
“ As to the purchase of stock, the latest authority states,
that cattle of good breeds might, in 1833, be purchased in
New South Wales at from twenty to thirty shillings a-head;
sheep of improved breeds at fifteen shillings ; and horses,
either for draught or the saddle, at from £lO to i?3O. The
price of all these descriptions of stock is now very consider-
ably higher,—the rise having taken place chiefly during the
years 1835 and 1836. A large tract of land, however, may
still he stocked with a comparatively moderate amount of
capital; and when the settler’sown land begins to be over-
stocked, which will very soon he the case, if his sheep and
cattle are well managed, he has only to send a portion of
his flocks and herds, under the charge of an overseer, and a
few shepherds or stockmen, into the interior, where he will
obtain a lease of as much pasture land as he requires, from


government, at a mere nominal rental. Cattle and horses re-
quire little attendance, a very few individuals being sufficient
to manage a herd of cattle from 500 to 2000 head.”
The following are general remarks pn the state and pros-
pects of the colony from the latest writers, and though there
may he some repetition, they are considered too valuable to
be omitted;—* ■- t
u Sheep farming, however, constitutes the principal de-
pendence of the Australian land-holder, 4 and settlers, de-
riving incomes of from L. 400, or L. 500, to L. 4000, or
L. 5000 a-year, principally from this source, are now to be
met with all oyer the colony. Indeed, lam confident that
there is no other country on the face of the globe, in which
there is a larger number of individuals, in comparison with
the whole amount of the population, enjoying incomes of
L.SOQ a-year, than there is at this moment in New South
Wales.’-Lang, vol. i., p. 405.
“ Wheat, barley, and maize, or Indian com, are culti-
vated’ to a greater or lesser extent in all. parts of the terri-
tory ; and 'within a reasonable distance from the capital, or
from water carriage, they are cultivated extensively for the
Sydney Market. The Plain of Bathurst and the district of
Argyle, being elevated at least two thousand feet above the
level of the sea, the climate in these parts of the territory is
rather too cold for the growth of maize, as it is also for the
orange, and for other similar fruits; but oats, and the
gooseberry, which cannot be cultivated with ad-
vantage in the lower districts, thrive exceedingly well in
these higher regions.”—-Ibid., p. 408.
44 Potatoes are cultivated in all parts of the colony, but by
no means extensively. They are little used as an article of
food by the lower classes.
44 The mildness of the climate of New South Wales, pre-
cludes the necessity for cultivating any thing in the shape
of winter food for sheep or cattle, .
44 The soil and climate are universally considered pecu-
liarly well adapted for the cultivation of the vine. The
cultivation of tobacco has been engaged in within the last
few years to a considerable extent. The hop plant has also
been successfully cultivated on several farms in the colony.


Oranges also are most abundant, and many parties make a
comfortable livelihood by the sale of this fruit.
« The fig and the peach abound everywhere, c the fruit
Of the latter being so abundant as to constitute a consi-
derable part of the food of the colonial pig in the peach
season/
“ 4 If a peach stone, 5 says Dr Lang, 4 is thrown into the
ground in a favourable situation in New South Wales, u
large quantity of fruit may he gathered from the tree that
shortly afterwards shoots up from it, without any subse-
quent culture, at the expiration of the third or fourth year.’ ”
—Lang, vol. i. p. 430.
tc Land can he readily acquired, either by purchase or
on lease. The facilities of acquiring land must now be
greatly increased, from the recent discovery of Australia
Felix formerly unexplored, and which lies to the south-
west of New South Wales, connected with the Morum-
bidgee river.
et Major Mitchell, the intelligent Government Surveyor,
in his dispatch, of date 24th October 1836, giving an ac-
count of Ms discovery of this country, says, 4 It has been
in my power, under the protection of Dime Providence,
to explore the vast natural resources of a region more ex-
tensive than Great Britain, equally rich in point of soil, and
which now lies ready for the plough in many parts, as if
specially prepared by the Creator for the industrious hands
of Englishmen. 5 Ibid., vol. ii., p. 470.
, The following is a quotation from the Colonist, a Sydney
newspaper, of 22d December 1836 :
“ In. the interior districts we find, with some recent exceptions,
overflowing crops of the staple produce of agriculture, and of the
minor fruits of the earth. The last spring has been one of the
most luxuriant, and the present summer has thus far continued one
of the most temperate, within the recollection of our oldest set-
tlers, whilst the approaching autumn promises to pour into our
garners a cornucopia teeming with the mingled bounties of Ceres
and Pomona. Hill and dale, prairies and forests, have been clothed
in the richest mantle of living green,—supplying our now scarcely
numerable flocks and herds with luxuriant pasturage. Of the pre-
sent shearing season, we have flattering accounts from all quarters,
*—-the abundant rains of winter and, spring so completely filled the


rivers, creeks, and ponds, that the facilities for sheep washing have
been general and great, almost beyond example. The flocks, with
but few unimportant exceptions, were so free from disease, and in-
deed had thriven on the fine grasses to so healthy and plump a con-
dition, that the wool has proved of the finest quality, and has
yielded a heavy clip. The increase in the previous lambing season
had been so steady and prolific, that nearly every flock-master had
realized a goodly augmentation on the year. The natural results
of prosperity like this are naturally discernible in our pastoral dis-
tricts. Domestic comforts, and the varied elegances of social life,
are spreading into the remotest nooks,—the log-hut gives place to
the neat cottage,—the neat cottage to the commodious house,—the
commodious house to the aristocratic mansion,—and internal con-
venience and embellishment advance in a corresponding ratio."
“ Villages and towns, 1 ’ observes another writer, “ are form-
ing in various parts of the colony, and concentration is taking
place gradually,—this is the natural march of society.”
For many years the colonists were confined to a range
of country of about forty miles north, south, and west of
Sydney. While this was the case, the colony made little
progress. The throwing open the boundless extent of pas-
tures to the westward of the Blue Mountains, on the river
Hunter to the north, and in Argyle and the adjoining coun-
ties *4o the south, was the first decided step towards the
prosperity which the colony at present enjoys.
Mr Macartlmr, on the present state and future prospects
of New South Wales, in one place remarks as follows :
“ On all sides, then, there exist the most cheering pros-
pects for the diffusion of education and religion through-
out the Australian territories,—on all sides earnest en-
deavours are making to add to that prosperity which these
colonies so abundantly enjoy, the higher prosperity which
consists in the possession of an enlightened, moral, and
Christian population. To this end the voluntary energies
of the colonists, the generous sympathies of the British
public, and the permanent sanction of government, both in
the parent country and in the colony, appear to he con-
sentaneously working.”
“ Seeing all this, who can doubt, to use the words of a
recent writer in the colony, that the destinies of those re-
mote dependencies of Great Britain are high beyond all


calculation, and that he who does his best to fit their inha-
bitants for those destinies, discharges the highest duty to
society ? With eight thousand miles of sea cost, and a
series of splendid .harbours, unsurpassed in the wide world,
—with every variety of climate, and every variety of soil, —
with a territory abutting upon India and China on the one
hand, and stretching towards the southern pole on the other,
—with a vast ocean, extending immeasurably to the east-
ward, rich in the hidden treasures of the deep, and studded
like the evening sky,—with ten thousand populous isles, all
fair to the eye as Eden, —and exhibiting in their half-civil-
ized population the very form and pressure of primeval
antiquity, who can doubt hut that the destinies of Australia
are inconceivably high ?
With respect to the description of labourers and work-
men wanted, the following enumeration is from the best and
most recent authority;—
Boat-builders —6s, to Bs. per day. See shipwrights.
Brickmakers —Bs. to 10s. per 1000, for making. Good workmen
will always find employment.
Bricklayers —6s. to 7s. per day. Do. do.
Blacksmiths —24s. .to 425. per week. Good workmen in demand.
Breicers—Maltsters —3s. to 4s. per day. Breweries are increasing.
Basket-makers —A few good workmen would find this a profitable
trade. Common labourers employed.
Chair-makers —2ss. to 30s. per week. Market glutted at present.
Carpenters —6s. to 7s. 6d. per day. Always in demand, especially
good workmen.
Caulkers —Bs. to 9s. per day. Work usually done by shipwrights,
Coopers —7s. to Bs. per day. Employment uncertain.
Cabinet-makers and Upholsterers —ss. to 7s.«per day. Not in demand
at present, except as carpenters.
Cooks —ss. 6d. to 10s. per week, and rations. Men usually em-
ployed. Careful and steady men wanted.
Coppersmiths— -30s, to 40s. per week. Good workmen would find
employment.
J)airy-mmm —£lo to £l5 per annum, lodgings and rations. In
extreme demand.
Engineers —2ls. to 425. per‘week, and rations. The class of men
here meant, are properly engine-men and blacksmiths.
Earners —6s. to 7s. per day. Much in demand.
Eencers —3os. to 40s. per week, or post and rail fences 2s. to 3s. fid.
■.. per rod.


Field Labourers —3s. per day, or ss. a-week and rations. All kinds
of field labourers in demand.
Gardeners —£2s to .£4O per annum, and rations. Always in demand.
Gardeners' Labourers— £ls to £25 per annum, and rations. Much
required.
Glaziers $ Plumbers —ss. fid. to 7s. per day. A few of the latter wanted.
Harness-makers and Saddlers —4s. to ss. per day. Chiefly supplied
by importation.
Joinm —6s. to Bs. fid. per day. Good workmen in demand.
Iron Pounders —24s. to 40s- per week. Good workmen would find
employment.
Lockstniths —6s. to 7s. per day. Good workmen would find em-
ployment.
Millwrights —6s. to Bs. fid. per day. Wanted to fit up wooden gear.
Milkmen —£l2 to £2O per annum, and rations. All kinds of hus-
bandry in demand.
MaUers—4ob. per week, and upwards. Good workmen required.
Plasterers-—' 42s. per week. In demand. An excellent trade.
Ploughmen —£ls to £25 per annum, lodging and rations. AH
agricultural labourers, shepherds, sheepshearers, &c., maybe so
rated, and are in great demand.
Potters— as labourers. One or two might find employment.
Printers — Compositors and Pressmen —2ss, to 355. per week. A few
steady men wanted to replace drunkards.
Quarrymen —4s. to 6s. per day. Always in demand.
Sawyers—6s. to 10s. per 1000 feet. In great demand.
Shipwrights —7s, to Bs. fid. per day. Good workmen in demand.
Shoemakers —ss. to 7s. per day. In great demand. A good trade.
Some sober men earn 10s. a»day.
Shilon—-50s. to 60s. per month. Always in demand.
Stonmasom and Setters —ss. fid. to Bs. per day. In great demand.
TaUons— sb. to 7s. per day. In demand. Piece-work one-third
higher than in England.
Tumm—A few might work profitably on their own account.
Vim-dmsers —£lo to £4O per annum, or upwards, according to
qualification. Skilful men in demand.
WAedwrights —Sa. to fis. per day, or £l5 to £2O per annum, and
rations. General workmen always find employment,
Parchneni-makers —Sheepskins 2d. to 3d. each. Parchment likely
to be manufactured for exportation. No demand at present.
When rations are mentioned, the usual quantity is 10 lbs. flour,
and 7 lbs. meat, per week.
With reference to parties of this description intending to
emigrate, Dr Lang observes:—
u For labourers of all classes, for shepherds, and for me


chanics of ail those handicrafts that are in requisition in the
building of .houses and ships, or in the sustentation and
maintenance of agriculture and commerce, the Australian
settlements present a boundless field for employment, and a
most favourable prospect of adequate remuneration.” u On
their arrival in New South Wales, the emigrants will be em-
ployed for the most part as farm-servants, shepherds, over-
seers, handicraftsmen ; and in any one of these situations
they will he able to live in the enjoyment of many of the
comforts and conveniences of life, of which a large propor-
tion of the industrious classes of society in England are
deprived through sheer poverty. Their much higher rate
of wages, and their other superior opportunities of accumu-
lating property, will also enable them, if at all industrious
and frugal, eventually to become proprietors of sheep and
cattle, houses, and land.”
“ With respect to the rate of wages in the colony, and
the advantages there held but to honest and industrious
families, it must be borne in mind, that the expense of
bringing up a family in New South Wales is much less than
in England. Children there, if properly’ - trained, in lieu of
being a burden, me wealth to their parents. Industrious
persons, of sober orderly habits, find no difficulty in laying
by a large portion of their earnings, which may he placed
with perfect security in the Savings’ Bank at Sydney, yield-
ing an interest of from Bto 10 per cent, per annum. After
a few years they would be enabled, if mechanics, to estab-
lish themselves in desirable localities for carrying on their
trade; or, if agriculturists, to rent farms, or to purchase
land, But any attempt by the latter class to settle as culti-
vators on their own account, immediately upon their arrival
in the colony, is, as a general rule, by no means desirable.
Local experience should first be acquired. Not only is there
much to learn, hut, what is-more difficult, much to unlearn."
—-Macarthur, p. 148,
“ It is quite unnecessary for a family of free emigrants to
carry out any thing from the mother country in the shape
of furniture or agricultural implements; such articles can be
procured at as cheap a rate in the colony as in England.
Even clothing of all descriptions can now be purchased at


a moderate price in New South Wales. The best way in
which nn intending emigrant of small capital can employ the
intervening time, between the adoption of his resolution and
bis actual embarkation, mid the best preparation which he
can make for settling in New South Wales, is to leam to
handle the axe, the saw, the chisel, find the plane ; for, al-
though he may not find it absolutely necessary to employ
himself in that way in the colony, he will find such accom-
plishments of the greatest utility."—Lang, p. 177.
For some years past the emigration of free settlers to
Australia has been gradually going on. There were more
last year than in any previous. AH the government ships
that carried from Scotland, free of expense, married labourers
and mechanics, certified of good character, were of the “first
class, and fitted up In the most comfortable manner ; pro-
visions of every sort Were laid in for the emigrants; the
whole detail was superintended by Dr Boytcr, the govern-
ment agent, to whom all were loud in their expressions of
gratitude for the great trouble he took in securing the com-
fort of the emigrants. Even wine was laid in for the pur-
pose of being served out in case of sickness,—«ad every ship
was accompanied by an experienced surgeon.
With the view of guiding such future emigrants in their
arrangements, it is proper here to state, that it is quite un-
necessary for them to take on hoard any provisions or cook-
ing utensils, as ail are found, for them on board, and of a
superior description. Mattresses, pillows, and blankets are
also provided. The emigrants have merely to take with'
them a quantity of clothes and linens sufficient for the voy-
age, which is now generally made in about sixteen weeks,
there bang few washing-days on hoard. It is also proper
to mention, that should any of the emigrants he in a situa-
tion to carry out money with them, they should either take
gold or silver, as Scotch bank notes will not pass in the
colony; hut should any emigrant he enabled to carry out
any thing like a large sum, it is recommended that he pro-
cure, before sailing, a letter of credit on one of the hanks in
Sydney, and this can he very easily accomplished, by lodg-
ing the money with a bank in this country, who will pro-
cure for the emigrant the letter of credit for the amount.


The following extracts are taken from a letter recently
received hy Mr Marshall, Australian emigration agent,
London, dated Sydney, 9th September last ; the writer went
rutin May 1837:
“ I have at length the pleasure of addressing you for the first
time from this place, having arrived here on the 30th ultimo, 105
days from Plymouth ; I am happy to add, without a single loss of
life on the voyage, and all in excellent health.” , . • “ The
demeanour and general conduct of our whole party has been most
praiseworthy, both before and since our arrival; they were all em-
ployed, within three or four days after landing, at good wages, am!
I believe if we had ten times the number, they would in a very short
time have been engaged with equal facility."
“ Shepherds, agriculturists, gardeners, &c., have been engaged
at wages varying from £25 to £5O, and in some cases, for the su-
perior class, so high as £BO to £lOO, per annum, with rations for
themselves and families. Carpenters,''masons, sawyers, &c., ob-
tain from £2, 2s. to .€2, 10s. per week in Sydney.”
“ Their condition in life is obviously much benefited by the
change, and I have heard.amongst them but one feeling of gratifi-
cation at the prospect which this fine colony presents to them.
The services of those coming, by the next ship will be seized upon
with equal avidity, and as many more really useful persons as you
can send hither.”
Another letter to the same, dated Sydney, Oct. 10, says:—
“ Let me add one thing which cornea more powerfully on my
mind every day, from the personal observations I have been able? to
make—that wereMhe prospects and resources of this delightful and
prosperous colony known to our labouring population at home, ami
indeed, to all whose limited means make it desirable to seek other
channels for enterprise and industry, than are now within their
reach, they would not. long hesitate in availing themselves of an
opportunity, which, if they are guided by a proper spirit, and are
prepared for some inconveniences, which must be felt at first, can-
not fail, in no long time, to lay the foundation for themselves and
families, if not of fortunes, at least of competency, and a degree of
comfort to which they must ever be strangers at home.”
Extract of a letter from Table Bay, Cape of Good Hope,
33th September 1837, on. hoard the William Nicoll, which
sailed from Skye on the 9th July.
“Nor do we want any thing that can make us happy, for we
have plenty of beef, pork, bread, oatmeal, flour, pease, tea,: and


sugar, and water in great plenty. Since we left Barra head, till
we came within twenty miles of this Bay, we did not see land,
excepting once.off Cape Verd Islands, nor had we twenty*four
hours’ calm, nor one.hour’s gale, having as good a passage as we
i’ould wish for. When I was ashore, I met with several men that
were well acquainted with Now South Wales, and they say it is
mtch hotter than this.”**
The population of the colony in 1837 exceeds 80,000,
which Sydney, the capital, which is beautifully situ-
ited on one of the inlets of Port Jackson, contains above
20,000.
The following is the official return of some of the articles
'xported from Sydney in 1835, which shows the commer-
rial products of the, country in these particulars;
Wool, 3,776,191 lbs.
Butter and Cheese, 224,000 ...
Suit Provisions,.. 1,675,520 ...
Flour and Biscuit,,... 846,720 ...
Soap and Candles, 76,160 ...
W00d,.. 1,131,070 feet.
Seal .Skins, 667
Hides, 35,679
Coals, ‘2,492 tons.
Sperm Oil, 2,904 ...
Black d 0.,. 1,159 ...
It may also be proper merely to mention, that in New
South Wales the natives, who are Mack, are thinly scattered,
nd of pcaceaMo demeanour to Europeans. Missionaries
Lave been for sometime employed among them, with good
fleet
The editor has thus given, in as small a compass as the
suture of the subject admitted of, the information he con-
caves to be most essential to intending emigrants of all
lasses and gradations, extracted from the most recent
rU I unities; and he trusts that the selection will be found
uffident for their general guidance. The works principally
onsultcd have been, —6 The Sydney Calendar, an Annual
Tire History of New South Wales, second edition* hy Hr
■* This vessel readied Sydney on 25th October, nil well, after
quids parage.


T .ang f “Few South. Wales, its present state and. future
prospects, by James Macarthur, Esq.; and, u Tlie HLtoiy
of Australasia, by R. M. Martin, F.b.S.; —to whic-i readers
are referred for full information.
For emigrants of the higher classes of this country, nume-
rous vessels, with every accommodation, sail from Leith for
Sydney through the year; and also several of the same kind
from Greenock and Liverpool. Passage money for a gentle-
man, L.6'o, for a lady, aboutL.ss. They have to provide their
own bedding, and take with them a stock of clothes and body
linens sufficient to serve them for four months, the usual
length of the voyage, there being no washing on board; also
some warm clothing for the southern latitudes for a time.
Mechanics and labourers who wish to obtain a free pas-
sage, must apply, with proper certificates, to Lieutenant
Forrest, R.F., Emigration Office, Custom House, Leith.
Their stores and embarkation are superintended with the
utmost care by Dr Boyter, the Government agent, along
with Lieutenant Forrest.
Of the Highlanders, with detachments of whom three
vessels sailed last year from Skye and Mull, these gentle-
men take the same charge. John Bowie, Esq., W.S., Edin-
burgh, who accompanied the Rev. Dr M‘Leod last year to
London, and was mainly instrumental in obtaining relief for
the destitute Highlanders and Islanders, and favourable
terns for their ’emigration, witnessed the sailing of the first
ship from Skye, and continues his benevolent labours in the
way of information to the proprietors and clergy of the
Highland districts. Several vessels are to sail this year from
that quarter, on the same plan.
Vessels sail also regularly from London for Sydney, (touch-
ing at Plymouth, to receive those passengers to whom it may
be more convenient to embark there,) under the direction of
the Australian Emigration Agent, with cabin, intermediate,
and steerage passengers,—a proportion of the latter being
labourers andmechanics certified of good character, carried
out free of expense. The following is the list of these ships
for 1838. They are from 500 to 700 tons each, and all of
the first class, with a skilful surgeon on board, —the rates of
charge being on the lowest scale consistent with really com


fortable accommodation. They will sail, wind and weather
permitting, on the following days pointedly
FROM LONDON-. FROM PLYMOUTH.
May 2 May 14
May 30 June 13
July 11 July 23
August 15 August 27
September... 8 September... 17
September... 29 October 8
October 24 November ... 3
November ... 21 December.... 3
December.... 29 January 7
.All particulars as to them may he known, and every ne-
cessary information respecting Now South Wales, on appli-
cation to Mr John Marshall, Australian Emigration Agent,
2£>, Birchin Lane, CornMU, London; Mr John Johnstone,
Publisher, 2, Hunter Square, Edinburgh; and Mr DatW
Porbest, 50, Union Street, Glasgow.—Lost-paid letters only
will be answered.
It is of importance to add, that there is in Sydney an
« Emigrants’ Friend .Society,” for the purpose of giving them
advice on landing, the secretary of which is William Mac-
pberson. Esq., Collector of Internal Revenue there.
The following summary is recently from the pen of ah
intelligent author in the colony:—
rt The artizan conies to a country where a day’s labour
may purchase provisions for a week—where the clothing re-
quired is a matter of no consideration—where the thought
of daily subsistence is never intruded on his mind—and
where his savings may soon place him Beyond the necessity
of labour at all. The disposition to prodigality inherent in
human nature is.of course fostered by this abuudance, and
often, leads to dissipation ; but the industrious and frugal
soon rise to respectable rank.
<c The agricultural labourer is supplied by Ms employer
with, lodging and all necessaries. From the nature of the
climate he needs little clothing. His wages are hence almost
clear gain. He thus may soon he aide to purchase stock,
or rent a patch from his master. Prom this he rises to a
small farmer, and may ultimately be a proprietor.


« As to the agricultural capitalist, by due caution he may
soon reach a position of far greater importance than he could
hope to occupy by similar exertions at home. The severity
of the winter forms no drawback to the efficiency of his
operations, nor are his profits endangered by the necessity
of procuring supplies of artificial food for his stock. A man
of limited means has it hence in his power to obtain for
himself and family substantial independence. 5 ’
In conclusion, the editor has only to state, that the more
he has read and thought on the subject, the more is he im -
pressed with its importance. The difference betwixt this
country and the one in question is, as expressed in one of
the early letters from the writer of the extracts to Ins family,
that here it is hard work, and little prospect of any thing
beyond subsistence, and there, though it is hard work, it is
accompanied with hope and moral certainty of success. Three
more of the family have recently gone out to join him. In
fact, the real agricultural and horticultural resources of New
South Wales have never yet been developed,—there having
been little or no inducement to do so, beyond the mere
supply of the pastoral occupants; hut when these capabili-
ties are fairly brought into operation in such a productive
climate and soil, the prospects of the future and increasing
prosperity of the colony are magnificent and boundless.
As cultivation extends over the vast surface, the farm-
stead, with its plain and substantial comforts-—-the sheep-
fold, the cottage, the village with the school and the church,
and its “ church-going hell, 55 —the manorial residence, amidst
its broad and fertile domain, with its ample appendages
and rural adornment,—the towered city, with its splendid
edifices, its busy mart, its science and arts, —will spring up
in natural and uniform successive progress, fostered and' en-
lightened by the humanizing influence of the Gospel,—
while plenty is “ scattered o’er the smiling land,’’ and all is
“ instinct ” with life, and happiness, and joy.
THE END.
