

THREE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
BY
A. R. BROWN.
[WITH PLATE IV.]
PUBLISHED BY THE
(JJogftf snforopofogtcaf Jngfifufe of <oreaf OSnffttn ans Hreftvnb,
50, GREAT RUSSELL STREET, LONDON, W.C.


THREE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
[WITH PLATE IV.]
BY A. R. BROWN.
In the year 1910 I was elected to the Anthony Wilkin Studentship in Ethnology
founded at Cambridge University in memory of the late Anthony Wilkin, whose
early death was a great loss to the science to which he had devotedbimself. Under
the terms of that studentship I undertook certain investigations among the
aborigines of Australia. Additional funds for the purpose of these researches were
provided by Mr. S. P. Mackay of Victoria and Western Australia, by Sir John
Murray, and by the Eoyal Society. During some part of my investigations I had
the help of Mrs. D. M. Bates, who has for some years been studying the aborigines
of Western Australia on behalf of the West Australian Government. The services
of Mrs. Bates were generously placed at my disposal by the Government. The
results of my investigations and those of Mrs. Bates in the same field will be
published in due course. A part of the results of my own researches are published
in the present paper. The information which is contained therein was all obtained
in 1911 during a journey through the country of the tribes referred to.
The Karieea Tribe.
The Kariera tribe occupies the coast of Western Australia from a point to the
east of the Sherlock Eiver to a point east of Port Hedland, extending inland for
about 50 miles. The tribe is adjoined by the Ngarla on the east, the Ngaluma
on the west, the Injibandi on the south, and the Namal on the south-east. No
meaning has been discovered for the name Kariera, by which members of the tribe
are spoken of by themselves and by their neighbours.
Bibliography.
The Kariera tribe is one of the tribes referred to in a pamphlet by
Mr. J. G. Withnell entitled “ The Customs and Traditions of the Aboriginal Natives
of North-Western Australia,” published at Eoebourne, 1901. The name of the
tribe is spelt Kyreara. The same tribe is referred to under the name Kaierra, by
Dr. E. Clement in “ Ethnographical Notes on the Western-Australian Aborigines,”
Internationales Archiv fiir Ethnographic, Band XVI, Heft I and 11, 1903. I have
found the statements of Dr. Clement, except where they repeat the information
a


given by Mr. Withnell, to be careless and inaccurate. The name of the tribe is
given as Karriarra in a pamphlet entitled “ Aborigines of North-West Australia,”
by “ Yabaroo,” Perth, West Australia, 1899.
Present Condition and Numbers.
At the present day the natives of the Kariera tribe are nearly all living on the
sheep stations that have been established in their tribal territory. They are fed
and clothed by the station owners or at the expense of the Government, and the
able-bodied men and women work on the stations. Their country has been
FIG. 1.—MAP OF THE KARIERA TRIBE.
occupied by the whites for about fifty years, and during that time their numbers
have steadily decreased. At the present time there are not more than 100 all told,
men, women, and children. My own estimate would put their present number at
between eighty and ninety. All of them, except the oldest, can speak fairly good
English.
Tribal and Local Organization.
The tribe is distinguished from its neighbours by the possession of a name, a
language and a defined territory. There is no tribal chief, nor any form of tribal
government. The fights that formerly took place were not wars of one tribe with


another, but of one part of one tribe with one part of another, or at times of one part
of a tribe with another part of the same tribe. Thus there was no unity of the
tribe in warfare.
The extent of the territory of the tribe is between 3,500 and 4,000 square
miles. The boundaries are shown approximately on the accompanying map. The
north irn part is mostly level plain covered with grass and scrub with occasional
hills of no great height. In the south, there are numerous stony hills with inter-
vening flats. The coast is low and consists chiefly of sand-dunes and mangrove
swamps. There are three main rivers or water-courses, the Turner, the Yule and
the Peeawah. These so-called rivers only run after heavy rains, but, during most
of the year, water is. to be found in the river beds in pools or soaks. Many of
these pools were formerly permanent and contained fresh water fish. Since the
country has been stocked with sheep, some of the formerly permanent pools now
dry up in the summer.
The natives have a very large number of geographical names. Many of these,
if not all, have a meaning that is understood at the present day An interesting
feature, and one often leading to confusion, is that there are often two different
places with the same name. Thus, there are two places called Murumbarina, one
on the Turner River, and one on the Sherlock River. Murumbari is the name
of a species of beetle, which is common, it seems, in these two places. Every
geographical feature, every little hill or pool or creek has its name. There are a
few names that seem to be the names of districts, but there is a good deal of uncer-
tainty in their application. A very large proportion of local names end in the
syllable -na, as in the above example, while others end in -adina or -indina.
The tribe is divided into a number of local groups, each with its own defined
territory. Membership of the local group is determined by descent in the male
line; that is to say, a child belongs to the local group of its father and inherits
hunting rights over the territory of that group. There are no distinctive names
for the local groups. To the question “ Where is your country ? ” ( Wanja nyinda
ngnra ?), a native replies by naming one of the more prominent camping places
of his local group, or in some cases the place where he was born. On the accom-
panying map of the Kariera tribe I have, therefore, indicated the different local
groups by means of Roman numerals. The map is not complete ; that is to say, it
does not show all the local groups formerly existing, but only those about which
I was able to obtain reliable information by means of genealogies. I found out
very little about the southern part of the tribal territory.
In default of an actual survey, it is impossible to do more than give a rough
estimate of the extent of the territory belonging to each local group. Along the
coast there are seven local groups, occupying altogether a strip of land about 80
miles long and a little less than 10 miles wide. This gives the area occupied by
each as about 100 square miles or a little more. The inland local groups seemed
to me to occupy each a somewhat larger country, between 150 and 200 square
miles. This is what we might expect, since the coast natives have both the land
b


and the sea from which to obtain their food-supply. As a rough estimate, there-
fore, but the best that our knowledge permits, we may suppose that the tribe
consisted of between twenty and twenty-five local groups. It is impossible at
this time to obtain any accurate information as to the former volume of the
local groups, that is the number of individuals belonging to each. My own
estimate is that each group contained not less than 30 individuals, giving
the minimum for the tribe at about 750 with a density of about ’2 per square
mile. This, however, is a very rough estimate, and no reliance must be placed
upon it.
The country of a local group, with all its products, animal, vegetable, and
mineral, belongs to the members of the group in common. Any member has the
right to hunt over the country of his group at all times. He may not, however,
hunt over the country of any other local group without the permission of the owners.
A single exception to this rule seems to have existed where a man was following
a kangaroo or emu and it crossed the boundary into the country of his neighbours,
when he might follow it and kill it. Hunting, or collecting vegetable products on
the country of A 'another local group constitutes an act of trespass and_ was in former
times liable to be punished by death. The importance attached to this law seems
to have been so great that offences against it were very rare. In the early days
of the settlement of the whites in the country of this and neighbouring tribes, the
squatters made use of the natives as shepherds, and I have been told on several
occasions that they found it at first impossible to persuade a native to shepherd the
sheep anywhere except on his own country. I could not find any evidence of the
individual ownership of any part of the soil or any of its products. The whole
territory of the group and everything on it seem to belong equally to all the
members of the group.
It is impossible for a man to leave his local group and become naturalized or
adopted in another. Just as the country belonged to him, so he belonged to it.
If he left it he became a stranger, either the guest or the enemy of the men in
whose country he found himself. He might pay visits to other groups, and such
visits were apparently of very frequent occurrence, but his “ home ” was his own
country, the country of his father and his father’s father. At the present day the
influence of white settlement has altered all this. The country now belongs to the
white men and the natives have to live where they can. But even now the attach-
ment of a man to his own country has not been destroyed. Natives often express
a wish to die and be buried in their own inherited hunting ground.
In their original condition of life the natives never stayed long in one place.
They shifted from one camping ground to another perpetually. It does not seem
that the whole local group always lived and moved about as one body. A single
family, that is a man and his wife or wives and their children, often travelled and
hunted by themselves. A single individual, or a family, or several families, might
pay a visit to a neighbouring group, during which time they hunted in the country
of their hosts. When some particular article of food became very plentiful in the


country of one group they invited their neighbours to come and stay with them.
Thus the inland natives visited those on the coast when fish was plentiful. On the
occasion of the performance of a ceremony, members of different local groups
might be found camped together often for weeks at a time. There was thus a
perpetual shifting to and fro both within the country of the group and from one
group to another.
This state of things shows very clearly that the unit of social life in the
Kariera tribe was the family, consisting of a man and his wife or wives and their
children. Such a unit might move about by itself without reference to the
movements of the other families of the local group. In the camp each family'
had its own hut or shelter with its own fire. The family had its own food
supply which was cooked and consumed by the family. The man provided
the flesh food and his wife provided the vegetable food and such things as small
mammals or lizards.
A native camp is composed of two parts, the married people’s camp and the
bachelors’ camp. The latter contains all the unmarried men, including widowers ;
unmarried women and widows live with one or other of the families of the
married people. If a visitor comes to the camp and brings his wife with him, he
puts his fire and shelter near the married people, on the same side as his own country
lies. If he is unmarried, or if he has not brought his wife with him, he goes to
the bachelors’ camp.
It will be shown later that a man is not permitted to marry a woman of his
own local group. The result of this was that in the camp of a local group would
be found only men and unmarried women and children who belonged to the group
by birth, the married women all belonging by birth to other groups. A woman
seems to have retained a sort of right over the country of her birth, so that a man
and his wife were generally welcome to visit the wife’s local group whenever they
wished. A man seems also to have a sort of secondary right over the country of
his mother, that is the country to which she belonged by birth. In a large number
of cases this was the same as the country of his wife. In both cases, however, it
seems to have meant no more than that a man was sure of a welcome in the
country of his wife or his mother.
Relationship and Marriage.
The Kariera tribe is divided into four parts that I shall speak of as classes.
The names of these are Banaka, Burung, Palyeri, and Karimera. Ko meanings
were found for these names. To the natives of the present day they are simply
the names of social divisions, and have no further meanings. These classes
regulate the marriages of the natives. A man of any given class is restricted in
his choice of a wife to one of the other classes. Thus a Banaka man may only
marry a Burung woman and a Burung man may only marry a Banaka woman.
The two classes, Banaka and Burung, thus form what will be spoken of as an
b 2


Father.
Mother.
Child.
Banaka.
Burung.
Palyeri.
Burung.
Banaka.
Karimera.
Palyeri.
Karimera.
Banaka.
Karimera.
Palyeri.
Burung.
intermarrying pair or simply a pair. This does not imply that a Banaka man may
marry any Burung woman, but only that he may not marry a woman of any
other class. The child of a Banaka man and a Burung woman is neither
Banaka nor Burung but Palyeri, while the child of a Burung man and a Banaka
woman is Karimera. The rules of marriage and descent of the Kariera tribe are
shown in the following table :
This may be expressed more concisely by means of a diagram.
- Banaka Buepng v
Karimeka / =^ x Palyeei
The sign = connects the two classes of an intermarrying pair, and therefore shows
the relation of husband and wife. The sign } connects the class of a mother with
the class of her child. I propose to speak of the classes so related as together
forming a cycle. In the Kariera tribe Banaka and Karimera form one cycle
and Burung and Palyeri the other. The children of a woman always belong to the
same cycle as herself, but to the other class of the cycle. The sign / connects
the class of a father with the class of his child. I propose to speak of the two
classes so connected as together forming a couple. In the Kariera tribe Banaka and
Palyeri form one couple and Karimera and Burung form the other. The children
of a man always belong to the same couple as himself, but to the other class of the
couple. There are no names in the Kariera tribe for the cycles, couples, or
pairs.
This class system can only be understood by a study of the system of reckoning
the relationships of consanguinity and affinity. The following is a list of the
terms used to denote these relationships. M, stands for “ Male speaking,” P. for
“ Female speaking,” and M.F. for “ Male or Female speaking” :
Modi. —Father’s father M.F., father’s father’s brother M.F., mother’s mother’s
brother M.F., consort’s mother’s father M.F., son’s son and daughter M.
Kabuli. —Father’s mother M.F., father’s mother’s sister M.F., mother’s father’s
sister M.F., consort’s mother’s mother M.F., son’s son and daughter F.


Tami. —Mother’s father M.F., mother’s father’s brother M.F., father’s mother’s
brother M.F., consort’s father’s father M.F., daughter’s son and daughter
M.
Randari. —Mother’s mother M.F., mother’s mother’s sister M.F., father’s
father’s sister M.F., consort’s father’s mother M.F., daughter’s son and
daughter F.
Mama. —Father M.F., father’s brother M.F., mother’s sister’s husband
M.F., consort’s mother’s brother M.F.
Nganga. —Mother M.F., mother’s sister M.F., father’s brother’s wife M.F.,
consort’s father’s sister M.F.
Kaga. —Mother’s brother M.F., father’s sister’s husband M.F., consort’s father
M.F.
Toa or Yumani. —Father’s sister M., mother’s brother’s wife M., wife’s mother
M., brother’s sou F., daughter’s husband F., husband’s sister’s son F.
Yuro. —Father’s sister F., mother’s brother’s wife F., husband’s mother F.
Raja.— Older brother M.F., father’s brother’s son and mother’s sister’s son if
older than the speaker.
Turdu. —Older sister M.F., father’s brother’s daughter and mother’s sister’s
daughter if older than the speaker.
Margara. —Younger brother M.F., father’s brother’s son and mother’s sister’s
son if younger than the speaker.
Mari. —Younger sister M.F., father’s brother’s or mother’s sister’s daughter if
younger than the speaker.
brother’s daughter M., father’s sister’s daughter M., mother’s
brother’s son F., father’s sister’s son F., wife M., husband F., brother’s wife
M., wife’s sister M., sister’s husband F., husband’s brother F.
Rumbali. —Mother’s brother’s son M., father’s sister’s son M., sister’s husband
M., wife’s brother M.
Bungali. —Mother’s brother’s daughter F., father’s sister’s daughter F., brother’s
wife F., husband’s sister F.
Mainga. —Son M.F., brother’s son M., sister’s son F.
Kundal. —Daughter M.F., brother’s daughter M., sister’s daughter F.
Ruling or Yaraija. —Sister’s son M., daughter’s husband M.
Ngaraia or Bali. —Sister’s daughter M., son’s wife M.
Ngaraia. —Brother's daughter F., son’s wife F.
Nguranu. —Wife M. (specific).
Yarungu.— Brother’s wife M.
As shown in the above list, each term is applied to a number of different
relatives. Only some of those to whom the term is applied are mentioned in the
list. Thus the term mama is also applied to a mother’s brother’s wife’s brother, to
a sister’s husband’s mother’s brother and to many other relatives. The list of
relatives denoted by any one term could be extended indefinitely.


At the same time each of the terms in the above list is used by the natives in
a sense corresponding to our own use in English of the terms “ father,” “ mother,”
etc. Thus, although a given person applies the name mama to a large number of
individuals, if he is asked “ Who is your mama ? ” he immediately replies by giving
the name of his actual father, unless his own father died during his infancy, in
which case he gives the name of his foster father. In the same way, if asked for
his maeli he gives the name of his own father’s father, although there are a number
of other men to whom he applies the same term. Each term, therefore, has, what
we may call, a primary or specific meaning. The primary meaning of mama is
“ father,” and that of maeli “ father’s father.” The primary meaning of the native
term corresponds very closely to our own use of relationship terms in English. In
West Australia I collected a large number of genealogies, and in questioning the
natives I always used the native terms of relationship in their primary meanings.
I never experienced any difficulty except in such cases as the one I have mentioned,
where the name of a foster parent was substituted for that of the true parent.
In English we use the one word “cousin” to denote a number of persons standing
in different relations to the one person. We distinguish between near and distant
cousins, and have developed a somewhat complicated terminology to denote these
distinctions. Just as we use the word “cousin” so the Kariera native uses his
word mama (father), speaking of a large number of different related persons by the
one name, but distinguishing in thought, though not in words, those of his “ fathers ”
who are more nearly related to him from those who are more distantly related. In
the modern blackfellow English he speaks of his “ close-up ” and his “ far-away ”
“ fathers.” The same is the case with every other term of relationship. With
regard to the term for “ father,” a man’s nearest relative of this kind is not
necessarily the man who gave him birth, but the man under whose care he lived
as a child. This is, of course, his own physiological father in most cases, and in
cases where the real father dies the child is, in most cases, adopted by a brother of
the father. This distinction between nearer and more distant relatives of the
same kind (that is, denoted by the same term) is of the greatest importance in the
social life of the Kariera tribe. It seems probable that it is equally important in
other tribes of Airstralia, though I do not know that it has been specifically pointed
out by previous writers.
Although the use of the terms of relationship is based on actual relations of
consanguinity and affinity, it is so extended as to embrace all persons who come
into social contact with one another. If we take any single member of the tribe,
then every person with whom he has any social dealings whatever stands to him
in one or other of the relations denoted by the terms in use and may be addressed
by that term. In this way the whole society forms a body of relatives. In the
Kariera tribe, a man or woman never addresses anyone, except young children, by
a personal name, but uses the appropriate relationship term. The method of deter-
mining the relationship of two individuals is extremely simple. Let us suppose, as
an example, that two men, A and B, meet each other for the first time. The man


A has a relative C who is his mama. At the same time Cis the kaga of B. It
immediately follows that A and B are kumbali to each other. Yet in all this
system of widely extended relationships the real relations of consanguinity are
never lost sight of. The natives preserve their genealogies carefully in their
memories, though in these degenerate days the younger men and
women neglect such knowledge. With the help of the genealogical knowledge
of the older men and women it is possible to trace out some relationship,
however distant it may be, between any two members of the same tribe. When a
stranger comes to a camp that he has never visited before, he does not enter the
camp, but remains at some distance. A few of the older men, after a while,
approach him, and the first thing they proceed to do is to find out who the stranger
is. The commonest question that is put to him is “ Who is your modi ? ” (father’s
father). The discussion proceeds on genealogical lines until all parties are
satisfied of the exact relation of the stranger to each of the natives present in the
camp. When this point is reached, the stranger can be admitted to the camp, and
the different men and women are pointed out to him and their relation to him
defined. I watched two or three of these discussions in West Australia. I took with
me on my journey a native of the Talainji tribe, and at each native camp we came
to, the same process had to be gone through. In one case, after a long discussion,
they were still unable to discover any traceable relationship between my servant
and the men of the camp. That night my “ boy ” refused to sleep in the native
camp, as was his usual custom, and on talking to him I found that he was frightened.
These men were not his relatives, and they were therefore his enemies. This
represents the real feelings of the natives on the matter. If I am a blackfellow and
meet another blackfellow that other must be either my relative or my enemy. If
he is my enemy I shall take the first opportunity of killing him, for fear he will
kill me. This, before the white man came, was the aboriginal view of one’s duty
towards one’s neighbour, and it still remains at the back of his mind at the present
day in spite of the new conditions brought about by the coming of the white
man.
In order to explain the Kariera system of relationship, I have made out the
two accompanying genealogical tables, by means of which it is possible to trace out
the relation of a man or a woman to any other member of the same society. We
must regard the tribe as divided into what I shall speak of as “ generations,” using that
word in not quite its usual sense. We may use special terms to denote these
generations. Thus I shall speak of a man’s own generation as “ contemporary,” and
shall call the “ first ascending generation ” that of a man’s parents, and the “ second
ascending generation ” that of his grandparents, and “ first descending ” and “ second
descending ” those of his children and his grandchildren respectively.
The first ascending generation includes a man’s father and mother and the
brothers and sisters of these. He calls his father and his father’s brothers mama;
his father’s sister he calls toa; his mother and mother’s sisters are his nganqa and
his mother’s brothers are his kaga. The wife of any mama is nganga and the


Table I. 1 Male Speaking.
Maeli =j
i
p Kabali.
1
Tami =j
p Kandari.
Father’s
Father’s
Mother’s
Mother’s
father.
mother.
father.
mother.
Mama =
1
p Ngangra.
1 1
Kaga =p Toa.
Father.
Mother.
Mother’s
Father’s
brother.
sister.
Kaja =
_ 1
p Nuba.
1
Kumbali p
p Turdu
or
Mother’s
Mother’s
or
Margara.
brother’s
brother’s
Mari.
Brother.
daughter.
son.
Sister.
Mainga =F Ngaraia.
i 1
Ruling =F Kundal.
son.
Sister’s
Sister’s
Daughter.
daughter.
son.
Maeli =
1
= Tami.
i
Tami =
= Maeli.
Son’s
Daughter’s
Daughter’s
Son’s
son.
daughter.
son.
daughter.
husband of any nganga is mama; similarly the wife of a kaga is toa, and the
husband of a toa is kaga.
In the second ascending generation his father’s father is madi, and the same
term is applied to the father of any mama or of any toa. The brother of any maeli
is also maeli, and the sister of a m.aeli is kandari. His mother’s mother is also
kandari and so are her sisters, while her brothers are maeli. His mother’s father
is tami, and the same term is applied to the father of any nganga or kaga and to
the husband of any kandari (to the husband of a father’s father’s sister, for
example). The brother of a tami is also tami, while the sister is kabali. The term
kabali is also applied to a father’s mother, a father’s mother’s sister, and to the wife
of any maeli, that is to the mother of any mama. The brother of a kabali is tami.
We thus see that all the relatives of a man in the second ascending generation are
l ln these tables the sign connects a husband and a wife. The husband is on the left
of the sign and is denoted by capitals (Mama), the wife is to the right, and is denoted by
clarendon type (Ngangra). The descendants of a married pair are shown by the lines from
the sign =j=.


Mabli =
Father’s
father.
Table 2. Few
1
= Kabali.
Father’s
mother.
[ale Speaking.
1
Tami =
Mother’s
father.
p Kandari.
Mother’s
mother.
|
j
Mama p
Father.
1
p Ng-ang-a.
Mother.
1
Kaga =
Mother’s
brother.
= Yuro.
Father’s
sister.
|
J
Kaja -
or
Margara.
Brother.
= Bung-ali.
Mother’s
brother’s
daughter.
1
Nuba =
Mother’s
brother’s
son.
p Turdu
or
Hari.
Sister.
|
|
Toa =;
Brother’s
son.
1
= Kundal.
Daughter.
1
Mainga -
Son.
= Ngraraia.
Brother’s
daughter.
Kandari =
Daughter’s
son.
Kandari.
Daughter’s
daughter.
1 1
= Kabali. Kabali =
. Son’s Son’s
daughter. son.
classified into two divisions. In one of these divisions all the men are rnaeli and
the women are kandari; in the other the men are tami and the women are kabali.
Maeli and kandari are brothers and sisters to each other, and so are tami and
kabali. Maeli and kabali are husband and wife to each other, and so are tami and
kandari.
The children of maeli and kabali are all mama and toa, and the children of
tami and kandari are all kaga and nganga. Thus in the first ascending generation
also, all the relatives of a man are divided into two groups, in one of which all the
males are mama and the females are toa, while in the other the males are kaga and
the females are nganga.
The children of relatives of the first ascending generation belong to the contem-
porary generation. The son of any mama, and of any nganga is either kaga or
margara according as he is older or younger than the speaker, and the daughters
are similarly either turdu or mari. The children of a kaga or a toa are kumhali
(male) and nuba (female).
In the first descending generation the children of a kaja or a margara, and a
nuba are mainga and kundal, these being the terms that a man applies to his own
son and daughter. The children of a turdu or mari and a kumhali are kuling and


ngaraia. In the second descending generation the children of mainga and ngaraia
are maeli without distinction of sex, and the children of kuling and kundal are tami.
This last feature is due to the reciprocal use of the terms for grandparents. Thus
lam maeli (father’s father) to my son’s son and he is maeli to me. Similarly lam
maeli to my son’s daughter and she is maeli to me. If a woman is speaking she is
kabali (father’s mother) to her son’s son and he is therefore kabali to her. The
following table shows how the terms for grandparents and grandchildren are used
reciprocally :
Father’s father M.F. = Son’s son and daughter M.
Father’s mother M.F. = Son’s son and daughter F.
Mother’s father M.F. = Daughter’s son and daughter M.
Mother’s mother M.F. = Daughter’s son and daughter F.
By means of the laws enumerated above, which are expressed in a concrete
form in the genealogical tables, it is possible to find immediately the relation of any
two persons by considering the relation of them to a third. There is, however, one
important point that has so far been omitted. It may happen that a man Bis by
genealogy the “ father ”of a man A, but is younger than A. In such a case A calls
B not “ father,” but “ son,” and B calls A “ father,” although by genealogy he is
his “ son.” The same thing may occur in the case of a kaga, a nganga, or a toa. In
one case I found three men, A, B, and C, aged about 65, 63, and 60, respectively.
The father of A and C, who were brothers, was the “ elder brother ” of B, and
therefore, both A and 0 were, by genealogy, the “ sons ” of B. He called C his
“ son,” but as A was older than himself, he called him not “ son,” but “ father,” thus
reversing the genealogical relation.
There are in the Kariera tribe no terms for relatives in the third ascending
or the third descending generations. I was able in a few cases to obtain the name
of a man’s father’s father’s father. When I asked what term would be applied to
this relative I was told that he would be mainga (son). In the same way I was
told that a father’s father’s mother would be ngaraia. I do not think that these
terms were ever actually used. I did not come across a single instance of a man or
woman, and his or her great-grandchildren being alive at the same time. The
point is, however, interesting.
We can now proceed to examine the connection of the system of relationship
with the classes previously described. It has been shown that by the system of
relationship the whole tribe is divided into a number of different groups of relatives.
Thus if I am a man, every male with whom I have any social relations is either (1)
my maeli, (2) my tami, (3) my mama, (4) my kaga, (5) my kaja or niargara, (6) my
kumbali, (7) my mainga, or (8) my kuling. My maeli are either older than myself,
as my father’s father, or younger, as my son’s son, and similarly with my tami. My
kaja are older than myself, and my mar gar a are younger, while my kumbali may be
either older or younger. My mama are older than I, and I am mainga to them;
my mainga are younger than I, and lam mama, to them. Similarly with the


A
D
B
C
Maeli.
Kaja.
Mama.
Tami.
Kumbali.
Kaga.
Margara.
Maeli.
Mainga.
Kumbali.
Tami.
Ruling.
relatives kaga and killing, lam kuling to my kaga, and kaga to my kuling. These
male relatives may be arranged in the following diagram, a horizontal line
separating those older from those younger than the speaker:—
Thus I belong to the column A, and every person represented in that column
is either my maeli, my kaja, or my margara. Every person in column Dis either
mama or mainga to me, and is either mama or mainga to every person in column
A. But a man who is mama to me may be mainga to my kaja, and one who is
mainga to me may be mama to my margara. Inversely every person in column A
is either mama or mainga to every person in column D. Similarly the men of
Column B are tami and kumbali to those of A, and inversely those of A are tami or
kumbali to those of B.
The four columns in the diagram correspond to the four classes which have
been described earlier. Thus if I belong to the class Banaka all the men of that
class are, by genealogy, either maeli, kaja, or margara to me; the men of the
Palyeri class are my mama, and my mainga; those of the Burung class are my
tami or my kumbali; and the Karimera men are my kaga and kuling.
It was stated earlier that a man of the Banaka class can only marry a woman
of the Burung class. We are now able to explain what this rule means. In the
Kariera tribe a man may only marry a woman who stands to him in the relation
of nuba. If the man is Banaka his nuba is Burung, and therefore in saying that
he must marry a nuba, we are saying that he must marry a Burung woman. But
amongst the Burung women there are some who are not his nuba, namely, his kabali
and his tami, and these women he may not marry. A man’s kabali may be only a
few years older than himself, so that marriage would be quite possible. It is,
however, in the Kariera tribe, forbidden. The marriage rule of the Kariera is
simplicity itself: a- man may marry a woman who is his nuba, but he may marry
no one else. Thus we may say that in the Kariera tribe marriage is regulated by
relationship, and by relationship alone.
A man applies the term nuba to the daughter of any kaga and any toa. He
applies the term kaga to his mother’s brother and the term toa to his father’s sister.
Therefore it is obvious that by the above-stated marriage rule a man may marry
the daughter of his own mother’s brother, or of his own father’s sister. Such


marriages of the children of a brother with those of his sister are common in this
tribe. Indeed we may say that the proper person for a man to marry, if it be
possible, is his own first cousin. In the genealogies collected by me I found that
in nearly every case where such a marriage was possible it had taken place.
A common custom in this as in most Australian tribes is the exchange of
sisters. A man, A, having one or more sisters finds a man, 8., standing to him in
the relation of Jcurnbali who also possesses a sister. These men each take a sister
of the other as wife. As a result of this practice it often happens that a man’s
father’s sister is at the same time the wife of his mother’s brother. If these two
have a daughter she will in the ordinary course of events become the man’s wife.
As the natives themselves put it to me, a man must look to his kaga to
provide him with a wife by giving him one or more of his daughters. The relative
who is most particularly his kaga, in the same sense that his own father is most
particularly his mama, is his mother’s brother, who may or may not be at the same
time the husband of his father’s sister. It is to this man that he looks first for
a wife. If his own mother’s brother has no daughter, or if she is already disposed
of, he must apply to other persons who stand to him in the relation of kaga, to the
husband of his father’s sister for example. He may have to go much further afield
and apply to some distant kaga, but this is only the case when there are available
no nearer relatives. Thus we may say that the man who is pre-eminently kaga (as
his own father is pre-eminently mama ) is his mother’s brother; the woman who
is pre-eminently toa is his own father’s sister who should be the wife of the kaga ;
consequently the woman who is pre-eminently a man’s nuba is the daughter of his
own mother’s brother, or failing this, of his own father’s sister. It is this woman
to whom he has the first right as a wife.
The arrangement of marriages, as in other Australian tribes, is managed by
the older people. While the children are quite small it is arranged which ones are
to marry. The death of one or other of them may, of course, necessitate a new
arrangement. Thus, when a boy is growing up he learns which girl is to be his
wife. To the father of this girl he owes certain duties, the chief being that he
must make him presents from time to time. This man is his father-in-law, and, as
has been said, is in some cases his mother’s brother. At the same time the man
has a secondary right to a number of other girls. If the girl betrothed to him
should die, he will have to try to obtain one of these, and therefore he must devote
some attention to their fathers, making them presents from time to time, and going
to visit them. It is this fact that seems to determine the social relations of a man
with his various kaga. They are all prospective fathers-in-law. A man owes the
same sort of duties to all the men whom he calls kaga, but the recognition of these
duties is more intense in some eases than in others.
A man applies the name toa to his father’s sister and to the wife of any kaga,
that is to any woman who might be his mother-in-law. He may not speak to any
of these women, nor have any social dealing whatever with them. If for any
reason he is obliged to be near one of his toa he must take care that he does not


look at her. He will, if possible, interpose a hut or bush between himself and
her, or else he will sit with his back to her. This rule breaks down when a man
gets on in years and has been long married with children of his own. He then
ceases to speak of these women as toa, calling them yumani instead, and he is
permitted to speak to them if he wishes, although the old habit still shows itself,
and he has very little to do with them. I was not able to make out that the
necessity of avoidance was more intense in respect to the actual mother-in-law. A
man must avoid all his toa, and must apparently avoid them all to an equal degree,
until the time comes when they can be regarded as yumani, and the necessity for
avoidance ceases. 1
There is no similar avoidance in the case of a woman, that is to say, she does
not need to avoid her father-in-law or her mother-in-law, but only her son-in-law.
A woman calls her husband’s mother not toa or yumani but yuro.
We may resume briefly the chief points of the above description :
(1) The relationship system of the Kariera tribe is not only a system of names
or terms of address, but is pre-eminently a system of reciprocal rights and
duties. A man owes the same duties (though not in the same degree) to
all the persons to whom he applies the same term. Thus the relationship
system regulates the whole social life of the people.
(2) It is based on actual relations of consanguinity and affinity that can be
traced by means of the genealogical knowledge preserved by the old men
and women.
(3) The recognition of relationships is so extended that everyone with whom
an individual comes in contact in the ordinary course of social life is his
relative. It is impossible for a man to have any social relations
with anyone who is not his relative because there is no standard by which
two persons in this position can regulate their conduct towards one
another. 1 am compelled to treat a person differently according as he
is my “ brother,” “ brother-in-law,” “ father,” or “ uncle.” If I do not
know which of these he is, all intercourse is impossible.
(4) Within the body of relatives of a given kind distinctions are made between
nearer and more distant relatives, just as in English we distinguish
between nearer and more distant “ cousins ” though still calling them all
by the same name. These distinctions are not of kind but of degree, if
we may use the phrase. Thus though a man owes certain duties to all
the men he calls “ father ” he must observe them more particularly in
regard to his own father or his father’s brothers than in regard to
a distant cousin of his father. The same is the case with every other
relationship.
1 I believe that the matter is settled by the older men and women, who decide that two
persons who are toa to each other shall be made yumani. There may be some sort of ceremony
on such occasions, but I could not ascertain any details about it.


(5) In Australia, much more than in civilized communities, a great deal of
attention is paid to actual relationship by blood and marriage. Thus the
Australian system- is characterized, not by a less intense, but by a more
intense recognition of actual relationships of consanguinity.
(6) The classes of the Kariera tribe are groups of related persons. The rule
that a man of one class may only marry a woman of one of the other
classes is the result of the more fundamental rule that a man may only
marry a woman bearing to him a certain relation of consanguinity,
namely, the daughter of his mother’s brother Marriage is regulated by
consanguinity and by consanguinity alone.
When a girl is old enough to be claimed as a wife she is handed over by her
father to the husband, who takes her away to his own camp. There does not seem to
be any ceremony on such an occasion. Polygyny is practised. In the genealogies
I did not find a case of a man having more than three wives alive at the same
time. Where there are several sisters in a family they are all regarded as the
wives of the man who marries the eldest of them. He may, if he chooses, waive
his right in favour of his younger brother, with the consent of the father of the
girls. If a family contained four girls and a man took the two oldest, but
permitted his younger brother to marry the third, the youngest daughter thereby
also becomes the wife of the younger brother, and the older brother cannot claim
any right to her. When a man dies his wives pass to his younger brother or to the
man who stands nearest to him in the relation of margara. This man marries the
widow and adopts the children.
There is no polyandry; that is to say, a woman is always the wife of one man
alone. The word nguranu is used by a man to distinguish his own wife from other
women whom he might have married but who are actually the wives of his own
or tribal brothers, the latter being called yarwngu. In this and the neighbouring
tribes there are certain customs of sexual licence on ceremonial occasions when
men who stand in the relation of brother to one another lend each other their wives.
I was not able to witness one of these ceremonies and what little information I
obtained in answer to questions is too unreliable to allow me to speak definitely
on the subject.
A woman who is promised or married to a given man may run away with
another. If the two who thus elope are not nuba to each other they are separated
by the tribe and punished, the woman being beaten by her female relatives and
the man speared through the thigh. If they are of the proper relation, that is,
if they are nuba to each other, it rests with the husband of the woman to get her
back if he can. This often leads to a fight in which one or other gets killed.
Practically all the quarrels amongst the natives are about the women.
In many Australian tribes what we may call irregular marriages are in some
instances permitted, that is, a man is permitted by the tribe to marry a woman
who by the tribal law is forbidden him. I have obtained good evidence, by means


of genealogies, that in a number 'of tribes of Western Australia such irregular
marriages took place before the country was occupied by white men. In the
Kariera tribe one or two such marriages have taken place in recent years, but have
been viewed with great disapproval, and in the genealogies I collected, there is not a
single instance of such a marriage taking pla£e before 1860.
Having described the relationship organization of the Kariera tribe it is
necessary to consider the relation of that system to the local organization previously
described. The whole tribe is divided into two couples of classes, Banaka-Palyeri
and Karimera-Burung. Each local group, however, that is, each of the local sub-
divisions of the tribe, consists of members of one couple only. Thus one
local group consists of men and women of the classes Karimera and Burung,
while another consists of Banaka and Palyeri men and women. In the
map of the tribe, underneath the numeral denoting each local group, will be found
two letters indicating the couple to which the group belongs. B.P. stands for
Banaka-Palyeri, and K.B. for Karimera-Burung. It is thus possible to realize at a
glance the geographical distribution of the couples.
In referring to a local group of the same couple as himself a native often uses
the term ngaju maru, and refers to a local group of the other couple as halu maru.
Ngaju means “my ” and halu means “ his,” these being the common personal
pronouns. Ido not know what would be a suitable translation of maru. We may
regard the two phrases as equivalent to “ our side ” and “ the other side.” A man
sometimes speaks of his own local group as maman-maru, from mania, “ father.”
It is obvious from the above account that a man can never marry a woman of
his own local group, since such women are either kandari, toa, turdu, mari, kundal,
or maeli to him. We therefore find in this tribe the condition often called “ local
exogamy ”by ethnologists. On analysis, however, we see that this local exogamy is
simply the result of the regulation of marriage by relationship, together with the
peculiar constitution of the local group.
I propose in this and future publications to use the word “ clan ” to denote a
social division of this kind, of which the Kariera local group is an example. A clan
by this definition consists of a body of persons who are closely related to one another
in one line (that is, either in the male line or in the female line) and who are
clearly marked off in some way from the similar divisions of the same society.
In the Kariera tribe we have clans with descent in the male line. Each clan
includes a number of men who are, by the relationship system, father’s father, father,
brother, son, or son’s son to each other. Each clan is marked off from every
other by the possession of its own territory, and as we shall see later, by other
features also.
A man’s own clan contains only men who are his modi, mama, kaja, margara,
and mainga, and it contains all his nearest relatives of these kinds, thus serving to
mark off those most nearly related to him from those more distantly related. This
is the essential feature of a clan in Australia, that it provides this distinction
between near and distant kindred.


Totemism.
We have seen that the Kariera tribe is divided into a number of local groups
each with its own defined territory, with descent in the male line, and that each
local group belongs to one of the two couples into which the tribe is divided. It
has been shown that the local group thus forms what we may call a “clan,”
with male descent, all the male members of the clan being “ father’s father,” “ son’s
son,” “ father,” “ son,” or “ brother,” to each other.
Each of these clans forms a single totemic group, possessing a number of
totems. All the totems of the clan are equally the totems of every member of the
clan. For each totem belonging to the clan there is within the territory of the clan
a ceremonial ground or totemic centre for which the name is talu. The talu is a
spot set apart for the performance of totemic ceremonies. Thus the Pidira talu is
the spot set apart for the performance of ceremonies connected with th epidira, white
cockatoo. The talu belongs to the men of the local group in whose territory it is
found, and the ceremonies connected with the talu belong to them at the same
time. If a talu lies within the territory of a certain local group only the members
of that local group can perform the ceremony connected with it.
The totemic ceremonies of the Kariera tribe have been discontinued for many
years. I was therefore unable to see any of them performed and had to rely
entirely on what the natives told me about them. Information of this kind is of
course very unsatisfactory. The purpose of the ceremonies is said to be to increase
the supply of the animal, plant, or other object with which it is connected. Thus
the purpose of the mungu or white ant ceremony is to increase the white ants,
which are eaten by the aborigines. At many of these totemic ceremonial grounds
there is either a single boulder or a heap of small stones and these play a part in
the ceremony connected with the place. In some oases it would seem that the
stone or heap is struck with clubs or with stones held in the hand. The performers
of these ceremonies are painted, and decorated with feathers and bird’s down. The
women of the clan take part in the ceremonies as well as the men. In some cases
songs are sung, in others one of the performers calls out the names of different
parts of the country. The head man of the clan, unless he be too old, takes the
leading part in the ceremonies of his clan.
There is no prohibition whatever against a man or woman killing any one of
his or her totems, if it be an animal, or against eating it if it be edible.
The following is a list of the totems of some of the elans of the Kariera tribe.
The list does not profess to be complete. It does not include all the clans of the
tribe, nor can I be sure that all the totems of any clan are enumerated. The
numbers of the clans in this list correspond to those on the map.
The clans numbered XYIII and XIX are doubtful. They lie at the boundary
of three tribes, the Kariera, Xgaluma and Injibandi, and it is impossible to say
with certainty to which tribe each clan belongs. Thus I was told more than once
that XVIII was “ half Xgaluma, half Kariera,” and it was sometimes spoken of


as a Kariera clan and sometimes as Ngaluma. In exactly the same way there is
some doubt whether XIX is Kariera or Injibandi, or even Xgaluma. I have
included both clans in the Kariera tribe for convenience, not because their claim
to belong to that tribe is any stronger than their claim to belong to the neighbouring
tribes. The fact is that one tribe is not clearly marked off from its neighbours,
but there are often near the border a number of local groups that occupy an
indeterminate position.
I. —Karimera-Burung.
Yiliguji ... ... rainbow ... ... at Womalana.
Pidira ... ... ... white cockatoo ... at Balia-balla.
Kurinja ... ... March fly ... ... at Balla-balla.
Mdngdbuga ... ... a fish.
Yatumba ... ... „
Pira ... ... ... conch shell.
II. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Wongali ... ... a lizard ... ... at Kayingarana.
Tarbun ... ... ... crab.
Balanu ... ... ... a fish.
Banangum ... ... „ ... ... at Magalana.
Waragalara ... ... „ .. ... at Madukurbarana.
Ghuri ... ... ... „
Minagalara ... ... „
Kagumada ... ... „ ... ... at Kagumadana.
Nyumeru ... ... „
Kandam ... ... a seed ... ... at Kayingarana.
lll.—Banaka-Palyeri.
Wanangum ... ... whirlwind... ... at Wanangurana.
Kambuda ... ... child or baby ... atPilgun.
Puna ... ... ... sexual desire ... at Kalbana.
Wajahi' ... ... ... a small mammal ... at Wajabina.
Wanangadi ... ... a snake ... ... at Bambana.
Kulibiri ... ... „ ... ... at Kulibirina.
Mungu ... white ant ... ... at Mungulina.
Tanamada ... ... a grub ... ... at Maludarana.
Taiyimara ... ... honey flower ... at Kaiyuna.
Yigara ... ... ... mangrove ... ... at Walunguna.
Nyura ... ... ... (?)
Pindanu ... ... (?)
IV. —Karimera-B urung.
Puriya the tide at Kurjadagabuna.
Kunya ... ... ... mosquito ... ... at Chindagalarana.
c


Kumi sand-fly at Kumina.
Ngalun a snake at Kgaluna.
Moyudi ... ... ... a snake.
Ynrguliguli ... ... a snake ... ... atKgaluna.
Tambalambala a bird at Chindagalarana.
Namali ... ... ... a fish ... ... at Kahuna.
Ngalara „ at Ngalarana
Muraban ... ... „
Waberi ... ... ... „ .. ... at Majanina.
Chindabiri ... ... „
Kalandi ... ... „ ... ... at Kalandina.
Mdnjir a flat fish at Ngamaua.
Kadumada ... ... medusa (?)... ... at Kalandina.
Ngalgu ... ... ... root ... ... at Yarina.
Bagada ... ... ... grass ... ... at Chindagalarana.
Wane ... ... ... a seed ... ... at Chindagalarana.
Y.—Banaka-Palyeri.
Ngandarimirgura ... a shark.
Ngadabururu ... ... a fish.
Midu ... ... ... „
Moji ... ... ... sting ray.
Yidawari ... ... saw-fish.
Walimbira ... ... a fish.
Munyungolo ... ... „
Malal ... ... ... , y
Piain ... ... ... „
Karhu ... ... ... „
Ngalgura ... ... „
Paldharangara ... ... ~
Ngundara ... ... „
Bungari ... ... crab.
Vl.—Karimera-Burung.
Kudwngum ... ... ebb-tide.
Kalunganara ... ... a snake.
Bulyago... ... ... a fish.
Chabiya... ... ... „
Kailyu ... ... .... „
Wandamala (or wanda- „
mana (?))
Wadabara ... ... „
Mingalara ... ... „


Waragalara ... ... a fish.
Churi ... ... ... „
Nyunurdu ... ... „
Kunabcmcli ... ... „
Wili ... . „
Yuajidu... ... ... „
Magadu... ... ... „
Maclamada ... ... „
Yll.—Banaka-Palyeri.
Kaliivana ... ... a grub ... ... at Kaliwanana.
Wanangadi ... ... a snake ... ... at Wanangadikundina,
Kunkun... ... ... a fish.
Wandimara ... ... „ ... ... at Wandimaranguna.
Pirhila ... ... ... „
Ngulgun... ... ... „
Budabudara ... ... „
Banagura ... ... „
Wanngai ... ... „
Wiriribuga ... ... „
Nanungana ... ... a seed.
Tulimalu ... ... „
Vlll.—Karimera-Burung.
Kanjaniara ... ... a root ... ... at Wargalgura.
Kalumbu ... ... a fruit.
Bangamalu ... ...(?)
Pidira ... ... ... white cockatoo.
Kalunganara{?)... ... snake.
Wuta ... ... ... (?)... ... ... at Maringa.
IX.—Banaka-Palyeri.
Woluga ... ... ... frog.
Mali ... ... ... „
Chargar ang ... ... (?)
Wogurarangu ...... (?)
Walambari ... ... opossum.
Murumbari ... ... a beetle ... ... at Murumbarina.
Milabilya
Kobilya ... ... ... dew ... ... at Murumbarina,
Purgun ... ... ... a beetle.
Chulgu ... ... ... a lizard ... ... at Chulguna.
Nyiriba ... ... ... a small mammal ... at Tungadangkundina.
c 2


X.—Karimera-B urung.
Walamara ... ... hot weather ... at Walamarana.
Wanbangu ... ... eaglehawk... ... at Chidamba.
Wagura... ... ... crow ... ... at Wagurana.
Biliga ... ... ... hawk ... ... at Kurana.
Wolgalu... ... ... red gum ... ... at Malumalunguna.
Kunguwam ... ... (?).., ... ... at Karpa.
Toli ... ... ... a grub ... ... at Parderingunina.
Mariang... ... ... „ ... ... at Maraianguna.
Maguya ... ... ... the red grub found in gum trees.
Chiyin ... ... ... a tree.
XI. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Kolobun ... ... ... honey flowers (caje- at Kolobuna.
put)
Murigangabu ... ... grub ... .. at Muruna.
Maldhangara ... ... honey.
Walyuru ... ... a seed.
Maiyingu ... ... (?)
Malyagolya{?) ... ... fish poison.
Talburu ... ... ... „ „
XII. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Kodagolu... ... ... fresh-water fish.
MvAu ... ... ... cold weather.
Waranu ... ... ... edible gum.
Walaiyura
Wanyali (Walyuru) ... seed.
Jfyurukadingana...
Chugura ... ... ... fresh-water fish.
Pidbarara ... ... „ „
XIII. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Yugoro ... ... ... dingo ... ... at Yulonguiua.
Nangu ... ... ... snake ... ... at Murijonguna.
Mangaiyura ... ... spinifex ... ... at Mogurina.
Tungariri ... ... „
Burn ... fly at Xyanyanana.
Yalya ... .. ... lizard ... ... at Yalyabaduna.
Maribula... ... ... spinifex.


XlV.—Karimera-Burung.
Kuraba ... ... ... ... ... ... at Kurabana.
Wuda ... ... ... ... ... ... at Xguberna.
Walha ... ... ... ... ... ... at Walbangunina.
Jima ... ... ... a fruit.
Bajela ... ... ... „
Nyuna ... ... ... a snake (adder(?)).
Manalya ...
Wandajiri{?) ... ... a lizard.
Minamba ... ... ... ... ... ... at Minambana.
Manangura
Woba
XY.—Banak a-Paly eri.
Yungoma ... ... ... a lizard ... ... at Malana.
Mandarara ... ... dew.
XYl.—Karimera-Burung.
Wanhangu ... ... eaglehawk... ... at Chidambana.
Ngaba ... ... ... a root.
JVyurukalara
Ngalgu ... ~. ... a root.
Kamarangu ... ... a fish ... ... at Kamaranguna.
Kandarigura
XVII. —Karimera-Burung.
Totems uncertain.
XVIII. —Karimera-Burung.
Yum ... ... ... the sun, or hot weather.
Kolu ... ... ... louse.
Wanhangu (?) ... ... eaglehawk.
Bibingu ... ... ... (?)
XlX.—Banaka-Palyeri.
Walambari ... ... opossum.
Maldhangara ... ... honey.
Mangula ... ... child.
Murumbari beetle at Murumbarina.
This list of clans and totems probably contains some errors, though I used
every endeavour to make it as accurate as possible. As the ceremonies in connection


Eaglehawk ...
X, XVI and XYIII
Karimera-Burung
Hot weather ...
X and XYIII
>)
White cockatoo
I and YIII
}}
Baby ...
III and XIX
Banaka-Palyeri
Opossum
IX and XIX
}}
}>
Honey
XI and XIX
»
Murumbari ...
IX and XIX
>)
>)
with the totems have been discontinued for many years, all the younger men
are ignorant on matters concerning them, and often do not know their own totems.
Even the statements of the old men are not always reliable. Thus one old man
in giving me the totems of his clan included some belonging to a neighbouring clan
of the same couple, and it was only with great difficulty that I sorted out the totems
of the two clans. Such errors were much more frequent when a man was enumerat-
ing the totems of a clan other than his own, for example, that of his mother.
There was thus a large number of cases in which it was doubtful to which of
two neighbouring clans a particular totem belonged, and I cannot hope that I found
the correct solution in all of these cases. The only satisfactory way of removing
errors of this nature would be to visit all the ceremonial grounds of each clan, but
this would have required time and labour that I could not give.
A point of considerable theoretical interest is whether each totem is strictly
confined to one couple or is to be found in both couples. To determine this I
examined all the cases in which the same totem was found in two clans. The
following is a list of these cases: —
In the case of the eaglehawk totem it is probable that it belongs either to XVI
or to XYIII but not to both. As regards the white cockatoo there was some doubt
in my mind as to whether it belonged to clan YIII or to a neighbouring clan of the
Banaka-Palyeri couple. The balance of evidence was in favour of the view that
it belonged to YIII.
Besides those of the above list there are three species of fish, churi,
minagalara, and waragalara, which are included amongst the totems of clan II
(Ban-Pal) and also amongst those of clan YI (Kai-Bur). The list for clan YI is a
rather doubtful one as it was obtained from only one informant, and he was an old
man who spoke no English. I cannot therefore regard this instance as definite
proof that the same totem is found in both couples. The best that can be said on
the evidence available is that the question must be left open.
Most of the totems are of an edible nature. Among the clans of the coast
various species of fish preponderate. There is not a large number of vegetable
species in the list of totems. I think it is probable that if the list were complete
a larger number would be found. I did not find in the Kariera tribe either a


kangaroo totem or an emu totem, nor was there a rain totem, unless we include in
this tribe a clan at Pilbara, which more probably belongs to the Injibandi tribe.
The absence of these totems in the Kariera tribe is of some interest when we
compare that tribe with others, for example, with the tribes on the Ashburton Eiver,
to be described later.
I could not find any prohibition against a man or woman eating his or her own
totem if it were edible, or against killing it. Every native that I questioned said
that there was no such restriction. A man killed and ate his own totem as readily
as he killed and ate any other animal.
As regards many of the totems, it would seem that the totemic centre or
ceremonial ground is in a part of the country where the totem species is naturally
plentiful. Thus the ceremonial grounds of the white cockatoo and the March fly
are in the creek at Balla-balla, where these two species.are plentiful. In a number
of cases, not only in this but also in other tribes, I was able to satisfy myself that
the totem animal or plant is actually more abundant near the ceremonial ground
belonging to it than in other parts of the country. In a large proportion of cases
the place where the ceremony is performed is called by a name formed by adding
the suffix na to the name of the totem. Thus there are two totemic centres for
murumbari, and in both cases the name of the totem centre is Murumbarina.
Many other examples may be found in the list of totems given above. Similar
place names, that is, consisting of the name of some species of animal or vegetable
species with the suffix -na, are also given to spots where there is no totemic centre,
but where the species in question is more abundant than elsewhere.
Initiation Ceremonies.
According to the statements of the natives the chief feature of the initiation
ceremony of the Kariera tribe consisted of tying a band of string tightly around the
biceps of each arm. The boy during his initiation is called Wamulu.
A man of the Karimera class described how he was initiated as follows:
He was seated on the ground with a circle of spectators round him. He sat
motionless and silent during the ceremony. Two men, spoken of as Mamia,
looked after the spectators. They were Palyeri and Karimera. Strings of
opossum wool were tied round his two arms just above the biceps. They were
tied on by a man who was his tami (of the Palyeri class) and a man who was his
maeli (of the Karimera class). A song, called chwnbaji, was sung by those
looking on:—
Jina yura ngari
Foot hot lying down
Jili mincli burdijang.
Arm band ?
At the same time a belt of human hair (pururu) was tied round his waist, a
band of fur-string ( kundi ) was tied round his head, and a tassel of the tails of the


spinifex rat ( chuba ) was fastened to the head-band so as to hang down on his neck.
Two hullroarers 1 ( banangari ) were given to him, a large one and a small. The
larger one he wore in the front of his belt and the smaller one at the back of his
head-band. The arm-bands are not taken off, but must remain on till they break
and fall off.
It seems that amongst the southern Kariera some of the men were initiated
by their neighbours the Injibandi, who practised circumcision. In the Kariera
tribe itself circumcision was not practised.
The Birth of Children.
When a woman conceives, her condition is said to be due to the action of
some particular member of her tribe, who is spoken of as the wororu, of the child
after it is born. If a man of the right relationship gives a woman some food and
after eating it she becomes pregnant, this man becomes the wororu of the woman’s
child. Sometimes the wororu does not give the woman food to eat, but when he is
hunting and has speared a kangaroo or an emu, as he is killing it he speaks to the
spirit of the kangaroo and tells it to go to a certain woman. The spirit of the
kangaroo follows the man home to the camp and goes inside the woman indicated,
who thereby becomes pregnant. The man who sent the kangaroo or other spirit is
recognized as the wororu of the child. In one case I was told that a man had
“ made ” his own child, having killed an emu and sent the spirit into his own wife.
Such a case is, however, an exception. The wororu of a child in every case (except
this one) that I examined in the Kariera tribe is a man- standing in the relation of
“ brother ” to the actual father of the child, and therefore stands in the relation of
mama (father or father’s brother) to the child itself. In most of the cases that I
examined the child had its origin in the spirit of a kangaroo killed by the wororu.
In one case the man showed me a birth-mark on his thigh which he said was
where his wororu had speared the kangaroo.
I did not find that there were any specific duties that a man or woman owes to
his wororu. All that the natives told me was that a man “ looks after ” his wororu,
that is, he attends to his wants, gives him food when there is an opportunity and
treats him much as he does his own father. It is possible, however, that there are
some more specific duties that I did not discover.
The animal from whose spirit the child arises, or the animal or vegetable eaten
by the mother and causing conception, is not in any way sacred to the individual
thus connected with it by birth. He treats it just as he does every other animal
or plant.
It must be remembered that “children” are a totem of one of the Kariera
clans, and it is the duty of the members of this clan to perform ceremonies for the
increase of children.
1 In this tribe women are permitted to see the bullroarer (banangari).


Death and Burial.
When a man or woman is near to death the relatives often throw themselves
on the body of the sick person and weep loudly. After the death the relatives,
both male and female, wail and cut their scalps until the blood trickles from their
heads. The hair of the deceased is cut off and preserved, being worn by the
relatives in the form of string.
The body is often buried in the ground, a grave being dug three or four feet in
depth. The body is doubled up in a sitting posture and is placed facing the birth-
place of the dead man or woman. Occasionally the body is placed in a tree or in a
hole in the rocks. It would seem that this is a more honourable form of burial,
reserved for those who are particularly esteemed as magicians or hunters. In such
cases some of the bones are recovered after a time and kept by the relatives and
friends. The relatives of a dead man or woman are required during the period of
mourning to abstain from eating the flesh of kangaroo. This was in former times
the principal meat food of the natives. In modern times, since the natives have
settled down to work on sheep stations, and their principal flesh food has become
mutton, they now abstain during the mourning period from this, either instead of
kangaroo or in addition to it. A man who is thus restricting his diet is said to be
chaji. The abstention comes to an end in the following way: A friend of the
mourner, who is not at the time himself mourning for anyone, takes some of the
fat of the animal, be it mutton or kangaroo, and comes up unobserved behind the
man who is chaji and rubs the fat on his mouth. After this he is free to eat again
of the food, but only if he was unaware of the intention of the man who thus
released him from the ban. A mourner will often take great precautions against
being surprised by some friend who thinks that he has mourned long enough.
There is little doubt but that the Kariera, like the other tribes of this part of
Australia, were originally cannibals. At the present day it is impossible to obtain
any reliable information on the subject. It would seem, however, that in some
cases they ate parts of their enemies slain in a fight, while in others they ate parts
of their own relatives and friends. I suspect that the practice of infanticide
existed also in connection with cannibalism, but cannot speak with certainty as to
how far the custom was at all general.
Myths and Legends.
Eaglehawk and Crow.
In the times long ago (palam or padam) there were two eaglehawks
(wanbangu ) who were brothers and had for their wives two galahs (hilagu). The
eaglehawks were kaga (mother’s brothers) to the crow ( icagura ). The eaglehawks
and their nephew the crow used to go hunting together. The eaglehawks always
took for themselves the fattest animals that were killed. One day they had killed
some kangaroos. The crow took the fattest and hid them. The kill had been
placed near a cave. The two eaglehawks thought that the crow might have hidden
the fat kangaroos in the cave, so they went inside to look for them. Then the


crow sealed up the entrance of the cave and left the eaglehawks inside. The crow
went home to the camp. The two wives of the ea gle hawk were there, waiting for
the return of their husbands. (As these two were the toa or mothers-in-law of the
crow they could not, of course, speak to him or have anything to do with him.)
The crow lay down in his camp. By and by he pretended that the ants were biting
him. He scratched himself and moved his camp nearer to that of his mothers-in-
law. They were watching him. After a while he pretended that. the ants were
biting him again and moved still nearer. At last he came right up to the camp of
the two women and lay with them.
The two eaglehawks managed to get out of the cave in which they had been
shut up. They found the crow with their wives. The eaglehawks seized the crow.
They rubbed him in the charcoal of- the fire and made him black all over. As
they did this they said to him, “ You stole our wives. You stole our meat. You
lay with your toa. We make you black now. .You will have to steal whatever
you can. You will never hunt with us any more. You will not eat fresh meat any
more. You will steal what you can from the camps. You will pick up the scraps
and offal.” The crow could only answer “Wa! Wa ! Wa ! ”
Ngaluma Tribe.
The Ngaluma tribe occupies the coast of Western Australia from the Maitland
Eiver to the Sherlock Eiver, extending inland for about fifty miles. The neigh-
bouring tribes are the Kariera on the east, the Mardudhunera on the south-west,
and the Injibandi on the south. Ngaluma is the name .by which the members of
the tribe refer to themselves and by which they are known to their neighbours.
No meaning could be discovered for the name.
Bibliography.
The tribe is described as the Nickol Bay tribe, in Curr’s Australian Race,
vol. i, pp. 296-303, the brief account there given being by Mr. A. K. Eichardson.
It is referred to in Mr. J. G. WithnelTs “ Customs and Traditions of the Aboriginal
Natives of North-Western Australia,” the name being given as Gnalouma. In
Dr. E. Clement’s “ Ethnographical Notes on the Western Australian Aborigines ”
the name is spelled Gnalluma. In a pamphlet by “ Yabaroo,” entitled
“ Aborigines of North-West Australia,” the name is spelled Gnalooma.
Present Conditions and Numbers.
There are very few survivors of the Ngaluma tribe, probably not more
than sixty all told. They are mostly employed by settlers, chiefly on sheep stations,
and all of them, except the old men and women, talk English fairly well. Their
country was first occupied by the whites in 1864. In 1866 a large number of them
died during an epidemic of small-pox. A little later an outbreak of measles
caused a further decrease of the tribe. Mr. A. K. Eichardson, writing in Curr’s


Australian Bace, says that “in 1860 the tribe numbered from two hundred and
fifty to three hundred persons.” As Mr. Eichardson does not mention the area
which he takes as his basis, and as he does not seem to have known the tribal
name, this statement should not be taken as referring to the whole tribe as here
described, but only to that portion of it in the neighbourhood of Eoebourne and
Nickol Bay. It is probable that the whole Ngaluma tribe included at least twice
as many persons as that part of it referred to by Mr. Eichardson.
FIG. 2. —MAP OF THE NGALUMA TRIBE.
Tribal and Local Organization.
The extent of the tribal territory is approximately 2500 square miles. It
consists of stony hills with intervening flats often of considerable area. The chief
rivers are the Maitland, Nickel, Harding and Sherlock. The pools in these rivers
provide a fairly plentiful supply of fresh water.
The tribe is divided into local groups in exactly the same way as the Kariera
tribe, and the description given under this head for that tribe will apply equally
well to the Ngaluma. On the accompanying map are marked by means of Eoman
numerals two of the local groups about which I was able to obtain information.


Relationship and Marriage.
The relationship system of the Kgaluma tribe is similar in every detail to
that of the Kariera tribe, and it is therefore unnecessary to describe it. The
classes are:
t Banaka = Burung *
Kaimera = Palyeri I
The following is a list of terms of relationship. The use of each particular
term is exactly the same as the use of the corresponding term in Kariera: —
Maicdi ... ... ... Father’s father M.F.
Ngabari ... ... ... Father’s mother M.F.
Tami ... ... ... ... Mother’s father M.F.
Kandari ... ... ... Mother’s mother M.F.
Mama... ... ... ... Father M.F.
Nganga ... ... ... Mother M.F.
Kaga ... ... Mother’s brother M.F.
Toa ... ... ... ... Father’s sister M.
Kaia ... ... ... Older brother M.F.
Turdti ... ... ... Older sister M.F.
Mariara ... ... ... Younger brother M.F.
Mayi ... ... ... ... Younger sister M.F.
Yagan ... ... ... Consort M.F.
Marganu ... Wife’s brother M.
Bungali Husband’s sister F.
Maihga ... ... ... Son M.F.
Kundal Daughter M.F.
Yaraija or Ngajela ... ... Sister’s son M.
Bali or Ngajela ... ... Sister’s daughter M.
Toa ... ... ... ... Brother’s son F.
Ngaraia Brother’s daughter F.
Totemism.
The totemic organization of the Ngaluma tribe is exactly similar to that of the
Kariera. I was not able to obtain much information about the particular totems.
Only two clans are marked on the map. The totems of these, and of another of
which the exact locality was not determined, are :
I. —Kaimera-Burung.
Taiyangul... a fresh-water fish.
Piranu ... ... ... eel.
Jigura ... ... ... a fresh-water fish.
Ngdburain... ... ... a vegetable.
Mariangu a grub.


Ngangari ... ... ... a seed.
Jimar ... ... ... a fruit.
Kalgal ... ... ... vomiting sickness.
11. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Mudu ... ... ... cold weather.
111. —Banaka-Palyeri.
Kalaijura ... ... ... a bird.
Walaigura ... ... pigeon.
Minarang ... ... ... centipede.
Ngandarimirgura... ... shark.
Budabudara ... ... a fish.
Puliribuga... ... ... „
Win-ga ... ... ... „
Bida-bida ... ... ... ~
A clan, the exact locality of which I could not determine, belonging to the
Kaimera-Burung couple, had amongst its totems three species of snake called
halunganara, bajamalu and ngamurgala. I was also told of a yungo talu (rain
totem) and of a mangula talu (baby totem) in the Ngaluma country, but I could
not determine the clans to which these two totems belonged. I was told of a
number of other totems each having its own ceremonial ground, without being
able to determine the clans to which they belonged. Some of these were as
follows:
Ngaba ... ... ... a root.
Kardang ... ... ... edible gum.
Waramba ... ... ... a seed.
Kandul ... ... ... a root.
Koro ... ... ... a seed.
Kulboro ... ... ... „
Bilar ... ... ... „
Bindanu ... ... ... „
Magardu ... ... ... a fruit.
Turguin ... ... ... „
. Madar ... ... ... a root.
Bugaji
Marduwari ... ... „
Pauwira ... ... ... grass-seed (?).
Mirganu ... ... ... the grass seeds collected and stored by a
species of ant.


The totemic ceremonies of this tribe have not been performed for many years
and the younger men know very little about them. When the ceremony for
producing cold weather was to be performed the men and women of the clan pro-
ceeded to the ceremonial ground. Here they painted themselves with white clay.
Some of the men made a big break-wind of boughs and grass, and to one
side of this a big fire was lighted. The break-wind was so placed that it would
shelter the occupants from the south-east wind, which is the cold wind, even if at
the time the wind was actually blowing from some other direction. The performers
then sat round the fire within the break-wind or shelter and pretended to shiver
with cold. After this the weather was sure to get colder in a few days. In some
of the ceremonies connected with seed totems, a part of the ceremony consisted of
grinding some of the particular seeds in the way in which they are usually
prepared for food, and then scattering the flour in different directions, calling out
the names of different parts of the country in which the performers wished the
seeds to flourish and ripen. One of the totems of clan I was said to be “vomiting.”
I gathered from my informant that if this ceremony were performed the natives
were seized with attacks of vomiting. Why this ceremony should ever be
performed, unless perhaps as a means of annoying then’ neighbours, it is
difficult to see.
Initiation Ceremonies.
When boys attain a certain age they are prohibited from eating emu and small
kangaroos. At this period the boy is called jajira. When he is sufficiently grown
he is sent away with five or six men, who are his kaga (mother’s brother) or his
margami (brother-in-law), to collect friends from neighbouring camps to visit his
father’s camp. These men bring presents. The boy’s journey seems only to have
been a short one.
The ceremony on the boy’s return consists of tying around each of his arms a
band of fur-string. The boy is decorated with red paint, and a bunch of eagle-
hawk feathers is fastened in his hair. A bullroarer ( banangari ) is given to him
and he wears this fastened in his head-band at the back of his head. The arm is
tied by a marganu (brother-in-law). The whole ceremony takes place at a cleared
spot away from the camp. Women are present during some part of the ceremony
but are prohibited from seeing other parts.
After this ceremony the boy is hagali and remains so for about a year, during
which time the bands remain on his arms. At the end of this time he becomes
muruguru and is free to marry. When married he is called kumbungu. When the
youth ceases to be hagali and becomes muruguru he is again permitted to eat emu.
A kaja (elder brother) takes some emu fat and rubs it on his face and then gives
him emu flesh to eat.
The Ngaluma also scarify the chest with horizontal cuts, but this seems to be
done in camp without any particular ceremony.


The Mardudhunera Tribe.
The Mardudhunera tribe occupies the coast of Western Australia from a point
somewhere between the Cane and Kobe Eivers as far as the Maitland Eiver. The
tribe is adjoined by the Noala on the south-west, the Ngaluma on the north-east,
FIG. 3. —MAP OF THE MARDUDHUNERA TRIBE.
and the Injibandi or Korama on the south-east. No meaning has been discovered
for the name Mardudhunera, 1 which is the name that members of the tribe apply
to themselves. They speak of the Noala and Talainji tribes as Noanamaronga, and
1 Many personal names in this tribe begin with the two syllables Mardu-, as Mardungaiana,
Mardudhangulu, Mardumijering, Mardumaninya.


refer to the Injibandi or Korama tribe by the name Korama, or else include
them under the general term Yanari, which they apply to all natives living
inland.
Bibliography.
The tribe has not been described by any previous writer. It is referred to
under the name Maratunia by Dr. E. Clement in “ Ethnographical Notes on the
Western-Australian Aborigines,” Internationales Archiv fur Rthnographie, Band
xvi, 1903. The name is spelled Mardathoni in a pamphlet entitled “ Aborigines
of North-West Australia,” by “ Yabaroo,” Perth, W.A., 1899.
Present Condition and Numbers.
Like the other tribes of this part of Australia, the Mardudhunera natives now
mostly live on sheep stations, where they work for the whites and are fed and
clothed. Their numbers have decreased greatly during the last fifty years, and
there are probably not a hundred members of the tribe now alive.
Tribal and Local Organization.
The country of the Mardudhunera tribe lies on the coast, at the north-west
end of the Hamersley Eange. This range of mountains forms a barrier between
the tribes on the Fortescue Eiver and those on the Ashburton Eiver, a distinct
ethnographical boundary coinciding with the geographical one. At the north-
western end the Mardudhunera tribe forms a connecting link between these two
groups of tribes. Consequently some of its customs and institutions resemble
those of the Ashburton tribes while others resemble those of the Fortescue tribes.
The area of the tribal territory is about 3500 square miles. The tribe is
divided into a number of local groups each with its own defined country. There
are no names for these local groups. In the accompanying map I have denoted
them by means of Eoman numerals. The local organization is in all respects
similar to that of the Kariera tribe.
Relationship and Marriage.
The Mardudhunera tribe is divided into four classes as shown in the following:
diagram 1 : —
i' Banaka = Kaimera t
V Boongo = Paljeri 1
A comparison of this diagram with that given for the Ngaluma or Kariera
1 In the word Boongo there is a “w” glide between the two “ o’s ” — Bowongo. This is the
equivalent of the “ r ” in Burong.


tribe shows that while the names of the classes are similar, the arrangement is
different. In the Ngaluma tribe the classes are arranged as follows;
j Banaka = Burung
!» Kaimera = Paljeri I
Thus in the Ngaluma tribe a man of the Banaka class marries a Burong
woman, while in the Mardudhunera tribe a Banaka man marries a Kaimera woman.
By means of genealogies showing inter-marriages between the two tribes it is
possible to discover which are the equivalent classes. These are shown in the
following table;—
Ngaluma. Mardudhunera.
Banaka ... ... ... Paljeri.
Burong ... ... ... Boongo.
Kaimera ... ... ... Kaimera.
Paljeri ... ... .. Banaka.
To put this in another way we may consider which classes in the two tribes
.may intermarry:—
JYgaluma. Mardudhunera.
Banaka marries Boongo.
Burong „ Paljeri.
Kaimera „ Banaka.
Paljeri „ Kaimera.
The system of relationship terms of the Mardudhunera tribe is very different
from that of the Kariera, and is of a type common in many parts of Australia. The
following is a list of the terms in use;—
Maiali. —Father’s father M.F., father’s father’s brother M.F., son’s son and
daughter M.
Ngabari. —-Father’s mother M.F., father’s mother’s sister M.F., son’s son and
daughter F.
Tami. —Mother’s father M.F., mother’s father’s brother M.F., father’s mother’s
brother M.F., consort’s father’s father M.F., mother’s father’s sister M.F.,
daughter’s son and daughter M.
Kandari. —Mother’s mother M.F., mother’s mother’s sister M.F., father’s father’s
sister M.F., consort’s father’s mother M.F., mother’s mother’s brother M.F.,
consort’s mother’s father M.F., daughter’s son and daughter F., mother’s
mother’s brother’s son’s son and daughter, mother’s brother’s son’s wife
d


M.F., mother’s brother’s daughter’s husband M.F., son’s wife’s mother
M., etc.
Babu. —Father M.F., father’s brother M.F., mother’s sister’s husband M.F.
Bebe. —Mother M.F., mother’s sister M.F., father’s brother’s wife M.F.
Yaji.— Mother’s brother M.F., father’s sister’s husband M.F., consort’s
father M.F.
Mogul. —Father’s sister M.F., mother’s brother’s wife M.F.
Talyu .• —Mother’s mother’s brother’s son M., mother’s father’s sister’s son M.,
mother’s mother’s brother’s son’s son’s sou M., mother’s brother’s 'daughter’s
son M., wife’s mother’s brother M., sister’s daughter’s husband M., etc.
Nganyi. —Mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter M., mother’s father’s sister’s
daughter M., mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter M., mother’s mother’s
brother’s son’s son’s daughter M., wife’s mother M., daughter’s husband
F., sister’s son’s wife M., husband’s mother’s brother F., etc. etc.
Kaia. —Older brother M.F., father’s brother’s or mother’s sister’s sons if older
than the speaker.
Turclu. —Older sister M.F.
Paldha. —Younger brother M.F.
Mayi. —Younger sister M.F.
Ngadhal. —Mother’s brother’s son M., father’s sister’s son M., mother’s brother’s
daughter F., father’s sister’s daughter F.
Bungali. —Mother’s brother’s daughter M., father’s sister’s daughter M.,
mother’s brother’s or father’s sister’s son F.
Yagan. —Mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter M., mother’s mother’s
brother’s daughter’s son F., mother’s father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter
M., mother’s father’s sister’s daughter’s son F., wife M., husband F., wife’s
sister M., husband’s brother F., brother’s wife M., sister’s husband F.,
sister’s son’s daughter M., father’s mother’s brother F.
Marianu. —Mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s son M., mother’s father’s
sister’s daughter’s son M., wife’s brother M., sister’s husband M.
Mura. —Son M.F., brother’s son M., sister’s son F.
Kundal. —Daughter M.F., brother’s daughter M., sister’s daughter F.
Ngajela. —Sister’s son and daughter M.
Kanainyu. —Mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter F., mother’s
father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter F., husband’s sister F.
Tumani. —Father’s father’s father M.F., son’s son’s son M.
Yarugalu. —Mother’s mother’s mother M.F.


The system of relationship of the Mardudhunera tribe is a very complicated
one to follow out in detail. The account here given is based entirely on examples
from actual genealogies. If lam a man of the Banaka class my father is Palyeri,
and is my balm. My father’s brother is also babu, and my father’s sister is mogul
My father’s father belongs to the same class as myself and is my maiali. The
brother of a maiali is also maiali, but the sister of a maiali is kandari. My father’s
mother is Kaimera and is my ngabari. Her sister is also my ngabari, while her
brother is my tami.
My mother is my bebe, and I apply the same term to her sister or to the wife
of my father’s brother. My mother’s brother is my yaji, and I apply this term also
to the husband of my father’s sister. My mother’s father is my tami. The brother
and the sister of this man are also my tami. My mother’s mother is my kandari,
and the same name applies to her sister and to her brother.
It thus appears that in the second ascending generation I have three names for
male relatives (maiali, tami and kandari) and the same number for female relatives
(ngabari, kandari and tami).
If we consider the children of these relatives, those of my maiali are my babu
and my mogul. Those of my male tami are my yaji and bebe, and those of my male
kandari are my talyu (male) and my nganyi (female). Thus in the first ascending
generation also I have three terms for male relatives (babu, yaji and talyu ) and the
same number for female relatives (mogul, bebe and nganyi).
In my own generation the children of my babu and my bebe, that is, my
brothers and sisters and the sons and daughters of my father’s brothers or of my
mother’s sisters, are my kaia (elder brother), my turdu (elder sister), my paldha
(younger brother) or my mayi (younger sister), according as they are older or
younger than myself. The children of my talyu are my kandari, male and female.
The son and daughter of my mogtd (father’s sister) are my ngadhal and my bungali,
while the son and daughter of my nganyi are my marianu and my yagan. It is to
be noted that the wife of my babu and the wife of my talyu are both equally my
bebe, but in the one case the children are my brothers and sisters, and in the other
they are my kandari. Similarly, my mogul and my nganyi both marry men whom
I call yaji, but in one case the children are my ngadhal and bungali, while in the
other they are my marianu and yagan. Thus in my own generation I have four
names for male relatives, exclusive of the distinction of older and younger brothers
(kaia or paldha, ngadhal, marianu and kandari), and four names for female relatives
(turdu or mayi, bungali, yagan and kandari). The most interesting feature
here is that the same term kandari is applied to the children of a talyu as to the
father of, a talyu. My kandari and my brothers and sisters belong to the same class
as myself, Banaka. My marianu, yagan, ngadhal and bungali belong to the class
Kaimera, from which I must take my wife. By the rule of the tribe I am not
allowed to marry any woman who is my bungali, but may only marry a yagan , that
is, the daughter of a nganyi, and not the daughter of a mogul.
In the first descending generation my own children are my mura (son) and kundal
d 2


Tabi
Maiali -
Father’s
father.
.E I.
= Ngbaei.
Father’s
mother.
1
Babu =
Father.
1
p Bebe. Mogul.
Mother.
1
Kaia =
- or
Paldha.
Brother.
1
- Yagan. Tuedu
or
Mayi.
Sister.
1
Mura =
Son.
|
p Ngajela. Kundal.
Son’s wife. Daughter.
1 „ 1
Maiali. Maiali.
Son’s son. Son’s daughter.
(daughter). I apply the same names to the children of any woman whom I call
yagan, whether she marries a man who is my kaia or paldha, or one who is my
kandari. My hungali (mother’s brother’s daughter), as a rule, marries a man
who is my kandari, and their children are my lalyu and nganyi. The children
of my turdu or mayi (sister), or of my female kandari, who are at the same
time the children of my ngadhal and my marianu, are my ngajela, male and
female.
In the second descending generation the children of my mura (son) are my
maiali, male and female, and the children of my kundal (daughter) are my tami,
male and female.
The system may be more clearly understood by reference to the accompanying
genealogical tables, which show all the different relatives of a male. Table I shows
the direct male line. It starts from my maiali (father’s father) and his wife. The
children of this pair are my babu (father) and mogul (father’s sister). My balm
marries my bebe and their children are my kaia or paldha (brother) and my turdu
or mayi (sister). The children of my kaia or paldha are my mura and kundal
(son and daughter), and the children of my mura are my maiali (son’s son and
daughter).
In Table II we start from a pair who are my tami and kandari, but who are
the yaji and ngomyi of my babu. The son of these two is my yaji and marries my
mogul (father’s sister) The children of these latter are my ngadhal and lungali.
The children of my ngadhal are my ngajela, and they call me yaji. My male
ngajela marries my bunded (daughter) and their offspring are my tami (daughter’s
son and daughter).


Tabl
Tami =
Mother’s
father.
E II.
= Kandari.
Mother’s
mother.
1
Yaji =j
Mother’s
brother.
= Mogul. Bebe.
Mother.
1
Noadhal 5
Mother’s
brother’s
son.
1
= Kandari. Bunqali.
Mother’s
brother’s
daughter.
1
Ngajela =j
Mother’s
brother’s
son’s son.
1
= Ku.ndal, Ngajela.
Mother’s
brother’s
son’s daughter.
Tami. Tami.
Daughter’s son. Daughter’s daughter.
Tabl
Kan dari =
Wife’s mother’s father or
Mother’s mother’s brother.
E III.
r Tami.
1
Talyit
Wife’s mother’s brother.
1
Y Bebb. Ns anti.
Wife’s mother.
1
Kandari
Wife’s mother’s
brother’s son.
=j= Bdngali. Kandari.
Mother’s brother’s Wife’s mother’s
daughter. brother’s daughter.
1
Talyij =f
Mother’s brother’s
daughter’s son.
: Ngajbla. Nganyi.
Sister’s daughter. Mother’s brother’s
daughter’s daughter =
wife’s mother.
1 1
Kandari. Kandari.
Sister’s daughter’s son. Sister’s daughter’s daughter.
Table 111 starts from my kandari (mother’s mother’s brother) and his wife, who
is my tami (mother’s father’s sister ). The children of this pair are my talyu and
nganyi. My talyu marries a woman who is my bebe and their offspring in turn are
my kandari , male and female. My male kandari in my own generation marries a
woman who is my bungali and their children are my talyu and nganyi. My talyu
in the first descending generation marries my sister’s daughter ( ngajela ) and their
children are my kandari, male and female. The peculiarity of this table as
compared with I and II is obvious. In Tables I and II the same term { maiali or
tami) recurs after four generations. In Table 111 the same term recurs every


alternate generation. Thus in the direct male line the two terms kandari and talyu
alternate with one another. The son of my male kandari is in all cases my talyu,
and the son or my talyu is my kandari.
This peculiarity in the use of the terms kandari and talyu deserves a brief
comment. The term kandari is applied to a mother’s mother. This is, at the same
time, the meaning given to the term in the Kariera tribe. In the Kariera tribe a
mother’s mother’s brother is called maeli (this being the term for father’s father).
In the Mardudhunera tribe, on the other hand, the term for mother’s mother’s
brother is kandari, one term being thus used for both male and female relatives.
This is a fundamental feature of the system, a mother’s mother’s brother being
distinguished from a father’s father\ and all their descendants being equally
distinguished from one another. The terms for grandparents and grandchildren
being reciprocal a woman calls her daughter’s children kandari, since she is their
mother’s mother {kandari). A man uses the same term to denote his sister’s
daughter’s children, calling them by the same term that they apply to him. It
thus follows that a man uses the term kandari, as applying to men and women of
the same generation as his grandparents, and also to both males and females of
the same generation as his grandchildren. In the Kariera system, while a man
applies the term kandari only to women of the generation of his grandparents it is
only a woman who applies the same term to persons (both male and female) of the
generation of her grandchildren. Thus in the Kariera tribe a man has only female
kandari, while a woman has both male and female kandari. In the Mardudhunera
system a man applies the term talyu to his mother’s mother’s brother’s son, who is
thus distinguished from a father’s father’s son ( babu ). The peculiarity about this
term talyu is that, unlike the terms habu (father) and yaji (mother’s brother), it is
reciprocal. While my babu calls me mura and my yaji calls me ngajela, my talyu
(mother’s mother’s brother’s son) calls me talyu. Thus a man applies the same term
to men of the generation of his parents, and also to men of the generation of his
children. Now the father of a man’s senior talyu is that man’s kandari (mother’s
mother’s brother). On the other hand, the son of a man’s junior talyu is that man’s
kandari also (sister’s daughter’s son). By what is a very simple step in the logical
development of the system a man therefore applies the term kandari to the father
and also to the son of any talyu whatever. The result of this is that the term is
applied to the father of his junior talyu, who is at the same time the son of his
senior talyu, in other words, to his mother’s mother’s brother’s son’s son. The term
kandari thus comes to be applied by a man to men (and women) of the generations
of his grandparents and of his grandchildren and also to men of his own generation.
This is a feature of very great importance in the Mardudhunera system.
Table IY starts from the same pair of relatives as Table 11, but in the first
ascending generation my yaji in this case marries a woman who is my nganyi,
belonging to the line of descent shown in Table 111. The children of this nganyi
are my marianu and yagan. My marianu marries my sister ( turdu or mayi) and
their children are my Tigajela. Just as my sister’s daughter marries my talyu, so my


Tablb IV.
Tami t= Kandari.
Wife’s father’s
Wife’s father’s
father.
mother.
Yaji =j= Nganyi.
1
Bbbb.
Wife’s
Wife’s
Wife’s father’s
father.
mother.
sister.
1
Mariantj^
p Tctrdu
1
Yagan.
Wife’s
or Mayi.
Wife.
brother.
Sister.
1
N GAJELA=P N GANTI.
1
Ngajela.
Sister’s
Sister’s
Sister’s
son.
son’s wife.
daughter.
i
Marianu.
1
Yagan.
Sister’s son’s
Sister’s son’s
son = wife’s brother.
daughter = wife.
sister’s son marries my nganyi (from Table III), and the children of this pair are
my marianu and yagan. The peeularity of this table lies in the second descending
generation where my sister’s son’s son and daughter are given the same names as my
brother-in-law and my wife. This is due to the fact that the children of a nganyi
are in all cases marianu and yagan, just as the children of a talyu (the brother of a
nganyi) are always kandari.
The above is what we may speak of as the general basis of the system. In
actual practice certain modifications have to be taken into account. In Table Imy
maiali is shown as marrying my ngabari. But in some cases it may happen that a
man who is my maiali by genealogy may have married a woman who is my
tami. Now the children of a maiali are babu and mogul, while the children of a
female tami are talyu and nganyi. Where a maiali has married a tami the natives
speak of the son of this pair as “ half babu half talyu ” and the daughter as “ half mogul
half nganyi.” Exactly the same thing occurs if a male Tcandari (Table III) marries a
ngabari, instead of a female tami. I found two or three such cases in the gene-
alogies that I studied. The same thing may happen in the contemporary generation.
Thus my bungali, as shown in Table 111, marries my male kandari. It may happen,
however, that she marries a man who is my kaia or paldha (brother). In such a
case the son of this pair will be my talyu, if I trace the relationship through his
mother, and my mura, if I trace it through his father; in other words, he will be
half mura half talyu to me, and in the same way the daughter will be half kundal
half nganyi. These indeterminate relationships are very interesting. In practice
it always happen that a choice is made between the two alternative relationships,
but the principles that guide this choice are not at all clear. In one case a man’s
male kandari had married a woman who was the man’s ngabari and had five


children, three sons and two daughters. The man, in giving me the terms of
relationship, called the two oldest brothers babu, while he called the other brother
talyu, and he called the two sisters nganyi. He was unable to explain why he
differentiated between them, and said that the men in question were all of them
really half babu half talyu.
The other modification of the system as described above is due to the fact that
a man who is by genealogy my mura (son) may be actually older than myself, and
in that case I must call him not mura but babu. Inversely, if a man who by
genealogy is my babu is younger than myself, I call him not babu hut mura. The
same thing occurs in the case of the relationships yaji, bebe, mogul, ngajda and kundal,
but not in the case of talyu and nganyi. Let us examine the case of a man who is
by genealogy my mura, but is a year or two older than myself, and is therefore my
babu. This man’s father’s father may be alive and would be by genealogy my babu.
Thus I should have to apply the same term babu to a man and to this man’s father’s
father. This is obviated by the use of the term yumani, which in this case would
be applied to the father’s father of my babu. In the same way the term yarugalu
would be applied to the father’s father of a man who is my yaji. These terms
therefore, yumani and yarugalu, refer to the third ascending generation, and, in
their reciprocal use, to the third descending generation. Both terms, however, are
also used in a looser sense. A man or woman applies the term yumani to any man
or woman of his or her father’s class who is considerably older than the speaker’s
father. In the same way a man or woman applies the term yarugalu to old men and
women of his or her mother’s class. Thus, in one case that I examined, a woman
applied the term yarugalu to her husband’s father and his sister. The father of
this yarugalu she called tami, and the mother kandari. In another case a man
applied the term yumani to his own mother’s father’s sister’s son.
The marriage law of the Mardudhunera tribe is very simple. A man may
marry a woman who is his yagan, that is, the daughter of his nganyi, the daughter’s
daughter of his male kandari. He may not marry any woman who does not bear
this relation to him. Marriages are arranged before children are born. Let us
take the ease of a newly married man, whom we may call A, who has as yet no
children. A man C, who is the talyu (wife’s mother’s brother) of A, has a daughter
born to him, whom we may call D. It is arranged that this girl D shall be the


nganyi (wife’s mother) of the first son born to A. When A has a son born to-him
this son B is told that the woman D is his nganyi, the man C being his kandari..
The woman D grows up and marries and has a daughter E, who is by betrothal
the wife of B. He keeps his claim alive by visiting the father of the girl, that is,,
the husband of his nganyi, and by making him presents. On one occasion I acted
as messenger and took some presents from a man about twenty to his prospective-
father-in-law. The daughter who was to become the young man’s wife was at that
time about seven or eight years old. He would therefore not be able to marry her
for six or seven years. Every boy is made nganyi to several women so that he:
may have the better chance of ultimately obtaining a wife. But of all these there
is generally one who is specially marked out. To the daughter of this woman he-
lms the first right, while to the daughters of other nganyi he has only a secondary-
right, some other man having the first right in each case. A man’s own nganyi,.
that is the woman to whose daughter he has the first right, is often the daughter
of his own father’s own talyu (wife’s mother’s brother). That is to say, a man’s
own nganyi is the daughter of his mother’s mother’s brother. In other cases a;
man A and his wife may ask the woman’s father’s sister {mogul), who is the man’s
bebe, to promise her daughter as the nganyi of the yet unborn son of A and his.
wife. In this case a man’s nganyi is the daughter of his mother’s father’s sister.
A man must carefully avoid all social contact with any woman who is his;
nganyi. There is no such avoidance in the case of a mogul. The daughter of a.
man’s mogul is his iungali and he cannot marry her.
Whenever a man is made nganyi to a woman his mother is at the same time;
made nganyi to this woman’s son. Thus we have two women, A and B, who are-
ngadhal to each other, each of whom is nganyi to the son of the other. The son of
A then marries the daughter of B, and inversely the son of B marries the daughter
of A. That is, there is exchange of sisters.
The mother’s brother of a girl occupies an important position. If there are-
several claimants for his sister’s daughter it is often he who decides which shall be;
the favoured one. This man is the talyu of the girl’s future husband. If a man.
wishes to obtain a girl in marriage he must therefore pay his attentions not only to.
the girl’s father (his yaji), but also to her mother’s brother (his talyu).
In many tribes of Western Australia in which the system of relationship is
similar to that of the Mardudhunera, I found that irregular marriages (that is,,
marriage of a man with a woman who is not his legal wife) occurred in fair
numbers as far back as I was able to trace the genealogical record, that is, some;
time before the country was occupied by the whites. In the Mardudhunera tribe-
the only irregular marriages that I found had all occurred recently, and there were,
very few of those. In the old days, before the occupation of their country, irregular
marriages were not permitted and did not occur.
A consideration of the Mardudhunera system of relationship shows that if
that system were used consistently throughout it would result in the division of
the tribe into eight sub-classes similar to those of the Warramungaand other tribes,


Mardudhuneea Tribe.
PALJERI.
BAN AKA.
BOONGO.
KAIMBEA.
( \
a &
« P
P a
t \
P a
Third
ascending
generation.
/ *
Yumani
(Father’s
father’s
father)
Yumani
Yumani
Yumani
—
—
Yaeugalu
Yarugalu
(Mother’s
mother’s
mother)
Yaeugalu
Yarugalu
—
—
Second
ascending
j generation.
—
—
Kandabi
(Mother’s mother’s
brother)
Kandari
(Mother’s mother)
Maiali
(Father’s father)
Kandari
(Father’s father’s
sister)
—
—
Tami
(Mother’s father)
Tami
(Mother’s
father’s sister)
Tami
(Father’s mother’s
brother)
Ngabari
(Father’s mother)
First
ascending
generation.
Habit
(Father)
Mogul.
(Father’s sister)
Taitu
(Wife’s mother’s
brother)
Nganyi
(Wife’s mother)
—
—
Yaji
(Mother’s
brother)
Sehe
(Mother)
Yaji
(Wife’s father)
Be he
(Wife’s father’s
sister)
—
—
Contemporary
generation.
—
—
Kandaei
(Mother’s brother’s
[daughter’s husband)
Kandari
(Mother’s brother’s
son’s wife)
EGO 3
Kaia (older brother)
Paldha (younger „ )
Turdu (older sister)
Mayi (younger ,, )
—
—
Ngadhal
(Mother’s
brother’s son)
Bungali
(Mother’sbrother’s
daughter)
Maeianu
(Wife’s brother)
Yagan
(Wife)
First
descending
generation.
'
Muea
(Son)
Kundal
(Daughter)
Taitu
(Sister’s daughter’s
husband)
Nganyi
(Sister’s son’s wife)
—
—
Ngajeia
(Daughter’s
husband)
Ngajeia
(Son’s wife)
Ngajela
(Sister’s son)
Ngajeia
(Sister’s
daughter)
—
—
Second
descending
generation.
/ *
—
—
Kandaei
Kandari
Maiali
(Son’s son)
Maiali
(Son’s daughter)
—
—
Tami
(Daughter’s son)
Tami
(Daughter’s
daughter)
Maeianu
Yagan
Third
descending
generation.
Yumani
(Son’s son’s son)
Yumani
(Son’s son’s
daughter)
Yumani
Yumani
—
—
Yaeugalu
Yarugalu
Yaeugalu
Yarugalu
—
—
186
A, E. Beown.— Three Tribes of Western Australia.


Arunta Tribe.
Panunga.
Uknaria.
Bulthara.
Appungerta.
Purula.
Ungalla.
Kumara.
Umbitjana.
Grandparents’
Generation
—
—
Ipmunna
(Wife’s mothers
father)
Ipmunna
(Mother’s mother)
Arunga
(Father’s father)
?
—
—
Tjimmia
(Mother’s
father)
?
?
Aperla
(Father’s
mother)
Parents’
Generation
Oknia
(Father)
Uwinna
(Father’s sister)
Mura
(Wife’s mother’s
brother)
Mura
(Wife’s mother)
—
—
Gammona
(Mother’s
brother)
Mia
(Mother)
Tkuntera
(Wife’s father)
?
—
—
C
Contemporary^
Generation
—
—
Ipmunna
(Father’s sister’s
daughter’s
husband)
Ipmunna
(Son’s wife’s
mother)
EGO J
Okilia (older
brother)
Itia (younger
brother)
Ungaraitcha
(older sister)
Itia (younger sister)
—
Unkulla
(Father’ssister’s
son)
Unkulla
(Father’ssister’s
daughter)
Umbirna
(Wife’s brother)
Unawa
(Wife)
Children’s
Generation
Allira
(Son)
Allira
(Daughter)
?
?
—
—
?
Gammona
(Son’s wife)
Umba
(Sister’s son)
Umba
(Sister’s
daughter)
—
—
Grandchildren’s
Generation
—
—
?
?
Arunoa
(Son’s son)
?
—
—
Tjimmia
(Daughter’s
son)
Tjimmia
(Daughter’s
daughter)
?
1
187
A. E. Brown. —Three Tribes of Western Australia.


of Central and Northern Australia. In order to make this clear to the reader I
have made out the accompanying table of Mardudhunera terms, which may be
compared with the similar table for the Arunta tribe reproduced from Messrs.
Spencer and Gillen’s “ Northern Tribes of Central Australia.” In these tables the
terms for male relatives are printed in capitals, while those for female relatives are
printed in italics.
The only way in which the Mardudhunera system differs from the systems of
Central Australia is that the former is not used consistently throughout. For
example, suppose I call B my kaia and C my bahu. Then if the system were
used consistently B would also call C hahu. But there actually occur cases where
B calls C not hahu but talyu. It is for this reason and this alone that the
Mardudhunera system differs from that of such tribes as the Warramunga.
It now remains to consider the connection of the relationship system with the
local organization. In the Mardudhunera tribe, just as in the Kariera, the members-
of one local group belong to only one couple of classes. One local group contains
only Banaka and Paljeri men and women, while another contains only Kaimera and
Boongo. On the accompanying map, beneath the number denoting each local
group, the letters BP and KB show to which couple the group belongs.
In the case of the Mardudhunera tribe another problem arises. In the
Kariera tribe one couple contains only one line of descent. In the Mardudhunera
tribe each couple includes two lines of descent, as below:—
Maiali, father’s father. Kandari, mother’s mother’s brother..
I I-
Bahu, father. Talyu.
Kaia or paldha, brother. Kandari.
I I
Mura, son. Talyu.
Maiali, son’s son. Kandari.
The question of interest therefore is, “ Does a man’s own local group contain
only men who are his maiali, hahu, kaia, paldha and mura, or does it also, in some
cases, include men who are his kandari or talyu ? ” Unfortunately, I was not able
to determine definitely which of these alternatives actually obtains. So far as my
information went, I did not find a single ease in which a man’s local group included
men who were his kandari or talyu; but the genealogical information that I collected
was not sufficiently, extensive to permit me to state that this is really so in all cases.
However, while I cannot speak definitely, I think it is probable that a man’s
own local group includes only his relatives in the direct male line, that is, his maiali,
hahu, kaia, paldha and mura. In other words, the Mardudhunera local group is a
simple clan with male descent. I much regret that lam not able to speak more
definitely on a point which is possibly of fundamental importance in connection
with the origin of this type of relationship system.


It is obvious from the above account that a man cannot marry a woman of his
■own, that is, his father's, clan or local group. A point of considerable interest is
whether he can marry a woman of the same clan, and therefore of the same totem,
as his own mother. In the few genealogies that I was able to collect, I found one
case in which a man had married his mother’s father’s brother’s son’s daughter,
who, of course, belonged to the clan of his own mother. This one case may have
been an exception, but I think it is probable that there is no special law prohibiting
a man from marrying into his mother’s clan.
Totemism.
The totemism of the Mardudhunera tribe is similar to that of the Kariera.
Each local clan has a number of totems that are transmitted from father to son.
The members of the group perform ceremonies, called talu, for the purpose of
increasing the totem, but there is no objection to a man eating or killing any of
his totems.
The following is a brief list of some of the totems of some of the clans of this
tribe 1 :
I. —Pulamba clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Manjeriwura or manjidiwura ... monitor lizard.
Waneriya ... ... ... ... a bird.
Mardera ... ... ... ... an edible root.
Kanguriya or ngalirmara ... ... a fresh-water fish.
11. —Chanjara clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Wanda ... ... ... ... devil or evil spirit.
Walambari ... ... opposum.
Buluwa ... ... ... ... the white-tailed spinifex rat.
Mulyaru ... ... ... ... a snake.
Birin ... ... ... ... spinifex lizard.
Kardangu ... ... edible gum.
Walyuru ... ... a bush with edible fruit.
Warari ... ... ... ... common fly.
Janungn ... ... ... ... a grub.
1 In this list, names have been given to the different clans (local groups) in order to
distinguish them. In each case the name is that of some important camping place in the
country of the clan. The natives themselves have no distinctive names either for the clan or
for the whole of its country.


lll.—Bulandurwa clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Milyangura ... ... ... a long red fish.
Yaruwara... ... ... ... a small fish.
Kurinja ... ... ... ... March fly.
IY.—Mandamalu clan (Kaimera-Boongo)
KwAeno ... ... ... ... magical power.
Mayi or Wanj'a ... ... ... dingo.
Kalaidu ... ... ... ... swan.
Ngarandi ... ... ... ... duck.
Wilinja ... ... ... ... white cockatoo.
Wilulu ... ... ... ... curlew.
Kolu ... ... ... ... a bird.
Balgunji ... ... ... ... a snake.
Y.—Jiwural clan (Kaimera-Boongo).
Jiwura or Jigura... ... ... a fish.
Yl.—Munguji clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Mudu or Ngudu ... ... ... cold weather.
YlT.—Yaliangu clan (Kaimera-Boongo).
Banga ... ... ... ... (?)
VIII. —Mulala clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Ngogura ... ... ... ... (?)
Mungeramara ... ... ... honey.
IX. —Chalyianu clan (Banaka-Paljeri).
Changuna... ... ... ... emu.
Wongada ... ... an edible root.
Note on Systems of Eelationship in Australia.
In all the Australian tribes about which we have detailed information marriage
is regulated by relationship. In all tribes a man may only marry women who stand
to him in a certain relation of consanguinity. There are two different forms of
marriage law, which I propose to speak of as Type I and Type 11. The Kariera
tribe is an example of Type I, while the Mardudhunera tribe is an example of


Type 11. In tribes with a marriage law of Type I, a man marries the daughter of
his mother’s brother, or some woman who stands to him in an equivalent relation.
Where the marriage law is of Type 11, a man marries his mother’s mother’s
brother’s daughter’s daughter, or some woman who stands to him in an equivalent
relation. I have found the marriage law of Type I amongst a number of tribes on
the For rescue and De Grey Eivers in Western Australia. It is reported by
Messrs. Spencer and Gillen for the Urabunna tribe near Lake Eyre, with a peculiar
modification whereby a man may only marry the daughter of his mother’s elder
brother. According to the late Mr. Howitt, the marriage rule of Type I was found
in the Wolgal and Ngarigo tribes of the Upper Murray Eiver. The Eev. John
Mathew (in Two Representative Tribes of Queensland, p. 157) states that the same
form of marriage is found in the Kabi and Wakka tribes of Queensland, but the list,
of terms of relationship given by the same author suggests that the Kabi marriage
system is really of Type 11, so that, till further information is forthcoming, we must
regard this case as doubtful. If I interpret rightly a very difficult passage by
Dr. Basedow in the Trans. Boy. Soc. South Australia, voLxxxi, p. 4, the Larakia
tribe of Port Darwin also has a marriage law of Type I.
T have found a marriage law of Type II in a number of tribes of Western
Australia, including the Mardudhunera. The same type is described by Messrs.
Spencer and Gillen as existing in all the tribes studied by them in the Northern
Territory from the Mara and Anula in the North to the Arunta and Luritcha in the.
South. Howitt’s description of the Dieri tribe shows that there also the marriage
is of Type 11. According to Mr. E. H. Mathews this type is found in most of the
tribes of New South Wales and Victoria. It seems probable from the description
of the tribes of Western Queensland by Dr. W. E. Both that they also have a
marriage law of Type 11.
The only tribes in which a different form of marriage law has been observed
are the Kurnai tribes as described by Howitt. Our knowledge of these tribes,
however, is very incomplete and unsatisfactory. Mr. E. H. Mathews states that
the Brabirrawulung tribe (one of the Kurnai tribes) has a marriage law of Type II
( Journ. Boy. Soc. Hew South Wales, vol. xxxiv, pp. 268-4).
We may say, therefore, that we know of only two forms of regulation of
marriage in Australia, and of these two Type II is very much more widespread
than Type I.
Corresponding to each type of marriage rule there is a type of relationship
system. We may take as the characteristic feature of systems of Type I the fact
that the term for “mother’s mother’s brother” is the same as that for “father’s
father.” Except for the Kariera and Ngaluma systems, described by myself, the
only other system of this type about which we have any information is that of the
Urabunna tribe, described by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen.
The characteristic feature of Type II is that the term for “ mother’s mother’s,
brother ” is different from that for “ father’s father,” and is, in many cases, the same
as that for “ mother’s mother.” Besides the Mardudhunera system, the following


systems of Type II have been described, though in some cases only imperfectly—
the Arunta, Luritcha, Kaitish, Warramunga, Worgaia, Umbaia, Tjingilli, Binbinga,
Mara, and Anula, described by Messrs. Spencer and G-illen; the Dieri, described by
Mr. Howitt; the Narrinyeri, described by the Eev. C. Taplin; the Wathi-wathi,
described by A. L. P. Cameron in the Journ. Anthr. Inst., vol. xiv, p. 354; the
Pitta-pitta and other tribes, described by Dr. W. E. Eoth ; and the Chaap-wuurong
and Knurn-kopan-noot tribes, described by James Dawson.
In some of the systems of Type II there is one feature of such extreme
importance that I propose to use it in order to define what I will call Variety (a) of
Type IL This distinguishing feature of the Variety (a) is that one term of
relationship is applied to a “ mother’s mother,” and also to a “ mother’s mother’s
brother’s son’s daughter,” and one term (in most cases the same as that for “ mother’s
mother ”) is applied to a “ mother’s mother’s brother,” and to a “ mother’s mother’s
brother’s son’s son.” The result of this peculiar feature is that amongst the women
a man may marry are his “ mother’s mother’s brother’s son’s son’s daughter’s
daughter,” In tribes with a system of Type I women of that relationship would be
forbidden in marriage. The distinguishing feature of Variety (a) of Type II has
been observed by myself in many tribes of Western Australia, including the
Mardudhunera. It is also recorded by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen amongst the
following tribes of the Northern Territory—Arunta, Tjingilli, Warramunga,
Binbinga, Worgaia, Umbaia, Mara, and Anula. With regard to most of the tribes
with relationship systems of Type 11, we have no information whether the distinctive
feature of Variety (a) is present or absent. In only one case, that of the Narrinyeri,
have we any evidence that it is absent, and even in that case the matter is not quite
certain. It may perhaps seem unnecessary to thus distinguish a separate variety
when it has not been definitely ascertained that any other variety of the same type
exists. It is, however, quite conceivable that a system of Type II (with marriage
with a mother’s mother’s brother’s daughter’s daughter) might exist without this
particular feature. It is probable indeed that there is such a system in the
Narrinyeri tribe. Further, the Dieri system, while probably possessing the peculiar
feature of Variety (a) possesses another feature of somewhat the same kind which
is absent in the other systems here referred to (namely the use of one term for
mother’s father and for mother’s brother’s son). If this feature should be found
in any other tribes besides the Dieri, it will be convenient to distinguish such
systems as forming a separate variety of Type 11.
1 hope shortly to publish a detailed account of the marriage laws and relation-
ship systems of Australian tribes. Meanwhile, it may be worth while to point out
one important fact which is often overlooked by writers anxious to expound
theories, that is, that the marriage laws of Australian tribes are not in any way
whatever affected by the existence in the tribe of two or four named divisions.
Amongst tribes with two named divisions, we find Type I in the Urabunua tribe
and Type II in the Dieri, Wathi-wathi and Chaap-wuurong tribes. Amongst
tribes with four named divisions, we find Type I in the Kariera and other


tribes, and Type II in the Mardudhunera, Luritcha and Pitta-pitta tribes, and
probably in most of the tribes of New South Wales. We also find Type II in such
a tribe as the Narrinyeri, which has no named divisions. Finally, even the
existence of eight named divisions is not a feature on which we can lay much stress
in classifying Australian tribes. It is true that wherever there are eight sub-
classes the marriage must be of Type 11, but exactly the same marriage rule, and
an exactly similar system of relationship, may be found in tribes in which the
FIG. 4. —SKETCH-MAP OF AUSTRALIA SHOWING DISTRIBUTION OF THE TWO TYPES
OF RELATIONSHIP SYSTEM.
eight sub-classes are not named. The fact that a tribe has two or four named
divisions tells us nothing whatever about the marriage law of the tribe, which can
only be ascertained by a careful study of the system of relationship.
It may also be worth while to note, in connection with the theory that the
prohibition of the marriage of first cousins (and the origin of the relationship
system of Type II) is due to the change from maternal to paternal descent of
the totem, 1 that in the Kariera tribe, Type I (with the marriage of first cousins), exists
together with paternal descent of the totem, and that in many tribes of New
1 Professor Durkheim. Annie Sociologique vol. viii.
e


South Wales and Victoria, Type II exists together with maternal descent of the
totem. The theory is therefore not supported by the facts.
The accompanying sketch-map of Australia shows the distribution of the two
types of relationship system so far as it is at present known. Where the marriage
rule has been reported, but where at the same time we have no detailed information
about the terms of relationship, the two types are marked by means of dotted
lines.
[Reprinted from the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, Vol. XLLIL,
January-June, 1913.]
Harrison and Sons, Printers in Ordinary to His Majesty, St. Martin's Lane, London.


Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute , Vol. XLIII, 191.3, Plate IV.
FIG. 1. — TALU (TOTEM CENTRE) OF THE KURINJA (MARCH FLY) TOTEM, KARIERA TRIBE.
FIG. 2.-TALU (TOTEM CENTRE) OF THE PIDIRA (COCKATOO) TOTEM, KARIERA TRIBE.
THREE TRIBES OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA.


ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF GREAT
BRITAIN AND IRELAND.
This Institute was established in 1871 by the amalgamation of the older
Anthropological Society and Ethnological Society. It has for its object the
promotion of the Science of Mankind—Anthropology—by the accumulation of
observations bearing on man’s past history and present state in all parts of the
globe. It investigates, in a rigorously exact manner, everything that otfh. throw
light upon the laws of man’s nature: his origin, history, and capabilities of
progressive development and civilization. It studies him structurally and
psychologically, under the several types in which he is found in various regions;
and comparatively, in relation to the rest of the animal kingdom. The ultimate
object of the Institute, therefore, is to build up a Science of Man on a basis of
well-ascertained fact, and logically deduced inference. As means to this end,
the Council of the Institute has adopted a plan of operations, the principal
heads of which are as follow:
1. Meetings for the reading of papers and for discussion of anthropological
questions.
2. The issue of a Journal containing Eeports of the Proceedings at the
Meetings, with other matters of anthropological interest.
3. The appointment of Local Correspondents in all parts of the world to
collect information, and to aid the Institute in its operations.
4. The maintenance of a library, which contains sets of all the principal
Anthropological Journals published in the United Kingdom or
elsewhere, besides a large and valuable collection of books of
reference, travels and researches, an extensive collection of photo-
graphs and lantern slides, and much unpublished material for the
use of students of Anthropology. Fellows residing in the country,
as well as in London, can borrow books from the library.
5. The appointment of Committees to conduct special investigations, as
occasion offers, in the various branches of Anthropology.
6. Co-operadon with the British Association for the Advancement of
Science, and with foreign scientific societies in anthropological
investigations ; co-operation with individuals and institutions in aid
of explorations and in the establishment of local centres of
anthropological study ; and generally, the stimulation of individual
and local efforts to further the objects of the Institute.
The annual subscription is Two Guineas, which is due on election (unless
such election takes place in ths month of November or December) and on the
Ist of January in each succeeding year. A Member may at any time compound
his future subscriptions by the payment of £3l 10s.
Persons who wish to become Fellows of the
Institute are requested to communicate with the
Secretary, 50, Great Russell Street, W.O.
