

O : '* t *[* '" Rg§R• pc&K : | tytzii uW'fjf^jdi
‘>Mt *B * f 1 : 1 i\l|l;/If! l lt 'Ht
CURRAWONC PUBLISJHIN G CO* PTY I TO


r 1 &
tit


I
#




THREE CAME FROM
BRITAIN
NOURMA HANDFORD
Wholly Set Up and printed in Australia
PRATTEN BROS. PTY. LTD.
Sydney, 1945 1 I <4 \0




AUG
THREE CAME FROM
BRITAIN
By
NOURMA HANDFORD
CHAPTER I.
Doctor Alan Grant stopped his car at the front gate
of Ids home, and craned his neck for any sign of juvenile
life.
All the doors and windows were open, but that proved
nothing, and he tooted his horn. There was no reply, and
slipping into second, he took the track down to the beach,
carefully choosing the parts where the coarse, discouraged
grass afforded his tyres some grip.
Straight down to the Point the track went, scrub each
side, and a patch of blue sky like a banner at the end of it.
Abruptly it stopped in a grassy clearance where long
saplings, some strewn on the ground, others still standing
like skeleton tents, and the blackened stones, were the
only trace of the canvas town that sprang to life at the
beginning of every holiday period; for the fishing was good,
and one swims all the year round at Moonaburra.
Reaving the car near the rusty old pump, he walked
quickly up the slight incline where the old cotton-trees
defied the wind and seaspray by turning towards the ele-
ments only their tough, uncompromising trunks, and
growing all their branches over the Reserve. On the hottest
day here their shade spelled coolness for those fortunate
campers who had been early enough to pick positions.
The doctor paused a moment in a gap in this natural
wind-break, to take in all the beauty of this bit of coast
that twenty years of association had not staled.
Blue sky with white drifts meeting bluer sea and whiter
break of surf creamy crescent of sand between two rocky
headlands. To the right, the Devil’s Cage, foam leaping


madly at its base; to the left, the round green-treed Pin-
cushion, opposite the Point where the river flowed inland,
joined only at low-tide to the mainland. Home of gulls
that circled now over the water and dipped together to
gorge on a patch of discarded gut —past Pincushion, further
out, the dark outline of Old Woman.
He pictured another beach on the other side of the
world, not tropically brilliant like his beach, but grey and
menacing, strewn with the wounded and dying, valiant
remnant of the rearguard of the British Army; the air
filled, not with leafy rustlings, but horrible with bomb-blast
and gun-fire. No gulls, but litfcte ships, desperately manoeuv-
ring to guard their precious salvage from the low-flying
Stukas.
That was Dunkirk. No one had any doubt now that
England would be bombed, possibly invaded.
He remembered his convalescence in the countryside
there in 1918, and the golden-haired children with their
pinafores filled with wild-flowers. What of their children
this time?
Already there was talk of sending as many as possible
from the large cities to the Dominions, and it was expected
that foster parents would be called for; but Alan Grant
was a man whose quick sympathies must find immediate
outlet, and he smiled with satisfaction as he thought of the
letter now literally winging its way to Dr. Deborah Kerr,
friend and one-time colleague, now a surgeon in the Royal
Manchester Hospital.
Looking down the beach he became aware of his own
children, thirteen-year-old Peter, expertly shooting the
breakers, and exacting the last ounce of momentum from
each as it carried his taut, eager body forward and stranded
it, spread-eagled on the hard wet sand.
Marion, her little golden body briefly clad in scarlet
trunks, squatted near a rock pool which she agitated con-
stantly with a stick.
“Giving the sea-anemone a thin time,” thought her
father idly. Fran, sunbaking beside her mother, was the
first to see him.
“Here’s Dad,” she called, sitting up and flinging back
her damp brown plaits, while her mother moved automatic-
ally to unpack the thermos and put out the cups. Peter
and Marion raced up the beach and prepared to hurl them-
selves on him.


‘Have you seen the letter?”
‘When will they be coming, Daddy?”
‘Will they be here in time for the Show?”
Their father laughed.
“Here, hold on,” he said, adroitly side-stepping. “These
are my trousers, Marion. Don’t come near them with that
blubbery thing, please.”
“It’s not a jelly-fish, Daddy, only one of those white
half-moon ones. Do you think it would keep till Monday?
If it would, it would do for nature study,” and she held
out an extremely dead form of sea life.
“Throw it away,” said Peter, impatiently. “It smells
now.”
“It does not,” said his sister, indignantly. “I have a
nose myself, and I don’t notice it. When are they coming,
Daddy?”
“I’ve only just this minute posted the letter, my poor
child, and I don’t know yet whether anyone is coming. We
will have to wait and see what Deborah thinks of the
idea.”
“Oh, blow! We’re so far from the war that it will be
over before they can start, anyway,” grumbled Peter,
dropping on the sand between his mother and the picnic
basket and helping himself to a scone, as she threw the
doctor a cushion and passed over his tea.
“No such luck, old man. This is only the beginning,
but I hope all the children in the cities will be evacuated
before long. It is over the air to-day, Winifred, that the
London children are being sent poste-haste to the country.
The Germans won’t stop at London; Manchester will get
her share of it and most of the other big towns, too. I
hope Deb gets our two on their way before anything starts.”
His wife laughed.
“Really, Alan, you are as bad as the children. One
would think Deb was already holding two of our own
children. The fact that these youngsters have yet to be
found and their parents persuaded, seems to be overlooked.”
He grinned.
“If I know anything of Deborah Kerr, she will find
them and persuade their parents in the shortest possible
time. Especially with things the way they are now.”


“Did you ask for a boy and a girl about Peter’s and
Marion’s ages?” asked Fran.
“Yes, they can take your place and Phillip’s,” he
replied. “I don’t suppose they will arrive until the end of
the year, and Phillip will be in the Army then. And didn’t
I hear some talk of your going away to school next year?”
“Oh, that may be off,” his daughter answered, carelessly.
“I’ve got a chance to be in the basketball team this term,
and then I wouldn’t want to leave and go somewhere where
I wouldn’t be anybody,” she added, naively.
The doctor laughed uproariously.
“The frog in the little pool, eh?”
“Something like that,” Fran replied, in no way abashed.
“A big school may be fun, but you know how it is worrying
yourself sick trying to make one of the teams. I do wish
they were coming sooner. It would be fun having English
children to play with. If Ido go away to school I’ll only
see them in the holidays. The girl can have Pannican to
ride. Not the boy, though, he might be rough with him.”
“Rough,” jeered Peter. “It’s a pity someone wasn’t
rough with him. You have to kick him along; the butcher’s
boy laughs himself into a fit when you go for the meat.
The way you have to get off and lead him away from the
honeysuckle at the back of the shop.”
“The butcher’s boy and his predicament leaves me cold,”
said Fran, with all the dignity of fifteen. “But,” she added,
with an unwonted and childish vehemence, “don’t let me
catch anyone kicking him along, that’s all.”
“Yah! Pie practically chews the cud.”
“That will do, Peter,” said his mother, perfunctorily,
her mind on the possible additions to her family. “Alan, I
do hope the children who come will like it here. It will
be so new and strange after city life; especially English
city life. So ordered, so sort of neat. I hope they won't
miss their people too much. It isn’t easy to like new ways,
at first ”
“Oh, I don’t .know,” replied her husband, airily.
“Children have no roots. They will settle down.”
“Gee, I bet the boy likes our school,” chimed in Peter.
“We have found a water-hole below the grazing paddocks
that the Plead hasn’t thought to forbid. We go swimming
there every dinner-time.”
“I hope there are no deep holes, and no fallen trees in


it,” said his mother, anxiously.
“Actually, they say you can’t touch bottom at one spot,”
said Peter, boastfully.
The doctor somewhat allayed his wife’s fears by remark-
ing dryly that there was, and always had been, a bottomless
spot in every schoolboy’s swimming-hole.
“I hope the girl is tidier than Fran, anyway,” said
Marion. “The way she leaves the sleep-out, Mummy, 1
never can make my end look good.”
Her mother smiled.
“I am hoping the visitors will teach you all quite a lot
about some things,” she said, adding ruefully, “Nice
behaviour included. They are usually beautifully trained in
‘Please’ and ‘Thank you.’ Pm afraid they won’t know what
to think of some of our casual ways.”
“What’s wrong with our ways?” demanded Peter, lying
flat and wet on the sand, with his eyes shut against the
glare as he sucked an orange through a hole in the top.
His mother looked at the firm, sun-browned body, as per-
fectly relaxed as a puppy’s, and privately thought there
could not be much wrong with ways that produced such
perfect harmony with life, but his father said:
“The row you are making with that orange, for one
thing.”
“Aw, you can’t suck an orange and not make a noise,
Dad.” and he gave it a final suck and turned the skin
inside out before discarding it.
“Finished for to-day?” Mrs. Grant asked her husband
as she took his cup to refill it for the second time.
He nodded a little wearily.
“Unless something turns up at the house.” He paused
to sugar his tea. “Did I tell you that Forsyte is going?”
“Oh, Alan, he can’t —not after Collins joining the Air
Force. If he goes there will be only you in Moonaburra.”
He grinned at her.
“Not for the first time, you remember.”
“But that was different,” she protested. “You had the
place to yourself for years, but things are different now.
The township was a quarter the size it is to-day, and there
was not nearly the surgery there is now. Think of all the
people who send for a doctor for things their parents
would have fixed up themselves.”


“I am thinking of it,” he replied, briefly, “although I
wished their parents were not so self-reliant at the time.
Matron will have to give the aneesthetics, and for major
operations, Forrest, from North Arm, will come over to
assist. He is alone, and we fixed it up this morning.”
“Well, I still think Forsyte shouldn’t go,” said Mrs.
Grant, decisively. •
“You can’t blame him, Win. Any young man would
do the same. Look at the trouble we had keeping Phillip
out of it until he took his degree. Lucky he was due to
finish before things got so bad, otherwise even my heavy
parental hand wouldn’t have held him.”
Winifred sighed.
“I suppose not,” she said. “All his letters have been
full of it. He has had a very unsettling year.”
“Well, he will be in uniform before Christmas,” replied
his father, “and if Fran goes off to school, we’re going to
be glad of those kids to fill the place.”
Marion jumped up and began shaking her fair hair
free of her tight rubber cap, and wrapping her towel
sarong-wise round her little middle.
“Daddy, what about us all going round to see Beno?”
she said. “We haven’t been there since Monday. Bill says
he has another tooth.”
“Then that settles it,” laughed the doctor, handing his
wife the cups as she packed them away. “What do you
say, Win? I want to see him about those papaws.”
“We’ll go, then,” she replied, getting up swiftly and
brushing the sand from her grey skirt and shaking out the
grey cardigan she had been using for a rug.
Her husband sprang up and took it from her.
“Better put it on,” he said. “The breeze is cool when
the sun goes down.”
She slipped her arms into the sleeves, and Fran thought:
“How right Mummy always looks. I think I’ll have a
grey outfit next vear with a red blouse.”
' . f
They set otf towards the Point, walking low on the
beach, where the receding tide had left the sand a smooth,
hard promenade, washed and clean like the start of a new
day.
The doctor swung the tea basket from one hand, and
Marion from the other hung on and jumped as far as she


could get each step, trying to put her small footprint ahead
of her father’s.
Mrs. Grant followed with Peter, sometimes coming
abreast of the other 1 two, sometimes falling behind, as
Peter considered it his special duty to slay with great
thoroughness every bluebottle washed up by the tide.
Fran walked by herself and swung her towel as she
hummed an unrecognisable tune.
At the Point they all loitered, while Dr. Grant gazed
wistfully at Pincushion and wondered if he would have
any free time on Sunday.
“The deep-sea bream are about,” he grumbled, “and I
haven’t had a line out for weeks.”
As he spoke they caught sight of Bill’s boat beached on
Pincushion and Bill himself coming down the slope laden
with fishing-gear, to bring it home.
“Coo-ee!” shouted the doctor, and Bill’s answering call
came back lustily as the gulls rose and circled in protest.
“Oh, boy, fish for tea!” shouted Peter.
“If he has any,” said his mother, “I suppose we may
as well wait and see.”
They strolled along to the little clearing among the trees
facing the mouth of the river, where Bill had his shack,
and Fran and Marion both ran forward to the shady spot
where Beno clung tipsily to the side of his play-pen and
threw things at his bodyguard, Wallup, who dozed at a safe
distance.
Fran lifted the baby out of his pen, and sat on the grass
with him, while Peter and Marion went through a panto-
mime of wild gestures, babblings and handsprings for his
entertainment, until Beno, usually a placid and self-contained
child, shouted with mirth and threatened to throw himself
out of Fran’s arms.
The doctor and Mrs. Grant sat on an upturned boat
and laughed heartily as Peter, losing his balance, came
down bang on Wallup, who streaked away with an agonized
howl.
A little less than a year ago, Beno had been born in the
little Cottage Hospital at Moonaburra.
His portentous frown had earned him the immediate
title of Benito, and no one who heard his demands and
protestations in the following fortnight felt he could be
called anything else.


At the end of that time, he was dressed in his em-
broidered frock and lacy bonnet, with huge tickly and
unaccustomed bows. He was handed up to his mother,
where she sat beside his father, in a smart sulky behind a
flash little pony.
He was all ready to go home and start using the new
cot his father had made him, and the bright pink bath his
mother had bought quite a long time ago.
Beno never reached the house where these things awaited
him, and no one ever knew exactly what happened at the
level crossing, for when the down train pulled up with a
screech of brakes, and the people came running, the nervous
little pony was dead, and so were Beno’s mother and father.
Beno, who had been wakened up by a frightful noise,
was lying in the long prickly grass near the railway fence,
yelling with rage and fighting with his bonnet, which was
slipping further and further over his eyes.
1 hey took Beno back to the hospital, where the nurses
were kept busy trying to make him take the exact number
of fluid ounces of nourishment laid down for him by Dr.
Grant as his daily ration.
1 hus he thrived for six weeks, and when everyone was
beginning to think he would have to go to the Orphanage
and was being very sorry about it, his grandfather came
to claim him.
Bor years Bill had humped his bluey in the Queensland
outback. A Digger of the last war, unable to find work,
he tramped from township to township, picking up what
jobs he could —rouseabout, cook’s off-sider, timber cutter —
he tried them all.
News of his son’s death reached him in Cunnamulla.
Now he had arrived, quite simply, for his grandson.
Beno was now a ward of the State, however, and not
to be rolled in a swag and carried off.
Dr. Grant, always with a soft spot and a helping hand
for an old Digger, worried over the matter, but didn’t see
what could be done about it if the man had no home for
the baby. He and the matron talked it over and decided
to recommend that the child be placed in. the Orphanage
until such time as the grandfather could provide a home
for him.
“But, Dad, he will never be able to do that!” exclaimed
Phillip, when the plan was discussed at the dinner-table
one night. “You know he won’t.”


“No, I don’t suppose he will,” his father said, sadly.
“He realises that himself, poor fellow. I only hope that,
later on, he will feel that we did the best for the child.”
Phillip refused to be complaisant about it.
“No, Dad, he won’t. He feels the kid belongs to him,
and it does.”
“I spoke to him the other day when he was waiting
outside the hospital. Poor beggar, he’s been hanging round
the place all the week; he feels awful about not having
anywhere to take the baby to. He can’t bear the Orphanage
idea for his son’s child. I reckon he’d look after it alright
if he only had the chance.”
“Yes, I believe he could,” agreed his father. “I had his
character checked, and he seems a thoroughly decent sort
of chap, decorated in the last war, too.”
“Then it’s a crying shame that something can’t be done
to help him,” said Phillip, suddenly; then flipping his
fingers, he cried:
“Look here, Dad, I’ve got an idea. What about the
boat-shed ?”
“Be your age, Phil, to suggest bringing up a baby in
the boat-shed,” said his mother.
“Yes, I know; but look, Dad. It’s got a well near it,
and a shower at the side. We used to use it after our
swims. He could camp there for a while, and you could
give him a job fixing up the boat. It wants painting, any-
way, and then we could get to know him. If we think he
is alright, what about letting him look after the orchard
and the garden? Jim is enlisting soon.” Phillip hurried
on, enjoying the elaboration of his plan and determined not
to let anyone interrupt. “What about getting some second-
hand timber and letting him put up a shack near the shed?
He told me he was handy with tools, and he seems to know
something of boats and fishing.”
The doctor pursed his lips dubiously.
“I don’t know whether it would work out,” he said,
“given that everything is favourable. All the same, I know
he gets a small pension and would probably be glad of
something to supplement it.”
“If you really think it could be done, Alan,” put in
Mrs. Grant, “I could rake up some odd pieces of furniture
to start him off with.”
“All the same, it will be a frightful nuisance,” the


doctor growled after his son had left the room. “If I
recommend the scheme, I’ll have to make myself responsible
for the feeding and general care of the child.”
“At the same time, dear,” said his wife, who secretly
felt that Phillip was practically perfect, “it is such a truly
kind thought of Phillip’s we mustn’t turn it down unless
you think it is quite impracticable.”
“Anyway, Jim is determined to join up as soon as he is
eighteen, and heaven knows whom we will find to replace
him. It is not much use looking for another young man.
What about trying him for a week or so on the garden?
I am sure Matron will have the baby for that extra time.”
The doctor thought for a while, and began to feel
mellow as he realized that Winifred intended to take the
responsibility of the infant. The fellow really didn’t seem
too bad, and if he could manage the orchard, it might be
worth trying.
He went in search of Phillip.
“Took, Phil,” he said, “this thing of yours might be
alright, but who’s going to help him put up his shack?
If I did agree to this involved scheme, and I’m probably
a fool even to think of it,” he added, hurriedly, “certainly
I wouldn’t pay for labour as well.”
“If we had the timber, I could give him a hand,” Phillip
said, slowly, “I’ve got three weeks of the vac, left.”
His father raised inquiring brows.
“I thought you and Brenda McLeod had fixed up for
tennis all the afternoons you are not surfing together.”
Phillip frowned and looked out to sea.
“Oh, we’ve had quite a good time,” he said, off-handedly,
adding with a grin, “Have to give the other fellows a
chance with her. I like to leave the township with a
reasonable amount of good feeling behind me.”
“The general feeling in the township is that you and
Brenda have an understanding,” laughed his mother with
a great show of gaiety, despite the fact that this disturbing
rumour had lost her many an hour’s sleep over the past
two months.
“Then the township, as usual, is under a misapprehen-
sion,” replied her son, calmly, “You ought to know, dar-
ling, that Brenda is much too gorgeous for me,” adding
wickedly, “I shall have to choose someone homely and
inexpensive like you.”


“Oh, what a horrid thought,” shuddered Winifred, “1
hope I wasn’t married for my inexpensive qualities, Alan.’’
“If you were,” he replied, feelingly, “I showed a com-
plete lack of judgment.”
Nothing was settled that day, but Dr. Grant did have a
word to say in the right quarter, and the upshot of it all
was that the timber was purchased and a snug hut, not
only floored, but fibre-lined, sprang up mushroom-like
beside the boat-shed, and so Bill came to live there with
Wallup, a scraggy but discriminating mongrel, who had
known the outback and didn’t think very highly of it.
The bare essentials, as Phillip called them, were coaxed
without much trouble from the parental roof, and a week
before Beno was to arrive, a grand rally was held, when
all the disused baby furniture was resurrected and painted
by Peter and Marion in a variety of bright, joyous colours,
and arranged in the new home with a number of instruc-
tions as to use.
Bill, an old campaigner, who, with a few nails and an
old packing case, could have made almost any article re-
quired by his grandson, listened gravely to a description of
the various gadgets for holding Beno upright in his chair,
and of releasing him from his pram, and yet another for
restraining the nose of the unconscious infant while he
slept.
CHAPTER 11.
Dr. Harvfy closed the door of Fay’s bedroom behind
him, his face losing the cheerful expression he kept for his
little daughter, and falling again into its habitual, rather
stern lines.
The faces of most Englishmen were grimly set this
morning when the headlines were splashed with news of the
first blitz on Eondon, and telephone lines hummed as
anxious parents cajoled or bullied country relatives into
making room for their children. People with leisure and
petrol to spare motored out to inspect schools inland and
to place their offspring as safely as they might in this
threatened little island.
The doctor had an added preoccupation. Even when
his wife had died seven years ago, leaving him the task of
bringing up three school children and a delicate baby, the


problem had not been so pressing because of good, reliable
Ellen McAlpine.
John, just turned fourteen, had been sent to school.
Nine-year-old Felicity and six-year-old Garnet and the new
baby were run all together with the rest of the domestic
machine by this capable woman.
Felicity had gone to the local day school, and their
father had hoped that this summer Fay would have been
able to start at the little kindergarten that Garnet had
attended when his mother had died.
She would have started last year, but for the whooping-
cough which had begun in the winter and left the thin
little body racked with a hard cough all through the
summer, long after the disease had run its course.
No amount of tonics did Fay any good. Each infantile
epidemic in its turn claimed her as its first victim, and
when, in despair, her father had taken her to Eondon to
consult an old friend and colleague, whose opinion as a
child specialist was eagerly sought, Sir Henry had said:
“My best advice is to get her to a warmer, dry climate.
There’s nothing organically wrong, yet but I won’t be
responsible for her if she has another illness.”
And so it was arranged that Mrs. Mac Alpine should
take the two young children to Italy to share the home of
an artist friend of John, Felicity to go to school in Eondon;
but while the doctor hesitated, wondering whether all the
talk of war in Europe would come to anything, Mrs. Mac-
Alpine’s sister died quite suddenly in the north of Scotland,
and left twelve motherless Scots, who had first call on
Mackie’s devoted life.
The Harvey children scarcely believed it. So often
had they heard tales of the childhood of Mackie and Hepsa-
bah, and of Hepsabah’s runaway marriage, that they
regarded her as a purely legendary figure.
But there was nothing legendary about the twelve little
MacTavishes, and the girls, most subdued, helped Mackie
to pack her bags, and all Fay’s gentle nature grieved for
Mackie’s dead sister, and never guessed that Mackie’s red
eyes and frequent sniffles were not for Hepsabah as much
as for the loss of the three well-behaved children and the
imposing, if rather gloomy, house that had been her home
and sole care for so long.
Only when Mackie had gone, did Fay realise that the
comfortable protective covering she had lived beneath had


been lifted off, leaving her as exposed as a snail without
its shell.
Certainly Felicity no longer went to school, but stayed
at home and did the housekeeping. She was very kind to
Fay, feeling as she did, really appalled at the little girl’s
dependence on her, and truly sorry for the timid little
creature virtually orphaned for a second time, but she did
not understand any of the games Fay played with her
hosts of paper dolls, and Fay was too shy to ask her
advice as she had done Mackie’s when a crisis loomed in
their domestic affairs.
Neither did Felicity have the fund of homely and de-
tached anecdote with which to while away the afternoon’s
darning or mending.
She took Fay with her when she went shopping to town,
but they went to different shops. Not the ones where Fay
was known and given, perhaps, a bull’s-eye “and now,
Mrs. McAlpine, what can we do for you this morning?”—
delightful to sit on a high, narrow chair, sucking the bull’s-
eye, while Mackie made her leisured purchases, and finally
departed with Fay in her wake, to round off the morning
with tea and cakes at Lyons.
Felicity went to much bigger shops, and a great many
more of them to get the same things Mackie had ordered
from one. Felicity was sixteen and she had a great
many friends, and when she was out with Fay she was
always meeting some of them. They liked to stand on the
side of the footpath talking, while Fay, growing wearier
every moment on the outskirts, was often pushed by the
hustling shoppers and humped by their baskets.
Not that Felicity meant to be unkind; it just never
occurred to her that all the light chatter she found so
diverting was nothing but utter weariness to her sister. ■
Usually they went with some of the girls to have ice-
cream sodas, perched on high stools at a bar, and once, so
hot and tired was Fay that the cold, gulpy liquid made her
sick, right in front of everyone.
Felicity must have been ashamed, though she was very
sweet and had taken a taxi home and put Fay to bed,
but Fay herself felt so badly about it that she couldn’t be
persuaded to go to town again. Quite often, if it was cold,
or if she didn’t feel like going out and meeting people, she
got a headache. Then Felicity let her stay in bed, and
brought her something to eat on a tray. It was quite easy


to play with her dolls in the bed-clothes, and Felicity
thought;
“Poor little mite. She is very delicate. Father will have
to get a very sympathetic woman to mind her.”
hor the war had started, and already Felicity was
planning some glamorous way of helping in the war effort
until she was old enough for one of the auxiliary services.
Dr. Harvey drove to the hospital thinking of the letter
he had received that morning from John, and wondering
whether he would be able to go south to see the boy get
his wings.
John, a pilot of a bomber crew—it didn’t seem possible,
and he pictured his son, slight, of medium build, fair hair
above serious eyes, not yet twenty-three, but just as full of
determination to see this thing through as he had been last
year to take up painting as a career.
He remembered the boy’s protesting voice and the final-
ity in his voice as he had tried to change his father’s
attitude to art as a profession.
“But, father, sending me to Oxford is practically chuck-
ing money away. I couldn’t stick it. There’s so much I
have to learn in Paris and other places, I promise you, in
five years ”
He sighed. Well, that argument had never been settled,
but the boy could please himself if he came out of this
safely. His thoughts turned to his eldest daughter—have
to think up something for Felicity, no life for a young girl
just keeping house, but what about Garry and Fay?
He felt relieved when he drove through the hospital
gates and had to take his mind off his private affairs.
As he entered the operating theatre, be heard his assist-
ant talking of last night’s raid as he scrubbed up with Dr.
Kerr, and, later, the operations over for the morning, when
the theatre nurse had removed their gowns, and they stood
about in the surgeon’s room drinking tea, the subject came
up again.
“We’re just about next on the list,” said the junior
surgeon, cheerfully. “These manufacturing towns will get
theirs, you can be sure. I’ve sent Claire and the baby to
The Caws.”
“You’re wise,” growled old Latimer. “But if they were
mine, I’d send them to the Dominions.”


“Pity you haven’t,” put in Deborah Kerr, “I have a
commission from a friend in Australia to find and post him
instantly, a boy and a girl for safe-keeping.”
“A boy and a girl”—the words stuck in Dr. Harvey’s
mind—“a boy and a girl.” An idea formed, but he thrust
it away. Just the thing for his youngsters if Fay were a
strong child, and if he could bring himself to part with
them.
He thought gratefully of Garry, a sturdy, practical child
of twelve, always well and in excellent spirits, totally
absorbed in whatever interested him at the moment.
No, not for his children, but a grand opportunity for
some small boy and girl.
On the way home he bought a paper, and read with
growing horror and uneasiness of the result of the raid
on London;
LONDON IN FLAMES ! HUGE DEATH-ROLL
50 CHILDREN BURIED BENEATH HOSPITAL
Fire death and frightfulness. He caught his breath
when he thought of his own children. Perhaps he could
send them to the country with Felicity. Would he be able
to get accommodation? Would Felicity, a schoolgirl, be
able to cope with Fay’s constant illnesses? And, above all,
he remembered Sir Henry’s warning, "Another year in an
English climate ”
He locked the garage door, and stood a minute looking
at the gloomy soot-covered buildings on either side of the
road, watched the mill smoke from the north, mingle with
the smoke from the south, and float like a ragged grey
blanket over the city.
He took out his handkerchief and wiped the grit from
his fingers as he walked slowly up the stairs.
"Australia has a wonderful climate. Wonder who these
people are? One would have to know more about it, of
course.”
He walked to his telephone and dialled Dr. Kerr’s
number.
Deborah Kerr was a small, coiled spring of a woman,
with terrific energy, and no little skill in her profession.


Entering Stuart Harvey's study, she briskly lit a cigarette
and said:
“Well, I’m glad I mentioned Alan Grant’s letter this
morning. I wasn t thinking of your children at the time,
but if you care to take it up, it will be the best thing that
can happen to them.”
Her hearer, a little taken back by this forthright an-
nouncement, said hurriedly:
“I only want to make enquiries, you know. I’m very
worried about Fay’s health, and I hesitate to let her out of
my sight, but .1 can’t protect her from bombs here. Garry,
I would send to the right people without a qualm; but he
couldn’t look after Fay on the trip out.”
“What about Felicity?”
The doctor hesitated.
“1 hadn’t thought of sending Felicity; you said a couple
of youngsters. They might not be willing to have an extra
one, and a different age. Besides,” he added slowly, “I
haven’t talked to Felicity. She probably has plans of her
own; most girls of her age are looking forward to doing
some war-work you know.”
‘T daresay she has, my dear Harvey,” his visitor
replied. “But this is war-work and a woman-sized job, I
think. If Fay goes, she will need someone to look after her,
and not just a stewardess, but someone who knows and
loves her. She is an absurdly sensitive plant for a seven-
years-old. Old Mackie never stopped babying her. Oh, I
know what you are going to say,” she laughed. “Mackie
brought them up and what a lot you owe to her.”
“Well, she did,” the doctor answered, defensively.
“Granted, partly, but she adored Fay’s dependence on
her, and cultivated it, much to the child’s detriment. Now,
she is gone I don’t mind saying what I have been thinking
for years. She adored running this house, too, and being
the hand that pulled the domestic strings. I know she ran
it very efficiently, and made a really good job of the
children’s manners, but she never let Fay stand on her own
feet, or Felicity, either.”
Dr. Harvey looked annoyed.
“Really, Deborah, you know Felicity better than that.
She is too old and responsible for her years, if anything,”
he protested.
“Yes, in many ways she is,” conceded his hearer.


Because cunning old Mackie outwardly deferred to her,
and let every suggestion appear to come from her. Made
her believe herself the mistress of the house, even when
she was at school. It was a sure way of ensuring harmony,
but it spoilt Felicity.”
Deborah Kerr was too old and trusted a friend to be
dismissed lightly or angrily, but Harvey prickled with
annoyance as he answered:
"Do you seriously mean to say you think Felicity is
spoilt?”
"I certainly do,” replied Deborah, decisively.
Ihe study door was open and Felicity, coming noise-
lessly down the carpeted stairs, heard her father’s question
and the uncompromising answer.
She stood perfectly still for a second, her fair face
flushing with rage and humiliation that Deborah Kerr,
she had never liked her, with her sharp black eyes and her
caustic wit criticising her to her father, and father listen-
ing without protest.
Felicity turned and ran quickly upstairs, full of bright
steely rage.
“I’ll show them,” she thought. "Just wait till I ask
father if I can go with Jennifer to work in Lady Cresswell’s
nursing home until I can join the A.T.S. They will see
whether I am spoilt or not.”
Quite unconscious of the storm she had roused, Deborah
Kerr tapped out her cigarette and went on deliberately:
"She is spoilt, Harvey, for being young. Responsibilities
come soon enough, and these last few years she should have
been just doing lessons and having fun. Mackie has made
her feel she was shouldering the burdens of the home. A
good way of making her behave like a little lady, but not
so good for her. She has all the airs and graces of a
young matron very pretty, but hardly suitable for her for
a few years yet.”
Stuart Harvey wondered miserably if this were true. He
rather thought it might be, now he came to think of it.
Felicity had never been pert and aggressive, as most girls
are in adolescence, when they are trying to make themselves
accepted among grown-ups. She never had to.
Deborah gathered up her bag and gloves.
"Well, I must be off,” she said. "I hope you decide to
send them. They are nice children, and Winifred Grant


will give them a couple of years of great fun, and love
doing it. helicity, too; they will have her like a shot. Let
me know what you decide, so I can cable Alan and let him
know how many to expect.”
After she had gone, Dr. Harvey filled his pipe and
thought over what she had told him of Dr. Grant’s country
practice, his ideally situated home, and the welcome she
had assured him his children would receive from Winifred
Grant.
At midnight he sat down and wrote a long letter to the
Australian doctor, giving him Kay’s medical history, and
thankfully accepting his offer of war-time hospitality.
Felicity never could remember the details of the longest
and most astonishing talk she had with her father the night
following Deborah Kerr’s visit. Her dismay was complete
at finding her plans for war-work so sympathetically lis-
tened to, but so firmly dismissed.
She would always remember her father’s voice saying:
“This is a war job, Felicity, and a bigger one, I feel,
even than scrubbing a hospital kitchen. You will be taking
two motherless children, one very delicate and timid, 13,000
miles from their home. You will be taking them away from
fright and shock, probably from death or mutilation; for
that is what will happen here to many less fortunate when
bombs begin to fall on Manchester.”
“I’ll be running away myself,” she replied, resentfully.
“Running away? I don’t want to frighten you, my
dear, but you will be running the risk of bombs at sea,
until you are well clear of the English coast, and of tor-
pedoes and calamity all the way to Australia. You will
have to restrain Garry’s high spirits on the high seas, and
bolster up Fay’s.”
He smiled at her, but there was no answering smile in
his daughter’s eyes, and he went on gravely;
“Your sister will be your chief care, of course. She
will, most likely, be ill if the voyage is at all rough, and she
will certainly be frightened.”
He rose and placed his arm round the girl’s shoulders.
“I shall be urgently needed here, Felicity. There will
be broken bodies and terrible burns that will require our
undivided attention at the hospital. Will you take this other
responsibility, so that I can stay here and serve England ?”
He felt the slight figure stiffen.


“Yes, father,” she said, steadily, and smiled as she
added, “I will go and tell Garry. There will be no holding
him now.”
Her father watched her mount the stairs, a slender,
gallant figure, with fair hair flopping on squared shoulders,
and decided that Mackie hadn’t done such a bad job, what-
ever Deborah might think.
Once his mind was made up, Dr. Harvey lost no time
in finalising matters. The breath-taking heroism of the
Londoners under further devastating attacks, filled him, as
every other Britisher, with a choking pride, and a determi-
nation to do no less when his turn came, but as the fiery
breath of the Nazi dragon scorched other cities and drew
nearer, and he chafed under the delays necessary for the
formalities before his children could sail.
In these hectic days, poor Felicity found that high
resolve is one thing, and sustained effort another.
Many of her friends, little older than herself, came to
say good bye before their posting, conscious of the trim
smartness of their uniforms, and strutting a little in con-
sequence.
The fact that she was too young by eighteen months,
for enlistment, did not console Felicity. She was hopelessly
out of things and she knew it.
“Going away, poor dear, with the children,” she heard
lovely Primrose Hall say to Felicity’s own chosen and
special friend, Elizabeth, and Elizabeth had answered
carelessly:
“Yes, isn’t it terrible for her? Prim, do you think my
cap looks better pulled down, or over to the side a bit?”
Felicity’s cup of bitterness ran over.
Her father gave her carte blanche for clothes within
the limits of their mtion cards, and Deborah Kerr, who, to
Felicity’s annoyance, seemed to keep abreast of every move-
ment, telephoned to offer her help with the shopping.
Felicity thanked her coldly and said she had all she
needed.
“But you will want quite different kinds of things there,”
Deborah protested.
Felicity remained firm, Deborah Kerr had, she felt,
engineered the whole thing, and she hated her fiercely.
The only bright spot in those horrid weeks, was the
forty-eight hours’ leave John was granted on the eve of


their departure. Looking taller and fitter than she remem-
bered him, his brand new wings filled Felicity with out-
spoken pride, and Garry with dumb hero worship as he
carried them along gaily with him, and eased the strain of
the last days at home.
\ ou are the lucky one, old girl,” he greeted Felicity.
“Lucky?” his sister echoed, tragically.
Jove, yes. Very lucky. I’d give something to be
going with you —in ordinary circumstances, that is. We
have a couple of Australians in our mess, capital chaps.
One was in the life-saving squad at one of the surf beaches,
and the other is a chap from the country. You ought to
hear them on surf-board riding and deep-sea fishing. They
want me to go back with them after this show is over.”
You can,” said Felicity, sharply. “I’m coming right
back here just as soon as I can. I’m not saying anything
to father now, but if Fay gets on alright and likes the
people we are going to, I am coming back as soon as I am
eighteen, Elizabeth has joined up, did you know?”
“Yes, I saw her at the station with Primrose. Prim’s
people are giving them a send-off to-night and they want
us to go along.” He hesitated. “I put them off. I thought
you and I might go off on a jaunt by ourselves somewhere.”
“Oh, John, you are a dear. I’d love that. I don’t think
I could bear seeing how marvellous they look in their uni-
forms any more,” cried Felicity, quite overcome by her
brother’s magnanimity.
Then she remembered Primrose.
“Though I don’t really mind,” she added, hastily, “Prim
will rather expect you, won’t she?”
John turned to throw his cap on the table and answered
with elaborate casualness:
“Oh, no. I’ll be seeing her some more later. Anyway,
I’m a bit fed up with parties.”
He resolutely put aside the mental picture of Primrose’s
lovely dark face as he climbed the stairs with Felicity, who
laughed and chatted gaily in anticipation of the outing.
“Poor little wretch,” he thought. “It’s tough on her,
this nursery governess business.”
That night as they dined at a little cafe with a Conti-
nental air and danced to a string band, he thought about it
again, and forgot all the dashing youths who would most
certainly be this minute crowding round Primrose, and


wondered again how this young sister of his would make
out in her new life.
He looked at the proud curve of the young mouth and
hoped she would fit in with the carefree, wind-blown
people he pictured in Australia.
And so the few hours of his leave sped by, rollicking,
happy hours as he had planned them. Borrowing the car
for a picnic with the children, keeping Felicity’s laugh
always on the surface, by his comical tales of the fellows
in the mess; never relaxing his efforts to make her last
day in England a gay memory.
Felicity had just finished putting Fay to bed when he
came up to say good bye, and to pin a pair of small flashing
wings on the lapel of her soft blue suit.
“Well, it’s cheerio, sis,” he said, trying to keep his voice
careless as he stood back to admire the effect. “Tally-ho.
That means all the best from one flier to another.”
The girl blinked quickly to hide the tears which a swift
rush of love and gratitude to her brother prickled to the
surface. She flung her arms around him.
“You’ll keep your tail up to-morrow?”
“Oh, yes, John, I truly will,” she cried; “I’ll try to
deserve these wings and I’ll wear them always.”
He patted her shoulder.
“That’s right. I know you will. Write and tell me all
about it, won’t you ?” —and with a rough, brotherly squeeze
he was gone.
Next morning the heavens opened over Manchester and
it rained, heavily, steadily. Passing their luggage locked
and corded in the hall, Felicity had to touch her wings to
remind herself that Garry’s persistent and quite unanswer-
able questions about ocean-going liners, the Grant children
and Australia in general, and Fay’s last-minute shrinkings
and weepings were all part of her going into action.
Dr. Harvey was going as far as Plymouth to see them
off and, fortunately for Felicity, her morning was a crowded
one, telephone calls to say the last good byes, rapid flights
upstairs to check over the hand luggage, a flying visit from
Deborah bearing a large parcel of games and comics for
Fay and Garry, and it was time to leave for the train.
Deborah had come with their father from the hospital.
“Just looked in for a second, Felicity, to say good bye
and leave these for the children, and I hope you will like


this,” she said, in her brisk clipped voice, thrusting a boxy
parcel into the girl’s arms. Felicity undid the string and
opened it slowly, knowing her father’s eyes were on her,
and hoping she could find something polite to say about
whatever it was.
But the flush of surprise and pleasure that rose to the
face were sufficient thanks for Deborah, as she lifted from
the pale pink tissue paper a beautifully knitted angora
bolero, its puffed sleeves standing out square and quaint
against its brief whiteness.
“Oh, I do indeed like it,” she cried. “Thank you so
much, Dr. Kerr. It’s the loveliest thing.”
Deborah looked pleased, as Felicity slipped it on and
turned round for her father to admire it.
“I hoped you would like it,” she said. “Handy to slip
on after dinner.”
“It is very pretty,” remarked the doctor. “But will it
be very warm?”
His colleague laughed.
“For where she is going, it will be warm enough for a
winter overcoat.” This was a rather unfortunate remark,
as Felicity remembered the grudge which the gift had made
her forget for a moment; but Deborah, blissfully unaware
of this ran upstairs, calling the children to say good bye.
Felicity folded the fluffy little nonsensical garment and
pushed it into a corner of her suitcase.
“I suppose she thinks we’ll be strolling on the deck and
dancing after dinner like a pleasure cruise,” she thought,
resentfully.
All the way to Plymouth it rained, and Felicity, who
had intended the journey to be a sad farewell to the beauti-
ful English countryside, was forced to close the window
which quickly steamed over, much to Garry’s disgust,
until he discovered that the misted pane made a splendid
drawing board.
As the carriage became stuffier Fay began to feel un-
pleasantly the motion of the train and leant against her
sister with her eyes closed. A forlorn little figure she
looked, her eyelashes lying like dark crescents against her
thin, pale cheeks.
Felicity had been dreading the actual moment of depar-
ture, but at the end of the journey, as she roused the
sleeping Garry and bundled both children into their rain


things, she began to hope fervently that they would soon be
settled on the boat.
Dr. Harvey, at the last moment, began to wonder des-
perately whether he was doing the right thing in sending
his children so far from home, and as he carried Fay up
the gangway, her small white face pressed against his glis-
tening raincoat, he looked at the high grey side of the ship,
and shuddered as he thought what a well-aimed torpedo
could do to her. He had meant to have something of
advice and practical suggestion to say to his eldest daughter
when the time for leaving her came, but now he felt that
the fatherly speech he had prepared mightn’t be the right
thing to say after all, so he kissed her and said:
“You are a woman now, dear. Try to act always with
good sense, and fall in with Mrs. Grant’s plans for you- —
things may be a little different out there, and she will know
best.”
After he had gone Felicity moved slowly about the
cabin, sorting out their luggage and settling Fay in her
bunk. She gathered comfort from the orderliness she was
creating and the shiny spotlessness of the cabin, not know-
ing that the home she had left that morning was already
vibrating with gunfire, its windows smashing to atoms as the
building opposite crashed in a heap of dusty rubble.
CHAPTER 111.
“You know, Alan,” said Mrs. Grant, passing over her
husband’s cup of early morning tea, “a millionaire would
be pleased to have this view.”
“Well, it wouldn’t please me if he had,” grunted the
doctor, rousing himself from the first unbroken night’s rest
he had had for a fortnight. And this statement was no
less than the truth. He had built the house of weather-
board, with large rooms and wide verandahs to please
himself, painted it white and called it COTTONTREES
to please his wife, and settled down to enjoy its cool comfort
undismayed by the knowledge that the house conformed to
no special style of architecture, ancient or modern. Their
bedroom led onto the flat top of the garage, which had
been glassed-in to make a little sleep-out, and here they
slept with the sliding windows wide open all the year round;
for they shared with their family the almost fanatical belief


that they were incapable of resting without at least two-
thirds of their walls open to the elements.
Winifred had trained a bougainvillaea over the front of
the garage and every morning she wondered afresh whether
anything in the world could be more lovely than the crisp
blue and white of the sea and sky in its purple frame.
A light breeze from the ocean stirred the mosquito nets
but she was not deceived by its cool promise. Already at
6 a.m. the few lightly wreathed clouds were scattering
before the sun as he rose just above the horizon and pre-
pared for the ripening of the bananas that hung in heavy
bunches on the ragged, resilient bushes that covered the
hillside at the back of the house. Yesterday had been a
scorcher, and to-day would probably be worse, she thought.
Aloud she said:
“I wonder where they will be now.”
The doctor swung himself out of bed.
“They won’t be into Brisbane until about eleven,” he
said, in a matter-of-fact tone, “and they can’t possibly get
here until this afternoon, so don’t start fussing about them.
I would have been a little worried about them being in
Sydney trying to cope with the Brisbane Mail alone. It was
a good idea of yours to write to the Traveller’s Aid and
have them meet the boat.”
“Yes, it was rather,” replied his wife, with some satis-
faction. “It’s a relief to know they were met and sent on
their way yesterday. I wish it wasn’t so hot. You know
what our train is like in a heat-wave.”
“It won’t be long now,” Dr. Grant said, cheerfully.
“The train gets in at 5.15 this afternoon. If the children
are ready they can come to the station”—and he went off
whistling his offspring to come for their morning swim.
Winifred allowed herself the pleasure of watching them
race down the track, brown legs flying over the scanty grass,
Fran pushing her plaits up under her cap as she ran.
Marion and Peter fleeing before their father who flicked
the bare legs of first one and then the other with his towel.
After dressing quickly, she went out into the kitchen to
prepare the breakfast, sincerely grateful that so far the war
had done nothing more to her than rob her of the services
of a very touchy and inept maid.
“One problem I haven’t now,” she murmured, putting
the porridge on and deftly slicing a pineapple, “is how to


keep a maid. 1 really believe 1 spent more time thinking
out ways to please Violet than it takes to do her work.”
Except on rare occasions, as when entertaining Winifred’s
dour old aunt from Melbourne, the Grants ate on one of
the twelve foot verandahs with which the doctor had sur-
rounded his house, and as this necessitated walking through
two doors and the room originally planned for the dining-
room, Winifred had had a hatch sawn out of the wall
between the kitchen and the verandah. She now began
putting through it the pile of breakfast china, yellow and
white, and plates of wholemeal bread and glass dishes piled
with slices of pineapple and papaw that Bill had picked
that morning and placed in the refrigerator with the milk.
As she worked she wondered afresh what Dr. Harvey’s
eldest daughter would be like. Deborah Kerr’s rather typic-
ally brief description—a pretty lass with plenty of character,
but allowed too much say, without any real responsibility”—
was not very reassuring, she felt. When they had received
the letter her husband, with his usual buoyant optimism,
had laughed her out of her misgivings.
“Good heavens !” he had exclaimed, “what girl of sixteen
these days doesn’t have too much say? From what Harvey
writes me, she has practically brought up the two younger
children with the help of an old housekeeper.”
But Winifred knew something of the quality of old
English housekeepers, and she had a shrewd idea that “the
pretty lass” had been mistress by courtesy only. Her joy
at the thought of sheltering and caring for the two small
children had considerably tempered by the doctor’s
cabled assurance of Felicity s welcome before she herself
had heard anything about it.
“You weren’t in when I rang and the cable had to go
off at once, naturally. Harvey is anxious to make his
plans,” he had explained heartily, and she had agreed that
certainly no time must be wasted; and, yes, certainly they
couldn’t very well have refused in any case.
“Especially as Harvey has offered to pay handsomely
for the three of them,” said the doctor, adding quickly, “I
turned that down, of course. He can make the girl an
allowance if he likes. That is his affair.”
As she thought of it Winifred shrugged her shoulders
ruefully. Alan did quite well for a G.P. in the country,
but most of the patients who could afford to pay for major
operations preferred to go to the city, not because they


had more faith in the city surgeons, but for the comfort
of knowing that the latest in hospital equipment was there
available in cases of unforeseen emergencies. At all events,
very few really large fees came Dr. Grant’s way and usually
his wife cared as little as he did, although his generous and
impulsive decisions often left her grappling with ways and
means long after he had lost interest in the primary cause
of the shortage.
His uncomprising attitude to Dr. Harvey’s proposal, she
felt, had been ill-considered, being sure these children had
been used to a good deal more luxury than had her own.
Her husband showed great astonishment at the suggestion.
“Luxury! Well, for heaven’s sake!” he ejaculated.
‘What sort of luxury could you get here? There are no
shows, unless you count the weekly movies. There is
nothing to spend money on, is there?”
“No, my poor lamb,” his wife assured him. “Don’t
give it another thought.”
But she sighed as she threw over the table the pale
green cloth and began pushing clean napkins into the
assorted rings. Well, that was that.
There was plenty of variety, she supposed, for anyone
who liked the sea or could amuse themselves with the pony
or the orchard. ,
“I must see if Bill has time to do the court this week,”
she thought. “It will have to be ready for Phillip, in any
case. He’s going to enjoy these holidays, whatever happens
afterwards,” and she was glad to hear the gate slam and
the sound of laughter as the children raced for the first
turn under the shower.
She wished not to think further than the holidays for
Phillip.
Evidently Peter won the shower, for he presented him-
self at the table in an incredibly short space of time, and
his mother served his porridge quickly, for Peter was the
only one with a train to catch.
A pupil at the Agricultural High School, ten miles up
the line, he was a regular passenger on the antiquated bus
that passed the Point at eight-thirty.
The driver of this chariot obligingly tooted his horn
continuously for two miles along the beach road, and this
enabled intending passengers ample margin for last minute
forgettings. Peter always caught it by the skin of his
teeth, springing on in an abandoned sort of way as it


laboured in second through the sandy stretch round the
track.
His mother’s invariable warning and final words as he
took his leave of her were:
“Be careful! you could get both legs cut off that way.”
So far his legs remained intact, and more miraculously,
he had been deposited at the station each morning at the
exact moment when the engine was pushing its snout out
of the tunnel and nosing into the station. Peter was speed-
ing down the track when the others sat down to breakfast.
“Mummy, could I stay at home to-day and help?” asked
Marion, rapidly spooning her porridge.
“No, thank you,” said her mother, decidedly. “You’re
behind enough as it is with your tables.”
“No, only sums, Mummy; all my other things are just
as good as anyone’s. I could help you fix the girls’ room.”
“It is fixed long ago; you know that very well,” her
mother replied, unfeelingly.
“And don’t forget,” added her father, “that it’s a sums
world, my child, and you won’t get anywhere if you can’t
do them.”
Marion considered this over a spoonful of porridge.
“Well, if I ever do want to get anywhere, I’ll start
learning them,” she said, with finality. “Daddy, Edna says
all English people are Pommies, and her brother says they
all show off like anything. Will Fay and Felicity be like
that?”
Fran laughed.
“Brenda said they think they know everything. She says
that Felicity will try to turn Beechwood into an English
school.”
“Pass the lemon, Fran, please and stop being ridiculous,”
her father said. “I don’t know what they will be like,
Marion, and none of us will know until they have been with
us for a while. They will probably be like the tortoise
Phillip brought home last year, hiding themselves just as it
did under a shell, when they feel they are being watched by
strangers.”
“Oh, Daddy, they haven’t got shells!” shrieked Marion,
who regarded her father as the world’s funniest man.
“No, but they will have pride and reserve, and they will
hide behind that unless we succeed in making them feel


very much part of the family. When I see them forgetting
their strangeness 1 shall know you children have been doing
a job for England,” he added, looking gravely from one
glowing face to the other.
“As for anyone turning Beechwood into an English or
any other kind of school,” laughed Winifred, “I imagine
Miss Ogilvy can cope with that.”
“I just want you to remember this, girls,” the doctor
added, seriously, “these children have been uprooted from
their home and sent halfway across the world to live with
strangers. They will often be homesick and anxious about
their father and brother. You yourselves know how you
do and say silly things when you are frightened, and how
you try to put up a bluff when you are not sure of your
ground. I’m not saying they will, or that you won’t like
them all immensely, but in any case I expect you both to
be as kind and sympathetic to them as Phillip was to
Blinkie.”
“Will they eat out of our hands like Blinkie did, then?”
asked Fran, impishly, as her father rose and pushed back
his chair. Pie gave the near plait an unexpected tug.
“They might if you kept them reasonably clean,” he
said coolly, as he took his dust-coat and keys from his wife,
“I don’t suppose I’ll be home to lunch, but I won’t be later
than three, and don’t you two forget to be ready.”
“Pm playing tennis this afternoon, I might go straight
from school,” said Fran, preparing to make her escape
from the breakfast table.
“Oh, Fran, it’s going to be an awful day,” expostulated
her mother. “You don’t want to arrive at the station
looking a fright. Change with someone and you play
to-morrow.”
“No,” replied Fran, firmly, “Belinda and I are to play
every day until the tournament, and I have to go now. If
you don’t see me here, Dad, I’ll be at the station when the
train comes in. Mummy, I think I’ll go with Dad. Miss
Parker said Belinda and I could mark the court if we
came early.”
“That’s very nice,” said Winifred, “I must tell you you
can clear the dishes away some morning, as a special
treat.”
But maternal sarcasms were lost on Fran, and Marion
began to stack the plates and pass them through the hatch
to her mother, who scraped and piled them up for washing.


Although Marion was only eight, she could do what her
mother feared Fran would never be able to do the job
that’s nearest. Of all the Grant children Fran had the
most energy, and all her days were filled with the most
feverish activity. Being a member of the Guides, of the
Junior Red Cross and of several minor organisations, to-
gether with a finger in every school pie, left her little time
for prep, and none, in her opinion, for home chores. Her
reports invariably carried a sting in the tail. “Frances has
the ability, but will not concentrate.”
In vain Winifred had carried these reports to Dr. Grant.
He read them and said calmly.
“Perhaps she doesn’t find school interesting.
“That’s more than likely,” Winifred would retort
sharply, “but is she to go through life idle because work
doesn’t interest her?”
“Well, I have you there,” her husband had replied.
“From what I hear Fran is seldom idle. Her ceaseless
activity quite unnerves me at times.”
“Yes, but she takes up things that are no good to her,
dear.”
“Everything is good for her,” the doctor argued. “Fran
is not the academic type, and she will learn all her lessons
from life. Let her give herself all the experience she wants.
She’ll make a good job of something when she finds out
what it is she must do.”
Winifred was unconvinced.
“I wouldn’t mind if, when she found a new craze, she
would drop an old one, but she clings to them all. It’s
getting that way now that she has her meals and bed here,
and all the rest of the time she’s rushing round seeing to
outside interests.”
“Well, if you succeed in making her give up something,
I hope it will be the violin, my dear,” the doctor retorted,
unfeelingly. “That early morning caterwauling is only fit
for a Spartan household.”
“Oh, Alan, her music is the only thing I want her to
keep up,” wailed his wife.
And so Fran, a most indifferent performer, kept up her
music, not because Winifred, herself a pianist with a true
feeling for music, wished it, but because Fran quite defi-
nitely meant to “do something” later and to “be somebody”;
and of all her interests so far, music was the only one that
would seem to lead to spectacular and striking successes in
public life.


Ihe violin continued to be practised with more dash
than detail, but the pressure of work increased Dr. Grant’s
hours from ten to sixteen a day and he began to sleep so
heavily that even his daughter’s tuning-up failed to rouse
him.
Now Marion had taken a clean tea-towel, and stood by
watching Winifred pour the boiling water onto the silver,
and whip it to a froth with the shaker. She adored her
mother, and Winifred was truly touched by this tribute and
tried to put her own preoccupations aside when Marion
was about, and to give all her attention to her little daugh-
ter’s affairs.
“And Miss James says she would rather have all the
sums wrong than right by looking on someone else’s book,
Mummy,”
“Yes, indeed, darling, and I am glad it wasn’t you she
had to speak to,” replied Winifred, dutifully, as she finished
the dishes and wrung out the mop. “Now I’ll come in the
bus with you and get the shopping done early, I think.”
That had been a wise decision, Winifred felt as she
was rattled home an hour later by the returning bus, for
already at ten o’clock Moonaburra shimmered in the heat.
The early morning breeze had died down, and the glare
from the gravel road seemed to rise and move like another
element. Once in the house she quickly placed the perish-
ables in the refrigerator and leaving the kitchen table strewn
with the rest of her assorted marketings, she cooled off
under the shower, which, coming from a pipe on the sunny
side of the house, ran uncomfortably hot for the first few
minutes. One thing she never could be sufficiently grateful
for was the foresight that made her husband put up the six
large tanks at the back of the house on the slope so that
only in the driest spell did she have to be very careful with
the water.
Even without a maid, Winifred found that by forfeiting
her early morning swim she was able to finish the house-
work and marketing before the heat of the day set in, and
now, cool in a light silk frock, her bare feet in toeless white
sandals and her dark hair combed damply back from her
forehead, she moved contentedly about her house. She
lowered the Venetian blinds to shut out the glare and pulled
the slats horizontal to catch any stray breeze; then she
arranged in wide-mouthed bowls the stiff-stalked multi-
coloured zinnias that grew as large as saucers in the fierce
heat of the front garden.


All the flowers had been picked before the sun rose and
kept in water up to their necks on the shady side of the
verandah. They repaid this little attention by remaining
erect and crisp when, by this time, every plant in the garden
was drooping in the heat, imploring a sea breeze. Even the
hydrangeas, pink and blue in the visitors’ room, casting their
faintly pastel shadow on the cream wall between the twin
beds, matched the frilled muslin spreads for freshness.
Winifred lingered a little in this room, enjoying its
completed perfection as much as she had its planning and
execution. Originally the boys’ room, it had been vacant
since Phillip’s enthusiasm for science began to make the
house horrible with his “stinks.” Winifred had urgently
demanded that a room be built for him well away from the
house, and Phillip, enlisting Bill’s help, had built a two-
roomed hut, and here, after a couple of strenuous week-
ends, he had shifted his entire belongings, sleeping and
studying in one room, and experimenting with his messes
in the other.
On his departure, Peter had insisted on installing himself
in the bedroom, and gradually encroached on as much of
the workroom as he dared without fear of reprisals.
When she knew for certain that the Harveys were
coming, Winifred had Phil’s old room cleaned and painted
cream. She did the rest herself, staining and polishing
the floor till it gleamed darkly round the island of jade
green rug. The furniture, solid, but bearing evidence of
Philip’s and Peter’s vigorous youth, she sandpapered and
painted pale green. Fran had helped with the first bed-
spread, but the interminable white froth of frills that made
up the second had been her mother’s entirely. As she
stood there now she wondered why she had striven for such
elaborate daintiness. She knew little of English life except
what she had read, but she imagined house pride playing a
tremendous part in it. She hoped the prettiness of this
room might remind the girls of their homes.
Her own daughters were delighted with the result, but
Fran thought the beds should have been put on the sleep-
out.
“Pm putting their real beds out there,” their mother
explained. “Of course, these beds were here, and they can
do for day beds. Naturally, I wouldn’t expect them to sleep
indoors.”
“Day beds,” echoed Marion. “What do you use day
beds for, Mummy?”


“To rest on in the daytime, pet, like 1 do on your bed
after lunch.”
“But Mummy, they’re not old. They won’t want to
rest, will they?” persisted Marion.
Her mother made a slight grimace.
“Felicity is not as decrepit as I am, I imagine, darling,
but they are not used to our trying climate and will probably
often be glad of a rest in the daytime.”
“Well, those spreads are terribly frilly for resting on,
aren’t they?” broke in Fran.
“Oh, for heaven’s sake,” their mother cried. “Go off to
your own piggery, and leave me to my frills.”
The girls had laughed and gone off to their own severely
practical dressing-room.
“I hope they won’t be as finicky as Mummy seems to
expect,” said Fran, when they were alone. “English girls
are always tramping over moors, or something hearty and
jolly like that, in books, anyway. You wouldn’t expect
them to be keen on frilled spreads, I should think.”
“What’s moors?” asked Marion.
“Oh, bush hills and things, I daresay,” said Fran,
vaguely.
Winifred continued her pottering, as she described the
countless small duties she found to do in her much-lived-in
home.
At one o’clock she made herself a pot of tea and some
cucumber and putting her lunch on a tray, she
carried it to the sleep-out where she read as she ate, and
finally, as the sun grew hotter and the locusts in the trees
more deafening, slept.
CHAPTER IV.
Sydney at last Garnet Harvey stumped down the
gangway on to the rain-swept wharf.
“Liars,” he said, fiercely. “Sunny Australia, my foot.”
He clenched his fists, forgetting that Fay’s hand was in
one of them.
“Stop hurting my hand, Garry,” she whimpered, trying
to free herself. Garry stared down at her; then, remem-
bering his elder sister’s strict injunction, made a grab and
secured her hand again.


“Come on now, stupid, I don’t want to hold your hand,
you may be sure; but I don’t want Felix going off the
handle again, and if I let you go you’re sure to fall over
or get lost or something. She’s ratty enough now,” he
added, resentfully glaring at the unconscious back of his
temporary guardian. “Beastly rain, worse than home.”
Fay looked at Felicity, who, helped by a small but
incredibly efficient woman, was checking their luggage.
“Is that the Travellers’ Aid lady?” she said.
“I suppose so,” replied her brother, gloomily, “Come
on,” as Felicity beckoned impatiently, “we’re going now.”
His spirits rose a little, on the short journey from the
wharf to the station, because the Travellers’ Aid lady with
rare tact, had popped him in the front beside the driver,
thereby frustrating Felicity’s plan for him to sit in the
middle at the back, with Fay on his knee.
“Great rain,” said the driver to the Travellers’ Aid lady,
as he piled the bags out onto the platform.
“Marvellous,” she agreed, enthusiastically.
“Looks sets in,” said the porter, cheerfully, wheeling up
his trolley.
“Coming down now, alright,” boomed a big country-
looking man as he carried his bags off to the cloak-room.
“I’ll say,” said his companion. “We ought to get some-
thing out of this.”
Garry followed his sister and the Travellers’ Aid lady,
whose name turned out to be Mrs. Roach, on to the station,
where a great many people were buying tickets, staggering
under suitcases or poring impatiently over papers at the
bookstall. From each group as he passed, Garry collected
figments of conversation dealing, to his great surprise,
almost exclusively with the weather. He began to wonder
whether he had been right in dealing with it so summarily
at the wharf.
At No. 13 platform their monster lay replete with food
and drink, its two trusty attendants gently poking it into
activity, touching favourite spots with a long-spouted oil-
can, and congratulating all and sundry on the rain.
“Here we are,” called Mrs. Roach. “Number 8 car, 22
and 23 sleepers for you girls, and 29 for you, son”; and in
answer to Felicity’s startled inquiry she added briskly:
“Two sleepers in each compartment; boys over seven
have to share with someone of their own sex.


“But,” protested Felicity, distractedly, “how can I
look after him if he is sleeping at the other end of the
carriage, in a cubicle with someone else, and a perfect
stranger ?”
“Don’t worry about him,” said Mrs. Roach, reassuringly,
he can’t come to any harm. He’s in with a young fellow
from Shore, travelling right up north. I made enquiries
before I booked up for him.”
This was Garry’s first intimation that he was to make
the 700 mile journey more or less unhampered by Felicity’s
supervision, and he awarded Mrs. Roach a look of passion-
ate gratitude, as he said breathlessly:
“Can I go to my compartment, now?”
“Of course,” she replied, “There it is just along the
corridor. You take your bag and settle yourself in. The
porter will be along to make up the berths as soon as the
train starts.”
He seized his bag and made off down the corridor.
Seated comfortably in the window seat was a tall, red-
headed youth, resplendent in the grey, blue-crested suit of
a famous school, his straw hat tipped over his eyes, as he
leaned back on the head rest. This lordly creature was
surrounded by an assortment of shabby suit-cases, a travel-
ling rug, a tennis racquet, cricket bat, and a large bundle of
books tied up in a football jersey.
“Hullo,” he said, not moving an inch, and regarding
the knickerbockered apparition in the doorway with comi-
cal surprise. “You digging in here, too?”
“Yes, I think so; 29 is my berth,” stammered Garry,
abashed at the sight of so much grandeur.
“You can put your things down,” said the other grandly,
this regardless of the fact that most of the floor space was
devoted to his own miscellany.
“You sleep upstairs.”
“Wh-what do you mean upstairs?” Garry wondered
wildly if this were a double-decker train.
“This,” replied the youth, laconically, indicating the rest
behind his head. Porter ties it up and you sleep on it.”
“Oh, I see,” and after a pause, “we came from Man-
chester to Tondon by train.” If this fellow thought he had
never been in a train that would jolly well show him. A
darn sight better train than this, too.


“Yes, I saw you were a Pommy,” the other replied.
“Going right through?”
"Seven hundred miles,” said Garry, with attempted non-
chalance, "to Moonaburra.” The other was not impressed.
“This packet goes only as far as Brisbane. You’ll have
to change there to go further north.”
"Do you change, too?” asked Garry.
"I go on from Brisbane by plane,” replied his companion.
“The old man broke his leg, and smashed himself up gener-
ally last week. I have to go home and help run the place
for a while sheep, you know, about 1,000 miles north-
west.”
“Gosh!” exclaimed the awed Garry. “Has your father
got a sheep farm?”
Don Manning gave him a sharp look, but there was no
guile in the pink and white earnestness of the face opposite
him.
“Holdings of any size are called stations here, my good
fool,” he volunteered good-naturedly.
Garry laughed.
“I’ll have to get the hang of things,” he said. “We only
came this morning.”
“You soon will,” young Manning replied; and then
suddenly, “Were you seasick?”
“No,” said Garry, proudly; “my sisters were, but I
turned up for all meals.”
Manning relaxed.
“Just as well, young feller-me-lad, or you’d change
berths with me. The last time I made this trip, the crawler
upstairs was train-sick. Vowed I’d never sleep down again,
but I suppose you’ll be alright.”
“Oh, rather,” said Garry, hastily, gazing with fascinated
eyes at the hanging ladder and praying his companion would
not change his mind. Manning did not know it, but Garry
was well aware that it was only poetic justice that he should
have the top berth. He had looked forward eagerly to
sleeping in an upstairs berth in the boat only to be bitterly
disappointed when it turned out that she was a luxury
liner being lent to the Australian Government for a troop-
ship, and instead of ordinary ship’s bunks she had proper
beds. He had not forgiven the shipping company for that.
The porter had arrived to make up the berths, and thev
went into the corridor to give him more room. Garry


noticed with relief that Felicity’s door was shut. Hie remem-
bered all the sporting impedimenta in the compartment.
“You play cricket?” he asked, diffidently, as they swayed
to the motion of the train. “Our game, too, you know,”
Manning grinned.
“Oh, yes, a bit of everything,” he returned; then with
studied indifference, “Skiffs, mostly. Second man. Got the
head of the river this year,”
“Gosh,” said Garry, again in undisguised admiration,
and despite the rain, which lashed at the windows and
leaked under the carriage door to run in trickles down the
corridor, his spirits soared.
This was life sharing a sleeper with a college blue,
who thought nothing of making a 1,000 mile journey by
aeroplane to run a sheep station. Seven hundred miles of
exclusively masculine company. As he shinned up the
ladder, he remembered something.
“Hey,” he called down. “Why is everyone making such
a fuss about the rain? It rains nearly every day at home.
We don’t take much notice of it.”
Young Manning was staggered.
“My godfather!” he ejaculated. “Don’t you know the
drought has broken? There’s been no rain here for two
years. My old man hasn’t seen any for three. They’re
getting some now, though.”
“No rain for three years?” It was Garry’s turn to be
staggered. “No wonder they all make a fuss about it.”
“I’ll say,” answered his companion, “and this is set-in.
We might get days of it now. This is set in.”
“Set-in,” murmured Garry, as he was shaken off to sleep
on the vibrating pillow, “Set-in.” And as the train sped
on through the dark deluge outside, the quick rotation of
the wheels beneath him caught and flung up at him the
repetition of his first Australian colloquialism.
“The rain’s set-in, the rain’s set-in set-in, set-in.
Next day, as the train approached the border, Felicity
realized she had been betrayed by the cool dampness of the
Sydney evening, and as one fellow passenger after another
began to shed their outer garments she chafed under the
light woollens that had seemed so right the night before
when they had boarded the train. She had a moment’s


sympathy for Garry in his good heavy worsted suit, before
she hardened her heart against him.
Little beast, hasn’t been near us all day.” She thought
bitterly of the dining car where she and Fay had sat three
tables away from him and he hadn’t seen them, so eagerly
had he been drinking in the words of that lanky red-headed
boy, as the latter pointed out of the window and explained
points of interest. They had left the rain some six hundred
miles behind; and as the sun rose higher over the dry,
fawn-coloured landscape, the atmosphere became heavy and
sticky.
If Felicity had been cold and weary on the journey to
Plymouth, she was hot and desperate on the one to Brisbane.
Fay complained that she itched all over, and her sister
prayed that at least it was not vermin.
At two o’clock Garry put in an appearance.
”1 say, Felix, haven’t I got some cooler things to put
on?” he said, his brown hair plastered wetly on his scarlet
face.
“No!” snapped his sister. “All the clothes are in the
van. You’ll have to wait till we get there. And,” she added
sharply, for she was beginning to itch herself, “we’ll be
getting out in about twenty minutes, so say good bye to
your funny friend.”
“I say, I say,” spluttered Garry. “He’s not funny and
don’t you forget it. He’s a Blue and he’s getting on a plane
at Archerfield to go home and run a sheep station that’s
farm to you I’m going there for a holiday some day.”
His sister was so taken back by this announcement that
she forgot to reprimand him for talking to strangers, and
said :
“Where does he live?”
“Oh, about 1,000 miles north-west,” replied the boy,
casually, as he disappeared up the corridor to collect his
luggage.
In Brisbane the heat stood still and let you light your
way through it, as Felicity transferred her little party from
the comfortable interstate express to the narrow, stiff com-
partment of the North Coast train. As the heat increased,
and the train stopped obligingly at every station and was
flagged to a standstill at almost every siding, she felt she
had plumbed the depths of misery in train travel.
Wet through with perspiration, her fair face scarlet, she
moved Fay from one side to the other, and surreptitiously


pulled her clothes where they clung to her flesh.
Kay whimpered incessantly and scratched through her
clothes. Garry leaned back in his comer, large drops of
moisture standing out on the bridge of his rather small
nose, his knickerbockers undone at the knees in a vain
attempt at ventilation.
As they flashed past the small collection of wooden
houses that make up most of the townships, and the isolated
farmhouses, and stopped for scalding hot tea at refreshment
stations, where the heat from the corrugated iron roofs
refused to let the tea cool in time for the traveller to drink
it, all Felicity’s original distaste for the journey rose up
and shook her. The trip out had been uneventful. Fay’s
cough had entirely disappeared, and she seemed better than
ever before. In the early part of the voyage her rather
mild sea-sickness was competently looked after by the ship’s
medical staff, and there was no earthly reason why she,
Felicity, should have been packed up and sent out of Eng-
land, as she now saw she had been, when all her friends
were having such a marvellous time.
She pictured John and Primrose dancing together on
John’s leave, Elizabeth having a lot of fun with the other
wireless operators at her station, even her father operating
in the emergency theatre while the bombs were falling out-
side, as his letter had described, and the patients being
carried to the basement, seemed to her to be having a more
enlivening time than she was.
But Moonaburra was just round the curve, literally,
“When we turn the next bend we’re there.” The offhand
but obliging guard had come to the window to announce,
and guests, even unwilling ones, usually arrive at their
hostess’s door with a semblance of self-possession; so she
quickly wiped Fay’s face and hands, and sharply ordered
Garry to pull up his stockings and fasten his straps over
them.
The train snorted contemptuously into the station, where
to Garry’s profound admiration, the name “Moonaburra”
was written along its length in red and green border flowers.
Their luggage was disgorged from the van, and the three
travellers alighted.
Holding Garry firmly by the shoulders to prevent his
straying away to examine the floral phenomena on the
station, and being clung to stickily by Fay, Felicity gazed
past the stationmaster and the tall man in sports trousers
and silk shirt, for any sign of Dr. or Mrs. Grant, and


began to wonder helplessly what she would do if they had
not met the train, when, to her amazement, the tall man
bore down on them, shook hands warmly with her and
Garry, swung Fay up in his arms with a dexterity born
of long practice, and almost before she knew what was
happening, was shepherding them off the station and arrang-
ing for their bags to be put in his car. She could hardly
believe that this boyish, breezy person was the doctor
himself.
Behind the station, in an old model Buick tourer, Fran
and Marion waited impatiently. Their father introduced
them briefly.
“This is Fran and Marion. Fran is a year younger
than you, Felicity, and Marion a year older than Fay.” He
set Fay on her feet. “This little lass looks as if she hasn’t
enjoyed the train trip. You and she had better come in
front with me. She won’t feel the motion of the car as
much there. Garnet, you hop in the back and keep the
girls in order,”
His daughters giggled appreciatively, and the boy
climbed stolidly over some of the bags as he obeyed.
Dr. Grant looked over his carload with the air of a
general well pleased with his staff work, and jumping in,
backed the car off the footpath, where it had been resting
illegally under the shade of an enormous jacaranda. As
he swung it round towards the Beach Road a frenzied yell
from the station made him slow down to allow a freckled,
determined looking child to jump on the running board
and throw his knapsack in the back with a cheerful dis-
regard of the persons of the three occupants. His hair
was plastered over his forehead in little wet peaks, and his
khaki shirt and shorts showed evidence of considerable
powers of absorption, as they clung damply to his sturdy
brown body.
His father slowed down and reached back to open
the door.
“Get in,” he ordered, “and sit on the floor, or the bags
or somewhere!”
His son obeyed, with a grin at Garry.
“I’m Peter,” he announced. “Our train was held up
by a shunter. Gee, I thought I’d never make it, and the
others would show you the hut before I got home.”
“What’s the hut?” asked Garry.
“I live there,” replied Peter, briefly. “You’re going to


share it with me. It’s goodo; away from the house, and
we do what we like. No one can come in unless we say
they can. I lock it up sometimes, and Pip has given me his
key for you.”
“Garry could scarcely believe this delightful and revolu-
tionary state of affairs really existed and looked as if he
were good-natured enough not to mind having his leg
pulled, but Felicity said quickly:
“Not really?” and looked at the doctor.
He laughed.
“You can take the bit about doing what they like with
a grain of salt,” he said. “The hut is a little two-roomed
affair apart from the house, where we put tortoise and
guinea pig fanciers, and those desirous of tinkering with
chemicals likely to cause shattering explosions.’”
“Is it quite safe?”
Dr. Grant raised his eyebrows.
“Much safer for us,” he replied coolly, and seeing that
his hearer did not find this funny, he added reassuringly,
“It’s only a few yards from the house; the boys built it
themselves, but their mother had it fly-wired, so there are
no mosquito nets to catch fire.”
Felicity remained unconvinced, but had to turn her
attention to Fay, who was grisling and rubbing her legs.
“I don’t know what is the matter with her,” she said,
adding pettishly, “Unless it’s this frightful heat, but she
has been crying off and on since we left Brisbane.”
Dr. Grant looked down at the angry red swellings on
the child’s arms and legs.
“It looks as though the mosquitoes have been at her,”
he said, “they raise lumps like that on the uninitiated. I
noticed that Garry has some on his face. Don’t cry, my
pet, your Aunt Winifred will have you bathed and cool in
no time.” But Fay hid her face in her sister’s shoulder,
and Felicity set her lips in a straight line.
“I, for one, will certainly not call her Aunt, ever,” she
thought.
The doctor, who was accustomed to being made much
of by every child within a fifty mile radius, and was, in
consequence, rather spoilt, received this silence with a
mental shrug and directed his conversation to Garry, with
gratifying result.
Down the road towards the beach they swept, scrub on


one side, a grassy slope, tree-dotted down to the river, on
the other; an occasional view of the river island with its
jungle of palms laced together by creeper vines.
A refreshing sight for anyone not as hot and sorry for
herself as Felicity, and a positive enchantment for Garry,
who asked rapid and often mirth-provoking questions,
which were answered immediately and volubly by every
member of the Grant family.
As the car turned into the drive of Cotton Trees, carpeted
and walled it seemed with the heavenly blue of the jaca-
randa, a figure that had been watching from the sleep-out
disappeared, and as the car pulled up by the house, Mrs.
Grant ran down the side steps, and in a moment they were
all out of the car and Winifred had an arm round each
tired lass and was leading them up into the house.
Allowing his special guest the shortest time to get
acquainted with his hostess, Peter dragged Garry up the
path and round to the hut.
“You can’t believe how comforting it is to have you all
here at last, quite safely,” Winifred said, as she ushered
them into their bedroom. “With so many sinkings off the
coast, we have had an anxious time thinking of you. I
daresay you had a few misgivings yourselves.”
“I have put you two girls in here together,” she went
on. “You may feel a little strange at first, but not for
long, I am sure. These are your day-beds. The proper
ones are on the girls’ sleep-out.”
As she spoke she was removing Fay’s garments.
“Come, darling, let me take off these hot things and get
you cooled off before dinner.”
Suddenly, she exclaimed;
“Oh, you poor lamb! No wonder she has been having a
weep, Felicity. She is covered with a heat rash.”
Felicity, thoroughly alarmed, knelt down beside Wini-
fred to look at the angry red lumps on her sister’s little
body.
“What can I do?” she cried, distractedly. “She was so
restless in the train, but I couldn’t undress her to find out
what was the matter.”
“It’s nothing to worry about,” Winifred said. “After a
bath and a change into cool things, the rash will fade in a
few days if it is not irritated. I’ve had to treat all my
children for them when they were small. It is probably the
unaccustomed heat and the woollen underwear. I will put


her into some light things of Marion’s until we can get her
some of her own.”
Felicity stood up.
“The children have never worn anything but wool next
to their skins, and I am sure father wouldn’t allow Fay’s
woollens to be changed for anything else,” she said, coldly.
Winifred, collecting towels and soap, felt that her first
misgivings were about to be justified, and striving for a
light touch, she answered casually:
“Of course, dear, he wrote us about you all, and we
know of the great anxiety he has had for Fay in the cold
winters; but she has finished with cold for quite a while
now, and what she is going to need will be some light
cotton things, for at least another eight months. Our
infants have never worn anything else, winter or summer.”
Winifred’s calm approach to such a vital matter as Fay’s
woollens, far from disarming Felicity, roused all her L,an-
castershire stubbornness, and she replied:
“But not the vests, I think. She has never been out
of them,”
Winifred, deftly removing the last of Fay’s clothes, and
wrapping her in a large white bath-towel, thought des-
perately :
“Perhaps it would be better to compromise about the
vest, for a little while; this girl isn’t going to be easy.”
But the sight of the hot red patches, some raw where
the child had been able to scratch them, suddenly hardened
her in her resolve to begin as she meant to go on, and she
smiled up at the rebellious face above her:
“You must be dying for your own bath, my dear. I’ll
run it for you as soon as Fay is out. My advice is to put
on the thinnest garments you have and very few of them.
Don’t worry about Fay. She is our number one priority,
aren’t you, pet? Your father has the fullest confidence in
my husband’s care of her.”
Felicity made no reply as she went on unpacking their
clothes, and hanging them in the long built-in wardrobe.
She bit her lips, and prayed that Fay would refuse to be
bathed by a stranger.
“If she only does that,” she thought, desperately, “it
will be in my favour, and I’ll put on what I think best.
Oh, she must —she must.”
But, surprisingly, Fay made no protest. Mrs. Grant’s


hands had something of the same comforting firmness as
Mackie’s had, and when she stood up and held out her hand
Fay put her hot, sticky little one into it and trotted off
without a, backward glance.
Felicity sat down on the bed, and shut her eyes to
prevent the scalding feeling behind them from materialising
into thick, fast tears.
“I won’t, I won’t,” she repeated fiercely to herself. “I
won’t let them see I care what they do, and if they kill
Fay it won’t be my fault.”
Springing up, she continued the unpacking, so methodic-
ally and neatly that Winifred, returning with a completely
made-over looking Fay, bathed, powdered, her spots com-
fortingly anointed with lotion and resplendent in a thin
cotton nightdress of Marion’s, exclaimed delightedly:
“I do hope your neatness will shame Fran into keeping
her end of the sleep-out tidier. Marion and Ido what we
can, but she will probably take more notice of your example
than of our pleadings.”
At this juncture Marion appeared at the door.
“Mummy, if Fay is having her tea in bed, can 1 have
mine there, too?”
“Yes, dear; pull up the table between the beds, and you
can be showing Fay some of your toys until I brine- your
tea out.”
Marion sped off to undress, and Mrs, Grant busied her-
self with Fay’s hair, brushing the damp, dark strands up off
the forehead, and back behind her ears, until she looked a
very different being from the hot little scrap hung with
clinging wisps of fringe, that had alighted from the train
less than an hour ago.
After dinner, Garry forcibly dragged his sister up to
inspect his new quarters.
“Look here, helix!” she shouted excitedly. “We sleep in
here, and keep our things in this room. That thing in the
corner is Peter’s brother’s surf ski. Isn’t it ripping? You
can’t touch anything on this bench, they’re his tools.”
Fran laughed scornfully.
“She won’t be tempted, I should say. She probably
would have to be paid to come within yards of here when
she gets a real good sniff of that dead seaweed you have
in the kerosene tin.”


“What you smell is ozone, my poor girl,” retorted Peter,
loftily. He gave his new friend a pained look. “Girls!”
he added, disgustedly.
When dinner had been cleared away and the washing up
finished, Winifred usually sat before the old-fashioned piano
and played softly old favourite melodies, partly for the
refreshment she felt this gave her, and partly to enable her
to ignore the fact that the girls were listening to the radio
serials as they did their prep. When they had finished they
came in for a sing-song before turning in.
To-night, however, she had not gone to the piano, but
getting out her knitting, sat down beside Felicity and drew
from her an account of the voyage, and of their departure
from England.
Politely contributing her share to the conversation, the
girl was at first, frankly, not interested; but as she spoke
of John and her father, her voice grew animated and she
shyly showed her wings to Winifred, although she had quite
made up her mind not to do so.
"He looks marvellous in uniform, and he loves the
life, though he didn’t think he would,” she said, half reluct-
antly. “Pie is going to be a painter, and he was just going
to start his studies.”
“Yes,” sighed her listener. “A lot of you young people
are having to change their immediate plans, and parents are
having to scrap a lot of theirs, too,”-she added, sadly,
thinking of the brilliant future predicted for Phillip by the
professors and his fellow-students.
“What did you want for yourself, Felicity?” she asked.
“Oh, nothing in particular,” replied Felicity, her early
resolutions re-asserting themselves, but she couldn’t help
adding wistfully:
“Most of my friends are in the auxiliary services.
“Poor child,” thought Winifred. “No wonder she is
peeved. Having to leave all the excitement and glamour
of the services to come out here with the children.”
“Mother,” called Fran. “Can you play that thing that
we hear from the Pixie programme?”
“If it’s the one that goes ta, ta, ta, turn, turn, ta, I can,”
replied her mother. “At least, only by ear, and I don’t
think that is good.”
“Oh, it’s good enough for us,” Fran said, impatiently.
Marion followed her sister into the room and Winifred rose


laughingly and put aside her knitting. In a few minutes
the house rang with strong young voices, for Peter and
Garry had rushed in demanding their favourites, and “Blue
Birds Over” alternated with “My Darling Clementine.”
It had been Felicity’s intention to ask if she and Fay
might sleep in their bedroom, for she felt already, as
Winifred had predicted, that the pretty little room was the
only place in this house of open doors and cheerfully loud
family noises where she could be alone. But Fay had
fallen asleep long since, and when Felicity went out, Wini-
fred was tiptoeing about the sleep-out, arranging the light
covering over the sleeping child, and tucking in the mos-
quito net. Warning her own daughters not to make a noise,
she put her arm around Felicity’s shoulders and whispered:
“Would you like me to help you finish your un
packing?”
“No, thank you, I’ll finish it in the morning,” Felicity
replied, politely.
Winifred tried again:
“Are you sure there is nothing I can get for you, dear?”
“Quite, thank you, Mrs. Grant.” The girl’s voice was
cool and not appreciative. Winifred felt suddenly chilled.
She gave the girl’s shoulders a squeeze instead of the good-
night kiss she had intended, and slipped away.
Felicity went slowly back to her room to undress. When
she came back on to the sleep-out, Marion was in bed; but
Fran, in her boyish pyjamas, was seated on the sill of the
window casement, looking out on the incredible beauty of
the water and the bushland in the moonlight.
“I was just watching the water until you came,” she
whispered, her bare feet plopping on the linoleum as she
jumped lightly down. “Isn’t it lovely?”
“Very lovely,” whispered Felicity, in return; then,
“What makes that frightful row?”
“What? Oh, that,” said Fran. “That’s only the cicadas.
We hardly notice them. They come round about this time
of the year.”
“It seems a dreadful din to me,” said Felicity.
“You won’t notice it in a little while,” replied Fran.
“They’re like grasshoppers, something, and the noise is when
they click their wings together.”
Felicity was sure this curious habit of the cicadas would


not reconcile her to the noise they made, and did not reply.
Since sundown a light wind had sprung up and now
gathering force, it flicked the casement curtains and swept
through the house, carrying away the heat of the day. The
two girls leaned together against the window-sill, one dark-
plaited, sun-tanned, in her natural element of wind and
open spaces and bushland sounds; the other fair, softly
i ounded and wistful in the moonlight, only slightly com-
fol ted by the abiding beauty of her new home, longing,
longing for the familiar grimy landmarks of her native
Manchester, and the privacy of her little top bedroom at
30 Melrose Road.
CHAPTER V.
It had been decided that Garry should go to the Agri-
cultural High School with Peter, and slightly intoxicated
after a week-end of new and varied experiences, this adven-
turous child set off in high feather. Dr. Grant watched
the two boys jogging belatedly down the track, as the bus
came round the corner.
“Why didn’t you put him into Peter’s shorts until you
could get him some of his own?” he asked his wife as she
came to see whether the boys would board the moving bus
successfully, or have all four legs cut off under the wheels,
as she had predicted when they kissed her good bye.
“My dear,” she answered, softly, “I did suggest it, but
it seems that suit was bought for him to start at the
Manchester Grammar School, and Felicity is quite firm
about it. She says he is to wear it out.” Winifred
laughed. “I think it is less on account of economy than to
give me a sharp lesson in proportion. I feel that khaki
shirt and shorts are not her idea of a proper uniform for
a secondary schoolboy.”
“What rot!” exploded the doctor. “Winifred, do you
mean to say you are going to let that poor kid swelter in
that heavy tweed knickerbocker suit in a temperature of
103 0 ?”
His wife smiled demurely.
“The line of least resistance,” she said. “Really, Alan,
I can’t keep on vetoing all her decisions and upsetting her
all the time. In the case of Garry’s pants, I am letting
nature take its course.”


Her husband joined in her laugh.
“Well, he’s no long-suffering male,” he said, approv-
ingly. “You should have seen the way he tackled the surf
this morning, hor a kid who has never seen any real
swimming, he is as game as they come.”
“Yes, he is a nice child,” agreed Winifred. “So they
all are, really. I wish Felicity would leave me to do the
best I can for the other two. I think that it’s not that she
doesn’t think I’m capable, but evidently she had set her
heart on training for one of the services, and her father,
anxious to get them all to safety, rather stressed the
younger children’s dependence on her.”
“And she is determined to vindicate her leaving Eng-
land, you mean?”
“Yes, something like that,” replied his wife. “I will
have to go carefully for a while, I can see. Fortunately,
Fay has taken quite kindly to my presence.”
“I should just think she would!” exclaimed the doctor,
adding cheerfully, “Miss Felicity will be all right when she
settles down, and makes friends at school. The more
contacts she makes outside, the less she will fuss about the
children.”
It had been no part of Felicity’s program to go to school
again, and her surprise at finding the doctor’s family all
took it for granted that she would go with Fran and Marion
to Beechwood, had been so complete as to leave her speech-
less, while Fran rapidly and in detail acquainted her with
the scholastic, sporting, and social activities of the school.
Her first impulse was to seek out Mrs. Grant and point
out gently but firmly that she had no intention of re-
starting school, but as Fran waxed enthusiastic about the
visits of various teams to other country centres she thought
bitterly;
“I suppose I might as well. There is nothing else to
do but stay at home and mope about.”
So as soon as Dr. Grant and his wife had waved to the
departing bus, Felicity went slowly to her room to dress
for school.
“Beechwood,” situated on the rise just out of the town-
ship, was a partly brick, partly timbered old house, built in
the early days by a successful settler for his English bride,
who planted as many English trees and plants as had sur-
vived the long sea voyage with her. By the time quite a
lot of her floral immigrants had died, the bride, who had a


well developed sense of suitability, had discovered in the
strange and colourful specimens that grew in the surround-
ing bush a number of favourites to take their place, and so
she planted something from the new land alongside some-
thing from the old land, and now they grew side by side,
hiding the unsymmetrical sproutings of extra sleep-outs
and other additions necessary for an ever-increasing number
of boarders.
The beautiful flowering trees and shrubs of sub-tropic
Queensland made vivid patches of colour along the fences,
and threw carpets of red, blue and yellow about the
grounds.
Miss Ogivlie, M.A., Oxon., on a health trip to Australia,
had seen the place for sale, and realized its possibilities in
a prosperous country town, surrounded by other smaller
country towns, where no girls’ school existed, and invested
in it most of her capital and all her energies.
Her Scottish integrity, and forthright charm, no less
than her excellent degrees, attracted parents who had
hitherto been forced to send their daughters some hundred
miles to boarding school in the cities, and when Mrs. Grant
called to arrange for Felicity to attend as a day girl, the
school boasted thirty-eight boarders and over a hundred day
girls, some from Moonaburra itself, but quite a number
coming by train from surrounding towns.
On the morning of Felicity’s first day at school, Fran
rushed into the kitchen, where Marion and her mother had
the washing-up in full swing.
“Mummy, will you look at the time?” she cried, in an
agonised tone. “Felicity has been dressing for ages. She
has the door closed, too.”
“Very properly, I should think,” replied her mother,
mildly.
Fran tugged impatiently at the string of her sandshoes
as she fastened them to her racquet handle.
“Yes, Mummy, but you can’t see how far she is on. I
knocked on the door and she said she would be out soon.
Now just look at the time.” Her voice rose in a pathetic
wail as the toot of the bus sounded in the distance. “There,
we’ve missed it! Whatever is she doing? Now we’ll be
late.”
“It’s only eight o’clock, dear,” her mother said, sooth-
ingly. “Marion doesn’t go until half past and she is never
late.”


Fran, refusing both the consolation and the tea-towel
that Marion held out to her, picked up her case and hurled
herself violently through the house. She could be heard
frantically imploring Felicity, and a few minutes later the
visitor’s door opened. Mrs. Grant followed Marion as she
flew for her hat and case, and saw the trio off from the
verandah.
As she watched them go down the path she wondered
a little uneasily how this reserved English girl would fit into
school life.
"She could have said if she didn’t want to go,” she
worried, "though I don’t know what I should have found
for her to do if she had decided to stay at home.”
She looked after the three girls again, her own two in
their pale blue summer uniforms, their short tennis socks
topping legs as brown as their school-cases, wide-brimmed
panama hats worn turned up all round, thus defeating as
far as possible their purpose of shading the neck and face.
Frequently they turned to wave to their mother, Marion,
long and lovingly; Fran, impatiently fluttering her hand as
she hurried on at least three paces in front of the others.
Felicity never looked back.
"She looks quite detached, even from here,” Winifred
thought, watching her guest, taller than Fran, her slight
figure trim in its grey silk frock and stitched grey hat
above the fair curled hair, picking her way carefully over
the ruts in the bush track.
Suddenly, Winifred thought of Fay.
"Goodness, that child is like a mouse,” she said to
herself. "One could forget all about her,” and turning
quickly she went indoors to find her.
Before she left, Felicity had settled Fay on the verandah
with her cut-outs and crayons and a variety of instructions
designed to cover the whole time she would be away, but
somehow the paper dolls had lost their charm, and as the
warm scents and the brittle little sounds of the bushlands
increased and the sun rose higher, for the first time in her
acquiescent little life, Fay wanted to do something new;
but when she saw Mrs. Grant at the door watching her,
she smiled shyly and began dutifully playing with Margery
Daw.
Winifred thought quickly:
"What a good infant she is, but far too conscious of


everyone round her. At her age she shouldn’t have such a
placating smile.” Aloud she said:
"Well, they’ve all gone, Fay. Now you and I can do
some work. How about helping me do the boy’s hut?”
Fay slipped quickly off the window seat, and put her
thin little hand into Winifred’s casually outstetched brown
one.
“Can I see the orchard, Aunt Winifred?” she asked.
"Why, of course, my pet. It is just behind the hut,
but we haven’t any apples here, you know, like you grow in
England. There are some peaches ripe, though, and pas-
sionfruit. We will get some passions for a salad while we
are there.”
They went together into the bright sunshine. It dazzled
Fay and she shaded her eyes with her free hand.
"Do mosquitoes bite the peaches, too?” she asked, look-
ing most intrigued at the net shrouded trees.
Winifred laughed.
“No, but the fruit flies do,” she replied. "We have to
put nets round the tree or they would be full of grubs, and
we couldn’t eat them. See, here are the children’s gardens.
Marion grows herbs, mint and parsley. Those are Fran’s
egg-tomatoes. She likes having them because they grow
themselves. All these lettuce and beetroot belong to Peter,
and this new bed must be for Garry.” She picked some
little tomatoes, and sat down on the grass, handing one to
Fay.
"Do you like it?” Fay nodded. "Then run down to the
kitchen and bring me the envelope of seeds you will find
on the dresser. This is a nice sunny spot for tomatoes,
and we will put some in for you.”
Fay sped off, and Winifred began idly pulling weeds
out of Garry’s plot.
"I’ll have to find some small responsibilities for her,”
she thought. "She is a sweet thing, but up till now seems
to have been treated like a superior sort of doll.”
Forking up the little corner, Winifred showed Fay how
to plant the seeds and where to get the can to water them
each morning.
"You won’t forget, Fay, will you? They like a lot of
water, and if you look after them they will bear more
tomatoes than you can eat.”


ay stopped sprinkling the sand over the seeds, and
looked up at her.
“Can I have them for my very own lunch, when they
are ripe?” she asked, eagerly.
“Certainly, dear; but if you are anything like the girls,
you will come up here and eat them as fast as they ripen
without waiting for lunch,” smiled Winifred.
The child looked pleased.
“I’ll pick them when we come up here to make the
boy’s beds,” she said joyfully. “We can sit on the grass
here and eat them.”
Winifred got up.
“We will,” she promised. “Now come, and you can dust
the table with this little duster while I do the beds.”
And so while Fay ineptly, but enthusiastically, dusted
such parts of the boys’ room as was not sacred to masculine
hands, the blue bus had rattled into the township, deposited
its passengers at the station, taken on the empty milk-cans,
and rattled a good deal more on the way back.
As the three girls filed through the small green turnstile,
cunningly designed by Miss Ogivlie for the exclusion of
stray goats, the scattered groups of girls in the playground
gave ample evidence that not even the attention bell had
rung. Fran’s frantic urging of the other two stopped, and
she permitted herself the luxury of taking off her hat and
fanning herself vigorously with it as they walked towards
the school.
“Oh, look, Fran. Valerie has the tree,” cried Marion,
delightedly, as she dashed off to join the several seven-year-
olds who, in industrious triumph, were setting up home in
and around the accommodatingly misshapen trunk and low,
sweeping branches of an enormous, aged Moreton Bay fig.
Her sister gave the tree a fond look.
“Whoever gets the tree has it for the day,” she explained
to Felicity. “It’s the best thing in the playground. We
often take our prep, out there, and if Middi is in a good
mood, she lets us do our needlework there, too.”
“Do you take your seats down, too?” Felicity asked,
curiously.
Fran laughed.
“If you’re fussy, you can,” she said, carelessly, “the
mistress usually has hers taken down. Mostly, we sit on
the grass or on the low branches.”


“Arc you allowed to talk during needlework here?”
“Oh, rather; that’s the whole idea. To get us in prac-
tice for sewing meetings and things later on. So we always
do more talking than sewing,” replied Fran, solemnly.
Felicity was silenced by the fantastic picture she sud-
denly had of a sewing class where the mistress instructed
from a throne on the grass, while the pupils chattered in
the branches above.
On the side verandah, a tall dark girl, whose smooth
shining plaits were wound round her head, was pinning
tennis fixtures on a notice board. She turned, fluttered her
eyes over Felicity, and said briefly, with patronage becoming
to a senior;
“Hullo, Fran.”
“Oh, Brenda,” replied Fran, in an incredibly respectful
tone, “this is Felicity Harvey. You know she’s come from
England to stay with us.”
Again the indolent dark eyes turned on Felicity, and she
said, in what seemed to the latter to be an insufferable
drawl:
“How do you do?” Without waiting for a reply, she
nodded to Fran. “Put her in the Ogre’s study. Have you
got a prep, before lunch?”
“Yes, after prayers, Brenda,” breathed Fran.
“Good, come down to the courts. I want to try you out
for the tournament.”
“Oh, thank you, Brenda,” said Fran, ecstatically; but the
older girl, with the air of having dispensed small alms,
turned her attention to a number of eager satellites who
were awaiting her decision on other matters.
Fran gazed after her in rapt beatitude. Felicity looked
at her disdainfully.
“Shouldn’t you courtesy?” she asked, sarcastically. “She
owns the earth, doesn’t she?”
Fran nodded blissfully.
“She’s wonderful,” she said, dreamily. “Isn’t she mar-
vellous to think of giving me a chance to play on Red Cross
Day? She’s captain of the school. You ought to see the
service; it’s wonderful, and she wins us the swimming
pennant every year.”
“In that case, one would think she could afford to be


gracious. I think she has a most objectionable manner,”
said Felicity, evenly.
Fran, a conscientious worshipper, looked horrified.
Shh,’ she whispered, looking anxiously round to see if
this heresy had been overheard, and recovering slightly on
finding no one within twenty yards of them.
“She is a bit snooty sometimes,” she conceded, hurriedly,
“but she is a wonderful sport. If it wasn’t for the war
she wouldn’t be here now.”
“That would be a relief, I should say,” said Felicity,
still smarting under the memory of the appraising coolness
of Brenda’s stare. She wasn’t in the mood for goddesses
who won cups for the school and walked over the prostrate
bodies of their fellows.
“Put her in the study.” she repeated to herself furiously.
Does she think I have come from a really famous school
to this provincial dump to be put in the study.”
However, Miss Ogvilie had to be waited for, and
apparently, in the stud} r . So Felicity declined a chair and
waited, standing up as a protest against colonial casualness.
The long french lights opening onto the verandah were
fastened back, and no hanging curtains had been allowed
to spoil the picture framed in the severe rectangle of the
doorway a gnarled old jacaranda, its mauve blue masses
stirring lightly in the breeze. Felicity forgot everything but
the glory of colour as she stood watching the gentle, inter-
mittent wafting down of airy bits of blue to form on the
ground the reflection of the blue above.
“You like my tree, Felicity?”
The girl turned quickly to see the owner of the warm,
quiet voice, with its attractive burr, standing in the doorway
smiling a little at her.
“Yes, it’s lovely,” she said, a little confused; but liking
at once the tall, rather weather-beaten woman who came
forward to take her hands firmly in her own as she said:
“I am glad you have come, my dear. I have a sister in
Manchester, and I have just heard that she and her family
are safe. Since the air-raids started I have been a little
worried. Now you are here and we can, perhaps, exchange
news. Sit down and we can talk a while.”
At this simple, unexpected mention of home, and the
taking for granted of the bond between them because of it,
Felicity felt suddenly warmed and happy, and all her de-


fences fell before the plain, charming woman who possessed
that quality, rare, even amongst the best head-mistresses,
of seeing instantly, and drawing out the best in their girls.
Felicity found herself telling of her father operating at
the height of the blitz; of John and his laughing, gallant
comrades, whose feet these days scarcely touched the earth,
and even of her own disappointment and humiliation at
being sent to safety. Miss Ogivlie listened attentively, and
when the girl stopped, a little embarrassed at her talkative-
ness, she said:
“You should have a lot in common with the girls you
will meet here, Felicity. In the ordinary course of events,
most of them, the ones in your form, wouldn’t be here now.
One had been looking forward to going abroad, and others
expected to matriculate this year and go on to the Univer-
sity. Now, of course, they are set on going into one of
the auxiliary services, and I’m afraid an academic career
no longer appeals to them.” She sighed, and went on:
“However, with the consent of their parents, I have formed
a sort of finishing class, so that the girls can be happily
occupied, and helped to fit themselves for their part in the
war effort later on. You will be in this form, and I think
you will enjoy the latitude regarding dress and other
matters allowed its members. Some of the girls are learn-
ing first-aid, others office routine, and all do certain subjects
such as English prose, French conversation and maths.
They keep fit with as much sport as possible. What is
your game?”
“Tennis,” replied Felicity. “I used to play a lot, but I
am rather soft now.”
“We’ll soon remedy that,” said Miss Ogivlie. “We are
fortunate in our captain. She is an excellent player, and is
at present organising a tournament for the Red Cross Day
next month. I will see that she tries you out for it.”
Felicity thought of Brenda and her enthusiasm wilted.
“I would need quite a lot of practice before I would be
able to play competition tennis, I think,” she replied, rather
stiffly.
Miss Ogivlie noticed the change in her new pupil’s
manner, but she said cordially:
“Well, settle down before you decide what you want to
do,” and as the attention bell had already ended playground
activities, and girls of all ages were flocking like a flight of
light blue birds towards the assembly hall. Miss Ogivlie


rose and, glancing at Felicity’s neat grey frock, said:
“Ihe finishing class is allowed a free choice in what
they wear. I don’t expect them to wear the school uniform,
but I am always glad to see them choosing simple day
frocks.”
helicity smiled, well pleased that she had not accepted
bran’s offer of one of her summer dresses, which she had
privately tried on in her bedroom with the horrifying result
of looking about fourteen. As she followed Miss Ogivlie
down the hall to prayers, she began to think that Beechwood
might not be so tiresome as she had expected.
Meanwhile, Garry was undergoing his initiation into a
very different kind of school the Agricultural High
School comprising some four hundred acres of beautiful
downs country divided up for experimental purposes into
miniature farms dealing with every kind of vegetation con-
ceivably to be found in the antipodes, and housing, hygienic-
ally and scientifically, every kind of domestic animal.
The school itself was a large collection of buildings,
some large like the science block, some small like the indi-
vidual classrooms, and milk-testing hut. Away to one side
stretched the dairy and piggeries; beside these, paddocks of
green rippled down to the river in the distance. Behind the
rise, protected from the westerlies, were rows of bananas,
and on the flat stood a forest of sugarcane.
The boarders’ dormitories spread themselves in another
direction. In the centre of all these erections, like the man
himself, was the Head’s house; and from this wide-veran-
dahed edifice J. C. Chisholm, M.A., M.Agr., ordered and
ruled like a kindly but awe-inspiring despot. Holding that
boys were the least complicated form of animal life, he
ruled by the maxim “You can do anything to a boy, except
an injustice,” and after a few gruff words of welcome he
virtually threw each new boy into the melting pot of
school, believing that each would find his level, and have
the corners rubbed off in the process. They usually did.
So successful was the result, that the Governor of the
State, who, a close friend of Chisholm, often spent the
week-end at the school, often found himself wishing he
could transport by magic carpet these several hundred boys,
clean-limbed and strong, their faces already taking on that
lean, humorous toughness that characterised their fathers
and brothers of the A.1.F., and set them down, like a living
poster, in the crowded parts of England.


“Give us those of your boys who want space to spare,”
he would write at the bottom, “and those who want land to
cultivate, and a free life. Send them to the land that
tilled out these sturdy bodies, whose sun coloured them to
match the khaki of their shirts and shorts.”
It was indeed this airy uniform that most abashed Garry
as he laboured along beside Peter, in his good heavy English
suit, outwardly stolid, but inwardly miserably conscious of
the stares and guffaws that followed in their wake, and his
knickerbockers reduced his school fellows to exaggerated
hysterics.
“What did you leave Pommyland for?”
“Did the Jerries chase you out?”
“Did the Customs bloke ask what you were hiding in
your pants?”
Poor Garry was like a young bull-pup, honestly bewil-
dered by the yappings of exuberant fox-terriers.
“All the fellows wear them at home,” he said. “It’s
pretty cold there.”
“My father sent us here because he wouldn’t be able to
look after us during the raids. He’s a doctor, and he does
operations, dozens while the bombs are falling,” he added,
boastfully.
“No, I’m not afraid of the Jerries. My brother’s in the
R.A.F. They’ll give the Luftwaffe something to think
about, you can be sure.”
Pie held his ground answering one after another, but the
chaffing continued and his patiently good-natured explana-
tions, instead of meeting with polite interest, rocked his
hearers with uncontrollable mirth.
The boys were no more thoughtless or cold-blooded than
any other group of boys anywhere else, but few of the first
and second year striplings could resist sharpening their
early wit on Garry’s knickerbockers, which to them were
excruciatingly funny, and the sound never rang so sweetlv
in his ears as the bell for assembly, when frivolity ceased
and honest toil began.
But Garry’s troubles were only beginning; for as every
schoolboy knows from bitter experience, the fresher
seldom escapes with verbal exchange. It was unfortunate,
nevertheless, that Felicity should be the first to meet her
brother, as he came home very hot, with a rapidly swelling
eye, and generally the worse for wear. Ignoring the united


and dismayed pleas of the two boys, she marched furiously
out to the verandah, where the Doctor and Mrs. Grant
were enjoying a late afternoon tea.
“Garry’s been fighting,” she announced, too angry to
care that her careful English manners were falling a little
into arrears.
Dr. Grant raised his eyebrows comically.
“Has he really?” he inquired, helping himself to another
scone, and quite prepared to enjoy the details of the scrap.
But Winifred, seeing Felicity’s mood, and anxious to smooth
things over as soon as possible, said:
“They do you know, Felicity. Alan, you might speak
to him.” She added thoughtfully, “Not that it ever does
any good.”
“It will do him good,” his sister said, tersely. “May I
bring him in, Dr. Grant?”
“By all means, my dear. Ah, there he is!” for the boys
had crouched under the railing to hear what Felicity had
to say. “Come and explain this unseembly behaviour, sir.”
As they came shamefacedly up the stairs Winifred’s
heart went out to the heated and battered Englishman, who,
for comfort had taken off his thick stockings, and rolled
up his knickerbockers.
“Really, Garry. You might dress yourself before you
come into the house!” exclaimed Felicity, colouring with
mortification at the untidy apparition before her.
“But, my dear,” protested Winifred, “it’s frightfully
hot.”
“Well, son, what was the fight about?” asked the doctor.
“Oh, nothing much, sir,” mumbled Garry.
“Thorne chucked off at the English cricketers, Dad,”
broke in Peter.
“I see, and did you think that was worth fighting for?”
his father asked curiously, looking keenly at Garry.
“Yes, sir.”
Dr. Grant considered him thoughtfully, then he said:
“Well, I’m glad you are not afraid to fight for what you
believe in, although I must say you are a nasty sight now.
How many did you have to get stuck into?”
“Just one, sir.”
“About your own size?”


■‘Just about, sir.”
The doctor frowned.
“Well,” he said at last. “If you are satisfied, I’m sure
no one else can complain. What about all those scratches
on your arms?”
“The fellows rolled me in the feed-bin, sir.”
Winifred and the doctor suppressed smiles and the latter
asked:
“What for?”
“Because I wouldn’t sing a song.”
“Oh, yes, of course. I think you were thrown into the
chaff-bin last year for the same thing, weren’t you, Peter?”
“Yes, Dad, I sang, but it wasn’t good enough.”
His father laughed.
“Whatever else they are, they have a certain amount of
judgment,” he said. “Be off with you both, Garry, you
have a hot bath, and Aunt Winifred will give you some-
thing for that eye afterwards.”
The boys disappeared thankfully, and when they had
gone the doctor looked quizzically at Felicity.
“You see,” he said, resignedly, “They all do it.”
Felicity set her mouth obstinately.
“He never did in England.”
“Probably not,” replied her host, imperturbably, “but I
understand he was at a prep, school then. If he had
gone on to one of the great public schools he would have
learnt to use his fists fast enough.”
Winifred passed over a cup of tea.
“Here, dear,” she said, “sit down and forget about it.
I used to worry about the boys, but it’s no use. A new boy
gets a rough spin for a day or so, until something fresh
turns up. He’ll survive.
CHAPTER VI.
Or the new arrivals, Garry was the only one, so far,
who had joined in the early morning surf.
He was an enchanted child as he watched the creamy sand
washed clean and hard by the sweep of the surf, and the blue-
green swell of the rollers, as they rose, arched and balanced
for an infinitesimal space of time before crashing forward
in a frothy cascade of light and bubble.


For a boy who could not swim, the doctor found him
disturbingly trusting as he battled up to his waist, often
being knocked flat as the roller broke and swept up and
over him.
On the calm mornings he managed increasingly well,
the cumbersome rubber surf-o-plane, lent him by Marion.
Standing thigh deep, clutching the plane firmly to him, he
tensely watched over his shoulder the incoming breaker,
and soon learned to throw himself forward on the plane to
join Peter and his father, who had ridden in from beyond
the first line of breakers.
Garry abandoned himself more completely to the water
than anyone guessed, and lived for this brief hour, when
he rode, light as air on the crest of a wave.
One morning, when the thunder of the waves told them
of a heavy surf even before they reached the Gap, they
found the surf patrol’s flag, instead of fluttering gaily to
mark the safe part of the beach, rolled and crossed above
the sign DANGER.
Peter gave a moan of disappointment, then joined in
the race with his sisters for the Boot. Garry stood irreso-
lute, gazing at the waves.
"Come on, old man,” said Dr. Grant, cheerfully. "No
surf to-day, I am afraid.”
Garry looked unconvinced.
"It doesn’t look much different to me,” he said. Couldn’t
we go in if we just keep near the edge.”
The doctor laughed.
"Not a hope.” Then, seeing the boy’s stubborn look,
he added:
"Well, come on, just once,” and taking him by the
shoulders, waded in with him up to the boy’s knees.
A roller broke and hurled itself at them. Garry was
determined to keep his balance, and laughed triumphantly
as the foam swirled past them and left them standing; but
his mirth was short-lived, for suddenly, the sand slipped
from under his feet like a rug on a polished floor, and down
he went like a ninepin, the retreating water scraping sand
and shell fragments over his body.
His feet, which seemed to be clamped to the suckers of
some giant sea-monster were pulling him under and out to
sea, but a stronger human force tugged at his armpits, and


after a few seconds he was standing on his two feet beyond
the reach of the surf.
Spluttering sand and sea water, and rubbing his eyes, he
looked at the doctor who was standing by with a broad grin,
and laughed shamed facedly.
“Gosh! they are strong,” he said. “Just as well you had
hold of me, sir.”
The other laughed.
“Seeing is believing, eh, Garry? Now you know why
you must never go into the surf without some responsible
person with you. It looks so inviting, but the undertow is
terrific sometimes.”
“Will it be all right to-morrow?” Garry asked, anxiously.
“Most likely, although this sea may last a few days. In
that time it will have shifted hundreds of tons of sand, and
the beach will have changed entirely.”
Garry looked most apprehensive.
“But we will still be able to surf here?”
“Yes, but perhaps in another part of the beach. The
lifesavers will investigate and find out where the dangerous
undertow is, and set up their flags enclosing the safe parts.
Now come along to the Boot, I have let you play about in
the surf too long. You must learn to swim now. At least,
enough to keep yourself afloat if you are ever carried out.”
“Will it take long to learn?” queried Garry, anxiously.
The doctor looked critically over the thickset little body,
already reddening above the new trunks, and answered
casually:
“Not long. A little nugget like you should make a good
swimmer.”
Peter and Marion were splashing each other, and run-
ning round the pool when they arrived there, but Fran was
conscientiously swimming up and down and trying to time
herself by counting.
“Daddy,” she gasped, as she pulled herself out of the
water and lay sprawled on the warm rocks, “I believe I’ll
do it yet.”
“Do what, Fran?”
“Get into the team,” she replied, “I’m sure I did there
and back in fifty seconds.”
“Doesn’t seem likely to me,” her Father replied.
“Well, you can’t absolutely tell without a watch,” she


retorted, “but I counted about that.”
But her father had ceased to interest himself in his
daughter’s prospects and was already wading back and for-
wards, pulling Garry by both hands and instructing him in
the art of correct kicks.
The three Grants dried themselves and warmed up like
lizards on the rocks and watched the performance, Peter
shouting encouragement, the girls giggling as Garry, deter-
mined to swim by himself, plunged forward vigorously,
churning the water for a few seconds until his legs got out
of control, and he sank to the bottom.
Suddenly the sound of an outboard motor came over
the sandhill, and the doctor said:
“Bill must have had the boat up the river. Fran, you
and Marion cut over and see if he has any fish for break-
fast. If he has, give him a hand to clean them, and take
some up to your mother. I want to spend a few more
minutes with Garry.”
They jumped up and made off over the sand, twisting
their towels like sarongs round their waists as they ran.
In front of the boat-shed, imprisoned in his play pen,
Beno bawled at the top of his voice, and banged his fist in
baby rage on the nose of Wallup whenever that faithful
hound pushed it sympathetically between the bars.
Marion put her arms round him and dragged him gently
over to her.
“There,” she said, soothingly. “Stop crying and tell me
all about it. He’s hungry, Fran. Fook, he is eating my
shoulder strap.”
Fran poked her head round the door.
“Daddy says is there any fish for us, Bill, please, and
we have to help you clean it if there is.”
She spied the battered creel on the floor, and, advancing
gingerly, opened it.
“Oh, Bill, what a lot of whiting. How do you do it?”
Bill concealed his satisfaction by frowning into the pot
he was stirring.
“Yes, there’s always plenty at the Hole.”
“We never get any,” said Fran. “Should I start scaling
some now?”
“What about you feeding the kid, while I do them?”
suggested Bill. “Here’s his porridge.”


“Oh, let me do it, Fran,” cried Marion, “I haven’t fed
him for ages.”
Right you are,” her sister said, magnanimously, “any-
way, I want to use Bill’s scaler. It is tons better than ours,”
and she commenced vigorously scaling and passing the fish
to Bill to gut, while Marion hoisted Beno onto his chair
and set to work with solemn joy, stirring the milk and
porridge round and popping it into his untidy little mouth.
“He’s dying for a mango, Bill. Can I peel one for
him? she asked, when the last spoonful of cereal had
disappeared.
“He’ll make himself awfully messy,” said Fran, severely.
“Never mind, give him one,” replied Bill, cheerfully. “I
just dip him in the river when he has had enough.”
So Marion carefully peeled the large ripe mango, and
Beno joyfully slobbered the sweet juice all over his face
and down his front as his grandfather piled the slender,
silver fish onto a plate and tied a clean tea-cloth under and
over them in a knot for Fran to carry them by, and the
girls set out up the track.
‘Don’t forget to ask your mother if she wants them
pines picked this afternoon,” Bill called after them as they
went.
“All right,” yelled Fran back, “and if she does she will
hang a white towel over the verandah rail.”
“I wish we could have stayed to wash Beno,” sighed
Marion, wistfully.
Fran laughed.
“I don’t think he ever does get an ordinary bath,” she
said. “Bill dips him in and out of the river, and he dries
off in the sun all day. He’s like a native.”
“Anyway, he’s much nicer all brown with only those
tiny v’s on,” said Marion, defensively. “Just fancy being
like those city children who get sunburn and blisters all
over them when they go surfing.”
Garry’s lesson had evidently spun itself out, for only
when the silver fish were served golden and delicious on
the hot breakfast plates, did the doctor put in an appear-
ance, the boys, their damp tousled hair, hurriedly brushed
back, following him.
“Mother, Bill wants to know if you want the pineapples
picked to-day,” said Fran, as she sat down to breakfast.


“Yes, I suppose so,” began Mrs. Grant, “although I
didn’t want to make any jam until next week,”
“You’d better have it done, Winifred,” broke in her
husband. “I have promised the Scott’s he’d help with the
hillside bananas in a few days.”
“Oh, Dad, can Garry and 1 go if they are picking on
a Saturday?”
“I don’t see why not,” replied the doctor. “Try not to
break your necks.”
“No fear,” laughed Peter; and turning to Garry, he said,
“We go up the mountain on ponies. It’s fun; you think
you are going to slip off their tails, it’s so steep.”
“But Garry can’t ride,” objected Felicity.
“He doesn’t need to,” replied Peter, airily, “The old
nags they give us are so quiet you have to kick them along.”
“It’s safe enough, Felicity,” said Winifred, reassuringly.
“All the same, Peter, if Garry is going, you see that he gets
some practice on Pannican every afternoon this week.”
Felicity went silently on with her breakfast.
“I often wonder what I am doing here,” she thought
bitterly. “No one takes the slightest notice of what I say.”
All the same, the sight of Fay, not only lapping up an
outsize bowl of porridge, but industriously removing the
bones from her own fish, made her grudgingly grateful for
the evidence of her sister’s growing independence.
Unwillingly, she was beginning to admire Winifred,
and half wished she had not been so uncompromising in
calling her nothing but Mrs. Grant.
The older woman’s tact and quiet charm, and her warm
kindliness to the three newcomers, was slowly but surely
breaking down the girl’s prejudice and mellowing her atti-
tude to things Australian.
She did not admit this even to herself, however, and the
problem of Garry’s school clothes still remained. Nothing
further had been said about getting him more suitable gar-
ments, and all the Grants literally chaffed in silent sympathy
as he set out each morning in his heavy clothes.
Unfortunately for the boy, he had arrived at mid-term
when there were no other new boys to divert the lively
attention of a certain section of the school, whose chief
entertainment lay in tormenting the latest arrivals.
This buffoonery consisted of nothing more harmful,


usually, than muscle grinding the arms of these unfor-
tunates, causing them to sing solo, and rolling them in the
chaff-bin.
These crosses Garry bore like a man, returning, with
Peter’s help, blow for blow when the aggressors were their
own size, and with silent fortitude when the odds were
against them.
What they could not cope with, however, were the atten-
tions of two fourth year boys, an admirably small percentage
of the, school, but a sore trial to Garry and Peter, who
carried on their private persecution in the train coming
home.
The rough handling he received from these two bullies
he bore stoically until they hit on the happy idea of com-
menting insultingly on the cowardice of evacuees being
hunted from their country by a few bombs. Seeing how
this cut into the English boy’s reserve, they developed a
technique of persecution not usually found in Australian
schools.
“Mein Gott, thees Engleesh boy, he can run how, Her-
man !” one would exclaim, winking at the other occupants
of the carriage.
“Himmel, he is an athlete, that von,” his friend would
reply.
When the train pulled in at Moonaburra station his bag
would be snatched from him and flung onto the platform
and his nor folk jacket pulled off and thrown after him to
the strains of “Run, rabbit, run!” and the unrestrained
mirth of a carriageful of his tormentors’ satellites.
This had gone on intermittently for a few weeks, and
poor Garry began to dread setting out in the morning, all
his delight in this most fascinating of all schools subdued
by the thought of the homeward journey.
On this particular morning, as the last morsel of crisp
little fish vanished from his plate, he felt fervently that if a
miracle in the nature of mumps or some painless but dis-
figuring illness could happen to him he could be very happy
messing about with a fishing line on the jetty. He glanced
at Felicity silently finishing her breakfast, and thought un-
easily of the evening before. He had had a particularly bad
time in the train, Peter having stayed at school doing field
work, and as he waited for the bus, wiping away a furtive
tear, it must be confessed, his sister had come along and
wormed the whole miserable business out of him. He was


sorry the minute he saw her face set, and realized that this
wouldn’t be the last of it as far as she was concerned.
Frantically, he had implored her to say nothing about
it to the doctor or Mrs. Grant. Felicity answered never a
word, but stalked up to the house and through it in search
of the doctor.
“I’m afraid he won’t be in until late, Felicity,” said
Winifred, in answer to her tense inquiry. “He is doing an
immediate, and may not be home until all hours. What is
the matter?”
“Nothing that anyone but Dr. Grant can put right,”
Felicity answered. “That is, he can if he chooses,” she
added sharply, as she went to her room.
Winifred ignored this piece of unwarranted rudeness,
and thought: “Oh dear, whatever is the matter now? I
really am getting a little tired of adolescent heroics. The
weather is against them,”
It was perfectly evident that Felicity meant to wait up
for the doctor’s return, and at ten o’clock, Winifred decided
to go to bed, and leave her to it.
Just as she was letting down the mosquito-net, she heard
her husband’s car, and feeling very pleased to be out of
range, she got quickly into bed, and lay cool and relaxed
under the thin sheet, earnestly trying to remember whether,
at sixteen, she had been so very trying to live with.
Meanwhile, Felicity was not enjoying her self-imposed
task. It is not easy to lay a complaint to anyone who
appears so very pleased at having one under his roof and
insists on treating one like a favourite daughter. The doctor
listened gravely to her story, and when she had finished he
said quickly:
“What do you want me to do about it?”
Felicity stared at him in surprise.
“Why, stop it, of course,” she said. “You can easily do
that by letting the Head know just how caddishly his senior
boys are behaving.”
“Do you really think that would help Garry?”
T don’t see why not. Those bullies should be expelled.”
The doctor was silent a moment, then he said:
“Possibly, but you can’t go through life expelling objec-
tionables. You have to learn to live in spite of them.”
“I wish my brother were here,” she cried, angrily. “He
would give those two something to think about.”


“No doubt,” replied the doctor, dryly; “and I shall be
surprised if one of their schoolmates doesn’t do the same
thing before long. Now, I can go to Chisholm and have
Cross and Hibbard soundly thrashed; but I won’t do it, not
yet, at any rate.”
“Why ever not?” demanded Felicity, her eyes flashing
indignantly. “They deserve it.”
“They most certainly do,” agreed the doctor, “but Garry
does not.”
“How do you mean?”
“Well, if this hectoring is stopped by my intervention,
Garry immediately becomes an object of scorn, a tale-
carrier. Now, see here, Felicity,” he reasoned, “I like and
admire that kid immensely. He has plenty of character,
and it will see him through this thing before long. Not only
that; he will have the respect of his fellows and, what is
more important, of himself. You can be sure that the way
he is standing up to this isn’t lost on his classmates.”
Felicity remained rebelliously silent for a moment. Then
she said in a tone of concentrated fury:
“I wouldn’t mind if they ragged him in the ordinary
way. John used to say he got an awful time in his first
term. But to accuse him of cowardice because he was sent
out here is too much,”
He nodded. “Yes, it certainly is hitting below the belt,
all right, and if it doesn’t stop soon I will take a hand, never
fear.” He rose and stifled a yawn. “Buzz off to bed now,
like a good girl, and I promise you if nothing happens
before the end of the week I’ll do something about it.”
There was nothing for her to do but accept his decision,
and she stood up and said a stiff goodnight as she left the
room.
Garry, of course, knew nothing of the outcome of her
conversation with the doctor, although he betted gloomily
with Peter, that if he knew anything about old Felix, she
had not rested until she had said what she wanted to.
At all events, he had made a good start at swimming,
and perhaps to-day
His hopes were dashed to the ground as he boarded the
train that afternoon, for as it moved out of the station
Cross and Hibbard jumped into the carriage usually occu-
pied by first year boys and, without ceremony, briefly
cleared a seat for themselves by the simple expedient of
pushing four small boys off the most comfortable one and


establishing themselves on it. Cross, the heavier and more
dangerous of the two, looked round, and seeing Garry sit-
ting beside Peter in the opposite compartment, crooked his
finger and beckoned him to come over.
Garry sat stolidly in his seat, and Cross continued to
beckon.
"Come here, you cowardly little cur, and brush my shoes
with your handkerchief or I’ll chase you out of the train
like the Germans chased you out of Pommyland.”
Garry didn’t move. Cross turned to Hibbard.
"Get him!” he ordered, briefly.
Hibbard laughed and, striding across the seat, seized
Garry by the arm and pulled him out of the seat.
"Are you going or do you want to be taken?” he said,
pushing his face up beside Garry’s.
Outwardly calm, but inwardly trembling, Garry re-
mained silent.
Hibbard twisted his arm.
"Answer, you mongrel!” he yelled. “Are you going to
do what you are told?”
"No,” replied Garry, hoping no one guessed how ill he
was beginning to feel.
"Oh, we’ll see about that,” sneered Cross, as Hibbard
thrust up the boy’s coat-sleeve and began to work on the
muscle of his upper arm with a series of short quick
punches. "We’ll see how a few muscle-grinders will go
for a start.”
Garry plucked up all his courage and wrenched his
arm away.
"Heave me alone, you bully!” he shouted
"Bully, eh?” said Cross, vindictively. "You can do with
a few lessons on how to speak to your betters.” He cuffed
the boy sharply over the head. Garry fell against Hibbard,
who gave him a push that sent him back to Cross’s arms.
At this moment, Peter, who had been choking with rage
in his seat and was stealthily preparing to throw himself on
Hibbard’s back with the object of turning it into a free-for-
all fight, noticed a slight movement in the seat second
behind the one occupied by Cross. An evening paper was
suddenly lowered, and the aquiline nose and sleepy eyes of
the school captain, Bob Scott, an epoch-making centre for-
ward, appeared in surprised enquiry.


The horse play was becoming rougher and much more
mirth-provoking to the fun-loving Cross and Hibbard as
the train pulled up at a station to take aboard milk-cans.
Slowly, before Peter’s delighted eyes, the hero of the
season’s matches heaved his lean, muscular body from its
comfortable corner, slipped negligently over two small boys
who had been dislodged by Cross and Hibbard, and before
those young gentlemen realized what was happening, had
seized each by the back of the collar, was lifting them from
their seats and propelling them in a bone-shaking manner
towards the door of the carriage.
Willing hands flung it wide and as the train stopped,
Scott delivered two of his powerful goal kicks consecutively
and so vigorously that the recipients skidded along in a
manner fascinating to the audience, before sitting heavily
on the garden border.
Their bags were flung out after them with great gusto
by their fellow-travellers, who made the most of the milk
loading time to sharpen their wits on the surprised victims
of their own mischief. Garry and Peter, overcome with
joy at the turn events had taken, stammered out their thanks
to their deliverer, who returned to his paper without a
glance in their direction.
When they scrambled out at Moonaburra, Peter executed
a war dance; but Garry, his arms still sore from the bullies’
attentions, could not help having a few misgivings.
“What about to-morrow. Won’t they half kill us if he
isn’t on the train?” he asked.
Peter was frankly horrified at this lack of faith.
“What? After the hiding they got from him to-day?
I can tell you they won’t dare to show their faces after the
booing the kids let ’em have. If they did it again and he
heard about it,” he added, in good earnest, “Scott would
take them apart.” He stopped, then said suddenly, “Look
here, Garry, I reckon you have stood enough rough stuff on
account of these sissy clothes of yours. Why don’t you
dump ’em?”
Garry looked appalled.
“Gosh,” he said, “I haven’t got any other sort.
“Well, I’ve got plenty of shorts, and if you have to
wear mine they will soon get you some of your own,” his
friend returned, with a fine show of logic. “Here, my gym.
shorts are in my bag, we can hop into the waiting-room and
you can change into them.”


“And go home only in shorts?” queried the fascinated
Garry.
“Why not?” demanded Peter. “You’ve got your singlet
on, haven’t you?”
“But what can we do with these? Felix will send me
back for them if we plant ’em somewhere.”
Peter thought earnestly for a few moments. Suddenly,
he said in an inspired way:
“Well, fancy not thinking of it before. There’s a box
on the station for the Hospital Salvage. Make them into a
bundle and poke them in the slot. She can’t take back
what’s been given to the sick, I hope,” he added, piously.
So Garry, to whom such a high-handed disposal of his
clothesi would never have occurred, saw the light with
deplorable speed, and hurried to divest himself of his bonds.
“About time they dressed that kid decent,” thought the
bus-driver as a semi-nude climbed after Peter into the
chariot. “Fancy sending him to school in them la-de-dah
clothes.”
Felicity, meeting them as they came into the house, was
so overcome with horror at her brother’s wanton action,
and helplessly indignant when the ethics of the Hospital Box
were explained to her with a great show of fair-mindedness
by Peter, that it took all the triumphant recital of the
final defeat of Cross and Hibbard to prevent her offering
personal violence to the unrepentant Garry.
Privately, the doctor and Winifred couldn’t decide which
episode pleased them most, and after Garry’s measurements
had been taken and the necessary orders telephoned to the
township, in order that he might appear in his own clothes
at the soonest possible moment, both boys were prohibited
the evening instalment of their favourite serial and sent
ignominiously to bed.
The doctor, feeling that Felicity’s feelings had been
pretty thoroughly considered by him, thundered at the delin-
quents and allotted each a formidable stretch of week-end
weeding.
CHAPTER VII
And now, as Garry walked among his fellows in khaki
shorts and shirt —of approved pattern —two hip pockets and
a special loop for his knife, he felt himself one among men
who are free and equal.


Pay, playing on the beach every afternoon with Beno,
under Winifred’s watchful eye, ventured after a while into
the shallow end of the Boot, and stayed so long there one
hot day that a light sprinkle of freckles took the place of the
heat rash. In fact, so busy was Fay kept, checking the
ebullient and scantily clad child Winifred had given her to
mind, that she forgot to be afraid of things on her own
account, and lived in constant apprehension lest this head-
strong youth should drown himself.
Indeed, Winifred was especially pleased about Fay,
whose delicacy had been so much heralded before her
arrival that she had sometimes wondered whether her hus-
band had been wise to take on himself so great a respon-
sibility ; her weight was increasing, and she had forgotten
to smile politely when anyone came near her.
She was now clamouring to join the others in the early
morning swim, and Winifred did not anticipate any difficulty
about starting her at Beechwood after Christmas.
Felicity had written several times to her father, and
Winifred hoped she was giving him comforting reports of
his younger daughter, although she privately doubted
whether the girl was mature enough to realise just what
such news would mean to a man working desperately
amongst the aftermath of hell let loose.
In this she was mistaken, for Felicity, when she wrote
in answer to her father’s cabled assurances after each bomb-
ing raid, put all her personal feelings aside and wrote
glowingly of the improved health of Fay and of Garry’s
infatuation with everything around him. Indeed, although
neither Winifred nor Felicity herself suspected it, she was
beginning to unbend, not very noticeably, certainly, but the
process had set in.
It is very hard, no matter how determined one is, to
remain aloof when one is sixteen, and unresponsive to
beauty and kindliness when one lives at Moonaburra Beach,
under the brilliant tropic stars and the roof of Alan and
Winifred Grant.
One morning, she was wakened by noisy and uncontrol-
lable peals of laughter issuing from a nearby gum-tree,
where a group of kookaburras was finding the increasing
heat of the summer day unbearably funny. It was Sunday,
and Sunday breakfast at Cottontrees was a ritual. Fran
and Marion were responsible for it, and as she lay idly
listening to the bushland stirrings and small shrill sounds,
she heard the clatter of cups and saucers and Fay’s thin


treble as she distributed spoons under Marion’s direction.
Suddenly she felt an unaccountably warm feeling for
this family, complete strangers, who were sharing their
home with her. How sweet the girls had been to Fay,
how tactfully Garry had been made to feel, not a guest to
be politely and carefully considered, but one of themselves.
She, Felicity, had remained the guest she flushed as she
thought how Winifred had often sought to propitiate bel-
aud how she had indifferently brushed aside the gentle
approach.
“I should be out there, now, helping the others,” she
said, and flung the net over the head of the bed. But as
she felt under the table for her slippers, the door opened
and Fran entered, her arms wide-stretched to hold a large
black japanned tray, on which reposed an enamel teapot,
an enormous pile of hot, buttered toast, and some hard-
boiled eggs rolling precariously.
Marion followed with a bowl of sliced pineapple, Fay
bringing up the rear with the milk and sugar.
Fran placed the tray on the shoe box.
“Everyone help themselves, and hop into the toast while
it is hot,” Fran announced.
“Fran, you are a dear,” Felicity said, shyly. “I should
have been helping with this. My turn next Sunday.”
“Good-o,” replied Fran, easily, “although I don”t mind
these sort of jobs. I’ll tell you what, Felicity. Suppose
you sort of tidy up my end of the sleep-out; not every
day, of course, but days I want to be early for school.
Mummy says she hasn’t had to supervise the sweeping and
dusting out here since you came. I’ll get the Sunday break-
fast always.”
Felicity poured herself some tea.
“It’s a bargain. I rather like tidying up, and I am
getting to love this airy sort of sleeping place, although I
don’t mind admitting,” she added, with a laugh, “I thought
it the oddest arrangement when I came here.”
Marion was instantly intrigued.
“Did you really, Felicity?” she asked. “It was awfully
polite of you not to say so.”
Felicity coloured and laughed. She was thinking of the
several times she had not been so polite.
“Well, I love tea in bed, so I will be responsible for the


sleep-out all the week. You need only make your bed, and
on Sunday I shall luxuriate in bed.”
When the last crumb had vanished, and Marion and
Fay had collected the plates and were rinsing them in the
kitchen, Fran sat cross-legged on the window seat as she
mended the straps of her swim-suit.
“What about coming down for a swim?” she said,
suddenly looking up. “You haven’t been in since you
arrived.”
Felicity smoothed the quilt over the head of her bed.
“Well, Fd like to, but I can’t swim. I haven’t been into
the sea since I was so high, and I’ll have to buy a bathing
costume. I can get one in the township next week, I
suppose.
Fran jumped up and surveyed her handiwork doubtfully.
“Here, be an angel, and put an extra stitch in that, will
you?” she asked. “I hate sewing, especially mending.
Mummy has a spare costume, I’ll ask her to lend it to us
while you do that.”
“Do you think she would mind?” said Felicity, hesi-
tantly, taking the cobbled shoulder strap in her hand and
firmly unpicking all that Fran had done.
“Heavens, no!” exclaimed Fran. “She’ll be thrilled to
see you going down with us. It will make things seem sort
of friendly, not,” she added hastily, “that you haven’t been
friendly without going down, I don’t mean that.”
Felicity laughed a little shortly.
“You wouldn’t be very far wrong if you did mean it,”
she replied, “but I would like to go down, if your mother
would lend me a costume.”
But Fran, with a genius for avoiding embarrassing con-
versations, had gone, to return in a few minutes with an
incredibly brief black affair, which Felicity took to her room
to change into.
This retiring to the bedroom and dressing and undress-
ing at some length behind closed doors, was the cause of
much secret mirth between Fran and Marion. From their
earliest days they had been so accustomed to slipping out
of their few clothes and into their swim suits with a mini-
mum of fuss and a maximum of speed behind such scanty
shelter as the beach afforded, that Felicity’s elaborate
privacy and lengthy toilet never ceased to amuse them.
If she were a little longer than usual this day, it was
because she found the almost dazzling whiteness of her arms


and legs against the snugly fitting black costume a little
frightening, and there seemed to be such an embarrassing
lot of her showing. But Fran was hammering at the door,
and she called as casually as possible:
“Come in,” as she tied a red scarf round her fair hair,
hoping her frowning concentration hid her nervousness.
Fran, however, as at home in a swim-suit as in a school
uniform, failed to imagine Felicity’s qualms, and flopping
onto the end of the bed, exclaimed admiringly:
“What a marvellous skin you have. All over you, too.
You want to be careful not to burn too quickly.”
Her companion laughed, somewhat relieved by the frank
appraisal.
“I wish to heaven I could. I feel like a plucked fowl.
How did you get your sun-tan?”
“Me?” asked Fran, in surprise. “Well, I suppose I’ve
been getting it steadily since I was born. But you’ll have to
be careful how you tan. I’ll get some lotion from Mummy,
before we go, to rub on you.”
It was a lovely day for the beach, deep blue sea before
them, warm dry sand giving squeakily beneath their feet,
and falling between their toes as they pushed their wav,
towels swinging, over the sparse patches of coarse prickly
grass through the gap, and onto the beach.
At the gap, Felicity stopped.
“Oh, how perfectly lovely,” she cried, breathlessly, “If
John could only see this. It has all the colour in the
world.”
“Yes, it’s rather nice, isn’t it?” Fran said, in a pleased
voice.
“We’ll have to go in the Boot, to-day. Daddy couldn’t
come down, and he never lets us surf without him. See
over there, that’s the Devil’s Cage. We will go there for a
picnic one day when Phil comes home. If you fell in there
you would be sucked under before anyone could get to
you.”
“Yes,” broke in Marion, with morbid enjoyment, “and
you’d be dashed to little pieces before people’s eyes.”
Felicity laughed.
“How inviting! Let’s go some day when the world
isn’t so attractive,” she said.
Fran led the way towards the Boot.
“Won’t your father even let you surf when the life-


savers are on patrol?" asked Felicity, curiously, looking at
some half-dozen young Hercules having a tug-of-war on
the sand near their reel.
“No, he says if we are to be rescued he wants to attend
to it personally," giggled Marion.
“Not that he doesn’t think the boys are capable,” said
Fran, quickly. “They’re wonderful, and as fit as they can
be. Phil is in the patrol when he is at home. Daddy says
that in most cases being swept out is pure carelessness, and
we have no right to expect these boys to risk their lives
because we won’t remember what we are told. Look at
those two girls now," she said, excitedly, “they’ll be for
it if they are not careful."
They stopped to watch, and Marion, always solicitous
for others, bit her fingers in apprehension as the Beach
Inspector’s whistle shrilled out. He beckoned them to
come out, but at that moment the undertow caught them
and they were swept together towards the rocks. One girl
managed to pull herself up on a ledge and managed to cling
there; but her companion, caught in the current, was
carried several yards beyond, well out of her depth, but not
especially dangerous-looking to the casual observer.
Marion began to cry.
“Oh, she will be drowned. Fran, do you think she can
swim?"
“Hush, Marion," said Fran, tensely. “I expect she can,
for a while, anyway. Look, there’s the belt-man going
out now!”
“But surely if she can swim she’ll swim in that few
yards," said Felicity, incredulously watching Marion’s
anguish and Fran’s set face.
“Oh, no she can’t," whispered Fran, clenching her fists
to her mouth as the girl s dark head bobbed further and
further out to sea.
The beach inspector never for one second underestimated
the treachery of that corner of the beach, and the patrol
was already in action. A crowd gathered round the reel as
the team methodically, rhythmically played out the rope to
the belted swimmer as he dived beneath incoming rollers
and came up like a cork well beyond them.
The girl was not even a fair swimmer, but she knew
the rudiments for keeping afloat and fortunately kept her
head. Nevertheless, a quick-drawn gasp rose from the
watchers on the beach as her head seemed to sink lower and


almost slip out of his grasp, as her rescuer came abreast
and put out an arm to her. A gull wheeled and screamed.
The crowd shuddered.
“He’s got her!” shouted a youngster from the vantage
point of the rocks, and the tension on the beach slackened
as scraps of conversation began again. A second lifesaver
had gone out to help bring in the half-conscious girl.
The girls waited to see her lifted from the water by willing
hands, then they turned and went on in silence.
It is a thought-provoking experience when you are young
and feeling strong enough to move mountains, to see some-
one just as pulsating with life, reduced to shaking, nerveless
prostration by a few yards of benign-looking ocean fringe.
But now the crowd were in the water again, the patrol
were disporting themselves as before, and in a few minutes
the thought of death swooping just too late, was forgotten
as the day before.
It was low tide, and the water in the Boot was only a
couple of feet deep, and as warm as a baby’s bath. Fran
and Marion jumped in and wallowed. Fay, cautiously
entering at the sandy end, looked patronisingly at her sister
standing on the rock edge.
“Come in, Felix!” she cried. “It’s lovely and warm.”
Felicity dropped her towel and got down crabwise. She
braced herself for the chill which never materialised.
“Isn’t it warm?” she said, unbelievingly, sitting down
and letting her legs float out before her as the others were
doing.
The water was clear as glass, the sandy bottom only
faintly stirred by the human invasion. And so alternately
they lolled in the water and dried off on the warm rocks.
Marion and Fay energetically rubbed every visible square
inch of Felicity, while Fran turned her expertly to ensure
an even tan.
At last, driven home by hunger they found Winifred in
the kitchen slicing tomatoes and cucumber for the salad.
“Thank you for lending me the costume,” Felicity said.
“It was grand down there.”
Winifred looked up, trying not to appear to notice the
different tone in the girl’s voice.
“Why, Felicity,” she said, “I wish you would keep it.
No, I meant it. The blue one suits my matronly charms, and
that black affair is far too skimpy, anyway.”


Determined to keep this informal atmosphere as long as
possible, she laughingly cut short Felicity’s thanks by hand-
ing her a clean towel.
“Fran, get the lettuce out of the refrigerator, and give it
to Felicity to dry, will you?” she said, hastily.
As lunch proceeded cheerfully to the fruit stage, the
telephone rang. Fran slipped out to answer it.
“Sydney calling Mrs, Grant,” she announced, excitedly.
“Quick, Mummy.”
“Oh, Alan, it must be Phillip!” exclaimed Winifred,
pushing back her chair and hurrying from the room.
After an interminable time for a long-distance call she
was back, her eyes shining.
“It was him,” she said, with a cheerful disregard of
good English. “His finals are finished, and he is coming
home for a fortnight on Friday, Alan. The afternoon
train-”
“Good,” replied her husband, just as elated as she was,
but determined to keep it well under control. “See that I
don’t make any arrangements for Friday afternoon short of
acts of God.”
“Is he going into the army?” asked Felicity, interestedly.
“Yes, the artillery,” replied the doctor, briefly.
“It seems his five years in the school cadets is going to
make a difference,” said Winifred, in what she imagined to
be a detached tone. “He was an N.C.O. in his corps for
three years, and now, he will have to do a six weeks’ course
in an officers’ school in the city and then will get his
commission.”
“Six weeks?” The doctor raised his eyebrows. “Isn’t
that rushing things a bit.”
“It sounds rather rapid,” sighed Winifred, “but remem-
ber all the exams, he had to pass at school and the weeks
he spent in cadet camps. Will you ever forget how filthy
he used to be when he came home after crawling for six
days through the scrub?”
“No,” returned his father, dryly, “and I will never forget
when he brought a rifle home for the first time and winged
old Topping’s Berkshire. I should remember. It cost me
enough.”
There was a general laugh as he rose from the table, and
Winifred began formulating hurried plans for an entire
spring cleaning, with special emphasis on the pantry; why,


no one knew, as the son and heir was so plied with food on
his holidays that he had no occasion to raid the food
containers.
“I must get the early bus to-morrow,” said Fran, rapidly
piling plates through the hatch.
“I must say I don’t see the connection,” responded her
mother. “Can you tell me why the slightest untoward move
in this house necessitates your arriving at school at some
unearthly hour?”
“To catch Brenda as soon as she comes and tell her
Phillip is coming in the holidays. I suppose that’s all right,
isn’t it?”
“I don’t know whether it is or not,” Winifred replied,
dryly. “But remember, you are not to make any plans for
Phillip until he comes. With Brenda or anyone else ”
“But, Mummy, he is sure to want some tennis, and
Brenda was his partner all last holidays,” protested Fran.
“You must remember that.”
“I most certainly do,” was the feeling reply, as her
mother wondered whether she would ever forget the last
summer when the beauteous Brenda, prevented by the war
from accompanying her parents overseas, had appropriated
the attentions of Phillip, the most presentable youth in the
township, and to such purpose that his family saw practic-
ally nothing of him. So she added firmly:
“I mean what I say, Fran. Those two weeks are to be
kept absolutely for Phillip to do as he likes in. For all we
know, he may not be keen on tennis this year.”
“Oh, Mummy, he is not likely to change his likes and
dislikes so soon.”
“I wouldn’t bank on it, my dear,” her mother said,
calmly.
As Felicity listened to this exchange she thought of
Brenda and her tall, imperious beauty, not unlike that of
Primrose Hall’s, but lacking the latter’s gentle charm. She
knew that John was in love with Prim, and Phillip was most
likely very keen about Brenda.
“What a pity,” she thought swiftly. She had been
looking forward to the school holidays, not only because
of her awakening joy in the beauty of the beach and bush-
land, but because for the first meeting when Brenda’s dark
languid eyes had swept over her in insolent appraisal the
older girl had treated her with a marked indifference that


left no doubt in the minds of her satellites that Felicity was
to be kept strictly in her place.
Now it looked as though, far from the holidays being a
welcome respite from Brenda, she was going to be very
much in evidence at Cottontrees.
Felicity would have been very surprised to know that
the other girl’s attitude was not as it seemed born of a
personal dislike, but simply because for the first time in her
life Brenda recognised a possible rival.
The only child of a wealthy grazier, whose property lay
on the tableland 100 miles west of Moonaburra, her parents
had chosen to send her to “Beechwood” as a boarder
rather than to a city school, in order that she might come
home some week-ends. They had planned to take her to
Europe to a finishing school and this she had kept well in
the minds of her companions, accepting their slightly envious
admiration as only part of her due.
The war had changed all those plans and she had stayed
on in the finishing class with the general demeanour of a
dethroned princess. With her excellent sports record she
was naturally captain of the school, and her flair for leader-
ship resulted in her becoming unofficial arbitrator in matters
outside school routine.
Miss Ogvilie believed in letting the girls run themselves
as a community, outside school hours, and though she some-
what deplored the influence Brenda exerted at “Beechwood,”
she could find nothing really to cavil at. The girl had
undoubted powers of organisation. Anything that required
pulling together could safely be left in her capable hands. If
she had been content to allow her popularity to rest a little,
Miss Ogvilie would have been well satisfied, but the fact
that Brenda threw into the scale all her family background
and material assets outraged the Scotswoman’s sense of the
fitness of things, but remained, nevertheless, too nebulous
to be dealt with directly.
On Friday afternoon the McLeod car would arrive to
whisk Brenda away for the week-end, frequently accom-
panied by classmates, whose parents had been only too
willing for them to accept an invitation to the luxury
station homestead. Brenda’s horse, her car, the electrically-
lit swimming pool, and above all, Brenda’s dinner frocks
and heavenly personal belongings, were discussed and en-
larged upon for the benefit of those less fortunate, who
only lived in the hope of being asked at a future date.


Her departure for England would have been a fitting
climax, she felt, to a gracious meteoric period at the school,
and her return to “Beechwood” was something of an anti-
climax; but Brenda had made the most of its possibilities,
taking full advantage of the dress privileges accorded to
the finishing class, and wearing her gleaming plaits in a
coronet round her head to offset her very simple, very
expensive sports clothes.
When Felicity arrived, much heralded by Fran, the
whole school knew she had been a pupil at an exclusive
English school, that her father was a famous surgeon, and
that she could reasonably be expected to find life very dull
in the small coastal township of Moonaburra. A good deal
of glamour attended the girls’ idea of what she would be
like.
The fact that Dr. Harvey’s fame was clinical, not social,
and that the narrow and rather secluded life his daughter
had led under the chaperonage of Mrs. McAlpine had left
her much less sophisticated than a lot of girls of her age,
were shades of thought unknown to schoolgirls.
Brenda was prepared in advance for the English girl to
be somewhat of a distraction from her own popularity, but
when she saw Felicity’s slender prettiness, her well-cut
clothes and carefully groomed appearance, as distinctive in
its way as Brenda’s own, she realised that only an uncom-
prising attitude at all times could prevent this girl from
winning the allegiance of quite a few of her followers.
From the first day Felicity had been at school, the main
topic of conversation had been the tennis tournament.
One player had been tried out against another, partner-
ships arranged, and re-arranged. Felicity had remained
outside all this activity, partly because Brenda had deter-
mined to ignore her until she had had time to realise her
complete unimportance, and partly because Felicity’s own
interest in the game had waned considerably since John
had joined the R.A.F.
In the old days she had strenuously striven to keep up
her play so as to be able to give him a game when he came
home. Later, there was no time for it in his short leaves,
and her interest had died for lack of healthy emulation.
On Fridays, her form was allowed free choice, and
usually took their various interests out under the tree. The
Friday before the breaking up, the group made a colourful
picture as they sewed, knitted or read, leaning against the


huge trunk, swaying on the broad, low-sweeping branches.
Brenda, who abhored handicrafts, looked disconsolately
round the group and said languidly:
“Felicity, have you been tried out for the tournament?”
Felicity, stretched out full length on the grass lost in the
enchantment of her first reading of “The Man from Snowy
River” didn’t hear the question, and Brenda repeated it
sharply.
Felicity looked up.
“The tournament? No; anyway, I haven’t played for
ages. I’m quite out of practice.”
“Are you any good when you are in practice?” queried
the captain, with a slight curl of the lip.
“Passable, I suppose,” Felicity returned coolly, returning
to her book.
Brenda, stung by the other’s quite unaffected indiffer-
ence, and catching a silent exchange of amused looks among
the other girls, went on suavely;
“As it is in aid of the Red Cross, you will want to
play, won’t you?”
Felicity raised her head again.
“Of course, I’ll play if you want me to,” she said.
Brenda smiled. “Then you had better brush up a bit.
Apart from the tournament I hear that Phillip is coming
home next week. He won’t find you very entertaining if
you are out of practice.”
Felicity returned the cool stare and said casually:
“It will not be part of my holiday task to amuse Phillip.”
The slight emphasis caused a scarcely suppressed titter
among the girls, who had been amused and exasperated at
Brenda’s tactics last summer to secure for herself the only
really good player and escort in the hometown.
Brenda flushed angrily.
“Then if it’s not too much effort, suppose you and
Marrianne have—some practice.”
“I, oh, Brenda, I can’t now, really. My pattern is in
twelve rows, and if I put it down I’ll never be able to pick
It up again,” wailed Marrianne, holding up three fingers
as she spoke to denote the number of accomplished rows.
Felicity got up and brushed the grass from her skirt.
“Don’t leave it, Marrianne, I’ll play Brenda herself, and


then she will be better able to judge. My sandshoes are in
the cloakroom. I’ll bring yours down, Brenda.”
She was gone, walking lightly over the lawn towards
the school-house. The others stared after her speechlessly.
“Well, of all the nerve,” burst out Pauline. “What does
she think she is? A Davis Cup player?”
“Are you really going to play her, Brenda?” asked
Robin, her eyes twinkling in anticipation of some fun.
But Brenda had recovered her poise.
“Why not? She asked for it.”
“Go easy, Brenda. Remember, the quality of mercy is
not strained,” laughed Marrianne.
In a few minutes Felicity returned, and swinging her
racquet, waited for the captain to put on her shoes. They
walked down the path to the court without speaking.
The game began and Brenda’s score mounted as
Felicity’s lack of practice handicapped her, but the on-
lookers saw that she was no beginner, and as the play con-
tinued her service became faster and her footwork surer.
“She’s good,” breathed Marrianne, as she dropped her
knitting to follow the play.
“Too good for Brenda’s liking, I’ll bet,” laughed Robin,
an independent lass, who had often fretted under Brenda’s
patronage.
“No, I don’t think so,” put in Ann, “though she would
be with practice.”
As the game continued, first to one girl’s advantage then
to the other’s, the spectators laid mild wagers on the out-
come, and during the last game the tenseness would have
flattered a test match.
Suddenly Brenda called
“Game and Set,” as by the narrowest margin she de
feated her opponent.
The watching class clapped vigorously. Felicity laughed,
but Brenda’s smile was set and a little forced as the two of
them walked back to the others. She had won, but she
knew the applause was less for the victory than for Felicity,
who had provided them with the best entertainment they
had had for weeks, instead of the embarrassment they had
expected to feel at her ignominious defeat at their cham-
pion’s hands.
“You didn’t mention you played so well,” she said


coldly, as they neared the tree.
“I don’t consider that frightfully good, although it was
very warming up,” replied Felicity, with casual distance.
“You are a dark horse,” called Robin. “You have
played a good deal more than most of us.”
Felicity smiled. “Perhaps,” she said. “My brother
used to play at Wembley. I had to work hard if I wanted
a game in the holidays.”
“Well, it was a close thing,” said Brenda, with deter-
mined fairness, as she fanned herself with a glare shade.
“It certainly was,” agreed Robin, with a great want of
tact. “You will have to be on your toes when she really
gets going, won’t you?”
Brenda affected not to hear this, but the thrust was not
lost on her, as she raged inwardly, and planned to include
Robin in the visitation of punishment originally meant only
for Felicity.
Felicity, pleased with her little triumph, and responding
to the newly-roused interest she felt for the first time among
her class companions, began to feel rather sorry that the
holidays were almost upon them, and to wish she had been
a little less aloof earlier in the year.
CHAPTER VIII.
The following week was one of ceaseless activity.
Fran’s urgent entreaties to be allowed to catch the early bus
were heartlessly ignored, as her mother set her to washing
up and chores, which she usually managed to evade.
Felicity made beds and dusted while Winifred, with
Fay’s help, sliced pears for pear ginger for Phillip, or
searched the high pantry shelves and brought to light, also
for Phillip, an odd dozen pots of grapefruit marmalade,
long after the last of this special delicacy had officially dis-
appeared. Felicity, coming in one afternoon, found the
kitchen warm and fragrant, six large round fruit cakes
whose brown knobbly tops gave evidence of a return to
pre-war opulence in fruit and nuts —for Phillip, Fay told
her, as she dislodged a hot raisin from the side of one and
popped it in her mouth.
Felicity looked at the groaning pantry shelves, the
tomato chutney cooling beneath the snowy tea-cloth, the


gargantuan cakes, and began to form a picture of the
absent-youth as the fat boy in the “Schoolboy’s Own” who
is always receiving hampers and having midnight feasts.
The school holidays began on the Thursday, and Fran
and Felicity had planned a day of swimming and sun-
baking with a cut lunch on the beach for Friday.
Felicity, her fair skin already a pale biscuit colour, was
now yearning for the honey tones beloved of all blonde sun-
worshippers, and could hardly wait to get on with her
tanning course. But Winifred had other plans.
“Fran, you catch the bus and call for the mail, and
while you are there, ask Mr. Pettit to pack these things in
a box and put them in the bus for you. It will save him
a delivery and I’ll have the things sooner,” she ordered,
briskly.
Fran opened her mouth to put forward her and Felicity’s
plan, but her mother waved her airily aside.
“Don’t be silly, my dear. You know Phillip is coming
this afternoon and there is so much to be done. Peter, you
and Garry run down and tell Bill I want the fowls ready
by three at the latest.”
Peter hurried to obey, silently gesticulating to Garry to
bring the fishing lines without drawing attention to them.
Together they slipped away before Winifred could follow
them up with orders that would waste the best part of the
first day of the holidays.
“Marion, I want you and Fay to pick the peas,” went
on Winifred, handing each small hepler a large enamel
basin. “Now mind, only big full pods,” she admonished,
as they withdrew full of importance.
Felicity found herself pressed into service in a dozen
ways that showed Mrs. Grant’s appreciation of her thor-
oughness and care.
Phillip was not due until late in the afternoon, but by
eleven o’clock the house was in a beautiful state of cool
polished surfaces, reflecting everywhere the massed yellow
of Golden Gleams and misted blue of the huge hydrangeas.
A clean, penetrating fragrance began drifting from the
kitchen where the two little girls were shelling the peas and
throwing in generous sprigs of dark green mint.
While Felicity began surreptitiously watching for Fran’s
return, seeing no good reason why they should not have a
quick swim before lunch, Winifred’s face appeared at the
hatch.


“Oh, Felicity, there you are,” she cried, pushing through
a flat shopping basket. “Be a dear and pick me a few
lemons off the tree near the gate. Get them as yellow as
you can, won’t you?”
Felicity swung the basket negligently as she walked
slowly down the drive to where the much prized Lisbon
lemon flourished amazingly between an oleander bush and
a giant jacaranda.
The day was growing hotter and the insects shrilled
piercingly as she threw herself down on the grass beneath
the tree and lazily enjoyed the scents that seemed drawn
from everything by the heat.
She had taken to going lightly clad and stockingless,
and was beginning to love the northern summer, although
she complained to the doctor that it made her very drowsy
and that twice she had fallen asleep while sun-baking. The
doctor had laughed and told her to fall asleep whenever she
felt like it.
“It will make you more tolerant of our leisurely ways,”
he said, and Felicity had laughed and flushed, thinking how
scornful she had been of the afternoon siesta Winifred
took as a matter of course.
She lay back and shut her eyes, letting the sounds and
scents drift over her. Suddenly the gate clicked, and she
sat up quickly, thinking it was Fran returning from her mar-
keting. But it was not Fran who walked over and looked
down at her, but a youthful replica of the doctor, tall,
broad-shouldered, with sternly disciplined dark hair and
blue eyes set in a brown, humorous face. He unended his
suit-case and sat on it, regarding her approvingly.
“You’re Felicity,” he said, in a matter-of-fact tone,
taking out his handkerchief and mopping his brow ener-
getically.
Felicity sat up and reached quickly for her basket.
“Heavens, you can’t be Phillip,” she said, aghast at the
upsetting of Winifred’s timing. “You are not supposed to
be here until four o’clock.”
Fie nodded.
“Didn’t wait for the train. Got a lift from Brisbane
with a fellow.”
Felicity jumped up.
“I should have had these lemons upstairs long ago.
Your mother will be waiting for them.”


He strolled over to the tree and with ostentatious ease,
the girl thought, removed the largest yellow ones, which
owed their size and colour to their hitherto unreachable
position on the top of the middle branch.
He dropped them into her basket, and asked seriously:
“Has the house been cleaned from top to bottom, pantry
inclusive?”
Felicity showed her surprise.
“Why, yes.”
“Is everyone in the house toiling like an ant-bed, and
snatching a hurried lunch from the refrigerator?”
She looked at him for a moment or two and then
laughed.
“H ; ow did you guess?”
“I’ve been through it,” he said, with a grin. “Winifred
always does it. The only difference is that this time I am
the wanderer returning instead of the cobweb sweeper.”
“Oh,” said the girl, “I suppose I am the lemon picker this
time. When I think how poor Fran must have worked
before we arrived.”
“Yes, I saw how you were toiling when I arrived,”
he said.
Felicity laughed.
“Well, I saw Peter and Garry sneaking their fishing
lines out of the house this morning. I didn’t see why I
shouldn’t relax after the polishing up I did for your
benefit.”
Phillip looked positively delighted.
“Did they?” he asked. “I used to do the same thing.
Had to, in self-defence. When it is a question of anyone
coming home, Winifred ceases to be human and becomes
fanatical.”
He picked up his suit-case.
“Well, here’s hoping there’s enough lunch for me.”
Felicity smiled as she thought of the feverish prepara-
tion of the past week.
“There’s enough to withstand a Siege,” she replied.
“I believe you,” he answered, as they went up the drive
together.
Accustomed to the sophisticated charm of the Sydney
girls, and perfectly at home amidst groups of pretty under-


graduates with whom he had been fraternising during the
past few years, Phillip did not consider himself easily
bowled over by feminine charm, but his casual eye took in
the details of his companion’s dainty fairness as she walked
with an unconscious little aloofness beside him.
He thought of the delightful picture she made when he
surprised her at the gate, her eyes shut, the dappled light
and shade falling on her bright hair and upturned face, her
arms, faintly tanned beneath the brief blue sleeves, raised
above her head.
At the sound of footsteps Winifred came out on the
verandah.
“Fran, is that you? It’s about time ” ceasing to be
brisk and giving a swooning cry. “Oh, Phil, you’re early,
my dear. Why didn’t you ring up your father from the
station ?”
Her son hugged her and grimaced.
“He’d have been thrilled if he had been in the theatre,
wouldn’t he?” he asked, “The bus was there and I just
hopped on. Charlie Armstrong gave me a lift from Bris-
bane. I just happened to see him at the south side. Any
lunch?”
“Phil, there’s not a thing prepared,” she cried, tragically.
“We were just going to make ourselves some sandwiches.”
He looked at Felicity and grinned.
“Well, I could do with a few good thick ones right
now,” he said. “And enormous quantities of tea, very hot,
on the verandah.”
Fran arrived before the tea was made and as they sat
down, in came the boys, excited and unrepentant about
their mis-spent morning.
“Hullo, Phil. You haven’t seen Garry yet. This is
him,” said Peter, briefly introducing and exhibiting his
friend, as they solemnly knelt down to spread out their
morning’s catch.
“Four tiddlers and ” Pie fished round and brought
out the piece de resistance with a flourish, “an octopus.”
Felicity jumped up hastily and Fran gave a little scream.
“Peter, what a revolting creature!” exclaimed his
mother. “Whatever did you bring it home for?”
“We’re having it for a pet,” explained Garry.
Not in this house, you’re not,” Winifred said quickly.


“We have plenty of room in the hut,” returned Peter,
loftily. “In a kerosene tin. We’re going to take it down
to the beach and get it full of sea water after lunch.”
“It won’t live long like that,” advised Phillip. “Take it
down and mess around with it in the Boot and then let
it go.”
“Like fun,” his brother said, scornfully. “We know
what to feed him on. He won’t die.”
Fran laughed unkindly.
“He will if he’s anything like all the other things you’ve
had,” she said. “Phil, those two have run through one
’possum, one goanna, a magpie and two tortoises in about
two months.”
“Oh, have we, smartie?” retorted her brother. “As a
matter of fact,” he added, with elaborate precision, “we
know exactly where the ’possum got to, but we don’t want
him back because he was an old one and we couldn’t train
him, anyway.”
Marion giggled.
“I think he was training you. Garry had scratches all
over his arms, and you had a septic lip where he bit you.”
“Yes,” added Fran. “And what about the magpie? It
was a baby one.”
Peter faced her with terrific dignity.
“I should think the less said about that the better, as
far as you are concerned,” he said, bitterly. “Your rotten
old cat ate it. We couldn’t stay at home all day looking
after it.”
He picked up the octopus and let it clamp its tentacles
round his arm in a way that made his mother shudder,
and added fiercely:
“If you want to keep that bobtail alive, you will keep it
away from the hut in future. We’re fair sick of it.”
As the boys’ outraged backs disappeared through the
door Winifred said, ruefully:
“But it’s quite true, Phil. There has been an endless
procession of creatures. They never last long enough to be
considered pets.”
“What happened to the tortoises,” asked Phillip, who
had had some trying experiences with these phlegmatic
reptiles in his day.
“They each bought one for two shillings,” said his
mother. “The things disappeared overnight, and about a


month later Garry’s turned up again. He put it in the old
parrot cage, but in the morning the door of the cage was
still shut, but there was no sign of the tortoise. So there it
is. There is still four shillings worth of reptile in these
six fair acres,”
When Phillip’s guffaws died down Winifred said:
“Your father has christened them by proxy, of course,
The Houdinis. The boys are quite sure they will turn up
again one day.”
Months afterwards Phillip looked back on that fortnight
as a traveller thinks of some enchanted island he visited a
long time ago, a carefree and beautiful thing.
Taking early morning tea with his father on the sleep-
out, talking of the overcast future, of Australia’s vulner-
ability, speculating on how the neutral nations would line
up when the showdown came foregoing his before break-
fast surf with the others that he might have the first quiet
hour with Winifred in the kitchen as she busied herself
with the breakfast.
Bright, clear mornings, when he and Bill rowed with
Pete and Garry over to Pincushion, and threw out a line,
answering the English boy’s interminable questions regard-
ing tackle and bait, demonstrating the proper throw-out for
fishing from the rocks, afternoon surfing, and lazing on the
beach with Winifred and the girls, pouring fine dry sand
into a little mound on the back of Felicity’s neck as she
lay sun-baking, damp tendrils of hair drying crisply in the
heat.
And Felicity Winifred, stretched out beside her on
the sand, a sun-hat over her face, watched through the lacy
brim the faint smile on the girl’s face as the sand tickled
her neck, and thought how attractive that face was becoming
these last few weeks. Winifred had never admitted even
to herself how the girl’s first tight-lipped detachment had
dismayed her. Far too modest to imagine her own tact
and personality responsible for the change, she thankfully
accepted it as a natural result of youth and lovely sur-
roundings.
Phillip always brought his surf-ski down and the work-
manship that had gone into the making of that slender craft
intrigued Felicity scarcely less than the artistry with which
its owner rode it triumphantly to the shore.
She looked at the strong, lithe figure, balanced like


some winged god in bronze on the incoming wave, skimming
the crest and seeming to outstrip the foamy flood as it
swept up the beach, springing lightly ashore as the ski
beached and left high and dry by the swirling surf.
What a picture, if only John were here to see it! It
was the sort of thing she knew he wanted to paint, strong
youth with a vibrant background of vigorous colour.
At the thought of John, her pleasure in the day faded a
little, and she lay with closed eyes going over the short leave
they spent together before she and the children sailed.
“Dear John, so dependable, so unselfish, giving all his
little time to his sister, a very disgruntled sister,” she
thought, ashamedly. She frowned and shook her head
quickly at the picture and thought instead of the un-
expected thrill and fulfilment he had found in flying.
looking miles out to sea over the everlasting shining
blue sea before her, it was hard to imagine him flying above
dark clouds, or sweeping low over grey, unfriendly seas,
relentlessly scanning them for signs of those long sinister
shapes, lurking death-laden round the island he and his
comrades had dedicated themselves to protect.
Winifred and Fran had strolled over to the Boot to
applaud Fay’s noisy dog-paddle and Phillip, upending his
surf-ski to drain, flung himself on the sand beside Felicity.
“Why so thoughtful?” he asked, as she stared with a
sad little frown out to sea.
“I was just thinking of my brother,” she said, “and of
how different the water looks round England. You know
he is in the coastal command.”
He nodded.
“Yes, Deborah wrote us about him. Those chaps are
doing a great job.” His usually casual voice warmed with
tribute. “That must be something that gets you, safeguard-
ing the very shores of one’s country. Knowing that if they
meet any size enemy force they haven’t a chance ” He
stopped suddenly, “Oh, I say. What a fool thing to
say. You must be always trying to forget that and I drag
it up like that.”
Filled with horrified disgust at his thoughtlessness, he
sat up and threw a handful of sand at the sea, knowing
there was no sincere withdrawal he could make.
Felicity raised herself and dusted the dry sand from
her legs.


“It’s all right,” she said, steadily. “I know what’s likely
to happen, and I am prepared for it in a way.” She stopped
and the boy stared at the water, so as not to see the effort
she was making to appear calm.
“I’m only thankful he’s not in a fighter,” she went on
presently. “He says he is as safe as houses in a Suther-
land, but that’s only to make me happier about it —leaving
England, you know.”
Phillip picked up some shells and began pelting idly at
some frantically gobbling gulls.
“Then you didn’t want to come out here?” he asked.
She looked at him in frank amazement.
“Of course not!” she exclaimed. “All the girls I knew
were preparing to go into the A.T.S. or were already in it.
Eots of them were filling in time helping in convalescent
homes or taking courses for something for later on. How
would you have felt if you had been in my place?”
He grinned.
“Pretty lousy about leaving all the fun, I suppose,”
he said.
“And it seems much worse being so far away when any
time bad news may come of John,” she added.
“Well, he’s doing a man’s job,” Phillip answered. “And
if a flier is unlucky it is a man’s end. At least, he*s
armed and has a fighting chance. I think you did a pretty
good job yourself, bringing two kids away from the danger
of bombs.”
He sat upright, his young face hard.
“There’s nothing glorious about kids being blown to
bits, and women smashed up. By jove! when you think of
it happening night after night, and parents having to carry
on with their own particular job and try to forget that
their kids may be lying under several hundred tons of
bricks, well, you ‘dips your lid.’ ”
“Father says they are wonderful. He is living in the
hospital now. They can hardly cope with the work unless
they do, but he says it keeps his mind off things and
missing us. You don’t know how good it has been to
write and be able to tell him how well and happy the
children are.”
“In that case, I don’t think you could regret coming
with them,” he said, with conviction. “I imagine a good


surgeon, able to work with a free mind, is worth more to
England than a dozen A.T.S.’s rookies.”
Felicity smiled in spite of herself.
“Yes, I suppose so. I know I’m very lucky to have
such a glorious place to be in until I go back.”
Phillip raised his eyebrows.
“You are not thinking of going back before the war is
over, are you?”
“Why, of course, I’m going home just as soon as I am
eighteen,” Felicity replied. “I couldn’t stay here having a
good time when 1 might be of some use there. Garry and
Fay have never been so well and happy before. They don’t
need me now.”
Her companion was silent for some minutes.
“No, I don’t suppose they actually need youi every
minute of the day,” he said at length, “though they would
feel a bit stranded if you weren’t here. I can understand
how you feel. But I hope you will change your mind.
Winifred would miss you if you went.”
“Your mother?” exclaimed Felicity, incredulously.
“Why, she has everything! I mean,” she explained, hur-
riedly, “there’s your father, and Fran and the children.
She is always busy, and in the thick of everything. The
whole place revolves round her.”
Phillip nodded.
“Yes, she is kept going. I suppose no one with as much
to occupy her time is ever thought to be lonely. It’s rather
like this. She has entered very little into the social life of
the township, because she has never known whether the
Dad would have a few free hours in the day, and she
didn’t want to be out if he came home. Now that he has
practically no free time, and she has no help in the house,
she can’t get out much, apart from the fact that someone
must always be in for the ’phone. Fran is as much com-
pany for a mature mind as a grasshopper.”
Felicity giggled.
“You see,” he went on, “I had the greatest hopes of
you. You are her sort of person.”
“I wish I thought so,” replied Felicity. “There’s no one
I would rather be like. In fact, I would be far happier
staying at home and helping in the house than going to
school.” He felt the resentment in her voice. “The school
I was at in England closed down when the war started, and


father was not going to send me anywhere else. I got
rather used to not being a schoolgirl.”
“Quite a comedown, going back to school, eh?” he
teased. “Anyway, the finishing class the Ogre has started
seems to be much the same sort of thing you would be
doing in England now, while you were waiting to reach the
mature age of eighteen. Brenda McLeod wrote me a long
screed about the new scheme.”
“So he writes to Brenda.” Felicity remembered Wini-
fred’s wistful admission that her son was the world’s worst
letter writer and never wrote a line he did not have to
write. “It’s nothing to do with me,” she thought, fiercely,
“I don’t care who he writes to.”
The sun was sinking, and the warmth seemed to have
deserted the beach. She jumped up, and pulled off her
bathing cap.
“Look, the others are going,” she said, shaking out her
hair. “We’ll have to hurry to catch them.”
“Coming up the mountain banana picking to-morrow,
Phil?” asked Peter, lying full length on the floor before
the radio and obligingly turning down the advertisement
parts between the acts of his favourite serial.
“That depends on when you are going,” his brother
answered lazily from the cane lounge from which he was
watching through half-closed eyes the play of light on the
two heads, one dark, one fair, as his mother and Felicity
bent absorbed over a knitting book.
Peter sat up.
“We’re going to-morrow afternoon,” he said, eagerly.
“Bill’s been up the mountain all the week with the Scott’s.
They’re sliding them down on Saturday, and we are going
to camp up there overnight. Bill’s bringing two horses.
He could get one for you if you like.”
“Hooray for us!” broke in Garry, ecstatically, “We are
going to camp out and carry our blankets with us,”
“Go on, Phil, what about it?” pleaded Peter,
“Not on your life. I’ll have enough of the glorious dis-
comforts of camp life and early rising when I am in the
Army,” returned his brother. “If the girls like, we might
rustle up a couple of nags and ride up to the clearing and
boil the billy. How about it, Felix?”


“I’d love it,” she answered quickly. “But I can’t ride,
at least,” she added, laughing ruefully; “I used to be an
expert on the donkeys at the seaside when I was young,
but I’ve never ridden a horse.”
“If you can sit a rocking horse you’ll be able to manage
the lady-like old mounts I will arrange for,” he replied. “It
will be good practice for you. Anyway, it’s rather a climb
and only a single track most of the way, so the pace will
be a walk up and a slide down. Are you on?”
She looked doubtfully at him, never sure how many of
his flippancies to take seriously.
“All right, if you think I can.”
“Sure thing. I’ll go over early and secure the Arab
steeds.”
“I’m just wondering whether I should ride Pannican
up that steep hill,” said Fran, thoughtfully.
“Why not?” asked her brother.
“Oh, he is getting old, and it’s a terrible climb.”
“Do him good, the lazy old wretch,” said Phillip,
heartlessly. “Sweat some of his fat off, I should say.”
“I don’t think he is too old,” said Garry. “I have been
riding him and he seems pretty lively to me.”
“Of course, he’s lively,” said Peter. “All he does,
unless we exercise him, is eat his head off in the side
paddock. Gee, Fran, you ought to see him go with Garry
up. He simply flies along the Beach Road.”
“Anxious to get home, I daresay,” retorted his sister.
“He doesn’t particularly enjoy learners on him.”
Peter rolled on the floor convulsed.
“Oh, ho, he ought to be used to them by now. You and
Marion and all those sissy girls you used to have here for
week-ends have ridden him, or tried to. Phil, you ought
to have seen them, riding him sore and squealing him deaf.
The poor brute has never been the same since.”
Fran glared at him indignantly.
“Well, of all the cheek ” she began heatedly
Winifred thought it was time to intervene.
“Oh, Fran, have you got to bite every time the boys
throw out a line?” she said. “That will do, Peter. Fran
has been more than generous with Pannican, good little
fellow, fat as he is, and splendid to learn on. Garry is
getting on so well,”


“Oh, I say, Aunt Winifred, do you think I really am?”
asked that youth. “Do you think I would be good enough
to ride in the Moonaburra Show if I practise like any-
thing?”
“And if Pannican can stand up to it,” murmured
Phillip.
Everyone laughed.
“Come off it, Gar,” remonstrated Peter, with the air of
one unwilling to let a friend make a complete ass of him-
self. “Those kids that ride in the Show are cracker]acks.”
And Winifred said kindly:
“I wouldn’t count on that, dear. The children from the
stations come in for the ring events. They are practically
brought up in the saddle and ride like champions. They
have the best ponies for miles round,”
Garry looked rather crestfallen, and she added:
“Just set yourself to be a good horseman, and don’t
bother about exhibition riding.”
“All the same,” put in Phillip, “there’s nothing I’d
rather see than him winning an event in the Show. I tried
it many a time myself. Those kids nearly broke my heart
with their swank and their thoroughbreds. Go to it,
Garry.”
Garry brightened up visibly at the thought that Phillip,
wizard of the surf, couldn’t beat the prodigies from the
west.
“Well, anyway, you tried, and that’s something,” he
said, consolingly.
Phillip grimaced.
“That’s all I ever got out of it,” he answered. “Do you
kids want to come and throw out a line for tailer one
evening before I go?”
“Do we?” they chorused. “As soon as we get back
from the mountain, Phil. We’ll get the lines ready before
we go,” added Peter, efficiently.
“Thanks, but don’t bother. I’ll attend to the gear,”
said his brother, hurriedly. “You can look round for some
extra hooks. If you like a really good filthy job, what
about cleaning the lantern,” he finished handsomely.


CHAPTER IX.
All the next morning the boys packed their swags for
the trip up the mountain.
They were to be away one night and wanted only
what could be carried comfortably on their horses, but as
Fran confided to Felicity, with a giggle, one would think
they were collecting a trousseau.
Mrs. Grant gave them each an old grey blanket, and
canvassed the entire family for suitable contributions.
After lunch, Phillip was persuaded to go up to the hut to
view the collection and advise about the packing.
Picking his way gingerly between the heaps of uncon-
sidered trifles that lay on the floor, he sat on the bed and
surveyed the array.
“What on earth do you hope to do with that old bird-
cage?” he demanded.
“Oh, I don’t know,” replied his brother, vaguely. “It
might come in handy if we see a bird or something.”
“Rubbish,” said Phillip.
He reached over and picked out two blackened billy-
cans, inspecting them for holes.
“That one’s no good,” he said briefly. “You only want
one between you, anyway. I don’t suppose you are going
to drink more than a quart at a time, are you?”
Peter threw the discard out into the yard with a con-
temptuous clatter.
“Now, clear away all this mess, quickly, and hand me
the two blankets.”
The two youngsters, recognising authority on the
matter in hand, unconcernedly swept the litter into a corner
and produced the blankets.
Phillip folded them lengthwise.
“Look sharp,” he commanded. “Each of you get an
enamel mug, a spoon, mix tea and sugar in a tin, matches,
bread for toast, and whatever else you have.”
“Mum’s giving us some cold corned-beef, and a bundle
of frankfurts,” said Peter, promptly. “Bill said the Scott’s
have plenty of stuff.”
“Have you thought of the mosquitoes?” said Phillip.
“We’ll be having a log fire,” said Peter. “The smoke
should send them away, shouldn’t it?”


“Not the ones on the mountain-side,” replied his brother.
Put in the citronella, unless you want Garry to come home
looking like the spotted dog.”
Garry had watched the preparations with some mis-
givings.
“Is that all we take?” he asked. “What about milk?”
“Won’t keep,” replied their mentor. “You can put in a
tin of condensed, if you like, but the tea tastes better
without.”
Garry silently doubted this and hurried off to the
kitchen after Peter.
They came back with the tin of milk and a screw-top
jar of butter.
“Mum says the butter will be oil by to-morrow,” an-
nounced Peter. “But it’s better than nothing for the
toast.”
“Sissies,” was Phil’s cheerful rejoinder as he rolled
the swags and tied the ropes. “There you are, and I’ll lend
you a ground sheet. You’ll have to share it, but it gets so
nippy up there at night that you will probably be glad to
huddle up a bit.”
The boys eagerly draped their swags round themselves
and whooped joyously.
“When you get on the horses, Bill will show you how to
tie these things to the saddle,” called Phillip, as they ran
down to display themselves to the family.
Their prancing and strutting was cut short by Bill’s
whistle from the gate, where, mounted on a horse, he led
two ponies distinguished more for their ruggedness and
general versatility on the farm than for elegance or
breeding.
Fran seized Beno, who had been the guest and plaything
of the Grants for the past week while the natural guardian
had been cutting bananas, and took him down to where the
horses were waiting.
“Do you think he has grown, Bill?” she asked, putting
him on the gate and swinging him to and fro. “Isn’t he
looking marvellous?”
“Not bad,” commented his grandfather casually, trying
not to look pleased as the fat little arms reached insistently
for his trouser leg.
“How is he behaving himself?”


“Oh, beautifully,” said Fran, enthusiastically. “I
wouldn’t like to tell you what time he went to bed last
night, though. The little wretch, he wouldn’t go till I went
with him, would you?” She nuzzled Beno’s round stomach
till he shouted with laughter.
Bill frowned portentously at him, silently giving thanks
for the Grants. He was a man to whom words came with
difficulty, but the state of the orchard and kitchen garden
gave ample evidence of his gratitude, and each member of
the family had a lifelong friend in him.
“Well, so long, we’ll be seeing you,” was his laconic
farewell as, rapidly adjusting the boys' swags and springing
back in his saddle, he beckoned them to follow him down
the track.
The boys waved frantically as Fran carried Beno back
to the verandah to wave from there until the horses dis-
appeared between the trees.
“Greystones,” the Scott’s place, on the west side of the
hill, was the most prosperous dairy-farm in the district.
The boys ran it for the old man and, in addition, grew
their own bananas on the easterly slope of the hill, which
separated “Greystones” from the sea.
These were the bananas which waved their ragged green
banners as far as one could see high above the back of Dr.
Grant’s house. In fact, the couple of acres of orchard of
which he was so proud had been bought from old Mr. Scott
years ago when Winifred in the first flush of enthusiasm
as a country matron had insisted that she must have her
own fruit-trees if she was to try out the recipes showered
on her by the older women among whom she had come
to live.
The Scott boys liked bananas, because they required so
little attention and could be profitably run as a sideline by
hiring casual hands for picking. But this year labour was
hard to hire and the doctor had been glad to let Bill take
a week’s work with them. From sunrise till sunset they
had scrambled across the side of the mountain, sweating
under the tropical sun, bracing themselves against the satiny
trunks as they slashed the tough green stalks with their
sharp knives, and at the same time, supported the heavy
bunches as they were severed from the trunk.
Slowly the green mounds between the rows grew and
were laboriously carried to the clearing next the camp and
covered with a huge tarpaulin. Now they were ready for


the last stage in the hillside cutting that of getting them
down to the bottom for loading onto the big Bedford and
taken to market.
The tarpaulin had been securely pegged down all round
and the men had ridden down to “Greystones” for the first
shave and hot bath for a week. Harry, the youngest, was
to drive the truck to the foot of the hill and the oldest Mort,
with Bill and the youngsters, was to return to send the
bunches down to him.
The boys jogged happily along with Bill and Wallup at
their heels, Garry every now and then giving his swag a
fond pat. Mrs. Scott had laid out the afternoon tea in
the large kitchen that served as a living-room for her
family, and Peter and Garry wasted no time on insincere
refusals as she pressed on them an amazing assortment of
scones, cakes and pastries, as well as a liberal helping of
fruit salad and cream.
When even Peter’s appetite seemed to lag, and the men
lingered on yarning round the table and making heavy and
repeated demands on the huge enamel teapot, the boys
slipped away from the kitchen and wandered down to the
stables and over to the bails to see the afternoon milking.
Here, directing the activities of the milkers and himself
milking a favourite cow, was Bob Scott, the object of
Garry’s hero-worship and warmest gratitude since the
episode on the train, when Cross and Hibbard were dis-
comfited.
“Hullo,” he said, as they poked their heads round the
door of the shed. “Want something to do?”
“Oh, rather,” breathed Garry, hurriedly swallowing the
last of his seed-cake. “Could we milk?”
Bob stared at him.
“What!” he exclaimed, with more emotion in his voice
than he usually permitted himself. “You milk? What do
you think? This is a prize herd. You can stay and watch,
if you can keep quiet and don’t get up to any tricks. But
don’t let me see you touch them before they are out of
the bails.”
Garry subsided, much abashed, and sat down beside
Peter on a pile of corn-sacks.
“Here, I’ll tell you what you can do,” Bob said suddenly,
looking up from the frothing bucket under his hands. “Nick
over to the stables and bring a half kerosene bucket here.
There’s a pile of them near the chaff-cutter.”


Away sped the elated Garry as Peter lay back on the
corn-sacks sniffing the sweet warm smell of the cows and
listening to the soft swish of the milk in the buckets.
Suddenly the cool quiet of the dairy was shattered when
Garry, red-faced and excited, dashed in, shouting:
“Quick, there’s a snake a big one quickly!”
Handing his bucket to the milker beside him, Bob sprang
up and seizing a hoe, followed Garry at a run towards the
stable, Peter, with Bill and the men who had just saun-
tered out of the kitchen at his heels, dashed up behind the
advance guard.
At the door of the stable Garry stopped panting and
pointed to the roof, where, lying along a rafter was twelve
feet of brown reptile, its flattened head hanging slightly
over the edge, its eyes glittering unwaveringly in the
shadowy roof.
There was a moment’s complete silence, before Bob
looked steadily at the four feet six of plump earnestness
before him, then his accustomed phlegm deserted him and
he burst into a derisive shout.
“You silly little coot, that’s Ebenezer!” he cried, between
his guffaws.
Garry was rocked.
“You mean he isn’t a real one?” he stammered.
“He’s real enough,” laughed the other, good-naturedly,
“he’s a carpet snake. We keep him here to eat the rats.
Have to, because they eat the feed if we don’t keep them
down. He wouldn’t hurt you if you trod on him.”
The volume of laughter increased as the onlookers at
the door crowded in and realized what had happened.
Garry quite simply wished the stable would fall on him
and create a diversion to have made such a fool of him-
self and in front of Bob Scott.
“Well, anyway,” Peter spoke up defiantly, “he’s an
awful-looking old sinner, and anyone would think he was
dangerous if they didn’t know.” He stood in front of his
friend to hide the poor scarlet face with its tear-filled eyes.
“So they would, sonny,” said old Mr. Scott. “The boy
did quite right to yell when he saw the snake. He was
pretty quick to spot it up there, too.”
Garry breathed again, as the laughter died away.
“Wicked old devil, that reptile. I always said I wouldn’t


be surprised if he did bite someone one day,” the old man
went on.
This was an outrageous libel, as everyone present but
Garry knew; but no one contradicted the kindly old man,
whose charity included boys sometimes as well as horses
and dogs. He stumped out, followed by the others. Peter
looked at his friend with a solemn wink, and they both burst
out laughing, rolling over on the feed bags like a couple of
puppies while Ebenezer, ancient, wise, stared blandly down
from the roof.
Soon they were called, the horses mounted, and the start
made. Garry had never, in his wildest dreams, imagined
himself in such a swashbuckling attitude, on horseback
climbing a mountain so steep that you felt sure even if the
sturdy little pony went steadily on, you might at any
moment slip back over his tail.
Up and up and up.
“Look out there, you kids, duck down when you see a
branch.”
“Not getting tired, are you?”
“Rather not, sir. This is ripping.”
“Not us. It’s good-o, Bill.”
Up you go, the track becomes narrower, the branches
slapping your face smartly if your attention wanders. The
pony slips back on some loose stones and you clutch at his
mane as well as hang on grimly to the reins.
Then the first pony is no longer climbing, then the
second, and now your Arab steed seems to pull himself
together and heave himself over the edge of somewhere,
and Peter gives a shout:
“The clearing! Here we are, Gar.”
“Gee, what a bonzer camp, Bill.”
And there you are, one of a party of horsemen, dis-
mounting, unsaddling your horse and giving him a drink
and a feed in the tradition of all horsemen, before you do
anything about your own camp. At thirteen years could
anything equal this?
“Don’t we have a tent?” he asked Peter, as Bill made
the fire at the end of a fallen log and put on the billies.
“Not us!” laughed Mort, preparing to grill chops over
the open fire. “We sleep under the stars.”
“What if it rains?” queried the boy.


“Not a hope,” answered the other, confidently.
Never did the boys remember being so hungry, and
certainly never had chops tasted so good, piled up smoking
hot on a huge tin plate in the centre. Everyone helped
himself and licked the grease and black off after, and when
the last cup of tea was drunk, the boys made toast before
the glowing log-end, while the men smoked and yarned in
the warm dusk.
And when the last morsel of toast had been consumed
and the last pipe knocked out blankets were unrolled and
the camp settled for the night.
Garry lay rolled like a cocoon in his, watching the
smouldering log, its heat mellowing the sharp mountain air.
Suddenly he thought he saw part of the log move, then
he knew it was not part of the log, but something long and
dark like a rope being pulled gently across the wood. The
firelight caught it for an instant and two brilliants glittered
before the sudden flame died down.
Cautiously, scarcely daring to breathe, he stretched out
his hand and shook the bundle that was Bill.
“What’s the matter?” mumbled that weary traveller.
“There’s something moving on the log,” whispered the
boy.
Bill was wide awake now, turning his head noiselessly
and staring into the darkness.
“Don’t move,” he commanded in a whisper, and began
rolling silently in his blanket away from the other sleepers.
Freeing himself, he groped for a stick. A waddy that
Peter had stripped and left ready for some activity of his
own the next day came under his hand. Picking it up, he
tested its strength as he crept round to the other side of
the log.
Garry saw him suddenly straighten up and swish, down
came the stick on the log, and again, swish. Garry sat up
almost sick with excitement. Everyone was jumping out
of their blankets.
“Got him. Get the lantern, boys,” came excitedly from
Bill, and the lantern quickly lit, shone on the red belly of
an evil blacksnake.
“Keep away, you kids, he may not be dead,” yelled Mort,
as the long sinister body writhed again and again.
“I think he is, but you want to be sure of these


beggars,” said Bill, pushing the waddy under the reptile
and lifting it up by its middle.
It hung there in the subdued light of the hurricane
lantern, twitching spasmodically. The boys shuddered.
"Gee, a black one, too!” breathed Peter, "How did you
come to see it, Bill ?”
"I didn’t,” the man replied. "I was nearly asleep when
this youngster wakened me. I thought he was up to some
of his snake tricks again,” he added slyly.
Garry could afford to laugh now.
‘‘Wouldn’t it have been awful for me if it had turned
out to be a false alarm again?” he said.
‘‘The brute must have been sleeping under the log and
the fire tickled him up,” observed Mort. "Just as well you
did see him son. If he’d bitten any of us, we wouldn’t
have been able to get him to the doctor in time. These
blokes are deadly.”
"Is he as dangerous as all that?” asked Garry, not
doubting the other’s word, but anxious to enjoy a little
longer his triumph.
"Just about as harmless as a death-adder,” Mort said,
tersely. "Stick him on the fire, Bill.”
“Oh, I say, I wish I could have taken him home to show
the others,” said Garry.
Mort laughed.
"If you get me up early enough, I’ll skin him for you,”
he said. "If Mrs. Grant doesn’t like the smell, don’t blame
me.”
"Oh, thanks a lot,” said Garry, happily. “She probably
won’t you know. She’s an awfully good sort.”
"Well, come on now,” Bill broke in. "We have to be
up with the sparrows to-morrow. We have to get some
sleep.”
Garry was convinced he would not be able to sleep a
wink, and was simply astounded when he opened his eyes
at dawn the next morning as Peter pulled the blanket off
him. Bill was preparing the breakfast, and Mort busy a
little way off with something that made Garry shed sleep
and dart across the clearing like a tousled flash.
"Gosh,” he said, breathlessly, "my snake! How do you
do it?”
Mort laughed and held up the partly-skinned snake.


“Look you pull it off like a stocking,” he said. Garry
watched in fascinated silence. The Scotts were truly a
remarkable family. The skin was rolled up on an old tin.
“There, take it home, and get Phil to show you how
to dry it,” he said.
“Thanks awfully, Mort. What are you going to do with
the rest of it?”
“Chuck it on the fire. You can do that after breakfast,
unless you would like to fry some.”
“Not me, thanks,” said Garry, hastily. “It might be
all right if you didn’t know what it was.”
“The blacks think it is all right in any case,” retorted
Mort, “but you had better stick to bacon.”
Garry had been expecting to see great mounds of
bananas, yellow and deliciously ripe, and great was his sur-
prise to find, when the tarpaulin was removed, the fruit as
green as grass.
“Aren’t there any ripe ones?” he asked Mort, in evident
disappointment.
Mort grinned.
“Well, I might find you a bunch to take home and
ripen for yourself if you work hard,” he said, “but those
bunches are to be sent to Sydney and Melbourne. If we
picked them ripe they wouldn’t be fit to eat when they
arrived there,”
“But when do they ripen?”
“They have sweating rooms at the markets,” Mort ex-
plained, “like a hothouse, something, and they ripen the
bananas that way. I’ll get you a bunch with a few ripe
ones on it, and you hang it in a dark place and look at it
ever so often. The others will ripen gradually.”
After breakfast the boys set to work with a will, helping
Mort carry the heavy bunches of green fruit from the heap
to Bill, who fastened them onto the cable and sent them
spinning down to the foot of the slope, where Harry in turn
loaded them onto the truck.
“I wouldn’t mind a slide down there, Bill,” said Peter.
“How about it?”
“Not much,” replied the man in charge, briefly. “You’ll
probably fall off the pony going down, but you certainly
would break your neck on the cable.”
They stopped for a break at noon, and as they sat
round eating chunks of corned meat cut off with their


pocket-knives, Garry looked down over the waving tops of
the bananas below. Suddenly he cried:
“There’s smoke coming from those trees. Took, way
down the hill.”
Peter gazed down in the direction of his friend’s finger.
“Oh, that’ll be Phil and the girls,” he said, carelessly.
“There’s a clearing in the scrub. We often ride up there
for a picnic.”
“Why didn’t we come that way?”
“Track only goes that far,” Peter explained, his mouth
full of beef. “Scrub too thick to get any further. Easier
for us to come from Scotts and wind round the hill.”
“Well, it looks easy enough this way,” persisted Garry.
“Why, there’s your orchard just there. I bet I could walk
up easily enough.”
“Yeah? Try it some day,” his friend said, tolerantly, as
behoves an old-timer to a new chum.
As Peter guessed, it was the smoke from Phillip’s fire
that curled lazily up as he squatted before it coaxing it
with dry twigs.
“Fran, look round a bit, will you, for some eucalyptus
leaves? There used to be some just about by that big
gum.”
“Why eucalyptus leaves?” asked Felicity, leaning back
against the smooth white-splashed trunk of the gum in
question and watching the proceedings with interest.
“Well,” drawled Phillip, imperturbably, “some schools
of thought believe that billy tea can be made on any open
fire, but I belong to the one that simply doesn’t recognise
the claims of any unless flavoured with the native shrub.”
“It looks as if yours is going to be flavoured with a
few insects,” she laughed, as Fran came with an armful of
green and reddish leaves for her brother.
“That’s nothing,” she said, deftly removing a horse-
stinger with a twig and giving the contents of the billy a
little stir.
“And a few insects,” gravely answered Phillip. “This is
just on the boil. Chuck over the tea, Felix, will you?”
“I hope the eats are ready, Fran.”
Fran sat down and began to unpack her knapsack.
“Biscuits, cake and peaches,” she said, as she spread


the contents out on the grass. “The sugar is mixed in with
the tea, Felix. I’m afraid you’ll be sorry you wouldn’t let
me put in a bottle of milk.”
“No, I won’t,” said Felicity, stoutly. “If billy tea is
drunk without milk, who am I to interfere with tradition?
Anyway, what is the use of new experiences if you don’t
take them straight?”
“Well spoken, child,” approved Phillip, “Here, taste
this, and let us know what your English palate makes of it.”
She took a sip of the scalding liquid.
“Well, it certainly has the smoky taste you promised,”
she said, with a grimace. “It’s too hot to tell, really, but I
think it must be an acquired taste.”
The others laughed.
“It grows on you, certainly,” said Phillip. “I think
there is nothing quite like it if it is consumed in the right
setting, but I’m probably prejudiced. You see, it is asso-
ciated with all the best times of my life.”
“Like what?” asked Felicity, curiously.
“Oh, kangaroo hunts, mustering on Moran’s station,
yarning over camp-fires in cadet bivouacs,” he replied,
vaguely.
“Sounds exciting, but I can’t imagine a better setting
for it than here,” Felicity said dreamily, looking down over
what seemed a solid mass of scrub to the sea beyond.
“I think you are right there,” the boy said slowly. “I’ve
always thought this the loveliest spot in the world.”
“But the English country is supposed to be the prettiest,”
said Fran, quickly. “Tell us about it, Felix.”
Felicity sat up and stirred her tea with a stick.
“We really didn’t see much of the country,” she said.
“When father had holidays, he usually went abroad, visiting
Continental hospitals. Mackie took us to the seaside. We
did go to the country once or twice. I loved it. I could
have stayed there forever. It was much nicer than the
seaside, especially as our holidays were usually in the spring,
and,” she added, in a sort of solemn voice, “I can’t begin to
tell you how absolutely heavenly the woods and lanes are
with their carpets of wild flowers, and the grass so un-
believably green, and the cottages like something that has
grown with the trees ”
“Oh, Felix, I wish I could see it,” cried Fran. “It makes
our bush seem awfully uninteresting.”


“Well, it’s just the other way round,” replied Felicity.
Phillip looked up quickly.
“What do you mean by that?” he asked, curiously.
Felicity hesitated.
“You see,” she said slowly, “the English countryside is
so very beautiful, so orderly, everything neatly arranged
and hedged off, if you know what I mean. You are sure
where one thing begins and the other leaves off. The lovely
muted colours are so divine you could look at them forever.
Here things are different; more interesting, I suppose, because
nothing makes you feel so safe and protected as you do in
England.”
“You are hardly at the age to want things snug and
safe, are you?” grinned Phillip, mischievously.
“Felicity, how can you say that?” demanded Fran.
“Why, in England those beastly German bombs are smash-
ing up everything. Even in the country.”
“Yes, now, but I meant in peacetime,” said Felicity.
“England gives you a nice, safe feeling. You think
things have gone on so long and are still there, that nothing
can really destroy them. lam sure you could be dropped
by parachute anywhere at home and not be afraid of not
being found and directed to the high road. Here, why,
the look of that wild-looking bush frightens me. lam sure
I would lose myself in it in no time at all.”
“You would,” declared Phillip, with conviction. “See
those hills to the south-west? An air-liner crashed on the
side of one of them last year, and though search-parties of
experienced bushmen were out night and day, it was a week
before the few survivors were found. They were nearly
dead with thirst and tormented by flies and insects.”
The girl shuddered.
“There, you see what I mean,” she declared. “And look
at the sea, lovely as a jewel; but, you know, if one of those
rollers felt playful, it could pull you out and feed you to
a shark.”
Her hearers laughed.
“Well, it’s true,” she protested. “All the same, I think
it is just as lovely to look at as the country at home, only
different. It is wild and sort of untamed. What lam
getting to like very much is the way the sun pours all over
you all the time. It warms everything through and through.
Why, the washing was only on the line a quarter of an hour


yesterday, and it crackled with dryness when we brought
it in.”
Fran jumped up.
“1 promised Mummy some orchids, if I could find any,”
she said. “I suppose you two wouldn’t like to hunt round
for some,”
“No, darling, we didn’t promise, and we are much too
lazy,” decided her brother before Felicity could answer, “I
have to husband my strength and wits before the down
trip,” as she wriggled into a more comfortable position
against the tree.
They sat in silence for a while, then Phillip said, apropos
of nothing:
“I think you must be something like my grandmother.”
“Heavens!” cried Felicity, lightly, “they used to say I
was motherly at home, but I must have aged a generation.”
But he refused to be laughed off.
“No, but really. I mean, when she was young. I’ve
only seen a picture of her, slight, fair, very serious-looking
at eighteen, when she set out from England on a four
months’ voyage to marry my grandfather in Victoria.”
“Did she like the country,” asked Felicity, interestedly.
“No, hated it at first. Naturally, she had been uprooted
from a sedate English family, who had brought her up to
expect the amenities they had always eriijoyed in their com-
fortable middle-class sphere. Her new home, a slab hut on
a Gippsland farm, must have stunned her at first.”
“How did she get on ?” Felicity was really intrigued.
“Oh, she was young enough to rise above it, and not
only raised a family of eight, but was called on by everyone
for fifty miles round to nurse the sick, human or animal.”
He took one of her hands in an absent-minded manner
and spread out the fingers.
“Your hands are like hers in the picture, slender and
boneless-looking.”
Felicity’s colour deepened, but she let her hand lie
in his.
“I’m sure I could never rise to those heights,” she
sighed.
Phillip lazily crossed and recrossed her fingers.
“I think you could.” he said quietly. “It would certainly
be worth finding out.”


She pulled her hand away on the pretext of tidying
her hair.
“I can’t in agine why,” she said, lightly pulling a comb
out of her poc! et and running it back over her head.
Phillip kepi his eyes on her face until she looked at
him again.
“Can’t you?” he said. “I’ll tell you why some day.”
IPs :prang to his feet and took both her hands to pull
her up.
“You are beginning to feel the challenge of this country,”
he told her. “It acts like that on the British. They get so
mad at it that they set out to put it in order.”
She laughed.
“And what happens then?”
“It takes them so long overcoming its cussedness that
by the time they are pretty satisfied with it, they have piles
of children and grandchildren who take all the orderliness
for granted, and they have their time fully occupied telling
them what it was like in the old days.”
She laughed with him and he released her hands.
“Shall we go now?” called Fran, catching Pannican and
tying some gumtips with the rock orchids onto her saddle.
“I suppose we had better,” said her brother. “I’m
expecting a wire from Potty Gordon. He’s supposed to be
finishing up to-day. If he did we’ll join up together on
Monday.”
“That means you’ll leave here to-morrow,” said Felicity,
as she packed Fran’s knapsack with elaborate care.
“Yes, but I’ll be back, you know,” he grinned, as he led
up her horse. “You won’t be so easily rid of me.”
She smiled back at him, though her horse slithered
frighteningly on the stones, going down, and her stomach
seemed to contract alarmingly.
His grandmother couldn’t have made the descent with
better outward grace.
CHAPTER X.
Phillip’s departure left the household curiously flat for
a few days, although Winifred and Felicity, who felt a
good deal more deflated than the others, threw themselves


into the Christmas preparations with a determined spright-
liness.
As more and more men left to join the services, so
deliveries of goods became fewer, and housekeeping began
to get just a little more difficult each day.
Winifred blessed the day she had insisted on having an
orchard, and the doctor congratulated himself openly on the
acquisition of Bill.
The two smaller townships each side of Moonaburra had
lost medicos to the Navy and Air Force, and Dr. Grant
seldom sat down to a meal with his family, often breakfast-
ing at five a.m. and dining at anything from eight p.m.
or later.
On one of the rare occasions when he was at home
early and having dinner at the normal hour, the conversa-
tion at the table turned to ages, and he said suddenly to
Felicity:
“Just when will you be seventeen?”
She smiled demurely.
“On the eighteenth of the month, the day after to-
morrow, I think.”
“And not telling anyone?” He raised quizzical brows.
“Oh, Felicity, that was positively sly!” exclaimed Wini-
fred. “You should have given us a hint long ago, and we
could have arranged a party of some sort.”
“Not for me. Thank you, all the same,” interposed
Felicity, hastily.
She had been taking an active interest in helping to run
the house, and was secretly appalled at the amount of hard
work that was Winifred’s lot.
“At least, not a party, but it would be fun if we made
up a picnic and all went somewhere.”
“What about getting Bill to take us in the boat up to
Four Mile?” suggested Fran.
“Not on Friday,” wailed Marion. “Fay and I are going
to see Mrs. Scott’s new puppies, and Bill is taking us over
in the morning to stay the whole day at the farm. Couldn’t
we have the picnic to Four Mile another day?”
Winifred thought for a moment.
“Yes, any time would do for that, and as you two
infants are having a day out, Fran and Felix and I could


have a very practical celebration by going to the city and
finishing off our Christmas shopping,”
“Oh, Mummy, how lovely, and lunch at Hows?” cried
Fran.
“Certainly, lunch at Hows, and afternoon tea somewhere
else very posh,” laughed her mother.
“I’d love it,” said Felicity. “I want to do lots of shop-
ping apart from Christmas things. I must have shirts and
shorts, and Fay needs ever so much. She is growing so
fast that her frocks are beginning to look like chest pro-
tectors.”
The doctor laughed.
“I’m giving her six months more before I have her photo
taken and sent to her father. Will you lay me the odds he
doesn’t know who it is?”
Felicity smiled.
“Gentlemen never bet on certainties,” she said.
Indeed, the change in the youngest Harvey was quite
remarkable. Unlike Felicity, her skin was inclined to
freckle, and already her shoulders as well as her little nose
were dappled with tiny golden specks. Her legs and arms,
while certainly not plump, had lost their former spindly
delicacy and, in firm admiration of Fran, she had cultivated
two extremely short, odd-looking plaits. Her clinging diffi-
dence of a few months ago was simply not there now, and
she showed a small-sized technique of putting forward her
wishes that surprised her sister and delighted Winifred.
To-day, she gently and firmly announced her intention
of starting at Beechwood with Marion after the holidays,
and coaxed Felicity to buy her some school uniforms when
she was in town.
“I think we should all get a few new clothes,” said
Winifred, “There is some talk of rationing. If it came
right now we would be caught with the bare essentials.
That is the worst of living in a climate where a minimum
suffices anything goes.”
“What about us for a trip to town?” inquired Peter.
“I reckon we ought to go too, don’t you, Garry?”
“What for?” asked that youth coldly.
“Why, to see the town, of course, and go places,”
answered Peter, with a surprised look at his friend.
“Wouldn’t you like to go?”


Garry suspended operations with a particularly messy
mango, and looked across at the doctor.
“Is it anything like the city at home?” he asked.
Oh, I suppose so,” replied Dr. Grant, vaguely. “Not so
big* perhaps, and not so old as your English cities. Much
the same streets, shops, dust, noise. But don’t let me put
you off,” he added, hastily. “It’s probably lots of fun, too.”
Oh, yeah, said the boy, in a deplorably un-English
way. “If there’s nothing fresh to see, I’m not going. Hate
towns.”
“Anyway,” he added as an afterthought, “I thought we
were going crabbing off the jetty on Friday?”
Peter’s interest in the city waned a little before his
travelled friend’s scorn.
“Well, p’raps we’d better stick to that, as long as they
bring us something home,” he added, craftily.
“Of course,” interposed Winifred, hastily.
“As well as Christmas presents?”
“As well as Christmas presents,” she laughed. “If you
two agree to be home here at five. We won’t be back until
seven o’clock, and Bill is to bring Marion and Fay home at
five.”
“0.K.,” said her son, cheerfully. “A couple of scout
knives will do us.”
Winifred and the girls made an early start on Friday,
catching the mail from the north at 5.30 a.m. and arriving
in the city about ten. Fran enjoyed every minute of the
crowded hours of shopping as they went from one fascinat-
ing department to another. Her mother and Felicity often
had to go back and drag her from a counter that held her
interest. Her dark plaits, and beautifully even suntan
excited audible comment from the carefully groomed but
rather weary looking shop-assistants, who were reminded
to think longingly of the four heavenly days they meant to
have in the surf when this ghastly Christmas rush was over,
and they could gather every ounce of zest for the hectic
splurge of gaiety over the holiday week-end.
Felicity, as the items on her list were ticked off one by
one, felt she was back in her accustomed element, and
enjoyed the feeling of elegance that town clothes invariably
gave her. She was a much better shopper than Winifred,
who loathed the city, and on her infrequent but necessary
visits to it she worked feverishly to diminish her wants and


be off home again. Winifred found herself pleasantly
relaxed as Felicity wrestled with quality and price and made
most of the older woman’s decisions for her.
“Do you think we might call a halt now, Felix?” she
said, laughingly, as Felicity triumphantly crumpled up her
list and divided the parcels between the three of them. “I
know you have done most of the work, but I’m as hungry
as though Fd done it all myself.”
“Me, too,” said Fran, feelingly. “I’m all for roast
chicken, vanilla ice and coffee.”
“Now that you mention it, so am I,” replied Felicity.
“There’s only the boys’ knives to get and you will know
just where to go for those.”
“The Scout Depot,” said Fran, hastily. “It is near the
station, and we can rush in and get them on our way
there.”
They chose an alcove which overlooked the river for
Winifred’s benefit, and the lift door for Fran’s.
“Tell us interesting bits about everyone who comes in,
Mummy,” she said. Winifred made a laughing grimace.
“My poor child, I haven’t been for years a suburban
dweller, and most of the people I knew have married and
are living away somewhere, or are moving in more exalted
circles, perhaps.”
“Well, there’s someone you do know, anyway,” Fran
cried, delightedly, “Mummy, it is Mrs. McLeod and
Brenda.”
“So it is,” answered her mother, mildly. “I do hope
they are not going back by our train, darling. Mrs. McLeod
is so very sociable, and you know I have the greatest
difficulty in keeping awake on that journey even with the
sprightliest company.”
But Fran’s wide smile and ecstatic beckonings had ful-
filled their purpose, and Mrs. McLeod advanced towards
their table like a ship in full sail, her daughter suavely in
her wake.
“Do have my chair, Mrs. McLeod,” Fran cried, spring
up. ‘Mother, they will let us have some more chairs,
won’t they?”
“Of course,” began Winifred, looking round for the
waitress; but Mrs. McLeod cut her short with a wave ot
her tight kid hand.
“Thank you, but we are to meet Mr. McLeod here at


one-thirty. He has a table for us by the window. I just
stopped for a minute to say How-do-you-do.”
I suppose you, too, are down Christmas shopping,”
said Winifred.
“No, my dear, I’m just getting a few things for Brenda.
She had her birthday last week and nothing her father or
I can say will stop her going to enlist in the Women’s Army
this afternoon.”
“Oh, the A.W.A.S.! Aren’t you lucky, Brenda?”
exclaimed bran. “You’ll probably get a commission almost
at once.”
Mrs. McLeod smiled warmly at her. She took an
instant liking to anyone who had so obvious an admiration
for her adored daughter.
“Her father and I think so, too,” she said; and turning
to Winifred, she added, “The child simply doesn’t care in
what capacity she serves. She feels she just simply must
do something these terrible times. She is so high-spirited,
Mrs. Grant.”
Brenda smiled charmingly at Winifred.
“Nonsense, mother,” she said, lightly. “Any girl with
any spunk will be in one of the services.” Her eyes flicked
casually over Felicity, who was idly toying with the menu.
“These modern girls,” sighed her mother, gustily. “I
daresay you will be having the same trouble trying to keep
these two at home soon.”
“Oh, I don’t think so far ahead,” replied Winifred,
comfortably. “It will be at least twelve months before
Felicity can be of any use officially, and three years before
Fran can. lam hoping the war will be over by then.”
“Oh, I think one mustn’t be so optimistic, really, Mrs.
Grant. My husband was saying, only this morning, that it
will drag itself out for years, until all our boys are killed
or mutilated, and none of us will have a penny to bless
ourselves with.”
Felicity saw Winifred’s effort not to wince visibly. The
effort could not have been very successful, for Mrs. McLeod
added hastily:
“An exaggeration, of course. Not all, and especially
not your clever Phillip. I am sure he would know just
what to do in any situation. I will never forget him in the
bush-fire when he was quite a child.”
She lumbered on happily:


And speaking of him. He has been neglecting us
shamefully. At home for a fortnight, I hear, and never
once did he come to see us,”
He would have liked to, in ordinary times,” his mother
said, apologetically; “but I think he wanted to be as much
as possible with the family. He thinks it will only be a
matter of weeks before he goes overseas.”
Really. I hope we may see something of him on his
embarkation leave. There is my husband. Come, Brenda.”
And with bows and smiles she set her course to the table
by the window.
Fran gazed ecstatically after her heroine.
“Isn’t she beautifully dressed?” she breathed.
“Yes, indeed, and very expensively,” agreed her mother,
without enthusiasm. “But you and Felicity look every bit
as nice.”
“Well, it’s a nice thought,” replied Fran, dubiously.
“Mummy, I can’t understand why you don’t like Brenda.
She is always very sweet to you,”
“Yes, isn’t she?” said Winifred, dryly. “It’s not Brenda
I dislike. I just can’t be bothered with spoilt people.”
“How can you say that after the way you indulge,
Phillip?” exclaimed her daughter.
Winifred smiled smugly.
‘T must do it much more subtly than Mrs. McLeod,” she
replied, “because it doesn’t show on him. Brenda has
some quite insufferable airs.”
“Mummy, that is practically heresy or something,” said
Fran, not nearly as shocked at her mother’s unsoundness
of thought as she felt she ought to be.
Late as they were in arriving home that evening, the
doctor was later still, and he brought the evening papers
and some letters out to the kitchen with him. The washing
up was in full swing.
“Something for you, Felicity,” he called, holding up a
bundle of English mail.
“Oh, how lovely,” she cried, throwing her tea-towel over
her shoulder as she perched on a high stool to open them.
“Take this one to Garry, Fay. Here’s one for you from
father and another from Deborah. Marion will help you
to read them. I’ll read out the interesting bits of mine to
you,” she added to the others.
“Oh, just listen to this. John is engaged to Primrose.


Didn’t I say he would be? listen Although you will not
get the news for some time, we want you to be the first we
are telling. When this letter leaves England no one will
know that Prim and I hope to be married on my next leave.
You know she is in the Fire-fighting Squad and they did a
great job the other night in the big raid on the city. Father
is going to say I am too young, but you know in wartime
every second counts, and a few short leaves will be better
than nothing. I know you will wish us luck, angel. You
are only a kid, but a sweet one ”
“As a matter of fact,” Felicity interrupted herself
frigidly, “Prim is just exactly eighteen months older than
I am.”
Winifred laughed.
“You will never be anything but his young sister,” she
said. “Aren’t you pleased, Felix?”
“Of course, Prim is a beautiful thing. Sort of elegant,
awfully good-looking and like something out of a story,”
said Felicity, loyally. “We are awfully lucky to be getting
her into the family.”
She flipped over the rest of the pages, which seemed to
be mostly mess jokes and bits of news of girls Felicity had
been to school with.
“There’s only one more from Deborah,” said Felicity,
folding John’s letter and tucking it away in her pocket.”
I’ll read it later when we have finished the chores.”
Her father’s letter, dated a week earlier than John’s,
naturally made no reference to his son’s engagement, but
Deborah’s had been written nearly three weeks later.
Felicity had not opened this one until she went to her
room to undress for the night.
Winifred, looking in for a moment with a few sweets
from a box belatedly presented by her husband, found the
girl face down on the beruffled bed, sobbing bitterly.
“Why, Felix, what is the matter?” she exclaimed, kneel-
ing down beside the bed, really alarmed by the wildness of
Felicity’s weeping. “No bad news of your father, I hope.”
Felicity did not answer, but held out Dr. Kerr’s letter.
“You read it,” she said, in muffled tones from the
pillow.
Winifred smoothed out the crumpled pages and glanced
quickly over them until she came to the last page. It read:


“You will have heard from John that he and Primrose
Hall were to be married as soon as he could get leave. He
took us all by surprise a fortnight ago by coming home
unexpectedly and hypnotising Mrs. Hall into letting the
wedding take place there and then. I wish you could have
been here. They were wonderfully happy. John expects
a posting soon in the south and Prim was to join him.
Now something has happened which you will have to brace
yourself to hear. The night after John left to join his
squadron we had the worst raid yet. Felicity, I cannot tell
you how horrible these raids are. Prim with some other
fire-fighters was trapped behind a wall of a collapsing build-
ing. It fell and killed all the others. Prim was taken to
hospital, miraculously unscathed, except for her eyes. I
hardly know how to write this, my dear. It will be such
a shock for you, for Prim will never see again. She is
hopelessly blind. It does not seem quite so terrible to us here
because of her wonderful courage. She seemed to know the
worst, even before the specialists had consulted, and asked
that she should be the first to know what they said. Your
father chose me to tell her, and after I had spent an hour
steeling myself for hysterics or nervous collapse on her
part you can imagine how I felt when after listening quietly
to what I had to say she asked me, in a matter-of-fact way,
to promise that no one other than her parents would be
told. As long as John is flying she will not let him know
that the damage is permanent. I know you will be as proud
of her as we are, and as John will be when he knows the
agony she will have spared him when they have to be so
much apart. She is convalescing in the country with her
mother, and insists that they go on with the plan for her to
join John when he gets his new posting.”
Winifred slowly folded the letter and laid it carefully
on the dressing-table.
“Come, dear,' we won’t talk about it or I shall be
crying, too,” she said, as the tears ran down her cheeks.
She gathered the girl into her arms and they cried together.
“John is very fortunate in his wife,” she said at last.
“If she can do without his support and sympathy when she
needs them so desperately, so that he can go on doing his
job and giving his best to his country, she will be worth
coming back to.”
Felicity sat up, her eyes still streaming.
“I can’t believe it.” she choked. “Prim’s beautiful eyes.
She’ll never be able to do the things John thought her so


marvellous at. Dancing, skating, theatricals. Oh, I can’t
believe it.”
Winifred put her arm round the girl’s shoulders.
‘What a man admires in a young girl he doesn’t always
want in a wife,” she said gently. “The war will age John,
you know. He will come back tired of quite a lot of things.
A girl of such character as she has shown will overcome
any disability, and make him prouder of her than he would
have believed possible.”
Felicity leant over and put her wet cheek beside
Winifred’s.
“I’m glad you came in, Mrs. Grant,” she said, in a sad
little whisper. “Phillip is right in what he says about you.”
“Phillip says a lot when he lets his enthusiasm run
away with him,” she said, smiling. “I’ve noticed that a
good deal lately.”
She gave the girl an amused little smile, and Felicity
felt her colour rising, as Winifred pinched her cheek.
“Don’t worry about Primrose,” she said. “She and John
will make out splendidly after the war, when they will start
to build something just for themselves. And what about
you calling me Winifred as Phillip does, Felix?”
“Oh, may I? You seem about my age, you know,” said
Felicity, eagerly.
“Then you must be a good deal older than you look,”
replied Winifred, preparing to depart. “Pop into bed like
a good girl, now. You’ve had a big day in more ways than
one. Try to put everything out of your mind until to-
morrow, when you will have quite a different outlook.”
Despite Winifred’s injunction, Felicity did not fall asleep
quickly. When she got into bed and lay looking at the
moon as- it rose late over the water, she thought sadly of
John living for the day of his wife’s recovery, and of poor
Prim fighting her blindness alone.
She seemed scarcely to have fallen asleep when she was
wakened by the ’phone ringing, and Dr. Grant’s voice,
urgent, controlled, in a long conversation with someone. As
a rule, his contribution to a telephone conversation was brief
and monosyllabic and usually followed by the sound of his
car crunching down the drive. To-night, Felicity sensed
that something unusual was afoot.
Light flowed out throughout the sleep-out doors as the


switch clicked in the living-room! and Winifred’s voice
mingled with her husband’s.
Felicity saw her blinking in the doorway as she came
from her sleep-out tying the sash of her house-coat.
“What is it, Alan?” said the doctor’s wife, as he im-
patiently rang the exchange.
“Garney just rang. According to him, there’s a ship in
distress not far out. Says he had his alarm set for the one
o’clock milking. Just as he went out onto the verandah
something flamed up on the horizon, burnt for about four
minutes and disappeared. He wondered about it and
waited about for a while. Then later he saw what he took to
be flares, two or three times.
“But it’s calm, Alan, and the moon is up. How could
a ship come to any harm just out there?”
Her husband was speaking into the ’phone
“That you, Martin, Grant here. There may be a ship
on fire out to sea. Don’t know anything definite yet, but
have the theatre ready and as many beds as possible made
up, will you? Yes, if you can, that will be splendid.”
He put the receiver down.
“Maybe a fire,” he said briefly. “Garney is mustering
up all the small boats he can. There should be at least
eight and we are going out to have a look-see. He reckons
it wasn’t more than five miles out.”
Winifred was wide awake now and flew back to the
bedroom to dress.
Felicity sat up in bed. Winifred came back and called
softly:
“Alan, they won’t be able to bring the boats in through
the surf. The nearest place to land anyone would be this
side of the Point. What about making Bill’s hut into a
temporary dressing station, just in case.”
“That will be fine,” her husband said quickly. “Wake
up the girls. They can stand by to help, if necessary,”
“Not Fran,” said Winifred quickly. “She’s such a baby,
Alan. Felicity and I will go down and wait there. Fran
can take charge here. Do you think I should ring Mrs.
Topping and ask her to come down, too. She’s very
practical.”
The doctor had returned to the ’phone.
“Yes, do. Fran can look after the younger children in


case they wake, and you three get the hut ready for emer-
gency first-aid. Plenty of hot water, bandages, and so forth.
I’ll ring matron now and ask her to leave the sister in
charge at the hospital and come over on the ambulance.
Too bad we have only one car at this depot, but it can’t be
helped. Heave a list of everyone you can think of in the
district who has a truck or car, and Fran can ring them and
ask them to stand by if anything turns up. They can bring
the cars down to the Point.”
Felicity was out of bed and putting on her clothes when
Winifred came in to waken her.
“You heard what the doctor said? Good girl, hurry
now and dress while I waken Fran.”
When the position was explained to that lass she almost
wept to find herself allocated to a waiting part in what
promised to be the most exciting episode in her experience,
but her mother was firm.
“If it’s what your father thinks, it won’t be exciting, but
probably very horrid, Fran pet, and lives may depend on
how smoothly and quickly his plans work out,” she said.
“Your part is to see that as many cars as possible are at
the Point to take any injured people away for treatment.
One ambulance may not be enough, and besides, I want you
to look after the children if they wake.”
“How marvellous for me,” said Fran, disconsolately.
“Minding the kids while you and Felix are rushing about
saving people’s lives.”
Winifred laughed impatiently.
“Don’t be silly, Fran. It’s to be hoped there’s no one
hurt at all. It may be something quite different from what
we think. We have very little to go on, it seems to me.”
“Dad’s pretty sure it’s something,” retorted her daughter.
He doesn’t rush round ringing up the neighbourhood for
nothing.”
But Winifred had gone indoors and Felicity was pre-
paring to follow her, and Fran was left alone with her
mutterings.
Down at the hut Felicity, inwardly seething with excite-
ment, marvelled at Winifred’s calmness as she rolled
blankets, stoked up the fire, filled hot water bags, laid towels
and bandages in readiness.
“I’m used to it,” she laughed, in answer to the girl’s
query. “When we were first married, there was very little


settlement here, and I had to help with all sorts of opera-
tions — give anaesthetics and be generally useful.”
Voices were heard outside, and the doctor poked his
head in at the door.
“Here’s matron, Winifred, she’ll take over. Mrs. Top-
ping is on the way. Just as well Phil enlarged this shed,”
he muttered to himself as matron took the suit-case he had
been carrying, accorded the others a brisk nod, and pro-
ceeded to unpack an assortment of instruments and swabs.
“Here,” the matron said, thrusting two or three folded
sheets at Felicity, “they’re old and ragged. Tear them into
strips about this wide, will you ? And Mrs. Grant, will you
look after these gowns? They’re sterile. We may each
need one.”
“Well, I’m off now,” said the doctor. “They are waiting
for me at the Point.”
“Did you get many boats?” asked his wife.
“Eight altogether,” he answered. “And we’ll probably
need them all. They saw the flares at the surf club. They
think it must be a ship in distress. So long.”
And he was off, the sound of his footsteps soon lost in
the sand and coarse grass round the hut. The three women
went quietly on with their preparations. Both Winifred and
Felicity felt steadied by the support of matron’s quiet
efficiency as she, moving between the table and the fire,
boiled needles, arranged swabs in bowls, and set out weird-
looking paraphernalia.
CHAPTER XI.
Felicity was always to remember that night. An ambu-
lance man looked in and said:
“Stains and I will get along to the Point, matron. If
there’s anything doing they will call out to us as they come
in and we can get back here to let you know easily ten
minutes before they can get here.”
“Thank you, Mr. Barnett. Have a cup of tea with us
before you go. We have just made some.”
Winifred poured out and handed around odd cups.
There was no fresh milk, and the condensed tasted thick
and sweet in the hot, strong tea. The kerosene lamp threw
a round of light on the table and as they all stood, cups in
hand, everyone’s face was in the shadow. Felicity thought;


“How queer. We look like a scene out of a backwoods
Play.”
The men went off to the Point. Felicity had finished
tearing up the sheets and rolling them into bandages. She
went to the window and blinkered her eyes with her hands
to look out over the sea.
The moon was up, but the drifting clouds were piling
round it, and the straight beam of light was no longer
unbroken. Yet it was clear enough to see a long way out.
She could not see the little boats. Nothing broke the silence;
it was warm, still, and clear.
“There couldn’t be a wreck on a night like this,” she
thought. “The whole thing is weird.”
She went back and sat on the kerosene case by the wall.
The long journey to and from the city and her grief at the
news from home had exhausted her. The voices of the
other women drifted over her and presently she slept.
She was wakened by Winifred shaking her gently.
“Come, dear, I want you to take a message up to the
house.”
She sat up guiltily.
“Oh, was I asleep? I’m awfully sorry.”
“It’s alright, dear. Mr. Barnett has just come from the
Point. A ship was torpedoed and they are bringing in some
of the crew, about forty, he thinks.”
“Torpedoed?” echoed the girl. “Here, in Australian
waters.”
“Yes, we don’t know any details, but they will be here
in a few minutes. I want you to run up and tell Fran to
telephone each one on the list again and tell them. They
will have had her first call and will be able to get here in
a few minutes. Hurry back, we will need you.”
The track sloped upwards from the hut to Cottontrees
for about a quarter of a mile a short cut made by the
Grant children through a veritable forest of trees. To the
country children with their knowledge of every square foot
of the bush round their home and of the rustlings which
denoted a hare in the grass or a dog on a scavenging
expedition, the track was a commonplace day or night. It
simply did not occur to Winifred that Felicity’s stomach
might quietly turn over at the thought of going alone up
that avenue of ti-trees with their short, thick trunks, white
and ragged in the moonlight, or that the bushland could


seem other than friendly. Felicity walked quickly outside.
Ihe men were talking in low tones by the side of their car,
and she wondered desperately if she could ask one of them
to come with her to Cottontrees gate.
“There they come,” she heard one of them say, and she
looked where he pointed. Half-a-dozen or so little lights
were coming up the river, strung out unevenly as the chug-
ging drew nearer.
“Action stations,” Mr. Barnett said half-jokingly to his
companion, as they picked up their stretchers and began to
carry them down to the small landing stage.
Suddenly, she realized that these little boats were really
bringing in wounded men. She remembered Winifred’s
words, “Hurry, we will need you.”
Panic in case she should not be back in time to help,
overcame her terror of the spreading branches overhead as
she flew up the track; her panting breath drowned the little
rustlings and squeakings which would have petrified her in
ordinary circumstances.
Fran saw her coming and ran down the steps.
“What is it, Felix? Is it really a ship?”
Felicity gasped for breath:
“Yes, it was torpedoed out there. They are bringing in
some of the sailors, I think. You have to ring those numbers
again and tell them to come to the Point at once.”
“Yes, yes, I know,” interrupted Fran, excitedly. “Did
you see any of them?”
Felicity shook her head.
“No, they hadn’t come in when I left, but I have to go
back.”
“Lucky beggar,” grumbled Fran, enviously. “Having
all the fun while I have to stick here missing everything.
Marion and Fay don’t need looking after. Anyway, they’re
sleeping their heads off.”
“Never mind,” consoled the other, glad to be the one
offering sympathy for a change. “You can get those cars
down. They want them as soon as possible.”
Fran turned to hurry into the house, when she was
stopped by a sudden tug at her sleeve.
“Hey, there, what’s up?”
Both girls jumped as two tousled apparitions in pyjamas
appeared out of the shadow of the verandah.


“What’s going on, Felix ? Be a sport !” pleaded Garry.
But his sister said, heartlessly:
“You go straight back to bed at once. There’s nothing
you can do except keep out of the way.”
She turned and sped down the track again, but the boys
followed bran inside and listened with incredulous joy to
her telephonings, besetting her with questions between calls,
but she kept resolutely on, ignoring them until the last
message was delivered. Putting down the receiver, she said
with dignity:
“I suppose you know everything as you listened-in to
about ten private conversations. Anyway, a ship has been
torpedoed out there and Dad is down helping to bring in
the ones who were saved. Now will you please go back to
bed, and you will hear all about ;t in the morning,”
Peter gave a derisive shout.
“Well, I like that! Go back to bed like good little boys.
What about it, Gar? Not much we aren’t. Come on!”
He dashed past his sister. “Pitch on some clothes. We’re
going to get in some rescue work ourselves.”
“Peter,” cried Fran sharply, “you are to go to bed. Dad
said only Felicity was to go with mother. He told me to
stay here.”
“He didn’t tell me anything,” said her brother, his voice
coming back muffled but excitedly as he dragged a shirt
over his head. “Jove, this is a bit of luck for us, isn’t it?”
They struggled blindly into their clothes and dodged
past Fran, who tried to bar their way, leaving her gasping
with indignation as they dashed down the path. Already
headlights were showing on the Beach Road. Presently an
assortment of trucks, sedans and lorries of all ages and
sizes moved slowly down the track to the hut. The door
was open and in the belt of light thrown by the ambulance
down to the landing stage the boys could see the last of the
small craft discharging its dripping passengers while Mr.
Barnett and Mr. Stains carried someone very still on the
stretcher and eased it carefully into the ambulance.
The children watched in breathless excitement.
“Shall we go and see if we can do something?” whis-
pered Garry.
Peter snorted scornfully.
“And be sent home for our trouble, not much. I’ve got
an idea,” and the two withdrew whispering into the
shadows.


Inside the hut, belicity, her hair bundled briskly into a
cap and her arms thrust into a long white gown by the
matron, mechanically rolled up the sleeves which came down
well over her hands. She found herself standing dazed
and a little sick holding a bowl of blood-stained water as
Winifred sponged a freely bleeding wound on a young
sailor’s head. The boy sat on the kerosene case she had
slept on only a few minutes ago. His head was resting on
the table, the blood trickling steadily into the bowl in spite of
the swabbing. Dr. Grant walked up to have a look at it.
He turned and beckoned matron to bring a dressing-tray
and began to swab and stitch the wound.
The room swam before Felicity’s eyes and she clutched
the bowl tightly as though it would keep her from falling.
Winifred put her arm round her gently and took the
bowl away.
“Poor child,” she thought. “I'll send her home if I can
get someone from the cars to take her place.”
But the doctor had finished and was putting a pad over
the freshly stitched wound. Seeing Felicity standing empty-
handed beside him, he thrust a bandage into her hand.
“Here, tie him,” he said, curtly. “Then help Bill put
him in one of the cars- Tell them he is to be put to bed
with aspirin and a hot drink. It’s only a flesh wound, but
he wants warming up.”
He turned to a man who was groaning as he was carried
in. A paling supported his twisted leg.
“Splints,” he snapped to Winifred, “and anaesthetic,” as
matron came hurrying up.
Felicity found herself alone with the boy, who moaned
faintly as he tried to raise his head. She recognised the
bandage in her hand as one of the strips she had torn
earlier in the night, and slowly and ineptly she began to
unroll it round his head. As she worked her fingers grew
steadier and the bandage firmer. She began to get used to
the mingled smell of dettol, blood and ether, and she sur-
prised herself by thinking quite calmly what a good thing it
was so hot.
“No one could get a chill this weather,” she said to
herself.
The bandage in place, she caught Bill’s eye, and together
they helped the boy out to a car where young Mrs. Scott
sat at the wheel.


“Anything to put round him, Mrs. Scott?” asked Bill.
“He’s wet through.”
“Yes, the rug at the back,” she replied. “I’m taking
another boy with a broken arm. Is he ready yet?” Bill
dashed off and returned supporting a tall youngster whose
face was sick and white after the whiff of ether that had
deadened the quick agony of the setting.
“You know what to do with them, Mrs. Scott. Is there
someone at home to help you get them to bed?”
“Yes, Bob’s waiting up. We’ll look after them,” and
the car backed and swung round headed for warm beds and
hot drinks and sleep to drown the horror of the past few
hours for the boys huddled in the back.
The ambulance had returned and the man with the
crushed leg was placed inside on a stretcher. The second
stretcher sagged under the weight of a big man whose blue
lips and gurgling breath made Felicity shudder as she
stepped back for the bearers to pass.
Patients who were able to sit up were crowded in and
the car moved off.
The night wore on, Dr. Grant fighting against time in
order to see every injured man before going on to the
hospital, where four serious cases were being prepared for
the operating theatre.
Felicity was pressed into service boiling instruments,
emptying bowls, bandaging after the doctor and matron, and
helping Winifred wherever she could.
“Get a triangle bandage.”
“Make a sling to rest this wrist.”
“Pass those forceps; hurry, please.”
She flew from one instruction to another. The doctor
absently put a three-cornered cloth into her hand.
“Fix up this arm, will you,” he said, as he bent over
the next man.
Felicity looked desperately at the thing and wondered
how to begin.
“There, lass,” the patient, a bearded engineer, said in a
pronounced north-country accent, “tie it round like this.”
“Oh, thank you,” breathed Felicity, in the manner of
all new pro’s escaping ignominy before the high priest of
the hospital. “You’re from Lancashire, too,” she added,
delightedly.


“I am that, lass,” he twinkled, “and yourself too?”
He showed her how to make a sling and, when it was on
and the ends pinned over, she stood back to admire the
effect.
“And how come you to this part of the world?” he
asked. Felicity explained, adding carefully:
“I’m going back home next year when I’m eighteen, I
can’t stay here while we are at war, of course.”
“And why not?” he asked.
The girl looked surprised.
“It’s funny that you should ask that,” she said. “You
are doing your bit. Don’t you know what I f®el like doing
nothing here?”
He patted his bandage.
“And would you be doing more than this at home?’
She smiled.
“Well, this is a most unusual happening here, you know.
This is the most leisurely, lazy place in the world, I’m sure.
I’ve done nothing but bask since I came here. There won’t
be anything like this again, you can be sure.”
“Is that so? Well, I wouldn’t bet on it, lass. I suppose
you might wonder how a German sub. could be so far from
home, eh?”
“I haven’t had time to wonder about anything yet,” she
answered, “but where do they refuel and get supplies?”
The man smiled grimly.
“That you might well ask,” he retorted. “Those dirty
Japs send their tankers and supply ships to meet them.
They can always set them up when they need anything.
I’m not even saying it was a German sub. that got us.”
“Oh, but we are not at war with Japan. She couldn’t
do that!” cried the girl.
“Ho, she shouldn’t be supplying the U-boats, either, but
we know she is. She knows we have our hands full at the
moment in the Atlantic and the North Sea. And don’t go
trying to measure the Jap with a gentleman’s yardstick,
miss. They’re a dirty, treacherous lot, and this country
will have cause to know it before this war is over, I’m
thinking.”
Felicity helped him up and led him out to Dick Topping’s
truck.
“Someone from my part of the world,” she explained,


proudly, as she handed him over. The man awkwardly
offered her his left hand.
“It’s been a great bit of luck for me to meet a Lanca-
shire lass so far from home,” he said, as she took it in both
of hers, “and doing the same sort of job that all her country-
women are doing at this very minute.”
Tears rushed to the girl’s eyes.
“How kind you are,” she said. “I only wish I could do
more of it. I hope to later.”
“Now, I hope you’ll mind what I said,” he added.
“Stay here with your brother and sister. There’ll be work
enough for you before long, unless I’m mistaken.”
It was dawn before the last car left with its bandaged
passengers. Of the forty survivors, all but six or seven
had some injury. The doctor and matron had departed
with the last lot in the ambulance, and Winifred and
Felicity were left to clean up.
“Weren’t they marvellous?” said Felicity. “Hardly a
sound, and no complaints, even from the badly hurt ones.”
“Yes,” assented Winifred, soberly, “and how dreadful
to think that out of two hundred and thirty, only forty-
three were saved. They say the ship stayed afloat for a
while after she was hit and they thought they would have
time to get the lifeboats away, when suddenly there was an
explosion, and she went up in flames. Only those who were
thrown out into the sea had a chance. They managed to
cling to driftwood and would have been there yet if one
raft had not been floating near them. It had flares in it,
and that was how they were able to let us know what had
happened.”
Felicity was silent. She was thinking of John flying
always over water. Not clear, moonlit water like that
which lay before her, if he came down she put the
thought resolutely away from her and tackled with vigour
the pools of water on the floor.
On the way up the track both Felicity and Winifred felt
a little uncomfortable at the thought of Fran’s reproachful
face as she would worm their experiences from them before
she allowed them to go to bed.
But no Fran awaited them with a martyred expression,
and the sound of laughing voices came from the kitchen.
Winifred and Felicity looked at each other, and hurried
inside. Peter came bounding through the dining-room to
meet them.


“Mum, come into the kitchen. Garry and I bagged the
only three who weren’t hurt,” he shouted.
A strange sight met their eyes as they entered the
kitchen. Three young men, oddly garbed in as many of
Phillip’s and the doctor’s dry clothes as the boys had been
able to lay their hands on, sprang up and saluted smartly.
“Midshipman McAdam, ma’am.”
“Cabin-boy Stevens, ma’am, first-class.”
“Able-seaman Malony, ma’am.”
“Sit down, all of you,” said Winifred, with a laugh.
“You know who I am, and this is Miss Harvey, a country-
woman of yours. I’m glad the boys found you some
things. Is there any coffee left, Fran? We are starving.”
The youths quickly pushed up chairs, and Fran, beaming
behind the coffee-pot, said happily:
“No, but there will be in a second. Make some more
toast, Peter.”
And so the doctor, returning weary but elated with the
night’s work, found the party consuming large quantities
of coffee and toast in the kitchen.
After introductions were over and Peter had explained
how he and Garry waited round the hut until they managed
to pick up the three uninjured men, the doctor said:
“I didn’t know you boys were awake even.”
“Trust us,” replied his son, boastfully. “We never sleep.
Anyway, we weren’t letting everyone in the district get
away .with all the heroes, were we, Garry? We rushed
down and collected these, at least.”
There was a general laugh, and Winifred said:
“It’s very exciting for you and Garry, but these boys
must be exhausted. I’ll fix up their beds, and I think we’ll
all turn in,”
“Hear, hear,” said the doctor. “Felicity is asleep on
her feet.”
“Why, I don’t feel at all sleepy now,” retorted Felicity.
“You will,” he predicted, sagely, patting her shoulder
as they left the room together. “I wish your father could
have seen his daughter to-night, my dear.”
“Thank you,” she said, softly and very happily, as she
went off to bed.
The next day the survivors who were fit to travel left
for the city. Felicity took the other girls to the station to


say good-bye to her patient from home. Most of Moona-
burra were present, but none more so than Peter and
Garry, who stuck like stamps to their midshipman, able-
seaman and cabin-boy, first-class, until the train pulled out.
Garry lugged along the riper half of his banana bunch,
which at the last moment he presented with much ceremony
to the surprised survivors.
It was a cruel trick of fate that high adventure should
befall them in the holidays and reduce their circle of
immediate acquaintances by several hundreds; but they
made the most of what audience they had, exhibiting them-
selves in the township for the rest of the day, referring to
the rescue in loud tones as they walked up and down the
main road in lordly fashion and related highly-coloured
versions of their own part of the night’s excitement to
anyone who would listen to them.
Of the ten men who remained in the cottage hospital,
only four had been seriously hurt, and the other six were
on the verandah when Winifred and Felicity a few days
later came with smokes and magazines.
1 hey were nice boys, these youngsters, who cheerfully
risked their lives in wartime to help keep open the supply
lines and whose main preoccupation now seemed to be to
find another ship.
“I’m going to try for an armed merchantman, this
time,” announced Angus, a fierce young Scot. “It’d be
some satisfaction at least to have a crack back,”
“Me, too,” drawled a tall fair youth who reminded
Felicity of John. “I don’t propose to be tipped out next
time without a fight.”
“1 he Jerry fish might not choose such a charming place
to cast us next time,” a youthful fourth officer smiled at
Winifred.
“You came at a most opportune time for us,” she
replied. “The youths who usually help with the decora-
tions in the wards at Christmas time are all in camp.
You will be a godsend to the nurses on Christmas Eve.”
“We will if you will supply the mistletoe,” he returned,
with a grin. “All the same, I can’t say I’m looking forward
to Christmas in hospital.”
“Perhaps you will be out by then,” Felicity said, lighting
a cigarette for the man with the tied-up hands.
“It won’t make much difference if we are,” he said,


ruefully. “None of us will get a ship until the New Year,
that’s certain.”
“When do you plan to discharge those boys, Alan?”
asked Mrs, Grant that night as they drank their coffee.
Strictly speaking, they could leave hospital to-morrow,”
her husband replied. “Except the engineer with the burns.
However, I think I’ll keep them there till after Christmas.”
“Why?”
“Well, not one of them has friends in Brisbane or
Sydney, and you know how crowded the hostels are in the
city. At least, they can enjoy their Christmas dinner at
the hospital instead of having to find somewhere to go in a
strange city.”
Winifred was silent for a moment, then she said slowly:
“I was wondering if we might have them here with us
for Christmas dinner.”
Dr. Grant grinned.
“I thought you would probably say that if I drew a
sufficiently pathetic picture,” he said. “I nearly said
'tramping the streets,’ but I didn’t like to lay it on with a
trowel.”
His wife laughed.
“I’m drawing a pathetic picture of myself trying to carry
off an English Christmas dinner for fifteen with the tem-
perature at about 104 degrees in the shade.”
“I hope you will have more sense than to try,” said the
doctor, severely.
“But. Alan. I intended to in any case.” she protested.
“I want Felicity and the two little ones to feel they are
having the traditional Christmas, even if they are so far
from home.”
“Well. I wouldn’t,” argued the doctor. “I spent only
one Christmas in England, a white Christmas it was, too.
but I know that it is something that can’t be transplanted
without the flavour being entirely lost. Our imitation would
probffilv only make all our English guests homesick, without
cheermg them up.”
“What do you suggest, then?” she asked, refilling his
cup.
“Just stick to our sort of festivity,” he said. “Every-
thing very cold, with tons of salad, and walnut dressing,
ice-cream, fruit salad with crushed ice, dessert grapes.


coffee iced,” he added, vaguely. “There are plenty of
grapes and peaches and pineapples, aren’t there?”
Winifred pondered.
“Yes, I believe you are right,” she said at last. “But
we’ll have to have the pudding with brandy sauce as well.
I don’t want them to think we are quite heathenish.”
And so the invitation was issued forthwith and accepted
with great gusto by the lusty convalescents, and prepara-
tions were speeded up at “Cottontrees.”
Peter and Garry fetched and carried with gratifying
enthusiasm and were more available in the next four days
than they had been in the past four weeks.
Under Fran’s fussy directions the little girls made the
streamers, sitting cross-leged on the sleep-out floor for hours
cutting and pasting while Winifred and Felicity washed
and polished glass and silver, and unearthed jars of mince
ready for the pies.
As they worked each thought of Phillip, Felicity grimly
determined that the Christmas party would not be the least
bit flat for her if he were not there for it, Winifred agoniz-
ing quietly at the thought that this was probably only the
first of many Christmases without him.
CHAPTER XII.
On Christmas Eve, the township swarmed with last-
minute shoppers. Felicity leant against the seat at the bus
stop with a brimful market-basket on one arm, the fingers
of the other hand entwined in the handles of two bulging
string-bags, looking after the suit-case full of meat on the
ground at her feet, while Fran hurriedly scoured the shops
for more balloons.
She was debating with herself whether to endure till
the bus came the strings cutting into her fingers or to
place the bags beside the suit-case and risk not being able
to gather them up again with the contents intact, when a
luxurious car rolled up under the jacaranda tree ten yards
away, with Brenda, smooth as a poster and beautifully
trim in the summer uniform of the A.W.A.S.
Her car, as usual in the holidays, was filled with an
admiring crowd of girls about her own age. Two, whom
Felicity did not know, were also in uniform ; the others.
Brenda’s staunchest supporters from Beechwood.


As they got out laughing and chattering, Felicity hoped
piously that the glare glasses she was wearing and the string
bags would prove some sort of disguise or that the bus
would by some miracle be early for a change. Brenda,
however, making her first appearance in Moonaburra in
khaki, was determined to be seen by as many of the locals
as possible.
“Why, here’s Felicity,” she cried gaily, halting her ani-
mated partv as they passed the waiting seat, and introducing
the two A.W.A.S.
“I see you have been finishing off the Christmas shop-
ping,” said one, a jolly stout little thing. “It’s a case of
come and get it these days, isn’t it?” She smiled pleasantly,
and Felicity liked her immensely. Before she could reply,
Brenda said brightly:
“I daresay we will all feel just as hot and bothered
before we are through.”
Felicity quite simply could have killed her
“We’ll see you at the dance to-night, I suppose?” Brenda
went on. “We managed to swing leave for the four davs at
Christmas, so we’re coming in force. Aren’t we, girls?”
“I believe we are going,” returned Felicity, without
enthusiasm; “but I haven’t taken much interest in it
because I know so few people.”
“Oh, I’ll see that you get some partners,” said the other,
patronisingly. “We have bagged most of the presentables
for our partv. besides some who are coming from town for
the occasion.”
“Thank you, I daresav I’ll get by,” Felicity said, quietly.
Brenda laughed. “Well, call on us if the supply runs
out. It’s a pity your beau won’t be there.”
Coldly furious, Felicity was determined not to rise to
the bait, and her drawl matched Brenda’s as she answered:
“If I knew who he was, I would insist on his coming.
I must have an unknown admirer.”
“Who is he, Brenda?” asked one of the service girls,
smiling quizzically at Felicity.
“The tall, dark Gary Cooper we met at the concert last
week. You should remember the one you admired so,”
retorted Brenda, maliciously, watching the effect of her
words.
“Is Phillip in Brisbane?” asked Felicity, quickly, and


could have bitten her tongue out when Brenda laughed
softly.
You see, she knows who I mean,” she said, as a ripple
of laughter went round the group.
Naturally I know whom you mean,” was Felicity’s
haughty reply. “It couldn’t be anyone else, seeing Phillip
is the only youth I know in the district.”
‘‘l don’t wonder you are peeved, my dear. He really
should keep you better informed of his movements,” said
the other, spitefully. “He seems to be enjoying his leave
in Brisbane.”
The jolly little A.W.A.S. began to feel sorry for Felicity,
and fluttered an eyelid at her.
“You ought to know, Brenda darling. You tried hard
enough to make him promise to come up for the dance,
didn’t you?”
Brenda stopped smiling.
“We really asked so many, I quite forget whether he
was one of them,” she snapped, forgetting to drawl her
words.
“Do you really, darling,” put in the other lass, sweetly.
“You must need a course of Pelmanism. We were admiring
his powers of resistance, weren’t we, Ann?”
Everyone laughed, and Brenda flushed as she tried to
laugh with them, but was spared the further revelations of
her friends (who evidently had not erected the accustomed
pedestal for her) by the arrival of the bus and a breathless
Fran.
When they reached Cottontrees Felicity was, as Brenda
had so sweetly described her, hot and grubby, and thor-
oughly miserable as well; but she determined to say nothing
of Phillip’s leave to Winifred.
“If he choses to spend his leave in the city, it’s nothing
to do with me,” she said to herself, heatedly, “and if he
wants to tell his people, let him tell them himself.”
After lunch the boys and Dr. Grant with a great deal
of hammering fixed up the decorations and Felicity helped
Winifred to prepare the ice-cream and the fruit punch and
everything that could be done towards the dinner the day
before. In the evening the doctor brought her a cable from
John and Primrose wishing her a Happy Christmas. She
was thinking gratefully of this little attention, and deriving
a half-hearted satisfaction from the sheen on her hair as she


brushed it mournfully before the glass that night, when
Winifred came in.
Phillip has just rung from Brisbane,” she said, ex-
citedly. He has a week’s embarkation leave, but he can
only spend a day or so at home, unfortunately.”
‘‘How splendid,” said Felicity, heartily. “When is he
coming?”
Winifred sat down on the bed.
“Tuesday, he thinks. Oh, Felix, it’s so soon. They
should give him more time in Australia. He’s only been in
the Army two months.”
“It doesn’t seem long,” admitted Felicity. “I thought
they had at least six months’ training.”
“Yes, but Phillip had done his training in the cadets.
He has only been doing a refresher course,” his mother
replied, with a worried frown. “I was hoping he wouldn’t
leave here for a little while. Just think, Felix, he is so
keen that he is giving up four days of his last leave to go
to a gunnery school. There is some new gun, invented by
an Australian that is supposed to be wonderful.”
Felicity hoped that the new pleased feeling she suddenly
had did not show too much. What a fool she had been to
take any notice of Brenda!
“It’s too bad for you, that he has such a short leave,”
she said.
“Perhaps,” admitted his mother. “Although I am glad
he is keen. But I regarded the fortnight he spent with us
as our good bye. I think I have been rather dreading this
one. It is so final, somehow. I feel I’d hate each day as
it passed. One day of that will be enough, Felix. I think
he is feeling the same about it.”
Felicity could not think of anything comforting and at
the same time convincing, so she clipped back her own hair
and began vigorously brushing Winifred’s. The older
woman sat with her eyes closed while her dark, short
strands fell rhythmically from the brush. Suddenly she
opened her eyes.
“Felix, you are an angel,” she said, in her old gay,
caressing voice. “I was just too dispirited to do that for
myself, to-night. I feel better now.”
Christmas Day went with a tremendous swing from the
minute Garry woke up to find beside his bed the most
wonderful, breath-taking present he had ever hoped to


have. Philip had taken his snake-skin away and had sent
it back magically transformed into a belt, complete with
loops for knives and other impediments, and a patent
adjustable slide grip in place of the usual buckle. He
invaded the sleeping quarters of every member of the
household, ruthlessly waking them from their sleep-in to
display his reptile. Despite their protests and threats, he
had so roused everyone as to start the interchange of gifts.
That woke them all so thoroughly that breakfast began
even earlier than usual, and spun itself out as they examined
each other’s presents with the glorious feeling of having
the whole morning before them.
"Gee, I wouldn’t mind having your belt,” Peter said,
enviously, to Garry as they left the table, unable to bear the
idle chatter of their sisters any longer.
"But you’ve got a snake-skin belt,” replied Garry, rub-
bing his finger along the wrong way of his for the pleasure
of feeling the scales prickle his hand.
"Oh, yeah,” grumbled the other. "Made out of an old
carpet snake that Phil shot by mistake when he had his
gun first.”
Garry had an uneasy feeling that his good-nature was
about to be played on.
"Go on, it’s a corker,” he said, with great heartiness.
"Put it on and we’ll show them to the fellows when they
come for dinner,”
The idea of centring on himself the attention of the
survivors, as he persisted in calling them, proved too strong
for Peter, and he hunted round until he unearthed the
despised belt, scowling as he fastened it about his sturdy
middle.
"Phil didn’t need to get the newest sort of clasp for
that one,” he muttered. "He knew perfectly well I had
only an old buckle on this one. It’s loose, anyhow. The
pin thing will probably fall out and I’ll lose the belt. I
wouldn’t be surprised.”
“Not on your life. It’s strong as iron,” Garry cheerfully
assured him, trying to keep his fingers off the shiny surface
of his grip, at least until Pete was safely belted and his
attention directed elsewhere.
The day threatened to be a scorcher, and the girls
hurried to give the finishing touches to the decorations and
flowers before the light morning breeze died down. Wini-
fred congratulated herself afresh on having to deal with


the refrigerator and not the stove, for the thermometer was
already at ten o’clock showing 99 degrees.
“Hjas anyone time for a swim before dinner?” called
Dr. Grant, strolling into the dining-room, where Fran and
Felicity were giving a final rub to the silver.
“Me, certainly,” said Fran, hastily finishing her pile
with a perfunctory flip of the chamois, and slipping out of
the room to collect Marion and Fay.
Felicity’s face brightened, but she looked across at
Winifred, who was sorting napkins at the end of the table.
“Yes, you go, Felix,” she said. “There’s nothing more
we can do until about half-an-hour before lunch. I’d come,
too, but I want to have a leisurely bath and finish that book
Phil sent me.”
Watching them a few minutes later as they went down
the track towards the beach, Fran and Felicity ambling
along beside the doctor, Fay and Marion vainly trying to
race the boys, who obligingly handicapped themselves by a
series of hand-springs, Mrs. Grant thought:
“They are all about the same colour now,” adding
resignedly as she noticed Felicity’s honey-coloured back and
arms beside her own daughter’s well-browned limbs, “except
Fran, who looks practically native.”
The white sand squeaked under their bare feet as they
ploughed through it and made a mound of their towels on
the firmer stuff near the water.
Felicity had discovered by now that the hotter the day,
the more icy the water seemed to be, and she steeled herself
to plunge after the doctor and Fran, who were already
waiting to catch the incoming breaker, but after the first
breathless gasp she revelled in the cool sting of the surf as
it swished and frothed round her. The surf was mild,
with long steady rollers breaking neatly and receding
demurely in a truly Christmas spirit, suavely denying such
things as dangerous undertow and swift currents. Between
the bubbling cascades the sandy bottom was clear as though
seen through glass, the bathers’ legs like shortened scissors
clipped the green silk of the water.
“Only about ten minutes more,” cried Dr. Grant, shak-
ing the water out of his eyes and ears as he came to the
surface after a dive beneath a breaker. “We must be
there when our guests arrive.”
The girls ran up the beach and threw themselves on
their towels to dry off in the sunshine. The hot sand


warmed them through the soft fluffy cotton as they lay
face downwards while the sun baked them gently into a
half-dose.
Back at the house, Felicity hurried through her shower
and dressed quickly, pulling a pale green linen dress over
her head still encased in its tight rubber cap, and rapidly
buckling white sandal straps across slim tanned ankles. She
tugged off the cap impatiently, well aware that the tumble
of fair hair would not be so easily disposed of. It should
have been trimmed a few weeks ago, but she was wavering
between a feather bob and growing it into a coronet round
her head. The extra inch made it just too long for a roll
at the back and in a frenzy of impatience she brushed it
vigorously back behind her ears. The result was cool
and utterly charming, but Felicity despised it as babyish
and wished she had chosen a less festive season to experi-
ment with her hair.
The arrival of the guests was heralded by Peter and
Garry, who had stationed themselves at the gate to escort
them to the house.
Privately regarding the acquisition of the entire six for
the day as a marvellous scoop and complete triumph
over less enterprising neighbours, they became so uproari-
ously entertaining, that the doctor had to call them to order
to make his welcome heard, but not before a very jolly
atmosphere had been established, and as the girls passed
round the fruit cocktails, English reserve melted with the
frost on the glasses.
Dinner, as the doctor had predicted, was so entirely
different from the sort of menu the guests regarded as
essentially Christmas, that no one was homesick or at all
wistful about the little island that was always in their
thoughts.
The conversation, of course, turned to England and the
youthful Fourth electrified his host by claiming as his birth-
place the selfsame village in Devon where the doctor had
spent most of his leave in 1917.
To go one better, the dark Angus had an aunt up his
sleeve, living in the north of Scotland, who had actually
been a neighbour of the late romantic Hepsabah.
Felicity and Fay were quite overcome by this piece of
coincidence. Not so Garry, whose only reaction to his
sister’s attempt to rouse in him some sentimental yearning
for his old nurse, was to remember that she had never


allowed him to eat green fruit, claiming dire results
following disobedience of this rule.
He, himself, however, had recently eaten the best half
of a bunch of green bananas and had been, if anything, in
better health afterwards.
He charged Angus if on any future visit to his aunt
he should meet Hepsabah to mention this to her, in the
interest of twelve Scotch orphans who, doubtless, were
denying themselves the delights of green fruit simply on
her say-so.
And thus the meal proceeded hilariously from sweets to
dessert, to coffee on the wide, bougainvillaea-festooned
verandah.
“Well, we’re off to-morrow,” sighed Angus. “I would
have liked to make a longer stay and have seen something
of the countryside here.”
“I hope you will come back-again,” said Winifred,
quickly. “All of you, whenever you find yourselves with
a few days in Brisbane. There’s always room for you
here.”
“That’s good of you, Mrs. Grant,” broke in Burnett,
the engineer, who was older by ten years than the others.
“And we all hope to make it if we’re lucky enough to be
in port here. I, too, would like to see something of the
country.”
“Ever think of settling down here?” asked the doctor,
casually, passing the cigarettes.
Burnett smiled up at him.
“How did you guess?” he asked. “I’m hoping to bring
my wife and sons out here as soon as I can get a passage
for them. The children were born in the city, but we want
them to be brought up in the country. I have never seen
any place where the coast and country combine as they do
here with such a perfect climate for enjoying both. They
will have to get used to the heat, but it will toughen them
up while they are young.”
“We certainly want them,” declared Dr. Grant. “More
of our own kind to fill up Australia. I’ve managed to
import three promising colonists myself,” he grinned at
Felicity, “but I am afraid the girls will want to fly home
after the war. However, I’m going to see if I can make a
deal with his father to let me keep Garry and take one of
my girls instead.”


"Oh, let it be me, Daddy,” begged Fran. “I’d adore
England, I know I would. The wildflowers and the bloody
tower.”
Her father laughed.
"You would have to discipline that suntan, or they’d
think Felicity had captured a native. But seriously,” he
went on, "that youngster, Garry, out-colonials the colonials.
He’s taken to the life like a fish to water. His Head tells
me he has a decided aptitude for agriculture, and he himself
is firmly convinced that his metier is to be a vet.”
Winifred laughed.
1 he last time I heard, he and Peter were laying plans
for acquiring some sheep country and raising fat lambs for
export,” she said. “I am afraid Garry is lost to the city,
whatever country he decided to live in.”
The Fourth turned to Felicity.
"Don’t you hanker after the brightlights ?” he said,
banteringly.
"They had been blacked out for some time before I left
home,” she said, serenely. "It took me a while to get used
to everything being so different, but it’s so very lovely here,
it grows on you somehow.”
"Speaking of brightlights, Felix,” interposed the doctor.
"What about the dance to-morrow night. You and Fran
are going, aren’t you?”
"Yes, we said we would,” she replied, disinterestedly.
The Fourth was intrigued.
"Is it going to be so very boring then?” he asked.
"It won’t be boring at all,” interjected Fran, heatedly-
"Why, it’s a good-bye party from the township to three
boys who are leaving to join up next week.”
He laughed.
"I can see that it is the first time you have been allowed
up after ten.”
Fran looked injured.
"And then I have to leave at eleven,” she pouted, "and
Felicity, who doesn’t even want to go, can stay till the
end.”
"Well, I probably won’t,” retorted that lass. "I don’t
know a soul, and I probably won’t have any partners.”
“Oh, come, Felix, we are not entirely without friends.”
the doctor said, with a twinkle. "I’m sure I could persuade


some of my old cronies to dance with you, and I was
hoping for one or two myself.”
Felicity smiled at him.
“Thank you, kind sir,” she said, demurely.
“Oh, Daddy, Felix and I don’t want to dance with old
Mr. Topping or Mr. Scott, or some other ancient,” cried
Fran, youthfully, bracketing off seventy-year-old Mr. Top-
ping with thirty-year-old Mr. Scott. “You see, Daddy,
Brenda and her crowd are bringing a party from town, and
they are sure to be young, and lots of fun. We don’t think
she will hand them round, though, to us,” she added,
mournfully.
“Oh, ho,” said her father. “Is that the way the land
lies? Brenda and friends have a corner in dashing young
men ?”
“I’ll wager anything within reason that those dashing
young men will find their way over to your side of the hall
before they have been there long!” exclaimed the gallant
Fourth looking at Felicity and smugly thinking that his
countrywomen had the most exquisite colouring in the
world.
Felicity looked up.
“That’s very cheering,” she laughed, “but I think I will
attach myself to old Mr. Topping to be sure I have a supper
partner at least. Don’t forget, Fran, Mr. Topping is mine.”
“I wish Phil were here,” sighed Fran. “If you have
one youth in the party the others come round somehow.”
Her mother laughed.
“What wisdom. But I’m afraid he won’t be here until
the next morning,” she said.
“It’s all right, darling, we have resigned ourselves to
Mr. Topping,” said Felicity.
“Oh, well, this estimable old gentleman might turn into
a Prince Charming by a kiss, like the Beast in the fairy-
tale,” suggested Angus.
“He’s not a beast. He’s a perfect old dear, and I’d risk
it if I thought he would,” replied Fran, gloomily.
Peter had turned the radio on, and the programme of
Christmas carols filled the house with their sweet, sharp
beauty.


“1 wonder what I would turn into if someone took a
risk with me,” whispered the Fourth to Felicity under the
cover of the music.
“A shy, retiring fellow, probably,” she suggested, mis-
chievously.
Despite Fran’s gloomy predictions regarding the dance,
Boxing Night found her in a state of wild excitement
mingled with indignation at having to wear her Special
Occasions school dress of plain white silk, instead of a
proper evening dress she had hoped to coax from her
mother. But for once Winifred was adamant.
“But, Mummy, Pat told me that Brenda has the most
marvellous gold lace frock, and it cost a frightful lot.”
“That I don’t doubt,” her father said, grimly, “accord-
ing to accounts, that young lady has enough clothes to see
her through the war. The frightful lot would have been
better spent on an Owen gun.”
“Oh, Daddy, don’t be grim,” his daughter muttered im-
patiently, pursuing Winifred to the kitchen.
“It’s no use badgering me, Fran,” the latter said, with
unaccustomed finality. “In any case, Brenda is much older
than you, and in ordinary times would be coming out and
having lots of evening gowns. So would Felicity, so it’s
much harder on them, really. And don’t tell me again that
Felix has two already,” she added, spiking Fran’s next gun.
“Two,” wailed Fran. “You are not going to wear that
gorgeous blue taffeta, are you, Felix?”
“Well, I was, and it’s not so gorgeous,” answered
Felicity. “I bought it to go dancing with John on his last
leave.”
Fran groaned and her mother said hastily:
“Run and tell your father that if he wants to go to the
hospital before he takes us he will have to go now.”
When she had gone, Winifred and Felicity looked at
each other and laughed.
“Poor Fran,” said Felicity. “Would you let her wear
the blue dress? I think I will wear the black.”
“No, and don’t you offer it to her,” said Winifred,
hastily. “I don’t want her to get any grown-up ideas for
some time yet.”


She’s only eighteen months younger than I am,” said
Felicity, thoughtfully.
Nonsense, replied the other, sharply. “You are years
older and you know it.”
helicity was glad the doctor was a little late bringing
the car back for them, for when, she put on the black net
frock with its appliques of tiny satin leaves on the bodice
and round the bouffant skirt, she found the windblown bob
wouldn’t do at all and a roll had to be managed at the back.
She had just coaxed the last shining hair into place and
clipped a little diamente star in to hold in check the small
escaping tendrils at the side, when she heard Dr. Grant’s
voice from the hall;
Ihe escort is ready.” And snatching up her wrap and
evening bag, she ran out onto the verandah.
1 hope I’m not the last ,” she began, then stopped
short. At the salute were the six Christmas guests. “Why, 1
thought you were to have left to-day,” she cried, in delighted
surprise.
“We are,” replied the Fourth, “but when we found there
was a train going through at eleven to-night we weren’t
going to pass up the chance of offering ourselves as
escorts.”
“And the chance of doing the old gentleman Topping a
dirty turn,” put in Angus, slyly.
“Isn’t it lovely, Felix?” said Fran, eagerly. “We have
each got three perfectly lovely young men.”
“Well, seeing you can’t dance with three of us together,
I hope you will find us some partners while we are waiting
for our turns,” said Burnett.
“Don’t waste any sympathy on yourselves,” laughed
Fran. “Every romantic young woman in the district has been
to the hospital with tender enquiries and cigarettes for the
last week. We had better make them fill our programs,
Felicity, before the local lasses see them.”
“Having no programmes, we will have to put them on
the honor system,” said Felicity, as they walked to the car.
The band was from town and the floor good, and even
the condescending smile she received from Brenda failed
to ruffle Felicity as she waltzed with the Fourth and fox-
trotted with Angus, and was equally diverted by the blan-
dishments of one and the youthful cynicism of the other.
The doctor was enjoying his first social outing since the


war began and the night was all too short for Fran, who,
with her plaits flying, one-stepped vigorously with Bob
Scott when she saw her father moving about amongst the
dancers collecting his guests to take them to the station.
“It must be nearly eleven, Bob,” she wailed, “and as soon
as Dad comes back I have to go home.”
“So what?” asked Bob, a youth of few words.
“So I’ll miss all the fun,” cried his partner, indignantly.
“There won’t be any fun,” he returned, gloomily. “If a
fellow isn’t old enough to be in uniform he might as well
stay at home. Ask any of these dames for a dance and
they’re booked up for the programme. It’s that bunch of
uniforms from town.”
“Oh, thanks,” retorted Fran. “I suppose I was asked
about eleventh, was I ?”
Bob grinned.
“What do you think?” he asked, teasingly, as he
whisked her madly round at the corner.
Winifred and Felicity offered to go to the station to see
the train off, but the men laughingly refused.
“We’ve been monopolising you all the evening,” said
Angus, “and there are some hefty partners lining up for
their innings. We would do to go peacefully away.”
They said good bye as the music stopped and Felicity
stood watching them as they left the hall. Suddenly, above
the milling crowd she caught sight of a dark head above
broad khaki shoulders, whose owner was bending down
towards Winifred. Winifred looked round and pointed in
her direction and the dark head began to move purposefully
towards her.
It was Phillip, and he was looking for her. The little
diamente star twinkled as she stretched up on her toes. He
saw her and she caught bits of his smile as he threaded his
way across the hall. The band was beginning again and
Felicity agitatedly noticed a Flying Officer from Brenda’s
party coming across to her from the other side of the room.
“He’s much nearer. “Oh, he’ll get here first,” she
thought, in a panic, shutting her eyes tightly for a moment.
“Oh, Phillip, why didn’t you come a second earlier?”
But Phillip had won —who doubted it? —and she was in
his arms whirling and swinging to the heavenly “Blue
Danube.”


“How strong he is—how definite, although he isn’t really
handsome, his face is too thin,” she argued dreamily to
herself.
“Aren’t you going to talk to-night?” he said, looking
quizzically down at her.
‘How nice,” she murmured. “Will that do?”
‘For the time being,” he answered.
‘We didn’t expect you till to-morrow.”
“I didn’t intend to come until then, but I met Brenda in
Brisbane and she told me about the dance. Then, when I
rang Winifred and she said you were going, I thought I’d
make the effort to protect my interests.”
Felicity smiled disbelievingly on principle, but her eyes
were sparkling and her feet hardly touched the ground.
“How gallant. Do they teach that at the gunnery
school?” she mocked.
The music stopped. Felicity was laughing as Brenda
and her partner came up.
“Oh, hullo, Phil,” cried Brenda. “He’s not to be trusted,
Felicity. He swore he couldn’t make it to-night, otherwise
I’d have bagged him for my party. All the same, Phil, I’ll
forgive you. Look, here’s a mascot!” She pulled off a
bangle on which hung a varied assortment of tiny carved
animals. “Which will you have, pet. Sometimes I think
you should be given the pig.”
“You keep it, darling Brenda, and the cat, too,” Phillip
drawled, with an infuriating grin. “Thanks all the same,
but I have a mascot. Couldn’t wear two, you know.”
Brenda flushed angrily, but retorted with a laugh:
“Ungrateful brute. Don’t worry, there will be plenty of
applicants for it.”
“I’m sure there will be,” he replied, cheerfully whirling
Felicity away as the music started again.
“Show me your mascot, Phil,” she said, as they danced,
not bothering to feel charitable about Brenda and thor-
oughly enjoying herself.
“Wait till I take it off your hair,” he replied, as he
commandeered her little star.
“Oh, you’re pulling all the hair out of that side of my
head,” she cried. “Look here,” as he held out in his palm
the trinket with a wisp of bright hair caught in its clasp
and said:


“Can I have it?”
“Yes, of course, but let me unwind the hair first.”
But Phillip had slipped it carefully into his pocket.
“I like it that way,” he explained briefly, as they con-
tinued the dance.
They were near the door when the music stopped again
and he led her outside.
“Let’s sit this one out,” he said.
“But, Phil, this is the Monte Carlo,” she protested. “No
one sits this out.”
“So much the better,” he said firmly. “I have something
for you and I am looking for a romantic spot to present it.”
There was no moon. The stars, brilliant in the tropic
sky, lighted their way to a seat in the shadow of a giant
Moreton Bay fig.-
“Now, close your eyes!” he commanded.
She closed them and felt him clasp something on her
arm above the elbow.
“Now, open !” She laughed.
“I can’t see anything if I do.”
“Wait a moment.” He felt in his pockets and produced
some matches.
“There, hurry up,” he said, as he struck one and held it
up near her arm. Below the transparent black of her wide
puffed sleeve she saw a narrow band of gold with a heart-
shaped clasp enamelled in Phillip’s battalion colours and
bearing both their initials.
“Oh, Phil, how lovely,” she breathed. “Thank you so
much. I love it.”
He looked pleased.
“I wanted something different,” he said, elaborately
casual, “and didn’t want to compete with John’s brooch, so
I designed that myself.”
“I’ll wear them both always,” she said, happily.
He was silent for a moment, then he said, soberly:
“This is hail and farewell, Felix. I’m off in the
morning.”
“Not so soon, Phil,” she said, sharply. “I thought
perhaps a few days ”
“No, worse luck. That gunnery course spun itself over


more time than we expected. I had to choose between
being here to-night and coming up to-morrow for a day
and a half. You’ll write, won’t you?”
“Of course, Phil,” she replied, in a small voice.
“Often? And let me know where to find you after this
show is over?”
“Yes, Phil.”
“You couldn’t tell me right now, I suppose?” he asked,
offhandedly.
“Yes, here with Winifred till you come back,” she said
simply, wondering dreamily why she had ever contemplated
doing anything else.
He put his arm round her shoulders and kissed her
gently on the top of her head.
“What a honey you are to say that without making me
ask you to,” he said. “Now I won’t have to worry about
submarine action.”
“If I were going home, I don’t know why you should
have to worry about me any more than I shall about you
when you go overseas,” she argued, leaning her head against
his arm.
Phillip laughed.
“But you’re such a little fool in the water,” he said.
The band could be heard beginning a spirited foxtrot.
In the rectangle of light that fell across the path from the
door to the gate they saw the doctor leaving with Winifred
and the reluctant Fran.
“Shouldn’t we be going with them?” Felicity asked.
“And have my poetic mood shattered by that bone-
shaker, not much,” he retorted, decidedly. “We’ll walk
home by the beach road, unless you would like to stay till
the end. Would you?”
“Whatever for?” she asked, lightly. “And I’ve never
walked in the country under the stars before.”
Phillip stood up and held out his hand. She put hers
into it without a word and together they went down Beach
Road, her filmy skirt billowing in the warm breeze.


#




3 1508 00221858 9


