

National War Service.
Thrift in
Time and Talents
BY
M. E. ROBERTS.
Lecturer in Charge, Women’s Handicraft
Department, Technical College, Sydney.




National War Service.
Thrift in
Time and Talents
By
M. E. ROBERTS,
Lecturer in Charge, Women’s Handicraft Department,
Technical College, Sydney.
Published by the Australasian League of Honour (in
affiliation with the League of Honour for Women and
Girls of the British Empire). Hon. Sec., Mrs.
F, W. Wood. " Branxholme,” North Sydney.




Thrift in Time and Talents
Thrift is said to be the ability to live
on, or to spend something- less than, one’s
income. It is more than that. It is the
ability to earn more than one spends on
mere material things, so that there will
be some over for the higher life.
So-called thrift that stints and dwarfs
our mental, social, and spiritual life and
development is positive waste.
There are times when one cannot be
thrifty, such as in days of sickness, when
we needs must spend more than our in-
come.
The economic condition of a nation at
war is much the same as that of a family
visited by sickness. The nation spends
its resources—time, man-power, wealth
—on winning its freedom ; on gaining vic-
tory. The family spends its resources—
time, man power, wealth —on gaining
victory over sickness.
In every case when victory and freedom
from unhealthy conditions have been won,
the family or the nation is in poorer cir-
cumstances than before the visitation of
war and sickness, and is sometimes heav-
ily in debt. Every member of the family


or every citizen of the nation so impover-
ished must find and follow the best line
of action which will again put them in
the position of having enough goods—or
wealth, if that term is preferred to live
as a civilised people and to make pro-
gress as a cultured race.
There are two ways by which we can
reconstruct or build up our national wel-
fare :
1. Saving by using less goods.
2. Producing more goods.
SAVING.
By “saving more” we do not mean
hoarding money. If our saving is to be
of service to the community, we must save
so that there will be more goods to pass
around to the less fortunate. In other
words, we restrict the amount of goods
which we allow ourselves to consume so
that there will be a surplus to serve out
to others, and money placed in the bank
to start new industries. Saving, then,
does not mean hoarding, but it means
restrictive consumption in order that the
whole nation may be more wealthy.
Some women imagine that if they pur-
chase twice as much clothing as they
really need they are providing work for
someone. True, it gives the worker more
labour to do; but it leaves less of this
world’s goods—less wealth —with which


to pay him. Even if he gets extra money
for the extra work, that money will not
buy so much goods when these commodi-
ties are scarce (through extravagant or
wasteful consumption, or through re-
stricting production) as he would get for
his money if commodities were more
plentiful.
In other words, there is a limit to the
capacity for production of the world, and
everyone who extravagantly uses more
than she really requires is leaving too
little for others to get a supply. Auto-
matically the cost rises of goods which
arc scarce, and so they are put out of the
reach of many.
This is true in normal times; but needs
to be especially emphasised now that
every commodity is made more scarce
through the use of such enormous quan-
tities for war. It, therefore, behoves
every woman to restrict the consumption
of her own household so that commodi-
ties may not be made more scarce.
Another reason for being careful of all
goods and chattels is that they have all
been produced by the labour of a fellow-
being. We never think of destroying or
treating carelessly anything a friend has
made for us, neither should we have less
respect for what any man s labour has
produced.


Although things are not made to be
hoarded, but to be used, we should make
the best possible use of them and not
waste anything.
An eminent economist from France
lately attending the Science Congress in
England said: “Restrictive consumption
and intensive production are the two
things which the Allied citizens must
practise if the Allies are to win through
to victory, and, after peace is declared, to
prosperity; but restrictive consumption
is the negative virtue, intensive produc-
tion is the positive virtue.”
PRODUCTION.
Every woman who produces some raw
material, every woman who adds to the
value of the raw material the labour that
converts it into the finished article, ready
for the consumer’s use, is not only adding
to her own wealth, but is building up the
prosperity of the nation.
In Australia there is such a small popu-
lation that the only way in which we can
produce enough to pay this enormous war
debt and make in this Commonwealth a
wealth and vigour of life common to all
is by everybody working, everybody pro-
ducing some of the commodities which
make civilised life possible.
When the demand for an eight hour
working day was being first made, the
great argument in favour of it was that


men would be able to give a better quality
of service and turn out better work if
not overtaxed by long hours. But many
workers have conceived the idea that the
reduction of working hours was neces-
sary because work itself is evil, and they
think they should do as little as possible.
This attitude of mind is the canker
worm that is eating into our national life
and may bring destruction on our
Empire.
Every member of the League of Honour
is bound to combat this idea both by ex-
ample and precept.
There is no blessing in the world like
work : there is no pleasure in life like the
joy of being able to do well and success-
fully the work of hands and brain. The
reason the working day has been reduced
to eight hours is that the workers may
have this joy; that they may have the
strength to do their work so well and
thoroughly that it will be a very real
pleasure to themselves as well as a means
of earning a living.
EFFICIENCY.
This pleasure conies'through the rough-
est work as well as through the more
artistic and intellectual The
man who enjoyed his success at his work
more than anyone I have ever met was
one who could wheel more barrowloads of


soil in a day than anyone else. It gave
him a sense of control that was nectar
to him. He, too, is part of the great In-
dustrial System—the Service Corps—that
is going to build up the nation’s prosper-
ity. So is the typist, the artist, the man-
ager, or any other worker, from the
roughest to the most intellectual. We
must take “Service” for our watchword
of to-day. The kind of service that the
nation most wants is that we shall work
to make ourselves better off by producing
more goods, more wealth. The nation is
not asking so much for sacrifice as for
service.
We shall have to give a percentage of
our wealth —of the goods we produce—
to pay our war debt and to maintain the
men who have fought for us; but the ser-
vice that is most required of us is that
we shall make ourselves more efficient—
more wealthy. The wealth and efficiency
of a nation cannot be greater than the
sum total of the efficiency and wealth of
its citizens.
I. IN THOUGHT.
So every member of the League of
Honour, if she is to keep her promise to
do all she can for the Empire, must now
train to make herself proficient. The
question then arises: What shall we train
ourselves to be ? What kind of workers


arc needed? The greatest need of to-day,
as it is of every age, is that we should
have more thinkers.
The scientific thought of the laborator-
ies 25 years ago has materialised into
the household and industrial implements
and conveniences of to-day. Again still
more important, the philosophic thought
of the study of 25 years ago is the practice
of trades unions now. The eight-hour
working day is an instance. Certainly in
putting these thoughts into practice some
of these ideas have become so warped and
stretched out of shape that the originators
would not recognise them. But, never-
theless, all that is good in trades union-
ism, all that has made the working classes
better fed and clothed and housed, did not
originate with the workers, but with that
section of the community sometimes
spoken of as “dreamers.” It is within
the lives of many people still with us that
Ruskin was called an impractical dreamer
for thinking every house might have
ventilators, every town a water supply
and a sewerage system. We enjoy these
hygienic conditions to-day without much
thought of the thinkers who dreamed
dreams, but without them we should be
still without sanitary conditions. If the
race is to make any progress in the future
it will always begin by and through the
seers seeing visions and possibilities for
the days to come.


In the present age there are more
women than men with leisure to do the
thinking. But if their thoughts are to
materialise into community benefits they
must study and train. It should be the
rule, not the exception, for every girl who
has leisure and the suitable temperament
to go up to the University, the Technical
College, or to some other centre of educa-
tion. Of course, all thinkers are not Uni-
versity men and women ; but more women
prepared for the University would raise
the standard of a girl’s attainments when
leaving High School and result in better
educated women throughout the com-
munity and give us more thinkers.
II. IN INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE.
Then those women who cannot spend
the years at the University should be en-
couraged to take up some skilled occupa-
tion and develop it to the degree of pos-
sible self-support.
No thinking woman can go into our
Public schools and see such a large per-
centage of the senior girls looking as if
they might be a great asset to the com-
munity without a regret that they will
almost all drift into doing the most un-
skilled work.
In nearly every department of industry
and commerce it is the rule for our women
to do the unskilled and ill-paid work,
while only the men are trained for the


more expert branches. In some kinds of
work—banking - , for instance—women
have so lately been admitted that there
has not been time for things to adjust
themselves; but even in their ancient
dominions they are not doing the skilled
work. In the matter of preparing food —
making biscuits, jam, preserves—women
mostly do the drudgery and men the
expert work, because women do not train
and fit themselves for higher work in the
industrial world.
Some women are frightened at the
mention of the Industrial System. They
seem to imagine that it is some evil sys-
tem for cheating the community of its
money and giving as little as possible in
return. On the contrary, the ideal good
of humanity underlies every principle of
industrial efficiency. Admittedly, the
ideal of selfish gain is the only motive of
some captains of industry, but not of
those who have built up great businesses.
This wrong ideal will give nlace entirely
to humane ideals as women take more in-
terest in and become captains of industry.
They will keep the ideal of the greatest
good to the greatest number burning on
every executive, not only because the
ideal good underlies every principle of
efficiency, but because women love their
fellows more than men.
Women would always rather work for
love than for money. That is why they


have not taken the place in industry that
the nature of things and their nature
especially fits them for, because it looks
like working only for money. But women
will find more scope for their penchant to
work for love of humanity—especially of
other women and children —in industrial
life than in any other field. Can Aus-
tralian women contemplate for one mo-
ment the way English women are pro-
ducing munitions—munitions that are
defending us as well as themselves —
without wishing to help in this produc-
tion ?
Though we are not called to work in
munition factories, we are called to pro-
duce more food, so that these very muni-
tion workers may be fed.
Only last Wednesday Mr. Runciman,
when speaking of the tragic circumstances
of the English people, said: “The strain
this country will have to bear in 1917
primarily is that of the food supplies.
Next year we will have to depend on
Australian supplies.” What are we doing
here to save food or to produce more?
THE IMPERATIVE CALL TO
WOMEN TO ENTER THE
ECONOMIC LIFE.
We have industrial problems here which
especially need the heart and mind of
women to solve them. To be able to do
this women must study and work to be-
come skilful at some occupation and know


everything - about it. She must also know
something of every other occupation at
which women work. At present we have
a lull which women are filling in with
knitting and any other work that can
make them feel they are helping the men
who are fighting—not only for the love
of one man there, but for the love of all
the great hearts who are doing their duty
even unto death. But women of Aus-
tralia are called to do a greater work than
knitting. That has its place; but every
able-bodied woman should be able to bring
sustenance to at least one family by her
exertions. By knitting she could provide
a family with salt—but certainly not with
porridge, much less with bread, and
clothes, and meat. At a recent meeting
of women a hope was expressed that at
the end of the war knitting needles will
not cease to click. If knitting is used to
symbolise the desire that has been stirred
up in many lives to do something useful,
it is certainly most desirable that it should
be kept active. But as for knitting it-
self, we hope it will only be done when
women are otherwise resting, and that
they turn their manual skill into indus-
tries that will enable them to provide not
only socks but all the needs of an abun-
dant physical life —and something over
for the higher life.
We must now prepare for the time, in
the near future, when the country can


not afford to have any idlers. Time and
energy not put to the best use is time anil
energy wasted. We must more than ever
learn to obey the command to “redeem
the time.” If we spend two hours daily
on work that can be done by machinery,
and, therefore, is not worth one penny an
hour, the time is wasted. That two
hours spent on a very small plot of the
back yard would grow vegetables enough
for two families and earn at least one
shilling an hour. If a woman, married or
unmarried, finds enough to occupy her
time and skill and knowledge in her home,
then that is her place in the industrial life
of the community. The home is the base
on which is built all that is good in the
nation and in the individual, and the
woman who' is fully occupied at home-
making is doing her duty to the nation.
But there is a vast army of women who
can direct their energies to production,
or to some study for community better-
ment. We are being exhorted on every
hand to prepare for work, to make sacri-
fices, and no one has the courage to tell
us straight out that now that most of
women’s industries have been taken out
of the home and are carried on in the
workshop—now that machinery has
taken the place of muscular enerev —now
that the world’s energy comes from en-
gines and muscular energy does not count
for much —if our energv is to be of any


value to the community we must use our
skill and brain power in the workroom,
where incarnate energy is provided so
that we need not spend ourselves with
so little result. It seems such a tragic
sacrifice for a woman to spend her time
and strength and then find her work has
earned less than a penny an hour.
OBJECTIONS TO BE OVERCOME.
I. "WORKING FOR A LIVING.”
Time was when a woman was ashamed
to own that she would have to “do some-
thing.” When the financial position of
her menkind became embarrassed and
necessity made her a productive unit in
the community, she felt humbled and mor-
tified because she could not be dependent
on her men relations. Women have been
gradually sliding away from this attitude
of leaning on others; but the war is
causing us to make great strides toward
the time when every woman will be
ashamed of not being able to contribute
toward the prosperity of the State by
using her powers to help in production.
But in the near future it is just dire
necessity that will make us all appreciate
the fact that it is true of the nation as of
the individual that those who will not
work shall not eat. How have other
nations regained their prosperity after a
devastating war? Switzerland, for in-
stance, was so impoverished after the


long struggle for freedom that she seemed
hardly able to maintain her independence.
Some patriots, looking for a national
asset that could be turned to de-
cided that the Swiss were more skilful
with their hands than other nations, and
proceeded to apply that skill to making
watches, dhe result was that they im-
ported metal at the cost of some thou-
sands of pounds, and exported watches to
the value of many millions, and the nation
was so much richer.
II. ”SORDIDNESS OF BUSINESS.”
Why do not more women in Australia
apply their skilful fingers and keen mem-
tal powers to making the nation, and
themselves incidentally affluent and free ?
Women enjoy manufacturing and selling-
tilings for some charity benefit, why not
•for the benefit of the Commonwealth?
Because they are ashamed to be termed
good business women. Businesslike!
What does it mean ? Many women think
it means underhand tricks, or taking some
mean advantage to get money from others
without giving adequate return. This
idea obtained and has survived from the
time when the only way to get things
done was to sweat the last ounce of
energy out of human beings, because no
other energy was known.
Greece arrived at a state of prosperity
because there were five slaves to every
free man. The free man kept the othcis


"under” so that he could commandeer
their muscular energy. We are living in
an age of a new morality, which docs
not permit human beings to be sweated.
Nowadays we do not keep men to saw
wood. A small gas engine or electric
plant will saw as much wood in a year at
a cost of five pounds and one man’s wages
as it would take i 10,000 worth of man
power to cut —paying eight shillings a
day.
So with the aid of coal and gas and
electricity has come a new morality.
Sweating and slavery are no longer toler-
ated. The business of the community
does not want man’s muscular energy so
much as his ability to organise and
manage. Need a woman be ashamed to
be so businesslike as to be able to organ-
ise and manage any concern? Good
business means giving people commodi-
ties and conveniences which they could
not obtain without the business man’s in-
tervention. It means bringing new ideas
into the art and science of production and
despatch. Women are crying out for the
right to have a place on every organisa-
tion —and at the same time shirking the
duty of helping in production, though
this is the organisation that needs her
most. There are two kinds of organisa-
tion—
1. That builds up.
2. That destroys.


These two primitive examples will il-
lustrate the spirit the e
methods of each kind. We are told ihe
righteous shall flourish like the palm tree,
he shall grow like the cedar in Lebanon.
“He shall be like the tree planted by t
rivers and whatsoever he doeth shal
prosper.” . . r i
This brings to mind visions of gram -
cur dignity, grace, benevolence, majesty.
But why <Ud the seer use the.tree or a
tvne of the great man? Why not
animal? That is because of the compara-
tive pettiness, transitoriness, antagonism,
paucity of animal life. Plants trust all
'nature! drawing help from everywhere
ourifying the environment at the same
time. 7 Animals trust none but their kind,
and grow through destruction.
It is not good business to grow through
destruction Business is the construc-
tional organisation that builds up. < L
draws heln from everywhere and enriches
the whole neighbourhood.
There have lately been some experi-
ments made in methods of work by which
“very action which unnecessary fatigues
the worker or wastes time has been elim
inated Applied to the work of brick-
ay ng. it was found that one man could
lay twice as many bricks and leave the
work less fatigued than when working by
the old traditional methods. Applied to
the work of coal lumpers, the labour


which formerly moved 16 tons of coal
can now move 47 tons. These are in-
stances of organisation and management
—businesslike qualities—making for bet-
ter conditions even when muscular energy
is used; better conditions for employer,
for employee, and the consumer.
It is not labour or capital or land that
makes the nation’s prosperity —but ideas.
Why should not women bring their in-
tellect, talent, skill to bear on producing
more commodities? Especially now,
when the whole issue of the war depends
on whether we can produce enough.
THE FORCE OF FACTS AND
FIGURES.
There are many industries calling out
for just the kind of genius a woman has
to build up, and there are nearly 400,000
women of working age in New South
Wales doing nothing productive. Of
course, it is not only the women who are
idle. Roughly speaking, there are four
people working for every six people exist-
ing on others’ exertions. Let us look at
some of the things we pay foreigners to
produce for us, which we could either do
without or produce ourselves —if women
would make their labour available. In
one month, November, 1915, we imported
from overseas the following:—


Confectionery, 372 tons (measurement).
Jams, preserves, 53 tons (weight).
Fresh fruit, 86,370 cases.
Fish, 76 tons.
Cheese, 31 tons.
Bacon and hams, 40 tons.
Potatoes, 1569 tons.
In addition to the 372 tons of confec-
tionery from overseas, we imported dur-
ing the same month 442 tons from other
States. The quantity manufactured in
the State is not available, but the cost of
it was about £66,000. So it is with all
other things. Besides the 53 tons of jam
from overseas, we imported in the same
month 307 tons from other States.
These are only a few of the things that
might be mentioned. There are millions
of pounds of fresh vegetables brought
overseas every year.
In the matter of clothing, in one year
the ready-made clothes brought into
Sydney cost £1,420,595. In the same year
there was £5,788,269 worth of clothes
made in Sydney. The cost of material
from which these were made was
£2,794,473, and wages paid for the mak-
ing was £2,993,896. It is somewhat more
satisfactory that this lastnamed sum re-
mained in the State, but very significant
that about half of it was paid to men—
mostly foreigners —although there were
three times as many women working on
them as men.


That means that women do not train
themselves for the more skilled and scien-
tific parts of the industry.
During the same period as that in which
these clothes were imported we also im-
ported piece goods to the value of
£3,588,877. Much of this was made from
wool grown in Australia, transported to
England, woven there into textiles, and
carried back here.
In the interim between the wool leav-
ing our sheds and getting back to the
consumer, the number of people who
handled it—the carters, wharf labourers,
shipping agents, clerks, weavers, finan-
ciers, etc. —all had to be paid something,
and this cost was all paid by the consumer.
It is even more wasteful when the textiles
are carried to Japan and there made into
clothes for shipment to Australia.
But it is not only the wool which we
export. The grease on it is what we buy
at the chemist’s as “lanoline,” and is said
to be worth nearly as much as the wool.
The by-products of wool, coal, etc., which
we waste in a most lordly manner would
pay our war debt. Women must save all
they can so that there will be money to
set up machinery for new industries. They
must give their best work to production,
and encourage their men to do the same,
so that we may be able to hold our place
among the foremost nations, and we


should at the same time use our brains to
secure legislation for easier and cheaper
transport of what is produced here.
VALUE OF SKILLED
OCCUPATION.
I TO THE INDIVIDUAL.
The nation’s needs can only be met
by skilled workers. Every woman must
have a skilled occupation, developed to a
degree of possible self-support, if she is
to serve her country. Every woman needs
a skilled occupation for her own sake to
insure against reverses; to give her a
wider comprehension of the problems of
the world’s workers and enable her to
sympathise with them; to enable her to
develop intellectually; to give her a sense
of , control which will make her morally
strong and willing to do her share of the
world’s work; to give her a moral sensi-
bility and courage that will guide her
conduct so that her social relationships
shall be harmonious.
II. TO THE NATION.
Every woman must use her skill to
help in the production of goods that are
marketable, for our very existence as a
nation now depends on our ability to pro-
duce what is required, not only for our
own consumption, but to meet needs
of the old country and the Allies in this
greatest fight of the Age; —


“Core of my heart, my country!
Land of the Rainbow Gold,
For flood and fire and famine
She pays us back threefold.”
All service ranks the same with God.
. . His presence fills
Our earth, each only as God wills,
Can work —God’s puppets, best and
worst,
Are we; there is no last nor first.


NOTE.
For farther information re work open to
women, expense of training, etc.—
In Victoria, see “ Women's Work," Cuth-
bertson & McGowcn, price if, Lothian Pub-
lishers, Flinders-street, Melbourne ;
In U. S. W., see “ Careers for U omen :
Opportunities for Social Service," price gd.,
published by the Presbyterian Girls' Auxil-
iary—Hon. See., Hiss Barron, Presbyterian
Church Ofaces, York-strcet, Sydney.
Advice will gladly be given on personal ap-
plication —
To the Vocation Club, Women's Handicraft
Dept., leclinical College, George and Regent
streets, Sydney—open 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Mon-
day to Friday ;
To the Girls' Realm Guild, Vickery s Cham-
bers, 76 Pitt-street, Sydney ;
To the Commonwealth Patriotic Association
—Hon. Sec., Miss Ruth Beale, Killara,
Sydney ;
Or to the Enrolling Officer of the League
of Honour.
Anglo East Print. 221 Thomas Street, Sydney. Tel. City 3933.
