



Through
ORIENT
to
OCCIDENT.
By
H.E.PRATTEN.




Index.
Page
1. Northern Australia - - 3
2. Malaya- 8
3. Tin Mining in Malaya 12
4. Asiatic Labor - - - 16
3. Glimpses of Eastern Life - 20
6. Sidelights on the East- - 23
7. The New Chinaman - - 29
8. Dalny and Port Arthur - 33
9. Manchuria and the Japanese - 37
10. The Trans-Siberian Railway - 42
If. A Peep at Russia - - 47
12. A Glimpse of Germany and
its People- - - 52
13. Australia in England - - 56
14. Homeward - - - 61


Northern Australia
I.
The Chinese and the Malays knew of Australia long
before the advent of the white man. They know it to-
day, and in their language they call it “The Land of
Gold.”
Centuries ago, the Chinese were digging for gold
in Borneo, and for tin in Malaya, and recent excava-
tions in the former island disclosed a Chinese pump
80 feet below the present surface of what was ap-
parently virgin land.
That Australia (at least the Northern part) was
known to the Asiatics very many years ago is beyond
question—but they did not settle there, for at no place
in the North can we find evidence of a large Asiatic
population, as we can throughout Malaya. It is fair to
suppose the reason was not the presence of fierce warlike
natives, not the distance, nor an angry sea (for a few
days at the most over usually smooth water should
bring the slowest Chinese junk or native prau from the
Islands of Java to Australia), but it must be that the
coast land was not attractive, the essentials for human
settlement were lacking, and even in tropical latitudes
North Australia did not hold the soil, the climate and
the vegetation of her neighbours.
It can then be fairly assumed that Tropical Australia
as the easy home of the coloured man does not hold
the same advantages of climate as do other areas densely
populated and not far away from her shores. Now
Australia belongs to the white man, who has decreed
that, whether they want to or not, no Asiatic or alien
coloured persons shall find a resting place there.
Australia’s conscience is becoming uneasy over the
unpopulated North, which also includes, geographic-
ally the north-west part of West Australia. This
area is largely now the vacuum which nature abhors,
and the development of that portion of our continent
must go on faster than the leisurely pace of the past.
The good ship which takes us on the way is steady,
for the Great Barrier Reef —that north-eastern natural
protection to our empty continent—is abeam. Memories
Through Orient to Occident.


of Captain Cook are numerous, and the names of some
of the islands passed suggest that the nomenclature was
inspired by the blacksmith’s implements—Hammer,
Anvil, and Tongs Islands being charted now as origin-
ally named.
Another group of islands is named after the days of
the week, and one is the widely known Thursday—the
most northern outpost of Australia, surrounded by other
islands and reefs, amongst which may we express the
patriotic hope that all invading ships may find a grave.
No evidence is yet forthcoming that anything prac-
tical will be done in the way of defence, and it is quite
certain that moral suasion will not always be adequate
protection.
As we steam westerly along a parallel of latitude
well within the tropics, across the Gulf of Carpentaria,
into the heat and deep blue of the Eastern waters, the
nearest land is Australia’s Northern Territory, the
peopling and development of which constitutes our
great national political problem. Can this be done
without an influx of inferior races that will set back
our white ideals, perhaps for all time? To those living
in cool Tasmania, temperate Victoria, New South
Wales and other States, the problem appears much
easier than it really is. We southern Australians point
to the rich, cheap land, the cattle areas, the potentiali-
ties for rubber, cotton, and agriculture, and to the
great Northern Territory as also a rich mineral area —
but the heat and environment there are similar to those
existing in other tropical areas, and must be considered
in connection with white settlement. No white man
in the tropical East does much manual labour—is it
natural he should? Are the members of his family
likely to thrive there? Can it honestly be said that
white women and children are physically the same from
Hobart to Cooktown, Darwin or Broome? Of course
they are not, and never will be. Our tropical posses-
sion—the Northern Territory— must be managed and
viewed largely from the tropical standpoint; but at
present some progress may be made if our Federal
Government can administer laws with the same facility
as they make them.
From the dawn of time, gold and other precious
metals have lured man through hardships, climate and
space. The cold of Klondyke, the heat of Africa,
the rigorous climate of Siberia, and the dangers of the
Andes, have been braved and conquered when gold
was to be won. Why should not our Northern Tetri-
tory contain its full share of the world’s supply of
precious metals? Those who ought to know, assert
that the Territory is full of minerals. Its surface has
barely been scratched, its vast spaces in particular are
Through Orient to Occident.


unexplored, and in mining development the solution of
part of our difficulty with the Territory may be found.
Subsidise the hardy pioneer, the speculative mining
capitalist, the adventurer—all and sundry who will do
some real and practical exploratory work. if dis-
coveries are made—and undoubtedly there will be rich
finds and big reefs, and, perhaps, startling develop-
ments in unexpected places—then people will be
attracted from all parts of the world. Streams of im-
migrants would gravitate to the rch, new country;
physical discomforts would be of secondary importance.
With rich discoveries, large mining towns would
spring up, and from the Occident, and across the
Pacific, people would come to us, and our problem
of peopling the Territory would be easier. No one
with the most elementary knowledge of our continent
will dispute the assertion that there must be many more
potential Broken Hills, Kalgoorlies, Cobars and
Charters Tow'ers as yet undiscovered, awaiting the
prospector’s pick, and there is no reason why our great
unpopulated Northern Territory should not be the area
in which the next rich discoveries may be made; but,
at present, it is largely a “terra incognita” to the man
in the street. Hence, a practical policy on the part
of the new administrators, coupled with a few score of
the many thousands of pounds available in the Federal
Treasury chest, judiciously expended in subsidies to
bona-fide capitalist speculators, exploration syndicates
and prospectors—such expenditure to be safeguarded by
businesslike conditions—would be at least some prac-
tical start upon a problem which our legislators do not
seem at present to know how to handle at all. With
rich mineral finds, production of wealth, remunerative
employment for labour, the establishment of mining
towns with all the trade ramifications necessary to feed,
clothe, house and amuse in comfort a prosperous com-
munity—with such permanent settlement would come
families and almost certainly some modification in
living conditions that would tend to stability and some
amelioration of tropical environment.
Will the Federal Government rise to the occasion
and realise and appreciate facts? Will they be prac-
tical and take things as they are, not as they would
have them be?
Port Darwin is an Oriental port without, as yet,
the large Oriental populace. In some places, even in
Northern Australia, the land is steeped in moisture,
swelters in heat and is swathed to the throat in vegeta-
tion that reeks of malaria. In these respects it differs
but little from other tropical climes. What can be
done with it? Can we do anything, or not? It is
quite certain that without population the Territory is a
source of weakness and danger, and it is also quite
Through Orient to Occident


certain that no large stream of desirable immigrants will
ever flow that way without some strong compelling
force, and where can that force be found? By the
allurements of cotton, rubber, copra, or other forms of
agriculture in a tropical country, without coloured
labour? Never. That can be placed as a phantasy
or dream impossible to be realised. Gold and other
minerals are the practical way out —wealth, the main-
spring of comfort, the desire for gain that will bring
ease.
Federal Legislators! Subsidise mining and the
miner, try and lure population by the irresistible mag-
net of all ages—gold.
Difficulties of climate, natural disadvantages, will
greatly disappear under the magic influence of gold,
and with the roar of the stampers will come wages that
will attract men even to the tropics, for the climate
there can be borne. The sun is the Universal Father
and is kind to those of his children who live well-
ordered lives.
While most of us see the difficulties ahead in the
settlement of the baby State of the Commonwealth,
may it not be our Cinderella? An old resident of
Calcutta told me that the climate in that part of India
is one of the worst in Asia, but a white man can live
as long there as he can elsewhere if he looks after
himself and abstains from alcohol. Wherever one
goes it needs but little discernment to see that the
white man’s tropical curse is alcohol, and it has been
said that for every white man who dies a natural death
two die from the effects of whisky.
The best preparation then that a sensible Federal
Government can make for a white population in the
Northern Territory would be the immediate prohibition
of alcohol. There are at present few vested interests
of importance to consider, and none to fight. Now is
the time to act and grapple with a problem that is as
alluring, though as difficult, as inspiring and as com-
plex as any that an indolent vote-catching legislator
ever tried to shelve.
In mining operations in the Northern Territory, there
has been a steady retrograde movement in recent years.
The Chief Warden, in his able report for 1910, makes
many suggestions, and urges on the Federal Govern-
ment its immediate and benevolent attention to mining
development which is now languishing.
The vast majority of the settlers in the North,
whether in Queensland or in West Australia, will tell
you candidly that they do not go there for their health,
but to make a bit of money, and will then go down
Through Orient to Occident.


South to live. They never intend that their residence
in the Australian tropics should be permanent. There
is no doubt about the effects of the malevolent climate
on white women, and we dwellers in temperate lati-
tudes must not view the question through picnic
spectacles.
That the white man can live in the tropics, and keep
as well as he can elsewhere, so long as he does not
kill himself with alcohol, is proved in Malaya, India
and Africa.
The whites live there in specially constructed houses;
they have cheap and numerous servants, and do but
little manual labour. Under these circumstances, to
live and keep well is easy. But can manual labour
also be done and sustained? Can women without hurt
undertake all household duties without assistance? In
the Tropics, so far, the white man lives in comfort and
often in luxury, and the women do nothing. Can
Australia show the world another new thing? Can
she upset all preconceived ideas as to tropical life? I
do not think so. The settlement of the North will
have to come first from pastoral, mining and allied in-
dustries, and the Territory is rich enough to give high
pay for light work.
The problem is urgent, and something must be done
soon. To attempt tropical agriculture with white
labour now would be to court failure. Let us do what
can be done at once —attract the miner and all who
follow his success, and this problem of problems for
Australia will be nearer a solution than it is now.
Through Orient to Occident.


Malaya
II.
The development now going on in the Malay States
(which, together with the Straits Settlements of Singa-
pore, Penang and Malacca, and part of the Kingdom
of Siam, constitute geographically the Malay Penin-
sula) is of particular interest to a British Australian.
The total population of the Peninsula is probably
nearly two millions—the Straits-born and immigrant
Chinamen numbering about one-half, and the native
Malay and the Tamil from Madras, together with the
small number of Englishmen, constituting the other
half.
Many people probably have the idea that the Malay
Peninsula is a tiger-haunted, snake-infested, malaria-
breeding land, inhabited by scalp hunters and people
who run amock. This misconception, if it still exists,
will not remain much longer, for King Rubber is alter-
ing the face of the country. In the jungle land, which
looks much the same as the average bush land of Aus-
tralia, a good deal of clearing and burning off is going
on. The heavy timber is being removed, and large
areas have already been planted and millions upon
millions of rubber trees are springing up in Malaya in
all stages of growth.
The talk at the clubs, on the trains, in the hotels, is
all of rubber and its future prospects, and it must be
said that the chance of some of those who invested
their money in this security during the height of the
London boom (and their name is legion) of getting it
all back again is remote. It will be remembered how
wild the scramble was, how feverish the anxiety to
get rich quickly; the sad reaction has now come, and
the East has had its full share of the loss. Large
fortunes were quickly made by the few; but many of
the small investors who have all their small savings
locked up in rubber shares have very little prospect of
realising more than a small interest each year on the
Investment made. This is the most that can be hoped,
and, good as rubber planting may be as a legitimate
business, good as the return may be upon the cost of
Through Orient to Occident.


buying and clearing the land, planting, attending to and
harvesting the crop, many investors will never again
see any part of the capital they so hastily and rashly
paid for rubber plantation stock, the shares in which
were largely loaded and watered by London promoters
and company mongers.
Every second man you meet in Malaya has rubber
shares for sale—but there are few buyers. The re-
action after the boom is keenly felt—very little local
capital being available for other legitimate Malaya
propositions at the present time.
The rubber trees themselves, millions in number, are
planted about fifteen feet apart. They are in all
stages of growth, from plants in areas even unstumped
and only partly cleared, to the magnificent estates, now
well established and paying handsome dividends. The
plantations are everywhere. The rubber tree is tall
and straight; when fully grown it is about thirty feet in
height, and has large light green leaves on branches
near the top. When the trees are full grown and are
in foliage they make a shade second only to the jungle
itself, and the dim, cathedral-like aisles of the planta-
tion are the striking features in every matured rubber
estate.
A bird’s-eye view of the Federated Malay States
gives one the impression of richness of soil and un-
limited resources of tin, rubber and cocoanut land.
Almost every mile traversed by the railway conveys
to the traveller an indication that some production or
development is being carried on.
The Federated Malay States Railway runs for four
hundred miles north and south; it is comfortable for
travelling, smooth-running, with a 3ft. 6in. gauge, and
cool sleeping berths costing I dollar (2/4). There
are also free beds for the weary traveller at night, and
good meals can be obtained on the train during the
day at reasonable prices. The average rate of speed is
twenty-five miles an hour, and the line runs through
very interesting country. The rich virgin soil will
apparently grow anything, and there abounds on every
side evidence that Malaya holds many of the agricul-
tural potentialities of rich Java.
The capital towns of the States, with their imposing
Government buildings and arboreal surroundings, clean
streets, orderly markets and public sale areas, all beat
evidence of the dominant British official who, proud,
exclusive, and perhaps at times prone to snobbishness
though he may be, yet has proved his ability in the
Malay State capitals and towns of Kuala Lumpur,
Kuala Kangsor, Ipoh, Taiping, and others, to effec-
tively rule and sway alien and subservient races by
methods of justice, falrplay and order—qualities un-
known before his arrival.
Through Orient to Occident.


The white population of the Federated Malay
States take but little interest in Australia. They can
reach the Old Country in almost the same time that
would be occupied in a trip here, and beyond the
jockeys and horse owners who accompany the stock
shipped to the east from our ports, they have seen but
little of us, and do not so far seem to have been very
favourably impressed, for the remarks they pass upon
the Australian types they have become acquainted with
are not always too complimentary.
The Tropics is not a favourite area for British
property investors, as the Englishman admits that he
does not go out for his health, and that his first object
in going there as a rule is to make money as quickly
as he can, and then to return to the Old Country to
invest and spend it. Consequently, alienated land is
largely owned by the Chinese, and it is more than
probable that three-quarters of the real property in
Malaya not owned by the Government belongs to that
race.
The late Commonwealth Representative in Singa-
pore, Mr. J. M. Sinclair, who was also the Com-
mercial Agent in the East for the State of Victoria,
has done good, practical commercial work for his
State, and by means of his branch office in Shanghai
and the frequent visits he made to India he has brought
many of the exporters of Victoria into close touch with
the centres of industrial activity in the East. In this
and other ways Mr. Sinclair has done much for Vic-
torian trade. He was formerly in London, and the
practical experiences he gained there helped him con-
siderably in his work in the East, and, as a result,
he has not only been able to give effective help to
Victorian trade generally, but has introduced Australian
mining dredges and other machinery into the world s
tin area as well as agricultural implements for rubber
plantations. Consequently, the name of Australia is
becoming well and favourably known in the East in this
connection —to the surprise of many who formerly knew
of Australia only as a producing and not as a manufac-
turing country.
The Malay has cynically been termed “the gentle-
man of the East” by those who know him, and he
certainly will not work if it is at all possible to avoid
it. When put to it he prefers a chauffeur’s or a coach-
man’s job, and will drive you more or less safely. If
very hard pressed, you may find him a policeman, a
railway guard or a porter —never a laborer, nor in a
job where the work requires severe manual exertion—
and yet the Malays are perhaps all-round the most
likeable Eastern race. Many of the women are
comely—all are modest, and the men are frankly in-
Through Orient to Occident.


dolent and have no care for the morrow; neither have
they any idea that time is of value. Their language is
the universal medium through which the European,
Chinese, Tamil and other foreign races understand one
another.
Malay, thg Volapuk or Esperanto of the Peninsula,
is simple, and some of the Malay terms for European
innovations are quaintly put. A railway train in Malay
is a “fire cart,” an express train is a “proud fire cart”
because it is too proud to stop at the smaller stations,
ice is “stone water,” and so on.
Incorrigibly lazy, the Malay often trains monkeys to
pick his cocoanuts, and in parts of Malaya the monkeys
sometimes do almost human tasks; they can certainly
distinguish the difference in a command “to go up a
tree and throw down a green, or a ripe, cocoanut.”
The natives of Borneo (the supposed home of the
missing link/, driven to and about by the Dutch, say
that monkeys are wise not to talk, as they are then
not made to work.
Malay improvidence may have been one of the
reasons which induced the Governments of the
Federated Malay States to lease only, and not sell,
all public lands. In this part of the Peninsula no land
is alienated. Leases are given for 25 years for mining,
and longer for agricultural purposes, at from 50 cents
to 1 dollar (2/4) rent per acre per year, with right of
renewal provided the labour conditions have been
carried out. These land rents, together with the
royalty on tin, and the export duty on rubber, make
the financial position of the Federated Malay States the
best in the Empire—no public debt, and ample funds
from revenue for the rapid development of the
country.
India is now supplying much labour for rubber grow-
ing, the demand being incessant and increasing. With
the Indian labourer and indolent Malay comes the
Chetty (native money-lender), with the white bands
of his caste painted on his forehead, wearing only white
cotton loin and shoulder cloths. Some of these men
who go about nearly naked—with no hats, stockings or
boots, and with such scanty covering— are reputed to
be able to sign cheques for fabulous amounts. Money-
lending in the East, as elsewhere, is a thriving profes-
sion; the chetty is seen in every public place, his
hawk-eye face suggesting a remote Semitic origin.
I met many patriotic sons of Australia in Malaya;
all will some day come back, and many sleep for choice
facing the South so that (they may nightly see the
Southern Cross—the symbol associated by most exiles
and wanderers from her shores with their Sunny
Austral Land.
Through Orient to Occident .


Tin Mining in Malaya
III.
Sprinkled in the form of black powder-like specks
in Mother Earth, from the grass roots to depths un-
known, tin is found in more or less payable quantities
throughout the whole of the Malay Peninsula.
From Malaya comes half the world’s tin supply of
about 100,000 tons yearly—patiently and laboriously
won ounce by ounce, and carefully washed from its
earthly covering. In various parts, the soil containing
the black tin oxide is treated by every old-time and
modern method known—washed in wooden bowls by
the Chinese women, or in small wooden chutes—
shovelful by shovelful—by the coolies working on
tribute. It is sluiced from the hills by hand pumps,
mined in quarry-like open holes, acres in extent, by
Chinese “Towkays” (i.e., landowners), employing
hundreds, and sometimes thousands, of their country-
men on each mine.
Tin is won in larger quantities by the modern
hydraulic sluicing and bucket dredging appliances,
and the patient labor of the Chinaman is being supple-
mented and will probably be eventually largely dis-
placed by Australian mechanical methods.
The distribution of tin in Malaya is probably the
cumulative result of ages of Nature’s attrition, which
has stored all over the valleys, and often on the hills
and in the shallow coastal waters, the little coarse
black particles of tin oxide which are now so increas-
ingly valuable.
The oxide, when smelted and rid of its 25 per
cent, of foreign matter, produces that white soft
metal so necessary in many modern industries all the
world over —universally used in electrical plants, in
metal working trades, in can manufacturing, for
culinary utensils. The uses of tin are yearly multiply-
ing, while its rate of production is, at the best,
stationary. This ill-distributed metal is produced
largely on the east of the peninsula, and a single State
of the Malay Federation—Perak—produces half the
Malayan yields, the area of this production being
largely concentrated in the Kinta Valley.
Through Orient to Occident.


From north to south, from east to west —over prac-
tically the whole peninsula— traces of tin can be
obtained, but not always in payable quantities;
throughout an area of 100,000 square miles, in the
geological ages of long ago, Nature seems to have
distributed tin for man to patiently and laboriously win
pound by pound. It seems to have ousted other
metals, for in no part of the peninsula do other
metals (with the exception, perhaps, of wolfram)
appear to be found in payable quantities.
For very many years back, past the golden age of
Siam, perhaps to the ancients—certainly to the Por-
tuguese —tin has been the rich metal of Malaya. The
native Malay is too fond of lotus-eating methods to
trouble about rich minerals; he is too lazy and indolent
to care for any exertion other than that necessary to
live. With a genial climate and rich land that will
respond to a slight tickling of the soil; with cocoanuts,
bananas, and Mother Jungle close at hand, tin mining
to the Malay is too toilsome and too troublesome. The
Siamese, and later the Chinese, came to Malay many
years ago and found the metal, and supplied those
who wanted it; following them came the adventurous
Portuguese, the hardy Dutch, and lastly the English,
who, even when they settled in the Straits Settlements,
and magnanimously returned Java to the Dutch, had
no notion that a royalty of 10 per cent, on tin produc-
tion would some day pay for the best-equipped and
best-managed railway system in the East. Tin has
also paid for the most magnificent and roomy Govern-
ment offices east of Calcutta; and, in addition to this
expenditure (all paid for out of revenue), money has
been lent to Siam to build her railways.
The efficient civil service of the Federated Malay
States carries no public debt, and yearly shows a
surplus, and administers and allocates the large
revenue obtained from the royalty on the production of
tin fot the many public purposes and rapid develop-
ment now going on.
Although Malaya has for years produced such a
large part of the world’s tin supply, and although the
metal has been mined there for many centuries, very
many years must elapse before the end of its supply
can even be estimated.
The Chinese own and control most of the industry.
Their shunkel (hoe) and basket methods of moving
the soil, their water-wheel and hand pump, may
perhaps show no improvement since the days of the
Phoenicians, and every pound of dirt has to be hand
washed for the often infinitesimal amount of fine, black
tin oxide which it contains, yet, by sheer force of
numbers, the Chinese turn over more or less effectively
Through Orient to Occident..


an immense quantity of soil. Mounds and heaps of
dirt everywhere show the work of the miner, and, as
on many old Australian alluvial goldfields, there are
evidences of much work done, and success or failure
encountered.
The independent Chinese miner does not appear to
work in any systematic way. Pig-rooting and surface-
scratching for rich patches seems universal, and much
of his most successful work, therefore, is pure luck.
Very little careful examination is made of the area he
decides to work on, as prayers to joss, omens, and
lucky days seem to give him all the information he
wants.
He is, moreover, fully convinced that the tin grows,
and poor land if left long enough will give a crop
well worth waiting for. These perfunctory mining
methods result in much ground that could be profitably
worked being either left fallow, partially worked, or
covered with tailings.
Among the best and most profitable mines in the
Peninsula to-day are Tronah, Tongkah, Tekka, and
Tambun.
Tongkah will, perhaps, be of the most interest to
Australians, as its one-time chequered career has been
followed with much interest in the Commonwealth.
Its headquarters and up-to-date engineering shop is at
Puket, in Siamese territory, 200 miles north of Penang.
Five dredges belonging to the company are working
on a large proved payable area of tin-bearing land
lying beneath the sea in a shallow harbor.
To Captain E. T. Miles belongs the credit of its
discovery, and his pertinacity and faith in the venture
carried it through its many early vicissitudes. Mr.
M. T. N. Bluck, the capable resident general
manager, has, during his year’s control, created a
world’s record in tin production by bucket dredging
methods. The Tongkah Compound Company—a
more recent Australian venture—is dredging the rich
flats of the old town, and altogether Australia is well
represented at Tongkah, which is really the chief town
in the Siamese western province of Puket.
Many local improvements are being made by the
Siamese High Commissioner from the proceeds of the
tin concessions sold and the royalty paid, which is the
same percentage as in the British States.
The Tongkah Harbor Company alone pays £ 1,300
per month in royalty, and this sum in Siam can be
made to go a long way. Street lamps, good metal
roads, kerbing and guttering, drains, a gradual sub-
stitution of brick and stone sanitary habitations for the
Through Orient to Occident.


bamboo and thatch huts, are all solid improvements
recently made, or well in hand, paid for from the
royalty received on tin produced by Australian
ventures.
With a new club and billiard room, good pay, and
a climate not of the worst, Australians at Tongkah find
life bearable, and not always unpleasant. Share-
holders can rest satisfied that their investment is sound,
and that for some time to come, given a continued good
tin market, dividends should be frequent and sub-
stantial.
Many of the mines, though, even in rich Malaya,
have failed to pay dividends. The tin wild-cat pre-
ceded the rubber boom, and consequently tin-mining
there is not so flourishing as it ought to be, and new
mining companies are even now regarded with sus-
picion. There are numerous gentlemen about who
appear to live well on air, waiting, to sell “options”
and “good things” to the unwary; but the pigeons
are not so plentiful as they used to be.
Tin-mining in Malaya, conducted on right lines, is
a perfectly legitimate commercial business, and de-
velopment of this sort will have the support of the
British officials who, in the Malay States, so ably
maintain the high traditions of the Imperial service.
Recently a reduction in royalty on the tin won from
low-grade propositions was announced, and a greater
insistence upon labor conditions being fulfilled on all
mining leases is likely to be a policy of the future.
Labor now is costing much more than heretofore,
and, with many of the small rich tin patches worked
out, the future of tin-mining in Malaya seems to be for
modern brains, experience, capital, and machinery.
The bucket dredge and the hydraulic sluicing plant
from Australia can work at a much lower cost per yard
than the cheapest Chinese coolie. Already Aus-
tralians, as a result of their home experience, are show-
ing the way. As machinery suppliers, as engineers,
and as mine-managers, Australians are coming to the
front. Many of her sons are in Malaya teaching the
world their own successful methods; but their patriotic
and one desire is, after a few years’ successful work
and profit, to get back to their own bright, sunny,
much-loved land.
Through Orient to Occident.


Asiatic Labor
IV.
With eight hundred millions of people—most of
whom are good workers, and have to work to live—
why do not the Chinese and the natives of India con-
quer the industrial world? Their labor, on paper, is
cheap, many of them are industrious; and with such a
vast host, how comes it that the products of Europe
and America still find a very large place in the Eastern
markets? Why has the colored peril not yet come,
industrially if not politically? It is not because of the
absence of numbers of human toilers. The reasons are
mainly three—the labor is not organised; it is generally
inefficient; and it is without any incentive to exertion
beyond the necessity to live.
A great deal has been written about the cheap labor
of the East, but the consensus of opinion one is able to
gather from those who employ the native most is that
the labor is cheap, but inefficient. Ask the stevedores
at Manila who pay the Philippines two shillings a day,
and, after a few strong remarks about natives in a
general way, they will tell you that one white man
is as good as three or four of them any day. Mining
engineers throughout Malaya, although they employ
Chinese labor at 60 or 75 cents (Is. 9d.) a day, say
that similar work could be done in Australia at a lower
cost with good white Australian workmen employed at
Australian rates.
The whole of the labor in the Federated Malay
States is supplied by Chinese and Madras coolie im-
migration, and if ever the time comes when those who
assert that North Australia cannot be developed except
by labor of that sort, have their way, it may be in-
teresting to know some of the facts. Coolie, i.e.,
colored, laborers working as miners, plantation hands,
or general laborers, earn on an average about Is. 3d.
to Is. 6d., or from 60 to 70 cents Straits currency,
for a day of from eight to ten hours, and, in addition,
outside the towns, they are generally provided with
housing accommodation consisting of bamboo thatched
sheds, with wooden sleeping bunks. But little sani-
tation is provided, and there is no other expense to the
Through Orient to Occident.


employers beyond these meagre “kongsi” or native
quarters. Chinese employers, particularly mining
magnates, who sell opium, spirits, and food to their
employees, in many cases, make profits from this
trading exceeding those of the legitimate business.
But what is this sort of labor worth? I was
interested for some days in watching the result of the
operations of a gang of seven engaged in moving a
small bank of sand some 30 or so yards away, and it
seemed to me that the combined work of all of them
was not greater than that of the ordinary Australian
laborer in good form with the shovel and barrow. The
Chinaman makes earthworks and removes soil just as
his forefathers have always done—with a shoulder
stick having a flat bamboo mat swinging at both ends,
each mat holding about half a shovelful.
The houseboys (servants) earn about the same as
the coolies, and, although many servant-harassed
Australians may covet a staff of domestics as efficient,
capable, and quiet as the house boys appear to be,
they would find themselves confronted with difficulties
from the start. Any moderate-sized house would
require at least half a dozen boys, and amongst them
will be found the most minute pride of caste and
definition of duties. The valet who personally attends
to his master’s wants would not think of carrying his
portmanteau. The cook would not carry water; the
gardener would not attend to the horse; the syce
(groom) would not do any other than his own special
work. And so on. One boy, one job, has been
brought to a high state of perfection by the domestic
servants of the East.
Watch the Tamil in JMalaya laying down road
metal by hand, a piece at a time. Fancy 14 native
bullocks and scores of excited natives struggling with
a steam engine weighing less than two tons, firmly tied
to a dray, on a good road, and you will then under-
stand why the engineer often says that one white man
is equal to half a dozen coolies.
In Malaya a Chinese mining coolie working with
basket will move up to 2 cub. yds. of dirt per day,
if you keep him at it; and his wages will average 80
cents (25.). In Australia, a good navvy, at 10s. per
day, will move 12 yards—a difference of 2s. per day in
favor of the white and highly-paid worker.
In the East, at rock-drilling, a good Chinaman will
get about 4s. per day, and will do about half the work
of a capable Australian at 12s. a day. But the work
of the Asiatic is less intelligent, and necessitates a
much greater explosives bill, as great carelessness is
Through Orient to Occident


shown in the use of the explosives; the charges are
less effective, and accidents are frequent, so that the
Chinaman is, on the whole, much the dearer workman
of the two, although he only gets one-third the wages
of the competent Australian miner.
The Asiatics have their own ideas, too, or the
fitness of things. A wet day means no work of any
sort; a sore foot or an ordinary cold often means
absence from work for a month.
The stamina and strength of the average coolie
worker is low, and even in the East he has nothing like
the staying power of the healthy European.
The strike and the boycott as weapons of offence
as well as defence are becoming increasingly popular,
and mineowners and employers in the Federated Malay
States are becoming much troubled and harassed by
Chinese secret societies. Very mild treatment now
has to be accorded even house boys for fear of a boy-
cott. The knowledge of what goes on from one house
to another, in various mines, and amongst employers
generally seems complete, and the silent, secret action
often taken is more tyrannical and unreasonable than
the most extreme trades-unionist would dream of.
The long-subservient and often badly-treated coolie
is slowly realising the power of combination. Wages
have these last five years risen from 45 cents to 75
cents, and there is a steady tendency to force them
up to 1 dollar (2s. 4d.) per day.
Wages are rising not only in Australia but all over
the East and other parts of the world as well. Human
wants are increasing, and even in the East the natives
are no longer satisfied with bare shelter and food.
Pleasure is by use becoming a necessity even for the
Chinese coolie. Cigarettes, picture shows, opium and
gambling, cheap as they are, cost money which some-
one has to pay. His food, too, costs more than it
used to, as the world’s -food supply does not seem to
keep pace with the increase in the number who must
eat.
The better government of their own country will
probably have the tendency to much restrict the immi-
gration of Chinese coolie labor into Malaya. A
possible future shortage is anticipated by some, and
the greater cost of labor will of a necessity interfere
with the estimated profits of many rubber ventures.
Increased attention is being given to immigration of
Indian labor from Madras, and the Dutch are taking
steps to prevent further Javanese emigration for labor
purposes, as they are anticipating a future shortage in
Java itself unless some restriction is now made.
Through Orient to Occident.


In Siam and the British States prison labor is con-
fined to the roads and public works; but in the native
State of Jahore (advised, but not administered, by the
British) the Sultan (known at one time in Australia)
has many commercial interests, and a labor shortage in
his rubber plantations is not so serious to him as his
power to arrest the natives of the coolie class is
supreme, and it is easy to magnify trivial offences when
the labor shortage in his rubber plantations is par-
ticularly acute, the labor of all prisoners being at the
disposal of the Sultan free of cost.
The resident European is particularly angry when
you suggest how lucrative a position he must have
amongst the cheap labor and food of the tropics. As
a matter of fact, it takes from £l2 to £lB per month
(even if you own your bungalow) to barely cover your
living expenses—a higher amount than the Englishman
would pay in his own country. You can, of course,
live cheaply in the East if you care to live as the
native does; but to live reasonably and economically,
as the dominant white man should live, costs in the
East more than in Australia.
On the whole, then, Asiatic labor is not nearly so
cheap and plentiful as it used to be; neither is it as sub-
servient as it once was. Strikes are not now un-
common, and secret concerted action is frequent.
Captain Boycott, the Irish agent of a generation ago,
has been immortalised in the Orient by aliens who
know nothing of his history.
But strikes usually collapse swiftly, as there are few
reserves of food supplies; King Hunger is the best
strike-breaker, and usually reigns supreme. What
with organisations, castes, clans, races and creeds,
and powerful secret societies, the ordinary Asiatic is
now quite a stubborn, always ignorant, and often diffi-
cult, servant to manage, and by devious ways and many
mysterious methods he is learning that union and
tenacity of purpose are becoming more and more
successful when used against the usually hated white
man’s interests.
Through Orient to Occident.


Glimpses of Eastern Life
V.
The problem of how to live in the tropics has to a
great extent been solved by the Dutch, who control
nearly all the rich volcanic isles of the Malay Archi-
pelago. In the architecture of their houses, in their
dress, and their mode of living, the Dutch temper so
far as possible the effect of the regular and constant
heat of their East Indian Empire. Lethargic but
firm, slow but shrewd, with but little of the English-
man’s pride of race, but with all of his grit, pertinacity
and sense, twenty thousand big Dutchman rule for their
own good, in peace, content and industry, the fifty
million natives who inhabit their large, rich islands—
for they are rich almost beyond the dreams of avarice.
Java alone produces thirteen hundred thousand tons
of cane sugar a year—seven times the quantity produced
in Australia; in this island, too, there is nearly three
million acres under rice crop, besides large areas under
coffee, rubber and tea.
Tin and gold are also in this Eastern Empire—
but the former is a monopoly of the Dutch Colonial
Government, while the exploitation of the latter
mineral has hardly yet begun.
Java, Borneo, Sumatra, Celebes, and the western
part of New Guinea form even by themselves a rich
Colonial Empire that might well be, and probably is,
coveted by a greater military Teutonic power than
Holland ever will be.
The Dutchman in his methods of colonial govern-
ment does not possess the breadth of view of the
Britisher—the Dutchman will not permit the foreigner
to exploit any part of his possessions unless allied with
a Dutch subject; he governs the natives with all the
firmness, if not the cruelty, of the Boer in the Trans-
vaal, and administers his Empire for himself and his
own race alone. If, in the whirligig of time, the con-
trol of this Empire eventually passes into stronger
hands—either by absorption or conquest —it will not
be an unmitigated evil for Australia to have German
territory lying athwart the path of Asiatic progress to
her shores.
Through Orient to Occident.


Unlike the proud Britisher in his dominions, the
Dutchman treats the racial problem in his own way;
he regards the Eurasian half or quarter caste as one of
his own, and for all practical purposes the Eurasian in
Java has the privileges of the white race.
In India, Singapore, and Hong Kong the slightest
dash of colour is “taboo,” and means exclusion from
select white circles. In Java such is not the case, and
the Eurasian is given the chance he seldom gets in
British territory, where he is usually treated as a
social pariah by Britisher and native alike. This
racial feature in Dutch rule greatly strengthens the
small Dutch population, and it certainly has been one
of the steps by which the peaceful government of half
a hundred million of natives by a handful of Europeans
has been attained.
Java is the most magnificent scenic picture of the
East. Mountains 14,000 feet high, intense culture,
picturesque people, and the luxuriant foliage of the
richest volcanic soil in the world, all combine to make
a visit there—even to the most blase traveller—one of
interest and profit. A passport is necessary, and a little
knowledge of Malay—that universal “patois” of the
East—helps.
Crowds of Asiatics brighten the narrow native
streets of the seaport towns with their many-coloured
costumes —for in no part of the East is there a greater
variety and better taste in colour than among the often-
times graceful and attractive Javanese.
The Dutch are meeting the near possibility of a
shortage of labour in the East by imposing further re-
strictions upon the exportation of labour to other parts
of Malaya, even from among the teeming millions of
Java —and it is surprising to find what a lot of native
labour is wanted in every part of the East. China-
men go north by rail, a thousand miles from their
homes, in order to get employment on the Siberian
Railway works and extensions. I saw at Harbin eight
hundred of them returning south after the Manchurian
harvest, packed by callous, big-whiskered Russian
officials into ten small trucks similar to those we use to
convey our sheep and cattle.
India is now supplying much labour for rubber grow-
ing in Malaya, and the Tamil immigrants there now
number hundreds of thousands. They are carried from
Penang to the various centres on a railway where
persons below four feet in height can travel for half
fare, without any age limit.
Through Orient to Occident.


Strikes are now frequent, and the increased demand
for Asiatic labour in the East is bound to create
further labour troubles even there—although a strike
in Siam was settled quickly without regard to the
merits of the case, the chief of police in the town where
the strike took place simply threatening fine and im-
prisonment for all who were not at work the next
morning. As the authorities do not yet allow strikes
in Siam, there at all events capital is safe from strikes
and agitators, even if it suffers disabilities in other
directions.
The Germans in their concession at Tientsin faced
with a strike, brought the recalcitrants back to work
under a threat of deportation. As a rule, however,
strikes so far amongst Asiatics quickly collapse, as the
strikers have no reserves, and hunger will not wait for
them to win.
Asiatics are now learning to do the work of
European artisans and mechanics, and some few of
them can earn four or five shillings a day at the lathe.
As builders, they have their own methods, and the
expert way in which the Chinaman on a roof catches
with either hand the brick or tile thrown him twenty
feet from the ground is worth watching—there are no
misthrows or miscatches. What a crowd an inter-
national cricket contest between Australia and China
would draw! The new Chinaman has already taken to
football; and for fielding, throwing and catching, the
builder of that house can show a talent that might
materially help to win a test match.
The better class natives in Asia are trying to put
down the opium traffic; they have partly succeeded in
China with the help of the late Government—mean-
while, the American Tobacco Trust is foisting on the
Chinese the curse of cheap cigarettes, about the
equivalent of a penny for ten, guaranteed to create the
habit. They are being extensively advertised through-
out the country, and the sale is pushed in the well-
known American way. The Government is helpless,
as the Great Powers will not have what they consider
“legitimate trade” interfered with. Those who ought
to know think that the cigarette will yet be as great a
curse to China as opium. The story is told of a
Chinaman, sentenced to be hanged for murder, regret-
ting nothing but the loss of a packet of cigarettes.
Not many years ago the Chinese trader was regarded
on the whole as the most honest business man to be
found anywhere; the opinion now amongst Europeans
who know him best is not so emphatically in his favour
—he seems to be fast assimilating the bad examples set
by many company promoters. The Chinaman is at
the best of times an inveterate gambler, and often a
Through Orient to Occident.


very rash speculator. After the Russo-Japanese war,
Shanghai suffered for some time from the effects of
over-trading, and when the late rubber boom reached
the East, Shanghai was badly hit.
All sorts of European wild cat companies first saw
the light there, and it is stated that seven or eight
millions sterling of Chinese money invested in
Malayan rubber is not worth to-day more than 30 per
cent, of the original capital. One estate owned in
Shanghai, and floated for £36,000, was recently for
sale at one thirty-sixth of its cost to the unfortunate
shareholders. Is it any wonder if unlucky Chinese
investors in companies of this sort begin to lose that
sense of personal honour and responsibility hitherto so
conspicuous in their private business life? All over
the East, economy as well as luxury dwell side by
side—the trail of Standard Oil, the Kerosene fin, is
used for heating, cleaning and cooking purposes; as a
cooking stove, bucket, dust pan, saucepan, rice bowl,
basket, it is in general use.
Nothing in money is too small. Many a retired
Sikh policeman (who has so ably helped to keep order
in Malaya and Hong Kong) ends his days in peace
and plenty by lending out at interest his life-long
savings of fifty or sixty rupees. The average Coolie
is always in a chronic state of impecuniosity (that is
why so many pawnshops at 10 per cent, per month
flourish), and gladly pays the equivalent of a farthing
a day for the loan of one of the big military Sikh’s
rupees—which interest the latter collects personally,
and, carrying a stick, visits any default in the prompt
payment of daily interest with corporal punishment
sufficiently severe to ensure the lender the payment of
arrears the next day.
The chit system is another method of lending money,
and. amongst our own countrymen, is the most
obnoxious and demoralising custom in the East. A
chit is really an 1.0. U. for the sum of your purchase
or account; it enables a known European resident to
get anything on credit, settlements usually being made
monthly.
Chits are more frequently used in clubs and hotels
for drinks supplied than for anything else. This easy
way of avoiding a cash basis has a most pernicious in-
fluence upon many young Englishmen sent out from
home to positions or situations on salaries barely
sufficient to pay the cost of ordinary living. It is easy
for them to run into debt and live beyond their means;
many a bright young Britisher has cursed the chit
system which has not only landed him into debts he can
never pay, but has made him a victim of drink, and has
caused much needless physical and mental suffering.
Through Orient to Occident.


When the youngsters survive the risky ordeal of the
first year or two of Eastern life; when the “side”
disappears with the more matured experience; when the
newly acquired joy of roaring “boy” for every little
thing required is mellowed by use, every Britisher feels
proud of them, for the young fellows play golf, cricket
and tennis under a tropical sun, have a “pride of race,”
and a self-respect, confidence and probity that are such
factors in the successful government of alien races all
through the world’s history of British rule.
Through Orient to Occident.


Sidelights on the East
VI.
The Chinese "Maskey” or the Russian “Nitchivo”
is the prevalent spirit of the East. “Never mind,”
“to-morrow,” “later on,” “what does it matter?”
“can’t be helped,” “it is fate”—all these ideas are
covered by the expressions named. The Malays,
Philippines and the Indians have similar expressions, but
the “Maskey” of the Chinaman is more often used.
If you are in a hurry, and, according to a Turkish
proverb, “already half mad,” go to Siam; there, as
elsewhere in the Orient, time is of no value, and you
will learn to wait. If you want to buy from natives
some of the Eastern things that can be sold so cheaply
(but seldom are) learn to be patient. As a rule the
greater your hurry the more you will have to pay.
Time and patience are very necessary in order to
buy cheaply. If you can, take a month to buy what
you want; you may then get it at the natives’ minimum
price. A white cotton suit made to measure can be
bought for two shillings if you care to wait and bar-
gain long enough. For some things take a week (a
month is always better), and if your time and
patience can equal the seller’s, you may get a bar-
gain. But do not run away with the idea that a mere
European buyer can ever get the better of the native
merchant; such things have been known to occur, long
ago, when force was used—but, in the ordinary way,
the only hope you have of ever getting the best value
in the East is to take your time.
To write about the East is to write about the China-
man. He is a hewer of wood, a drawer of water, a
beast of burden, a human horse (often pulling the
dray as well as the rickshaw). He is the worker who
delves for tin in the soil of Malaya, the storekeeper
who does most of the retail trade of the Orient, and
his labor is helping Russia to complete the duplication
of her Trans-Siberian Railway.
The Chinese are the fishermen and mariners (and
often the pirates) over sixty degrees of latitude on
Asia’s shores. They are the best land cultivators
Through Orient to Occident.


known—the most determined, the most industrious, the
most consistent. They control a large part of the
trade and commerce of Asia. Many possess great
wealth and live in luxury—highly respected even by
their European competitors—but they are all gamblers
at heart. Twice in seven years have the rash specu-
lators of Shanghai been badly hit. The rich Straits
speculator will gamble on the tin market, while the
coolie tin miner will work better on shares than on
fixed wageSj as the chances of lucky profit appeal to his
speculative nature. The British, Dutch, and French
Governments license and control Chinese gambling
shops in their territories, and reap not a little revenue
from this source —and without Chinese patronage the
Jahore, Macao, and other Eastern “Monte Carlos”
would close up.
The Chinese mind and the Chinese nature are the
world’s problems of the twentieth century. China’s
civilisation runs back 4,000 years in the history of the
world, and the educated claim their race to be the
direct descendants of the ancient Egyptians. The
theory of the origin of the Mongolian at least throws
some light upon the high knowledge the Chinese un-
doubtedly had of handicrafts, arts, and science when
the people of Europe had not emerged from the dark
ages. Also, in the older statues, mummies, and
Egyptian remains now in the museums of Europe there
is a type of high cheek bone, eye and head not unlike
the Mongolian of to-day.
The Chinaman boasts to the “foreign devil” that
his country and race had no beginning, and that it will
naturally have no end. With his high, broad, back
head he cannot but think that he is better than anybody
else as a race. He has self-esteem abnormally de-
veloped, and, being without compensating qualities, is
often a stubborn blunderer, especially in paths other
than trade and commerce, for which his race is dis-
tinguished. A hard-working, and in many respects, a
clever people, the Chinese can, in a moment almost,
show the extremes of placid stolidity and frenzied rage
—a racial weakness; the source of much national
trouble.
The Chinaman is much averse to straight lines. The
native streets, the tracks which serve as roads, the fur-
rows made by their ploughs, and the planting of their
crops are never made in straight lines—all are curved
in order that the devils he so firmly believes in shall
not be able to hurt either himself or his crops, as
Chinese devils only travel along straight lines, never
in curves or circles. Poor John Chinaman! How
much of your infinite labor will be saved when the
education that your new republic promises you comes
along.
Through Orient to Occident.


Reverence for ancestors is commendable, but the
numerous small graveyards scattered all over the land
and held sacred for all time, sadly subtract from the
arable area of the country, and sorely try progressive
foreigners who cannot make straight roads nor rail-
way lines—not because they fear devil-damage, but
because the numerous last resting places of even long
dead ancestors must not be desecrated and must be
always carefully avoided, even at the expense and in-
convenience of numerous and snake-like curves in every
mile of road. The Chinese will worship ancestors and
reverence even their bones; but I have seen a party of
Chinese coolies bury a dead countryman in a heap
of mining tailings. Chinese philosophy, originating
with the Sage Confucius and his disciples, sets a very
high standard of what the conduct of life should be.
Family life is the pivot round which up to now China
has revolved. The Chinaman loves his home, and
when able to afford it lives in private luxury. His
code is, as a rule, peacefulness and contentment; and,
although there is much poverty and want among China’s
teeming millions, there are not, for the great popula-
tion, a large amount of lawlessness, many breaches of
public order, or serious crimes.
Dense ignorance has kept China stationary. The
transit vehicles, pumps, and agricultural methods of
her people could easily take us back to the time of
Abraham. Women still hobble along the streets with
little short steps, as if on stilts, owing to their feet not
being allowed to grow any bigger than those of the
children they carry.
The Japanese women, scuffling along in their clogs,
are ungainly and ungraceful; but the short, stilted,
hobble-like steps caused by the malformed feet of the
Chinese women are almost painful to watch. Doubt-
less, this custom will disappear with the queue. It
has its origin in an age when women were looked upon
as chattels, and feet-bandaging achieved at least the
object of preventing them from running away from their
rightful owners.
In his diet the Chinaman is unique. Rice is the
basic food amongst all classes, and with the poorer
people is often the only one —and not always regular
at that. Birds’ nests, sharks’ fins, beche-de-mer (sea
slugs), and all sorts of gelatinous dishes grace the
tables of the rich; the poorer people are satisfied with
strong and flavoury tit-bits to spice up the insipid
boiled rice. Salted cabbages, brined and pickled
vegetables (the older the better), raw eggs (buried for
a year or two, and which when disinterred emit the
smell of smells), very old salted fish, cats, dogs, rats,
and pigs—these form the dirty eating of the average
poor Chinaman. While there is a want of national
Though Orient to Occident.


cohesion in China, there can be no world’s yellow
peril, but the new Chinese nationalism sprung upon the
world recently is the beginning of a new and mighty
force in Asia.
Newspapers and railways will rapidly help the
change coming over the Chinaman and China itself.
The internal postal service is growing; and nothing is
beyond the reach of a people who have extraordinary
capacity in many ways, providing their susceptibili-
ties are not touched.
Railway extension will undoubtedly help the new
national spirit born in Canton, and now centred in
Shanghai, the most important trading centre in
China, and whose cotton mills, docks, and other
large industrial concerns perhaps mark the beginning
of a new industrial East. It would be unwise to at-
tempt to forecast all that will happen in China during
the next ten years —by which time her leaders hope
to be able to “talk back” to the foreigner. Probably
events are travelling too quickly for the mind of even
the educated Chinaman. The conservative instinct
of many, ardent reformers though they may be, is even
now questioning the wisdom of the republican form of
government. The much-hated, arbitrary, unjust Man-
chu rule is gone never to return; a democratic Republic
will not suit the average Chinese temperament, and if
this form of government holds it will be like no other
Republic in the annals of history—probably essentially
Chinese, and suited to their present needs.
After a good deal of internal disorder, China, if
left alone by the Powers, will have a period of
quiescence. Many of her ardent, young, and able
patriots who have come at their country’s call from
the uttermost parts of the earth, will have time to
evolve a system of good government, of education, and
of transit. When that time comes her people—count-
less as the sands upon the sea shore—will have to be
respected even if they will not then be feared.
Through Orient to Occident.


The New Chinaman
VII.
In a short six months large numbers of Chinamen
in the interior of China itself, most of those living
in the coastal towns, and practically all that vast
number who form the working population, and who
also have their full share of riches in larger Malaya
(which includes Java and the Dutch Indies), have cu
off their pigtails, abolished the green dragon as a
national emblem, have wholly or partially adopted
European clothes, and salute the rainbow flag of the
Revolution. In October last these Chinamen dressed
as they always have dressed, lived as they always have
lived, and gave no open indication of ever being able
to change the thoughts or the fashions of their ances-
tors. Stolid, mysterious “John” was peaceful and
long-suffering, and apparently interested in nothing but
his food, home, and pleasure.
Yesterday scores of books were written about his
conservatism, and his hide-bound adherence to the
customs of the past. The Chinese New Year holidays
last February showed an epoch-marking change. The
flag of the new Republic—called a rainbow flag, but
really consisting of a combination of strips of each of
the five cardinal colors—reigned supreme. It bravely
waved over almost every Chinese shop, house, and
labor-shed from Shanghai to Java.
By far the greater part of the Chinamen one sees
in the East have sacrificed their queues, and most of
those who can afford it have discarded the typical
white, black, or blue loose cotton dress.
The disappearance of the pigtail has brought with
it the adoption of caps and hats—the round skull cap
is no longer worn by emancipated natives; and at
Hongkong and in Canton the stocks of hats and caps
were quickly exhausted. No particular style is yet in
favor—but green, grey, and blue colors in soft felts are
generally worn, and the leisured classes are adopting
the bowler and the fashionable straws.
Through Orient to Occident.


AH who can afford it, especially for holiday occa-
sions, are now arrayed in all the glory of tailor-made
cotton, crash, or silk jackets and trousers of European
cut; and white collars and shirts of the latest fashion
are not rare. The prices of European boots are
beyond the purses of most of the natives at present,
and this change is expected to arrive gradually.
Many Chinamen at present compose an odd picture—
partly Chinese and partly European.
In his best clothes, queueless, smartly tailored, and
rakishly hatted, he looks a new Chinaman—with neat
socks and tan shoes in feet that but yesterday were in-
cased in slippers; he is Westernised in appearance,
and is largely altered 100 in his ideas.
What are the new ideas, and how will they develop
in that mystic brain? The first indications are that the
new Chinaman is anti-foreign, truculent, pert and
cheeky, in his new-found glory, and much less servile
than he used to be.
Densely ignorant, as a rule Chinese coolie immi-
grants when they first land in Malaya are as meek as
lambs, and submit themselves to be penned in like
sheep by their importers; but now as free men of a
free republic even a few days’ detention at quarantine
stations is irksome to them. Many more fights now
go on; many more robberies are committed, and much
uneasiness is evinced amongst the European residents
of the East since the passing of the pig-tail.
The general complaint is that the success of the
revolutionaries has spoilt the hitherto obedient, servile
Mongolian; the house boys are more independent; the
‘ ’rickshaw” pullers less docile; laborers want more
money; the educated section desires the Eastern-British
Civil Service open to cadets of Chinese birth.
Recently, in Singapore, a victory of Japanese wrestlers
over English soldiers (an exhibition it was" a mistake
to permit) was uproariously applauded. A similar
occurrence a year ago would have seen a fearful and
subdued simmer of appreciation only. Instances are
not now uncommon of coolies, on being jostled in the
street, swearing at the European jostler in the choicest
Billingsgate.
Rich Chinese tin and other magnates have for some
lime past been pouring their money into the coffers of
the revolutionaries. Poor Chinese all over Malaya
have rioted in sympathy—not against British law and
authority, but often out of a truculent, ignorant, quarrel-
some spirit, born of the success of their countrymen
at home against the hated foreign Manchu rule.
Native barbers have for months been busy in cutting
the hitherto adored hirsute ornament, and the stiff,
Through Orient to Occident.


bristly black hair has now a brush-like appearance,
where once the pigtail gracefully and proudly hung.
The time saved by the now queueless Chinamen in the
daily labor of trimming it, must soon amount in the
aggregate to very many thousands of years.
The new Chinaman will not stop where he now is.
The disappearance of the pigtail will be generally
followed, so far as purses will admit, by the adoption
of European clothes. The next step will probably
be to Westernise their calendar, and bring the Chinese
New Year and other holidays into line with Western
dates. This change will be the one most welcomed
by every European in the East, as the Chinese form
so large a proportion of the workers everywhere, that
the banks, European merchants, shippers, and virtually
all other business houses, bow to the inevitable, and
close doors when the Chinaman is holiday-making—so
that the combination of Eastern and Western holiday-
making will save the double dislocation of business
which two different calendars now involve.
Family life has been, from time immemorial, the
foundation-stone of China, and for this even a national
spirit up to now has been sacrificed. Nameless and
unnumbered ancestral dead have their special days of
ceremony and remembrance. Coffins containing dead
relatives often lie for months at the family shrine before
the final burial and funeral obsequies take place. The
new Chinaman begins to wonder whether these time-
destroying, Irksome, useless, and unnecessary customs
do not stand in the way of his national progress.
The revolutionary movement had been preparing a
long time. Rich, educated, progressive Chinese the
world over had long seen the necessity of some change.
Realising his country’s weakness, recognising her
danger—the danger of disruption from forces both
within and without —the new Chinaman in the Univer-
sities of England, the Chinatowns of the Pacific Coast,
the mansions of the Malay Peninsula, as well as in
innumerable centres in his own country, has been for
years doing his share in preparing the foundation upon
which the recent successful national movement has been
built.
China’s weakness down through the ages has been
the absence of a national spirit; but a few short
months has worked a marvellous change. Students,
professors, doctors, and patriotic exiles, from all over
the world, are hurrying back to their native land, to
help in the gigantic work of adopting Western ideas,
and teaching cohesion to a people saturated with the
myriad opposite traits of their ancient race.
Through Orient to Occident.


Given concerted action by the Chinese people,
nothing can keep them back, and thus early they show
signs (it may be prematurely) of feeling their power.
The new Republic is already talking to the Dutch in
Java about the bad treatment their fellow-countrymen
receive under that rule. Unity of action by Chinese
coolies in any settlement in Greater Malaya—
European or native—must succeed unless met by mili-
tary force. As one European resident puts it: “You
and I might account for two or three dozen of them,
but we cannot keep back a sea of people.’’ The dis-
appearing queue and dragon are synchronal with the
commencement of Western views, habits, and dress.
Like all rapid chances, crudities are obvious, and the
objective is often vague. But there certainly is in the
new Chinaman a national spirit far different from the
docility of old.
The successful revolution, though not quite under-
stood by the man of the masses, yet tells him that he
is a human entity to be reckoned with even by
Europeans. His subservience has given way to cheer-
fulness; his national lethargy to a spirit of pride, and
he has a glimmering knowledge that even the hated
foreign devils are beginning to fear the pressure of his
numbers.
Through Orient to Occident.


Dalny and Port Arthur
VIII.
When we leave Shanghai and cross the turbulent
waters of the Yellow Sea, on a Japanese steamer, we
quickly arrive at a neighborhood which will ever go
down to history as the scene of momentous happenings.
A well-lighted coast brings the good ship to the once
Russian Dalny, the late Chinese port of Darien. The
barren-looking and hilly shores of South Manchuria
frown upon the harbor, which is now a busy place,
with a long line of breakwater and lengthy stone
wharves, with every evidence of trade and a great port
nucleus. On landing, we find the übiquitous Chinese
working in large numbers, together with the Japanese
police, hotel runners, military, and various other
officials. The Chinaman is the workman and laborer
from Java to Manchuria, from Siam to Manila and
Honolulu. He is the same John Chinaman in all
latitudes and climes, and the East without him would
be as “Hamlet” without the Prince, Sydney without
its harbor, or Australia without its wool.
Dalny, with its chain-wide streets planted with
ornamental trees, and—though not all built upon—its
kerbed and guttered footpaths, its roads well
macadamised with limestone and granite materials, is
as yet a new city largely in the making. The steam-
rollers are at work, and here and there are touches of
apparently a new American town set down in the
Orient, with many superior residences and public
buildings built of red and white-faced brick.
At Dalny a large amount of money is being spent
by the Japanese on wharves, harbor works, electric
lighting, and trams through miles of at present sparsely-
populated country. It is said that this town cost the
Russians 20,000,000 roubles, and it is striking to ob-
serve the Russian names still adorning some of the
many substantial buildings they erected there. Dalny
already contains 60,000 people, and has a trade of
eight million pounds a year. Fourteen years ago it
was unknown. The Russians had it for six years, and
since the Japanese have held it they have made many
further improvements, doing what the Russians seldom
do—making good roads and drainage.
Through Orient to Occident.


The original stately Russian buildings are now put
to varied uses—what was once the Russian City-hall
is now the best hotel.
The shipping is mostly Japanese, and, looking at
the pretty sea surroundings, the electric lighting
arrangements, the electric tram-cars, an opinion is
formed of a future in store for Dalny, and that it will
doubtless grow as fast as the Japanese exchequer will
permit. Many lines of Japanese steamers already sail
from the port, and here as everywhere the Japanese
mercantile marine is rapidly becoming the biggest
factor in the carrying trade of the East. Quite re-
cently special Japanese services to South America,
Calcutta, and Java have been inaugurated, and their
two principal steamship companies have now as many
ramifications as the largest British and German lines.
Thirty miles from Dalny is Port Arthur. How shall
I describe Port Arthur? It has a name in the annals
of the world that can never die. The thought that is
uppermost is, “Was it worth it?” Thousands of
brave Japanese and Russian soldiers are buried here—
-22,000 of the former are in one grave, which is appro-
priately named “Charnel-hill.” Most of the shallow
harbor is navigable only for small craft, and is
apparently used principally by Chinese trading vessels,
junks, and Japanese fishing schooners. In the old
town there is a tawdry hotch-potch of Chinese and
Japanese streets, with Russian and Chinese military-
buildings, as well as the original Russian cantonments,
and the Japanese have evidently spent no money upon
improvements or additional buildings or forts since its
capture.
Manchurian pony-carts are in evidence. Military
vehicles may also be seen; but there are no signs of
trade, commerce, or work being carried on. It is a
poor place from the commercial point of view, and
this truth is probably recognised by the Japanese, who
are only there, and will only stay there, so that no
other nation can step in and again attempt to build and
fortify what would be a “Gibraltar,” and dangerous
to their rapidly-increasing sea-borne trade. Strong
this fortress must have been, and probably is now; but
visitors are strictly prohibited from going near any of
the forts and fortifications. The narrow entrance to
the port suggests visions of the gallant Togo and his
men, who, under cover of the night, torpedoed the
Russian fleet, lying in apparent safety under the
frowning Golden-hill and other forts. This was one
of the most daring feats recorded in history.
The most celebrated point from which to view the
port is 203 Metre-hill, although imagination has to be
Through Orient to Occident.


given full play even there in order to summon up
visions of the desperate scenes of less than eight years
ago.
The Military and Naval Museum is interesting,
containing, as it does, many memories of the siege—
guns, rifles, swords, tools, medicines, wire entangle-
ments, accoutrements, shells, and some of the scientific
instruments, telephones, and telegraphs used by the
opposing armies.
Souvenirs, consisting of empty shells, cartridges,
etc., are purchasable in the town. The Chinese have
the best stock of these, probably because their
countrymen are the only tillers of the soil in the
neighbourhood. The hills show how they were
scored by the shells—several of the summits being
completely ploughed up, and so shattered that volcanic
action rather than shell fire could reasonably be
assumed to be the cause. On leaving the town and
the immediate surrounding forts, the hills on both
sides appear to be furrowed like water-courses. In
reality these furrows are, in many cases, the trenches
cut by Japanese soldiers, and in them many died
heroes’ deaths.
Just outside the town is the Russian Memorial, under-
neath which lie the remains of fifteen thousand of the
Russian soldiers who fell during the siege.
The imposing monument to the Japanese soldiers
consists of a tower on a hill, and is over two hundred
feet in height; it is fittingly near the Charnel Shrine,
which covers so many of the brave Japanese.
It is now a matter of history that during the siege
hundreds of charges were made, numberless tragedies
were enacted, legions of lives were sacrificed, and
prodigies of valor on both sides were exhibited. Very
little of all this remains but the memory and the record.
The Chinese, whose country is also Manchuria, are
calmly ploughing, sowing, and reaping their bean crops
on every bit of arable land—land which was once the
scene of military operations, valor, sacrifice, and death.
The peasant, in his stone house, with its thatched roof,
thinks not of heroic deeds; he is anxious to garner the
first fruits of his labor before the frigid Manchurian
winter sets in. You come across him everywhere on
the Port Arthur Peninsula, ploughing, sowing, reap-
ing. and gathering his crop of soya beans (a kind of
Indian corn). Probably, for thousands of years, this
hungry-looking soil has been refreshed by the rains and
snows of a long winter in order to raise year in and
year out the same crop, which has been coaxed in its
growth by the insistent and indefatigable labor of the
Chinese—men and women alike.
Through Orient to Occident.


Although in virtual occupation of South Manchuria,
japan’s title to its southern end—the Liao Yang Penin-
sula—is as successor to the Russian lease from China,
and but for its tragic memories it would add to the
gaiety of nations, as it is a comedy in diplomacy to
know that this “lease” has many years yet to run, and
that the money spent, being spent, and to be spent at
Dalny, and all the present and future improvements
and unearned increment, there may some day be
totalled, and if it suits Japan, will be the “bill of
costs” for her relinquishment to China of the southern
end of much-troubled Manchuria.
Japan is now the fourth, if not the third, Great
Power, and already spends more than a third of her
revenue yearly upon her army and navy. The esti-
mates of the Japanese Naval Department for this fiscal
year forecast an increase of £5,000,000 sterling every
year for the next five years, and this seems to show
that she is determined to keep up with any possible
enemies, and that her alliance with England is to
have no effect upon her expanding armaments.
The railway for 400 miles north from Dalny is
worked by the Japanese, and that race have taken all
the positions of importance—they are the stationmasters,
railway guards, and gangers. The Chinaman is doing
the manual work, and seems to be treated by the
dominant Japanese in much the same way as he is
treated elsewhere in the East by the hated but master-
ful European.
Manchuria is more than a Chinese province—it is a
large country, and a few scarce Chinese officials still
nominally play their lonely part as the representatives
of the Chinese Government at the ports and Custom-
houses. With Russia in effectual occupation of the
northern part, and Japan in occupation of the southern,
the Manchurian Customs will soon be actually (as it
now practically is) Russian in one oart and Japanese
in the other. The sop to China’s “amour propre”
of nominal Customs control is close to being jettisoned
after having served its purpose.
Through Orient to Occident.


Manchuria and the Japanese
IX.
It is not historic Mukden (at one time the capital of
China), with its tombs of the Manchus, that will make
Manchuria famous in the annals of the world, but the
Russo-Japanese war. A two years’ contest, with a
million and a half of men in the field—the first clash
of arms in which Mongolian defeated Caucasian since
the invasion of Europe by the Huns—gave Japan
Southern Manchuria and Korea; and it also for the
first time revealed to the Asiatic the fact that the
European was neither invulnerable nor invincible.
From Dalny the Manchurian railway runs north over
300 miles—nearly 400 miles of which is within the
Japanese sphere of influence—and the gauge has been
altered from the Russian sft. to the Japanese standard
of 3ft. bin. A few miles north of Dalny—its
southern terminus—stands the Hill of Nanshan (the
capture of which by the Japanese completed the isola-
tion of the Port Arthur garrison). Through bean-
fields, and past many roofless houses and earth-works,
the train wends its way north.
The substantial railway stations, the roomy sur-
rounding station buildings, and here and there stone
barracks and cantonments, were all built with the
Tsar’s millions—but are now occupied by the smart
Japanese military and civil officials. At some of the
stations Russian names built in the walls with
different-colored bricks, can still be seen. Most, how-
ever, are now painted over, and at every station
Japanese signs, with English translations, show the
traveller where he is. The stationmasters, railway
and military guards are all Japanese. With each train
goes a small garrison of five or six Japanese soldiers
fully armed and in fighting array: stolid officers are
seen at all the principal stations; and, penned up at
the station barriers, working as laborers on the line or
in the fields or towns, are the real owners of the land,
the Manchurian Chinese, much like their own brethren
in the south, but with a blue cotton dress instead of the
black of Canton or the white of Shanghai.
Through Orient to Occident


The train goes through Liao \ ang, across the
shallow Sha-ho River, into Mukden. In this 50 miles
of flat country the great Russo-Japanese war was
settled. A few trenches, little better now than
ditches in the ground, a few earthworks at the railway
stations, a few Shinto shrines showing where brave
men lie, are all that remain now to indicate one of the
most famous battlegrounds of history. The flat
country is again being cultivated by the native Chinese,
and over the countless graves grow the tall soya beans.
The Chinese of Manchuria had the Russians for
their masters for seven years, and now give sullen
service to the pushing sons of Nippon—they have had
masters before, and will have masters again. Patiently,
indifferently, and laboriously the Chinaman goes on
while pages of history are writ large with events he
cares nothing about.
The war was won by the railway line—both sides
made it their base, and neither Russians nor Japanese
went very far from this their only line of communica-
tion, for there are no roads in Manchuria. Mile by
mile the Japanese advanced, and the Russians sullenly
retreated, both keeping close to the iron road; and
along this same road the comfortable passenger trains
now do their daily journeys.
At many apparently unimportant stations great
shunting and trucking yards bear good evidence of the
military traffic this narrow road has had to bear (and
it is not improbable that it may have the same to bear
again). At some stations as many as eighteen
separate tracks and sidings were built in order to keep
supplied Marshal Oyama and his ever-increasing army.
With system, with regularity, and with foresight the
war was fought, and the Japanese with their perhaps
over-cautious and chessboard strategy forced the stolid
Russians to a sullen though not altogether ignominious
retreat.
Along the Siberian railway similar large sidings and
trucking yards are being built. Some say that the
Russians have learned a good lesson from their late
foes, and will not always rest satisfied with the present
position. Many hold the opinion that the Japanese
land victories were not so complete as biassed news-
papers led the public to believe, and that Russia will
not go into the next war with Japan as ill-equipped
as she was in the last.
The best railway communication decided the war.
The Japanese organisation was said to be almost per-
fect, and gave her armies an advantage not all the
bravery of the Russians could counter-balance. Aus-
tralia will do well to note that the iron road helps to
win wars and campaigns now, and in this respect her
different gauges and isolated centres make her very
unready.
Through Orient to Occident.


Manchuria is more than a province. It is a country,
and seen in the autumn, with the dull yellow-brown
tints of the ripening crops, it looks a harvest field for
hundreds of miles. Everywhere on almost every avail-
able acre can be seen the crops of soya beans and kow-
liang (a short of maize), some ready for the scythe,
some already cut and stacked, or gathered and stored,
leaving only the stubble of the recently-garnered crop.
Past millions of acres and along hundreds of miles
of cultivated land, the railway train speeds on its way,
until, approaching the north, the soil becomes poorer—
and this is reflected in the poorer houses and lower
types of the native Chinese inhabitants. Instead of
the stone-walled, thatched-roofed dwellings of the
farmers of the south, are mud huts huddled together,
and surrounded by all the filth of humans and live-
stock alike.
There are no roads or streets, the tracks being usually
the dry sandy bed of a stream or river, tolerably
passable in dry weather, but impassable in the wet
season, when the people cease to work.
The land right through Manchuria does not look
invitingly rich, but the indigenous soya bean is said
to be the best crop possible for the dry, poor, sandy
soil it grows in. Ground up as porridge, made into
cakes, or treated in various ways, it forms the staple
food of the Manchurian people. It was largely used
by the Russians as food during the war —horses, cattle,
sheep, and stock of all kinds will eat it, thick stalks
and all.
Soya bean oil crushed from the bean forms a valu-
able and growing industry. The Americans are giving
attention to the production of the bean, and in the
southern parts of the United States the cultivation of
this crop is becoming of some importance. It is said
to be the best crop for the soil of Manchuria, and
may be, it would be found that some tracts of land in
Australia —so far not considered worth cultivating—
could be utilised to much advantage in the production
of this crop. It must have some characteristic to
explain the reason for the luxuriant growth obtained
year after year in spite of a sparse rainfall, and century
after century of cultivation on land largely of a dry,
poor, sandy nature.
Our progressive Agricultural Department will no
doubt consider the suitability of the kowliang or the
soya bean for some of our more unpromising areas.
America has proved that exact Manchurian climatic
conditions are not absolutely necessary for their
growth.
Through Orient to Occident.


As before stated, superior railway organisation en-
abled the Japanese to win the war. The fruits of that
success are being consolidated by an extension and
perfection of the iron road, and in a year or two a net-
work of lines with uniformity of gauge from Fusan to
Newchang and from Dalny to Mukden, and north to
the Russian sphere will be completed.
The South Manchurian Railway Company will then
have its organisation perfected, and the Japanese share
of Manchuria, together with Korea, will be more
tightly held. It is with some admiration that one sees
how thorough and to the point are many Japanese
methods—the Japanese seem to know what they want,
and they set about getting it.
I heir whole national policy is built up on protec-
tion, and what amounts mostly to prohibition against
Europeans. They not only cry in their excited
moments, “Banzai Nippon”—but in every action of
their normal lives their policy is, “Japan for the
Japanese.” Handicapped somewhat by an Asiatic
brain, imitative but not creative, cunning, keen, and
knowing but not wise—they are making strenuous
efforts to add to their export trade in every possible
way. The Japanese start with the assumption that the
more they sell and the less they buy as a national
entity, the better off they will be and the less they will
owe —so by aggressive trading, fair and foul, and every
other possible means they work to this end. Heavy
duties on European imports not a necessity for her
people, light duties or a free list for raw and other
products that can help her own industries, shipping
bonuses and new lines to South America, Calcutta, and
Java, financial help to ironworks, shipbuilding, col-
lieries and other important industries, form part of the
policy of the Government—in fact, in the South Man-
churian railway itself, as in many important and great
industries, the dominant partner is said to be the
Imperial Government of Japan. This protective policy
shows out everywhere. Only recently, foreign ships
were prohibited from carrying passengers from one port
to any other port in Japan—all the coastal trade, there-
fore, is now done by Nippon’s own steamers. Her
trade plagiarism is well-known, and there is a very
bitter feeling throughout the East at the flagrant com-
mercial dishonesty of many Japanese traders.
A proposal is made to hold an exhibition in Tokyo
in 1917. Many British and German manufacturers
have absolutely declined to exhibit their machinery and
other wares there in any shape or form. An official
Eu ropean Consular report upon the question sets out
that the policy of the Japanese Government is approach-
ing the prohibition of many imports—the trade in which
has been built up on a moderate tariff; that year after
Through Orient to Occident.


year some machine or article is copied by the Japanese,
and fraudulent imitations are then poured into the
Eastern markets ; that secrecy of machinery and manu-
facture is now the makers’ only safeguard to their pre-
sent trade and business in the East, and that no further
machinery or fabrics should be exhibited at another
Japanese exhibition.
While on this subject—could not our New South
Wales Government change the residence of the Trade
Commissioner in the East from Kobe, to some other
more suitable centre? We cannot hope to greatly
expand our trade with Japan unless in raw materials,
for which when the Japanese want them they come to
us. We could either move the office to a better and
more prominent Eastern trade port or abolish it alto-
gether, as being unnecessary and unprofitable where it
is. There are many reasons why the substitution of
Commonwealth Agents for the State Agents should
now be made. Australia wants a representative at
Shanghai, and another at Calcutta—men, patriotic, able
and fully conversant with their country, and who would
also gather information and facts helpful to our
Ministers and politicians. There are many possibili-
ties of the fast expanding Orient affecting Australia
and its people.
Through Orient to Occident


The Trans-Siberian Railway
X.
This great railway, which is like the Russian Col-
ossus, materialised into some tangible form, lies like
a giant right across the northern part of the Old World
—from Moscow to the waters of the Pacific. The
head and shoulders are in Europe, while the two great
arms stretch to the Arctic Ocean, on the North, and to
the frontier of Afghanistan on the south; the body of
this colossal railway is the real Siberia; the Baikal sec-
tion runs from hip to knee, and the feet touch Vladi-
vostock and eastern waters.
The railway is nearly 8000 miles in length from
feet to head, and its outstretched arms are almost as
long. This gigantic undertaking is State-owned, and
the people on its route are destined, in all probability,
to shape the history of the world. A ten days’ rapid
journey in a comfortable express train and one has
passed through immense unpopulated areas, crossed
great rivers, and a country of extremes. In a few hours
the conquering railway arrives at points that formerly,
over snow and steppes, took weeks to reach. A few
days are sufficient to cross tracts in Siberia which for-
merly took the weary prisoners and their guards months
to traverse. In a week the traveller can pass from
Europe to regions that at one time could scarcely have
been reached within a year —such is the power of this
iron road, made by Russians, paid for by Russians,
equipped and managed by Russians.
Going from Vladivostock to Moscow the traveller
finds an ever-changing scenic panorama of varying coun-
tries and peoples. He passes through Kharbine, the
new Russian outpost in Manchuria, and the 50,000 in-
habitants of this town, during the six months’ rigorous
season, delight in making revelry and gaiety in order
to while away the long winter hours.
The railway fringes Mongolia (inevitably destined
to become Russian territory). Here on the great tree-
less plains ponies and herds of hardy cattle peacefully
graze oblivious of the coming winter. A small cara-
van of dromedaries, with their Mongol drivers, may be
seen going leisurely south to escape from the biting
cold soon to come.
Through Orient to Occident.


I hen the traveller passes into the mountains of the
Baikal region, which shelter sparse Russian settlements
just springing into life. At the railway stations there
a few Moujicks mingle with the Mongol natives, who
are now being fast left behind. Next come the Rus-
sians—the military, police, and a small army of uni-
formed officials who take the place of the Chinamen
the traveller thought he could never lose. The com-
mon people become more numerous, and, as the train
passes round the shores of Lake Baikal and on to
Irkutsk, the wild scenery of this mountainous district
is viewed at its best, through the bright, crisp, clear
and cold autumn air of 60deg. north.
Over great river bridges, still the train travels on;
and a mixed company is being whirled westwards—
German business men and officials from Shanghai and
other cities of the Far East, booked for Hamburg and
Berlin; British, Russian, French, Dutch, Japanese, and
American passengers are also on the train. A broad
gauge, comfortable, well-heated sleeping compartments,
and a restaurant car make the journey an easy one.
The numerous and sometimes lengthy stops afford op-
portunities for much-needed exercise, and for the pur-
chase of a bottle of Siberian milk or any other deli-
cacy that may be available at the small railway station
stalls. And oh! that milk—how thick, creamy, and
fresh! Although the red, round-faced women who sell
it so cheaply have apparently but little acquaintance
with soap and water. At a railway restaurant a big
bowl of Russian soup, which contains meat, many
mixed vegetables, fat, and cream —accompanied by a
slice or two of black rye bread and plenty of native
butter—is a meal fit for a king, assuming that he has
been breathing the Siberian autumn air.
The train sipeeds onward, leaving the Mongolian
territories far behind, and passing now through real
Russian settlements—the unpronounceable names of
most of which end in “sk.” Kransk, Krasnoisrsk,
Atchinisk, Marinksk, and Omsk are the principal ones
passed in a twenty-four hours’ run. Towns, villages,
wolf-haunted birch and fir forests, rolling plains and
hills all come and go, but, except in a few of the
larger towns, there is no pretence to architecture. The
rough, bare, wood shanties of the workers and the
painted wood residences of the officials and military,
together with the pure white Mosque-like Russian
church, with its minarets and light green cupolas, com-
plete the villages and even most of the towns. The
church in its whiteness and size stands out upon the
landscape in a striking contrast to the rough huts of
the moujicks, and is often the only bit of relief and
color in the village.
Through Orient to Occident.


Going west, the settlements become more and more
populous, although they are still great distances apart,
but the pressure brought to bear upon the rapidly in-
creasing Russian population in Europe is causing a
strong tide of emigration, encouraged and fostered by
the Government, to the hitherto unknown region of
Northern Asia.
At the railway stations, and here and there on the
broad (but as yet unpopulated), rich-looking, treeless
steppes, the real Russian moujick respectfully views
the great train and its passengers. With the universal
Wellington boot in all stages of decay, a sheepskin
hat and coat worn with the wool inside, he looks as
warm as he is dirty. Judging from the frayed edges
and the shiny skins of these coats they are made to
last a lifetime.
The strong and lusty young moujicks with the open,
good-tempered face of youth, are, as a rule, of the
European caste of countenance; but the Tartar or
Mongolian features are not rare. The sullen, cowed
types of the older men speak of ignorance, suffering,
labor, toil, and an iron rule.
The military is supreme, and struts about here and
there in their striking uniforms and great coats, for-
bidding the harmless tourist’s camera and any undue
curiosity- The soldier guards have their rifles with
bayonets fixed, and the police hurry after the man who
is without a passport, while suspicious and alert officials
carefully scan the train.
In Western Siberia the train passes through the
forest region. The birch and fir trees, thickly grow-
ing, are not large; the best of them would make good
ships’ masts, harbor piles, or telegraph poles, and not
be too bulky. There is no big log timber at the saw-
mills, such as we see in Australia—the many sawmills
having logs in their yards that would be considered by
the average Australian sawmiller as too small for
cutting. This part of the route seems to compare in
soil and climate with that of Canada in the same
latitude; the difference in progress is perhaps explained
by the fact that one is under Russian and the other
under British rule.
Here, one thinks, if anywhere, is a good sheep and
cattle country, little cultivated and little used. But
what of the rigorous climate? For days the weather
reminds one of Southern Tasmania in winter—cold, but
sunny, and with snow on the hills only. Ah! but soon
one can imagine what Siberia is like during its six
winter months. Snow now covers the treeless plains
Through Orient to Occident.


as far as the eye can reach. There is a blanket of
white, only relieved here and there by tufts of hardy
fir or birch trees. The sheep, cattle, and ponies go to
their sheltered winter quarters. The numerous hay-
ricks and the grass heaps will soon come into use as
the long cold season closes in upon the land. The
droskies, which in the summer are driven on earth-
tracts, misnamed roads—always dusty or muddy, and
which would be suffered in Australia only under pro-
test —give place to the snow-sledges with their tinkling
bells. The peasants will loaf in their hovels without
any regard to the laws of fresh air or hygiene. Kings
Snow and Frost reign supreme, and the only good
roads to be seen in the Russian Empire will come when
the winter has frozen hard every foot of the earth’s
surface.
The great railway is being duplicated. Colossal
bridges, embankments, and cuttings are being prepared
mile by mile for the second iron way. The steppes
are again being crossed, and the forests brushed aside.
The great rivers are again being spanned by bridges,
and the hills cut through, in order to make the second
track, which means a further domination of immense
Mongolia by the Russian. Every new fortress and
every mile of road, each year, brings the Russian Bear
nearer to the centre of China. When she again fights
in Asia her armies will have better communications.
In the Russo-Japanese War her soldiers were fed from
Harbin by Chinese cultivators and Mongol sheep and
cattle breeders. Now on her rivers may be seen float-
ing barges carrying wheat and foodstuffs over long
distances, and, when duplicated, the track of the
trans-Siberian railway will better stand the strain of
Russian troops and transport than before.
The railway is a monument to Russian dominion,
and must make her the mightiest Asiatic Power. It
may be that the hundred millions and a half of the
Tsar’s European subjects, whose numbers are increas-
ing at the rate of 4,000,000 yearly, will, in 50 years,
with the education and liberty to progress that they
need, dominate the world.
A hard climate makes a hard race. From the snow-
clad treeless steppes, the Huns long ago came west,
but the migration of Russians will be eastward, for
Germany bars the way to the west. Siberia is being
populated now by emigrants, and not by exiles; and
the rich, black-soil country will, in the future, when
more equally divided, make the cultivator more
prosperous, and support in comfort a much larger
population than it does now.
We pass over the Ural Mountains into Europe, and
see in the articles displayed for sale at the various
Through Orient to Occident


railway station kiosks, specimens of the mineral re-
sources of that little-known part. The great bridge
over the noble Volga, a mile long, is a good example
of Russian work, while the number of engines, and the
vast quantities of rolling stocks at wayside junctions
show what resources this great railway has in reserve.
The junction for the Turkestan line suggests further
thoughts on the political power of the iron road. A
generation ago Turkestan, Khiva, the Caspian, and
Merv were journeys of months, and now they can be
reached in modern sleeping and restaurant cars in a
few days. Thus has Northern and Central Asia been
conquered, and as the railways extend further more
Asiatic tribes and races will be dominated by the hardy
and brawny Russians.
The noble rivers, the great railway, the big-
whiskered uniformed Russian, are some of the
memories taken away, and the term, “It is not
allowed,” is an answer to many a harmless request.
We travel onward in the steady train; the pace
increases as we get into Europe; the track is heavier;
we leave behind town after town, and village after
village, mainly comprised of the übiquitous Russian
wooden huts, and our journey leads across the great
grain plains of Central Russia—treeless and cultivated
—as far as the eye can reach, and brings us to the
ancient capital of all the Russians—the place of the
Kremlin, the city of churches—Holy Moscow.
fhrough Orient to Occident.


A Peep at Russia
XI
Treeless plains meet the horizon on both sides of the
railway line—ploughed, cultivated and tended by the
hard-working peasant, who, year by year, from boy-
hood to old age, labours for his annual crops of rye,
wheat and other cereals. The Steppes and plains are
now great grain producing areas, and, after feeding
Russia’s millions, there is a surplus for foreigners
sufficient to influence the world’s markets.
For hundreds of miles each way the great flat plains
extend, now and again crossed by large rivers, of which
Russia has so many. One is the Volga, the longest in
Europe, which in one part is spanned by a huge iron
bridge a mile long. This broad, sluggish stream
slowly flowing to the Caspian Sea is now greatly
utilised, and much of the traffic of central Russia is
carried on its bosom by barges, tugs and steamers.
Moscow, the holy city of the Russians, where the
Trans-Siberian train ends its journey, boasts a popula-
tion of a million, also 1,728 churches and shrines, and
58 convents; but it contains very few schools. The
cobble stone streets, the cafes and the Kremlin are
outstanding features of this mediaeval city. Here
East meets West, and the Greek churches, with their
mosque-like minarets, gilded domes and Byzantine
architecture, clearly show that Moscow has copied and
preserved much belonging to the Greek Empire which
once had its home in Constantinople.
Mothers still bring their children to the shrine of
the saints and pray before the numerous Ikons which
are to be seen, not only in every church, but also in
every street of importance.
A hasty visit gives the impression that modern im-
provements in hospitals, public gardens, street planning
and the like are slowly being adopted.
Theatres and opera houses are numerous, and the
joyous, busy cafe is as popular an institution in Moscow
as it is in the European capitals further west.
Through Orient to Occident.


The great centre of attraction in Moscow for the
traveller is the ancient Kremlin (the Tartar term for
castle or citadel), and within that walled enclosure of
nearly a square mile is gathered, in barbaric splendour,
a store of precious things which is unequalled elsewhere
in the world.
The Kremlin itself consists of a series of buildings
which include the Treasury, several magnificent
churches, and the Imperial and other palaces. The
Treasury building stands out boldly, and contains an
immense collection of the finest and rarest precious
stones and gold fabrics, including the crowns, sceptres,
coronation gifts and tributes from the many tribes and
nations, particularly in the East, whom Russia at one
time or another has governed, protected or cajoled.
Diamonds, jewels, and many costly stones in all kinds
of settings, shapes and forms, enable us to picture in
concrete form the magnificence and splendour of the
East.
The Treasury also has within its walls the original
gilt Imperial coaches of Catharine the Great and Ivan
the Terrible, the magnificent presents of the Turkish
Sultans, the gilt sledge coach which brought the
Empress Elizabeth from St. Petersburg to Moscow to
be crowned, and the coronation robes, crowns and
thrones of all the Russian Emperors and Tsars.
In this unequalled collection of treasure the
coronation robes of recent Tsars are seen displayed on
mannikins enclosed in glass show cases. Many golden
crowns and the large display of armour, ancient and
modern, while adding to the inestimable wealth of the
numerous objects gathered under one roof, also convey
an idea of the gorgeousness and splendour of Russian
Government, both mediaeval and modem.
In the Kremlin stands the Imperial Palace, contain-
ing the rooms of state, its older portions reminding us
of the Pauls and Drometskies; and, as one gazes upon
the walls, fine pictures tell of conquered Turks, the
battle of Poltava, and the exploits of Peter, Catharine,
and other famous Russian rulers.
Many interesting objects within those walls vividly
recall Napoleon. The curious traveller will have
pointed out to him on the battlement of the Palace the
exact spot where Napoleon slept for three days, and
from which, when awake, he watched the burning of
Moscow. He and his army of half a million of men
were without food, and the prospects of ultimate
protection from the cruel Russian winter, already creep-
ing upon the city, were very slender indeed. Here
Napoleon had to decide what to do. The Russians
left him no alternative but retreat. History tells us
Through Orient to Occident.


how he f arecl, and the expression “to meet his
Moscow” is now a literary classic. Napoleon was so
sure of success that he actually carried about with him
on this campaign his pictures and a statue of himself
as Caesar in order that he might, with his own hand,
place them in the Kremlin after Russia was con-
quered. Those relics are there now —but as mementoes
of his defeat instead of victory. Another interesting
trophy is also to be seen —a simple, plain, short, iron
camp bed, which could not have been used by a tall
man. It is Napoleon’s bed used in the Russian cam-
paign, proving how furious was the Russian pursuit of
the broken French “Grand Army.”
The gorgeous Palace of the Kremlin has many fine
halls, dedicated to the various orders of Russian
chivalry. In the court-yards are some eight or nine
hundred French cannon captured in that celebrated
retreat from Moscow, also the great bell of the fortress
—the biggest in the world—which carries the imagina-
tion back to the ancient times when it was tolled for
the dead, rung in jubilation for royal births and
weddings, or when its clang sounded far across the
surrounding plain, warning the serfs of danger and that
their only safety was within the shelter of the fortress.
Several gorgeous cathedral-like churches are also
erected within the enclosure of the Kremlin. The
Church of St. Michael contains the tombs of bygone
Tsars, arranged in rows of box-shaped sarcophagi of a
uniform dull-brown pattern, with no distinctive feature
beyond brass name plates. In another court-yard is the
monument to the Grand Duke Sergius placed on the
spot where the Nihilists ended his career with a bomb.
Splendid views of the City of Moscow can be obtained
from the Tower of the Kremlin.
Moscow can boast of its cotton millionaires. Some
of the mills there employ as many as 6,000 hands, and
in Lodz there is a cotton mill which employs 16,000
operatives—being the largest mill in the world. Most
of the successful Russian manufactories and mills have
been started by foreigners, and some of our Australian
wool finds its way to Russian factories; but, for the
most part, the Russians are an exclusive people, and
foreigners are not wanted there permanently, and are
the legitimate prey of every patriotic Russian. They
give no consideration to foreigners. Passports are
rigorously insisted upon, and when the stranger has
crossed the borders into Russia he may find a difficulty
in getting out again, for, without a police vise to his
passport, he runs the risk of being suspected of being
a thief or an anarchist.
Through Orient to Occident.


The Russians are big men, and, no doubt, good
fellows at heart, and apparently are well fed upon
good, cheap, substantial food. A penny will buy a
pound of wholesome black rye bread, tenpence a
pound of butter, and twopence a pint of fiery vodka.
The Russian has a physique to be admired, but still
possesses a dash of the Asiatic in his character. Tie
takes things as they come, and is a hundred years be-
hind the rest of Europe in government, politics and
social work.
The people have probably all the freedom they
require in their present state of development. Local
government for the urban areas is free enough, but the
main features noticeable are the absence of education
and the officialdom and militarism everywhere. No
political meetings, public criticism of or opposition to
the Tsar’s government are allowed. Perhaps the
most accentuated Oriental characteristic observed by the
passing traveller in the Empire of the Tsars is the
custom of “squeezing’’ or extracting money from all
and sundry for many services and privileges provided
free in more progressive countries.
The Moujicks, cursed by landlordism, contribute
more than a fair share towards the extravagances of the
Russian nobles in Paris, Monte Carlo and elsewhere.
The police and military authorities extract their black-
mail from the townspeople; even the hotel runners and
the train conductors, who travel in top boots, thick
tunics and leather belt, want their share. The one
chief object of life in Russian officialdom seems to
consist in extracting—not earning—money from the un-
wary traveller and others, and I should not advise
anyone unacquainted with the language to leave him-
self for any length of time to the tender mercies of the
Russian hawks. Though there may be plenty of room
in the train, a price over and above the railway fare
has often to be paid in order to secure a seat; and on
Moscow railway station I have seen excited foreigners
vainly endeavouring to board an express train while
smiling officials, cynical hotel runners, waiters, Mou-
jicks, and railway porters stand by waiting for the
psychological moment when the inevitable bribe shall
be forthcoming.
Warsaw, with its half-million people, more than half
of whom are hook-nosed Hebrews, has better streets,
finer public parks and boulevards and better dressed
women than Moscow. Warsaw is Russianised, but
full of Jewish traders. This city is an exemplification
of the fact that all over the world the Jew prefers trade
to manual labour. Warsaw contains many Abrahams,
Isaacs, Rachels and Rebeccas, who seem to thrive
even under Russian rule, and they show the marvellous
adaptability of their race to increase and flourish in a
country where they are unwelcome and harassed.
Through Orient to Occident.


The letters of the Russian alphabet are Greek in
character, and cannot be deciphered by the Western
European, even though he may be familiar with half
a dozen or more languages.
Russia is self-contained and is making great strides
in population, manufactures and products; its inhabi-
tants claim descent from and belong to many tribes and
peoples; and its population, now numbering nearly
130.000. is still increasing at the rate of about
4.000. a year. The people seem to be migrating
eastward over the boundless, rich, but treeless Steppes,
and are rapidly transforming these once inhospitable
plains into rich, productive areas.
Russia is a strong nation, but the rouble is an open
sesame to almost everything procurable. The Govern-
ment have an annual revenue of £200,000,000 sterling
—much of which finds its way into illegitimate
channels.
It has an immense mileage of unprofitable railways—
unprofitable not through lack of traffic, but because of
the corruptive administration. Millions on millions of
people live in structures which the enlightened Aus-
tralian would regard as affording only moderate ac-
commodation for his cattle and domestic animals. Yet
Russia is a vigorous nation; her manufactures are going
ahead by leaps and bounds; her people, partly Tartar
with a touch of the Levantine, are a rapidly increasing
population of fine physical types. The Empire has
extensive areas of productive virgin land. Even her
inhospitable climate and corrupt bureaucracy will not
prevent Russia’s advance in national strength—but
more general education and political freedom must
eventually, though perhaps gradually, be evolved for
her people. Russia holds all the elements of national
wealth, strength and vitality, and must go on gather-
ing dominion and Importance when some of the now
more advanced nations have become decrepit and
decadent.
The future of civilisation may be for the Slav—if his
commercial and political education does not engender
the same germs of national decadence as are now
threatening the future of some of the peoples of
Western Europe.
Thwugh Orient to Occident.


A Glimpse of Germany
and its People
XII
In fifteen hours from east to west, and in ten hours
from north to south, an express train can traverse
modern Germany—filled with 65,000,000 of sober,
industrious, trained people, whose law of life is to
work.
Increasing yearly at the rate of a million more, these
people are forcing the land’s productiveness to a maxi-
mum, extending factories and workshops rapidly, and
utilising to its utmost all waste land. This great
people—unit for unit equal to the Britisher, well-
trained, highly educated, thrifty, disciplined, selfish,
and ambitious—must expand, and year by year be an
increasing force in the world’s affairs.
Largely a flat country, Germany is closely culti-
vated, and shows much evidence of the re-afforestation
going on everywhere. All over the world German
ships, German travellers, and German merchants
carry the flag, the customs, the merchandise,
and the language of the Fatherland. Our brother
Teutons—good citizens and good fathers as they are —
also make the development of industrial Germany
keenly felt by British merchants at all points of con-
tact.
Abroad, the German merchant is not a popular
individual, particularly in British possessions. The
truth is that the ordinary Britisher is jealous of him. In
the commercial freedom of the British East the German
merchant flourishes and waxes rich; his industry and
thoroughness tell there more than at Home, and,
scorning the ordinary pleasures and relaxations of
Asiatic life, he is a formidable competitor.
In Germany the feeling is to some extent perhaps a
jealousy of England. It is quite reasonable to think
that the German sometimes sees red when England is
concerned—as British territory and interests are across
his track in many parts of the world; but it is no fault
of the British nation that modern Germany had the ill-
T brought Orient io Occident.


luck to be born as a nation a hundred years late in the
world’s history, and the British Empire has ever been
as free to Germans as to its own citizens.
Germans of the official class undoubtedly harbor
ambitious ideas, and, until recently, it was thought that
the millions constituting the nation were not sympathetic
with the Kaiser’s colonial policy, but the weighty pro-
nouncement of the German Socialists last year that
their country must have room to expand in colonies of
their own not yet created, shows that all Germans now
are united in supporting a policy of expansion abroad
and join hands with the Emperor in his determination
to establish German colonies over the seas, and keep,
if possible, Germany’s surplus population under the
Empire’s flag.
The life of the Germans is essentially practical.
They are good citizens all the world over, and have a
great intellectual development in both classical and
commercial life. From idealism they have turned to
science, and in a marked degree to Socialism; and
their faculty for business organisation is strongest of all.
They, however, are now inclined to subordinate every-
thing to nationalism, and I believe the German de-
mocracy will follow its rulers even to war.
State railways, municipal Socialism, homes for
workers, are some evidence of their progressiveness.
Systematised organisation is everywhere; from the cul-
tivation of the land to the scientifically equipped
factory; from uniformity of city building to the relief
of the poor. In education, in military training, and in
advanced technical science, are indications of a high
degree of national efficiency—for the Germans have
lofty standards of excellence in their methods and a
great aptitude for the practical.
Not only in stately Berlin, but in practically every
town of importance, broad, tree-planted boulevards,
with clean, dustless roads, will be found. Tree-
planting seems an outstanding feature in German cities;
the trees are not evergreen, and shed their leaves in
autumn Into the busy streets, but it seems no trouble to
keep the streets clean, the perfect municipal organisa-
tion seeing to that.
Open-air spaces, well-kept public parks, up-to-date
lighting, municipal music, libraries, trains, together
with strict regulations with regard to the handling of
food and sanitation, offer the industrious German and
his family attractions in the few hours of relaxation he
spares from his work.
More than half the German nation lives in the
towns, the desire for company and pleasure being the
same there as in Australia—but everywhere the slum
areas are being done away with. The cleanliness pre-
Through Orient to Occident.


vailing is remarkable. The bread is packed in thin
paper bags before being delivered; the sandwiches and
cakes bought at a railway station are wrapped in grease-
proof paper; and the traffic in all edibles, in tooth-
brushes, and other toilet requisites is now by law made
as clean and sanitary as possible.
There are but few beggars, drunkards, feeble or
emaciated men in tatters and rags in the streets of
Germany, and these few are very seldom seen. The
State insures against accident, sickness, invalidity, and
old age, has an excellent system of labor bureaux, and
cares for the unfortunates. The unemployables are
cared for by the police until they reform—which they
usually quickly do, as forced labor in the gaol is usually
harder and longer than that outside.
From German social development much can be
learned. Sunday closing, technical education, or-
ganised relief of and the utter absence from the towns
of beggars, drunkards, and loafers, naturally evoke an
inquiry as to the source of this most desirable state of
things, so different from the ordinary British city.
Music, cafes, and beer saloons and gardens are the
popular forms of recreation. Under the newer con-
ditions of life in Modern Germany, the town dwellers
have less regard for home, and tenement houses and
flats seem to have almost entirely displaced the small
house and garden. Even where apparently there is
plenty of land available, no attempt seems to be made
to house the workman and his family in any other
than a barrack-like way.
Every German of 25 years of age has a vote, but
the votes are not of equal value. Proportional repre-
sentation is not known—the small, sparsely populated
agrarian districts having the right to send members to
the Reichstag out of all proportion to their wealth, im-
portance, or population. The millions of Socialist
votes in the towns do not carry the representation they
are entitled to. When they do, constitutional govern-
ment in Germany will be a reality and not a name;
for, although Germany’s factories, houses, and streets
are the last word in progress and prosperity; although
Berlin is a splendid stately city of big establishments
and typifies the modern spirit of science and work;
although Germans are so highly organised and trained;
politically, the country is still in the middle ages. A
majority in the Reichstag can prevent the passing of
legislation, but cannot initiate any; and the Emperor,
not Parliament, appoints the Government and Ministers.
The recent great increase in the Socialist vote was
quite as much a protest against this form of parliamen-
tary governments as it was a vote for Socialism of the
Bebel type.
Through Orient to Occident.


From the engineering shops of Westphalia to the
coal mines of Silesia, from rich commercial Hamburg
to artistic Dresden, the Germans both of the north and
south are able to look after themselves, and, if patience,
untiring energy, and thought can build up a mighty
nation, they are doing it. They are perhaps the most
highly organised, systemised, and precise people in any
civilisation—it may be that we should apply the term
“selfish” also.
German citizens and merchants are treated by Britain
all over the world the same as her own sons. High
British civil and military officials generously patronise
German steamers; it is often the boast of the Germans
that some of their steamers carry more British than other
passengers, and at no point where Germans touch
British territory are they treated in any different way
from our own people. The Germans themselves, the
Dutch, the French, the Japanese, the Russians, and
even the Americans have not the same generous com-
mercial spirit.
Thoroughness is typical of the German, and what-
ever racial competition the future has in store for
Australia, she will, at all events, welcome with open
arms as many of the ever-increasing and virile Teutons
as will come over the seas and make their home with
us.
Through Orient to Occident.


Australia in England
XIII
It is many a long year since old Father Thames bid
farewell to so many hopeful, happy people on the way
to their new homes under the Southern Cross, as he
did in 1911; and at no time in our generation have
people in England talked so much about “The Land
of Gold —for the Australia that is now known is not
sterile and bare, but is a country that will amply repay
and turn to gold all the honest labour applied to its
soil.
Three years ago Australia was a hazy geographical
term to the average Englishman, and the question that
I was then asked by one, “How long does it take a
railway train to go from Sydney to New Zealand!” was
typical of his ignorance. To-day the geographical
illiteracy is gone, and the questions now asked are
with regard to wages, rent, climate, and the cost of
living. Interest in Canada seems to have paled—
some immigrants coming back from that country with
tales of bleak winters and often hard conditions, and
to English eyes the glamour of the bright Australian
sun is just now over our continent.
Australia and Australians are popular in England to-
day; our legislation and political views are better
understood; and the efforts of Sir George Reid,
capably backed by our own Agent-General, Mr.
Coghlan, and his efficient Immigration officer, Mr.
Covers, have borne excellent fruit. The Publicity
Department of the Commonwealth Offices, in the
competent hands of Mr. Smart, is co-operating and co-
ordinating with the States in the very successful joint
and separate efforts that have been made to popularise
Australia in the old land. The result is a steady
stream of carefully chosen and desirable settlers and
workers to our land, which is taxing to its uttermost
capacity the passenger accommodation of the whole of
the steamers available.
In the days when emigrants left England for the
Australian gold “diggings,” the place of embarkation
was close to the city, and the voyage was truly a
7 hroagh Orient io Occident.


penance; to-day, in large modem steamers, the jour-
ney is more often a pleasurable experience, affording
a widened horizon to the folks who have hitherto only
known the corner of England in which they have
lived.
From the north, the west, the south, and the east,
the emigrants converge to their steamer —great London
being crossed by train, tram, tube or motor ’bus—past
the dreary wilderness of drab brick houses in the East
End. London here shows no attractions, for the usual
haze, fog and mist are in its atmosphere. Out of a
city where one man boasts of owning or managing fifty
different newspapers and magazines, go the emigrants,
facing with brave hearts the enlarged possibilities for
them of an Industrious life in the land of the Southern
Seas.
Every steamer with any third-class accommodation
at all is taking emigrants from British ports—but the
transport question is at present acute; berthing space
is many thousands short of the demand, and, by all
appearances, the congestion will increase. Sometimes
the emigrant has to wait months for a passage, whilst
his little stock of money—accumulated perhaps with
infinite care and toil—gradually disappears, when all
this time he could have been at work in the new land.
The shipping companies are not fretting about this
scarcity of accommodation. All their ships will be
crammed full for many months to come, and that will
pay them. They are waiting to see whether this new-
born zeal to go to Australia and the promise on the
part of our Government to assist the new-comers is real
or only a flash in the pan. Australian Governments
have been hot and cold on Immigration before, and,
as the shipping companies rightly argue, may be again.
What they say in effect is: “If we know what your
Governments are going to do, we can arrange the
transport question; but if it is purely a private matter
between passengers and ourselves, we do not build
ships to carry only emigrants, and the present arrange-
ments are sufficient for all the cargo offering.”
Nearly 70,000 people left England for Australia
last year (about double the number for 1910), and it
is expected that 100,000 will emigrate this year if the
available shipping accommodation is sufficient. These
figures approximate to where Canada was ten years
ago; but there seem to be indications of coming luke-
warmness on the part of some of our States. Person-
ally, I believe it would be nothing loss than criminal
to attempt to do anything to arrest or slacken the strong
flowing emigrant tide to our shores.
What a unique opportunity the Federal Government
has to step in and create a strong broad policy now —
Through Orient to Occident.


a policy that would collate, co-ordinate and give co-
operation and cohesion to the six varying immigration
policies of the continent. What a far-reaching effect
it would have on our future! With 50,000 assisted
passages a year for three years, at least an equal number
would come and pay their own fares—for, instead of
a plan for securing and distributing immigrants being
approached with the system and energy the occasion
demands, Australian Immigration is now in the hands
of a shipping association who await, naturally, a per-
manent scheme.
The question of defence has been removed from the
sphere of partnership. Why not make Immigration,
in which is our truest line of national safety, a non-
partisan question also?
Let us continue the advertising, increase the number
of assisted passages, encourage employers to get out the
additional skilled labour many so badly want, and co-
ordinate methods as between the States.
The interest in Australia is great, but, unfortunately,
wages in England are so low that many who desire to
come to us have but little or no chance of saving any-
thing like the amount of money necessary for their
passage. Many deserving people—particularly the
youth of the country, hard workers, honest and clean,
who would, if given the opportunity, make worthy units
in our land and help on its development materially—
have to sorrowfully turn away from beholding what
seems to them (and which is) “the Land of Promise,”
for the lack of a few pounds.
Now is the time for a settled policy; now is the
time to prevent any diversion of the stream; now is
the time to extend and increase the system; get the
best return for the money already spent and the energy
employed along lines so vitally necessary to our national
development. By their method of treating this urgent
matter, our rulers will best show what faith they have
in Australia’s future.
The ship-owners will respond if they know that a
national policy of immigration has been placed beyond
the reach of party politics and election exigencies. Let
us keep the ball rolling. The people are ready to
come, and, if our Governments vote the money, Aus-
tralia need have no fear of the result. In the highways
and by-ways of England people are interested in our
country, and the many satisfied immigrants who have
already settled with us are so many more agents to
increase the flow.
No longer can it be said that Americans and
Canadians abroad are the only cheerful patriots. Aus-
tralia’s interest, worth and potentialities have arisen like
Through Orient to Occident.


the sun above the horizon; her progress in production
and manufacture is becoming better known; the cry of
“stinking fish” is dying out, and to the cheerful
patriots abroad must now be added the self-made Aus-
tralian who delights in the very many favourable com-
parisons to be found in his country above all others.
And he will enumerate a few: No racial question as in
the United States and South Africa; a common
language—not two as in Canada and South Africa; no
bleak winter as in Canada; examples in successful
legislation—old age and invalidity pensions, industrial
arbitration, adult suffrage, free education, the early
closing of shops, employers’ liability, land taxation,
and protection (some of which the Mother Country has
partly followed, and the rest she will soon consider).
Australia the cheapest place in the world for the
necessaries of life in food-stuffs—not even excepting the
cheap East; and so on. It is surprising how truthfully
one can compare our natural and social advantages
favourably with any other place in the world.
I should like to see a minimum of 50,000 assisted
passages arranged for by the Federal Government
yearly for three years, and these allocated to the States
pro rata, so that the existing State organisations could
control their own immigrants. We Australians got
our land practically free, and our kith and kin have a
right to come in, and the world would have reason to
complain if we were lukewarm about the matter.
Many progressive and more or less truthful emigra-
tion agents flourish on the commissions allowed them
by the shipping companies and others. Canada is not
such an attractive field for them as it was —more atten-
tion being now given to, and further information being
wanted about, Australia. These agents, of course, are
out for business and to supply the wants of their clients.
One advertises: “Why linger here in this land of
strikes and low wages when you can get full and plenty
and twenty shillings a week in Australia?” Another,
in setting out the attractions for domestic servants,
mentions that the chances of matrimony are more favour-
able, as the men get higher wages and are better able
to support a wife—and so on.
The site chosen for the Commonwealth Offices, and
recently purchased by the Federal Government, in the
Strand near the Law Courts, is perhaps the best for the
purpose in the whole of vast London. Let us hope the
proposed Australian building will be big enough and
impressive enough for every purpose. No doubt in it will
eventually be housed (and rightly, too) the various
State Agents-General and staffs. With that must come
further uniformity of methods with regard to things
Australian in London, and, if Canada’s lead be
followed, the Australian motto will soon be, “Each for
all. and all for each.”
Though Orient to Occident.


To Canada
To Australia
and
New Zealand
To British
Empire
To other parts of world
(principally United
States of America)
1877/80
10 per cent.
30 per cent.
40 per cent.
60 per cent.
1880/90
12* ,,
16 ,,
30
70
1890/1900
12*
5
28
72
1900/07
32 „
5 „
49
51
1911
51 „
25 „
O
00
20
Cricket, football and other sports, meat, butter and
fruit have all helped the growth of Australia’s popular-
ity. Tales of hatters and drowning sailors are now
myths. Even the raison d’etre of our White Australia
policy is being better understood, and the tide of our
own emigrating kinsmen from Britain is now flowing
thus:—
It is very satisfactory to see from these figures the
increase of emigration to other parts of the Empire
and a continued decrease to foreign parts. There is
noticeable in a marked degree a considerable decrease
of emigration from the United Kingdom when trade
is good, and a large increase when neriods of bad
trade come.
In spite of the distance, the journey and the cost,
the flowing tide is with us. Let us make hay while
the sun shines, and get the immigrants we want while
we can ; otherwise, they will go elsewhere. To this end
we should earnestly set to work, so that a complete
linking up can be effected between the work and de-
velopment waiting and the new-comers who can do
it. Our State organisation is not yet complete. The
new arrival wants friends, cheap accommodation and
kindly interest; at least for the first few weeks of his
life amongst us. There is plenty of room for him,
and, given a fair start, it will be the fault of the im-
migrant and not of our country if he fails.
Through Orient to Occident.


Homeward
XIV
How pleasant it is to be on a good ship, manned
only by a white crew, and filled entirely by people
of our own race. 1 hanks to our White Australia
policy, no good Australian gold goes to subsidise any-
thing but white crews. How different to the general
British idea which, although born in patriotism, is
reared on tonnage figures, and is likely soon to awaken
to the fact that most of our much-vaunted British
marine is no longer British, but Asiatic!
British steamers, officered and engineered by Bri-
tishers (largely Scotch), still hold the most promi-
nent place in the trade of the Orient, in spite of the
severest competition; although, as the years roll on,
that personage immortalised by Dibdin—“the British
sajilor”—is becoming a constantly decreasing factor
in the Eastern shipping trade, and the Coolie or Las-
car crew, from stoker to steward, from deck hand to
donkeyman, is now firmly established on practically
all the British ships trading to Eastern ports. The
British sailor, then, so far as half of the world is
concerned, is the Chinaman from Hongkong, the Las-
car from Calcutta, the Goa boy from the Malabar
Coast, or the Tamil from Madras. No longer is
there even room for Hans or Dutchie from the Baltic.
The “Dagos” of the Mediterranean have also been
crowded out, and those people in the East who go
down to the sea in ships must perforce travel in ves-
sels manned by Asiatics, or, unless they choose one
of the few German and French boats, not travel at
all. Is the gradual extinction of the British sailor
being brought about because he is now less fitted for
the work? Is it because the Coolie is safer and can
better run the ship? Is it because passengers and trade
are attracted to a steamer that is manned by Asiatics?
Nothing of the kind. On the contrary, passengers
would undoubtedly feel safer with their own country-
men; but the fact is that a coloured crew is cheaper,
and our kinsmen, the shipowners across the water, have
not yet learned the lesson that other things than cost
have to be taken into consideration.
The decadence of England must be serious if the
Englishmen of to-day—the descendants of Drake and
Frobisher, Cook and Nelson—are transferring their
heritage of the right to rule the waves to the Asiatics.
Through Orient to Occident.


The English-speaking races have a vast interest in
this question, for the future of the Empire is bound up
with it. If we lack the men to handle the ships,
what will the end be? The need for real men will in-
crease as the seriousness of the situation becomes real-
ised; but by then the reserves will have become les-
sened, for Britishers are displaying an increasing dis-
position to go to sea, and, at the same time, ship-
owners are manifesting a growing tendency to replace
white crews by Chinese, Lascars, and Coolies.
There must be a reason for all this. We who be-
lieve in the principle of a White Australia, and those
of us who know the East and her people, will surely
look for a cause for this grave deterioration in the
personnel of British shipping. We are told that col-
oured crews are more amenable to discipline than Euro-
pean, that they are obedient and abstemious, can bet-
ter stand the tropical weather, and are in many other
ways more efficient than the drunken, unreliable Bri-
tisher. It is well that judgment on ex-parte statements
is never passed, as in this case the real cause of the
momentous change that has taken place in British
shipping is a question of £ s. d. Brush away the
veneer, heed not the excuses, listen not to the mis-
statements, and you will find, as some unctuous mem-
ber of that large and powerful organisation in London
which controls much of the shipping trade of the world
would say, Profit and Loss. The real reason, then,
that Coolie crews are preferred is that they better suit
the pockets of the shipowners; seven to twelve rupees,
or five to eight dollars—or, in plain English, 9s. 8d to
16s. a month—are the magnificent wages paid. The
safety and pleasure of the passengers are usually as-
sured by the fine weather of the tropics; but the acts
of the Coolie crews in time of danger do not reassure
the nervous traveller when upon troubled Eastern wa-
ters.
A few steamship lines from Europe going east carry
none but white crews; and, by the favour of her de-
mocracy and her “White” policy, Australia is show-
ing the world that shipowners shall, so far as she is
concerned at all events, cease to be purely mercen-
ary, and that they must, when trading with Australia
and receiving Australian subsidies, pay some attention
to the “White” conditions there.
The British Shipowners’ Federation have so far
been, in a great measure, able to control freights and
shipping routes, and have kept wages down to £4 and
under a month for British seamen embarking from
British ports. The cry in England is that the shipown-
ers cannot get sailors, that the sea as an avocation
is much less popular than it used to be, and that,
owing to this feeling in maritime ports, the Royal Navy
even is experiencing a serious shortage of men.
Through Orient to Occident.


Is it any wonder that seafaring is becoming so un-
popular when the wages that can be earned are insuffi-
cient to support a family on shore? Even if the sailor
gives up all he earns, it is rarely, even when in cheap
England, that £3 10s. a month can be eked out so as
to pay for sailor’s necessaries and the support of wife
and children. While wages on shore are higher than
they used to be, the wages at sea are lower than they
were, yet people wonder why the British sailor is dis-
appearing. Is it not a wonder that he exists at all
under conditions such as these, and will not the doc-
trine of cheapness and low costs have to be seriously
considered before the decadence of the personnel of
the British mercantile marine can be stemmed?
Shipping subsidies, navigation acts, seamen’s pro-
tection, fiscal protection and other laws which have
hitherto been anathema to the shipowner, will have
to be accepted—otherwise many British seamen will
continue to be taken from the lowest quarters of Bri-
tish ports and from the scourings and riff-raff of human-
ity, who delight in insubordination and insobriety. It
is necessary that there should be more British sailors,
less individual profit, better seamen’s conditions, higher
wages and adequate protection for seamen’s labour, less
regard for tonnage, and a greater appreciation of the
satisfied white seamen’s personal and national worth.
It is not agreeable to passengers on a British ship to
see her manned by any but white sailors and servants.
The Chinaman is willing and attentive enough, but
he is not to be compared to a decent white steward for
real comfort and getting exactly what you want.
At Broome, W.A., the fiat has gone forth none too
soon that the work of coloured divers at that import-
ant centre shall cease, and, on and after January Ist,
1914, white divers only can be employed for pearling
along the shores of Australia. After the usual fuss
(made mostly by those who are wedded to old ways),
the white divers have in some cases already started
their work; and it is almost the unanimous opinion of
those who ought to know that in a short time, when
these capable English divers “know the bottom,
deeper diving, improved methods, more shell and
fewer fatalities will be the result of the new policy of
the Federal Government. Broome is a centre of a
pearling industry that is known to produce £500,000
worth of shell and pearls yearly, and how much more
in pearls that the master pearler never gets is known
only to the Asiatics. The industry is flourishing, and
supports three hundred luggers and their crews and
owners, also very many hangers-on of all sorts and
colours over hundreds of miles of coast-line in North-
west Australia.
Through Orient to Occident.


The price of pearl shell is good, and the substitution
of white divers for Japanese and Malays will be a
national benefit from a defence standpoint, as five hun-
dred or so British divers (many of them R.N.R. men)
will replace the aliens who now do the work. The
principle of co-operative profits between owner and
diver will probably increase with white labour; and
with more Europeans and fewer Asiatics in the busi-
ness, more pearls will go to the rightful owners, and
more profit to those whose due it is.
Thirty-five thousand miles of European, Asiatic and
Australian travel show up more vividly than ever our
possibilities and our emptiness, our strength and our
weakness. We desire with all our heart to keep the
labour of Australia “white” in colour and in treat-
ment; and even if we have to entrench upon some of
our pleasures and deprive our children of a few pounds
in the future, most of us would be willing to do it.
Let it not be heard again that ours is the land
where the workman not only deliberately saunters, but
loafs; let it not be said of us that one of the baneful
effects of industrial arbitration is the protection of the
worthless, lazy man; let us try to eliminate selfishness
and any growth of hysteria and undue emotion in the
public character.
The Germans are increasing at the rate of one mil-
lion a year, and the Japanese by three-quarters of a
million. The competition of the products of the fac-
tories of Bombay, Osaka, and Shanghai, with the pro-
ductions of the white man, is increasing. This, how-
ever, is less to be feared here than the possibility
of our fair Australia having to be flooded by the Asi-
atic before realising her destiny. Our great weak-
ness as a nation is our sparse population; and weak-
ness in the affairs of nations must be paid for like that
of the individual.
It is pleasing to know that whatever the various
State Governments do, it will be impossible to check
altogether, at least for some time to come, the flow of
immigration to populate Australia from the Old Coun-
try; but there must be no deadly sapping at our weak-
est and most vital national point by faint-hearted gov-
ernments. All our much-vaunted industrial and hu-
mane legislation would tumble down like a house of
cards at the first sound of the enemies’ guns.
The foundation of our nation building must be stable,
and that stability can only be ensured by a numerous
patriotic and unselfish people, who would be willing
and able to defend it.
Most of those who leave Australia’s shores are glad
to get back again and live their lives in the best coun-
try of all. The future lies in our hands, to be made
or marred according as we use our present national op-
portunities.
Through Orient to Occident.
