

t •
AA *ft«. A A A#A A a4L A#a *♦* J.4L *♦., ■«.♦■* A#A A^aA^AJ^A^J^Aa^aA
vV^li^ir%^* WvWV V%^^^^rvVVVVvVVvV>^f^r^rV^r5rvV
I • I
X ■~ I
I —- I
I through fhc |
I Spy-glass. |
\ Sketches of ll
t I 4
| I Well-known Westrallans V
% ■ y
* ! |
*| “^ s Others See Them. /
$ By “TRUTHFUL THOMAS.”. f ' , ..."
f A
... AKNO DOMINI MXMV.
| i I : * I '
\ —— —-, V
t 5
X Naught extenuated, nor aught set I ❖
X %
♦| down in malice. ♦*♦
4 |
i i
Published by Praagh & Lloyd, Perth, Western Australia; Pietermaritzburg and
Durban (Natal), South Africa.




Through the Spy-glass.
Short Sketches
of
IVell-known Westralians
As Others See Them.
Naught extenuated , nor aught set down in malice.
(By * Qhomasß
ANNO DOMINI MCMV.
Published by Praagh & Lloyd, Perth, Western Australia ; Pietermaritzburg and Durban
(Natal), South Africa.
[copyright.]




FORE-WORD.
smok ing my pipe at the Club the other evening
and listening to the gossip around, which invariably
assumes a personal character in the lazy hours after dinner,
it occurred to me that it would be refreshing to the general
public, after a surfeit of heavy, dull, statistical biographies
of local notabilities and nonentities (the latter largely pre-
ponderating), compiled to order and “ from information
supplied,” to come across short and crisp character sketches
of prominent denizens of the State —those whose names are
in our mouths every day.
The result of my cogitations is the publication of this
small book, now offered for general edification and amusement.
It will serve to while away pleasantly an idle hour in the
home, at the club, or in the railway train, and can be taken
up and laid down at any time.
Should any one of the subjects submitted to treatment in
the following pages consider the portrait here given of him
insufficiently flattering, I would recommend to his especial
notice the well-known lines of Burns :
“Oh, wad some pow’r the giftie gie us
To see oorsels as ithers see us.”
Truthful Thomas.
Perth, Jan., 1905.




SHORT SKETCHES;
OF
WELL-KNOWN WESTMLIANS
AS OTHERS SEE THEM.
‘-TRUTHFUL THOMAS.'’
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR FREDERICK Gr. D. BEDFORD.
Perhaps the last person one would select as the Governor of this State, as he appears
in the street, is the dapper, ordinary-looking individual—His Excellency Rear-Admiral Sir
Frederick George Denham Bedford, G.C.B. Short of stature and leaning forward slightly
as he walks quietly along, there is no suggestion of the sailor’s alertness. Usually garbed in
a morning coat and vest, tweed extremities, and a silk hat, he looks just an ordinary citizen,
but the clean-shaven face with its firm set mouth, yet kindly expression, would give the idea
that he was above the ordinary run of men. Full of the practical spirit of a naval officer, he
abhors the round of formal functions, which make up the sum of gubernatorial duties. At
the outset he declared he was not a rich man, and that parties, routs, balls and feastings
would be strangers to the vice-regal mansion on the Terrace. He has kept his word. That
is a characteristic. He means what he says, and the friends he makes are fast friends. Very
few people find their way to the Bedford “ At Homes,” because they are not encouraged and
the dates are not made public. Sir Frederick is an exclusive conservative, and his heart does
not warm to shoddy-built aristocrats. Punctuality is almost a fad with him, and he arrive s
at Executive Council meetings always well in advance of time. He prefers that his advisors
should do likewise. When the period of his vice-regency has effiuxed, few will recall the
unobtrusive, quiet man with his methodical ways and his bland, agreeable manner, save those
who were admitted to the inner circle of his acquaintance Having no preternatural talent
for administration, he, nevertheless, makes very few mistakes —an endowment which, next to
influence and genius, is the surest lever to promotion in British official life, as well as in the
Army and Navy. He never forgets that he is a British Admiral, which, after all, is excusable
as the type is known and honored the world over. Has seen considerable active service afloat
and has been wounded in warfare.


LADY BEDFORD.
The gentle consort of the representa-
tive of the throne in Western Australia
indicates by her actions, to those of her
sex whose social head she is, that her
ideal of woman’s work is the work of
home. Her charming and pleasing per-
sonality express rather the qualities of
a helpmate, than those of an independent
individuality, being of that clinging, de-
pending nature, so extolled by the writers
of half a century ago. A typical Eng-
lishwoman, gentle, devoted, cultured, of a
retiring disposition, possessing that
ritual of society-politeness to a degree,
wearing the laws of conventionality as or-
naments, Lady Bedford inspires the sen-
timent that, with her, publicity is a mar-
tyrdom, cheerfully undertaken according
to the demands of her social position.
Kind and thoughtful for others to the ut-
most, she is graciousness itself when per-
forming those duties that society thrusts
upon her. With female club life, or with
the innumerable women’s societies, now
extant, Lady Bedford has no sympathy;
but she delights in moving among the sick
and poor in the various charitable insti-
tutions, and in bringing a ray of sunshine
to lighten the shadows which have fallen
across their lives. This amiable lady rea-
lises that there is a purity, a tenderness,
a dignity, an elegance of soul, which are
of no account, certainly, in the business
of making one’s way in life, but which
will assist in the nobler—the divine—duty
of “wiping away tears from all eyes.’’
SIR JOHN FORREST.
“King John,” “Big John,” “John
the Great,” “The Knight of Bunbury,”
are only a few of the sobriquets by
which this most prominent of all living
W ester n Australians is familiarly
known. By virtue of his membership
of the Privy Council he is entitled to
the prefix “Right Honourable,” while
a whole string of letters after his name
denotes the other honours which have
been successively conferred upon him.
a man of achievements.
The first Premier of autonomous West-
ern Australia, and held the position
uninterruptedly for ten years. His
enormous force of character has
through life carried hijn through or
over every barrier in his path and has
enabled him to attain his present emi-
nence. Possesses just the physical pro-
portions and mental composition for
forcing his way to success in a new
country by sheer persistence. Has the
determination of a bull and the courage
of a lion. These qualities have made
his name, first as an explorer and after-
wards as a politician. Is equipped in
a large measure with the highest attri-
butes of a statesman—foresight, width
of knowledge, depth of understanding,
and the rapid and unfailing intuition
in judging men and affairs which
springs from a combination of these
qualities. Possesses also, to an extra-
ordinary degree, the courage, self-con-
fidence and readiness in declaring his
views and defying opposition, w T hich are
indispensable to a political leader.
Humanum est errare; and Sir John
would be the first to disclaim infalli-
bility. He has the merit, too, of look-
ing facts straight in the face, and
when he has found that he made a mis-
take is quick to own up frankly, and
then, with unabated vigour, sets out
in search of the right path. Is very
effective as a public speaker by reason
of his penetrating voice, commanding
presence, confident manner, and, above
all, a habit of saying all that is in
him. His career as a Federal Minister
and member has been marked by splen-
did strenuousness, conspicuously shown
in his persistent advocacy of the great
project for connecting this Western
State with the other States of the Com-
monwealth by a trunk railway. As a
private individual, bluff, hearty Sir
John has no real enemies. Is now in
his 58th year.
LADY FORREST.
To his amiable and accomplished wife
Sir John Forrest undoubtedly owes much
of his success in life, and all the happi-
ness which success renders possible.
Throughout the long years of their union
she has been to him “guide and philoso-
pher, as well as all that is comprised in
the sweet words “companion and friend.”
And as she is to him everything, so is he
to her. She is wrapped up'in him, cheers
him when weary of the fight—as even the
stoutest combatant must become sometimes
—and her diplomacy, tact, and ever-pre-
vailing persuasive powers are material


aids in his political campaigns. The
straight road to the heart of this clever
and gentle lady is praise of “Jack.” That
topic is with her one of never-failing and
absorbing interest; and her enthusiasm in
regard to her distinguished husband is
pleasingly infectious. A charming hostess,
as Sir John is a genial host, the hospi-
tality of this conjugal partnership is pro-
verbial, either in Melbourne during the
Federal sessions or in their proper home
in Berth, the charmingly snug residence,
with its pleasant lawns, known as “The
Bungalow.” While Sir John, as every-
one laiows, is a native of the State he
has served so long and so well, Lady For-
rest is also practically a Westralian, hav-
ing been born in Normandy, France, during
a visit of her parents to Europe. She
was a Miss Hamersley, a member of one
of the “six families” of this Province, the
cream of the local elite, and whose grand
old ancestral home in England is Pyrton
Manor, Oxfordshire. Among her many
accomplishments, this cultured lady is an
excellent amateur artist, her paintings of
specimens of the wealth of the beautiful
indigenous flora of Western Australia,
which form one of the main attractions
of “The Bungalow,” and have secured the
admiration of all who have seen them, be-
ing exquisitely executed. Unstinting
kindness to the poor has always charac-
terised Lady Forrest equally with her
husband.
REV. D. I. FREEDMAN, B.A.
It is hard to believe that even in the
bitterest days of Jewish persecution the
Rev. D. I. Freedman could ever have been
persecuted. His gentle smile would surely
disarm a whole company of tor-
turers. Fortunately in this free and en-
lightened land there is no reason to sup-
pose that any persecuting priest will ever
experiment on the Rabbi with red-hot
pincers, or lengthen his limbs artifically
by means of the rack. Mr. W. S. Gilbert
has told us in the Bab ballads of a ship’s
crew whose strongest oath was a mild
“Dear me!” but it is doubtful if the Rab-
bi has ever indulged in even this moder-
ate amount of profanity. When he is pre-
siding at a meeting of the Hebrew Literary
Society, and some irreverent humorist in
the gathering “cheeks” him, he only
smiles. He is frequently heard in Perth
as a lecturer, and always with pleasure.
He knows more about the history of the
theatre than some other clergymen will
ever know—because he studies facts, and
does not place any reliance on rqere hear-
say. The Rabbi’s lecture on “Shylock”
threw quite a new light on the character
a new light even to those who had studied
Shakespeare’s “Merchant of Venice” very
carefully in non-Hebraic editions. But
it must be confessed that some of those
who heard were not altogether convinced
by the argument that Shylock could not
have done certain things, becajose these
things are forbidden by the Jewish law.
The Christian religion forbids lying, and
yet some mining experts (for example) are
nominally Christians. So far as a Gentile
can judge, the Hebrew community is ex-
tremely fortunate in having such a head
as the Rev. D.L Freedman. Mentally a giant,
physically a pigmy, the Rabbi is a living
example of the triumph of rnind over mat-
ter.
WILLIAM ERNEST MOXON.
Certainly one of the most conspicuous
figures in the shipping world at Fremantle
is Wm. Ernest Moxon. In fact, “Moxie
would be conspicuous anywhere. His pro-
portions are hardly those of an Adonis, and
his personality is one that makes itself felt
in all circumstances. This shipping power
—and Moxon is a power where ships are
concerned, no matter how much those who
do not see eye to eye with him may de-
claim to the contrary —has many points
that attract attention while repelling ad-
miration. The average temperance crank
prides himself on being able to “say no
and stick to it.” If Moxon takes a parti-
cular pride in anything outside the pro-
sperity of the Adelaide Steamship Com-
pany, it is in being able to refrain from
saying “No” in season and out of season,
and hanging on to that for evermore. He
might have been a success in many things,
but platform oratory isn’t one of them. He
has attempted on various occasions to
charm the public with speech, but he has
always taken himself so seriously that his
auditors have extended more notice to his
extremely prominent ears than to his
ponderous arguments. Australian Federa-
tion had a forcible' advocate in Moxon,


With him the battle-cry —“One people one
flag”—was of considerable value; and if
some malicious individuals persisted m
declaring that the “one flag” was that of
the A.-S.S. Company, well —perhaps the re-
sult was due entirely to the man’s being
simply “not understood.”
HENRY DIGGERS HOLMES.
Of the hard inscrutable features which
pictorialists commonliy ascribe to financial
genius, the General Manager of the West-
ern Australian Bank possesses none. A
kindly benevolent countenance is framed
with a full beard of ample proportions,
which accentuates an amiable expression.
But the eyes are keen and searching, domin-
ating the whole face. Applicants for ac-
commodation —especially those who have
not the soundest .security to offer —find his
gaze just a little disturbing and discon-
certing, as they unfold their story. He
never interrupts or assists them. They
must begin and end in their own way, the
while he takes off and meditatively polishes
his eyeglasses. When it’s all over, they
may find themselves politely bowed out
before they realise that for some unfortun-
ate reason—quite outside their calculations
—the bank cannot help them. Those who
approach him regarding anyone’s stability
find at the finish that they have given
some useful particulars regarding them-
selves, without getting much “forrader” in
their quest of information about others.
With polished tact, Manager Holmes
extracts information, but seldom imparts
it—all under the guise of the most amiable
solicitude for hiis visitor’s welfare. Socially,
he is the most genial of men, and possesses
that passion for music which so often ac-
companies a talent for finance. He bears
himself rather as an ordinary well-to-do
man of business than the first financial
magnate in the State. The possessor of a
marvellous memory, he carries in his head
a fund of information regarding past deal-
ings with clients and their present position
in relation to the Bank which is always
immediately available. Can tell a customer
his balance on either side of the ledger,
• i O'
without reference to the books ; and will
surprise him with accurate knowledge of
his business transactions. Recalls, without
an effort,past conversations—-and the circum-
stances of past accommodations. A keen
reader of human nature, is not easily to be
deceived by plausibility or chicane ; and
once given cause for distrusting an appli-
cant for an overdraft that individual
will do well never to approach him again.
Is ready, however, to afford assistance in
cases where he feels his confidence is not
misplaced. Always takes the character of
an applicant into consideration as if it were
part of the security offered. Is a tireless
worcer, and has a high idea of duty to the
institution which has prospered go wonder-
fully under his management, and endeavors
to instil the same devotion to duty in the
lar e staff under his charge. Takes great
interest in all social movements, particu-
larly those which have for their object the
amelioration of the condition of suffering
humanity. The Ministering Children’s
.League’s Convalescent Home, and the Vic-
toria Institute for the Blind, most import-
ant and successful philanthropic institu-
tions, owe very much of their present
sound financial position to the continuous
efforts of Mr. Holmes, and in the case of
the first-named institution, he has been
aided by the self-denying efforts of Mrs.
Holmes, who has made the well-being of
the Home her constant care and thought.
W. D. JOHNSON.
Minister for Works and Acting-Premier
—and thereby hangs a tale. Daglish,
when departing for the Premiers’ Con-
ference, not having sufficient confidence
Hastie’s ability to take the helm—Hastie
being, in the ordinary course of things,
the Minister to step into the position—put
Johnson into the chair, giving as a reason
that Hastie was going on an extended
tour through the Murchison. Johnson is
dark-skinned and black-haired. Can only
raise a diminutive moustache —also black.
Is a carpenter, and looks it. Doesn’t put
on side, and is genial in his manner. Very
outspoken, and has courage of his opinions.
Vigorous but not eloquent speaker, and has
got a good grasp of the affairs of his de-
partment.
FREDERICK DUDLEY NORTH.
Civil servant, amateur operatic singer
(amateur in name only), C.M.G., and
farmer, is without doubt one of the “mis-
understood” of this world. Well-born,
well-bred, cultivated, his manner


“is agen ’im” in a democratic community.
Has never quite lost his English johnnie-
ism, and it has brought on him much con-
tumely from his critics. Is a thorough
sportsman, and has gained much distinc-
tion in the cricket field. He took a bold
stand in the Civil Servants’ grievances
against Mr. James, and although he was
credited with gaining his C.M.G.-ship be-
cause of his family connection with Sir
John Forrest, his brother-in-law, he can-
not be said to have had greatness thrust
upon him, for always courteous and gentle-
manly, he is qualified to fill any position
to which fate may call him. Has directed
his energies to farming lately, and never
seems happier than when engaged in some
of the varied duties pertaining thereto.
Rejoices in the sobriquet of “Piggy,” a
relic of his school days. Physically on the
large side in appearance, he looks a typical
farmer, being roundfaced, fair, and ruddy.
A. E. THOMAS.
One of the assertive characters of the
Legislative Assembly. A young man
of 33, of undoubted ability, he is at
times troubled with severe attacks of
the cacoethes loquendi of painful fre-
quency. A mischievous demon of de-
nunciation possesses him at times and
whirls him whither it wildly wills, with
the result that the temper of the House
becomes ruffled and the public time is
sadly wasted. Such a quiet, pleasant-
looking young man in ordinary, too, giv-
ing no sign, as he sits smiling in his
seat, of the fierce Cornish temperament
enclosed in that mild exterior! Gained
his very complete knowledge of mining,
both theoretic and practical, in the best
schools and working fields at Home and
at Johannesburg, South Africa. But
for those unfortunate outbreaks in Par-
liament. would, with his talents, be a
most useful politician. However, as he
is young yet, and not lacking in deter-
mination. there is abundant hope of a
successful public career before him if
he will but curb his propensity to “let
fly” in debate.
HORACE W. SHOLL.
Man well on in life, but still as vigorous
as lots of younger men. Under medium
height, but over medium girth. Deserves
well of his country for his pioneering work
in the Nor’-West. Squatted and pearled,
with much advantage to himself. Now
lives in a delightful home at Peppermint
Grove. Was once in the Legislative As-
sembly, but beyond saying, “Hear hear,”
and voting solidly with Sir John Forrest,
made no mark. Is still game to go into a
spec. If he loses, doesn’t whine; if he
gains, doesn’t crow. No one over says a
bad word of “Horry,” and no one ever
wants to.
J. P. LEARMONTH.
Son of the late Peter Learmonth, one of
the best known of Victoria’s Western Dis-
trict squatters in the early days, J. P.
Learmonth inherits the old man’s Scottish
dourness. Tall, spare, and with large
moustache, is a typical Australian.
Came to this State about nine years ago as
manager for W. R. Cave and Co., but
found in that capacity insufficient opportu-
nities for raking in the dollars. Went “on
his own” as an auctioneer. Possessing keen
business instincts, has built up one of the
best paying hammer-wielding concerns in
the State. Has two brothers in the same
line in Victoria. The man who wants to
get the better of J.P.L. in any deal has
to be up betimes. Was engaged by Gardi-
ner, then Colonial Treasurer, to carry out
the secret land purchase deal, but his ex-
act position in regard thereto has not been
divulged. Money generally mates with
money, and his wife is one of James Lilly’s
daughters. In social life has a leaning for
the 11-inch guns, and may always be found
in their proximity, to the temporary eclipse
of those of lighter calibre. Is a good
cricketer and first-rate horseman. In
Hamilton (Vic.) there was no straighter
rider after the hounds.
TOM O’BEIRNE.
A rough-natured, robust, hospitable,
quick-tempered, jolly Irish-New Zealander
is Tom O’Beirne, sometime hotelkeeper of
Fremantle, and now retired private citi-
zen of Claremont. In his youth (he’s now
about 45) Tom was easily the champion
athlete of Broken Hill, and he bid fair
to become the champion pugilist of the
world. Then came an accident. A hogs-
head of beer rolled down on to one of his
legs and smashed it to pulp. Such was
his nerve, however, that Tom looked calm


ly on while a couple of surgeons carved
the battered flesh and bone from the
sounder portion of the injured limb. This
accident deformed what was generally
conceded to be at that time one of the
finest specimens of physical manhood on
the globe. O’Beirne has ever been a
generous patron of every form of sport.
His maimed leg keeps him out of the
prize-ring, but it can’t prevent him using
his hands in defence of his honor or Ins
body. Too many men know this to then-
sorrow. O’B. had Parliamentary aspira-
tions once. This doesn’t imply that he
had political talent. Far from it. He
knew precious little about politics. For-
tunately (for him, perhaps) the electors
discovered the latter fact, and returned
his opponent. At one time he owned
racehorses, and invariably watched them
run seconds and thirds. Now, he watches
other fellows’ horses run. He says it’s
cheaper.
CAPTAIN IRVINE.
For many years Captain Irvine (still in
the middle forties) navigated the coasts of
W.A. Now he worthily fills the position
of Chief Harbor-master of the State.
There’s nothing about seamanship that lie
doesn’t know, unless it’s how to pile a
ship up on the rocks for the benefit of
her owners. Those who travelled with
him on the old s.s. Rob Roy between Fre-
mantle and Geraldton had nothing but
the warmest praise for his skill, energy,
and attention. Those who didn’t travel
with him are sorry for their want of for-
tune. Before he took command of the
harbors of W.A. visiting ship-masters were
loud in their complaints against grievances,
some of which may have been real. Now,
those master-mariners fill in their spare
time by relating narratives about the grie-
vances that they used to have. Stout,
sunburnt, and clean-shaven, he is pleasant
to look upon.
CHARLES HUDSON.
Figure, medium height, and spare ; face,
kind and pleasant, with hirsute_ appen-
dages ; manner, affable and conciliatory.
That’s Charles Hudson in a nutshell. He
was president of the Fremantle Chamber
of Commerce, and it speaks well fcr his
tact and discretion that he was head of
that august body for several years. His
friends are—the whole of his acquaint-
ances. He hasn’t got an enemy. Between
fierce, contending parties he holds the
balance as evenly as the relative strength
of the combatants will permit, and he is at
peace with them all.
W. DIVER.
“Bill” Diver is one of the most pugna-
cious leaders of the Labor Party. Of medium
height and looks well-fed. Has the face
oj a fighter—square, prominent jaw and
keen blue eyes. An ex-President of the
Trades and Labor Council, which office he
filled with credit to himself and advan-
tage to the Council. Attends every meet-
ing of that body, and can alwavs be re-
lied on to talk freely and at length.
Speaks slowly and distinctly, in a voice
without modulation, so that a littleßof him
goes a long way. Stubborn, and prejudiced
in favor of the working man, he hangs on
to the principles he advocates with the
tenacity of a bull-dog. Like most of the
leaders has political aspirations, but they
have so far not been realised. Once stood
for the Legislative Council, and once for
Greenough, but defeated on both occasions.
Has carefully studied the relations between
employer and employee, but from one
standpoint only, that of his own party.
Certainly a “battler” for his crowd, by
whom he is held in high esteem.
HAROLD E. PETHERICK.
A 'barrister by profession, is a man
about 45 years of age, medium height, in-
clined to be stout. Affects a black frock
coat and the orthodox tall hat, which sur-
mounts a somewhat rubicund, clean-shaven
visage. Has been the victim of excessive
and adverse press criticism, while certain
papers have heaped ridicule, chiefly di-
rected against his personal appearance,
upon him. This spirit of malevolence has
had no detrimental effect as far as he is
concerned. Without the slightest doubt
he is a man of conspicuous ability and
mental attainments. Is a member of the
Inner Temple, and when in England prac-
tised on circuit. Originally devilled for
Sir Charles Russell, of whom he tells
many good stories, and was also junior


counsel in numerous important cases both
in England and Australia. Though a
highly-educated man, has the peculiarity
of ignoring his aspirates when speaking.
Is a thorough organiser, as was evidenced
by his work during the visit of Their
Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess
of Cornwall and York. On that occasion
acted as secretary of the entertainment
committee, and was personally compli-
mented by His Royal Highness on the
efficient manner in which he carried out
his task. Also presented by H.R.H, with
a souvenir to mark his appreciation. Is
an ex-town clerk of Perth.
FRANK MARTIN.
Could be seen anywhere on account of
his vast proportions. “Laugh and grow
fat” might be appropriately applied to
him, as his clean-shaven apple-liKe face is
generally wreathed in smiles. A young
man, 72 inches high, probably turn
the scale at 18 stone. Solicitor by profes-
sion, enjoying a good practice. Is a keen
lover of sport and a “jolly good fellow”
both in appearance and character.
W. T. KEINOH.
The Oongregationalists do not claim that
more than 2 per cent, of the people in
Australia are adherents of their church,
but it is probable that at least 20 per cent,
of the churchgoers of Perth “go to hear
Mr. Kench.” That is how many of them
would phrase it —they are not, and are not
likely to be, church members, (they may in
some cases have a very hazy idea as to the
differences in point of doctrine and church
government between the Oongregationalists
and any other rehgious bo£y, but they
“like Mr. Kench,” and they would pro-
bably follow him if he suddenly became a
Particular Baptist, or started a new
church of his own. Of prosperous mien,
well set up, with a pink complexion,
small dark moustache, and a placid air of
being at peace with all men.
HARRY J. KING.
A really good-hearted fellow, who nearly
lost the number of his mess a few years
■ago under a railway truck on the Fremantle
jetty, is Harry J. King. In working hours
fte is shipping manager for Dalgety and
Co,. After that, he is thoroughly good
company, either in his own neat home at
Richmond, or out (among his numerous
friends. Still under 40, he is a cheery,
healthy-lookmg man, and were it net for
the misfortune that rendered one of his
legs almost useless, he would still be some-
thing of an athlete.
HARRY WILSON.
When the W.A. boom was at its height
Harry Wilson was the only auctioneer in
Fremantle, Now his position is less soli-
tary. He’s getting on towards the half-
century in years, and he’s inclined to take
the world more leisurely than he was wont
to do. The wielding of the hammer was so
dexterously and persistently performed by
him in days gone by that he can now afford
to go easily. He has no ambition to be-
come notorious. He never had, and he’s
not likely to change in this respect. He's
hardly the sort to mistake the “puff of a
dunce” for fame.
SERGEANT HOPKINS.
A squat, wiry little man, with a wea-
ther-beaten visage, and a meagre, greyish
whisker, Sergeant Hopkins struts among
the water-police of Fremantle after the
style of a bantam rooster in a barn-yard.
A good investment would be to buy Hop-
kins at his real value, and sell him at his
own estimate of himself. Still, he has
his good points. He has a rough, kindly
nature, well-protected by a stout armour
of vanity, and once the latter is pene-
trated the man rises superior to the con-
stable. It’s seldom, however, that the
armour is found vulnerable.
DR. HORROOKS.
Bespectacled, .teitout, between SO and
40, may be of medium height, but owing
to stout and heavy build, looks below it,
with a peculiar walk, indicative of energy
—such is the subject of this sketch. One
of the highest-qualified members of his
profession in the State. Has a large and
lucrative practice among the better class
of people. Hot, not to say peppery, tem-
pered—which considerably adds to his
effectiveness as a physician, in that. Ins
patients know that his directions must


be followed without tomfoolery. Fond of
cricket, tennis, and golf. Excellent com-
pany, fond of congenial society, and is a
good all-round man.
H. V. E. CALTHROP.
Tall, slight stoop, fair moustache, gold-
rimmed spectacles, immaculate attire, ter-
minating with white spats over his pedal
extremities. Best-groomed man in Fre-
mantle. Astute busness man, and, work-
ing well up to the top like the “Pinnacle”
tea he booms. Also runs M‘Dougall’s
sheep dip and insect destroyer, and booms
them, too. Has demonstrated the effi-
ciency of the latter by spraying orchards,
but has not yet tried it on members of
Perliament. Deliberate in manner, never
rushes headlong into argument, but he is
a man of strong views. Belives that land-
grant railways would benefit the State.
Aspires to public life, though not an
orator. His sound business common sense
should stand by him, and will, probably,
in the near future, come to the front, and
certainly deserves it.
A. BORCHERT.
The attorney in W.A. for Bell’s Asbes-
tos Co., is a man of middle age, about an
inch short of six feet, with a fresh, pink
complexion, and 20 years ago must have
been particularly handsome. Fond of
men’s company, though he eschews the
society of the opposite sex. A chronic
growler. Holds strong opinions, and is
not afraid to give expression to them.
Takes but little interest in politics or
sport. Never misses his sea dip, no matter
what the weather. Has a peculiar walk,
inasmuch .as he puts his feet down tiatiy
and firmly. Generally attired in a tweed
suit, with a large check, and always wears
a Stetson felt hat. Well liked by every-
body, notwithstanding, or perhaps because,
of his penchant for “growling.” Fond of
houses and dogs, and generally accom-
panied in his walks by one of the latter.
HARRY ROAN.
Proprietor of Boan Bros. ; of medium
height, slight build, very dark complexion,
dark brown hair, heavy dark-brown mou-
stache and full beard, with keen brown eyes.
Of Jewish appearance. Very smart and alert
in business matters. Built up a large es-
tablishment in Broken Hill from nothing,and
then came to Perth in 1805, where he laid
the foundations of his present extensive
business. Is an excellent buyer, knowing
exactly what he wants and its value. Takes
a passive interest in politics. Of a charit-
able nature, is kind and considerate to-
wards his numerous employees. Spends
most of Iris time in tripping to the eastern
States, varied by an occasional visit to the
old country. Popular with everybody.
Deserves his success.
J. M. DREW.
Is a member of the Legislative Council,
Minister for Lands, and one of the strong-
est members of the present not very strong
Government team. Cinder medium height,
middle-aged, small face, with a big expanse
of forehead, sharp features, fair, ruddy
complexion, ginger hair turning grey. A
journalist by profession, and, judging from
his paper, the Geraldton “Express,” a
forceful writer. Does not talk much, but
what he says bears every evidence of care-
ful thought. A man who will probably
be in Parliament for many years to come,
and will always occupy a prominent posi-
tion. When not a Cabinet Minister will
be a useful private member. Certainly a
strong, forceful man. A native of W.A.,
he represents the district in which he first
saw the light of day.
ROBERT HASTIE.
A typical Scotsman, with all the national
caution and whatever of its virtues you
may be able to discern. Somewhat
squarely built for his inches, and looks
more diminutive than he really is. Speaks
in spasms more or less protracted, and
most of his words are distorted with a
particularly aggressive Scotch accent.
Strong leanings towards the powers that
bo—a characteristic which led to the
rumor during last Parliament that Mr.
James had him. in his pocket—a feat which
neither Robert’s physique nor his strength
of purpose rendered impossible. Plenty
of originality—in facial contortions.
Sketches of his various expressions whilst
listening to an opponent’s attack would
fill the portfolio of a caricaturist and
make his name. Would be an ideal


Minister for Mines if he possessed the re-
quisite ability. Inclined to be extrava-
gant in his donations to his Savings Bank
account, and is reported to be the only
Labor member w T ho emerged from the
wrestle with his Parliamentary emoluments
showing a credit balance. Makes many
friends, but Robert Hastie is the foremost
of them, and he sticks to him valiantly.
Cannot fathom the financial problem of
a wife, and therefore takes the risk of
single blessedness.
DR. KELSALL.
Might be any age between manhood’s
majority and the half-century; clean-
shaven, dark, well-dressed, very quiet, gen-
tlemanly and affable in his manner, which
wins for him many friends. Familiar
figure to Perthites bowling along in his
motor-car, which he drives stooping slightly
forward. Has a large general practice,
and in addition does special work. Does
not appear to worry much about politics,
which may be accounted unto him for
righteousness. Fond of tennis and all
other out-door pastimes. Married a sister
of the late George Leake.
JAMES LILLY.
When you see a handsome, venerable-
looking man, of about 60, in Fremantle,
tall, with slightly-bent shoulders, full grey
board, and grey hair, you can bet that he
is James Lilly, a justice of the peace. In
his youth he was a champion juggler with
cuss words, and age has not withered nor
custom staled the infinite variety of his
language. Is one of the identities of the
Port, having resided there for over 20
years. Started with' the proverbial shil-
ling—or less—in his pocket, and has
amassed considerable wealth, being one
Of the largest owners of town property in
the State. Is of a retiring disposition, but
when you know him, a jolly old boy.
Has Deen out of active business for some
years. Is the fortunate father of a large
family of handsome girls. One of his pe-
culiarities is that of growling hard,
whether he is losing or making money in
a speculation. Is the largest shareholder
in the Fremantle Gas Co., from which he
benefits much by large dividends. By his
deputies was a strong opponent of the
introduction of the electric light to Fre-
mantle. Has the most beautiful house,
situated on the top of Monument Hill, in
Fremantle. During his long experience in
this State was connected with the ship-
ping trade, having represented the Ade-
laide Steamship Co. in its struggling days.
Etas been' approached by designing persons
to enter Parliament, but he declined to
fall a victim to their machinations.
0. E. BYRON.
His Excellency the Governor’s private
secretary is a familiar type of the well-bred
Englishman. May be any age between
35 and 45. Tall, slightly built, hair turn-
ing grey, clean-shaven, kindly face, and pos-
sesses all the agility of youth. Scrupu-
lously neat, is always well turned out. Un-
necessary to add, is courteous and gentle-
manly, as befits his position. Is a lover
of all manly sports, and a general favorite.
Gives one the impression that he is always
alive, and is happy and contented.
E. GILLELAND.
Short, broad as he is tall, fair, pro-
truding lips, a prominent corporation,
built on the lines of a humming-top, a
man of many chins, with a head shaped
like a cone—such is ‘’Gillie,” the top dog
of the Labor Party at Fremantle. Affects
a black-tailed coat when on the platform,
which seems to add more to his breadth
than his height. On most occasions, hew-
ever, he wears washing clothes. Has a
screechy, John de Baun-like voice, and
when talking to one his eyes grow per-
ceptibly larger and open wider. Looks
something like a cow that has been turned
into clover after rain. Is withal, a man
of considerable ability and energy, and is
resourceful. Energy enables him to get
through a lot of work —by getting others
to do the bulk of it for him. According
to his own statement, it is generally known
that, when he had been in the State for
about three years, he worked for eight
days as a wharf laborer. A good speaker,
with any amount of force, and marshals
his facts well. Has the faculty of making
one believe what he states is fact, whether
it is or not. Everybody likes him, but
none takes him seriously, and the spectacle
of “Gillie” running for a train is a sight for


the gods. Has political aspirations, which
were frost-bitten by A. J. Diamond at the
last election, when he stood for the re-
presentation of South Fremantle. Regards
himself as an authority on the question of
a State Bank.
DR. TAAEFE.
Stands somewhat below medium height.
Fair complexion, with greyish hair and
bushy eyebrows. Always dresses in pro-
fessional style—frock coat, dark pants, and
silk hat. Has distinctly bland professional
manner. Has been a daring speculator,
and had losses, but is not above having a
flutter again. Was a good friend to cab-
men. Never used to go to a case except
in a cab. Didn’t keep a turnout of his
own. Bought a motor-car. Bad day
that for cabby.
H. B. JOSEPH.
One of the chosen race, and a solicitor.
Typically Hebrew appearance. Clever,
but not exceptionally brilliant. Practises
his profession as if he was not enamoured
of it, but treats all his cases conscien-
tiously. Used to have a good thing as
solicitor to W. G. Brockman in the heyday
of that magnate’s meteoric career. Has
a tricky little habit of throwing up his
chin while talking and turning his head
from side to side. Wears dark sac
suit as a rule, but dons full war-paint for
levees, garden parties, or court cere-
monies.
“DRYBLOWER” EDWIN G.
MURPHY.
Of medium height and build, with a,
round face, particularly meaty on the jaw,
and only escapes being heavy by the deep,
far-away look of a singularly bright blue-
grey eye. A fine forehead, which gives
seme indication of the power within, and
a dimpled chin which bespeaks some of
the weaknesses which are the common
lot. Altogether, the face would be
mournful in its cast were it not for the
spirit Avhich flashes in the eye and the
piquancy of the nose, which points in the
direction which sky pilots exhort folks to
travel. Knows everybody, and by his
writings under the name of “Dryblower”
has legions of admirers. As a writer of
verse of all descriptions, humorous, topical,
and some which breathes the divine
afflatus of true poetry, he has no equal in
Westralia. Whatever class of verse he
produces he includes under the name of
“jingle.” Is thoroughly conscious of the
merit of his writings and the talent
he possesses, but could not be ac-
cused of being uppish. In his early
days he figured in comic opera chorus in
“the big smoke,” and has a pleasant tenor
voice and elocutionary gifts which might
have brought him among the principals if
he had stuck to it. Very precise in keep-
ing appointments—when he remembers
them —but is absent-minded. Forgets injuries
more readily than favors, and never for-
gets anecdotes or good stories at all.
J. B. PERCY.
You might mistake him for a retired
cavalry colonel, for he is essentially a
military-looking man. A somewhat haughty,
distant manner aids the illusion. He is
a little under 6ft. in height, and is particularly
handsome and dstinguished looking. He
has a gentlemanly style, marred somewhat
by his haughty demeanor. In society
circles he is exceedingly popular.
C. S. TOP PIN.
Looks about 36 years of age; tall, ruddy
of complexion, with a well-trimmed, short
red beard. Always smartly attired and
well groomed. Is Auditor-General, having
relinquished his duties in the Railway De-
partment, in which he had been for many
years, to accept this office. An authority
on accountancy and finance, has proved a
success. Always alert, energetic, and
businesslike. Has many friends, and is
respected and esteemed by his subordi-
nates.
H. D. BEVILAQUA.
So intent is the accountant of the West-
ern Australian Bank in his work, that
when in the streets he does not walk, he
“tripples.” About 40 —he may be over—
getting thin on the thatch, dark complexion
and moustache, particularly intellectual
face, evidently a brainy man, and far more
in him than appears on the surface,


Genial disposition, keen sense of humor,
and can tell a good joke outside the bank
—too serious during office hours to do
more than think of his duties. Intensely
nervous, and tMs characteristic is empha-
sised by his walk. Is most courteous to
everyone, never failing to offer a chair
to all who desire to see him in his office.
Very kind to his sLiff, but means what
he says, and never tells a man twice to
do anything.
I. S. EMANUEL.
About 35 —he may be more, but does
not look it —sallow complexion, dark, curly
hair, tinged with grey, with unpronounced
Jewish features, medium height and build
—such is the presiding genius of the firm
of Forrest, Emanuel, and Co. Hard as
a nail in a deal, keen and shrewd in gaug-
ing chances, and capable of handling very
big things. Reserved in manner, and self-
contained, he is somewhat difficult to ap-
proach. Frequently to be seen ivalking
along the Terrace, in the direction of the
Wield Club. Invariably carries an um-
brella in one hand, and, afar off, the
Emanuel walk enables one to pick him
out. Drives the best horses and carriages
to be seen in the city, and is a good judge
of horseflesh. Has no liking for politics,
sticking closely to business. Fond of
horseracing. Has been very successful in
his operations, therefore very wealthy.
Success of the firm due in no small measure
to the ability displayed by the subject of
this sketch.
JOHN JOSEPH HIGHAM.
A clerical cut, which personally he does
not do justice to, for there is nothing of the
parson about him. Politically, a ghastly
failure. He was no speaker, and took no
pains to make himself an influence in the
House, The appointment of Whip only
assisted his downfall. With no definite
political opinions, he was a cockshy for the
other side in every political melee. Social-
ly, he was the most genial and kindly of
men, and whenever there was a Parlia-
mentary outing, he devoted all his energies
in attending to the comfort and enjoyment
of others, and never troubled about him-
self. Sir John Forrest had great influence
over him. If Sir John had remained in
politics J.J. might have done so, too. He
has a kindly eye, and wears a brown beard
now tinged with grey Married into the
wealthy Bateman family.
WALTER MORROW.
Represents W. Howard Smith and Sons
Proprietary, Ltd., steamship owners and
coal merchants;, in Westralia. Fair, even
unto the verge of “ginger,’ 3 apple-blossom
complexion, with moustache to match; of
genial and quiet habits; is liked by every-
body. Particularly fond of sport, with
a weakness for tennis.
FRANK VILES.
Polite, and pleasant, tail—he is in the
vicinity of six feet—prematurely grey,
fair complexioned, with sharp, pronounced
features, handsome, walks with a bend of
his body from the thighs upwards—such is
Frank Viles, of Fremantle. Is energetic,
alert, active, and enthusiastic about every-
thing he undertakes. Always plays the
game, whether winning or losing, and no
compromise about him. Is young, prob-
ably 30 years of age or thereabouts. Has
had an extensive commercial experience,
having represented the firm of G. S.
Yuille and Co. in London. Was a mem-
ber of the Fremantle Council, and during
his term of office did yeoman service in
the direction of securing a tramway ser-
vice arid electric light for the Port. Not-
withstanding this, when he stood for a
seat on the Tramways Board, was de-
feated. Takes considerable interest -in
politics, and is a prominent member of the
National Political League, Fremantle. A
man of strong likes, and equally strong
dislikes—a good fnend, and a bad enemy.
Is a coming man politically, and in every
other way. Very impetuous, and inclined
to go off the rails. Prefers to bump into
an obstacle rather than go round it or
stop to remove it.
F. HOLLIS.
Is about 45 years ot age, rugged ex-
terior, but kind of heart, peculiar eyes.
Well-built. Manager of the Union Stores,
Limited, Fremantle, and indirectly sup-
plies nourishment in the shape of Nestles’s


milk and Mellin’s food to hundreds of
Port youngsters. Has a peculiar temper,
and not easy to know when one has got
him. Takes an interest in politics, from
the capitalistic standpoint, though his
views are not rabid or extreme. Does not
appear to have any inclination in the
direction of entering Parliament, preferring
to devote his attention to business. Mar-
ried one of John Bateman’s daughters.
THEO FELSTEAD.
Is a handsome man, beautiful eyes, very
white hair—though he is only a young
man, probably not more than 30, and pos-
sibly under—wears a greyish-white mou-
stache, and is of medium height. The
manager of Charles Moore and Co.’s
Drapery Emporium, is a thorough organ-
iser and administrator, quick and ener-
getic, shrewd and smart. Has large
ideas, and grasps every detail connected
with any business with which he is con-
nected. His quick, energetic walk is an
index to his mind. Speaks quietly,
placidly. Though bold, he is deliberate
in his methods. While a man who pos-
sesses a kindly disposition, yet he has
strong prejudices, which may by some be
termed dislikes. Is very popular with a
large circle of friends.
ELIAS SOLOMON.
For a lengthy period Elias Solomon was
Mayor of Fremantle. Some say that this
was Solomon’s fault. Others blame Fre-
mantle. Further, Sol. was member for
Fremantle in the State Parliament; and
later on he was member for the same
place in the Federal House of Representa-
tives. But there —requiesoat in pace! also,
de mortals nil nisi bonum! After all, we
are a long-suffering community, and above
everything else we have a reputation for
charity. Let us sustain it. Solomon, who
is now approaching 70 years of age, did
his level best for those he represented—
he couldn’t have done more. Also, he
couldn’t well have done much less. If he
didn’t attempt all that his constituents
d-sired —well, let them thank themselves.
He certainly very adequately reflected the
hopes, and ambitions, and aspirations of
the majority of them, and not every mem-
ber of Parliament can justly lay claim to
such a merit. Solomon had one big failing
—he never knew his own worth. His const l -
intents never knew it, either. However,
“Look round the hospitable world; how
few know their own worth, or, knowing
it, pursue.” Short of stature, and bent
with years, he wears a white moustache
and goatee to match.
J. W. KIRWAN.
An Irishman, slightly above middle
height, pale complexion, darkish hair,
mousey-brown moustache, when he wears
one, with a distinct brogue in his voice,
though the latter is not aggravatingly ap-
parent. Originally engaged in journalistic
pursuits at Port Augusta, and came over
to W.A. in the early days. Joined Hock-
ing Bros, in a newspaper venture referred
to by John Waters K. as the “Kalgoo-er-
lie Moiner-r.” Seized his opportunities
with the majority, recognising that the
nimble penny came from the many and not
from the few —more particularly was this
the case at the time of the alluvial trouble.
Elected a member of the House of Repre-
sentatives in the first Federal Parliament
by a large majority, but at the last election
was hurled out with much violence by a
Labor man. Quiet, thoroughly unassum-
ing, and when you know him with a kindly
disposition, though this is not superficial.
Somewhat dogmatic and inclined to be of
the same opinion still. Not pushing, but
thorough in everything he undertakes.
Nervous and diffident in manner. An eli-
gible bachelor.
H. J. PRESTON.
Solid, shrewd-headed fellow, with firm,
determined expression of face; keen and
alert-looking. He has practically mono-
polised the market in Western Australia
for condensed milk. Has sole agency for
Nestle’s goods. Aspired to enter the poli-
tical arena. Stood for the Senate at last
general election. Announced himself as
a freetrader, and was earnestly supported
by the mercantile community. Electors
were not taking freetraders that time—
wanted nothing but Labor—so Preston was
defeated. Takes keen interest in Federal
politics all the same, and has been of great
service to Westralian members whenever
he has visited Melbourne.


“CAPTAIN” OATS.
“Pioneer Bill” is a prominent figure in
Perth and on the fields. What the Cap-
tain” doesn’t know about mining—not
wild-cat flotation, but honest and practical
delving in the bowels of the earth- is
hardly worth bothering about. His China-
silk-clad figure, with waving white green-
lined umbrella, is familiar to most of the
residents of Kalgoorlie and the capital.
That white umbrella furled is the captain s
means of emphasis in argument. No one
has ever been able to classify his politics. He
is a Comervative-cum-Labor man, with a
fine belief in the Divine right of Kings,
coupled with subscription to some of the
wildest theories of ultra-socialism. This cur-
ious composite set of opinions notwithstand-
ing, he can always get the votes of the man
with pick, shovel, and dish ; and that s
all he cares for. If you should see that
silk-clad figure carrying that white urn
brella, wearing gold-rimmed glasses, and
a fairly long white beard, toddling along
St. George’s Terrace, one foot at a time,
don’t throw a brick at it, or you might hit
Captain “Billy” Oats—and he is really a
“white man.”
GEORGE PARKER.
George Parker has lived all his life in
the reflected glory of his brother Stephen
Henry, now a Judge. Parker and Parker
was the firm of which “S.H. was the head
and George the nether part. As an
advocate, George Parker has won cases
by not abusing witnesses and by not befud-
dling the Bench. Is, in fact, quite a ne-
gative sort of man —until he finds himself
on the cricket pitch. To him, in conjunc-
tion with one or two others, is due the
existence of the West Australian Cricket
Association. Has always been an enthu-
siast of the great British pastime, not a
mere barracker —not one of those indivi
duals who delight in laying down the law,
but do nothing eke to promote the interests
of the game —who dictate from the kerb-
stone, but never play. No; George Parker
is the right sort of enthusiast, performing
rather than preaching; and for what he
has done for cricket in this State deserves
credit and has the real gratitude of all
genuine “flannelled fools.” Until lately,
he wore a, nice grey beard. This he has
now shaved off —and the change doesn’t
make him look less a grandpapa. He is
a quiet-mannered man who is not made
to create a great stir in the community,
but will always possess many genuine
friends.
SENATOR PEARCE.
Like nearly all Labor members, Senator
Pearce is a bookish politician. Has occu-
pied his leisure from working at his trade
as a carpenter in reading works of poli-
tical economy, but without studying actual
conditions and reasoning out cause and
effect for himself. Because Mill and other
political writers have declared it is good to
let articles be manufactured when they can
most cheaply be produced, 'George Pearce,
Senator, must hold and preach the same
view. He fails to see his illogical position
when he practically says “We shall not
allow the yellow man to come to this
country and work for lower wages than
those on which the white man can live ;
but we will let the colored alien make his
foods under what conditions he likes, and
we will let him pour them into this
country so that the white man shall not
work nor earn wages at all. Pearce is a
thin, earnest-looking man whose deep-set,
dark eyes are those of an enthusiast. But,
that his admitted enthusiasm and! stead-
fast adherence to his rather mixed princi-
ples will be for the benefit of Australia is
very much open to doubt.
CHARLES FROST
“To those who know him not,
No words can paint ;
And those who know him, know
All words are faint.”
Such is Charles Frost, the Fremantle
manager of the “West Australian. He
is the most unassuming, and at the same
time one of the very ablest, of the new
school of journalists in Western Australia.
Only a young man yet, on the sunny side
of 30, already he has acquitted himself
creditably in almost every description of
literary work open to a pressman in Perth
or Melbourne. Doesn’t pretent to encyclo-
pedic knowledge or exceptional discern-
ment, yet, in gauging the public value of


remarks or events, he invariably exercises
a judgment as sound as it is rare. Frost does
not claim to be either aristocrat or democrat,
protectionist or freetrader, Fremantleite or
Perthite, ’Tothersider, or Sandgroper.
A ever lays claim to any strong views or
opinions or capabilities. Lets his deeds
alone speak for him. Has no enemy, and
in journalistic work he never permits his
friendships to influence his actions. His
sole objects (in office hours) seem to be
strict impartiality, scrupulous accuracy,
and comprehensive thoroughness. Where
he fails to achieve these ends, ninety-nine
out of every hundred journalists in Austra-
lia would be found wanting. With a liter-
ary staff of the Frost type even a sub-
editor’s life might be a happy one.
FRANK CRAIG.
Is a man of no very marked character-
istics. He knows a good Jersey bull when
he sees one, and is loaded up with yarns
about the “olden da vs,” especially in con-
nection with the Avon Valley. Some of his
stories do not impress the hearer with the
conviction that a his’h moral code was in
force in the Avon Valley in those “good
old times.” As Justice of the Peace, oc-
casionally fills a comfortable and -well-
upholstered chair on the Bench at the
City Police Court. His mode of magiste-
rial procedure is original, and smacks of
the familiar. “Fine him ten bob,” he will
say, “his father used to work for me,” or
“Let him go this time, his brother’s a de-
cent fellow.” Physically, is not built on
the lines of a racehorse. He classes him-
self as “medium draught.” Has done
plenty of hard cvork in days gone by; but
doesn’t need to exert himself nowadays.
Does not squander much at the tailor’s.
Knows he doesn’t look well in a frock coat
and stove-pipe hat.
J. T, GLOWREY,
Looking at J. T. Clowrey, one wishes
one wure a successful hotel-keeper and
could drive a spanking turn-out like hie.
He isn’t really very short in stature, and
his color is roseate, still he strikes the ob-
server as a little grey man. Broad in the
back and important in appearance, he sets
his feet dowm gingerly as if he had ten
corns one on each toe. No one has ever
seen him running up-stairs. Flies off the
handle tolerably easy and never seems to
bustle ; yet his servants go in terror of his
frown. All right when you know him, but
then “you’ve got to know him first.” He
is at his best at a symposium of goldfields’
visitors and financial magnates. Hasn’t
much time for small fry, and never tries
to cultivate business by excessive geniality.
As a politician, never made any particular
mark, but took his beating at the last elec-
tion with perfect equanimity, as a good
fighter should. Glowrey isn’t the sort to
whine at micfortune when that unkind
“Miss” comes bis way; but puts his
shoulder to the wheel vigorously, and soon
manages to push his cart out of the mire.
SAMUEL W. COPLEY.
A man who sprang from small begin-
nings. Hard as a nail physically, he is
nearly as hard mentally. Hard-headedness
is, perhaps, the main characteristic of this
stout Yorkshireman. Is in business to
make money—and all his energies are de-
voted to that end. Does not pretend to
run philanthropic institutions. Is out
after dollars, and the dollars are bound
to_ come his way. Some folks say hard
things of him; but what cares he? No
one ever doubts his shrewdness, and no one
ever tries to beat him in a deal. The man
who tried to beat Sam Copley ds probably
not yet born. Sam has been known to
give a penny to a street boy—but he took
care that he got the “Daily News” in ex-
change. People used to think when Sam
went in for the meat business that prices
would come down; but he didn’t enter
into the business for the benefit of the
public, any more than for the benefit of
his health. His scheme of motor buses,
which failed in the service to Victoria
Park, brings in shekels on the shorter
routes. Sam is supposed to know to
the exact financial position of every busi-
ness man in the city. He could,' if he
would, tell whether the leaders of local
“sassiety” pay their milk bills, or whether
the Civil Servant has had to leave his
v ashing in pawn at the laundry to enable
him to pay his tennis club subscription.
Once seen never forgotten, Sam Copley


doesn’t walk, he waddles. He is nearly
a yard across the back and is not built
for speed. No one could imagine him run-
ning or tripping it on the light fantastic
toe. He always, wears a heavy brown
suit, no matter how hot the weather. He
would make an admirable State Treasurer,
but takes no interest in politics. When he
dies he will go to that heaven where all
dead Yorkshiremen go.
RICHARD SEPTIMUS HAYNES, K.C.
Universally known as “Dicky” Haynes,
the diminutive of his baptismal name accur-
ately expressing his appearance. His short
stature, perky demeanour and jerky manner
irresistibly suggest resemblance to a pert
dicky-bird. Possessed of undoubted clever-
ness, he is wanting in settled judgment;
and this defect, combined with an absence
of gravity, has proved an effectual
bar to his elevation to the Bench. Witty
and good-hearted, he is capital company,
and is generally voted “a good sort,” his
talents for humorous recitations and quick
appreciation of a joke contributing largely
to his popularity. Without doubt he was
born in a merry hour. Very effective with
a jury and clever at seizing every point of
advantage to his side, he is in much request
for the defence in criminal cases. It will
ever be remembered how strenuously he
exerted himself on behalf of the notorious
Deeming when that wholesale murderer was
run to earth in this State, and how skil-
fully he took advantage of every possible
chance of defeating the prosecution. But he
is weak in technical legal knowledge and
sustained argument, and is consequently
not effective in civil cases. Has
had a good deal of parliamentary ex-
nerience in both Houses of the
Legislature, and has shone meteorically in
municipal affairs. But always the defect
of want of application, combined with the
hot-headedness characteristic of his family,
which impels a Haynes to rush in where
angels fear to tread, has prevented his
risin n- to permanent distinction in the public
arena The public decline to take him
seriously. Thus it is that a man who, had
he taken himself more seriously from the
first and devoted more attention to the
study of law in his youth, might, with the
opportunities open to him at the bar in the
earlier days of the State, have risen to the
highest legal position, has to remain con-
tent with the reputation of being merely
an ordinary practitioner and a negligible
quantity in public affairs
T. F. QUINLAN*.
Good-hearted, charitable Timothy
Francis Quinlan, may his shadow never
grow less. It could not oe much reduced
without fading into the ewigkeit. Does
not wear that rotundity that generally
characterises the successful man. Is the
soul of good nature, and does not desire
to let his right hand know what his left
hand gave away —not in public subscrip-
tions, but in quiet unostentatious help to
the needy. The hundreds could testily -o
this were they not forbidden. He has in
the past done good work in Parliament
and in the City Council. _ Though some
may laugh at Tim for wearing a gorgeous
uniform °and Papal orders of knighthood,
to a good Catholic those distinctions are
as dear as are the orders of the Carter
and the Thistle to Dukes and Marquises.
The church to which he belongs has also
profited largely by the beneficence of her
loyal son.
POLICE INSPECTOR LAWRENCE.
His men call him “one of the best. ’ He
takes his position very seriously. If an epide-
mic destroyed the rest of the inhabitants of
Perth and missed him, he would be dis-
covered by a rescue party in his office in
Irwin Street at 10 a.m. seriously handling
reports and minutes, dealing with basket-
fuls of official documents, and wishing the
“Fremantle Doctor” would start to blow.
But the rescue party would have to be on
hand at the office before 4.30 p.m., or else
would have to go to the West Australian
Club to find this strictly punctual and ever
methodical officer. If the superintendent
were not found at the latter resort, he
would surely be seen somewhere along the
Terrace, or at Daniel White’s entrance
“waiting for Mac.” When dressed in all
his official paint and feathers, with his com-
manding physique, he presents a very fine
appearance ; but he finds his official uniform
too hot for ordinary wear. He has done


some good police work in the past, and has
a rare fund of stories of crime and cri-
minals in by-gone days. Stands over
six feet high, and has a proportionate
chest measurement. Mostly affects blue
serge for every-day wear, with a hard
hitter hat. A twinkling eye, tanned
face, peaked grey (or magpie) beard com-
pletes his description as it would appear in
the “Police Gazette” if he were “wanted.”
Is a good-hearted soul and has consequently
had his confidence frequently abused. Has
been known, when promoters of a benevo-
lent fund felt diffident about calling on him
for a subscription, to ring up and ask why
he has not been asked for a contribution,
adding that a guinea was waiting to be
called for.
FREDERICK HARE.
That s one of the prettiest men I ever
saw/’ said a society dame at a Weld Club
gathering, directing her gaze at the Com-
missioner of Police. She was using
Lady English,” so probably meant that
the Commissioner impressed her as a
handsome man. “Oapt.” Hare is a sol-
dierly-looking fellow and carries his uni-
form, with all its nickel-plated accessories,
with grace and aplomb, as the ladies’
journals say. Even in mufti he looks a
military man. He has taken considerable
interest in the welfare of the men of the
foorce, and has fostered their endeavors
to form an efficient band. Is also credited
with bringing to a head the long dormant
project of barracks for the metropolitan
police. Has never done “beat” duty him-
self ; so doss not know where to feel for
a bottle of beer in the dark. Has the sense
to get reliable men appointed to the re-
sponsible positions under him, and to con-
tent himself with the genera] administra-
tion of his Department without interfering
in details.
DR. E. J. S. HAYNES.
The fierce light that beats upon a pub-
lic man must beat upon Dr. Haynes. Un-
less he feels that he is in the public eye, he
isn’t happy. Nothing he likes better than
a joust with the hospital staff, or a smart
exchange of hostilities with his fellow-mem-
at City Council meetings. When these
stock recreations are not available, any
subject will serve to bring him into publi-
city and print. But, truth to tell, his sub-
jects are mostly well-chosen ; and if many
of his ideas were put into effect, the public
would be benefited. Take, for instance,
his suggestion for the establishment of a
foundling hospital, or his crusade 1 against
infected milk. As a City Councillor he is
a firebrand, of whom the timid among his
fellows, are afraid. Professionally, he is ad-
niitted to be one of the cleverest operators
in the State; while as a pathologist, even
those who have bitter personal feeling
agiamst him admit that his position is
among those in the first rank. Socially,
he is hospitable; but he would sooner
the compound comminuted frac-
tured tibia of a professional rival than the
liver wing of a roast chicken. Personafiy,
he is burly and ruddy-complexioned.
Sports a close-cropped grey beard and mou-
stache, and generally wears a black silk
dust-coat and buff waistcoat, which with
grey pants and shiny “dice-box” hat, forms
a tout ensemble characteristic as conspic-
uous. He has had numerous vehicle acci-
dents, but has always been able to heal
himself.
E. E. KRUG.
To have “the luck of a Chinaman” is
the ambition of many young Australians.
To have the luck of Krug is to have the
luck of many Chinamen. Knowing habitues
of racecourses watch what horse Krug backs,
then put their bit on” ; and nearly al-
ways those knowing ones find themselves
m consequence “a bit ahead of the day.”
Krug looks most virtuous when he is giving
evidence about a, bit of “Joowelry” which
has been, what he calls, “moshkined by a
gonoff.” Civilised people would call it
‘ pawned by a thief.” He wouldn’t take
a bit of “crook stuff,” s’help him. He
has an eye for a pretty girl, and hi s good
looks and liberality secure him popularity
with the gentle sex. If you haven’t met
him before you will recognise him by the
way he carries his chin in the air as he
looks through his specs along his nose. His
blue cloth frock coat is a landmark on the
Terrace —which is frequently dodged by
impecunious citizens whose paper he holds.


F. LYON WEISS.
Mr. Bumble enunciated the general prin-
ciple that “the law was a hass,” and the
leonine Weiss has boldly set himself the
task of substantiating that doctrine in the
“groper” courts. It would be wrong to
say that he is any the better for his. efforts
—neither is the law, which continues to be
as big an ass as ever. You can’t touch pitch
without being defiled. When the Educa-
tion Department attempted to dispose of
Lyon’s services at Boulder years ago, they
never dreamed they were raising up a legal
Frankenstein, which would haunt them
for years. They did not know their man —
though a glance at his prize-fighter jaw
and his set defiant expression should have
made them wary of setting him at defiance.
Doubtless he was right at the outset of his
crusade; but the wrong done him has
warped his judgment, and he cannot see
that his insistence may be construed into
the pursuit of notoriety. The impression
thus conveyed has been his undoing. The
righting of injustice appears to have been
lost sight of in following up the sweet uses
of advertisement. Baffled in the inferior
courts, defeated in the Supreme Court, and
snubbed by the High Court of Appeal, there
might be some hope that the perennial
litigant would now take a very long voca-
tion. But, he being who he is, the Weiss
proceedings bid fair to continue as inter-
minably as the famous equity suit of Jarn-
dyce v. Jarndyce. A certain capacity for
hammering out verse of a heavy character
has unfortunately prompted the ex-educa-
tionalist to cultivate the muse —and this
may be adjudged by some as another sign
of lack of mental balance. Those who
have read his poetical (?) efforts, may ex-
cuse him, but are not likely to forgive
him. As a patriot, Lyon Weiss trespasses
severely on the credulity and patience of
the public. They get better value in re-
garding him as an expert swimmer and
diver, for in the water he excels. Perhaps
just past the prime of life, he has seen
enough of the world to despise appear-
ances, and therefore pays no heed to his
apparel. A frock coat of sublime endur-
ance would get a better chance of reflect-
ing credit on its prehistoric cutter if the
wearer had not cultivated such a pro-
nounced stoop of the shoulders. The
nether garments, antedating the coat, have
developed embonpoint at the knees and thus
obscure physical developments of some
strength and creditable dimensions. Cel-
luloid collar and shirt front minimise the
laundry bill, and so save means for many
small kindnesses in the way of cheap meals
to the distressed derelicts from way-back
who get stranded in the city. How do
they come to discern that this lion.of the
Law Courts has a charitable disposition?
DR. SUMMERS
Is the only musician in Western Aus-
tralia with a University degree, and as
such is entitled to respect. Is a bachelor
of Music (Oxford) by examination; and,
though his Doctorate is a “Lambeth” de-
cree —i.e., it was conferred on him honoris
causa by the Archbishop of Canterbury—-
that fact is no evidence that he would
have been able to obtain such an honor
in the usual manner. Of late years Dr.
Summers has dropped more and more out
of the musical life of Perth, in which he
was once prominent. He has ceased to
conduct the Perth Liedertafel and the
Subiaco Philharmonic Society, with which
he was formerly connected; and he no
longer dates his letters from the “Perth
College of Music.” His concerts in Perth
have not been invariably successful—to
put the case very mildly— and there are
still some who remember, with a fearful
joy, his dramatic ,scena “The Bush Skele-
ton,” which was illustrated by a stage
scene, the principal feature of which was
an improbable skeleton, seven feet long,
in the foreground. Then there was his
concert at the Theatre Royal, in which the
scenes, intended to illustrate his music to
“The Two Worlds,” became strangely
mixed, “The Pool of Hades” appearing in
place of “The Garden of Eden,” while ir-
reverent youths in the gallery made refer-
ence to the 1 new baths at Cottesloe, and
suggested that the figure of Satan in mid-
o o O
air was the first kangaroo on the gold-
fields. However, Dr. Summers has never
been daunted by failures. He would prob-
ably be very much astonished and annoy-
ed if he were told that he had failed. He
still composes music, and carries the MS.
about in the pocket of his somewhat shabby
coat ; and some day he is going to visit
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, and Lon-
don once more. Kindly sympathetic per


sons may feel sorry for a man who has
held good positions in his time, and will
never be able to hold them again—for this
is an age of young men. But the doctor
does not want their sorrow or their sym-
pathy. He sails on in the dreamland of
his artistic fancies, supported by recollec-
tions of a happy and promising past in
the Old Country years ago, and content to
be supremely alone. Had he possessed,
with his unquestionably high qualifications
as a musician, the smallest aptitude for
turning his talents into cash, he should
now be occupying a high position in his
profession.
GEORGE TAYLOR.
One of the curious products of Austra-
lian life. Beginning life-work as a sta-
tion hand in Queensland at the age
of eight, and without having received any
schooling after those early years, he has
since passed through extraordinary vicissi-
tudes. Becoming in his native State an
ardent advocate of the rights of the shear-
ers, as proclaimed by the organised union
of that claes of workers, he had to pay
the penalty for his vehemence by an en-
forced retirement from the world. On his
re-appearance among the free denizens of
Australia, he sought a new sphere for his
activities in the Western Province. Ar-
rived on the Eastern Goldfields in 18'J3,
he became identified with a Workers 3 As-
sociation there, and thus managed to ob-
tain a seat in the Assembly. In the Legisla-
ture he at once became a prominent figure,
mainly on account of his burly size, his
big bushy beard, and his independent at-
titude. He also speedily became a nui-
sance by reason of his frequent voci-
feious and annoying interjections, never
better pleased than when he could
thus arouse the ire of an oppo-
nent or even one of his own party.
His power of making himself obnoxious
being recognised, he was given a portfolio
in the Daglish so-called Labor Ministry,
formed in June, 190-1. and now prolong-
in'.;' a precarious existence. As Colonial
Secretary of the State, George Taylor has
proved a complete failure in every way.
The familiar proverb about a “silk purse”
and a “sow’s ear” applies in his case.
CORiNTHWAITE HECTOR RASON
Is, at the time of writing, Leader of
the Opposition in the State Legislature,
occupying a seat in the Lower House. So
frequent, however, and sudden are the
changes in colonial politics that at any
time after the opening of Parliament thin
year he may be occupying the position
of ' render. Whenever the defeat of the
Haglish Ministry does come about—and it
only has a precarious tenure of office—the
opportunity is to Mr. Rason. Having had
a long experience as a member of Parlia-
ment, during which he has filled with cre-
dit to himself and benefit to the State
several Ministerial positions, and being an
al le debater and eloquent expositor, he
will make a model head of the Govern-
ment His gift of quiet sarcasm, with
which he illuminates his public utterances,
makes him dreaded by his opponents;
while his fluency, combined with a wide
knowlege of public affairs, a habit of ac-
curate statement and a well-modulated and
telling voice, constitute him an effective
speaker. An English gentleman by birth
and education, he is of the best type of
professional politician. Possessed of agree-
able address and sympathetic manner, he
is popular even with his political foes.* In
the prime of life, and with great abilities
and experience, should have a great future
before him.
WILLIAM JAMES GEORGE,
Commissioner of the Government Rail-
ways, and the best abused man in the
State. His position as the head of the
great land transport service brings him
into contact, and often conflict, with all
sorts and conditions of men ; and the large
body of employees under his control are
continually harrying him with grievances
of one kind and tire other. Notwithstand-
ing, however, a very quick temper and a
disposition to autocracy, both defects of
which he is himself aw T are and strives to
correct, is by no means out of place in
the very responsible post he occupies.
With continuance in office, his faults are
becoming less evident, and witli a little
more experience, he will justify the ap-
pointment he obtained for himself some
three years ago by a Parliamentary move


that was much canvassed at the time.
Has disappointed the expectations of his
enemies, and as time runs on bids fair to
fulfil the best hopes of his friends. A
strong man, with unbounded self-confi-
dence, a hard head, enormous persistence
and considerable ability. Certainly mere
in place at the head of the railways than
in Parliament. With his disregard of the
suaviter modo, would never have become
a model politician. Is a hard and honest
worker. Had considerable experience 111
railway engineering in his native Birming-
ham and in the Eastern States_ of Aus-
tralia, which is very useful to him in his
present position. As the comic song says ;
“He’s all right when you know him,
but you’ve got to know him furst.” Has
more varioufly difficult, voluminous and
exacting business to deal with than any
other high official in the Public Service,
and tackles it all with supreme courage
and confidence.
THOMAS WALL HARDWICK.
Deserves all the success he has attain-
ed, for it has been gained by strenuous
effort' directed by keen business acumen.
As (Managing Director of the Swan Bre-
wery, is thoroughly master of his business,
having been always a first-rate brewer. Is
a splendid specimen of a robust, even-tem-
pered, pioneering Englishman; and, judg-
ing from his sturdy physique, may be saiHy
backed to top the century in years. was
over fifty when he first landed in Mel-
bourne, a stranger with but £3 of spend-
ing money in his pocket. d he grit of the
man was shown in his at once setting to
work at the first employment that present-
ed itself—gardening, to wit. Since then,
has seen much of Australia, and been vari-
ously employed, gravitafTng at last to his
proper calling in this State. Does not
drink his own beer, because that bever-
age does not agree with his ‘‘innards’ as
well as it does with his bank-book. Is
ever ready to help a genuine lame dog over
the i tile ; but his shrewd eye can see
though the imposter at the first glance. Is
a valued member of the Perth City
Council, at whose often stormy delibera-
tions his sedately genial presence exer-
cises a soothing influence ; while his wis-
dom, experience, and sound practical sense
greatly assist the transaction of the muni-
cipal business. Has very strong views
regarding the necessity for proper top-
dressing for the streets ol Perth a mattei
that certainly requires attention.
THOMAS G. MOLLOY,
A prominent citizen of Perth, who is
better known than liked. Possessed with
the Irishman’s proverbial love of a row, is
always in hot water. Probably would not
be happy unless embroiled in some dispute.
As a member of the City Council, is in-
variably at loggerheads with the Mayor
or one of his fellow councillors. As a
badness man, with many irons in the fire,
his path is strewn with legal proceedings
with one kind or the other. Probably
dreams of caveats, injunctions, suits for
damages and actions for trespass; and in
conversation or on the platform or in the
Council Chamber is refreshingly free m
the expression of contentious views. With
it all, is wonderfully successful in his many
financial speculations. Has a large fund
of enterprise. Owns a good deal of city
property, and has erected many large build-
ings in the capital, his latest enterprise
being the erection of a large new theatre,
with hotel attached, which forms a notable
addition to the architectral features of
Perth. As a speaker, is logical and worth
listening to when not tempted to indulge
in personalities.
WILLIAM PATERSON.
Manager of the State Agricultural Bank.
Few prominent Government officials in
Western Australia enjoy such popularity
with all classes as does he. And this de-
spite the often delicate nature of his of-
ficial duties. After many years of the
hardest work in town and in the bush,
with his erect carriage and stalwart ap-
pearance he still presents the appearance
of a man in his prime. The genial smile
that so readily comes to his face and the
merry quip to his lips are further evi-
dences of true youthfulness, besides being
safe passports to -general favor. Healthy
out-door occupation in his youth and
throughout his life have preserved his phy-
sical powers unabated, while his mental
equipment is as serviceable as ever. One


must get up very early to catch him nap-
ping. His parents hailed from the Ork-
ney Isles, and the son’s nature, although
he is a native of the State, partakes of
the rugged grandeur of the far northern
home of his race. Imbued with a keen
sense of humor, heartily appreciates a good
story. Has also a sympathetic chord in
is composition a very rare possession
with those who have spent their lives and
made their way in the rough and tumble
of colonial life. The great and continual
growing success of the Agricultural Bank
is entirely due to his able management.
He has slaved night and day for years in
the interest of this institution, and has
made it one of the most useful in the
fetate Perhaps his highest qualifications
for the position he so competently fills is
his thorough knowledge of all the agricul-
ural areas of the State and their varied
Conscientious in the ex-
treme, he gives his own personal attention
to every application for a loan—and they
come in by hundreds; and he never sends
a bona-fide applicant away disappointed if
he can help it. Has reared a charming
family of girls in the right way. Is a
clever mechanist, and knows all there is
to know about “bush” life in all its
phases. A man of many parts—all good.
Has been a useful member of Parliament.
JARLATH S. DUFFY.
About 36 years of age, tall, strong-looking
clean-shaven, but with no pretensions to
facial beauty. Experience in life varied,
commencing as the first police constable in
Cdolgardie in the early days of the gold
lush and from that out sharebroker, auc-
tioneer, speculator, and what-not besides.
When Australians saw a chance to gratify
theii lestless disposition and cover them-
selves with “glory” and good pay by
volunteering for service in South Africa
against the Boers, Duffy saw a chance and
piohted by it. < He left as a corporal, and
came back in charge of his company,
vv hen the war was over he returned once
more to Westralia, where he set up as an
auctioneer, for which pursuit nature and
his varied experiences have eminently
qualified him. He is of a' kindly disposi-
tion withal, and though always keeping, as
sailors would say, “‘well to windward” in
a deal, possesses a heart, and has done
many a good turn to those less fortunate
than he.
NORMAN K. EWIING.
An elder of the Presbyterian Kirk? No,
but looks it. Combined with a puritanical
expression, there is the narrow-crabbed
look of an Old Bailey lawyer. There is
a ferrety look in the small dark eyes that
peer cunningly through the gold-rimmed
spectacles that he invariably wears. Want-
ing in strength and force of character, he
has pinned his political faith to sectarian
influence, just as his place in society has
been secured by marrying into the
Chief Justice’s family. In State politics
he was able to make some showing amongst
the minnows surrounding him, but he was
overweighted and outclassed in the higher
realm of Commonwealth legislation. Would
make more friends if content to be thought
the man he is, instead of posing as the
biainy individual he can never hope to be.
Tact and discretion, which make up for
so many shortcomings, do not come nigh
him, or he would never have been led into
Ins feud with the press in Victoria, which
practically cut him off from the public,
which was indispensable to him. A strong
man could barely withstand a conspiracy
o± silence from the press, and the weak
man is flattened* out essentially. Capitalis-
tic in his principles and inclination, he does
not hesitate to flirt with the Labor Party
and may possibly-at the first favorable
opportunity—be found standing in the
labor interests with a mortgage on the
portfolio of Attorney-General.
JOHN H. PROWSE.
If a community is to be judged by its
Mayors, then Subiaoo must have a strong
Waning towards teetotalism. Theex-Mayor
JDaghsh is a strong opponent of accursed
. lnk; and his successor (Mayor Prowse)
is even more pronounced in his horror of
alcoholic liquor. He even shudders at the
idea of taking down a temperance drink
poured from a bottle with the fatal words
• a € champagne” on its label. He
is a pillar of the Wesleyan Church, and


on the Sabbath dons a full suit of black
and a silk hat. The hotter the day the
blacker his costume, presenting living
testimony to the existence of a material
hell. In his Mayoral capacity has not
so far made any remarkable splash; but,
by the end of his year of office he will
probably be able to show that he is an
able president at the council table, besides
being an earnest advocate of ail thac
tends to the benefit of his suburb. Very
tall and erect, with a rapid gait, he con-
veys in every movement the idea of a
smart business man. As proof that his
appearance and manner do not belie his
attributes, does there not stand the patent
fact that, in the course of the two years
he has sojourned in Western Australia, he
has, through his own energy, not only es-
tablished on stable lines a branch of the
insurance company which Tie represents,
but has also built up and conducted that
business on such progressive lines that
already he has found it necessary to move
into more commodious offices situated in
a more central position than those in
which he commenced operations in the capi-
tal city? A man of enterprise, evident-
ly, and brimful of energy, he may be
counted a decidetf acquisition to the busi-
ness life of the community ; and no doubt,
should he continue his connection with
public affairs, a successfid political career
lies before him.
JOHN DE BAUN
Looms large, literally as well as figur-
atively, in any group of the notabilities
of Perth. A big man with a little voice—
and a history. Were his biography to be
truthfully given to the world it would re-
veal astonishing vicissitudes and varieties
of occupation. Credited with culinary
ability, he has, if report be true, more than
once in his chequered career had to fall
back upon the humble business of a peram-
bulating pieman. Has probably experienc-
ed as much of the ups and downs of
colonial life as any man in Australia. Has
generally managed, however, to , “come
out on top” somehow. Should now be in
possession of a comfortable income from
his interests in two of the leading hotels
of Perth and other property. Built the
Palace Hotel, and conducted it for a
while. That his employees spoke well of
him is greatly in his favor and more than
can be said for most of the other hotel-
keepers in this State. Though keen on
following up the main chance, John is
not a bad fellow to deal with if he knows
you are dealing straight with him; and
he has been known to indulge in the ex-
pensive luxury of doing a disinterested
kindness for a friend. But try to “have”
him in any way, and you will find that he
is up to every trick and dodge practised by
the rogue fraternity. He will speak gen-
tly to you in his curiously high-pitched
voice, but at the same time will give you
plainly to understand that he sees
clean through your little game. Is com-
monly reported to be a great favorite with
the ladies —a phase that implies little or
much according to the way in whicTT you
use it, and whether or not it is accom-
panied by a wink of the eye.
PATRICK J. WHELAN.
Ls well known on the Eastern Goldfields
and fin Perth, and likewise in Adelaide. Of
considerable girth, with a large, ruddy
countenance, of an exceptionally genial ex-
pression, P. J. Whelan exemplifies in him-
self the nickname by which he is known
far and wide, “Paddy.” Nobody ever
thinks of speaking of him otherwise. Alert
and with a lot of Irish shrewdness in his
commercial dealings, it is hard to make a
point on “Paddy” Whelan, except on the
soft side of pure good nature or an appeal
to his goodheartedness. “Paddy” is an
hotel proprietor, and held a big interest
in the Hannan’s Brewery Co. His faith
in the venture stood the test of time and
adversity, and now the brewery has
evolved into a highly successful commercial
proposition, “Paddy” is reputed to have
benefited largely, in a financial sense. The
genial “Paddy” has one weakness, the
histrionic art, and has many a good story
to tell, while he will, on the least provoca-
tion, declaim with no mean elocutionary
ability, much Shakespeare or Byron—his
favorite poets. The high personal charac-
ter and reputation of P. J. Whelan are
everywhere acknowledged, and he is one of
the oldest goldfields Justices of the Peace.


DOUGLAS G. GAWLER.
About forty years of age, medium height,
square shouldered and well-set up, small
fair moustache, becoming tinged with
grey, Roman nose, square jaw, and a frown
which shows power of deep concentration
and earnestness. Occupation, barrister
and solicitor—one of the best known and
best liked in Fremantle. Has acquired a
considerable share of this world’s gpods,
and is reputed to be a wealthy man. Pro-
fessionally, has a reputation as a sound
lawyer, although he is not gifted with the
oratorical powers so invaluable to the man
who goes frequently into Court. A good
sportsman, with a weakness for the hunt-
ing field and a liking for golf, Douglas
Gawler manages to while away many an
hour. He possesses an earnest disposition,
and in a quiet unassuming way indenti-
fies himself closely with political and
other movements making for the general
welfare of the community, and while others
talk he works. He comes of good British
stock, his grandfather, Lt.-Col. G'addidiq
having been a former Governor of South
Australia. He carries out the best tradi-
tions of the race and is first and last —a
gentleman.
THEOPHILUS HOOSON.'
Who is Theophilus Hopson? Let it t>e
known to the world that he who answers
to this Yankee-sounding nawq is Leader, of
the Reporting staff of the “West Austra-
lian” newspaper, and consequently a “re-
cording angel” of local importance. But
any one less like a celestial being than
Theophilus, despite the Greek significa-
tion of his name, it would be hard to
imagine. Only a Dickens could adequate-
ly describe him, or, rather, take him as
raw material and, by power of vivifying
imagination, work him up into a really in-
teresting character —say, a man who, un-
der the cloak of a depressing taciturnity
and entire absence of companionableness,
hides an abnormal depth of feeling and a
shrinkingly tender soul, or a far-seeing and
deeply calculating mind. No sign of such
qualities appear on the surface, no inkling
of what lurks behind that sallow counten-
ance and secretive demeanour is given.
Whatever is contained within is known
only to Hooson and his Maker; and the
door of the inner chamber is fast locked
and the key apparently lost. He may be
a Tulkinghorne full to the brim of dark
and unpublishable secrets, or his silent soul
may be nursing impossible ambitions, or
the heart within him is dead with disap-
pointment. Who can tell, save Hooson ?
—and it is certain he never will divulge.
Yet the desire to find what is in this enig-
matic man is the more piqued by his un-
conquerable reticence. Is his heart being
slowly consumed by immitigable grief, or
was he born lugubrious, this Knight of the
Rueful Countenance? Is a good mechani-
cal reporter, and a most assiduous and con-
scientious worker in the performance oi
his press duties could not be found. Will
not leave the office in the “wee sma’
Aprs” until the last forme of the day’s is-
sue of the paper has been safely “put to
bed.” Is a bachelor, like his chief, Dr.
Hackett, and has never been seen in the
company of a female, being understood to
abhor womankind. Has the (meritorious?)
negative qualities of being a teetotaller and
a non-smoker; and his only known weak-
ness in the way of dissipation is for six-
pen’orth of lollies. “Duke est desipere in
loco” applies in this case of even this mys-
terious and uncompromising personage, if
only in that mild and harmless form. To
the staff he leads is as much an enigma
as to outsiders. Is a native of England,
and was, nine years ago, on the reporting
staff of the Melbourne “Age.” About that
time he came to Western Australia. Very
sparing of words, he is a patient listener,
and has a curious habit of expressing his
approval by humming or whistling tune-
lessly.
JAMES GALLOP.
A typical prosperous son of the soil is
James Gallop, of Fremantle. He framed
the basis of his success in life with Dal-
keith oranges and grapes. The progress of
the country did the rest. Apparently he
has no need now to worry about financial
matters, and a glance at his bluff, good-
humored, full-bearded face as he indulges
in his favorite pastime—billiards—gives the
impression that it would make very little
difference if he had. He simply wouldn’t
worry. Recently he built Fremantle’s first
and only theatre.


WILSON DUNN.
Looks the part of a jolly Boniface. Bid
he might also be mistaken for a highly
salaried comedian. Is slow to wrath, but
if you want to see him get mad call Cas-
cade ale “shypoo.” is a good man of
business, and a prompt payer. Is open-
handed, and a moving tale can coax a
sovereign out of him without much ado.
But he is getting tired of the “lug-biters,”
and does not produce his lending money
now without due inquiry. It is a sight
for the Gods to see Wilson Dunn splashing
good beer over the landscape in a vain en-
deavor to get a “No. 10” cork into a “No.
7” bottle; and his language, when he hits
his knuckles with a bung-starter, is appall-
ing. Is described as the dude of the local
licensed victuallers fraternity, and is cer-
tainly one of the best-groomed men in the
city.
W. CARR BOYD.
Is over CO years of age, grey-haired, big,
rugged featured, small grizzled moustache,
‘•hard old case” (in Australianese). Pos-
sesses in a most eminent degree the faculty
of placing self-advertisement before every-
thing else, with Carr Boyd close up be-
hind. Carr Boyd has seen a good deal
and imagined a great deal more. Pos-
sesses an excellent memory, keen faculties
of perception and mental assimilation, and
an observant eye, so that, as the wheels
of time roll on, the substratum of truth
which formed the original basis of one of
his stories becomes added to and embel-
lished, until upon it has been built a “fairy
tale” that would do credit to the late
Baron Munchausen or “The Wide World
Magazine.” Carr Boyd has doubtless
seen a good deal and roughed it, but it is
safe to say that his faculty of apt expres-
sion and his gift as a raconteur, together
with the artistic garnishing of his little
tales, have established a reputation for
him, which has been sustained more by his
own hard work in insisting that every word
and detail is true, and by telling the tale
“in and out of season,” than by actual
fact, although he never takes his eye off
the chief actor and mover in the yarn
Carr Boyd. Of great native shrewdness,
the gnarled old warrior never misses a
point, assuming a sturdy independence of
dress which always makes the uninitiated
—when they see the tall figure and the
rugged face —ask “Who’s that?” to which
the answer and the advertisement come at
one and the same time —“Carr Boyd.
That he has travelled everybody knows,
but the lustre of his reputation as an ex-
plorer, second only to Stanley or Living-
stone, is somewhat dimmed by the over-
liberal embellishment to his tales of travel
of an overdose of imagination.
OHARLEiS HARPER.
One of Harper’s constituents once
described him as “a cold man —a man that
wants a gallon of human blood pumped in-
to him.” Perhaps he may more kindly
be described as lacking in sympathy. He
has the appearance of a shrivelled, dried-
up being, a ribstone pippin of a man —one
of those human apples that, to become
sweet, must be touched by frost. No-
thing appears to thaw him. One could
not imagine Charles Harper under any cir-
cumstances in a towering red-hot rage.
But one can conceive him being coldly,
frostily angry. His personality, alto-
gether, represents the dried-up, frost-bit-
ten, intellectual fruit of civilisation. No
one can deny his intellectuality. No one
can refuse to credit him with the posses-
sion of all those cold, calm, judicious quali-
ties that go to make an ideal Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly. But no one
would think of ascribing to him the heart-
warming soul-stirring attributes of a
Burke or a Fox. Calmly logical, his poli-
tical utterances are carefully weighed, and
tend rather towards the expression of broad
principles than to the Little Pedlington
politics of the average country member.
He advocates the cause of the tiller of the
soil; not only because he is one who wins
much of his wealth from that source, but
also because he believes that all those in
a young country who embark on agricul-
tural pursuits should be given every ad-
vantage that legislation can secure for
them. Socially, he figures but little in
the public eye. His hobbies are his or-
chard and the welfare of the Guildford
Grammar School. His part-proprietorship
in the “West Australian” newspaper pro-
vides him with a substantial income, but
his heart is not with journalism—until he
wants a speech to his constituents fully
reported.


ACTING-JUSTICE ROE.
Successively lawyer, pearler, mariner,
daring explorer among the Polynesian Is-
u"ds, mining investor, criminal judg~ '
the nigger communities of the North-
West, Stipendiary Magistrate in the capital
city, and now Acting Judge of the Su-
preme Court, Augustus Sanford Roe is one
of the prominent men of the nascent State.
Just over 50 years of age, with his athletic
and stalwart physique and easy carriage,
he looks fully ten years younger. With a
gentlemanly bearing, he possesses a really
kind heart, and is consequently deservedly
popular with all and sundry. Even those
who have had to receive due punishment
at his judicial hands bear him no personal
enmity. On the bench he always tem-
pers justice with mercy, though never re-
sponsive to the appeal of mere maudlin
sentimentality. Many of his high personal
qualities he inherited from his father, Cap-
tain John Septimus Roe, R.N., who was
for 42 years Surveyor-General of Western
Australia, and was universally esteemed
both afloat and ashore. Commissioner
Roe is, as might be deduced from his ap-
pearance—his keen quick glance and his
alert manner —an ardent sportsman. He
shoots as surely and straight as he does
everything else. The public are anxiously
awaiting his permanent appointment to the
Supreme Court Bench, which event cannot
be far off.
JOHN WINTHROP HACKETT.
Occupies a unique and commanding posi-
tion'in the State, principally owing to his
connection with its leading newspaper. As
director of the “West Australian,” of
which he is part proprietor as well as
Editor-in-Chief, he wields the power of a
virtual dictator in connection with public
affairs. It is fortunate for the State that
this power is in such safe hands. A
graduate of Dublin University, in his na-
tive county of Ireland, and a non-practis-
ing barrister, he has more recently ac-
quired the degree of Doctor of Laws from
his Alma Mater. A man of bright intelli-
gence, wide sympathies, refined thought
and high culture, he lacks boldness as a
leader-writer and newspaper conductor.
Seems to shrink from outspokenness from
a fear of wounding the susceptibilities of
individuals. When, however, on his legs
in the Legislative Council, of which he is
the doyen, no speaker could be more di-
rect in utterance and more free from timid-
ity. Is most assiduous in attention to his
Parliamentary duties, and practically rules
the Oouncfi to such an extent that that
Chamber is referred to by the vulgar as
’Ackett’s ’Ouse.” There is not a move-
ment in the direction of the improvement
of the material and social conditions of the
community in which he does not take an
active interest, and to which he is slow to
give the powerful assistance of his journal.
Was instrumental in procuring the estab-
lishment of the King’s Park, Queen’s Gar-
dens, Karrakatta Cemetery, Observatory,
Mint, Zoological Gardens, Perth Boys’
High School, and Public Library and
Museum, and is Chairman of the Managing
Boards of many of these and other public
and semi-pfiblic institutions. Is ever soli-
citous for {he improvement and beautifica-
tion of the capital city. Is a prominent
Freemason. Has refused the offer of the
lower order of Knighthood. Dr. Hackett’s
advocacy is a tower of strength to any
good cause in Western Australia.
ALBERT LANGLER.
The sheet anchor of the “West Austra-
lian ’ newspaper, and was for years sub-
editor of that journal. Now fills the As-
sociate-Editorship, which Nanson vacated.
Cautious as a canny 'Scot—though with no-
thing of /North British narrowness or near-
ness—-very little that is unsuitable for pub-
lication escapes his searching, critical eye.
Many of the laboriously-turned sentences
penned by budding journalists in the be-
lief that they are writing fine English, are
ruthlessly eviscerated by the Dangler blue
pencil. But, in the kindness of his heart,
he always finds some cheerful excuse with
which to console the author of the copy
he has found it necessary to mangle. In-
deed, the suaviter in modo is his greatest
characteristic; and many an irate citizen
reading in the morning’s “West” the in-
formation which he confidently imagined
over night he had arranged to have sup-
pressed curses the urbanity which has de-
luded him. Besides a very sound judg-
ment, nature has endowed him with a per


suasive engaging manner, which enables
him to decline requests, while at the same
time making friends of the people he re-
fuses. All the ladies to whom Dr. Hackett
cannot say “No” are passed into his Asso-
ciate’s sanctum, to receive an affable,
charming, and even flattering—negation.
Himself, he wields a terse and forceful pen,
but years of labor in the furrow of the
“West’s” leader columns have tutored him
into writing voluminously on dangerous
topics without expressing an opinion. An
adaptable, amiable, good fellow, with a
spice of the Bohemian in his composition,
he is never so thoroughly in his element as
when swapping experiences with brother
journalists, and recounting incidents of his
press days in Devonshire and South Aus-
tralia. Finishing his work when most folk
are abed, he is then heedless of the flight
of time, and will stand at a street corner
revelling in the companionship of a good
talker until sunrise lights him home. He
sheds sunlight himself, too, on the not sel-
dom dark and wearisome paths of those
with whom he is associated in the exact-
ing profession of journalism. It must in-
deed be a difficult position that Dangler
cannot devise some way out of; and he is
always ready to give his aid
M. C. DAVIES.
A particularly placid old gentleman, with
a mild, far-away look in his eyes, which
might mislead the unwary into believing
that he could be squeezed heavily in a
deal. They’d fall in serevely. Keen as a
razor, he knows nothing of the wrong side
of a bargain. From his youth in Tasmania,
many tens of years ago, he has been suc-
cessful. Contracting in South Australia —
especially the hills section of the Adelaide-
Melbourne railway—brought him royal pro-
fits. A sharp eye for timber possibilities
allured him into securing an immense tract
of country at Karridale, and by skilful
floats he has traded it off to companies for
princely sums. Without any hobby, save
that of making money, he lives a quiet,
almost idle existence, in which his pipe is
his chief companion. A quiet game of solo
whist attracts him, but not nearly so
strongly as horse racing, over which—if
he could permit the calm of his existence
to be disturbed by anything outside the
aggregation of the almighty dollafl —he
might grow enthusiastic. All his fortune,
colossal as it is reputed to be, does not
shed so much lustre upon him as being the
father of “Karri” Davies of South African
fame. Proud as he is of his son’s achieve-
ments, he dilates less upon them than on
the fact that he has personally entertained
no fewer than six Governors of Western
Austrialia in his home by the Leeuwin.
J. T. PEET.
An Englishman by birth, James T. Peet
has resided in the States for a number of
years. It is just 10 years since he came to
Perth, where he is in business as a land
agent. Short and thin, keen penetrating
eyes indicate the schrewdness with which
he conducts his business. Has learned the
necessity that exists for hustle, and in this
respect is typical of the enterprising
ankee. Is one of the most pushful men
in his line of business in the State. Few
other men bring to bear in such a marked
manner the best of the American trade
methods, hence so much of his success. Is
an enthusiastic cyclist, and on his machine
hustling after business is a familiar figure
to men about town. Besides his love of
cycling, has a penchant for horticulture
and music. Helped ho form the Melbourne
Amateur Opera Club in 1893 and is an
enthusiast on the subject.
WALLACE NELSON.
Anyone who has seen Wallace Nelson
might be pardoned for once again study-
ing Darwin’s “Theory of Evolution.” His
rugged, smooth-shaven face, head partially
bald, adorned in most unexpected places
with tufts of hair, stumpy figure, square
shoulders and comparatively lengthy arms,
impress one with a sense of strength. Men-
telly he is an excitable, nervous being. As
a speaker he is forcible and vigorous but
his delivery is trying, as the Parliamentary
reporters know. His shoulders heave, he
waves his arms and vsways on his hip-
joints and toes as he thunders forth in
raucous Aberdonian. He has a ready pen,
which he handles as a prettily-poised rapier
for the delivery of shrewd pricks of satire.
Has brains, but is too strongly prejudiced


in favor of his pet theories to ever be aught
but a wordy politician and will never be
a Statesman. Is a Labor member of the
Lower House in the State Parliament;
and has been credited with acting as chief
mourner at the funeral of five journalistic
ventures.
SAM GRIM WOOD.
Or “Old Sam,” as he is familiarly termed,
enjoys a reputation akin to that of Csesar’s
wife, and it extends throughout Australia.
Over sixty years of age, grey-headed, red-
faced, with a firm set mouth, gait active,
and above middle height, would astonish
many a man thirty years younger if he
happened to accost him in an unfriendly
spirit. Good all-round sportsman. Riding,
diooting, biliards and boxing are the princi-
pal branches, and in the two last he excels.
To announce a boxing contest will be refe-
reed by Sam is to ensure an audience and a
fair “go” at the same time. Quiet and
unassuming, has many friends among all
classes of the community. Victorian born.
HARRY WHITTALL VENN.
A Bunbury farmer, who takes a large size
in waistcoats. He owned a large tract of
country at Dardanup, near Bunbury, which
has been acquired by an English Company.
Once in Parliament, and became a member
of Sir John Forrest’s Ministry—and was
‘‘'sacked” in his pyjamas without the custo-
mary week’s notice or week’s wages in lieu
thereof. Politics of the prehistoric period,
but has aspirations, though in a political
sense he is not regarded too seriously.
Married into the Shenton family and need
not work for his living. Has joined the
Panama hat brigade, but that description
of headgear does not become him, as his
face and throat being round and red, the
contrast is too violent. In a frock coat and
silk hat he might be taken for a major on
half pav. Was Commissioner for Westralia
at the Paris and Glasgow exhibitions, where
the mineral exhibit attracted so much atten-
tion. Like W. S. Gilbert’s House of Lords,
“did nothing in particular and did it very
well.” While in London learned the art of
companv promoting, and, rumor hath it,
shaped like a second Hooley.
W. A. G. WALTER.
A career as resident magistrate in a sleepy
country town like Bridgetown does not
necessarily fit a man for administering
justice in the City Police Court. And the
acting P. M. must feel his lack of the legal
technical knowledge requisite for the quasi-
judicial position he fills. What he lacks in
knowledge and experience he endeavours to
atone for by conscientiousness. “Moves in
society,” plays tennis well, and occasionally
“picks a winner.’’ Swarthy of complexion,
massively built, iron-grey moustache, may
be honestly described as a fine looking man.
W. A. GEORGE.
Superintendent of Prisons, is a broad,
square built man, below middle height, with
a large iron-grey beard and hair, and posses-
ses a pleasing countenance. An old Imperial
servant, and has been in his present position
for thirty years. Much abused in press as
allegedly incompetent and out-of-date. As
a matter of fact is right up to the hour on
prisons, of the treatment of prisoners, and
long ago submitted plans to the Government
for a modern prison on the latest lines.
Strong advocate of classification of prisoners,
and opposed to the present system of mix-
ing all classes of prisoners, long and short
terms, together. Lives in a nice house on the
hill at Fremantle whence extended views of
the Indian Ocean, with Rottnest, Garden
and Carnac Islands may be seen in the
middle distance. Is withal a genial person-
age, despite the society he moves in
officially.
JAMES LONGMORE.
Occupies the responsible Government
positions of Superintendent of Public Chan-
ties and Government Labor Bureau, and
Inspector of Industrial and Reformatory
Schools, in these capacities controlling the
institutions wherein are housed the worn-
out and destitute members of the com-
munity, and also having the care of the
juvenile flotsam and jetsam of the State.
The number of the unfortunate naturally
increases with the growth of the popula-
tion of a new country. It seems to be a
dispensation of Providence that in all com-
munities a certain percentage must go to


the wall in the struggle for existence, or
must find themselves dependent on charity
either on the threshold of the house of life
or in the evening of a long existence spent
perhaps in arduous and honest labor. “The
poor ye have always with you” ; and the
obligation on the State to provide, for its
helpless indigent, young and old, is fully
recognised is Western Australia. In charge
of the refuges in which decrepit humanity,
male and female, is maintained, and allow-
ed to see out the remainder of its days
secure from houselessness and starvation,
Mr. Longmore is quite the right man in
the right place. A native of Aberdeen,
and possessed of the Scotch faculty of
economic management, so necessary in con-
nection with benevolent institutions, he,
nevertheless, has in abundance the higher
quality of sympathy with the unfortunate,
one of the rarest of attributes in human
nature —particularly in a colonial com-
munity, where every man is striving for
his own material benefit —as it is one of
the most gracious and nearest the divine.
Had considerable experience in t .e manage-
ment of reformatories and training schools
before he came to this State in 1897 to
take up his present position, and was for
two years Superintendent of Dr. Barnardo’s
central home for waifs and strays in Lon-
don. The Government Labor Bureau, un-
der his capable direction, is losing the in-
evitable initial stigma of being a “charit-
able institution,” and is becoming a useful
means of bringing together those seeking
employment and those having employment
to offer, without cost to either side. Is
unostentatiously doing good work for the
State. Is President of the Swan River
Mechanics’ Institute in Perth, the literary
recreative resort of those whose means are
limited.
BISHOP OIBNEiY, D.D.
Generous, kindly, and brave, the Right
Rev. Matthew Gibney, Roman Catholic
Bishop of Perth, has been, throughout his
career in Western Australia, a fine ex-
ample of muscular Christianity. One of
the great works undertaken by him as a
priest was the foundation of orphanages
both for boys and girls ; and it was while
travelling through the colonies, collecting
funds for this object, that he met with an
adventure in connection with the final
break-up of the notorious Kelly gang. At
the risk of his life, Father Gibney bravely
entered the burning hotel in which the
bushrangers were making their last stand
and had barricaded themselves, fighting
the police until the place was fired. His
all-laudable object was to minister to any
of the outlaws in need of the services of
a priest; for the bushrangers had been
trapped without chance of escape, and
were surrounded by the officers of the
law, who were pouring fusillades into the
building. Dr. Gibney established the
Mission for Aborigines at Beagle Bay on
the North-West coast; and, on his last
visit to that spot, in , 1900,. he , had to
rough ,it considerably, which, however, in
spite of his advanced years, disturbed him
not in the least. It is characteristic of
him that he can adapt himself to any
circumstances which present themselves.
A giant among men Bishop Gibney has
been, and he has performed the work of
a giant, his weapons ever being Faith,
Hope, and Charity. Most of the Roman
Catholic institutions established through-
out the State owe much to the endeavors
of Bishop Gibney, and the convent schools
he has caused to be built are numerous.
It may be said of him, “He is a stronger
proof of the immortality of the soul than
any that philosophy ever produced.”
BERNARD H. WOODWARD.
The Curator of the Museum is a man of
rather striking appearance, and till he opens
his mouth to speak would impress you as a
handsome man. A comparatively youthful
face crowned by a wavy mass of snowy hair
and with a white moustache, his appear-
ance would attract attention anywhere. He
has a peculiar affectation of speech, drawl-
ing somewhat and inserting quite unnecess-
aiv “Ahs!” His voice, too.) is throaty in
quality. He is immensely proud of his little
museum, but leans more towards the
technical portion than to the natural history
section, believing it to be of a more prac-
tical educational value. None the less is
a clever naturalist. Has a hobby for photo-
graphy, and has produced some pictures that
would challenge comparsion with the best
the world has seen.


HON. THOMAS FREDEiRIOK OUT-
RIDGB BRIM-AGE.
Essentially a big man —as regards avoir-
dupois. Florid, and of considerable girth,
“the Honorable Tom,” as he is familiarly
known, looks as if fortune has been kind
to him, which indeed is the case. Early
in the “nineties” he was occupying a
position in the loco, shops of the South
Australian Government Railways, and
thence later was promoted to the draughts-
men’s office in that service. Subsequent-
ly, under some scheme of retrenchment, it
was suggested that he should return whence
he came —to the Loco. Shops again.
But T.B. objected to taking this retro-
gressive step—was not exactly constructed
on those lines; and, as the gold rush to
Westralia had broken out, he took pas-
sage to this “promised land.” Here he
has made money—and has had the sense
to hold on to it, unlike many more—and
some better —men. In his early gold-
fields days T.B.’s ambition was modest.
He loomed large as the Chairman of the
Kalgoordlie Roads Board, a high-sounding
title. In this capacity, to his credit be
it said, he worked so diligently that he
was rewarded, in due season, by a seat in
the Legislative Council, where he now sits
and votes. Meanwhile, to say that he
looks a typical “Bulletin” “fat man” will
convey a more accurate idea of his per-
sonality than anv other description.
SENATOR ALEXANDER PEKOE WAT.
MATHKSO'N.
Is not a politician by trade. He will re-
main a Senator until the time comes for
his re-election.- He describes himself as
an “experimental democrat.” That is to
say, he is prepared to support any experi-
mental legislation tentatively. Should it
turn out successfully, he will claim credit
for supporting it. Should it prove a fail-
ure, he is ready to “saw wood and say nuf-
fin.’ ” Understands to a nicety the art
of sitting on a rail; but the electors of the
State are likely to give him a lesson in
something like riding on a rail when
the next choice of Senators is made. is
somewhat of a dude, and affects a languid
haw-haw style of speech. But is very well
read, having delved deep in English litera-
ture, Is at least a decent fellow enough,
but does not know how to make himself
liked. Though he has resided for some
years in the State, he was never noted for
"hospitality. Has, however, been known
to ask a man to “come and have a cup of
tea!” Commercially, he at one time held
a high position, but immersion in Federal
politics and other non-remunerative mat-
ters has caused him to drop out of the run-
ning.
LEWIS A. WOOLF.
One of the leading accountants in town.
He neither affirms nor denies he is a Jew.
A familiar figure in town. Tall and round-
shouldered, he strides along the street with
head well ahead of him, hands clenching
and opening, muttering as he goes. He is
making a political speech to himself. in
imagination he is on a public platform,
being cheered to the echo by enthusiastic
crowds. The reality was different. Ho
stumped the country when seeking election
to the first Federal Parliament. Wherever
he went he was received with eloquent
silence. No one threw vegetables, probably
because they felt sorry for such a hopelessly
impossible candidate. He does not know how
he appears to other people, so this may do
him a lot of good.
DR. T. H. LOVEGROVE.
One of the old regime. As coroner, he
regarded himself as the one true and only
person capable of presiding at an inquest.
His methods of extracting evidence con-
veyed the idea that he had already arrived
at a decision, and merely wanted evidence
to confirm his judgment. In summing-up
he would lie back in Ins chair, place his
finger-tips together, close his eyes, and, as
one in a trance, would review those points
which tended to confirm his opinion, brush-
ing aside those that did not. If a jury
did not give a verdict such as he desired,
the doctor and the foreman would argue.
Once he met with a foreman who told
him he, as coroner, was not there to give
a verdict. Personally, the doctor is a
lovable old chap who likes a joke in a small
way, but fails to see any joke in the in-
flux of the ’tothersiders, whose advent he
considers rather as an insult to the intelli-
gence and an injury to the prosperity of
the State,


E. A. LE 80EUF.
When the present director of the Zoo
was a small boy he used to keep white
mice in his pockets, guinea pigs in his hat,
and disinfecting fluid all over him. Com-
ing as he did of a sire whose hobby was
the Melbourne Zoo, and born amidst the
lions and tigers, which Dr. Watts assures
us must be allowed to “growl and fight,”
it is small wonder that E. A. Le Soeuf took
to menagerie management like a duck to
water. Has a fine quality of stage man-
agement, and, while he runs the Perth Zoo
as an educative institution, also has a keen
eye for the fleeting and elusive shekels
of the public. He understands the value
of advertisement for his show, and never
fails to “work the press” for a paragraph
announcing the arrival of novel attractions.
The recurrence of public holidays is always
preceded by a shower of newspaper adver-
tisements from him, and always followed
by a downpour of news paragraphs tending
to boom the Zoo. This proves not only
his devotion to the institution under his
charge, but also that he is up-to-date in
business matters. Stands over 6ft. in
height. Some day, it may be, he will be
seen riding a giraffe in the streets of Perth,
or driving a pair of hippopotami through
the King’s Park. At present he contents
himself with driving a most diminutive pair
of ponies in a phaeton through the city.
The “Western Mail” would have an unpre-
cedented run if it would publish a picture
of Le Soeuf riding one of his phaeton
ponies.
e. c. d. keysier.
As Secretary of the Western Australian
Turf Club, has proved himself to be the
right man in the right place. There was
room in that body for a man possessed
■of a strong personality, free and forcible,
exempt from toadyism, broad, healthy,
massive, in body as in mind ; and, having
found his place, he has seen possibilities
ahead of the premier racing club of the
State, which would never reveal them-
selves to a man of less strength of char-
acter. Is a “sandgroper,” a term which
can convey no opprobrium in connection
with his handsome and gigantic person,
the symmetry of which is equalled by that
of his mind. Identified with sport for
nearly twenty years, and secretary of the
Albany Race Club for ten, the experience
and ability he thus gained have been in-
valuable to the governing body of local
racing. Some years ago, he started the
Country’s Racing Clubs’ Conference, which
has done a considerable amount of good
for the turf. “As mild as he is game,
and as game as he is mild,'’ at peace with
himself, and therefore disposed to be so
with all the world, he will always be as-
sociated, in the minds of lovers of “the
sport of kings,” with progress, justice, and
success.
E. L. LOB STEIN.
As representative of labor on the arbi-
tration bench, occupies an anomalous posi-
tion. Accepting the word of certain
unionists, one must believe that he has
forfeited their confidence. His quarrel with
Croft, then secretary of the Trades and
Labor Council, and the subsequent trials
of an action for libel, left Lobstein like
Mahomet’s coffin. Some unionists believe
he is to be trusted to guard the workers’
interests; others declare he is a capitalist
at heart, and weeps because he can’t be
removed from his position. He is a pale-
complexioned, fair-haired man, without
much individuality, stoop-shouldered and
sluggish in his movements.
HUGH MAHON.
Quite a professional air pervades the
member for Coolgardie in the Federal Par-
liament, and it would be easier, from ap-
pearances, to believe that he was a doctor
or a lawyer than a journalist who had
worked his way up from the case to the
editorial chair. Tall, square jawed, and
bespectacled, with a brown moustache
turning grey, he presents rather a striking
personality. Prone to adopt an abstract-
ed air, he has been credited by some ad-
mirers with superlative intellectual powers,
due to a pronounced faculty to criticise.
With a master hand he tears to pieces the
proposals and plans of others, but is not
too liberal in exercising his constructive
ability on any scheme to replace that
which he destroys. A genial and entertain-


ing companion, he makes many friends,
but this faculty is discounted somewhat by
a resentful spirit, exhibited towards those
who cross him. He was one of the founders
of the “Sun” newspaper at Kalgoorlie,
and was for years its editor, being largely
responsible for that paper’s subsequent suc-
cess. Politically iMr, 'Mahon is a Laborist,
and has already made his mark in the
House of Representatives, having held a
portfolio under the Watson Government as
Postmaster-General. In early life he was
secretary to the late Charles Stewart Par-
nell.
E. A. HARNEY.
“ ’Tis himself is the broth of a b’y, in-
dade.” Any “divilment” in the old days
wouldn’t have been complete without Ned.
But when he discovered that he was one
of the cleverest advocates at the Bar, he
gave up frolic and frivolity and stuck
close to business. Has native Irish wit,
and a tine “nisi prius manner.” More
than all, he has a physique and appear-
ance that help him greatly. Can look
at a judge when pleading for the prisoner,
and at the same time convince the jury—
by a twist of his eye—-that they are the
people whom he is really concerned with
and whom he most respects. “Ned” flies
low as well as high, and isn’t above tak-
ing a police court case. He can “put the
cornedher” on to an amateur Justice Shal-
low or thunder against the iniquities of
a debtor with equal ease. Having a dis-
criminating palate, can tell exactly where
to find a truffle in the pate de foie gras,
and whether the champagne is “tres sec”
or “trop frappe” as well as he can discern
the weak points of a case or the pretty
features of a female witness. Like all
Irishmen of his type, is a good fellow.
OHIEiF JUSTICE; STONE.
Successively a member of a local legal
firm of the oldest and highest standing,
Grown Solicitor, Judge of the Supreme
Court, and now Chief Justice, Sir Edward
Stone has advanced step by step to his
present elevated position, accompanied
throughout his career by the good opinion
and esteem of the whole community. His
stately presence and impressive demeanor
lend the requisite dignity to the Bench,
and his courteous manner is highly ap-
preciated by the practitioners appearing
before him. His lofty personal character
and known sincerity in religious matters
are attributes that well befit the occu-
pant of the highest legal position in the
land. His pre-eminent fairness is shown
by the following remark he once made to
a suitor who was appearing before him in
person against one of the ablest of local
advocates: —“You may be poor, but you
are still entitled to justice.” The sub-
sequent judgment in the suitor’s favor af-
forded eloquent testimony that the arts
and skill of counsel had not succeeded in
diverting justice from the straight path.
Not perhaps a profound jurist, the more
scientific lawyers may doubt the broadness
of the Chief’s legal vision. But he is
blessed with that vein of strong common
sense which is often of more value in de-
ciding a case rightly than the most com-
plete mastery of technical legal knowledge.
Above the lawyer stands the man, with the
impress of a strong moral personality —one
of the most valuable attributes humanity
may possess. Too austere and dignified to
indulge in humor on the Bench, or even
tolerate any deflection from the strictly-or-
derly course of procedings in court, Sir
Edward is yet one of the kindest-
hearted of men, and shows the widest to-
lerance towards inexperienced juniors of
the Bar. He is chiefly distinguished by
the high moral qualities which make for
justice and uprightness. His honor and
integrity have never been called in ques-
tion, and he has ever held the scales of
justice with a firm and even hand.
HON. ZEIBINA LANE.
Son of a well-known mine manager of
Ballarat and himself trained from his
earliest years in the same walk of life,
this handsome and still stalwart, though
now middle-aged and stout member of the
community can claim to be as high an
authority on mining matters generally as
may be found in Australasia. He has
mined for gold in Victoria and New Zea-
land, for silver at Broken Hill—where he
was manager of the Block 14 Mine —for
gold again on the Eastern fields of this


State, and is now largely concerned in
the coal-raising industry on the Oollie
Elver. Is generally spoken of as one who
has been particularly favored by luck in
his mining ventures. But, although un-
questionably fortunate in his connection
with the Great Boulder when very rich
discoveries were made in that mine, he
has had, for the most part, his own ability
and exertions only to thank for his pre-
sent wealth. Is popularly regarded as
something of a millionaire —we are always
apt to magnify the wealth of those un-
doubtedly rich. Is the owner of extensive
property in and about the capital, in ad-
dition to possessing large gold-mining in-
terests. Although a member of the Le-
gislative Council, is not an active politi-
cian. Speaks seldom, but always to the
point. Does not concern himself with
small matters or petty quarrels. Has al-
ways had the reputation of being suscep-
tible to the charms of the fair sex. Has
essayed the role of art patron —with good in-
tentions but indifferent success. Is hos-
pitable and kind-hearted in his own bluff
way. Hobby, training birds and animals.
WALTER HARTWELL JAMES.
Born in Western Australia some 41 years
ago, and educated in the State, has raised
himself by sheer determination and hard-
headedness, coupled with considerable
ability, to the highest political position.
Very ambitious, and, as he is still young,
will probably distinguish himself still
more. During his two years Premiership,
which terminated at the last general elec-
tion, when the Labor Party came from the
polls with a majority, displayed unexpect-
ed aptitude for generalship, and proved a
successful administrator. His legislation
partook too much of the Socialistic type,
and he was overmuch given to troubling
himself with efforts to effect small social
reforms which by many are classed as fads
—such as, for instance, the suppression of
cigarette-smoking by boys (by-the-bye, he
is hardly ever without a pipe or cigarette
in his own mouth !) But with the in-
crease of experience of office, he began to
take a larger view of the duties of the
head of the Government, and, had he re-
mained in office, would have turned his
attention solely to more important affairs.
As a pleader, was not conspicuously suc-
cessful at the Bar, and is not particularly
popular with his professional brethren ;
but filled with credit the position of At-
torney-General, especially as regards the
administrative side of that responsible of-
fice. At one time he was the darling and
champion of the much-daring womenfolk
who seek to reform mankind ; but, with-
out losing his sympathy with all that is
sensible and practical in social movements
of this and similar kinds, he is growing
out of his first callow enthusiams in rela-
tion to them and is taking a calmer as
well as wider outlook on the possibilities of
wholesale reformation in a hurry. His
present experience as Agent-General in
London will be invaluable in widening his
views generally, besides affording him op-
portunities for rendering great services to
the State. When his term of Ambassa-
dorial office is over, is bound once more
to take a leading part in local politics.
NORBERT KEENAN.
Tall, with a slight stoop, and not too
much flesh. Is a Barrister of King s Inn,
Ireland, and the Middle Temple, London,
and partner in the firm of Keenan and
Randall, Kalgoorlie. To the casual spec-
tator he might appear like “Simon the
Cellarer,” whose “nose doth show where
many a flask of his best doth go.” But
such a judgment from appearances would
be wrong, for the rubicund aspect of the
most prominent feature of his face is in
his case due to dyspepsia. A good speaker,
without superfluous verbiage, and, above
all, a gentleman. 'Mild-mannered and ap-
proachable, behind it all is a real live man
of exceptionally alert intelligence. Elect-
ed Mayor of Kalgoorlie in 1901, since then
the townsmen of Kalgoorlie have “taken
no other.” Married a daughter of Judge
Parker, an exceptionally charming woman.
MR. JUSTICE PARKER.
Stephen Henry Parker, Senior Puisne
Judge. belongvS to one of the “first
families” of the State, which is closely
associated with the town and district
of York, where some of its members
still reside on their own property. Be-
fore his somewhat recent elevation to
the Bench, was a leading advocate in
the Supreme Court, having some years


ago been made a Q.C. The head of
the well-Known legal firm of Parker and
Parker, he was also one of the promi-
nent politicians of his native Western
Australia. Went to England as a
member of the mission which secured
the boon of self-government for the
State, and was subsequently Chief Sec-
retary in Sir John Forrest’s long-termed
administration. In all his public work
has displayed great ability, coupled
with the perseverance that forms a
distinguishing trait in his character.
As a pleader, was both keen and hard-
working—never brought an ill-prepared
case before the Court or pursued a hope-
less argument, and seldom missed a
point that would tell for his side. Odd
as it may seem, good lawyers are seldom
smart in commercial and every-day
business affairs. But S. H. Parker has
always shown himself an exception to
this rule, and he must now be possessed
of considerable wealth. In his judicial
capacity his good nature and sound
sense as a man of the world, with a wide
knowledge of its intricate ways and of
the vagaries of human kind, are con-
stantly tempting him to transgress the
rigidly narrow limits prescribed by
statute law. He would take a short
cut across country to an obvious and
common-sense conclusion rather than
follow the wearisomely tortuous wind-
ings and detours of the beaten path
of strict legal procedure. But appraise
him fairly, weigh him in the scales of
an evenly-balanced justice, and he is
found to be a good and upright judge
—a little impatient, it may be, of
tedious technicalities, yet sincerely de-
sirous of fulfilling the duties of his high
office. Always sound in his main prin-
ciple, he is both conscientious and fear-
in applying that principle and fol-
lowing it out to its logical conclusion.
Those who know him in private life
recognise in Justice Parker a good-
natured. kindly-hearted and upright
gentleman of broad and tolerant views
and wide sympathies.
OR. JOHN BRYCE DUNLOP.
this gemal Irishman has permanently
established himself in the hearts of all
his friends during the score of years
that he has resided in Northam. " Has
all the best characteristics of the typi-
cal son of Erin. Kind-hearted, hot-
tempered, with a soul in keeping with
the amplitude of his physical develop-
ment, he is one of the most popular
medicoes in the State. Possessing the
experience gained by travel —he tried
his luck in America before coming to
Australia —as well as that of years—he
is now on the shady side of 40—is one
of the most skilful practitioners in his
profession. His sympathies are wide
and his generosity is great ; yet he is
ever careful not to let his left hand
know what his right hand doeth.
Cheery and gigantically hearty, he is
“a lump of sunshine” whenever his
genial face appears. Yet, not to be too
god-like, he has an extensive vocabulary,
not altogether classical, by means ot
which, when his generously quick tem-
per is roused, he can hold his own with
the best of ’em. Was the founder of
the Agricultural Society of Northam, of
which he was president for two years,
elected unanimously; but declined the
honour for the current year. Has also
been district medical officer since the
establishment of the local hospital, over
ten years ago, and was recently appoint-
ed Government Health Officer at Nor-
tham. An enthusiastic sportsman,
the doctor drives only the best thor-
oughbreds, which must go the pace. Is
a splendid marksman with the rifle, and
a good player of polo, golf, and bil-
liards. Is allied by marriage to one of
the best local families, his wife being a
daughter ot Mr. Edward Dempster, and
has a charming home in the most ele-
vated part of Northam. The handsome
doctor has innumerable friends through-
out the State.
HON. WALTER KINGSMILL.
As a politician of Long standing—
having been in Parliament, in one
House or the other, continuously for
years—-and having filled more than one
Ministerial office, Walter Kingsmill
ought, long ere this, to have been Pre-
mier of the State. Is, however, cursed
with a constitutional indolence that
nullifies all the advantages of his natu-
ral ability and long experience in public
affairs. Of all who followed the late
George Leake in Parliament, Kingsmill
stood with the greatest promise; yet
on the death of Leake, he calmly allow-
ed himself to be shouldered out of the
leadership by hard-headed and pushing
M alter James, who had no such claims
as his to the position. He made no


public protest when James’s friend
Gardiner, was substituted for his own
faithful colleague, Illingworth, him-
self contentedly accepted a subordinate
office in the new Ministry. Owing to
tins submissiveness, the outcome of his
inveterate propensity to take things as
easily as possible, he has undoubtedly
suffered in public estimation. But even
now, if he would only take himself seri-
ously and assert himself vigorouslv
m mild be bound, with his talents, to
Mimb to the top of the political tree.
Uas shunted by his astute chief, ex-
rremier James, from the Assembly,
, re he 'V 38 a recognised authority,
and as such might rival that shrewd
strategist, to the dull and gloomy atmo-
sphere of the I pper House, where no
man can conspicuously shine. As
Leader of the Government in the latter
Chamber, he performed his routine
duties conscientiously but without en-
t msiasm. The repose of the Council
is. however, unquestionably more to his
taste than the squabbles of the more
or less savage animals in the other
menagerie. At heart a real good fel-
•ov always a most pleasant companion
most obliging colleague, ever ready
to do anyone a good turn, he is the most
popular member in the Legislature;
ml as a Departmental chief he won the
hearts of all his subordinates by his
gentlemanly courtesy and consideration.
Duong the rough elements of colonial
parliamentary life, a 'well-mannered
gentlemanly individual is like a Dres-
den vase going down the stream jostled
■ the brass pots. Is well educated,
Mid a really good speaker, when he
chooses to exert himself. At 41 years
M age, still has opportunities for dis-
tinction before him.
MAYOR HARRY BROWN.
Perth’s Dick Whittington is a man
with a hard head, soft heart, and in-
gratiating manner. His heart allows
nim at times to promise thino-g that
other ties prevent him performing; but
Ms ingratiatory manner gets him votes
and popular support. As a Mayor, has
proved himself a man of backbone, with
a good knowledge of proper procedure
■at the board of the Civic Council. As
a member of the Legislative Assembly,
has shown good intentions, but so far
has not made a conspicuous mark. Has
publicly admitted that his ignorance of
the forms of the House has led him to
ma e mistakes; but, with experience
*ie will improve, and probably will be-
come just the right sort of member for
fn 0 f C w y °^ l f erth - Some people aver
that Harry Brown was born with a smile
on i i S^ ace ’ for he 8661118 to be always
glad to see you.” But his geniality
may be diplomatic only. His charac-
ter i s strongly marked in his hand-
writing plain, legible and without
nourish. Socially, has proved a good
host, with no unnecessary frill. Has
not sought the “patronage of the
great,” nor set on one side the “lowly
and meek.” While his hospitality as
Mayor has not been ostentatious, it has
been all-embracing. In business, has
a imputation for straightforwardness
and probity, though no one credits him
with the brilliance as a financier of a
Pierpont Morgan or a Rockefeller. His
management of the Perth Building So-
ciety has been attended with success to
the satisfaction of shareholders and
clients alike.
REGINALD D’ARCY-IRVINE
When he first came to Perth, seven
years ago, he looked about twenty.
Since that time he has aged somewhat,
and now looks about twenty-
one. Most people know that he
has talent as accompanist, pianist,
organist. composer and conduc-
tor . Lut he has more genuine musical
talent than most people know. When
he conducts, he indulges in no pretty at-
titudes or fantastic contortions ; but he
“gets there” every time. As organist
of St. George’s Cathedral, he has the
best “king of instruments” in Perth to
nerform on ; and, after evening service,
he usually plays a voluntary! except
when the bells are rung, or when the
weather is unduly hot, or he is feeling
tired, or unwell, or annoyed at some-
thing that somebody has said or done,
or is not in the mood to play, or has an
important message to deliver to the
ehoir, or wishes to catch a suburban
train. His concerts are usually suc-
cesses of the artistic rather than of the
financial character. This is partly be-
cause. when he was a hoy, he never pro-
perly mastered the rules for the addi-
tion and multiplication of money. In
subtraction and division he is. Imwpver,
proficient. Nobody knows when his next


concert or recital will come off. The
only certainty is that it will not take
place on the date first announced. He
is always in time for church services or
concerts, but, otherwise, punctuality is
not his strongest point. However, if he
makes three appointments for the same
hour on the same day, he usually shows
his impartiality by keeping none of
them. His pet delusion is that he lives
economically. When his epitaph is writ-
ten —may that day be far distant —the
following words, which were once ap-
plied to a famous historical character,
may serve; —‘‘He had very many friends
and very few enemies, and died generally
lamented.”
JAMES BYFIELD, OF NORTHAM.
One of the most prominent residents
of the chief town of the
Eastern districts, with the P ro "
gross of which he has been intimately
identified since he first arrived there in
1869, and of which he has been Mayor.
Has been a member of the Northam
Municipal Council for years, and has
always interested himself greatly in
local' public affairs. Is a native of the
State, having been born at Mahogany
Creek, 55 years ago-. His father was
one of the first settlers in Western Aus-
tralia, and Ins mother came from Eng-
land in the ship Parmelia as nursegirl
to the children of Governor Stirling.
Thus “Old Jim ” as he is called, forms
a link with the first establishment of the
colony. Degan business at Noitham
as a wheelwright, and subsequently
bought and improved the flour mill
there so long known by his name.
Also owns a great deal of property in
and about Northam, including a large
sawmill Woorooloo ><iricl sovgibl taims.
Shrewd, hard-headed, and keen after
money, he is very enterprising v hei e
profit is to be made, even if the profit
amounts to only a few shillings. Has
built many houses in Northam, and on
terms with the occupants which, while
satisfactory to the other contracting
parties, are very remunerative to him-
self Is largely interested in the agri-
cultural industry of the district and
farms his own land. His tall, bioad,
but snare form is bent, and he looks
far older than his years, heavy losses,
amounting to some thousands of pounds,
over a contract he undertook, to build
a section of the South-Western rail-
way, having prematurely aged him.
This has been, however, his only mis-
take of any importance in business, and
he has no cause to regret any of his
other numerous ventures. Is, there-
fore, now a man of large means. Has
raised a family—all doing well. Speaks
with a nasal twang, and is an out-and-
out teetotaller.
REV. G. E. ROWE.
Was once called “the temporary
head of the respectable Wesleyan
body.” The respectability of the
Wesleyans is undoubted, but otherwise
this description—which did not proceed
from an adherent of his own church—
is hardly accurate as regards the defini-
tion “temporary.” It was mainly
through his efforts that the Methodist
Church in this State obtained respon-
sible government. Was the first pre-
sident of the conference, and, though
he has not yet been re-elected, prac-
tically stands as the local representa-
tive of Methodism, whoever the presi-
dent may be. It is his misfortune that
with a taste for remaining in one place
—and that place Perth —he belongs to
a religious body which keeps its minis-
ters “moving on.” With a capacity for
leading men, he has to submit to the
nominal leadership of others. It is,
perhaps, possible that he might be per-
suaded to join the Anglican Church- —
if he could be assured of a bishopric,
together with the honorary degree of
Doctor of Divinity. He is not a
scholar, but can always attract and
hold an audience and keep it interested r
whether with sermon or lecture, or
political address, his vivid language
accompanied by free dramatic gesture.
At one time ran a series of “Pleasant
Sunday Afternoons” in connection with
his. church, at which he frequently
pointed out the errors made by our
politicians, “Parliament on the Down
Grade” being the title of one of his
addi •esses. Now gives “Pleasant Sun-
day Evenings” at the Queen’s Hall,
which gatherings are always well at-
tended. They do not interfere with the
Sabbath afternoon nap or the Sabbath
walk, and consequently are patronised
more numerously than were the “after-
noons.” He advertises Us church ser-
vices largely and liberally, but he does
not advertise the services which he


renders to numerous applicants for re-
lief. Not a rival of Santley or Sims
Reeves as a sacred vocalist, he yet sings
hymns lustily and with a good courage.
The Methodist Church might do worse
than elect him president for the next
five years—or longer. Some folk have
been known to say that, with his talent
for organising concerts and lectures and
his general hustling energy. George
Powe would have made a splendid show-
man, and that he has given to the cause
of religion what was meant for secular
mankind. Hailing from Cornwall—
which is somewhere near England, and
of which the latter country is under-
stood to be a mere appendage—he is a
keen man of business. Is popular with
all classes and denominations, and no
more cheery and pleasant companion on
travel could be desired. Does not flaunt
the religious flag too obtrusively, and
is rather chary than otherwise of dis-
cussing sacred subjects in m.scellaneous
company.
ALFRED EDWARD MORGANS.
A Welshman can generally be trust-
ed to make his way in the colonies, par-
ticularly if trained as a mining engi-
neer, as was the case with A. E. Mor-
gans, Since he came to this State in
1896, he has acquired extensive mining
properties and interests on all the gold-
fields, and now represents a large
amount of British capital invested in
various ventures. In and outside Par-
liament, has always been the recognised
champion of capitalism as against the
soc alistic propaganda of the Labour
Party, so called. Despite, however,
having been frequently brought into
direct conflict with the local advocates
of socialism, is not unpopular with any
section of the community. Has now ap-
parently abandoned politics—probably
in disgust at having been deserted,
when he undertook to form a Ministry,
by those who owed him their support.
An impressive manner and deliberate
utterance lent great weight to his par-
liamentary speeches, which were always
imbued with sound common sense and
thorough knowledge of the subject
under discussion. When he rose to
speak in the Assembly, which was not
too often, the House always composed
itself to listen, sure of hearing words
of wisdom. His voice has an attractive
ring in it that compels attention. But
though a clear and forceful speaker,
he lacks the fervour of the true orator.
Has a deep contempt for the rabid,
ignorant, pseudo-somalism of the day.
A man of strong personality, combined
with great business ability and a natu-
ral instinct for big enterprises. Is
generally understood to be wealthy,
lives in good style and is always to the
fore in entertaining distinguished visi-
tors. Would be glad to see the pro-
posed Pilbarra railway constructed* so
as to connect his large mining proper-
ties there with the coast, thus enabling
them to be profitably worked: and is
prepared to find the capital and carry
out the undertaking if permitted bv
Parliament.
HORACE G. STIRLING.
Having acquired e competency, prin-
cipally by his investments in real estate
rather than from his share in the news-
paper business which he, in conjunction
with his tnree brothers, took over from
his father, the late Edmund Stirling,
the founder of Stirling Bros, and Co.,
Ltd. This dapper little gentleman may
be seen daily on his arrival, by train,
from his pretty suburban home in Clare-
mont, wending his way to his office m
the city, looking as alert and energetic
as in those days when ambition led him
to try the fates by publishing the first
daily paper in the then colony, namely,
the “Daily News.” Throughout his
career, which has been a successful one,
he has been mindful of St. Paul’s world-
ly- Wxse teaching, inasmuch as he has
made himself “all things to all men.”
Or, as another has said of himself,
Horace might truly be imagined saying,
“The same unvaried day saw me read-
ing or writing, ailing, jesting, reflecting,
interested in public events, in the pro-
gress of society, in things great and
small, in a plaster cast, in a hand-organ,
the stars, in the flower on my table,
in the fly on my paper, while I write.”
Homo sum: human! nihil a me alienum
puto. Also, in accordance with St.
Paul’s teaching, in striving for the
mastery, he has been temperate in all
things. Now, happily, the years have
brought him a fair share of wealth, of
friends, of fame, and a cheerful mind
to enjoy life. Is never happier than
when, having secured a novice of new-
comer as an interested listener, he
“fights all his battles o’er again.” As


a raconteur is unrivalled. Has enjoyed
civic honours, having occupied the
mayoral chair at Claremont ; and was
once an aspirant (unsuccessful) for a
seat on the Commonwealth parliamen-
tary benches, A good sportsman, he
is a regular attendant at race meet-
ings ; a follower of the hounds, he enter-
tains lavishly during the hunting sea-
son. He married the second daughter
of Chris. Armstrong, one of the early
settlers in Western Australia ; and Mrs.
Stirling has identified herself with most
of the social functions in Claremont.
ROLAND HARCUS KELSEY.
One of the many South Australian
pressmen who have migrated to this
State and are now engaged with the
Perth newspapers. Had some training
in journalism in Broken Hill, and sub-
sequently was a member of the report-
ing staff of the Adelaide “Advertiser.”
Having thus graduated in the business
of reporting, he came to Perth a few
years ago on engagement with the
“Morning Herald.” An expert steno-
grapher, has the reputation of being
able to take a “lovely note” and of
transcribing his shorthand matter in re-
cord time. Is undoubtedly the fastest
of local pressmen at this class of work.
By some, Kelsey, with the attention
he pays to matters of dress and a cer-
tain tendency to haw, haw-ness in his
manner, is regarded as “a bit of a
Johnnie.” But those who best know
him reckon him a really good fellow at
heart —good natnred and thoroughly ‘
sincere. Is a great lover of tennis,
at which game he is proficient, while
at billiards he has few equals in the
city, being; the crack player of the Perth
Club. Used to be an enthusiastic
cricketer, but was no great performer
with either bat or ball. Used to bowl
what are known as “googlers,” some-
times with considerable effect. Is a
good bridge player. Is popular at the
Club, where he spends most of his time,
but does not court female society—
which latter trait may by some be ac-
counted to him for righteousness. Is
therefore generally regarded as a hope-
less. case from a matrimonial point of
view. There is, however, plenty of
time before him in which to be taken
captive: and, careful as he always is
to avoid all danger of becoming enmesh-
ed in Cupid’s net. he may yet find him-
self struggling helplessly in the toils of
the Boy-God before he thoroughly re-
alises his position. Such is often the
fate of men who declare for celibacy.
They propose, but Cupid disposes in his
own wilful and arbitrary way.
EBEN ALLEN.
A hustling personality and a well-
known Terrace habitue, with a very ap-
parent intensity of purpose. Has made
a. name for himself as. a “hustler,” and
has secured the confidence of those with
whom he does business. Yet, to a
certain extent, he lacks self-confidence.
Has “funked” standing for- the City
Council—because, forsooth, he thought
there were so many better candidates
than he. His supporters, however,
screwed his courage up for him—with
the result that he defeated one of the
“better men.” He knows how to keep
his temper—truly a useful acquirement
in a city councillor. If he gives that
attention to the business of the rate-
payers that he bestows on that of his
clients, will make his mark in civic
affairs, and may find himself destined
for a still higher administrative sphere.
If you have never met Eben Allen you
will know him by his bent shoulders,
peaked fair beard, and jerky nervous
walk. Should the weather be hot he
sports a silk dust coat and a solar hel-
met. You can safely say “Hullo,.
Eben” to that lot.
FRANK CONNOR.
A leading stock-raiser and stock-
dealer, and a unique figure in
the Legislative Assembly. Fairly
tall, neatly rather than broadly
built, with clean-shaven face, clear-cut
features, and a crown of white hair, he
presents a striking appearance. If you
did not happen to know he was Irish,
you might at first sight take him for
a Yankee. After he has spoken, no
such mistake would be possible. Is a
member of the small, but at present all-
powerful Independent Party ; and inde-
pendence is the prominent characteris-
tic of his mind. A man who scorns ser-
vility, who speaks his mind plainly and
without reservation, who can tell you
to go to Hades on provocation, but
withal a good fellow.' Impulsive of
temperament in the Hibernian way,
warm-hearted, energetic, enternrising.
well afford to scorn the idler and


the lounger, for he is one of the pio-
neers of the great stock-raising indus-
try of the State, which has for its chief
field the magnificent pastoral country
in the Kimberley Division, in the far
north of the State. Beginning busi-
ness in that part as storekeepers at
Wyndham in 1886, he and his partner,
D. J. Doherty, regularly supplied the
gold-miners at Hall’s Creek in the face
of constant danger from the fiercely
hostile aboriginals. Frank Connor and
his mate next turned their attention
to cattle-raising; and the firm, which
now includes the Durack family, has
since rapidly grown into one of first
importance, supplying beasts for slaugh-
ter by the ship-load to the south-west-
ern centres, including the capital and
the Eastern goldfields. With his ready
wit and his constant geniality. Frank
Connor is a universal favourite Vith
both sexes.
RICHARD HARDMAN.
Not gazetted at time of writing, but
recommended by the Federal Public
Service Commissioner for appointment
as the Deputy-P.M.G. for this State.
When ‘‘Dicky” Shell retired, Hard-
man, who had been his right-hand man
at the Post Office, was created Acting-
Deputy, and within the limits imposed
upon him in that capacity, forthwith
made , sundry improvements in the De-
partment. A native-born West Austra-
lian of the best type, he badly wants to
see the Western Australian branch of
the- Department able to hold up its
head among those of the other States.
He has no use for the mossy-backed
man who, because he also is a
■“groper,” thinks he is entitled to a soft
and permanent billet in the Depart-
ment. When Hardman is seated
solidly in the saddle as Deputy-P.M.G.
you may expect to get a telegram from
Midland Junction more quickly than
a letter —which is more than you can
be sure of at present. Hardman has
a keen eye for a good man among his
subordinates, and will see that capa-
bility has due recognition. It is no
secret in the Department that he does
not admire the ways of the telegraphic
branch. “Groper” or no “groper,”
the incompetent man under his regime
will not be allowed to inflict his vagaries
upon the public. Personally he is an
amiable middle-aged man —an old do^
that can travel the hard road. Is one
of the most accessible heads of Depart-
ments in the State, and always gives
a courteous hearing to all complaints.
“See Hardman!” is the universal ad-
vice if you have a real grievance against
the postal service. But if your com-
plaint isn’t genuine, leave him alone,
or you’ll be sorry. His disposition en-
tirely belies his name.
MR. JUSTICE BURNSIDE,
“There is no humbug in Burnside,” a
learned counsel who is accustomed to
appear before him once remarked. It may
he added that there is no chance of hum-
bugging Burnside. He knows his men.
Fresh -from the Bar. he is up to all
the tricks of its members; and is not to
be bluffed. Eminently judicial, law
is his first consideration. A master
of cold and contemptuous sarcasm, there
is something in the sharp curve of the
underlip, in the impatient sniff of the
nostrils, the gleam of the eyes, which
effectually demolishes elaborate but
specious arguments presented to him on
the Bench. Excels in cutting remarks,
“I regret my absence, your Honor,”
was the off-hand apology for non-at-
tendance offered by a self-satisfied em-
ployees’ advocate before the Arbitra-
tion Court, over which Burnside pre-
sides. “We have not missed you, Mr.
Blank,” immediately replied the judge
caustically. As Crown Solicitor he dis-
charged his duties faithfully and fear-
lessly. and proved one of the best and
fairest public prosecutors in Australia,
always maintaining the English tradi-
tion that Crown Counsel in criminal
matters must not be a partisan and
should not unduly press- for a convic-
tion. Yet his cases were always well
prepared, his argument always sound
and convincing. Possessing that ca-
pacity for taking pains which is not the
least of the_ attributes of genius, it was
seldom possible to take him by surprise.
There are local lawyers, doubtless, with
a wider range of vision, but few who
combine those qualities of careful pre-
paration and thorough mastery of all
the details of a case, which are more
effective in a co-urt of law than the most
brilliant generalisation. In dealing with
the difficult business which comes be-
fore the Arbitration Court, in which
so much of his work lies, he satisfies
both sides —not by his decisions, but by
his inherent and unshakeable fairness.


The unionist, as. well as the employer,
may be sure that his case will receive
just, unprejudiced consideration. Ad-
verse opinions regarding himself have
no effect in influencing his decisions.
Consequently he succeeds where other
judges have failed ; for the simple rea-
son that law and its application forms
the main business of his life. The
judge is the man. In private life he
impresses with his power of terse, direct
and forcible expression. Is an enthusi-
astic yachtsman. Unfortunately suffers
from ill-health.
ARTHUR LOVEKIN.
In the prime of life, possessed of
great ability and more than ordinary
energy, a good man of affairs, with a
particular knowledge of financial mat-
ters. it is surprising to those who know
him well that he has not made a greater
mark in the community. Is. however,
the principal proprietor and conductor
of a daily evening newspaper which
practically has the monopoly in its line
in the capital, and which, under his con-
trol, has become an important and pro-
sperous journal. Has had large experi-
ence in connection with journalistic
enterprise, and was solely instrumental
in establishing the “Morning Herald”
in Perth in 1896, of which he was first
Editor and Managing Director. Under
his regime this paper returned a hand-
some profit. Had he cared to obtain a
seat in the Legislature, would certainly
new be one of the leading politicians
of the State. Has a logical mind and
the faculty of seeing straight into the
heart of a matter. Not an eloquent
speaker, but goes direct to the noint,
and marshals his facts clearly and
cogently. The same qualities of clarity
and directness characterise his writings,
which make no pretence to ornate ex-
pression. An Englishman by birth —
the son of a clergyman—has experienced
many ups-and-downs during a varied
Australian career, but has always man-
aged to pull through his difficulties. Has
had legal training, but did not follow up
the study of the law. With a deep in-
sight into the tortuous ways of men,
is a poor judge of human character.
Deserved in manner; makes few friends,
but those admitted to his intimacy he
retains. Is too unsympathetic in de-
meanour to be popular as an employer
in a democratic community. Not a
man one takes to at first sight. With
a preoccupied air, always seems to he
absorbed in thinking out some great
scheme. Evidently requires a larger
field than this young State can afford
in which to do justice to his capabilities
and satisfy his aspiring ambition.
REV. THOMAS BIRD.
It wuuld be difficult to find a more
benevolent countenance among the
“crows” of the community than that of
the “Bird” who, for a quarter of a cen-
tury. has held the position of Secretary
to the Wesleyan Conference. The clergy
have often been dubbed “crows” by dis-
respectful people, probably on account
of their black coats, and perhaps—
though this is only a random suggestion
—because they are generally supposed
to cro-aik at times! But, although the
name “Bird” may appear apt in such
connection, it is only in name that it can
apply to this reverend gentleman, wffiose
gentle demeanor and kindly words and
actions cheer all who come in contact
with him, and who, in his sermons, as
in his life work, prefers to foretell hap-
piness rather than forebode evil. Cour-
teous and suave, he has few enemies and
hosts of friends.
JOHN MARSHALL, THE; “BATTLER"
One of Kalgoorlie’s civic fathers, is
also the parent of a small book entitled
“Battling for Gold,” which, if it has
not brought him much gold, has cer-
tainly given him kudos; for the head
of the State ou his last vice-regal visit
to the goldfields capital actually dis-
tinguished him from his brother coun-
cillors as “the literary member.” John
is a Scotsman, therefore a “battler”
himself, and none strive for gold harder
than he. He battles for other things as
well as gold, his ambition leading him to
seek a seat in Parliament. Although the
fruit of that ambition has not yet
ripened, another season may bring the
plucky little Scotsman his basketful.
John has more wit than his country-
men are generally credited with, and
his “retort courteous” is ever ready,
while he has ai fund of dry humour with
which to discomfort either friend or
foe. Shrewd in business, hospitable at
his own board, he has a store of useful
knowledge, which makes him a thor-
ough citizen of the world ; and, as he


is tenacious and persevering to a de-
gree, the future will probably see him
filling some other and more important
positions in the community than those
of councillor and roads board member.
CONSTABLE GREEN.
Who does not know this gigantic
member of the Forth police force ?
Standing, Lke Saul, a head and shoul-
ders above most of his uniformed com-
rades, he is, with his towering figure
and rubicund countenance surmounted
by close-cropped silvering hair, a con-
spicuous figure when on duty in the
streets. Hibernian, every inch o-f him,
has always a ready and humorous reply
to any chaffing remark. But on duty
at the sittings of the Legislative Assem-
bly no one could be more dignified and
serious. is the real custodian of the
House, the upholder o-f its dignity, and
the guardian of its proprieties. As
the Speaker presides at one end of the
House, SO' does this officer in the gallery
at the other. When the “visiting
strangers” up aloft, overcome by the
soporific effects of the oratory down be-
gently dlf to sleep and threaten to
low on the floor of the Chamber, drop
-contribute nasal music as an accompani-
ment to the debate, the watchful eye
of Green immediately detects the out-
rage and impending danger, and his
white-gloved hand in a twinkling ad
monishes an awakening tap on the
shoulder, while his deep voice whispers
the necessary warning in the ear of the
delinquent. Thus is the dignity of
Parliament preserved. When the
Speaker is called upon to give a de-
cision upon a point of order he always
looks up to the gigantic guardian in
the gallery for confirmation; and the
generally good behaviour of the boys
of the Legislative school is attributable
to this awe-inspirhig presence like Timo-
theus “placed on high.” From his
lofty personal altitude in his elevated
position, Green surveys all his charges,
members and strangers, with an air of
tolerant supremacy. As he is strong,
so is he merciful, and gentle as a cooing
dove so long as order is maintained
within the sacred precincts o-f the Lower
House. Lately displayed great cool-
ness and courage in the collision on the
river between the steamers Dunskey
and Duchess, whereby the lives of a
whole cargo of Hebrew children, bound
for a picnic, were endangered. Green was
in charge of the youngsters, and by his
promptitude and self-possession avert-
ed a panic among the juveniles, gather-
ing them under his wing like a hen her
chickens. For his action on this oc-
casion has been deservedly rewarded
with a gold medal by the Hebrew con-
gregation and a certificate expressing
their appreciation of his conduct. Yet,
like the thoroughly good officer he is,
he told his admirers, with right manly
modesty, that he “only did his duty.”
But that was just the point—he did
his duty.
HENRY DAGLISH, Premier.
At time of writing is head of the Go-
vernment, a position towards which he
has worked his way with steadfast pur-
pose through years past. In the Vic-
torian capital, before coining to Western
Australia, occupied but a subordinate
position in the public service; and began
his career in the Western State pretty
near the bottom of the ladder. Since
then he has climbed up rung by rung,
assisted more by a consuming ambition
than by conspicuous ability. Having
gained a seat in the Legislative Assem-
bly, he allied himself with the rising for-
tunes of the Labour Party, whose ulti-
mate triumph at the polls he had the
perspicacity to foresee. In the almost
total absence of oratorical talent in that
party, he became its spokesman; and
when the excellent organisation and
strenuous combined exertions of the pro-
letarian party resulted in victory for that
side at the General Election of June,
1904, and the spoils fell to the victors, he
naturally stepped into the Premiership.
A fair speaker, a wily Parliamentary
strategist, he has as yet altogether fail-
ed to shine as an administrator. Spare
in figure, ascetic in appearance, and en-
tirely wanting of geniality and charm of
manner, is commonly known as “Dreary
Daglish.” Lacks every quality that
makes for popularity and helps to atone
for want of commanding ability in a
leader. Is not likely to retain the Pre-
miership for long after the opening of
next session, or even the leadership of
the Labour Party. The unionists
throughout the State are thoroughly dis-
satisfied with him for having thrown the
proletarian platform overboard whole-
sale. after having hoisted himself into
power by means of their support; and if
his Ministry went to the polls straight


away, it would certainly meet with a
crushing defeat. Would make a fair chief
clerk in a not too busy Government De-
partment where no initiative is required ;
but has not learned even the A.B.C.> of
true statesmanship. Looks very closely
after his own personal interests, but re-
quires continuous hard driving to bestir
himself for the public good.
Hon. FREDERICK HENRY PIESSE
M.L.A.
A prominent citizen of Western Aus-
tralia one of the most notable figures in
the State Parliament, and an agricul-
turalist on a large scale. Has held had-
ing Ministerial positions, but was pre-
vented by his own scruples from attain-
ing the Premiership when within his
grasp. Has never received sufficient
credit for this rare and lofty disinte-
restedness;, but is generally esteemed
throughout the community for his high
qualities and straightforwardness. A
lack of sympathy in his nature, or, at
any rate, of any show of this rare
quality in his manner, has, doubtless,
militated against his becoming generally
popular. Too conscientious to assume a
virtue he does not possess, he is no
angler for support, and he makes no
attempt to be ingratiatory. Has. never-
theless, been fairly successful as Opposi-
tion Leader: and. at 52 years of age, of
robust physique is bv no means a “back
number” as a politician. With his
brother, carries on a large business in
growing fruit, wheat, etc., at Katan-
ni”~ and deposing of these products in
various consuming centres of the State.
Has Qualified himself to retain for life
the title of “Honourable.”
SEPTIMUS BURT, K.C.
M as one of the first and ablest men
in politics when Western Australia at-
tained autonomy. A member of one
of the leading families, son of a Colonial
Chief Justice, a distinguished lawyer,
he was appointed first Attorney-General
under Responsible Government, the
head of the Ministry being Sir John
Forrest. Had previously been a nomi-
nated member of the Legislative Coun-
cil for many years. Of late years has
not concerned himself with politics.
A ppnrently not blest with robust health,
he has probably found the labours in-
separable from his high position in the
legal profession sufficiently exacting.
Here is not one of your ranting, roar-
ing advocates, but a quiet-mannered
pleader, with, however, a perfect com-
mand of his subject and a delivery im-
pressive from its clear and incisive
cogency. This counsel, being reahy
learned in the law and skilled in its
exposition, can afford to eschew the
tricks and forensic clap-trap of the
every-day advocate. He argues with
the judges and with the pick of Ids
“learned friends” with a calm con-
fidence m his own knowledge of the
points in a case and of the law govern-
ing them, which goes far to convince.
Could have been a judge over and over
again, even Chief Justice, had he wish-
ed; but preferred to remain at the Bar,
where, if report lie not and appearances
do not deceive, he has amassed a con-
siderable fortune.
JOHN LEIGHTON NANSON.
M hen, after some fifteen yeans of
journalistic work in connection with the
West Australian,” he blossomed out
as a politician, it was generally thought
that a brilliant parliamentary career lay
before him. It is highly questionable
u hether he himself is satisfied with his
performances in the political arena so
i! ; re P e,a t € d changes of front,
v Inch always gave r.se to the suspicion
of hunger after Ministerial office, have
unsettled general belief in his possession
of consistent political principles. Has
a talent for leader-writing and is a
vigorous and ready speaker, but does
not appear to possess the mental ballast
requisite for a successful parliamentary
leader. Prompt and effective in de-
bate, he nevertheless is very apt to lose
us temper when contradicted. Works
himself up into a white heat and thus
exposes himself to the galling thrusts
of i idicule. Has courageously and
single-handed championed several un-
popular causes on the public platform
with fervour, and at times with a flow
of real eloquence. But, although these
efforts have considerably impressed his
audience at the time, they have never
been productive of permanent results.
Ambitious and clever, is yet wanting of
the linked qualities of sympathy and
tact necessary for leadership. As pro-
prietor and conductor of the “Morning
Herald” has not succeeded in extending
the influence of that paper, although


his leading articles are invariably care-
fully constructed and clear in expres-
sion. Is not generally popular, lacking
geniality and all the qualities that
make for good fellowship. In his ap-
pearance, with his abnormal length of
nether limbs and his exceptional slim-
ness he is a boon to caricaturists. His
face generally wears an anxious and
pre-occupied look, which is not pre-
possessing.
BISHOP RILEY, D.D.
Dr. Charles Owen Leaver Riley, en-
throned on February 4, 1895, as Angli-
can Bishop of Perth, was born in Bir-
mingham in 1854, and is the son of a
clergyman. An English prelate re-
cently said, “The life of a modern
bishop is the life of a commercial travel-
ler —without the commission.” How
much more so is this the case with a
colonial bishop. Doctor Riley’s work
in this State is not by any means a
sinecure, and his achievements as a
traveller in the “bush” and the back-
blocks are probably due to the fact that,
as a student, he gave much attention
to athletics. He was a great oarsman,
and he possesses the “cyclist’s back.”
For this vigorous perambulatory pre-
late no place in his huge diocese is too
remote to visit, however un-get-at-able
it may be. When first the Bishop start-
ed his peregrinations through this coun-
try, he got off the track in the South-
Western districts, and feeling the need
of refreshment, he did not hesitate,
when stumbling accidentally on a shep-
herd’s hut, to annex flour, etc., in the
owner’s absence, with which to make
himself a “damper” to susta’n him
until he could find his way to the near-
est settlement, which happened to be
Busselton. Above pettiness of any
kind, Dr. Riley has endeared himself
to all his intimates, and made himself
popular among all classes. He has
identified himself with every good work
in the State. Is never too busy to
enjoy social life around him, nor too
weary to administer to the needs of
any who require his aid or sympathy.
A persuasive and pleasant, rather than
an eloquently denunciatory preacher
and speaker, his sermons and addresses
are never pitched too high for the com-
prehension of his hearers. The annual
reunion of church people and others,
which takes place at Bishop’s House, in
St. George’s-terrace, is one of the most
pleasant of the social gatherings held
in the State. With wide views of life
and the broadest sympathies, Dr. Riley
has a tolerant mind for the professors
of all religions and even for all schools
of secular thought; and is ever ready
to co-operate in social movements for
the general good with even “Jews,
Turks, infidels and other heretics,” to
quote the words of the Anglican Prayer-
book. Is reckoned a first-rate man
of business, and is unquestionably a
capable administrator of the affairs of
his diocese. His tall, stalwart form,
with a bend forward at the broad shoul-
ders, is a familiar spectacle in St.
George’s-terrace as he passes to and fro
between his “palace” and the Anglican
Church Office and Cathedral, exchang-
ing cheery greetings with all and
sundry. He possesses a keen sense of
humour, and relates with gusto the em-
barrassment he once experienced when
he found himself alone in a railway
carriage with an unmistakably newly-
married couple just starting on their
honeymoon. He tried to hide behind
his newspaper ; but, seeing he was de-
tected by the lady, he muttered some
confused apologies for his presence.
Judge of his astonishment when the
fair bride exclaimed: “Oh, don’t say
that, I’m delighted to see you. You
buried my first husband three years
ago.”
DOCTOR DAVY.
A medico with the highest qualifica-
tions, one of the best-read men in the
State and a walking encyclopaedia on
literary subjects. An Oxford gradu-
ate and a good classical scholar who
delights in apt quotations from the
Greek and Latin poets, his favourite
being Horace, also knows his Calverly.
With his high mental attainments,
philosophical temperament and intellec-
tual bent, is no common saw-bones, and
is rather out of place among the crude
conditions of the colonial community.
Of independent character and with a
supreme contempt for mean and petty
things, scorns to court vulgar popu-
larity or advance his personal interests
by employing the usual methods of self-
advertisement. That he is, however,
nossessed of abundant energy in a pub-
lic cause is conclusively proved by the


work he has taken in hand, as City
Health Officer, of condemning the un-
savoury hovels with which Perth
abounds. No matter who may be the
owner of the premises which he decides
are unsuitable for habitation —no mat-
ter whether the property belong to the
greatest magnate in the community or
the humblest individual —Doctor Davy
hesitates not a moment in ordering de-
struction or renovation, according to
the requirements of each case. For
the fearless performance of his public
duties in this respect, the citizens owe
him a deep debt of gratitude. When
he meets With anyone of an intellectual
cast of mind similar to his own, is a
most delightful conversationalist and
agreeable companion. Is of athletic
frame, and has been an enthusiastic
cricketer. Owns a very fine collection
of scientific books and the latest types
of surgical instruments. Has lately
taken to motoring, and signalised this
new departure by running over a China-
man.
CHARLES JOHN MORAN.
Is isomewhat of an enigma in local
politics—or, rather, a not yet fully as-
certained quantity. Before long, how-
ever, he may be playing a prominent
X)art in the administration of the affairs
of the State. Off and on, has been a
member of Parliament for some years
past, and has now become quite a recog-
nised authority in the Legislative As-
sembly, where he leads an “Indepen-
dent” party of some four members.
Small as this combination is, it is suffi-
cient to hold the balance between the
two nearly evenly numbered regular
parties in the House. Hence the
Leader of the independents is enabled
to make his own terms for his support
and that of his following. For the
nonce, has thrown his lot in with the
Labour Government of the day, led by
Mr. Haglish, on condition that certain
views held by himself and his Indepen-
dents —but which are, by the hye, quite
foreign to the proletarian propaganda
—are included in Hie Ministerial pro-
gramme. With the expected early
downfall of the Haglish Ministry, Moran
will he in a curious, position, and it
remains to he seen how he will come
out el the business. Political vagaries,
however, have ouite ceased to be of
account in this State, and in any case
his ambition and force of character will
carry him far to the goal of his desires
—the Premiership of the State. Pos-
sesses the enormous advantage of having
time on his side; for he is yet only
thirty-seven years of age. Has all the
ardour of youth in stating his convic-
tions, added to quite an Irish fluency
and emphasis of diction, but is not a
polished speaker. Time may correct
a tendency to hotheadedness —also Hi-
bernian, no doubt.
JAMES MORETON CRAIG.
Although “sent under” by the James
Government for too zealously doing his
duty as Government Inspector of Stock,
will probably go down to Westralian
posterity as the man who eradicated
“scab” from the country. Born at
the Castle Hotel, York, he owns valu-
able property in that district, his two
model farms, the Beverley and the
Helena, being well known to agricul-
turists in the State. So valuable are
these properties that the loss of his
Civil Service “screw” did not materi-
ally affect his monetary position. Gain-
ed his colonial experience and know-
ledge of stock when he went North with
the late E. T.* Hooley; and it speaks
well for his perceptive faculties and
quickness of grasp that he is now one
of the best judges of horseflesh in this
country. Outspoken, honest, and well-
read, Mo re ton is popular with most,
although he is regarded as being some-
what close-fisted, except where his plea-
sures are concerned. Hard as nails in
business, is a good friend and—a good
enemy. Is a great admirer of Hux-
ley’s works, of which he possesses a
complete and well-thumbed edition. In
his official position, was well liked by
the subordinates in his Department.
They could always rely upon perfectly
fair treatment at his hands.
J. T. REILLY, OF NORTHAM,
Editor of the “Northam Advertiser,”
his own venture and a most creditably-
produced provincial journal. Is one
of the best-known men in the Eastern
districts, where he is universally popu-
lar, and enjoys the reputation of being
“one of the whitest old men that ever
breathed.” At the ripe age of 69, is
still hale and hearty, with energy un-
abated and journalistic instinct all


alive. At times, wields a trenchant
pen, and his thorough knowledge of
the affairs of this State for half a cen-
tury past was shown in the book “Re-
miniscences of Fifty Years in W.A.,”
which he published some two years ago
—a readable work giving interesting
accounts of the old identities and their
doings. An ardent Roman Catholic,
his religious leanings are very much
in evidence in his writings. Is inti-
mately connected with all public move-
ments in his district. Was one of the
first Clerks of Courts in Perth, and one
of the founders of the Swan River Me-
chanics’ Institute. Came to Western
Australia at an early age, and has been
associated with the press for very many
years, being now the doyen of the jour-
nalistic fraternity of the State. Adopt-
ed his co-religionist, Timothy Quinlan,
as an orphan child, and that now suc-
cessful business man and prominent
politician owes his start in life and the
opportunities of which he has so fully
availed himself to this grand old man
of North am.
ARTHUR J. DIAMOND.
A political “Wandering Willie,” im-
bued with a passion to achieve popu-
larity, always mussing it in the early
days of any great question, but invari-
ably whooping with the biggest crowd at
the finish. A North of Ireland man,
with all his country’s impulsiveness but
little of its witty eloquence. Not a
great debater, is yet apt at private per-
suasion, and consequently commands
considerable influence. His rather blus-
tering style often obscures his geniality
and goodness of heart, and repels the
friends whom the true Diamond should
win. Commercially, he is equipped
with foresight and enterprise, but he is
not afflicted with that strenuous applica-
tion which builds up a business. Is,
therefore, more of the “bagman” than
the merchant. No one could sell him
“colonial cabbage” as a real Habana
cigar, for he combines with a delicate
taste in “weeds” the knowledge of an ex-
pert. An enthusiastic supnorter of foot-
ball, he founded the great Norwood Foot-
ball Club in South Australia, and still
from afar follows, with the ardour of
youth, the fortunes of thew red-amd-blne
banner, Mental arithmetic is a favour-
ite pastime with him. and the multipli-
cation of six figures by six figures is to
his arithmetical mind as> simple as the.
addition of a money column, pounds,
shillings, and pence, together, which he
also accomplishes more easily than the
average accountant tots up a single line
of pence. With a fine talent for mimicry,
a profound sense of humour, and an in-
exhaustible memory, is an ideal racon-
teur. His greatest accomplishment,
however, is proficiency on the English
concertina which has won him a reputa-
tion in every State of the Common-
wealth.
ALAN BARLEE.
Ex-contingent man though he be, no
one would take him for a military man.
His tall figure and desk-bent, shoulders
hardly harmonise with the kind of
cavalry stride that distinguishes his gait.
Is however, reputed to be a good shot
and straight rider —qualifications which
count highly in actual warfare. Nor
does he lack those socially pleasing ac-
complishments with which the British
officer is commonly credited, for he is
popular with the gentle sex, dances
divinely, can stage-manage picnics and
other social functions, and always carries
them to a successful issue. His work in
the Civil Service is recognised asi being
of a high order, as emphasised by the fact
that on his return from South Africa he
had little difficulty in resuming his posi-
tion in the Mines Department, vacated
when he set out “vernal sword in hand
to subjugate the Bandersuatch Boei.
SYDNEY ST EBBS.
Perhaps nothing can better convey to
the reader the impression which Mr.
Sydney Stubbs makes on the general
public than the story told by “Dicky”
Haynes, when Sydney was Mayor ot
Claremont. It runs as follows; —An in-
dividual one day knocked at the gate of
Heaven. “I’m Stubbs,” he said to the
keeper in charge. “Don’t know you,’
was the reply. “Oh, but I’m Stubbs —
Sydney Stubbs.” “What? Mayor of
Claremont P Chairman of the W .A.
Club? Drive about Perth in a carriage,
smoking a big cigar?” “The same,” was
the answer. “Come right in,” said the
attendant, hastilv “We want you.”
Stubbs entered, and was_ requested to
make his way to the controller of the


world. “I’m Stubbs,” he said. ‘‘Don’t
know you,” was the answer. “But I’m
Sydney Stubbs —Mayor of Claremont.”
“ VVhat P Chairman of the W.A. Club?
Drive about Perth with a big cigar P” “I
am, and I do,” was the proud response.
The controller leaped with delight. “I
can have a rest now,” he said ; “take this
chair. It’s the centre of the universe.
We have been waiting for you for years.”
His ostentation notwithstanding, Syd-
ney’s liberality and hospitality in pri-
vate, as in public, life are unquestioned ;
and if he has acquired the means of en-
tertaining, the art of doing it was cer-
tainly Nature’s gift. That he has ac-
quired the means proves his business
acumen and application. Although pos-
sessing many of the defects of the nou-
veau riche, his many good qualities over-
shadow these little defects—except, per-
haps, from the captious critic—and he
is commonly accounted “one of the
best.”
MRS. J. M. FERGUSON.
The wife of one of the most success-
ful merchants in the State, Mrs. Fer-
guson does not require the reflected
glamour from any position her husband
may have acquired to enhance her own
personality; which, although confined
to a petite frame, is most striking.
She has looked on life bravely, and has
worked steadfastly, even if many of her
efforts have been wasted in “trampling
on thistles because they yielded no
figs.” Firm in her ideas of right, this
energetic lady never hesitates to express
them forcefully, either in her private
circle or on the public platform. Early
showed the calibre of her mind, when
she undertook marital responsibilities;
for. on her marriage, she not only had
to leave her home in the Old World, to
face the perils of the New, but she also
became the stepmother of a very large
family. Has identified herself closely
with the temperance question, has been
president of the W .C.T.U, for many
years, and has been one of the princi-
pal movers in the best work done by
that body. Earnest and single-minded,
expresses herself lucidly and to the
point when speaking, and allows no
doubt of her meaning to enter the
minds of her hearers. Naturally, in
so doing, she exposes herself to much
censure, as is the case with all those
who. holding positive views, expound
them fearlessly. But adverse criticism
has always left her unmoved. She has
also been strenuous, in endeavouring to
lessen the social evil, to raise the stand-
ard of morality, and to combat all the
wickednesses that humanity is heir to —
with more or less success. Some few
years ago' was connected with a little
publication entitled “The Chimes,”
whose mission it was to awaken a
“moral” conscience in its readers. This
literary venture failed, however, not
from want of vitality, but for lack of
monetary support—of that want of
pence which proverbially troubles pub-
lic men—and women, but without which
not even the best-intentioned publica-
tions can thrive. Recently, however,
Mrs. Ferguson has not been so busily
engaged in putting the world to rights.
Perhaps her luxurious home at Clare-
mont has tended to slacken her energies,
for it has been argued that luxury di-
minishes the industrial efficiency of the
individual. At the W.C.T.U. State
Convention in session at Boulder City,
Mrs. Ferguson impressed the gathering
with the way in which she conducted
her duties as chairwoman. There was
quite a scene when the president said
to a lady, who rose rather excitedly to
assert something, “You are out of
order.” The intimation from the chair
of disorderly conduct was apparently
misunderstood, for the dame addressed
retorted sharply. “Pardon me, I’m as
sane as any lady in the hall, not exclud-
ing the president!”
MISS MARY E. MOORE.
Niece of Mr. G. F. Moore, one of the
earliest settlers of this State, and
whose diary, containing details of the
history of the early days of the young
settlement, and published in serial form
18 months ago created general interest.
Miss Moore is one of the most unosten-
tatious workers for good in and about
Perth, her efforts to benefit the various
charitable institutions being continu-
ous and not spasmodic, as are so many
of those whose social position—and,
therefore, their charitable deeds —de-
pends on Parliamentary ins and outs.
With a charming personality and a
pleasant word for all this lady makes
her home—“ Wanda,” in Mount-street —
an attraction for many callers, both in-
timates and outsiders ; and it is safe to


say that neither leave her presence dis-
appointed. But she can be stern enough
with an offender against the rules of
propriety. Miss Moore is one of the
old. strict, yet kindly school so rarely
met with now in Australia, and, pre-
haps, more highly esteemed on that ac-
count by those who know how to value
high morality coupled with gentleness of
manner and true charity of heart. In
addition to the work she does in com-
mon with others for various charities in
the State, Miss Moore labours steadily
at home in the same good cause ; and in
November of each year holds a sale of
home-made sweets, preserves, and
needlework, the proceeds. which are
substantial, being divided among
the charities. Miss Moore has ‘‘mo-
thered” several of her neices, which fact
probably accounts for her success and
popularity with young people as with
adults. She was even credited in the ear-
lier days of being something of a match-
maker, a fair maid of Perth heine said
to have won a uniformed husband
through her kindly agencv. Benevo-
lence to all and sundry is Miss Moore’s
main characteristic; and she is espe-
cially prompt in responding to the cry
of genuine distress, though far too
shrewd to become the victim of impos-
ture. With her charitable disposition
it is well that she possesses ample means.
Does not confine her kindness to' the hu-
man kind, but is a fast and firm friend
of the brute creation, being the life
and soul of the local Societv for the Pre-
vention of Cruelty to Animals, of which
she is the energetic secretary.
MRS. (CAPTAIN) SMITH.
Whose good work at the Port of Fre-
mantle has almost become historic, was
born in Jamaica nearly 50 years ago;
and this active little lady has the bright
temperament one generally associates
with the sunny clime of equatorial re-
gions. Mrs. Smith may be called the
“Agnes Weston” of this State: fo-r she
is. indeed, the sailors’ friend. It was
mainly owing to her efforts that the
Sailors’ Rest at Fremantle was estab-
lished. In the comfortable quarters
there provided for him, Jack Tar may
write his letters, or get them written
for him; and many anxious mothers,
wives and (sweethearts have written
grateful letters of thanks to Mrs. Smith
for that lady’s kind attentions to some
lonely or shipwrecked son, husband, or
lover. Proved her love for those who
go down to the sea in ships by marrying
a sailor, the genial shipping master at
Fremantle. Has taken an active part
in the working of the W.C.T.U. of this
State ; and any good work for the bene-
fit of the community invariably has her
sympathy and support.
MRS. BATESON.
Those who have made up their minds
that women are necessarily weak-willed
are recommended to make the acquaint-
ance of bright-faced, brilliant, daring,
Mrs. Batson, and they will have their
ungallant opinion rudely shaken. The
tenacity with which this outspoken
little person fought her great war of
litigation some years ago in the Supreme
Court, while at the same time fighting
her enemies outside the legal arena
with unabated vigour, won her the ad-
miration of all who were disinterested
onlookers. Mrs. Bateson is by birth
a South Australian, by adoption or
adaptation a West Australian, but by
nature a gipsy, and, being a gipsy, is,
in the eyes of the conventional world, of
course put down as eccentric. But
whatever the world may think, she has
been known to do exceedingly kind
actions. After having shaken off,
through the medium of the Supreme
Court, the incubus of wedded bondage,
she has since become one of Perth’s
public people, by word, pen. and act.
In the course of a smart address de-
livered in the Perth Town Hall at the
time of the Anti-Federal campaign, she
raised Homeric laughter among the au-
dience by stating that her old enemy,
Walter James, had done nothing more
important at the Sydney Federal Con-
ference than gain the beauty prize.
The reference was to a paragraph, of
feminine origin, in one of the Sydney
papers, relative to the alleged good
looks of the present Agent-General.
Again, her quaint and witty fairy-tales,
on absolutely original lines, have been
enjoyed by many readers of the local
papers. In the recent political cam-
paign, she paid out ex-Premier Walter
James by her active and smart can-
vassing for the Labour Party. Has a
good memory and can be a good hater :
so those who happen to come in contact


with her would do well to make a
friend rather than an enemy of her.
At the same time she is capable of being
a thoroughly staunch friend.
MRS. TRACEY.
One of the public “diameters” of
Perth. A voluble little old Irishwoman,
with a grievance, of course, which she
is ready to ventilate at all times and
seasons. Addresses open-air meetings
regularly every Sunday on the subject,
coupled with allusions to all other mat-
ters under the sun, and with no- attempt
at connection or coherence. She stands
on a box in the middle of a ring of
amused listeners, the younger among
which delight in punctuating her ram-
bling and vociferous discourse with
chatting remarks. These generally
good-humoured interjections the lady
takes in all seriousness ; and sometimes
her retorts, if not witty, come with
Hibernian readiness and point. At any
rate, she always manages to raise a
laugh whenever she speaks, and her
Sunday afternoon gatherings on the
Esplanade have become quite a recog-
nised institution. Not gifted with any
of the qualifications for public speaking,
beyond a loud voice, an assured man-
ner, and a limited command of vitu-
peration, she has never yet been able
to make clear the exact nature of her
grievance. But it is understood to
have reference to some land transaction
in which the lawyers, as she alleges, got
the better of her. Hence she covers
the members of the legal profession
with abuse, and complains that she has
been debarred bv the Crown from get-
ting justice. Her special bete noire
appears to be ex-Attorney-General
Walter James, the very mention of
whose name acts upon her as a red rag
to- a bull. No one takes her seriously ;
and perhaps the collection she takes up
at her meetings forms the real purpose
of her public appearances.
J. M. FOWLER.
Member of the House of Representatives,
is a calm, shrewd Scot. Dresses neatly and
tubs frequently. Speaks with a marked
north o’ Tweed accent, always took a big
interest in politics, but, like mnny other
Labor men, is academic rather than practi-
cal. A pronounced freetrader, he secured
the votes of the mercantile community,
though they shied somewhat at him as
being a Labor man. Has fought hard for
the trans-Australian railway. Labor men
have lost some of their belief in him, as
they consider he is leaning somewhat to-
wards what they call capitalistic theories.
Lives mostly in Melbourne now, and only
pays Hying visits to his constituency. Is
a sterling and lasting friend when once he
has made a friendship, but is slow to do it.
Is markedly cautious at all times. In de-
bate is not brilliant, but is always listened
to with respect. Is a well-built man, fair-
complexioned, with light hair and mous-
tache. Perpetually wears gold-rimmed
glasses, and smokes cigars. Walks rapid-
ly, a habit contracted while hunting for
orders for Messrs. Sands and M‘Dougall.
H. TE BSD ALE SMITH.
Is a little, under-sized man, with well-
trimmed beard. Appearance does not im-
press one with the idea that he possesses
an extra large supply of dignity. Particu-
larly capitalistic in his views, and is an-
tagonistic to the Laborites with a capital
“L.” Very popular with his office staff,
but the men working in the karri and jar-
rah forests dislike him. A splendid orga-
niser, with a thorough knowledge of
finance, he engineered the formation of the
Timber Combine. Was in the Legislative
Assembly for a time, but a Labor man
ousted him at the last election. Wrapped
up in timber business, takes but little in-
terest in anything else.
FREDERICK W. BULL.
A tall man, who can afford to throw
away the effect of an inch or so by
bending slightly as he walks. Has a pro-
fessional appearance, pleasant, good-tem-
pered face, which is hardened in some de-
gree by the glasses which he invariably
wears. Knows everybody worth knowing
and many who are not, for his circle of
acquaintances has been inflated by a long
sojourn on the goldfields and some years
in Perth. A genial, laughing expression
discloses a sunny temperament. Not
easily cast down, even when times are bad,
though he does not know much about that.


as his business, law reporter and short-
hand writer, is connected with the ever-
,affluent law. Is a master mariner,
and has travelled a great deal,
so that he has acquired a fund of
general knowledge, against which people
not so well informed bump badly at times.
Very adroit in business, and more far-
seeing than he gets credit for. Has a
very clear method of speech, but seems to
doubt it, as he interlards his narratives
with the interrogation “See what I mean.' 1
Girnoc could not burgle his business pock-
et, but a friend in trouble or distress could
get away with his cash box.
0. L. HAINES.
Healing with the figures concerning the
city of Perth, in his capacity of account-
ant, for some 15 or 16 years, has given
Mr. 0. L. Haines a keen insight into the
financial position of its residents. He has
been dubbed “the detective accountant,
not a bad term for one who, having been
on the scent so long, must be able to “smell
out” inaccuracies, if they exist, without
much effort. WAs one of the early resi-
dents at Oottesloe Beach, when its desira-
bilites as a suburb were recognised, and to-
day he is chairman of the Roads Board,
and has a finger in most of the “pies” in
that seaside area. He takes great interest
in church matters, speaks well on most
subjects, and is a good conversationalist,
the only drawback being that he is afflicted
with deafness. In appearance somewhat
resembles the Rev. W. T. Kench.
EDWARD MAYHEW.
“Teddy,” as he is known to everybody,
is a man well over six feet in height, par-
ticularly well proportioned, of fiorid com-
plexion, about 50 years of age, generally
clean shaven. Stoops slightly, walks along
with short, quick steps, as if he were in a
desperate hurry. Not a soul in Western
Australia has a word to say against him.
Great believer in phrenology, and reckons
himself a judge of human nature. Not-
withstanding this, probably no man in the
State has backed more men who have
turned out frauds than the same genial
“Teddy.” Has put lots of money into the
pockets of prospectors, doing them a lot
of good, but causing himself loss. A scru-
pulously upright and honest man, is too
good-hearted for his own pocket. One of
the founders of the firm of W. Sandover
and Co., which was then known as May-
hew and Sandover. Chemist by profession,
resides at Claremont, where he has an
orchard. Particularly fine elecutionist, and
possesses a vast knowledge of the poets,
whom he can quote largely. In the early
days took a great interest in theatrical
matters. Had some experience of news-
paper work in New Zealand, but lost his
job by publishing a portrait of a prize-
fighter for that of a well-known divine. If
he cannot say a good word about a man,
he will say nothing. Chairman of the
Pharmaceutical Society for a number of
years. Unlike many, he commenced life in
gaol, and afterwards was a bank clerk
Rather remarkable, and against the general
order of things. In fairness to him it may
be stated that he occupied a clerical posi-
tion in the Fremantle Gaol, but did not
sleep there. Was also a member of the
Penal Commission.
J. W. CROFT.
Without any striking characteristic,
save steadiness of purpose and self-re-
liance, Mr. Croft has won the confidence
of the Labor Party, and through it the
high position of member of the federal
Senate. Life began in earnest for him
when he ran away from his home in New-
castle (N.S.W.). Even then he _ was a
unionist, and he has been prominent in
all Labor movements ever since. Short
and nuggety in build, he has a handsome
face, which beams forth the honesty and
candour of the man. These are not al-
ways the best materials for secretary of a
Trades and Labor Council to make his
way with, and he has encountered many
troubles which a more politic and tactful
man would have adroitly avoided, the
Labor political platform he knows like a
parrot, and no more. Unattached to the
Labor Party he could never have expected
legislative honors, and his election aa Sena-
tor is attributable more to his personal
popularity as secretary than to his political
potentiality. One of the few Labor secre-
taries whose accounts never disclosed ir-
regularities, he has won unbounded con-
fidence even among people outside the


unions. Included among his admirers is
Sir John Forrest, who once invoked suc-
cessfully his assistance to avert a strike
at the Government Printing Office. The
Lobstein libel action was another evidence
of Senator Croft’s injudicious downright-
ness and candour, for which he has still
cause to be regretful.
W. E. OOOKE.
Is the local travesty of Clement Wragge.
Is official time-keeper, weather-prophet,
and astronomer. For nearly 10 years has
been in charge of the Observatory, and
many advantages have been secured for
Perth through his efforts. Has caused to
be issued a volume entitled “The Climate
of Western Australia.” Contributes regu-
lar monthly notes to the press, and has
been the means of placing the Perth Ob-
seivatory on a par with such old and
famous institutions as those of Greenwich,
Paris, Berlin, and the Cape of Good Hope.’
Has also taken a very active part
in the work of the University Exten-
sion Committee, and in all educational mat-
ters pertaining to the State. Retiring in
disposition, is fond of home life, and ex-
cept in such social duties as his position
demands, he is not identified with society.
A man of letters, somewhat pedantic, but
generally- esteemed for his earnestness and
gentle disposition.
F. D. GOOD.
Good by name and by nature. Owns
plenty of wealth, Daniel White and Co.’s
Carriage Factory being one of his chief
sources of income. Isj a J.P. by the
grace of a past Governor-in-Council. As
an administrator of justice was no better
than the average amateur magistrate, but
never inflicted a harsh sentence on a poor
sinner.
W. T. LOTON.
Success in every form has followed his
footsteps. Has never had much difficulty
in getting elected to any position he
wanted. Legislative Councillor, Mayor,
or bank director, he had only to reach after
those positions to get them. Is known as
a shrewd, straight-going man of business.
His white waistcoat, somewhat ample in its
spread, bespeaks the respect due to a suc-
cessful merchant. He had the foresight to
buy land in what has become the heart of
the city, so now has wealth enough to
make the balance of his journey through
life calm and smooth, without having to
worry when his boots want the sole re-
newed. Was an ideal mayor—hospitable
and courteous. In commercial circles he is
respected as being cautious, but per-
fectly fair in all his dealings. Is a mem-
ber of the Upper House and a bank direc-
tor, besides occuping a seat on the boards
of several other public companies.
WM, F. SAYER.
When the first fight between the Govern-
ment and the Midland Railway comes to
pass W. F. (Sayer will be sure to be on
deck. Probably knows more of the inner
workings of both sides of the case than
any other man in the State. Is a type of
legal practitioner that Chas. Dickens would
have used as a model. Not a blustering
Buzfuz, but a suave, plausible gentleman
who can wheedle information from a
hostile witness or tickle the vanity of their
Honors, to the manifest advantage of the
cause of which he is the advocate. Is now
acting Attorney-General and keeper of the
legal consciences of the Ministry. Is an
apple-faced little man, and could not insult
any one if he tried. Was once member
for Claremont and Attorney-General in the
Throssell Ministry, but found the cool
shades of the Crown Solicitorship more
to his liking.
SIR GEORGE SHENTON.
Though well below middle height, ho'
carries himself straight as a gun-barrel
and makes some amends for his dearth of
inches. A round pleasant face with a
iresh complexion, which would appear to
better advantage if he shaved, instead of
wearing a full grey beard. A quick bright
eye and a high forehead give a dignity
and depth of expression which is never
seen to better advantage than when he as-
sumes the robes of President of the Legis-
lative Council. Essentially cautious, he
misses the pitfalls which other presidents
often fall into. Recognising the obliga-
tions of wealth and position, he entertains


on a scale which only the very affluent
can affect. Nothing delights him more
than to dispense hospitality, and he is never
so happy as in personally planning and de-
signing the details for some great function.
In private life, he bears himself quietly
and unobtrusively, but is always profusely
hospitable, not to make display, but because
one of his chief delights is to witness the en-
joyment and comfort of others. Having
no particular hobby, he devotes himself to
the study of Parliamentary procedure and
upholding the dignity of the Presidential
Chair. Personally, forms and ceremonies
have no attraction for him, but he appre-
ciates the responsibility and importance
of the Presidential office and is jealous
that its glory and privileges should not be
diminished under his regime. Not a fluent
speaker, he is careful to say just as much
as is wanted and no more. Fond of driv-
ing, he may be often seen behind a fine
pair, taking his daughters into Perth. Ail
visitors of importance arriving in the State
are entertained by Sir George, who goes
out of his way to show them attention, so
that the prestige of the State for hos-
pitality and its reputation for thoughtful-
ness towards visitors may not be impaired.
There is never likely to be another Presi-
dent of the Legislative Council whilst Sir
George lives.
FRANK CADD.
It is not often that a man secures the
honor of occupying the mayoral chair of
an important municipality like Fremantle
for two years in succession, but Frank
Cadd is one who has been favored in this
respect. A young man, slim, clean-shaven,
very dark, hair tinged with grey, is parti-
cularly shrewd in business matters. His
principal achievement towards the advance-
ment of the Port is that he was primarily
instrumental in bringing the negotiatons for
the installation of an electric tramway sys-
tem to a successful issue. By virtue of his
civic position is chairman of the Tramway
Board. There is no limit to his activity
and energy. Is of a very enterprising
nature, and knows the secret of success —
the proper time to get out of a speculation.
When he decides that the time has arrived
to clear out of a show he does so unhesitat-
ingly. By dint of hard work and natural
shrewdness has worked his way up to his
present position from small beginnings, and
has amassed much of this world’s goods. A
poor speaker, yet he has political aspira-
tions, and is earnest in the advocacy of his
views. At the last election he stood foi
Fremantle against the Labor candidate,
and put up a splendid fight, being beaten
by only 28 votes. The fact that he was
able to run a Labor man so closely for a
recognised Labor constituency says much
for him. Is hot-tempered, inclined to be
resentful, and in business believes in get-
ting full value for his money. In private
life open-hearted and liberal.
W. J. TRAYLEN.
Was once an ordinary “common or garden’
printer and a lay reader, but piety
and printing don’t go successfully
so sold his printing business and became
Chairman of the Metropolitan Waterworks
Board. That position he seemed to con-
sider was an absolute monarchy, and for a
long while ruled his fellow boardsmen with
whips and with scorpions. A change came
about when Harry Brown and T. C. Vil-
liers joined the Board, which ended
in its dissolution and the tyrannical chair-
man found “his occupation gone.” Among-
the outside public his initials stand
“Water dug,” for he is a frenzied teetotal-
ler. Has a dogmatic way of advancing his
theories, so does no good with them. Dab-
bles a little in science, but is not brainy or
logical enough to practise research. Clad
either in a long Alpaca coat or a snuff-
colored tweed suit, the grizzled grey whis-
kered -figure may often be seen peering
about town through his two-powered gold-
rimmed spectacles. When he is buried the
water consumers of Perth may possibly
subscribe to put up a monument over him
weighing 17 tons in case he anticipates the'
Resurrection.
A. S. WILSON.
Baptist pastor, pale, lean, -and not more
intellectual-looking than the next man.
Very strong on Sunday observance. Sees
wickedness in wildflowers, and sin in Sun-
day picnics. Conscientious, but cannot
truthfully be said to be very broad-minded.
Apparently loses sight of the fact that edu-
cation has taught the masses to think for


themselves. Possibly does not recognise
that men and women nowadays prefer to be
the keepers of their own consciences.
Charitable in his way, he robs his good
deeds of their savour by mixing kindly,
Christian charity with bitter, hard-shell
doctrine. When St. Peter makes up his
balance, there will be found on the credit
-side of Parson Wilson’s ledger, “He
meant well, and did what he thought was
right.”
JAMES GIBB NEAL
If you are a good Orangeman and can
roll your bowl nearer the “Jack” than
James, you will have him for a friend for
life. Not that James isn't a good friend
to others than Orangemen and bowlers.
Fills a responsible billet as Printer of the
‘West Australian,” and draws a comfort-
able income from properties he owns, hav-
ing had the foresight to purchase land in
the city when values were a deal lower
than they are now. A full, pale face—
bearing faint traces of smallpox in youth—
flatly-planted feet, with toes well turned
out —broad shoulders, slightly rounding
over in unision with the suspicion of a
stoop, and a cheery smile, which is seldom
absent, “James’s” figure may generally be
•seen at the “West Australian” end of
the Terrace late in the afternoons. Though
a better listener than a talker, he some-
times finds occasion to tell in the North
of Ireland accent, which he has never
wholly lost, trade anecdotes, discuss the
theory of bowls, and expand on the merits
of his chief —Dr. Hackett —who is his hero
in real life. Approached in the right way,
nothing is too much trouble, but if you
once cross him, he is marvellously re-
sourceful in placing obstacles in your way.
Genial and good-humored when all is well,
be lets go when he is ruffled, and those who
are wise in their generation “stand aside
and let the swell go past!”
HUGH DE LARGIE.
One of Westralia’s six representatives
in the Federal Senate. Is a big, bold-
featured, bearded Scotsman, Is a fairly
good speaker, at times inclined to be
laboriously facetious, and when under stress
of excitement there is no mistaking his
nationality. Has a rather extensive book
knowledge, but lacks the power to discri-
minate between what is practical and
what is merely theoretical. Is regarded
as a Collossus by the Labor Party, and is
sedulous in advocating their views; conse-
quently has no use for those whose political
opinions differ from his, and does not hesi-
tate to tell them so. Is a good tighter,
and hits hard. When he arrived in Wes-
tern Australia from New South Wales
proceeded to the goldfields, where he took
a prominent part in labor matters. To
such an extent did he cut ioe that the
party selected him as one of the two
Labor candidates for the Senate at the
first Federal elections, and he was successful
in being returned. He has hung on to
his job ever since, and the confidence of
his party in him continues unshaken. Has
no good word to say for the capitalist —“the
enemy of the cause” —and strenuously as-
serts that the panacea for the existing
conditions is a form of socialism. Some
there are who associate his name unkindly
with the memory of a late Supreme Court
judge.
DR. GEORGE FREDERICK MCWIL-
LIAMS.
Everybody knows Dr. M‘Williams. Has
spent 15 years here in knowing people. Is
one of the most popular and successful
medical men of Perth. Was appointed out-
patient physician of the Perth Hospital,
and Surgeon-Captain of the W.A. Voiun-
ter Force. Was president of St. John’s
Ambulance Society, and honorary surgeon
to the W.A. Turf Club, president of the
Perth Cycling Club, and vice-president of
the League of W.A. Wheelmen. Was one
of the directors of the W.A. Brick and
Tile Company. And all this before the
South African war, where he gained more
distinctions and honors. The handsome,
athletic medico practised first in York for
nine months. Then went up north as far
as Wyndham, then he tried the pearling
trade, and made a voyage to the islands
in the Straits and to Java. Then he took
cattle all over the Gascoyne and Ashburton
districts, spending 12 months in accumula-
ting a fund of colonial experience; and
thus equipped “Dr. Mac.,” as he is
familiarly known, settled down to practise
his profession in real earnest. But his
roving instincts were too great to allow of


him staying quietly at home when all
Australia was on fire with enthusiasm to
help conquer the Boers, and Dr. M‘Wil-
liams was during that period in South
Africa throughout a central figure among
prominent Australians. Urbane, generous,
intellectual, athletic, practical, indefatig-
able, are only a few of the attributes
which may with justice be attached to the
name of Dr. M‘Williams.
DICK STKELITZ.
A member of the firm of Strelitz Bros,
Is the one who catches business by genial-
ity. He is younger than his brother, and
hasn’t the hard, shrewd head Paul has.
But he has what is as good, a faculty for
making friends. He inclines to corpulence,
is clean-shaven, dark, and very short-
sighted. His defective vision causes him
to wrinkle his face into a thousand puckers,
that a minute later are smoothed out by a
smile. Is a genial, jolly fellow, and is
liberal in business or out of it. Is parti-
cularly well up in shipping work, and con-
trols that part of the firm’s business. Owns
the finest motor-car in Westralia.
L. RATAZZI.
Is a German, but does not inherit the
physical attributes of the race, being more
like an Italian in appearance. Short in
stature, he stoops in his walk, and looks
shorter than he is. A man of warm im-
pulses, he is generous, hospitable, and
hot-tempered. Entertains in a style which
is that of the man of good taste. He has
a natural aptitude for sleight-of-hand con-
juring and other parlor tricks, and can
beguile away an hour of his guests’ time
so pleasantly that it appears but a few
minutes. Being a man of excitable tem-
perament, he uses all those aids to argu-
ment such as the shrugging of shoul-
ders and outstretched hands. As
Imperial German Consul he has
had to deal with intricate ques-
tions, but in every case has come out
with flying colors, his natural shrewdness
and common sense guiding him to correct
conclusions every time. Is agent for the
N.D. Lloyd’s S.S. Co., and that the line
has grown in popularity is as much due to
his courtesy and affability as to the splen-
did service itself. Is a good-looking man,
and shows his loyalty to the Kaiser by-
brushing his moustache as much upwards
as it will go. Is a man of culture, and
is highly educated.
A. W. FARQUHAR.
Familiarly known as ‘Hilly."’ Reddish-
brown complexion, heavy grey-brown mou-
stache, and a merry little twinkle in his
eye.” Not very tall, and develops signs
01 me :.iS-.ig girth, although just within
reach of forty summers. Weaknesses —•
yachting and horticulture, and at one time
was well known on Sydney Harbor. Wes-
tralian manager for the Ocean Accident
Insurance Company, and a success at
that. Very popular among a large circle-
of friends.
G. L. THROSS'ELL.
Is the eldest son of Hon. George Thros-
sell, and controls the firm of Geo. L. Thros-
sell and Co., which does a very large busi-
ness at Northam. Is good-looking, of me-
dium height, slightly taller than his father,,
and, like the latter, hard of hearing. A
keen judge of horse-flesh he drives none
but, the best animals, and is a first-rate
whip. Has filled the Mayoral Chair of Nor-
tham on several occasions with credit to*
himself and satisfaction to the burgesses.
Indeed, in all public capacities has ac-
quitted himself remarkably well. Is a
“jolly good sort,” and very popular. On,
one occasion stood for the Upper House,,
but suffered defeat. However, is bound to
get there sooner or later, as he takes a
keen inters! in politics. To a great ex-
tent possesses many of the characteristics-
of his father.
A. GIBB MAITLAND,
n Government geologist, is a tall, medium-
built, gentlemanly man, with a clean-
shaven, intellectual student’s face. Is.
essentially a thinker. Very dignified and
precise in speech and manner. Chooses,
his phrases with great deliberation, but
when on technical subjects does not weigh
down his hearers with technicalities. Has
a wide knowledge of the State, having
visited every hole and corner where mine-
ral wealth is likely to be found. Is a
master of his subject, and one of the best


assets the State possesses, his reports be-
ing regarded with respect outside as well
as inside the State. Came to Western
Australia from Queensland, where he had
already established a reputation as a
geologist.
J. B. HOLMAN.
The Minister for Railways and Labor in
the Daglish Government, is of medium
height, fair, and with no particular pre-
tensions to beauty of countenance or form.
Is a hairdresser, tobacconist, and news
agent at Cue. Selected by the Labor
Party there to contest the Murchison
seat in the Legislative Assembly in their
interests, and was successful. Up to the
present has done nothing to distinguish
himself in the political arena. Still the
Labor crowd have singled him out for
praise, on account of his administration
of the Labour Department. They are
discreetly silent, however, in regard to
his doings in connection with the other
department he has under his control.
W. M'OULLOUGH.
Manager of the Perth branch of the
Bank of New South Wales. Grey-beard-
ed, tall, broad but not stout, with kindly
blue eyes, well up in years, and is essen-
tially a “manly man.’’ No one has ever
seen him walking without a stick, and his
gait is uncommon. Is particularly well
informed in regard to banking matters,
on which he is a recognised authority.
Has managed branches of the bank all
over Australasia, so has had a varied and
an extensive experience. Practically
speaking he has spent by far the best part
of his life in the bank’s service. It is
difficult to get the better of him in a
business proposition.
WILLIAM LOWE.
If it be true that our names are derived
from some personal attribute, the Lowe
family has vindicated itself from the impu-
tation implied as regards its stature ; for,
in the present generation, each of the
family of which William is a member be-
lies his cognomen. “Big Bill Lowe,” as
he is familiarly called by his hosts of
friends, is known from Broken Hill to
Coolgardie as one of the most popular
members of the firm of Goode, Durrant,
and Co. ; and as one holding a high com-
mercial reputation. Nothing pleases “Bill”
better than to beguile a journey telling
“of summer days, and of delightful years” ;
and altogether he is one of the jolliest of
companions, and in social as in business
circles he enjoys great popularity. Has a
striking personality, being a giant among
men, with a face to match. Well-trimmed
brown beard, erect carriage, and finely pro-
portioned, there is nothing small or mean
about him. Had an extra share of “devil-
ment” in his composition as a boy, and
was noted for his weakness for his neigh-
bors’ fruit, in spite of the circumstance
oat there was a fine orchard at home, and
would go to infinite pains and run much
risk to capture the fruit which is always
the sweetest.
/
F. W. BURWELL.
A little, ruddy-complexioned man, ener-
getic, who flies all over the place as if
everything depended on his getting there
in time—such is F. W. Burwell, of Fre-
mantle. Invariably wears a tall hat, and
is not very particular as to the kind of
clothes he carries about with him. Is an
architect by profession, and has one of
the most extensive practices at the Port.
Has lived there for nine years or more.
Does not seem to take an interest in any-
thing outside his profession, in which he
is all there. Is not half a bad sort, and
has many friends.
SYDNEY P. EMANUEL.
Is one of the wealthiest of the “chosen
people in Perth. His father owned a
station in the Nor’-West, but resided at
Sydney. S.P. ran a livery stable in Syd-
ney for a while, but it did not pay, so he
emigrated to Westralia before the gold
rush. Fell in with the late Alec. Forrest,
whose service he entered, subsequently be-
coming his partner in the firm of Forrest,
Emanuel, and Co. Owns stations in the
A or-West about the size of England, and
formed the meat ring which enabled them
to regulate the supply and prices in the
metropolis. About sft. lOin. high, dark,
and pleasant-looking, “Syd.” is one of the


best judges of horseflesh in the State, and
is a capital whip. Has one of the finest
homes in Perth. Free-handed and open-
hearted, has no false pride, and is conse-
quently well liked. Adopted the daugh-
ter of the late Justice Moorhead, being
married, but having no olive branches of
his own.
ANGUS M‘DONALD.
Is a tall, raw-boned, bearded Scotsman,
fine-looking, but not handsome, about 45
years of age. Assistant manager of the
Perth branch of the National Bank for
several years, is particularly strong as re-
gards finance, on which he is a recognised
authority. Hard and shrewd, but just in
all his dealings. Stickler for system, but
does not believe in red-tapeism. Certainly
not conservative, but progressive. What
was good enough in years gone by is not
good enough now that hustle is such an
important factor in attaining success. A
good judge of human nature, and a man of
forceful and determined character. The
appearance of the man and a few minutes
conversation inspire the greatest confidence
in him. Is a man who evidently reads
good literature, and having a capacity for
assimilation converses freely on any sub-
ject. Mery popular with the bank’s clients
and staff.
JAMES MOYLAN.
Is in the vicinity of 40, of medium
height, and the top of his head looks as
if it had experienced a prolonged drought.
Has been very energetic in business, but
of late has rested on his oars, having
made more than a competence. Particu-
larly (liberal and ikind-hearted, finds it
difficult to say no to anyone who asks
him for assistance of any kind. Is uni-
versally liked and respected. Not a
sporting man in the strict sense of the
term, though an enthusiastic fisherman.
SIB EDWARD WITTENOOM.
Medium built, grey, well-dressed man.
Once was a storekeeper in the Nor -West.
Now is interested in large pastoral pro-
perties on the Gascoyne. Entered politics
before establishment of responsible govern-
ment. Later became Minister for Mines,
and made a name for himself during the
alluvial trouble. Then took Agent-Gen-
ralship. On conclusion of his term re-
turned to become managing director in
State for Dalgety’s, Ltd. This position
he recently resigned, and is going to Eng-
land. He is wealthy, and can live “at
home” in ease. His bump of self-esteem
is well developed. He purch; ses pic-
tures at times, but does not pose as a
judge of art. Never forgets how much
he paid for them. He is a knight, and
enjoys the handle to his name. Is hos-
pitable, but exclusive.
P. P. BUOKLAND.
The West Australian representative of
Brown and Bureau, one of the largest
firms of mercantile brokers in Melbourne,
resembles in appearance the fat boy in
“Pickwick.” Good nature beams from his
clean-shaven face. Is young for such a
responsible position, and when he becomes
as dignified outside as he is during business
hours little remains to make him one of
the finest fellows in the State. At present
his principal fault lies in the fact that he
will persist in attempting to sing in the
bathroom at a very early hour in the
morning, much to the joy of those who de-
sire to sleep. Smart, energetic, competent,
and always alive to the interests of the
firm he represents. Held in high esteem
by the business people of the State. Not
lacking in grit, he saw active service during
the South African campaign. Age and in-
creased responsibility will mellow his
youthful propensity for larking.
C. E. DEMPSTER.
Is not a particularly brilliant member of
Westralia’s House of Landlords. A big,
burly, grey-bearded, Roman-nosed man.
Hands are* large, capable of holding what
they get on to, and toil-marked. Gives
one the impression that he does not worry
his “soul-case” out about anything.
Knows all there is to know about stock,
but is not such a good judge of a man.
Is a native of Fremantle. In the early
sixties went exploring, and penetrated fur-
ther than any previous explorer. Dis-
covered quartz veins in the Yilgarn dis-
trict. Later on went to Esperance Bay
and Fraser’s Range, where he and his
brothers managed to get on to large tracts


of land. Operations successful, hence he
can sign his name to large cheques with-
out trouble. Is charitably disposed to-
wards those who are deserving. As justice of
the peace is lenient, believing in giving
every man a chance.
M. E. JULL.
Under-Secretary of the Public Works De-
partment, is a tall, clean-shaven, ascetic-
looking man, with the air of a student.
Scrupulously neat in his attire, and re-
gardful of his personal appearance, is al-
ways well turned out. Has a splendid
orchard and vineyard at Armadale, where
he dispenses hospitality, principally to
church dignitaries. Staunch supporter of
the Anglican Church, and no work in its
interests is too arduous for him. Talks
some in a studied way at church functions,
and .is the principal resident of the pic-
turesque suburb. Is a candidate tor
Public Service Commissionership, and it
would not be surprising were he to re-
ceive the appointment. Thoroughly honest
in his convictions, he has the courage to
express them.
JOHN ABBOTT.
Master mariner, and of world-wide ex-
perience enough to fill a fair-sized book.
Over the half-century, small in stature,
florid complexion, sandy hair, wears spec-
tacles. Self-contained, kind-hearted to a fault
to those who deserve it. Of sound judg-
ment and undoubted probity. Holds a
high reputation among Fremantle commer-
cial men. Runs a big business, the Fre-
mantle Stevedoring Company, and finan-
cially is “warm.”
FRED. INSTONE.
Fremantle’s tin-man par excellence —Fred.
Instone. Good-humored and witty, with
an inexhaustible fund of entertaining anec-
dote, he is good company anywhere and
at any time. He takes the tin business
seriously enough to make it pay. Al-
most everything else he takes with a grain
of salt or whatever will make it palatable.
With him its “laugh and the world laughs
with you ; grieve and you grieve alone.”
Instone hates being alone, so he seldom,
if ever, grieves. Devoted to a devoted
wife, he finds the world, round about his
45th year, not such a bad place after all,
and hke a sensible man he makes the
most of it. When he quits this fly-
speck any one of his friends can truly
inscribe on his tombstone —
“Green be the turf above thee,
Friend of my better days ;
None knew thee but to love thee,
Or named thee but to praise.”
A. ORTON.
The manager of the firm of Loan Bros.,
one of the principal softgoods houses in
Perth, is a distinguished-looking man.
Slightly under 6ft., inclined to be portly,
and clean-shaven, is a man who might
be any age between 30 and 45. Has a
peculiar gait, though of erect carriage.
The casual observer, at first glance, might
be inclined to consider him somewhat
phlegmatic, but this would be one of the
greatest mistakes he ever made. Kindly
grey eyes look out at one from a fine
face, and take in everything. Makes up
his mind quickly, and it takes a mighty
smart man to convince him that he is
wrong. A thoroughly good fellow he is
voted by his friends, and no man desires
more than that. Is very fond of dogs
and birds, and is a good sportsman.
T. H. BATH.
Chairman of Committees of the Legis-
lative Assembly of this 'State, is a small
man with a dark moustache, neat in ap-
pearance—“dapper” not inaptly describes
him—who suffers considerably from
swelled head. First got into Parliament
as representative of Hannans, in the inter-
ests of the Labour Party, on the death of
“Jack” Reside. At that time was secretary
of the Goldfields Trades and Labor Coun-
cil, and the majority cast in his favor at
the selection ballot was so great that no
one was rash enough to come out against
him. During his first term in the Assem-
bly continually bumped against C. J.
Moran with great disaster to himself. Not
a conspicuous success in his exalted office.
Has inclinations towards the pulpit, and
will probably get there if other attractions
are not too great. Contributes Labor
notes to the press, that being as far as he
has got with his literary aspirations.


Popular among the Labor people on the
fields, though is not blatant like the ma-
jority of his fellows. Holds views in
which the employer gets a chance.
L. E. WOODM.iN.
Of Tolley and Co., Fremantle, is an
old bagman, who has been on the roads
for years. Probably travelled over as
much of Western Australia and South
Australia as any man. Squarely built
and muscular, has a kindly disposition,
and is generous to a fault. Fond of mem-
bers of the opposite sex. Succeeded Phil
Campbell, whom he closely resembles in
disposition and good qualities. Has a
wonderful wealth of good stories, which
he takes a keen delight in telling. Like
his late chief is jovial, particularly popu-
lar, and withal a smart business man.
THOMAS OOOMBE.
A little man, well up in years, grey,
with a big, well-developed head. Slow
and precise in his movements, deliberate
in speech. Not particular in regard to at-
tire, wealthy enough to be able to disre-
gard conventionality or fashion in this re-
spect. Made money in Broken Hill, and
lost it. Repeated the first part of_ the per-
formance here. Is connected with laige
business concerns, and is now very wealthy.
Has one of the finest residences in the
State, situated at South Perth, from which
a panoramic view of the city is obtainable.
No aspirations towards public life, though
Commissioner of the Fremantle Haiboi
Trust, and could have been Mayor of
South Perth had he so desired.
DR. MONTGOMERY.
Would easily pass anywhere for a bro-
ther of E. A. Harney, his resemblance to
the latter in appearance, manner, and
voice being strongly marked. Clean-
shaven, determined, yet withal kindly
face, broad-shouldered, and well set up,
he is a “good looker,” as Americans would
say. Is hot-tempered, rather impetuous,
and full of pluck and energy. In the
performance of his duties as superinten-
dent of the Lunatic Asylums of Western
Australia, cannot be excelled. Splendid
manager and organiser, possessing a pro-
found knowledge of lunacy and its treat-
ment, has progressive ideas. Of consi-
derable mental attainments, with an ex-
tensive knowledge of literature. Also an.
accomplished raconteur, and tells many a
good yarn about his University and hospi-
tal days. Is a thoroughly good fellow,
and exceedingly popular, A lover of dogs,
which he breeds.
WM. ZIMPEL.
Like the Phoenix, he arises from his own
ashes. A disastrous fire left him some
years ago almost a ruined man. But in-
domitable energy and pushfulness over-
came all difficulties, and to-day he is not
merely where he was when he met disaster
but a bit ahead. A wizened, dried-up man
with straggly beard and pre-occupied man-
ner. Not by any means a man of striking
appearance. Despite his air of pre-occu-
pation he is wide awake when it comes to
a business deal. Speaks with a slight
German accent. Is not given to society.
Lives in a nice house on a beautiful site
at Cottesloe. He carefully watches the
Registrar-General's statistics concerning,
the birth-rate, as he does a big trade in
perambulators.
J. W. BATEMAN.
With John W. Bateman, Fremantle is
the world, and the firm of J, and W. Bate-
man is Fremantle. To refine still further
perhaps John W. Bateman is J. and W.
B. At any rate, John Bateman (not the
ancient of that name who struck W.A.
considerably more than half a century ago)
views every proposal from his own stand-
point. The range of his mental vision is
limited strictly by his own interests, and
within those lines he works with a zeal
worthy of the noblest cause. He has
no pretensions to physical beauty.
H. P. DOWNING.
Though of youthful, almost boyish, ap-
pearance, is at least ten years older
than he looks. Fresh-complexioned end
pleasant-mannered. Raises a genial smile
without trouble. As a practitioner in the
coruts he shines rather on the civil side
than on the criminal. He is painstak-
ing and methodical in working up a case,,
following the most intricate through all


its mazes till the tangled web becomes
an orderly array of facts. Looks a gen-
tleman all the time. Downing in dun-
garee would still look well-bred, and
would still be a well-mannered man.
Kindly and courteous at all times. Though
not athletically built, is active, and plays
a good game of tennis. Has a hobby
for flower cultivation, and is a successful
amateur gardener. Bears the goodwill of
most men.
G. E. PITCHFORD.
Managing director of Bon Marche, Ltd.
A bit of a dandy, but not a dude. Good-
looking man, with regular features and
fine eyes. Has the reputation of taking
religion into business. Shrewd and busi-
nesslike, has always an eye to the main
chance. Understands exactly what the
public wants, and gives it to them. Good
to the firm’s employees, who are mostly
of long service. Is hospitable, which hos-
pitality is chiefly extended to pillars of the
church, especially those on tour. Has
little sense of humor. Is a good friend,
but could be a bitter enemy if he felt that
way.
MICHAEL GIBSON LA VAN.
'Solicitor, and works hard for his clients,
and knows a good deal about his own
business. Is a smug-looking, well-washed
yorng man with an auburn moustache, of
which he takes great care. Has a brogue,
but likes to call it “The Dublin Accint.”
Enjoys a lucrative practice. Well known
and generally liked.
T. P. DRAPER.
At first sight yon might think he was a
lean skerrick, but when stripped he has a
fine physique and rather a saintly ascetic
expression on his face which would turn
out magnificently in stained glass. A thin,
treble voice suggests that he is effeminate,
but he is in fact full of manliness, and
spends all his spare time shooting or hunt-
ing in the open air. Served as city coun-
cillor for some time, and has political as-
pirations, though he will scarcely admit it.
Talks democracy with singular fluency, but
in essence is an unmitigated conservative,
as witness bis efforts to secure the rejec-
tion of Mr. Walter James and the return
of the Labor candidate at the last general
elections, because the late Premier pro-
posed to liberalise the legal profession. A
capable lawyer, handicapped by his
squeaky voice and a slightly diffident
manner.
R. L. HERBERT.
The blest paper credit that “lends cor-
ruption lighter wings to fly” has no cham-
pion in R. L. Herbert (the Perth manager
of the Western Australian Bank), unless
the security is sufficient to check all
chances of the flying. A calm, courteous,
kindly-looking man of something over 40,
with a full, brown beard, he sits in hi#
office of control and daily settles the finan-
cial hopes of dozens of Perthites. The
despatch always comes with the most gra-
cious consideration, though, and even when
an applicant for an overdraft meets with
an unfavorable reply he invariably goes
away without bearing any illwill towards
the polite manager who has given his aspi-
rations a set-back. “All that I want is
satisfactory security for the bank,” is
Herbert s usual reply to the man who asks
for some of the bank’s funds. Given the
required security, he will do business until
further orders.
CAPTAIN ROBERT LAURIE.
An ordinary-looking man, with more
than ordinary ability. Captain Laurie
has made his mark in Fremantle. In the
days when Western Australia was de-
scribed as a sand-patch extending from
the Great Australian Bight to the Gulf of
Carpentaria,” and when Fremantle harbor
was said to consist of “a few poles stuck
out in the Indian Ocean,” Laurie traded to
the chief port of the sand-patch in com-
mand of one of the A.S.S. boats. After-
wards a shore life attracted him, and of
late he has been amassing wealth on land.
Somehow or other somebdy conceived the
idea that Laurie was a politician, and as
the middle-aged seaman was too generous
to contradict him he permitted the elec-
tors to foist him into the Legislative Coun-
cil in opposition to the short-term record-
holding Colonial Secretary Moss. He’s
been in the House ever since, and will pro-
bably stay there, although he would hardly
fret himself to death if he found his seat


filled by someone else. On nautical
matters he is a sound authority,
and in his position of Chairman of
the Fremantle Harbor Commissioners it’s a
good thing that he is so. In private life
he is an excellent fellow to meet, but it is
not unfair to him to say —“For thy sake
I’ll admit that a Scot may have humor —I
had almost said wit.”
DONALD CHIPPER.
The local Sowerberry, is of large stature,
dark-haired and ruddy-countenanced, and
when clad in the habiliments of woe, in
pursuance of his calling, does not look the
part. More life than death about him.
He gained something of notoriety, some 15
years ago, by a quarrel with the residents
of the “Bungalow,” when he refused to
remove an obnoxious signboard which de-
tracted from the appearance of that resi-
dence, while setting forth his occupation.
Notwithstanding which, there are many
who find “Don.” a “good fellow.” “Here
we may think and pray, before death stops
our breath.”
MILES STANIFORTH SMITH.
Suavity won him his seat in the Com-
monwealth Senate, but it may take more
than that to win it again. His sugary
smile won many a woman’s vote, and he
went into the fight heart and soul. Visited
New Guinea on a lengthy trip some years
ago, and now he is tripping down in the
Solomon Islands. Consequently has been
dubbed the hon. member for Polynesia.
Tall, good-looking, and substantially built,
he makes friends easily. Presses imma-
culately, and will some day be a nicely-
groomed, prettily-mannered angel, who will
be very kind to the girl angels. When
in Perth—his visits are getting few and
far between—he can generally be found
standing on the steps of the Palace Hotel
dressed in a Keautifully-fitting grey suit,
tan boots, and red tie, with a cigarette
daintily held ftbtween his lips. Whatever
may be said by his detractors, is a worker,
and is not above learning day by day. Is
thoroughly sincere in his efforts to serve
Westralia, and was backed for a place in
the Reid Cabinet. Like the Prime Minis-
ter, is a staunch freetrader, and none would
be surprised if he did not yet make a name
for himself. Originally was Reuter’s agent
at Kalgoorlie, and was also Mayor of the
Eastern Goldfields capital.
MATTHEW LEWIS MOSS.
It’s not paying M. L. Moss an unde-
served compliment to say that there is no
lawyer in W.A. who will work harder for
a client. Yes, the smart, clever, little
clean-shaven New Zealander of forty sum-
mers (or thereabouts) will do almost any-
thing that the law permits in order to win.
a case, and the stronger case he has the
harder he’ll fight. He’s a lawyer before
everything else. Some say that he’s a
lawyer always ; but, however that may be,
it’s true that he’s never been particularly
successful as a politician, despite his un-
limited ambition and undoubted talent to
shine in the parliamentary sphere. Pro-
bably, after the manner of Edmund Burke
(very much after) he narrows his mind,
and to party gives up what is meant for
mankind. Also, his comparative want of
good fortune may be found in the fact that
he cannot or will not battle against odds.
So far he doesn’t appear to have been
geared for hill-climbing—on a level road
he would be on the scratch mark. Show
M.L. that he’s almost sure to be beaten
and he sinks to the level of a fifth-rater
right away, with the result that his oppo-
nent can sit back with confidence. When
he comes to know his own strength—if he
ever does—he’ll easily retrieve his past
failures. Moss is mated with one of New
Zealand’s cleverest of clever women. The
pair took the field on the Federation ques-
tion, but they didn’t pull in the same boat
by any means. Moss advocated union—
that was the winning ticket then. His
wife brought all her marked ability to bear
on the other side. The house of Moss won,
of course.
MISS DAKIN.
An artist new to Perth, Miss Dakin’s
talent has been rapidly appreciated. She
excels at seascape, though among the pic-
tures hanging on the walls of her studio
are some of the daintiest bits of genre
painting ever seen in the State. Sir
Frederick Bedford—himself an earnest
amateur—has purchased some of Miss
Dakin’s work. Her landscapes from vari-
ous States are full of local color, and their


atmospheric effects very truthful. Most
artists in Australia attempt the difficult
task of depicting a bush fire. Is no ex-
ception, and has faithfully set forth the
devastation caused by a forest burning neai
Zeehan in Tasmania. Comes of a well-
known mercantile family in London, her
uncle having been at one time Lord Mayor
of that city. Her training was received
at various art schools on the continent oi
Europe.
PAUL STRELITZ.
There’s a sallow', portly form, topped by
a keen, clever, Jewish face, that s to be
seen around Fremantle, He and his brother
came to this State some years ago with
very little money between them. Now the
firm is in the first flight at the Port. Is
“the man behind.” No business is under-
taken by the firm till he has weighed the
pros and cons. Is astute and daiing in
business, and not afraid to handle a big
proposition if it’s a sound one. Does
not touch little schemes. He is no sort of
society man, and though he has a fine es
tablishment at Richmond (the fashionable
suburb of Fremantle), he does not entertain
lavishly, but by some is deemed rather
near.
ARCHDEACON WATKINS.
Some men mistake their vocations. Many
people think Archdeacon Watkins would
have filled a more suitable niche as a com-
mercial man than as a cleric. Is shrewd
in business, and has been of great assist-
ance to the wealthy and well-managed
diocese of Perth. Is tall, but not athletic
in appearance, and his professional costume
hangs limply from all the angles of his
person. Nature in designing him never
anticipated that his leers would be encased
by gaiters. Even his personal friends and
admirers admit he is the dreariest preacher
in the State, and that is saying much,
where there are so many dreary preachers
of all demoninations. Was once asked to
resign his incumbency at Fremantle. The
Archdeacon took a referendum on the sub-
ject, putting the question—“lf you wish
me to resign strike out the word ‘No.’
If you wish me to retain my position strike
out the word ‘Yes.’ ” Every paper re-
turned had the “Yes” erased. It may be
explained that the referendum papers had
to be “signed.”
JOHN CHURCH.
To the casual observer John Church, of
Fremantle, is a prosperous merchant, at
peace with himself and all the rest of man-
kind. Now well on in years, with a full,
iron-grey beard and ample proportions, he
is a conspicuous figure during his regular
promenades between his snug residence and
his High-street business premises. After
the toils of the day he retires far from “the
madding crowd’’ (as far as a Fremantle
private house will permit), and there he
exists in ease and comfort. His family are
prominent in the social world of the Port,
and their position in that particular seems
to give immense satisfaction to the head of
the house.
H. T. WRIGHT.
Achieved rapid fame by some years ago
issuing a circular, which has become his-
toric. Like Gilbert’s character, he had
evidently “hunted up the germs of the tran-
scendental terms and planted them every-
where” —in that circular. Holds a local
record for selling more iron tubing than
any other firm at Fremantle. Is garrulous
to a degree, the burden of his song being—
to again quote Gilbert —“I am right ....
all is right as right can be.” Wears
a thick beard and moustache. Is optimis-
tic as to the future of the State, and
believes the time will come when it will
manufacture all its own reouirements, and
likewise believes, too, that Fremantle will,
one day, be the New York of Australia.
R. R. ARMSTRONG.
Retired commander, Royal Navy. Still
active and energetic, though past man’s al-
lotted span. One of the old school of naval
men, and a Crimean veteran. As a
“snotty” was one of the storming party
on the Redan. A kindly natured old fel-
low, with a taste for painting in oils. Is
never separated from his beloved umbrella.
Kindly face buried in a trimmed grey~
beard. Wears China-silk clothes in hot


weather, but has never lost the naval
man’s love for dark blue, which he dons
when the heat is passed. Was a pioneer
of the cotton and sugar-growing industries
in Fiji, but, like most pioneers, showed
others a means of wealth, but did not ac-
quire it himself. Has performed many
daring and courageous acts, is a gallant
swimmer, and at 72 could give many a
younger man a start, and a beating, in
a long-distance swim.
JOHN GRAY.
The Rev. John Gray, M.A., 8.H.,
Presbyterian Minister, is not very well
known as yet, except among members of
his own church, but where he is known he
is highly esteemed. Those who have de-
nounced him because he denounced gamb-
ling, do not know the man at all. He is
not a sour-faced Puritan by any means,
but a man with plenty of humor, an ex-
-cellent hand at saying kindly things. Is a
scholar and a theologian, though he makes
no parade of learning, and can fill his
ehurch without resorting to any claptrap
devices or vulgar advertisement. Is no
seeker after publicity. He has not yet
been Moderator of the Assembly, but that
honor must surely be in store for him be-
fore long. In learning, in eloquence, and
in experience he is superior to most of his
brethren in the ministry—and to say this
is no disparagement to them.
HARRIS M. SAHNHERS.
One of the firm of stockbrokers (Messrs.
H. J. Saunders and Co.), is a veritable
type of the fearless man of business. Has
the money-making gift, and having travel-
led extensively in Europe and elsewhere,
has a very accurate knowledge of men
and things. Although reserved in manner,
and inclined to be satirical, is well liked
among his intimates, but does not make
promiscuous friendships. His work takes
him through all the mining centres, and he
is often absent from the city; still, he has
found time to fulfil the duties as council-
lor, and afterwards as mayor of Claremont,
to universal satisfaction. Is a fluent speak-
er, and has done good work for the ad-
vancement of the suburb where he has
made his home. Is a member of the Can-
ning Park Turf Club committee, and is
interested in all kinds of sport. In appear-
ance, of middle height, fresh com-
plexioned, and wearing an auburn beard.
HARRY WRIGHT.
Is tall, fair, and of a particularly kindly
nature. Has been connected with the
National Mutual Life Association of Aus-
tralia for nearly thirty years, and has been
manager in this State since the opening of
the Western Australian Branch, facts
which proclaim the integrity, business
acumen, sociability, and the successful per-
sonality of the man. Possessing more than
the usual share of_domestic virtues, Mr.
Wright has always been a favorite among
a large circle of friends, and being the
happy owner of a beautiful voice, no con-
cert, "musical entertainment, or friendly
social was considered complete in olden
days unless “ the silver tenor ” was
among the contributors to the programme.
Is a good cricketer, and has won laurels
as a batsman.
HENRY BRIGGS.
Tall, burly, of great girth, tipping the
beam at 18 stone, with genial expression
—such is Henry Briggs, Chairman of
Committees of the Legislative Council.
There is no one more popular or better
known or liked in Fremantle, where he re-
sides. A capital speaker, though inclined
to be ponderous, and with a slow delivery,
is always interesting. Has a great wealth
of matter, both instructive and humorous,
and probably there is no finer after-dinner
orator in the State. Conducted the Fre-
mantle Grammar School for 17 years with
great success. Though he wielded the rod
with considerable frequency and effect, all
his old pupils speak highly of him. A man
of learning, and possessed of the rare gift
of being able to impart his knowledge to
others. In his rule of the Upper House
inclined at times to be somewhat school-
mastery in his attitude. When a member
is inclined to wander from his subject,
fixes him with a basilisk; eye, as if he were
a recalcitrant pupil, and the speaker stops.
Though inclined to make a poor mouth,
has acquired considerable wealth by judi-
cious speculation in land, of the value of
which there is probably no sounder judge


in the Port. Has a happy knack of ob-
taining information without seeming to be
extracting it. Is of very kindly disposi-
tion, and exceedingly popular with all
classes of the community. Scored heavily
over the Labor Party at the last elections,
beating Somerville, their elect, for the
representation of the West Province in the
Legislative Council.
OOTAVIUS BUT IT.
One of the sons of Sir Archibald Burt,
Octavius of that ilk has considered the
honor of birth sufficient, and has never
roused himself sufficiently to leave his own
mark on the history of his time, although
the accident of birth made him many op-
portunities. Held the position of Resi-
dent Magistrate at Newcastle, for many
years under-secretary in Perth, and now is
head serang of prisons, and should occasion
call, and no tool be found to officiate, Oct.
would be expected to act as controller of
the ten-foot drop. The white page of his-
tory which is entrusted to each one at
birth is still unmarked in Mr. 0. Burt’s
career, his life being set to no particular
strain of music, although his devotion to
sacred and society ritual may tinge the
greyness of it to his personal satisfaction.
Good-looking and grey-bearded, small in
stature, his mind also is content with a
small orbit. Decorated with the 1.5.0.
JOHN S. PEARSON.
Has been manager of the Sun Insur-
ance Company for the past 10 years. Is
one of the oldest underwriters in the State,
his professional career extending over more
than 30 years, 10 of which were passed in
London and the remaining in the Austra-
lian States. The fact that during the
whole of this time he has only been in the
service of three companies is in itself a
striking and valuable testimonial of Mr,
Pearson’s ability. Has many artistic
qualifications, as well as keen business in-
stincts, and he is well known by the older
residents of Perth, as one of the Best plat-
form entertainers, and one who can keep
his audience in a perpetual fever of merri-
ment with his comic sketches and songs.
A good and staunch friend, and a charm-
ing acquaintance. Catches the eye as he
walks abroad, by reason of the somewhat
incongruous combination of a tall silk hat
and a short sac coat, the latter worn with
the bottom button fastened. Has a habit
of carrying a hand bag and crook stick in
one hand and his pipe in the other.
OH ARLES AUGUSTUiS SAW.
Few people remember that the genial
head of the well-known firm of auctioneers,
B. C. Wood and Co., once represented the
South Ward in the Perth City Council.
More energetic in those days than he now
appears, was full of vitality and energy,
and to him was due much of the progress
of that part of the city. Of an amiable
and affable disposition, social, and generous
in his instincts, has long been regarded as
a great favorite among the unlimited circle
of his acquaintances. With his many-sided
character goes a well-informed mind ; tor
he has travelled much. In 1886 left the
National Bank, Perth, after a period of
three years’ service, for Kimberley; and
on his return he continued the gold quest
by going to Southern Cross, Back again
to banking, was eventually appointed
manager of a branch of the Commercial
Bank at Southern Cross, and among other
things, he joined the enterprise of
lishing the well-known coach connection be-
tween Southern Cross and every point of
the eastern goldfields. Returning to Perth
in January, 1896, he is, after many changes,
the principal in the firm above-mentioned.
One of the handsomest men in Perth, well
proportioned, would compel more than a
passing glance from men, while as to
ladies
JAMES MONTGOMERY SPEED.
The first impression received on meet-
ing 'Mr. Speed ia that he regards life aa
a huge joke, and would scorn the idea
of singing with the poet, “Life is real,
life is earnest.” Indeed, his mirthful
nature, combined with his power of
observation, disposes him to wit and to-
ridicule to .such an extent as to
make enemies of those towards whom
he bears the greatest goodwill. Was at-
tracted to Perth from New Zealand some
years ago, thinking that it offered a good
field wherein to occupy his talents, and has


not been disappointed. During the time
he has spent in W.A. has tasted the sweets
(and the bitters) of public life, both in
Municipal halls and in Council chambers.
Solicitor by profession, fie is sometimes
nicknamed the “debt-collector” of Perth,
probably by those who have had to dis-
burse in favor of his clients. A recent trip
to Europe gave him a new hobby, and he
has now the finest collection of spoons —
and probably the finest collection of post-
cards—possessed by anyone inside this
State. He otherwise distinguishes himself
and lives up to his patronymic by going
the pace—in a motor-car !
CHARLES WILDBORE.
A florid, clean-shaven man, of medium
height. Son of a clergyman, is the excep-
tion that proves the rule that clerical off-
spring are ne’er-do-weel’s. Is a walking
‘‘C'rockford’s Clergy List,’’ and can reel of!
the names, incumbencies, and cures of the
Anglican clergy. Is eccentric. Also ex-
tremely sensitive and touchy, and is one
of the most difficult men to get intimate
with. Is an assiduous worker in the in-
terests of Balchin, Ltd., of which firm he
is attorney and local manager. You may
know him by his walk, his head being
thrown backward, and his chest forward.
He walks with a quick, short, jerky pace.
Not every man understands Wildbore, but
those who break through his outer husk
get to know him as a sterling business
man, and a real good fellow. Was once a
sea-faring man, but, nevertheless, is able
to repeat hundreds of hymns and psalms.
J. J. HOLMES.
Good-looking, with a dark brown mou-
stache, and so tall that, though broad-
shouldered, he looks narrow. Is impulsive
and somewhat hot-headed. Dives a little
as he walks. Dresses neatly, but not loud-
ly. Was in Parliament for a number of
years. Had an antipathy on the then
management of the railways—trucks of
mna<t constantly going astray. Became
Minister for Railways, and set to work
straightening things out. Made things
lively all round, and got matters maae
more satisfactory for the public. During
his short regime the railway strike oc-
curred. Good man with whom to do bust-
ness. If he means “yes,” says “yes.” If
he means “no,” it’s waste of time to try
and make him say “yes.” Has a peculiar
trick when speaking his piece—puts
one hand in his loose-cash pocket, and sways
on his hips. He has had a lot of luck,
but it wasn’t luck alone that built up the
big business of Holmes Brothers. Organisa-
tion and administration had a lot to do
with that success, and that’s where Joe
Holmes came in. Good-hearted and liberal,
he is liked by his employees, and esteemed
by his friends. Courageous in business, he
never shirks a big deal if there is a chance
of securing a profit.
WILLIAM JAMES STEWART.
Had yearnings to enter the church, for
which he would have been admirably
suited, but his ambition was not grati-
fied, and he began life in commercial pur-
suits, and eventually became a partner in
the firm of Throssell, Son, and Stewart, at
Northam. Was Mayor of Newcastle for
five years, and chairman of the local School
Board for eight years. Has also filled the
Mayoral Chair of Northam; and has always
prominently indentified himself with local
public affairs. Has been acting Resident
Magistrate in the capital of the wheat-
growing districts, and in that capacity
dispensed even-handed justice. Is a pro-
minent Wesleyan, and wears a tall silk
hat to church every Sunday. But under
this dignified sign of respectability is a
man of by no means narrow notions or
bigoted ideas, but, rather, of a genial tem-
perament, and fond of a joke, and good
company. Dignity, however, must be
preserved at proper times. Is an en-
thusiastic cricketer, a keen man of busi-
ness, and withal a thoroughly good fel-
low. Is tall, well built, and broad-
shouldered, with a fresh complexion, and
sandy beard turning grey.
GEORGE CABLE KNIGHT.
And don’t forget the “Cable.” Below
medium height, he is sturdily and well
built, and dark in complexion, with hair
turning grey. Usually wears a moustache,
but is apt in an impulsive moment to have
it removed, and thus alter his whole ap-
pearance, Is always accompanied by a


brown silk “brolly,” which he swings as
he walks. Has passed to the dizziest
heights in Masonry, but is not affiliated
with the craft in the State, as he has a
lordly contempt for local brethren. His
equipment of Masonic regalia is as exten-
sive almost as the Crown jewels. Has re-
galia “suited,” as outfitters say, “for ail
climates and weather.” Was for many
years in S.A. with D. and J. Fowler, and
then was a staunch teetotaller and prac-
tised what he preached. Came to W.A. as
managing partner for the above firm. Time
was when he owned a fast trotting pony
and trap, which he was wont to drive furi-
ously, like Jehu of old. Once owned one
of the finest residences at the Port. It was
decorated with figures that were not clad
for Arctic temperatures. Is a J.P. for
S.A., as well as for this State. Is gener-
ous, open-hearted, and hospitable, and is
remarkably well informed. (No one can
ever mistake the man once they have met
him. Is a deliberate walker, but there is
more than a hint of latent energy in all
his movements. His eccentricities have
made him locally celebrated, but few people
have anything ill to say of him.
J. R. WICKS.
The manager in Western Australia of
Kronheimer’s, the great tobacco firm, is
one of the jolliest men in town. He has
all his life laughed, so has grown fat. He
sings a good comic song or delivers a reci-
tation with telling effect. He is a natural-
born cornerman, and nature has endowed
him with a crisp, curly cornerman’s wig.
Though exceptionally genial in private life,
has an opposite character in business, being
stern and upright, with always an eye to
the main chance.
A. E. TOMLIN.
Westralian manager for Sargood, Butler,
Nichol, and Ewen. Came from New
Zealand to represent their firm, and
it would be difficult to find a man with
keener business faculties. Appreciates the
words of Carlyle : —“The runners are tread-
ing on each other’s heels : woe to him who
stops to tie his shoe-string.” It is a
world of hustle, and none knows better
how to hustle than the manager of that
cosmopolitan house, where twelve depart-
ments are fully stocked with goods of all
descriptions, and whose business connec-
tion is world-wide. Is a quiet worker, bet-
ter known amongst his confreres than in
outside circles, and they testify to his
many estimable qualities. Is popular with
his employees. Enjoys a game of cricket.
Lean and lanky, long-featured, clean-
shaven, and with a determined cast of
countenance.
ALFRED 6ANDOVER.
A little, dapper, business-like man, and
member of a firm that has grown to con-
siderable importance, not only in Western
Australia, but in England. Said in Lon-
don that few business houses in Australia
have attained such prominence and solidity
as that of W. Sandover and Co. With a
long connection with trade in this State,
having been here for over 10 years, Mr.
Sandover has witnessed the growth of the
metropolis, and his business has kept pace
with the developments of the country.
Large of heart, generous, and kindly, Mr.
Sandover gives freely to charities, is a
great supporter of his church, and is a
useful member of the district in which he
has placed his home. He has been a mem-
ber of the Perth Chamber of Commerce as
long as he has been in the State, and is
one of the Fremantle Harbor Commis-
sioners.
PAGET THURSTAN.
Paget Thurstan, M.D., is a man well up
in years. Of medium height, spare frame,
thin face, and equally thin grey moustache,
his appearance may be said to be gaunt.
There is, perhaps, no greater authority on
bacteriology in W.A. What he doesn’t
know about this subject is not worth
worrying about. Holds very high degrees,
gained at Cambridge. In midwifery cases
particularly is his ability shown, and he
has played an important part in the intro-
duction to this .State of numerous hostages
to fortune. President of the Medical
Board, he is very jealous of the rights and
privileges of the profession. “Sweet are
the uses of advertisement” is a dictum that
finds no place in his philosophy. On mat-
ters of hygiene also is the doctor pretty far
advanced. His views are expressed with a


strong air of conviction. In regard to
politics he is of opinion that freetrade is
the only road to prosperity. Has practised
in Perth for many years, and is still going
very strong. Was at one time a surgeon in
the Royal Navy.
DR. CHARLES W. LAYER.
Coleridge’s description of Mercutio comes
instinctively to one’s mind when one meets
the doctor, whose heart ever seems to be
overflowing with the milk of human kind-
ness. “Wit ever wakeful, fancy busy and
procreative as an insect, courage, an easy
mind, that, without cares of its own, is
at once disposed to laugh away those of
others, and yet to be interested in them-
these and all congenial qualities, melting
into the common copula of them all, the
man of rank and the gentleman, with ail
its excellencies and all its weaknesses, con-
stitute the character of Mercutio. Of
high principle and generous-hearted, Doc-
tor Laver’s personality attracts all who
meet him. Laverton, an inland mining
town, was named in honor of Dr. Laver,
who has done much in developing the dis-
trict ; and, in recognition of the many ser-
vices he has rendered to the locality. Has
not long since returned from England,
having brought his bride with him, and
who shares the general esteem and favor
with which her husband is regarded. Over
six feet in height, broad shouldered,
with a clean-shaven countenance of happy
expression, such is his appearance. In his
chase for gold has been unfortunate, al-
though his pursuit of the elusive weight
has entailed much hardship and physical
discomfort.
JOHN MICHAEL FINNERTY.
For a mining man not to know Jack
Finnerty (one-time Warden of the whole of
the eastern goldfields and now Resident
Magistrate at Kalgoorlie) is to argue him-
self unknown. Tall and broad-shouldered,
would be a perfect specimen of physical
culture were it not for the fact that his legs
are not in proportion to the rest of his
body. He has many extremely good quali-
ties—he’s open-hearted and generous to a
fault, a keen sport, a capital chairman of
a convivial gathering, and a highly enter-
taining narrator of anecdotes, real and im-
aginary. Among other good points, Fin-
nerty has no patience with the average
police constable —he was in the police force
at one time and he probably knows his
ground well. An old Rugby boy of good
Irish family, he has the reputation of being
the .soundest magistrate on the goldfields
bench. Married a daughter of “Captain”
Oats. Full-blooded, full-faced, wears a
Vandyke beard, and is quite capable of
taking his own part if necessary.
DAVID FORREST.
A member of the Forrest family, David
Forrest more closely resembles in appear-
ance his late brother, Alec, than Sir
John. A tall, stout man, with rubicund
visage, spare iron-grey moustache, peculiar
walk, and an insatiable desire for cigars.
Very wealthy, being largely interested in
pastoral pursuits in the State. Is also the
principal executor of his late brother’s es-
tate, and acts as attorney for Sir John dur-
ing the latter’s absence from the State. A
staunch advocate of Forrest and the old
West Australians, he has not much time
for t’othersiders. Once represented the
Gascoyne constituency in the Legislative
Assembly. In the vicinity of 50 years of
age, is married, and has a large family.
CLAYTON T. MASON.
Over 50 years' of age, the Collector of
Customs at Fremantle still retains his
vivacity and joy of living. Tall, erect,
with big iron-grey moustache and full
beard, is certainly distinguished in ap-
pearance. Of commanding presence, and
compels more than a passing glance.
Kindly face, and as kind and generous as
he looks. Known among his intimates as
“The Colonel” —a nickname which aptly
sums up his appearance. Immensely popu-
lar with all classes, particularly with his
subordinates who do their work. Has no
use for a shirker, being particularly severe
with those who have a disinclination for
duty. An ardent advocate of the promo-
tion of his own good men, does not be-
lieve in the importation of officers from the
other States to fill vacancies which occur
in this. Particularly keen on racing, and
a familiar figure at every meeting. Mem-
ber of the W.A.T.C. committee for many


years. Crack rifle shot, and interested
in every form of sport. Probably held
more positions than any man in Westralia.
Brought over from New South Wales as
resident engineer of the Geraldton-North-
ampton railway, the first constructed by
the Government. Was Commissioner of
Railways in 1882, and also member of the
Executive and Legislative Council. Ap-
pointed Collector of Customs when Re-
sponsible Government was granted. Mem-
ber of the Institute of Civil Engineers.
J. H. BALES.
An architect of Fremantle, J. Herbert
E’ales is one of the best, more particularly
in the higher branches of his profession.
Rather a faddist in regard to septic tanks.
One of the best musicians in the State,
and was organist of the Fremantle Roman
Catholic Church. Has rather esthetic
tastes, particularly fond of flowers, and is
about the best all-round sport in Western
Australia. Whether in rifle shooting,
tennis, bowls, billiards, or any other
pastime, he does not take second place. Is
tall, well proportioned, square-shouldered,
very dark, and handsome. Of undoubted
talents, he is somewhat deficient in energy.
Takes an interest in military affairs, hold-
ing a subaltern officers commission.
A. A. HALL.
The manager of the Fremantle branch of
the Bank of Australasia, A. A. Hall, is a
tall, well-proportioned man, with a peculiar
walk. Is of dark complexion, with heavy
dark moustache, about 35 years of age. As
a man of business is shrewd and cute,
talks little, preferring to listen to others!
In manner is somewhat assertive, but not
aggressively so. Fond of swimming, never
missing his morning dip, and also of long
bicycle rides. Married, and has a family
of two.
THUS. 0. VILLIERS.
Reuter’s man in Perth is a hustler. Had
the luck to get his billet when the gold
boom was on. Hustled and finally became
boss of the concern in W.A. Game from
Queensland with very little more than six-
pence, but had good chances and gripped
them. Got into good things early, and
avoided the subsequent crush. Also knows
the art of getting out early. Has earned
the gratitude of Perthites by breaking up
the old mismanagement by the Waterworks
Board with the assistance of Mayor
Brown. Has a nasty tongue when he
likes, and used it to good effect in the in-
terests of the citizens. Possesses a humor-
ous twinkle in his eye, and a somewhat
jerky utterance. Is quiet and retiring in
private life, and takes no active part in
social functions. Full face, ruddy com-
plexion, with dark moustache, and pleasant
expression are the chief characteristics of
his physiognomy.
WILLIAM ALEXANDER HUGHES.
Though the flight of time has left its
mark upon the hair of “Billy” Hughes, he
bears no other traces of the accumulating
years, and is a singularly handsome man.
The figure is still erect as a flagpole, the
step as buoyant, and the laugh as gay as in
the days when he was a crack oarsman and
one of the fleetest-footed amongst the ama-
teur pedestrians of South Australia. There
is an infectious bonhomie about him which
has made him popular wherever he is
known. Somehow, he inspires regard spon-
taneously, and the insurance craft would as
soon think of defrauding their own mother
as of taking “Billy” even if they
could. Seeing only what is good in life,
the faults and foibles of others do not
trouble him, and he has not a bad word
to say of anyone. A don in the law and
custom of fire insurance, he is much in re-
quest amongst * the underwriters. Might
be accused of being a popularity hunter if
he were not blissfully unconscious of the
universal goodwill which he inspires.
ARTHUR WILLIAM MARTIN.
“Long Tom” Martin, as his friends call
him, is probably one of the best-known of
West Australian journalists, and he is just
as much at home on the fields as he is in
the metropolis. If he carried himself erect
he would be a veritable giant, but he has a
loose easy way of walking, a few degrees out
of the perpendicular, which disguises his
great physical development. The embodi-
ment of good humor, his genial appearance
is heightened by the fact that he wears his
hat well back, a fashion which has cost him
a lot of headgear. Intending to be a far


mer, he served a long course at the Longere-
nong Agricultural College in Victoria, but
eventually falling in the footsteps of his
father, who owned and edited the “Ballarat
Courier,” he became a pressman. With an
unique faculty for extracting information
from people and picking up news he com-
bines a splendid memory, which renders
note-taking unnecsesary. Thoroughly in
sympathy with all athletic sports, there are
few which he cannot write authoritatively
about, but in bowls he stands alone, and the
writings of “Jack High” are looked for by
every follower of the game. When not en-
gaged in his literary pursuits, he is mostly
busy finding a billet for some unfortunate
friend who is out of work. Throughout his
West Australian career, he has identified
himself with the labor cause, and he enjoys
the entire confidence and respect of the
leaders of the movement.
CHARLES BOOTH.
Though quiet and unassuming in his
manner, Charles Booth is yet one of the
smart men of business of to-day. Of
medium height, wears somewhat the ap-
pearance of a student. His only hirsute
adornment is a small moustache, ffair being
somewhat sparse on top. Is manager of
the Australian Mutual Provident Society
in Perth. Came to the West a short time
ago from Tasmania.
FREDERICK ILLINGWORTH.
Decidedly a short man, but broad and
sturdy. The body was made for a big
man, but his carriers are short—very short
and so, as he ambles along the street, he
appears to be all coat. A benevolent face,
which only escapes weakness through the ef-
fect of a lustrous eye, which is full of ear-
nest power. A man of strong convictions,
he is narrow, at times almost to the verge
of being rabid, but capable of broad cosmo-
politan views on most subjects, and can
urge them with a logical effectiveness which
makes him a powerful debater. Rather
too anxious to please everyone, and hence
his non-success as a Cabinet Minister. Well
versed in constitutional law and in parlia-
mentary forms and procedure, he would
have made a fine Speaker of the Legislative
Assembly, albeit prone to allow members
too much latitude, and lacking promptness
in enforcing the courtesies of debate. A
staunch teetotaller, but, withal, a most hos-
pitable man, always ready to assist others
when he sees a reasonable opportunity.
Bitterly disappointed and chagrined at be-
ing discarded when Mr. James became
Premier, he was unable to conceal his
pique, except in Parliament, where he bore
his reverse with a fortitude and dignity
which inspired lasting respect. Altogether,
he is an incongruous mixture of strength and
weakness, breadth and narrowness, generos-
ity and nearness, and you never quite know
how you will find him.
RICHARD HOLMES.
One of the most successful merchants of
I erth, one might fancy Mr. Richard
Holmes giving “John Graham’s” advice to
his son: “You’ll find that education’s
about the only thing lying around loose in
this world, and that it’s about the only
thing a fellow can have as much of as he’s
willing to haul away. Everything else is
screwed down tight, and the screw-driver
lost. Many people say of Richard that
he is a pretty close proposition; but he
believes again with “John Graham” that
the meanest man alive is the one who is
generous with money that he has not had
to sweat for.” Has learned not to over-
work a dollar any more than he would
overwork a horse. Is a keen sportsman,
too, and has a fine string of racehorses. Is
most hospitable, and lavishly entertains a
large circle of friends. A big man in every
sense, with a somewhat heavy cast of
countenance, grey headed, and grey mous-
tached, you can pick him anywhere in a
crowd.
JOHN MARQUIS HOPKINS.
Until he was elevated to the position of
Commissioner of Crown Lands and proved
himself a giant in industry and sound sense
was not rated high politically, except by
Mulga” Taylor, who prophesied that the
member for Boulder would eventually be-
come Premier. Now that “Mulga” knows
something of the difficulties in the way, per-
haps he would wish to mend his forecast,
but J.M.H. is young, and has tasted the
sweets of office early. Cultivating the habit
°f. forgetting neither his duties nor his pro-
mises, he soon acquired the respect and es-
teem of his officers and the public, and
easily holds the record for good work done


in the advancement of agriculture, and the
inducement of /settlement upon the land.
Great strides were made in his regime, and
he became fairly conscious that John M.
Hopkins was doing all this valuable “graft”
without finding it essential to use a shoe-
horn to adjust his hat. An unquenchable
spirit of jollity and joviality won the hearts
of the farmers all over the country, and
the genuine interest and concern he showed
in their interests and in all questions affect-
ing them are still remembered to his credit
in the agricultural areas. A soupcon of
bombast is not altogether amiss politically,
but he divested himself of it radically when
he took office, and both in the House and
out of it showed that he realised the respon-
sibilities of his office. Is an adaptable man,
and if ever the goldfields are to provide the
State with a Premier, it will be per me-
dium of the personality of John Marquis
Hopkins.
DR. ERNEST BLACK.
To be “Poor Bah” may be desirable, but
it has its drawbacks. Dr. Black has in-
cluded in his services to the State chair-
manship if several commissions and the
job of coroner. Now he is chairman of
the Central Board of Health, and has
straightened up a number of dirty people,
insanitary milkmen and other food sellers
included. He has a judicial mind, and
thoroughly understands sifting evidence.
He is a fair-complexioned man, with crisp,
curly, almost golden, hair. He plays a
good game of tennis.
H. J. SAUNDERS.
One of the best-dressed men about town,
and at the same time one of the most
unassuming. • Of medium height, inclined
to be stout, kindly face, dark complexion-
ed, bald, carefully-waxed black moustache.
A civil engineer by professon, commenced
practice on arriving in this State.
Abandoned it when the goldfields broke
out, and made much money by company
flotation and judicious speculation in
shares. Head of the firm of H. J. Saun-
ders and Co., is also local director of and
attorney for several important English
companies’. Shrewd and keen in all busi-
ness transactions. Kindly disposed, hos-
pitable, and charitable, is deservedly
popular. Very keen sport, and one of the
straightest goers on the turf. Breeds
blood stock, as well as high-class
shire pigs, at Henley Park, near Guild-
ford. Twice Mayor of Perth, ex-M.L.C.,
and ex-Senator.
R. J. WILLS HIRE.
Head of firm of Willshire and Feely,
merchants, Fremantle. Is an old resident
of State. Above medium height, sallow,
dark-bearded. Suffers chronically, and is
very delicate. Is a member of the
committee of the W.A.T.C. Fol-
lows the sport of kings consist-
ently, but is never a heavy bettor.
Cautious in business, and always sticks to
his word. Never been known to break it.
Is liable to be led away by first impres-
sions, which are difficult to disturb. In
early days w r as particularly energetic, and
despite his impulsiveness exercises con-
siderable foresight in business. As a con-
sequence, has built up a comfortable com-
petence- Delicate health compels him to
lead a quiet, retired life. Every man has
a good w r ord for him, and he a good word
for every man. Would sooner speak well
than ill of his fellows.
J. A. HICKS.
The Jandakot advocate, as J. A. Hicks
is known, is the proprietor of the largest
drapery establishment in Fremantle.
Short, stout, and polite, with an air of
importance, he gives the appearance of a
man who is of a somewhat nervous tem-
perament, About 45 years of age, he has
accumulated a deal of money. Is a smart,
keen, business man, very enterprising, and
deserves his success. All that he has and
all that he is are practically due to him-
self alone.
W. B. GORDON.
If it were not so far round the member
for Canning, it would eeem a much
greater distance from head to foot. Is
essentially a funny, round, fat little man.
A couple of sessions ago he was regarded
as the humorist of the House, but he does
not exert himself in that direction nowa-
days. No strong political convictions


worry him, but on the question of roads
and bridges he is an artist and authority.
Like most funny men, cannot stand ridi-
cule, and is the most uncomfortable man
in the House when the laugh isl against
him.
GEO. RANDELL.
When you see a little, grey, bent man,
about 68 years of age, clad in a black alpaca
coat and other articles of attire toddling
along Sit. George’s Terrace, you are looking
at the Hon. George Randell, member of the
Legislative Council. Was Minister for
Education from 1898 to 1901, and somewhile
Colonial Secretary in one of Sir John For-
rest’s Ministries. Is a Conservative of
Conservatives, and is regarded by the ultra-
progressives of the State as a drag on the
wheel -of progress. By his fellow council-
lors he is regarded rather as a steadying
brake on the wheel, and is applied when it
shows a tendency to revolve a little faster
than the gentlemen of the Upper House con-
sider is consonant with dignity. Has also
been Mayor of Perth, and though he has
never shone in the world of politics, has
done good work. He is full of reminis-
cences of Perth of the olden days, and owns
some interesting pictures of the city as it
used to be. He has never figured promin-
ently in society, nor evinced any taste for
the display of hospitality. Also, he thinks
“drink’s a curse.” Is of a- kindly disposi-
tion, and possesses a ready faculty of
speech, but his weak voice detracts from his
eloquence. Originally started the Swan
River Shipping Company, and is reputed to
possess a fair share of this world’s goods
as well as a large number of lineal descend-
ants, having been thrice married.
ALEXANDER MONGER.
Is a descendant of one whose sobriquet in
the early days of the settlement was “Duke
of York,” Alec, also is entitled to a title
of distinction, for he is the most fastidious
dresser in town; in fact, he may be termed
the “Beau Tibbs” of Perth, He is the
happy possessor of an extensive wardrobe,
and should it happen that history records
his career, his may parallel that of Queen
Elizabeth herself in the number of changes
his wardrobe contains. Trade laid the
foundation of the prosperity of the Monger
family ; another instance in which the tra-
ditional name is upheld, for a monger is
trader, and the generations have not for-
saken the gods of their fathers, although
Alec’s part has a negative one rather
than a positive, his wealth being inherited,
and increased by speculation. Italian on
his mother’s side, tall and dark, Alec hag
some claim to beauty, and may therefore be
pardoned his worship of Asmodeus, and his
friends like him none the less for it; indeed,
it characterises the man, and provides a cult
which evolves a following of its own. Al-
though not in his first youth, Mr. Alec.
Monger is regarded as one of the eligible
young men of Perth, and could he decide
to become a “Benedict,” he would settle
down into a jolly good citizen. Although
eminently exclusive, he is one of the staunch-
est friends a man can have —once a friend
always a friend.
ALFRED BRAUND.
An enthusiastic and skilful cricketer, of
pleasing address and nervous tempera-
ment, popular with the ladies and good-
hearted—this sums up Alfred Braund,
manager for Geo. Wills and Co. at Fre-
mantle. He’s still' a bachelor. The bu&-
ness of his firm takes up the greater part
of his working day. Other business has
no charms for him.
HARRY GREGORY.
Meeting Harry Gregory casually, a non-
observant man might be inclined 1 to mark
him down as a nonentity, but he would
err egregiously. Not only has he a well-
balanced brain, but sound judgment and
infinite industry, which only just falls
short of genius, charitable, and good-
hearted beyond the ordinary acceptation
of that term. In the early days of Men-
zree, when the hospital was over-crowded
with typhoid cases, he sat up with the
bad patients when his hotel had been
closed, and finally he cleared the boarders
out of his hostelry and installed the typhoid
patients, crowded out of the hospital, in
their places. By his own efforts he has risen
to the position he occupies, and though
he has made some enemies, he has won
more friends, and has a habit of sticking
to them. Is broad-shouldered, of short
stature, with a ruddy countenance, square
jaw, iand small moustache. Is a. member


of the House of Assembly, and was Minis-
ter for Mines in the James Government.
Originally a tinsmith, has worked his way
up the ladder, foot by foot. Plays an ex-
cellent game of billiards.
W. E. BOLD.
Three or four years ago the most dis-
cussed man in Perth. The City Council
was divided into two factions, the
“Boldites” and the “anti-Boldites,” One
side claimed that he had been a model as-
sistant town clerk during the Petherick
regime, and had earned promotion. Against
that it w T as urged that he was too* young
and inexperienced, and that an older head
was required to direct the affairs of the
city. Perhaps the latter were right, for
though an indefatigable worker, he has not
the breadth of thought or the knowledge
necessary for an ideal town clerk in a city
like Perth, but considering the calibre of
the council, it is well that the gulf between
them is not more marked. Something of
an exquisite in dress and bearing, he
would be distinctly a nice young man for a
small tea party, especially if any music
were required, because his organ-playing
abilities are of no mean dimensions. A
nice discrimination in playing up to the
strong side, municipally and socially, does
not tend to diminish his popularity
officially and in influential circles. Brimful
of etiquette and tone, and wedded to his
work, the administrative affairs of the city
are carried out with propriety and de-
spatch. Though it has been a big pro-
motion from shipping clerk to town clerk,
none of Mr. Bold’s early friends have been
passed over in the jump. Is a native of
England, and is a good-looking man.
A. E. BARKER.
When nature designed Mr. Barker for a
lawyer she concealed all exterior evidences
of her handiwork beneath a heavy cast of
face, with dull phlegmatic expression, and
an indolent, insouciant air, suggestive of a
well-to-do- bucolic, but giving no inkling of
the bright legal intellect with which she
had endowed him. To this she added a
reserve almost amounting to shyness,
which wears away on better acquaintance,
and the genial wholeheartedness of the
man unfolds itself. Before his capabilities
were known, the judges of the Supreme
Court were inclined to treat his arguments
with a degree of levity, which soon disap-
peared as the strength of argument and the
fulness of his knowledge became more
keenly appreciated. He does not invest the
position of Crown Prosecutor with the
same quiet dignity for which his predeces-
sor was so remarkable, because he is more
human, and the insolent thrusts, sneers,
and discourtesies which criminal lawyers
make use of for the purposes of defence get
through the joints of his armor and extract
choleric, if not courteous retort. A fine
critical mind makes him always an enter-
taining conversationalist. Fond of hunting,
he is full of tales and anecdotes of the
sport. Then the almost dour, bored look
is engulphed in an earnest animated ex-
pression, which makes a different entity of
him.
JAMES GARDINER.
What a headpiece—inside and oat.
Within the subtleties and convolutions of
finance are mastered and made plain, and
without, a configuration, which dramatic
star, artist or musical genius would pawn
his soul to possess, so sweet are the uses
of advertisement. But “Gardey” takes
no stock of personal appearances. Those
bushy curly locks, the lofty brow, the rapt
expression are the triples of a triviality, for
his first and last thought is figures and
deals. There was no State finance in
Western Australia until Mr. Gardiner
reigned in the Treasury. The plunder of
the public went on gaily. Evasions of the
Stamp Act were rampant; companies
boldly set the dividend duty at naught,
and there was laxity everywhere. With
unmoved courage, he remedied these evils,
and then having straightened the finances
of the State, he put off his political gar-
ments, started financing for himself, and is
putting James Gardiner on a very affluent
footing, and James Gardiner is bearing
it with that modesty and satisfaction
which become a man. Patriotism is a
great thing, but he could not afford it at
the price of wrecking his own business,
and so, having done all he could for the
State, he sought to do better for himself.
He has not acquired the habit of forgetting
himself , though probably he may be


familiar with the theory. Few acquire
fame at a bound, and fewer still win it off
their own bat as “Gardey” did. At the
outset he was declared to be the weak man
of the team, but inside a year he was the
most powerful Minister in the Cabinet.
Next time he takes a portfolio he will allot
it to himself. Entirely devoid of social
aspirations, he loves to devote himself to
his very numerous olive branches, and he
would sooner spend an afternoon romping
in the nursery than be a guest at a royal
banquet. Very proud of his old father—
still living—his chief pleasure in being a
Cabinet Minister was that his old dad
would be proud of his son’s advancement.
A keen sense of humor and a satirical pen
were sufficient equipment to make him a
successful journalist, but he preferred com-
merce, and his bank balance has thriven
in consequence.
P. J. HEVRON.
North Fremantle’s Mayor, “Jack” Hev-
ron, is a calm, shrewd, honest Irishman,
who looks carefully after his own business
and gives a reasonable amount of time to
municipal affairs. At one time he was a
particularly smart athlete, and although
he is now something over 40 he is still able
to give many young men a big start and
a beating in several branches of sport.
J. M. FERGUSON.
In public life J. >M. Ferguson has become
known through the indefatigable efforts of
his amiable wife in the cause of temperance
and charity. Left to himself, he would
probably never make an acquaintance out-
side his timber yards or his comfortable re-
sidence at Claremont. Mainly at the bid-
ding of his wife’s friends he came out for
the Legislative Assembly for North Fre-
mantle when D. J. Doherty retired, and en-
tirely on the influence of his wife’s reputa-
tion, he gained the seat. The whole affair
was evidently not at all to his taste. Per-
haps he was too honest for the surroundings
of parliamentary life. Perhaps, too, he
didn’t fully realise that speech was given to
“honorable” members to enable them to
conceal their thoughts. At any rate, it
may be no disgrace to him to say that he
was a failure as a legislator. Some men
live on the reputation of the reputation
they might have made. Originally a mas-
ter mariner, he embarked in the timber
trade, and has now built up an extensive
business by his own shrewdness, combined
with a reputation for probity which might
be envied by any man.
A. GREEN.
There is hope for the Federal public ser-
vice so long as men like Green are in posi-
tions of responsibility. Is accessible to the
lowest man in the service, who may have a
real or imaginary grievance. And where
there is injustice may be relied upon to
see things put right. Has a thankless
billet. It brings him up against men who
have risen to power and consider that A ihey
are the service. Is a first-rate accountant,
and used to look after the finances of the
N.iS.W. defence force. He wears an eight-
foot waistbelt, smokes good cigars, has a
yellow complexion, and a peaked sandy
beard. Deservedly enjoys the good opinion
of those brought into immediate contact
with him.
J. T. SHORT.
Ever since John Davies went away, J. T.
Short has carried a mourning heart. They
both correspond still. Short has a high
opinion of John Davies, and thinks he was
badly treated when here. He is of sub-
stantial habit, and is good looking, wearing
a peaked brown beard. Has no affectation
of dress or manner. Is a good man at rail-
way work, arid is credited with possessing
the bulk of the brains. Resides on the
banks of the Swan at Guildford, where he
has built himself a nice house. His official
designation is chief traffic manager of the
West Australian Government Railways.
FRED. JONES.
“Would you ask for his merits?
Alas ! he has none ;
What’s good is spontaneous—
His faults are his own.”
His friends say he is a rough diamond, but
his enemies, with a more hasty discrimina-
tion and infinitely less charity, usually place
an adverb before the word “rough.” All
the same, Fred Jones (one of the fathers of
the Fremantle Municipal Council) has many
of the characteristics of Kimberley’s preci


ous gem—he’s very solid. With a weight
of many years upon him and a long experi-
ence at toil in the “dull brown days of a
shilling an hour” and less —usually less-
old Fred, endeavors to pose as a sound au-
thority upon what is right and wrong in the
public affairs of a city. He has a profound
contempt for science, and implicit faith in
rule of Far from the haunts of
modern civilisation, he would be invaluable
because of his inordinate self-reliance. In
a busy centre he’s like fly in amber —you
wonder how he got there.
EDWARD PRETTY.
Cut in the pattern of a master mariner,
which he is not, and with a great deal ox
the manner and bearing of an Imperial
naval officer, which he never was, Mr. Ed-
ward Pretty was certainly born to com-
mand. There is no bluster about,
him, but be gets things done all
the same. A very fine nose for
the good things of life does not detract from
his enjoyment also of music and the fine
arts. Tells a good story well, and listens
to one with great relish. Many of his per-
sonal anecdotes, especially those concerning
his life in Northern Queensland, will bear
repetition many times, but it re-
quires some skilful drawing to extract them
from him. Carries himself trim and taut,
and exhibits unmistakable signs that the
commissariat is skilfully administered. Fond
of yachting, he is often afloat on Perth
waters, and this probably accounts for his
nautical appearance. Unlike the “pug”
who has “a nasty left,” he possesses a gene-
rous right, which does good by stealth, and
takes tine care that it does not become
fame.
G. E. WHEATLEY.
A miniature Falstaff, without his beer-
drinking propensities, a fat rubicund face,
and a waistcoat projecting so as to intercept
the vision of his toes. But a merry face,
without a trace of the ascetisism which is
looked for in the church, with which Mr.
Wheatley parted company, because the
loaves and fishes which the church provided
were not commensurate with his appetite.
Lack of fixity of purpose has been shown in
many phases of his life. A sympathiser
with Demos, in Adelaide and Fremantle, he
became the High Priest of the capitalistic
political organisation in Perth. Aforetime
teetotalism has given place to alcohol in
moderation, a course reasonable enough and
right enough, but still manifesting inherent
tendency to change. Modest enough in a
general way, has still a hankering after
notoriety, and would probably sooner be
abused by the newspapers than passed over
or ignored. At one time he had the Fre-
mantle electorate in his pocket, and could
have relied upon election merely for the
asking. Now he could not secure his re-
turn for that constituency if he spent a for-
tune. Is a Yorkshireman, and runs a land
agency.
B. A. ALLNUTT.
As president of the Fremantle Chamber
of Commerce, E. A. Allnutt has gained
some prominence in the realm of trade.
Those versed in the photography of men of
some other time-assert that he is, in facial
appearance, a modified modern edition of
the late Charles Bradlaugh, He finds
recreation as a lay preacher in the hope
that he may do good. So far as his own
methods of life are concerned, he can claim
to piactice what he preaches. Director of
a large business, D. and J. Fowler, Ltd.,
his commercial standing is considerable.
Always keeps an eye to the main chance,
and whether it be deserved or otherwise,
has certainly no reputation for liberality. ’
JOHN PHAIR.
With the head, but no other attributes of
the artist, “Jack” Phair is essentially a
practical man. Tailoring, for which he was
designed by his parents—the proprietors of
I hair s Hotel, Collins-street, Melbourne—
never suited his tastes, and he was glad to
put it from him. The position of secretary
to the A.N.A. helped him into a new sphere,
which has been crowned by assuming the
secretarial chair of tlm Chamber of Manu-
facturers, an office for which his strong pro-
tectionist principles eminently fit him. In
later days he .has achieved some success as
an advocate before the Arbitration Court,
where qualified solicitors are not permitted
to appear. If unskilful in eliciting evi-
dence and handling witnesses, has a com-
prehensive knowledge of the scope and pro-
visions of the Arbitration Act, and makes
more than a- respectable showing against
those more learned in the law. A little too


impatient and irascible on occasion, has
still considerable ability for the work he has
undertaken, and is not adverse to saying so
himself.
DR. ANDERSON.
Bubonic plague caused many of Fre-
mantle’s worst features to be exposed. It
also brought out a somewhat retiring
young medico in Dr, Anderson, now gene-
rally recognised as the plague specialist of
W.-L Has an intimate acquaintance with
the dreaded bacteria, and it’s well for Fre-
mantle and Perth that he has. He is,
indeed, an efficient in much that peitains
to medical science, although his sturdy,
low-set stature and gentle, modest manner
might not suggest anything out of the
ordinary. Physically, has been likened in
appearance to a Shetland pony. Besides
wrestling witii the foes ol human natuie,
he has a fancy for the cricket pitch, and
with bat and ball he can always be relied
upon to do credit to himself and his club.
W. STRICKLAND.
The chairman of the W.A.T.C. com-
mittee for many years, there is no more
familiar or more popular figure on ou(p
courses than that of William Strickland.
Tall, erect, without sign of that adipose
tissue which usually afflicts men of ad-
vancing years, flowing white beard, and
neat attire, inspire confidence and respect.
Is one of the handsomest of our old, but
perennially young, men. In the “seven-
ties” and “eighties” owned a number of
winners, and earned a reputation as a
straight goer. Deservedly respected, and
is a racing encyclopaedia. Tolerant and
charitable, is deservedly held in high re-
gard. The kindly look from his keen,
grey eyes is an index to his character.
REGINALD B. PELL.
A thorough sport is “Reg” Pell. He is
known among the fraternity from one end
of Australia to the other, and he can hold
his own with the best in the card-room, bet-
ting-room, or billiard-room. He knows
every wrinkle in the game. Hoi*' racing
is his pet hobby, and he is a great judge of
form, so great that he takes liberties with
horses which he knows 'are not well liked,
and receives the anathemas of the press in
consequence. Tall and squarely built, he
is a commanding figure, but carries a trifle
too much adipose now. When he has money
he spends it freely, and when he hasn’t got
it he seems to squander it just the same.
Has made many rises, but has no faculty for
retaining money. With wonderful courage
he faces misfortune and ill-luck,'and is juso
as jovial when a thousand on the wrong-
side as he is with a pocketful of winnings.
In sport and play Reg. Pell has nothing to
learn, and if fate were only a little kinder,
he would be a millionaire in a twinkling.
OH AS. GREEiNHAM.
What he and his clever wife don’t know
about photography has not been written
about. Temper uncertain and peppery, so
people have a way of dodging him. Is and
always will be a socially popular man, as
he thinks less of himself than he does of
other people. Of late years every nota-
bility who has visited Perth has fallen
before the baleful gleam of his lens. He
is a good photographer, and is up to all the
practical work of the day. That’s why he
takes so many of the pretty women in the
town. He will bring out the last detail
of a piece of lace or remove a disfiguring
mole. About fifty years of age, with more
the appearance of a prosperous farmer than
a man of artistic temperament.
GEORGE THROSSELL.
The lion of Northam, has a fine lace, in
which there is undoubted character. Bread
forehead, aquiline nose, and luxuriant sil-
ver hair, he has a patriarchal appearance,
and in regard to Northam he has been
father as well as patriarch. Politically he
has not been a strong man, except as Com-
missioner of Crown Lands in Sir John For-
rest’s Ministry, wherein he did good work,
but when his leader’s mantle fell upon him
he was overweighted. Increasing years
and his deafness forced him out of politics,
though the latter was not always an un-
serviceable affliction. When Minister for
Lands had an effective method of getting
rid of awkward and wearisome deputations,
as well as unwelcome callers. Would re-
move the sounding-board from his mouth,
as if he understood they had finished, and
shake hands with his visitors, who would
find themselves ushered into the street be-


fore they knew where they were. Has a
peculiar habit of placing his hand on your
shoulder when speaking, and mouths his
words as if he were speaking with a por-
tion of hot potato on his palate. Shrewd
and keen as a business man, he carries an
exceptionally buoyant fund of humor, and
in the gentle art of “pulling the other
man’s leg” has few superiors. Notwith-
standing his deafness, the “Honorable
George,” as he is popularly called, sees
only the bright side of things, and is an
incurable optimist, always tempering his
tendencies in this direction, however, by
an almost Scotch sense of looking after the
main chance. Mr, Throssell is an ardent
temperance man, though by no means a
fanatic. Years ago, at a banquet, he
drank long and appreciatively from a
bottle of curacoa, which was placed before
him, and which he was assured was the
latest teetotal drink. The effect was disas-
trous, but the temperance bodies to which
the Lion of Northam belonged, though un-
utterably shocked for the moment, eventu-
ally accepted an explanation and forbore
the major excommunication. A little
story of the days when he was Minister for
Lands well illustrates Mr. Throssell’s great
sense of humor. An applicant for a billet
in the Lands Department was introduced to
the Minister by a member of Parliament,
who, as they entered the Minister’s room,
advised his protege to speak loudly, as the
old fellow “is as deaf as .” In the
midst of a harangue, which rose to the
pitch of a shriek, the applicant was quietly
stopped by the Minister, who, with his
eyes swimming owing to suppressed laugh-
ter, gasped, “Go it, young man. Yell
out at the top of your voice. The old fel-
low is as deaf as .”
GHAS. SOMMERS.
There’s a deal of devilry in some of these
little chaps—not that “Charley” has more
than his share. He is a little fellow though,
and his little legs may be seen carrying
his little body with his little head on top
of it round about the Terrace most days of
the week. He is a fair-and-square auctio-
neer, but only cares to personally conduct
big things. Then his power of descriptive
language runs away with him. His de-
scriptions teem with superlatives, and his
catalogues are miracles of composition. Is
a member of the Legislative Council. As
Minister for Lands he was severely criti-
cised in connection with certain drainage
works. He has a gude conceit o’ himsel’,
like many little men, and has prospered
just as most men with a big bump of self-
esteem. However, his success in life shows
that, though small in stature, Nature has
supplied Him with a valuable asset in
brains by way of compensation.
CHARLES NATHAN.
Notwithstanding that Charles Nathan is
rather inclined to be all things to all men,
he is a brainy man and very ambitious.
About 30 years of age, or thereabouts, is
built on a small scale. Is dark com-
plexioned, and wears spectacles. Controls
the destinies of the well-known firm of
Charles Atkins and Co., Ltd., and is a
member of the East Fremantle Municipal
Council and the Fremantle Tramway
Board. Lndoubtedly of brilliant intellec-
tual capacity, this is somewhat marred by
a lack of force of character, evidenced by
that anxiety to please everybody. As one
versed in financial operations, he is hard to
beat. In early life ran a newspaper round,
reaching his present position by the exer-
cise of shrewdness and natural ability.
R. A. SEOUL.
A composition in grey and rose. Grey
hail, giey clothes, and damask rose com-
plexion. Tall, with a slight stoop. Spent
40 years in the post-office, and for many
years was Postmaster-General and later
Deputy P.M.G. when Westralia joined the
Commonwealth. Curiously is an enthusias-
philatelist. If public opinion may be
relied upon, his regime at the post-office
was not an unqualified success, and he has
been the subject of probably more curses
than blessings, deserved or otherwise. An
old Westralian, and member of the Weld
Club.
A. G. RUSSELL.
Has always been filled with enthusiasm
tor the' game of cricket, and has never lost
a chance to forward its interests. He is
a good all-round player, a dashino- bat
cautious if need be, a fair trundler, °and a
reliable man behind the sticks. Off the


cricket field he apparently suffers from
“that tired” feeling, and may generally
be seen propping up the door-post of his
produce store in William-street. This may
be only a habit, however, as he rarely
misses an opportunity to do business. His
China silk coat and his soft felt hat, and the
ruddy, lean face, with grey moustache, and
the somewhat prominent nose are the signs
one may know him by. He ornaments the
City Police Cburt Bench on occasions, but
does not appear prominently in his magis-
terial capacity. Possesses a charming wife,
who is an accomplished musician, and who
ranks as one of the finest accompanists in
the State.
HENRY IRWIN BLAKE.
Please do not confuse him with the man
who used to run hotels—who had a long
wavy moustache. This one doesn’t grow
hair on his face. No social function or
race meeting is complete unless “Harry”
is there. He never misses a meeting, and
is a daring punter. Sometimes he picks
winners. He manages a fidelity guarantee,
accident, and burglary insurance office, but
ought to have been in a dragoon regiment.
Had political aspirations, and took part in
the movement in favor of Federation. On
the platform he has a gentle bleating voice
—in his office he has a hurricane roar.
When he summons his office-boy, “Hec-
tor,” the business man in Howard-street
whose Christian name is likewise jumps
out of his chair. Son of the Governor of
Ceylon (Sir Henry Blake), and consequent-
ly has plenty of sycophantic friends thirst-
ing for “Sassiety.’ He used to be in
Alec. Matheson’s service, but they don’t
play chaneys on the sidewalk now. Is
tall, broad-shouldered, and altogether a
fine figure of a man. His face is cold and
expressionless—when he likes. Is particu-
larly neat in his dress, and always turns
out well-groomed.
JAMES THOMSON.
Journalist, exhibition commissioner, and
journalist again and again. “Jimmy’s”
rubicund visage, with geniality bubbling
from every pore and wrinkle, is familiar
in the capital, the Port, and the Mur-
chison goldfields. Is one of the last of the
old school of journalists, men of education
and worldly knowledge. Has a weakness
for dragging Jules Joubert into the conver-
sation, as that gives him a lead up to
“When I was in India as commissioner for
the Victorian Court at the Calcutta Exhi-
bition.” He has seen men and cities,
and still wields a sturdy, vigorous pen.
Is not a man of wealth, and has missed
some of his best opportunities.
H. R. ENGLAND.
Cutside the National Bank, of which he is
the general manager in Western Australia,
H. R, England is an enthusiastic yachtsman.
After over 60 years of life, he is still a very
tall, well-built man, and takes a keen in-
terest in out-door pastime. In his office he
exercises a careful control, and to a business
man who approaches him with an applica-
tion for financial assistance without reason-
ably clear prospects of pulling through, he
can give a negative response without the
slightest compunction.
J. M. LARSCLEY.
Superintendent of the Metropolitan Fire
Brigade, lord high guardian of the Royal
goat, Gran’ Chief among the kilted
caterans, ye ken, and heaven know r e what
beside. Has a costume for each, and each
costume is more gorgeous and surprising
than the others. Is that rarity among
Scotsmen—a teetotaller. Likes to entertain
distinguished visitors, and tries his best to
afford them good entertainment. Has
never had a big fire to deal with, so has
his practical reputation yet to win. Takes
a gieat pride in his work, and has a fine
body of men under Kim. Some unkind
critics there are who assert that Lapsley
puts Lapsley first, second, and third in all
that pertains to fire fighting.
WILLIAM STODART.
“Bill” Stodart has as many real friends
as any man in the State, due to an affable,
courteous and unaffected manner. His grey
head with its never-changing pattern of
hard felt pee-wee’s nest tile, is familiar in
Barrack-street, mostly about Nicholson’s
warehouse, but sometimes lower down the
street. He is ruddy of countenance as
King David was, and could interchange
variations on the truth with that monarch


on musical matters till the cows came
home, but his firm does not stock sackbuts
or shawms. Was formerly with Nichol-
son’s, Sydney, and, backed by the enter-
prising A. E. Morgans, launched out under
that name here. His general garb is a
long cutaway coat, dark grey pants, and
“hard-hitter,” unless in evening dress or
pyjamas. Is a good friend to all new and
young musicians, which, while it may be
business, is also due to a kindly heart.
LAURENCE ALEXANDER.
No sane person would dream of mistak-
ing L. Alexander (known to his associates
as° Alec) for other than a Jew, and Alec
wouldn’t thank them if they did, Fre-
mantle’s most successful mayor is pioud
of his nationality, and he takes no pains to
conceal that fact. He is an exceedingly
pushful person, who has risen from the en-
virons of a Melbourne tobacconist s shop to
the control of one of the biggest warehouses
of W.A. Ambition is his strong charac-
teristic, but it is ambition combined with
ability. Like many others of his race he
has a wonderful capacity for grasping op-
portunities. It was this, in fact, that first
brought him prominently before the citi-
zens of Fremantle and made him their
mayor, and it will probably be the same
thing that will take him into Parliament,
where he'has a burning desire to make a
hit. As a public man is always approach-
able—particularly to the Press. For the
interviewer he has invariably a few min
utes to spare’ —what interviewer ever wants
more? —and on any subject under the sun
is prepared to say something. Occasionally
is confronted with a topic of which he
knows as much as a he-goat does of astro-
nomy, but that’s only a trifle with “Alec
Some day may come more prominently to
the front, assisted by that “tide in the
affairs of men,” if “taxen at the flood,
which it is almost certain to be.
DR. J. W. HOPE.
Not many years ago Dr. Hope, the Fre-
mantle health officer, was as fine a mili-
tary figure as any person could wish to
feast his eyes on. He is still a 1 soldier
and a man” worthy of more than passing
notice when he parades in his major s uni-
form, but with more than 50 summers
against his account and a vast deal of
rough work performed in an exposed,
harbor, he is by no means as sprightly as
he was. The health of Fremantle es-
pecially that of its babies —is Dr. Hope s
main care. If the youngsters could speak
for themselves they might well say
“Hope like a gleaming taper light adorns
and cheers the way; and still, as darker
grows the night, emits a brighter ray. ’
Regularly every year Dr. Hope shows the
Fremantle health authorities where lie the
glaringly weak spots in their wretchedly
poor system of municipal and health con-
trol, and just as regularly those authori-
ties ignore his warnings and advice.
He is blessed with a charming wife, and
equally charming daughters.
INSPECTOR M‘KBNNA.
If you want to get the right side of
Inspector M‘Kenna tell him you admire—
his feet. He is inordinately proud of
them, and every three or four minutes has
a look to see if they are still there. He
cannot buy boots small enough to fit him,
so duplicates his eldest daughter’s order.
He was once transferred to the goldfields,
but pined so for his old home at the Port
that the authorities had to let him go
back. Is a fairly good administrator, of
undoubted personal courage, and has had a
long and varied experience in nearly every
part of the State, including the Nor’-
West. “Nuggety” in build, with a full
face and trim brown beard, with a symp-
tom of the snow of years, is a credit to the
“foorce,” and enjoys a well-earned reputa-
tion.
CYRIL WALKER.
Tall, sparely built, with small, long
face, sharp features, fair, wearing glasses
—such is Cyril Walker, a partner in the
firm of W. Sand over and Co. On the
right side of 40, and of considerable
means. Gives one the impression that he
is always preoccupied in mind. Of con-
siderable book knowledge, is in some re-
spects what might be termed fanatical.
Politically, midway between an extreme
Conservative and an extreme Socialist.
In manner somewhat repellent on first ac-
quaintance, and must be known to be ap


predated at his true worth. Once known,
one cannot help liking him. Peculiarity of
his gait iis that though he is apparently!
stooping, yet he is erect.
DAVID B. ORD.
If Davy Ord were one of the New York
“Four Hundred” would be a most popu-
lar man, leader of the cotillion and social
captain. In Western Australia he fills, to
a certain extent, a similar niche. Knows
how to enjoy life and how to help others
amuse themselves. With all real sport is
au fait. Rides a good race, is a daring
polo player, wields a decent bat, and ran
row a little, box a little, swing clubs a
little, play bridge, and has never been fined
for playing “two-up.” Is a good-looking
fellow with gentlemanly manners, though at
times inclined to the habit of - judging a man
by his social position rather than by his na-
tive worth. As private secretary at Go-
vernment house acted the part of deputy
host gracefully and with tact. Is another
of the prematurely grey men in the city.
Has a nice snug billet in the Civil Ser-
vice. No girl has yet been able to capture
him, though many have tried.
EDWARD CAS SON.
Secretary of the Railway Employees’ As-
sociation, Ted Casson is a little man, full
of energy and bluster. Like most promi-
nent Laborists, can talk lots. His keen
eyes flash and his carefully-trained mous-
tache bristles as he talks about the wrongs
done to the working man. Has no time
for capitalists, evidently regarding them
as having no place in Nature’s scheme. The
importance of Casson is fully realised —by
himself. Political aspirations in inverse
ratio to his stature. Once stood for East
Perth against Walter James, giving the
latter a fairly hard row to hoe. Is re-
garded by members of the association as an
authority on politics, has a nodding ac-
quaintance with the works of political
economists, and reckons himself thoroughly
an fait with May’s Parliamentary practice.
Has little use for the boss of the railways,
and just about as much for Daglish and
his crowd. One man is wanted to put
things straight. When he says this, gives
the impression that man is—Casson. Cer-
tainly a splendid man for his job. Took
over the association when its affairs were
in a. state of chaos. Now, mainly thanks
to him, matters in connection with that
body are good. Two or three seekers after
his billet recently tried their hardest to
get it. Resigned, but was re-elected by a
large majority. Value of work done recog-
nised by members of the association, who
are the only judges whom he worries
about. Should stick to his job, for which
he is eminently fitted, and abandon the idea
that he i 5 a Heaven-sent political genius.
MATHIESON HARRY JACOBY.
There is nothing large about him, unless
it be his own idea of himself, and the
sound of his name. Some people achieve
notoriety, and some have notoriety thrust
upon them. He has done the one, and
gained the other. By commanding his
parliamentary henchmen to attend in his
train at a social function, and by inviting
a menial to accompany the “Speaker,” as
an honored guest, he endeavored to es-
tablish a precedent—but fortunately only
achieved the notoriety—and by placing
him in the Speaker’s chair, his colleagues
thrust it upon him. The one was a se-
quence of the other, and perhaps he is
more to be pitied than blamed. Mr.
Jacoby’s claim to fame are the facts that
he founded a branch of the St. John
Ambulance Association in Perth, and that
he makes wine where, before, only water
flowed. Nothing striking in his person-
ality. Through an unfortunate accident
lost the sight of one eye. As “Whip,"
he was without lash; and as “Speaker,”
he has slipped the leash.
HARRY B. LEFROY.
Belonging to a good family, Harry Le-
froy found very little trouble in getting
into West Australian politics in the early
days, for the old groper always had a
deep reverence for blood, breeding, and
birth. Abilities only mediocre, but his
sunny temper compensates for the lack of
wit. Is somewhat lengthy and loose-built,
and of that complexion that gained
Britishers the name of rooinek in Kruger’s
country. Sandy and blue-eyed. Wields
a good bat, is a medium bowler, but takes
little interest in the game if in the field.


Sat for old electorate of Moore, and when
“Ned.” W ittenoom incurred the displea-
sure of the gold miners and took sanctuary
in the A gent-Generalship, Lefroy took the
vacant portfolio of Mines. Was not a
dazzling success, but he did no harm. In
turn was translated to the Agency-General,
but did not sufficiently guard his tongue,
and while booming jarrah made some re-
marks which necessitated an apology.
To the surprise of many old Westralianis,
his first wife having died during the term
of his agency, he married again. His
residence in England has increased his
girth somewhat.
H. J. SOMERSET.
The real boss of the Perth Tramways is
a somewhat retiring man. Tall and stoop-
shouldered, mostly dressed in a light grey
suit and straw or hard felt hat, he can fre-
quently be seen walking with rapid stride
along Barrack-street. Is the outward visible
sign to some people of a large, grasping,
capitalistic octopus. As a matter of fact,
is a shrewd Canadian engineer, whose chief
desire is to give the public the best he can
in the way of a tram service, and at the
same time make as much profit for the
shareholders in his company as he can.
Knows that there will come a day that he
or someone else has got to hand over to
the City Council an up-to-date, perfectly-
working system, and that guides him in
his work. He doesn’t figure largely in
society, though he is a member of the Weld
Club, and dances at Government House, is
of a kindly open-hearted disposition, and is
unaffected in his manner.
F. EDGCUMBE.
If anyone asked Cr. F. Sdgcumbe what
all people were on earth for, he would,
without hesitation, reply, “For me tom-dce
use of.” He believes in himself, and be-
lieves he ought to get all he -'-an :;ur Cf
other men, and the less he has to pay for
what he gets the better he likes himself.
No one has ever turned round and said,
“Who is that?” Does not impress one
with his individuality. Is loud-voiced, and
in the council thinks that is all that is neces-
sary. His language is not marked by that
refinement that one looks for in a Bose-
bery or a Balfour, but it is just the lan-
guage for a City Councillor. Has no care
for appearances, and if a flea bit him on
the backbone while he was walking on the
Terrace, the nearest lamp-post would serve
with which to kill that flea. Considers
himself a “plain man,” and it is not for
others to deny that he is.
DR. ATHELSTAN SAW.
He’s a credit to his country. His Oxford
career was bright and his professional
career has been successful. Is genial and
sympathetic, but does not cultivate a pro-
fessional bedside manner. In appearance
is the fairest of the brothers Saw in Perth.
His profession is his hobby—and he doesn’t
drive a motor-car.
EVERARD F. HARLOT.
Who does not know the “red and white
hoops,” the racing colors of “Firebrace?”
One of the committee of the W.A.T.C.,
and of unimpeachable integrity, is also
one of the most popular of sporting men.
Station owner, and one of the big pastora-
lists of W.A., and known to be one of the
“whitest of white men.” Encourages
sport of all kinds. A typical Australian,
tall, and with no flesh to spare, tanned face
and grey moustache, and wearing a wide-
rimmed, soft felt hat, he looks a son of the
bush.
CHARLES WATSON,
A little, alert, business man, with keen
shrewd features but without any of the
loudness and effrontery usually associated
with members of the betting ring.
‘‘Charlie'’ Watson has the happy knack of
making friends wherever he goes, and making-
money also. It was only in a small way
that he commenced betting nearly twenty
years ago outside, at Flemington, with
Syd Bell, but, like the “little peach In
the orchard,” it grew. Hazard and poker,
which melt so much of the bookmakers’
gains, have never been brought near the
crucible of his gains, for the simple reason
that, though a bookmaker, he is not a
gambler. “Stick to figures and they will
stick to you” might have been his life’s
motto. Level-headed and straightforward*


he would have succeeded in any business.
More than the average number of friends
are numbered to him, especially as a
generous hand never tires of its work. In
the same way he is a bad enemy and does
not easily forget his wrongs. Unmarried
and, according to present portents, unlikely
to be.
E. ACLARTY.
One of Westralia’s mossy-backed politi-
cians. Has a broad and stodgy figure, and
politically a narrow and stodgy mind.
Owns some of the best agricultural land on
the Southern line, and farms it well. Has
done good work for the farming com-
munity, but has not materially aided the
progress of other sections. Has a gruff,
unmusical voice, a wretched delivery, lacks
logic, but sticks to his main point like a
Bathurst burr to a swaggie’s blanket. He
hates wax matches, and objects to his farm
hands smoking. Stands about six feet
high, and girths a little more.
R. T. ROBINSON.
A member of the legal profession, he has
been given an apt nickname, “Cocky.”
Active, he moves as though built of wood
and wire. His learned brothers give him
credit for being able to quickly grasp
points of a case. He has a fine memory for
leading cases and precedents. When one
of the gents of the long robe has labor-
iously built up his case, little Robinson has
been known to break it all up with a quo-
tation from some obscure Amending Act.
Wears his hair long, and nicely brushed, so
as to expose his classic marble brow.
Temper is sudden and uncertain. Widely
read, well-informed, and abstemious. Will
never be popular, as he is too self-centred.
ALFRED CARSON.
A small, rotund man, laughing counten-
ance, heavy mouse-colored moustache, grey
hair —such is Alfred Carson, a member of
the editorial staff of the “West. Austra-
lian.” Has been connected with the
“West” for many years, and now licks
into shape the cable news, in addition to
orinding out a leader on an important sub-
ject. A well-read, intelligent man, with
quick perceptive faculties, it does not take
him long to pick out what is good from
a sea of mediocrity. A native of W.A.,
has never been beyond its borders. A
tolerant, kindly, genial little fellow, Car-
son is deservedly liked and respected by
the reporters. Fond of a good joke, at
which he chuckles quietly, is also a good
raconteur. Affects a black flogger coat,
and in the summer time sports a Panama
hat, around which is a multi-colored band.
Smokes cigars, and occasionally a pipe.
Unlike his chief, is married, and has given
several hostages to fortune. Has taken to
the fat man’s game-bowls—and is now
an enthusiast. One of the last men to
leave the “West” office every morning,
hard work seems to agree with him.
J. H. PAYNE.
A small, modest man with a great big
heart, is a fair defininion of J. H. Payne,
of Fremantle. To describe his merits
would require a whole volume, and then,
probably, some of his good points would
be quite overlooked. He’s known from
one end of W.A. to the other, and every-
where he’s liked. About 40 years ago he
appeared in the world, and he’s been of
the world mostly every since.
G. F. MOORE.
Popularly known as Freddy Moore! Of
military inclinations and bearing, but
with a figure rather too slight for that of
a would-be warrior bold. He’s a bachelor
—age uncertain. A warm supporter of
cricket, and a very capable performer
with bat and balk In fact, one of the
thoroughly good, all-round sports of Fre-
mantle. Is wealthy, and is also W. 1).
Moore and Co., general merchants.
E. C. MILLAR.
Is a big man, very muscular, with not
even a nodding acquaintance with fear.
Better known as “Nebraska Ned.” Once
ran a ranch in Mexico, losing a fortune
in so doing, but that didn’t worry him.
Genial, jolly, and good-humored, is exceed-
ingly popular. Never looks for trouble,
but the man who bumps him should first
attend to his mortuary arrangements. Not
by any means aggressive, in fact quite the
reverse, does not parade his immense
strength. A great yachtsman, and one of
the finest men at the tiller of a boat


sailed in the open sea. (Spends half his
time in cruising between Fremantle and
Rottnest. Plays golf, takes an interest in
horseracing, and is a good all-round sports-
man. Well-known figure in Perth, Fre-
mantle, and Kalgoorlie. Managed J. M.
Ferguson's business at North Fremantle
and Kalgoorlie. Knows how to control em-
ployees, at the same time winning their es-
teem and respect.
H. K. CALLED.
Clean-shaven, sandy hair, never opens
his mouth without smiling largely, and if
it be possible to have an extremely pleasant
appearance without being handsome, then
the manager of Couche, Calder, and
Go., in W.A., is the man. Might be any
age between 20 and 45, and walks with
a slight stoop. Never known to be in a
hurry, and if he misses the train he in-
tended to catch, simply waits for the
next to come along. Evidently life tor
him is too short to run after anything. A
oevout worshipper at the shrine of b\iy
Lady Nicotine,” he takes things philoso-
phically. Is a keen sportsman and close
follower of form. Like most men who
observe form here, it is not generally
known whether he backs winners, or only
those horses which should have won. Can
tell one from memory the pedigree and
performance of every horse mentioned in
Ruff’s and Miller’s “Guides.” Holds
strong opinions before a race as to the
winner, and invariably backs his fancy
Also takes a keen interest in cricket
Reads every sporting paper, but swears by
the “Australasian.” A bachelor, is popu-
lar with everybody—too much trouble for
one of his temperament to offend a man.
When spoken to, he does not reply imme-
diately, but a few minutes later makes a
remark that is humorous and apropos.
Several years ago attended the interna-
tional conference of Chambers of Com-
merce as delegate from the Fremantle
Chamber.
A. G. LEEDS.
Dalgety and Co.’s general manager
in W.A. Is a stoutly built, nervous man,
of average Height, and an age bordering
round about the half-hundred. In business
hours he is “To all always open ; to all
always true.” His courtesy is his leading
characteristic. In that he is never found
wanting, no matter how unreasonable is
the application made to him, or how
limited the time at his disposal. As
generous as he is just, he steers his even
way along the thorny path of life, fully
conscious of the obstacles to be encounter-
ed, but never striving to shift his burdens
on to the shoulders of other people.
“Taught by that power that pities him, he
learns to pity them.” He has never ap-
peared in public life. The loss is the public’s
and not A. G. Leeds’s, unless, indeed,
there’s any truth in Samuel Rogers’s lines
—“The good are better made by ill, as
fioers crushed are sweeter still.”
ORLANDO I. KEMPTHORNE.
The friend of the Jap—so much so that
he wears a necktie that is a diminutive
Japanese standard. Has a warehouse full
of Japanese curios and photos, and has
the greatest collection of literature on the
war that there is in the State. Doesn’t
give much away, except descriptions of his
trip to Japan, which the newspapers
published. Aged about 45, medium height,
wears peaked grey beard, and brown
twe eel suit.
SYDNEY W. CURTIS.
Mayor of South Perth, and only just
past 30. Ruddy-hued complexion, chest-
nut hair, stands about sft. lOin. Is in
the legal profession. Is an all-round
sport, good speaker, logical in debate, and
has modes of procedure at his finger-tips,
so fills the mayoral chair with credit.
Shows promise of becoming prominent in
Westralian affairs.
GEO. BLAND HUMBLE.
Considerably after the period when Lord
Brougham so confidently, though incor-
rectly, declared “ The soldier can do
nothing in this age. The schoolmaster is
abroad, and I trust to him, armed with
his primer, against the soldier in full battle
array.” Had a weakness for the volun-
teer branch of the military service, and at-
tained the rank of major. Originally a
schoolmaster. Of course, Brougham’s as-
sertion may have had no influence on
Humble, just as military training (if he
ever had any) had no appreciable effect


upon his bearing and carriage. Still if
Humble (now close up to the end of the
allotted span) was not an ideal soldier, he
has always been a thoroughly conscientious
citizen. Many persons freely asserted that
during his long term as town clerk of
Fremantle the old gentleman retarded the
progress of the town. They were all
wrong. Humble never retarded nor ac-
celerated anything. Either would have
cost an effort, and Humble strongly ob-
jected to making an effort. To his mind
it was the last thing in the world that he
should be called upon to make. As much
enthusiasm as he could muster was at one
time devoted to football—while the Fre-
mantle players were winning. As soon
as an opposing team showed a substantial
lead old George Bland’s enthusiasm be-
came a negligible quantity. Now, in the
autumn of his days, Humble plays bowls —
and plays well.
W. J. BUTCHER.
A typical-looking squatter. Hard to say
whether he is getting bald, or has a re-
markably high forehead. Eyes deep-set
under an overhanging brow. Is a Tasmanian
oy birth, but has been about 30 years in
this State. Represents Gascoyne in the
State Parliament, and there most of his
interests lie. He was one of the pioneers
of that district. Knows a good deal about
sheep, and a thing or two about pearls and
pearling. Is interested in both industries.
Is a fair to middling politician, a good man
for his district, which looms larger in his
view than does the whole State.
“ADRIENNE.”
Newspaper writers invariably meet with
two classes of persons. One class always
wants its name kept out of the papers, and
the other always wants its name in them. The
police court reporter attends to the first,
and the social editress attends to the se-
cond —as well as she can. “Adrienne”
(Mrs. Ernest Chase) has the latter duty on
the “West Australian,” and if the number
of personal names that she crams into her
columns is a sign of success, she deserves
the highest praise for her work. A girlish,
timid, delicate woman, of rare beauty, ex-
quisite taste, incomparable grace, and
charming manner, she seems to be utterly
unsuited to the task of turning out the
yards of prosaic directory and dress-cata-
logue stuff that appear to be inseparable
from the woman’s portion of a daily news
journal. Still she does it, and if present
writer had a woman’s taste he might add
that she does it well. “Adrienne” has
sprung from a Puritan stock on W.A. soil,
and in every respect she is a credit to her
country. in fact, she would be a credit
to any land and any clime. Like others
of her sex, she probably has some faults —
who hasn’t? —but “if to her share some
female errors fall, look on her face and
you’ll forgive them all.” Her blemishes
do not appear on the surface, however.
Everything that is lovely in nature, art,
and literature attracts her, and everything
that is coarse or clumsy repels her. She
doesn’t pretend to know anything of poli-
tics —the “dismal science” has no charms
for her. It’s all one to her whether the
Treasury benches in Parliament are occu-
pied by autocrats or democrats, liberals or
conservatives, protectionists or freetraders,
socialists or individualists. To her what-
ever is (in the political arena) is right—>or
wrong—it doesn’t matter which. She is
essentially a home woman—a children’s
woman. The feverish rush and ceaseless
worry and grimy, inartistic surroundings
of a newspaper office seem as uncongenial
to her as an eagle’s eyrie would be to a
canary. She has never been known to
write an unkind word of any person. Per-
haps she couldn’t. Apparently she can’t
even “hint a fault or hesitate dislike.”
G. S. BHUEEREY.
A kindly-disposed, typical Britisher, as
depicted by American cartoonists. Of med-
ium height, full-bodied around the chest,
but falls away as he gets to ground line.
Florid complexion, with sandy-grey face-
hair, shaved chin. Is the human embodi-
ment of the British Lion, a nickname by
which he is known among his familiars.
Deliberate in his manner and methods, he
gets through more work in a day than a
seemingly more active man. Method is the
keynote of his character. He works and
plays as by time-table. Arrives at his
office same hour every morning, hangs his
hat on the same peg, mops his shiny dome
of intellect at the same number of minutes
after arrival to-day as yesterday. Goes
through his office in same method I 'cai
style. Leaves for a little fresh air


same hour, goes to lunch same hour. Goes
home by same tram every day, goes to bed
same hour every night, gets up same hour
every morning. Makes up his mind slowly,
and then sticks to his resolution. Everyone
has a good word for ’‘Old Shuff.” Origin-
ally was “Commis. Yoyageur” for the
firm of which he is now director, Messrs
Goode Durrant to wit. In his early day?
dabbled in mine speculation, with much
the same result as attends the endeavours
of all men who do not “lay to their book.
Nevertheless, he is comfortably off. Has
no extravagant tastes. Is a thorough busi-
ness man, knows the softgoods trade from
Ato Z. Lends money, or gives it with the
same formula every time. “Don’t come
near me again.” Then swears “That s the
last time,” and promptly falls an easy
victim to the next borrower.
MRS. DOMELA.
Is a social writer —i.e., she writes for
women about women, and probably only a
woman (which “Truthful Thomas,’ of
course, is not) could do her justice. That
inferior creature, a man, is not competent
to say whether her views are sound and
orthodox on the great question of dress,
which is supposed to be of more interest to
women than any other. (There was once a
woman who returned from the Perth Cup
without having taken the trouble to dis-
cover what had won, but was tnere ever a
woman who returned from such a gather-
ing without remembering what anybody
had on?) However, those who imagine
that Mrs. Domela’s work consists entirely
in writing “Miss Smith, white silk, etc. ;
Miss Jones, brown holland, etc.,” under-
estimate her versatility, and those who
know her only as a writer must not sup-
pose that she has no other interests than
“getting copy.” Some male journalists are
so unchivalrous as to resent the incursion
of women into their domain, but even these
men are willing to regard Mrs. Domela as
“one of the exceptions.” It is very easy
for a woman who describes the dress of
otlmr women to make enemies for life, and
yet it is probable that if Mrs. Domela were
to prepare a banquet, and to announce that
all personal enemies would be cordially wel-
comed —she would have to sit down alone.
It must not be supposed, however, tl at
she is a spineless individual, like the
governess in one of Wilkie Collins’s
stories, who “smiled when she came down
to breakfast in winter and said it was a
cold morning, and smiled when she came
down in summer and said it was a warm
morning.” Has to make her own way in
the world, and as she possesses a ready in-
itiative, boundless energy, and a graceful
manner, besides being courageous and self-
reliant, deserves all success in life.
J. DREYEK.
Surveyor, farmer, agricultural writer,
and son-in-law of Hon. George Thros-
sell, the “Lion of Northam.” Dreyer
as if he were made of greenhide
and fencing wire. Was once described
as being “constructed of spare ribs.”
As a farmer, was not noted for con-
spicuous success. As an agricultural
writer, wields an experienced, if some-
what stodgy, pen. No one has yet un-
earthed the reason why Dreyer affects
short pants. He has a bucolic taste
for heavy boots, but never uses swear
words. As a writer on the “West
Australian” several years ago, he occu-
pied the isolated pinnacle of purity of
speech, abstinence from tobacco, and
rigid teetotalism. Has political am-
bitions ; but has laughingly admitted
that a house full of Dreyers would be
indeed a “dreary” assemblage. He has
lately taken over the advertising de-
partment of the “Herald,” and in that
capacity appears to be in hus element.
LEWIS RAMACIOTTI.
Externally, Italian nationality has
written no sign upon the features of
her son, who leads the literary staff of
the “Morning Herald;” internally, the
Southern genius for music abounds,
more particularly in the interpretation
of the mandolin, on which instrument,
perhaps, there is no greater proficient in
Australia. All the warmth of heart
and sympathy for those who suffer,
which run so strong in the Italian blood
are as evident under the Australian sun
as they would have been on the shores
of the Mediterranean. As also the
swiftness of thought, the finesse and
adroitness which have made the secret
societies of Italy so powerful, and
“Rammy” the smartest news-getter in
the Golden West. He is the author
of most of the great coups which the


“Herald” has made in Western journal-
ism. He knows everyone, and mem-
bers of Parliament and civil servants
trust him implicitly, thus news which
would never find an outlet elsewhere
filters into his hands. In the hours of
defeat, which come to all journalists,
he talks revenge—overnight; but the
sun rarely nses. upon his wrath. If it
does, something is going to happen.
“Unlucky with money, lucky in love,”
runs an old saw; but “Hammy’s” ex-
perience is that neither prospers. All
his investments go wrong, and his affec-
tions are still unfettered —save in re-
membrance. Partial to a mild practi-
cal joke, he never carries it too far.
Passionately fond of yachting, he
handles the tiller deftly—-indeed, he
would be content to spend his life upon
the water. As a writer he lacks style ;
but he has produced the finest word-pic-
ture of the Margaret River caves which
has been penned. Diminutive of sta-
ture, he is yet a multum in parvo of
energy, and undertakes far more than
h s share of the shattering work of news-
getting, in which, however, he seems to
revel. Is as popular inside his office
as he is outside. Everyone knows ami
likes “Rammy,” as he is familiarly call-
ed ; and the staff he controls sweats b\
him. His labours are of the most ex-
acting and wearisome kind, but no
matter how difficult the matter with
which he has to deal, no matter how ob-
stinate the “subject” from whom in-
formation is required, “Rammy _ nevei
loses his temper, and by his suavity and
diplomatic tact generally gains his point.
As an interviewer is, therefore, unrival-
led in the local press-world.
FRANK WILSON.
A keen, shrewd man of business, as
might be inferred from his Scotch
origin ; and his countenance “bewrayeth
him.” Yet it is not an unpleasing face,
though betokening a nature as hard as
Aberdonian granite, and the owner is
not impervious to a joke. A man
yet in middle life, with great experi-
ence, and a head for finance, quick
mental grasp, and a ready tongue,
Frank Wilson should have an increas-
ingly prosperous career before him, both
in his private business and as a public
man. He is associated with the Hon.
Zebina Lane in the control of ibhe prin-
cipal coal mines at Collie, m the South-
Western division of the State. Is «
prominent member of the Legislative
Assembly, wJaere lie always speaks to
tile point. With Ins capamlities. natu-
ral and acquired, would make a really
useful Minister. Possesses far better
business and administrative qualihca
tions than all the Daglish Cabinet com-
bined —aye, tnan ail the Labour Party
taken together. Is understood to be
the only member of Parliament whose
abilities are really admired and held in
respect by Raihvay Autocrat George. In
disputes over railway rates the latter
finds his match in Frank Wilson.
JAMES MORRISON, OF WATER-
HALL.
One of Westralia’s most substantial
business men, and is to the manner
born. Having probably inherited his
keen commercial qualifications, his fore-
bears having been business men in Lon-
don. James came to this State with
the object of starting farming in the
Eastern districts; but finally drifted to
that English-like settlement at Guild-
ford, where he set up as a stock and
station agent and commission agent.
Shrewd and far-seeing, he has always
been actively engaged in pioneering
work in the State, from which he has
risen to his present position. Foresee-
ing the needs of the population as the
State should develop, he selected Clare-
mont as a suitable and promising field
for his land-purchasing operations, and
raised it from its obscurity into its pre-
sent position as the leading residential
suburb. But his keen business instinct
notwithstanding, he “missed the ’bus’'
on one occasion. He had selected some
250 acres in the locality known as
“Bullen’s,” at Cottesloe, for which he
was required to pay the usual fee oi
6d. an acre. For some reason or other
he failed to complete the purchase, and
by this mischance lost the opportunity
of acquiring an estate now worth
£BO,OOO. A good story is told of one ot
Jimmy’s deals. He set about select-
ing a family burying ground in the
cemetery, and although several choice
spots were offered, nothing would meet
his approbation but a corner block!
Calculating and shrewd though he may
be in business transactions, is known to
his intimate friends as a “good fellow/’
and many instances of his generosity
are recorded, more especially in relation
to church matters. He is not, how-
ever, exactly to be classed among the


“unco’ guid.” He married Miss de
Burgh, a resident of Moore River, and
resides with his family at “Waterhall,”
a beautiful residence and estate on the
Swan River, near Guildford.
ARCHIBALD DAVIDSON.
Is a solidly built man, well under 50
years of age, of dark and. swarthy coun-
tenance, with a hook nose. A jolly good
fellow, but “you’ve got to know him
fust.” Chronic grumbler, but recog-
nises good work. Done his duty to the
State, which sorely needs population,
being the father of half a score child-
ren. Is master printer of the “Morn-
ing Herald,” and knows his game from
A to Z. Served his time with the
original “Morning Herald” at Freman-
tle. Afterwards took charge of the
predecessor of the “West Australian,”
then a weekly published at Perth, and
with it until it assumed present propor-
tions. Went on to the “Inquirer” and
“Daily News,” afterwards returning to
Fremantle to take charge of the
“Herald,” When the latter was pub-
lished at Perth he came right along to
the city, where he has remained. Has
been in the State for 30 years, two de-
cades of which have been spent in the
“Morning Herald” office. Is a native
of Glasgow, and possesses the better
traits of the Scotsman.
HAROLD P. COLEBATCH.
“Coley,” as his friends call him, is
one of the best of Western Australian
journalists. A pale face adorned with
a brown pointed beard and a slight stoop
in his carriage give him the appearance
of a student. Equ pped with a logical
mind and a singularly sound judgment,
he has been the sheet-anchor of the
“Morning Herald” in troublous periods,
and he has managed to accommodate
himself, with some facility, to the
protean changes of policy which that
journal has undergone. Federal and
anti-Federal, protectionist and free-
trader, capitalistic and labourist, he has
never been at a loss for argument,
whichever way his journal has been
jumping. Getting in with the right
crowd, he made some sound mining in-
vestments, and is a “warmer”
man than most journalistis. Chess is
Colebatch’s strong point, and many
championships have gone his way, but
in later years the stress of maintaining
his form has been too great to combine
with his press duties, and he seldom
plays now. Bowls have more attrac-
tion, and he excels in that, as in all
else which he seriously undertakes.
Mowers are his pet hobby, and his gar-
den is excellently stocked and cared for.
Outside of his good fortune in Western
Australia. “Coley” has fought every
inch of his way from the age of four-
teen, when circumstances forced him,
then a delicate boy, to go out into the
world.
ALISON G. O. PAIN.
A face with a strong family likeness
to Svengali, but without the Satanic
expression and the aquiline nose which
are usually depicted in Du Manner’s
great character. A lank beard, which
has a peculiar outward curve, derived
from a nervous habit of passing his
fingers through it in an upward direc-
tion. Nature has made amends for
lack of finish upon the exterior, by a
superabundance of heart and brain.
Never an ill word for anyone, but kind-
liness, thoughtfulness, and sympathy
for all. In his humour and satire there
is not a breath of malice, spite or un-
charitableness. Possessed of a marvel-
lous capacity for absorbing facts and
general information, he is a perfect
storehouse of knowledge, but lacks the
business faculty of turning it to account
commercially. The talent which won
him the distinction of a wranglers hip
in classics at Cambridge would hardly
earn him a loaf of bread. There is in
all his writings a very clear resemblance
to the style of his brother, Barry Pain,
but without the latter’s forcefulness.
No one in Australia could produce daily
a column of whimsical satirical com-
ment on current events such as he does
in “Points,” even if, at times, the
stories grow a little threadbare _ and the
humour has cold feet. Music is his
one hobby, and. being a capable organ-
ist, ho spends his spare moments at the
instrument in St. George’s Cathedral,
towards the enlargement and improve-
ment of which he has been a more than
generous contributor.
MRS. J. L. NANSON.
The penwoman is the product of the
19th century. The lady journalist was
the fin-de-siecle result. Mrs. Nanson
is the sort of woman that makes a good


journalist. She has that power of
scenting out news and information, that
capacity for making friends and encour-
aging confidence that go to make up
what is called “the journalistic in-
stinct.” She is untiring in her work
and wields a facile pen. But not even
Mrs. Nanson can help falling into a
stodgy style in describing “quiet but
pretty weddings” and other oft-recur-
ring social events. Originality of dic-
tion and choice of phrase have their
limits, and in journalistic—especially
social journalistic—work those limits are
narrow. Mrs. Nanson must be re-
garded as the pioneer of the
social column in daily newspapers in
Perth. “Sigma’s” daily budget of
gossip was eagerly anticipated by a large
circle of feminine and not a few mascu-
line readers. For a brief period after
her translation to that heaven where
the “Herald” angels grind out copy,
“Sigma” continued her social journal-
istic labours. Then, as becomes a poli-
ticlan’s wife, she took to politics and
political scribing. Her “Sigma s ’ mantle
has fallen on no other shoulders, and
the “Herald” social columns are flat
by comparison. When her husband
plunged into the troublous sea of poli-
tics Mrs. Nanson plunged with him, and
helped him to win his first seat. Per-
sonally she can best be descrbed in the
words of Captain Corcoran’s alliterative
definition of Little Buttercup. Mrs.
Nanson is what society writers describe
as “a man’s woman.” She is at her
best in conversation in male society.
She will always break a lance in defence
of her sex if some scoffing male should
make jest at its expense. She was, and
is always, bon camarade with “the boys
on the paper.” And she hasn’t much
time for tabbies and mutual admiration
societies. “Sigma” dearly loves a joke,
end has more than that share of the
sense of humour with which ladies are
usually credited.




INDEX.
Abbott, John . ... 53
‘‘Adrienne” gg
Alexander, D 73
Allen, Elben 4 g
Allnutt, E. A 74
Anderson, Dr. 75
Armstrong, R. R 6 2
Bateman, J. W 59
Bath, T. H ’ 53
Baun, J. de 05
Blake. H. I 77
Black, Dr. E 7 g
Bold, W. E 72
Booth, Chas 59
Buckland, P. P 57
Barker, A. E 72
Bailee, Alan 47
Bedford, .Sir F. G. E>. ... 5
Bedford, Lady 5
Bevilaqua, H. D 14
Bird, Rev. T 4 2
Bateson, Mrs 4 g
Boan, Harry 22
Borchert, A 22
Boyd, W. Carr- 27
Braund, A. ... 74
Briggs, Henry 55
Brimage, T. F. 0 32
Brown, Harry ... zy
Bull > e. .. ;;; 50
Burnside, Justice 41
Burt, S ”. 44
Burt, 0 g 4
Bur well, F. W. 54
Butcher, W. J oz
Byfield, J gg
Byron, C. E * 43
Cadd, F C 7
Calder, H. K 82
Calthrop, H. V. E 42
Carson, A ... 81
Casson, E 73
Oarr-Boyd, W 27
Chase, Mrs. E 33
Connor, F 4 q,
Copley, ,S. W 43
Craig, Frank ... 28
Craig, J. M. ... ... nr
Croft, J. W 51
Curtis, S. W ’ gg
Chipper, Don. J 54
Church, John 62
Colebatch, H. P ”* g^
Cooke, W. E. ... co
Coombe, T " gg
Darlot, E. F gg
Davidson, A 35
Dempster, C. E. ... ... ... 57
Dreyer, J "* on
Daglish, H * ” 43
Dakin, Miss ' 61
Davies, M. C. ... on
Da vy, Dr *” 4S
Do Baun, J 25
De Largie, H • g 4
Diamond, A. J ’’’ 47
Diver, W " 20
Domela, Mrs g 4
Downing, H. P. 5Q
Draper, T. P
Drew, J, M ’’ ’* 12
Dryblower’ (B. C. Murphy) 44
Duffy, J. S n 4
Dunlop, Dr. ... ”* 3.
Dunn, Wilson
Dales, J. H 6 g
Edgecumbe, F go
Emanuel, S. P. ... . ’’’ „
Emanuel, I. S -.c
England, H. R." *” 77
Ewing, (N“ .K ’* 24
Finnerty, J. M 67
Fore-word 3
Forrest, D A 7
Fowler, J. M. ... ... ." 50
Farquhar A. W 55
Feistead, Theo...'. 43


Ferguson, J. M. \ 73
Ferguson, Mrs. J. M. ... 48
Forrest, Sir John 6
Forrest, Lady 6
Freedman, Rev. D 7
Frost, Clias 17
Gallop. J 26
Gardiner, James 72
Gawler, D, G 26
George, W. A 50
George, W. J 22
Gilleland, E 15
Gibney, Bishop 51
Gibbney, James 64
Gicwrey, T. J 18
Good, F. D 62
Gordon, W. B 70
Gray, Rev. J 65
Green, Constable 43
Green, A 73
Greenham, C 75
Gregory, H 71
Grimwood, Sam 50
Hackett, J. W 28
Haines, O. L 61
Hall, A. A 68
Hardman, R 44
Hardwick, T. W
Hare, Fred 20
Harper, Chas 27
Harney, E. A 54
Hastie, Robt
Haynes, R. S 19,
Haynes, Dr. E. J. S 20
Hevron, P. J 75
Herbert, R. L 60
Hicks, J. A 70
Higham, J. J
Hollis, F 16
Holman, J. B
Holmes, R. * 69
Holmes, J. J 66
Holmes, H. D 8
Hooson, T , 26
Hope, J. W 78
Hopkins, Sergt H
Hopkins, J. M, ... ... 69
Horrocks, Dr. H
Hudson, Chas 19
Hughes, W. A 68
Humble, G. B. ...
Illingworth, F 69
Instone, F
Irvine, Capt 19
Irving, D’arcy 57
Jacoby, M. H 79
James, W. H 55
Johnson, W. D 8
Jones, F
Joseph, H. B
Jull, M. E 68
Keenan, N 65
Kelsall, Dr
Kelsey, R. H
Kempthorne, 0. I 82
Kench, W. T - • H
Keyser, E. 0. D
King, Harry J
Kingsmill, W •••
Kir wan, J. W 16
Knight, G. C 65
Krug, E. E
Lane, Zeb 64
Langier, A 28
Lapsley, J. M 77
Largie, De 54
La van, M. G
Laurie, Capt. R 50
Laver, Dr. C. W 67
Lawrence, Supt 19
Learmonth, J. P 8
Leeds, A. Gr 52
Lefroy, H. P 79
Le Soeuf, E. A 53
Lilly, James 15
Lobstein, E. L
Longmore, Jas 53
Lot on, W. T 62
Lovegrove, Dr. T. H 52
Lovekin, A 42
Lowe, W 66
Mahon, Hugh 53
Maitland, A. Gibb 65
Marshall, J 42
Mason, Clayton T 67
Matheson, A. P 52
Martin, A. W 68
Martin, Frank H
Mayhew, E 61
Millar, E. C
Molloy, T. G 23
Moore, Miss Mary 48
Monger, A 71
Montgomery, Dr 59
Moore, G, F 81
Moran, C. T 46
Morrison, Jas. ... 85
Morgans, A. E 39
Morrow, Walter 15


Moran, C. J 45
Moss, M. L 61
Moxon, W. E 7
Moylan, J 57
Murphy, E. G. (Dryblowor) 14
McCullough, W 56
M’Donald, A 57
M’Kenna, Inspector 78
M’Larty, E 81
M‘Williams, Dr. G. F. ... 54
Hanson, Mrs 86
Hanson, J. L 44
Hathan, C 76
Helson, Wallace 29
Horthj* F. D 8
Oats, Capt 17
O’Bed me), Tom 9
Ord, D. B 79
Orton, A 58
Parker, S. H 35
Parker, Geo 17
Pain, A. G. 0 86
Paterson, W 23
Payne, J. H 81
Pearson, J. S 64
Pearce, G. Senator ... ... 17
Pell, Reg. P 75
Peet, J. T ... 29
Percy, J. B 14
Petherick, H. 00, 10
Phair, J ... 74
Piesse, F. H 44
Pitchfcrd, G. F 60
Preston, H. J 16
Pretty, E 74
Prowse, J. H 24
Quinlan, T. F 19
Ramacciotti, L 84
Randell, G 71
Eason, C. H 22
Rat azzi, L 55
Reilly, J. T 46
Riley, Bishop 45
Robinson, R. T 81
Roe, A. S. 28
Rowe, G. E 38
Russell, A. G 76
Sandover, A. ... 66
Saunders, H. J 70
Saunders, H. M 63
Saw, C. A 64
Saw, Dr 80
Sayer, W. F 52
Shenton, Sir G 52
Sholl, Horace W 9
Shell, R. A 76
Short, J. T 73
Shuffrey, G. S 83
Smith, Mrs. Capt. 49
Smith, H. Teesdale 50
Smith, M. Stand forth 61
Souef, E. A. Le 33
Sommers, C 76
Solomon, Elias 16
Somerset, H. J 80
Speed, J. M 64
Stewart, W. J 65
Stirling, H. G. .3 39
Strelitz, Dick 55
Strelitz, Paul 62
Stodart, W 77
Stone, Chief Justice 34
Strickland, W 75
Stubbs, Sydney 47
Summers, Dr 21
Taaffe, Dr 14
Taylor, Geo 22
Thomas, A. E 9
Thomson, James 77
Throssell, G 75
Throssell, G. L 55
Thurston, Dr. Paget 66
Tomlin, A, E 66
Toppin, C. S 14
Tracey, Mrs 50
Traylen, W. J 53
Venn, H. W 30
Viles, Frank 15
Villiers, T. C 68
Walker, Cyril 78
Walter, W. A. G 30
Watkins, Archdeacon 62
Watson, C 80
Weiss, F. Lyon 21
Wheatley, G, E. 74
Whelan, P, J 25
Wicks, J. R 66
Wild bore, Chas 65
Wilson, Frank 85
Wilson, Harry 11
Wilson, A. S 53
Wiltshire, R. J 70
Wittenoom, Sir E 57
Woodman, L. E 59
Woodward, Bernard H. ... 31
Woolf, Louis A 32
Wright, H. T. 62
Wright, Harry 63
Zimpel, W 59




PUBLISHER’S NOTE.
[This book has put up a record in this State for rapid
production. The whole work was conceived and completed
within ten days, and this included the literary matter, printing,
binding, and issuing ; so that if any slight typographical errors
appear, we must rely upon the good nature of our readers to
excuse us.]


" ■ 'V ■_,■ , i ; ' '■ - . . T ;;■ Ifei*
; ■-*-
>. • wMBaf > « • ■£» •■ <r\
f|s|
‘ . ■ .1 s”\ ■-■; . , ■; ■/ ;,V"j ■ \ f ; /■;•',■ ; . ... ,; v-
tf
; . ’■ .. ' | -; >; : $ -\f. v ■ ;4V"' ■.;■$■/'" $' ' •> y C ■■ ■ f- - J: ; |
■
*
T. Bryan, Printer, £
Otley Place, Murray Street,
Perth. “i
!
.
■ !
, ■■ ■-■ , '■ ■ - f /*'>' * W I t { 4 t /, U
j>€
r-■ ,t ■ <
