

“Launceston Examiner” and “The Tasmanian” Office,


STEAM TO THE HUON AND CHANNEL PORTS.
THE FAVOURITE STEAMER “HUON”
•
Leaves Hobart at 8 30 a.m. for Victoria, via Channel Ports,
EVERY
'MONDAY Mi THURSDAY.
RETURNING ON
TUESDAY AND FRIDAY.
FACT AND FISHER.






HUON AND CHANNEL STEAM CO.
STEAM TO THE HUON.
T The s.s. MINX leaves Hobart every Wednesday and
Saturday, at 8.30 a.m., for Port Cygnet, returning from
thence at 9 a.m. every Monday and Thursday.
Conveyances can be obtained from Port Cygnet to
Victoria, enabling excursionists to view the Finest Bush
Scenery in the Huon district.
The MINX trades to Port Esperance and Southport
every Saturday.
The s.s. CYGNET (to arrive from England) has
been built expressly to meet the requirements of this
trade. This boat will trade up the Huon River to
Victoria.
Particulars and every information may be obtained from
W. J. WATCH OR N,
SPT A ■m?tFXT ( Near \ rfnTQ A TDCTT*
j JnJjlXy£xXx.Xj Jh X Ju'w X « VWharf/j XX w XjxxJa X n
STEAM TO AND FROM NEW NORFOLK.
The MONARCH leaves Hobart during the Summer Months on
Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays at 3’30 p.m., Satur-
days at 2 p.m., and New Norfolk daily (Sundays and Thursdays
excepted) at 7 a.m. In Winter the Steamer leaves Hobart each
Tuesday and Thursday at 3 p.m., and Saturday at 2 p.m., and
New Norfolk every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday at 8 a.m.
Fares to New Norfolk. —Cabin —Single, 45.; Return, 6s.
Steerage—Single, 25.; Return, 3s.
Fares to Bridgewater. —Cabin—Single, 25.; Return, 3s.
Steerage—Single, is ; Return, is. 6d.
FRED. H. WISE.
STEAM TO TASMAN’S PENINSULA.
The s.s. TABANNA
Leaves Hobart every Monday and Thursday at 8 a.m.,
returning on Tuesday and Friday at 8-30 a.m.
Fares. —Single, 75.; Return, 12s.
First-class Accommodation at the Tasman's Hotel.
TERMS MODERATE.


Semmelkaack Bros.,
SAMI AID MILITARY TAILORS
HABIT MAK3EE!!,
108, MURRAY-ST., HOBART,
GEORGE-SL,LAUNCESTON
Gentlemen’s and Ladies’ Plain and Fancy
Tailoring of all descriptions
made up at the
LOWEST REMUNERATIVE PRICES,
The Material being well Shrunk.
GENTLEMEN’S HOSIERY IN ALL BRANCHES.
Prompt and Careful Attention
paid to Country Orders.
Patterns and Forms of Measurement sent
to all parts of the Colonies Post Free.


It is worth your while to read this and save
money.
When you buy your Dresses, Hats, Calicoes, Hosiery,
Jackets, Under-linen, and all other classes of
Drapery, go to
LLOYD’S NEW WAREHOUSE
Corner Elizabeth and Liverpool Streets.
All goods sold with Importer’s Advances Only,
Address —J. Roberts Lloyd, Warehouseman, Hobart.
HARDWARE STOKEJS,
CORNER OP MURRAY AND COLLINS STREETS, HOBART.
H. 7. MARSH & CO.,
Ironmongers & Importers.
Fishing Tackle, &c. Breech and Muzzle-loading
Guns. Fancy Goods suitable for
Christmas Presents.
Under the Patronage of the Countess of Donoughmore
and Hon. Airs. Du Cane.
MM. KOEPPEH,
LADIES’ HAIRDRESSER & DRESSMAKER,
UNDER-LINEN WAREHOUSE:
15, MUMMA Y-STMMMT, MOB AMT,
Mrs. Koeppen desires to draw the attention of the
public to the great success of her manufacture of Ladies’
and Children’s Wearing Apparel and Fancy Work.
Mrs. K. has taken Medals and First-class Certificates
at all the Exhibitions. At the Calcutta Exhibition of
1884 the following were awarded : —1 Gold Medal, 5
Silver Medals, and 5 First-class Certificates of Merit.
Orders punctually attended to, and all branches of
work executed on the shortest notice.
“LESSONS A SPECIALITY.”


FRED. H. WISE,
MERCHANT,
SHIPPING, INSURANCE,
General Commission Agent.
QQhOEl&h PEOOU€E
Received for Storage, Sale, or Shipment.
Liberal Advances made on all Consignments.
FRANKLIN WHARF, HOBART.
A. G. WEBSTER & SON,
MERCHANTS,
Wool Staplers and Brokers,
Shipping, Commission, & Insurance Agents*
WOOL, GRAIN, HOPS, BARK,
And other Produce, received for Storage, Sale, or
Shipment.
Agricultural Implements, Sugars, Teas, and all Country
Requisites supplied or imported to order.
A. G. WEBSTER,
CONSUL for the UNITED STATES ofAMERICA


lASMAKIAH HOUSE
[Established 1846]
H. HENLEY & CO.,
Successors to W. Burgess & Co.,
HOLESALE AND FAMILY GROCERS
PROVISION MERCHANTS,
IVERPOOL STREET, HOBART,
Cash Purchaser of Dairy
Produce.
ESTGOTT’S CIRCULATING LIBRARY,
65, COLLINS-STREET, HOBART.
Terms strictly in Advance from any date.
Extra Set.
Annual Subscription £1 1 o .../o 10 6
Mf-yearly ditto 012 o ... o 5 o
'uarterly ditto o 6 6 ... o 2 6
'onthly ditto o 2 6 ... o 1 5
G. W. REYNOLDS, Proprietor.
HOBART NURSES’ HOME
(Under the Ladies' Christian Association).
English Trained K urses available for every
branch of Nursing, on application to the
Some, JPatrick-street, Hobart,
Letters or Telegrams promptly attended to.
MISS E. S. POYNTER, Hon. Sec.


ELIZABETH - STREET, HOBART.
WELL-SELECTED STOCK OF
Fishing Rods and Tackle
Single and Double Breech-loading Guns and
Ammunition
Best brands of Sporting Powder
Large assortment of Electro-platedware
Flavel’s Prize Kitcheners
Portable Cooking Ranges
Chaff Machines, Horse Works, and Corn Crushers.
VISE'S imiss MIES IELITO.
The Parcel Delivery Carts start every day (Sundays
excepted) at a.m., 2-30 and 6'30 p.m., from the
Fared Delivery Stores, 27, Hew Wharf, Mart,
Orders to call should be posted before 9 a.m.,i p.m.,
and 4 p.m., and will meet with attention and prompt
despatch.
Rates of Carriage within the City Boundary ;—Small
Parcels, 3d.; Carpet Bags and Trunks, 6d.
Stores and Shops dealt with by agreement.
Luggage carried at reasonable rates.
Contractor for the Tasmanian Main Line Railway Co.,
*7, lew W&airf, MQ'b&wt,


iADLEY’S ORIENT HOTEL,
MTJRRAY-STREET, HOBART.
'he best and most centrally-situated Family and
Commercial Hotel in Tasmania.
lample Rooms for Commercial Gentlemen.
First-class Billiard Saloon.
'able d’Hote ris p.m. daily; ditto, during Summer
season, 6 p.m.
J. C. HADLEY, Proprietor.
LIVERY AND LETTING STABLES,
Adjoining Ship Hotel, Collins-street, Hobart.
Weddings, Balls, and Evening Parties attended to
promptly. Charges striftly moderate. Careful and
Competent Drivers.
J. CHANT, Manager.
BROWN’S RIVER.
Proprietor, THO 2. B. CURTIS.
FIRST - CLASS ACCOMMODATION
FOR VISITORS.
Wines and Spirits of the Best
Brands.
Boats and Fishing TacM©
ml’wmjm on hand*


OATLANDS
MIDLAND RAILWAY
HOTEL
This Hotel, which faces the Railway line,
and where all Trains stop for Refresh-
ments, is replete with every
convenience.
Visitors from the other Colonies may rely
upon Civility and Attention.
Dinner* Supper* Tea* and Coffee* &c.* ready
upon arrival of the Trains.
The very best of Wines, Ales,
&c., are always kept
on hand.
Conveyances and Saddle Horses on Hire
at the shortest notice.
JAMES JOHNSTON,
Proprietor.


RAILWAY HOTEL,
CAMPANIA.
This Hotel is replete with every
comfort.
THE FINEST QUALITY OF WINES,
SPIRITS, ALES, &c.
WHITE,
Proprietor.
& TURNERS
(Successors to 0. H. HEDBERG),
fmishm and fmtucc pewliimts,
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENTS, ETC.,
14, AHGYBE-ST., HOBAHT.
Having good Storage for Grain and Dairy Produce we are pre«
pared to Sell on Commission, the Highest Price being ob-
tained, with Immediate Returns on Sale of Goods.
TEA, SUGAR, KEROSENE, SOAP, CANDLES, Etc.,
ALWAYS ON HAND.
Agents for Campania Roller Flour Mills •
BSITBran, Sharps, etc., always on hand.


42 MACQUARIE-STREET. 42
The Most Complete Studio in Tasmania, having the
Quickest and Most Modern Appliances for Instan-
taneous Work on record; the Head and Body
Rests are therefore never used in this establishment.
Children’s Photos taken very successfully:
A large assortment of Views from different parts of
the island.
Photography of every description taken and finished
under the special supervision of the Proprietor.
ALBERT OEBQEABT,
42 MACQUARIE-STREET, 42
HOBART.
PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT,
HAKKXNOTON HOUSB,
HARRINGTON - ST., HOBART.
SITUATION CENTRAL.
MRS. NEWNHAM.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to .
AUCTIONEER
COMMISSION AGENT,
EXCHANGE MART,
COLLINS - STREET, HOBART.


ffiOYAT. H AI 1*
OOAOMKIS.
S XV A y S F. A „
Royal Mail Coaches leave Campania Railway
every Tuesday and Friday Morning at 9’3Q, on
arrival of the Hobart Express, reaching Swansea
at 10 p.m.; returning from Swansea every
Monday and Thursday at 5 a.m., reaching Cam-
pania Station at 7 p.m., in time for Express to
Hobart. FARE, 28s. EACH WAY.
Visitors from the other Colonies desiring to enjoy their holidays at the
sea-side could not do better than visit Swansea, which is
the most beautiful spot on the East Coast.
G. BURDON, Proprietor.
ATKISSOS BROS., MfiNITCDEIUIO/S
ROYAL MAIL COACHES
FROM LATROBE TO EMU BAY.
Coaches leave Latrobe Station daily, on arrival of
i2’3o p.m. train, for the Don, Forth, Leven, Penguin,
arriving at Emu Bay at 5 p.m.
Leave Emu Bay at 8 a.m., reaching Latrobe at 1
p.m.
NOTICE. —Visitors can obtain Vehicles and Saddle-
horses from these Stables upon the shortest notice.
TERMS MODERATE.
Telegrams and letters promptly attended to by the
proprietors.
Atkinson Bros., MMoll, & Co.,
Latrobe.


CLUB HOTEL,
BRISBANE-STREET,
la A U NOE S T 0 N
Visitors to Tasmania will find this Hotel
exceedingly comfortable.
The rooms are lofty and well-furnished.
Suites of Rooms for Families.
The Hotel commands a fine view of the town.
Best of Wines, Spirits, Sc Ales.
Near Railways and Shipping.
WILLIAM MALT MAN, Proprietor.
WISEMAN’S
BURNIE, EMU BAY.
Firstndass Accommodation for Travellers
and Commercial Gentlemen.
Rest Brands of Wines , Spirits, etc.,
always on hand.
Coaches to and from the Launceston and
Western Railway daily.
THOMAS WISEMAH* Proprietor.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.


COACHES.
Wefcstet’s Eoyal Mail Cowles
Leave the British Hotel, Liverpool-st., every
morning, at 9 o’clock, for Mountain Road,
Fern Tree, Half-way House, Victoria,
Franklin, and Geeves Town.
Visitors may leave in the morning and return the
same day by the Up coach at 3*15 p.m., travelling
through some of the grandest scenery in the Colonies.
N.B. —Box seats may be secured by early applica-
tion. Special Coaches and Brakes supplied for Picnic
Parties, &c., at moderate charges. All Parcels must
be paid for at the Office.
Proprietor.
MRS.
FISHER’S aWfc COACHES
LEAVE
KINGSTON AND HOBART
At the under-mentioned hours :
ROYAL MAIL
Leaves KINGSTON each day (except Sunday)
at 8-30 a.m., and EARDLEY ARMS, HOBART,
at 4 p.m.
DAILY COACH
Will leave KINGSTON HOTEL at 4 p.m. for Hobart,
and EARDLEY ARMS, MELBOURNE-ST.,
at 8 ’45 for Kingston, each morning.
All Parcels carefully attended to.
Single Fares, 25.; Return, 3s.
C. J. FISHER, Proprietress.


inml
MOUNT ST. MARY, HOBART.
UNDER THE SPECIAL PATRONAGE OF THE
MOST MMYMRMNJD) JD>M< MUMTHY,
LORD BISHOP OF HOBART.
The Religious of this community have made ar-
rangements for the reception of a limited number of
Young Ladies as Boarders, who will have advantages
of a superior education on moderate terms
The Pleasure Grounds are extensive, and the
Convent is delightfully situated in one of the healthiest
parts of the city, commanding a view of the Harbour
and surrounding country.
The Course of Education comprises English in all
its branches, History, Arithmetic, Algebra, Geo-
metry, use of the Globes, Geography, Astronomy,
French, Italian, Music, Singing, Drawing, Painting,
and Needlework (plain and ornamental).
In all the branches of Female Education this
Institution unites every advantage that can be de-
rived from a punctual and conscientious care bestowed
on the Pupils, while health is the object of constant
solicitude.
TERMS-
Tobe paid Quarterly in Advance, per annum, £35.
Extras — Music, Singing , Italian . &e.;
Dancing, Stationery, Medicine, and Medical Attendance,
A Quarter's Notice previous to the removal of a Pupil.
Should a Pupil remain in the Convent during the Summer
vacation an extra £3 will be charged.
For further particulars apply to the SUPERIORESS.


THROUGH TASMANIA:
HOWARD HAYWOOD’S
ILLUSTRATED GUIDE
VISITORS AND COLONISTS,
WHERE TO GO, HOW TO GET THERE,
AND WHAT IT WILL COST;
HOW TO SPEND A HOLIDAY IN TASMANIA.
1885-6.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
“LAUNCESTON EXAMINER” AND “THE TASMANIAN” OFFICE.
MDCCCLXXXV.


OS, lAverpool-street, Hobart .
DARLING AND FACY,
FAMILY GROCERS,
Frovision and Tea Healers 9
IMPORTERS OF
China, Glass, Earthenware, and Garden Tottery.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL.
SHOW ROOMS upstairs for Breakfast, Tea, Dinner,
Dessert Services, Chamberware, &c., &c.
Families waited on for Orders, and Goods delivered to
all parts of the town.
N.B. —Visitors please ask for our Business Card.
We would specially name our PRESERVED FRUITS
and JAMS, which are prepared as immediately picked
fresh at the gardens. Enquiries solicited.
PRIVATE BOARDING ESTABLISHMENT.
INGLE HALL ,
Macquarie - street, Hobart, Tasmania.
Public Drawing-room, and every convenience appertain.
ing to a First-class Establishment.
Commanding a fine view of the River Derwent.
MODERATE CHARGES.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
Mrs. TURNER,
Proprietress.


PREFACE.
AGAIN I present to the travelling public my
“Guide of Tasmania,” which has been
revised and illustrated. Every place of note
and interest that is worth visiting in Tasmania
is herein mentioned, so that all in quest of
information respecting the colony would do
well to use the “ Guide.” I have visited
every place mentioned in the “ Guide,” so
that visitors need have no fear in following
out my suggestions and recommendations.
I have endeavoured to make this a service-
able and entertaining “Guide to Tasmania of
to-day,” trustworthy and direct in its informa-
tion, and inviting in its appearance—a handy
book, both for the stranger in the colony and
the resident to possess, for ready and easy
reference.
In the next edition, if all be well, I shall add
to the illustrations, also give particulars of the


Castra, Kentish, Nook, Circular Head, Duck
River, and Montagu districts, which I have:
been obliged to withhold from this edition.
To my Advertisers I offer my earnest thanks
for the generous support they have given me,,
and hope again to receive their support and
assistance.
HOWARD HAYWOOD.
October, 1885.


Ifaumeston feamirier,
PUBLISHED DAILY.
The Oldest Newspaper in the Colony.
Subscription — ios. per quarter, in advance; xas. Gd. credit.
Published on Friday morning , in lime for Country
Mails ,
Contains the News of the Week, Tales, Sketches, Foreign and
Colonial Telegrams,. Sporting News, Agricultural and Mining
Intelligence, etc., etc., and is specially adapted for Country Resi-
dents, among whom it has a
Larger Circulation than any other Journal in
Tasmania.
It is, therefore, an excellent medium for Advertisers.
Subscription—d£i per annum, in advance; £i ss. credit.
HINTING OF ALL KINDS,
[vETTER-PRESS, pOPPER-PLATE,
AND
EXECUTED IN THE BEST STYLE.
Illuminated Addresses a Speciality.
Wood Engraving clone on the Premises by a
First-class Artist.
Book -binding, Paper-Ruling, Emboss-
ing, Stereotyping, Electro typing,
&c., done on the shortest notice*
PLATES and DIES Engraved to Order.
PATTERSON-STREET, LAUNCESTON.


Chemists by Appointment to His Excellency,
Have much pleasure in introducing to the Public of
Tasmania the under-mentioned Crated Waters and
Cordials, which are all of their own manufacture, the
superior quality of which is attested by the success met
with at the
London, Calcutta, Melbourne, and Sydney Ex-
hibitions, having received Two Gold, Three
Silver , and Three Bronze Medals,
together with numerous First-
class Certificates of Merit.
MMA.TBB VAtBM.
Soda Water Tonic Waters Sarsaparilla
Ginger Ale Lemonade Ginger Beer
tSUrdll Bottles charged unless returned.
coiiiiia
Peppermint Brandy Bitters Ginger Brandy
Cloves Aromatic Tonic Cherry Brandy
Lemon Syrup Bitters Square Sarsapa-
Raspberry Vin- Quinine Cham- rilla
gar pagne 1 Lime-juice Cor-
Orange Bitters Ginger Wine | dial
GRAPE, DAMSON, & RHUBARB WINES.
Special attention is drawn to the two new Prepa-
rations introduced by us, viz.:—
DANDELION ALE,
A non-intoxicating hut refreshing beverage;
and
STAMININE,
An Mrated, Phosphatic, non-intoxicating
Tonic.


Australia to Tasmania i
~ Launceston ... 2
Banks, Hobart 106
~ Launceston 107
Ben Lomond 17
Bischoff Tin Mines 28
Bothwell 85
Branxholm 15, 99
Brighton, 43, 83
Brown’s River (Kingston)... 63
Cab Fares, Hobart 107
~ ~ Launceston 108
Campania 43
Carnck 11
Carters’ Charges, Hobart... 108
~ ~ Launceston 109
Caves, Chudleigh 17
Christ’s College, Hobart ... 59
Churches, Hobart 105
~ Launceston 106
Coffee Palace, Launceston 5
~ ~ Latrobe 25
Corra Linn 9
Cressy 22
Deloraine 23
Emu Bay 28
Epping Forest 38
Evandale .. 37
Fadts Worth Knowing ... inside
Falmouth 92
Fern Tree Bower 65
Formby 25
Forth 26
George’s Bay 92
George Town 13
Girls’ Home, Launceston ... 10
Glenora 80
Hamilton 82
Hobart 46
Horton College 57
Huon, by coach 66
„ steamer 77
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Jerusalem 42
Lake Country 34
Latrobe 24
Launceston 7
Longford ig
Lymington 12
Memoranda 113
Mount Wellington 52
New Norfolk 78
Oatlands 41
Uatlands 41
O’Brien’s Bridge 44
Post Office Mail Table in
*. wot man lOUic 111
Port Arthur 74
Port Esperance 71
Raminea 72
Kammea 72
Railway Time Table 103
Ringarooma 16, 100
Ross 40
Koss 40
Salmon Ponds 80
Scottsdale 14, 100
Scottsdale 14, 100
St. Joseph’s Orphanage 50
St. Leonards 9, 37
St. David’s (Anglican) Ca-
thedral 54
St. Mary’s (R. Catholic) ditto 55
Schools, Public 61
Steamers, Huon (Facy and
Fisher) 77
~ Port Cygnet (W.
Watchorn) 77
~ N.W. Coast 30
Tasman’s Penin-
sula 77
Tasmanian Steam Naviga-
tion Company 1
Telegraph Charges, &c, ... no
Tin Mines, N.E. C0a5t...... 98
Waratah 29
Watermen’s Fares, Hobart 109
~ ~ L’ton.. 109
West Coast 31
VV CoL - 31
Westbury 23
Westella • 47


TASMANIAN
STM Emm COMMIT.
IEU STEM! IlilH
BETWEEN
Hobart, Launceston, River Mersey, Mel-
bourne, Eden (Twofold Bay),
Sydney, and Newcastle.
LAUNCESTON AND MELBOURNE LINE.
The s.s. PATE ENA,
1,212 tons, 242 h.p., James R. Young, Commander,
and
The s.s. FLINDERS,
950 tons, 200 h.p., Adam Drysdale, Commander, leave
Launceston and Melbourne Mondays and Thursdays.
Fares. —Saloon, 455.; Return (3 months), 80s.
Steerage (without provisions), 20s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist Odober and
31st March, available for two months). —Saloon, 655.;
Steerage (without provisions), 30s.
HOBART AND MELBOURNE LINE.
The s.s. SOUTHERN CROSS,
780 tons, 150 h.p.,Thomas Capurn, Commander, leaves
Franklin Wharf, Hobart, and South Wharf,
Melbourne, about every ten days.
Fares. —Saloon, 755.; Return (three months), 130 s.
Steerage, 405.; Return, 70s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist Odober and
31st March, available for two months). —Saloon, 100 s.;
Steerage, 60s.


T.S.N. Company continued.
HOBART AND SYDNEY LINE (Via EDEN).
The s.s. FLORA,
1,270 tons, 180 h.p., Henry Bennison, Commander,
leaves Franklin Wharf, Hobart, and the Tasmanian
Wharf, Sydney, every Monday fortnight.
Fares. —Saloon, 100 s.; Return (three months), 160 s.
Steerage, 60s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist December and
3 1 st March, available for three months). —Saloon, 1 405.;
Steerage, 100 s.
Note. —This steamer calls at Newcastle each trip.
LAUNCESTON & SYDNEY LINE (Via EDEN).
The s.s. CORINNA,
1,280 tons, 141 h.p,, Herbert Sams, Commander, leaves
Launceston every Friday fortnight, and Tasmanian
Wharf, Sydney, every Thursday fortnight.
Fares. —Saloon, 80s.; Return (three months), 140 s.
Steerage, 50s.
Excursion Fares (issued between Ist December and
31st March, available for three months). —Saloon,
1205.; Steerage, 80s.
Note. —This steamer calls at Newcastle each trip.
MERSEY (FORMBY) AND SYDNEY LINE.
The s.s. E S K,
854 tons, no h.p., James P. Sharpe, Commander,
leaves Formby and Tasmanian Wharf,
Sydney, once a fortnight.
Fares same as Launceston and Sydney line.
Any further information can be obtained by appli-
cation to
HEAD OFFICE, HOBART: E. M. Fisher, Manager
P. Facy, Jun., Accountant and Secretary.
BRANCH OFFICE, Launceston : A. T. Woods, Man acre r. Lower
MELBOURNE : Chas. Hudson, Agent, 1, Queen-street
SYDNEY: T. and W. Willis, Agents, 15, Pitt-street
EDEN : T. and W. Willis, Agents
NEWCASTLE : R. B. Wallace, Agent
RIVER MERSEY (Formby): John Henry and Co., Agents.




'Wnt to Casimuiia.
From distant shores v/e come to greet,
With loud acclaim, our sister sweet,
And hail her, as with queenly grace
Amidst our band she takes her place,
Queen of the Southern Seas !
J.W.D.
IppHE tourist from the mainland (Australia) has
iillf the choice of two routes —vid Hobart, which
is in the southern portion of the island, and
the seat of Government; and Launceston,
mV the largest town in the north, and which]
!/l® commercially speaking, is the most import-
-9 i ant centre of population and trade. The
<•£> Tasmanian Steam Navigation Company have
excellent line of fine steamers, which trade regu-
•ly with the mainland, and have every accommo-
tion that a traveller could desire. The charges are
within the reach of all. Every year im-
ovements are made by the Direftors, who endeavour
meet all the requirements with which to ensure the
mfort and safety of passengers. Each addition to
sir fleet is constructed with all the most modern
provements, so that they may be of the highest
der, and thus obtain that success which the manao-e-
--mt is yearly aiming at. The comforts on board
ise steamers are equal to those obtained in any of
r colonial hotels, and certainly compare most
’ourably with the vessels which trade regularly from


all parts of the world to the southern seas. Each
steamer leaving the mainland during the season has
its fullest complement of passengers; and often this
Company has found it necessary to run extra trips tc
accommodate the hundreds who have desired to reach
the favoured colony of Tasmania. When we find a
company owning such good vessels doing their utmost
to provide for the general comfort of their patrons, it
cannot be wondered at that this beautiful island is
becoming more and more popular every year, and the
passenger list so great that the announcement ol
arrivals fills a large portion of the shipping columns in
our local newspapers. This, I think, is the best
demonstrating proof that the requirements of the
travelling public have been fully and liberally met
and a confidence fully established in this line of fas)
going steamers. One thing has often struck me as
likely to meet with public favour, which is, that the
directors might very easily make several direft trips
from Adelaide, South Australia, to Tasmania, thus
saving transhipping at Melbourne on the part of the
many who seek this island during the hot summei
months. Return tickets from the mainland are issued
which, if desired by passengers, includes the trip fron
one end of the island to the other over the Main Line
Railway. The time occupied in the trip from Mel-
bourne to Launceston is twenty-four hours, and tc
Hobart forty-two. As most visitors during the holidaj
season book to Tasmania via Launceston, we will a
once push onward, leaving behind the hot, scorching
winds of the vast continent of Australia, and reach the
sweet, cool hills, dales, vales, valleys, and gullies o;
fair Tasmania by way of the Tamar river.
FROM AUSTRALIA TO LAUNCESTON.
Leaving the continent of Australia, the good shi]
peaches Bass Straits, and in a few hours Tasmania i
in sight. Port Dalrymple and Low Head are the firs
places passed, where the submarine cable depot i
situated; then comes the Tamar river. The littl
township to the left is known as George Town, \
favourite rendezvous for many Viftorian gentlemen


who, seeking peace, rest, and quietness during their
holidays, find it at this watering place. As a summer
resort it is most pleasant, the distance from Launces-
ton by water being 37 miles. The trip along the
river at high tide is extremely nice, and the cottages
on the banks look very home-like and cheerful.
Thickly-wooded gorges and swelling terraces clothed
with bright foliage are passed, and the distant hills
lend enchantment to the scene. If it should be a fine
day, the visitor can hardly wish for prettier river
scenery. Sidmouth, with its church and manse, lies
to the right, on the Beaconsfield road, where there are
several snug little gullies, mantled with luxuriant ver-
dure and evergreen foliage, with their crystal streams
flowing down to the waters of the Tamar. In these
gullies are every variety of fern; and when spring
time is near, the banks for miles are covered with
sweet smelling wattle trees, laden with their beautiful
blossoms. On further, and on the opposite bank, is
Windermere, with its little church, which, reflecting
in the water at its feet, imparts a strange feeling to the
visitor; the mansion, too, at the rear, with its neat
gardens and avenues, goes far to make this a perfect
pifture, that is always admired by the visitors from
across the Straits.
The whole of the river scenery is beautiful in the
extreme; the river expanding into wide reaches dotted
with islands, and opening into lovely bays; and the
banks varied by bold wooded headlands and long
fertile plains, sloping to the distant ranges, on which
farms, homesteads, and the residences of wealthy
landowners are visible in every direction. The trip
down the Tamar is equal to that of the Derwent, and
when the steamer gets within easy reach of Launces-
ton, a feeling of regret passes o’er one to think that the
journey is at an end.
As the boat nears Launceston, turning a sharp cor-
ner, one is struck with the grand position of the town.
Hill after hill is studded with comfortable cottages,
villas, and mansions, the churches and chapels, with
their spires, towering high above the surrounding
buildings. High chimney stacks are on all sides, re-
minding the visitor of Port Adelaide, in South Aus-


tralia, or Sandridge, in Victoria—only on a smaller
scale. The town proper reminds me of Nelson, in
New Zealand. It is prettily situated, and commands
a splendid view of the river and distant country. The
streets are regular, water is laid on to all parts of the
town, and at night the streets are lighted up with gas.
Public and private buildings suggest that good taste
and great care have been bestowed upon their con-
struction ; the Banks seem to take the lead. The Town
Hall, Government buildings, and Mechanics’ Institute
rank among the best buildings. The Institute has grown
into popularity, and it is now found too small for the
town, and additions are being made. A theatre is also in
course of construction, and many other improvements
are progressing. From the Windmill Hill the traveller
is able to take a good view of the town, the river
making an excellent foreground to the picture. The
look-out on the other side is more beautiful, showing
the ranges enveloped in their winter garb, and pre-
senting an interesting sight, reminding one of the
New Zealand Alps that span the west coast of the
South Island. Then away down the valley lies the
snug and pretty village of St. Leonards, a suburban
resort for business men of Launceston. The churches
are of an English-like character. The streets are well
formed, having on each side fine stores, shops, and
other business houses. A marked change has taken
place within the last few years, and Launceston is not
the place it was. Large, handsome buildings are seen
on every side, towering high into the sky; its wharves
crowded with shipping; high chimney stacks, throw-
ing off volumes of smoke from the smelting and other
furnaces; the ring of the smith's hammer from the
foundries —give warning of increasing local industries.
Coachbuilders, potteries, brassfounders, millers, saw-
mills, &c., &c., each give employment to the inhabit-
ants, and help to make this northern town a busy one.
Launceston, although not the seat of Government, is
by far the most important in trade and commerce;
its people energetic and pushing, ready at all times
to embrace new industries, and carry high the flag
“ Excelsior!”
On arriving in Launceston, the visitor soon finds his


way to comfortable quarters, the hotels being all that
one can desire. One place I think well worthy of
mention is “Sutton’s Coffee Palace,” in Brisbane-
street. Here the most particular attention is paid to
the general comfort of the guests. The Palace is well
furnished from top to bottom, the rooms lofty and well
ventilated, bath-rooms on each landing, good balcony
overlooking the main street. The public dining-room
is the largest in Tasmania, quite equal to that of the
Collins-street Coffee Palace, Melbourne; its sitting-
rooms are cosy, with a plentiful supply of newspapers
and books. Private suites for families, with pianos and
organs, render this Coffee Palace one of the most com-
plete in these southern lands. A most attractive addi-
tion to this well-known establishment is the billiard
room, which is second to none in Tasmania, being
replete with the latest requirements. The Coffee
Palace has been considerably enlarged, and every im-
provement conducive to comfort has been strictly
attended to. It is situate within two minutes walk of
all the public buildings, and is close to railways and
shipping. The charges are moderate, and all who
visit the Palace will find it a pleasant abode during
their sojourn in the town of Launceston. Letters and
telegrams are promptly attended to. There is also a
telephone attached to the premises.




mmsam
COFFEE PALACE,
BRISBANE-STREET,
L ATI NOE S T O N .
This establishment has been consider-
ably enlarged, and every improvement
conducive to comfort has been strictly
attended to. It is situate
Within two minutes walk of
all the Public Buildings.
The most recent addition to the Palace is
BILLIARD-ROOM,
Which has been fitted up regardless of
cost, and is the best in the island.
CHARGES MODERATE.
Letters & Telegrams promptly
attended to.
Telephone attached to the
building .
S. J. SUTTON,
PROPRIETOR.


CORRA LINN, NEAR LAUNCESTON.
See page p.


St. Leonards, a suburban village, four miles from
Launceston, where the visitor can find plenty to en-
gage his attention, and help to while away the time.
There is a good hotel where visitors may rely upon
good fare and civility. The walk to this village is
over a good road all the way from Launceston, and if
so desired, the return could be made by train, or
another road which passes the railway crossing. Fare
by train, is. return.
Corra Lynn. —This is a beautiful gorge and cataraft,
or series of catarafts, on the North Esk River, about
seven miles from Launceston. This place is another
of the lions of the district, and attracts numerous
visitors. It is a chasm in the volcanic rocks, through
which the river forces its way. The gorge is about
200 feet high, the rocks being perpendicular, and a
quarter of a mile in length. From the bridge which
spans this gorge, a fine view of the foaming waters
below is obtained. The vegetation with which the
rocks are covered, help much to increase the loveli-
ness of this romantic spot. It is
A sight to delight in ;
Confounding, astonishing,
Dizzing and deafening the ear with its sound.
How to get there —some hire a trap and drive through
Brisbane-street to the Elphin Road, taking the first
turning to the left, over the railway crossing, and
Hobler’s Bridge, along the right hand road, through the
pretty village of St. Leonards, and about three miles
further on the bridge spanning the gorge is reached.
Turner and Jones run an omnibus during the summer
season. Fare, 2s. 6d.
Waverley Woollen Mills. —This establishment is
worth visiting for two reasons, the first and most im-
portant is because it shows that even in slow Tasmania,
we have those who are willing to introduce an industry
by which the material that is grown in the island can
be manufactured into that which is made beautiful,
warm, and useful. It teaches us that although little
or no credit is given us as a people capable of doing
like our neighbours,' who follow the footsteps of the
mother country, we are year after year adding to our


industries, giving employment to greater numbers of
artisans, and teaching the rising sons of toil the arts
and sciences common to the old world. “ What man
has done, man can do.” Another reason for visiting
the Woollen Works is to take a peep at the lovely
situation that has been chosen by the proprietors to
carry on their work. Lovers of beauty may have their
fill, enjoying the pure fresh air, taking into their lungs
that which seldom, if ever, fails to give health. The
whole surroundings are hilly, rocky, and precipitous,
where springs rise and streamlets flow from year’s end
to year’s end. Distance from Launceston, about three
miles ; good road all the way.
Girls’ Industrial Home. —How often in our plea-
sures, when the world seems to possess nothing but
brightness, when cares, strife, poverty, want, and the
like, appear unreal, we forget that there are in our
midst suffering creatures, who, if given but a mite
from the cost of our luxuries and pleasures, would
benefit considerably. So it is with our little ones,
whose parents have gone to that “ bourne from which
no traveller returns,” or perchance through misfortune
been separated from their friends. In Launceston our
girls have a home provided, where they are cared for
until they are of an age to be placed out to service,
where they have a chance to become good members
of society. The matron who has the charge of the
Home would, I am sure, give every visitor an oppor-
tunity of going over the building and seeing for them-
selves the work of the institution. It ought, in every
sense, to be one of the places worth visiting, and,
indeed, worth helping.
“ Blessed are they who from great gain
Give thousands with a reasoning brain,
But holier still shall be his part
Who gives one coin with pitying heart!"
New premises have been purchased by the committee
of management, which are situated within easy reach
of the town, on the Wellington-road. ’Bus passes the
door frequently during the day, cost 3d.
The Devil’s Punchbowl. —This interesting spot is
on the Penquite estate, about two miles from the


centre of the town, and easy of access. Like the
rugged sides of the Cataract, it is wild and steep, and
the Bowl itself forms quite an amphitheatre. There is
beauty on all sides of this remarkable pleasure resort,
and the many shades and tints of foliage add con-
siderable charm to the scene. At certain seasons of
the year a great variety of wild flowers is to be found
in the vicinity, and the locality, which is a favourite
resort of the townspeople, will well repay a visit.
About a quarter of a mile from the Punchbowl is
another very picturesque spot, known as Burns’s
Retreat, situated on a shady and secluded bend of
the North Esk river.
LAUNCESTON TO GARRICK, THROUGH
PROSPECT AND HADSPEN.
To obtain a complete panorama of Launceston, the
river, and adjacent country, the visitor would do well
to drive through to Garrick, being careful, however, to
pay particular attention to the view which can be had
one and a half miles from the Post Office, from what
is known as “ Prospeft Hill.” Here I promise the
tourist a treat, and if possessing an eye for the beauti-
ful, he will behold a glorious panorama from the high
standpoint of this hill. He will gaze wonderingly and
delightedly across the town, river, valleys, and gorges,
to the mighty peaks of the East Coast. The scenery
is absolutely glorious. Leaving the hill we make for
Hadspen, a pretty village on the South Esk. After
passing the bridge on the left hand side is the home of
the Hon. Thomas Reibey, where can be seen a splen-
did cricket ground, one of the prettiest in Tasmania.
Carrick comes next, and is a quiet spot with English-
like surroundings. The church, with the parsonage,
stands in a very prominent part of the village. Near
the bridge which spans the river stands the house of
Mr. Monds, a gentleman who gives employment to a
great number of people in the district; the flour mill
is close by, a popular institution, one known far and
wide. Distance, 11 miles. How to get there —hire a
trap, or walk.


LAUNCESTON TO LYMINOWW? YiH-
EYANDALE.
Visitors desiring a nice drive over an excellent road
through beautiful scenery, with a broad and extensive
view of the country, could scarcely do better than take
the coach, or hire a trap, and visit the little and charm-
ing village of Lymington. The road is om? of the
best in Tasmania, although from Launceston it is
rather up-hill work for about three miles. On the top
of the rise the famous Ben Lomond is plainly visible,
also the Blue Tier and Wyniford Ranges, where the
miners are actively engaged bringing forth the rich
deposits of tin ore these places are noted.
About four miles from town is the village of Cocked
Hat, or Franklin, so named, as I was informed by
one who ought “to know, you know,” on account of
the Governor of Tasmania having his hat cocked by
the wind whilst passing through the township. Next
comes Breadalbane, a small township, with public
school, church, chapel, hotel, blacksmith’s shop, store,
and watchhouse. The district is a farming one, with
small and scattered population. Four miles further on
is Evandale, with the English Church on the left, and
the Scotch Church on the right of the road, following
which down the hill the traveller sees on all sides well-
kept farms, with good homesteads, fine sheep, cattle,
and horses. The land is good and flat, through which
many streams flow, till they fall into the South Esk
river, that runs through Evandale, and thence to
Launceston, into the Tamar. The distance from Evan-
dale to Lymington is seven miles. This village is a
very pretty one, the township and its surround-
ings have many attractions. The avenue which
leads to the English Church, with the waters of the
Nile gliding gently along, and the weeping willows
waving their delicate branches over the clear mirror-
like water below, is well worth visiting. There is a
very comfortable inn, where peace and quietness reign,
and the visitor may well fancy himself in some secluded
part of the mother world. Distance from Launceston,
twenty miles. Coach leaves York Hotel, York-street,
every Monday, Wednesday, and Saturday, at 3 p.m.,
leaving Lymington same day at 7 a.m.


- -BWIGONSFIELD HOAD.
As a drive this is equal to any I know of round or
ibout Launceston. The road is parallel with the river
'or many miles. There is an inn on the road, which
iffords the necessary accommodation. The drive from
;own to inn, would, with a ramble on the hills at
:he rear of the inn, make a good day’s recreation.
Fhe geologist, too, can find much for study. Asbestos,
;ron, lime, marble, and gold have been found within a
tew miles of the inn. On some of the hills the view
3 not easily matched, and if a fine day the visitor may
lepend upon a satisfactory day’s treat. How to get
here —hire a trap from the stamfc; terms, moderate.
GEORGE TOWN.
Most visitors take the steamer when wishing to visit
his watering place, which is on the east bank of the
Famar river, and one of the oldest towns in the colony.
Fhe course up the river is very winding, and seeming
sometimes of a zig-zag nature. The scenery by which
he steamer passes is lovely, and often excites the
yonder of the observer. The town lies snugly on the
Dank, is one of the quietest places in the island, and a
'avourite rendezvous for Melbourne gentlemen. For
Lose who can spare time to remain a few days in George
Fown there is comfortable accommodation obtainable
Dn the township. Whilst at George Town the tourist
Dught to visit Low Head. A lighthouse is ereCted on one
Doint. This place is the receiving station of the sub-
marine telegraph to Victoria, and thence to the other
colonies and Great Britain, and is connected by wire
vith all parts of Tasmania. Boat fare, ss. single, 10s.
•eturn ; refreshments on board.
THE PIPER ROAD,
Many visitors ask, “where shall I go?” “which
:s a good day’s drive, with good scenery ? ” In reply I
tvould answer, try the Piper, and depend upon it, the
;ime occupied in going will not be lost, as it would be
sure to give satisfaction. Although so near Laun-
:eston, it is seldom visited, because “ Our Guides ” of
long standing have not heard of such a place. On


the road, some ten or twelve miles or so, there is an
inn, kept by Mr. Smilie, who is an old identity, and
well able to give much information regarding the
district, and the Bangor Slate Quarries. Some parts
are heavily timbered ; good ferns, large or small, can
be obtained from the many gullies.
LAUNCESTON TO SCOTTSDALE, BRANX-
HOLM, AND RINGAROOMA.
After spending a short time in the town, the visitor
often seeks fresh fields and pastures new, so I would
draw attention to a trip which very few seem to think
about from the simple fad that the beauties of the
road have never been given in the Guides of the past.
We cannot expeft visitors to bury themselves in our
large towns the whole time that they have put aside for
health-seeking and holiday-making, nor ought we from
a spirit of covetousness try to hide from them the
many beautiful spots that are within easy access of our
city homes. Hobart or Launceston may be perfeftion,
the good folk therein may have room, and even more
than enough, to accommodate the hundreds who, dur-
ing the season, come over from the mainland. Yet our
country cousins could do with a few, and at some of
the hotels the landlords, I feel- confident, would do
their very best to make their visitor’s stay pleasant and
agreeable. Country life is to my mind about the
jolliest one can enjoy, hence I take it as a duty to my
readers, now that I have taken it upon myself to aft as


Guide (that is through this book), to point out to
iem such places as are worth visiting in all parts of
te island. Scottsdale is a distrift it is possible every
ly (except Sunday) to reach by coach, which leaves
ahey’s Cornwall Hotel at 9’3° evei T morning. Mr.
. Beswick, the coach proprietor, has always done his
est to afford those who travel by his coaches the best
ccommodation that the road will admit of. He has
capital team of horses at all the stages, which dash
long at a good rate past the noblest scenery that is to
e seen in the northern portion of the Island. At
lillbrook the coach stops 20 minutes for dinner, when
r ith another good relay of horses tracks are made for
cottsdale. As a bush trip I know only one other like
in Tasmania (Huon). This road has its fern tree
owers, cascades, forests of trees, hundreds of feet
iigh. Mount after mount capped with snow peeps
ut from behind the gorges. The merry songs of the
>irds the whole day long suggest freedom and happi-
ess. Chop ! chop ! chop ! on all sides is heard, thus
illing a tale of what will be in years to come, how the
nass of stalwart timber will give way to the plough,
md the land made resplendent with farms and
jrchards. Several saw-mills give employment to the
>ettlers, and help to supply material for the cottages of
he pioneer of this wonderful region of mountains and
)lains. Past Scottsdale, which is 42 miles from
mnceston, the visitor reaches
BRANXHOLM,
V good-sized mining locality, where he will find the
in mines in full swing. Branxholm is 18 miles from
Scottsdale, or 60 from Launceston. About half-way
3n this road the traveller will notice a coach road to
;he right; this leads to Ringarooma and Mount Vic-
toria diggings, also farming settlements, which promise
svell in the course of a few years. As far as Ringa-
rooma there is a good road, and the coach goes there
every day, so that the good folk are able to enjoy the
advantages of having a mail regularly, also their news-
papers. As a new settlement, it is truly wonderful the
advanced state it is in; schools, churches, hotels,
boarding-houses, post and telegraph offices, are all


established, so that in a few years we may expect to
see a flourishing town where, but a few months ago,
all was an impenetrable forest. Five miles further on
is Mount Victoria (Alberton), another mining district
(gold and tin), which, like Ringarooma, promises to
be an important centre of population and industry.
The whole of this part of the North-East will, at some
time or other, be taken up, on account of the good
nature of the soil, which, when cleared, will vie with
the land about the Longford and Cressy distrifts; and
when the iron horse steams through from Launceston
the good farmers will then be able to obtain their
reward for years of waiting, as the fruits of the soil
will then be taken to market, thus affording the set-
tlers an opportunity of getting good returns for their
labours. Persons from the old world would find land
here that in a few years will be worth twice the
amount, or even more than that, demanded now, for it
is, without doubt, to be the granary of the North-east.
Visitors or theatrical companies desirous ot visiting
Scottsdale and mining centres, would do well to com-
municate with Mr. S. Beswick, the coach proprietor,
at his booking office (Fahey’s Cornwall Hotel) or pri-
vate residence, as he has always on hand good coaches
and horses for special use.
Miles. Single Return
Fares. Fares.
Distance from Launceston
to Scottsdale ... ... 42 15s. 30s.
„ to Branxholm ... 60 225. 6d. 455.
~ to Ringarooma ... 56 225. 6d. 455.
Beswick’s coach leaves Fahey’s Cornwall Hotel,
Caraeron-street, Launceston, every morning at 9'30
a.m. Passengers reach Scottsdale at 4’30 p.m., and
those going on to the other places change here, getting
to their destination at 8 p.m. On the return journey
the coach leaves Ringarooma and Branxholm at 5
a.m., change at Scottsdale 8 a.m., reaching Laun-
ceston in time for the 3 o’clock express to Hobart.
For other particulars see coach advertisements.


BEN LOMOND
[s a lofty mountain, one which is visible from many
Darts of the northern portion of the Island. It is the
highest range along the eastern part of the Island,
ittaining an altitude of 5,010 feet above the sea.
From this gigantic mountain flow a number of
dreams, feeding the South Esk River, which river
nay be said almost to encircle the giant. The view
:rom the summit is a most magnificent one, affording
1 panorama of mountain and plain, forest, and
neadow, lake and river, almost unequalled. Visitors
wishing to reach Ben Lomond generally do so from
\voca, taking with them a guide. Good accommo-
dation can be had, the charges reasonable. Whilst
visiting the northern portion of the colony, the tourist
would do well to bear in mind that this mighty range
:ould be reached from Launceston in one day. How
;o get there —rail to Corners, then coach to Avoca.
Fare —£1 is. 3d. return.
CHUDLEIGH CAVES.
The visitor leaves the Deloraine Station by coach,
which starts on arrival of the first train in the morning
Tom Launceston. The road is a good one, with a
vast amount of nice scenery on all sides. If the tra-
veller is fortunate to secure a box seat he will be
well pleased with the trip, as the mail-driver is
obliging, willing to explain the chief points of
interest. Mr. Smith has placed good coaches upon
die road, with spanking good horses, that add a great
deal to the pleasure of the journey. On the township
3f Chudleigh there is an inn. The greater portion of
;he houses are on the main road; two stores, post and
:elegraph office, police office, public school, Scotch,
English, and Wesleyan churches. In summer time
:he district presents a most pleasing sight, surrounded
by majestic ranges thickly studded with all kinds of
;imber trees, with numberless farms on all sides. Mr.
Picket, at the inn, has horses for the use of those who
desire to make an inspection of the caves. They are
ibout six miles from the inn, over an excellent track,
dirough country teeming with the beautiful. Close to


these caves is a mountain of variegated marble, which
extends several miles. Proceeding by a fine creek of
clear water you reach a huge stone, in form like a.
round table, and, fancying yourselves its knights, it is-
well to refresh here before you light your candles and
enter. The appearance of the stalaftites is very beau-
tiful ; they are of all sizes and diameters, from that of
a wheaten straw to that of a man’s thigh. The former
are snow-white, and depend in thousands from the
roof; the latter are generally united to the stalagmites,,
originating from the ground, and growing upwards
until they meet and coalesce with the stalaftite from
above. The latter are hollow, and are increased by
the deposit of particles of lime at the extremity, at the
moment the drop of water proceeding from_ the roof
falls from the lower end of the stalaftite; they cluster
by thousands, and are generally about from three to
five feet long, presenting a scene like fairy land. After
traversing half-a-mile of bewildering cavern of stalac-
tites you come to what is called the “Light Hole,” and
where is a stream of water, having a rise and fall,
running across the cave; here the gentlemen, if there
are any ladies in the party, must evidence their gal-
lantry by carrying them across—2oo yards beyond
this is the “ Pulpit,” so called because here the cave is
domed like a cathedral, and here is its greatest magni-
ficence, for the walls appear as if dotted with glow-
worms or sparkling with gems. A little further on and
the “ Register Office” appears, a huge stone pillar on
which visitors usually autograph their names. There
are other caves in the distrift, but I think those just
mentioned will prove quite enough for my readers.
Distance, 10 miles to Chudleigh township. Fare, 2s.
6d. Coach leaves Chudleigh every day at B’3o a.m.
for Deloraine in time for mid-day train to Launceston,
returning to Chudleigh at a.m. To reach the
caves the visitor has another 6 miles to travel.


*OM LAUNCESTON TO MOUNT BISGHOFF,
Via Perth, Longford, Wesihury, Deloraine,
\trohe, Don River, Forth, Leven, Penguin, and
Emu Bay.
If the tourist is only on a flying visit he can go to
lischoff from Launceston, and back, in four days, but
would advise a short stay in each of the above named
laces. The train starts at 8 a.m. from the Western
Railway. The first place passed is St. Leonards, then
ilvandale Junction, branching off here to the west,
kirting the north bank of the South Esk River, where
be visitor will notice a fine mansion ; this belongs to
Villiam Gibson, Esq., the estate is called “Native
s oint,” celebrated for its grand breed of sheep; the
nansion stands on the south bank, and is plainly seen
rom the train.
PERTH
s the township where the train pulls up. A quiet
dace, with many neat cottages, several churches, school,
,nd one hotel, where the visitor desirous of making a
tay in the village would find every accommodation.
LONGFORD
Hornes next, and is one of the most charming town-
ihips in the colony. It is situated upon a slight
devation, commanding an extensive view of undu-
ating plains, which are only broken by the noble
Tiers, that present a bold appearance from
;outh to west; eastward, Ben Lomond and its chain
;erminate the view, Just before reaching the railway
station the train passes over the finest bridge in Tas-
mania. It is constructed of iron, is 400 feet in length,
and cost something like There is also a
me brick viaduCt in connection with this bridge, that
s passed under by those going to or from Perth by
road. The township of Longford is of considerable
size, boasting of many well-built houses, public and
private buildings, churches, chapels, public assembly
rooms, etc. Almost the first object that attracts the
eye of the traveller is the Episcopalian Church,


centrally situated in its own grounds of ten acres.
This church was built in 1842, at a cost of
the material used is freestone. The window above the
altar is an elegant stained glass one, presented by an
old resident, the late Charles Reid. The church is in
thorough repair, has a clock tower (unfinished) ; the
clock was the gift of William the Fourth, King of En-
gland. At the rear of the church is a simple stone
which records the last resting place of the mother of
the first child of European parents born in Tasmania.
The Public Library and School are two places which
deserve a word. The first is open at any time to a
visitor, where every welcome is extended to those who
feel inclined to visit the place. A large assortment
of books is kept, and the tables always supplied with
papers, periodicals, and magazines, of the latest date.
The school ranks amongst the best in the colony, both
as to building and instruction given. The scholars are a
fine body of children, always neatly dressed, be it in
the early or latter part of the week; the attendance
good, and from a glance taken at the visitors’ book
I find ever on the increase. The head master, Mr.
George Heritage, has not only a desire to cultivate the
minds of the rising generation, and so fit them for
future usefulness, but devotes some of his spare time to
the garden within the school grounds, which will, in a
few years, add considerably to the school corner. The
visitor, if he makes a stay in the town, will find much
to occupy his attention, more so if he takes his walks
abroad. Longford has long been popular for its agri-
cultural shows, being, without doubt, the premier show
of the colony; everything reflecting great credit upon
the secretary, T. R. Arthur, Esq., who has an earnest
pride in his work, doing his very best to bring to a
successful issue an exhibition that deserves the liberal
and hearty support of all good colonists whose desire
it may be to keep the bonds of friendship securely
united between the pastoralists and agriculturists. My
sincere wish is that the worthy secretary will live long
to enjoy good health, and see his yearly shows increase
in usefulness and popularity. As we travel through
this district many English-looking mansions are seen,
the owners being gentlemen who take an interest in


j country, trying to help the farmers in securing a
tter breed of sheep, cattle, and horses. I must not
•get to mention that hotel accommodation is plenti-
, the best house being the Blenheim, conducted by
r. Lawson, whose house is the favourite resort for
i visitors who stay in this lovely English-like village,
shing parties are often made up from this hotel;
;o, many who have a desire to see the “ Great Lake"
irt from Lawson’s. Places of considerable note
thin a few miles of the township are—“ Panshanger,”
ounding in beauty, watered by a crystal stream,
:ing which is the house, brimful of comfort, its
,11s hung with paintings, choice, beautiful, and truly
;istic, which depict the taste of the gentleman who
ms this estate. “ Brickendon," with its fairy-like
ths, avenues of trees, sweet-scented flower beds,
lit garden, shady bowers, grassy plots, and
;11-built mansion, captivates the beholder, and
mgs back from over the sea memories dear,
is a charming estate, delightfully situated, and within
5y distance of the town of Longford, The respeCted
cl popular owner has spared no expense in making
ickendon a miniature Eden, and the visitor will find
beauties equal to his most sanguine expectations.
. H. D. Archer, Esq., must surely love his Tasmanian
me. “ Norley ”is another property of note, with
tastefully planted grounds, charming walks, and
icid stream, bordered on either side with full-grown
ilows, which droop over its sides, and in many
ices weave their boughs together, forming leafy
;hes across the stream. This estate is surrounded
the snug looking town of Longford, and faces
.ppleyard” square, which is so named after the doftor
that name, who has taken so much pains to beautify
s portion of the English-like town. The bird’s-eye
;w as seen from “Norley," shows the broad fertile
lins, dotted with green groves, and pleasant looking
imps of timber, which surround numbers of warm
d comfortable-looking homesteads, and one cannot
1 to be impressed with the loveliness of the country,
le prolific orchard of “Norley” is, in the spring
re of the year, ablaze with golden blossoms, and
;ssed in the brightest of rich green, fringed with


pink and silver; and in the summer time, this, th<
peaceful home of Mrs. Chas. Arthur, is full of charms
and like other fine places already named—
Its roses are bright in their summer days’ light,
With their delicate scent and their exquisite hue;
But, though beautiful flowers claim many a song.
The fruit that hangs round us is beautiful too.
Past Longford we reach
GRESSY,
Where there are a good number of fine estates, ownet
by the descendants of some of the earliest settlers o
the North. On many of these estates there are gooc
farms under cultivation, which are noted for thei
splendid crops. The township is a very pretty one
well laid out, and brim full of useful buildings. Then
are several churches, chapels, schools, institute, hotels
police quarters, &c. Amongst the industries must b(
mentioned Newton and Sons’ Tannery and 800
Faftory, which gives employment to many in th<
locality. It is a favoured spot. Some 13 miles fron
Cressy is the hospitable home of Arthur O’Connor, 0
Connorville, whose name is almost a household won
throughout Tasmania. He employs a great amount 0
labour, keeping in his service, “till death them call,’
all his old and tried servants. For miles around he i
known for his generous deeds and kindly help, and i
more hospitable gentleman could not be found in th
North. As he is to his men and women servants, s<
is he to the poor beasts of the field, for he gives then
free liberty to roam the fields after they have for si
many years done the duties required of them. Th
Western Tiers are accessible from various points
Through the Connorville estate, and up the Den, th
summit may be reached from Arthur’s Lakes; an
other ascent may be made at the back of Parknook
The view from the summit is very extensive.
Returning to Longford we next reach, by train,
HAGLEY.
The population is small, most of the farmers having
left the distrift, their leases having expired, land mon-
opoly, the curse of the beautiful island, being the ruin


if the district. The visitor would do well to devote
lalf a day here, as there are several places well worth
eeing. There is a comfortable inn on the township.
WESTBURY
Vill next attraCl the traveller’s attention. The streets
ire well laid out, and there are a number of superior
mblic edifices. It is situated upon the Quamby Brook,
rhe houses are mostly detached, and have gardens in
ront; these gardens add considerably to the beauty of
be town. For miles round the country presents a
prand appearance, the Western Tiers forming a splen-
lid background to the picture. The distant scenery
s exceedingly captivating, and often chosen by artists
is a fitting subject for the canvas. As a farming dis-
riCt Westbury can and does hold its own against any
>art of the colony. Before passing on I shall draw
he visitor’s attention to the churches which belong to
he Episcopalian and Catholic communions, both
landsome structures, the latter being without doubt
second to none outside of Hobart or Launceston. It
;an be plainly seen from the railway line, and the
:ourist cannot help seeing the church as the train goes
ay.
DELORAIN E.
The Meander River which flows through the town-
ship is, to anglers, an attractive spot. Another river is
be Mersey, which has an advantage over the former,
nasmuch as it contains an abundance of native fish
and blackfish. The banks present a lovely appearance,
covered with native shrubbery of the richest variety in
great profusion. Deloraine has bold and impressive
surroundings, the twin mountains Gog and Magog
being prominent features in the landscape, besides
other mountains of considerable elevation. Gog and
Magog are separated by a mighty and wonderful gorge,
equal to any that is to be seen in the island, and
through this gorge run the waters of the Mersey. Like
most of this portion of the island, farmers abound,
their homes suggesting prosperity. The scenery on
all sides is of a romantic character. The dark ranges


of the West Coast, which the greatest part of the year
are clothed with a pure mantle of snow, with magnifi-
cent forests at their base, cannot fail to delight the
traveller as he journeys on, and cause him to feel that
his time has not been misused in visiting this lovely
part of Tasmania. Deloraine has, like other towns
passed, its many institutions, beautiful cottages, and
other characteristics that mark the towns of the colony.
Till June, 1885, this was the terminus of the Western
Line; now the iron horse has superseded the coach,
and onward we rush through scenes of beauty
and loveliness. Immediately after leaving the Delo-
raine station the railway crosses the Meander River
upon a magnificent bridge, with concrete abutments
and piers, capped with Ross freestone, and carrying
iron girders, the three spans being respectively 70ft.
6in., 75ft, and 44ft. 6in. The line then curves round
the esplanade of the township of Deloraine fronting
the river, and passing through the Keanefield estate
and farms belonging to Mr. F. W. Grubb and others
traverses the Dunorlan estate. Thus far its course is
through agricultural farms, but next comes the
Whitefoord Hills estate, a magnificent block of land
used for pastoral purposes. It is, however, stated the
Messrs. Field intend to cut up this estate into farms,
and should they do so it will give a great impetus to
the progress of the district. On the Whitefoord estate
are many attractive spots, which rivet the attention of
the traveller. To the left, after passing Middle Plain,
is the hill called “ Punch’s Terror,” and on the oppo-
site side of the line is “ Blackamoor Head.” Coiler’s
Creek is passed over several times before reaching the
next station, also the fast flowing waters of the Mersey.
RAILTON,
Which is the next township, has made wonderful head-
way during the last year or two. There is a comfortable
accommodation house, which is in good hands, the
proprietor, Mr. Tucker, doing his best to make his
guests happy and contented. Eight miles further on is
LATROBE,
The most important town along the Coast, being sur-
rounded by a large farming community. Many fine


places have been built on the main street; the banks
are a credit to the town, also the business houses.
Besides the usual public institutions there are several
?ood churches, large public school, and hall, which
s often in use for entertainments. The Mersey river
masses through the township, and is spanned by two
bridges—railway and foot. This town is making won-
derful progress, and there is no doubt that in a few
fears to come it will be the most noted outside of
Tobart or Launceston; but there is one great need
vhich should be attended to, that is the formation of
ts streets, which, at the present time (August 1885), are
n an abominable condition ; mud appears to be its
:hief trade mark. If the settlers wish to make Latrobe
jopular with visitors and others, let them attend to the
streets and paths, if this is done it will rank foremost
imongst the towns in Tasmania. The visitor, if in
search of comfortable quarters, would do well to visit
Whitaker's Coffee Palace, which is close to the Latrobe
Railway Station, and conspicuous by its “ Red Lamp,”
1 welcome beacon to the traveller in search of good
accommodation. The management is in good hands,
and the Palace has been furnished throughout on a scale
drat would please the most fastidious. The rooms are
lofty, well-ventilated, and cosy; good dining and sit-
ing rooms, well supplied with papers from all parts of
:he world. Those who are fond of music can have
;heir fill; in fact the comforts of a home, combined
vith freedom, are to be enjoyed at this well-known and
Dopular house, which is without doubt the best place
Df accommodation along the Western route, where
Ihose who prefer private to hotel life can feel perfectly
it ease. On leaving Latrobe the train passes over a
ine bridge, which spans the Mersey river; several
nice bits of scenery are passed by; the land is thickly
Imbered on both sides of the line.
FORMBY
[s the last station on the Western Railway, where
;he traveller takes coach or steamer' to the North-
West Coast. , The township is small, and as a


watering place exceedingly quiet. On arrival of
train —
The steeds are ready for their flight;
And old, bluff Jehu once again
Swings up to rule the whip and rein.
Onward we hie, like shooting star
That runs all dazzling —fleet and far;
And worthy sight for king to see,
Are four bold coursers, fast and free.
The hill is mounted, we look round with lingering
thoughts on all we see, then bidding adieu, press on-
ward, past tiny hamlets with their nest of pleasant
homes, whose owners with smiling faces greet the mail
as it goes through. To east and west, north and
south, our eyes are ever turned, taking in the thousand
and one charms that mark the way. Valley after
valley, with pure streams of water gliding by, are
passed, where quiet herds lie down to crop. The
settler’s axe and forest bird’s song join in chorus as we
spank along, making our journey short and pleasant.
The first township passed on the coach road is the
FORTH,
About six miles from Formby, over a good road.
Respecting scenery, etc., I can say nothing new.
The institutions are about the same as in the other
districts. The township is divided into two parts by
the bridge which spans the river. As you pass over
this bridge to the right the visitor is able to see the
home of Mr. James Smith, the greatest and hardest
worked prospector that Tasmania, or even the Aus-
tralias, have ever known. He it was who discovered
the Mount Bischoff tin deposits, which have given to
many profitable employment. May his name ever be
a household word in Tasmania, and may our children
be taught to know his true worth, and how for years
he strove to become acquainted with the mineral
wealth of the colony. Accommodation at the town-
ship is good, there being several hotels, and one com-
fortable private boarding house, kept by Mr. Bonner.
Another seven miles brings the visitor to the
LEVEN,
This pretty little township is well worth a visit,
there being so many places of interest that a visitor


mds no difficulty in getting to. It is noted for its
geological formation, the “ Three Brothers ” range,
,nd rocky gorge, or “ Leven’s Gates,” being very
ugged and romantic. The view from the bridge to
he left is very lovely, and away as far as the eye can
each the tourist sees the massive perpendicular rocks,
ising to a height of hundreds of feet, clothed with
egetation, wherever such can find root-hold. The
waters, flowing gently along at the base, make up a
>ifture not easily forgotten. The country through
diich this river flows is undulating and heavily tim-
>ered ; many good farms are seen, so that in the
:ourse of a few years we may expeft to find great
:hanges in the Leven district. The climate is all that
;ould be desired, and the Leven must in time become
i pleasant resort for visitors from the mainland. After
eaving this township the road runs parallel with the
ea-beach, and is a most renovating drive over a good
oad, with much to admire. Seven more miles, and the
PENGUIN
s in sight, a quiet spot, where nothing seems to
listurb the tranquility and peace of the inhabitants,
[die back country, which is very thickly wooded, is
ast undergoing a change, the settlers being real hard
vorking, striving hard to do their best with the
imited capital at their command, sending to market
, great deal of beef and garden produce. The end of
•ur coaching is now approaching; we are fast disap-
pearing from the Penguin; several small bridges are
rossed, the last being that which spans the Emu
liver, celebrated for its excellent fish, eels, trout, and
ilackfish. The Bay is in sight, and ranks amongst
he most beautiful of all the bays in the colony of fair
?asmania. This noble bay affords safe anchorage to
,ny sized vessels. It is something like three miles
dde. The coach with dashing steeds spins on till
The Inn is reached, both men and boys
Gather round with bustling noise.
Few moments serve—the harness bands
Are flying off as by magic’s hands,
The loosened nags are panting hard,
Seeking the well-known stable yard,
ilst the travellers make all haste to gain the wel*
le shelter which a good hotel gives.


EMU BAY,
With its interesting aud charming beach, recommendi
itself to the family man who desires a place for hi'i
children to enjoy the benefits of the seaside. Th(
township is laid out upon the banks that overlook the
Sea, thus affording a grand look-out and pleasant spo
for visitors to while away the time set apart for holiday
making or health-seeking. I must not here particu-
larise the hotels of Emu Bay, because each has done
its best to study the comforts of its patrons. The
country around the township consists of open fores
hills and swamps, with tracks of dense bush, timbered
With fine blackwood, stringybark, gum, myrtle, dog-
wood, sassafras, and gigantic fern trees. The visitoi
may also find delightful the many lovely walks that are
close to the township ; all of an enchanting nature. ]
feel sure the visitor who, taking my advice, makes a
short stay here, will not be disappointed, especially ii
fond of fishing, bathing, boating, and the gun, alsc
walking exercise. The Bay has many attractions that
will please all who go so far round the Coast. There
is also a good jetty, the best I should think on the
North-West Coast. It is an open roadstead with good
anchorage, having four fathoms of water at low tide,
Our next place of call is the wonderful tin mines oi
MOUNT BISGHOFF.
To reach this remarkable seat of industry, the tourist
takes the railway that has recently been completed by
the Van Diemen’s Land Company. To tell the tra-
veller that the trip from the Bay to the Mount is
charming would not sufficiently convey to him the idea
of its real grandeur. Onward we press, the iron horse
puffing and blowing as it winds round and round the
gorges and gullies that are clothed with the richest of
foliage, past deep solitary ravines walled in by precipi-
tous cliffs, where the pure crystal waters of the hills
leap from rock to rock, till they reach the flowing
waters belo^; here, there, and everywhere are the
hundreds of fairy nooks, festooned with trailing ferns,
that lend lustre to the scene. So is it from start to
finish,- and when we reach our destination a sort of
regret creeps over. us, which, however, is, dispelled


'hen we look around and gaze upon the remarkable
lountain homes of the tin miners, who, within the
hort period of 10 years, have planted upon the moun-
tin top an industry which seems likely to last for
lany years, whilst all around the table lands are being
fought under cultivation, and, like the prolific district
: the North East, have become a centre of adivity for
liners and farmers alike.
WARATAH
B the name given to the mountain township. It
preads over a large area of ground ; the streets are
eing well formed, the houses construded in a sub-
antial manner; in fad all foretells an important
iture. The inhabitants are counted by thousands
istead of hundreds. What once were barren mountain
opes are dotted with nice homes ; “ labour like a
lighty magician has walked forth to this region of
arkness and waste, and turned it into an abode for
je worthy sons of toil; the ‘philosopher,’ perfed in
is knowledge of nature, has handed over to labour
le mountain of tin which in his wanderings demanded
ttention, and gave signs of future wealth.” The once
ilitary and unknown spot now re-echoes with the voices
: the inhabitants. “ The anvil rings; the busy wheel
hirls round ; the mart of commerce,, the hall of
fience, the temple of religion and learning, rear high
leir lofty fronts; civilization smiles; liberty is glad ;
ie people rejoice, and the voice qf industry and glad-
es is heard on every side.” The prophets, who
-dared the enterprise a sham, hang down their heads ;
ie philosopher, whose, years of labour, amidst priva-'
3ns, hardships, and discomforts, are now ended, lives
sacefully in his cottage home, surrounded by a loving
ife and rosy-cheeked children, the thanks of the
)lonists have been tendered to him, and the name of
imes Smith is written upon the pages of history. A
aveller when here has a deal to see, ; that will be long
imembered by him. The workings of this extensive
line, will show what man can do, and what a wonderful
id this tin deposit really was. To spend one day in
ie locality wpuld be a folly, seeing, that there is so:


much that a visitor should make himself acquaints
with. On application to the respefted manager, Mi
H. W. F. Kayser, the visitor will be able to make i
tour of inspection of the Mount Bischoff Company’
works ; he will there see a sight the like of which h
has never seen before, or is likely to see again. Fron
beginning to end he will see the care and skill tha
have been used by the manager in bringing to per
feftion so remarkable an undertaking. Before departinj
from Bischoff, it would be well to go to the highes
part of the Mount; there take a look towards the Wes
Coast, when a marvellous and mighty sight will pre
sent itself. Whilst at the Mount no trouble wouli
be experienced with regard to hotel accommodation
This is now the length of the tour, where it is possibli
to enjoy ease and comfort. The traveller after enjoyinj
the sights of the Mount, returns to Emu Bay, on hi
way back to Launceston. If a change is required, th<
return trip could be made by water. There are tw<
steamers, the Devon and the Wellington, namet
after the two counties which skirt the Northern Coast
The Wellington is a new steamer, built in Englam
purposely for the trade. She has been fitted u]
most handsomely, so that visitors may depend upoi
a pleasant journey round the coast, with a change o
scenery. The want of another steamer has long beei
felt, both by the company and the travelling public
and my earnest wish is that this latest addition ma;
prove useful and successful.
Distance from Launceston to Mount Bischoff vii
Formby, is about 150 miles. Fare, by rail, fron
Launceston to Formby, distance, 82 miles, first clas;
16s. 3d., second class ns. Bd.; coach to Emu Bay
1 os.; rail to Bischoff, first class 12s. 6d., second clasi
7s. 6d.
By Water. —Steamers Wellington and Devon leavi
Launceston every Tuesday and Friday for Circula
Head, via Emu Bay.
George Town
Mersey River
Leven ...
First Class. Second Class.
Single. Return. Single. Return,
Ss. xos. ss, 10s.
xos. 20s. 7s. 6d. 15s.
15s. 30s. 12s. 245.


First Class. Second Class.
Single Return. Single. Return,
mu Bay ... 2ls. 425. 15s. 30s.
ircular Head ... 275. 545. 21s. 425.
These charges do not include meals. A good table is kept,
e charges being moderate.
FROM MOUNT BISGHOFF TO THE WEST
COAST.
To take this trip the tourist must be in good health
>le to rough it, and to carry his swag; be prepared
r a little mud now and again, hip deep, the chance
: being stuck up by the rivers being flooded, and
imerous other difticulties, including limited accom-
modation, and all the drawbacks common to such
smote regions. The track from Waratah to the
'ieman River is through heavy bush country, awfully
ret and uncomfortable and mountainous. On the left
,s the Magnet Range, and to the right Mount Cleve-
and ; then comes the Heazlewood River, past which
1 tramp over Long and Brown’s Plains brings the
tourist to the township of Corinna, on the Pieman
River. Post and Telegraph Offices, with a few huts,
constitute this settlement. The river is a fine body of
water, with numerous tributaries, many of them have
been traversed by C. P. Sprent, Esq., the present
Deputy Surveyor-General, a gentleman who has in his
time, as surveyor, done some remarkably hard work,
and often carried a load which would almost sink a
ship. Mr. Sprent has done more to open up the West
Coast than any other man, and I hope he will live to
see this portion of the island settled upon the same as
the West Coast of New Zealand, which by wise men
was said to be of no account. I have had many chats
with West Coast prospeftors, who have done some
rough work in their time, yet none would admit that
they have worked so hard as the worthy Deputy Sur-
veyor. This river divides the counties of Russell and
Montague. On the other side of this river the track
leads to the Mount Heemskirk mines, thence to Trial
lay, over the Little Henty River, along the beach till the
denty River proper is reached. The opposite side
eached, there are two tracks, one inland, the other along


the beach, which leads to Macquarie Harbour, once a
penal settlement of the most horrible character. The.
entrance to this harbour was called Hell’s Gates, and.
the penal station, Hell-upon-Earth, The system of
torture carried on at this place was such that death was
often sought as a relief by many of the unfortunate
prisoners. There are many’cases on record where
prisoners confined in that horrid den of iniquity have
committed murder so that they might be brought to
Hobart—there to be executed. There are numerous
instances where parties of determined men resolved on:
escape, and owing to the barrenness of the soil in that
part of the Island —which produces nothing eatable
for man —lots were cast, the death blow was given/
and the flesh of the dead body devoured by the
derers. One case I will here mention, which will
show the extremes to which these poor creatures were
driven, who, bent upon escape, had no thought of
future prospers, or even the consequences that would,:
if captured, follow.
Having been arrested at Hobart, after his escape
from Macquarie Harbour, one Pearce was sent back
to that settlement, where the deceased (Cox) and he
worked together in the same gang. Cox constantly
entreated him to run away with him from that settle*
ment, which he refused to do for a length of time.
Cox, having procured fishhooks, a knife, and some
burnt rag for tinder, he at last agreed to go with him;
to which he was most powerfully induced by the
apprehension of corporal punishment for the loss of a
shirt that had been stolen from him. For the first and
second days they strayed through the forest; on the
third made the beach, and travelled towards Port
Dalrymple until the fifth, when they arrived at King’s
River. They remained for three or four days in an
adjoining wood to avoid soldiers, who were in pursuit
of them, and were all the time from the period they
started without a morsel to eat. Overcome by famine
Pearce determined to take Cox’s life, which he effected
by the stroke of an axe while Cox was sleeping. Soon
after the soldiers had departed Pearce occupied
the place they had been in, where he remained a day
and a night, living on the mutilated, remains of Cox*


He then returned to the • settlement, made signal, and
was taken up by the pilot, who conveyed him to Mac-
quarie Harbour, where he disclosed to the Comman-
dant what ho had done, being weary of life, and
■Willing to die for the misfortunes and atrocities into
which he had fallen. Other dreadful deeds could be
penned, but this one will suffice to show the awful
misfortunes which came upon the unfortunate crea-
tures who were detained in this hell upon earth.
' The track inland must now be kept in sight and
followed, the river being kept to the left, through
Misery Flat, over the West Coast Ranges, down again
the other side to Long Marsh, past several streams
and rivers, keeping somewhat to the north-east over
very rough country, past the King William Ranges,
to the south of Lake St. Clair, till the Derwent River
is reached, which river is about 8 miles from the lake
at this part of the track. Still pushing onwards, and
nearing cultivated country, the tourist reaches the
ViToria Valley, Native Tier, and lastly the Ouse town-
ship, where at the corner stands a good boarding
house, kept by one who does his best, with the aid of
his wife, to attend the wants of all who give them a
call. There is also a hotel close by, from which the
coach starts for Hobart. At the Ouse the tourist
can take the coach through Hamilton, Macquarie
Plains, New Norfolk, and then to the Railway Station,
known as New Norfolk Road, or South Bridgewater,
on to Hobart. The visitor who undertakes this
journey may well boast of going through the worst
part, yet grand and most isolated portion of Tas-
mania. If any of my readers accomplish this route,
I shall be most happy to hear from them. A letter to
the Post Office, Hobart, Tasmania, would find me,
and be attended to ! Audaces fortuna juvat .


TO the; lake country.
Via Tunbridge.
Many of the difficulties which have for a number of
years prevented visitors from making a tour through
this marvellous portion of the colony have been swept
away, yet there are still impediments in the way which
tempts me again to be very “soft” respecting advice
with regard to this trip. Chief among these reasons
are—the want of accommodation —distance from one
lake to another—and need of better tracks. As a holi-
day trip it is one of the most enjoyable that can be
taken, providing that the visitor can walk his 18 miles
per day over hills and mountains, boulders, rough
tracks, and swamp lands. The chances of the weather
is another great drawback to the journey, there being no
“ pubs ” on the line of march in which to seek shelter.
The only recognised place of accommodation is at the
bridge between Lakes Sorell and Crescent; this is
kept by Mr. Brownie, who, with his wife, does his best
to make everything pleasant. The two lakes are close
to his cottage, and divided by a narrow strip of land.
To the south-east of Lake Crescent is a remarkable
eminence, known as the Table Mountain, which can be
seen for miles along the Lake Country. Lake Sorell
has high land close to its shores, and presents a
pleasing appearance. Boats are kept for the use
of visitors, but they are, like friend “Brownie,”
rather old and somewhat the worse for wear, not
to be trusted on smooth or rough water. From
his cottage it is close upon 12 miles to the next
place of call, which is called the Steppes. Constable
Wilson lives here, and is known far and wide for his
hospitality. The cottage is the pifture of cleanliness,
and he has a good library with books to suit any taste.
Mr. Wilson’s garden has in it almost every kind of
flower, from the tiniest to the largest and most choice.
His neighbours all speak well of him, and I am sure
they have reason to do so. He is a great reader; his
weekly budget of papers show it. He makes good
use of his papers by lending them to the shepherds,
who appreciate his thoughtfulness. About 5 miles
from Mr. Wilson’s cottage, off the Great Lake Road,


ONE HUNDRED PIANOFORTES,
n Rosewood, Walnut, Black, and Black and Gold, selected from
he manufactories of the most eminent makers in England, France,
ind Germany.
essrs. J. WALCH & SONS,
Messrs, Walsh Bros. A Birshall,
Invite inspection of their Magnificent Show of Pianofortes, selected
by their London Agent from the following makers; —LONDON—
Brinsmead and Sons, Broadwood and Sons, Collard and Collard,
Esdaile and Co., Challen and Son. PARIS —M. Bord. BERLIN—
Schwechten, Neumeyer, Ecke, Rosener. • STUTTGART —Lipp
and Sohn, Schiedmayer. DRESDEN —Roenisch, Kaps. LEIPSIC
—Bluthner. HAMBURGH —Renardi, Blackenstein. COLOGNE
—lbach and Sohn, Carl Mand. CASSEL —Carl Scheel.
PRICES FROM £35 TO £B5.
HORIZONTAL BOUDOIR IRON FRAME GRANDS.
The Finest Instruments ever imported into the Colony.
Brinsmead and Sons, Lipp and Sons, Collard and Collard, Schied-
mayer, Broadwood and Sons, Kaps.
C3T Price List and Terms of Payment, extending over TWO
YEARS, to be had on application.
The Mason and Hamlin Cabinet Organs.
Sole Agents for Tasmania —J. WALCH & SONS, and WALCH
BROS. & BIRCHALL.
Important Improvements, securing: Greater Excellence and
Lower Rates.
Improved Key Action. —Reducing the force necessary to manipu-
late the Keys nearly one-half.
Improved Stop Action. —Very effective and reliable, yet simple in
construction.
Improved Reeds or Vibrators. —Manufactured by newly-invented
machinery, thus securing complete uniformity and tho-
roughness.
Improved Centre Pressure and Self-Adjusting Reed Valve. —
Makes the aClion more instantaneous, sure, and perfeCl.
Improved Knee Swell, —Producing the most perfeCt crescendos
and DIMINUENDOS.
Improved Voicing Reeds. —Producing special excellence, such as
no other instrument in the world can equal.
Resonant and Vibrant Cases. —lncreasing both the volume and
qualities of the tone.
Send for Illustrated Price Lists, and Terms for Monthly
Payments. Prices from EIGHT to FIFTY POUNDS.


8
h •*
Z §
0 g
CL *
s
CO -S
- <S
s.i t;
<K •*■
—I
Q
< « ■§
HI $
1
8
2*l


are the Arthur’s Lakes. To reach these, Mr. Best’s
cottage is passed, where, if the visitor should call, he
may rely upon a good reception. Returning to the
Steppes, the traveller may, if he so desires, leave the
Lakes by the road near Mr. Wilson’s cottage, which
leads straight into Bothwell—distance, about 25 miles.
Fhis, of course, would curtail the Lake trip, which I
■hink the tourist does not desire, so instead of leaving
:or Bothwell the Great Lake road should be followed,
ivhich is in a line with Wilson's cottage. A tramp
Df about 16 miles brings the tourist to the Great Lake,
vhich is about 15 miles long by 5 broad, but the deep
md continuous indentations of its shores give it a
circumference very disproportionate to its limits, and
conjectured to be little less than 150 miles; its depth,
vhich is extremely variable, is differently estimated,
cut in no case with any pretension to accuracy; its
might above the level of the sea is 3,882 feet. There
ire five islets in the lake, covered with a species of
cedar and numerous shrubs. The country in the vicinity
s not thickly wooded, but composed of alternate marsh
md hills, offering many traCls available for sheep and
cattle runs, while in the distance the landscape abounds
n the picturesque adjuncts of mountain and forest. A
ocal historian, Mr. David Burn, speaks of its woody
slands and glittering bays with rapturous admiration,
ingland, he says, may vaunt her Windermere; Scot-
and chant the beauties of Loch Lomond ; Ireland
croclaim the graces of Killarney; but not with truer or
crouder tongue than Antipodean Tasmania may boast
he mountain glories and glowing waters of her own
weet lakes, than which none is fairer or sweeter than
he majestic Clarence. The lee shore of the lake is
noteCted by a singular natural breakwater from the :
ury of the winter winds, and the causeway is nearly
.s regular as if constructed by masonic art. The
Shannon emerges a full-grown river from the broad
xpanse of Great Lake, whose waters nevertheless, in
ome parts, overflow their borders, even during the
/arm months; after rain they of Course rise con-
iderably, and during tempestuous weather occasionally
/ear a turbulent aspeCt, quite at variance with their
ordinary tranquil beauty.


; Lake Echo is the next aftd last brnthis track, before
reaching the low lands. Lovelier scenery could scarce
be imagined. The . shore is high and covered with
heavy timber to the water’s edge; the lake is clear,
deep, and blue, and several miles from side to side.
This beautiful lake cannot fail to charm the tourist, so
picturesque are its surroundings. Belts of forest and
wooded spurs, enclosing a succession of bays and
inlets, are its peculiar characteristics. There are two
islands to the north of this lovely lake, which are called
the “ Haywood ” and “ Ash ” islands ; both are thickly
wooded, and add considerably to the beauty of this
lake. Lake Echo, with its fairy islets, its flowery
banks, and clear blue waters, render it far more at-
tractive than any of the others. Close to the lake is
the shepherd’s hut, occupied by William Cashion, a
jolly good fellow, whose hearty welcome may always
be relied upon. Distance from Great Lake is 10 miles.
Leaving this lake, the visitor has a long journey before
him, of nearly 40 miles, before he reaches a hotel,
which is at Bothwell, situated upon the banks of the
Clyde, where good roads and accommodation are again
met, thus bringing to an end a journey of great
interest.
LAKE ST. CLAIR
Is about nine miles long from north to south, and two
miles wide from east to west; it has an area of 10,000
acres, and is formed by the damming up, by volcanic
aClion, of the valley between Mounts Olympus and Ida.
There is but one outlet, which is the River Derwent,
which issues from the south end of the Lake. To reach
this Lake rough country is passed through. There is
no accommodation after passing the Ouse Bridge,
"T*
& m


By Main Line Railway.
FROM LAUNCESTON TO HOBART,
The Launceston Terminus is opposite the Parle, con-
venient to the town, and within easy access of the
shipping. As the train rolls out Of the station a
capital view of the town presents itself. The houses
present a handsome appearance, the outskirts of the
town along the Elphin-road, with the green hedges and
fertile gardens, look inexpressibly charming on a fine
day. I
ST. LEONARDS
Is the first outside settlement on the line, and lies to
the left, four miles from Launceston. The North
Esk flows along close to the line, and on each
bank the waving willows bend their branches over the
placid waters, forming an archway for some distance;
It is an agreeable place to spend a holiday at, having
a tranquil beauty of its own.
BREADALBANE,
A farming district, comes next, where there is a siding
for the convenience of those who are settled upon the
land between St. Leonards and Evandale. The train
next winds round several hills r and through
gradually ascending, till it reaches .d
EVANDALE,
I "■ r
Where the landscape cannot fail to call forth ex-,
pressions of admiration. As. far .as. .the eye can reach


undulating lands are seen, divided into many farms,
each with its snug cottage, orchard, and leafy elms,
oaks, and other English trees that afford shelter. The
village of Evandale, as seen from a distance, adds
considerably to the beauty of this romantic district.
The church with a spire is the English, and that on the
bank overlooking the railway, Presbyterian. The
panoramic view obtained from the line cannot easily
be forgotten, and as the express train speeds along to
the next station the visitor can see to the east the
mighty peak known as Ben Lomond, which in the
winter months is covered with snow. To obtain a good
view of the mountain and country which is beyond the
railway station at
EPPING,
The visitor would do well, if he has time, to leave the
train, and take a walk of about four miles, turning to
the left of the coach road, then the first to the right,
through a gate, thence straight away towards the hills,
past several well-known sheep stations, chief amongst
them being that of James Gibson, Esq., known as
Belle Vue, a name famous throughout the Australian
colonies for its quality of wool and unique breed of
sheep, such as the far-famed Sir Thomas I. and Sir
Thomas 11., which brought their popular owner re-
spectively 680 and 604 guineas. Sir Thomas was
sold in Melbourne when six years old, and the other,
Sir Thomas 11., was sold in Sydney when seven
years old. Both were old prize-winners, and no better
proof of their value can be given than the appreciation
shown by intercolonial sheepowners for them when
submitted by auction, as evidenced by the keen com-
petition and high prices realised. From this gentle-
man’s mansion a noble sight presents itself. There,
at your feet, is the substantial and comfortable home
of the squire, with its pretty gardens, neat paths, and
snug trysting places ; the noble river flowing gently
along, hemmed in by grassy banks with sheltered ave-
nues, which are deliciously cool and refreshing in the
summer time; green landscapes, over which the best
sheep in the colony are seen roving; and a hundred
other objects which tend to make life sweet and.


pleasant. Then away to the east, amidst forests of
mighty trees, are rocks where, in mid-summer, the
snowflake reposes, and sparkling streams of water
flow from shelf to shelf, till the river is reached, all
radiant and clear as crystal. Then there are the hun-
dreds of fairy nooks, festooned with trailing ferns, and
carpeted with choice grasses, o’erhanging which are
dripping boughs that catch a brighter green from
translucent cascades that come skipping from the
rocks above. And higher still is the monster peak
Ben Lomond, a sight of greater magnificence than the
most enthusiastic can conceive. The eye takes in at
one glance, as the traveller ascends this majestic
pyramid, the beautiful valley below and the far distant
ranges of the west, which complete a pifture not easily
depifted with pen or brush. This tempest worn peak
of Ben Lomond, rising about 5,000 ft. from the sea
level, is, without doubt, the grandest sight along the
eastern side of the island. All along the line are
noted home stations, which, if the visitor be on foot,
would be well worth visiting; but, as we are in com-
pany of the iron horse, we will retrace our steps, and
speed away to the
CORNERS,
Where the junction of the Fingal Railway is met, and
where passengers change for George’s Bay. (For par-
ticulars of the district, see elsewhere.) The coaching
days of Tasmania are fast coming to an end, for the
country is being well spanned by railways, which
betokens much prosperity for Tasmania, and its busi-
ness will so be done with considerable despatch, thus
bringing every part in quick communication with
Hobart and Launceston. Before long a large-sized
township will spring up at the Corners, for back lands
are gradually becoming occupied by small farmers
and others, who will bring to market [their produce by
way of the Corners.
CAMPBELL TOWN,
Forty-two miles from Launceston, comes next. It is
a large town, has several good hotels, and well-built
stores; the church with the spire, somewhat hidden


from view by a cluster of trees, belongs to the: Presby
te'rians, and the red brick one is the Church of England
There is also a Mechanics’ Institute, Assembly Room
and Public School. The surrounding country is chieth
pastoral. The river that is spanned by a bridge, alonj
the main road, is the Elizabeth, where the disciples o
Isaac Walton find enough to do if a short stay is mad<
here. The main street runs through the centre of the
town, which forms part of the main road betweer
Hobart and Launceston. There are some fine build'
ings in the township, which in many instances are
equal to those of our chief towns.
ROSS
Is eight miles further on, and lies in the Macquarie
Valley, through which a fine river runs. This river has
its attractions on account of its being well supplied with
Several kinds of fish. The English Church faces on
the main road. The material used in building it was
taken from the quarries close by. There is* at the
Southern end of the town, another place of worship;
which stands on an elevated spot. This is the new
Wesleyan Church. Almost opposite is the Public
School, attended by a fair number of scholars, who
kre well conducted, healthy looking, and intelli-
gent. The interior of this school speaks volumes for
its master, Mr. W. Barnett, and his daughters, who
evidently take a delight in their work, doing their best
to make school life attractive and pleasant. The old
buildings at the south end of the township, and facing
the line, are remnants of the hateful past. About three
miles from the township of Ross, on the main road,
stands the well-known Horton College, which was
founded in 1855 by the late Captain Horton, It is a
large handsome building, in the Tudor style of archi-
tecture, built of brick, and pointed with lime and
cement. There is a fine tower, which adds consider--
ably to the appearance of the building. It is plainly
to be seen from the railway line, and is admired on
account of its noble exterior. On the other side of
the railway line the visitor will observe a fine estate*
known as Mona Vale, with one of the largest mansions


hat has been built in the Australasias. The gardens
ire well laid out, and facing the mansion is a good
sized lake, which looks very pretty because of the
iyillows which overhang its banks.
TUNBRIDGE,
Which is nine miles past Ross, is the destination of all,
who are disposed to visit the wonderful Lakes Sorell and
Crescent, &c. (particulars to be found elsewhere). The
township is not over-inviting, nOr is it likely to attrafb
the attention of the tourist. Hotel quarters are good,
and from the owner much information —re lakes —can
be obtained.
ANTILL PONDS
Gomes next. This was in the coaching days the Half
Way, where passengers could seek repose, and break
their journey. In the first days of the railway, also, a
stop was made here for refreshments, but this is now
past, so away w r e roll till the welcome station of
PARRATAH (OATLANDS JUNCTION)
Is reached, where a short stay is made, so that passen-
gers may refresh themselves. Within a stone’s throw
of the railway platform, and facing the same, is the
Railway Hotel, kept by Mr. Johnston, who has gone to
considerable trouble and expense in fitting up his hotel,
so as to afford to the travelling public every means to
make this breakage in the journey acceptable. A good
table is kept, the charges moderate. Ladies may
always rely upon getting a cup of tea here. Visitors,;
who wish to spend a few days in the neighbour-
hood, could not do better than make the Railway
Hotel their head quarters. Good sport can be had with
the rod and gun. About four miles to the west of the
station is the town of Oatlands, connefted to the main
by a branch line, through Bacon’s Hill, a pastoral dis-r
trift. This was once a prosperous place, that is, when
the coaches ran, but now very little is doing, the
country having fallen into the hands of a few. Within
& short distance of Oatlands is Lake Delverton, and
Lake Tiberias; is eight miles further on. Visitors will


notice that on reaching Parratah the air is cold and
bracing, and a need is sometimes experienced for a
wrapper or top coat. The reason is that a height of
i,33 7fr- above the sea level has been reached. The
road which crosses the line to the east leads to Tun-
nack, a small township, which is likely to become an
important and large one in a few years. The popula-
tion around Tunnack is very great, chiefly small farmers,
who send to market a great amount of produce.
Leaving Parratah Station, the line is all down hill
through to Hobart. If the tourist is not tired he may,
by taking a seat on the eastern side of the line, rest his
eyes upon glorious scenery, extending over a distance
of 50 miles. Jericho siding is first passed, then skirt-
ing along the east bank of Lake Tiberias, and through
leafy forests, the Flat Top Tunnel is reached, water
taken in, and then within a few seconds all is darkness,
the “iron horse ’ puffing like mad, as it pushes its way
through a tunnel three-quarters of a mile in length. It
will be advisable to keep the windows closed, as the
smoke arising from confinement of the tunnel is by no
means pleasant. So soon as daylight is reached the
traveller (if not unpleasant to others) should open the
east side window, and below will be seen a spectacle
not easily described, one which the most skilful word
painter would fail to do justice to. Pen or pencil can
but mimic the lovely and vast panorama stretching to
right and left, with the flowing river, mighty rocks,
ferns, and gigantic trees, which, combined, form about
the grandest scene along the railway. The steep,
narrow gorge gradually widens out, till hill, dale, vale,
and valley are reached, where lies peacefully the re-
nowned town of Jerusalem (not the golden). The
construftion of the line, with its wonderful bends,
cannot fail to attraft the notice of the traveller. Several
very sharp curves are made, so much so, that it seems
as if it would not be an over-difficult task for the driver
to shake hands with the guard.
JERUSALEM
Is an important farming district, and somewhat noted
for its coal, several of the mines being in full working


order. The township is an extensive one, with two hotels,
public school, Roman Catholic school, two churches,
and a number of stores. On the eastern side of the
line is the English Church, and that on the opposite
side is the Roman Catholic Church, both neat, handsome
structures, with good and well-kept grounds. For
miles round Jerusalem the land is under cultivation,
the farmers generally reaping a good harvest. The
visitor, if not tired, should note the passage of the
train, and the remarkable construction of the line, as
also the wonderful scenery passed through, from the
Tunnel.
CAMPANIA
Is the next station, and those going to the East coast
(Swansea) leave the train to seek the hospitalities of
host White, whose house is now famous for its good
brands and comfortable accommodation. The large
Building close to the station is a grannery of recent
•construction, The whole of the valley is under culti-
vation, and is considered to be the best wheat producing
■district of the south. There are many neat farms along
the East coast and Richmond roads, which would vie
most creditably with those of the old world. The flats
are well watered by Native Corners Creek, White Kan-
garoo, and Coal rivers. As the train passes onward, and
when nearing the next station, the visitor will observe
an extensive stone quarry (freestone), which is owned
By Mr. Ripon Shield, of Hobart, builder, who has used
it of late on some of the finest buildings in Hobart.
he quarry is in the Tea-tree district.
BRIGHTON
Follows next, and the first view of Mounts Wellington
and Direction is obtained here. The township proper
is about a mile from the Railway, through which the
■coach passes on its way to Bothwell. Passengers who
stay here could not do better than seek the comfort
and repose which is afforded by a short sojourn at the
snug little inn, “The Enterprise,” which is close to the
line, and kept by W. Hagan, who, with his amiable
wife, does all that is possible to make the break of the


journey pleasant and agreeable. For particulars r<
Coach drive to Bothwell, see index.
NORTH BRIDGEWATER
Brings the journey almost to an end, and it is here tha 1
the Derwent river is crossed, when, till the city o‘.
Hobart is reached, the line is parallel with the river
along which there are so many charming spots, which.
On a fine day, are most enchanting.
NEW NORFOLK ROAD JUNCTION.
(South ’Bridgewater.)
Where the traveller, if bent upon a visit to the Der-
went Valley, New Norfolk, Glenora, Hamilton, and
(f)use, would change. From this station till Hobart is
reached many picturesque spots are passed, which
fully compensate the weary traveller for the long
journey of this remarkable railway. After stopping a,
few. moments the train dashes onward past several
nice estates on the Berriedale-road, thence to
O’BRIEN’S BRIDGE
(Glenorchy),
Which is the last station of any note. The scenery of
the district is indeed enchanting, backed up as it is by
the mountain ranges, with deep gullies and gorges,
grown over with tall timber trees, and majestic tree ferns,
lighted up here and there by bright tints of the morn-
ing sun. The hop gardens on either side mark the
steady progress of one of Tasmania’s industries.
Orchards, flower gardens, snug cottages, and happy,
merry, little children, cattle, sheep, and horses roam-
ing the fields, give life to the scene. At Glenorchy
the visitor will observe a remarkable light patch on the
side of Mount Wellington. This is the landslip,
caused by an unusually large fall of rain in June, 1872.
The heavy rainfall had saturated a considerable
extent of the upper side of the mountain, where the
almost impenetrable scrub was interspersed with
enormous blue gum and. other trees, and the gravelly
soil easily absorbed the water till it reached the rock


m which it stood. It then, owing to the steepness of
he hill side, slid down to the extent of a hundred
icres.into the narrow bed of the rivulet, taking with it
housands of trees, many of them 40 or 50 tons in
veight, with the boulders of rock and clay, till it corm
>letely dammed up the rivulet, and kept back its
swelling waters. The mighty mass of water at last
oecame so great, that it took all before it, doing com
piderable damage to valuable property which lay in its
oath. On the other side of the line, overhanging the
oleasant waters of the Derwnet, can be seen the bury-,
,ng-ground of Cornelian Bay, and over the water
stands Mount Direction, with its companion close by*
known as the “Devil’s Nose,” Following the line,'
New Town comes next, then the sweet-smelling gar--
dens of the Royal Society, close to which can be seen
Government House, with well-kept grounds, walks,;
and carriage drive; then turning the bend a full view
of the Bay presents itself, with Bruni Island in the
distance, and Mount Nelson, and lastly, as if by
magic, a full view of the beautiful City of Hobart
suddenly attracts the attention of the tourist, and brings
to a close a pleasant tour from one end of the island
to the other. Three trains leave Launceston each day
(except Sunday) for Hobart. Fares : First class —30s
single; 455, return. Second class —20s. single; 30s.
return. Distance, 133 miles. Return tickets are
available for 11 clear days (or two weeks) for the whols
journey.


WESTELLA, HOBART.
See page 47.


The visitor or tourist upon landing finds no diffi-
ilty in getting a cab to convey himself and luggage
an hotel, or other place of accommodation. The
incipal hotels are—the Orient, Carlton, and Currie’s ;
id best boarding establishments—Westella, Pressland
ouse, Ingle Hall, and Harrington House, all of
hich are in the centre of the city. I would sincerely
I vise all who wish comfort to seek out the best
)uses, and so prevent the necessity of going from
le place to another, which means expense and
Duble, and other annoyances so common in all
aces of pleasure resort. The Carlton Hotel has
;en thoroughly renovated by the present owner, Mr.
Oastler. late of Kingston, who has not spared time
- r il '" oof
here is the publicubie im LlWyyn liu illi uijpuuuu.
r company tables for small parties, and private
»artments j each floor has its shower and plunge
iths; the bedrboms are lighted with gas, and there is
nice garden with lawn and numerous little snuggeries,
mstituting fruit garden, fernery, and fountains,
ood stables, with coach-house. I must not forget a>r
iportant item for so large an establishment; I mean
e dairy, from which fresh butter and good milk can
i relied upon. Another feature in Westella is, that
SPECIAL NOTICE
WESTELLA.
Terms for Vifc, £2 2s . per
Season - £3 3s.
corner 10 ? , paid to the
comiort of Invalids.




The visitor or tourist upon landing finds no difli-
ilty in getting a cab to convey himself and luggage
an hotel, or other place of accommodation." The
incipal hotels are—the Orient, Carlton, and Currie's ;
id best boarding establishments—Westella, Pressland
ouse, Ingle Hall, and Harrington House, all of
hich are in the centre of the city. I would sincerely
Ivise all who wish comfort to seek out the best
louses, and so prevent the necessity of going from
me place to another, which means expense and
rouble, and other annoyances so common in all
daces of pleasure resort. The Carlton Hotel has
ieen thoroughly renovated by the present owner, Mr.
:. Oastler, late of Kingston, who has not spared time
>r money in making the hotel one of the most com-
pete in Tasmania. As can be seen by the accom-
lanying picture, it has a handsome and inviting
ippearance, the balcony being a most pleasant addi-
ion to this now favourite hotel. Visitors desiring
irivate suites of rooms can have them, as the
nanagement has made every provision for all
flasses of tourists. Those in search of a re-
ined home, healthily situated, with pleasant sur-
.md;*igs, and a splendid view of the city, Mounts
Wellington and Nelson, also the Bay, should go to
Westella, which is in Elizabeth-street, and deserves
mreserved recommendations, for within its stately
vails are comforts of every kind, the rooms being
veil furnished throughout with all that is neces-
sary to suit the most fastidious of tastes. On
he ground floor are good dining, billiard, and smok-
ng rooms, fitted up in a style that would suit the most
distinguished visitor, every requirement being studied.
Fhere is the public table for those who feel disposed
:or company;»tables for small parties, and private
ipartments; each floor has its shower and plunge
3aths; the bedrboms are lighted with gas, and there is
i nice garden with lawn and numerous little snuggeries,
constituting fruit garden, fernery, and fountains.
Good stables, with coach-house. I must not forget a»
important item for so large an establishment; I mean
the dairy, from which fresh butter and good milk can
be relied upon. Another feature in Westella is, that


all can feel at home, and enjoy the privileges of hon
and club life alike. Ingle Hall, which is close to tl
Town Hall, and within five minutes walk of the princ
pal public buildings, is another of our comfortab
homes, where everything that can be done to make
holiday trip to the Island enjoyable is done. I
rooms are lofty, well furnished, and cosy, from whic
a fine view of the Derwent River is obtained. TI
wharves are close by, also the Main Line Railwa
Station, the Domain, and other places of interest, s
that Ingle Hall has around it the chief objefts of not<
Harrington House has also been much favoured t
visitors from the other colonies. The fare by cab t
any of these places is only one shilling, that is accorc
ing to the table fixed by the City Council; extra i
charged for luggage.
Hobart received its name from Governor King afte
the Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lord Hobar
in 1803. The city is well supplied with water from th
numerous springs in Mount Wellington. The princi
pal streets are Macquarie, Davey, Collins, Liverpool
Elizabeth, and Murray ; the last named three contaii
the chief shops. In Macquarie-street will be foum
the Post Office and Supreme Court, handsome edifice
of freestone ; lower down on the same side, is the Towi
Hall, an ornament to the city; it contains a fine organ
public library and reading room, and a large hall
besides many other offices for municipal purposes
The Museum is also in this street, and should b(
visited by the tourist. The present Curator seems ben
upon making it a success, and deserves great praise foi
his endeavours. The members of the Royal Society
of Tasmania meet in this institution once a month
when instructive papers are read, dealing with scientific
Subjects. Opposite the Supreme Court is the Telegrapl
Office. The Government Buildings are in Murray-
street, adjoining the Post Office, and the Land anc
Survey and Government Printing Offices in Davey-
street. At the bottom of Murray-street, facing the
harbour, are the Houses of Parliament; the Custom
House lies at the west end of the block. The Hospital,
with its new addition, is in LiverpooLstreet, as also the
T.M.L. Railway Station (from Hobart to Launceston);


Her Majesty’s Gaol is in Campbell-street, as is also
the Theatre. Places of Worship are numerous, every
seft being represented, as will be seen elsewhere.
Many other useful particulars will be found in the fol-
lowing pages, so that visitors and others seeking infor-
mation may be supplied.
PLACES THAT SHOULD BE VISITED,
Within easy reach of Post Office , Hobart.
Public Gardens, open from daylight to dusk. They
are beautifully situated on the banks of the Derwent.
Queen's Domain, a large area of open land situated
on an undulating elevation to the north-east of the
city, laid out with good roads, and forming a capital
recreation ground for the public. On the south-east
portion of the Domain is a cricket ground and regatta
ground, each having a grand stand and other conve-
niences. The baths and Queen’s battery are here also.
Correft time of day is made known by gun, fired at
i p.m. daily.
Franklin Square, Macquarie-street. A reserve
planted with trees and flowers, between Town Hall
and the Supreme Court. In the centre of this square
is a bronze statue of Sir John Franklin, the Arftic
explorer, and once popular Governor of the colony.
Seats are provided for the public, and it has become a
favourite resting place for young and old.
Town Hall and Public Library, Macquarie-street.
The Town Hall is a fine, handsome building, which
would stand well and creditably side by side with
similar institutions in the Old World. There are the
usual offices attached, with a large hall upstairs, in
which there is a good organ. To the right of the Town
Hall is the Public Library. This important institution is
3pen free of charge to the public. The greatest care
is taken by the Librarian to preserve its thorough use-
fulness. The Reading-room tables are covered with
periodicals and newspapers, from all parts of the
world. The Reference-room, where books for that
irpose can be seen, is well arranged, with the latest
id best that can be obtained. Should a visitor find
ly difficulty in obtaining the volume he or she desires.


application should be made to the Librarian, whc
office is in the opposite room, when all aid will
rendered. The Public Library is, without doubt,
great acquisition to the citizens and others who wish
make use of it.
Girls’ Industrial Home, Barrack Square, Upper
Davey-street. This, like the Boys’ Home, is for the
reception of children whose parents are in indigent
circumstances. They are well cared for, and when of
suitable age placed out to service.
St. Joseph’s Orphanage (Roman Catholic), where a
number of children are taken care of, and when of a
suitable age placed out in the world to obtain their own
living. This institution is well worth a visit, and is
open to visitors at any time of the day. It is situated
at the top of Harrington-street, almost opposite to St.
Joseph’s Church, part of which faces on Macquarie-
street. The visitor would secure a hearty welcome
from the Sisters, whose work of love bears fruit in
many ways. The children when placed out in the
world do not forget the kindness shown, and often pay
a visit to the home of their childhood. During the
past year a new wing has been built to the Orphanage,
which now gives it an imposing appearance, and has
thus added another to many handsome buildings in
the City of Hobart. It is to be hoped that ere long
the other wing will be erefted, thus completing one of
the most useful homes in the colony. The Orphanage
is supported by all creeds, and in the words of a well-
known clergyman of the old world (Church of
England), I would say all honour to the men and
women “ whose aim it is to provide for the little ones,
and rescue them from probable guilt and grief. Ye
who love children, ye who delight to see the smile of
joy upon the youthful face, ye who love the ‘holy child
Jesus,’ ye who desire to see the child-like (which is the
Christ-like) spirit spread upon the earth, help those
who try to lead the little ones in the right way. Help
by your sympathies, your efforts, your prayers, and
your offerings.”
Johnstone Brothers’ Woollen Mills, Mac-
quarie-street, where the busy workers are gathering
together the “ fleece from the flock, and weave it into


raiment soft, warm, and beautiful; the purple robe of
the prince and the grey gown of the peasant being
alike their handiwork.” These brothers deserve great
credit for the determined manner in which they have
resolved to show what can be done in Tasmania, and
thus add to the industries of the colony. Local
industries should be viewed with favour in every new
country, Parliament and people should foster them,
for they mean not only gain to the promoters, but to
the whole colony. The more these industries prosper,
;the more independent we become as a colony, and
the more employment is found for our own population.
Messrs. Johnstone Brothers have had an uphill fight,
but if they do not succeed it will be because Tas-
manians fail to appreciate what is good for themselves
and country. If the people want good material for
their money, if they want to show their love of their
country, and wish to do something in the development
of this colony, let them enquire for, and purchase the
goods of, the Hobart Woollen Mills. The time for
visiting these works is on Wednesday and Saturday
afternoons, between two and four o’clock. Cascade
*us, 3d.
Hospital, Liverpool-street. By order from the
loard.
Gaol, Campbell-street. Sheriff’s order.
Knocklofty Hills, to the west of the city. A
good view of the harbour and city is to be obtained
from these hills.
Sandy Bay, 3 miles from the Post Office, Reached
by bus, 6d. The Cemetery is on this road, about
half-way from Hobart.
Kangaroo Point, on the east side of the Derwent
River, and opposite Hobart. The township, very wild
looking and bare, is called Bellerive. Communication
is by O’May’s steamer “ Victory charge 6d. The
beach is the chief attraction, and a popular place for
denies.
Cornelian Bay Cemetery, north of the city, about
2 miles from the Post Office.
New Town, a suburb three miles from Hobart,
long Elizabeth-street, a pleasant walk, commanding
beautiful panorama of the country around. Bus, 6tL


Benevolent Depot, New Town. It is a favourite
resort for visitors. The grounds are well arranged,
and the quarters of the poor people scrupulously clean.
It should be visited. Distance, 3 miles. Bus, 6d.
Glenorchy (O’Brien’s Bridge).— A good-sized and
important township, about 5 miles from Hobart, and 2
miles past New Town on the main road to Launces-
ton. Several nice walks in the district make it a
pleasant rendezvous. The surrounding country is
mountainous and undulating; the hills are heavily
timbered. A good number of market gardens are seen
here, also very fine orchards. Hops are cultivated in
the district, and remind one of Kent, in England,
which county is noted for its hops, fruits, and flowers.
Bus from Elizabeth-street, 6d.; train, is. return.
Mount Nelson. — A lofty hill to the south of the
city, from which a grand view may be obtained of the
Derwent and D’Entrecasteaux Channel, It is a signal
station, with telephone communication to Marine
Board Offices. The mount is much visited by excur-
sionists and visitors from the other colonies. It over-
hangs the quiet little village of Sandy Bay, and is 1,191
feet above the sea level. Bus to Sandy Bay, 6d., hence
a climb to the Mount.
Mount Direction. —Another lofty peak and promi-
nent landmark, 1,212 feet high. The track to the top
is very steep, and somewhat slippery; but the reward
great when once on the top, for you there behold such
a spectacle that it is impossible to forget. Glenorchy
reposes romantically below, with its snug cottages and
well-kept gardens, churches, and school. Government
House, Derwent River, Main Line Railway, and road
are plainly visible; in fact, you have a scene before
you that shows at once the loveliness of Hobart and
its environs. Access is by boat (ferry), from Risdon
Road, New Town; or train, first-class 6d., and then
ferry, fid.
Mount Wellington, 4, 166 feet, raises its lofty head
far above the sea level, its ascent commencing at about
three miles from the Cove (Sullivan’s). Striking as
is the view of Mount Wellington from the plain below,
infinitely more so is the view from its summit. The
visitor can see around him on every side as far as the


eye can reach, until towering mountain, tier after tier,
green meadow, sparkling lake, darkling forest, flowing
river, and shining sea, fade away in the grey distance.
The ascent from Hobart is one of those trips that
every visitor ought to make, for although the hill
affords a long climb, the road taken by a circuitous
route, extending over nine miles, is comparatively
easy, and there is nothing in it that even a delicate
lady may not surmount without much difficulty. The
road to the summit, is, after leaving the Huon Road,
along the top of a spur to what is called the Springs,
thence up a sharp incline to the gap, thence across a
track of rough boulders called the Ploughed Field, and
so to the top of the mountain. Looked at from
Hobart, the face of the hill seems broken away under
the summit, and so indeed it is, for ages ago there
has been a terrible landslip there, which has laid bare
the skeleton, as it were, of the huge mass, a perpen-
dicular face of rocky columns, appropriately called
the Organ Pipes. This mountain, known to the
aborigines as Unghanyaletta, or Pooranettere, was, in
the early days of the colony, called Table Mountain,
from its supposed resemblance to the mountain of
that name at the Cape of Good Hope. To visit
the mountain a fine morning should be chosen,
and the company of others is to be desired, so
as to make the trip pleasant. As the trip creates
an appetite plenty of creature comforts should
be taken, or otherwise the tourist will regret
his negleftfulness. Visitors wishing to make this
journey should walk or drive from the General Post
Office, up through Davey-street, thence on to the
Huon Road, till the finger-post on the right hand side
of the road is reached, which is just past the four-mile
stone. The visitor then turns to the right and “ makes
tracks.” Mr. Charles Gadd, the constable, whose
cottage is close by, and who has for a long time afted
as guide, is always willing to escort visitors to the top
of Mount Wellington, and point out the many wonders
which are to be seen. The time generally taken in
“ doing ” the trip is between four and five hours, but
of course it much depends upon the visitor’s mode of
travelling. All information of the district can be ob-


mined of Mr. Gadd, who has considerable knowledgi
of the place. He is most obliging, and ever ready t<
make the day’s outing pleasant and agreeable.
The Waterworks is on this same road, and ha
become a favourite resort for picnic parties, ant
those who wish to spend a quiet day to themselves
The distance from the Post-Office —three miles —cai
be done very easily, although up-hill work : still yot
are fully compensated, and on reaching the works ge
your reward. If the reader makes up his or her mint
to pay the above place a visit, and intends to walk a]
the way, the best and most dired route is up Davey
street, following the telegraph wire, which leaves th
main road, but must be kept in sight, and followet
the whole distance ; if this is done, you will g<
straight to the caretaker’s house.
The Cascade, which is at the top of Macquarie
street, is another of those lovely sights, within eas;
access of Hobart, where a pleasant half-day could wel
be spent. Bus, 6d., every half-hour from Collins
street.
St. David’s Cathedral, the foundation stone of
which was laid by His Royal Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh, January Bth, 1868. The Cathedral com-
prises nave, north and south aisles, transepts, chancel,
and choir, south chapel, vestries, and north choir aisle,
with detached tower and spire on the Macquarie-street
side. The general walling material is of brown stone,
which was taken from quarries near the Waterworks,
the window and door jambs, tracery, mouldings, etc.,
of beautiful white stone, from Hestercombe quarries,
near Bridgewater, the same as used in the Town Hall
buildings. The organ, a very fine one, made by J.
C. Bishop (London), was erefted at a cost of £ 6OO.
It was first used in the old Cathedral, and when the
new one was finished was removed there. Its grand
capabilities are well understood and used with taste
and skill by the organist, Mr. F. A. Packer. The
Cathedral is adorned with several stained glass
windows, amongst them being one in memory of the
late Sir Richard Dry, and the other in memory of the
late Mr, Robert Pitcairn. The present Bishop of Tas-
mania (Anglican) is the Right Rev. Daniel Fox Sand-


ford, L.L.D. The Bishop, who only succeeded Dr.
Bromby (late Bishop) in 1883, has not let time
pass lightly by, for he has already visited every impor-
tant district in his diocese, including the Islands in the
Straits. It is also gratifying to know that the Bishop
has been most hospitably received, wherever he went,
by all classes of the community, who did their best to
welcome him to Tasmania. Very few can properly
understand the difficulties which his Lordship had to
encounter whilst making his first tour through the
colony.
St. Mary’s Cathedral (RomanCatholic). —This fine
cathedral is in Harrington-street, and situated upon
rising ground which overlooks the city. The material
used in its construction is a light freestone. The walls
are supported by buttresses, which are about eight
feet apart, and in each space are five windows, which
give ample light to the interior. The interior is beau-
tifully fitted up ; the walls hung with paintings. The
pulpit is of a very fine stone, splendidly worked. Just
above the entrance is placed the organ, which, together
with a well-trained choir, adds very much to the gran-
deur of the services. There is a magnificent stained
window in the east end of the chancel, ereCted as a
memorial of the late Bishop Wilson and his Vicar-
General, the Very Rev. Dr. Hall, who came out to
preside over this diocese in 1844, and who, after
labouring here together for upwards of twenty-two
years, died (the Bishop in England, and the Vicar-
General in Hobart) within a few days of each other.
In the wall of the Cathedral, at the foot of the
Chancel, is a brass monument. The brass is an effigy
of a priest vested for mass, having suitable borders,
inscriptions, etc. The window and brass are from
Hardman and Co., Birmingham.
Near the Cathedral stand the Presentation Convent
and Schools. Their architecture is of the Oriental
tvpe, and was designed to harmonise with the
Cathedral. The Convent is admirably situated, com-
manding an excellent panorama of the harbour, city,
and surrounding country. The gardens are nicely
laid out, kept in good order, and also present an
attractive appearance. The interior, like the exterior,


m *
iff!*
I #3 H
giili . $
h*
*l= &
PH <
LJs m
ps o
g| x
ES _J
o
=n
jlgtsl X
S o
B 1 co
■ co
is ?
if x
™ o
h"
il i
ejM m -L


but the land in Macquarie-street was granted by Gov-
ernment on condition that it should not be sold, let, or
mortgaged, but reserved for ever for school purposes.
The Bishop of Tasmania is the Visitor of the school,
and the head-master must be a clergyman of the Church
of England. At the present time this school is very
popular, and has the warm support of the colonists
from far and wide, and even from the other colonies
has drawn scholars to its ranks. The head-master now
is the Rev, J. R. Buckland, 8.A., a gentleman who is
well-known both in Tasmania and Australia. During
his tenure of office considerable additions and im-
provements have been made to the school building,
and the formation of a library and museum, as well as
the introduction of chemistry leCtures, and lessons in
carpentry, are also due to him. The past scholars of
this school, among whom is the Chief Justice of the
colony, have always shown a warm interest in its wel-
fare, and it is mainly owing to their liberality that the
excellent playground attached to it has been provided
with a fives court and also an asphalt' lawn tennis
court. The building, as can be seen from the annexed
cut, is gothic in style, and is especially attractive to
colonists, as serving to remind them, with its ivy-
mantled walls and surrounding English trees, of
schools and colleges in the old country.
HORTON COLLEGE, ROSS.
This College is situated on the main road from
Hobart to Launceston, and is plainly visible from the
railway line about three mijes past the township of
Ross. It was founded in 1855 by the late Captain
Horton. It is a handsome large building, in the
Tudor style of architecture, built of brick, and pointed
with lime and cement. There is a fine tower, which
adds considerably to the appearance of the building.
It is plainly to be seen from the railway line, and
is admired on account of its noble exterior. The
healthy appearance of the scholars adds weight to the
assertion that Ross is considered a very healthy place.
Everything is done for the comfort of the scholars. They
have good play-grounds, and in wet weather can find




Combined with the abilities of a finished scholar, Mr.
Neale possesses in a high degree the gift of organisation,
together with the taft and gentle firmness which are
the necessary characteristics of the able manager. No
more encouraging proof of his ability in the above
directions can be adduced than that in Tasmania, Vic-
toria, and New South Wales, I have met the parents of
several of the pupils, all of whom spoke very highly to
me of the progress made by their sons now attending
Horton College. Of course it is only fair to the head-
master and his assistants that they should receive a share
of credit for the high reputation that the college has
obtained. Mr. Wm. W. Fox, 8.A., London, has held
the position of head-master for over 20 years. He has
thoroughly established his reputation as a competent
and pains-taking teacher,and some of his former pupils
now occupy prominent positions in professional and
commercial circles. The senior masters are all
engaged in England.
CHRIST’S COLLEGE
(late high school).
The first important institution which meets the
visitor’s eye on leaving the Hobart railway station
is the College. The fine position and architectural
beauty of this institution, in the government domain,
attract general admiration, and give a natural pre-
eminence to the College. The lovely and varied
panorama commanded from the terrace walks is
beautiful indeed, for it combines every feature
which can charm the eye, blent and contrasted
with exquisite effect, and the fresh sea breezes seem to
give good assurance for the health of all who seek so
charming a spot. The building was erected at an
original cost of ,£4,000, and has been subsequently
enlarged. It was founded as a proprietary school for
boys of all creeds, the funds being provided by share-
holders and subscribers. The name given to it was
“The High School.” Several changes of manage-
ment were unfortunately occasioned by death, and
others by difficulties of various kinds, after the first
opening in 1850; and it was not until the appointment


of the Rev. R. D. Poulett Harris, M.A., as rector, in
1857, that the School established for itself a name,
which it held till the return of the rector. This
gentleman, after holding his position for nearly 30
years, retired in the month of August, 1885. Pre-
vious to his retirement arrangements were made
with the Council of Christ’s College to continue the
work of the School on the same basis as heretofore,
the whole being under the superintendence of the
Warden of Christ's College, the Rev. T. Thistle, M.A.,
a gentleman whose qualifications are of the highest
order. The troubles of the High School at its start
were very great, inasmuch that a heavy debt rested
upon it, when the then Council of the High School
let “ slip their responsibility,” handing over to the late
reftor all proprietary rights, he undertaking to carry
on the School at his own risk. This of course brought
to an end the High School proper, hence for the last
20 years it has been a private School carried on by the
reftor “ for his own profit at his own risk.” But the
reftor did not depart from the fundamental principles
of the High School, which were as follows; —Ist.
That the Holy Scriptures shall be read in the
Institution to the pupils thereof daily, but that
to preserve the catholicity of the institution this
rule shall not be enforced in the case of any
pupil whose parent or guardian may objeft to it,
2nd. That the inculcation of the peculiar tenets of any
religious denomination shall be scrupulously avoided
as foreign to the design of the institution. The
advancingageof therector rendered it imperative forhim
to seek the retirement and rest which he has so well
earned by nearly 30 years labour in the cause of edu-
cation. His strength was unequal to the arduous
work, and the school was steadily dwindling in conse-
quence. It was just at this period that Christ’s
College entered the field as a new and formidable
competitor. It became clear that the reftor’s school,
■weakened as it was, would not be able to make head
against the powerful opposition of an institution with
an endowment at its back, which would enable it not
only to keep a strong teaching staff, but, by biding its
time, to tire out its unendowed rivals. It was plainly


a case in which the weakest must go to the wall, and the
weakest would inevitably be the reftor and his school.
This then brought about a change whereby the Council
of Christ's College took possession of the building for
educational purposes, at the same time the council guar-
antee that the principles laid down by the High School
Council shall not be violated. There will, therefore,
be no other religious teaching than such as has been
given during the reftorship of Mr. Harris, concerning
which no complaint has ever been made by the original
subscribers or their representatives. The preparation
of students of divinity, which is part of the work of
Christ’s College, will not be conducted at the School.
There is no doubt that Christ’s College will grow in
popular favour year by year. Its endowment, which
is about j[ 1,200 a year, enables it to maintain a large
and efficient staff of masters, such as to ensure the best
possible education, whether classical or commercial,
for all boys who attend the college. Under these cir-
cumstances there is good reason to hope that the Col-
lege will fulfil the intention of its founders, and become
a home of sound and useful learning and a school
of Christian gentlemen. The buildings have recently
been put in thorough repair, and entirely re-furnished.
Some alterations have also been made by which a
much larger number of boarders can be accommo-
dated than before, and greater convenience, in the
way of special rooms for their evening study, has
been provided.
PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
Amongst the many changes that have taken place in
Tasmania may be mentioned the Public School system
of the colony, which indicates a change in the right
direction. No distrift need be neglefted if those who take
an interest in the rising generation would but make
their desires known to the department. The State
Schools of the colony, which for some 20
years had been under the control of the Board of
Education, passed at the beginning of this year under
the direft supervision of the present Chief Secretary,
the Board ceasing to exist. One of the most
important measures submitted during the current term


of Parliament has been a new Education Bill. The
number of State Schools now erefted is 191, attended
by 14,846 children. During the last year or two the
Government have shown every desire to meet the
increasing requirements of the outlying districts, and
new schools are being erefted in all directions, which,
taken as a whole, will bear favourable comparison with
similar provision made in other colonies, Hobart and
Launceston can now boast of most creditable temples
of learning, a want not too soon supplied. Teachers
are also receiving some attention at the hands of
the Government, so that in a short time Tasmania will
be on a par with the other colonies with regard to
encouragement to those who undertake the education
of rhe young. The Chief Inspector of Schools in his
report (1884) drew attention to an important want,
which should be supplied without delay, as it would
go a long way to place the teaching staff of the colony
on a sound footing, and thus enable the Inspector to
replenish their ranks more readily. Mr. Stephens in
his report remarks “ I may be excused for re-
peating that the chief weakness of our educational
system is the absence of the means of training eligible
persons, of whom there are many in the colony
seeking suitable employment, in the business of school
teaching and management. lam content, in the first
instance, to ask only for a provision for enabling such
persons to qualify themselves for teaching the simple
rudiments of education. One good Normal or Model
School would soon make its influence widely felt, at a
very moderate cost, and the improvement in the
schools would be the best argument that could be
used in favour of an improvement in the position of
the elementary teacher.” Each of the other colonies
has such schools, which are the means of doing a
vast amount of good, and are exceedingly beneficial,
supplying those needs which the Chief Inspector of
Tasmania speaks of. Visitors to the colony would do
well to pay a visit to the public schools, and thus see
for themselves what is being accomplished.


«Y 9 /4wi>) «?/*
Kkatrllou. Dam,
HOBART.
This well-known and favourite Hotel is
now under entirely new management, and
complete with every requirement.
THE VERY BEST BRANDS OF WINES, &c.,
ALWAYS ON HAND.
Suites of Rooms, Piano, Bath-rooms, and
every convenience for Visitors.
Table d’Hote Daily.
Charges Moderate.
Visitors from other Colonies may rely upon
every comfort and attention.
JAMES OASTE.EB,
PROPRIETOR.


_F
LU
h*
O
X
2
O
H
_l
OL
<
o
i'l I >
i I
BMhi;
M l «
iS
i „■*
w<
Sis “
■ S


The city and its sights being “done,” we will now
turn our attention to other places of interest. The
first of which I purpose drawing attention to is
BROWN’S RIVER, KINGSTON.
This is one of the most delightful places within easy
reach of the city, and one that should be visited by all
who wish to spend a pleasant day. A coach starts
from the Post Office every morning at nine o’clock.
This coach has been built specially for the travelling
public, so that all who travel by the same may rely
upon the comfort so needful to those who are travelling
through the colony. Mrs. Fischer, the proprietress,
deserves much praise for the pains she has taken to
afford to her patrons the pleasure of good travelling.
On the road many places of interest are passed, chief
of which is the grand view of the Bay and its surround-
ing country. Moir’s “Shot Tower” is one of the sights,
and, should the proprietor give his consent, and pass
the visitor to the top, a treat is in store. At Kingston
there is a good beach, where those who feel so dis-
posed can have a bathe. Fishing is to be had at all
seasons, so that lovers of the rod may have their fill.
From the hill, just before the bridge and village are
reached,the view is one of untold beauty and loveliness.
The hotel accommodation is all that can be desired,
and the worthy host, with his good wife, does not mind
a little trouble, and is willing at all times to afford
every comfort to his visitors. Besides the beach, there
are a number of fine walks, over which the visitor can
never tire, and a bettbr day’s outing could not be found
within so short a distance from the city, and at so
reasonable a cost. The coach which leaves Hobart
reaches Kingston at and returns from Kingston
at 4 p.m., thus giving to the visitor five hours and a
half for pleasure, in one of the best places along the
beach. The return coach reaches town about 5*30,
giving visitors time to reach their hotel for late dinner.
Those who wish to stay a night can return to Hobart
by the coach, which leaves Kingston at 8-30, getting to
town at 10. The coach also runs on Sunday mornings
from Hobart, returning at usual time from Kingston in


the afternoon, but there is no coach leaves on Sunday
morning from Kingston. To those who seek hotel
accommodation, and wish to be comfortable, I would
recommend them to visit the Kingston Hotel, kept by
Thos. B. Curtis. Here the traveller will find a good
table, comfortable bed and sitting rooms, bath, and
other accommodation. Those who wish it can also
have private rooms. Mr. Curtis has a good garden,
where he invites his patrons to take their ease. Some
enjoy the shady nooks whichyear after year are sought by
old and regular visitors, who are always sure of a right
hearty welcome to this popular hostelry; others rest
upon the grass and bask in the sun ; whilst others
don the large cabbage-tree hat, and with pipe in
mouth take a stroll. Mr. Curtis is very obliging, so
that should the visitor seek information respecting this
familiar watering-place he will render all the help
that is in his power. The patrons of this hotel are
legion, and Mr. Curtis has the pleasure of knowing
that he has been able to give every satisfaction to those
who, from far and wide, have paid him a visit. Not
far from his hotel are the beach, and sand-holes, noted
for bream, also the blow-hole. This beach, once
occupied by bushrangers, is now famous for its
pic-nics; the caves that did such service for the bush-
rangers are used by those who pay the place a visit.
Many merry, happy, laughing girls seek out this spot,
and year after year re-visit a place that has always
proved a source of delight to them. As a coach road,
it cannot be surpassed ; even Victoria is unable to
boast of a road so thoroughly well constructed. It
reminds one of the Terang and Mortlake districts of
Victoria, that have roads the like of which are not to
be found in any other part of that colony. The
scenery along this magnificent drive is quite sufficient
to compensate the visitor for the trouble taken, time
spent, and outlay of cash, which is so small that I feel
ashamed to make mention of it. Before I close my
remarks upon this delightful spot I think I ought to
inform the reader that within a stone’s throw of the
hotel are the Post and Telegraph Office, bridge over
Brown’s River, Church of England Parsonage,
Churches, School, and Police Office. To those who


[rive from Hobart in hired traps, it would not be
miss for them to know that at the hotel there is
very accommodation for horse and carriage, and the
andlord has every attention paid to the wants of all
/ho put up at his place. Fare by coach, 25. ; return,
is.; cab, Distance from Hobart to Kingston, 10
niles.
COACH TIME TABLE.
FROM HOBART TO KINGSTON.
A.M. p.m. Miles. Single Fare. Return,
[obart 9 4
Kingston 10-30 5-30 io 2s. 3s.
FROM KINGSTON TO HOBART.
a.m. p.m. Miles. Single Fare. Return.
Kingston 8-30 4
Hobart 10-30 5-30 10 2s. 33.
Coach on Sunday runs from Hobart at 9 a.m., and
returns from Kingston at 4 p.m. Visitors who wish a
“box seat” should visit the “ Eardley Arms,” Mel-
bourne-street, and book a day or two in advance.
FERN TREE INN AND BOWER.
There are very few spots on this road with which
some of our many visitors have not a pleasant associa-
tion ; almost every citizen and visitor has rejoiced in
the grateful shade of the mighty mountain, or graceful
ferns which overhang the road leading to this popular
place of recreation, on a warm summer’s day. But
the associations are by no means confined to the mere
experience of comfort beneath the shadow of these
wide-spread wonders. How many love-tales have been
told, or pleasant courtships initiated, it would be hard
to relate ; but sufficient it is to say that this road has
long been a favourite with all. Apart from the afore-
mentioned there are the homesteads, cottages, and
cultivations of the contented settlers, with mountain
ranges, hills, dales, valleys, streams clear as crystal,
and waterfalls, leaping from rock to rock, sparkling in
the sunshine on all sides, with gorges and gullies,
clothed in all shades of foliage, with the beautiful and
mighty eucalyptus, the semi-tropical fern tree, and a
hundred other charms, which make the trip one of the


most captivating outside of the city. The road windinj
along the mountain side brings ever and again net
scenes, which fill the visitor with awe and admiration
Far away to the south is the wide-spreading channel
■dotted with small craft, which seem to be dancinj
merrily over the deep blue waves, and forms a mos
■enchanting foreground to this lovely picture. Afte
walking or driving close upon five miles, the “Fern Tre
Tnn is reached, and there the good landlady and he
daughters (Mrs. and the Misses Hall) are alway
Teady to place before their guests the best of every
thing, at most moderate terms. Horses can be stabled
and a visit then made to the “Bower,” which is througl
the gate opposite the Inn, and about a quarter of
mile from the said gate. Visitors wishing to drive t
the “Bower” and “Fern Tree Inn” could not do bette
than pay a visit to Mr. Newnham’s Livery Stables, ii
Macquarie-street, where good comfortable conveyance
and horses can be obtained on reasonable terms.
THE HUON.
By coach this is by far the grandest trip of the
South, and is looked upon by all who come over to
Tasmania from the mainland as the treat of the
season, A start is made from the British Hotel, that
is if we take the coach, at 9 a.m.; the mails are called
for at the Post Office, and with a crack of the whip
away we start up Macquarie-street, into Davey-street,
and through to the Huon Road. The journey for
several miles is all up hill, and Mount Wellington is
kept in view for a considerable time. The country
passed through is very wooded, and many settlers are
taking up the land, mostly for fruit-growing. These
hard-workers send a quantity of firewood into the
•city; also palings, shingles, etc. Many nice
private houses are being built within a short
distance of the city, and the spot I think bids
fair to become a pleasant retreat in the summer for
city business men. As the distance becomes greater
from Hobart, so the scenery seems to be more beau-
tiful, and the air refreshing. The road has been cut
through a dense bush, and forms quite an avenue of
ferns that grow so luxuriantly on each side of the


road. At a distance of five miles from the city is the
Fern Tree Inn, a favourite house of call for colonials
and tourists.
LONGLEY
Is next passed through; the population is scattered,
consisting chiefly of small farmers, who have hard work
to contend with in getting their lands cleared, and under
cultivation. About two miles further on is the Moun-
tain River, which flows into the Huon. A short stay
is made for the purpose of changing horses, when the
passengers get a chance of stretching their limbs, a
real need, if the coach should happen to be crowded,
which is not unlikely during the summer months. All
aboard ! Another start is made towards
VICTORIA,
A small township on the Mountain River, at its
junction with the Huon, a mile off the main line
of road, bridge, and Picnic Hotel. This last men-
tioned place is 23 miles from Hobart. The hotel
faces the Huon River. Many visitors, finding this an
easy distance from the city, make it their halting-
place. Here sportsmen can enjoy themselves shooting,
fishing, boating, and bathing, and be sure of com-
fortable quarters during their sojourn. A stroll round
and about the district would give the visitor a good
idea of the produce that is sent to market
yearly from this important district. The orchards
are under good management, and refleft great
credit upon the thrifty sons of the soil, who have
for years shown a spirit of determination to overcome
all difficulties, and face manfully the hardships so
common to those who, as pioneers, undertook to clear
the densely timbered lands of the Huon, and make
the wilderness rejoice and blossom as the rose.
PORT CYGNET,
Another township on the south side of the river, and
connected by a branch road from the main coach line,
is well worth a visit; it stands upon the lower end of
the picturesque Agnes Valley, where the Agnes Rivulet


flows into Port Cygnet Bay, an arm of the Huon River
A.mail is carried every day from the Bridge (Victoria),
but should their be any passenger wishing to reach the
Port, notice of the fact must be given to the landlord
of the Picnic a day or two before, or to make quite
sure, a post card to the mail man (Port Cygnet), whc
is very obliging, and does his best to meet the require-
ments of his patrons. Why I give this advice is on
account of mails being chiefly carried on horseback
The distance from the hotel is about 12 miles. No
fear need be felt respecting accommodation at the
Port, as there are substantial hotels on the township,
well conducted and comfortable. Returning to the
Picnic Hotel, the visitor continues the journey over the
bridge and away to
FRANKLIN,
A straggling township on the western banks of the-
Huon, The population is very considerable, and
taking the whole district of Franklin, there are
several thousand settlers. The coach road is parallel
with the Huon River, facing which are the three hotels,,
institute, jam manufactory, Court-house, and principal
stores. The township also contains four churches, a.
public school, and a temperance hotel. A remarkable
feature to be seen in this part of the island is the so-
called “ Huon Belle,” or “ Sleeping Beauty,” and is
sure to be pointed out by the driver of the coach, or
some resident. If not, look to the north of the river
far beyond the bridge to the highest range, and there
most distinctly can be seen the form of a woman, lying
far away amongst the ranges, clothed in nature’s robes,
sleeping (so it seems) peacefully, under the canopy of
heaven. There are good hotels. Fishing is a great
pastime with the settlers, also boating and bathing,
besides other sports to be obtained in the bush at the-
back of the township. The sight early in the morning
is one not easily forgotten, and surely the visitor bent,
upon sight-seeing should not be content to pass on to-
the next place without enjoying the picture which is
seen from the pretty village of Franklin; in fact it
would be useless on my part to undertake a descriptive-
account of this trip through the Huon from Hobart.


Should any of my readers be bent upon a walking tour,
md wish to spend a profitable holiday, he may leave
;he coach at this place, and make tracks for the extreme
south, where much will be seen that would please. Go-
ing back to the Franklin, which, by the way, is the
changing stage, it is very advisable (if a return to
Hobart by the water is determined upon) to stay
in the district, as the boat starts for the city
early in the morning. The trip is a pleasing one, and
many places are called at on the way up to Hobart,
such as Port Cygnet, Three Hut Point, Long Bay,
Peppermint Bay, and Oyster Cove. In fact the owners
af the steamers seem to have instructed their captains
to “pick up” anywhere and everywhere. If, along the
channel, a person wishes the boat to call, all that is
needful is to light a fire as a signal. Yet, if wishing
to continue the journey, the visitor can reach Geeves
Town the same day, or rather evening. After having
bad a look around the township, another start is made
from the Franklin, through
CASTLE FORBES BAY,
iow a flourishing district, with public school and post
ffice, but no quarters for travellers. Hence to Ship-
wrights’ Point, a small township, with good hotel, store,
iost and telegraph office, jam factory, and jetty. The
luon River at this point is about a mile wide, and
lavigable for vessels of large burden. Above this
lavigation is impeded by flats and shoals. The Ker-
aandie River empties itself into Hospital Bay, at a
ioint about two miles from the Point. This river dis-
harges a considerable volume of water, and takes its
ise in the Hartz Mountains, which are about 20 miles
0 westward. Brown trout has been successfully accli-
natised in it. At one time a good trade was carried
in in the shipbuilding line —this is a thing of the past,
.nd now the settlers have directed their attention to
•uit-preserving industries, potatoes, and other produce,
dfich finds a ready market in Hobart,
HONEY WOOD
’omes next, with its saw mill, post office, police station,
nd hop garden, with a number of settlers’ huts, within
asy reach of the main road. After handing over the


Fern Tree Inn ...
10-15
Si
2s. fid.
4s.
Leslie
11-30
P.M.
12
3s. fid.
6s.
Vince’s ...
12-30
IS
4s. fid.
1 os.
Victoria Huon Bridge
1-30
23
7 s -
12S.
Franklin ...
2-30
28
8s.
I4S.
15 s -
15s.
Castle Forbes Bay
3‘3°
3i
8s. fid.
Shipwrights’ Point
4-0
33
8s. fid.
Honey wood
4 "3°
3 6
OS.
16s.
Geeves Town
4’5°
3S
9s.
16s.
mail, Geeves Town is made for, and thus comes to ai
end an exceedingly pleasant trip of 38 miles, over
good road, and through romantic country, the like 0
which is not to be met with in any other part of th
colony, although there are other places of great not
and interest that should be visited before leaving th
colony.
GEEVES TOWN
Is a busy centre, with its saw mills, owned by the
brothers John and Osborne Geeves, after whom the
distrift is called. There are churches, school, public
hall, temperance hotel, post and telegraph office.
The distrid is chiefly a timber-producing one. Agri-
cultural pursuits are also followed, and there is°no
doubt that in the course of a few years many good
farms will be under cultivation. Good wages are paid
at the mills, and a number of the employes possess
good gardens, stocked with choice fruits, which give
ample returns. I have had every opportunity of gaining
reliable information from this distrift, and can safely
say that there are no poor folks; everybody has plenty,
with a little to spare, and are twenty times more com-
fortable than they would have been had they stayed in
the old country. Whilst staying at Geeves Town, it
may not be out of place for the visitor to follow the
tramroad into the bush, and witness the men engaged
in bringing down immense trees, for which this part of
the island is noted. The saw mills also should be
inspected, and if you let your wants be known to the
proprietors, they will gladly show all of passing interest.
COACH TIME TABLE AND FARES.
FROM HOBART TO GEEVES TOWN THROUGH THE HUON.
A.M.
Hobart ... ... g
Miles. Single Fare. Retun


Refreshments at Vince’s ; coach returns from Geeves Town
every morning (except Sunday) at 8 o’clock, and reaches
Webster’s British Hotel at 330 p.m. Mr. W. Webster, pro-
prietor of the Royal Mail coaches, wishes to inform the reader
that his coach leaves the British Hotel, Liverpool-street,
Hobart, every morning at 9 o’clock for the Huon. Box seats
may be secured by early application. Special coaches and
brakes supplied for picnic parties, etc., at moderate charges.
At Geeves Town the reader must understand the
good coach road terminates, and whoever is bent
upon pushing through to the south must be prepared
to face a hard and difficult track. A start must be
trade early in the morning, as the distance from
Jeeves Town to the next village, Port Esperance, is
ilose upon 14 miles. Several creeks are passed, over
tffiich are very inferior bridges, and extremely dan-
gerous for horses, unless the same should happen to
>e familiar with them. You must not think of hiring
torses on this track, for those that are in this district
are in constant use, and owners have to be careful
into whose hands they are trusted. Tourists may
rely upon what I advise, that, to save trouble, expense,
and anxiety, it is, far better to use one’s own legs;
then, barring accidents, a safe passage over this track
may be safely looked for. On the road or track
Surge’s Bay is come upon, at a distance of six miles
from the saw mills of Geeves Town. The country
that is now cleared at this place is assuming a flou-
rishing aspect, and, like Castle Forbes Bay, will be an
important farming district in the space of a few years.
A mill is in full swing, with a fair number of men
engaged; the scenery is charming, added to which
the settlers are most hospitable, ever ready to entertain
the stranger —that is, if the said stranger will be enter-
tained. Still following the track, keeping the tele-
graph line in view, a stiff walk must be looked
forward to, and should it be a wet season, then make
up your mind for a little mud —knee deep in some
places is no uncommon occurrence. The day’s
journey ended,
PORT ESPERANCE
Is reached. The hotel or inn is, for a country one,
extremely comfortable, the landlord—Mr. Conelly—


with his good wife, doing their very best to please,
and afford visitors an opportunity of enjoying them-
selves, For cleanliness it is not to be surpassed; a
good table is kept that would suit the most fastidious.
The hotel is beautifully situated, and commands a fine
view of the islands known as Faith, Hope, and Charity,
Several saw-mills are in full working order, and give
employment to a large number of men. The cottages
are very neat, and go far to show the condition of the
settlers. Gardens are stocked with fruit, flowers, and
vegetables. A good public school, church, chapel,
court-house, and library are to be found, also a public
hall. Perhaps the tourist may feel disposed to close
his tour at this stage, and return to Hobart ; if sOj
there are steamers leaving Port Esperance twice a
week. If, on the other hand, he feels inclined to
proceed further, he can do so by taking steamer to
Hastings and Southport, or, if preferable, by road.
RAMIN EA,
A scattered district, is next visited, the distance from
Esperance Hotel close upon three miles, over a
wretched track, or it was so on the two occasions that
I passed through. Mr. Chesterman, of Hobart, has a
saw-mill here, which faces the Esperance River, where
a large number of work-people find profitable employ-
ment, and seem to be well contented with their
lot. Good wages are paid, and to my own knowledge
many of the men have very creditable deposits in the
Post-Office Savings Bank, which is a wide contrast
with the condition of the classes in the old country.
But these savings have been hard wrought for, and not
obtained by the go-easy style of employment. Work
in the colonies is just as hard as in the old world,
but the chances of putting by for a rainy day
are very much greater ; in faft, in these lands
men can always get on if they choose; nor need there
be any occasion for want of employment, if they
possess the bump of industry. The public school is
just on the hill,, about a quarter of a mile past the
bridge and sawmill. Opposite the school may be seen
a track to the left of the main one; this leads to
another saw-mill, which belongs to Mr. Judd, a gentle-


nan well known throughout the south portion of the
sland. It is, if the visitor has the time, well worth a
isit. Pluck, determination, hard work, and persever-
nce have been the means of doing a considerable
mount of good to this portion of the Huon, and all
dio know the difficulties that the owner of Strathblane
ias had to contend with are pleased to find that his
xertions have at last been crowned with success, for it
aeans prosperity to others as well as himself. Both
re and water have brought these works to a standstill
.me after time, yet the enterprising owner has faced
ight manfully such fearful enemies of the bush, and
ae hardships encountered by such noble pioneers
how clearly the class of men who have undertaken to
•ansforra this part of our grand island. Our city and
awns folk know little or nothing of our country settlers,
nd often begrudge them the vote given by Parliament
ar the maintenance of the so-called roads, which are
disgrace to all who have the management of our
xchequer and the opening up of the country. But
ais, as I said before, seems to occupy the attention of
iw-makers, and bids fair to give all satisfaction in the
nd. Although the visitor is off the track, he or she
annot do wrong by following Mr. Judd’s tramway,
finch will lead to a short track, that must be followed
11 another tramway is met with; this leads straight to
HASTINGS,
nother centre of industry, where the finest saw-
dll in the colony is to be seen. Like Mr. Judd,
;e owner of the Hastings mill (Mr. John Hay) has a
ell-construfted tram, which would put many so-called
dlways (!) in the shade. To the new chum these
amways have all the appearance of permanent ways,
id surprise is expressed at so substantial a struc-
ire in these wild, roadless regions. To the
dll-owners of the Huon and the farmers Hobart
wes a debt of gratitude, for from these parts
■e derived a great portion of the city’s support,
he visitor will see much, and be able to understand
le reason I advocate the cause of the hard workers.
lr. Hay’s mill is about 11 miles from Raminea, and
le district is fast becoming cleared, so that in the


course of a few years there will be a good number of
farms in full working order. Coal and iron have been
found here, besides other minerals. There is also a
well-attended school, chapel, store, post and telegraph
office, and police quarters. The scenery in some por-
tions of this district is fine, and rising grandly to the
N.W. is Adamson’s Peak, 4,017 feet. The last place
of call on this road, so far as I am inclined to advise
the reader to visit, is
SOUTHPORT
another timber-producing district. The mill belong
to Mr. Graves. There is splendid fishing hereabout;
oysters are plentiful, and very fine scenery is found a
over the neighbourhood. One hotel, public schoo
and chapel, also jetty. This being the last place (
note on going through the Huon, and there being n
need to retrace the road, the visitor will leave by th
steamer, particulars respecting same will be foun
below. By going through to the city this way :
affords an agreeable change, one which must prov
very acceptable after a journey of nearly 80 mik
overland. Steamers “Huon” and “Minx” leave Soutl
port about twice every week, calling in all intermedial
places on the way to Hobart. Refreshments can b
obtained on board. Fare, Bs. For other particulai
see advertisement pages, also Hobart papers.
TRIPS BY STEAMER.
PORT ARTHUR
(tasman's peninsula).
Port Arthur, the once dreaded and most vile spot of
the tight little island, has now undergone a consider-
able change; instead of its being the exile home of
prisoners, hundreds of honest colonists are there
now, clearing the bush, ploughing the lands, build-
ing up neat little cottages, with a hope that before
long they will reap the rewards of their labour.
Port Arthur proper—the prison settlement that was —
is called Carnarvon. The allotments are fast being
sold, and the whole township is undergoing a rapid
change. It is a lovely spot, which must in time be-


come a favourite health and pleasure resort for colonists
and visitors. The Cascades, Impression Bay, Salt
Water River, and Coal Mines, are also old penal
settlements worth visiting, each place facing Norfolk
Bay. Most of the buildings and dungeons are falling
to decay, so that in the course of time all signs of the
past will be gone. The whole district is worthy a
visit, on account of its lovely surroundings and old
associations, but the great drawback is the want of
proper accommodation. There are boats leaving
Hobart twice a week for the Bay (Norfolk), which
call at these places, then go on to Taranna, where
an hotel is found. “ Eagle Hawk Neck,” “ Blow
Hole,” “Tasman’s Arch,” and “Tessellated Pave-
nent,” are the chief objects of interest to be seen, the
listance being within easy reach of the hotel, which
s kept by the owner of the boats, and where the visitor
vill find comfortable accommodation at reasonable
ates. Messrs. Whitehouse Brothers have done their
>est to make their boats comfortable, so that the trip
lown the bay may be thoroughly enjoyed by their
>atrons. They will also give every information possible
>f the Peninsula.
Eagle Hawk Neck was celebrated in the early days
>f the colony as the only point where persons could
>ass from Tasman’s Peninsula to the mainland, and
n order to prevent the escape of prisoners a number
>f ferocious dogs were kept, chained in such a manner
,s to allow them to meet across the neck, each of
hem receiving the then prison scale of rations. It
pas considered therefore impossible for a poor prisoner
o pass these wretched dogs, irrespective of the chain
)f sentries with loaded guns, without being torn to
)ieces. It was here too that the sharks were fed
lumptuously every day, so as to keep them in the
ocality as an additional guard against the escape of
he prisoners.
From Norfolk Bay Hotel the distance to Port
Arthur is about seven miles, over a very indifferent
rack, but the visitor is fully rewarded after his tramp
)r ride, for there are boundless matters of interest to
)ccupy attention. The township is fast losing alb
iigns of the past, and there is everv probability of its


becoming one of the most fashionable watering-placi
in the colony. This place has been chosen by tl
Bishop of Hobart (Dr. Murphy) as a suitable one f(
a college, and there is every reason to believe that
will be a success. Buildings have already bee
secured, as an earnest of the undertaking. Po
Arthur is a very beautiful place, and even in tl
winter time hath its charms. No one who knew th
place of old will be sorry to hear of the wonderfi
changes that are rapidly being made, by which i
transform it into one of the most inviting in the soutl
Port Arthur is surrounded by mountains and hig
lands. There is a good bay, which affords a con
fortable shelter for vessels. Arthur’s Peak lies to tl
S.W., and distant about nine miles; Mount Arthur 1
the W., and Tongataboo to the N.W., each about tv
miles from the port. Port Arthur has a bright futu:
before it, and when its settlers make up their mine
and set to work forming good tracks, hundreds (
visitors and colonists will every year pay the place
visit, and thus help to make the port one of the mos
popular places of pleasure resort in the south. Hob
accommodation is now afforded, Host Jones being th
comforter and giver of all good gifts.
The whole distrift is a highly favoured one, abounc
ing in picturesque and romantic scenery. Suppos
the visitor goes by boat a call is first made at Eai
Bay Neck (Dunally), where there is a good jettj
recently constructed for the convenience of the settler
living in the back country, known as Bream Creel
Carlton, Forced, Kellevie, and Coppington, whic
are agricultural districts of some importance. A
Dunally the visitor can be well provided for at a con
fortable hotel kept by Mrs. Scringer, who keeps
good table, and has the best house in the distriCl
which counts from Hobart via Kangaroo Point throug
to the Neck. After the steamer leaves this plac
steam is made towards Saltwater River, the
Impression Bay, next Cascades, and lastly Tarann
(Norfolk Bay) ; from the latter the tourist has
walk or drive of 7 miles through the bush to accom
plish before he reaches Port Arthur. For the publi
convenience I append the boat time table.


■ The s.s. Taranna leaves Hobart on Monday and
Thursday mornings, at 8 o’clock, arriving at East Bay
Neck, 12’20 p.m.; Saltwater River, i p.m.;. Impression
Bay, 2 p.m.; Cascades, 3 p.m.; arrive at Taranna
(Norfolk Bay), 4 p.m. Return-Leaves Taranna,
Tuesday and Friday, at B*3o a.m.; Cascades, 9 a.m ;
Impression Bay, a.m.; Saltwater River, io"I5
a.m.; Dunally, 12 30 p.m.; and arrive at Hobart at
4'20 p.m. Fare —7s. single, 12s. return.
HUON.
This journey may also be made by steamer, and
iffords an excellent opportunity for the tourist of seeing
tvhat scenery is like along the Channel, and thence to
;he Huon River and Port Cygnet. The steamers call
it every place of interest along the route, and the
:aptains are most obliging to their passengers, which
las caused the trip to become a favourite one with
uany who, year after year, visit the Huon district.
Messrs. Facy and Fisher have their favourite steamer,
:he “ Huon,” running regularly. She is an excellent
x>at, wdth the best of accommodation, and her captain,
1 most obliging gentleman, is desirous at all times to
mpart information respecting the thousand-and-one
:aptivating spots along this enchanting trip. Passen-
gers Mall also find that a good table is kept, so that
hose who have a keen appetite may depend upon
saving their fill. To enter fully into details concerning
he journey is beyond my power, for the whole of the
Channel and river abounds in remarkable and en-
trancing beauties. W. J. Watchorn has placed on this
route a fine steamer, the “Cygnet, ’ that has been built
expressly for this trade, also for passenger traffic. The
popular commander of the “Minx,” Captain Mason,
has charge of her, which will doubtless meet M'ith the
unanimous approval of all who knew him when trading
with the “Minx.” Visitors M'ould find this river trip
most enchanting, captivating, and lovely, one not
easily forgotten.
Messrs. Facy and Fisher advertise that their favourite
steamer, “The Huon,” leaves for Victoria (Huon) and
Channel ports every Monday and Thursday, at B'3o
a.m., returning on Tuesday and Friday.


Mr. W. J. Watchom also calls attention to the faft
that the s.s. “ Cygnet,” built expressly for the trade,
leaves Hobart every Wednesday and Saturday, at B‘3o
a.m , for Port Cygnet, returning from thence at 9 a.m.
every Monday and Thursday. Their boats also trade
to Port Esperance and Southport. For other parti-
culars see advertisement pages.
FROM HOBART TO NEW NORFOLK.
To this place the tourist has the choice of routes,
both favourite ones. The first one I shall write of
is by the steamer “ Monarch,” which starts from
Hobart every afternoon, returning in the morning.
The town of New Norfolk is situated upon the southern
bank of the Derwent River, about 30 miles from the
city. The trip up the river is very pleasant, and brings
to view many lovely spots on either side. During the
summer, excursion trips are made weekly, when the
owner of the steamer affords an opportunity to those
who so wish it to start in the morning, and to return
to the city again in the evening. Time occupied in
going up the river from the city to New Norfolk is
about 2\ hours; many places of interest are passed.
The Tasmanian Main Line Railway runs along the
south bank, up as far as South Bridgewater, when it
crosses over the causeway and bridge to the other side
till the township is reached, which is on the opposite
bank. From the station the town of New Norfolk
presents a pretty appearance. On the North Bridge-
water side of the river there are two bridges, swing and
draw, one for the railway, the other on the coach road,
which runs parallel with the railway line ; the steamer
stops here to take up passengers, etc., then continues
the journey to the bridge (New Norfolk), which
spans the river a few yards from the landing
stage. Traps are always in waiting to convey passen-
gers to the township or hotels. Very little trouble is
experienced in obtaining hotel accommodation. Tht
charges range from £2 2s. per week and upwards.
At most of the hotels the visitor can be provided with
fishing tackle. The upper portion of the river, that is
from Bridgewater to New Norfolk, is remarkable for


Under the Patronage of His Excellency the
Governor of Tasmania,
Slfi & €. SfMHll, S.&U.&
NEW NORFOLK^
The above well-known and favourite Hotel is beauti-
fully situated on the banks of the River Derwent,
commanding some of the Grandest Scenery
in the Australian Colonies.
All the Appointments of a
First-class Hotel .
ALSO,
Large Garden, beautifully laid out with
Flowers and Fruit Trees.
Boats, Bait, Fishing Tackle, etc,, etc,,
FOR THE USE OF VISITORS.
llsIT Visitors are respectfully requested to commu-
nicate direCt with the Proprietor, as some self-interested
people are in the habit of saying the house is full when
such is often not the case..
Telegrams and Letters promptly attended to.
Carriages wait the arrival of Steamers to convey
Visitors to and from Hotel, Free of Charge.
Proprietor,


If I • 1 | LU
il
S gi DU §
ilit => s
SR I x
•Ml I h-
■'JPi C£ ?
■ <* .


its massive pillars of rock, which stretch far away into
the air like so many giants, arid overgrown with all
colours of foliage. On the other side of the river is
the Bush Hotel, with its choice flower beds, and
orchards; it overlooks the river, and is undoubtedly one
of the most popular river retreats in Tasmania, and as
well-known throughout the colonies as Melbourne in
Victoria is. Every distinguished visitor to Tasmania
knows the Bush Inn, and its hearty proprietor, thereby
showing that Mr. O. Blockey has a wide-spread repu-
tation, hence his hotel is a rendezvous for visitors from
the other colonies. The situation is nice to an extreme,
one which it would be difficult to surpass. Year after
year old faces are seen at this trysting place,seeking over
and over again the delights of so charming a spot.
The Freemasons’ Hotel, which is now in the hands of
Mr. G. Leatham, affords ample accommodation for
those seeking rest and pleasure in the township; he
has two good gardens, ample coach and stable accom-
modation, with a number of good horses for his
visitors. The post and telegraph offices, and public
recreation grounds, are close by. Lovers of the rod
can find all the necessary tackle on the premises. Mr.
Leatham has long been a settler in these parts, and
has much information to give, and has often been
engaged to accompany gentlemen to the Lakes. The
visitor can also reach New Norfolk by the Main Line
Railway from Hobart. The town of New Norfolk is
charmingly situated upon rising ground. One of the
most prominent buildings is the public school and
teacher’s residence. Besides the public buildings on
the township of the usual character, there is a good
public library (which is supported by public sub-
scription), new post and telegraph office opposite the
reserve, and a large Lunatic Asylum, occupying a
large extent of ground, and containing in its buildings
a great number of patients. The institution appears
to be well conduced and clean throughout. As there
are two routes by which the visitor can reach New
Norfolk, I may be pardoned if I make a suggestion,
viz., go by train, return by steamer. Distance from
Hobart by road, 22 miles; good coach road all the
way. The p.s. “ Monarch” leaves Hobart during the


summer months on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays,
and Fridays, at 3-30 p.m., Saturdays at 2 p.m., and
New Norfolk daily (Sundays and Thursdays excepted)
at 7 a.m. In winter the steamer leaves Hobart each
Tuesday and Thursday, at 3 p.m., and Saturday, at 2
p.m., and New Norfolk every Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday, at 8 a.m. Fares to New Norfolk—Cabin,
single, 45.; return, 6s. Steerage, single, 25.; return,
3s. Fares to Bridgewater—Cabin, single, 25.; return,
3s. Steerage, single, is.; return, is. 6d.
SALMON PONDS
(near new Norfolk).
These now celebrated Ponds are within easy reach
of the township of New Norfolk, and most of the
visitors to the district make it a special drive whilst ex-
ploring the many other beauties of the Derwent Valley.
The road to the Ponds is a good one, surrounded with
beauty, so that an observant mind cannot fail to be
well pleased with the trip. The caretaker has made a
host of friends through his well-known courteous and
obliging manners, being always ready to give every in-
formation to those who seek it. Persons wishing to reach
the Ponds should give Mr. Smith at the Livery Stables,
New Norfolk, a call, as he has every kind of vehicle,
with good horses, for the use of the public, which can
be obtained upon most reasonable terms. Mr. Smith is
prepared at any time to meet the requirements of his
patrons, and ever ready to point out the most populai
places of pleasure resort in and around New Norfolk,
For address and other particulars see his advertisement,
GLEN OR A.
This pretty little village, so much like an English
one, with a good macadamised road all the way, and
scenery which is truly captivating, richly deserves a
visit. As I looked round, first one side of the road
and then the other, my thoughts went far away ovei
the sea to the home of my childhood. There stood
the cottages of those-.who, during the season, are en-
gaged in hop-picking; not far from the gardens I spied


the kilns in which the hops are dried and prepared for
market. Then at the foot of the hill, encircled by
sweet smelling flowers and evergreens, stood the peace-
ful abode of Mr. William Shoobridge. By this gentle-
man's exertions, enterprise, and industry, there are many
who, year after year, earn a good living, and have been
;able to put by something for a rainy day. The homes
of the classes in this district are very clean and comfort-
able, such as go far to determine the character of
employer and employes. Good wages, good cottages,
regular hours of labour, and healthy climate, with every
freedom, are not to be put aside; rather, I think, to be
tvalued. This, lam confident, is the feeling of all who
live at the Kent-like village of Glenora. One of the love-
liest sights that it has been my luck to look upon whilst
travelling through the colonies, is up the Native Tier, at
the back of the village, about six miles from the main
road. The Fern Tree Bower, on the road to Mount
jWellington, is placed in the shade when contrasted
with the avenue of ferns that overhangs a portion of
the new road which is being made over the tier. It
will some day be a source of attraction to visitors from
other colonies, who, seeking the romantic, would here
find it. The great drawback to visitors or travellers is
the want of accommodation; that which can be had at
present is good, but limited. Mr. Robert Marriott,
the coach proprietor (Glenora), will give visitors every
information respecting the accommodation. The
nearest hotels are on the other side of the Derwent
River, at Gretna Green, and Macquarie Plains. Persons
wishing to visit Glenora from New Norfolk, can go by
the mail coach, which leaves the latter place about
12'30 p.m. every day, returning from Glenora at 7
a.m. The distance is 14 miles. Coach fare, single
35.; return, 6s,
OM NEW NORFOLK TO THE OUSE BRIDGE,
Vtd Macquarie Plains and Hamilton.
Like the Glenora road, this is teeming with beauty
om one end to the other. The visitor leaves New
orfolk by the bridge on the north bank of the
'erwent, and if by coach spins away to the west-


ward. On looking up, following the Western ranges
in the far distance, the eye rests upon Mounts
Field, east and west, which lift their kingly heads
4,165 feet and 4,721 feet high respectively. They
are about five miles apart, and situated in densely-
timbered country, the former being about 10 miles
S.W. of the township of Hamilton; if these mount-
ains should be covered with snow on a fine day, it
would be next to impossible to miss them. The
country is very hilly, and occupied by agriculturalists
and pastoralists, population scattered. At the Rose
Garland, Macquarie Plains, the coach stays a few
minutes to give an opportunity to the passengers for
refreshments. The Macquarie Plains are teeming
with settlers of the right sort, such as the colonists
might be well proud of. The work carried out has
not been the labour of a few months, but of years.
The farms are a credit to their owners, showing plainly
the results of determined perseverance. After passing
the Plains, we come upon one of the finest estates in
the colony. With the exception of two small trafts of
country on the left-hand side of the road, one
occupied by a farmer, whose name just now I have
forgotten, the other by Mr. Downie, the whole of that
country from Plains to Ouse Bridge, both sides of the
road, belongs to one man, and he an absentee. What
a busy part this would be if he could see his way
clear to cut this estate into farms, from which he
would derive a far greater revenue, and be one of Tas-
mania’s greatest benefactors.
HAMILTON,
A once prosperous town, is now reached, a sort of
decayed memento, showing what had been and what
might be. Showing what had been before this
wretched monopoly of land on all sides of the town,
and what could be if under cultivation. As to accom-
modation there is ample—more by far than is really
needed. The Council Chambers are substantial
buildings, so are also the Public School and teacher’s
house, and the hotel, within a stone’s throw of the
school, kept by Mr. Bailey, which house is mostly
resorted to by those who on pleasure or business bent


visit this town. The owner of the large estate before
mentioned has an overseer, a shepherd or two, and
when shearing time comes a few extra hands, very
little money derived from the estate being spent in the
district. What a contrast, this estate and that of the
gentleman at Glenora, whose expenditure in wages,
rations, etc., reaches nearly every year. Oh
that Tasmania had a few more men like this (Glenora)
one. The visitor never fails to remark the dullness of
the town of Hamilton. Leaving Hamilton the coach
now moves on towards
THE OUSE BRIDGE,
The full extent of our journey, and a pleasant drive.
It is within a few miles of this bridge that Lawrenny
Estate is seen, once the abode of farmers, now a sheep
run. I shall not attempt to describe it, but rest fully
satisfied by saying that you may visit all the grand
estates of the north, yes, indeed, of the island, even go
to the other colonies, another to eclipse it could not be
found. At the Ouse there is one hotel, and just over the
bridge, near the Post and Telegraph Office, is a private
boarding house, very clean, where the traveller may
rely upon every comfort. A few days stay in this lo-
cality would prove beneficial. If the tourist be on foot
or horseback he can go cross-country via Hamilton to
Bothwell, a distance of 18 miles. Beautiful scenery all
[the way, but rough road. Two houses or huts are
passed, where one is able to get a rest, or if needs be,
a shake-down. Most of the settlers throughout the
colony are always ready to afford some sort of shelter to
those who may, through unavoidable circumstances,
require it. The distance from New Norfolk to the
Ouse Bridge via Hamilton is 34 miles. Fare, 9s.
single; 18s. return.
HOBART TO BOTHWELL,
Via Brighton Railway Station.
Many visitors find this picturesque locality an agree-
able haven of rest during their holidays. It recommends
itself because it is within a day's journey of Hobart.
Several important places are passed through, reminding


one of the old days gone by before the railway, when
coaching from North to South was in full swing.
After leaving Brighton Railway Station, a distance of
two miles brings us to the bridge at Pontville, com-
monly known as Brighton township. The river Jordan
runs through this township. Mounts Dromedary, 3,245
feet, and Mangalore, 2,044 feet, overshadow the same;
they are very rugged and steep, both producing ex-
cellent timber.
BAGDAD,
A village about five miles from the bridge, is the
next postal district. There is no hotel nearer than
Brighton Bridge, Pontville, or Green Ponds, seven
miles. After leaving Bagdad, there is a tough pull for
the horses, over what is known as Constitution Hill,
which overhangs a tremendous gorge, a great study for
geologists. From this hill can be seen a glorious pano-
rama of a very captivating character. The many valleys
and lovely dales look charming on a fine day. The cul-
tivations with the neat cottages of the owners, form an
interesting pifture. On the Hill is a church and public
school, both very neat buildings. Several remarkable
huts, very primitive looking, grace this road; the store,
too,is a real model, worthy of a place in the Hobart
Museum. Perhaps the owner, on reading these few
lines, may express himself thus —“Things are not as
they seem;” to the passer-by it appears a complete
“ Noah’s Ark.” Had I not been told it was a store, I
certainly would have reported it to my friends as the
original “Ark” in which Noah was saved from the
flood.
GREEN PONDS
Is the next township, with its old-fashioned, tumble-
down, brick buildings, which give it the appearance of
an old diggings “city.” It is unique, and for that reason
well worth visiting. Many good farms in the locality
look extremely snug and neat. Hotels, stores, and the
usual public institutions are seen on every side of the
township. The coach makes a short stay here, when
also a fresh team of horses is brought out, and away


Freemasons’ Hotel,
NEW NORFOLK.
Visitors to New Norfolk will find this Hotel
very comfortable, where every care
and attention is given.
The Finest Quality of Wines,
Spirits, Ales, &c.
Fishing Tackle, &c., kept for the use of
Visitors.
G. LEATHAM, Proprietor
NEW NORFOLK LIVERY STABLES
Visitors to New Norfolk can obtain Horses, Carriages,
Buggies, &c., &c., to Salmon Ponds or
elsewhere on the shortest notice.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.
A. SMITH, Proprietor-
High-street, New Norfolk.
JUSTIN BROWNE & CO.,
AGENTS FOR
THE PENINSULAR AND ORIENTAL STEAM
NAVIGATION CO.,
AND FOE
GEO. W. WHEATLEY & CO.’S EXPRESS.
No. 1, Lord’s Place, Elizabeth-street.


WATERFALL, BOTH WELL.
See page 85.


we roll, past Melton Mowbray, on to Bothwell k Between
Melton Mowbray and Bothwell the tourist, if a lover of
the beautiful, can find much to occupy his attention,
the country being mountainous and impressive. Soon
after p.m. the coach draws up at the hotel, thus
ending another drive over country teeming with all
that is exquisite and wonderful.
BOTHWELL
Is one of the oldest towns in the colony; it stands
upon the banks of the River Clyde, which river is
popular amongst those who ply the rod. Victorians
are year after year visiting this place, because of its
many attractions. At one time it was looked upon as
a little Scotland, the settlers being mostly Scotch, but
this exclusiveness has vanished. Bothwell Falls are
very pretty, and within easy reach from the hotel, and
should be visited. The Shannon River, 12 miles from
Bothwell, is another favourite spot for trout fishing.
On the township is a good reserve, where the youth of
the place enjoy themselves at cricket or football. The
public school, an antediluvian structure, is just off the
main street, and presided over by Mr. J. T. Johnston,
under whose care is also the library. The great lion
of Bothwell is the Clyde River and its beautiful cas-
cade (which is little more than a mile from the
village), where the whole volume of water pours over
a perpendicular cliff forty feet in height, with a roar
that is heard to a great distance. The deep gorge
through which the mighty stream rushes onward for
about a mile is one continuous scene of wild, romantic
beauty. Fish abound in this river, and the visitor will
be able to pass his spare time right well if a lover of
all that is noble. For particulars re coach fares, etc.,
see below. Distance from Brighton Station, 32 miles.
Fares, single, 7s. 6d.; return, 155.; hotel accommoda-
tion, Bs. to 10s. per day. District, agricultural and
pastoral.
TROM HOBART, VIA CAMPANIA, TO SWAN-
SEA, ON THE EAST COAST.
This is a popular seaside place, and if once visited
would be resorted to year after year. The traveller should


leave Hobart by the express at 8 a,m., on Tuesday or
Friday morning; or, if desirous of a good night’s rest,
without being hurried to catch the first train from
Hobart, might go on to Campania by the night mail
on Monday and Thursday, which reaches the station
at 10 p.m. Close to the station is the Railway Hotel,
kept by host White, who has made every provision for
the comfort of those who make a stay at his house. A
good table is kept, as also the best of wines, &c. Mr.
White being a long resident of the place, is able to
impart much information to his guests with regard to
the trip to the coast. The charges are moderate, every
care and attention being bestowed upon all those who
pay this hotel a visit. On arrival of the express Mr,
George Burdon is ready with his well-appointed coach
and fast-going steeds for the journey. The fare from
Campania to Swansea is 28s. For many miles the
traveller passes through good agricultural and pastoral
country, dotted with many well-kept homesteads and
farms. The road in many parts is hilly, yet we are
not obliged, as in many other parts of the colony, to
get out and walk, or push up behind, for the pro-
prietor takes good care to study his patrons, so keeps
good horses and excellent coaches. The first place
of call is
BUCKLAND,
A small village, home-like, on the Prosser’s Plains,
where many charming bits of scenery are to be seen.
Here there are several stores, hotel, public school, and
one church. A number of creeks flow through the
Plains. The surrounding country is mountainous.
Population of village small, all seeming in good cir-
cumstances. The traveller may now prepare for a
fea«t with regard to majestic scenery, as the drive to
Orford Bridge is magnificent indeed, several gorges
with mighty rocks towering high into the air, and
seeming, as the coach spins along, as if they will
topple over. Much of this road overlooks the Prosser’s
River, and its construction reflects great credit upon
all who had the management of same. A place
called Paradise is very attractive, and to some may be
a Paradise; still I saw no Paradise about the place;


I trust the reader, on visiting this spot, may do so.
For the bold, massive, awe-inspiring, and the wonder-
ful, I give it best, but not as a Paradise. It is indeed
one of the most picturesque places that is to be seen
in the island, one not very easily forgotten. At
ORFORD
There is a good beach, which would be a favourite
place for families, if there happened to be the needful
accommodation.
SPRING BAY
Comes next; the township goes by the name of
Triabunna. It has the usual law courts, post and
telegraph office, two hotels; the harbour not being
open to the heavy swell of the ocean, being protected
on the east side by Maria Island, and being in the
route to the other colonies, is frequently run into as a
port of refuge, A stoppage is made, thus giving plenty
of time for dinner. Fresh horses, and a start is made
for
LISDILLON,
A well-kept pastoral district, which is in the hands
of Mr. Mark Mitchell, who employs a great num-
ber of hands with good wages and comfortable
homes. He has always taken a great interest in the
district, and endeavoured to advance the well-being of
those who, from time to time, work upon his estate.
A good church has been built by him, which is also
used as a school, and w r ell supported by Mr. Mitchell
and his family, in faCl, a few more such gentlemen
would indeed be a desirable acquisition to the island.
There are police quarters also. The coach stops here
to deliver mails, at roadside post office. There is tele-
phone connection with Swansea, this I think is for the
convenience of the station-holders. Of course others
can use it, being Government property. Another 14.
miles and we are at
SWANSEA,
A good-sized town on the west shore of Oyster Bay.
Several hotels. Swansea is without doubt one of the
best places for those in search of health, rest, sport, or
pleasure. The beach is a first-class one; bathers can


here indulge, enjoying a fine time of it. Boating and
fishing (freshwater and salt) are the pastimes of the
settlers. The gun is brought into use ; in fad, no one
need be lost whilst at Swansea for thorough enjoy-
ment. I cannot pick upon another spot that would so
well suit families; it is away from the bustle of the
city, yet within a day’s journey, and to reach it a grand
drive is experienced; charges at hotels moderate.
Post several times per week. There are so many
places of interest to be visited, that time could not
hang wearily upon one, unless laziness happened to
be the order of the day. Distance from Hobart, about
90 miles; a good road all the way, with remarkably
grand scenery. Not far from the town, and well
worth visiting, is the ten-mile beach ; good shells may
at times be found of a choice character.
SWAN RIVER
Is within easy reach of the town, and affords a pleasant
day’s outing. Excellent fishing at all seasons of the
year. Rocky Hills, 9 miles south of Swansea, the
ruins of a very large conviCt station, is much frequented
by picnic parties. Swansea must come to the front
within a few years, and so soon as the Campbell Town
road, via Swansea, is completed, it will be only 34
miles from the Main Line Railway, thus saving many
miles of coach travelling.
Casting our thoughts back to Swansea, the traveller
must now make up his mind respecting the return
journey, or a continuation of the same. If the former,
particulars of return coaches can be found in the
Swansea Time Table, published below:—
RAILWAY AND COACH TIME TABLE AND FARES
FROM HOBART, VIA CAMPANIA, TO SWANSEA.
Hobart to Campania by rail: Fare, Ist class, ss. 3d.; 2nd
4s. Distance, miles, coach.
Miles. Single Fares. Return.
Campania ... g - 30 a.m.—
Buckland ... ... 24 ios. 20s.
Orford... 36 14s. 28s.
Spring Bay 40 15s. 30s.
Lisdillon ... ... 58 235. 465.
Swansea ... 10 p.ra. 72 28s. 565.


This coach leaves Campania Railway Hotel every Tuesday
and Friday, returning Monday and Thursday from Swansea
at 5 a.m., reaching Campania in time for the express train
from Launceston to Hobart, at 7.30 p.m, arriving in Hobart
at 8.45.
FROM SWANSEA TO AVOGA,
Vid Gala, Rock House , and St. Paul's River.
After spending a few days or weeks at Swansea, and
instead of returning by Spring Bay, the tourist can go
round by Avoca to the Corners, thence to Hobart or
Launceston. This trip through in one day can be
accomplished verily well and easily, with a grand drive
also, through one of the most romantic districts of the
East Coast, over the highest road in the colony, thus
saving the necessity of returning over the same road a
second time. There will be a little more expense
attached to this route. As a pleasure trip it is one of
the most remarkable that it has ever been my pleasure
to take, so full of beautiful and charming scenery.
Many parts of the road are on a perpendicular wall of
rocks crowned with dense forests. In some places
these rocky walls rise to close on 300 feet high. There
is some capital sport to be had here with the gun, and
much time might be profitably spent amongst this
wonderful mountain fastness. This all-round journey,
as I may call it, is from Swansea to Cranbrook, past
Gala Kirk, a Presbyterian Church, on to St. Paul’s
Plains, a track of flat but elevated country, on the St,
Paul's River, thence to Rock House, when a change of
coach is made, and away to Avoca, on the main coach
road, changing coaches again, then through to the Cor-
ners railway station, in time for the express from Laun-
ceston to Hobart, which passes at 4*23 p.m., arriving
in Hobart at 8-45. The train for Launceston leaves
the Corners at 5*52 p.m., reaching Launceston at B*io.
To give a correct statement of expenses seems to me
very advisable, so I will place before the reader parti-
culars to a shilling, the cost of reaching Hobart or
Launceston from Swansea.


SWANSEA TO HOBART, VIA AVOCA, VIA CORNERS.
Starts at 5 a.m.; reaches Hobart at 8'45 every Wednesday
and Saturday.
cost. £ s. d.
Coach Fare, Swansea to Rock House ... ... 012 6
0 12 6
Rock House to Avoca... ... ... o 3 6
~ „ Avoca to Corners ... ... ... 050
Train, First Class to Hobart... ... ... ... 1 2 6
Breakfast on the Journey ... ... ... ... 016
jjicttiviaot uic JUUWICJ ... ... «»« U 1
Dinner at Avoca ... ... ... o 2
Refreshments at Oatlands Junction ... ... ... o 1
Total £2BO
Distance from Swansea to Hobart, 158 miles. Time occu-
pied on the journey, 16 hours.
SWANSEA TO LAUNCESTON, VIA AVOCA, VIA
CORNERS.
Starts at 5 a.m.; reaches Launceston at B'io p.m. every
Wednesday and Saturday.
cost. £ s. d.
Coach Fare, Swansea to Rock House ... ... o 12 6
Rock House to Avoca... ... ~.036
„ „ Avoca to Corners ... ... ...050
Train from Corners to Launceston ... ... ...076
Breakfast ... ... ... ... ... ...016
Dinner ... ... ... ... ... .... ... o 2
Total 12 o
Distance from Swansea to Launceston, 95 miles. Time
•occupied on the journey, 15 hours 10 minutes.
AVOCA TO GEORGE’S BAY.
Instead of returning to Hobart or Launceston, the
tourist being bent upon going further, in fact working
his way through to Launceston by road, can do so with
little trouble, thus having the pleasure of visiting the
tin mining districts of the North East. Coach leaves
the Avoca Hotel every morning at B’3o for Fingal, 16
mi'es. The country from Avoca to Fingal lies south
of Ben Lomond, a mountain 5,000 feet high, and north
of St. Paul’s Dome, a lofty mountain 3,368 feet, lying
in the angle formed by the junction of the South
Esk and St. Paul’s River. The township of Avoca is
prettily situated, and boasts of the usual business
houses that are common to all country places. Popu-
lation very small, and distrift decreasing in numbers,
instead of increasing, most of the land falling into the


hands of the large sheepowners, more is the pity,
because the soil is good, and well suited for agricul-
tural purposes. At one time three hotels did good
business here, but it is as much as one can do now to
hold its own. The drive from Avoca township is
certainly a delightful one upon a fine morning; there
is a well-formed road, over which the English-like
coaches of Mr. Page dash at a good rate. The driver
is well-acquainted with the road, and if it is your luck
to secure a box seat he will give all the needful parti-
culars respecting the district. The nature of this part
of the island is flat, surrounded by mountains on all
sides. The Break o’Day Plains are kept in sight for a
long distance before and after leaving Fingal. The
coach stops at the
TOWNSHIP OF FINGAL
Half-an-hour for the mail to be made up. This is a
far more important place than Avoca, with a large
number of small farmers to the south of the township;
gold, coal, and tin are found close by. The remains
of a conviCt settlement are seen to the right of the
coach road, part of the buildings being used as a public
school and master’s residence. A number of creeks
flow through the country, thus adding to its appear-
ance. In the course of a few months this township
will be connected with the Main Line Railway (via the
Corners), thus adding another important link to those
already constructed.
ST. MARY’S
Is the next place of call, situated upon St. Patrick’s
Creek. St. Mary’s is noted as a cheese-producing
district, several hundreds of tons being sent to the
Hobart and Launceston markets. Butter, which is
famed for its quality, is largely exported to the other
Half-an-hour is allowed for dinner. This
finished, we take our seats, and off we go through to
the ravine known as St. Mary’s Pass, a romantic spot,
which is the most remarkable place along the George’s
Bay road. There are many wonderful curves on this
road, past which brings real beauty. Below is a yawn-
ing gulf for miles, which strikes terror into the nervous


6/Si co
F' h 92 H
or timid traveller. Far away to the east lies the snug-
little village of Falmouth, near Henderson’s Lagoon, a
fine sheet of water during the winter months. This is
kept in sight for several miles whilst driving through
the Pass. There are very few such sights as this to be
found in the colonies, so I would recommend the
tourist, if time will admit, to visit it. He will be de-
lighted, and amply rewarded for his trouble.
FALMOUTH.
At this place there is one Inn, much resorted to by
visitors from the mainland who wish seclusion.
Newly-wedded folk find Falmouth a safe nook and
an acceptable one in which to spend the honeymoon.
Each time I have paid the place a visit it has been the
resting bower of those whose chief objeft it has been
to have the comforts all to themselves, and small
blame to them. May it ever be so, and may the
affable landlord, with his obliging wife, meet with
success.
GEORGE’S BAY
Is the last place of call on this coach road, one which
has from all time been picked upon as suitable for a
trip, whether by the colonist or visitor from other parts.
The harbour is a fine land-locked one, about
three miles long, and entered by a narrow channel,
opening to the north-east. St. Helen’s Point is
the south head, and Grant’s Point the north.
The bay affords safe anchorage to vessels of any
draught, the deep water being on the south side, and
going along up to the beach. The town of St. Helen's
is situated on the northern shore of George’s Bay, near
the George River, which is a fine and important stream,
rising in Mount Albert to the east of Mount Victoria,
from thence flowing about 40 miles, and falling into the
sea on the East Coast at George’s Bay near the towr jn *
ship. There is a fine bridge leading into the to-'® 1 ? 16
ship, close to which is the jetty, used .- ra^^e >
much by small crafts, that bring most
merchandise round from Launceston, Hob* W “ 1C "
Melbourne. There are good fishing gr ie ver^


FACTS WORTH KNOWING.
Cabs.— When engaging a cabman to drive you to a hotel,
or other place of accommodation, do not take for granted
the information oft-times given—“lt’sfull: I’ve just taken a
party there, and had to take them to So-and-so ” —but insist
upon going to the place, and finding out the truth. Nor is it
advisable to credit the advice offered by strangers, that the
place you are seeking is full, as interested folk are ready to
do so —their interest being in some other place.
North-West Coast. —One of the most delightful drives
is from Latrobe to Emu Bay, through charming country,
over-looking the “ deep blue sea.” Atkinson Bros, and
Mitchell’s well-appointed coaches leave every day, on arrival
of the morning train from Launceston.
Visitors to Hobart, who desire to pass a few hours
pleasantly, could not do better than visit Westcott’s Circu-
lating Library. This favourite place has the latest published
books from Mudie’s and other well-known English houses.
A comfortable room has been fitted up for those who desire
to use the books in the Library.
Snakes. —Visitors taking their rambles should be on their
guard, and look well before sitting upon fallen timber or
near water.
Stables. —Newnham's, Macquarie-street, Hobart.
Photographs. —Sargent’s, Macquarie-street, Hobart; and
Duval’s, Quadrant, Launceston.
Smithies (Shipping Agent, &c., Emu Bay). —Visitors
desiring information respecting the North-West Coast would
do well to communicate with Mr. Smithies. Mr. S. is also
agent for “ Haywood’s Illustrated Tasmanian Guide.”


J. T. SAMPSON,
cash ®a®tsia.
BRISBANE - STREET,
LAUNCESTON. m
DIRECT IMPORTER FROM
LONDON.
PRICE LISTS POST FREE.
fSIM One ie most successful remedies ever introduced
UUCii f°r the relief of Facial Neuralgia. Numerous testi-
monials as to its value.
Mummali'* fLaaui uxur ious cosmetique for removing
MlgDOlll yiOaHli Sunburns, Tans, Freckles, Pimples, and
• Roughness from the Skin, producing a
Clear and Brilliant Complexion.
Hlmlkumn -An ex quisite perfume, prepared from Tas-
mml. manian flowers.
A delicious liquid dentifrice, for thoroughly '
UOiluOllZlOi Cleansing and Whitening the Teeth, Hardening
the Gums, and imparting a Delightful Fragrance '
to the Breath.
The above are prepared only by
J. W. TOPLIS,
Pharmaceutical Chemist (from Songster and Co., London),
80, MURRAY-STEEET (NEXT SUSMAN'S), HOBART.
Under the Direct Patronage of the Leading Medical Practitioners
of Hobart.
PRESCRIPTIONS ACCURATELY DISPENSED.
