

THROUGH HELL
■: ik
ANZMS
M/i! ''vV if
A
mm ■ >/A\
FIRST PUBLICATION.


"TiVJ'ERGUSON COLLECTIONJ\\P
|[( Rational |l|
- ■ -'
i
'
.
*
I
f
" ' - • ' ',.•; ■■ : 'I
,


"There stands not on the roll of fame
Heroes of a nobler name
Than the Anzacs"
THROUGH HELL WITH
THE ANZACS
Original Poems and True Stories expressing the
Beautiful Sentiments of the Anzacs
in their Great Sacrifice
E. M. BRADBURY
Author of
"The Lady of the Skies," "Callalrean," "The Cleaning Up,
etc., etc.
Copyright
Publication, wholly or in part, without permission of
The Richbury Press Co., Sydney
is strictly forbidden


4*
In Memoriam
GALLIPOLI, DECEMBER, 1915
Tread softly, bare your head, in reverent silence bow,
No tolling bell doth toll o'er their place of resting now;
No officers' voices call, no laughing soldiers tread,
'Tis the resting place of heroes—the valorous Anzac
dead.
Beneath that hallow'd ground, Death doth keep his
state.
Enter! no mourners attend, no guards defend thy gate.
On sacred earth thou'rt treading, with holy reverence
bow.
Remember! they are the Anzacs; greater far than
thou.
Sleeping! the brave —whose souls have journeyed west
To meet their God—lie peacefully at rest,
And the angels' choir is chanting it shall never
cease—
Hear the solemn hymn rising; "Peace, Perfect Peace."
And once again tread softly, in reverent silence bow,
No cannon's roar disturbs their sleep, no bayonet fight-
ing now,
They have God's sweet benediction; and tho' this life
be o'er,
There's another life in Heaven, when we'll meet again
once more.


'' Remembrance '
Have you forgotten! when the enemy hordes drew nigh—
Sixteen long years ago, when the bugles were calling?
Have you forgotten! how our flags waved on high,
Inspiring men to triumph; tho' many were falling?
Hear our voices as we cry, "Help those who helped thee."
* Beatus qui intelligit, "Dcmine."
Can we forget how our soldiers rushed to meet
The enemy charge, and our battalions' forward dashes?
Can we forget how the bullets fell like sleet,
And the deafening roar—and the cannon's flashes?
Hear our voices as we cry, "Help those who helped thee."
Beatus qui intelligit, "Domine."
Here and there they mingled in Death's awful rout,
With the roaring guns and the wounded's groan.
Here and there the vanquished cries and the victor's shout,
Showing the world how to die; comfortless, alone.
Hear our voices as we cry, "Help those who helped thee."
Beatus qui intelligit, "Domine."
And then the night's shadows all round us close,
Those heavy broken hearts that ever yearn,
And we ask Thee, dear God, to succour those
For their loved ones who'll never more return.
Hear our voices as we cry, "Help those who helped thee."
Beatus qui intelligit, "Domine."
♦Blessed are they that help the poor and needy, O Lord.


" The Anzacs' Triumph
Bow your heads to the Gallipoli heroes, who will always be
to fame.
The laughing, boistering fellows, who won the Anzac
Was there fighting to be done, they did it,
Was there danger, they rushed amid it.
Wounded to death, with a smile they hid it,
Answering flame with flame.
known
name
Strapped at the chin, or bandaged at the hand,
Or stripped to the waist for fight,
They chased the alien hordes o'er rugged land,
To hills of defeat and flight.
Illumined by the cannon's flashing,
They rushed as one, the enemy crashing,
Shoulder to shoulder with bayonet slashing,
Lunged at the lurking sight.
A khaki mass of muscle, power and pride,
They came from everywhere.
From New Zealand spaces, where men can ride,
From office, desk and chair.
They were bravehearted, reckless, undaunted,
With Death they courted and taunted,
In the Valleys of Hell their flag they flaunted,
Damning all who care.


The gallant leaders with rank and file,
In the days of "No Man's Land."
Under each helmet and cap with a smile,
Was the brains of a fighting band.
They were valiant, swift, unsleeping,
Like bolts from the azure leaping,
Like birds of prey on the enemy sweeping,
Defying all orders to stand.
The men who swore with the Australian twang,
Were the men they had to take,
All through the world their bravery rang,
The enemy's pride to break.
They were fierce to fight and to sunder,
The Turkish gains and all plunder.
The marvellous feats and Great Britain's wonder
Splendid for Australia's sake.
Brave men came back from that bloody field,
Battlestained, hearty and bold.
Their duty well done, where none would yield.
Equalling their weight in gold,
The Anzacs, whose deeds of daring,
Were fought with each other sharing,
Of jokes and laughter, together with swearing,
Of stunts that will always be told.
With hidden cannon in line and machine guns in
Fed by the Anzac men and boys;
front
Lizzie's shells were those in the early morn brunt
Fired with deafening noise,
The death-shrieking messages were flinging
Into the enemy trenches, and bringing
Wounded and prisoners back with singing,
Shared by our Allies' joys.


The cliffs were scaled as their leaders died,
By the Anzac men, well bred.
Who has not read with glowing pride,
The roll of those glorious dead.
On Gallipoli heights, uncharted,
Their valorous souls departed,
They fought, they fell, and in dying blithehearted,
Cheered as the Turks had fled.
Sixteen years have passed since the battalions rushed,
That will always be known to fame.
Where the life-blood spilt of both young and flushed,
Gave them that glorious name.
Was there a coward among them? No! never.
'Twas proved as they all fought together
With unbroken ranks that none could sever,
Answering flame with flame.
friemoria in Sterna
Read their names o'er their graves on the battlefield glory
A beautiful cross at each head of brown earth,
Sleeping, in the prime of their youth and their glory,
Far from their homes and land of their birth.
Soft sigh the winds of Heaven o'er their grave,
While the lulling billows mournfully roll,
And the calm blue Aegean seas condole,
Singing sweetly to the souls of the brave.


"The Walls of '
The commands are silent which long ago were given. In my
awful dream of that hell upon earth, "Gallipoli." It staggers
the imagination; sixteen long years ago. What a nightmare! I
am, and I suppose will always be, dreaming of it, of the Anzacs of
yesterday, to-morrow and for ever. Come with me for a walk
around in that land which knows suffering and sorrow. Only
one day in the year in the public mind, but in mine always.
"Anzac!" Look up at those giant towering cliffs, standing like
sentinels over the sand-swept beach. The old spot where we
landed. Look into the blue waters of the Mediterranean, sobbing
and lulling the sands, trying to wash the bloodstains that will
never be washed away. What a slaughter-house it was. "What's
that?" my companion cried as a wild bird's eerie shriek rang out
over the frightful stillness. "Nothing," I replied; "come on." The
wonderful pale blue of the Turkish sky locks the deep blue waters
of the Mediterranean. What wonderful, yet awful memories it
awakes. Yet God's peace reigns all round. Slowly, reverently, we
walk along the shore and everything comes back again into my
mind. Surely right in our path there looms the figure of a khaki-
clad form. Not an Australian! yet not a New Zealander! Yes,
it is a Turk. Good Heavens! what is he doing there? A sniper,
no doubt, after all these years. The sun shines down from a cloud-
less sky. Instinctively my hand goes to my shoulder for my
rifle, but it is not there, and then I remember the war is over
long ago. Slowly, yet silently, my memories are carrying me too
far. We pass the place where the pier used to be, but there is
no pier there to-day. Do you old diggers remember it? Half
fearing the coming of the terrible shrapnel we go on; every
stone, almost every rock and boulder is familiar. We pass the
spot where we first landed, and look up at the ridges, still scored
by the myriad dugouts that we dug for our first rest. They
are still there, silent symbols of the past, but they are all empty.


Here and there we see an old portion of a tunic; the buttons and
Rising Sun are all rusted. An old pack, or a cap. Yes, very little
left of them. With pain throbbing through me, I pick them up,
tell my mate to examine them, for they were once worn by
my comrades, the grandest, the best, the bravest men God evex
made. I wonder if they can hear me talking. No! they are too
peacefully sleeping. All attention and alert, and ready to duck
from the snipers' bullets that played so persistently over the
beach, we saunter on. Old memories again come rushing back
when we pass where the hospitals used to be; and I imagine I
can see the doctors at work again on that first Monday morn; one
digger begging the doctor to leave him and go to the others, who
are in worse pain. The Anzac all over, always thinking of others
before himself. To the tune of the shrapnel shrieking overhead,
the thundering roar of the warships, and the pinging of the stray
bullets, the Anzac boys are teaching the world how to die. Listen
to them laughing and joking when they are dying. Is there any
record quite so glorious in the world? Here, there, everywhere,
the surgeons are hard at work. Yes, they knew their work,
probing, binding, stitching, and amputating. These diggers didn't
want chloroform. Relays of stretcher-bearers in endless proces-
sion are carrying their human freight, mangled and torn by
shrapnel, bullet and bayonet, to the protection of the Red Cross
flag. Johnny Turk must have had a bad time. "No surrender"
was the password. We walk on and pass where the mules used
to be tied, and then into the ravine that leads to "Shrapnel
Gully." This is one of the spots where the Turks gave us hell;
then, our eyes are aiuested by the signboard that was once I
remember in blue crayons: "Diggers, this water must be boiled.
We stood spellbound at the old familiar spot. Somebody is at
those water pumps again, hundreds of men behind in single
column; yes, with dixies, kerosene tins, bully beef tins, anything
that will hold water. Laughing and joking, waiting their turn.
There is no jostling, pushing or crushing, everybody waits his
turn. Then they trudge back to the firing line, or dugout, from
wherever they came. Avoiding the shelter of the sap, for there
is no danger now. We walk on. Cn our right we see the old dug-
outs of the Royal Marine Light Infantry, and I laugh as I think


how, when the guards were sleeping, three of us stole their tins
of water. I'll bet they wouldn't have stolen it from the Anzac
when he slept, sometimes with one eye open. On the left there
is the old road leading to the headquarters camp, and a little way
further we come to the cemetery. We tread softly and again
silently over this hallowed ground, sacred by the memories of
those old pals of mine. Yes, the graves are beautiful, well tended
and kept, the green grass growing over them, even the wild flowers
blossoming all round. The wild poppies even bend their heads in
sorrow. Wandering through them I came across the grave of
my best digger pal. I must confess that I knelt down and prayed
that God will never again give another hell upon earth, another
Gallipoli. "Sleep on, dear pal, your fight was not in vain," I
murmured as I tore myself away. Then we pass through sap and
tunnel and communication trench to the old firing line. Every-
thing is the same, nothing has altered. Parapets are still there,
the loopholes as we left them, but there are no men to man them.
No! the maxims do not bark —everything is quiet and peaceful.
Yet, who would have thought that this once was a regular inferno?
Here's the spot where my digger pals dug and fought, the little
dugout that I used to lie in is still there, even the peg where
I hung my pack, and I imagine I can see my rifle alongside with
the bayonet glistening. We pass along past Tasman's Post and
Bolton Ridge, and into that place, "Hell with the lid off"—shot,
shell and bursting bombs —"Lone Pine." Here it is where the
glorious men of the Ist Brigade carved their way to glory with
the bayonet. This is where the shining crimson life-blood spelt
its name, "The Ist Brigade"; and then we pass along to Court-
ney's and Quinn's Posts. Here we come to the neck, this hal-
lowed ground made sacred by the blood of the Bth and the 10th
Light Horse, who plugged well into the Turks before they gave
their lives. More than two human columns met and crashed in
opposite directions, and fought to the death, in order that the
diggers at Suvla Bay might land successfully. Yes! they were
the bright and brave fighting, units of Victoria and Western
Australia, rushing out to meet certain death with smiling faces.
Do you remember their cry, ycu diggers living to-day? "Into 'em,
the Ist Brigade." We climbed the steep cliffs of Walker's ridge.


Here's the New Zealanders and Maoris going out in the night to
clear the foothills. Yes, they were brave men, too. Hill 60 and
971 are still there; the chessboard and the Sphinx are just the
same, Shrapnel, Dead Man's Gully. Look! there's the Daisy
Patch and Bowling Green. What memories they awake. Trenches,
dugouts and the outposts seem all the same as in the olden days.
Shattered and sodden, rent and torn by the high explosives. Yet,
there is a feeling of glory and understanding that can never fade,
won by deeds of bravery, determination, and "no surrender," that
have no parallel in military history. It is the old diggers that
were spared that can tell of these horrors, and to think that this
was the studied purpose of Kings and Emperors for forty years,
with no protest on account from the common people, v/ho have
lent their bodies, their industry, their money, and their very
souls to this hellish accomplishment. Yes, just think! There
are seven thousand lonely and beautiful graves on Gallipoli. I
see them all over again. No warships belching forth Death, no
thundering overhead, no shrieking of shrapnel, no pinging of
bullets; yet the Star and Crescent is flying where the Union
and Australian Jack used to be. "Sleep on, dear Digger Anzacs,
God's Crown of Glory is shed over you like a sweet benediction,"
and the angels are whispering to one another:
"Closest to their God in splendour
Lies the souls of such as these."


"The Landing"
GALLIPOLI, APRIL 25th, 1915
Steady, boys! All hell seemed bursting, as the crash of carnage
came
At four o'clock; flashing shell arose, and licked all the hills with
flame,
And belching cannon and whistling shot, with lightning speed
went past,
Screaming Death's awful message, into the battle blast.
For Death was walking on that morn, and grimly smiled to see
How all was ready and ranged, for his sumptuous jubilee.
From dawn till night they fought their fight, and at the set of sun,
Stood conquerors on Gallipoli; their first great battle won.
The Anzacs crushed into the fight, where the angels feared to
tread;
With the glow of victory on their face, leapt the trenches o'er
the dead.
All for the peak of peril rushed, all for the fiercest post,
Majestic as a God defied, they scaled the Turkish coast.
Our comrades fell in boyhood's bloom and bravery's lusty pride.
Where is the valour to compare, of those Anzacs who have died?
No voice can speak, nor pen can write, of deeds that stand alone,
With those, who now are sleeping, under God's perpetual throne.


"They Shall Not
It is typical of the spirit of the Australian soldiers, when
dying on the field of battle and about to drink their mugs of
water to assuage their mortal thirst after heavy fighting, seeing
around them wounded brothers looking longingly at the water,
knowing themselves they are all in, there is no hope for them,
and they are going west, to ask that it be given to their comrades,
saying "Their needs are greater than ours. Give it to them over
yonder." Brotherhood, love and honour are not mere words, but
words that are written upon the sands of destruction, and we,
though remote and happy, must turn our thoughts close beside
those of our soldiers who dwelt in the blackest years this earth had
ever known, and learn more of the profound significance of life and
of grandeur of spirit which can rise deathless and triumphant out
of the deepest grave of misery. So, on the indelible pages of
history, where day by day our men looked into the abysses of
Hell, they made those records stand for all time on the
altar of sacrifice. This community owes a debt of gratitude to
the Diggers who fought and fell and laughed in spite of Death.
Come with me into that crimson haze of all the vanished com-
panies that ventured death and distance; not for the yearn of
gold, nor for the itch of power, nor the favour of women; but
for the might of honour, the nod of fame, and for the glory of
God, shall dare and do and die again for us all. Look back to
France in August, 1918, for five days through a living hell. It
began on the night of August 7th. What a splendid collection of
our very best fighters; what daring they showed, as we lined up
the best way we could. A general order from the Army Corps
Commander was read, asking us to give the best, display the
fighting quality of the soldier: "THEY SHALL NOT PASS." It
was the greatest onslaught ever launched by the Allied Armies,
on a 14-mile front, from the Amiens-Roye Road to Morlancourt.


The Australians, the New Zealanders, and the Canadians, with
the picked assaulting troops of the French Army. Our issue
of rum was handed out at daybreak next day, and to the deaf-
ening bombardment we started off. It was a weird, astounding
scene, in the half-light grey of the morning, with a thick fog
hanging over the whole countryside, valley and hills for miles, as
far as the eye could strain, was scarlet red with the flash and
flame of our artillery. The very heavens were tipped also with
red. Over and into the German lines swept the endless, steady
columns of our fighting infantry. The French marvelled at our
daring and fighting men. The morning sun rose to give us more
light, that our task, it would seem would be easier, and tipping
the thousands of bayonets with ruddy gold that were soon to be
steeped in blood. What an awful, yet brilliant spectacle we
were gazing on. God knows where through the spume and fog
of shell bursts, and into the rising mists the fleet of tanks
plunged, ploughed and rocked like fearsome and treacherous mon-
sters. They were spitting flame and death at the German
machine gunners and helping to clear our way. It wasnt long
before swarms of Huns, of all sizes, sorts, ranks and ages came
trooping through, and, as we went on passed a battery of whizz-
bangs, already in our hands. We had captured cur objective,
we halted awhile, as another of our divisions raced past in the
gruesome chase. To give the soldiers their due, they don't know
to-day what danger is. Not many seconds elapsed when our
batteries came madly galloping into action, and some of our gun-
ners turned the Huns' own whizzbangs round and plugged into
the retiring troops. It was a desolating war forced upon the
Empire by the arrogant military caste of Germany, which sought
to enslave Europe. This military caste thought a perfected war
machine would tear through the vitals of Europe and leave her
bleeding and crushed; but they had reckoned without the Aus-
tralians, and the French cheered "Vive les Australiens." There
were souvenirs everywhere, armoured cars, troops, supplies, lorry
loads of shells, giant guns, all the prizes of war. We rested there
for the remainder of the day and slept in a German machine gun
dump for the night. The following morning we packed up and
off again, marched another 10 kilometres forward, with orders


to go over the top again with a New South Wales brigade, old
fighting mates of ours at Ypres, Pozieres, and Bullecourt. We
arrived in the new front line about an hour before the next
big stunt and had a good rest and a smoke. What a relief is a
good smoke! You diggers remember how tired all were, but our
hearts had not dropped yet; we were determined to give Fritz
hell and score at every chance, and the Germans knew it. At
the last hour we had another nip of rum, and then over once
again. We had no' barrage to cover us, and with the aid of
several tanks out of about 400 engaged, we gained a mile and a
quarter over bare flat country at 4.20 in the afternoon. Either
Fritz had the wind up or their machine gunners knew we were
coming again, and would not stop till we gained our objective, for
they simply poured it into us, to stop the rush. We got there,
but at what a cost. Then came storms of bullets, whizzing,
pinging, zipping and shrieking past us, and our brave lads
were dropping here, there and everywhere, in limp heaps as the
bullets struck home. But they were not downhearted. I can
hear them now as they lay on the ground. "Stick it into them,
Diggers." "Don't be frightened." "We're coming with you, after."
Then the tanks helped us as we gained the last lap, settling a
number of machine guns that were doing us damage. Now we
come into the heaviest trouble. The rifle and machine gun fire
was something terrific, and some small field guns opened up on
us at point blank range. They made an awful mess, finishing
all except one of the tanks and cutting into us badly. Few troops
but our wonderful fighting infantry would have stood, for nearly
all the officers had been killed or wounded. One of our teams
under this death-dealing fire got their gun into action and put
some sixty rounds into one of the whizzbangs, which the Huns
quickly dragged round into the shelter of one of the tanks, blazing
and spitting it into us again. What a pitiless storm of death
it was. Then the world swung in a crashing and smashing of
whirling madness —hell broke loose again—demolishing everything
in its path, that made the earth reverberate —an indescribable
thundering of roaring and belching guns, breaking against earth,
cloud and man, terrific in its awfulness. Then worse sounds arose,
pitiless in their horror - shrieks of men and horses in agony. End-


less days of torturing hell, and then, for most, Eternity. The
whole place for miles around seemed bathed in blood. In
the smash-up of confusion and lurid hell of the next hour,
who can describe it? Volcanoes bursting and hell with the
lid off wasn't in it. The fighting was thick and heavy. Our men,
Canadians, New Zealanders and the French were all mixed up,
sending death into the Germans, not giving away a foot of land.
Old diggers, will you ever forget it? But we still smashed into
the Germans. They were done, smashed and battered to a stand-
still. Then an officer rushed among us, grabbed a few battalion
men, and shoved them onto the guns, one gunner with only half a
leg valiantly assisting. Where is the record to compare with it?
These are the men that made up the crews to replace those who
had gone west. Yet we formed a strong-post and pumped death
into them. What we went through in those days no one but the
men who were there know.
Here I might say, "Thank God that such wonderful mothers
were born to breed such brave soldiers as these." But now, as night
was falling again, our situation was not a rosy one. Still, in
the absence of our leaders, we stayed there. To retreat was death
in itself. Fighting after a while gradually quietened down, then
the enemy sullenly withdrew, and for two days we stopped there,
not knowing when Fritz was going to start his concert again.
We got what we were after—Victory! We had won through, thank
heaven. Yet we held our ground without flinching, subjected to
a galling fire and the terrible onslaughts of the German's heavy
guns, until the end of the engagement, giving an example to
posterity of courage and endurance that has never been equalled.
The command had been obeyed—
"THEY SHALL NOT PASS."
'Whereby our dead shall sleep
In honour unbetrayed,
And we in faith and honour keep
The peace for which they paid."


" The Anzac Regiment"
In Prance they marched along, their voices blending >n song,
Thro' the slush and mud, thro' the slippery roads of blood.
"Australia," their battle cry, New Zealand mates with us to die
For Britain in her woe, both ready to strike that blow;
All were waiting that great event —all of the Anzac Regiment.
Along with that khaki column were boys both brave and solemn,
On their rifles their bayonet—glistening and firmly set.
They flashed with purpose grand, just before the sharp command
Of the shrill bugle call, 'twas perhaps their time to fall,
Told them that England had sent for the Anzac Regiment.
"No Surrender," commanders had cried, tho' death and doom
betide,
Show them the way to fight, show your valour and your might,
For the whole world to see what soldiers you all can be.
Be not undismayed, for braver men God never made,
And, oh; the shout there went, from the Anzac Regiment.
Over lads; cannon and gun awoke, then onward the Anzacs broke,
Down they tore man and gun, and laughed in that hellish fun;
Raced along with bloody heel, thro' the crashed and bursted steel,
Shouting to their mates in vain that had fallen down in pain.
And this victory God had sent to the Anzac Regiment.
Yet hundreds and hundreds fell, who went thro' that shrieking
hell,
Machine gun and cannon death, nevermore shall take their
breath;
But, oh; to the living few, who lived to see those battles thro',
Ilaii them as Diggers tried, dauntless they fought side by side.
Hop our them, both maimed and rent, honour the Anzac Regiment.
"VIVE VALE."
At twilight, e'er the sun is set, the angels' swelling choir
Chants to them with psalteries, and the golden lyre,
Harmonising in the vesper hymn, beautiful in melody,
Whilst God leans from heaven to hear, "Abide with me."


" Lest We
So many tender words and true,
We said at parting, dear brother to you,
So many things we promised to do,
But we forgot.
Those awful days, who can forget,
The long nights fell unaware.
You passed beyond our pleading prayer,
While we forgot.
Now evermore through heart and bram,
There burns an undertone of pain.
Though what has been, should be again.
Would we forget?
We feel, we know, that there must be,
Beyond the veil of mystery,
Some place where we can plainly see,
And not forget.


A. E. RICHARDS
Printer
l7a Pitt Street (near Quay)
SYDNEY
Published by The Richbury Press Co. Box 1820K,
G.P.0., Sydney
