

TICHBORNE:
Reasons why he should have had the Benefit of the
Doubt.
EDITED BY GUILDFORD ONSLOW, ESQ-
LONDON:
“ENGLISHMAN” OFFICE, 63, FLEET STREET, E.C.
[ Copyright .]


TICHBORNE,
TO THE
PRIME MINISTER OF ENGLAND.
By GUILDFORD ONSLOW.
It having been insinuated, in more than one quarter, that in taking
the part I did in the late Trial, “ The Queen v. Castro,” I was
willingly upholding a base impostor, I think it right to place before
the world the following pages, as some of the data on which I
have acted (independent of personal recognition and a close in-
timacy with the Claimant during the past seven years). I fear-
lessly leave the public to judge whether I have sufficient ground
for my still firm belief in the identity of
[Sir Roger Charles Doughty Tichborne.
A VOICE FROM THE GRAVE.
I Dame Henriette Felicite Tichborne, at present residing at
No. 2, Dorset-street, Manchester-square, in the county of Middlesex,
widow, make oath and say as follows :
18. After the death of my husband, and in the year 1863, i
caused advertisements for the plaintiff in the English, French, and
Spanish languages, to be inserted in the ‘ Times ’ newspaper.
10 X sometime subsequently communicated with Mr. Arthur
Cubitt, of the “Missing Friends’ Office,” Bridge-street, Sydney,New
South Wales, advertising agent; and the said Mr. Cubitt, by my
direction caused advertisements to be inserted in various news-
papers published at Melbourne and elsewhere, announcing the death
of the plaintiff’s father, and giving a description of the plaintiff, and
offering a reward for his discovery. T
20 Ultimately, and in or about the month of March, 1866, i
received a letter from the plaintiff, dated from Wagga-Wagga, New
South Wales, in which he told me that he had made up his mind to
face the sea once more, and requesting that funds might be sent out
to him to defray his voyage home. I replied, urging his immediate
return home, and I afterwards wrote him a letter, and remitted to
him a draft for I had been previously in communication
with Mr. Gibbes, of Wagga-Wagga, and the said Mr. Cubitt, and had
urged them to be very careful of the plaintiff’s identity, and to be


sure that he was my son before they allowed him to come home •
and I gave them certain information respecting the plaintiff, upon
which they could question him, and test his identity. I have been
informed, and believe, that the plaintiff left Australia before such
letter arrived there, and I have since received the back.
2 1. I expected that the plaintiff would arrive by the French packet
from Australia to St. Nazare, in France, and I went to Paris in No-
vember, 1866, to meet him. He did not, however, come by that
route. I received a letter from him in the early part of January
1867, announcing that he had arrived in England, with his wife and
child, and that he would be at the Hotel de Lille et d’Albion in the
Rue St. Honore', Paris, on Thursday, the tenth day of the same
month.
22 I sent my servant, on the following Friday morning, to the
hotel he had named, to enquire if Sir Roger Tichborne had arrived
and a message was returned to me to the effect that he had arrived’
but was too unwell to go out. I then went to the hotel, and was
shown into a room when I saw the plaintiff. He was dressed but
lying down upon the bed, and was much overcome by emotion at
seeing me. I instantly recognised him as my first-born son, Sir
Roger Charles Tichborne.
t 2 3- } expressed my happiness at seeing him, and did all I could
to soothe him; but he became so ill that I sent for Sir Joseph Olliffe
physician to the British Embassy at Paris, and Dr. Shrimpton, of that
city, to attend upon him. I waited until they arrived, and in the
presence of the plaintiff and of the said Sir Joseph Olliffe, and Dr.
Shrimpton, and Mr. Holmes, the plaintiff’s solicitor, and Mr Joseph
Leete, a friend of the plaintiff, I declared that the plaintiff was—as
in fact he is—my first-born son.
24. From that time until the 19th day of January, 1867, I spent
the greater part of each day with the plaintiff. By that time he had
sufficiently recovered to return to England, and he did return on
that day, and a few weeks subsequently I rejoined him, the plaintiff
and his wife and daughter. I resided with them at Essex Lodge’
Croydon, where they then lived, from the 15th day of February to
the 25th day of April last, when I left Croydon because it did not
agree with my health, and came to live in London. Since the last-
mentioned day I have frequently visited and written to the plaintiff
and I have made and paid him an allowance at the rate of /Tooo
per annum, to support his family until he obtains possession of
ins estate.
25. I am certain, as I am of my own existence, and distinctly and
positively swear that the plaintiff is my first-born son, the issue of
my marriage with the said Sir James Francis Doughty Tichborne
(deceased). His features, disposition, and voice are unmistakable
and must in my judgment, be recognized by impartial and un-
prejudiced persons who knew him before he left England in the
year 1853. °


, „• r „ he returned, we have constantly talked over many
private family matters which> occmiedm
time of his leaving Eng an , up havinv sent over from
recollection, andhe has reminded ™ ° hereinbefore
Se" P his m"ccou ; rements within
I°”ad £
is. j „jif i Q imrjossiblc I Cctn be rnistcikcn.
P WMst tte plata ffwas staying with me at Paris, the said Teresa
r wSSSss*sKi saarsw *
“f SFH=s=rf tßKsa vs
said Teresa Mary Josephme *J°*Zmir
tetetoTA™, Alfred Joseph Tichborne I have shown
~ ° n the pounds
herein appearing. Henriette F. Tichborne.
Sworn at the Record and Writ Clerk's Office Ctancery Lane, m the
County of Middlesex, this 27th day of June, 1867. -Hetore
Frederick Bedwell.


MRS. ALEXANDER.
Statutory Declaration of A. M. Alexander.
I, Anna Maria Alexander, wife of Charles Booth Alexander, of
Dry Creek, in the colony of Victoria, do solemnly and sincerely
declare that in the years 1847 and 1848 I was well acquainted with
Roger Charles Tichborne in England. That in the year 1855 I met
in the said colony of Victoria a man named Thomas Castro. That
I recognised in the person called Thomas Castro the identical person I
had known as Roger Charles Tichborne in England. That I told
the man called Thomas Castro, otherwise Roger Charles Tich-
borne, that I knew the name of Castro to be an assumed or false
name, and told the man Thomas Castro that the name Thomas
Castro was a false name. Then the said Thomas Castro owned that
his right name was Roger Charles Tichborne, and for family reasons
he intended to be known in Australia as Castro. That the said
Castro had been wrecked in the ‘ Bella.’ And I know from observa-
tion that in the year 1855 the said Castro was not tattooed.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the
Parliament of Victoria rendering persons making a false declaration
punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.
Anna Maria Alexander.
Declared, before me, at Woods Point, in the colony aforesaid, this
seventh day of July, in the year One thousand eight hundred and
seventy-three.-— Andrew Nash, J.P.
I, Robert Brooks Peters, Town Clerk and Custodian of the Seal
of the Borough of Woods Point, in the colony of Victoria, do hereby
certify that I did see the within-named Anna Maria Alexander, and
Andrew Nash, a justice of the peace in and for the said colony,
severally sign the within statement or declaration on oath in my
presence, and that their signatures are of their own and proper
handwriting of the said Anna Maria Alexander and Andrew Nash.
In witness thereof I have hereunto set my hand and affixed my seal
of office, on the seventh day of July, a.d. 1873, at Woods Point.
(Signed) R. Brooks Peters,
Town Clerk and Custodian of Seal of the Borough of Woods Point,
Harbinger Hotel, Dry Creek, near Red Jacket,
February 25th, 1873.
Sir, —By accident on Wednesday last I, for the first time, saw a
likeness of the gentleman called the Claimant. I recognise it as the
likeness of Roger Tichborne. Now that lam no longer afraid that


what I write will help to strengthen the case of an I beg
to inform you that on the road to Melbourne Tom Castro admitted
to me that he was Roger Tichborne, and told me his reason for
coming. At this time he was pretty well under the influence of
liquor. The reason he gave effectually prevented me from telling
my real name.
Wishing you and your cause God speed,
I am, in haste, your obedient servant,
(Signed) A. M. Alexander.
To Guildford Onslow, Esq.
Mr. Onslow has in his possession several letters from this lady,
asserting as a fact that the Claimant, calling himself Thomas Castro,
so far back as 1855 was known to her and identified as the Mr.
Roger Tichborne she knew in England.
These letters also state how and where she became acquainted
with him in former days.
ARTHUR ORTON AND THOMAS CASTRO.
The Statutory Declaration of Wm. Deakin, of Sandhurst, in the
colony of Victoria, solicitor.
I, William Deakin, of Sandhurst, in the colony of Victoria,
solicitor, do solemnly and sincerely declare: That I have resided in
the Castlemaine district of the said colony from the year One
thousand eight hundred and fifty-six until lately. That I have seen
a photograph purporting to be a likeness of the Claimant to the
Tichborne estates in England, and that I recognise the same as the
likeness of a person who was brought up before the Castlemaine
bench of magistrates in the year 1859, or thereabouts, in company
with one Arthur Orton, on a charge of horse-stealing, and that the
men were discharged on that occasion. That the chairman of the
bench was Captain Harrison, R.N., the police magistrate of the
said district. That lam quite certain of the identity of the person
whose photograph was shown to me as aforesaid. That I am per-
sonally acquainted with Arthur Orton, and that I have seen and
conversed with him in the colony of Victoria within the last three
years.
And I make this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the
same to be true, and by virtue of the provisions of an Act of the
Parliament of Victoria rendering persons making a false declaration
punishable for wilful and corrupt perjury.
Wm. Deakin.
Declared at Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, this third day or
December, One thousand eight hundred and seventy-two, before
me—G. D. Languev, J.P.


MR. DEAKIN TO H. E. MICHEL, ESQ.
Sydney, 13th February, 1873.
My dear Sir, —I am still detained at Sydney, and may be for
another month. I see by the telegrams the prosecution are using
almighty efforts, and spending a lot of money; but, nevertheless,
notwithstanding, as the lawyers say, it will take the Crown all its
time to prove the Claimant to be Arthur Orton (I mean the man
who went by that name here). As I have already told you, the
person who was brought up at Castlemaine with the Claimant is
available at any moment; and when I say available, you will
understand me to mean come-at-able.
commission agent, private detective, &c., is the great
instrument for the Crown here, but I do not think the instruments
he has procured are at all dangerous.
I accidentally became acquainted with a gentleman long resident
at Wagga-Wagga and that district, who was well acquainted with the
Claimant, and remembers perfectly being told by the Claimant, in
confidence, and before any stir was made in the matter, that he was
Sir Roger D. Tichborne, &c.
My informant is a gentleman, and I believe him to be perfectly
reliable.
I see also by telegram that the person who could prove the
Claimant to be Arthur Orton is missing. I think he may be. I
shall be happy to receive any news you may have to impart. Of
course you understand I am at your service when you let me
know.
Be kind enough to address as above. My sister-in-law promised
me she would see you. Ido not know whether she has or not.
I have heard from her several times since I left Melbourne, but
she has not mentioned your name.
I am, dear Sir, yours faithfully,
W. Deakin.
H. E. Michel, Esq.
Statutory Declaration of Wm. Hy. Lock, Agent to the Insolvent
Court of Melbourne, with Certificate attached from Judge Noel.
I, William Henry Lock, of Thirty-one, Charles Street, Fitzroy,
Melbourne, agent to the Insolvent Court of Melbourne, in the colony
of Victoria, do solemnly and sincerely declare : That in the year
One thousand eight hundred and sixty, and subsequently up to the
present day, I was and am attached to the Insolvent Court of the


city of Melbourne. That previously to that I had resided in Castle-
maine, and was well acquainted with the inhabitants of that locality.
That on a certain day, date unknown, on or about that period, I was
in the Castlemaine Court House, and did see two persons brought
before the justices, charged with stealing horses. That I carefully
looked at the said men, and was told that their names were Thomas
Castro and Arthur Orton. That the magistrates on the bench that
day were Mr. Hamilton, Chinese Protector, certainly, and, I believe,
Captain Harrison. Mr. Kentish was clerk of the bench. The
prosecutor was a man who lived on Barker’s Creek. It was either
Detective Addy or Hudson who had charge of the case. That the
men were discharged. And I further declare that some time after-
wards I proceeded to Sale, in Gipp’s Land, in the colony .of Victoria,
on business, and whilst there resided at the Commercial Hotel.
That I saw, in the bar of the said hotel, Tom Castro, Arthur Orton,
a,nd a man whose name, I believe, was Allen, and who at that time
lived with one Johnstone, a squatter, I saw both Arthur Orton and
Tom Castro on that occasion. I spoke to the landlord about the
Castlemaine trial, asking him if he knew the men, and saying they
were the men 1 had seen in the dock. He said he knew them as
Castro and Orton, and that they had horses in the township.
And I make this solemn declaration, &c., &c.
W. H. Lock.
Declared at Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, this fifth day
of December, One thousand eight hundred and seventy-two, before
me— Geo. Cilley, J.P.
Certificate from his Honour Judge Noel, Judge in Insolvency.
I hereby certify that I know Mr. William Henry Lock as an agent
of the Insolvent Court of Melbourne for a number of years, and that
he is a person of good fame and repute.
W. B. Noel.
The Statutory Declaration and Letters of Henry Edward Michel,
Esq., brother of Major-General Charles Michel, of St. Ives, near
Ringwood, in the county of Hants, in England :
I, Henry Edward Michel, of Melbourne, in the colony of Vic-
toria, gentleman, do solemnly and sincerely declare—That I was
present on the third day of December, One thousand eight hundred
and seventy two, at Melbourne aforesaid, and did see William
Deakin, solicitor, sign and declare the declaration accompanying, in
the presence of , and I further declare that the signature
of the said William Deakin, attached to the said declaration, is his
proper handwriting, and that my signature at the foot hereof can be


verified by Major-General Charles Michel, of St. Ives, near Ring-
wood, in the county of Hants, in England.
And I make this solemn declaration, &c., &c.
H. E. Michel.
Declared at Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, this third day of
December, One thousand eight hundred and seventy-two. —
Before me, G. D. Languev, J.P.
MR. H. E. MICHEL TO GUILDFORD ONSLOW, ESQ.
Melbourne, Dec. 5, 1872.
Dear Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of yours of
September, and to inform you that I have left no stone unturned to
forward the cause of Sir Roger ; and, I am happy to say, I have
sent, accompanying this letter, some Statutory Declarations of, I
conceive, the greatest importance. I am well aware that these
documents will not be admitted as evidence, but I conceive their
moral weight in the eyes of the British public will be very great,
and you can reproduce them in every newspaper in England. Be-
sides, I think that they might be used as grounds for a fresh trial,
as they are fresh evidence, or even for a postponement, possibly,
of his present trial ; but when you have read the whole of this
letter, you will understand the steps I have taken more fully, and I
believe I can say, without unduly praising my detective powers, that
I have found out more good evidence in this short space of time, and
for nothing, than all Mr. Jeune and his commission was able to elicit.
It requires a thorough Australian education to find out such things.
A man who is both a gentleman, and who has also roughed it, and
not a London barrister, or even a Melbourne attorney. The first
step I took on receipt of your letter, was to advertise in the papers
for the gentleman who had told me at the Balaclava Station he had
seen Tichborne and Orton both together, and who had spoken about
it to Mr. Jeune, and not been much attended to. Without weary-
ing you with telling you how I sought him, let it suffice to say I
found him, and the result is the Statutory Declaration of W. H. Lock
and a certificate attached to it that W. H, Lock is a highly respect-
able and trustworthy man from Baptist Noel, the judge in the
Insolvent Court. As we must proceed seriatim, before dismissing
his Declaration, I have to inform you something about his ante-
cedents, and how it came to pass that he could not easily be mis-
taken. Mr. Lock, previously to the period spoken of, was in the
detective department, and, from the nature of his business, had a
sharp eye for thieves in general, recommended specially from the
detective department. He entered the employment of the assignees
of the Insolvent Court, and having still at that time a little of the
old leaven of the detective about him, he made that day particular
inquiries and looked specially at these two men to see if he knew
them, and marked their appearance well down in his mind. He


£ r “ es > though we have not considered it desirable to enter it
in the Declaration, that the fact of no record of these two men having
cords at* dlschar S ed appearing on the Castlemaine re"
cords, is not at all strange, for he knew of his own knowledge
several similar omissions made through the loose way things were
done there in the excitement of the times. He mentioned one
and rn Ven f of a man W s° f d been brou £ ht U P on suspicion of murder
and no entry appeared when he looked for it. This, he says satis-
factorily accounts for the omission of a paltry case against two men
out° W lTtt SCharge t d Th i 1 ° ai T all be proved if a commission is sent
ut ; i th ? meantime, whilst I was maturing this evidence I de-
R. e f le f e r tb " / Ull descri P tion of Orton, as described by
Ur. Wheeler, to the Brisbane Courier , *
To Guildford Onslow, Esq. HV ‘ MICHEI "
STATEMENT OF JOHN BLOOMFIELD.
I°™J : Melbourne, now in the employ of
Connell Watson and Hogarth of Flinder’s Lane, and living at the
e von shire Hotel, Fitzroy Street, and formerly brewer and hotel
swS r I Vhere 1,6 wiil be remembered well, wS
evt lriT 6 a^° U ‘ iB6o~6 3 , dates can be ascertained,
a events ong before the Claimant was at Wagga-Wagga when
he was travelling m the wine and spirit line, he met Tom CaTrio
who was then on a station, and the conversation got on to be about
It™ the P e °P ]e , there ’ of whom this person Castro
seemed to know a great deal about. At last, to the immense
tOM himover th o drink that he
looked, was one of the Tichbornes, and when
Tom de 0 C^ Ca r t 0 th -e, he said b e had taken the name of
no \vih C fn i T SOme P ?J ate reaSOnS ’ and was workin S and did
not w! S h to be known. Mr. Bloomfield saw and spoke to the
wer J “ We]] 6 ! o ' tWl ° e af f 7 a £ ds - The words u sed by Tom Castro
Well, I am one of the Tichbornes/’
wfl* w ThIS occurred lon g before Tom de Castro appeared at
Wagga-Wagga, or set up his claim ; and it points to the smne con-
fonsZZ of rrr ° f J ° bn the possibility o?a
at Wagga 7 as he TJ W ° thers > commen ™S when he was
before ' evidently proclaimed himself Tichborne years
H. E. Michel.
MR. H. E MICHEL TO GUILDFORD ONSLOW, ESQ.
Dear Sir —Yours of Oct. 3rd to hand. As ycm observe’ I expect
this will probably close our correspondence, as ere you receive this


all will for the present be over. I was, however, in Sale, Gippsland,
about ten days ago, and although it can only be of use, perhaps,
some future day, send you a few more items of information. Mr.,
George Ellice, of Sale, now employed by Cobb & Co., stage coach
people, will swear, when wanted, that he was in Tracy’s yard, in,
Burke Street, about the time stated by the Claimant, and that he saw
and heard William Foster engage a young man to go back with him.
He asked the man whether he could ride, and he said he could, and
they took back to Gippsland Miss Wildspin, a hurdle-race mare..
The people there say that W. Foster was only twice down to Mel-
bourne, once with fat cattle and once with horses. It was on the
occasion of his going with the horses that he hired this young man.
Moreover, Foster on that occasion is said to have knocked down
some hundreds of pounds. Mrs. Foster (now M‘Allister) was at the
time in Van Dieman’s Land. Therefore, they sayshe couldnotpossibly
have seen Tichborne arrive. Moreover, that at the time Orton was
butchering for Johnson, at Port Albert, Gippsland, great arguments
were going on at Sale about it, many people saying openly that Mrs.
Minister had said many things which were incorrect.
Secondly: One Mr. Wallace, a farmer near Pearson’s Bridge,.
Sale, is said to have known, quite well, both Orton and Castro.
Thirdly: A man called old Tom, who has lived for years at a
station a few miles from Sale, states that he knew both Orton and
Castro.
In short, any amount of evidence can be obtained to clearly prove
that two distinct persons, Orton and Castro, both were in Gippsland
at that time.
The mass of the people in Australia believe the Claimant is Tich-
borne, and the only fact they cannot get over is his forgetting his
French. Everybody wishes to see him win, and so do I.
Yours faithfully,
H. E. Michel.
CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN MR. R. SHANKLIN AND
GUILDFORD ONSLOW, ESQ.
Portions of a correspondence from Mr. Rt. Shanklin, of Sale, in
Gippsland, dated Sale, Gippsland, Oct. 4th, 1873 :
Sir, —I have another friend in the person of Mr. J. Michel, stock-
rider to Mr. Cunningham and to Mr. Rt. Thompson, of Bank Run,
who knew and saw Castro at Bogsdale, and saw him off with cattle
for the Dargowan, in company with Arthur Orton, and on his return
he stayed with Mr. Michel, at Clyde Bank. Mrs. Minister gave
testimony. Her sister, Mrs. M £ Clure, spoke to her, previous to her
departure for England, on the subject of the Claimant. She called 1
to Mrs. Minister’s mind that her husband, Mr. Foster, did go to
Melbourne in the year 1854; and I see from her evidence that she
admits that in that year he did go to Hobart Town, and must have
passed through Melbourne. Coming back, he picked up the Claim-


ant, not Arthur Orton, but Tichborne, alias Tom de Castro; and
Mrs. M‘Clure brought this to her sister’s mind, that the flash young
stockman who was wrecked had arrived with her husband at the
Heart Run, on his way to Boisdale. It is my purpose to prove to
you that Arthur Orton was not in the district of Victoria or Gipps-
land in the year 1855. The truth could say that the leaves of the
store book were torn out on purpose to cheat justice. The Claimant
left Boisdale in 1857 or early in 1858, and was never at Mewburn
Park.
(Signed) Rt. Shanklin,
Raymond Street Dispensary.
MR. ROBERT SHANKLIN TO MR. ONSLOW.
Oct. Bth, 1873.
Dear Sir, —I beg to enclose another letter from Mr. Fuller
Beechworth. The Claimant ought to know this witness. He is firm
in his assertions of his knowledge of the identity of the Claimant.
His friend Stretton and Vesper could alone prove identity. We, the
people of these colonies, are interested in this remarkable trial, and
note that few telegrams are now published in the Argus , now that the
prosecution is closed. I have just seen back files of Gippsland
papers, which prove that Arthur Orton came into this district about
the latter end of 1857. He came to Newburn Park, and was in
Johnston’s employ. Now, this Captain Johnston was a squatter,
and traded to Hobart Town with cattle, where Orton resided, and
he must have come over in one of Johnston’s cattle-ships to Welsh-
pool, South Gippsland, about the year mentioned. Vesper told me
an incident which you can test the Claimant with, and which proves
he was never in Johnston’s employ.
When the Claimant met Vesper at the “ Moe,” he stayed a day
and a night with him. The hotel is a very lonely spot, with no other
building near it for miles, on the bush track, Melbourne road, in
those days. At the hotel was a pretty-looking young woman, who
called herself a Mrs. Marshall; the groom was in love with her.
During the afternoon of the day of which I have spoken and named,
the old cook from Mr. Johnston’s, named Marshall, called, and
Tichborne invited him to have a glass of whiskey. The old man
remarked he had a recollection of his face, when Tichborne replied,
“ Yes, I know you. You recollect my giving you some peaches at
Mr. Crooke’s, when you wanted a drink of water?” The old man
knew the woman, who was his niece. They had a long chat together
that night, which the groom mistook for a closer intimacy, and
wished to stab her, but was prevented by Vesper and Tichborne,
who turned the tables on him. Mrs. Nicholl Brown, who was only
just married, at that time owner of the hotel, ordered the girl away
from the house, but through the interference of Tichborne, who took «


the girl’s part, she was allowed to remain. Now the first part of this
evidence shows, that had Tichborne been in Johnston’s employ, the
old cook would have known him at once ; the second will vivid y
bring to mind his meeting with Vesper at Shady Creek and the love
affair. I give these incidents to refresh memory.
The captain of the “ Osprey’s” name was supposed to be Hodges,
he was nick-named old Podge or old Hodge. There was no ship-
ping office opened in Melbourne in the early part of 1854. I have
now endeavoured to give you all the information I have collected
up to the present time, and hope you will hand the same to Ur.
Kenealy, the counsel, who we all think will give them a Roland for
an Oliver. My reference I have previously given, and now remain,
c; r Yours sincerely,
Robert Shanklin.
MR. JOSEPH MADDEN.
A Letter from Jos. H. Madden, enclosing a Photograph of Mr..
M., which has been identified by the Claimant.
Melbourne, Dec. 13th, 1873.
Sir —So little familiarity is there in my writing to you now, upon
a subject touching the Claimant, that I scarcely think you will recog-
nize it Notwithstanding, I have previously, in a somewhat hurried
manner, made known to Mr. Nolan, a solicitor of Melbourne, the
facts of my close intimacy with Tom Castro, the present Claimant,
when he wrote to his then solicitors, who had not long thrown up
the case but they answered his letter at length, stating that my in-
formation on the matter was of the greatest importance, and that he
thought they would telegraph for me to go over ; but we have never
heard further on the matter, and Mr. Nolan has since written, but he
thinks his letters must have been intercepted. I promiscuously met
Mr Oto Berliner, who said he had given up the affair, but asked me
to make a statement to the editor of the Evening Herald 111 Mel-
bourne, which I did, and he published the same, and thought it would
appear in the London papers. .. , ,
In 1863 Tom Castro, the present Claimant, and myself drove the
mail on the Murrumbidgee for Mr. James Gprmby, the mail pro-
prietor. I took the mail from Hay to Boree twice a week, and he,
Tom Castro, took it on to Narandera township once a week, and to
McNeil Bros.’ station once a week. During that time, one day in
particular, as I was tailing—in other words, platting a new piece
on to a green hide halter at the door, Tom lay on a bunk reading a
book • we suddenly started an argument about countries and horses,
when I said to him that I did not think he was a native of this
country (as he sometimes told us about there he was, his reason for so
doing I think was, and he may tell you so himself, that there was a mob
of colts to be broken in at Grooryal station, upon which run we had
the mail depot, and as old Buckley, the overseer, was partial to


natives as breakers, he thought he would procure them more easily).
Then, to my question, he said he was not native of this country,
but of England, and brought up in France in his young days ; and
he asked me if I had ever heard of Sir James Tichborne. I said no,
and he said he was his son, and entitled to the title and estates in
Hampshire and other places. When I answered he was a fool not
to go home, he said he had got into a little mess in Hay with a boot-
maker’s daughter, Anderson’s, and contracted a few small debts, and if
he could square off matters there and get a little money together, he
would go home; he also told me about the ‘ Bella,’ and being in
South America, and a long tale about a charitable bequest inheritant
to the Tichborne family, and as to their being great Catholics. On
telling him I belonged to Galway, in the west of Ireland, he said he
knew some respectable people there. We carried a brandy-flask
which was his property; it was a small, flat-sided, pewter one; no
doubt he recollects it well; and on that he wrote, with an old
pocket-knife, Roger C. Tichborne on one side and Tom Castro on
the other. lam positive he is not Arthur Orton, as he was up there
at the time, and I also say, conscientiously, and will take the same
opinion with me to the grave, that he is the person he represents
himself to be, Sir Roger Tichborne. I know him and his feelings so
thoroughly well, and being a man who can be surpassed by few as
to the habits and nature of an Australian life, both rough and smooth,
and that I am connected with some of the most respectable families
in the west of Ireland, I would be an important witness for him. If
there is anything I can do in his behalf, I would be most happy, and
without incurring any unnecessary expense. It is only within the
last twelve months that my parents in Galway knew that I was alive
myself, as I was here for twelve years and never communicated with '
any one in the old country, or any one in this that would be likely
to do so ; so when I wrote to my father, after a protracted silence, I
said I might go home and give evidence on the Tichborne Trial,
and in his reply he cautioned me from having anything to do with it,
to come home and not mind it. However, that has no particular
weight with me now-a-days, after my open wanderings in the southern
hemisphere so long. What I have said to you in this letter is just a
few remarks. Mr. W. H. Gregory, late Governor of Ceylon and
member for Galway, knows our family well.
The reason I never put myself prominent in this case before is,
that simply I might be for months and not have an opportunity of
seeing a paper, being so much on the roads with cattle, and many
other reasons too long and numerous to narrate.
I often wondered he never wrote to me himself, I am writing
this letter from Sale, Gippsland, and indeed it is through Mr.
Shanklin here I do so, as I happened to be talking to him yester-
day, and he told me he writes to you. I enclose you a likeness of
mine that you may hand to Tichborne. In kind remembrance to
my old friend Tichborne, with whom I spent many a hard, wet


night, and at whose service I am at any time to render him any
possible good, I remain,
Your Obedient Servant,
Guildford Onslow, Esq. Joseph H. Madden.
Joseph H. Madden,
(Care of) Messrs. Nolan & Jordan, Solicitors,
55, Burke St, West Melbourne.
Or, Mr. R. Shanklin, Chemist,
Sale, Gippsland.
PROFESSOR ANDERSON.
Copy of a letter to the Editor of the Times from John Hy. An-
derson, Esq., and refused insertion in that Journal, Professor Ander-
son died a few days after he wrote this letter :
Public Rooms, Hull, Jan. 9, 1874.
Sir, —It being suggested to me that in the cause of truth and
justice I should, through the medium of your valuable columns,
repeat the assertion I made at the Oxford Rooms, Oxford Street,
and also at the Royal Amphitheatre, Liverpool:—When Thomas
Castro and Arthur Orton were acquitted at Castlemaine, in 1857 or
1859, that Thomas Castro made me a present of a whip, which I still
have in my possession, given as a memento of the acquittal ; I de-
clare this as a truth which cannot be denied. My reason for not
appearing on the trial is my ill health, and the strict injunctions of
Sir Henry Cooper, my medical adviser, not to attempt to travel.
I am, Sir,
\ Yours Respectfully,
John Henry Anderson,
“ Great Wizard of the North.”
To the Editor of the Times.
AFFIDAVIT OF MR. ROCHETT.
Sworn to at Melbourne, Sept. 6th, 1874.
“ I am brother to Mr. Rochett, the Manager of the York City and
County Bank, at Goole, Yorkshire. I have been a Pilot for upwards
of twenty years at the Port of Melbourne. I went on board the
vessel which brought in the wrecked men of the ‘ Bella.’ The vessel
which brought these men in, in my belief, had no pilot on board,
pilots then being very scarce for the number of ships arriving. It
was not unusual for one ship to follow in the wake of another for
want of pilots.
“One of the shipwrecked men of the ‘Bella’ was a Freemason,
and the Captain of the little steamer the ‘ Comet ’ was also a Mason,
Captain Carden (since dead). Finding this out, he asked me, I


being then a W. M. in masonry, to look after this man, and so it
came to pass that I saw and spoke to them all. My attention was
particularly directed to a young man who was a passenger with them
in the 4 Bella; ’ he was thin and looked ill, but the sailors told me it
was brought on by hard drinking. He was very silent and reserved.
The name of the mate of the ‘ Comet ’ was Willoughby; he is now
alive, and at Sandridge, and he will tell the same facts : he is now
Captain Willoughby. He bought from one of the wrecked men of
the ‘ Bella’ a sort of rug, or poncho, as it is called in South America,
which belonged to this saved young gentleman, as a curiosity, and
Captain Willoughby either still has it, or at least had it in his pos-
session very recently.
“ I took my shipwrecked sailors of the 4 Bella’ and the Captain of
the vessel that picked them up, and the gentleman, all in the
£ Comet,’ up the river to see Melbourne. I took them to the Royal
Highlander Hotel, and stood treat for them ; they then went out to
see the town, the Captain and the young gentleman going by them-
selves, not with the sailors. In the evening I again met the Captain
and the young gentleman.
“For several days after I saw the shipwrecked sailors of the
‘ Bella,’ and once spoke to the young gentleman, who told me he
was going up the country.
“There were three different 4 Osprey’s ’ in Melbourne Harbour at
that time that I remember. One was a regular trader, belonging to
the Eagle Line of Messrs. Gibbs, Bright and Co., Liverpool; an-
other was a three-masted schooner, from Glasgow; and then there
was the barque-rigged vessel (three masts) from South America, with
some dark men on board.
44 Mr. Jeune, the barrister sent out by the Claimant from London
to take evidence, saw me and Mr. Alport, the solicitor, in Melbourne,
and they both took my affidavit of all these facts. Mr. Jeune pro-
duced several photographs, which he showed to me and Captain
Willoughby ; these were photographs of the Claimant, and I picked
out the photograph of Mr. Roger Tichborne as being that of the
young gentleman I- saw, saved from the 4 Bella,’ on board of the
4 Comet.’ I immediately distinguished the likeness.
44 The Captain of the vessel that picked up the crew and passengers
of the 4 Bella,’ being a stranger at this port, and the place being all
in confusion, he asked me what he had better do with these ship-
wrecked men he had picked up, and whether he ought to go before
the water-police magistrate ? I advised him to let them go, and
not trouble himself more about them. Some short time after this
I saw the carpenter of the 4 Bella ’ on board the 4 Wyvern,’ which
brought Lord Alfred Churchill out. The 4 Wyvern ’ was afterwards
lost, with all hands, of course including the carpenter of the 4 Bella.’
44 All these facts I am prepared to swear to, by Statutory Declara-
tion, or to come to England as I may be required.
44 (Signed) Rochett, Pilot, Melbourne, Australia.”
No. I,—Price Three Halfpence. One Dozen, Post-free, Is. 6d,
