

TICHBORNE TRIAL
Startling Affidavit
OF
LADY TICHBORNE,
MOTHER OF
SIR ROGER TICHBORNE,
Now a PRISONER in
PORTSEA GAOL
Whom she unmistakeably recognised as her
LONG LOST SON.
All persons desirous of seeing justice done to Sir Roger Tichborne
should'read this Pamphlet.
PRICE, THREEPENCE.
The Proceeds to be devoted towards defraying the expenses
of taking
ARTHUR ORTON
Now a Lunatic in the Parramatta Asylum, to England, so that
SIR ROGER TICHBORNE’S
Identity may be clearly established.




malformation, is evident from her sworn affidavit that her son was
kept in long clothes till he was twelve years of age.
There is a deep melancholy significance in the letter of Sir Roger
to his aunt, wherein he says, u I told you at lichbornc that I intended
to go abroad and you said it was my duty to remain in England,
but if I die abroad I have a brother that will take my place, and I
am sure he would take my place better than I should.’ And again !
« What shall I ever be worth ?” “ Nothing.” Suppose I were the
head of a family, I could not fulfil the duty of that station as I
should do. -(“ Daily Telegraph ,” July 86th, 1873 ) I would like
to ask what did Tichborne allude to if he did not have in his own
mind the malformation referred to by Dr. Wilson. Most certainly
there was not an iota of evidence to give the faintest supposition
that Arthur Orton had, while on the other hand there was abundant
evidence of some of the most important witnesses for the prosecu-
tion, and strong circumstantial evidence at the trial proves that
the malformation referred to belonged to Sir Roger lichborne.
The perusal of Lady Tichborne’s affidavit and the affidavit of Mi.
Thomas Taut, at the end of this pamphlet, will overthrow the
windbags who frequent the domain on Sundays misrepresenting
facts respecting the identity of the claimant, and the intelligent
readers will scorn such individuals as would stand in the way and
prevent justice being done to one who is beyond all shadow of
doubt the real Sir Roger Tichborne.
DANIEL SMITH.


INTRODUCTION.
In presenting the readers with the affidavit of Lady Tichborne , I
can scarcely do so without making some remarks. The unmistake-
able way she has recognised her long lost son needs no comment,
as the affidavit in this pamphlet speaks for itself. The remarks I
here wish to make are, first, with reference to the false and slander-
ous accusations against Lady Tichborne as to being dotisli or insane.
They are most damnable falsehoods. There were no less than forty
witnesses examined as to the soundness of her mind, and all agreed
that Lady Tichborne had shrewd business capacity and there were
never any indications of her being dotish or insane. That Lady Tich-
borne was sane is seen by the numerous fresh links of evidence that
has been adduced during and since the trial. The person now con-
fined in gaol is not Arthur Orton, and if he is not Arthur Orton, he
must necessarily be Sir Roger Tichborne, and' consequently, tells
of her correct judgment of his individuality. Now as regards her
shrewd business capacity you have only to turn to page 6, par. 20,
referring to the draft for £4OO where she said, “ I had been previously
in communication with Mr. Gibbes, of Wagga Wagga, Solicitor,
and Mr Cubitt of the Missing Friends Office, Bridge-street,
Sydney, and had urged them to be careful of the plaintiff’s
identity, and to be sure that he was my son before they
allowed him to come home, and gave them certain information res-
pecting the plaintiff, and upon which they could question him and
test his identity.” That the prisoner now in Portsea Gaol is no other
than Sir Roger Tichborne, is most convincing, from the evidence
and critical examination of Ur. Wilson referring to the malformation
of the claimant which evidence by the authorities has been suppressed
in Sydney, and for the publication of which I. received a sentence of
14 days in Darlinghurst Gaol. In the opinion of Counsel and
several leading attorneys a great miscarriage of justice took place in
my case. Had I been defended lam sure that I would have been
honorably acquitted, as there was an entire absence of obscenity in
the pamphlet (“ VIDE PAMPHLET.”) Ur. Wilson’s evidence
to an unprejudiced mind must be conclusive proof of identity and it
is to this effect The confinee in Portsea Gaol as Arthur Orton
has a deformity in the genital organs. A physician of such dis-
tinguished reputation and extensive practice as Dr. Wilson in sworn
evidence stated that never in his life had he witnessed such malforma-
tion, and gave it as his opinion that there could not be found such
another instance in 10,000,000 (millions) of men—(“ Vide Ur.
Wilson’s evidence in pamphlet.”) That Sir Roger Tichborne had a




Affidavit of Lady Tichborne
I Damme Henriette Felicte Tichborne at present residing at No.
2, Dorset! Street, Manchester Square, in the. County of Middlesex,
Widow, make oath and say as follows :
1. On the Ist day of August, 1827, I intermarried with the late
Sir James. Francis Doughty Tichborne, Bart, late of Tichborne, in
the County of Southampton, then James Francis Tichborne, Esq.,
now deceased. My said marriage was solemnized in St George’s,
Hanover Square, and at the Roman Catholic Chapel, Chelsea, both
in the County of Middlesex. There was issue of the said marriage
four children and no more, viz., the above-named plaintiff, our first-
born son, who w r as born at Paris on the fifth day of January, 1821).
2. Mabella Louisa, who was born on the Bth day of July, 1825)
(now deceased). 3. Alice Mary Perpetua, who was born on the
14th day of October, 1837 (now deceased), and 4, Alfred Joseph
Tichborne, who was born at Paris on the 4th day of September,
1839 (now deceased).
2. Upon the death of the late Sir Edward Doughty, my husband
became Sir James Francis Tichborne, tenth baronet of Tichborne,
and entered into and thenceforth down to his death continued in the
possession or receipt of the rents and profits of the Doughty. Estates,
referred to in the plaintiff’s bill filed in this cause, as tenant for life,
under the limitations created in his favour, as in the said bill
mentioned.
3. By Royal License dated the 25th day of April, 1853, Her
Majesty granted unto my husband license and authority that he and
his issue miglvt thenceforth use the name of Doughty in addition to
and before that of Tichborne, and that lie and they might bear the
arms of Doughty, quartered with those of Tichborne, and, in exercise
of the said license, my late husband thenceforth continued down to
his death to use the name of Doughty in addition to and before that
of Tichborne, and also to the arms of Doughty.
4. My husband died on the 11th day of June, 1862, leaving the
plaintiff’, his eldest son and heir-at-law, and the said Alfred Joseph
Tichborne, his second son, his only issue, now surviving.
5. Upon the death of my husband the plaintiff became the
eleventh baronet of Tichborne. He attained his age of 21 years on
the sth day of January, 1850.


6. The plaintiff’s brother, the said Alfred Joseph Tichborne, being
then a bachelor, intermarried on the 17th day of April, 1861, with
the above-named defendant, the said Hon. Teresa Mary Josephine
Tichborne, daughter of the Right Hon. Henry Benediot, eleventh
Lord Arundel of Wardour.
7. The said Alfred Joseph Tichborne died on the 22nd day of
February, 1866, having had issue one son born in his lifetime,
namely, Edward Francis Tichborne, who died in early infancy, and
no other son born in his lifetime ; but his wife was enciente at the
time of his decease, and on the 28th day of May, 18.66, she gave
birth to the above-named defendant, Henry Alfred Joseph Tichborne.
8. My husband and myself resided for many years before lie
succeeded to the baronetcy at Paris, and the plaintiff resided with
us at Paris where he was born, from the date of his birth until the
year 1845, when he was brought over to this country, and shortly
afterwards placed at Stonyhurst College, Lancashire, where he
received his English education.
9. In the month of July, 1849, the plaintiff was appointed cornet
and subsequently lieutenant in Her Majesty’s 6th Dragoon Guards
(Carbineers). He joined that regiment in the month of October,
1849, at Dublin, where it was then quartered, and was on duty with
the regiment until the month of January, 1853, except during
temporary leave of absence. Tli’e plaintiff retired from the regiment
in the month of February, 1853.
10. During his vacation from college and while on leave of
absence from his regiment, the plaintiff usually resided from the
year 1845 until he left the country, to travel in foreign parts, as
hereinafter mentioned, with his late uncle, the said Sir Edward
Doughty, at Tichborne Park, the family seat of the Tichbornes, and
was in the habit of shooting over the Tichborne Estates and hunting
in that neighbourhood, and gave up much of his time to field sports
and the management of horses.
11. The plaintiff frequently expressed a strong desire to travel in
foreign parts, and he left his regiment with the object of travelling
for some years in distant parts, and in the first instance he deter-
mined to proceed to South America.
12. In the month of March, 1853, the plaintiff took passage on
board a ship bound for Valparaiso, and from letters which I subse-
quently received from him I was informed and believe that lie
arrived there in due course, and from the like source of information
I knew that he was engaged in travelling in various parts of South
America and enjoyed the wild sports of the field until about the
month of April, 1854.


13. After the death of Sir Edward Doughty my husband and I
took up our residence at Tichborne House, where we continued to
live down to the date of his death. During the plaintiff’s stay in
South America he sent home to Tichborne some birds which I
understood he had killed, and also some pictures, and two pairs of
very large and peculiar silver-plated spurs and stirrups.
14. Sometime afterwards and in the course of the year 1854,
intelligence reached Tichborne that the plaintiff had taken passage
in the month of April, 1854, at Rio l)e Janeiro on board a ship
called the Bella, bound for New York, and that she foundered at sea
and that the owners of the ship and the underwriters at Lloyd’s
treated her as having been lost, but no tidings reached us as to the
fate of her crew except that one boat belonging to the Bella had
been met with at sea with no one on board, and it was feared that
all the crew were drowned.
15. I clung to the belief that my son was saved and had a settled
presentiment that some day I should see him again. I thought it
probable he might have been picked up at sea, and I never ceased to
express that belief to ray husband and various members of the
family, and also to Mr. Francis Joseph Baigent, of Wenchester, an
old friend of the family and a frequent visitor to Tichborne, and to
other persons.
16. In or about the year 1855 a sailor whose name is unknown
to me solicited alms at Tichborne Park, while I was living there
with ray husband, and represented that he had come from Australia,
and I had a conversation with the sailor and made inquiries of him
as to whether he had ever heard of the Bella or of any of her crew
having been saved. The sailor replied that he had heard when in
Australia of some of the crew of a ship, which he thought was the
Bella, having been picked up at sea and brought to Melbourne, but
no further or more definite information as to the Bella or her crew
could be obtained from the sailor.
17. I communicated to my husband the statement made by the
sailor, but he expressed the opinion that it was not worth notice,
and no further notice was taken of such statement in his lifetime,
save that I frequently referred to it; and when the marriage between
my younger son and Hon. Teresa Mary Josephson Tichborne was in
contemplation I stated that I had still the presentiment that the
plaintiff was not lost, and my husband and 1 sent the defendant,
Vincent Gosford, from Tichborne to Wardour Castle, to Lord
Arundell, before her marriage, to explain that whenever the plaintiff
returned the title and estates would belong to him and not to Alfred.
18. After the death of my husband and in the year 1863 I caused
advertisements for the plaintiff in the English, French and Spanish
languages to be inserted in the Times newspaper.


19. I sometime subsequently communicated with Mr. Arthur
Cubitt of the Missing Friends Office, Bridge-street, Sydney, New
South Wales, Advertising Agent, and the said Mr. Cubitt, by my
direction, caused advertisements to be inserted in the various news-
papers published at Melbourne and elsewhere, announcing the death
of the plaintiff’s father, and giving a description of the plaintiff and
offering a reward for his discovery.
20. Ultimately and in or about the month of March, 1866, I re-
ceived a letter from the plaintiff, dated from Wagga Wagga, New
South Wales, in which he told me that he had made up his mind to
face the sea once more, and requesting that funds might be sent out
to him to defray his voyage home. I replied, urging his immediate
return home, and I afterwards wrote him a letter and remitted to
him a draft of £4OO. I had been previously in communication with
Mr. Gibbes, of Wagga Wagga, and the said Mr. Cubitt, and had
urged them to be very careful of the plaintiff’s identity, and to be
sure that he was my son before they allowed him to come home, and
I gave them certain information respecting the plaintiff and upon
which they could question him and test his identity. I have been
informed and believe that the plaintiff left Australia before such
letter arrived there, and I have since received the £4OO back.
21. I expected that the plaintiff would arrive by the French
packet from Australia to St. Nazaire, in France, and I went to Paris
in November, 1866, to meet him. He did not, however, come by
that route. I received a letter from him in the early part of
January, 1867, announcing that he had arrived in England with his
wife and child and that he would be at the Hotel de Lille et d' Albion ,
in the Rue St. Honore, Paris, on Thursday, the tenth day of the
same month.
22. I sent my servant on the following Friday morning to the*
hotel he had named to enquire if Sir Roger Tichborne had arrived,
and the message was returned to me that he had arrived but was
too unwell to go out. I then went to the hotel and was shewn into
a room where I saw the plaintiff, he was dressed, but lying down
upon the bed, and was much overcome by emotion at seeing me. I
instantly recognised him as my first-born son, Sir Roger Charles
Tichborne.
23. I expressed my happiness at seeing him and did all I could
to soothe him, but he became so ill that I sent for Sir Joseph Olliffe,
Physician to the British Embassy at Paris, and Dr. Shrimpton, of
that city, to attend upon him. I waited until they arrived, and in
the presence of the plaintiff and of the said Sir Joseph Olliffe and
Dr. Shrimpton and Mr. Holmes, the plaintiff’s solicitor, and Mr.
Joseph Leete, a friend of the plaintiff, I declared the plaintiff was,
as in fact he is, my first-born son.


24. From that time until the 19th day of January, 1867,1 spent
the greater part of each day with the plaintiff. By that time he had
sufficiently recovered to return to England, and he did return on that
day, and a few weeks subsequently I rejoined him, the plaintiff, and
his wife and daughter, I resided with them at Essex Lodge, Croydon,
where they then lived from the 15tli day of I ebruaiy to the 25th
day of April last, when I left Croydon because it did not agree with
my health, and came to live in London. Since the last mentioned
day I have frequently visited and written to the plaintiff, and have
made and paid him an allowance at the rate of £l,OOO per annum to
support his family, until he obtains possession of his estate.
25. I am certain as I am of my .own existence and distinctly and
positively swear that the plaintiff is my first-born son, the issue of
my marriage with the said Sir James Francis Doughty Tichborne
(deceased). His features, disposition and \oice aie unmistakeably
and must in my judgment be recognised by impartial and un-
prejudiced persons who knew him before he left England in the year
1853.
20. Since he returned we have constantly talked over many
private family matters which occurred in his youth and up to the
time of his leaving England, upon all of which he has a perfect
recollection, and he has reminded me of his having sent over from
South America the birds, pictures, spurs and stirrups, hereinbefore
referred to. I had forgotten the circumstance of his having sent the
spurs and stirrups. After the loss of the Bella, was repoited, I
ordered that all his military accoutrements should be placed within
a large box, which was accordingly done, and to the best of my
knowledge and belief such box has not been opened for some
few years, until it was searched, as hereinafter mentioned. I had
the box sent to me at Essex Lodge, Croydon, aforesaid, and opened
it and in the box I found the spurs and stirrups, which the plaintiff
immediately recognised as those he had sent home from South
America. The box also contained the plaintiff’s hvo military cloaks,
three-cornered hat, gauntlets, cap, coat, trousers, epaulettes, and other
articles. The hat, cap, cloak and gauntlets fitted him directly they
were taken out of the box, and he put them on, while the other
garments seemed to have been made for a man of the same height
and length of arm as the Plaintiff, but thinner in person than he
now is. The evidence I have had that the plaintiff is my first-born
is most positive and conclusive and it is impossible that I can be
mistaken.
27. While the plaintiff was staying with me at Paris the said
Teresa Mary J.osephine Tichbome wrote and sent me a letter enquir-
ing of me whether I was perfectly satisfied that the plaintiff was my
son. I immediately upon the receipt of such letter wrote and sent


to the said Teresa Mary Josephine Tichborne from Paris, a letter in
reply, informing her in the most positive terms that the plaintiff w r as
my son.
28. I believe that the last mentioned letter was received by the
said Teresa Mary Josephine Ticliborne in the course of post and. in
the month of January, 1867. Since then she has had no communica-
tion whatever with me, although previously we had been on terms of
close intimacy and affection with each other, and in particular since
the death of my son, Alfred Joseph Tichborne, I have shown her
many and repeated marks of kindness and affection.
2!). The several statements hereinbefore mentioned contained are
within my own knowledge, except as hereinbefore appear, and in
such last mentioned cases are believed by me to be true on the
grounds herein appearing.
HENRIETTE F. TICHBORNE.
Sworn at the Record and Writ Clerk Office, Chancery Lane, in
the County of Middlesex, the 27th day of June, 1878,
Before me,
FREDERICK BE DWELL.
Affidavit of Mr. Thomas Tant.
On this thirty-first day of May, in the year one thousand eight
hundred and eighty-three, Thomas Taut of 223 Crown-street, Surry
Hills, in the City of Sydney, being duly sworn, maketh oath and
saitli as follows : „ , „ T , ™ i
] I was a sergeant of the New South Wales Police E oree, and
was'stationed at Tumut, in the Colony of New South Wales, from
August, 1865, to October, 1863.
2. Shortly after my arrival at the Tumut, I met a person whom 1
have since seen at the Parramatta Lunatic Asylum, who was then
in the employ of Mr. John Macnamara, Butcher, of Tumut. He
was known in the district as Old Leather Jacket, and old Cresswell.
3. He voluntarily gave me valuable information in connection vyith
several cattle stealing cases, and bushranging, which at that time
was rampant in the district, and wrote me several letters in reference
to these matters. To the best of my recollection, upwards of a dozen
memorandums were furnished to me by him.
4. In connection with the information he supplied me, 1 had
several conversations with him. In answer to a question from me


as to where he came from, he immediately replied, Wapping, in
London. I then remarked to him that I had been for six years a
policeman in London, and then asked him what his name was.
He replied that he usually went by the name of Cresswell, but that
was not his correct name, that it was Arthur Orton, and that he
was the son of George Orton, Butcher, of Wapping.
5. When he sent me the letters above referred to, they were
severally signed, W. Cresswell, “ A. Orton," “ W. Cresswell , A. 0.”
“A. 0.” “ W. C .,” A'c. Most of the memos were given to me by
him during the year 1868, and the early part of 1869.
6. At the commencement of the year 1869, he continued sending
me several memos couched in most idiotic terms, but still signing
his name, A. Orton, &c. I then perceived that he was gradually
losing his balance of mind, and as several persons had mentioned
the matter to me, I was compelled in the performance of my duty
as a police officer to have him arrested as a person not fit to be at
large.
7. He was tried before the Police Magistrate at Tumut, and
received a sentence of one month’s imprisonment in Gundagai Gaol, for
medical treatment, the date of his sentence to the best of my know-
ledge and belief, was the early part of the year 1869.
8. From that time till I visited the Parramatta Lunatic Asylum
on the 27th instant, I have never seen the above mentioned person.
At first sight, in the presence of Mr. Daniel Smith, and several
officers of the Asylum, I recognised him as the person whom I knew
as Cresswell and Orton, at Tumut. With the exception of his
beard being longer and looking older, I failed to discover any material
difference in his appearance. I noticed that he had (what I always
noticed at the Tumut) a twitching in his eye, and a scar on his left
cheek. ►
9. He also recognised me at once, remarking, I know you, you
were in the service at Tumut. Have you done anything with
those letters I gave you ? he said. I replied, yes. I asked him to
shake hands with me. He indignantly said, No ; if it had not been
for you I should not have been here.
THOS. TANT.
Sworn before me, on the day and
date before mentioned.
Lewis Lipman, J.P.


AN ALARMING DISEASE,
Afflicting a Numerous Class.
NERVOUS DEBILITY.
It is impossible to over-estimate the amount of human misery which
the mere sight of these two words suggests to the practitioner of exper-
ience and observation; it is simply incalculable. Briefly, the most
marked symptoms are: lowness of spirits; want of confidence ; disin-
clination, and a positive inaptitude for business, society, or pleasure ;
irritability, carried to such an extent sometimes as to verge on childishness ;
palpitation of the heart; pains in the loins ; partial, and in some cases
alarming, loss of memory; dimness of vision, often characterised by
clouds and spots floating before the eyes; shortness of breath ; sexual
debility ; nervous fancies, and, in fact, a preliminary decay.
It is a great fact that many of the fatal diseases which, under a great
many names, sweep away multitudes, and devolve on the lives of thou-
sands wretchedness, misery, and degradation, would, if traced to their
real origin, be found complicated with derangements of the generative
organisations. Such disarrangements may be either constitutional or
acquired ; they may have been incurred through the imprudence of the
sufferer, or transmitted in all their insidious and deadly effects, the
result of direct violations of the healthy laws of Nature.
This terrible evil is silently but surely spreading itself throughout all
ranks and classes of the community, sapping to the very foundation the
strength and energies of youth, and entailing either the miseries °f a
premature old age, or the certainty that their children will pay the
penalty cf their faults ; for doth not the Scriptures say that “ the sins of
the parents shall be visited on the children, even unto the third and
fourth generation ! ” And how many of the present generation are now
reaping such rewards ?
These evils being in existence, does it not therefore behove any man
who has the gift bestowed on him by the Almighty of alleviating the suf-
ferings of his fellow men to come forward and announce in every public
form and manner that he has such a gift ? Would it not be an act of
inhumanity disgraceful to the most barbarous savages on the face of the
earth, let alone our boasted Christianity and civilisation, to withhold
such valuable assistance when human lives are at stake; nay, more than
life, for who would not rather die, or how many thousands seek self-
destruction, sooner than live the life of corruption, misery, and self-
degradation entailed by the before-mentioned evils ?


For the past twenty years Dr. Bottrell has made these diseases his
special study, and the great success achieved by him, speaks volumes in
h?s favour. It is a success which is totally _ unprecedented, for by his
unwearied researches into the subtle mysteries of the healing art, he has
been the humble instrument under Divine Providence of rescuing
thousands of his fellow creatures from being hurried in the bloom o
youth to a premature and untimely grave.
To live now-a-days is a science ; and it behoves all to study the
science of life, and not go through the world a mere amanuensis. _ln
these competitive days, it is hard for a man to be handicapped against
his fellows by ill-health. If there should be a screw loose in his
machinery, it is madness to work the same under disadvantages; so it is
advisable to have a thorough overhaul, and regain your lost energy a d
manhood; for health is beyond every other consideration on eart .
The limited space forbids a more extended research into these
diseases, suffice it to say that patients consulting us need not fear the
result. Remember that promptitude of treatment is nearly everythi g
in these cases, and that we have had hundreds come who afterwards
expressed their gratitude, and blessed the day that they putasidetheir
silly shame and consulted us. Do not let, therefore, the slightest
warning pass you unheeded, but lose not a moment—consult us at
once-and return thanks to God that you have at your disposal the
skill and experience of a fellow-man like Dr. Bottrel .
In concluding, we must return our sincere thanks to our numerous
friends (whose name is legion) for furthering our good work and defray-
ing our late law costs ; also to the many local medical gentlemen who
•' have entrusted their debilitated patients to our care. It proves at once
our locus standi, and ought to give unbounded confidence to the
general public. We emphatically say, grasp the disease, and free your-
selves by obtaining the best and most experienced medical skill
available. • •
Observe the Address—
• '• DRS. BOTTRELL & GILBERT,
18i LlTsfep.OO. CKKET,
SYDNEY.
‘Consultation Fie hi/ tetter, £1 Is. (One (Juinefi.)
