

SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
Chamber of Manufactures
INCORPORATED.
Tis— J&f'
r AN ADDRESS
Mr. J. H. Symon, Q.C.
On MAY 21 st, 1897.




SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES,
INCORPORATED-
“ Tis Sixty Years Since.”
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED AT THE TOWN HALL, ADELAIDE, ON MAY 21st, 1897,
BY
MR. J. H. SYMON, Q.C.,
INAUGURATING A COURSE OF PUBLIC LECTURES ARRANGED BY
THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES.
Chairman —His Excellency the Governor,
Sir T. Fowell Buxton, Bart., K.C.M.G.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The Chamber of Manufactures, thinking that the people
of the Colony generally would agree with the Chamber
in desiring to preserve in a permanent form Mr. Symon’s
address, decided, with his permission, to have the same
printed for general circulation. They are confident it will
be found full of instruction and interest.
f %' —/ - ■ I C- z i
THOS. HARDY,
President.
Eastern Annexe,
Exhibition Buildings,
Adelaide.


“ Tis Sixty Years Since.”
THE following address was delivered by Mr. J. H. Symon, Q.C.,
on May 21st, 1897, to a crowded audience in the Town Hall,
Adelaide, at the request and under the auspices of the South Austra-
lian Chamber of Manufactures. His Excellency the Governor, Sir
T. Fowell Buxton, Bart., K.C.M.G., the Patron of the Chamber, was
in the chair.
Mr. Symon, who was loudly applauded on rising, said :
Your Excellency, gentlemen of the Chamber of Manufactures, ladies
and gentlemen; when about a fortnight ago a deputation, consisting
of the Chairman and Secretary of the Chamber of Manufactures, waited
upon me and asked me to inaugurate the usual Winter Series of
Lectures with an address having relation to the interesting and
auspicious event which the citizens of the British Empire are about to
celebrate, I felt the compliment, but the magnitude of the task rather
appalled me, and I took leave to doubt whether the request had come
to the right man either for the occasion or the subject. Statistics are
not my plaything. I am unskilled in historical generalisation. But
my friends of the deputation would not yield to my hesistation or
respect my humility, and so I, good easy man, gave way, and am now
before you to fulfil the duty which has been placed upon me. Your
generous indulgence I know I shall have. Your Excellency’s presence
in the chair assures me of that kindly encouragement which is never
withheld from those in need, and for the rest the subject itself is an
inspiration, and no one can be more imbued than I that speak to you
with the spirit which marks this age of progress and of empire for the
English-speaking race. The late Lord Iddesleigh, better known as
Sir Stafford Northcote, once delivered a Lecture on “ Nothing.” That
should seem an easy undertaking. Most of us, perhaps, do talk a good
deal of nothing though we may not admit it. Your candid satirical
friend, who claims to be so superior, will even tell you that airy Noth-
ing is so much the staple of conversation that to translate it into a
lecture should be a process of the simplest kind. Our subject, however,
is the very opposite of Sir Stafford’s. It is the history of our own
times in the widest sense. It involves a survey of “ Mankind from
China to Peru.” It might appropriately be styled “ Everything.”
But that is not the title I have chosen.
I have chosen “ ’Tis Sixty Years Since.” That is my text. The
phrase is no original coinage of my own. It is from the immortal mint


of the great Wizard, who wrote no line which you may not read by
the fireside to your girls and boys, the greatest novelist of the language
—Sir Walter Scott. It is the alias, if I may use that not unfamiliar
expression, which he gave to his first great novel—Waverley, or Tis
Sixty Years Since. Sir Walter’s was but a fairy tale peopled with
the creations of his own teeming imagination. But the marvellous
tale with which we have to do this evening is real and vivid ; for weal
or woe it is an imperishable fact in the history of the ages ; it tran-
scends anything the unaided imagination of man has conceived. It
tells of the vast and unbroken expansion of the mightiest empire on
which the sun has ever shone; it tells of the wondrous march of
physical and mechanical development; it tells how the very elements
and forces of nature have been subdued and disciplined to aid in
civilization and progress. If some new Rip Van Winkle were to wake
up after a sleep of sixty years he would have more reason than even
his interesting prototype to doubt whether he was himself or another
man. Change in all around he would see, prodigious change. He
might well say,—
Do I sleep,
Do I dream,
Are there visions about ?
“ ’Tis sixty years since ” that bright morning in the leafy month of
June when the girl Victoria Alexandrina, the only child of the Duke
of Kent, was waked at Kensington Palace, by the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the Lord Chamberlain, to be told that her uncle
William was dead and that she was Queen of England. It was two
hours after midnight when these dignitaries left Windsor, and it was
five o’clock in the morning when they reached Kensington Palace.
“ They knocked, they rang, they thumped for a considerable time
before they could rouse the porter at the gate ; they were again kept
waiting in the courtyard, then turned into one of the lower rooms
where they seemed forgotten by everybody. They rang the bell, and
desired that the attendant of the Princess Victoria might be sent to
inform Her Royal Highness that they requested an audience on
business of importance. After another delay, and another ringing to
enquire the cause, the attendant was summoned, who stated that the
Princess was in such a sweet sleep that she could not venture to
disturb her. Then they said:—‘We are come on business of State to the
Queen, and even her sleep must give way to that.’ It did, and to
prove that she did not keep them waiting, in a few minutes she came
into the room in a loose white nightgown and shawl, her night cap
thrown off, and her hair falling upon her shoulders, her feet in slippers,
tears in her eyes, but perfectly collected and dignified.”
That was an announcement which might well have turned the head
of any maiden of eighteen summers. It did not turn her head. Her
mother, from judicious motives, had for a long time kept from her
all knowledge of her nearness in the succession to the throne. But


the maternal prudence was needless. The young Queen received the
news and assumed the sceptre with the calm and dignified composure
of an English gentlewoman.
It was indeed a happy omen that her reign came in with the sweet
summer dawn. In its progress with the sun the meridian is already
passed; the nearing sunset is at hand ; the earth is even now lit up
with the glow of its splendour; and yet when it does come, when that
benignant reign shall, like all things human, glide into “ the infinite
azure of the past”—a time we pray may be still far distant—its vivify-
ing and beneficent influence will survive and will continue potent to
preserve the character and advance still higher the destiny of the
nation.
The great Ministers of State and the Privy Council were summoned
for eleven o’clock that morning. Mr. Greville gives an interesting
account of what took place. His own impression of the young Queen is
valuable, especially as it comes from one who evinced no particular
desire to magnify the virtues or hide the weaknesses of royalty :
“ The King died at twenty minutes after two yesterday morning
{2oth June), and the young Queen met the Council at Kensington
Palace at eleven. Never was anything like the first impression she
produced, or the chorus of praise and admiration which is raised about
her manner and behaviour, and certainly not without justice. It was
very extraordinary, and something far beyond what was looked for.
Her extreme youth and inexperience, and the ignorance of the world
concerning her, naturally excited intense curiosity to see how she would
act on this trying occasion, and there was a considerable assemblage at
the Palace, notwithstanding the short notice which was given. The
first thing to be done was to teach her her lesson, which for this
purpose Melbourne had himself to learn. I gave him the Council
papers, and explained all that was to be done, and he went and
explained all this to her. . . When she entered the Council Chamber
she was quite plainly dressed and in mourning. After she had read
her speech and taken and signed the oath for the security of the
Church of Scotland, the Privy Councillors were sworn, the two Royal
Dukes first by themselves, and as these two old men—her uncles
knelt before her, swearing allegiance and kissing her hand, I saw her
blush up to the eyes, as if she felt the contrast between their civil and
their natural relations, and this was the only sign of emotion which
she evinced. Her manner to them was very graceful and engaging.
She kissed them both, and rose from her chair and moved towards the
Duke of Sussex, who was farthest from her and too infirm to reach her.
She seemed rather bewildered at the multitude of men who were sworn,
and who came one after another to kiss her hand; but she did not
speak to anybody, nor did she make the slightest difference in her
manner, or show any in her countenance, to any individual of any
rank, station, or party. I particularly watched her when Melbourne


and the Ministers and the Duke of Wellington and Peel approached
her. She went through the whole ceremony, occasionally looking at
Melbourne for instruction when she had any doubt what to do—which
hardly ever occurred—and with perfect calmness and self-possession,
but at the same time with a graceful modesty and propriety particu-
larly interesting and ingratiating. When the business was done she
retired as she had entered, and I could see that nobody was in the
adjoining room. Peel said how amazed he was at her manner and
behaviour, at her apparent deep sense of her situation, her modesty,
and at the same time her firmness. She appeared, in fact, to be awed,
but not daunted; and afterwards the Duke of Wellington told me the
same thing, and added that if she had been his own daughter he could
not have desired to see her perform her part better.
“ A.t noon, on the 21st, she held a Council, at which she presided
with as much ease as if she had been doing nothing else all her life, and
though Lord Lansdowne and my colleague had contrived between them
to make some confusion with the Council papers, she was not put out
by it. She looked very well, and, though so small in stature, without
much pretension to beauty, the gracefulness of her manner and the
good expression of her countenance give her on the whole a very
agreeable appearance, and with her youth inspire an excessive interest
in all who approach her.”
’Tis sixty years since. Men and women have been born and grown
old—their children and their children’s children have come and gone,
knowing no other Sovereign. We can hardly realise the British
Empire without Queen Victoria. Loyalty to her is personal devotion.
Her sway has been illumined with all the highest attributes of a
Christian Monarch —the loving mother of a free people—and she has
shed amongst her myriad subjects a living, pervading influence, that
tends to noble thoughts and noble conduct. Her reign has been made
illustrious by the courage, energy, and capacity of her subjects; but
we cannot overlook how much they owe, in the steady uninterrupted
stream of achievement, to the settled and well-ordered Government to
which their Queen’s undeviating adherence to constitutional rule and
enlightened appreciation of the necessities of the Parliamentary system
have in no small degree contributed. We in Australia—blest with
the freest institutions, and the largest measure of self-government
are able to estimate what this means. She has freed the throne from
every suspicion of political intrigue: from every connection with party
politics. Her private life has been an example for imitation • her
public conduct for admiration. The courtly grace, the charm of man-
ner, the kindly air which attracted Mr. Greville sixty years since are
still there. I speak from an opportunity of personal knowledge, for
on one occasion, at the opening of the Colonial and Indian Exhibition
in 1886, I stood as near the Queen as I am to His Excellency, when
she acknowledged the salutations of her subjects assembled on that


occasion with queen-like courtesy and woman-like grace. For two
generations she has been seated
High on a throne of royal state,
full in the eye of her people, and of all people—under that fierce light
which beats upon a throne—and yet we day by day find new reason
for saying “ God save the Queen.”
We prefer the title Queen, although on Ist January, 1877, Her
Majesty was proclaimed Empress of India at Delhi with every cir-
cumstance of Oriental pomp and magnificence.
It is not without significance that no Socialist or Anarchist irruption
has ever threatened the person of the Queen. The worshippers of
chaos and disorder have been content to propitiate their idols with loud
noise and wild vaporings round the Nelson lions in Trafalgar Square
or upon the spacious and pleasant turf of Hyde Park. Conspiracies
and upheavals which menace and madden or unnerve Continental
potentates have been practically unknown in England.
The Angel of Death has passed through her palace gate. Thirty-
seven years ago she heard the beating of his wings, and was left a
widow. I am old enough to remember how the death of the Prince
Consort plunged the nation in grief. It was the loss of husband and
father—a loss equally felt in the Court and the cottage. It does one
good to recall the pathetic letter, it is said, she afterwards wrote to a
friend, in which she said, “ It all seems so lonely ; there is no one now
to call me ‘ Victoria.’” Other trials and afflictions, only less severe,
have fallen upon the Queen. In these her people have sought to share
in her sorrow, to be partakers in her grief ; and they have rejoiced, and
given thanks with her when the hand of affliction has been lifted.
And now, after sixty years, may we not say—
She wrought her people lasting good.
Her Court was pure ; her life serene ;
God gave her peace ; her land reposed ;
A thousand claims to reverence closed
In her as mother, wife, and queen.
“ I will not,” said the Rev. De Witt Talmage, on the occasion of the
crisis of the Russo-Turkish War in 1878, when the British fleet steamed
through the Dardanelles with decks cleared for action, “ I will not hide
the fact that my deepest sympathies at this moment are for England.
She has not always acted kindly to this nation, but what is the use of
keeping old grudges good, while the fact is certain that England and
the United States stand side by side to-day in the great cause of civiliza-
tion and Christianity 1 When England is humiliated, the Church of God
and the Cross of Christ are humiliated. Look at her Churches, her Bible,
and her Missionary Societies, her Universities. Look at her throne, the
purest in Europe, if not in all the world. The girl Victoria, kneeling with
her ecclesiastical adviser on the night before her coronation, made vows
to God and promises to England, not one of which she has ever broken.


Her sorrows have been the world’s sorrows, her bereavements the
world’s bereavements. Wherever there’s a heart that knows how to
admire pure Christian womanhood, there is an admirer of Queen Vic-
toria. We unite with all the Chapels and Cathedrals of England, and
all the good people of the earth, in praying, singing, and shouting
‘God save the Queen.’” /
From Canada there is an answering note through the voice of Lord
Dufferin, the Governor-General, one of the most distinguished of many
distinguished Irishmen who have served their Qneen and country.
“ Love and devotion to the Queen,” he says, “as the type and living
representative of constitutional freedom, of well-ordered government,
of a renowned historical past and a hopeful futnre, is the ruling passion
of Englishmen all over the world. But with this national, normal,
and abiding principle, rooted as it is for all time in the hearts of our
countrymen, there is undoubtedly intertwined a tenderer sentiment, a
sentiment of chivalrous personal devotion towards that Sovereign Lady,
who, in her early girlhood, was called upon to preside over the destinies
of so vast an Empire; whose chequered life, as maiden, wife, and widow,
has been so intimately associated with every phase of the private, as
well as the public, existence of each one of us; and whose unostenta-
tious, patient career of faithfully fulfilled duty, and never-failing well-
doing, immeasurably enhances the splendor of the crown she wears,
and has advanced to a degree it might be difficult to estimate the
general welfare of her subjects.”
What, then, under auspices so happy and so august have these sixty
years given us % I addi’ess men and women who are proud—and justly
proud—of their country and their race. The sentiment of patriotism
beats strongly in every British heart. Neither time nor distance
enfeebles the passion. It is as vehement on the banks of the Ganges
as of the Thames, and in the turmoil of South Africa and the un-
measured areas of Australia as among those who dwell within the
shadow of St. Paul’s.
They change their skies above them,
But not their hearts that roam ;
We learn from our wistful mothers
To call old England “ home.”
It awakes a tradition of heroic exploits and inspiring emotions, of
sacrifices for its sake on the field and the scaffold, of high examples of
military skill and civil prudence, of literary and scientific fame, of
commanding eloquence and profound philosophy, of fascinating poetry
and romance, and, above all, of freedom—won, in earlier times, at the
point of the sword \ and, in later, broadening slowly down from pre-
cedent to precedent.”
England—and in that old name I embrace every rood of ground,
and every man who owns allegiance to the Flag—holds at this day more
transcendent power than at any other period of her history. Surely,
then, this is an exhilarating and inspiriting epoch. These sixty years.


have been the most fruitful period of her national life and growth.
They were ushered in—to quote the words of a poet who has given im-
mortality to the language—with
White-handed Hope, the hovering angel
Gilt with golden wings.
Now the retrospect of achievement wears the aspect of romance.
There have been other periods greater in military glory, more full of
stirring maritime adventure ; times when the fate and fortune of
England were in peril, as when the Armada—
That great fleet invincible against her bore in vain
The richest spoils of Mexico, the stoutest hearts of Spain ;
when Van Tromp sailed the Channel with a broom at his
masthead, to show how he would sweep the English from their own
seas ; when the legions of Napoleon were encamped almost within
sight of the white cliffs of the sea-girt isle, which their master only
lived to humble; or when “ The little body with a mighty heart ”
withstood unaided and undismayed the world in arms. The intellect
of England may have reached supremer altitude, and shone with
more effulgence in by-gone days. There have come down to us
the traditions and the triumphs of a commanding statemanship
and a lofty eloquence which it is said the Victorian era cannot rival.
This may be so, but for general advance in all elements and directions
of human progress there has been no period to compare wdth the sixty
years of the Queen’s reign. “In no other sixty years of the world’s
history—one might almost say in no 600 years—has there been so
much material and moral progress.” It has gone far beyond the wis-
dom and the wealth of the past.
It has often struck me as worthy of note that the fame and pro-
gress of England were perhaps most marked during the reigns of her
three Queens. Elizabeth witnessed the destruction of the Armada ;
the first brilliant development of the English sea power under Raleigh,
Drake, and Hawkins; the founding of the first American colony in
Virginia ; the glory of Shakespeare and Spencer and Bacon. To the
reign of Queen Anne the magnificence of Marlborough gave imperish-
able military renown; the genius of her scholars and writers gave the
memorable title of the Augustan age of English literature; and con-
structive and far-seeing statemanship gave the legislative union of
England and Scotland. Yet of these three, the greatest is the reign
of Victoria.
Let us, then, examine the matter, with an eye undazzled by glamoi',
and fairly open to blemishes and failures, as well as triumphs.
It is told that on one occasion the Judges of England met to frame
an address of congratulation, I think, to the Queen. A proposal that
it should begin “ Conscious as we are of our defects,” provoked much
opposition; and the late Lord Bowen, as a way out of the difficulty,
sw r eetly suggested that it might read “ Conscious as we are of each


other’s defects.” Conceived in a similar spirit was the thoughtful hint-
given by an Oxford graduate to the only stranger at a College break-
fast, when he quietly told him not to be surprised at the conversation,
as they all knew each other’s good qualities so well that they only dis-
cussed those which seemed to require amendment. This friendly candor
of criticism may be not unprofitably turned in upon ourselves—nation-
ally as well as individually—so that we do not permit what may be
even greatly superior merits to blind us to what are undoubted
defects.
What, then, is the greatest product of the Victorian era 1 It is the
individual Englishman—l mean the type wherever found, and under
that name in its largest acceptation. He is charged with supercilious
arrogance, owing mainly to his calm indifference to everything and
everybody, except the business in hand. He is selfish, because he
succeeds. He is grasping, because he prospers. He is hard, because
he is just. But it is he and his qualities that have made the Empire.
He and it have acted and reacted on each other. But the workman is
greater than the work. Paradoxical as it may seem, he is at once the
maker and the product of his age. He is the greater—greater than
the countries he has conquered, than the cities he has built, than the
States he has founded. All this he has done. We measure him by his-
achievements; but it is he who should be placed on high.
Never a story and never a stone
Tells of the martyrs who die like men
Just for the pride of the old countree.
The anxieties undergone, the crises endured, the unflinching resolu-
tion, the silent heroism, and the simple faith which have gone to the
making of the British Empire cannot be told. And when these are
no longer at the country’s service or are enfeebled, your empire will
have entered upon the down grade and the hand on the dial of civiliza-
tion will begin to go back. Everything depends on the character and
courage of the race, of each individual of the race.
Vain, mightiest fleets of iron framed :
Vain, these all shattering guns.
Unless proud England keep, untamed,
The strong heart of her sons.
These sixty years have, perhaps, produced no men of such transcen-
dent military or naval capacity as those of earlier time. It may be
that the man has not come because the hour or occasion has not come.
Yet there is no visible deterioration of the race. The tendency to
bewail the degeneracy of the times has largely disappeared. English-
men now are just as capable of answering to the call of duty or of
patriotism as the men who responded to Nelson’s signal. Are there
none who would put the telescope to their blind eye rather than see a
signal to yield the battle ? Was it an English bugler who, when a
prisonertothe French, told Napoleon that he had never learned and could


not play a retreat? Are our buglers now more apt? Forty-five years ago,
at the word of command, five hundred British soldiers “steeped in
honor and in discipline ” formed up “in line to die ” on the deck of
the “ Birkenhead,” and, true to their colors, went down with the ship,
that the women and children might be saved. Well might the late
Emperor William of Germany cause the story of the loss of the
“ Birkenhead,” and of the heroic discipline of the troops on board, to
be read at the head of every Prussian regiment. A similar scene of
disciplined valor was enacted, but without the tragic loss of life, quite
recently on board the troopship “ Warren Hastings ” in the same
waters as engulfed the “ Birkenhead.” The private of the Buffs may
well be taken for the type of all the race—
He only knows that not through him
Shall England come to shame.
•Of military glory the reign has had full share. The Crimea—that sad
theatre of blunder and mismanagement—glows with the bravery, en-
durance, and discipline of the British soldier. The charge of the Light
Brigade is wedded to immortal verse, but the memory of the charge of
the Heavy Brigade, the thin red line of Balaklava, and innumerable
other incidents of those terrible winters is no less inextinguishable.
Mankind supped full of the horrors of the Indian Mutiny; the
treachery and slaughter of Cawnpore were bitterly avenged ; and the
Residency at Lucknow holds in Anglo-Indian history the place occu-
pied in Greek story by the Pass of Thermopylae. The little wars of
daily occurrence through the necessities of empire and civilization are
full of deeds of daring. We are so accustomed to them that we treat
them as exactly what men should do. So do the men themselves. It is
told that the 9th Lancers, during the mutiny in India, when asked to
nominate for the Victoria Cross, nominated their regimental Bheestie, or
water-carrier—their “ Gunga Din.” And when the authorities, with
strange perverseness, declined that nomination, the soldiers refused to
make any other from amongst themselves. Surely such deeds and such
sentiments show that the race has not lost its fearlessness or chivalry.
There is scarcely a campaign in which the Victoria Cross is not won. One
day it is Major Aylmer, laying his charge of gun-cotton at the gate of the
Fort of Nilt—going back alone, when it would not explode, to remove
the fuse and replace the charge—coolly performing his task though shot
through the hand and arm ; and the next it is Major Beresford, in the
Zulu War, going back for a wounded trooper, and rescuing him, although
the trooper resisted, because he feared his rescuer might lose his own life,
and only desisted when Beresford knocked him on the head to keep him
quiet. If, as Ruskin has said, “ All the pure and noble arts of peace are
founded on war; that no great art ever yet arose on earth but among
a nation of soldiers; that there is no great art possible to a nation but
that which is based on battle,” then we have had enough, and more
than enough, in this reign to bring about a very gratifying develop-


ment of art amongst us. The names of Lord Clyde, Lord Roberts,
Lord Wolseley, John Nicholson, Havelock, Outram, Gordon, Evelyn
Wood, and Stewart—who came to his death in the moment of victory
in the Soudan—are enough to illustrate the capacity for war and
generalship of the reign.
There has been small opportunity for naval glory. The sea power
of England became supreme after 1815. Nelson and Trafalgar left the
command of the sea in the hands of England. It has not been dis-
puted since. The heroes of that age have long since gone. Probably
the greatest seaman of them all—Cochrane, Lord Dundonald, lived on
into the Queen’s reign, but under adverse circumstances transferred his
sword and his genius to South America. But the “ Calliope,” in the
harbour of Apia, convinced the world that British seamanship is not
extinct, and is worthy of its best traditions.
“A nation of shopkeepers,” w T as Napoleon’s phrase. It was a
striking sarcasm, but, like many others, it lost nothing by want of
truth. The nation is great in peace, because it is great in war. The
energy and persistence which achieved victory in war were turned to
industrial pursuits when the war was over, and all rivals were out-
stripped. The same qualities which won victory on sea and shore
established supremacy in industry and commerce.
The spirit of adventure has had full play in the field of exploration.
It is no exaggeration to say that in Africa a new continent has been
discovered and added to the Empire, and with it are associated the
names of Livingstone, Speke, Grant, Baker, Stanley, and others.
Arctic and Antarctic secrets have been sought after and laid bare at
a cost of heroic lives beyond, it may seem to us, the solid value of the
results. One of the most intrepid Arctic navigators, Sir John Franklin,
was at one time Governor of Tasmania. He holds, therefore, a special
place in the memory of Australians on that account, as well as because
he laid down his life in those regions of eternal ice.
Not here, the cold North has thy bone 3 ; and thou,
Heroic sailor soul,
Art passing on thy happier voyage now
Towards no earthly pole.
There is no corner of the habitable globe which is secure against the
invading tendencies of Britons. The eternal snows of the Andes are
scaled by Whymper, and the deserts of China, the fastnesses of Thibet,
and the plateau of the Pamirs are opened to us by Younghusband. In
Australia, too, explorers take their lives in their hands. It is but yester-
day since a gallant band set forth, flushed with hope and full of confi-
dence. To-day the unending sand ridges hold the mystery of the
uncertain fate of two of their number, and refuse to make it known.
London is the type and epitome of the progress of these sixty
years. It is long since the laureate of Will Waddle wrote —
Have you e’er been in London, that overgrown place,
Where lodgings to let stare you full in the face ?


We shall want another laureate to do justice to the happy Australian
who went to Cornwall to collect a legacy, and, when asked on his
return what he thought of London, said he did not go there. London
began the reign with a population of little more than one and a half
millions. The population is now more than four and a half millions
larger than the whole population of Australasia, including New
Zealand, but with hardly so much elbow room. Outside the limits of
the ancient city its affairs are administered by the London County
Council—the greatest municipal body of which history gives any know-
ledge —whose establishment is one of the grand reforms of a reforming
era. It is really a Parliament. Peers and politicians, financiers and
men of science, capitalists and working men, seek and hold seats in it.
The Earl of Rosebery was its first Chairman. The receipts and expendi-
ture it controls exceed the entire revenue and expenditure of South
Australia by about a million a year. It borrows money freely at 2|
per cent., which South Australia has never yet attempted. Improve-
ment and sanitation have gone hand in hand. The water supply has
been purified and perfected. The President of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, in a recent address, related that about the beginning of the
reign an old woman, with a spotless white apron, used to sit in front of
a table, with a spotless white cloth, near the end of St. Margaret’s
Church, retailing brilliantly bright water at a halfpenny a glass from a
pump in suspiciously direct communication with the churchyard. The
well-to-do inhabitants of Westminster were so charmed with the
sparkling brightness of this water that they used to send their servants
to fill their pitchers with the refreshing beverage for their lunches and
dinners. People soon, however, began to get wiser, and to believe that
water was not like old port, improved, according to the grim old joke,
by having some body in it; and so the pump was removed by the
authorities.
One thousand acres have been within the last eight years added to
the magnificent parks and open places of the vast city. Insanitary
areas, moral and physical plague spots, have been cleared ; fetid lanes
and pestilential hovels have been swept away, to give place to wide
thoroughfares—of which Shaftesbury Avenue is an example—and to
bring about the better housing of the poor. To see to the housing of
the working classes is part of the Municipal business entrusted to the
Council. They have already established Model Lodging-houses. The
death rate has been reduced more than one-fifth —from 24 - 4 per thou-
sand to 19-5. This means an annual saving of the lives of 22,000
persons in London alone. The Thames Embankment has revolutionised
the river-side ; and the underground railway system is one of the chief
agencies which have made the London of to-day possible. At a cost
of a million, the tunnel under the Thames at Blackwall is nearing
completion. The bridges over the river are a pride to the metropolis,
and, with three exceptions, are of the Queen’s reign. Westminster


Bridge is nobly worthy of the architectural magnificence of the Houses
of Parliament by which it is neighbored, and of Wordsworth’s splen-
did sonnet—
Earth has not anything to show more fair:
Dull would he be of soul who could pass by
A sight so touching in its majesty;
This city now doth like a garment wear
The beauty of the morning ; silent, bare,
Ships, towers, domes, theatres, and temples lie
Open unto the fields, and to the sky ;
All bright and glittering in the smokeless air.
Never did sun more beautifully steep
In his first splendor valley, rock, or hill ;
Ne’er saw I, never felt, a calm so deep !
The river glideth at his own sweet will:
Dear God ! the very houses seem asleep ;
And all that mighty heart is lying still !
In the matter of hotels, it might almost be said that this reign
found them of brick and leaves them of marble—the latest and finest
being, perhaps, the “ Hotel Cecil,” where the Premiers of the Colonies
are to lead a glorified, though transient, existence.
Sacrilegious hands have not yet been laid on the Tower or the Beef-
eaters, but Temple Bar—through which even the Sovereign of the
Realm was not permitted to pass until the Lord Mayor had handed
her the keys of the City—which furnished John Bright with that
metaphor of most effective remonstrance against hurry in legislation,
when he said, “You cannot drive six omnibuses abreast through
Temple Bar ” —that historical barrier and landmark—to the grief of
old Londoners—has had to give way to modern progress, and is gone.
Near by its site the Courts of Justice rear their impressive architecture,
adapted for every purpose except, perhaps, for that for which it was
designed.
The County Council may take over the tramway system of the
metropolitan area, after a twenty-one years’ term to the original con-
cessionaires, at the first cost of construction, without any payment for
goodwill. This power has already been exercised, and is likely to con-
tinue to be exercised. May Ibe forgiven if I just hint that we might
do worse than confer similar powers upon the Municipality of Adelaide.
Education is represented by the London School Board, which re-
ceives and expends a greater revenue than that of this colony.
Let us turn from the Municipal life of London to the national life
of the Empire. In point of territorial expansion, increase of -wealth,
the application of practical science, the advance of material improve-
ment, the growth of industry, this reign has been unequalled. The
development of commerce, and manufactures has been without parallel.
It is marvellous to reflect on the widespread Imperial domain ! The
spirit of the Vikings is in our island race, and drives us over the path-
way of the sea to possess and use strange and distant lands.
Never was isle so little, never was sea so lone,
But over the scud and the palm-trees the English flag was flown.


This has not been always a tranquil process, nor yet one that can
be considered as belonging to purely recent times. Throughout the
eighteenth century it was an active principle of disturbance and,
according to thoughtful historians of modern date, the real cause of
many wars. That century witnessed the great duel—as Professor
Seeley calls it—of Prance and England over the New World. A wide
interval has elapsed during which the forward and endless march of
English colonization and settlement has been steadily proceeding.
Other countries seem now waking up to the Anglo-Saxon absorption of
the earth’s surface which is taking place, and there are not wanting
signs of an active jealousy which may lead at no remote date to
Britons having to fight to hold their own. The great American states-
man and orator, Daniel Webster, even in his day described England
as a power “ to which, for purposes of foreign conquest or subjugation,
Rome in the height of her glory is not to be compared—a power
which has dotted over the surface of the whole of the globe with her
possessions and military posts, whose morning drum-beat following the
sun and keeping company with the hours, circles the earth with one con-
tinuous and unbroken strain of the martial airs of England.” How r is it
now ? How has it, I wonder, impressed those military detachments at
this very hour on their way “home”? Did it, think you, strike our Aus
tralian Tommy Atkins that, from the moment when he leaves these
shores until he reaches English soil he is never out of hearing of the
English bugle or out of sight of the Union Jack? The drum and the
bag-pipes welcome him at Colombo; the regimental band discourses
music which almost makes him forget the cinder-like desolation of that
fortified post called Aden ; he enters the Red Sea under the protection
of the British guns on Perim, and is flanked, as he steams up what
seems nowadays an English lake, by the British garrison at Suakim.
He passes through Egypt, all but in name a British possession, and
leaving Cyprus, that place of arms, astern, he passes under the massive
fortifications of that more formidable place of arms, Malta, whence,
after saluting the impregnable rock of Gibralter he reaches
The little isle compassed by the inviolate sea
in which all this power and dominion has its centre.
From east to west the earth is like a street sentinelled and policed
by the Queen. “ ’alf of creation she owns,” says the Tommy Atkins
of Rudyard Kipling —
Take ’old o’ the wings o’ the morning
An’ flop round the earth till you’re dead,
But you won’t get away from the tunes that they play
To the bloomin’ old rag overhead.
There is something very characteristic in the indifference which is
shown towards the mighty phenomenon of the diffusion of our race and
the expansion of our State. It is all treated as though it were the
most ordinary affair ; all in the day’s wrnrk. Indeed, some writer


whom I remember to have read, has aptly said that we seem to have
conquered and peopled half the world in a fit of absence of mind.
The statistical records of British progress during these sixty years are
as fascinating as a fairy tale. The very figures glow as with a lambent
flame. No man, it is said, can study Bradshaw’s Railway Guide for
an hour without becoming insane. In studying the multitudinous
figures which exhibit the recent history of the Empire the danger is
you may become a poet. When the Queen came to the throne the
population of the United Kingdom was some 26 millions ; it is now
40 millions. The significance of this fact is emphasised when the
enormous emigration to the United States and to the Colonies in the
old and the new world is taken into consideration. The increase of
wealth has been relatively far greater. In less than 50 years the
public fortune had risen from 4,100 millions sterling to 9,210 millions
in 1887.
Railways—of which, about 1840, there were 840 miles, representing
a capital of <£24,000,000, and carrying 18,000,000 passengers—have
now a mileage of more than 21,000 miles, with a capital exceeding
£1,000,000,000, and carrying 900,000,000 passengers. The gross
annual revenue of one railway alone—the London and North Western-
is about £12,000,000, or five times the total revenue of South Australia.
This railway development has been astounding, and is coeval with
Her Majesty’s reign. The first of the great trunk lines, that between
London and Birmingham, was not open till 1838. No line had then
been constructed or even contemplated in any other part of the
Empire. The most far-seeing railway projector had not foreseen the
growth of travelling which the new system was to produce. Third-
class passengers, who number eight out of every nine of all who travel,
are now carried at a speed and comfort which first-class passengers
could not command in the early days of railway enterprise. The appli-
cation of steam to locomotion by sea has been productive of even
greater results. In the year after Her Majesty’s accession the “ Great
Western” and the “ Syrius” crossed the Atlantic. This was considered
a great event and a mark of singular progress. The “ Syrius ” took
18 days on her passage from Cork to New York. The distance is now
completed in barely five. The journey from London to Bombay, which
then took 38 days, is now accomplished in 14. The “Syrius” was a
small vessel of 700 tons and 320 horsepower, whilst the largest Atlantic
liners of to-aay have each a burden of 12,000 tons, with a horsepower
of 30,000. Wood has given place to iron and steel. The steamship is
superseding the sailing vessel. The nominal capacity of the British
commercial marine is 9,000,000 tons, or more than three times what it
was in 1840, and two-thirds of it are in steam. British and Colonial
owmed shipping is now more than half the entire shipping of the world,
and is six times that of the United States, which comes next in magni-
tude. The result as to British trade may be imagined. The imports


and exports in the years from 1837 to 1840 averaged 115 millions
annually, whilst in 1895 they totalled the enormous amount of
£702,522,065. The mind can scarcely grasp what these figures mean,
and they would have been much higher if the level of prices had been
maintained equally with the volume of trade, If the trade of the
British Colonies is added to that of the United Kingdom the aggregate
would be almost one-third of the trade of the whole world.
The increase and development of manufactures show quite as startling
results, but upon this it would be presumptuous in me to dwell in
detail before any audience gathered together under the auspices of the
Chamber of Manufactures. May I just mention that the output of
textile fabrics such as cotton, wool, flax, and jute, has grown five times
faster than the population. Whilst in 1840 there were only 791
millions of yards of cotton cloth exported, in 1885 there were 4,492
millions, or six times as many. As with textile fabrics so with all
others.
The banking power of the United Kingdom has risen enormously ;
in 1885 it was seven times what it was in 1840. The aggregate of
capital and deposits in that year was 125 million pounds sterling, or
£o per inhabitant. In 1884 it had grown to 840 millions or £23 per
inhabitant. The revenue of the United Kingdom which at the begin-
ning of the reign was about 50 millions per annum has increased until
it is now over 100 millions, or taking the figures given by Sir M.
Hicks-Beach, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in his budget speech of
this year, the revenue in 1836 was millions, while in 1896 it was
112 millions.
Yet taxation has been continually remitted. Instead of a tariff of
some 1,200 articles which fettered and restricted trade, the whole
customs revenue of nearly 21 millions sterling is raised from less than
a dozen commodities. Freetrade for England at least is not the mere
mumbling of the dry bones of an effete political economy.
Since the Crimean war something like 200 millions sterling have
been paid off the national debt. What enormous power that one
massive fact reveals, for financial elasticity and strength mean power.
At this moment in the event of such an emergency arising as to render
it necessary, England could by merely stopping the annual payments
towards the reduction of the national debt raise 200 millions of money
without imposing one farthing of additional taxation upon the people.
When the Great Powers of Europe enter into war they have to count
the cost with an anxiety which often and fortunately gives them pause.
If they go on a second campaign there is more financial trouble, and
very few will be found going into a third campaign. But look on the
other hand at the condition of the Sovereign of England, if she is
threatened with war, or if she should unfortunately embark in it, if
she does not wish to discontinue the reduction of her national debt,
she has but so to speak, to touch a spring and there is one single tax


which will for every penny that is imposed give a revenue of two
millions per annum. It is this which doubles the power of her armies
and of her fleets, and you may depend upon it, that whenever there is
a critical occasion when her fortune or fame is concerned the conscious-
ness that England, if she embarks in a quarrel can maintain it not
through one campaign only, but through succeeding campaigns has,
and always will have immense influence—an influence which we all
pray may be used on the side of peace.
And now may we not ask which have done most for this amazing
progress so briefly indicated to you—which have done most for the
civilization and improvement of mankind—the politician, or the man of
science? The locomotive engine has changed the face of civilization.
Steam and electricity have been put in harness, and made to do our
work : they annihilate for us time and distance. Can you believe that
when the Queen came to the Throne no electric telegraph existed in
the United Kingdom ? In those days Professor Wheatstone was called
to give evidence as to his plans for an electric telegraph before a Select
Committee of the House of Commons. One of the members asked
him, “ Now, really do you think we could send a message from Dover
to Calais ? ” But another member, a practical business man, I suppose,
who would stand no nonsense, interfered, and said, “ Now, don’t waste
time in asking such foolish questions.” No submarine cable was laid
till 1851. The Atlantic cable was not successfully laid till 1866.
Since then the progress of telegraphy has been constant and rapid.
The telegraph system in Great Britain is now in the hands of the
State, giving increased efficiency and reduced cost; and, in consequence
of these facilities and cheapness, the number of messages has increased
from ten millions in 1870 to seventy millions a year.
The telephone is within the memory of the youngest of' us. The
“Are you there 1” and “ Exchange, please,” are heard in private houses,
as well as in the mart and the counting house. It is impossible to
foresee the full measure of the application of electric power.
May we not then assert that the engineer and man of science have
subdued the elements and led the march of civilization. They are the
artificers and conquerors—they are the great men of the time—which is an
age not of fancy, but of thought and action. The engines of war, equally
with the instruments of peace, are theirs; we owe to them as well the
ships which carry our merchandise and our dear ones, as those which carry
devastation and death to our enemies; the cataracts of the Nile are in
daily danger of obliteration at their hands, and even the Great Sahara
may be one day startled to find a railway laid across its weary expanse \
their field is underground as well as aboveground, and when they have
dealt sufficiently with the bowels of the earth, there will remain to
them the regions of the air—if you ascend to the heavens they are
there: and if you fly to the uttermost ends of the earth they aro
with you there also.


The Forth Bridge and the Manchester Ship Canal are imposing monu-
ments of engineering skill and mechanical construction, and I have lately
observed a proposal to connect Scotland with Ireland by a sub-marine
tunnel. Of all rail way engineering works perhaps the greatest is the trans-
Siberian railway which winds across the illimitable plains of Orenberg
and traversing the broad Urals, spanning the widest rivers—the Obi,
the Irtish, and the Yenesei-—creeps round the southern end of Lake
Baikal, mounts the eastern plateau beyond, and thence descends into
the valley of the Amoor and ends at Vladivostock This great work,
which is now being carried quickly on, will be the longest railway in
the world with a total length of nearly 4,800 miles and estimated to
cost 35 millions sterling. This is a Russian enterprise, but I make no
apology for bringing it to your notice because it may be of surpassing
interest to Australians before many years pass by.
Invention has been endless. Unlike the ancient Athenians who
were taken up merely in hearing or seeing some new thing, the Queen’s
subjects keep their ingenuity constantly on the rack to discover some-
thing that will help mankind forward, and lessen the labor and the
pain of life. Pure scientific investigation has kept equal pace and the
dominating impulse there also is that the results may be applied for the
advantage of humanity. We are almost on speaking terms "with the
inhabitants of Mars and distressingly familiar with the daily habits of
the microbe.
Lifeboats and the diving bell belong, as regards all purposes of
highest usefulness, to these sixty years, and even the manipulation of the
weather may be regarded as a science—slightly inexact.
We shall scarcely wonder if the recent shock of earthquake has set
scientific minds thinking whether that erratic and disagreeable form of
natural force may not be subdued to man’s use. The spectroscope
enables the Astronomer to analyse the composition of the sun, and to
watch the movement of the distant star; geology has been almost
reconstructed ; biology as a science has been created ; and chemistry
has attained dimensions and achieved successes which in 1837 would
have been looked upon as hopeless.
Ido not deny that there is still a dark side to the picture. It is not
so black as when Ruskin wrote that there was a wilderness of factories
and people with no clothes; that industry had blackened every leaf of
English greenwood, and yet the people die of cold ; that the harbors
were a forest of merchant ships, and yet the people die of hunger. But
there is still much poverty, in contrast with enormous wealth. There
is still a submerged tenth. There is vast waste and frivolous spending
of money side by side with great charities. Some people—some honest
enough reformers—imagine that the age is fruitful of new social
miseries and degradations. The truth is that the evils are, with scarcely
an exception, old; they have been assuaged and lessened ; that
which is new, we may be proud to say, is the intelligence that discovers


and the humanity which remedies them. The eyes of the philanthropic
see and their hearts feel for the suffering which is near their own doors.
It used to be said that English folk were apt to forget the needs of their
own people and of their own neighborhood in their desire to enlighten
the heathen and free the slave and relieve the distressed in distant
lands.
These lofty souls have microscopic eyes,
Which see the smallest speck of distant pain,
While at their feet a world of agonies
Unseen, unheard, unheeded, writhes in vain.
That cannot now be said with truth. Charitable and humane effort-
is directed for the benefit of those of our own blood and our
own country. The uplifting of the downtrodden of other races
is not forgotten; but our own dark places are more and more
opened to the flood of healing light. It is pleasant to note that
a marked feature of the celebration about to take place is the wide-
spread desire, both in Australia and England, to commemorate the event
by the establishment or extension of institutions for the sick and
afflicted. We may well be proud of the moral and social improvement
of these sixty years. England has her armed forces and great ships,
she has the stout hearts and earnest consciences of her people; but
there are other forces that make and keep a people strong and great.
These are the moral forces, whose foundations are the true basis of all
the world's advance and forward movement. Moral and intellectual
strength guide the material forces, and those who have the most strength
are not always the great ones of the earth—not always the pushing and
the noisy—but families whose plain homes are the abodes of reverence,
morality, sobriety, thrift, self-denial, truth, simplicity, personal refine-
ment, and consideration for others. These are “ the things that are
more excellent.”
The grace of friendship, mind, and heart,
Linked with their fellow-heart and mind ;
The gains of science, gifts of art,
The sense of oneness with our kind,
The thirst to know and understand,
A large and liberal discontent —
These are the goods in life’s rich hand,
The things that are more excellent.
In faultless rhythm the ocean rolls,
A rapturous silence thrills the skies,
And on this earth are lovely souls
That softly look with aidful eyes.
Though dark, 0 God, Thy course and track,
I think Thou must at least have meant
That nought which lives should wholly lack
The things that are more excellent.
Freedom of speech and freedom of conscience have become a com-
monplace ; a man may do and think and say the thing he will. Re-
ligious freedom has become as universal and as perfectly assured within
the Queen’s dominions as the air her subjects breathe.


The emancipation of Catholics and Jews, the abolition of tests, and
the sweeping away of all promissory oaths have once and for ever
eliminated from our civil and political life everything which could in-
vite bigotry or leave a sense of bitterness or injustice under cover of
the Christian faith.
Perhaps the most picturesque of the Queen’s Prime Ministers was a
Jew. The present Lord Mayor of London is a Jew ; and the present
Lord Chief Justice of England is a Roman Catholic. Few in 1837
would have been bold enough to predict that these high offices would
be so filled during the reign about to begin.
Pope Piux IX. is declared to have once said that he had a kindness
for the Gailio-like attitude of the British Government which in its
various dominions leaves perfect freedom to about thirty different
faiths. “ Settle what you want, gentlemen ; choose your creeds ; and
so long as you do not shock the universal conscience, or disturb the
public peace, enjoy full liberty.” This, in a sentence, is the State
attitude in these latter days throughout the Queen’s dominions towards
questions of faith and religion. Sir George Cornwall Lewis once said
in answer to a deputation, who protested against being required to fill
up the religious census as an unnecessary interference with liberty of
conscience, “ We are not asking you to state the religions you believe,
but only the religions you profess.”
The reform of our laws has been a peculiarly marked feature of the
period. The Statute Book has been purged of penal laws which were
no less than crimes themselves. When the offence inspires less horror
than the punishment, the rigors of the penal law are obliged to give
way before the common feelings of mankind. It is demoralising to a
people to place venial offences within the category of crimes. Your
criminal code should be reserved for serious offences. The full recog-
nition of these principles brought about the ameliorated code now
existing.
Labor strikes are a conspicuous characteristic of the reign. The
right of combination in industrial matters which at the Queen's accession
was treated as immoral and a crime, is now established. Trades
Unions exist everywhere sanctioned by law, and to combat them
employers have formed themselves into similar associations. The
medieval Guilds give probably the nearest approximation to the Trade
Unions of the Victorian era. It might be of great industrial advan-
tage if the latter took guidance in some respects from the earlier
organisations. It may be a possible defect in the modern system that
the Unions have nothing of the benevolent society about them, and
are essentially militant. When therefore a dispute takes place they
are full—both sides are full—of the war spirit. Men then are led to
break the law rather than feel themselves powerless. Still whilst all
fair men must deplore consequences and methods, it is a gratifying
reform that men are now free to combine for their own interests and
their own protection.


There is, however, a less commendable tendency, and that is to
secure one’s own freedom by interfering with or curtailing the freedom
of others. It cannot be a salutary law or one to the credit of the reign
which heavily fines men, arrived at years of discretion, or sends them
to prison as malefactors for daring to work on a Saturday afternoon,
or more than eight hours on an ordinary day. It seems a renewal of
the tyranny of the curfew at the time of the Norman conquest, nearly
a thousand years ago, and therefore I pass it by as not quite in keep-
ing with the Queen’s reign.
Socialism as distinguished from anarchism is also a development of
these sixty years, but its forms are various. The true socialism is, I
think expressed in these lines—
Press on, the triumph shall be won
Of common rights and equal laws,
* * * *
Blessing the cotter and the crown,
Sweetening worn labor’s bitter cup ;
And, plucking not the highest down,
Lifting the lowest up.
And the greatest agency for its attainment is not to be found in the
perpetuation of social hatreds and class war, but in the spread of educa-
tion. The schoolmaster has indeed gone abroad through the land.
Education is practically free wherever the English tongue is spoken.
Nine millions a year are spent on it in England. It has been liberalised
to meet the times, and is more and more directed to the necessities of
the age, to making useful men and women rather than prigs and pedants.
In this city of ours we have a technical school with an earnest and
enthusiastic president, which marks the progress and meets the demand
of the later educational movement.
And with education has come visible amelioration of the conditions
and manners of life. What a marvellous distance we have travelled
during these sixty years in refinement, humanity, and taste. Tempora
mutantur et mutamnr in illis. Those myriad bells which pealed forth
the people’s joy on the Queen’s accession did surely
Ring in the nobler modes of life,
With sweeter manners, purer laws.
To this happier state, taking in, as it does, the happiness of the
household, progress in discovery and invention has contributed equally
with education. Just consider what the cheapness and application of
gas and petroleum to lighting and heating has done. The lucifer match
is perhaps one of the greatest domestic boons of the century. About 1839
a countryman of mine in the North of Scotland bought three lucifer
matches for sixpence and exhibited them to his neighbors, who thought
them uncanny. What about the sewing-machine ? The application of
machinery to the making of clocks and watches has enabled you to buy
a watch for as many shillings as they cost pounds, even so recently as
when I was at school. Sixty years since there were no Mechanics’


Institutes or free libraries or picture galleries, no public baths or wash-
houses ; and instead of quick access by excursion trains and the like to
green fields and pleasant scenes, the kindly philanthropist encouraged
the poor to put a cracked teapot bearing a geranium or a fuchsia in the
window-sill.
The food of the people is cheaper, better, and more abundant. When
the Queen began to reign, the population was confined for its main
article of food to the acreage and growth of the British Isles, and at
every return of an indifferent or inferior harvest, famine walked abroad
through all the houses of the poorest portion of the population. Now,
however, the change is so great that I believe the mass of men,
women, and children in the United Kingdom are dependent for their
entire consumption of the principal articles of human food upon the
colonies and foreign countries. Consider what the colonies alone supply
towards the food of the mother country—aye, and clothing, too.
It follows, as you might expect it to follow, that crime and pauperism
have greatly diminished, and the humane spirit of the time is shown
even in our gaols and the treatment of criminals, and above all in the
kind and pitying treatment of those amongst us in whom the light of
reason has been dimmed or extinguished. Anesthetics and scientific
surgery have dulled the edge of pain, taken away from the knife of
the surgeon many of its terrors, and saved much human life. But I
must dwell on these aspects no longer.
The greatest, probably, of all social reforms has been in the treat-
ment of women and children. When the reign began their legal
rights were of the flimsiest, and illegal wrongs crushed out their hearts
and often their lives. Children were exposed to brutal treatment,
even by their parents ; they were overworked in factories, put to slavish
and pestilent ti’ades, and forced under cruel conditions into chimneys,
colleries, and mines. Their hours of labor were horrible. The Queen
had been on the throne for ten years before the employment of little
children under eight years of age was prohibited. How different
now !
There is another phase in the advent of the “ new woman ” —in the
steady advance of women into the general arena of the world’s life and
action. It is spoken of as emancipation, but it is more than an emanci-
pation from those tender bonds which held women back from the glare
of publicity, which held them away from the strife of commerce as from
the bloody violence of war, which treated as a sacred thing the sweet
and ineffable influence of mothers and maidens, wives and sisters,
shrinking equally from the madding crowd of the rialto and the tumult
of the hustings'! There was room for some emancipation—to the extent
that it opened new avenues of employment, enlarged the field of
women’s practical effort, gave a new sense of self-dependence, and put
in their hands fresh opportunities of earning their daily bread. But
is it not just possible it may be going too fast, and too far! Do


not let us “ break the golden bowl at the fountain,” and pour out its
beauty and sweetness in wanton waste upon the dust. Is there any-
thing on earth worthy of being given in exchange for the beauty
and tenderness which the unspoiled and unroughened woman may
bring to the home, whether it be a palace or a cottage. The quality
and fire of patriotism does not now suffer when we think of the
mothers of England, from the Queen on the Throne to the lowliest in
the land. It is they indeed who trim the lamp and keep alive the
sacred flame. They need no signal to rouse them to duty. They do it,
and know it not. It is woman's prerogative to teach us to suffer and
be strong. Their quiet heroism is the treasure of the race. May we
not well pause lest in our haste we imperil the highest and finest
destiny of women—lest we endanger the duty which is ours as well as
theirs of keeping them unspotted from the world.
Educational barriers have disappeared. Women are competitors
and successful competitors—with men in all the higher learning.
Our old halls have changed their sex,
With prudes for proctors, dowagers for dons,
And sweet girl graduates in their golden hair.
They have entered the pulpit, ascended the platform, descended into
the forum, assumed the gravity of the physician and the dexterity of
the surgeon; embellished the ranks of the journalists, dropped into the
role of political agitator as though to the manner born, snatched the
Mayoral chain of office and donned the municipal robe, secured the
inestimable privilege of voting for members of Parliament, and just
missed setting their feet within the sacred precincts of the Senate itself;
and finally, the sisters in America have issued lately the “ Women’s
Bible,” designed to emphasise the greatness of their sex in the scheme
of creation, to demolish for ever man’s faulty claims to superiority, and
to bring about his second fall!
With all the material progress constantly expanding, do we find in
the reign intellectual eminence ? Has the nation, it is asked, ceased to
produce great men ? There is a high average of work, but no man who
stands out “ in shape and gesture proudly eminent” above his fellows.
In poetry, in literature, in art, in oratory, are there names worthy to
be ranked with the great ones of the past? No one can be sure of a
man’s immortality in art or letters until he takes his place amongst the
immortals. How often has it happened that men neglected by their
contemporaries have achieved a posthumous and a permanent fame,
whilst others have been silently deposed by posterity from that niche
in the temple to which in their lives their contemporaries had assigned
them. Are we to condemn an age as intellectually barren or mediocre
because it may not produce a Shakespeare or Milton, a Bacon, a Gibbon,
or a Scott ? Such giants are not the measure or standard of the intel-
lectual level. They are isolated peaks, thrusting their sublime summits
amongst the stars. The Victorian era has no such pre emince to show,


but it can claim men in war and in statesmanship, in letters and in
arts, whose deeds and whose writings will, in all human probability,,
endure as long as English history is remembered or English literature
read. Wordsworth, “ who uttered nothing base,” Tennyson, and
William Watson have given us “the full tones of vigorous minstrelsy.’
Macaulay, Hallam, Grote, and Green have done something for history,
whilst Thackeray, George Eliot, and Dickens have added to the master-
pieces of fiction. In the mechanical and distributing departments the
progress has kept pace with the growth and necessity of the age.
Never before have the resources of the printing press and the book-
seller been so vastly utilised. Books and editions have been multiplied
almost beyond belief, and at a price which enables us to buy excellent
copies of valuable volumes for as few pence as our fathers and grand-
fathers paid shillings.
The great publishers have become potent factors in the educational
power of the State. To their eternal honor we may recall the great
work done by the Chambers of Edinburgh, the Blackwoods, Macmil-
lans, and hosts of others. The ponderous Reviews have given place to
the Magazines. The newspaper press has multiplied its power and
influence many-fold. It has reached a degree of perfection not only in
literary excellence, but as an instrument for collecting and dissemin-
ating news from all parts of the world, which to the men of 1837
would have seemed incredible. The newspaper press owes its pre-
eminence to the scientific advance of the reign, and is itself one of its
most remarkable and characteristic products. Great editors have be-
come public men of station and influence —Russell of the Scotsman,
and Delane of the Times, and Albany Fonblanque of the Examiner,
to confine ourselves to those not now living, are typical examples. It
used to be said of Fonblanque that during the excited times in which
he lived, an epigram or a witticism from the Examiner went off like a
great gun, echoing all over the country. I know myself—for I was
there—the wide and deep influence exercised by the Scotsman news-
paper in the days of Russell. Shams, intolerance, and bigotry were
the special objects of his satire and ridicule. Every hamlet has its
broadsheet modelled —at a respectful distance—on the City Thun-
derers. And, thanks to our enlightened and universal Press, public
opinion has become a potent force for good or ill, undreamt of—at all
events, very dimly forseseen —at the beginning of the reign.
Literature and the drama and painting and sculpture have been
honored with titles of distinction to an extent unknown before in the
persons of Sir Walter Besant and Sir Henry Irving, Lord Tennyson,
and Sir Frederick Leighton, and others whose names will readily occur
to you.
Greater Britian is the creation and chief material good of the Queen’s
reign. The name would have been inappropriate sixty years ago. It signi-
fies no mere possessions and dependencies, no mere military posts or trading.


■factories, but lands of settled Government, well ordered commonwealths
alike in their institutions and aims, alike in their loyalty and in their
freedom to the mother state, but vast in area, in natural resources, and
in the possibilites of the future which lies before them. The simply
■territorial growth of the Indian and Colonial Empire has been immense.
India when the reign began was nothing but a huge dependency,
governed not by the Queen, but by the East India Company—“ John
Company ”as it was called. India is now under the direct rule of the
Sovereign, an Empire within an Empire, governed with an intelligence,
a faithfulness and a humane sympathy never before bestowed on a
conquered native race. Trade follows the flag and carries civilization
with it, and the habit of freedom which belongs to Britons and which it is
their mission to extend has made less favored races welcome their
coming. The result has been for forty unprecedented prosperity
and content. Justice is the secret of British power. On one hand
there shall be no paltering with revolt, on the other the law abiding
shall be protected, and, if need be, avenged at all hazards. The rebel
whose hands drip with the innocent blood of women and children
shall be blown from the cannon’s mouth. They who seem ready to
perish from famine are fed, and those smitten with pestilence are healed.
You may call it a benevolent despotism if you will, but it secures the
highest purpose of all government, the greatest happiness to the
reatest number. Annexation to India has steadily gone forward.
In 1843 Sir Charles Napier conquered the great Province of Scindh.
In 1848 the Punjaub was annexed, and in 1856 the Kingdom of Oudh,
whose capital Lucknow played so memorable a part in the terrible
conflict of the following year. More recently the whole of Upper
Burmah was incorporated with, to quote Rudyard Kipling—
Other countries east of Suez where the best are like the worst,
Where there aren’t no Ten Commandments, and a man can raise a thirst.
In Africa the possessions of the Queen have been increased seven or
eight times in area—enormous in future possibilities as in area. If
the territories administered by the great chartered companies are
included, British Africa, which at the beginning of the reign comprised
about a quarter of a million square miles, will be found to comprise about
one-fourth of the continent, more than two and a-half million square
miles, and a population of 44,000,000. God prosper her enterprise
and expansion in that dark Continent if she keep true to her mission
to set free the slave and put an end to the raiding, hunting, and barter-
ing of human flesh made black by the same Hand as made yours and
mine white. The North American and Australasian colonies developed
under other and even more favorable conditions, together represent an
area equal to one-ninth of the surface of the globe. It is something to
remember that the Empire now embraces an area of about ten million
square miles and contains a population of some 350 millions or about
one-quarter of the entire population of the world. In all these vast


dominions the Empire plays many parts—it is the greatest Protestant
and probably the greatest Roman Catholic power; it is the greatest
Mahomedan as well as the greatest Pagan power—the assassin of the
Yildiz Kiosk does not himself command the civil obedience of so many
of the faithful, nor has the worshipper of stocks and stones more liberty
of worship under the most idolatrous of African potentates —in
Jamaica it is an absolute power; in Gibralter a military despotism;
in Ceylon it is partly absolute and partly limited ; in Canada it is
federal and protectionist; in Australia it is democratic; in India it is
a military power; at home it is free trade; in Victoria it is ultra-
protectionist ; in a word it embraces almost every race and every clime
and every creed. And yet the yoke of Empire sits not uneasily ;
difficulties do not appal, obstacles do not deter. There exists in
Englishmen and Americans, and as far as I know in no other people,
a power of tranquilly overlooking rather than overcoming obstacles ;
the obstacle has to go, that’s all. Silent and undemonstrative deter-
mination, great composure and subdued strength are the chief
characteristics of British as of ancient Spartan valor. There is a time
when they give tongue, then let the foe beware for they are upon him.
They pursue an enterprise untroubled about anything except attaining
the result ; duty is their guide. It is these qualities which have
enabled the weary Titan to bear the too vast orb of his fate.
England is still in the foreground of the picture, but the great
colonies are ranging up alongside. They cannot long be in the back-
ground ; their life is bound up with that of the mother country, their
prosperity with hers, their safety with her safety. Enlightened colonial
policy is the product of the reign. Before then there was much error
and groping in the dark.
Do not suppose that England has always been successful in coloniza-
tion. Raleigh’s first settlement in Virginia in 1584 was a failure. The
most grievous of all blunders was in 1776, when the fatuous course was
taken which drove the American Colonies into rebellion, and kept them
there, in spite of their eager yearnings for words of kindly explanation,
which might have brought them back again to the fold.
The first stage in English Colonial policy was the “plantation
epoch,” when the colonies were treated as mere outlying estates or
settlements, whose own interests were not supposed to be the first object
in the method of their government, which might not wrongly be
described as formed on the principle of sparing the rod and spoiling the
child.
This was the stage which had been reached when the American
Colonies were our chief possessions, and which the lessons of their
revolt taught us, after a time, might wisely be departed from.
The second was what is known as the “ ripe fruit epoch,” which con-
stituted the reaction from the older system, with its unfortunate conse-
quences ; and the new doctrine was that when ripe the colonies would,
like fruit, inevitably fall from the parent tree.


The last sixty years have seen both these extremes brought to an
end, and the present epoch breathes the spirit of Imperial unity. Kin-
ship and affection, a common history and a common interest, are the
links which bind. The interchange of commerce is a powerful factor
in keeping these links bright and unbroken. Of the total exports from
England, the colonies—that is, everywhere—take one-third, and of her
imports they send her one-fifth. Their own increase in population,
commerce, and revenue has outstripped anything previously known.
Exclusive of India, Malta, Gibraltar, and Hongkong, the population of
all the colonies, which in 1840 was 5,000,000, had increased to
20,000,000 in 1895. Commerce, which in 1840 reached a total value
of 27 millions sterling, had increased to 279 millions sterling, or ten
times as much in 1895. The revenue, which was £2,400,000 in 1840,
had increased to £48,366,000, or more than twenty times as much in
1895.
But I must hasten on to Australia, the part of the Empire with
which we, our interests, and our hopes are more immediately, though
not solely, concerned ; the land
Where with fire and fierce drought on her tresses,
Insatiable Summer oppresses
Sere woodlands and sad wildernesses,
And faint flocks and herds.
In the Spring, when the wattle gold trembles
’Twixt shadow and shine,
When each dew-laden air-draught resembles
A long draught of wine.
where, though at this hour there are many of our fellow colonists
forced to listen to their children crying for bread, when there is none
lor them, and to witness the dumb animals perishing of hunger, the
hearts of the men are big, and the recuperative power of the country
is great.
Has there been a like sum and measure of progress in this wide land
given to us for an inheritance—a land to be greater yet when the sun
of Federation shall arise, and open to us the new and splendid day of
national and progressive life. The wealth and progress of Australia
have grown with the swiftness of Jonah’s gourd. In 1840 the popu-
lation of the whole of the Australasian Colonies was only 200,000.
In 1895 it was four and a-quarter millions, or more than twenty times
as many. In 1840 the volume of commerce reached in value just over
three millions sterling, and in 1895 nearly 115 millions or nearly forty
times as much. The revenue, which in 1840 was £600,000 increased
to 28| millions, or nearly fifty times as much in 1895.
Was there ever such a transformation scene ?
Such is our brief and hurried survey of the abounding past. May
I give just a moment and a word to the future ? What then
is the future of England ? What then is the future of Australia ?
Surely if there is one spot where peace may rest and justice


reign it is in England. Where are men ever to be happy if not
in England with her rural beauty, her hedge-rows, her birds, and her
streams, with her well-ordered Government, and her noble equipment
in all the accessories needed for the use and enjoyment of life under
the highest conditions of civilization—with her treasures of art and
literature and learning. Mr. Reid, the Premier of New South Wales,
before leaving the other day, told me that one great desire of his heart
was to see the beauty of rural England, and he asked me how he could
best do that in the short time at his disposal. I said he would find it
everywhere round him within an hour’s drive of London. Listen to
what a famous American poet wrote :
Hugged in the clinging billows’ clasp,
From seaweed fringe to mountain heather,
The British oak, with rooted grasp,
Her slender handfuls holds together ;
With cliffs of white and bowers of green,
And ocean narrowing to caress her,
And hills and threaded streams between—
Our little mother isle, God bless her !
But there is another England—the builder of nations and the maker
of men. Never in the story of the universe has there been anything
like the destiny of England in that respect. Other nations have been,
and are now, jealous of her ever-spreading power and influence and her
ever accumulating wealth. France sees her own colonies languishing
and sinking into debt. The fire-eating Emperor of Germany has no
particular colonies to get into debt. Russia, from her Asiatic steppes,
looks down with envy and despair upon the riches of Hindoostan.
But is there a man of English blood who does not thrill when he
thinks of the valor and enterprise and nobility of that island realm
and of the deeds which won the Empire.
Dear mother land, our home !
No distance can divide
The boys who rest or roam
From England’s faithful side.
“ Our little mother isle,” says the American poet I have quoted.
•Our cousins of America are as proud of old England as we are. They
exercise the privilege of children by criticising, and sometimes by just
a show of rudeness to their parent. But it is all on the surface. Do
you think they would stand by and see the mother land in deadly
peril 1 Paris may be the paradise of the Americans. England is their
Mecca. Westminster Abbey and Stratford-on-Avon belong to all of
English kin, and until the people of the United States can unfasten them
from their present situation and transport them two thousand miles
further West, they will never stand idly by and permit a foreign
soldier to lay unhallowed hands on these shrines. Little more than a
year ago there was a moment when war seemed inevitable. Venezuela
had introduced differences with America. The German Emperor sent


a telegram to the Transvaal. England courteously acknowledged the
telegram by equipping a flying squadron within twenty-four hours.
But it was an American Senator who expressed in living words the
moral strength of the mother country and the spirit which should
animate her future.
“France,” said Senator Wolcott, from his place in the Senate, “ is a.
sister republic, and although most of her colonies have fewer rights than
Cuba, she is yet entitled to our consideration and sympathy because of
her form of Government. Germany has furnished us hundreds of
thousands of worthy citizens, who are a credit to the Republic. Russia
was our friendly ally in the late war. And yet, when I read that all
these powerful Governments—France, Germany, and Russia—had allied
themselves together against Great Britain, and that the people of those
little islands, ‘ compassed by the inviolate sea,’ in defence of what they
deemed their rights, were marshalling their armies and assembling their
navies, ready, undaunted, to face a world in arms, unyielding and un-
afraid, I thanked God I was of the race ! There is no drop of blood in
me, Mr. President, that is not of English origin, and I have no
ancestor on either side since 1650 who was not born on the soil of
New England ; but my heart beats faster when I recall the glorious,
deeds of Clive and Lawrence and Napier and Wellington—
England’s greatest son ;
He that gain’d a hundred fights,
And never lost an English gun—
of Drake and Hawkins, who fought the Spaniard and swept the-
Spanish Main, and of the incomparable Nelson ; and my pulse quickens
when I realise that the splendor of their achievements is part of our
glorious heritage, and that the language of Burke and of Chatham is
our mother tongue.”
Whatever of advancement and of progress the centuries shall bring
us must largely come through the spread of the religion of Christ and
the dominance of the English speaking peoples ; and wherever we find
both you find communities where freedom exists and law is obeyed.
Blood is thicker than water, and until some just quarrel divides them,
which Heaven forbid, may these two great nations of the same speech
and lineage and traditions stand as brothers, shoulder to shoulder, in
the interest of humanity, by their union compelling peace and awaiting
the coming of the day when “ Nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.”
England’s destiny is to herself to prove but true, and to maintain
the traditions of her past.
And what is to be the future of Australia ? Are we not of the same
race, the first among the strong ones of the earth, the blood in us in-
capable of weariness, unconquerable by grief? Shall not we prove our-
selves worthy of those from whose loins we have sprung ? Are we not
partakers in all the ancestral honor ; sharers in all the pride of Empire*


inheritors of a history of which we can hardly think without becoming
insolent in our just pride of it. Let it be for us then to rise to the
iull level of our high calling and to maintain undimmed and unashamed
the character and heritage with which we have been endowed. “ On !
on ! you noblest English ” is the clarion call to us as well as to the
dwellers in England.
We may without reproach linger over the record of our material and
industrial progress. It is well for us to cherish the historical memories
and achievements to which I have referred ; but, Your Excellency,
there are other things for every country that are greater than its
trade, greater than its commerce, greater than its wealth, and amongst
them is the duty of maintaining and broadening free institutions, and
preserving the physical vigor and the moral fibre of the people. It is
our hope as it is our duty to hold fast to the great historic liberty
which has come down to us. It is our duty to bear aloft the high
standard of British humanity, and we may still do this and still be
great in war and in peace, in trade and in commerce, in literature and
art, science and jurisprudence. To me it is a firm article of faith that
the Federal impulse is that which will most surely make for the moral
grandeur, the social strength, and the permanent happiness of the people
of this continent. Therefore, as my last word I say to all of you within
reach of my voice, to all who may read or hear of what I say, seek ye
first the just federation of these colonies and all other things shall be
added unto you in full measure, heaped up, and running over. Let
our aspiration be for the quick coming of the new nation and the
larger citizenship. The great heart of the Empire still beats as it has
ever beat before, every hope it can cherish, every aspiration it can
breathe, are hopes and aspirations for freedom, for justice, and for truth;
and may we here, we, the citizens of no mean country, before another year
shall be added to the reign of the Queen, accomplish an union which
shall give us a nobler place than we have yet filled in that Empire and
in the world, a place which I humbly pray it may be given to
us to make great in the beauty of moral and material strength, and
which shall give us a country within whose borders no sound of
oppression shall be heard, and truth, justice, and contentment shall
never fail.






