

VC» AJSmXm
CXVI
FRIENDS—
As the number of unemployed is stead-
ily increasing, and consequently depres-
sion in trade is becoming more severely
felt as time goes on, it becomes the
duty of every citizen to inquire into
the cause of the ever-increasing evil of
poverty, and take energetic steps to
prevent a further growth of pauperism.
If left unnoticed, it can have but one
effect, bankruptcy, and probable loss
of liberty ; and that may cause a
serious national catastrophe, and end
in bloodshed. Every man out of
employment causes a diminution of
wealth. He eats up what he has
s.rved, and finally becomes a burden to
the community. But this is not the
worst. As pauperism increases, the
Government will be all the less able to
enforce laws and prevent criminality.
No patriotic citizen wishes to see an
increase in police, lawyers, judges,
and gaols, and neither is there any
necessi y, if the root of the evil is cut
off; but if matters are left to go on as
at present, the penal department must
of necessity become a heavier burden
than it is already. The causes which
have brought about this unsatisfactory
state of affairs are various, but at the
bottom of all of them is injustice.
Every social disorder has seme injus-
tice underlying it. People do not
become paupers and criminals from
choice, but from bad laws, there-
fore, no amonnt of law can stamp out
criminality. Law there must be, but
it must be founded on moral justice,
or else it is worse than useless. It is
impossible to define what justice means
in a legal sense. Law is not justice
unless it has moral right for its founda
tlons. Do unto others as you wish to
be done unto, is the only medium by
which to judge right from wrong. Now,
whose fault is it that there are so many
unemployed ? Some people say the
Government’s. Well, if it can be
proved that such is the case, then it is
the bounden duty of them to provide
them with work; if not, then the
Government should be called upon to
treat them as vagrants. Now, what are
the duties of Government ? And
what do they get their salaries for ?
To en ure equal rights to ail citizens,
uphold law and order, and protect the
weak against the strong. Of all the
rights of citizenship, the right to live
comes uppermost. Everything else is
of minor importance. Every child
bom into this wor’d has aclaim to all
the bounties of Nature which God has
provided for human kind. So long as
a Government allows every citizen to
earn a living, and does not restrict him
from pursuing a calling by which he
can produce wealth without doing an
injury to his neighbor, no man has a
right to ask Government for assist-
ance. But when a Government allows
privileges to exist which enable one
class of people to live in idleness, and
enjoy all luxuries of life, whilst another
class are continually kept on the brink
of poverty, although they produce
wealth ; and worse than that, a large
number of the producing class are
actually forced to idleness because
they cannot make any use of their
faculties by reason of laws which allow
one man to claim exclusive possession
of a certain portion cf the earth’s sur-
face, and everything under it; then
such person can in justice be called
upon to contribute to the maintenance
of idlers, or to give up his privileges,
Here is the kernel of the whole pro-
blem. But this is not to say that
Single Tax is the cure for the social
evil. At any rate, there is no time to
waste in waiting to see the results of n:w
measures. Paupers also have a right
to live, and therefore must be provided
with food, no matter wbo pays for it.
Few of them will commit suicide, and
and thus get out of the world, and any
person who does so is as much a fool
as a criminal; but those who neglect
to see to the welfare of the nation,
although they take large salaries, are
neither fools nor delinquents, but
worse than that. They are nothing
less than villains and blackguards of
the darkest die. If any person can
quietly look on and allow baby farming,
burglary, thieving, swindling,and depra-
vity to increase without making the least
effort to guard against those evils, he is
the most contemptible scoundrel in
existence, and, besides that, he is
an absolute thief, although he may be
George Dibbs. Nobody need to think
that he does not know where the fault
lies. He knows it only too well, for
he has been requested several times to
relieve distress, ar d has been told the
simplest way out of the difficulty, that
is, the utilisation of vacant land ; but
he only sneered at the proposal.
Working men would then become
independent, and capital would lose its
power. Therefore, he keeps on fish-
ing in the dark. As a royal lickspittle
and tuft-hunter, it would not do for
him to undermine the mainstay of
aristocracy, for then, royally would
tumble to the ground. As civilisation
advances, aristocracy of ancient titles
is becoming supplanted by the aristo-
racy of the stock exchange, who now
stand nearest to the throne, because
the nation is mortgaged to them. As
soon as the producing classes are en-
abled to make free use of the natural ele-
ments, they can pay off all debts in a short
space of time, and c -pital becomes
valueless, for no bank can exist where
there are no borrowers. It has been
proved that six hours work per day is
more than sufficient to p ovide all
members of a community wi'h the
necessaries of life, without the aid of
labour-saving appliances. Thus, it
stands to reason that, with the aid of
labor-saving appliances, a communal
settlement would not only become
self-supporting in less time than any
new industry could become self-
supporting and able to compete with
foreign goods, but would prove a
source of revenue and could not be
objected to by any class except privi-
leged loafers. Further, the labor
market would soon be relieved of its
surplus, and as a demand for labour
deprives parasites of the opportunity
of getting slaves for their mere exist-
ence. Dibbs naturally objects to
make working men independent. The
essence of slavery is the robbery of
labor—get all you can out of him for
his mere existence—make one man
dependent on the good nature of
another to earn a living, and he is no
longer a free man. Any government
which allows such an anomaly to exist
is not democratic, but aristocratic,
although it may be a republic. The
value of democracy can only be seen
where every citizen is enabled to earn
his living without anybody's consent,
and more than that, where the Govern-
ment sees to it that there are no
vagrants whether they be rich or poor.
The first thing to get rid of is the
paupers, for they are a burden to the
community, and are bound to become
criminals. They have to be main-
tained. Whether they live on credit or
charity does not alter the fact that
they impoverish the country as they
increase in number. Already so large
a proportion of the community are
dependent on charity that the govern-
ment is utterly helpless to enforce the
most important of all laws in an
orderly community, that is the vagrant
act. If citizens insist on the vagrant
act being enforced, the authorities are
bound to do so. If not, we will soon
be down to the same level as the
Egyptian fellahins, who now have to
maintain British soldiers to insure
stockholders against losses.
In dealing with the u teraploj'ed, it
must be borne in mind that there are
two cla c sss—one that would not work
if they did get it, and one who really
cannot find employment. For those
who will not work a reasonable num-
ber of hours per day, there is but one
remedy, the coffin —he who will not
work shall not eat; but those who can-
not find work deserve consideration ;
they have added to the wealth of the
community, but have been systemati-
cally robbed out of their earnings.
And so long as capital is allowed to
rule the world, this will continue to be
so. But it is a grave question as to
how much longer people will be fools
enough to be fleeced out of their
earnings. One thing is certain,
matters must come to a climax before
long, and what will not bend must
break. The top is becoming too
heavy, and political institutions which
forget the foundation of prosperity,
that is the welfare of the producer,
cannot be maintained even with brute
force. Civilisation is too far advanced
to re-introduce slavery. People be-
come criminals rather than slaves,
and they cannot be blamed when
robbery is legalised. In a country
like New South Wales, where there
are but three persons to two square
miles there could not possibly be a
dearth of employment if there we;e
equitable laws. But when privileged
classes make laws no justice can be
expected. Ignorance in social prob-
lems by the toiling classes and con-
tempt to human rights by the ruling
classes, are the responsible cause of
our misery. All people who take the
welfare of humanity to heart admit
that conditions are not as they ought
to be, but the majority never trouble
their minds to inquire where the fault
lies, and consequently the most
absurd theories are advanced as the
cause of the depression. One says
freetrade, the other protection,
another again says increase the popu-
lation, and still another says labour
saving appliances. Admitting that all
these circumstances have seemingly
contributed to the cause of depression,
yet none of them can be blamed any
more than a pair of trousers can be
blamed for becoming 100 small when
a boy outgrows them. Advance in
politics has not kept pace with advance
in science, and consequently Parlia-
ments have become obsolete. A man
carrying on business in the same style
as people did 100 years ago has a poor
chance of success, and just so a
Parliament that forgets that laws must
be equitable to all classes. In
mediaeval times, aristocrats were petty
chiefs, who ruled over people living on
their lands. It was to their interest to
see to their tenants’ welfare, so as to
insure their loyalty in time of attack.
But the modern aristocrat of the stock
exchange not only fleeces the laborer but
takes no interest in their welfare. It
falls on the shoulders of the public
to maintain worn out artisans, while
the legalised robber ~dds millions upon
millions, although he produces noth-
ing. Hence the consequence that we
see the swindler and scoundrel attired
in broadcloth and honesty in rags;
prostitutes in silk and satin, and work-
ing men’s wives perishing for the want
of bare necessities of life. If working
men only were aware of the tremendous
power they posses as a collective body
nothing in the world could prevent
them from keeping the products of
their labor and compelling parasites to
become producers or starve. Only, by
reason of superior intellect and shame-
less prevarication of fundamental
truths as regards human rights and
iustice by the majority of the privi-
leged classes, the working man is
enslaved and brutalised. When his
patience once is exhausted, and a
national c:'amity overtakes us, it is to
be hoped that people will not be
foo’s enough to shoot down th >se who
are no better off than themselves, and
leave the root of the evil undisturbed,
as then the privileged parasite will
again manufacture paupers as he has
done in the past. Let land be State
monopoly and millionaires as paupers
will become extinct. It is of no use
forbidding a man to become a
miiionaite, nor telling a man to become
rich. So long as chance or luck is
allowed to remain the main roads to
wealth, work will be neglected. Is
there a man living who became wealthy
solely by the products of his own
labor ? If so, he is the first who ever
was able to enter heaven. Look upon
any rich man that you may, and you
must admit that it was only when
he got other people to work for him,
that he became we dthy. Of course
I don’t include landlords, for they do
not employ anybody. Their tenants
work for their own benefit, and pay
rents because it gives them pleasure to
do so. They are not compelled to
live in houses, because they can fly up
in the air or live in water if they don’t
like to live on land. Of what value
would property be in Sydney if all
people out of employment be settled
on vacant land, on a co-operative
basis, and allowed a natural growth ?
And why is D.bbs dead against such
proposals ? Because it would knock
the bottom out of monopolists, and
he could no longer say me, and royalty
rule the world. Oace give co-opera-
tion a fair start, and competition!
will cease to live. Competition is
merely the natural result of oppres-
sion. One class of men are deprived
of their natural birthright, yet they will
and must live, and thus they become
the servants of those who have access
to the natural elements, such as
minerals, metals, cereals and animals,
all of which are more or less necessary.
A man owning all land can tell people
to leave it, and live on the water, pro-
vided they are fools enough to do it.
Tnere is a limit between the man who
works a farm and the one who mono-
polises land merely with a view of
increase in value. The man who cul_
tivates the ground adds to wealth"
of the nation, and should therefore be
free from tax ; whilst the other, who
prevents others from producing wealth,
should bear the burden of taxation.
Of course, people will ask, where is
revenue to come from ? Well, where
is the necessity for a revenue when
every man receives his wants in return
for his services to the country. Let
justice reign supreme, and the result
will be beneficent to all. Of what use
are the millions now hoarded up in
banks ? Why do financiers refuse to
invest P Because men are no longer
fools enough to work for other people’s
benefit. Beggars and thieves are not
a necessity of civilisation, but the result
of injustice and oppression. The
greater the despotism, the more intense
the poverty, and the more independent
the producing classes, the greater the
prosperity. In a truly civi ised com-
munity, there can be but one class, the
working class. Parasites would not be
a’lowed to exist. Look at ancient
Sparta ; how wealthy and powerful was
that nation when every man had to
work for the common good. And
what became of them when they intro-
duced wagedom and slavery ? With
them, as well as with all other nations,
despotism, luxury, and consequent
corruption in high quarters caused
misery among the bulk of the popula-
tion, and ruination of the empire. On
the bed of luxury, all great nations
have expired, and Australia is on the
road to ruin before having achieved
greatness, because of the insane policy
of following others in their track.
Compare the ancient Egyptian to the
fellahin of to-day. The relics of their
works excite wonder and admiration,
what has produced them ? Co-opera-
tion, not financing. Financing is
merely robbery in disguise. Where
will the nation get to if we all become
pawnbrokers and syndicate swindlers ?
The more the producer is robbed out
of his earnings, the less he cares for
work. Legalised robberies have a
more demoralising influence than
illegal ones, because they make honest
people helpless and bring juitice into
contempt.
If working men take my advice, and
do as I do, matters will soon come to
a head. Spend your money, to the last
shilling, and then go to gaol as a
vagrant. Belter to do that than to
work yourself to death for other peo-
ple’s benefit. When 1000 or 1500
men are sent to prison for no other
offence than that they are unable to
obtain employment, on reasonable
terms, ratepayers will soon insist on
alterations in Parliamentary business.
It is a disgrace to civilisation to see
the country cverrun with able men,
and cities choked with vagrants. Such
are the result when c ipi al has pre-
dominating influence. It is in the
interest of the privileged classes to
keep people at the brink of starvation,
so as to have willing slaves. But ask
them to fulfil their duty to heir neigh-
bors, then they disclaim any responsi-
bility for other people’s poverty. The
laborer is blamed about existing con-
ditions, but nothing is said about the
land boom which ruined more people
than all strikes put together. Look at
Melbourne, what gool has capital done
for it, and then, what disasters has it
caused ?
The suburbs of Heidelberg and
Doncaster were twelve years ago flour-
ishing villages of market gardners.
When loan monies flowed into Mel-
bourne speculation ran mad. Industries
were neglected, and money invested in
land ; gardens and orchards were sold
to syndicates, who left them to ruin,
and then could not pay for them.
Formerly, thrifty husbandmen could be |
seen parading up and down the streets
adorned with belltoper and kidgloves ;
they ware ashamed of their former
avocation because they had risen in
dignity by becoming auctioneers, land
and commission agents ; they did no
longer produce anything, but lived
on fictitious land values, and when
the bubble burst, they had neither land
nor money. Government loan monies
were squandered away on valueless
works, to keep Ministers in office, and
artisans induced to leave their callings
and go navvying, and when loan monies
were expended industries were ruined.
Increase in revenue was thought to be
a sign of prosperity, just like a farmer
mortgaging his property and buying
horsefeed instead of growing it himself.
If industries had prospered how could
custom’s revenues have grown larger ?
Is it a sign of prosperity when a boot
factory is closed, and in consequence
the custom’s revenue increased ? Of
course, so long as bootmakers can find
work elsewhere, there is no loss, but
when they live on borrowed money,
what is to become of them when the
money is done ? Industries cannot be
started on a day or two after they have
been ruined. Of course, it is always
the workingman that is in fault, never
the priviledged parasite. If a pack of
wolfes come among a mob of sheep,
and scalt.r them broadcast, would
anybody sympathise with the wolves
if there were a few old rams who could
buck the life out of them, probably not.
And working-men are at present in
exactly the same position. And if a
man is cornered and shows his teeth,
he is denounced as an agitator, and is
promptly sent to goal ; it is to be ' oped
that all unemployed become agitators,
then our pretendedly law and order
loving Government will see the disorder
they have created. They are living
now in a fool's paradise, and sneer at
poverty and depression, thinking it
best to drown troubles in champagne,
quite forgetting what people might do
when driven to desparation. Consider-
ing the hardships endured by thousands
of citizens, it is no wonder people talk
about revolution, the wonder is that
bloodshed has been averted so long.
If a Minister thinks that people quietly
pocket the insult of being told that
they are only a marketable commodity,
he is slightly out of his rekoning. Com-
mercial business transactions go be-
yond limit when human beings become
chattels. Circumstnncial slavery is not
a bit better than chattel slavery, rather
worse, for the slaveholder is bound by
law to maintain his slaves, whist the
employer of “ free ” laborers can work
them to death and leave them to perish.
If Jesus Christ himself were to come
among us again, He would be sent to
goal in less than 24 hours after He
started preaching, for He could not
help exposing the bottomless corrup-
tion and hypocrisy in high quarters.
It is nothing else but the callous,
depraved morals of modern society
who breed prostitution and crime.
Ministers of modern churches are net
a wit better than the pharisaes and
saducaes who ruined the Hebrew
nation, but are worthy disciples of
Anas and Caiphas.
It sickens me to think over it, so I
windup with again advising fll idlers
to do as I do, go to goal when your money
is done, and you have the satisfaction
of suffering as a martyr in a good cause.
Let the producing classes show a
determined front, and nothing can
hinder them from acquiring their
rights. Tufthunters are not only
merciless tyrants, who can coldly allow
people to perish knowing full well how
to do justice to them, but they are
also most contemptible cowards, and
take to their heels at the first sign
of determined opposition. A solution
of grave problems is as yet possible,
but if allowed to drift on, there
cannot possibly be an alteration with-
out bloodshed. An alteration of
system is nectssary, and that can as
yet be effected without interfering with
private property, but, in a short time
hence, the innocent may have to suffer
with the guilty. Any Australian think-
ing that British war vessels are here
to protect us must be green indeed.
Perhaps the true character of our
protectors will be found out before
long.
FRANZ MEISS.
Printed at the Australian Workman Office, 97a
Bathurst-street,
* ' *
