

To Aussie: Home and Beauty
The Voyage on the 5.5. “ Hororata.”
Pte. A. H. ANDLRSON, 32nd Batt.
On April sixteen, we left England’s shore,
On the ship “Hororata,” with families galore.
They all seemed so happy, these soldiers and wives;
And all intend having the time of their lives.
Twas hard for the ladies to leave friends behind;
But sunshine and welcome in Aussie they’ll find.
They soon settled down to their new mode of life,
Each Aussie was doing his best for his wife.
Whilst crossing the Bay each man proved a brick
By the way they attended their wives, who were sick.
They minded their babies, and washed all their clothes,
And did it with pleasure, as everyone knows.
This lasted a week, and in some cases more,
And not to one “Digger” did this seem a bore.
But when they got over the sickness, youd see
Honeymoon couples, just out for a spree.
The fourth day out was Tuesday; we lined up in a queue,
For the first inoculation, to prevent us getting “’flu.”
And exactly one week later, there were quite a decent few
Lined up outside the hospital, to get stab number two.
The women folk could please themselves, if they were done or no(
But not so with the “Diggers,” but they didn’t care a jot,


For they had been done times before, some even eight or nine—
As that’s the first thing that they do, if wounded in the line.
And every Sunday regularly we have a church parade.
The pulpit is a table, on which a Union Jack is laid.
1 he padre then a lesson reads, and many hymns they sing;
And after this we all stand up and sing “God Save the King.’*
There are sixty-one babies —all sizes and age,
And the music is ragtime, when they’re in a rage.
But the mothers soon soothe them, with Glaxo, or breast,
And the fathers then nurse them whilst ma has a rest.
You can see them all lying about on the decks,
With arms all entwined around each other’s necks.
They all seemed so happy with their little lot,
They don’t seem to care if the ship sinks or not.
The time passes quickly with concerts and sport,
Which continues each day, till arrival in ; port.
But it makes dancing awkward, for when the ship rolls
They fall about just like a cat on hot coals, .
We’ve a Y.M.C.A. here, and nursery, too.
And a rec. room for kiddies to play,
Which is used for the concerts, and it’s cosy to rest
If we happen to have a wet day, ,
The mothers were pleased when the word was announced
Of an issue of wool, milk and frocks;
And so were the men, when they got fruit and fags
And an issue of two pairs of socks.
As we speed on our journey, each person delights,
For the morrow in hopes of seeing strange sights.
For most have seen porpoises, flying fish too.
Also some sharks, but only a few.
“Salt Bush Bill” gives us some “fair dinkum” shows
With whips of all sizes; some fine tricks he knows.
He fires a revolver he holds in his hand,
Though the roll of the boat makes it so hard to stand. ,
,■■ ■■; - ::i ■■ ■■ 1 1 ' ■ ’ 1 ’;;
He opens an envelope, knocks ash from a fag.
It’s a dead cert, he won’t have to carry a swag.
?ci; ? v ; «
The concerts amuse us —there’s good talent, too —
,R V-' *v


And helps pass away a good hour or two.
On arrival at Cape Town, the weather was grand, \
And it did us all good once again to see land.
But restrictions and, orders were read out galore;
The chief one was “no one to sleep on the shore.”
But many young couples for comfort had yearned,
Had two nights ashore before they returned.
The fines were not heavy, ’twas just two days’ pay;
And not one was sorry that they’d stayed away.
The charges against them were A.W.L.;
But what really happened I’m not going to tell.
Some went to Sea Point, and some fo Camp’s Bay—
Both decent places to spend a good day—
But things were expensive, and to make matters wprse,
One-and-sixpence was stopped for each pound from your purse.
But it’s always the same, where Australians go,
You cannot say truthfully “prices are low.”
The word passes round that “the Aussies are here,”
Then up goes the prices, and down goes the beer;
Some drink it from glasses, and others from kegs,
Then go to a cafe and have ham and eggs.
You could get enough food for eight with .a note,
And the food was so. different to that on the boat.
The cabins with luxuries people did stock,
As they knew we were leaving at seven o’clock.
As soon as we left, she started to roll,
Although we were loaded with water and coal.
They said that the reason was just a ground swell,
But whether it’s true or not we could not tell.
The dishes and cups down the tables they glide
When the boat does its best to get down on its side.
On the fifteenth of May, the rolling was worse,
And it caused all the Diggers to swear and to curse.
Whilst resting in hammocks we swing and we rock,
Just like a pendulum does in a clock;
For the waves were made choppy with a boisterous breeze,
And all through the night we thought we would freeze.


The skipper said “No one allowed on the decks.”
He knew it was rough, and we might break our necks.
The roll made us stagger as if we were drunk;
Each lady was sleepless all night in her bunk.
About two days later the trade winds we met.
We experienced the worst night that we have had yet,
For the seas swept the decks, with a thud and a roar;
Through the portholes we saw Table Mountains galore.
We are nearing the end of our journey at last,
And must think of our futures, and not of the past.
Some credit is due to the women whose pluck
Has brought them to Aussie —we wish them good luck.
Good health and prosperity to all, I am sure,
Is the wish of each Aussie, and “Peace times” once more^
✓VT\
