

To Build and Defend
A Happy
and
self-Reliant
Australia
POLICY SPEECH
of the
Australian Labor Party
Delivered by
MR. J. CURTIN, M.H.R.
at the
TOWN HALL, FREMANTLE
on
SEPTEMBER 20, 1937.
Authorised by .T. A. BEASLEY, M.H.E. (Campaign Dlrerf-"', "'LAVES, M.L.C.
"-’’-■ted by The Labor Dai'” T ‘ J Yeek.)


Australian Labor Party
Denounces
Communism
The following declaration was unanimously agreed
to at the meeting of the Federal Executive of the A.L.P.
held in Sydney on April 22, 1937:
The Australian Labor Party hereby refuses
affiliation to the Communist Party and dissoci-
ates itself from the policy, methods and propa-
ganda of the Communist Party and all its
auxiliary organisations.
“It declares the Communist Party to be an
anti-Labor political organisation.”
"IT DECLARES, furthermore, that the Com-
munist Party is in direct conflict with the policy,
platform and constitution of the Australian
Labor Party.”
“Membership of the Australian Labor Party is
obtainable by every person who supports its
principles and policy and who is not a member
of any other political party or subsidiary body
connected therewith.”
“It is by membership of the Australian Labor
Party alone that a United Front can be presented
by the workers of the Commonwealth towards
the for of War, Fascism, and Reaction


LABOR’S MESSAGE
to the
PEOPLE OF AUSTRALIA
Delivered by
MR. J. CURTIN, M.H.R.
at the
TOWN HALL, FREMANTLE
on
SEPTEMBER 2b, 1937.
The real decision which the people of Australia are called upon
to make at this election is one of values. The Labor Party declares
that the immediate task of statesmanship is to overcome the forces
which are undermining the moral, social and economic foundations
of civilisation.
It affirms that the level of social well-being is the crucial test
of economic policy and that peace is an idle dream without social
justice between nations and between individuals.
The primary purpose of Governments is to give leadership and
direction so that all citizens by their work and industry may contri-
bute to their own welfare and to the common heritage of society.
As things stand in this Commonwealth we are con-
fronted by grievous distress among large sections of our
people and a corresponding waste of our human resources.
MALDISTRIBUTED PROSPERITY.
Yet, in the budget speech, recently addressed to Parliament,
the Treasurer, as mouthpiece for the Lyons Ministry, stated that the
present level of prosperity is higher than it has ever been in the
previous history of this country. It is on that premise that the Gov-
ernment has formulated its policy for submission to the electors.
Ministers postulate that we are a prosperous nation; that all is well
with us; and that in fact we have emerged into the sunlight.


I say positively that this high level of prosperity is not shared
by the vast majority of the people.
It is a prosperity limited to favored groups, and, however the
aggregate of the wealth of the nation has increased, the truth is that
the maldistribution of the fruits of prosperity has never been greater
in the history of the country. That is my answer to the pivotal
claim of Ministers. There is great prosperity, but it is being ; shared
by a comparatively few.
I ask the workers if they are enjoying a prosperity unexampled
in our history? I put the same question to the farmers and the
primary producers generally. I put it to many of the middle class?
And in each instance the answer must be an emphatic negative.
But if I put the question to the powerful financial groups; to the
stock market investors; to the commercial and speculative classes;
to certain interlocked manufacturing interests; and to the forces
whose profits rise when the trade in armaments is stimulated, then
the answer would be in the affirmative.
Just as this Government views prosperity from the standpoint
of a class prosperity, so also has its record been one of preferential
regard for the wealthier sections of the people, and so also is its
policy for the future inspired by the same purpose.
THE GOVERNMENT’S UNREDEEMED PLEDGES.
All this is reflected in the broken and dishonored promises
regarding social policy which the Prime Minister put forward three
years ago. These undertakings were many and varied. Here I
refer to Unemployment Insurance, Housing, the employment and
training of youth, and the debt structure of the primary producers,
while leaving the general question of employment to be dealt with
at a later stage.
It was a conspicuous feature of Mr. Lyons 1934 policy that
his Government would inaugurate an extensive building plan of
workers’ homes in order to assist in the abolition of slums. There
is on the Commonwealth Statute Book a Commonwealth Housing
Act, but no advances have been made under the terms of that Act
for several years. The Government has done nothing to carry out
that obligation of the 1934 policy.


With regard to national and unemployment insurance, all that
can be said about it is that numerous reports have been received on
tha subject; that more conferences and inquiries are contemplated;
and, although three years have elapsed, the Commonwealth Gov*
eminent has yet failed to bring its own proposals before the public
in a concrete way.
Mr, Lyons undertook to raise a loan to afford relief to primary
producers, in order that their obligations may be brought within
manageable bounds. An Act was passed for this purpose, but, at
the present rate of distribution, another 1 5 years will elapse before
the money is expended, instead of three or four years as promised
by the Government. This money should not be trickled out in small
amounts each year. The Government’s only method of dealing with
this matter is to urge the States to reduce their works programmes
in order that its debt adjustment proposals could be operated more
effectually.
In short, it is only by reducing the amount of employment whiclr
the State Governments provide that the Lyons Ministry proposes
finding the money for farmers’ debt adjustment.
Mr. Lyons promised that practical and enlarged efforts to
relieve unemployment—with particular reference to the needs of
youth—would take precedent over Commonwealth activities.
Then, two years later, and characteristically, Mr. Lyons called a con-
ference, and subsequently the Attorney-General said that the Com-
monwealth had no plan to deal with youths. All that it has done
to date is to provide £200,000 as its contribution to the problem
and has now passed the responsibility on to the States.
In his policy speech three years ago, the Prime Minister said
that the Government would engage in a number of sound major
employment works. He especially referred to the unification of
railway gauges, country water storage, sewerage construction for
large country towns, and the extraction of oil from coal, as a means
to relieve the unemployment situation. Practically nothing has been
done in these matters by the Commonwealth Government. Such
works as haye furnished employment as a relief to the community
in the past three years have been provided by the Governments of
the States.


He also promised to assign to a Commonwealth Minister
definite responsibilities for Commonwealth action in relation to em-
ployment, but no such Minister was appointed.
The Government authorised its delegate to the International
Conference to support the principle of a 40-hour week, but since
then has refused to adopt the principle; it refused to allow the ques-
tion to be put to the people; and has refused to adopt the 40-hour
week in respect to Commonwealth employment.
As against this record of unfulfilled promises:
The Government has embarked upon frequent Mini-
sterial visits to other countries.
It has appointed numerous Royal Commissions, the
cost being £128,000
It promulgated a trade policy which caused the hold-
up of wool sales to a valuable customer nation, involving
the loss of £7,000,000 to the wool growers of the Common-
wealth.
It has bungled the arrangements in regard to air mails,
aeroplane manufacture, and ground organisation for the
safety of pilots and passengers.
It has failed to establish collaboration with the States
in matters of major importance, to the prejudice of the wel-
fare of Australia as a whole.
RISING YIELD OF TAXATION.
The Government claims to have made large remissions of taxa-
tion, but its spokesman did not mention the fact that the Lyons Gov-
ernment has collected the highest amount of taxation ever collected
by any Commonwealth Government; that the amount per head was
the highest; that the remissions-made chiefly benefited those tax-
payers in receipt of high incomes; and that the increased taxation
received by the Government bore most heavily on the working
people with low incomes.
In 1931-32 taxation yielded approximately £54,000,000; last
year it was over £63,500,000; and this year £62,800,000.


Examined in detail, compared with the year 1931-32, taxation
proceeds in the latest financial year shows an increase of £9,000,000,
and this nine million pounds is made up of an increase in indirect
taxation of over £14,000,000, and a reduction in direct taxa-
tion of over £3,000,000. In 1935-36 Commonwealth taxation
per head had reached the staggering figure of £9/8/5, and in
1936-37 it was £B/4/9, The latest fall is due to the disappearance
of the Flour Tax.
In its remissions of taxation the Government has favored
wealthy land and property owners, shipping, insurance and other
companies; while to a great extent it has disregarded the principle
of levying taxes on the basis of ability to pay.
It is perfectly true that the financial position of the Com-
monwealth is greatly improved, compared with what it was during
the years of depression. This is also true of every Government in
Australia. It is true of most countries in the world. The fact is
that the Commonwealth improvement is entirely attributable to
the increased proceeds of taxation amounting to over £9,000,000
more in the last year, as stated, than in 1931-32, and the reduc-
tion in the expenditure occasioned by interest savings.
SAVINGS DUE TO MR. SCULLIN.
To the end of June last, interest savings on loans held in Aus-
tralia and converted by the Scullin Government under the Financial
Emergency Act of 1931, have saved Australian Governments
£46,000.000.
Interest savings on loans held by the public in London, and
converted by Mr. Bruce, have saved Australian Governments
£11,200,000.
The arrangement made by the Scullin Government in regard
to the war debt to the British Government, of suspending the annual
payments, has resulted in £33,200,000 of payment being suspended.
Thus, over £90,000,000 has been: saved Australian
Governments by these various- arrangements;- and, of the
total, the Labor Government was responsible • for
£79,000,000, and the Lyons Government, through the in-
strumentality of Mr. Bruce, as High Commissioner, for
£11,000,000.


In the latest financial year the Commonwealth Government
budget benefited to the extent of approximately £9,500,000, and
this nine and a halfmillion, plusthe £9,000,000 additional increase
in taxation collected, accounts for approximately £18,000,000.
MONETARY AND BANKING.
The Royal Commission on Monetary and Banking Systems was
appointed by the Lyons Government to Inquire into and report upon
what alterations in the present System are desirable in the interests
of the people of Australia as a whole. The cost of the Commission
was more than £20,000. Its report and recommendations are a
reinforcement of the Labor Party’s views on this important subject.
It observed that during the depression the proper policy for
the Commonwealth Bank was one of expansion, and has stated that
if central bank credit was to be successful in promoting recovery
Government expenditure had to be the chief factor. The Commis-
sion’s opinion is that governmental expenditure shquld be increased
during the depression period and that the Commonwealth Bank
should have extended credit, the additional credit being used
mainly by Governments.
In the matter of monetary policy, the Commission states that
the Commonwealth Bank’s policy should conform with the views
of the Federal Government, and, in return, the action of the trading
banks should conform with the policy of the Commonwealth Bank.
WhOe it was declared that when there is a conflict of opinion
every effort should be made to reconcile the views of the Govern-
ment and the Bank Board, it was none the less made clear that the
Commission considered that if this is not possible then the views
of the Government should prevail.
The emphatic nature of this recommendation is confirmed by
the further decision of the Commission that, in the event of failure
on the part of trading banks or a trading bank to conform to the
policy of the Commonwealth Bank, ample powers should be given
to the Common Wealth Bank to enable its policy to be carried out.
1 direct attention to a further series of important decisions
which the Royal Commission made; the recommendations to repeal
the statutory provision regarding the gold or sterling reserve for the


note issue is a significant commentary on previous controversies on
this matter. The abolition of the gold and sterling reserve—and it
is practically all sterling—would enable the Commonwealth Bank
to use the note issue reserve to further its activities instead of the
reserve remaining frozen as at present.
Another important recommendation is that the Commonwealth
Parliament should enact legislation to prohibit any person, firm, or
company from carrying on the business of -a bank without licence
or authority from the Treasurer of the Commonwealth. Another
recommendation requires the trading banks to keep with the Com-
monwealth Bank a deposit of an amount not less than a percentage
of the liability of that bank to its depositors in Australia. These
findings emphasise the degree to which the Royal Commission on
Banking realises that banking is more than mere finance; that it is
in fact a great social function which should be controlled in the
permanent interests of the people.
Fo deal with unemployment and to make that industrial and
economic preparedness which is the essence of national defence and
security, three related monetary measures are necessary;
(1) National control of credit to ensure its adequacy to
maintain and increase employment
(2) National control of interest rates, in order to keep
to a minimum the monetary and capital costs on
production and industry.
(3) National direction of investment with the object of
assisting in the promotion of a balanced economic
development.
The Commonwealth Bank is the logical instrument to function
for the community in effecting monetary re-adjustment and
economic reconstruction.
The Labor Government will legislate so that the Common-
wealth Bank would be able competently to control:
(a) Credit for the Nation.
(b) Rates of Interest.
(c) of general investment.
(d) Currency relations with external markets.


In the report of the Director of the International Labor organi-
sation submitted to the Conference in June last the statement was
made that if the depression has done one thing more clearly than
anything else it is in .making prosperity and social security depend
more on monetary policy than on any other single factor.
The Labor Party points to the planks of its platform
and insists that the Commonwealth Bank must have its
original charter restored. The policy of the Government
must be given effect and the people’s authority established
in respect to an indispensable national service.
Banking policy is not a fixture under existing conditions. It
varies in peace and war and in prosperity and in depression; varies
as between different banking companies and also from time to
time in the same bank. I point to the history of the Commonwealth
Bank and declare that its establishment marked a great change in
national banking policy. Opposed by every political party except-
ing the Labor Party it was predicted by its opponents to be doomed
to failure. In the last few years policies opposed in 1929 and 1>930
were a few months later endorsed as being safe and sane policies.
The mobilisation of gold reserves; the export of gold reserves;
the abolition of the gold base in currency notes; the 25 per cent,
exchange rate; and the conversion of loans at lower interest rates,
were all changes of policy at first opposed by banking executives,
yet ultimately accepted by banking executives.
If the Government of the Commonwealth deliberately excludes
itself from all participation in the making or changing of monetary
policy it cannot govern except in a secondary degree.
TRADE DIVERSION BLUNDER.
The trade treaty policy of the Government has been the cause
of friction and complications. Any agreement tending to retard or
hamper the future development of the Australian national economy
is a major mistake irt. fiscal policy. In all fiscal polices, whatever
the potential misunderstandings and misrepresentations may be,
Australia must come first. It must be conceded that trade treaties
can be arranged only by giving something in return. What Aus-
tralia gives must be either at the expense of the United Kingdom
or of Australian manufacturers. Invariably, under the Govern-
ment’s policy, Australian industries have chiefly suffered.


The discrimination against Japan and' the United States of
America was foolish.
That policy was described as a “trade diversion” plan, and it
meant that the importation into Australia of certain goods from
these two countries was to be restricted. Its purpose was not to
protect Australian industries. It was to stop imports from one
country, and buy from another.
Dislocation to the motor building trade was one of the effects
of this policy, and motor body builders were unable to secure
regular and sufficient supplies of materials, with the result that many
men were rendered idle.
A SOUND FISCAL POLICY.
The Labor Party says that, in regard to trade relationships
■with other countries, Australia should treat the world as a whole,
with preference to the United Kingdom and our sister dominions.
Such preference, based on kinship, is understood by all foreign
countries and excites no reprisal. But to have arrangements with
some foreign countries, at the expense of other foreign countries,
does not protect Australian industries, while, at the same time, it
gives ground for misunderstandings, criticism and retaliation.
Tbe Labor Party stands for the development of Australian in-
dustry and for the employment of the people. Non-employment
of man power means the diminution of the power to produce
wealth. Tire utilisation of our man power is a better national policy
than the subsidisation of idleness.
Doles and low rates of relief pay sap the moral and mental
fibre of those forced by circumstances to accept them. Industrial
armies engaged in the construction of homes, roads, schools, and
other permanent works are sustained just as are our military armies
by production and transport in the rear. They are fed, clothed
and equipped by the energies of workers in the fields and factories.
The Labor Party is determined that no group of private
bankers, no coterie of vested interests and certainly no instrumen-
tality set up originally by the people for the people, shall stand in
the way of bringing full industrial opportunity to every member of
Australia’s unemployed, including the youth of both sexes.


Instead of advancement in Australia, are seen malnutrition and
too much compulsory idleness. It cannot be disputed that a Gov-
ernment can, if it so desires, absorb man power in a campaign of
national construction works. ' Governments use man power in war
to destroy assets. The Labor Party declares that its‘Government
will use man power to create assets.
PROBLEM OF POPULATION.
The most rapid and effective way to increase population is to
make the conditions in Australia better than in any other country.
Population moves from where conditions are bad to where they
are reported to be better. The hope of larger freedom or of
material gain such as new goldfields, new lands, higher standards
of existence, has shifted more people than all the known forms of
assisted migration. Before any new form of migration is attempted,
work and higher standards of existence should be provided for the
idle man power within Australia now.
This is not an impossible thing. Australia sustained armies
for war purposes. It may have to sustain armies for war in the future.
Therefore, there is no reason why it cannot sustain the present
unemployed in the work of construction. By making the conditions
and rewards of toil superior to those of other countries, additional
man power for this Commonwealth would flow in as a matter of
course.
The essentials to the building up of the requisite
population for the security of the Australian, people, are work,
security, ample food, clothing and shelter. By providing these the
Labor Party will ensure the competence of Australia not only to
attract migrants, but to hold them when it gets them. We need in-
creasing population to increase our strength.
By carrying out useful public projects and raising the standard
furnishing new purchasing power for the products of factories, and
thereby providing an increasing home market for primary products,
we should engage in laying the foundation of the work of peaceful
conquest over the forces of nature; and in this development there
ought not to be any limit.


Australia’s power to increase population is not to be
found in overseas loans or in parrot cries about confidence.
It is to be found by ensuring work for those idle, and also
by ensuring security for the youths entering or endeavor-
ing to enter industry.
It is very desirable to have a better spread of population in
Australia. This end is best achieved by providing occupational
opportunity in States of the Commonwealth which relatively have
not made the same progress in secondary industries as the two great
manufacuring States.
From the standpoint of supplies for defence the economy
associated with a concentration of production will be offset by the
difficulties of rapid trcsisportation and distribution in time of emer-
gency. Some decentralisation is very necessary.
Tire Labor Party wll estabish industrial units in all States of
the Commonwealth as an integral part of the defence organisation.
This policy will assist in the promotion of allied industries and
thereby give employment and added economic strength to the
smaller States.
SOIL EROSION.
Here I draw attention to a major national requirement in order
to make our country more competent to produce wealth. We need
an effective reafforestation policy to prevent the silting of streams,
the clogging of water storages, and the loss of soil by erosion. In
European countries the soil is regarded as the nations’ main asset,
and its protection is as important as is national defence itself.
In Australia that work has been neglected. By fire and axe
forests have been destroyed, with resultant eroded soil and silted
streams. Forest lands in many cases have been converted for
settlement and then it has been found that the land was too poor
for agriculture, and the best timber having been cut and sold, the
land has been abandoned.
In all the States of the Commonwealth are to be found sad
areas of dead trees ringbarked for no other purpose than to secure
grass for a few sheep. In many instances the surface ground has
been so torn by erosion as to become useless even for sheep.


As a result, Australian! streams and storage basins are In pro-
cess of siltation, and responsible departmental officers declare that if
this is not checked, water supply, either for power'or for irrigation,
will be diminished.
These are facts of major importance, and the Labor Govern-
ment will put national forestry in the vanguard of its planned
national projects. ft will ensure and sustain the counter attack
against soil erosion, and in collaboration with the States —within
whose functions forestry, tree planting, and , soil preservation
mainly lie—will urge immediate and constructive action in order
to ensure a united national drive for forestry recovery and afforesta-
tion in order to combat the ravages by loss of soil arising either
from wind or water.
DEFENCE OF AUSTRALIA.
All Governments—in all countries and whatever their policy
or label—profess to support international peace. All claim to be
non-aggressive. All claim to be armed purely for defensive
purposes. Not one admits a desire for war, but all are ready for
participation in war.
The Australian Labor Party exists primarily for social
uplift and to promote the welfare of the great mass of the people,
but like every other Party, it is confronted with the universal fact
of preparedness for war. It cannot ignore it. It does not now,
nor has it ever in the past attempted to ignore the facts of the
world situation.
From its very inception the Labor Movement has
stood for Australian national defence. It provided the
first Australian Government which transformed words into
facts. It gave Australia a navy; a well trained army; a
national small arms factory; a national woollen mills; a
national clothing factory; national munition works; and
behind all these essentials to the defence of the nation it
gave Australia the national note issue and the Common-
wealth Bank.
Labor’s defence policy is designed not for the purpose of
aggression against foreign countries, but to maintain Australian
security. As a first principle, Labor declares that Australia should


aim at the establishment and maintenance of friendly relations with
all other countries, and should' not be provocative in its interna-
tional policies and contacts. The defence of Australia has to be
proportioned to our ability to sustain and provide for our defence
and we must take into account the changing character of modern
warfare.
The primary need in Australia is the building up of industries
until every possible requirement to self defence can be supplied
within the Commonwealth.
No longer is that doctrine of self-sufficiency merely an indus-
trial ambition. It is now the supreme national necessity. Self
defence has become increasingly a question of industrial prepared-
ness.
We must have the essential industries to feed, clothe, and.
transport by sea, land and air, the forces of the Commonwealth;
supplies of every branch of our armed forces must be assured.
Munitions of all kinds must be manufactured in Australia. We
need more docks for the navy, more aerodromes and aeroplanes;
oil storages and reserves, and a line of landing bases for repairs,
replacements, and refuelling away from the coast. We must
exhaust every possibility of exploiting the natural and artificial
sources of oil, because oil is undoubtedly an indispensable com-
modity in modern effective defence.
As defence is a cost on the entire community and is solely
for the protection of the community, it must be chargeable against
the citizens in proportion to their capacity to contribute, and
expenditure for defence must not be allowed to become a mere
market for profiteers.
The complete control of the provision of munitions and war
material of all kinds should be a major measure of Commonwealth
policy. We must remove the profit from defence, no less than
from war.
War obligations and defence constitute a heavy drain on
Commonwealth funds, and in the latest financial year, 26f million
pounds had to be provided. From 1914-1915 to date, Australia
has spent 125 million pounds on defence, while the Great War,
repatriation and war services, and interest on war loans and sink


ing fund, have involved the Australian people in the colossal
expenditure to date of 843 million pounds. By the end of this
financial year, over one thousand millions will have been spent by
the Australian people since 1914 on the related activities and
obligations of the last war and for the defence of the nation.
No political party can justify wasteful expenditure or ineffec-
tive expenditure in this vital matter. Money spent on armaments
means money withdrawn from our people.
The labor employed for the purpose of destruction means
labor withdrawn from productive purposes. The raw materials
used create a dearth for industries working to increase the national
wealth. A race in armaments, therefore, is an element of
economic weakness in civilisation. The recent accentuation of
the policy of rearmament not only impoverishes the social and
humanitarian policy of all Governments, but, so long as the fear
of war is widely prevalent, it is vain to expect that any nation can
attain its full economic momentum.
Governments that cannot or will not raise money for houses,
or for improved social standards, do devise ways and means
whereby to raise money for guns, battle-ships and munitions.
The Labor Party declares positively that the financial, com-
mercial and social measures which have been used in order to
combat the depression crisis, must all fail ultimately, if the political
and economic fabric of civilisation is for any lengthy period to
remain under the constant menace of disruption by another interna-
tional conflict. We abhor war and regard it as so detestable a
thing as to demand the maximum of effort on the part of all
Governments to avoid it.
The safety of Australia and the peace of the nation
being our fundamental obligation, we insist that the country
shall not be committed to warlike activities outside Aus-
tralia without the absolute and established consent of the
Australian people.
Our position renders it impracticable that we can exercise any
decisive influence, either as a police or as a salvage corps, in the
problems of Europe. We make that perfectly plain. The Labor
Parly’s policy involves, first, a paramount obligation to effectively
defend Australia, and, secondly, no compulsion to be exercised


upon any citizen for service on foreign battlefields. It is our view
that by being self-reliant in our own defence, we make a notable
contribution to the defence of the British Commonwealth of Nations.
By ensuring the safety of Australia, we ensure the safety of nearly
seven million British subjects.
When we defend Australia, we defend not only these seven
million British subjects, but also three million square miles of
British territory, and one thousand million of British investments.
This is our contribution, and it is on a higher scale than that of
any sister Dominion in the British Empire.
In 1936 the per capita expenditure on defence by Australia
was 21/10, by New Zealand 12/7, by Canada 5/7, and by South
Africa 3/5.
For years the Australian Commonwealth has accepted a finan-
cial burden far in excess of that of the other Dominions of the
British Empire. And the Labor Party asks if that is not a major
contribution, what is a major contribution?
We will maintain the Australian Navy, and remind the coun-
try that Labor founded the Australian Navy. 1 have shown that
Australia is spending on defence more than six times as much per
head as South Africa, and four times as much per head as Canada.
Together, Canada and New Zealand last year spent approximately
a million pounds on naval forces, whereas Australia spent
£3,100,000, and in the present financial year will spend £3,600,000
out of a total defence expenditure of 1 I 2 million pounds.
In recent years the character of modern warfare has changed
remarkably. The development in aerial services has affected a
complete revolution not only in having brought communities closer
together in point of time, but also in endangering the civilian popu-
lation in time of war to an extent without precedent in history.
It is foolish to say that Australia can sustain a sea-going navy
adequate to Australia’s needs. Australia’s expenditure on defences
which are within Australia’s ability to sustain, should be on those
forms of defence which have become increasingly important and
which are within our capacity to provide, while at the same time
ensuring at least an approximate equality with the forces an enemy
could employ against us.


The strength of Australian defence must lie in aviation. A
member of the present Government, the Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes,
declared that aerial defence is the only defence within our capa-
bilities. Yet to this “best defence" the Lyons Government has so
far provided only eight squadrons, or 96 planes, while there is not
far away from us a power equipped with a sea-borne plane strength
of not less than 300 planes. For the capital outlay of £7,500,000,
Australia could have an aerial fleet of 25 squadrons, or 300 planes.
Ships pf the Australian navy which cost double that have been
towed out to sea and sunk as obsolete. Twenty-five squadrons
equals the existing sea-borne planes of any nation which could be
regarded as a potential danger to this Commonwealth.
If we cannot afford, as we cannot, a floating navy equal to
that of a world power, it is yet within our means to sustain an aerial
fleet equal to any that can be brought against us.
• Aerial defence represents one of the features of the Australian
defence services which the Labor Party will develop and strengthen
to the utmost efficiency, while at the same time it will maintain our
land and shore organisation to the highest strength within our
power and resources. In addition, our problems of internal supply
in respect to equipment, munitions and rapid transportation, will
be grappled with resolutely. Labor believes that to be a great
nation, we have, in this matter, to be absolutely competent to meet
every obligation of a great nation, and the Labor Party
identifies itself with the famous statement by W. E.
Gladstone when he said: “No community which is not primarily
charged with the ordinary business of its own defence is really,
or can be in the full sense of the word, a free community.
The privileges of freedom and the burdens of freedom are abso-
lutely associated together. To bear the burden is as necessary as
to enjoy the privilege, in order to form that character which is the
great ornament of all freedom itself."
STANDARD RAILWAY GAUGE.
Railways are the arteries of Australian commerce and the chief
means for the internal transport of men and materials. The stan-
dardisation of gauges will provide much useful employment and
is a matter of urgency in connection with national defence and is
desirable for other reasons. This work will be proceeded with as
Tigorously as is possible.


PRODUCING OIL FROM AUSTRALIA.
In addition to its importance in national defence oil is a vita]
necessity for our transportation and productive enterprises. Thera*
fore the Labor Government will take complete steps to survey
thoroughly the latest methods of extraction of oil from coal and
agricultural products, in addition to the exploitation of the possibi-
lities of producing power alcohol.
The Labor Party declares that every step should be taken to
ensure that our great coal resources should be used as far as is prac-
ticable in order to reduce the dependence of Australia on oil
supplies from other countries, thereby giving security to the nation
in a time of great emergency.
More liberal provision will also be made, as a relevant aspect
of this policy, for research into the possibilities of natural flow oil
supplies in the Commonwealth. Action in this respect is motived
not only by the desire to provide employment, but also because
the safety of the country in a very material degree is dependent
upon the successful establishment of industries in Australia which
will furnish the nation with what is an indispensable essential in
modern economic Ife.
THE PRIMARY PRODUCERS.
1 he Labor Party has a comprehensve country policy designed
to deal effectively with the problems that confront the man on the
land: and because of freedom from embarrassing alliances. Labor
is the only Party that can give effect to this policy.
While standing for adequate tariff protection for both primary
and secondary industries, the Australian standards of wages and
conditions of employment for workers in industry, the Labor Party
also stands for a return to the primary producer, based on Aus-
tralian economic standards, for such of his output as is sold within
the Commonwealth. It believes that such objective can only be
secured by collective effort by those engaged in primary production.
In the circumstances, we stand for organised effort on the part of
primary producers in the marketing of their products, both locally
and overseas: and more liberal provision will be made for a system
of scientific research for the betterment of rural production.


The Labor Party undertakes to pass the necessary legislation,
in co-operation with the States, to facilitate schemes for orderly
marketing of primary products, whenever the producers themselves
are prepared to organise. By such efforts not only will machinery
be provided to permit of a reasonable return for commodities pro-
duced under efficient conditions, but it will be the means of elimina-
ting speculation in foodstuffs and other primary products by un-
necessary interests, in that way helping to bring producer and con-
sumer closer together.
There will be close co-operation between the Federal
Labor Government and State Governments, acting through
the Commonwealth Bank, to provide for an effective system
under which substantial areas of land suitable for closer
settlement will be made available for farmers’ sons and
those able and willing to use it.
The difficulties confronting small woolgrowers and other
primary producers, in the marketing of their products, because of lack
of finance, give the Labor Party concern; and with a view to assisting
them the general policy of the re-organised Commonwealth Bank
to be laid down by Labor legislation in the next Parliament, will
provide for advances to primary producers against their products
at low rates of interest, to prevent exploitation of their financial
position by private financial interests.
Labor will take steps, in co-operation with the States, to bring
about fodder conservation against the ravages of drought, and a
progressive system of water conservation and irrigation, with provi-
sion in certain areas for the communal supply of water from artesian
and sub-artesian bores and wells.
A Labor Government will provide for improved postal, tele-
graphic and telephone facilities, particularly for the people in the
country districts.
Improved meteorological facilities for recording and publish-
ing information in regard to weather conditions, rainfall, and river
gaugings, will be provided.
The wheat industry is one of great national importance, provi-
ding employment and food for our people, as well as producing an
exportable commodity to pay for necessary imports. In view of
these facts, the wheat industry must be placed on a sound basis.


The Labor Party proposes that, after reference to and approval
by the growers by ballot, and with the co-operation of the States, C
national wheat pool be established.
Labor will continue the present system of control in the sugar
industry, thus ensuring the whole of the Australian market to the
Australian sugar growers.
The cotton-growing industry will be further encouraged by
restoring adequate protection to both primary and secondary
branches of the industry.
The Labor Party, when last in power in the Federal sphere,
realised the importance of establishing new primary industries on
a sound basis, and gave the necessary encouragement to tobacco
growers in Australia. The result was a valuable expansion in the
cultivation of tobacco. With a change of Government came a
change of policy and a severe setback was given to that industry.
A Labor Government will not only restore the necessary margin
of protection, but will restrict imports over a number of years,
gradually diminishing the importation of foreign leaf and increasing
the consumption of Australian tobacco, so as to ensure, by gradual
development, the whole of the Australian market to the Australian
tobacco growers.
The position of the apple, pear and citrus industries is giving
much concern. Steps will be taken to confer with representatives
of these industries with a view to dealing with their problems so
that they may be given a reasonable return for their labor.
FORTY-HOUR WEEK.
The subject of hours is among the most acutely disturbing of
all the problems in industrial history. During the post-war period
there was an increasing displacement of human labor due to exten-
sive technological development. Improved mechanism in industry
has rapidly increased to such an extent as to leave an alarming gap
in the ranks of human employees. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment has adopted a policy of evasion and it has no intention of
giving effect to the decision of the Geneva Conference which by
79 votes to 30, adopted the principle of a 40-hour week, 27 nations
voting for the Convention.


On 6th May, 1936, a motion was moved in the House of
Representatives stating that the House is of opinion that the draft
Convention in respect of the 40-hour week adopted by the Inter-
national Labor Convention should be ratified by Australia.
Every member of the Government Party voted against
this motion, which was supported by the whole of the
Labor Party.
Again, on 19th November, 1936, Labor moved that the Gov-
ernment shall proceed to give effect to the Convention providing
for 40 hours as the maximum working week. In order to avoid the
taking of a vote the Government successfully moved an adjourn-
ment and shelved the debate.
This question of the 40-hour week has reached the stage when
it should be settled by national action. There is a wealth of testi-
mony to justify us in declaring that it is a matter for the Parliament
and not the Courts.
A Government is acting dishonestly if it'employs its delegate
to the International Labor Conference to vote for a policy which it
docs not endeavor to apply.
The Labor Government will ratify the 40-Hour Internationa)
Convention and it will take every legislative step to give application
to this principle in Australian industry.
That Is our definite declaration of policy In this very vital
matter. It must be clear to the people that the soundest and safest
way in which to introduce this reform into the Australian industrial
system is by the orderly processes of law.
CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION.
In view of the general dissatisfaction at the methods of arriv-
ing at the Commonwealth basic wage. Labor will remove any res-
trictions which at present prevent the Statistician from collecting
data from a much wider range of commodities.
Action will be taken to develop the conciliation machinery of
the Conciliation and Arbitration Act in order to avert industrial dis-
putes and to promote agreement and concord in industry.


CIVIL LIBERTIES.
During the period of anti-Labor rule the Statute Book has be-
come disfigured by the enactment of penal laws which deny the
elementary rights of free discussion and free assemblage, limit the
political and industrial action of Labor, and create a censorship of
political and economic literature. If returned to power Labor will
repeal these penal provisions.
UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
The Ministerial pigeon holes are cluttered with numerous re-
ports on the questions of national and unemployment insurance,
and on this occasion the Government intends to go to the country
repeating the heroic evasions of many years past, while boasting
of their humanitarian enterprise in engaging experts from overseas
to tender them advice which so far the Government has failed to
act upon.
There is no excuse for the neglect to institute a system of in-
surance. Invariably, the Lyons Government refers to the financial
difficulties that must be solved, but these difficulties it makes no
attempt to solve. It has before it the four reports of the Royal Com-
mission on National Insurance, and also a report on Unemployment
by the same body. More than two years ago, as Parliamentary
Under-Secretary for Employment, Sir Frederick Stewart submitted
a report on national insurance.
The Government Statistician of Western Australia, the actuary
of the Australian Mutual Provident Society, and two experts from
overseas have been engaged sporadically in advising the Govern-
ment upon the matter, yet there are eleven countries, said to be
backward industrial countries, which have insurance schemes
covering unemployment, and there are nine countries, also allegedly
industrially backward, which bave insurance schemes covering
health.
The truth is that this Government has left the whole respon-
sibility for the relief of unemployment to the States. As a result,
heavy taxes have been imposed on the lowest ranges of incomes in
order to provide money, and, in addition, the States have had to
add enormously to their public debt in order to ease the burden)
which this aspect of the depression inflicted upon the workers.


All the taxation thus collected has not been made available
to the unemployed. Millions of pounds raised from special taxes,
which the workers have found oppressive, have been used for
general budget purposes, thereby enabling the taxes on the higher
ranges of incomes to be far less than otherwise would have been the
case.
Any scheme of insurance against unemployment must be re-
lated to an all-embracing plan of industrial reorganisation, which
should include all works covered by Federal, State, Municipal, and
other Government or semi-Government bodies. This is necessary to
ensure as far as possible the withholding or the releasing, as the
case may be, of such works to meet the needs of the labor market,
so that public works can fill the gap caused by the failure of
private enterprise to absorb the labor available.
In addition, there should be progressive reductions of the
workers’ hours of labor to meet the ever-increasing use of machinery
in industry.
It is further necessary to limit overtime in all departments
of labor, both public and private, except in cases of absolute neces-
sity; and to ensure the legal enforcement of holidays: and a period
of annual leave in order to make more permanent the income of
the workers generally, and reduce to the lowest minimum possible
the number of those who otherwise would be forced into the ranks
of the unemployed.
For many years this Commonwealth has had provision against
invasion, against illiteracy, crime, old age, and invalidity. None of
these is as effective or as extensive as is desired, but all are based
on common principle, namely, mutual responsibility. In all cases
the cost has spread, and in no case does the community sublet its
disabilities or contract itself out of its obligations. Defence is a
charge upon the community. The preservation of law and order
is a charge upon the community. The provision for old age, in-
valid and soldiers’ pensions is a charge upon the community. All
are based upon the taxable capacity of the nation as a whole.
The U.A.P. and Country Parties now propose to alter
the existing system and provide for old age and invalidity
on a contributorv basis.


f the Government's proposals on unemployment insurance arc
to cost Australia nothing more than the existing benefits, hov> is it
possible that there can be any more benefits than are now the case?
The report submitted by Mr. Ince on unemployment insur-
ance provides for one week’s benefits to be drawn for every two
contributions paid by the applicant within the preceding year. This
gives an absolute maximum of 26 weeks as a continuous period
of benefit. Anyone who has exhausted his rights to benefit and is
still unemployed, must either be supported by the State provision
through sustenance or relief work, or be thrown on his own resources,
in practice the latter would be non-existent, and he would become
a liability as at present on the Governments of the Slates.
It is well to bear in mind that the expenditure on relief of
unemployment by way of relief works and sustenance amounted
for the financial year 1935-36, from revenue and from loans, to
£21,000,000. It is this expenditure that contributed primarily to
the relief of unemployment.
Broadly stated, Mr. Ince estimates that the workers
will pay 9d. per week, the employer will pay 9d. pet-
week for each employee, and the Governments will make a simi-
lar contribution. The total income of the unemployment fund from
these sources is estimated to be about sif millions, and having regard
to the scale upon which claims will be payable, the total benefit pay-
ments are estimated to amount to approximately a little over five mil"
lion pounds. These are the facts in connection with Scheme "A.
All the schemes contemplate that approximately £6,000,000 will be
paid in by contributions from workers, employers, and Govern-
ments, and therefore it is obvious that contributions in the vicinity of
six millions will have to be made by the Australian community. This
amount is to be derived from contributions, but the word is only a
synonym for the word "taxes.’
The Labor Party maintains that the provision in this connection
ought to be made out of the consolidated revenue fund of the Com-
monwealth Government, and it proposes to institute a scheme of un-
employment payments based on this principle.
Labor will act decisively, where the Lyons Government has
proceeded from inquiry to inquiry, all the time employing every


device of which it is capable to avoid action, preferring to regard
unemployment insurance as an election catch-cry and not a definite
plan of legislation.
We undertake to provide legislation to place this matter ini
the realm of achievement and thereby lay the foundation upon
which the nation can develop this principle of social justice in an
orderly and rational way. It is proposed, therefore, to provide
six million pounds for the initiation of the system.
YOUNG PEOPLE.
Ihe special problem of young people must be faced. There
are four spheres of life in which the needs of youth are now greatest.
These are education, vocational guidance, employment, and the
rational use of leisure time. Our purpose must be to ensure that
when adulthood is attained our young men and women are fitted
to take their place in the general life of mankind.
Because of the manner in which authority is distributed in
Australia between the States and the Commonwealth, a concerted
programme by all our Governments is required. The States
should adapt their school and educational systems to the new needs
that have arisen, and training and work should be assured by a
definite plan.
We should take the home as the base of this problem and en-
sure for the father good work and good wages.
The plan should include raising the school leaving age and
attendance either at technical school or commercial college; for
those young persons who have left school within the last decade
and to whom industrial training has been denied, a system of voca-
tional training should be instituted. In addition, there should be
in our educational system guidance not only for industry, but also for
sensible use of leisure time.
WIDOWS’ PENSIONS.
1 heie has been little or no advance in the extension of the
forms of social service in Australia for many years, and the time
has arrived when action in this matter should no longer be delayed.


In prosperity, and more so during years of depression, the lot
of those families in which there is no male breadwinner has been
a sad one. While the male breadwinner lives he must bear the
major responsibility for ensuring the rearing of his children. It is
"when these responsibilities cannot be discharged that the State should
second the efforts of parents to obtain for their children opportuni-
ties for full development.
The child is the most important asset that Australia
possesses, for the children are the future citizens and to the
case of children we cannot apply the doctrines of
independence and self-help.
The Labor Party has long been impressed by the seriousness
of the plight in which women find themselves when, after a few
years of matrimony, their husband dies and they are left with
several children to support. The mother, now a widow, has to
serve all too often as a breadwinner and when the day is done, then
undertake the almost impossible task of nurturing and guarding her
fatherless little ones. It is too great a task. Her health suffers.
Her economic ability to win a place in industry is lessened and then
the herself, as well as her children, undergo strain and hardship
which in too many cases becomes unendurable.
The moral effects of this grave disability, apart from its physi-
cal consequences, must be obvious to responsible men. Therefore
the Labor Party will etablish in Australia a system of pensions pay-
able to widows who have dependent children.
We consider it proper for the payment to be £1 per week for
the widow who has dependent children and 10 ■ per week for each
child so dependent.
There will be assured the usual safeguards to provide that the
payment would not be made where there was no necessity for it,
and in this way we estimate that £1,800,000 would enable the Aus-
tralian people to institute this aspect of a sysem of family allowances.
The best way in which a widow with dependent children can
do her greatest work in Australia is not by competing for wages, but
by carrying on to the best of her ability in her home the work of
mothercraft so that her children may be given the best maternal
guidance to become the future citizens of a great Commonwealth.


SOLDIERS’ PENSIONS.
It is my intention to amend the law to provide that children
horn subsequent to 1931 whose parents were married prior to Ui*
passing of the Financial Emergency Act shall be brought into th'i
pension system. We will also liberalise the provisions in regard to
the treatment of sick returned soldiers in repatriation hospitals.
OLD-AGE PENSIONS.
Notwithstanding the promise in 1931 that old-age pension*
would be restored to £ I per week immediately the financial position
of the Commonwealth enabled that to be done, the Government,
until the eve of the elections, failed to carry out the undertaking
which all sections of the Parliament gave to the pensioners.
In the meantime Mr. Lyons had penalised pensioners
who had property and also compelled relatives to contribute
to the support of pensioners.
Out of the proceeds of the first Commonwealth surplus in 1932-
33 the rights of pensioners should have been met. This was not
done, but instead 12,000 pensioners were constrained to surrender
their pensions beause of the restricted provisions the Government
had incorporated in the law.
The surpluses of the Commonwealth approximate over eleven
million pounds in recent years while the concessions which it has
made to the wealthy sections of the people have saved that fortunate
group taxation approximating many millions.
The Labor Pary has fought steadfastly, and now successfully,
to have the pensions fixed once again at £1 per week. We now
undertake to liberalise the law and regulations so that invalids and
aged persons will in future be given better treatment.
LEGISLATIVE POWER.
A number of important and necessary reforms, including forty-
hour working week, the control of excessive prices and profits,
national insurance, vocational training for youths, etc., may require
either the co-operation of the States or increased constitutional
powers for the Commonwealth Parliament. If the States prove un


willing to co-operate or to transfer essential constitutional powers to
the Commonwealth, the Labor Government will ask the people by
referendum to give to the Commonwealth Parliament the legislative
powers necessary to give effect to the undertakings given to the
electors.
SUMMARY.
I summarise the main features of Labor’s policy at
this election by affirming that: —
We will defend Australia.
We will develop and protect Australian industries to
ensure our capacity to resist aggression and to enable us
to be a self-reliant people.
We will make the employment of the Australian
people a major measure of national policy.
We will make the Commonwealth Bank a bank for
the nation.
We will initiate action to develop oil supplies within
Australia, as a major measure of national security.
We will apply the Forty-Hour Week principle.
We will enable the primary producers to organise on
a Commonwealth basis for their mutual protection against
exploitation.
We will establish a system of unemployment allow-
ances.
We will provide pensions for widows who have
children dependent upon them.
We will make soil erosion a matter for national
attack.


We will give young persons opportunity for training
and employment.
We will liberalise the pensions and repatriation laws.
We will not, as this Government has done, evade our
responsibilities by shunting them on to Boards and Com-
missions; nor will we throw on to the State Governments
the blame for Federal failures in matters of major economic
and social importance.
A Labor Government in the next Parliament will
carry out the policy I have placed before you—a policy
that will promote the widest distribution of national pros-
perity and which will safeguard the peace and happiness
of our people.
Authorised by J. A. BEASLEY. M.H.ft. (Campaign Director). J. J. GRAVES, M.L.O.
The Labor Daily Ltd.. Printers, 4 Brisbane Street. Sydney.—(4o-Hour Wes’x),


ENDORSED LABOR CANDIDATES
Place the figure [T] opposite the names of these candidates
and vote for all other candidates on the ballot paper in the order
of your preference.
Electors who may not be able to record their vote at the polling booth on
Polling Day for any bona fide reasons, such as illness, travelling, etc., should
make early application to the Electoral Office of their Electorate for a postal
vote.
Information regarding postal voting, Including names of candidates for
every dectorate In the Commonwealth, may be obtained at the A.LP. Office,
coulburn Street, Sydney. Write, Phone or'Call. Tel. MJ4651.


ililllli For the Senate
752792 5
VOTE
0 AMOUR, S. K.
0 ARMSTRONG, John
0 ARTHUR, T. 0.
0 ASHLEY, W.
Then continue numbering the other candidates right down the
ballot paper.
Every candidate must be voted for or your vote will be informal.
Authorised by J. A. Beasley, M.H.R, (Campaign Director); J. J. Graves, M.L.C.
Printed by The Labor Daily, Ltd., 4 Brisbane Street, Sidney. (40-Hour Week.)
