

FLOWER MISSION
W. W C. T. U.
DEPARTMENT.
1896
CAUNPER & Co., PRINT., 117 ENMORE ROAD ENMORE.




TO FLOWER MISSION
WORKERS.
Newtown, N. S.. Wales,
June 25th, 1896.
Dear Sisters—
The second half of my term of office as
World’s W.C.T. U. Superintendent of Flower
Missions having just commenced, I send you
this letter as a sort of New Year’s Greeting.
I hope it will find you all in the enjoy-
ment of health and strength, with daily
increasing joy in the Master’s Service, and
loving loyalty to the W.C.T.U.,- and its
incomparable leader, sweet Frances Willard,
As to the results of your work, they can
never be tabulated, and will never be fully
known until you reach the better land and
hear the glad welcomes of many who will
tell, with joy and gladness, of the great
blessing they received through the dear


Flower Mission, while they were still in the
land of the sick and dying.
But still we often meet with success, or I
should say, are permitted to see it, even be-
fore we do “go up higher,” Of these some
wonderful cases have come under my own
cognisance ; let me tell you of a few which
will show how varied as well as wonderful
are the results of this easily worked, beautiful
department of the Woman’s- Christian
Temperance Union.
Fred. S. was the only son of his mother,
and she was a widow. He was a member
of a Bible Class, and a lad of great promise.
One day two of my workers visited the
Accident Ward for males in Prince Alfred
Hospital, near here, and seeing an empty
bed, and knowing it would soon again be
occupied, one of the girls pinned a text card
and bunch of violets to the side, curtain as
she passed by. Less than an hour after
Fred. S. was brought in and placed in it,
having been jerked oil' the top of an omnibus
and run over by a passing vehicle before he
could regain his feet. His right leg was


severely injured, and some hours after ad-
mission it was found necessary to amputate
it. As he was being lifted, to be taken to
the operating room, he snatched at the
card, tore it from the safety pin, and held it
throughout the operation and the night and
and day following, and now always declares
that it saved his life, or rather the words
which was written upon it —“ Be not afraid,
neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord thy
God is with thee whithersoever thou goest.”
Joshua 1-9.
Upon another Flower Mission day to the
same Hospital, one of the workers was going
idong a balcony to reach a particular ward
when she saw a well dressed gentleman on
a cane lounge, and although he was in the
full glare of a fierce summer sun, he was
deadly pale. His eyes being closed she
thought he had fainted, so laid her fingers
on his arm, upon which he opened his eyes
and raised himself to a sitting posture.
Apologising for disturbing him, she asked if
she should move his chair into the shade
when he answered, smiling, “Oh, no I love


the sun; I have just come from India, and
feel any cold terribly, Laying a fragrant
bouquet and an interesting little booklet
upon the arm of his lounge, she went on to
the ward; but as she was returning he begged
her to take a chair close by, and entered
into a conversation with her. He told her
he was a major in the army in India, had
been wounded in a fray with some natives,
and the surgeons gave him little hope of
living long. She often visited him after-
wards, and had the joy of seeing him
abandon his infidel notions and accept Him,
whom he had so often scoffed at, as his
Saviour and Friend. His new joy gave him
new physicial strength, and he was able lo
undergo the operation which was his only
chance of recovering. He returned to India,
where he is now serving the King of Kings,
and preaching His love wherever ho goes.
And wonderful as are the effects of the
bouquets of flowers and text cards attached,
opening as they do opportunities for conver-
sation and help, still more direct in its
influence is the singing, which should, always


if possible be a part of the IFower Missioner’s
visit. Here are two or three instances :
Four girls were entering a surgical ward
for males, but were met just inside the
door by the Sister in charge who told them
that there were some cases there which pre-
cluded a visit; but others wanted them to
sing, which they might do in the passage
outside the door, with which of course they
acquiesced, and after singing two songs in
order to attract all the in mates of the Ward,
they began that beautiful well-known hymn,
the chorus being :
“ Whiter than the snow, whiter than the snow,
Wash me in the blood of the Lamb,
And I shall be whiter than snow.”
Just inside the Ward, there was lying a
captain and owner of a vessel trading to the
South Sea Islands, whose mother had been
a native of one of them, and by a freak
of nature was almost as black as ebony.
He had been wounded in a drunken fray
with one of his friends who had taunted him
with his colour, about which he was very
sensitive. For some days he had been in a


sullen mood, refusing to take nourishment
for several hours consecutively, but this
hymn, or rather the chorus, appeared to stir
him into life. Several times during the night
he spoke about it and in the morning gave
them no peace until they sent ftp one of the
Flower Missioners, and she had explained
the meaning of the words and led him to
the Fountain open for all uncleanness, Zech.
XIII., 1. Now, wherever he takes his ship,
he takes also the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and
points others to Him who is able to save to
the uttermost, and make those black in
heart and life “ Whiter than the Snow.”
Another clay the Missioners were singing
in a private ward, when a message came
from an adjoining one, asking them to visit
that one also. They found a young lady of
wealth and position, who had met with a
carriage accident in that neighbourhood, and
had been carried in an insensible condition
into the Hospital. She asked them what
they had been singing, as it had been set to
one of “ Mendellsohn’s songs without words. ’
The leader told her it was 727 of Moody


and Sankey, and the words were “Wo
would see Jesus.” She asked for it to be
repeated, and it was done, and as soon as
the last notes were rendered, the younger
singers left the room, and the other going
close to the bed asked the patient if those
words were the language of her heart, and
was answered, “ Oh no, you mistake, society
people do not require a Saviour, for we
conform to all the rules of propriety and
good form; your mission is for the poor, the
drunken, the outcast.” “What about your
duty to God?” The Bible distinctly states
“that to whom much is given, of him or her
will much be required.” Have you rendered
him much gratitude, much love, and much
service ? The Missioner left soon after, but
the next morning received an urgent message
from the young lady begging her to come to
her. She found her in great distress of
mind, and she entreated her to remain
until her relatives came in the afternoon,
declaring that she would die if left alone,
as she now saw herself in the true light, and
was afraid at the revelation Just then a


nurse entered with her beef-tea and toast, and
told the visitor that the Lady Superintendent
of the Hospital invited her upstairs to lunch.
“ Oh,” said the sick girl, “ can’t you give her
lunch here at my expense ?—a glass of wine
and a piece of cake; there is plenty of fruit
in my cupboard.” “Well,” exclaimed the
nurse, laughingly, “ she might eat the cake
and fruit, but a million of money would
not induce her to drink a glass of wine.”
“Is that true?” asked the invalid, “and if
so, why 1 ” “Do you not see my little White
bow,” she was answered, “ and don’t yon
know that is the badge of the Woman’s
Christian Temperance Union, and I do not
take alcohol even for medicine.”
This visit was daily repeated during the
week Miss M remained in the
Hospital, and now she also wears the White
Ribbon in society as well as out of it; she is
becoming one of our greatest Evangelistic
workers, and is, I need scarcely. Say, an
earnest Flower Mtssioner.
During a visit to the Children’s Ward one
day the girls sang, amongst other things:


“ I have a Saviour, He’s pleading in Glory,
A dear loving Saviour, though earth’s friends be
few ;
And now He is watching in tenderness o’er me,
And, oh, that my Saviour were your Saviour too! ”
They were in the middle of the Hymn when
they were interrupted by a Sister hurrying
in and saying “Dear*, you must stop; a
poor girl has just been brought in fearfully
burnt. Her life is trembling in the balance,
and the slightest noise might kill her.” We
learnt afterwards that the poor girl became
delirious, and remained so for several days
and nights, and every now and then she
would sing quite distinctly the words which
had reached her dulled senses as she was
being carried in. Her case was so critical
that her mother was allowed to remain with
her, and every time her child would sing,
her anguish of mind seemed to increase
terribly, and at the next visit of our Flower
Missioners, as soon as she heard them singing
the poor woman went to them and entreated
them to pray for her, asking that the Saviour
she had neglected so long might receive her
into His family, for, she added, with a


terrible look of agony on her face, “ Whether
my Effie lives or dies I want hor S mour to
be my Saviour too.” The dear Lord was
truly good to that poor woman, for He filled
her with His own joy in believing, and
restored her- Effi? to . life, and. health*, again.
Jn the,B.detain,Cottage Hospital a Flower
Missioner found a man tossing in delirium,
and shouting comm mds in different' langua-
ges. Her heart went out to this poor fellow
in a strange manner, and for a week she went
to enquire daily for him. One morning she
was told he was sensible but very weak, and
very sullen or reticent, as he would only
answer a question when quite obliged, and
then only in monosyllable. Going away sh :
procured a few bright flowers and bunch of
choice grapes, and returing addressed him
in French, as some of Ids ravings had been
in that language. Immediately he responded,
and soon told her all his tale, and such a
tale as it was ! He was an Australian, not
a foreigner; the son of an English clergyman
not a hundred miles from where he was
lying, but when quite a lad had run away to


sea, and going ashore at San Francisco met
with a street accident and was taken to a
hospital there. When he was convalescent
he found his ship had sailed without him
and ho resolved to cut off all chance of his
parents discovering -his whereabouts or
identity ; so he changed his name, shipped
for three year’s trading to Chinese Ports
and the West Indies. After that he had
made several successful voyages to English
and othor ports, and had at last resolved to
have a look at the old home and see if his
parents were still alive, but during a
drunken “spree” in Sydney he had been
wounded severely, robbed of his belt which
contained some hundreds of pounds, and
had now determined to drown himself in
Sydney Harbour as soon as he was able to
get to it. For days Mrs. pleaded with
him and at last got him to mention the
name of his father, and in a few minutes
telegrams were sent to several country towns
asking clergymen there to try and find his
father, and giving some of the facts of the
case. The next Sunday morning, on her


way to church, the Flower Missionor called
to enquire for Willio as she had got to call
him, and found a w ilte-haired clergyman
holding his hand; and as she crept back on
tiptoe she hoard the words “ Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear Him, for He knoweth our frame,
He remembereth that \ye are hut dust,” and
the response, in broken tones, “ Father I
have sinned against Heaven and before thee
and am no more worthy to be called thy son.’
One day in the Consumptive Ward of
Sydney Hospital a nurse whispered to me,
“ don’t speak to the woman at the top of the
ward in the left-hand corner, she is a terrible
character, and will only insult you.” I
wont quietly up to thy ward, speaking to
each patient, and as I left the one next to
her, she pulled the bed-clothes over her head,
covering both arms, head, and face. I did
not like to leave her unnoticed, so hud a
bunch of buttercups and mignonette on the
chair close to the bed and turned away.
Stooping to answer a question, asked by one
of the patients, 1 suddenly heard a cry, and


saw the prodigal, who had been so hardened,
pressing the flowers convulsively to her lips,
and sobbing, “ Mother! mother! oh,
mother ! mother! ” She had been a country
girl, and buttercups and mignonette had
been her mother’s favourite flowers, because
they reminded her of dear old England, and
the sight of them so suddenly brought
before her in her pain and misery, broke
down the barriers which before had been
stronger than iron. The next day she was
lying in her mother’s arms, held as tenderly
to her bosom as though she were still an
innocent child, instead of a woman just
brought out of an Opium den. And when
I saw her again, she said, —“ If my pure
mother could forgive me, and hold me to
Iker heart again, lam sure the good Saviour
could, so I crept into His arms also ; and
now safe in the arms of Jesus, whether I
I live or die all will be well.”
But what need is there to multiply oases ?
Every Flower Missioner meets with signal
success sooner or later, and it comes in divers
manners as reported above, so I will content


myself with two more oases, and these are
like side-shows to those generally experienced.
One evening, upon reaching home from
the Hospital, I found I had left a borrowed
book behind, one of the patients having
wished to see the illustrations in it, and
fearing it might become misappropriated, I
hurried down for it very early the next
day. Just outside the Hospital there was
a woman witli thick dishevelled hair hanging
about her shoulders, from which a handsome
shawl was drooping, and who was trying to
hush a wailing infant in her arms. As I
came close to her, I saw there was a look of
deep misery on her face, so I adced if I
could do anything for her. Was the child
scalded ? could she not gain an interview
with a doctor, or what was the matter 1
She answered quite wildly, “ Oh, it isn’t the
baby, that doesn’t matter! It’s my dear
husband; he’s dying in the Hospital, and
I was sent for in the night to be with him
to the last, but can’t stay with him, as this
little wretch keeps screaming, which disturbs
him so.” I said lam very sorry for you,


you are indeed in trouble, and your grief has
caused what the doctor’s call “fretted
milk,” and it has given your baby great
pain. “Do you know me?” and I
mentioned my name. She replied “yes, my
sister was once in your Bible Class at
Newtown.” Then said I, “Perhaps you will
trust me with your baby for a day or two,
if I can find a suitable wet nurse; come with
me for a few minutes, and I will show her
to you.” She got into the buggy, and, after
wrapping the shawl round her head, shoulders
and the baby, I drove rapidly to a cottage
a few hundred yards distant, where lived a
young woman who had married from my
service, and whose second child was about
three months old. Bidding the poor mother
take a seat near the fire, she put the babe
to her own breast, when it drank greedily,
and was soon fast asleep. Then Mary,
taking a jug of hot water into her bed-room,
asked the mother to “ come and have a
wash, and do up your hair, for you are
enough to frighten your poor man to death,
you look so gruesome.” The poor woman


obeyed mechanically, and when she returned
a few minutes late; 1 ; looking ten years
younger. Mary had a cup of tea ready,
which she poured upon a beaten-up egg and
sugar, and ordered the woman to drink
slowly for fear it might disagree with her
in her “upset condition/ As we drove
back to the Hospital I learned that the
husband was a Wesleyan Local Preacher,
but the wife was not a Christian, and she
vowed that if Robert was taken from her,
she would drown herself and baby in the
first creek or waterhole she could get
to. Knowing the fresh air would do
her good, I drove her round the large grounds
of the Hospital, going very slowly and
pleaded the cause of One who had poured so
much good into her life notwithstanding this
terrible trouble. “For instance,” said I,
“ you have a good husband and a dear little
baby, two great gifts from above, and even
if your Robert dies, you wilt have his love
for evermore.” So I pleaded, and at last
had the great joy of bearing her say in the
words of the Bible, with which she was well


acquainted, “ Though He slay me, yet will I
trust Him.” I accompanied her to her
husband’s bedside, and her face was like the
morning as she whispered, evidently in
answer to something that had gone before,
“ It’s all right, I have given myself to Him
at last, and now whether you live or die I
shall bo alright.” From that hour the man
began to recover, and now there is not a
happier trio in New South Wales than the
one I first saw under such sad circumstances.
Here is the last case I shall cite. Miss
Hassall, daughter of one of our ministers,
grand-daughter of Rev. Samuel Marsden,one
of the first Missionaries to New South Wales,
and herself a splendid Christian-worker, one
day spoke to an old man in an Accident
Ward, and saying she was sorry to see him
there, asked what was the matter ? “ Thrown
out of my cart, broke my leg, wrenched my
back,and cut my head open,” was the brusque
reply. “That is very bad,” said she, “I
hope you have the Friend that sticketh
closer than a brother to help you bear it.’’
“ Who is that? ” said he. “Why the Lord'


Jesus, who has done so much for you.”
“ Umph ! broke my leg, wrenched my back,
cut my head open. Is that what you mean ? ”
“Oh ! tliis is terrible,” said she, you are
badly hurt, but your injuries are nothing
compared to your evil heart, If you die
where will you poss eternity 'I Do pray for
a new heart and a right spirit, and do not
rest satisfied until you have the Lord Jesus
for your Saviour and friend.” *' Do you
really care about it?” he asked eagerly, “If
so, kneel by that chair and pray for me
yourself, and loudly, as I am a bit deaf ; ” for
a moment she felt nervous, as eight or nine
of the other men in the Ward were listening,
but quickly regaining courage she knelt and
prayed, loudly and firmly, for this poor man
without God for his Father, Jesus for his
Friend, or the Holy Spirit for his Comforter,
and regaining herfeet, was greatly astonished
to see him smiling, and to hear him say, as
he grasped her hand with both his, “ Dear
Madam, I have had all three in most blessed
union for over forty years; I was only trying
you. My daughter has helped Miss Pemell


pick and arrange flowers for her Hospital
work every Monday for over five years, and
I have said hundreds of times she would do
better to stay and help her mother at the
wash-tub than waste every Monday morning
upon flowers, but after to-day I will never
say such a thing again, but wherever I go
I will bear testimony to the efficacy of the
Flower Mission,” As soon as he got out of
the Hospital the poor old fellow got a cab
and drove to this house to apologise for ever
having breathed a word against my pet
work, and at leaving said, “ Please allow me
to give you a text, and pass it on to all your
assistants— ‘ Be not weary in well doing, for
in duo season ye shall reap if ye faint not.’
My sisters, take it for yourselves, one and
all, it is as you see your very own text ”
But who could grow weary of such glorious
work ? My only wonder is that thousands
more do not offer themselves and beg to be
engaged in it. How can anyone who calls
herself a Christain keep back from what
requires so little self-denial, and yet brings
such a host of blessings in its train ? How


can anyone carry the Light of the World in
her heart without some of the rays showing
out in her life ? And how can anyone who
reads her Bible forget that it contains these
solemn words, “To whom much is given, of
him (or her) much shall be required.” I
write this in a cosy, well-appointed room,
easy-chairs, piano, pictures, bookcase, beauti-
ful flowers, and bright fire, my only sister
reading at my side, and faithful collie dog
lying at my feet. A largo picture of the
Temple Chicago above ray head, and my
beloved friend, Jessie Aclcormann smiling
down upon me from the wall opposite.
Outside the rain is pouring in torrents, the
garden walks are flooded, and the plants
and shrubs battered by the downpour.
Half-an-hour ago a poor hunch backed girl
came to the door trying to sell needles,
cottons and other trifles, to eke out a sub-
sistence for herself and invalid mother.
Now suppose I had sent her away wet, cold,
hungry, and empty-handed, what should I
have deserved ? Why, at the very least,
that all my comforts should be swept away,


and that my circumstances should be ex
changed for such as hers. And yet there
are many women, the crumbs from whose
table of joyous life would be food, yea, life
itself perchance, to the sick, sad, and dying,
but who, either through thoughtlessness or
self-indulgence, neglect to send those crumbs,
and so miss the choicest blessings that their
wealth was intended to afford them.
And now, dear Sisters, fourthly, lastly,
finally, and in conclusion, let me remind you
that there is at this moment, such an oppor-
tunity of blessing offered to all interested in
the sick, and those anxious for the welfare
of the human race for generations to come,
as has never been known before, and which,
if neglected, may never occur to us again.
You, with myself, must often have been
grieved to the heart at seeing alcohol pre-
scribed for patients who had better die than
touch it. Better, as a City Missionry said
the other day of a sick man, die sober than
live a drunkard. And how difficult we have
often found it to persuade our own physicians
to think of something else for ourselves and


our dear ones, instead of the wretched stuff.
And how many thousands are now in drunk-
ards’ graves, “ victims to doctors’ orders,”
who forgot when prescribing that to many
it is indeed, as Spurgeon called it, “ The
Devi! in Solution ; ” “ Distilled Damnation,’’
according to Dr. Talmage; and “The Curse,’’
as Miss. Willard so very aptly puts it.
Well, we have now an opportunity of
remedying this, and in such a beautiful
rn inner, too, that it makes one weep tears
of joy at the very thought of it. Here it is.
The World's Union Signal, for April 9th, is
called the “Clarion Call,” and contains
upon the first page a letter from Miss
Willard, telling us White Ribboners that a
wonderful opportunity offers itself to us of
proving to the world that we are Christian
Temperance Women, not only in profession,
but also in deed and in truth ; a wonderful
opportunity of doing honour to the dear
Lord who so signally honours us ; and such
an opportunity of blessing mankind as surely
women have never been offered before.
That a piece of ground has been secured,


which is a most suitable site for a Hospital,
not very far from the Temple, Chicago, and
it is proposed to build a White Ribbon
Hospital, and, if built, it will be surrounded
by other Hospitals, and will be an object
lesson to every medical student and nurse
in that vicinity as well as an instructor
and example to the whole world. She further
adds that anyone sending twenty-five dollars
(£5 55.) will become a life member of the
Hospital, and as soon as two hundred per-
sons send such a sum, the building will be
c immenced. Oh, my sisters, what a chance!
Will you not give our noble Chieftain a
surprise-party, and gladden her heart by
s Hiding her orders for those twenty-five
dollars in a perfect shower; thereby
strengthening her belief in, and love to her
Flower Missioners, as well as her faith in
Him who said, “ Ask and ye shall receive.”
And give, and it shall be given unto you,
good measure, pressed down, shaken together,
running over for with what measure ye meet
it shall be measured to you again.
And now, farewell 1 The Lord bless you


mu] keep you; tho Lord make His face
to shine upon you, and through you, and upon
others, daily Prays
Your Sister and Fellow-Worker,
AMELIA J. PEMELL,
W.W.C.T.U. Superintendent
of Flower Missions.
