

m
JLSt'C ll'f UJ
J I I J L , l /L (St /Ltll /L
'Yew s/i A T aiion.
‘
if
m
s
-
; db;
j#f J
fi iX, .w.; ■* ■
1 6 5 5 •
.:
REPRINTED
Q Tp
Hii
G^O
BOOKSELLER
AN') PUBLISHER, BOURKE STREET EAST, MEJLBO
" RNF - Gib
. 8 6 8,
1) W?c)
p g r vo pc\ p B&fd P P'T / //o
cJ■»sv9 fo 6fKvo Gy/ijc)(oc)*s\.v (o c)’VVg (b c)*s\c) fa cJ*vs. 9 QyA b c)
T °
H HIS HIGHNESS E p
p-ry 1 H h errs
S I. O R D PROTE C T O R $
1 ■ OF THE fd
t\i COMMONrr E A L T H 0 F pjl
\k/. «r?
Sc um m u iiv ii Ji si jJi u r roic? ;
England, Scotland, and Ireland. life
l • 1 » « |
|| II UMB L E AD D R ESSES |
oVc3
nip
Smd
SMenasseii Ben Ifrael, a Divine , and
Doctor of PHYSIC . in belialfc
SOSCi ■'




T O
HIS, HIGHNESSE
THE
LORD PROTECTOR
OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF
England, Scotland, and Ireland
THE
HUMBLE ADDRESSES
O F
Menasseh Ben Ifrael, a Divine , and
Doftor of PHYSIC , in behalfe
of the Jewish Nation.
1655.
REPRINTED BY H. T. DWIGHT,
BOOKSELLER AND PUBLISHER, BOURKE STREET EAST, MELBOURNE,
J 8 6 8.




/NTRODU C T I O N.
The history of the first settlement of the Jews in Great Britain is buried in
impenetrable obscurity; nevertheless, the subject has been the theme of speculation
by many writers, some of whom have ventured upon the most daring hypotheses.
One has endeavoured to prove that the religions of the Druids and the Hebrews
were identical (i), whilst another has asserted his conviction that the ancient
Britons were descended from emigrants from Judea (2). There is, however, no
doubt that Jews resided in Britain from the earliest times. The first record
in confirmation of this fact is an edict of the Emperor Augustus, in the
year 15 of the Christian era, in which he refers to the Jews residing in
Britain (3). In several of the Saxon authors the Jews are likewise mentioned, and
in the laws attributed to Edward the Confessor a distinct reference is made to
them (4). But it is only after the Conquest that any extensive and reliable infor-
mation is afforded by English historians. After the victory at Hastings (1066) the
Jews were invited by William to settle in England, and large numbers availed
themselves of the invitation, and took up their abode principally in London,
Stamford, York, and Oxford. The Jews were then considered by law under the
protection of the King. By the first three Norman kings the Jews were treated
with kindness, and under the sway of Henry I. they increased in number and
advanced in prosperity; but on the accession of Stephen (1135) their troubles
commenced. Under the false plea of their crucifying children and using
Iheir blood, they were ill-treated and oppressed, and as the ecclesiastics and barons
were heavy debtors to the Jews, it was to their advantage to cause them to be
imprisoned or massacred, so that their bonds could be destroyed or their debts
remitted. Instead, therefore, of protecting the unfortunate race, they used every
means of rousing the prejudice of the King and people against them. For nearly two
hundred years the history of the Jews in Britain is but a series of false accusations,
of tyranny, of oppression, of massacres, and of deep and dark violence, until it
culminated in their expulsion by Edward 1., in 1290 (5). It is commonly supposed
that, from the time of their expulsion until the Protectorate, no Jews resided in
England; but it is almost certain that in the time of the Tudors some ventured back,
and although the law of Edward I. was still in force, yet by some tacit under-
standing they were tolerated, and permitted to employ themselves in commerce (6).
It was not, however, until the time of Cromwell that any attempt was made to
remove the restriction that prevented their return. The principal mover in this
attempt was Manasseh Ben Israel, a celebrated scholar, born in Lisbon in 1604,
(1) Identity of the Religions called Druidical and Hebrew. London, 1829.
(2) History of the Jews in Great Britain. Margolionth. London, 1851,
(3) Vide 111 HO'/ a.m. 3775. Frankfort, 1692.
(4) “The Jews, wheresoever they be, are under the King’s guard and protection,” &c,
(5) Annals of England. Oxford, 1858 ;p. 350.
(6) Genius of Judaism. J. DTsraeli. London, 1833; p. 240.


but residing in Holland, who, seeing the advantages it would confer on his co-
religionists and on England, by extending the facilities for commerce to both,
petitioned the Protector that permission might be granted to the Jews to settle in
England. This petition was favourably received by Cromwell, and submitted
by him for consideration to a select assembly, appointed to determine upon the
legality of the question. The deliberations of this assembly were, however, so
inconclusive that no practical result took place. Notwithstanding this, the Jews
continued to settle in England without opposition and without molestation; and
the Protector marked his approbation of the endeavours of Manasseh Ben Israel
by allowing him a pension of fioo per annum (7). The obnoxious restriction was,
however, removed by Charles 11., and the settlement of the Jews in Britain again
legalized. Since then, the Jews have continued to reside in every part of the United
Kingdom, receiving equal rights as citizens, increasing in numbers, and whilst
partaking of the continued progress of the nation, by their industry, their per-
severance, and their business habits, contributing their just proportion towards its
welfare and prosperity, A. F. O,
Melbourne, 10th February, 1868.
Manasseh Ben Israel, the author of the accompanying addresses, was born in
Lisbon, in 1604. His parents having been forced to flee from Portugal through the
machinations of Philip 111. of Spain, and the Inquisition, took up'their abode in
Holland. At the age of fifteen, on account of his extraordinary abilities, he was
selected to succeed his teacher in the office of Rabbi of Amsterdam. His knowledge
was remarkable, and his industry untiring. During the first twenty-five years of his
office, he prepared for the press five hundred original sermons preached by himself; in
addition to this, he wrote several voluminous works in Hebrew, Latin, English, Por-
tuguese, 6°c., dvc. As the stipend of his office was insufficient to support his
family, he established a Hebrew printing-office in Amsterdam. Through his exer-
tions permission was granted to the Jews to return to England. His reputation was
spread throughout the world, and among his correspondents Avere the greatest names
among th o. literati of that period, both of Jews and Christians. The works he has
left behind him stamp his reputation, not only as a profound scholar, but also as a
deep thinker. Many of his varied writings have been translated into English by
Mr. Lindo. He died in Middelburg in 1657. His name is principally identified
with his greatest work, the readmission of the Jews into England; and although he
did not succeed in his petition, still it was owing to his endeavours that the
restrictions which existed against'their return were removed.
If the sale of this republication affords the Publisher sufficient
encouragement , it will be followed by “ Vindicice f u decorum or a
Letter in Anfwer to certain Queftions propounded by a Noble and
Learned Gentleman , touching the reproaches cast on the Nation of
the Jewes; wherein all objections are candidly , and yet fidly cleared.
By Rabbi Menaffeh Ben Israel , a Divine and a Phyfcian. 1656.”
(7) Carlyle. 11. 163.


TO
His Highneffe the Lord Protector
of THE
Common-wealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland
The Thimble Addreffes of. Menaffeh Ben Ifrael, a Divine and
DoTlor of Phyftck , in behalf of the Jewifh Nation.
sp|||lve me leave, at fuch a juncture of time, to your Highneffe,
[till * n a and manner t 0 us 7 ewes and our condition.
wS&L It is a thing molt certain, that the great God of Ifrael ,
Creator of Heaven and Earth, doth give & take away Dominions
and Empires, according to his own pleafure; exalting fome, &
overthrowing others: who, feeing he hath the hearts of Kings in
his hand ; he eafily moves them whitherfoever himfelf pleafeth, to
put in execution his Divine Commands. This, my Lord, appears
molt evidently out of thofe words of Daniel , where he, rendering-
thanks unto God, for revealing unto him that prodigious Dream of
Nebuchadnezar , doth fay: Thou that removeft Kings , andfets tip
Kings. And elfewhere, To the end the living might know , that the
Higheft hath dominion in Mans Kingdoms , and giveth the to
whom hepleafe. Of the very fame mind are Thalmudifts likewife,
affirming that a good Government, or Governor, is a Heavenly
Gift, and that there is no Governor, but is firft called by God unto
that dignity : & this they prove from that paffage of Exoaus:
Behold I have called Bazale I by name, &c. all things being governed
by Divine Providence, God difpenfmg rewards unto Vertues, and
punifhment unto Vices, according to his owne good Will. This
the Examples of great Monarchs make good ; efpecially of fuch,
who have afflidfed the people of Israel'. For none hath ever
afflicted them, who hath not been by some ominous Exit , mofl
■ a 2 heavily


heavily punilhed of God Almighty; as is manifeft from the
Hiftories of thofe Kings, Pharaoh , Nebuchadnezar , Antiochus ,
Epiphanius, Pompey , & others. And on the contrary, none ever
was a Benefactor to that people, & cherifhed them in their Coun-
tries, who thereupon hath not prefently begun very much to flourifti.
In fo much that the Oracle to Abraham (I will bleffe them that
bleffe thee , and curfe them that cnrfe thee) feemeth yet daily to have
its accomplifhment. Hence I, one of the lead among the Hebrews,
fmce by experience I have found, that through Gods great bounty
toward us, many confiderable and eminent perfons both for Piety
& Power, are moved with fmcere and inward pitty and compaffion
towards us, & do comfort us concerning the approaching deliver-
ance of Ifrael, could not but for my felf, and in the behalf of my
Countrey men, make this my humble addrefs to your Highnefs, &
befeech you for Gods fake, that ye would, according to that Piety
& Power wherein you are eminent beyond others, vouchfafe to
grant, that the Great & Glorious Name of the Lord our God may
be extolled, and folemnly worfhipped and praifed by us through
all the bounds of this Common-wealth ; & to grant us place in your
Countrey, that we may have our Synagogues, and free exercife of
our Religion. I nothing doubting, but that your Clemency will
eafily grant this moft equitable Petition of ours. Pagans have of
old, out of reverence to the God of Ifrael ; and the efteem they
had to his people, granted moft willingly free liberty, even to
apoftate Jewes; as Onias the High Prieft, to build another Temple
in their Countrey, like unto that at Jerufalem : how much more
then may we, that are not Apoftate or runagate Jewes , hope it from
your Highneffe and your Chriftian Council, fmce you have fo great
knowledge of, and adore the fame one onely God of Ifrael , together
with us. Betides, it increafes our confidence of your bounty to-
wards us, in that fo foon as ever the rumour of that moft wifhed-
for liberty, that ye were a thinking to grant us, was made known
unto our Countrey-men; I, in the name of my Nation, the Jewes,
that live in Holland, did congratulate and entertain their Excellen-
cies, the Ambaffadors of England ; who were received in our
Synagogue with as great pomp & applause, Hymns and cheerful-
neffe


neffe of mind, as ever any Soveraign Prince was. For our people
did in their own minds prefage, that the K ingly Government being
now changed into that of a Common-wealth, the ancient hatred
towards them, would alfo be changed into good will . that thofe
rigorous Laws (if any there be yet extant, made under the Lungs)
againfl fo innocent a people, would happily be repealed. So that
we hope now for better from your gentleneffe, and goodneffe, fmce,
from the beginning of your Government of this Common-wealth,
your Highneffe hath profeffed much refpedl'and favour towards us.
Wherefore I humbly entreat your Highneffe, that you would with
a gracious eye have regard unto us, and our Petition, and grant
unto us, as you have done unto others, free exercife of our Religion,
that we may have our Synagogues, and keep our own publick wor-
fhip, as our brethren do in Italy, Gcvniany , Poland, and many other
places, and we fhall pray for the happineffe and Peace of this your
much renowned and puiffant Common-wealth.


A DECLARATION
T O 1' H E
Common-wealth of England,
Rabbi Menajfeh Ben Israel, /hewing Jhe
Motives of his coming into England.
rßfl Avin g f° me years fmce often perceived that in this Nation,
| | God hath a People, that is very tender hearted, and well
wifliing to our fore afflicted Nation ; Yea, I my felf having
fome Experience thereof, in divers Eminent perfons, excelling both
in Piety and Learning : I thought with my felf, I fhould do no
fmall fervice to my own Nation, as alfo to the People and Inhabi-
tants of this Common-wealth, if by humble addreffes to the late
Honourable Parliament, I might obtain a fafe Conduct once to
tranfport my felf thither. Which I having done, and according to
my defire, received a moft kinde and satisfactory Answer, I now
am come. And to the end all Men may know the true Motives
and Intent of this my coming, I fhall briefly comprehend and deliver
them in thefe particulars.
Firft and Formoft, my Intention is to try, if by Gods good hand
over me, I may obtain here for my Nation the Liberty of a free
and publick Synagogue, wherein we may daily call upon the Lord
our God, that once he may be pleafed to remember his Mercies
and Promifes done to our Forefathers, forgiving our trefpaffes, and
reftoring us once again into our fathers Inheritance ; and befides


to fue alfo for a bleffing upon this Nation, and People of England,
for receiving us into their bofomes, and comforting Sion in her
diftreffe.
My fecond Motive is, becaufe the opinion of many Chriftians and
mine doe concurre herein, that we both believe that the reftoring
time of our Nation into their Native Countrey, is very near at
hand ; I believing more particularly, that this reftauration cannot
be, before thefe words of Daniel Chap. 12. ver. 7- be firft accom-
plifhed, when he faith, And when the difpeffion of the Holy people
fhall be compleated in all places , then fhall all thefe things be coin-
pleated : fignifying therewith, that before all be fulfilled, the People
of God muff be firft difperfed into all places and Countreys of the
World. Now we know, how our Nation at the prefent is fpread
all about, and hath its feat and dwelling in the moft flourifhing
parts of all the Kingdomes, and Countreys of the World, as well
in America, as in the other three parts thereof; except onely in
this confiderable and mighty Ifland. And therefore this remains
onely in my judgement, before the ME S SIA come and reftore
our Nation, that firft we must have our feat here likewife.
My third Motive is grounded on the profit that I conceive this
Common-wealth is to reap, if it fhall vouchfafe to receive us; for
thence, I hope, there will follow a great bleffmg from God upon
them, and a very abundant trading into, and from all parts of the
World, not onely without prejudice to the Pmglifh Nation, but for
their profit, both in Importation, and Exportation of goods. Yet
if any fhall'doubt hereof, I truft their Charity towards the people
of God, will fatisfie them, efpecially when they shall read the
enfuing Treatife. _
The fourth Motive of my coming hither, is, my fincere affedlion
to this Common-wealth, by reafon of fo many Worthy, Learned,
and Pious men in this Nation, whofe loving kindneffe and Piety I
have experience of: hoping to finde the like affedtion in all the
People generally, the more, becaufe I alwaies have, both by writing
and deeds, profeffed much inclination to this Common-wealth; and
that I perfwade my felf they will be mindfull of that Command of
the Lord our God, who so highly recommends unto all men the
love


love of fir anger s\ much more to thofe that profeffe their good
affection to them. For this I defire all may be confident of, that
I am not come to make any difturbance, or to move any difputes
about matters of Religion ; but onely to live with my Nation in the
fear of the Lord, under the fhadow of your protection, whiles we
expect with you tke hope of Ifrael to be revealed.


How Profitable
The Nation of the J ewes are.
things, if it pleafe your Highneffe, there are that make
IgSl a ftrange Nation wel-beloved amongft the Natives of a
B3EB land where they dwell; and on the 'contrary, three things
that make them hatefull, viz. Profit , they may receive from them;
Fidelity they hold towards their Princes; and the Noblenes and
purety of their blood. Now when I fhall have made good, ™ at
all thefe three things are found in the Jewish Nation , I mall cer-
tainly perfuade your Highnefle, that with a favorable eye, (Mon-
archy being changed into a Republicq) you fhall be pleafed to
receive againe the Nation of the Jews, who in time paft lived in
that I Hand : but by, I know not what, falfe Informations, were
cruelly handled and banifhed.
Profit is a mod; powerfull motive, and which all the vv orld pre-
ferres before all other things : and therefore wee fhall handle that
point firft. , . . a.
It is a thing confirmed, that merchandicmg is, as it were, the
proper profeflion of the Nation of the Jews. 1 attribute this m the
firft place, to the particular Providence and mercy of God towards
his people: for having banifhed them from their own Countrey, yet
not from his Protedlion, hee hath given them, as it were, a naturall
instinft, by which they might not onely gain what was neceffary
for their need, but that they Ihould alfo thrive m Riches and pol-
feffions • whereby they fhould not onely become gracious to their
Princes and Lords, but that they fhould be invited by others to
come and dwell in their Lands.
Moreover, it cannot be denyed, but that neceffity furies up a
mans ability and induftry ; and that it gives him great incitement,
by all meanes to trie the favour of F ortune.
Befides, feeing it is no Wifedome for them to endeavour the
gaining of Land and other immovable goods, and fo to


i .
their poffeffions here, where their perfons are subjedl to fo many
cafualities, banifhments and peregrinations ; they are forced to life
marchandizing untill that time, when they fhall returne to their
owne Country, that then as God hath promifed by de Prophet
Zachary, There Jhall be found no more any merchant amongft them
in the Houfe of the Lord.
From that very thing we have faid, there rifeth an infallible
Profit, commodity and gain to all thofe Princes in whofe Lands
they dwell above all other drange Nations whatfoever, as experi-
ence by divers Reafons doth confirme.
i. The Jewes, having no opportunity to live in their own Coun-
try, to till the Lands or other like employments, give themfelves
wholy unto merchandizing, and for contriving new Inventions, no
Nation almoft going beyond them. And fo it is observed, that
wherefoever they go to dwell, there prefently the Traficq begins to
florifh. Which may be feen in divers places, efpecially in Ligorne,
which having been but a very ignoble and inconfiderable City, is
at this time, by the great concourfe of people, one of the mofl
famous places of Trafique of whole Italy.
Furthermore, the Inventor of the famous Scala de Spalatro , (the
moft firme and folid Traficq of Venice) was a Jew, who by this his
Invention tranfported the Negotiation from a great part of the
Levant into that Citie.
Even that very fame is feene likewife at this day in Nizza, and
in other infinite places more, both in Europe and Afia.
11. The Nation of the Jews is difperfed throughout the whole
world, it being a chaftifement that God hath layd upon them for
their ’idolatries, Deut. 28. 69. Ezech. 20. 23. Nehem. 1. 8. Pfal.
107. 27. as likewayes by contrary fortunes their families fuffer the
fame fhipwrack.
Now in this difpersion our P'ore-fathers dying from the Spanifh
Inquifition, fome of them came in Holland, others got into Italy,
and others betooke themfelves in Afia ; and fo eafely they credit
one another; and by that meanes they draw the Negotiation
where-ever they are, wherewith all of them marchandifing and
having perfedt knowledge of all the kinds of Monees, Diamants,
Cochinil, Indigo, Wines, Oyle, and other Commodities, that ferve
from


from place to place ; efpecially holding correfpondence with their
friends and kinds-folke, whofe language they underftand; they do
abundantly enrich the Lands and Countries of Grangers, where
they live, not onely with what is requifite and neceffary for the life
of man, but alfo what may ferve for ornament to his civill con-
dition. Of which Traficq , there arifeth ordinarily Five important
benefits. . , .
1. The augmentation of the Publicq 1 oils and Gabels, at their
coming in and going out of the place.
2. The tranfporting and bringing in of marchandifes from re-
mote Countries.
3. The affording of Materials in great plenty for all Mechaniqs;
as Wooll, Leather and Hides, and fuch like Marchandize.
4. The venting and exportation of fo many kinds of Mani-
fadtures.
5. The Commerce and reciprocal! Negotiation at Sea, which
is the ground of Peace between neighbour Nations, and of great
profit to their own fellow-citizens.
111. This reafon is the more ftrengthened, when we fee, that not
onely the Jewish Nation dwelling in Holland and Italy, traficq
with their owne ftocke, but alfo with the richeffe of many others
of their owne Nation, friends, kinds-men and acquaintance, which
notwithftanding live in Spaine, and fend unto them their moneys
and goods, which they hold in their hands, and content themfelves
with a very small portion of their eftate, to the end they may be
fecure and free from danger that might happen unto them, in cafe
they fhould fall under the yoke of the Inquifition; whence not
onely their goods, but oftentimes alfo their lives are endangered.
IV. The love that men ordinarily beare to their owne Country,
and the defire they have to end their lives, where they had their
beginning, is the caufe, that moft ftrangers having gotten richeffe
where they are in a forain land, are commonly taken in a defire to
returne to their natif foil, and there peaceably to enjoy their eftate;
fo that as they were a help to the places where they lived, and
negotiated while they remained there ; fo when they depart from
thence, they carry all away, and fpoile them of their wealth ; tranf-
porting all into their owne native Country; But with thejewesthe
case


cafe is farre different; for where the Jewes are once kindly re-
ceaved, they make a firm refolution never to depart from thence,
feeing they have no proper place of their owne: and so they are al-
wayes with their goods in the Cities where they live, a perpetual!
benefit to all payments. Which reafons do clearly proove, that it
being the property of Citizens in populous and rich countries, to
feeke their reft and eafe with buying lands and faire poffeffion of
which they live : many of them hating commerce, afpire to Titles
and Dignities: that of all ftrangers, in whofe hands ordinarily
Trafique is found, there are none fo profitable and beneficiall to the
place where they trade and live, as is the Nation of the Jewes.
And feeing amongft the people of Europe, the chiefeft richeffes they
poffeffe, come from Spaine, thofe neighbour Nations, where the
jewes fhall finde liberty to live according to their owne Judaicall
Lawes, they fhall mod eafily draw that benefit to, themfelves by
meanes of the induftry of our Nation, and their mutuall corref-
pondance.
From hence (if it pleafe your Highnes) it refults, that the Jewifh
Nation, though fcattered through the whole World, are not there-
fore a defpifable people, but as a Plant worthy to be planted in the
whole world, received into populous Cities, who ought to plant
them in thofe places, which are mofl fecure from danger; being
trees of mofl favory fruit and profit, to be alwayes molt favoured
with Lawes and Priviledges, or Prerogatives, fecured and defended
by Armes. An Exemple of this we have in our times. His
Majefty, the Illuftrious King of Danemarck, invited them with
fpeciall Priviledges into Geluckftadt : the Duke of Savoy into
Nifa of Provence ; and the Duke of Medina in Retio, allowing
them fuch conditions and benefices, the like never were prefented
unto them by any other Prince, as appeareth by the copy of thofe
Priviledges, which I have in my hands. But fuppofmg it would
be a matter of too large extention, if I fhould make a relation of all
the places under whofe Princes the Jewes live, I will onely fpeake
briefly of the two tribes Judah and Benjamin : Thefe in India in
Cochin have 4 Synagogues, one part of thefe Jewes being there of
a white colour, and three of a tawny ; thefe being moft favoured by
the King. In the yeare 1640. dyed Samuel Caftoel, Gouvernor
of


of the City, and Agent for the King, and David Caftoel his fonne
fucceeded in his place. In Perfia there is a great number of
I ewes, and they live indifferent freely: there are alfo amongft them
that are in favour and great refpedl by the King, and who live
there very bravely. Some years paft, there was Elhazar Huza,
the Viceroy, and now there is David lan, if yet he be living. In
the year 1636. the Saltan Amarat tooke in Bagdad, and putting all
to the fword, he commanded that they fhould not touch the Jewes,
nor their houfes, and befides that, he freed them from one half of
the tribute they were wont to pay to the Perfmn.
But the chiefeft place where the Jewes live, is the 1 urkifh
Empire, where fome of them live in great eftate, even in the Court
of the Grand Turke at Conftantinople, by reafon there is no Vice-
roy, or Gouvernor, or Baffa, which hath not a Jew to manage his
affaires, and to take care for his eflate : Hence it cometh, that in
fhort time they grow up to be Lords of great revenus, and they
moft frequently bend the minds of Great-ones to moft weighty
affairs in gouvernment.
The greateft Viceroy of whole Europe is the Baffa ot Egypt;
this Baffa always takes to him, by ordre of the Kingdome, a Jew
with the title of Zaraf- Baffa (Threfurer) viz. of all the Revenus of
that gouvernment, who receaves purfes full of money, feals them,
and then fends them to the King. This man in a fhort time
grows very rich, for that by his hands as being next to the Baffa,
the 24 Gouvernments of that Empire are fould and given and all
other buffmeffes menaged. At prefent he that poffeffeth this place,
is called Sr. Abraham Alhula. The number of the Jews living in
this Kingdome of the Great Turke, is very great, and amounts to
many Millions. In Conftantinople alone there are 48 Synagogues,
and in Salaminque 36, and more than fourefcore thoufand foules in
thefe two Cities alone. #
The firft King gave them great priviledges, which they enjoy
untill this day : for befides the liberty, they have everywhere, of
trading with open fhops, of bearing any Office and poffefiing o
any goods, both mooveable and immooveable, he yet graunted them
power to judge all Civill caufes according to theii own Lawes
amongft themfelves. Moreover they are exempted from going to
6 Warres,


Warres, and that fouldiers fhould be quartered in their houfes,
and that Juftice fhould take no place upon the death of any one
that left no heir to his Eftate.
In all which they are preferred before the naturall Turkes them-
felves. For which caufe they pay in fome Cities to the King three
Patacons, and in others two and a half by the pole.
In this eftate fome of the Jewes have growne to great fortunes;
as Jofeph Nafmo, unto whom Amatus Lufitanus dedicated his fifth
and fixth Centurise, was by Sultan Solime made Duke of Maccia,
Earle of Andro, Seignor of Millo, and the feaven Iflands; And lacob
Ben-lacs by Sultan Amurat, was made Gouvernour of the Tiber-
iades : fo likewife others were exalted to very great and eminent
Dignities ; as was that Selomo Rofe, that was fent for Ambaffador
at Venice, where he confirmed the laft Peace with Amurat. In
Germany, there lives alfo a great multitude of Jews, efpecially at
Prague, Vienna and P'ranckfurt, very much favoured by the moll
mild and moil gracious Emperours, but defpifed of the people,
being a Nation not very finely garnifhed by reafon of their vile
cloathing : yet notwithftanding there is not wanting amongfl them
perfons of great quality. The Emperour Matthias made Noble
both Mardochai Mairel, and Ferdinando Jacob Bar Seba.
But yet a greater number of Jews are found in the Kingdome
of Poland, Pruffia and Lethuania, under which Monarchy they have
the J urifdidlion to judge amongfl; themfelves all caufes, both
Criminal and Civil ; and alfo great and famous Academies of their
owne. The chief Cities where the Nation liveth, are Lublin and
Cracow, where there is a Jew, called Ifaac lecells, who built a
Synagogue, which flood him in one hundred thousand Francs, and
is worth many tons of gold. There is in this place fuch infinite
number of Jewes, that although the Cofaques in the late warres
have killed of them above one hundred and fourefcore thoufand;
yet it is fuftained that they are yet at this day as innumerable as
thofe were that came out of Egypt. In that Kingdome the whole
Negotiation is in the hand of the Jews, the reft of the Chriflians
are either all Noble-men or Rufliques and kept as Haves.
In Italy they are generally protected by all the Princes : their
principall refidence is in the moft famous Citie of Venice ; fo that
.. in


In that fame Citie alone they poffeffe about 1400 Houfes; and are
ufed there with much courtoify and clemency. Many alfo live m
Padoa and Verona; others in Mantua, and alfo many in Rome it
felf. Finally they are fcattered here and there in the chief places
of Italy, and do live there with many fpeciall priviledges.
In the Gouvernment of the great Duke of Tufcany, they are by
that Prince moft gracioudy and bountifully dealt with, having
power from him graunted, to have their Judicatory by themfelves,
and to judge in all matters, both Civill and Criminall; befides
many other Priviledges, whereof I my felf have the Copies in hand.
The rich and illuftrious families that flourifhed in thefe Countries
are many, viz. The Thoraces, who being three Brethren, (hared
betwixt them above 700 thoufand Crownes. In Ferrara were the
Viles, whofe dock was above 200 thoufand Crownes. Ihe Lord
Jofeph de Fano, Marquis de Villependi, was a man much lefpected
of all the Princes in Italy, and was called by them, The Peace-
maker and appeafer of all troubles; becaufe he, by his audtority
and entremife, was ufed to appeafe all troubles and strife rifmg
amongst them. Don Daniel Rodrigues, becaufe of his prudency
and other good qualities, was fent in the year 1589 from the most
Excellent Senat of Venice into Dalmatia, to appeafe thofe tumults
and fcandals given by the Ufquoquibs in Cliffa: which he most
manly effected, and caufed all the women and children, that were
kept cloofe prifonners, to be fet at liberty, brought alfo to an happ)
iffue many other things of great moment, for which he was fent.
Alphonfo 11. the Duke of Ferrara, fent alfo for his Ambalfador to
the Imperiall Majesty, one Abraham de Bondi, to pay and dif-
charge Investiture of the States of Modena and Reggio. The
Prince of Safol and the Marquis of Scandia Hkewife, had to theii
Factors men of our Nation.
In the Kingdome of Barbary, there lives alfo a great number of
Jewes, who-ever cruelly and bafely ufed by that Barbarous Nation,
except at Marrocco, the Court and Kings where they have
their Naguid or Prince that gouverns them, and is their Judge, and
is called at this day, Seignor Mofeh Palache ; and befoie him was
in the fame Court, that Noble family Ruthes, that had powei and
JurifdiFtion of all kinde of punifhment. onely life and death
excepted.
In


In the Low-Countries alfo, the Jewes are received with great
Charity and Benevolency, and efpecially in this moft renowned
City of Amfterdam, where there are no leffe then 400 Families :
and how great a trading and Negotiation they draw to that City,
experience doth sufficiently witneffe. I hey have there no leffe
then three hundred houfes of their own, enjoy a good part of the
Weft and East-Indian Compagnies ; and besides have yet to fet
forth their Traficq fuch a flock, that for fetting a fide, onely one
duit of every pound flamish for all kind of commodities that
enter, and again as much for all what goes out of this towne and
what befides we pay yearly of the rents we get from the East-
Indian Compagnie to the reliefe and fuftenance of the poore of
our Synagogue, that very money amounts ordinarily every year,
unto the fumme very near of 12000 F ranks ; whereby you may
eafely conceive what a mighty flock it is they trade with, and
what a profit they needs muft bring into this City.
In Hambourg likewise, a moft famous City of Holface in
Germany, there lives alfo a hundred families, protected by the
Magistral though molefted by the people. There resides
Sr. Duark Mines d’Acofta, refident for his Majefty the King of
Portugal; Gabriel Gomes, Agent for his Majefty the King of
Danemarck; David de Lima, a Jeweller, for the fame his
Majesty: and Emmanuel Boccaro Rofales, created by the
Emperor a Noble-man and a Count Palatin.
In all thefe places the Jewes live (in a manner) all of them
Merchants, and that without any prejudice at all to the Natives ;
For the Natives, and thofe efpecially that are moft rich, they build
themfelves houfes and Palaces, buy Lands and firme goods, aime
at Titles and Dignities, and fo feeke their reft and contentement
that way: But as for the Jewes, they afpire at nothing, but to
preferre themfelves in their way of marchandize ; and so employing
their Capitals , they fend forth the benefit of their labour amongst
many and fundry of the Natives, which they, by the traficq of
their Negotiation, do enrich. From whence it’s eafy to judge of
the profit that Princes and Common-wealths do reap, by giving
liberty of Religion to the Jewes, and gathering them by some
fpeciall priviledges into their countries : as frees that bring forth
fuch excellent fruits, S°


So that if one Prince, ill. advifed, driveth them out of his Land,
yet another invites them to his, and fhews them favour ; Wherein
we may fee the prophety of Jacob fulfilled in the letter : The Jiaffe
(to fupport him) Jhall not depart from Jacob , untill Meffias Jhall
come. And this fhall suffice concerning the Profit of the Jewish
Nation.
How


How Faithful!
The Nation of the Jewes are.
He Fidelity of Vaffals and Subjects, is a thing that Princes
much most esteem off: for there-on, both in Peace and
Warre, depends the prefervation of their estates. And as
for this point, in my opinion, they owe much to the Nation of the
Jewes, by reafon of the faithfulneffe and loyalty they (how to all
Potentates that receive and protect them in their Countries. For
fetting afide the Histories of the Ptolomies, Kings of Egypt, who
did not trust the Guard of their perfons, nor the keeping of their
Forts, nor the most important affaires of their Kingdom to any
other Nation with greater fatiffaction then to the Jewes; the
Wounds of Antipater fhewed to Julius Caefar in token of his
loyalty, and the brafen Tables of our Ancestours amongst the
Romans, are evident witneffes enough of their fidelity fhewed unto
them.
In Spaine the Jewes of Burgos, as the Cronicles do declare,
most generoufly fhewed the very fame fidelity in the times of Don
Henrique ; who having killed his Brother, the King, Don Pedro
de Cruel, made himfelf Lord of all his Kingdoms, and brought
under his obedience all the Grandos and People of Spaine : Onely
the Jewes of Burgos denyed to obey him, and fortified themfelves
within the City, faying, That God would never have it , that they
Jhould deny obedience to their Naturall Lord Don Pedro , or to his
right full fucceffours . A constancy that the prudent King, Don
Henriques, very much esteemed of, faying, that fuch Vaffals as
thofe were, by Kings and great men, worthy of much account,
seeing they held greater respedl to the fidelity they ought to their
King , although conquered and dead , than to theprefent fortune of the
Conquerour: And a while after receiving very honourable condi-
tions , they gave themfelves over.
In Spaine alfo (as you may fee in Mariana) many Jewes for the
fame fidelity were appointed Gouvernours of the Kingdome, and
Tutors


Tutors of Noble-mens children, jointly to others of the Nobility
upon the death of their Parents.
The Chronicles of the Xarifes, dedicated to King Philip the
fecond, King ofSpaine, alleagues for an exemple of great fidelity
and vertue, how the rifmg of the Xarifes againfl the Morines,
their killing and fpoyling them of the Kingdome, was such a
great grief unto Samuel Alvalenfi, one of those banifhed out of
Spaine, and much favoured by the king of Fez, defcended from
the house of the Morines; that joyning himfelf with other
Magistrats and fubjects of the Morines, 'arming some fhips
and going himfelf Captain over all, he came fuddenly with 400
men, and fell by night upon the Army of the Xarifes, that were
more then 3000 men, befieging Copta, and without lofmg one man,
killed of them above 500, and caused them to raise the fiege.
Many the like Exemples may be brought of times past; but for
our prefent, and moderne times there is no Exemple fo evident, as
in the befieging of Mantua for the Emperour in the year 1630,
where the Jewes fought moft valiantly, and refcued it from the
Natives. As likewife in the Seignory of Brafil, where the fame
thing was done : for one of the fame Nation, a Dutchman, having
delivered the Cape unto the Portugals, there was found in our
Nation there not onely loyalty, but alfo fuch difcretion, that had
they taken their advife, the bufmes had not so proceeded.
This may be feen more clearly yet in their being banifhed out of
Castilla, in the dayes of Ferdinand and Ifabella. Their number
at that time was fuppofed tp have bene half a million of men,
amongst whom were many of great valour and courage (as Don
Isaac Abarbanel, a Counfellor of State, doth relate) and yet
amongst fo great a number, there was not found any one man, that
undertooke to raife a party to free themfelves from that most
miferable banifhment. An evident figne of the proper and naturall
refolution of this Nation, and of their constant obecfience to their
Princes.
The fame affedlion is confirmed by the inviolable custome of all
the Jewes wherefoever they live : for on every Sabbath or festival!
Day, they everywhere are ufed to pray for the fafety of all Kings,
Princes, and Common-wealths, under whofe jurifdiction they live,
of what profeffion-foever: under which duety they are bound by
b 2 the


the Prophets and the Talmudists ; from the Law, as by Jeremy
chap. 29. vers. 7. Seek the peace of the Citieunto which I have made
you to wander: and pray for her unto the Lord , for in her Peace
you fhall enjoy peace. He fpeaks of Babylon, where the Jewes at
that time were captives. From the Talmud ord. 4. tradt. 4.
Abodazara pereq. 1. Pray for the peace of the King dome, for unles
there were feare of the Kingdome, men wouldfwallow one the other
alive, &c.
From the continuall and never broken Cuftome of the Jewes
wherefoever they are, on the Sabbath-Day, or other folemne
Feafts; at which time all the Jewes from all places come together
to the Synagogue, after the benediction of the Holy Law, before
the Minister of the Synagogue bleffeth the people of the Jewes;
with a loud voice he bleffeth the Prince of the Country under
whom they live, that all the Jewes may heare it, -and fay, Amen.
The words he ufeth are thefe, as in the printed booke of the Jewes
may be feen : He that giveth falvation unto Kings, and dominion
unto Lords, he that delivered his fervant David from the fword of
the Enemy, he that made a way in the Sea , and a path in the Jlrang
waters, blejfe and keep , preferve and ref cue, exalt and magnify, and
lift up higher and higher , our Lord. [And then he names, the
Pope, the Emperour, King, Duke, or any other Prince under
whom the Jewes live, and adds :] The King of kings defend him
in his mercy, making him joy full, and free him from all dangers and
distreffe. The King of kings, for his goodnejfe sake, raise up and
exalt his pla7ietary farre, and multiply his dayes over his Kingdom.
The Kings of kings, for his mercies fake, put into his heart, and into
the heart of his Counfellers, and thofe that attend and adminifter to
him , that he may show mercy unto us, and unto all the people of
Israel. In his dayes and in our dayes, let Judah be fafe, and
Isra'el dwell securely, and let the Redeemer come to Ifrael; and fo
may it pleafe God. Amen. Thefe are the very formalities fet
downe word for word, which the Jewes, by the command of God,
received from the Talmud, do ufe in their prayers for Princes,
under whofe gouvernment they refide. And therefore wife
Princes are wont to banifh from their Courts falfe rapports. And
most wife R. Simon Ben-lochaifP\x\ his excellent book called Zoar
in Sarafa Pecudi, relates, that it is a Tradition receaved from
Heaven,


Heaven , //W Kings of the Nations of the world, Princes ,
Gouvernottrs, that protect the y ewes in this world', do them any
good, that the fame Jhall enjoy certain degrees of glory or eternall
reward; as on the other fide, they that do to the Nation of the J ewes
any harme, that they shall be punifhed with fome particular eternall
punifhment. As appeareth alfo out of Efa. the last chapter.
Thus you fee the Fidelity of the Jewes towards their Gouver-
nours clearly prooved. Now, that no man may thinke that their
banifhment out of Spaigne and Portugal, proceeded from any fufpi-
tion or faults of theirs, I fhall clearly rehearfe the reafon of fo
fudden a determination, and what the thoughts of many
Christian Princes have bene there-upon. The bufmes was thus :
Ferdinand and Ifabella, Gouvernours of Castile, having gained the
Kingdome of Granada, of which they tooke poffeffion on the 5 of
January, they refolved to thrust out all the Jewes that lived in
their Kingdomes, and so on the laft of March, they made an
Edict in the fame City, in which they expreffed : That seeing the
yewes in their Countries drew many Chriftians to turne y ewes, and
efpecially some Noble-men of their Kingdome of A ndalusia, that for
this caufe they banifhed them under most heavy penalties , cfc. So
that the caufe of their banifhment was not any difloyalty at all.
Now what amongst many others in all Christendom, one famous
Lawyer in Rome, and Oforius an excellent and most eloquent
Historian have thought, I fhall here relate. In the year 1492
(faith the Lawyer) Ferdinand, called the Catholick, being King of
Spaine, drove out of his Country all the Jewes that were living
there from the time of the Babylonian and Roman Captivity, and
were very rich in houfes and goods ; and that upon pain, if they
went not away within the terme of 6 moneths, that all their houfes
and goods fhould be confifcated unto the Exchequer, which as we
have faid, were very great. Whereupon they leaving the King-
dome of Castile, they went over many of them into Portugal, as
being the nearest place. In the year 1497, there being an
Alliance contracted between the Kings of Castile and Portugal;
the Jewes at the request of the faid King Ferdinand, were banifhed
out of Portugal; but it being against the will of Emanuel, King of
Portugal, to have them banifhed out of his Country, he refolved to
oblidge them to become Christians, promifmg never to molest
them


them, neither in Criminall matters, nor in the loffe of their goods ;
and exempted them from many burdens and Tributs of the King-
dome. This Emanuel being dead, John 111. fucceededin his place
in the Kingdome of Portugal, who being excited by others, said,
That what his Father Emanuel had done, concerning the not-
troubling them, was of no valew, because they lived not as was
convenient, and that without the authority of the Pope of Rome,
his father could not graunt any fuch thing : for which caufe he
would that for thofe that lived amifh, there fhould be proceeded
against, as against the Mores in Castile : And fending to Rome to
difanull the faid promifes, it was not onely not graunted to him,
but moreover they reprooved his appearance there, and praifed
and approoved the promises made by his Father Emanuel to the
Jewes, publifhing a general pardon to all that were taken, which
were about 1500, and they all were fet free. Which Bull was
granted by Clement VII. by the intervention of all the confistory
of Cardinals. Afterwards the faid king John fent once againe
to defire the former Licence with fo many replications and tripli-
cations, that at length the Pope granted it : But a few dayes after
it was revoked againe with a generall Pardon to all that were
taken, which were 12.000, with fuch a determination, that the fame
Licence fhould never be granted, as being against all right and
reafon. This troubled Don John the King very much, and with-
all the Cardinal his brother, who came in thefe last dayes to be
King of Portugal himfelf. Great Paul 111. of the house of
Farnefia, fucceeding to Clement the VII. there was a request
tendred to the Pope for power to bring in the Inquifition into
this Kingdome : The Pope would not grant it, saying : He could
not, and that it was a thing against reafon and Justice, but on the
contrary confirmed the promifes made by the King Don Emanuel,
his Father; and pardonned all the delinquents fince the time of
violence unto that day. Don John feeing this, fent an Embaffadour
meerly for that bufines to the Pope, but could obtaine
nothing at all: for which caufe King John refolved to entreat the
Emperour Charles the V. than paffing for Rome, as Conquerour
over the Turks, having wonn Tunis and Goleta, that in this his
Triumph he would take occafion to defire this favour from the
Pope, that the King of Portugal might fet up the Inquifition in
his


his Kingdome, it being an old custome that thofe that triumphed,
fhould aske fomething of the Pope that they most defired. The
Emperour than having defired this, the Pope anfwered him, that he
could not do it by reafon of the agreement made, and the promifes
of the King Don Emanuel; which he had found by an Apostoli-
call Nuntio in Portugal in the year 1497, at which time the Jewes
were forced and compelled to become Christians. The Emperour
replied, Let that fmne fall on him, and the Prince his fonne, the
Apostolicall feat ffiall be free from it. So'the Pope granted it;
becaufe the Emperour Charles the V. was brother in law to King
Don John of Portugal; and befides they treated at that time to
enter further in affinity, and to marry their children, which fmce
was effected. After Paul the 111. granted this, there was a new
Pardon given in generall to all that were taken unto that time,
amounting the Number unto 1800. But the King refufing to
obey the Pardon, and to free the Prifonners, the Pope tooke it very
ill, and fent for this onely bufmes for his Nuntio, one Monfegnor
Monte Paliciano, Who fince was Cardinal of the Church of Rome.
And the King for all this not obeying, the Pope made the Nuntio
to fix the Pardon upon the doores of the Cathedral Churches, and
the Nuntio caufed the Prifons to be opened, and there were fet
free about 1800 prisonners. He that sollicited this bufmes at
Rome, was one Seignor Duarte de Paz, a Cavalliere of the Order
of St. John: whom to fearch out there were appointed at Rome
ten men difguifed; thefe having found him, gave him fifteen
wounds, and left him for dead ; thus wounded, he was carried to
the houfe of Seignor Philip Estrozi : This being reported to the
Pope, Paul the 111. he caufed him to be carried to the Castle
of S. Angelo, where he gave order to have him nobly cured.
That fame Seignor was by the Pope, by all the Cardinalls and
the whole Court in great refped. At the fame time that this
man was hurt, the Emperour Charles the V. was at Rome with
his Army. On the time when he began to treat of this bufmes
with Clement the VII. feeing the Kings importunity, he made
a Bull and gave licence to all the Portugals of that Nation of
the Jewes, that they might go and live in the Church- Dominions,
and whofoever will come in the said Dominions, that he ffiall
have freedom to live, as at the first, in his Jewifh profcffion, and
that


that at no time they fhould be enquired into, but after the fame
manner as they were wont to live in Portugal, so they fhould live
there. The faid Bull paffed all the Confistory ; and being con-
firmed and received by the faid Portugals, they began fome of
them to depart to live in Ancona, being a fea-port more com-
modious then others: which being known by the King and
Cardinal of Portugal, they caufed to be proclaimed in all the
Kingdome, that upon paine of death, and loffe of all their goods,
no man fhould dare depart the Kingdome, Clement being dead,
in his place fucceeded (as we have said) Pope Paul the 111. who
confirmed the fame Priviledges : Afterwards in the year 1550.
Paul the 111. died, and lulius the 111. fucceeded, who ratified the
fore-mentioned Priviledges given by his Praedeceffours, and the
whole Apostolike Seat inviolably. In thofe times there were
many Dodlors that wrote on this matter, amongst whom the
chiefest were Alciat, and the Cardinal Parifius in '2 & 3 parte
Confiliorum pro Chrijiianis noviter converjis ; fhewing by reason
and law, that confidering they were forced and not converted
willingly, that they had not fallen nor do fall under any Cenfure.
Thefe reafons being confidered of by the Princes of Italy, they
graunted likewise the fame Priviledges : viz. Cofmo the Great,
Duke of Florence, and Hercules, Duke of Ferrare, and within few
yeares Emanuel Felibert, Duke of Savoye ; and were by all his
succeffours confirmed. In the yean? 1492, when they were banifhed
from Castile, we read in the Chronicles of that Kingdome, that the
Lords of that place did complain that their Cities and Townes
were destroyed and dis-inhabitated; and had they beleeved any
fuch thing, that they would have oppofed the Kings decree, and
would never have given their consent to it. That was the cause,
that Don Emanuel of Portugal feeing on the one fide apparent
dommage, fhould he let them depart his Kingdome ; and on the
other fide, not being abte to breake his promife made to the King
of Castile, he caufed them to be compelled to the Faith, upon
paine of Death, that they fhould not depart out of his Dominions.
The Catholiq King was blamed of all Chriftian Princes, and
especially by the Senate of Venice, (as Marcus Antonius
Sabellicus doth write) for having banished a Nation fo profitable
to the Publicq and Particular good, without any kinde of pretence.
And


And so the Parlement of Paris likewife did extreamly wonder at
fuch a determination. And truely good reason there was to
Avonder; for we fee fince, what the Senat of Venice hath done,
avlio never deliberats or puts into execution any thing, without
great judgement : having the advantage of all Republicqs in their
o-ouvernment and leaving behinde them the Romans, Cartha-
genians, Athenians, and most learned Lacedemonians ; and that
Parlement of Paris, Avhich in the gouvernment of affaires was
always most prudent. Most of thofe that were banifhed paffed
to the Levant, Avho were embraced by the Ottoman-family, all
the fucceeding Kings wondring at it, that the Spanjards who
make profeffion to be a politiq Nation, fhould drive out of their
Kingdoms fuch a people. Moreover Sultan Bajazet, and Sultan
Soliman, received them exceeding well, the coming of the Jewes
to them being very acceptable; and fo did likewife all their
fucceffours, confidering of how great a profit and benefit their
refiding in their dominions was. And in the yeare 1555. Paul
the IV. being chosen Pope of Rome, who before was called
Cardinal de Chief!, an intimate to the Cardinal of Portugal,
caused the Jewes to be held in Ancona, and other places of the
Church, according to the Priviledges graunted to them by the
Popes, his Predeceffeurs in the name of the Roman
seat. Licurgus, Solon, and Draco, and all Founders of Common-
wealths, gave counsell that strangers ought to be loved and much
made of, as in the Discourses of Se. in 7 de Legibus de Rep », is
amply to be feen. And by the Divine LaAv (as Moses com-
mandeth us) we ought not to trouble a stranger, but he sayes,
Remember you were Jlr angers in the Land of Egypt.
In summa, to the same purpose might be brought many other
and more powerfull reasons, but because they are out of 0111
confideration, we pafle them over. And here to declare some
particulars, worthy to be known for advise and exemple, that
befell our Nation in those bitter banifhments; part whereof
Hieronymus Osorius recites more at large, in the first of his elegant
two Bookes de Rebus Emanuelis. The first title he giveth to
those miserable succeffes, is this, which he puts for a Postil in the
margent of his booke, Judceorum Liben per vim ad Chrijlianifmiim
pertradti: and than rehearses, how that in the yeare 1496 the King
decreed,


decreed, that all the Jewes and Mores, that dwelt in his Kingdome,
and would not become Christians, fhould depart his Dominions in
a fliort time ; which being past, all that fhould be found in his
Kingdome, fhould loose their liberty, and become Haves to the
King. The time being now at hand (as Osorius proceeds) in
which the Jewes, that would not turne Christians, were to depart
the Kingdome, and all of them as many as they were, had with all
their power provided, and taken a firme resolution to be gone ;
which the King seeing, and not able to endure it, thought upon
a bufmes (as he saith) fadlo quidem iniquam & injujlam , which to
do was realy wicked and unjust, and that was to command that all
the children of the Israelites, that were not above 14 yeares old,
fhould be taken out of the power of their owne Parents ; and when
they had them, they Hiould force them to become Christians; a
new thing that could not be done without a wonderfull alteration
of their minds : for it was (as Osorius speakes) a horrid and
miserable spedtacle to see the tender Infants wrestled out of the
arms and brefts of their lamenting mothers, to dragge along their
poore fathers that held them faff, and to give them many wounds
and blows to draw them out of their handes; to hear their cryes
that afcend to heaven, their groanes, lamentations, and complaints
every-where ; fo that this cruelty was the cause, that many of
thofe diftreffed Fathers threw their children into wells, and others
killed themselves with their owne hands, that they might not fee
fo bitter a thing with their eyes. The cruelty of Emanuel ended
not here, but going on with compulfion and revilings, gave caufe
to his owne Chronographer to make the fecond title or poftil, with
these words ; Vis & Dolus ludceis illata : That is, The force and
deceit ufed towards the Jewes, And fo he goes on, declaring how
he had promifed in the condition they had made, that he would
affigne them three Ports and his Kingdome to embarque at, viz.
Lifbon, Setuval, and Puerto: and nevertheleffe he forbade them
afterwards to embarque themselves in any place but Lisbon : for
which caufe all the Jewes of the Kingdome came to that City, from
whence befides a thoufand moleftations and extortions, he drove
them (as Vafquo faith) as Hieep in the flails, and there forced their
afflifted bodies to counterfeit, that which their foules and thoughts
never meant nor approved of. Works, of which his owne
Chronologer


19
Chronologer faith, Fuit hoc quidem neque ex Lege , neque ex Religione
folium. That is, This was done neither according to Law, nor
Religion. Let men of clear minde, and free from paffion confider
for Gods fake, if fuch violences can worke any good impreffion or
character in men : or what Law, either Humain or Divine,
National or Moderne, can beare, that the foules of men (which the
Moft High hath created free) be forced to beleeve what they
beleeve not, and to love what they hate ? This cruelty was re-
prooved and cenfured of many Princes of the world and learned
men. And his owne Chronologer reprehends it with a new poftil,
and fpeakes freely ; Regis in hides os facinorum reprehenfeo. That is,
A censure of the Kinges wickednes againft the Jewes. Truly with
juft reafon doth Oforius call the workes, which the King did unto
us, Iniquities and injujiices , deceitfull violences , and wicked attempts :
And fo goes on, reprooving them with moft elegant Reafons.
Further what happened to the Jewes under other Princes in other
Kingdomes and Countries, is notorious and enough known to all
the world, and therefore not neceffary here to relate. So farre
concerning their Bannifhment.
Now, I will not conceale to fay, but that alwayes there have
bene found fome calumniators, that endeavouring to make the
Nation infamous, laid upon them three moft falfe reports, as if they
were dangerous to the Goods , the Lives , and withall to the very Soules
of the Natives. They urge against them their zfuries, the flaying
of infants to celebrate their paffe-over, and the inducing Christians
to become Jewes. To all which I shall answer briefly.
i. As for ufury, fuch dealing is not the effentiall property of
the Jewes, for though in Germany there be fome indeed that
pradfife ufury; yet the moft part of them that live in Turky,
Italy, Holland and Hamburg, being come out of Spaigne, they
hold it infamous to ufe it; and fo with a very fmall profit of 4or
5 per Cent, as Chriftians themselves do, they put their money
ordinarily in Banco : for to lay out their money without any profit,
was commanded onely toward their brethren of the fame Nation
of the Jewes ; but not to any other Nation. And however by
this Charity is not hurt; for it ftands in good reafon, that every
one fhoulcl gaine and get fome advantage with his money, to
fuftaine his owne life : and when any one to fupply his own wants,
doth


doth take fome cours of marchandife, by which he hopes to gaine
by other mens moneys taken up on truft, ’t is no inhumanity to
reckon and take from him ufe : For as no man is bound to give
his goods to an other ; fo is he not bound to let it out, but for his
owne occafions and profit, and not to leave himfelf deftitute of the
profit he could make of the moneys. Onely this mull be done
with moderation, that the ufury be not biting and exorbitant,
which the Chriftians themfelves ufe, amongft themfelves; as even
in the Mounts of Piety at Padua, Vicenza and Verona is to be
feen, where they take 6 par Cent, and elfewere yet much more.
This in no manner can be called Robbery, but is with confent and
will of the Contrafter; and the same Sacred Scripture, which
allows ufury with him that is not of the fame Religion, forbids
absolutely the robbing of all men, whatfoever Religion they be
of. In our Law it is a greater finne to rob or defraud a ftranger,
than if I did it to one of my owne profeffion; becaufe a Jew is
bound to fhew his charity to all men : for he hath a precept, not
to abhorre an Idumean, nor an Egyptian ; and that he (hall love
and protect a ftranger that comes to live in his land. If notwith-
ftanding there be fome that do contrary to this, they do it not as
Jewes simply, but as wicked Jewes, as amongft all nations there
are found generally fome Ufurers.
2. As for killing of the yong children of Chriftians ; it is an in-
fallible truth what is reported of the Negros of Guinea and Brazil*
that if they fee any miferable man that hath efcaped from the danger
of the fea, or hath fallen or fuffered any kind of ill-fortune, or Ship-
wrake, they perfecute and vex him so much the more, faying, God
curse thee. And wee that live not amongft the Blacke-moors and
wild-men, but amongft the white and civilized people of the world,-
yet wee find this an ordinary cours, that men are very prone to hate
and defpife him that hath ill fortune ; and on the other side, to make
much of those whom fortune doth favour. Hereof the Chriftians
themfelves have good experience; for during the times of their
fuppreffion and perfecution under the Roman Empire, they were
falfly flandred of divers Emperours and tyrannicall Princes. Nero
accufed them, that they had fet Rome on fire ; Others, that they
were Witches and Conjurers ; and others againe that they Hew
their children to celebrate their Ceremonies, as wee find in divers
Authors.


Authors. Even fo likewife it is with the Jewifli Nation, that now
is difperfed and afflicted, though they have moneys ; There is no
flander nor calumny that is not call upon them, even the very fame
ancient fcandall that was caft of old upon the innocent Chriftians,
is now laid upon the Jewes. Whereas the whole world may easely
perceive, it is but a meer flander, feeing it is known that at this day,
out of lerusalem, no sacrifice nor blood is any use by them, even
that blood which is found in an Egg is forbidden them, how much
more mans blood ? More-over I could produce divers memorable
exemples which out in our owne times in Araguza to a Jew :
how he was accufed of this fame wickednes, and not confef-
fmg it, how they imprisoned him betwixt two walls, and being
diftreffe, how he cited before God all the ludges to
anfwer there for what they did; and how within a year after
many of the ludges died, and thofe that lived, fearing the like
might befall them, and loofe their lives, fet him free : But I muft
not be too prolix; it may fuffice to fay, that by the Pope himfelf
it was defined in full Counfell the accufation to be falfe ; and fo
likewife judged all the Princes of Italy | as alfo Alphonfo the
Wife, King of Spaine, and that it was onely a meere invention to
drinke the blood, and to fwallow up the goods of the harmleffe
Jewes.
3. As for the third Point, I fay, that although Ferdinand and
Ifabell, giving colour to fo indifcreet a determination, faid, that
they induced the Nobles to become Jewes, yet truly this cannot
be faid, but by fome falfe informations. For if fo be, amongft
thofe difficulties and impoffibilities, it may happen, that fome of
the Se6l of the Papifts, of a better minde, embrace the Jewifli
Religion ; it cannot therefore be prefumed, that they were induced
thereunto by the Jewes ; feeing the Jewes do not entice any man
to profeffe their Law ; But if any man of his own free-will come
to them, they by their rites and Ceremonies are obliged to make
proofe of them, whether they come for any temporall intereft, and
to perfuade them to looke well to themfelves what they do : that
the Law unto which they are to submit themselves, is of many
precepts; and doth oblige the tranfgreffor to many fore punifh-
ments. And fo we follow the example of Nahomi, cited in the
Sacred Scripture, who did not perfuade Ruth to go along with
her


her ; but faid firft to her : Or pa thy fefter returned to her Nation
and her Gods; go thou and follow her. But Ruth continuing
condant, then at length dice received her.
Befides this, the Jewes indeed have reafon to take care for their
owne prefervation ; and therefore will not go about by fuch wayes
to make themfelves odious to Princes and Common-wealths, under
whofe Dominions they live.
Now, becaufe I beleeve, that with a good confcience I have
difcharged our Nation of the Jewes of thofe three Handers or
calumnies, as elfewhere I have more at large written about it; I
conceive I may from thofe two qualities, of Profitablenes and
Fidelity conclude, that fuch a Nation ought to be well entertained,
and alfo beloved and protected generally of all. The more, con-
fidering they are called in the Sacred Scriptures, the Sonnes of
God ; and’t is faid by all the Prophets, that they who fhall wrong
them, shall be mod feverely punifhed ; and that he that toucheth
them, toucheth the apple of Gods eye. And at lead,St was alwayes
the opinion of Auguftine, as he made it appear in his works Libr.
de Doflrina Chrftiand cap. 28. where lie saith, Quod omnes
homines czquc diligendi funt. That all men are equally to be
beloved.
Now, having prooved the two former Points, I could adde a
third, viz. of the Nobility of the Jewes : but becaufe that Point
is enough known amongd all Chriflians, as lately yet it hath bene
mod worthily and excellently Hiewed and defcribed in a certain
Booke, called, The Glory of lehudah and Ifrael , dedicated to our
Nation by that worthy Chridian Minider M r • Henry leffey , (1653.
in Dutch) where this matter is fet out at large : And by M r - Edw.
Nicholas Gentleman, in his Booke, called, An Apologie for the
Honorable Nation of the Jewes , and all the Sons of Ifrael (1648. in
Englidi.) Therefore I will here forbeare, and red on that faying
of our King Salomon, the wifed on earth, Let another mans mouth
praife thee , and not thine owne.
TAiy
ft 16 LJO
I N.
