



HAT & COMFY.
MANTLES.
In this Department we are receiving by every mail the latest pro-
ductions of the Home and Continental markets, and as we are not only
Retailers, but Designers and Makers of every description of MANTLE,
our patrons may rely upon their orders receiving our careful attention ;
and employing none but competent workers, our garments invariably
prove successful.
MILLINERY.
Our Stock of FRENCPI and ENGLISH MILLINERY will be
found equal to any in this Colony, and as we import direct from the
makers, our customers may depend upon obtaining the LATEST
STYLES at Moderate Prices.
COSTUMES.
In this Department we have no real competitors whatever. We
import every description of COSTUME for any occasion. Having
Three Head Dressmakers and a thoroughly efficient staff of workers,
we are enabled to execute orders to any extent without delay. Diagrams
sent to any address for self-measurement. Prices Moderate, and a
Good Fit Guaranteed.
Black Costumes in every description of material, and a large
variety always on hand to select from.
UNDERCLOTHING.
This Stock comprises all the LATEST STYLES in LADIES’
UNDERCLOTHING. Wedding Orders receive our special atten-
E l NCY DEEARTMENTS.
Wool Wraps, Opera Hoods, Lace Fichus, Plush Ties, Gloves, Sun
shades, Ladies’ Hosiery.
Children’s Hosiery, Ribbons, Fringes, Gimps, and Trimmings of
the latest production.
HAY & COMPY,
miu® waaaa&sa sssaasa?*
ADELAIDE.


DINING ROOMS,
48 & 50 KING WILLIAM STREET;
117 R.TT3sT DLE S T E,IE IB T.
THREE COURSES, ONE SHILLING.
Shilling luncheon Tickets, lOs. 6d. per doz.
X ADZES’ ROOMS UPSTAIRS. Opened from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m.
HARDY’S
ADELAIDE WISES
GUAEANTEED G-EZSTXJIKTE,
Quality & Price to suit all Tastes & Pockets. Price Lists sent Free.
JBankside Vineyards Office:
OTTBBIB STREET.
Messrs. W. B. EOTJNSEVELL & CO.,
'wine & SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
GRENFELL STREET, ADELAIDE.
BRADBURY & CO.’S World-renoivned
SEWING AND KILTING MACHINES.
SOUS AGENT for the Australian Colonies —HENRY HEUUA WEUU,
184 RUNDEE STREET.
Having received several AWARDS at the MELBOURNE EXHIBITION, I can with
confidence recommend the above Machines to Manufacturers, Dressmakers, and the
public generally. Call and inspect them for yourselves, and see our New Patent
Self-Threading Shuttle, New Patent Self-Acting Spoolwinder, New Patent Fast
and Loose Wheel, New Patent ‘Wellington’ Kilting Machine Price E 3 10s.
W- H. HARRISON & CO.,
sP>jmmamtttcal anti Ji>ispmsmo
153 RUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
Try Harrison’s Cough Elixir, Areca Tooth Paste, Hair Restorer,
Marking Ink, &c. &c.


COLONIAL-BUILT TRAMCARS,
The Directors of the Port Adelaide Tramway Company say the 2 (two) Cars built by
Duncan & Fraser for this line carry 70 (seventy) passengers each, and they have run for
7 (seven) mouths 80 (eighty) miles per day, have cost nothing for repairs, and the
Company is thoroughly satisfied with them. These are the only tramcars for which
tenders have been called for in the colony.
JlWil II HiiiEl,
|cnfedicn£rs.
Four Medals Awarded for Purity and Excellence of Quality, also
several Certificates.
MEDAL & FIRST DEGREE of MERIT SYDNEY EXHIBITION.
-STEAM FACTORY: WAYMOUTH STREET
(Opposite Light Square).
SS3iO TOE EEICE LIST.
OIVX.'S' HARMLESS OOLOES USED.


(FROM A ROUGH SKETCH BY THE AUTHOR.)
DEPOT GLEN.




MOUNT BROWNE AND BACK;
MOSES AND ME.
Chapter I.
THROUGH THE NORTH-EAST.
“ Gold, gold, gold.
Heavy to get and light to hold,
§INCE the world-famous day in February, 1851, .when Hargreaves’
startling discovery of the yellow dross at Bathurst woke the plod-
ding colonists of that time to the astounding fact that they had
been walking on untold wealth for years, and turned the easy-going graziers
and shepherds into an eager, hustling throng of dirt-stained gold-grubbers,
no word has had such an electrical effect on all classes of the community
as the short word “ gold.” Staid sober-sided men feel a thrill of excite-
ment at the very whisper of the discovery of the royal metal, while to
to the mind of adventurous youth the picture of another Bendigo or
Ballarat, where a ragged tramper might become a millionaire by the
stroke of a pick or turn of a spade, is at once conjured up, and no
privation, hardship, or danger, is deemed too great that will enable one
to try his luck with the pick and shovel. Many will remember a former
disastrous rush which took place to the Barrier country in, I think, 1867
or was it 1866 1 I was one of the foolish thousands,_ starting from
Victoria alone, who shouldered their swags, and, throwing up work of
all kinds, thronged over the South Australian border, and set out on a
six or seven hundred mile journey through, what was at that time to
most people, a real terra incognita. Luckily our party was turned back
before it had travelled fifty miles by the information that the rush had
proved a “ shicer.” And now, behold you, I may sing with that almost
historical personage, W, Barlow, Esq.:
“ O, dear, lack-a-day, O,
I’m off to the diggings, says Billy Barlow,”
though on this occasion not to dig, and the only driving I shall do will
be to drive a quill over my paper pad.
I left Adelaide by the 7 a.m. train, bound to Terowie, en route to
Mount Browne, on Friday, March 25, accomplishing the, as usual,
dreary journey to the now flourishing town, Terowie, 140 miles from the
capital, in about seven hours. Dreary or not, this was the luxury of
travel, the caviare and pate de foie gras of the journey, so to speak, to
the “ dry bread and pull it ” that was soon to come.


Terowie is really a flourishing place. This will he abundantly
evidenced when I state, which I do ’pon honor, hand on heart, that on
Local Court days at Terowie there are at times no less than fourteen
lawyers to be seen to the fore, all eager to get justice for their
multitudinous clients, and as a secondary consideration, of course, fees
for themselves. From Adelaide, Burra, Jamestown, Georgetown, yea,
from distant Orroroo, they come in the interests of law and justice.
Now, a place that can afford sufficient litigation for fourteen lawyers
must he in an enviably flourishing condition, and I certainly envy—the
lawyers.
Mind I don’t vouch for the fourteen legal luminaries, but 111 swear to
eight, for it was Court day when we were there and I saw them.
Terowie has sprung into prominence since the railway ran up north-
eastward, and is a very different looking place from the Terowie that
Jack Mitchell founded when he started his little “ pub ” on the, at that
time, outside hem of civilisation. There are now two hotels in the town
that would ornament any street in Adelaide —Upie’s and \\ einrich’s—
while Mitchell’s old house is a large if not showy hotel. _ Messrs.
Bleechmore Bros, and Sara and Bunstan have erected splendid stores,
well-stocked with all necessaries and most luxuries ; and numerous other
buildings, built or building, including a neat railway station, evidence the
prosperity of the place. After a good dinner and a bottle of excellent
Bass, at Weinrich’s—the last, alas, for long weeks—the north-eastern
travellers went round to the office to take their places in the coach for a
journey, in my case, as I supposed, of between six and seven hundred
miles—but L'homme propose, Crews & Co. dispose.
Thirteen unfortunates were packed into on old rattletrap of a coach
meant to carry about nine, and then, to make all things lovely, some 15
cwt. or so of heterogeneous luggage and goods of all kinds were piled,
poked, crammed, strapped, jammed, slung, and hung on every part of the
creaking old concern. Four equine frameworks were next assisted into
their harness, and with a crack of the whip we were off. Hurrah for the
road ! It was hurrah the wrong side of our mouths before we got far,
for our cruise with Crews & Co. was anything but an “ Oh, be joyful ”
affair. I may, however, as well say at once that I do not believe the
story that the vehicles used by this company were discovered in digging
a well near Outalpa, in a slate formation which Professor Tate decided
to belong to the Laurentian period, and that the horses are, to a hoof, of
a prehistoric age, though truly the appearance of all would cause credence
to be placed in the tale. The coachman, a much-enduring man,
was the only presentable or modern-looking portion of the turn-out,
Lancelot, the last north-eastern attempt at urban architecture, is
reached in twelve miles. There is the inevitable ,f pub,” store, and
blacksmith’s shop that go to make a township in Australia; the chapel
is yet to come.* But Lancelot does not look happy somehow. It would
almost seem that she felt bilious at the overshadowing prosperity of her
next neighbor, and as we all know that every town in the Areas is to its
fond admirers, the residents, actually the hub of the universe, the reason
of the apparent gloom is obvious.
Crack goes the whip (it does that most of the way, so I only make
the statement here for ornament), and we are once more enjoying the
beautiful prospect of black grass tussocks and dust. We are now out of
* I beg- Lancelot’s pardon. On my way back I discovered that a small iron struc-
ture in the distance was a chapel, and that a tea-fight was in full swing as we
passed.


ordinary civilization and in the bush—the land of patched pants and
profanity. Night closes in, and we struggle on till Cropley’s is reached
—twenty-four miles out. This is a changing station, and in a two-
roomed pine hut we partake of our first refection on the road. It con-
sists of baked mutton —the sheep whose innocent life was shortened to
provide the banquet being apparently of the same age as the horses, say
not earlier than Noah—damper or heavy bread and post-and-rail tea ;
the price, one shilling and sixpence. It might be said that neither the
charge nor the meal “ went high.” There is a delightful unanimity
about the victualling department all the way to the Border. W hether
the feed was billygoat, bread, and tea, or tea, bread, and billygoat, the
charge never varied, but was one-and-sixpence all the time.
We were now fairly launched on our Orient liner voyage —I call it
such because of the many attempts the Orient liners have made of late
to go the same way —that is, overland. Had it been daylight there
would have been nothing worth seeing to see —as it was night there was
less. I endeavored to sleep the sleep of righteousness, and a mind at
ease —but knees cocked up to the nose, a nice handy iron nut tickling the
middle of your spine, and a well-arranged bar of iron to catch the back
of your head when you chanced to nod backwards, were not the best
soporifics one could imagine or most conducive to ease of body. I dozed
and dreamed I was being put through the Advertiser's new Prestonian
machine in a continuous roll, and that the machinery was not working
easily either. Waking and feeling my limbs, I almost believed my
dream was reality.
We got to Paratoo eating-house, fifty miles out, somewhere about
midnight. There some confiding passengers went for another eighteen-
pennorth. It was the same old billygoat, so they afterwards told me.
Then, to paraphrase the song, we once more lumbered “ Off in the chilly
night ” —and it was chilly. The only sounds that woke the stillness as
we sped on at the blood-curdling rate of say three and a half miles an
hour were the loud gasping breathing of the wheelers, a pair of wretched
yoarers, the rattle and creak of the crazy old coach, the jingle of harness,
the constant fusillade of whip-cracks, and the cursing both loud and
deep of cooped-up passengers reminded by the pointed application of
some knot or corner on coach or luggage that the time of the millenium
was r't yet.
I am once more half dozing when I wake to a Hallo ! and find the down
coach drawn up alongside, when the pleasing order is conveyed that we
are to have the pleasure of dragging a heavy bush buggy behind the
coach all the way from Deep Well, the next station, to Outalpa. Of
course every one is gratified at the prospect of the extra load, the driver
especially so, and he gives vent to his extreme delight by the expression
of pious wishes in terms which for terseness, point, and comprehen-
siveness Junius himself could not have excelled.
Deep Well, sixty-five miles, some time before daylight. A short
spell, and on again till daylight breaks on a clear, sharp morning. The
road was fairly hard and level, yet the unfortunate horses could hardly
manage to drag their cruel load, but strained and staggered along in a
manner most painful to witness. I won’t readily forget that first night
out —cold, cramp, bad horses and vehicle, and a companion who (heaven
forgive him for it) would persist in whistling incorrectly the first two
bars of “Turn on, old Time”—made all things lovely and life an
ecstacy.
At Winininie a fresh team —anything but fresh—are got in, and then.


'breakfastless and bad-tempered, we crawl on again to Manna Hill, eigh-
teen miles distant, where Ward’s folly, the Experimental Farm, has been
converted into a comfortable eating-house, where we combine dinner and
breakfast, and do our level best to take in enough for botk Another start,
and at 4 o’clock in the afternoon, instead of 9 in the morning, we reached
Outalpa, where we were to be delivered over to the care of the amiable
Mr. George Rainer. Here we found the arrangements for conveying
ten passengers and about three-quarters of a ton of luggage some 260
miles to Wilcannia were an old rattletrap buggy of the composite order
of architecture, string and wire being the principal component parts in
sight. Into this the luggage was piled, and the pleasant order was
conveyed in Mr. Rainer’s most dulcet tones, “ Five of you can come on ;
the rest must do the best they can.” Seven got in or on —heaven knows
how—but three, of whom I was one, were told we might wait for next
week’s coach, and left to enjoy the delights and view the sights of the
city of Outalpa. It did not take long.
I always thought I had no real taste for Northern travel—l was sure
of it now.
As I do not wish to be unfair, I state here that the return journey was
performed in much better style. The first portion from XJmberumberka
was a tight-packing match, but the horses were in good condition, and
the buggy hung together somehow. From Outalpa down there was
nothing to complain of, and we were delivered “ this side up, glass with
care,” 0.K., at Terowie almost to a minute of mail time. The season is
a very trying one, and the road difficult to work, so that some allowance
must be made, and from what I saw when returning I believe the con-
tractors are doing what they can to keep things up to the mark by
feeding with chaff as far as Outalpa. But this is a digression.
I found myself set down in a veritable desert, with no means of
getting on. Luckily my bush experiences of by-gone days came to my
aid. But what was to be done ? An inspiration ! Bimbowrie, Messrs.
Crozier’a hospitable homestead, was about eighteen miles away—to take
the branch mail by buggy thereto, and either beg, borrow, buy, or steal
a horse, saddle, and bridle.
No sooner thought of than begun. Hastily unpacking my numerous
travelling chests, without which no one should ever journey in the bush,
I placed my guinea Woodruff in the hat box, folded away my dress and
morning suits, packed my white shirts, jewellery, gloves, and toilet
requisites regretfully away, and rolling up a hunk of yellow soap and a
broken comb, three pair of socks, and a couple of handkerchiefs in a
towel, and the whole in a bush rug, was once more ready for the road.
It is very hard to have to travel without a belltopper and gloves,
because people may not know you are a gentleman._
On Sunday I enjoyed Messrs. Orozier’s hospitality, and on Monday,
having bought a horse, saddle, and bridle, made a second start. So far
there is nothing much to say about the route, except that feed was very
scarce indeed in most places. You were only constrained to believe it
possible that grass sometimes grew there when some enthusiastic
resident of unquestionable repute asserted the fact on his best silver-
mounted colonial oath, otherwise it would have seemed incredible.
At Bimbowrie I overtook one of the Port Augusta parties, in which
was Mr. Plummer, the representative of the Port Augusta Despatch;
and a party of three who started from Wilmington were also camped on
the run. Here also I was introduced for the first time to the colored
■carriageocracy of the North.






I had often been informed that the aborigines of the North were the
■treme de la creme of niggerdom, and was now to have the fact fully im-
pressed on me. While standing in the verandah with the ladies on
Sunday morning a spring cart drawn by two wretched horses was driven
up the hill, crammed with our aboriginal men and brethren, and also
sisteren. While I stared a second vehicle appeared likewise loaded, and
in a few minutes after another appeared in which were a sable gentleman
clothed in a new greatcoat and immeasurable dignity; his lady, in what
might fairly be termed blackfellow purple and fine linen ; and two youth-
ful scions of their honorable house clad in sunshine simply. The horse
jibbing, one of the latter descended smartly to act as “ tiger,” but it is
only fair to state that before doing so the lad with a sense of decency
and an appreciation of the proprieties which did him credit,
paused to pull on a pair of dilapidated top-boots about seven sizes too
large, then taking the horse by the head he kicked and coaxed him up the
hill. These vehicles and horses, such as they are, are the_ purchased
property of the natives who use them. I should not be surprised to hear
that they had started a mail line in opposition to Messrs. Crews & Co.
The Postmaster-General might consider the advisableness of giving
them the mail contract, as this would be a most practical mode of en-
couraging native industry , which would delight the heart of protectionists.
These natives are fast getting civilised ; even now they can swear in
English with as much precision and finish as many white men, and they
get drunk and beat their wives in a way that some of -Mr. Beddome’s
most promising pets could scarcely excel. When they have learned how
to take the benefit of the Insolvent Act so as to make a profit out of the
transaction their education will be complete.
The weather began to get cool while I was at Bimbowrie, par-
ticularly at night It wasn’t quite so cool as the conduct of some of our
cherished politicians, but it was cold enough to bottle and send home to
England to freeze meat on the voyage instead of the Bell-Coleman
process.
I started on Monday for the Barriers with Mr. Kennedy of Umber-
umberka—nice name that to write a few hundred times — via Boolcoo-
matta and Benowrie. The horse I had bought may have been a “ Tartar
of the Ukraine breed,” but truth to tell, he was not a very “noble
steed.” I called him “Benediction,” because “he had a face like a
benediction,” or rather like the beatific look I have seen in the coun-
tenance of a well-known suburban parson. He was not, however, a pious
horse —at least he never went on his knees while I had him.
We got wet through to the skin by a steady downpour of rain,
which caught us when going through the Boolcoomatta ranges. These
ranges, which are the highest for many miles, are very rough and rugged.
The formation is granite, slate, basaltic rock, with multitudinous veins,
leaders, reefs, and blows of quartz, some of which “ look keenly ” for the
precious metal. It is in this neighborhood —in fact close to the old
station—that a small proprietary have been for years working a reef
known as “ the Clachnacuddin ’’—suggestive of haggis that name—for
gold, and getting it in varying quantities, but from what I can hear the
mine has never had a really fair trial. I was informed that the last
man left in charge had bolted to the diggings, and that the place was now
d6S6rt6d«
That’s just the way with us South Australians. A rumor informs
us that there is an ounce of gold to be found beyond the borders of
Bolivia, and we are eager to rush for it, but tell us that within our own


territory tons of the precious metal might be got by the expenditure of a
little common sense and capital and we “ pass.” “ Can any good thing
come out of Nazareth ?”
We passed a curious rock, known as the Woman in White, near
Boolcoomatta. It is the cap of a quartz reef which protrudes above the
ground, and at a very short distance presents a most striking resemblance
to a female dressed in white. The country hereabouts is well wooded
with the timber usually found in the North. Mulga, black oak, prickly
acacia, mallee, and quandong. Made Benowrie that day (twenty-eight
miles) and stopped the night, not wishing to knock up our horses so early
in the journey. I was surprised at the substantial nature of the improve-
ments both at Bimhowrie and Benowrie. The woolsheds especially, at
both stations, are equal to anything of the kind I have seen in Victoria,,
and that is saying something. They are substantial stone structures,
iron-roofed, with room for twenty-five and thirty shearers respectively.
Mr. Tyndell, at Benowrie, is going in for another kind of improvement
that I should like to see more extensively practised—that is, tree planting.
He has tried a few to begin with, which are succeeding; they are pepper
trees and white cedars. One of the former, which was planted only last
September has actually grown five, feet six inches since that date. How
is that for high ? and does it not speak volumes for what our Northern
soil will do. Verily we don’t know what we may not grow yet.
Leaving Benowrie the track takes its way over a wide salt bush plain,
extending without a break to the foot of the Barriers, about forty miles
distant, and which now begin to loom up in an imposing manner. Camped
at midday at Bundra Creek, fifteen miles from Benowrie, where our
horses if not in clover were at all events in good grass, and with good
water obtainable by sinking a couple of feet in the sand of the creek.
The country hereabout looked much fresher, and the rain of the day
before had evidently been heavier in the neighborhood, for as we came
along the roadside claypans were all full. Animal life was more abundant.
We saw numbers of turkeys, emus, ducks, and kangaroo. Another twenty-
mile stretch brought us to Thackeringa, abont three miles over the
Border, which I made in about 330 miles from Adelaide.
Chapter 11.
THE BARRIERS.
UrTTHACKARINGA is not an imposing city. As a matter of fact it con-
(jjfT sists of a public-house and a couple of tanks or dams. Be it under-
stood that tank in the North usually means a great hole scooped out
of the clayey soil by means of ploughs and scoops. We found it a very
lively place, however, for when we arrived there were not less than ten or
a dozen teams of all descriptions camped round the water. Things began
to look like “ off to the diggings ”in earnest; and at night the white
tilted waggons and drays, with the numerous camp-fires throwing a
warm red glow on the figures of swarthy, bearded men, and feeding
horses, were really picturesque ; while the sounds of concertinas, penny-
whistles, and beaten tin pans, mingled with snatches of song and shouts






of laughter, with ever and anon in the pauses the tinkle of a horse bell,
or weird cry of curlew or plover, were highly suggestive of old diggings
days, and jolly camps amongst the stringy barks and messmates of the
Black Forest on the Bendigo-road, barring of course the stringy-barks
and messmates, for Thackaringa is almost as bare as a billiard board, and
in daylight is about as unlovely a spot as one could wish (not) to see.
Should the Albert gold district turn out to be highly auriferous, as
many believe it yet will do, Thackaringa must become an important
place, situated as it is at the confluence of several roads, and being on
the direct track from Adelaide to Wilcannia and Mount Browne. The
house has been wretchedly kept in the past, and when I arrived there
and sought surcease of sorrow and a sore riding seat in the flowing bowl,
I found the only nectar obtainable was “ fighting rum ” guaranteed to
kill as far off as a Greener gun, and sherry liberally diluted with yellow
dam water, and dam bad sherry and water at that. Things have,
however, altered for the better. The house is now in good hands, and
the new lessee is working hard to put everything straight.
Next morning the road was lined for miles with drays, horsemen, and
footmen all “ off to the diggings,” and all eagerly anxious for news
therefrom. It only needed a few saffron-faced “ Chinkies,” with their
big umbrella-shaped hats and laden-baskets, to recall the scene of many
a rush in old days. I turned off the track to go to Umberumberka for a
pony which Mr. Kennedy had kindly promised to obtain for me as an
extra horse. Here I met with a new experience, one that I had often
heard of but never seen —a pub out of grog, and a store out of stock.
The usual topers hung around the former place in a disconsolate sort of
way that reminded one of a lot of old horses round a dry tank.
My new steed now made his appearance, and proved to be a sturdy,
shaggy, little Timor rascal, about as big as a billygoat and a half, age
beyond the memory of man, but with four stout clean legs under him
that were yet as sound as a bell. It might fairly be said of him that
age could not wither nor custom stale.” His face was a study : a pro-
truding under lip, very prominent brows, and deep hollows under the
eyes—it looked like something between that of a camel and a Chinaman,
and was as expressionless as that of either, except when a bit of green
bunch grass appeared in view, then his smile was indeed childlike and
bland, and he would “ snick it off ” while going at a quick jog trot.
This equine curiosity rejoices in the name of Barrier Moses, and is as
well-known for many miles as Mount Robe, the most noticeable point
in the ranges. I may mention that Moses being very shaggy might be
said always to have his hair on. (Pray pass over this little slip.)
My early acquaintance with Mr. Moses was not felicitous. I started
for Mundi Mundi by a short cut through the ranges, riding my new
acquisition and leading Benediction, who having a will of his own
objected to be led and nearly pulled me off several times by a pleasant
trick of unexpectedly stopping short, probably to consider the financial
position of the colony or else to observe the geological formation. Any
way this mode of procedure grew monotonous, and I determined to give
Benediction a turn of riding, as he would not lead. Unfortunately my
righteous wrath had caused me to address my recalcitrant Bucephalus in
language suggestive of the condemnatory clause of the Athanasian creed,
and it was equally unfortunate that it had not been explained to me that
one of Mr. Moses’s innocent eccentricities was a decided objection to
being addressed in “language strong,” and that, like Sir Joseph
Porter, K.C.8., “ He hadn’t any sympathy with ill-bred taunts,” which


he always resented by bolting at tbe earliest opportunity. He evidently
took my remarks to himself. Deceived by his meekness of demeanor I
was not particular while shifting the saddle to keep hold of the bridle,
which the cunning little “ varmint” perceiving, slipped it out of my
hands and started back to Umberumberka with my bridle at the rate of
about 260 miles an hour, more or less, leaving me with the saddle in my
hands, and Benediction, looking sweetly on with half-closed eyes, as
though he were going to say “ For what we are about to receive.” He
wasn’t so thankful for what he did receive, however. For tully five
minutes the surrounding atmosphere was of a cerulean tint, and there
was a suspicion of brimstone mingled with the oxygen.
The rope halter and two saddle straps made a bridle, and a piece of
fencing-wire a rough bit, then, once more astride of Benediction, I sadly
wended my way back to Umberumberka, where I had the pleasure of
waiting till noon next day for an interview with Mr. Moses.
The night closed in with a heavy lowering sky and all apparent
indications of rain. Indoors that night an entomologist might have made
a magnificent collection of the small game his soul loves, without leaving
his seat. As I sat writing I counted no less than thirteen varieties of
beetles, bugs, and buzzers generally, in my candlestick, and took a large
Cooper & Bailey’s Menagerie of tlie indigenous fauna of the Far North,
from my back hair. Next day, having got Master Moses in hand once
more, I started late in the afternoon, and made Mundi Mundi that
evening.
Mundi Mundi is a station belonging to Messrs. Hart & Horn, managed
bv Mr. C. Chappie, and is situated close under whatis generally considered
the highest point of the well-known Barrier or Stanley Range, though I
believe Mount Lyell is really higher. Why Barrier, heaven knows, for
it is anything but that ; I am speaking without book, but, unless it be
that the level of the plateau from which they rise is more elevated than
I believe it to be, the Barriers are not higher, if as high, as the Mount
Lofty Range, and certainly are easier to cross. The Barriers run nearly
north and south, and extend about 100 miles. They are sparsely wooded,
except in the valleys along the courses of the numerous creeks—dry for
the most part unfortunately—by which they are intersected
Some of these are very beautiful, although lacking that highest element
of beauty in a landscape—water. The banks are often clothed with
lovely drooping redgums, while the alluvial flats are covered with mulga,
black oak, pine, and quandong, the varying foliage of which makes a
pleasant contrast. The formation of the range is for the most part a
decomposed slate, set almost vertically, but there are large tracts of
intrusive granite which has unsettled the regular lay of the country.
This is especially the case at Golddigger’s Creek, near Poolamacca, Mr,
Broadribb’s hospitable homestead, where the disastrous rush of 1867 has
left its saddening marks of ill-requited toil in numerous shafts and
mullock heaps along the roadside. Here the country is composed for the
most part of granite, mica schists, quartzites, ferruginous conglomerates,
and quartz blows. So far as I know not a color of gold was obtained in
this neighbourhood, though certainly it looks likely enough to inspire the
heart of any digger with high hopes.
The Barrier route along the western face of the range is the great
highway from pastoral Queensland to the Adelaide market; and even
now, though the season is so dry, it is a well-watered track ; and,
taking the average from the Queensland border to the Burra, I do not
think the general distance between waters natural or artificial would be






more than about twenty miles, though there are some stages considerably
longer than this.
Next day I made a good start, and got to Carona —called forty miles
from Mundi Mundi. I think it a short forty ; indeed I may say that I
found all the distances in the Barrier country to be footmen’s miles and
not the stockriders’ mile, so common in the bush, which is estimated as
eight furlongs each time a man wants to light his pipe. Near Mundi
Mundi I passed two parties from Moonta, and others from Petersburg
and Georgetown.
The feed between Mundi Mundi and Carona is very scarce ; indeed,
with the exception of a few patches, it is conspicuous by its absence.
Town-reared horses cannot get through without chaff, but bush nags,
such as mine were, will eat anything, except, maybe, ironstone conglo-
merate ; they usually pass at that; but mulga leaves, cotton, salt, and
blue bush they will tackle with a will, and will take a bite of almost
any weed that grows. I frequently saw Moses, whom not even “Mr.
TVs aunt ” could accuse of having a “ proud stomach,” munch a mouth-
ful of the little bitter wild melon, common near Adelaide, and which, we
were told a few years since, was a deadly poison. If so, my shaggy
little steed never appeared to be aware of the fact, and no inward
monitor seemed to apprise him of it. Really, after seeing Moses’s
gastronomic feats, I believe the old bushman’s yarn, that, having nothing
better to give his nag, he took off his greasy old cabbage-tree hat, and
presented it for the hungry animal’s delectation, who, saying a very short
grace before meat, demolished the dainty in thirty-five seconds inside of
no-time.
Parties travelling to the diggings can find water and some feed in
several places in this stretch of the journey. First at L.B. or Eldie
Creek, about seven miles from Mundi Mundi; water, but no feed, will be
found about half a mile up the gorge to the east of the track. A few
miles further, at Yungella Creek, fair feed can be found to the west of
the road, and water in the creek to the east. Seven miles on, at Ifould’s
Springs, there is water, and some feed a little way on. Good rains
having fallen since my return, there is doubtless good feed all along
the route. Seven miles north is Campbell’s Creek, the great watercourse
of the district, which carries the waters of numberless hill creeks far
out over the level plains towards the South Australian boundary. It
must be a grand sight to see this immense watercourse in full flood. It
was dry, with the exception of a few holes, but its great sandy bed is as
wide as that of the Murray at Blanchetown. Like all the northern
creeks its banks are clothed with lovely pendulous gums. I saw no feed
near the creek, but was informed by one party that they had found some
about two miles down.
Campbell’s Creek is named after two relatives of my own, who were
the original discoverers of the neighboring country and who held it for
a time, so I have heard, without paying rent, as neither New South
Wales nor South Australia knew exactly to whom it belonged, and
neither cared to go to the expense of running the boundary line
along the 141st degree of longitude. As a matter of fact the true
boundary is now proved to be some twenty miles or so to the west, so
that the whole of the Barrier and Grey Ranges country belongs to New
South Wales.
The next water is that in the Carona tanks, and a mile nearer the
head station is a magnificent dam, the Alberta, which covers from four
to six acres of ground and is about fourteen feet deep in the centre.


With the exception of our own Hope Valley Reservoir this is the finest
artificial sheet of water I have seen since I left Victoria. At these dams
I came on one Moonta party pushing on briskly, and also found the Port
Augusta (Dispatch) party making anything but dispatch in their journey.
The horses they had left looked starved, and no wonder, for they were
turned out close to the water, where the sheep had made the land as
barren as a King William-street flagstone. They had lately lost three of
their horses, and had just had to shoot one which was too weak to crawl
out of the water of the dam. People unaccustomed to northern travell-
ing will do well to always bear this maxim in mind. The nearer the
water the worse the feed in bad seasons. After watering your stock, take
them well away from the road and water in the direction which looks
most promising for feed. Where the ground is crabholy will usually be
found small patches of grass, but in any case by leaving the road there is
almost certain to be found clean salt bush, and perhaps cotton bush, a
plant which most stock will put away with pleasure to themselves and
profit to their proprietors.
That o-ame was plentiful in this neighborhood was evidenced by the
fact that nearly every dray or waggon I passed had a hindquarter or tail
of kangaroo or rock wallaby tied behind* while some had a fine fat turkey
or brace of wood duck, or string of teal or pigeons hung temptingly to
the Jtail nearly gQ> from Mundi Mundi to Carona the ground
as it sweeps down from the hills is covered with the curious formation of
broken quartz which looks so strange when seen for the first time. On
the hillsides are great blows and outcrops of gleaming white quartz, and
below these, far out on the plains, fragments of the same rock, in size
about that of ordinary metal, and quite as sharply broken, lie so
closely as to hardly leave room for any vegetation. At least, so it seems
now though I am told that at times the whole country hereabout is a
sea of waving grass ; yet, verily, were it not that the statement is backed
by the asseveration previously mentioned, one would be disposed to cry,
while looking at the gleaming white barrenness, Credat Judeeus Apella.
Carona, which belongs to a wealthy proprietary, is one of the most
extensive squatting properties in the North-East. The improvements
are of the most substantial description. The house of the manager Mr.
J Sutherland, is a handsome country mansion, while the woolsheds,
dams, tanks, troughs, and fences are all of the very best and most
modern construction. The station is not nearly fully stocked yet.
Copper has been discovered in the ranges near here, ihe discoverer
says it is a splendid lode of high per cent. ore. I did not see it, but I
make it a rule always to accept as gospel whatever a prospector says, so
I have no doubt the Carona Copper Mine is what they term in the
neighborhood a “ regular bottler,” meaning thereby that it is AAI at
Ll °l d was reminded at Carona of a circumstance I had quite forgotten,
owin" to the fact that it had not been prominently brought before me for
nearly fifteen years. It was that I was a “ croweater.” I well remember
somefifteen years ago coming overland from Victoria to Adelaide, and
calling at the station of Mr. James Brown in the South-East. When at
tea the proprietor suddenly propounded the query— By the way, Mr.
ar e you a croweater ?” I hastened to assure him that I was not in
the habit of partaking of crow diet as a regular thing, when I was met
with the startling information that all Adelaide men were croweaters and
that the parson-coated birds were known on the border as Adelaide


pheasants,” because it was asserted that the early settlers of the
Farinaceous Village,” when short of mutton, made a meal of theunwary
crow, which, trusting to the immunity his ill-repute as a game bird had
given him, ventured within reach. There is the old tale often told on
North-Eastern stations of the stranger to the colony who calls at a
small station to buy a bit of meat. Seeing a boy only at the house, he
explains his want, and asks where his (the lad’s) father is. Oh, father,
he’s down at the stockyard a killin’ a beast.” The stranger strolls down
to the yard, and finds father seated on the top rail with an old blunderbuss,
engaged in shooting crows, to entice which a couple of sheepskins are laid
over a post. Still I was a little taken aback and amused at having the
title applied to myself, and this time correctly—if it is correct at all,
and fifteen years’ residence make it applicable. .
As before mentioned, this Barrier country was for a long time debatable
around •it is still a ground for debates. Being so near the boundaries of
three large colonies, and for the matter of that not such a great distance
from the border of that big little colony Victoria, it is not strange that
the various colonials meeting should discuss with some warmth the relative
merits of their provinces and of their people. And so it is a question
that often arises in the “men’s hut which are the best fellows, the
“cornstalks,” the “gumsuckers,” or the “ croweaters,” while the Central
Australian or Border man is also discussed under the at first bewilder-
ing name of “ overland fisherman.” I had previously often heard of and
met “ Murrumbidgee whalers,” that is, gentlemen “on the wallaby up
and down the streams of Rivenna, who eked out their pannikins of flour,
by carrying a piece of twine and fish-hook with which to vanquish the
voracious codfish and devour his, by some thought, savory flesh, but what
an overland fisherman was I had no idea. It seems that the carme
or Jew lizard, is esteemed a luxury by many of the Central Australian
men, and that they never miss an opportunity of sacrificing him as a
burnt offering to appetite when the nimble little reptile gives them »
chance; and the Jew lizard is known as the overland fish, hence the
ftneC( j ote bearing on the question of the relative merits of
the different colonies which amused me. A discussion arose in Oarona
“ men’s hut” between representatives of the various provinces, and an
“ Adelaide man,” who happened to be a bit of a bush lawyer, was goring
the best of the argument, when the old cook, a “ Sydney man who had
been sitting as k sort of chairman, suddenly jammed in his oar thus .
“ That’s all mighty fine, no doubt, but 111 just tell ye what a bloomm
croweater is. Ye see, there was wonst a decent Sydney man travellm
alone a road, an’ it was a darned hot day, an’ so he sits down under a
tree.° Now, fie did’nt know that up that there tree there was a bloomm
crow’s nest, and a measly old croweater was up there a-cadgmg of the
voung crows. Bi-’n-bi the croweater he begins to come down, an he sees
the Sydney man a-settin’ there permiscuous, an he sings out, I say, what
the (incandescent ensanguined perdition) are you a-dom there I
aint doin’ of nothin’, ’ says the Sydney man. _ Well, ye couldnt be
a doin’ of less than that, anyhow ; but you can just hump your bloomm
drum out o’ that,’ says the croweater, ‘ for the deuce a wing of one of these
.re yiu l goin’ to get. anyway.’ And ’ added flg narrator
“that’ll just tell ye what a mean crawler a croweater is. He wouldnt
lP< But woweater’s champion was not quite beaten, for he
retorted, “ Ah, yes, I dare say ; but ye see, mates, the Adelaide man he


■was up to snuff, and when he was a cornin’ down he see the tail of a nasty
pisenous overland fish a stickin’ out o’ the tother chap’s bundle, an r
though he wouldn’t demean hisself to eat such varmints, still he see as
the overland fisherman had plenty of his favorite tucker for to carry him
on to the next station.”
I was subsequently somewhat amused at the diggings to witness
the astonishment and indignation of several Adelaide men from down
country at being told they were “ croweaters,” a term most of them had
never heard before. One night I had some little difficulty in persuading
two decent-looking young fellows from Moonta way, I believe, not to
engage in a fistic settlement of the question, but to treat the matter as a
joke.
The trip between Mundi Mundi and Carona had been an arduous one
for both horses and rider, for I rode through without a stoppage, as I
had lost a day at Umberumberka and had to make it up. The next
stage, however, compensated. It was to Fowler’s Gap, 25 miles, an
out-station of Carona, where Mr. William Sutherland was in charge.
The Barriers had become quite insignificant hills near Carona, but there
was an improvement in the scenery, as all the route for miles was well
wooded, and the track wound in and out of timbered valleys, which
looked as if they only required a slight fall of rain to make them Antipo-
dean Edens. Each valley had a creek winding through it, the banks
lined with that most beautiful of northern trees, the thorny acacia, which
with its graceful shape and bright green leaves is such a feature in the
landscape. The creek beds were of course dry, but they often contained
patches of sweet bunch grass, and always that most deceitful but beau-
tiful plant the lemon grass, which, green and enticing-looking as it
appears, was too strongly scented for even the non-fastidious Moses,
who would look at it in a sorrowful sort of way, that somewhat incon-
sequently perhaps brought to my mind Othello’s apostrophe to his wife,
till I fancied little shaggy-mane was saying—
“ O thou weed.
Who art so lovely fair and smells’t so sweet ~”
That the sense aches at thee j would thou hads’t ne’er been horn.”
It certainly was rough on Moses ; his mouth watered for the tempting-
looking dainty, but he couldn’t stand the scent. I did find a few patches
of bunch grass, and, dismounting and holding the bridles, gave the
hungry horses a chance.
I now learned why Mr. Moses was able to keep up his condition so
well— he hadn't far to reach; when both horses got at a tussock Bene-
diction got one bite to Moses’s two. That was the odds all the way-
two to one on the little ’un. J
The hills gradually became lower until I got out on moderately large
plains, surrounded by low ranges. I passed Herbert’s and Gregory’s
parties from Terowie and Petersburg camped together near the Eight-
mile Wells. They were all in high spirits, the youngsters especially.
Some of them were actually anticipating their digging labors, and were
amusing themselves by putting down small “new-chum holes” in the
neighboring gullies.
I had a faint suspicion, somehow, that they would probably have
about sufficient of that sort of fun before they called in at Opie’s,
Terowie, for their next nobbier. But then you never can tell, some
folk like f< hard graft.” Entre nous, I am not a gentleman of that
particular complexion myself.


After passing another well of good water with grand tanks and
troughs, I came in sight of Fowler’s Creek, which flows through the Gap,
and for the first time en route saw a watercourse containing water.
This creek has been recently filled, and the soil being stiff and good
holding ground, the creek now presents the appearance of a series of
fine long reaches of water divided by sand and shingle bars. This is an
exceedingly pretty bit of country, and in a good season must be a most
lovely spot. Ducks and pigeons were plentiful all along the creek, and
that ornithological puzzle, the pretty little grebe,which with their short
almost useless wings yet manage to take inland journeys that would
tire an emu, showed their bright satin breasts in each pool as they
glanced at the intruder for an instant, and then dived like a stone to
appear again well out of gunshot. How do grebe get into these far-
inland tanks, dams, and creeks P You find them wherever there is
water, which they cannot live without, for their feet are not formed for
walking nor their wings for flying far, yet hundreds of miles of drought-
devastated country often intervene between these little wanderers and
any permanent water.
Chapter 111.
ON STURT’S TRACK.
morning, having enjoyed the supreme luxury of a bath in
gv i clear fresh water, I started on my weary way. A large number
9 '«■ of men bound for Mount Browne were camped on Fowler’s
Creek, including a party which started from Unley on the 10th March.
They seemed practical men, and were making good progress. It being
Sunday morning they were camped and engaged in the usual bush
services for the day of rest— i,e. , scrubbing down their moleskins and
washing their shirts; most of them were thus devoutly occupied when
I passed.
A few miles further the country opened into wide rolling plains
which, O, joyful sight! were actually clothed with green grass, a thing I
had not seen for six months or more, and which seemed strange coming
thus upon it in the desert, so to speak.
You should have seen Moses’s face—it smiled all over; and he began
to make preparation for a passover feast—passover feasts, it will be
remembered, were eaten standing. Moses took his walking, but that
was the only difference. Even easy-going Benediction suddenly woke to
the fact that there was corn in Egypt again, or, rather, grass in the Grey
Range country. The reason of the verdant phenomenon was that two
weeks previously a slight fall of rain had passed over this part of the
country, and the stronger grasses, which, if I am not much mistaken,
are really perennial, or something like it, at once began to send up fresh
and succulent shoots. The grass does not grow in this country as with
us, that is, like small corn evenly distributed over the land on separate
stalks, but in tussocks, generally in patches on low-lying ground between
the blue, cotton, and saltbush plants, which tone down the fresh
greenery of the plains with their monotonous olive-green tints.


This is a fine country for flowers. Though late in the season I saw
numbers of pretty plants and blossoms that would grace a town garden ;
many I did not know even by name, and nearly all were new to me. In
season the gorgeous Clianthus (Sturt’s peaj blossoms in great luxuriance
in favored spots.
Talking about Sturt’s pea reminds me that I was now close to the
track of that brave but most despondent explorer who penetrated this
region in 1845 ; in fact it was at “ Depot Glen,” close to where gold was
first found in the Grey Ranges, distant from here about 90 miles or so as
the “ Adelaide pheasant ” flies, that Sturt and his party were camped for
over six months, unable to move on account of the lack of water other
than that in the Glen waterhole. Some 25 or 30 miles from here there
exists, or did until lately, the ruins of an old dray supposed to have been
left there by Sturt, and at the Glen there may yet be seen the fragments
that remain of the boat the explorer carried with him, wherein to cross
the mythical inland sea of Central Australia,
Always having adhered to the rule, “when in Rome do as Rome
does,” and noticing that every second person I met wore a green shade
or a bandage over his visionary organs, I thought it quite time to chime
in with the prevailing fashion, and start a couple of highly-inflamed sore
eyes forthwith. I had been thinking of it for several days previously,
but had deferred the full fun of the thing till now. Assisted by the
glare of the sun on the red soil of these open plains I was able to get up
a pair of unimpeachable sandy-blighted eyes on the most approved
pattern. Then, knowing that I was in the latest north-eastern mode of
fashion, of course I felt happy, or ought to have done so. Somehow I
didn’t.
People constantly ask what causes sore eyes to be so prevalent in the
North country. I think, first, the cold, dry winds which are so often
experienced, at night especially ; and, secondly, the confounded flies, the
equal of which for diabolical, fiendish ingenuity in torture I never before
met. They doubtless help to spread the complaint by carrying the pus
from one eye to another.
The track soon became much heavier, and low sandhills, clothed with
scrub, mulga, broom, and balsam bush, broke the dead level of the now
somewhat sandy plains; still there were evidences of the late rain in the
the feed which was springing gaily in favored spots.
The odd-looking nests of the Australian silkworm, or hairy
caterpillar, attracted attention all the way from near Boolcoomatta, but
hereabout they are very numerous ; in fact, I may say that all through
the North the market for flies, wasps, and caterpillars is very fully
stocked. I missed that sweet song-bird the mosquito, of which there
were but few to
“ Sing, sing, sing on to cheer me.”
It was a pity, too, for with mosquitoes to fill up the time the flies left
unoccupied, one’s cup of happiness would have been chock full.
The hairy caterpillars spoken of are curious little brutes. I don’t know
where they start from or when; but, when they do start, they link them-
selves head and tail into a long train, and set out on their journey at a
rate of speed that is seldom emulated by our fastest railway express
trains. This is literally correct, for their time is about half
a knot a year or thereabouts, and I never saw an express
go at that rate. The nest they make is about the size of the old-
fashioned strawberry pottle, and resembles it in shape, or something like


go I T a CHI P 3
■1
-zdiSti
PO KER,
PLAYERS
wlfcv 7 .1 'll -




an elongated fool’s cap turned upside down, and suspended onjthe twigs
of a low°tree or bush. It is formed of a very strong whitey-colored silk,
and is covered with a sort of glaze to withstand the weather. Into this
the architects retire, but what they do there, or in what shape they come
out, I had no opportunity of observing. All I know is that bushmen told
me that the silk made excellent crackers for their stockwhips if carefully
twisted. It looks as though it might.
I made Tultie, or rather Nundora, an out-station of Poolamacca, that
night. Here Benediction began to show signs of having had about
enough of it, and as he had contracted a very sore back, brought on by a
lack r of stuffing, partly of himself and partly of the saddle, I decided to
leave him, and having arranged for the hire of a horse from Mr. Donoghue,
the gentleman in charge, I pushed on gay and early for Packsaddle, an
out-station of Gnalta, another twenty-miles journey over very similar
scenery to that traversed the day before, except that as I went on the
country became dryer and dryer, and the feed at last so scanty that
nothing short of a high-power binocular microscope could detect a grass
stalk to a square mile. Packsaddle is so-called from a small semi-flat-
topped hill close by, which some imaginative person fancied looked like
a packsaddle Here I found Mr. K. Barry in charge, a typical old style
bushman of a school now alas ! fast disappearing, who laid himself out
to cheer both the physical and mental man of the wayworn and now
somewhat delapidated-looking traveller whom fate had cast on his hospi-
tality. Next day my start was delayed by the inspiriting information
that someone had walked or rather ridden off with my newly-borrowed
horse, and it was not until 2 o’clock that Mr. Sydenham, the second in
command, rode in with Moses. .
There was no help for it now; Moses and I seemed destined to do the
rest of the journey in company. I got away about 3 o clock, and reached
"Wonaminta Creek about 5, where I camped on the water, to give my
pluckv little pony a spell, as there was for a wonder a small quantity of
feed near the water. The country in this district is just as likely look-
ing for gold as any I have seen. The formation is the usual vertical
decomposed slate, a little more deeply covered with soil than at Mount
Browne, the surface strewn with broken quartz and ironstone, and the
hills low and rounded, with long sweeping gulleys between. In some
places numerous reefs crop out, but not very high above the surface.
The quartz is not hungry-looking, but is stained with oxide of iron, and
occasionally contains mundic or iron pyrites. This part of the country is
well worth a trial, but I fear most of the returning diggers will be almost
too “ full up on digging ” to care about taking much trouble in prospect-
ing on the back track.
About 7 o’clock I once more monnted and plodded onward on the,
most dreary part of the journev I had yet seen to Cobham Lake, distant,
as 1 was told, about 22 to' 23 miles. Before I got there I made
it out to be about 222 miles or thereabouts, and Moses agreed with
me fully. In a very short time I had got beyond the influence of
the recent rain, and then the country as seen by the light of a young
moon was wretched in the extreme.
About three or four miles on I came to the camp of the first large
party of back-trackers from the diggings. They numbered about twenty-
and had two drays and teams. They were “ Sydney men, and had
come round Wonaminta way for the sake of feed and water. They had
camped where they were, not because there was any feed, but merely to
let their horses have a spell, and to give themselves time and breath to


swear at the diggings and things in general. Nothing was too bad to say
of the rush or of the newspapers which had induced them to go to it.
One gentleman, whom I judged to be either a Spaniard or Italian by
his accent, expressed himself—“ Av he only had a hoult av the (blank
blank blank) prospecthor that tould people there was six fut sinkin’ he’d
cut off his (blank) ears, an’ there was more av the byes av the same
opinion.”
I endeavored to convince them that the Press had almost unanimously
warned people against rushing to Mount Browne, but without avail. So
when they asked me what my occupation was, being a truthful man,
who keeps a little hatchet always by him like George Washington, I
intimated that I was a commercial traveller. I thought it would be a
pity to say anything that might make their “ angry passions rise,” because
that would be wrong, and again I considered that perhaps the Eyetalian
gentleman might want to keep his hand in at ear-marking men, and if so
my ears were rather handy. There were one or two sensible
fellows in the company who told me that they did not condemn
the diggings altogether, but that they had tried them and found
they could not make a living there without water, but that should
it rain soon they would return and have another try. One of them had
a little gold, about half-an-ounce or so, the first I had seen from the new
rush; it was coarse, clean gold, and looked waterworn, but of that more
anon.
I plodded onward, my game little steed growing more tired each
mile as we toiled over the heavy sandhills, which were growing higher
and heavier as we got into the Cobham country, till at length in mercy I
got down and led Moses, first at each hill, but finally I quite gave up the
idea of riding further. After all there was an advantage in having a
small horse for such a journey, because it was not far to get on to and
down from him, and again when Moses would carry me no longer I
might get down and carry him. Oddly enough the excellence of this
plan did not strike me at the time, so I merely got off and towed the
tired pony on towards Cobham.
They had been telling me at Carona and Tultie that the wild dogs
were very troublesome in the neighbourhood. I had, however, previously
seen none on this journey, but, as misfortunes never come singly, as if to
make my misery complete, the confounded brutes chose this particularly
auspicious occasion to seek an introduction. It was nearly one o’clock
in the morning, and the moon was getting very close to the horizon, I
was plodding wearily on, with a good haul on Moses’s bridle, and feeling
amiably disposed towards things in general. I had not seen a living
creature for miles, when suddenly from a belt of scrub a great gaunt
mongrel dingo, with a strong touch of the kangaroo dog about him,
flitted silently over the soft sand, passing within a dozen yards or so.
Deliberately sitting down on the road behind me he attuned his soul to
music with a howl that would have made the flesh of a respectable
ghost creep, provided he had any. This delightful song brought several
echoes, and in a few minutes I was followed by three or four of the
nasty skulking cowards. I had seen too many dingoes to feel any fear
of them, but the situation might have been more cheerful for all that.
To spring to the back of my gallant steed, dash among the open-
jawed pack, and with two or three well-directed shots from my trusty
Derringer lay the leaders low—was the last thing I thought of, simply
because my gallant steed hadn’t a gallop left in him, and my trusty
Derringer was where the Dutchman left his anchor—at home ; besides.


it is only in American threepenny dreadfuls that picturesque heroes do
this sort of thing. Now I was not a hero, and I wasn’t a hit picturesque,
so I just worried on and wished my canine persecutors in perdition.
Moses didn’t seem to mind them a bit; maybe he was more used to
their pleasant company than I had been of late.
Talking about these dingoes reminds me of something 1 heard on
the way up. We were speaking of iguanas, when a man told me he had
seen some very large ones down in the Lachlan country, over six feet
long he said, and very powerful in the jaws. He said he one day came
on the tracks of a very large iguana, which were following those of a
dingo; soon after he found the skeleton of the dingo picked bare. I
hate a man to tell a lie for a little thing like that. Had he said a
bullock it would have been a story worth telling. Any way there were
no iguanas about that night I suppose, for the dogs followed me all the
way into Cobham, where I did not arrive till 2 a.m.
I found the lake, which is about three miles in circumference, sur-
rounded with camp fires, and as I had come on it by no regular track I
was for a time bewildered. However, with the valuable aid of a half-
awake blackfellow, whose camp was the first I happened to strike, and
who from his blanket pointed about three parts round the compass,
informing me that the public house was “ over there,” I found Blore’s
Hotel, and was delighted to hear that I had got in in time to intercept
the mailman—which I had been pushing on to do—and so get a letter
to Wilcannia, to be thence telegraphed to the Advertiser and Chronicle.
A couple of judiciously-supplied nobblers induced the man to wait
while I scribbled up my notes, which accomplished I tumbled into bed
fairly done up.
Next morning, what with sore eyes, a feverish cold, and fatigue, I
was—in the vernacular of the district—rather “ oft my onion,” Anglice
unwell, and had willy nilly to lay up for a day, but thanks to the kind
womanly attentions of Mrs. George Blore, the landlady, I was not in
such evil case as I might have been.
Cobham Lake is not a very romantic spot by daylight or any other
light. As a matter of fact I have seen several prettier places in my
travels. It is simply an unusually large claypan containing the usual
whity-colored water common in freshwater claypans, strongly impreg-
nated with gypsum. This water is simply horrid as a beverage, worse
if anything than “ fighting rum.” You don’t require milk in your tea
at Cobham—your cup is well colored without. The lake is surrounded
by barren sandhills, and close to the water is a straggling fringe of most
forsaken-looking stunted box gums. Of grass or feed of any kind there
is absolutely none, and the characteristic features of Cobham Lake are
red sand and wretchedness. The animals about live on imagination, the
memory of the past, and claypan water. They don’t seem to thrive
on this sort of provender, however, for the shores of the lake all round
are strewn with the skeletons or decomposing carcases of cattle and
horses. Needless to say the prevailing scent in the neighborhood is not
Jockey Club, I often wanted to know where the Abomination of
Desolation dwelt when at home. I know now ; its address is Cobham
Lake, N.S.W.—at home every day.
Having obtained a fresh mount from Mr. Blore, I pushed on for the
diggings, distant thirty-five or forty miles according to circumstances ;
“humping your drum ”it is fifty at least. For nearly twelve miles the
road is over the same description of red sand-hills previously met with,
And all as barren as a brick wall. Then the country changes, losing its


stony and sandy character, and for miles the track winds round the shore
of a vast swamp, now dry, and covered with herbage of one kind or
other. After crossing what I presume to be either the Evelyn or the
Yango Creek, you come on wide alluvial plains, which are evidently
subject to inundation at times ; occasional belts of scrub are met with,
and there is plenty of good salt and cotton bush, and some grass here
and there. Water can be obtained in two or three places in the bed of
the creek, and the feed becomes gradually better till you reach the
diggings.
I met two large vans, containing not less than fifty to sixty returning
diggers, bound, so I was told, for Temora, from which place many of
them had come ; and there was also a large number of men on horse-
back and footback toiling back despondent and wretched. It was pitiful
to see some of these poor fellows, emaciated and with eyes hound up,
groping their way along, or being led by a compassionate companion, I
thought of more than one adventurous young Adelaidean whom I had
heard talking of throwing up a snug berth to test this far off goldfield,
and came to the conclusion that had one of them been with me that
broiling day, and seen the sights I saw and heard the tales I heard, he
would probably have begun to consider how many parts of an out-and-
out confounded fool he was for his pains.
Passing the western end of a curious range of flat-topped hills ending
in a high steep bluff* a few miles brought me to the end of my journey
for the present, Milparinka, on the Evelyn, where the principal business
places are situated, and all the washdirt comes in to he washed.
Chapter IV.
AT THE DIGGINGS.
dCf INCE my return I have been asked, I suppose, not less than a
'xN score of times, “ Well, and what’s your real opinion now about
those diggings ? Is there gold to be found there, or has it been
taken there to get up a rush p”
I am aware that some amount of responsibility rests on me, and I
fear to encourage people to rush madly off to what is yet, and likely to
be for some time for all practical purposes, an almost untried diggings ;
for though thousands have visited the rush, but comparatively few have
gone fairly to work to test the ground, and these few have been heavily
handicapped by the want of water and other difficulties due to the
distance from any centre of population. My answer therefore is—
A diggings certainly does exist at and in the neighborhood of Mount
Browne, and the gold-hearing country probably extends many miles
from the present centre in all directions. Gold of good quality has been
got there in fairly payable quantities by a few; these have been and are
still making good wages ; a larger number of men are “ making tucker,”
and no more ; while the rest, so far as their gold-finds are concerned, are
starving, and no less. Thus it will be seen that there is nothing to
warrant a large rush to the place, and such a rush can only result in a
fearful amount of misery and disappointment.


Many people whom I meet seem yet to be uncertain as to the exact
position of the diggings, and I am often asked whether they are on our
side of the border. If enquirers will take any recent map of Australia
and look at the extreme north-western corner of the province of New
South Wales, they will find at a point about equidistant from the
frontier line of South Australia and Queensland the hills known as
Mounts Poole and Browne. The first was named after Mr. John Poole,
surveyor in Captain Sturt’s devoted little band of explorers, who in
1846 were imprisoned in Depot Glen, near by, for six fearful months,
owing to the drying up of the whole country around them, while scurvy
and dysentery reduced their strength, and at length caused the death ot
poor Poole, when trying to escape. His body was brought back to
Depot Glen, and laid at the foot of a beefwood tree, on which his initials
were carved, and on which they may still be seen. Mount Browne was
so named after Mr. J, H. Browne, the surgeon of the party. It is
close about these hills that the workings are situated, and therefore the
diggings are fifty miles within the New South Wales border.
The Albert gold-field, to give the place its proper name, was dis-
covered about six months ago. The finding of payable gold in the dis-
trict is due to the enterprise of Mr. A. Ashwin, a brother of Mr. E. M.
Ashwin, of this city. Mr. Ashwin, who is a practical miner, having
had experience in Victoria, the Northern Territory, and the Queensland
dry diggings, and liking the appearance of the neighboring country, did
a little "prospecting on his own account, and finding a fair prospect, he
having other engagements, induced a young fellow named Thompson,
then employed on the Mount Poole station, to go out and do some sys-
tematic work in stripping the soil of the gully. Thompson got about
two ounces of good shotty gold, and now, satisfied that there was a fair
chance of success in the search, Ashwin formed a prospecting party, and
the result was the discovery of the Mount Poole diggings, about three
miles from Depot Glen. There a large amount of work was done, as
may be seen now by the abandoned claims. The sinking was from close
to the surface to a depth of nearly thirty feet in made ground—that is,
in soil or strata of recent origin deposited by the action of wader over
the ancient and regular strata of the country, which is a vertical slate
with a little ironstone, and numerous quartz reefs and leaders mtei sect-
The Mount Poole Rush was not a very successful one, but it led to
further discoveries. Early in the present year a party of men who bad
struck across country to the Yango Creek, about fifteen miles south, to
try if they could find water sufficient to enable them to prospect the
neighborhood, were seated on a hill-side covered with the usual broken
quartz, when a black woman who was with them picked up a fair-si e
nugget on the surface. This induced them to search further, and resulted
in the taking out of a prospector’s claim on that spot by_ Evans and
party. So far this claim has proved the richest on the diggings. It is
situated on the south or south-eastern side of the most southerly point
of the Mount Browne range, and is 700 x TOO feet—a space which it it
prove of anything like average richness compared to what has already been
tested, will yield a small fortune to each of the lucky holders. Ihe
principal wo/k done on it hitherto has been mere guUy-raking ° rs u rf
ing in the bed of the creek, or on the sides of the guliy c ose to the
present watercourse. The yield of the prospectors claim thus far has
been somewhat over 100 ozs., and has averaged about 16 dwts. to the


I spent my first day in Milparinka—as the township surveyed on the
Evelyn Creek waterhole is named—in looking up the place, and inspect-
ing the washing operations on the lower waterhole. The New South
Wales mining regulations have evidently been framed with the purpose
of giving every possible encouragement to the search for gold within her
borders, and amongst other provisions they enact that when a goldfield
has been proclaimed the district surveyor shall lay out a township of
sufficient size to accommodate the business people who will probably be
attracted there to supply the wants of the diggers. The terms upon
which the allotments are obtained are most liberal. All that is necessary
to be done is to take out a business licence and pay a fee of £l, when
you are entitled to select an allotment, on which you must erect improve-
ments to the value of £lO, after which—so far as I can understand—
you may hold the land against all comers till judgment day gun fire.
Any natural waters in the neighborhood are at once reserved for mining
purposes, and the squatter is precluded from interfering with them in any
way. A miner’s right entitles the holder to take up a claim of 100 x
100 feet; if two partners, 144 x 144 between them; three men, 185 x
185 ; and four men, 220 x 220. A prospector’s claim for four men is
700 x 700, if five miles from any other diggings.
The township at Milparinka has been laid out on a level plateau
above the creek, but the greater number of people are camped on the
eastern bank of the creek, close to the water. I say are, but for what I
know the whole township may have been moved by this time to Depot
Glen, as the water in Milparinka holes was rapidly drying up, and when
I left it was thought it would not last more than another fortnight or so.
Now water, I may observe, is highly necessary—for washing out gold—
otherwise at Milparinka the residents could fall back on grog for drinking
purposes.
It is a good place for grog, is Milparinka, and I fancy a considerable
number of its inhabitants would never know whether the creek had run
dry or not unless somebody told them. There was when I left a popula-
tion of about 300, and there were exactly six shanties—l beg the pro-
prietors’ pardon—hotels, besides several other places where something
stronger than tea might be obtained at the usual fare of one shilling
each time you “ took the oath.”
Now “ fair’s fair,” and I am bound to admit that though I saw a good
deal of drunkenness, still there was not more than might have been
expected in a place where a lot of idle bushmen and diggers were
assembled, and there was very little rowdyism. The four troopers
stationed on the ground found their duties so light that I heard them
constantly grumbling that they had nothing to do. I must also in justice
say that the proprietors of all the shanties, not one of which by the way
is licensed, seemed highly respectable men, and they would, I know,
one and all, be willing, nay pleased, to take out licences, but the
Licensing Act prevents it, as they have not the proper accommodation,
and until people know where the centre of the goldfield is likely to be,
or whether this is going to turn out a really payable diggings, it would
hardly pay to put up substantial buildings. Still, to South Australian eyes,
the curious laxity which seems to prevail everywhere over the border in
the matter of unlicensed houses does look a little odd. There are also at
Milparinka several stores, of which Messrs. T. Ottaway & Co. s is the
largest. This firm has secured two good allotments in the township, and
has erected the only structure ranking above a tent or a tabernacle—in
the Jewish sense, that is, a house of boughs—or, to use our blackfellow






longues, a whurley, gunyah, or humpy. There are also a butcher, baker,
chemist, two blacksmiths, and several other tradesmen, including a jolly
old barber, who plays the banjo in his unofficial hours. I’m wrong here,
by the way ; the residence of the tonsorial artist is not at Milparinka, but
at “ Twelve-Mile.”
The scene at Milparinka in the daytime was novel to one who had
been cooped up in town for so many years, but that at night was more so
—camp fires all over the place glinting through the trees, white tents
-(big and little), diggers ditto, music of various sorts, violin and con-
certina principally, with snatches of song; but I doubt if there was much
real jollity, there was not enough gold-getting. I tried to imagine my-
self back in “ far-off ’52,” when I—then a little bit of a chap—got my
first look at a real “poor man’s diggings,” with all the glorious excite-
ment of the time.
Amongst the respectable tradesmen at Milparinka, I noticed a select
squad of gamblers, including a rouge-et-noir man, a gentleman with a
“ wheel of fortune,” and a ring-and-spike artist. Evidently they
haven’t the fear of Mann’s Gambling Act before their eyes over the border.
Sickness is very prevalent on the diggings, due in a great measure,
I think, to bad water and coarse living; dysentery, congestion of the
liver, bronchitis, and ophthalmia or sandy blight of a virulent type being
most common. My eyes got so bad at last that I could not see in the
sunlight, and I very soon emptied the bottles containing a few of the
most suitable medicines contained in my small pocket homoeopathic
medicine case in doctoring people who, hearing I had medicine, begged
doses. The “ Barcoo vomit,” which here usually accompanies dysentery,
is a very distressing complaint. Luckily for me I escaped it, though
everyone told me I should have an attack.
Provisions are not unreasonably dear, considering the distance they
have to be carried and the difficulties to be overcome. This list of prices
is, I think, approximately correct :—Meat (beef only to be had when I
was there), Od. per lb.; flour, 4d. to 6d.; sugar, Bd. ; tea, 35.; salt, 4d.;
tobacco, 6s. ; potatoes, 6d. ; onions, lOd.; soap, 6d. ; tinned fish, fruit
and vegetables, 2s. per tin. Boots, clothing, &c., -were scarce, but some
were obtainable at reasonable rates.
Next day I started for the actual scene of the diggings. A tolerably
level ride of about eight miles brought me to “ The Four Mile ” rush,
which so far as appearances go is the most likely looking spot for a genuine
deep lead in the neighbourhood. The puzzling name of “ Four Mile ”is
given because it is that distance from the workings at Mount Browne or
the “Twelve Mile.” At the “ Four Mile” I found the inevitable shanty
—three, I believe—and about sixty tents, from which I estimated the
population as being abor or rather more, as there were doubtless
camps out of sight in the gullies around. I visited a number of the
claims, and found that a few were doing fairly well, but the usual diffi-
culty was now presented—how much or how little to believe of what
you are told by diggers.
I have noticed as a general rule that a party doing well does not care
to say much about the matter, while another which is “ making tucker”
will often represent matters as being all couleur de rose, or rather couleur
d'or. The reason for both is obvious. From quiet observation and
enquiry not always from the men themselves,l believe that several parties
on the “ Four Mile ” have been doing very well, although one at least
which is believed to be amongst the most fortunate has sold little or no
gold.


They pay 15a. per load for the carriage of their washdirt to Milpar-
inka, so there would need to be a fair average result of not less than 5-
dwts. to the load to clear bare expenses. 1 spoke to a number of the
men, and if what they told me was correct I should say there were per-
haps half a dozen parties who were getting gold in payable quantities,
but none so far as I could learn for certain were making anything very
great. Of course none could properly’test their claims, as the “ wash” sent
to the creek was mostly picked stuff, which they judged would pay for
cartage.
This wash was a new wrinkle for one who had been accustomed to
the wet gravelly “ dirt ” and pipeclay of Victorian diggings. What I
now saw being collected was simply decomposed slate debris, containing
a quantity of shingly slate and fine reddish clay, and all as dry as
a Colonial Treasurer’s budget speech. This wash for the most part
covers the vertical slate formation which is the true bottom, to an average
depth of only about 18 inches in the principal claims, and I think I am
safe in saying that no quantity of paying stuff has been anywhere got
at a lower depth than four feet. Many practical men had pegged out
claims where the various shallow gullies opened out into a likely-looking
flat, and had gone down in one instance at least thirty feet, but with the
most discouraging results. In most cases not even a “color” was
obtained, and none bottomed on good prospects. In some of the deeper
claims the wash looked more like what is usually met with—that is,
whitey clay and quartz gravel, but, worse luck, this wash “ won’t wash”
so as to pay its owners. I like the look of the “ Four-Mile,” and think
it quite on the cards that something better may possibly turn up there
yet.
Four miles further you come to the prospectors’ claim, and turning
the corner of the low hill that ends the Mount Browne range the tents
of “Twelve-Mile” appear in view. They are very widely scattered,
some being a-way out on the plain towards the main Yango Creek, and
others up in the' numerous gullies which intersect the ranges. Ido not
think the population, when I was there, numbered much over a hundred,
but a fresh rush was setting in owing to the reported discovery of a fair
prospect at a depth of 13 feet.
I made a careful examination of the claim where this had taken
place, and came' to the conclusion that the result did not
advance matters a single peg, and proved nothing as to the existence of
a deep lead. The claim where this prospect, 4 dwts. to nine dishes
« dry blowing,” was got is situated on a rise between two steep ravines,
just where they run out on to the flat and join the main creek. On each
side of this rise in the gullies gold has been got at the usual average
depth, say 18 inches, and there can be no doubt that, the rise being un-
questionably made ground which slopes down to the bed-rock again just
beyond, the old wash from the gully has at some time swept across
what is now high ground, and that the depth—l 3 feet —is merely due
to the fact that the recent deposits have been piled up to that height on
this particular spot.
Nothing much has been done so far to prove the country for a deep
lead, but a few plucky fellows have begun to do something in that direc-
tion, and they deserve to have good fortune for their pains. Principal
amongst these is the party of Butler & Co., which includes Mr. A.
Ashwin. They have gone well out on the flat below the prospectors’
claim, towards the Yango, and are steadily sinking. When I left they
had got down about 90 feet, and were then on an exceedingly hard strata


■of quartzite rock, as hard as flint, and, if anything, more tough, which
defied all efforts to penetrate it with pick or gad, and were awaiting a
supply of powder and fuse in order to make an impression on it. Many
people insisted that they had reached bottom, bqt Mr. Butler, a plucky
little Englishman, was not satisfied, and said he was going on till he
struck either gold or water, he didn’t much care which. So far as the
diggings are concerned it might be better if he found the latter, but
wishing him the luck he deserves, I shall be glad to hear that he has got
both.
I maintain that unless a very curious and unusual “ fault” has taken
place just at this flat, no parties will have bottomed until they strike the
slate set up on edge, but it must be remembered that should Butler’s
party find bottom and no prospect, that fact will not prove the non-
existence of a deep lead, for it may be that the “ gutter” is a very
narrow one, and nothing but a line of shafts across the flat, with drives
between covering the whole width, will prove that there is not a lead
even at this spot.
I must admit that these diggings are most puzzling. There are men
mining there who were wielding pick and shovel when I was trundling
hoops, but they seem to be as much perplexed as I was and am. I think
I can make the reason of this clear, at all events to people acquainted
with, mining, if they will try to follow my description of the place and
circumstances under which gold is found in the Grey Ranges.
As before said, these ranges, which are not by any means lofty, are
•composed principally of vertical slate, containing many quartz veins,
trending for the most part N.W. and S.E., which can be plainly traced,
and from which apparently the unwaterworn quartz fragments have been
washed down, but even in the gullies the covering of soil, such as it
is, is not thick. The gold, which for the most part is heavy and, to use a
digger’s term, “ sluggy” rather than nuggety, is found in these gullies, and
almost invariably this gold appears to have been well water-worn. So far
all right, but now comes the puzzle ; all the gold worth getting lies in the
bottoms of little steep ravines, none of which would be more than half
a mile long, and which lead directly from the reef-crowned hills into the
long winding valleys of the principal creeks. In these more level and
larger gullies one would naturally expect to find the heaviest deposits of
the°precious metal, but such is not the case. So far hardly a color has
been found in the long gullies. Still, as I said before, Ido not consider
that they have been anything like properly tested; but this remarkable
fact must be borne in mind —wherever the small ravines debouch into
the main gully the run of gold ceases, and cannot be found again any-
where near, neither does the bottom seem to dip as you would expect it
under the circumstances to do. Then arises the question, whence comes
the gold ? There is not the slightest indication of it in the surface
reefs above, and it appears watervvorn. Where has it travelled from 1
The ravines where it is found can hardly be long enough to have rounded
off its edges if it came direct from the reefs above, and if not from
those reefs from whence is it, and why only in these at first sight
unlikely snots, and no farther from its source 1
Theories as to the why and wherefore are about as plentiful as flies,
and the fly population of,the Grey Ranges according to the recent census is
about nine billion seven hundred and sixty-two million three hundred
and forty-two and a half statute adults to the square mile. As there are
no Chinamen as yet at the rush, the diggers fill up their spare time curs-
ing the flies.


Anthony Trollope advised Australians not to blow. His admonition is
not heeded on these diggings. There is a lot of blowing always going
on—“dry blowing.” This is a most amusing performance to everyone but
the blower; he usually fails to see the fine humor of the situation or the
fine gold resulting. The process, which is sometimes called “ dry
fiddling,” is conducted as follows : —The operator, taking in hand the tools
used in this latest form of mining, often consisting only of a small broom
and pair of spectacles, proceeds to sweep the bottom (which strange to
say is often on the top) of all its superincumbent deposits—the slaty
shingle and clay previously spoken of—which he places in an ordinary
miner’s tin dish till that receptacle is about three parts full. He then begins
to throw the dirt into the air with a movement somewhat similar to that
of a cook tossing pancakes. The wind carries the finest dust away, and
the tossing brings the larger fragments of stone to the top, from whence
they are swept with the hand much as in ordinary washing with the
dish. This action is continued till all the dirt but some fine sand and
very small particles of stone are left; then if the “ fiddler” has been
dexterous, any gold the stuff may have contained will be found in this
residue, and should be lying in the corner of the dish bottom next the
operator. To finally separate gold from dirt he raises the dish to a level
with his mouth and blows the dross over, leaving the prospect of more
or less of the much-prized metal exposed on the tin. Large lumps and
nuggets—where there are any—will have been noticed before this and
taken out. The process is a tedious one, requiring patience and powerful
lungs, and then is unsatisfactory, as much of the fine gold may be lost
though all care be taken.
Chapter V.
MOUNT POOLE, AND ON THE BACK TRACK.
gone over the actual diggings, carefully examining them,,
and become about as wise as I was before as to the raison d'etre
of the gold deposits, I determined to give one day to Mount
Poole and Depot Glen, not so much for what I should learn there, as the
diggings in that immediate neighborhood had been deserted for some
time, but rather to make myself acquainted with what is really
historical ground, and to see the Goldfields Warden, Mr. G. C. Thompson,
whose head-quarters were fixed at Mr. Mcßryde’s station, close to the
Glen. The distance to the Glen from Milparinka is about seven miles
over well-grassed meadow-like plains, the track following the course of
the Evelyn. I was received with all kindness at the station, and Mr.
Thompson courteously assisted me in compiling my notes, and
checking figures, distances, &c., though we were not agreed as to
the population of the diggings, which he informed me the census
only returned as 250. If this is so I can only say the census returns
might possibly have been more correct.
I fear that to the governing authorities in distant Sydney, the
Albert District is considered out of the world. Certainly there is
room for improvement in the way they legislate for its wants, of
which they know as much, I suspect, as our own authorities do of






our Northern Territory. The land and postal regulations will bear
alteration with advantage.
They have a tale in the Barrier country to the effect that when a new
police magistrate was to be appointed for Wilcannia the Attorney-
General’s department was plunged into a state of chaos by the eager
endeavors of the officials from the Minister downwards to discover by
means of plans, maps, and diagrams whether that flourishing town
was really in New South Wales at all, for it was variously believed to be
in South Australia, Queensland, and West Australia, while the office-
sweeper’s aunt threw fresh light on the matter by stating that “ she
heard it was somewhere in Rooshia, or else Maddeegasker.” Official
ignorance is great, but you can’t believe all you hear.
Mr. Thompson told me that two Port Augusta parties had got
through by the northern route via Beltana. Mr. Ranche brought some
passengers across in a buggy,but a little diggings seemed to go a long
way with them, or they thought they had had to go a long way for a
little diggings, one or the other, for they were on the back track in a
few days.
Riding with two of the troopers the day previously on the “ Twelve
Mile ” track, I met two members of another party who had come by the
same difficult route; the pair consisted of a fat little donkey and his
rider. Our meeting strongly suggested the humorous American adver-
tisement picture “ The boss of the road,” for assuredly Neddy was boss
in this instance. We were cantering easily along in the twilight, when
about five miles out from Milparinka we saw coming towards us what
looked like a white pony well laden with swags, water-bags, &c.
We took no further notice—our horses did. I was between my two
companions, riding a big, raw-boned piebald beast, that looked as though
he had run away from a circus waggon, and I was just explaining the lay
of the country and observing “the ground falls quickly,” when
I too very nearly fell quickly over my noble * charger’s ears;
luckily his neck was long, strong, and stiff, so I merely felt the back
of his head with the bridge of my nose, and having given up the
idea of counting all the stars I saw gambolling round I decided that
circus horses have hard skulls—a fact in natural history worth knowing.
Looking round I found fifty yards off the track, and the
two gallant defenders of Her Majesty’s peace as far on the other side. One
of the blue coats, a big powerful young fellow, had his horse quickly in
hand, and when I saw him he was rolling in his saddle and roaring with
laughter as he cried—
“A donkey, by jingo; I don’t know when I met one before.”
From a respectful distance, for our horses could not be persuaded to
be introduced to their humble relation, we questioned the rider, who had
sat stolidly amongst his numerous goods and chattels the while, both
he and the donkey seemingly somewhat surprised at our equestrian
display. He told us that he and two others had come all the way across
by the north route, starting from near Port Augusta and proceeding
via Beltana. The country was fearfully burnt up and sandy, feed almost
unobtainable, and on one stage they had to come seventy miles without
water, and would probably not have got through at all had a black
boy not shown them how to obtain water from the roots of the u water
bush.”
Through all this that little donkey had carried three heavy swags,
two big water-bags, and numerous other etceteras, and yet when we
saw him he looked as fat and contented as if he had just come out of
a clover paddock and were going a few yards further to find a thistle


field. Hearing of Neddy’s feats of endurance I felt inclined to buy
him on the spot, take him to Cobham, introduce him to Moses, and take
the home track on horseback and assback alternately—doubtless it
would have caused a sensation; but, fearing folk might possibly see the
family likeness between myself and my latest compaynon de voyage, I
To return to Mount Poole. After dinner at the station Mr. Thompson
kindly offered to take me over the hills to a point where I could get a
grand view of the surrounding country, and could see the old workings
at Mount Poole. , , , ,~.
Had I the skill of H. J. Johnstone 1 would be glad to put this scene
on canvas for my readers, for it was well worthy the brush of our
truest Australian artist. As, however, my artistic flights do not usually
soar higher than a big brush and a pot of whitewash for my back fence,
I’ll try a monotint painting in printer’s ink. _ .
Behind Mr. Mcßryde’s neat homestead rises a jumble of irregular
hills, wtiich form portion of the Grey Range, and run southward in
low undulations to Mount Browne. First then, looking south—at
my feet almost, awav down below—seen between the reddish broken
slate bluffs, lie the long deep water reaches of the Glen, shaded by
noble drooping redgums. On the other side the bank is not precipitous,
but sweeps up in low hills, over the tops of which Mount Browne Range,
the boldest and steepest in the neighborhood, with its deep gully-seamed
sides, stands out dark and sombre, with here and there a white
streak that marks the run of a quartz reef. Turning a view
that might be a tract from the green meadowlands of old England,
breaks on the sight: green grassy plains stretch away towards
an amphitheatre of hills; to the south-east and east lie low fiat-topped
sandstone ranges, mounting higher as they run northward till,_ O
wondrous sight in this sunny south land, over some lower peaks rises
Mount Stuart, his pointed crown capped with dazzling snow—
Australian snow be it noted, for the gleaming white of Mount Stuarts
brow is “ copai,” or a form of gypsum used by the natives for making
themselves more ugly than heaven made them. From beneath _ our
feet eastward runs Preservation Creek, showing more than one shining
silver streak of waters fringed with handsome trees —gums, _ bright-
green shapely acacias, and the beautiful but ill-odored gidgie with
its thick crown of pendulous leaves —till the broader bed of the Evelyn is
reached, then the dusky green ribbon of timber that marks the water-
course, so fair to the sight of fainting wayfarers in far north wildernesses,
bends and sweeps away to the south to carry the storm waters of the
uplands to Cobham’s sandy desolation. Looking north, far over
plains showing often the white expanses of broken quartz, rises another
chain of steep bills trending east and west with high quartz blows
standing out strangely on their rugged sides, and close by, over an
undulating plain, rises the single peak of Mount Poole with its cairn
of rough stones that speaks of the death of one of the many martyrs to
science who in this then unknown land laid down their lives for pos-
terity’s sake. A cool fresh wind blowing gently from the south and a
clear blue sky overhead added to the beauty of a scene which I little
expected to look on in Central Australia, still less on the spot where
Sturt and his men endured such hardships.
Alexander Smith’s lines rose spontaneously to my lips—
“ This world is very lovely, O, my God
I thank Thee that I live.”
Beautiful scenery affects me powerfully —and now I fall for an


instant into a short sweet romantic reverie. My thoughts float far away,
when bizz, pizz, buzz-z-z—confound it all, here’s another beastly fly under
my goggle-spectacles—a treat for sore eyes truly.
It takes about a minute to coax the wily brute out, and by that
time I am “ full up ” on scenery and everything else, and quite ready to
descend to the Glen with my patient companion, wno I fancy thinks
he has to deal with a harmless sort of lunatic from the Croweaters’
capital, and humors him accordingly. We start to descend by the bluffs
which overhang the north bank of the creek, but soon fail to see the
fun of it, and make a detour.
These bluffs rise almost sheer in places to a great height over the
water, and are composed of the usual reddish or yellow slate. They are
quite bare on the top, and the action of the weather on the
laminations has caused the surface to have a curious corrugated
appearance, and they are very sharp and difficult to walk on. It
struck me that if there were any modern St. Simon Stylites who
would like to mortify the flesh and sanctify the soul by living upon
a pillar of stone, he could hardly find a better place for the
operation than the slate bluffs of Depot Glen. I know this, the
sharp edges mortified my sole very considerably, and, seeing that my
only pair of boots was somewhat hol(e)y already, this was a matter
for serious consideration.
Arrived at the water level, I lingered for half an hour to
sketch a libel of the beautiful place, and yet though I drew some-
thing that the old housekeeper at the station was half persuaded into
believing was intended for a caricature likeness of herself, and which
she could easily have been made to credit was either a kangaroo upside
down or a wheelbarrow afflicted with epilepsy, still the overhanging
rocks didn’t fall down and mash me for the desecration; but really I
don’t know why.
And this was the actual spot where Sturt was imprisoned
in 1846, and within 200 miles of where Burke and Wills* slowly
starved to death. With hundreds of human beings close around you,
with signs of civilization on every hand, it is difficult to realise that
this could have happened so short a time since.
Where Sturt’s devoted band were penned in for six long months,
while the leather of their boots was actually roasted off their feet by the
intense heat, is a wool-washing plant, and within 200 yards is a
large and comfortable stone house, where folks read their Chronicle
weekly, and enjoy many of the comforts if not luxuries of civilization;
and think of it, Burke’s dying bed and grave, are now in the midst of a
fenced paddock.
This is what Sturt says in his journal of the site of the present
busy goldfield:—“ We pitched our tents at the place which I shall
henceforth call the ‘ Depot,’ on the 27th January, 1845. They were not
struck again until the 17th July following. This ruinous detention
paralysed the efforts and enervated the strength of the expedition, by
constitutionally affecting both the men and animals, and depriving
them of the elasticity and energy with which they commenced their
labors. It was not, however, until after we had run down every creek
in our neighborhood, and had traversed the country in every direction,
that the truth flashed across my mind, and it became evident to
me, that we were locked up in the desolate and heated region into
which we had penetrated, as effectually as if we had wintered at the
Pole. It was long, indeed, ere 1 could bring myself to believe that so
great a misfortune had overtaken us, but so it was; Providence had in its


all-wise purposes guided us to the only spot in that widespread desert
where our wants could have been permanently supplied, but had there
stayed our further progress into a region that almost appears to be
forbidden ground. The immediate effect, however, of our arrival at
the Depot was to relieve my mind from anxiety as to the safetv of the
party.”
I noted in this neighborhood a number of pretty plants and
blossoms which .were new to me, and the varieties of grasses very
numerous. Of those in flower alone I gathered no less than thirteen
sorts, some of them very graceful, and all looking as though they
were excellent fodder grasses, as is proved to be the case by
the condition of the stock feeding on them.
Of trees new to me I observed several, especially the leopard bark
tree and the gidgie. The former is much like an olive in form and color,
except that the trunk is somewhat straighter, with bark spotted
white and brown, in appearance more like the skin of a snake than
that of a leopard. The gidgie is evidently of the same tribe as the
mulga and myall, or the narrow-leaf of our own latitude. It is quite a
feature in the landscape on these northern plains. The gidgie has one
bad quality, however. An eminent German-Australian savant is
credited with the following:—He was exhibiting a flower to some lady
friends, and observed, “You zee, ladies, dees is a very preety flower
indeed, but dere is von ding I moost dell you, dat he has a most vicked
stink.” This description covers the whole ground with regard to the
gidgie tree. The crushed seed of the common acacia cannot hold a candle
to the gidgie for fullness of flavor, and those who in boyhood’s
innocent days have soaked these seeds in hot water, and, having crushed
them, placed them beneath the chair of some beloved preceptor,
will appreciate exactly how sweet are the zephyrs in a grove of
gidgies.
There are still signs left of the visit of Sturt, thirty-six years ago.
The remains of the old cart, and boat are yet to be seen, and the
excavation where he constructed his underground hut; while the
initials of Poole, cut in the tree that marks his grave, are wonderfully
fresh and distinct.
The unfortunate bungled Burke and Wills’s expedition also passed
through this way in 1860. It was only a few miles further back
that Wright, the man upon whom the principal blame rests, was
camped, where Brahe, the officer left in charge by Burke at
Cooper’s Creek, met him with the news that the two leaders,
together with King and Grey, had certainly perished, as nothing had
been heard of them for four months, and so he had left the depot and
returned.
It was the irony of fate —the starving and weary trio, Burke,
Wills, and King, having left their fourth companion, Grey, dead in
the desert, had reached that depot on the afternoon of the very day
that Brahe and his party left it, but were too weak to follow. Wright
should have been with fresh supplies at Cooper’s Creek long before,
but was idling his time away at Menindie. He afterwards returned with
Brahe to the depot, but, with a criminal carelessness that cannot be too
strongly condemned, was actually content to look at the cache without
uncovering it to see if the leaders had returned. Had he taken this
simple precaution he would have found that they had been there; and as
a matter of fact the unfortunate men were at the time no great
distance from them down the river, having been repelled in their endeavor
to reach our northern settlements.






Having returned to Milparinka, I next day bade a not reluctant
adieu to the diggings, to start on the back track. There were the
usual number of people hanging about doing nothing, and doing it well.
For one man working at either of the three centres of population, I
certainly saw three sitting around watching him do it. This is
usually the way though, even at better diggings than those at
Mount Browne have hitherto proved. There is always a large
proportion of people who, like Tom Baker’s cat, are “ almost death on
superintending,” and who seem to think the whole duty of man is to sit
meditating on his latter end , physically if not mentally. To hear
them talk, you would get the idea that things generally are very wrong
—that squatters are all scoundrels of the deepest dye; that store-
keepers are ditto; that prospectors who find fields where you cannot
dig gold out in two-pound lumps with a trowel should be incontinently
hanged; and that they themselves are the only decent people left
alive, who, had they their deserts, would either be in Heaven or in
Parliament.
I had a stirrup cup with one or two acquaintances before taking the
road, but I may mention that I was very temperate on the diggings—the
fact was as 1 hadn’t found a 40-lb. weight nugget I could hardly
afford to be otherwise. In a moment of reckless extravagance I one day
ordered a bottle of English ale—Marrion’s, nine shillings a dozen in
Adelaide,
What’s the price, barman ? “ Four shillings, sir.”
I paid it. I would much have liked to enquire the price of a bottle of
brandy, but pure consideration for the publican prevented me doing so, for
I feared if he opened his mouth to mention the figure the strain upon the
muscles of his jaw would be so great that either the top of his head
would fall off backwards, or his facial orifice remain permanently
gaping; still I would like to have known.
Moses had been brought up by Mr. Blore’s man, so he had to be led
back to Cobham, I riding a smart borrowed mare of Mr. Blore’s. Moses
and I had another little difference on the road. At sundown I camped
for a couple of hours to spell the horses, when the pony got the idea
that he was off duty for the night, and consequently was rather
sulky at starting, and after one or two deliberate attempts he managed
to jerk the end of the leading rein out of my hand as I was mounting,
and made off back towards the diggings. This, however, was one of
“The mistakes of Moses,” for the mare was much quicker than he, and I
feelingly remonstrated with the little rascal by means of a hunting-
whip for half a mile up the road, and am certain I made a striking
impression. After all, I had to resort to strategem to get hold of the
leading rein again, for the swag on my saddlebow prevented me stooping
quickly enough to the pony’s level.
Finding we were losing ground I galloped ahead for a couple of
hundred yards or so, then dismounting I tied the mare to a tree, and
waited Mr. Mo’s arrival. He soon came pit-patting up the track, gave a
look, and evidentlv saying to himself—
“o, its all right; camp O, this time,” turned off, and began to feed
in his usual whole-hearted way. Waiting till he had comfortably
settled to work, I went quietly up and caught him.
We travelled smartly the rest of the way, and I made Cobham late,
but started on early next day, and at Wonaminta Creek fell in with a
pleasant party of surveyors, consisting of Mr. E. G. Vickery (in charge),
Mr. Oxley, Mr. Southerland, and assistants.


Mr. Oxley, by the way, is the grandson of one of the earlier New
South Wales explorers, Lieut. Oxley, the then Surveyor-General of the
colony, who in 1814 conducted a party down the Lachlan and Macquarie
in search of the supposed inland sea. He was the discoverer of the
rich Liverpool Plains, and afterwards of the river Brisbane, on which
the Queensland capital now stands. Mr. Vickery proved a most congenial
companion, and as the party were going the same way, I spread my
rug in their capacious tent for several nights.
The down journey was pleasanter than the up trip had been, for by
the time I lost my surveyor friends I had found another in Mr. Ernest
Broadribb, and was easily persuaded to take in his brother’s station,
Poolamacca, on the road down, as my new friend was coming on to
Adelaide en route to Sydney.
Poolamacca lies in the heart of the ranges, which hereabout are very
rugged. The road from thence to Umberumberka was about the
roughest sample of a track I ever had the misfortune to travel over;
indeed, I found it absolutely necessary to explain to Benediction, on
whom I was then riding, that it was a road. Previously, I feel sure that
benign beast was under the impression that I was inducing him to climb
a ladder. It is worthy of mention that this especial track is called the
Gum Flats, principally, I believe, because the country is about as flat
as a set of iron harrows turned teeth up.
Some part of this day’s journey was along the east bank of Gold-
diggers’ Creek, where the disastrous Barrier rush of 1866 has left its
marks. From Umberumberka I took Messrs. Crews and Co.’s coach for
Adelaide, and, as previously mentioned, the down trip was performed
in fair time, and with as much comfort as one can expect in night and
day coach travelling. No rain had fallen in the North-East, and
consequently stocks of dust were full, but the article was “ moving off
briskly.” An old saying puts it that a man must eat a peck of dirt in
his life; he need not wait so long, for if he takes a trip to Mount Browne
I’ll guarantee he can stow his quantity in four weeks or less. I arrived
in town on the 23rd April, having been away a month, and immediately
disposed of a small landed estate which I had for some time been carry-
ing about my person.
In conclusion I wish most strongly to impress South Australians
with the fact that we have in our own territory many places at least as
likely looking as Mount Browne for alluvial goldfields, and more which
are unquestionably better as reefing districts. Notably amongst these is
the Waukaringa. The reefs in this neighborhood are most promising, and
had they been situated in any of the sister colonies would long ere this
have been fully tested, and without any doubt yielding good returns.
From the Alma alone, though it was very badly worked, no less than
3,730 tons of quartz were crushed, yielding 3,262 ounces of gold,
valued £13,046, or an average of 17 dwts. 11 grs. to-the ton, and where
so much gold has been got it is ridiculous to think that there is not more
■Hto be found for the seeking. I have one satisfaction, which is, that even if
the Mount Browne field should prove unremunerative to many, its
discovery may be the means of stirring up some of our colonists to a
systematic search for gold within our own boundary, and may induce
capitalists to use a little of their idle capital in developing known reefs
and alluvial ground—a consummation devoutly to be wished.
ADVERTISER PRINT, ADELAIDE.


BE MW JW. JCi3EiJB33ir,
TENT, TARPAULIN, AND FLAG MANUFACTURER,
' AND
FISHING TACKLE WAREHOUSE ,
31 KING WILLIAM STREET.
A LARGE ASSORTMENT OF THE ABOVE ARTICLES ALWAYS ON HAND.
A. €9tAiiBS&S’
Domestic Comforts and Conveniences.
The New American Gas Burners and Globes,
That give Double the Light, with 50 per cent, saving in cost of Gas.
6s. complete.
The New American Kilter and Pleater,
That a Child can make 50 to 80 yards of per day. Only ss. each.
The Perfect Cure Washing Machine,
That can thoroughly cleanse 40 to 50 articles in 10 minutes, and can
be easily worked by a Child of 12 years. Price, £4.
Mangles, from £2 15s. upwards.
Wringers , 305., 355., 405., 50s.
Portable Coppers, ss. gallon.
Washing Troughs, 20s. each.
House Steps, Skirt Boards, Paste Boards,
SPECIAL—The remaining Stock of GENERAL FURNISHING GOODS to*#
Cleared Regardless of Cost.
BARGAINS. BARGAINS. FOR CASH!
■A. O. CHAMBERS,
OLD SHOP, FLINDERS STREET.


FLINT’S,
37 HINDLEY STREET.
Three Rooms Furnished for £33,
PARLOR BEDROOM
For £l4 13s. 6d. For £lO 4s. 6d.
PolishedCedarEound Half-tester Bedstead
Table, with Pillar Palliasses
and Claws Flock Bed
4 Cedar Chairs Bolster
Hair-covered Spring- Pillows
seated Couch Cedar Washstand
Cane-seated Booking- Dressing Table
chair Complete Toilet Set
Cane-seated Arm- Looking Glass
chair Water Bottle and
12 yards Carpet Glass
Hearth Bug 6 yards Matting
Pender 2 Cane-seated Chairs
Set Fire Irons
Comice Pole & Bings
KITCHEN
For £8 3s. 4d.
Deal Table Frypan
Double Meat Safe Hair Broom and
2 American Chairs Handle
China Tea Set Scrub Brush
Dinner Set Dust Pan
Teapot Wash-up Tin
6 Knives and Forks Lamp
Boiler 6 Tumblers
6 Teaspoons 6 Wine Glasses
Kettle Box Iron
2 Galvanized Tubs Sugar Basin
and Bucket Butter Dish
3 Saucepans Pair Salt Cellars
Min mu”
THE BEST
ii&irjgtfSjatfsJ® & doj\nd
ITT THEE COLONY.
Proprietors—JL^ F. JOHNSON & A. H. SCARFE.
The attention of the Public, both in Town and Country, is directed to
“ADELAIDE PUNCH ” as being a journal well worthy their support.
Its Conductors are endeavoring to maintain its character as a
SATIRICAL & HUMOROUS PAPER,
From which SCURRILITY, VULGARITY, and GROSS PERSON-
ALITIES are CAREFULLY EXCLUDED, and are receiving tangible
evidence that their efforts in this direction are
WIDELY APPRECIATED.
The Terms of subscription are 4s. per Quarter, PAYABLE STRICTLY
IN ADVANCE, ss. if charged.
Agents wanted in rising country Towns. Liberal Commission given for
new subscribers and advertisements.


SEEDS.
AGRICULTURAL SEEDS.
VEGETABLE SEEDS.
FLOWER SEEDS.
GARDEN REQUISITES.
FRUIT TREES,
ORNAMENTAL TREES.
FLOWERING SHRUBS.
BULBS AND ROOTS.
MANURES OF MOST KINDS, INCLUDING GUANO
ENGLISH LOAM AND PEAT,
ALSO
MAIZE, AND OTHER FEEDING GRAINS.
L i W a iiCKITT^
Jtfdsmcn, &t.,
73 BUNDLE STREET, ADELAIDE.
PJ»X€KS.
To Builders , Contractors , Carpenters , Joiners , Cabinetmakers, Carvers ,
Patternmakers , Wheelwrights , Shipbuilders , Coachbuilders, and others.
WM. KING, JUN., & CO.
Pirie-St., Adelaide; o’Connell-Bt., North Adelaide;
Divett-St., Port Adelaide.
PLANING and MOULDING MACHINES, any sizes up to 11 x 4,
Architraves and Mouldings made up to any design.
BAND-SAWING MACHINE, JIG-SAW MACHINE, TENONING
MACHINE, RANSOME’S GENERAL JOINER, Fine Sawing, Rebatting,
Tongueing, Beading, Champhering, Ploughing, Grooving, Cross-cutting, &c.
Doors and Windows and all kinds of Joinery Made to Order. Boxes.
Galvanised Iron, Guttering, Ridgecapping, Screws, Nails, Zinc.
Hoop Iron, &c., &c.
SAWING DONE FOR THE TRADE.
WM. KING, JUN., & CO.
TIMBER MERCHANTS AND BUILDERS.
N.B.—Special Prices given for Buildings and Building Materials.


TDRVII THE TABLES
I HAVE NOW MANUFACTURED AND SOLD
SIXTY
Of my Patent Extension Dining Tables, being an average of
Six per Month since tbeir first introduction to the Public.
The price of them is Considerably less than that of the
Ordinary Telescopic Dining Tables with Screw Expanders,
and the operation of extending or closing them, although,
perhaps, not so amusing as the barrel-organ action, is
performed in much less time, and with greater ease.
J. G. OLDING,
FURNITURE FACTORY,
Pirie Street, Adelaide.


3CX r o Vi \
CHEAPEST HOUSE IN TOWN
ENGLISH in COLONIAL
BOOTS & SHOES.
BOOTS OF EVERY DESCRIPTION MADE TO ORDER ON
SHORTEST NOTICE.
Repairs Neatly Executed on the Premises.
HAND-SEWN BOOTS & SHOES & FANCY SLIPPERS TO ORDER.
3 1508 00637684 7


THE
ADELAIDE,
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
"«ceeoOOeeecßt*p»" —--
Proprietor:
“ One of the Largest and most
Complete Breweries in. the Australian
Colonies.” —Illustrated News.
* yoviynstt* Lith
