

To Persons desirous of Emigrating and to those wishing
to assist their Emigration.
The Council of the “ National Emigration Aid Society ” regret having
to inform applicants and the public, that the applications for assistance,
from the unemployed or from friends on their behalf, either in London or
from all parts of the country, are so numerous that it is quite beyond the
Society’s power to afford them adequate help.
The Council feel that the only effectual remedy for the present sad
condition of things is State or Parliamentary aid, and the Society is devo-
ting its exertions to obtain such aid towards the Emigration of the deserv-
ing unemployed to British Colonies.
All friends of the cause are invited to obtain signatures to Petitions to
Parliament, a draft of which can be procured at the Offices of the Society.
The Society is ready at all times to advise persons, and also to aid those
desirous of Emigrating, when its funds permit of their doing so, but at
present, it is only occasionally, where applicants can pay, or who can be
helped by friends to raise, the hulk of the amount required, that assistance
can be given.
The following shows what Emigration has done for the United
States:
Extract from the Report of the Special Commissioner of the Revenue of the
United, States, dated — Treasury Department,
Washington, January, 1869.
Immigration. —“ From the Ist July, 1865, to the Ist of December, 1868,
54 about 1,000,000 natives of foreign countries have sought a permanent home
“in the United States. Investigations made some years ago—since when
“ the character of the Emigration has greatly improved—showed that these
“ Immigrants bring with them specie, or its equivalent to the average
“ amount of 80 dollars per head; while their average value to the country
“ as producers, cannot be estimated at less than half the average value of
“ an ordinary labourer in the south, prior to the war, viz., 1000 dollars.
“ Immigration, thus, since the termination of the war, maybe regarded as
“ having added 80,000,000 dollars directly, and 500,000,000 dollars indirectly,
“ to the wealth and resources of the country.
“ (Signed) D. S. WELLS,
“ Special Commissioner”
N.B. —A dollar is about 4s. of English money.
Is it not far better to use every exertion to direct to our own Colonies
this valuable stream of Emigration, they being our best customers, and com-
paratively free from taxation ? As an illustration, suppose that 10,000
Emigrants were to leave for our Australian Colonies for ten successive
years; at the expiration of that time, they would have consumed products
and manufactures of the United Kingdom to the value of at least <£4,400,000,
and have then become consumers of upwards of <£Boo,ooo annually.
Besides the one million of paupers now receiving poor relief in Great
Britain, it is estimated that another million of unemployed persons are
upon the brink of, or fast drifting into pauperism; and while all these facts
are notorious, our Colonies are in urgent need of population to develope the
boundless resources of their lands.
The Council of the Society earnestly solicit the contributions of those
able to give money, and the co-operation of all disposed to forward the
good work of Emigration to our own Colonies.
Bead the Society’s Pamphlet on “ State Emigration,” price Twopence;
per post, Threepence.
Offices of the Society;— -16, Northumberland Street,
Charing Cross, W.C.
J. BATE,
May , 1869. Hon, Secretary.
