

To Promote the Building of Churches and Chapels for Christian
Worship, and to provide for the Maintenance of Ministers of the
Christian Religion.
1847.
No. 10.
ORDINANCE enacted by the Governor of South Australia , with the advice and
consent of the Legislative Council thereof.
[ 3rd August , 1847.]
Whereas for the advancement of the Christian Religion, and
the promotion of Good Morals in South Australia, it is expedient
to encourage the observance of Public Worship, and for this pur-
pose to authorise the issue from the Public Revenue of the said
Province of Sums to be applied in aid of the Building of Churches
and Chapels for Christian Worship, and of the Maintenance of
Ministers of Religion:
Be it therefore Enacted, by The Governor of South Aus-
tralia, with the advice and consent of The Legislative Council
thereof— That whenever it shall be made to appear to the satisfac-
tion of the Governor and Executive Council, that a population i
equal to Fifty adult persons are desirous to erect a Church
or Chapel for Christian Worship, or a Dwelling for the Officiating
Minister thereof, at any place within the Province, and a Sum not
less
Preamble.
Regulating the issue
of Public Money in
aid of the erection of
Churches and Mini*,
ters’ Dwellings.


Proviso, limiting the
amount.
Proviso.
less than Fifty Pounds shall have been raised by Private Contribu-
be applied towards the Building of such Church, Chapel, or
Minister’s Dwelling, it shall be lawful for the Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, by Warrant under his Hand, and
subject to such Regulations for the due Appropriation and Application
thereof as shall from time to time be made by the Governor,
with the advice of the Executive Council, to issue from the Colo-
nial Treasury, in aid of the Undertaking, any Sum of Money, not
exceeding the amount of the said Private Contribution : Provided
always, that nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to
authorise the issue from the Colonial Treasury in aid of any
Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling, of any Sum exceeding
One Hundred and Fifty Pounds; and that no Sum shall be so
issued in aid of any Private Contribution, until such Contribution
shall be wholly paid up and deposited or secured to the satisfaction
of the Governor, with the advice of the Executive Council: Pro-
vided further, that nothing herein contained shall prevent or
be construed to prevent the Appropriation for the purposes afore-
said, of any Sura exceeding One Hundred and Fifty Pounds, by the
Governor, with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council.
Stipend of the Minis-
ter of a Church. ,
11. And be it Enacted, that it shall be lawful for the
Governor with the advice of the Executive Council, by War-
rant under his Hand as aforesaid, to authorise from time to time,
the issue from the Colonial Treasury, of Stipends towards the
support of the Ministers of Religion, duly Officiating in any
Churches or Chapels, to be erected in manner aforesaid, or in any
Churches or Chapels already erected, and of which Trustees shall
be appointed, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, such
Stipends being issued at the several rates hereinafter mentioned ;
that is to say, whenever it shall be certified to the Governor by the
Trustees or Officers appointed for managing the Temporalities of
any Church or Chapel, according to the usages of the Religious
Communion to which the same is professed to belong, in the form of
the Schedule hereunto annexed, marked with the letter A, that not
less than Fifty Sittings have been rented and paid for in any Church
or Chapel, erected or to be erected in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, for One whole Year,commencing within
One Month previously to the date of such Certificate, and that such
Sittings are bond fide intended to be occupied by persons frequenting
such Church or Chapel, it shall be lawful for the Governor,
with the advice of the Executive Council, to issue from the Colonial
Treasury, to the Minister thereof, a Stipend not exceeding Fifty
Pounds for the Year then current, and if it shall be so certified as
aforesaid, that a greater number of Sittings have been rented and
paid for to be occupied as aforesaid, then it shall be lawful to issue
in


in manner aforesaid to such Minister a further Stipend, increasing at
the rate of Ten Shillings for every such additional Sitting of the
next One Hundred and Fifty, and at the rate of Five Shillings for
every such additional Sitting beyond that number: Provided al-
ways, that no Stipend shall be increased beyond the Sum of Two
Hundred Pounds in any Year.
111. And be it Exacted, that whenever it shall be certified
to the Governor, in manner aforesaid, that any such Minister has
been duly appointed to and usually officiates at least Once on every
Lord’s Day in Two such Churches or Chapels, not being
more than Ten Miles distant from each other, in each of which
Churches or Chapels there shall be not less than Fifty
Sittings, rented and paid for and intended to be occupied as afore-
said, it shall be lawful for the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council, to issue from the Colonial Treasury to such
Minister, an additional Stipend for and in respect of the Church
or Chapel to which he shall have been last appointed, not exceeding
half the above rates of Stipend.
XV. And be it Enacted, that whenever it shall be made to
appear to the satisfaction of the Governor and Executive Council,
that there is resident in any part of the Province, a population of
One Hundred adult persons, requiring pastoral superintendence, and
that there is no Church or Chapel erected s or likely within One Year to
be erected,at which such persons can reasonably be expected to attend,
it shall be lawful for the Governor, in manner aforesaid, and subject
to such Regulations for the due Application thereof as from time to
time may be made with the advice of the Executive Council, to issue
from the Colonial Treasury, towards the maintenance of a Minister of
Religion, or Missionary for the Spiritual care of such persons, any
Sum not exceeding Fifty Pounds in any One Year: Provided an
amount equal to the sum so to be issued shall previously have been
raised by private Contribution, and deposited or secured for such
purpose to the satisfaction of the Governor, with the advice of the
Executive Council.
V. Provided always, and be it Enacted, that Once at least in
every Year for which the Stipend of any Minister or Missionary shall
be issued as aforesaid, such proof shall be produced to the Governor
and Executive Council as they shall require, of the sufficient and re-
gular performance of the duties in respect of which such Stipend
shall be respectively issued; and if it shall appear to the
Governor and Executive Council that the said duties have been
culpably or wilfully neglected, it shall be lawful for the Governoi
and Executive Council to withdraw the said Stipend for such time
as shall seem proper.
VI. And
p ro yiso.
Sl°tLg “tS>"
churches,
Support of Ministers
or Missionaries where
there is no Church.
Proviso,
Proviso) proof of duft
performance of duties


Trustees to be ap-
pointed.
Mode of appointing
original Trustees.
Trustees to be Mem-
bers of the church
or P OvC#
’
VI. And be it Enacted, that before any Sum of Money shall
be issued from the Colonial Treasury towards the building of any
Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling, in the manner
aforesaid, Trustees shall be nominated and appointed in pursuance
of this Ordinance; and that the whole real Estate in fee simple,
in the site of such Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling, and of
any Lands, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances thereunto belong-
ing, shall be conveyed to the said Trustees, upon Trust for the erec-
tion, maintenance, and repair of such Church, Chapel, or
Minister’s Dwelling and Appurtenances, and for the Provision
out of the Revenues belonging to or arising from the use of the said
Church or Chapel, Lands, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances, in
such manner as shall be lawfully appointed, of all things necessary
for the celebration of Divine Worship and Service therein, subject to
the provisions of this Ordinance; and to the said Trustees shall be
issued under such regulations for the due appropriation and applica-
tion thereof as hereinbefore mentioned, all such Sums of Money as
by the provisions of this Ordinance are authorised to be issued in
aid of the erection of any Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling.
VII. And be it Enacted, that such Trustees may be appointed
in manner following; that is to say, whenever any number of
persons shall by Private Subscription contribute any Sum not less
than Fifty Pounds for or towards erecting or providing a Church or
Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling, Land, or Appurtenances thereto be-
longing, it shall and may be lawful for the said Subscribers to elect
by plurality of votes, any number of Trustees, not less than Three
nor more than Five, subject to the approval of the Governor and
Executive Council ; and such Election shall take place at a Meeting
of the Subscribers, of the time and place of holding which, at
least Fourteen Dajs’ previous notice shall have been given, by
publication in the South Australian Government Gazette; and every
person having subscribed and paid One Pound towards the erection
of any such Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling (if any con-
nected therewith), and being also a Member of the Church or
Religious Persuasion to which the same belongs, shall be entitled
to vote at all Elections of Trustees for the same, until such Church
or Chapel shall have been completed.
VIII. And be it Enacted, that every person so to be nominated
or elected a Trustee, shall be a Member of the Church or
Religious Persuasion in behalf of which he is appointed a Trustee,
frequenting its public Services, and not known to impugn publicly
any of its doctrines; and willing to accept and act in the execution
of such Trust.
IX. And


IX. And be it Enacted, that any such Trustee as aforesaid, who
shall leave the Province, and shall be absent therefrom more than
Six Months in succession, or who shall be a confirmed Lunatic, or
found not to be qualified as hereinbefore mentioned, shall and may be
removed from his Office by the remaining Trustees, or the greater
number of them, at a Meeting of Trustees held for that purpose,
alter at least Fourteen Days’ previous notice thereof shall have been
given to all the Trustees within the Province.
X. And be it Enacted, that whenever and as often as any
Trustee, nominated or elected under the provisions aforesaid, shall
Die, Disclaim, or Resign his Office with the consent of his Co-Trustees,
or shall be removed as aforesaid, the Surviving or Continuing Trustees
shall forthwith call aMeetingof theSubscribers,if the Church or Chapel
shall not have been then completed or opened for Divine Service, or
of the Seat-holders therein, after that period (as the case
may require) for the purpose of electing a New Trustee in the
place of the one so Dying, Disclaiming, or desiring to Resign, or
removed as aforesaid ; and the election of such New Trustee shall at
all times before the completion or opening of such Church or
Chapel be made by the Subscribers thereto, and shall at all times
after the completion or opening thereof, be made by
the Seat-holders, and the same notice shall be given of
the time and place of the said Meeting; and the same proceed-
ings shall be observed in all other respects as to the election of
such Trustee, as upon the original nomination or election of
Trustees: Provided however, that no Trustee shall be per-
mitted to Resign his Office until he shall duly have accounted, to
the satisfaction of his Co-Trustees, for all Sums of Money at any
time received by him in his said Trust.
XL And be it Enacted, that if the Surviving or Continuing
Trustees, appointed under the provisions aforesaid, shall
not within One Month after the Death, Disclaimer, Resig-
nation, or Removal of any Trustee, give public notice in manner
last aforesaid of a Meeting of Subscribers, or Seat-holders as
the case may be, for the election of a New Trustee, it shall and
may be lawful for any Six of the Subscribers, or Seat-holders, upon
giving Fourteen Days’ public notice in manner aforesaid, to assemble
a Meeting, as the case may be, of the Subscribers, or Seat-holders,
being Members as aforesaid, and to proceed to the election of a
New Trustee : And if no such Meeting be held, nor election pro-
ceeded with, within Two Months after the Death, Disclaimer,
Resignation, or Removal of any Trustee as aforesaid, it shall and
may be lawful for the Governor, by writing under his hand, to be
enrolled in pursuance of this Ordinance, to nominate and
appoint a fit and proper person, being qualified as aforesaid, to be
such Trustee. XII. And
Trustee disqualified
by absence or other-
wise, to be removed.
Mode of electing a
new Trustee at Meet-
ing convened by Old
Trustees.
Proviso,
in default ofimstees,
convene
meeting for election,
in default whereof,
pd n ? vemormayap '


New Trustee to be.
eome Joint Trustee.
Bishop may be no«
minated sole Trustee
for Churches, &c., of
the United Church of
England and Ireland.
Proviso, saving all
existing trusts and
rights.
XII. And be it Enacted, that every New Trustee to be nomi-
nated as aforesaid, pursuant to this Ordinance, shall become jointly
with the Continuing or Surviving Trustees or Trustee, a Trustee of
the site of the Church, Chapel, Minister's Dwelling, Lands, Heredi-
taments, and Appurtenances thereto belonging, in respect whereof
he shall be so nominated; and, upon such nomination being approved
by the Governor and Executive Council, and being by direction of
the Governor, by writing under his hand, enrolled in the General
Registry Office, pursuant to this Ordinance, the whole Legal Estate
in the same shall, by force of this Ordinance, and without any Con-
veyance, become vested in possession in the New Trustee, jointly
with the Continuing or Surviving Trustees or Trustee, if any,
or else in the New Trustee or Trustees alone, upon the same
Trusts as in the original Deed declaring the Trusts thereof.
XIII. Provided always and be it Enacted, that notwithstand-
ing anything contained in this Ordinance, it shall be lawful for the
Subscribers jointly contributing any sum not less than Fifty Pounds
towards erecting any such Church or Chapel of the United Church
of England and Ireland, or Minister’s Dwelling, subject to
such conditions as to them shall seem fit, and with the con-
sent of the Bishop, within whose diocese the same may be situate,
to nominate such Bishop, and his successors, to be the sole Trustee
and successive Trustees of such Church or Chapel and Minister’s
Dwelling, with any Lands, Hereditaments and Appurtenances
which may be thereunto respectively annexed, for the
purposes of this Ordinance; and upon such nomination being de-
clared to the Governor and Executive Council, the site of such
Church, Chapel, Minister’s Dwelling, Lands, and Hereditaments
respectively, shall be conveyed to the said Bishop and his
Successors upon the Trusts herein mentioned; and such Con-
veyance being, by direction of the Governor, by writing under
his hand, enrolled pursuant to this Ordinance, the whole legal
estate in fee simple in the said Hereditaments, with their Appur-
tenances, shall by force of this Ordinance, vest in possession in the
said Bishop and his successors, as sole and successive Trustees,
upon the Trusts aforesaid, subject to the provisions of this Ordi-
nance ; and such Sum or Sums of Money shall be issued to him
and them from the Colonial Treasury, towards the. building of any
such Church, Chapel, or Minister’s Dwelling, of the said United
Church, as it may be lawful to issue to Trustees, under the provi-
sions of this Ordinance.
XIV. Provided always and be it Enacted, that nothing herein
contained respecting the mode of appointment of Trustees, or the
declaration of any uses respectively, shall affect any existing Trust
or


or Right whatever; and that if any such mode of election of Trus-
tees, or declaration of uses, shall be inconsistent with the customs
or usages of any Religious Denomination, such customs and usages
may be followed.
XV. Provided also, and be it Enacted, that whenever any
appointment shall be made or Trusts declared, otherwise than as
herein expressly authorised, the Deed of Conveyance or Deed
of Trust to Trustees for the purposes of this Ordinance,
setting forth therein, or by reference to a Model Deed of the Re-
ligious Denomination to which the same is professed to belong, the
mode of appointing Trustees or other Officers, by whatsoever name
they may be known, for managing the Temporalities, the provision
for creating a succession of such Trustees or Officers, and for de-
fining the manner in which the Trusts are to be fulfilled, shall be
produced to the Governor and Executive Council, and proved to
their satisfaction to be in terms which are recognised and estab-
lished by or in accordance with the usages of the Religious Deno-
mination to which they are professed to belong; and thereupon
such Deed of Conveyance, or Deed of Trust, and Model Deed
(if any), shall be directed by the Governor, by writing under his
Hand, to be enrolled in the General Registry Office, pursuant to
this Ordinance : And from and after such enrolment every such
Conveyance, Deed of Trust, and Model Deed so enrolled, shall
have the same force and effect as if the particular clauses and
provisions thereof, respecting the mode of appointing Trustees or
other Officers, of creating a succession of such Trustees or Officers,
and of defining the manner in which the Trusts are to be fulfilled, had
been herein inserted ; and on every appointment of any New Trus-
tee or Officer, under the powers contained in any such Deed, such
appointment having been proved to the satisfaction of the Governor
and Executive Council to have been duly made, a Memorial of the
name of such Trustee or Officer, shall be, by direction of the Go-
vernor, in writing under his Hand, enrolled in the General Registry
Office in pursuance of this Ordinance; and from and after such
enrolment, the Legal Estate of the Church or Chapel,
Minister’s Dwelling, or other Hereditaments as the case may be,
shall, by force of this Ordinance, and without any Conveyance,
vest in possession in every such Trustee or Officer, either solely
or jointly with the continuing or surviving Trustees, or Trustee
or Officer, if any, as the case may be, upon the same Trusts as in
the original Conveyance.
XVI. And be it Enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for
the Trustees appointed in respect of any Church or Chapel, subject
to the provisions of this Ordinance, or for the major part,
of
Proviso for Religious
mode'
of ° appointment or
SiStr the P w!
poses aforesaid *
Free Seals and Mi-
nisters’ Pew re.
maining Sittings tc
be let.


Votes of Seal-holders
Proviso.
Ministers’ right to
h?g Upa Hous°e! DW and
Glebe.
Proviso.
of them, and they are hereby authorised and required to set
apart One-fourth part of the whole number of Sittings contained
in the same, to be appropriated free of any charge whatsoever to
the use and accommodation of persons choosing to occupy the same
during the time of the Celebration of Public Worship, or of any
Rite or Ordinance pertaining thereto; and also one Pew contain-
ing not more than Six Sitting’s, nor less than Four, for the use and
occupation, free from all charges, of the family or household of
the Minister officiating in such Church or Chapel; and
it shall and may be lawful for such Trustees, or the major part of
them, and they are hereby authorised and required by themselves
or Officers appointed for that purpose according to the usages of
the Religious Denomination to which they belong, to assess and
fix equitably the Annual Rent or Rate for each Pew or Sitting in
every such Church or Chapel, with the exception of
such Pews and Sittings as are hereinbefore declared to be free
from charge, and to make Agreements and Contracts with any
persons desirous to Hire or Engage the same according to such
assessed Rent or Rate.
XVIL And be it Exacted, that in estimating the majority
of Seat-holders at any Meeting held for the purposes of this
Ordinance, and in takiing the Votes of Seat-holders thereat
(which Votes may be given in person, or by causing to be
presented to the Chairman, a Voting Paper signed by each
Seat-holder) every individual shall be entitled to One Vote in
respect of each Seat or Sitting holden by him : Provided, that
no person shall in any case have more than Five Votes : Pro-
vided also, that no person shall at any Meeting be entitled to
Vote in respect of any Seat or Sitting, the Rent of which shall
be then due and unpaid.
XVIII. And be it Enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for
the Minister duly appointed to officiate in any Church or Chapel
under this Ordinance, during the continuance of his office, to have
free access and admission to and into such Church or Chapel, and
the Burial Ground belonging thereto, and every part thereof
respectively, at all times as he shall think fit, and freely to exer-
cise his spiritual functions therein respectively, without any hind-
rance or disturbance of the Trustees of the same, or any person what-
ever ; and such Officiating Minister shall and may, in like manner,
during such continuance in office, freely use, have, possess, and enjoy,
the Minister’s Dwelling, Garden, Appurtenances, and Glebe, belong-
ing to such Church or Chapel, and receive, have, and take, the
Rents, Profits, and Issues, and every part thereof respectively:
Provided always, that no such liberty of access and admission
to


to any Church, Chapel, or Burial Ground, or the possession and
enjoyment of any House of Residence as aforesaid, nor occupation
of the same for any length of time whatever, shall be construed to
confer any Right of Property in the same upon the Minister or any
other parties, as against the Trustees thereof.
XIX. And be it Enacted, that it shall be lawful for any
Trustees appointed in manner mentioned in this Ordinance, to
accept and take from persons willing to give the same, any Lands or
Hereditaments adapted for the site of a Church, Chapel, or Minis-
ter’s Dwelling, with a Garden and other Appurtenances thereunto,
or any Lands or Hereditaments adapted for the purposes of a Burial
Ground ; and such Land and Hereditaments may be holden and
transferred to New Trustees upon the Trusts for which the same may
have been given, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, so far
as applicable thereto.
XX. And be it Enacted, that every Church, Chapel,
and Minister’s Dwelling, in the building of which any
Public Moneys shall have been expended, under this Ordinance,
shall, with their respective Appurtenances, be and continue to be,
for ever dedicated to the purposes and holden solely for the uses au-
thorised by this Ordinance : Provided, that if any such Church or]
Chapel shall have ceased to be applied to such uses, or if Divine Ser-
vice has not been performed in any such Church or Chapel at least Six
times during One Year, it shall be lawful for the Governor, with the
advice of the Executive Council, by notice published in the South
Australian Government Gazette, to require the Surviving Trustees,
if any, or the parties in the actual occupation of such Church or
Chapel, to refund to the Colonial Treasurer the amount of Public
Moneys which shall have been issued in aid of the building of such
Church or Chapel under the provisions of this Ordinance, within One
Month from and after the date of such notice ; and if such amount
shall be so refunded, such Church or Chapel, Minister’s Dwelling,
and all Lands, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances thereto belonging’
shall thenceforth cease to be subject to the provisions of this Ordi-
nance ; and if such amount shall not be so refunded, it shall be lawful
for the Governor by like notice published as aforesaid, to call a Meet-
ing to be held not less than Fourteen Days from the date of such
notice, at the said Church or Chapel, or some convenient
Place in the neighbourhood thereof, of all persons desirous to con-
tribute to the maintenance thereof, and to the support of a Minister
to officiate therein, to elect new Trustees for such Church or
Chapel, in pursuance of this Ordinance, and it shall thereupon
be lawful for all persons present at such Meeting who shall then pre-
viously have subscribed One Pound, towardsthe maintenance of such
Church
Trustees may accept
Lands -
Churches and Min-
isters’ Dwellings, to
be dedicated to the
uses of this Ordi-
nance.
Proviso to prevent the
disuse of Churches.


Enrolment cf Deeds
and appointments of
Trustees.
Minister to te duly
of dut y-
Church orChapel,orwho shall thenhe Seat-holders, or offer to rent any
Sitting in the same for One whole Year, or for the major part of such
persons then present to declare that snchChnrch or Chapel has fallen
into disuse, and to elect in any manner authorised by this Ordinance
New Trustees for such Church or Chapel for carrying
into effect the purposes of this Ordinance according to the laws
and usages of any Church or Religious Persuasion which shall be
determined by and at such Meeting; and the names of such
Trustees and of such Church or Religious Persuasion being by the
Governor by writing under his hand, enrolled in the General
Registry Office in pursuance of this Ordinance, the fee simple of
the Trust Estate in such Church or Chapel, and of any Minister’s
Dwelling, or Hereditaments thereto belongingor appertaining, shall
from and after such enrolment pass from the original Trustees or the
survivor of them, to the Trustees so appointed, who are hereby
authorised to enter into possession of such Church or Chapel
and Hereditaments and to hold and apply the same for
carrying into effect the purposes of this Ordinance according to the
laws and usages of such Church or Religious Persuasion as shall
have been so determined at such Meeting.
XXI. And be it Enacted, that every Deed of Conveyance, and
Deed declaring Trusts, subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, as
well as a Memorial of every appointment of Trustees made in pur-
suance thereof, shall, on such approval or proof as by this Ordi-
nance is required, be, by direction of the Governor, in writing
under his hand, enrolled in the General Registry Office of the
Province, in a book to be kept for the purposes of this Ordinance ;
and the Registrar General, or other Officer in that behalf lawfully
appointed, shall accordingly enrol every such Deed or Appoint-
ment, at the request of any party presenting such direction of the
Governor, which enrolment shall, in the absence of fraud, be con-
clusive evidence that such appointment has been duly made; and
any such Deed or Memorial of Appointment shall be valid and
sufficient in the form, or to the effect of the Schedules marked
B and C respectively.
XXIi. And be it Enacted, that no Stipend shall in any case be
issued, under the authority of this Ordinance to any Minister
whose appointment shall not have been proved to the satisfaction of
the Governor and Executive Council to have been made in accord-
ance with the Laws and Principles of the Religious Denomination
to which such Minister belongs, and that no Stipend shall be con-
tinued in any case to any Minister after it shall have been certified
to the Governor, by the proper authority of the Church or Per-
suasion to which such Minister belongs, that he has been sus-
pended


pended or removed from Office, or has ceased to be in the actual
performance of duty as Minister of the Church or Place in respect
of which such Stipend was payable.
XXIII. And be it Enacted, that the registered Trustees of;
every Church or Chapel, subject to the provisions of this «
Ordinance, and every person to whom any Public Moneys shall be
issued under the authority of the same, shall annually, on or be-
fore the Thirty-first day of March, present to the Governor, full
and true Statements, Accounts,and Reports of the Moneys expended,
and for what purpose, the names of the Minister and Office-
bearers of each such Church or Chapel, and how frequently Divine
Service is usually performed therein; and all such other particu-
lars as shall be necessary for explaining the manner in which this
Ordinance has been carried into effect; and such Statements,
Accounts, and Reports, together with an Official Return certified
under the authority of Government, of all Ministers and Missionaries
to whom, and of all Churches and Chapels in respect of which, aid
hasbeen granted from the Public Moneys under this Ordinance,and of
the sums"so issued, shall be by the Governor laid before the Legis-
lative Council, as soon as may be after the then next assembling
thereof.
XXIV. And be it Enacted, that in the construction of this
Ordinance, the word “ Minister” shall be taken to mean any
Minister qualified to solemnize Marriages, according to the Laws
of the Province in force for the time being; and that in estimating
the number of “ Adults,” every person above the age of Fourteen
shall be reckoned, and that Two Children under that age, and
above the age of Six Years shall be reckoned as equivalent to One
Adult person, and either of the Parents, or any Guardian or
near Friend of such Children, shall and may be taken for the pur-
poses of this Ordinance to represent such Children.
XXV. And be it Enacted, that this Ordinance shall com-
mence and take effect from and after the passing hereof, and that
the same shall be construed to authorise the issue of the Public
Moneys for the purposes aforesaid, for Three Financial Years only,
commencing on the First day of April next.
Accounts and Reports
to be presented to the
Governor and laid
before the Legislature.
Construction clause.
of
dSc£ °
FREDK. H. ROBE,
Lieutenant- Governor.
Passed the Legislative Council, this Third
day of August, One Thousand Eight
Hundred and Forty-seven .
W. L. O’Halloran,
Clerk of Council.
SCHEDULE


No.
Names of Seat-
renters
No. of Sittings
Rented. 1
Amount of rent
j No.
Names of Seat-
renters.
No. of Sittings 1
Rented.
Amount of rent
_
1
£
I S "
d.
1
I
£
s.
d.
•
1
1
1
1
SCHEDULE A.
Return of Seat-renters in the Church (or Chapel) of
18 r rear commenc i n g
We, the undersigned (1) of the aforesaid Church (2) do hereby
certify that the above list of persons, who rent seats in the same, is
correct; that we believe such sittings to be bona fide intended to be
occupied by persons frequenting the said Church (2); that we have
S*™ 1 t " e . ai ? ount of rent set opposite the respective names; that
the Church is in good repair, and fit for the Ministration of Divine
and that the Rev. is the duly appointed
and Officiating Minister thereof. 11
SCHEDULE
(1) Trustees or other Officers, as the case may be.
(2) Or Place of Worship.


SCHEDULE B.
FORM OF CONVEYANCE FOE THE PURPOSES OF THIS ORDINANCE.
Enow all men by these presents, that
m pursuance of an Ordinance enacted by the Governor of South
Australia, with the advice and consent of the Legislative Council
thereof 44 To promote the Building of Churches and Chapels for
Christian Worship, and to provide for the Maintenance of Ministers
of the Christian Religion,” and in consideration of the sum of (1)
DO HEREBY GRANT, BARGAIN, SELL, AND RELEASE UNTO (2)
being respectively Trustees nominated and appointed under and in
pursuance of the said Ordinance, and to their Heirs and Suc-
cessors, all that (3), to hold unto the said
Heirs and Successors for ever, upon trust, [for the erection, main-
tenance, and repair, of (4) , and for the provision out of
the revenues, belonging to or arising out of the same, in such
manner as shall be lawfully appointed, of all things necessary for
the celebration of Divine Worship there,] according to the usages
of the (5) , and subject to the provisions of the aforesaid
Ordinance. In witness whereof, have hereunto set
hand and seal, the day of in the year of our Lord One
Thousand Eight Hundred and
Signed, sealed, and delivered,}
in the presence of )
Approved, and directed to be enrolled pursuant to the Or-
dinance.
( Governor’s signature).
SCHEDULE
(L Consideration.
(2) Trustee’s names.
(3) Parcels.
(4) When the Conveyance is not of the site of a Church, insert, instead of the words
in Brackets, the following, as the case mag require, viz.
minister’s dwelling.
Upon Trust for the Appropriation thereof as the site of a Dwelling-house; Garden, and
other Appurtenances, for the Minister duly appointed and officiating in the Church erected at
, and known as
GLEBE LAND.
Upon Trust for the Appropriation thereof as a Glebe, annexed to the Church erected at
, and known as
BURIAL GROUND.
Upon Trust for the Appropriation thereof as a Place for the Interment of the Dead, an-
nexed to the Church erected at , and known as .
(5) Name of the Religious Denomination.


SCHEDULE C.
FORM OF MEMORIAL FOR ENROLMENT OF NEW TRUSTEE.
In pursuance of an Ordinance to “ Promote the building of
Churches and Chapels for Christian Worship, and to provide for
the maintenance of Ministers of the Christian Religion,”
(0 having been appointed
a Trustee of (2)
in the place of (3)
and such appointment having been approved by the Governor and
Executive Council (or proved to the satisfaction of the Governor
and Executive Council, to have been duly made, as the case may ?
be), I hereby direct the said (4)
to be enrolled as a Trustee of such (5)
pursuant to the said Ordinance.
(Governor’s Signature).
Adelaide: Printed by authority, by A. Mubjut, Printer, Bundle-street-
(1) Name of New Trustee.
(2) The C hurch, Chapel, &c., as the case may be,and the Religious Denomination to which■
it belongs.
(3) Name of Old Trustee, and cause of vacancy, as death, resignation, &c.
(4) Name of New Trustee. b
(5) Church, Chapel, &c., as the case may be.




