

The Land of Gold.
?This is my own, my native land.??


.


Jjetween Ourselves.
Fellow Australian.
I have something to say to you. Don?t tell me
that I am a parson and should stick to my pulpit.
I have to preach in which is contemptuously called a
? tin ? church, in wMch the seats are said to be
? simply execrable.? You would not be attracted
by a tin tabernacle with uncomfortable seats. But
will you read ? It may be in an arm chair by a
cosy fire, or in a hammock in a cool corner. If vou
should sleep in reading?l hope not ?may you dream of
a great Australia helped to greatness by your own
moral earnestness and faith ?faith in God, faith in vour
country, faith in yourself. But DO YOUR PART.
Yours very sincerely,
AN AUSTRALIAN PARSON.
P.S.?lf any profit is made in the publication of
this pamphlet it is to be given to a fund for helping
students for the ministry through the Universitv.
V , cl d c n.


.


Scripture for Australia.
For the inspiration of most that is noblest in om
lives we look back to the Bible as source. In religion
this is obvious. In other things though less obvious
it is as real. Our Law, whatever the form, is Hebrew
in spirit. For home-life, for the more serious and
noble aspects of thought and poetry how much do we
owe to the andient Scriptures ? Then the Bible has
a message of patriotism. The Jews exaggerated this
sense of national privilege, if that could be possible.
They were right in recognising the Hand of God in
their history. They were wrong in imagining that the
divine election was merely mechanical and in forgetting
that the Lord?s people could only be His in their
endeavours to be a holy people worthy of his election.
For its patriotic tone the book of Deuteronomy is espe-
cially valuable for Australians. This is not for the
detail of its laws. That has passed with the past.
But the earnest tone is for to-day. It is the book of
A PEOPLE IN A NEW LAND, WHICH IS CALLED
TO SOLEMN THOUGHT AND REMINDED OF ITS
responsibility.
IS NOT THAT OUR CASE ?


?A5 J r ? .


jffustralia?s Opportunity.
J{ear, O Australia !
Deuteronomy 4-1-?? And now, 0 Israel, hearken unto the
statutes and unto the judgements, which I teach you, for
to do them I; that ye may live, and go in and possess
the land which the Lord the God of your fathers, giveth
you.?
Let us read our own name into it. Hearken, 0
Australia ! Are we not to he an Israel ?
There is a well-known series of books ?each volume
of which narrates the history of one of the peoples.
If we could understand it, each story is a lesson.
Each lesson is two-fold?a positive contribution or a
negative example. Of remote history it is possible to
state what the contribution made to the world?s pro-
gress was. In more recent cases it is harder to detect
and describe this. Australia has a place in the senes,
although her story is just beginning. What is it going
to be when more fully told ? Each nation has an
individuality, a something that makes it distinct. . Each
history spells an opportunity. Have you ever thought
of the magnitude of Australia?s opportunity ? The
man from the greater world may speak scornfully of
111 the ideas of those who have never been outside of
Australia.? We should cherish the idea nevertheless
that God means us to be one of His peoples. He
means to use us in working out his great purpose of
human uplifting and enlightenment. We are,coming of
age, and, therefore), > coming into our fortune?our na-
tional heritage. We are becoming conscious of our
national individuality. This does not mean in the
least that we are disloyal to the great brotherhood of
the Empire. No father desires to have in his sons


facsimiles of himself. What endless confusions occur
in the case of twins who closely resemble one another !
So in that wider family of the race, while we desire
the family-likeness that is British, we desire also the
individuality that is Australian. Thus are we develop-
ing our opportunity as a people.
And what an opportunity it is ? Can it be
paralleled anywhere on the broad page of history ?
A New Country
A great continent Iving alone and aloof in the Unknown
South. A statesman spoke of England?s ? splendid
isolation.? Here is a more splendid isolation in that
it is continental and not insular. One great continent
embracing in itself all climates, fidl of resources and
wealth, and free from all hostile adversities. We call
it a new country, but it is not a young country.
Far from being one of the most recent of the great
land-masses it is very ancient. All through the ages
it was kept?the last great land mass to be opened to
the tide of human progress. It was kept?and for iis.
When Spain was spying out the world I)e Quiros
dreamt of a southern continent. Seeking it, he got
amongst the islands to the north, and thought he had
discovered ? The Southern Land of the Holy Spirit.?
And may the name be proved prophetic, though the
land had not been reached ! God meant lit not for
Spain.
The sturdy Dutch arrived later, and at a barren
part of the great North-West. In effect, they said to
themselves ? That is no place for us.? It was not
meant for them or for that century. It fell to Britain?s
lot, but Britain at first recognised not the worth of
her prize and sought to make it a prison?a penal colony.
A Picked People.
The second factor that makes the opportunity of
Australia lies in the people who came to the new land
and in the time at which they came. At first they
dribbled in, here a ship and there a ship, and had priva-
tions enough to be sure in the new land. Then Provi-
dence called them in multitudes by the discovery of gold.


Now, that was, in the fifties. If we turn back from
the first important page of Australia?s history, and
begin to read at the same date in the history of Eng-
land, and read back, what do we find ? We read about
the Reform Bill and about Chartism, and behind both
we see the people?s uprising. They were getting en-
lightened. They wanted votes. They wanted room.
They were in bondage, even if not Egyptian bondage.
Therefore, they were ready to face the wilderness of the
unknown, believing in a new Promised Band. They had
no pride, little money, but unbounded pluck, and they
brought over to the new land the divine impulse which
.had come to nothing for the time being, or come to
little in the old land. They brought over the living
heritage of the centuries into a new land. The past
hands on a great heritage of good and evil. The lumber
of the past was left behind. The spHrit of expansion
was brought forward.
The People?s Band
Our land must be the people?s land. Here the
people are given their opportunity. They proved
worthy of it. How they realised individual opportu-
nity ! I could mention the name of a well-known
squatter in another State. In Scotland he was the
minister?s ? boy,? blacking his boots, stabling his
horse. Coming to Australia after the minister had
kindled up his mind and his ambition somewhat, he
became ?a prince of a man ?a' well-informed country
gentleman of cultured mind. There were many such
eases. The days of individual opportunity are not
passed, and though such opportunities are rarer, the
day of class-opportunity is coming.
Now, if you can?t see in all this a notable opportu-
nity, SUCH a people in SUCH a land, I?ll give
over arguing with you at once.
What is the opportunit} r in one word ? It is liberty.
We are a trusted people in a wealthy land. For ex-
ample, there is no compulsory church-going or religion.
But that does not mean that the great men, whom
God gave to these States to shape their constitutions,
dreamt that the claims of religion would be disregarded
and that, because there is no State-aid to religion land


no compulsion, the people would judge religion slightly.
No ! They trusted the people in this mutter as in
others. Again, there has l>een from the beginning a
wide franchise which is now practically universal. they
did not dream of class-politics. They trusted the sensie
of the people. We want a great patriotic religious
?conviction to lift us above all this carelessness and
thoughtlessness.
The Gospel of Native Land
1 have never forgotten hearing a good Scotch lady
remark to her husband after a religious service in dis-
paragement and criticisms, ? There was not much of the
gospel in yon sermon.? Do you feel inclined to say
that just now ? A preacher wants to touch human
hearts with the sense of responsibility. There is a
gospel of native land, and I want you to realise from,
our opportunity, yoiir responsibility.
Would it not be shameful if with such an opportu-
nity we should accomplish nothing or nothing worth
while ? According to the cables, Mr. Foster Fraser
concludes from his meteoric visit that the third genera-
tion of Australians shows signs of deterioration owing
to climatic influences. I have seen the nearest
approach we can have to third generation Australians
at a country wedding where the climate was severe,
and lam proud to think of them. The climate is not
the deadliest foe. There are other things. The most
stirring note of modern patriotism was the Recessional
?Lest we forget. It is an echo of .Deuteronomy.
Hear, 0 Australia, God?s laws that ye may go in
and possess this good land which the Lord thy God
giveth thee. Be no mere tenantry, but an abiding
people, beautifying and developing your heritage.
Beware lest thou forget the Lord.
Beware lest thou forget the past ?the people who
toiled and suffered in this land and the. deathless army
who died in other lands to win the privileges enjoyed
here.
Beware lest thou forget the people yet to be for
whom you hold the land in trust.


Some jffustralian Perils.
Jhe peril of
Last Sunday I urg'ed upon your thought Australian
opportunity- I wonder if we searched over the pages
of human history and could apprize them rightly, whe-
ther we would find such another. The last great land-
mass to be colonised ; full of all wealth, free of most
dangers ; colonised by sturdy men who came in sheer
freedom ; and enriched by the heritage of the centuries.
In oiir land more than in others the great adventure
of human freedom must be made.
Wherever you find a great opportunity you may be
sure perils lurk in its shadow. The first peril that meets,
us, gifted with this opportunity, Rs the peril of
?the peril of doing nothing at all.
Deut. 32-15?? But Jeshurun waxed fat/ and kicked : thou art
waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art become sleek :
then he forsook God which made "him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his salvation.?
The ancient poem from which this queer text is
taken is a song of a divine election. Just as we speak
of England as John Bull, or Australia, perhaps, as.
Tommy Cornstalk, the author speaks, but with more
reverence of Israel as Jeshurun. There had been a
notably favourable history, and Israel had been chosen
and watched over and enriched. But in the chief hour
of success had behaved like an over-fed pet?waxed fat,
kicked in the fulness of bread, forsook God, and lightly
esteemed the God of his salvation until God?s discipline
came to recall his heart. How often has the story
been repeated. A time of heroism, of struggle and hard-
ship. A time of success, despite and even by means
of the hardship. A time of decay when the hardship


was left behind. Nations grow old and decay. How
sad would be to grow prematurely old and decay before
the time. How unfortunate if the colonies planted for
a new garden of God in this rich land should run to
seed like the plant in too rich a soil.
A friend of mine was asked when travelling in the
old country ?and do you think that country -will ever
come to anvthing ??? I put the question to you :
DO YOU THINK THIS COUNTRY" WILL EVER COME
TO ANYTHING ? Of coiirse you do. But you must
ACT OUT THE THOUGHT. The great opportunity
MAY open into a great. destiny. It may, mind, not
it must for it is not a matter of necessity. It is in
the hands of the people, and EVERY" ONE COUNTS.
The peril of doing nothing besets our young people
in this new land. There are thousands of theirt' to-night
in the city of Adelaide, up and down the streets, doing
nothing. The picture-shows are crowded, and all these
young people never hear an earnest voice, never read
an earnest book. They are setting out upon lives of
mere personal gratification. The motto of the pleasure-
lover's life of old was : Let us eat and drink ?to-mor-
row we die. The expression of such lives as I have
referred to is worse : Let us eat and drink?-everything
else can die.
Democracy on Trial
It needs no prophetic insight to see that the next
period of our history as a people will be a very critical
one. We have reason to be thankful as we look back
for the wealth of privilege that the past has given us.
Our pioneer statesmen were full of faith in the people.
Through their efforts the rights of every individual are
recognised, and practically every one has a voice in
the government of the land. The fruits of the old land
battles are ours without the fighting. Again, we have
possibilities of culture in the liberal systems of educa-
tion that have been planned. We have possibilities of
leisure and recreation. Over and above all, we have
religious liberty and freedom*. This, again, was a great
privilege others had to earn, but we freelv enjoy. All
these in a rich and wealthy land. And all these are
now to be put to the test. We have come fully into


our fortune. How will you use it ? For nothing
but football and picture shows, and idly strolling up
and down the streets. Doing nothing ! Strolling
away precious liberty ! The danger is great.
I would like to make an appeal to every young
Australian man and woman. I would like to impress
them with what has been done in the past for them,
and .50 years would almost cover it: I would like
them to imagine themselves looking back over another
50 years ?these critical years of testing the great ad-
venture of liberty. Suppose the next 50 years
SHOULD prove unworthy, falling far short of the past.
You would have to look back and recognise that in
yoim life there had been nothing very good and nothing
very evil. You did what you had to, and no more ?
not one tap for the welfare of your native-land, nothing
for God?s cause'. What reproaches of heart it would
call forth unless the worst had happened, and the
heart was too indifferent and dead even for reproach.
Hyper-sensitive Australia
This peril of doing nothing with our great oppor-
tunity is very real. Australians are over-sensitive to
a little criticism) from those who speak not to fault-
find, but out of loving zeal and with an eye to the
honour of our history. When an Australian bishop
ventured a few earnest remarks on some aspects
of the moral life of the people, he raised a howl of
protest, ?We are as good as other peoples.? But
that is not the point?we have surely a greater oppor-
tunitv. Are we what we ought do be and what we
might be ? We certainly must not be complacent.
Dangers are always near the young man or woman
who can?t be taught anything by their elders and who
brook no reproof. The same is true of a young nation.
Nor must we look back to the past and put our trust
in it. In some of Mr. Zangwill?s stories the ludicrous
pride of the Ghetto is thrown into bold relief. Here
are people with a great national heritage, puffed up by
a sense of dignitv amid the squalor and dirt of the
slums. The past does not help them. No one lives
in the past but a man in his dotage. Life is in the
present and hope is in the future. Ours is such a


rich present. Are we going- to wax fat in a plethora
of advantages and then wax helpless, forgetting the
things that are highest and best ?
The Unawakened
Alas ! there are so many unawake to their
privileges. They are too lazy to use their
political power. A few hoard up the wealth
that can be gathered, but hundreds and thou-
sands of pounds are given over to gambling. This is
a canker upon our recreation, upon industry, and upon
the spirit of true brotherhood. As a matter of mere
patriotism such a canker should be cut away at the
root. With their leisure how many make a poor in-
vestment. Instead of joining in healthy sports they
look on. If they read, it is. the style of book that
makes least tax on the mind, and, unfortunately, the
various State Governments vote thousands of pounds
for free libraries, the bulk of which is spent in ephemeral
fiction. The reading of such by idle people can do no
good. Sunday, picture shows are crowded. Churches,
are half empty. It is all very well to blame the par-
sons and the church people, but the fight is unequal-
Against picture shows and idly marching up and down
the streets churches whatever the sermons and services
must be dull. They ask people to think. They ask
people to do something over and above the mere'demand
of worldly work. Sitting at picture shows eating
sweets or lounging in the streets smoking cigarettes
may be a pleasant and an easy way of spending Sunday
evening, but it must mean enervation.
Reverence.
The question of church-going is much debated. Does-
church-going matter ? Some people?s church-going does
not matter. But reverence, and earnestness matter
beyond all estimate. Nothing is more important than
to worship God, to seek out His order and obey His
will. This is wider than churches of course, but the
churches come easily first in the emphasis they give it.
In the introduction to a book of Australian verse
there occurs a reference to a widely circulated news-


paper and this comment, ? its racy and irreverent tone
is characteristically Australian.? If irreverence is cha,-
racteristically Australian, alas! for Australia. With-
out reverence decay must he speedy. No, brethren, let
us remember that God calls us for our own sakes, to
give heed to our own salvation. Then He wants ear-
nest patriotism. We must beware of doing nothing
and of being nothing. Our aim must be to be AUS-
TRALIAN MEN?MEN IN CHRIST JESUS.
Jhe J(eal l/ellow Peril and
its Complement.
We hear much of the yellow peril. The Northern
Territory has l>een compared to an open door through
which a Hood of men of another race might surge in
upon this rich and sparsely peopled continent. Is that
the most deadly peril, the REAL yellow peril that we
have to fear ? It must be kept in view certainly and
provided against wisely and firmly. But the enemy
within the gates is always more treacherous and deadly
than the opposing foe without. ' Every mian must find
his chief temptation within his chief opportunity, and
so it is with nations. It behoves us to heed the
warning note uttered in Deuteronomy viii. n ; 13.
? When thy silver and thy gold is multiplied ? (v 13)
? then BEWARE ? (v. ir) lest ? thine heart be lifted
up and thou forget the Lord thy God ? (v. 14). The
real yellow peril is the golden wealth of our great
opportunity.
The Land of Gold
Australia might not inappropriately be called the
Land of Gold. When first discovered it was disparaged
and undervalued. When Charles Darwin came in the
Beagle in 1836 he uttered what was a significant pre-


diction in the light of what sprang afterwards from the
unknown. ? Pasture everywhere is so thin that settlers
have already pushed far into the interior : moreover, the
country further inland becomes extremely poor. Agri-
culture, on account of the drought, can never succeed
on an extended scale I formerly imagined
that Australia would rise to be as grand and powerful
a country as North America, but now it appears to me
that such future grandeur is rather problematical.?
But the discovery of gold made all the difference,
and thereafter development went on like magic. The
story was repeated State by State as the mineral
wealth was discovered in each. When the treasures of
the easily-got surface gold began to be exhausted, men
turned to the deeper gold of the quartz, and to the
riches of the soil hitherto only slightly worked, but a
great golden equivalent all the same. And Australia
has come to be one of the richest of the lands. Our
silver and gold has multiplied. The time has come to
beware lest laying up treasures on the earth, wfe are
laying up none of the incorruptible treasure of heaven.
THE YELLOW PERIL IS UPON US. Not the men-
acing hordes of yellow men but the golden peril?the
worship of mammom instead of the worship of God,
It is certainly a great peril momentous in its power
for evil.
False Arithmetic.
Men are tempted to try and make gold?money THE
common denomination of all life. It is A great com-
mon denomination and one that is very serviceable. We
can reduce commodities, rents, services, etc., to ta money
value, and we have to do so for purposes of exchange.
But that is little excuse for imagining that all life can
so be reduced. Even prices vary and have to be fixed
according to circumstances, and there are things beyond
all price. Take the world of artistry, e.g., a great
concert. Money buys the best seats, and, perhaps, a
private rehersal. But for the fullest enjoyment you
may have to pick out a poor student under the gallery
or . a poor artist who, from that point of view, with a
few sheets of music and a violin, is happier than a
millionaire. Again, take the world of love. When
Clara Butt was in Australia someone calculated the


?value of her songs at so much a note. It was no
secret at all that Clara Butt was intensely happy in
her marriage and with her children. When she sang
to her children there was nothing of so much a note
for love 'is priceless. , And so on. Man?s LIFE does
not consist in possessions. It can?t be reduced to
�s. d. The man who makes money an end in itself
is making the most grievous of mistakes. It is only
a means to an end?a fuller and better life. If it aids
not to that attainment it is a means to death. The
man who makes it an end in itself is serving mammon
and he can?t possibly serve God. Are there not whole
classes of our community who live in disregard of that
great Christian emphasis ?
The Life?s the Thing
The life?s the thing, and not the mere outward
possessions. We are proud to measure our national
health by statistics of worldly prosperity, as if the
richest nation was either the strongest or happiest
nation. When our educational experts make appeal for
rrtore support, especially financial, for educational ad-
vancement they seem to give sharpest point to their
plea by contending that without more education our
young citizens will not be as efficient wealth-makers.
It is not the enrichment of manhood and culture, but
keeping up with others in commercial prosperity.
What would become of us if this yellow peril, this
worship of gold, smote our professional men, and the
fee was first rather than the work to be done ?
A magnificent ideal lies at the back of the farmer?s
life. He is helping in God the Father?s work of
finding daily bread for the great human family. During
recent good seasons the farmer?s life has been wonder-
fully rewarded. England has been proud of the good
old English gentlemen. Farmers have now the chance
?of developing a race of Australian gentlemen lindepen-
dent,' sturdy, free from toryfism. But in the realitv
the surplus wealth has been in too many cases just
used to buy out neighbours, or after selling out to
migrate to a bigger holding elsewhere, where there will
be more' land, and rrnre money. More land, more


money, always EXTENSIVE life, but so little consider-
ation of an INTENSIVE life, deeper and richer in
character and refinement.
So, also, the yellow peril touches business life. The
one thing sought after is more, more, but only more oi
the treasure of earth. If Australian business man
can find no time for the enrichment of their own and
their children?s life, is their life worth living? They
consider they are doing the best for the children by
earning for them more money, and they are possibly
denying them the indefinable and ennobling help of a
father?s stimulus. What use is money' to children if
they have not a wide outlook on life ? Without
character and wisdom to use it wisely it may, indeed,
be a curse.
The undue emphasis set on money and wealth is
responsible for the foolish pride of gold. Pride is
always foolish, but pride in a man whose only recom-
mendation is full pockets, while head and heart are
alike empty, is foolish in the extreme. Yet there are
men who have made a pile, and they expect to sit on
top of it and command respect if not worship from
all and sundry. It is too vulgar almost to speak of.
To measure the man and his social position and worth
by his money is as impossible as measuring a song
by the yard. Wealth by all means if possible, but
first things first, and, therefore, wealth far down in.
the scale.
The Complement. ??
The physiologist speaks of * ? complementary
colours.? The 'one seems to be in the colour world
a reversal or turning upside down of the other.
Thus you look at a yellow image steadily and then
look at a white ground and you will see the same
image, but in violet. The complement of the yellow
peril is a green one. It is the same peril, but, so to
speak, reversed. It is the spirit of discontent. One
has spokeh of a ?divine discontent? that leads on to
a fuller and happier state. There is a diabolical dis-
content that leads away from all progress and happiness.
It is the grasping after more instead of using wisely
and enjoying what one has.


Christianity preaches contentment, but in Christian
lands only is there the people?s insistanoe that the
wealth must,be fairly apportioned.- New circumstances
have been created and new factors brought in.
Machinery has vastly multiplied wealth. Education?
which has been given as a demand made by religion?
has quickened the social consciousness of whole classes.
We have the social problems with vast potentialities
of strife. Arbitration courts cannot be expected to
resolve them. They must be referred to the tribunal
of God. The assertion of the Deuteronomist comes on
us startlingly (ch. viii., v. 18). ?It is He that giveth
thee power to get wealth.? Our silver and our gold
is multiplied. e forget Him and say in our. hearts,
?My power and the might of my hand hath gotten
me this wealth.? At one extreme men ignorantly
abuse capital. At the other they selfishly misuse it.
Australia needs both capitalists and labourers of
Christian conviction?strong against greed, strong
against envy, heedful of the treasures that mfay be
hidden in a heavenly heart.
Then we have the latmosphere in which the problems
can be solved and wealth will be wisely and safely
sought. Then at business a man will not be a customer
out of whom money can be made, but a brother to be
served. In professional life a man will be not a client
or patient to pay fees, but again a brother to be helped.
And in the complexities of industrial life a man will
be a member of a great organism of business, whether
head or hand, to be cared for and nourished just as well
as is possible, as a living part of a living thing.
And then Australia will be A LAND OF MANHOOD,
not of mammon ; not a land of gold, but A \ ERA
LAND OF GOD.


Australia?s fleshly perils.
? For ye, brethren, were called for freedom ; only use not
your freedom for an occasion to the flesh, but through
love be servants to one another.? Paul to the
Galatians 5, 13.
Called for freedom? might almost be an
Australian motto. Freedom is our great opportunity
and freedom is the prime condition of all true virtue.
But it contains in itself the possibility of vice. Liberty
may become licence. Freedom may be used as an
occasion to the flesh.
Paul constantly distinguished between what he
called the flesh and the spirit. He detected a great
order of development, ? first that which is natural
and then that which is spiritual,? and the one was a
basework on which the other could be developed. You
n?�ay see in a naturally beautiful face the bloom of
health and a perfect regularity of feature, but it is
quite of a different order to a spiritually beautliful face
where the light of the expression of' a cultured soul
shines. Two types of thought and two types of life
correspond to this great distinction. The great
onsweeping progress which is apparent in the world?s
history may be viewed backwards and interpreted
downwards, or it may be viewed forwards and
interpreted upwards. What we call the interpretations
matters little. Materialism or animalism on the one
hand, idealism or spirituality on the other. The thing
that matters is to remember that the one MUST tend
down and the other as much must tend up in a grasp
after a something greater to be striven for. Further
there is the tragic possibility of sin deliberately and
knowingly twisting the flesh awry. The animal is
compelled by instinct. Man, with reason and will,
may come immeasurably higher, but mav sink lower
than the animal.
In proportion to the measure of our freedom we
have to face fleshly perils, some very ugly and all very
unworthy. The characteristic of the Australian fauna
is its dearth of higher animals (mammals). The land
has been isolated from far back in geologic time. Man
has a bigger hand in peopling it zoologically, but is it


to be filled with only higher animals ? This land whose
first name was ? The Southern Land of the Holy
Spirit.?
The Peril of i Plenty.
This is the bodily peril concerning the stomach?
taking thought chiefly about what is to be eaten and
drunk. Was it not Kipling who expected great things
from the 1,1 three-mealed meat-fed men.? As if the
food eaten makes the man. That is the crassest
materialism ever imagined. There may easily be too
much meat and too much food. There have been men
who succeeded on porridge but their descendents tend
to fail in fulness of bread, waxing fat and kicking as
aimlessly as Jershurun.
The Peril of Muscle
If the typical Australian is to be well-fed and
athletic, but principally that, the outlook is gloomy.
One goes through the Park Lands on a Saturday
afternoon with a glad heart at seeing young men and
women in hundreds at football or lacrosse, or hockey
or tennis, as the case may be. The recreation must
be healthjful and it may and should give a glow that
quickens the higher faculties. But one has a sad heart
passing into a main street to hear incessantly of some
football match which creates a far greater enthusiasm
than any great national issue. The worst of it is
that a trifling minority plays the healthy game,) while
a vast majority barracks. We are sick and tired of
being told in justification of Australian sport that the
Battle of Waterloo was won on the field of Eton, for
no great battle will ever be won by mere barrackers.
Such enthusiasm for a mere sport, such diffidence about
the battle of life.
The Peril of Lust.
How can you refer to such an odious thing ! But
it is a deadly peril and darkens our horizon, and we
must, so far as possible, avert it.
One of the gladdest functions that a minister has
to perform is his part in celebrating a happy marriage.
? Yes,? says the cynic, ? there?s a big fee.? It would
be well indeed, if such fees could be abolished and the
free people of a free land would support religious ordin-
ances right out. There are too many who only come


to the Church with sacred thought when it is a case
of a wedding or a funeral, and they might live in the
light of God at all times. No ! For its sheer joy,
a wedding is made almost the universal emblem ol
joy. What is there above it ? Here are two trustful
hearts that have been ? keeping company ? for years,
maybe. They have been through a discipline of
waiting, of saving and preparing, and thus are prepared
for the new discipline of self-control and self-sacflifice,
both so essential to happy married life. They stand
at the portal of a new life, far more beautiful and
wonderful because they enter it in innocence and purity.
But there are other weddings in sad homes. A
shadow rests over everything because some have been
snatching forbidden fruit. There is no discipline and
no preparation, and # though good comes out of evil
sometimes, it is all so different. There is the fleshly
sin flouting all divine and all human laws and breaking
hearts. Alas ! that it is so much wider in its fell
sweep than the shadowed weddings. The story of the
prodigal son is sad enough but the story of the
prodigal daughter is unspeakable. And our beautiful
white Australia is threatened by this shame.
In a small but typical country town, where brick
buildings generally cracked because of the friable dee])
clay on which they had to be built, a small party was
intently inspecting a large two-story brick building.
There was a bulky policeman, quite 6 feet 2 inches of
dignity, the occupier of the building, and one or two
others. And a passer-by said to himself, ? Something
interfering with the foundations.? Later he learned
the truth ?that the dear children who should have been
pure-m!inded as the snow scribbled filth on the walls
and the stern arm of the law had to be sought in
protection. Yes, indeed,
something interfering WITH THE FOUN-
DATIONS.
A teacher told me that he kept a pot of paint to
paint out the filth that was scribbled about his school
but you CAN?T PAINT IT OUT OF THE MIND. Its
fruits will appear in the mad house, in the brothel, in
the dreadful diseases that our hospitals dare not cater
for. The very well-springs of life are being tainted.


Our preachers are crying out. Our judges are in some
cases dead in earnest in seeking to ayert this peril.
Our doctors are plagued with requests for an illegal
use of their skill. Precious girl lives are sacrificed and
our police are baffled, for they can?t sheet home the
crime to those known to be guilty.
Dear Young Australia, what hope is there of a
nation whose men, to any considerable extent, have
lost a sense of the sacredness of maidenhood, whose
wives have lost the sense of the sacredness of mother-
hood, whose husbands have lost the sense of sacred
wifehood.
Thank God we are becoming conscious of such perils
?not only perils in our land, but greater here because
ours is the land of liberty and the open air life. Let
us nip these vile things in the bud. Let us not use
the great opportunity for an occasion to the flesh but
by love serve one another. Make all life sacred because
it is from God and because it is for Him. Thus shall
we spread social health and help others.
jffustralia?s Strengttj.
Let us' recapitulate briefly. Australia has a great
opportunity in that she is a great reserved land, new
and rich, into which picked men came and into which
they brought the heritage of the centuries. She has
also great perils amongst which are : (i ) that she may
do nothing with the great opportunity but live merely
for pleasure and be enervated ; (2) that she may
misuse her golden wealth merely to earn more of earth?s
gold and l>ecome worldly and hard and narrow ; (3)
that she may minister to the flesh and rot away the
social fabric with positive disease. THEN WHAT IS
TO BE HER STRENGTH ?
The different States are giving earnest heed to
education. Thie Commonwealth is concerned with
defence. There is a desire to develop, to increase the
fertility of the land and make more of the vast resources
so far only scratched over. These are our civil


problems and one is proud of the earnest attention
they are getting. It is a sign of Hife and vigor and we
feel that there' is a rising tide of earnest interest in
civil affairs. We have sent a High Commissioner to
represent the ? Greater Britain ? beyond the seas. But
do you touch the source of strength in any of these
things ? The strength lies deeper.
Strength is in Life.
The North Eastern coast of this continent is,flanked
by a great bulwark for 1,200 miles?the Great Barrier
Reef. There it is, a strong wall against the ocean,
solid and enduring.' The coral which composes it is
dead. But it has settled down out of life. We should
think rather of the little polypes which silently built it.
Our bulwark is in life. The strength of a nation is
in the living realm. Thoughts and feelings settle down
into character, character determines institutions, but
the living personality is of first importance.
Perhaps otne of the finest bits 1 of preaching to
Australians is to be formed in Mr. McCubbin?s picture,
? The Pioneers.? In the first panel is represented a
brave men and braver women beginnfing the fight with
the forest. The woman is sitting with woe-begone face
on ia fallen tree, while a man kindles a fire to boil the
billy. In the second panel the trees are less numerous
and the little bush house appears and the woman brings
out lunch on one arm and the baby on the other. There
is no woe-begone face now for a little love dispels a
very great loneliness. In another panel another man
like to the first?son or grandson ?kneels reverently at
a rude bush grave and you can see in the distance
through the trees a mighty city. Shall we say the
first picture emphasises character, the second home and
the third the great fact that civilisation and progress
rest on character, on home life, and on the sacrifice which
must be made in the present to bring about the fuller
reward of the future. The Pioneers lived for the future.
There is to-day far too much living for the present.
The great foundations of a natlion?s life lie in the living
realm of personality.' That is in the living will Of
man in the active responsible now, and in the living
God in the Unseen For Ever. God?s call to (than in the
appeal of duty is highest of all.


God?s Place.
We are begriming to be conscious both of our oppor-
tunity and of its perils. Let us become conscious that
our strength is in God. How often were the makers
of history conscious of and actuated by a religious
impulse. The great history of America began with a
religious bed-rock. Modern Kurope was born in the
thrill of that great Reformation which had religion as
its power. Could we but realise as a religious truth
that GOD has given us this land ! It was a wilder-
ness, but through the wilderness He led His people of
old to the Promised Land and by the way they found
and cultivated many of life?s best things. So He
leads us.
? For what great nation is there, that hath a God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is whensoever we call
upon Him ? And what great nation is there, that hath
statutes and judgments so righteous as all this law, which
I set before you this day. Only take heed to thyself, and
keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things; which
thine eyes saw, and lest they depart from thy heart all
the days of thy life ; but make them known unto thy
children and to thy children?s children.? ?Dent. 4, 7?9.
Man?s Two Duties
In this message of the nearness of God and His
demand of righteousness we have the contribution of
Hebrew history to the world?s great wealth. God and
duty are the two everlasting pillars of national life.
We can give to each term a fuller content but the two
remain all important.
The Deuteronomist urges two points that should be
carefully attended. The soul must be KEPT DILI-
GENTLY in these things. There must be no laxlity
or indifference. Like all other living things, they need
to be kept alive diligently. 'And they must be handed
on as a sacred trust to posterity.
It is this religton that will make all life strong and
sacred, the babe in the cradle, the beautiful children in
the homes, pure minded maidens, sturdy vigorous
youth, parenthood and masterhood in their varying
responsibility, and age when the work has all been done.


We are doing so much as a young people in so many
ways education, defence, legislation for the needier
classes, development of resources.
We are doing so much less for higher things. We
need a vigorous church life to foster the deeper spirtual
principles. We have church sentiment and the forme
of church order but we want more organised life. Our
churches, thank God, are all free but let us realise
what it means. They must be supported freely. Their
work must be done by volunteers. Yet on every hand
there is a scarcity of workers who are prepared to
make sacrifice.
There is a lot of talk about Church going and the
question is argued from the point of view of personal
gratification. What we want is CHURCH-DOING that
shall bring the spirit of religion to the enrichment of
the national life. We want more religion in
our politics. That is quite different from politics
in religion. There is enough of the clash of parties
without sectarian issues being added. But we want
the high incentives of duty and faith in civil affairs.
We want more of the true spirit of religion in our
homes and schools and we cannot have it unless first it
prevails in our hearts. For us there is only one
religion, the religion of the Lord Jesus Christ. We
want utter devotion to Him.
Without venturing to assume the risky roll of
prophet I am sure that the God who has given us this
great land will not let us rot away in sloth or mam-
monism or sin. He holds control of drought and fire.
He keeps our great northern door. If Australia does
not in peaceful ways and prosperous days strive to
realise her destiny, He will in sterner, sadder times,
bid her Awake, Awake, and put on her strength.
It is hard, brethren, for us to grasp th% significance
and tendencies of our dawning history. But let us set the
perspective of the great future. We dream of the Holy
City and the Perfect Land. We hope to see our land
more or less a realisation of the dream.
Let ns do our part here, and have our hope and
reward in God and the future ?in that great beyond
where somewhere lies the city of pure gold.


*
'


toyi A?. M. Osborne , Printer ,
83-85 Currie Street, Adelaide.
