

W '\\'
To the of {& Leonatd^,
Gentlemen, —
Though too long delayed, the Dissolution of Parliament has come at last. With
the political prospect obscured by confused counsels and much legislative work which has
violated all sound principles of government, you are called upon to take your part in
electing a new Assembly, which shall be a true representation of the People, and capable
of giving adequate and just effect to the people’s will. As one of your late Members I offer
myself again for your service ; but I am fully aware that I have no claim on any 'ground
affecting myself personally, and that your choice must be guided by considerations of fitness
for the business of Parliament. -«
We have reached a period in the history of Australian growth and development,
when these colonies present to the world all the proportions of national life, and when
their coming together under a Federal form of government is a question pressing for settlement
in the realm of practical politics. The formative stages of Federal opinion are past, and
the national sentiment is alive and strong in the hearts of all thinking men. If any of us
would favour delay, we do not possess the power to ward off the pressure of the great
national questions which challenge our capacities of statesmanship as a United People, and
which no one of the Provincial Governments is competent to solve, to legislate for, or to
touch. The inviolability of the soil as the home of one Australian people, the restriction
of the influx of inferior races, the opening of new fields for the employment of our people
and for the investment of capital, the lighting of our coasts, the improvement of our harbours,
avenues of enterprise in connection with the commerce of the South Seas and of neighbouring
markets, the name and influence of Australia among the nations of the earth: these, and
a crowd of other Federal questions are waiting for the consummation of the Union.
In all human probability, the Parliament about to be elected will have much to do in
the preliminary work of Federation. As that work advances the unwholesome conflict between
FVeetrade and Protection, as we now witness it, must grow less and less until, with the
advent of complete success, it will disappear altogether from the provincial stage. Absolute
Freetrade will be established between all the sister states of Australia, and the character of
the future Tariff in respect to other countries will be remitted to the electors of the
Federal Parliament. The State Legislatures, as such, will have no direct voice in framing
the future customs laws. It will thus be seen that no sincere advocate of Australian union
can be at the same time a provincial Protectionist.
If I am' honoured by a majority of your votes, I shall do all within my power to
hasten the work of Australian union, while yielding no jot of ground in my exertions for
the good government of New South Wales. One clear and inevitable consequence of
Australian Federation will be to compel the State Governments to resort to direct taxation
(the most honest and economical of all forms of raising revenue) to meet the State
expenditure, and it is a duty incumbent upon all to consider how the burdens can be
most equitably apportioned so as to conform to the doctrine of Adam Smith, that “ every
tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to keep out of the pockets
of the people as little as possible over and above what it brings into the public treasury of
the State.” Under the new order of national existence a large surplus from the Federal
customs will, by some mutually accepted arrangement, be divisible among the federated
States ; but this source of State income must necessarily be supplemented, as in other free
countries, by taxation over land, negotiable instruments, personal income, and other kinds of
property. In this country we have been acquainted with one of these forms of direct taxation
for many years in the shape of our Stamp Act. Attempts have been made to impose an
income tax ; but in new conditions of Society a special odium attaches to the inquisitorial
power which, in giving effect to the principle, there is danger of placing in incompetent
and untrustworthy hands. In dealing with land taxation, a strange confusion appears to
distract some minds in confounding the taxing privileges conferred on Municipalities witli
the undoubted and inherent rights of the State Government in raising revenue for general
purposes. A land tax is recognised as sound by the highest authorities, and it possesses
the twofold advantage of raising revenue, and at the same time assisting to make land
more productive for the general community. But I need hardly add that I would not join
in throwing an undue burden upon the owners of land or any other class of taxpayers.
Among the most urgent measures relating to New South Wales must be a measure
to deal effectively with the great problem which may be thus stated for solution : That
while on the one hand there lies abundance of land requiring nothing so much as labour,
on the other hand there are large numbers of men seeking employment and unable to
obtain it. We cannot neglect this unexplained anomaly. Under the operation of healthy
principles Society ought to be the richer for every man and child added to the population.
I fear it must be admitted that in all our legislation in relation to the public estate,
there has been too much indefiniteness as to the rights of individuals living upon the land,
and too much power lodged in the hands of mere officers of administration, while the interests
of the large numbers who have no actual share in the possession of the soil, have been
comparatively lost sight of. In any amending law, not only every just facility should be
given for productive freehold settlement, but every just security should be extended to the
employment of capital on leasehold properties, while care should be taken to secure to the
general body of tax-payers an adequate return in reduction of their burdens.
Strict economy ought to be enforced in all the Departments of the Public Service,
and in any system for effecting this object no political influence should be permitted, even
in the introduction of candidates for employment.
In respect to the pressing question of Local Government, I may be permitted to call
attention to the fact that all the municipal bodies in the colony, nearly 200 in number, exist
under my Act of 1867. The great defect of the present law is that large portions of territory
are still outside the boundaries of incorporation. The existing Councils have, as a rule,
worked beneficially for their respective areas. In any measure for extending the benefits of
Local Government,' the utmost care must be taken to render the conditions easier, not more
oppressive, and to ensure to the residents in proclaimed areas full and adequate powers
to carry out their local improvements, without vexatious interference from the central
authorities.
The public credit outside the Colony will be best conserved, not by the political
nostrums of official charlatans, but by the restoration of the population to the pursuits of
productive industry and sober enterprise under just laws and wise administration. The
security of the public creditor will be always found in the general prosperity. 1
One measure must be passed by the new Parliament without delay—a Bill to largely
amend, or to repeal the new Electoral Act. Under the provisions of this abominable law many
hundreds of our fellow citizens will be disfranchised. Any Act relating to the rights of the
Electors should be clear and simple in its provisions, and free from all ambiguities or
liability to misinterpretation.
Other subjects of urgency await the deliberations of the new Parliament; but my
views on the great and leading questions to which reference is made will be a guide to my
general course of action.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your faithful servant,
HENRY PARKES.
Sydney, July 2nd, 1894.


