

TO THE
CHRISTIAN ORGANISATIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
Do you see the hand of God steering this mass of humanity through the universe ? Did you see
the wave of superstitious fear flash through that great German army when it encountered the British
Army for the first time ? Did you see it at Gallipoli when nature created that mist which saved our
men from destruction when they were withdrawing from that quarter ? Do you see it to-day in Aus-
tralia warning you to take action? Do you see the hand of God working through nature in those
twelve men who are arraigned before the Courts in Sydney for sabotage?
Do you see it in the insane censoring of the truth through the public press ? Do you see it in
the Conscription and Anti-Conscription meetings—in the former by the denial of free sp&ech? The
latter are using sane reason and figures in their argument to gain the freedom of the press that is
being denied them, the people whom it touches most vitally. Are we of the Christian Church going to
remain idle and let these innocent people commit acts of violence against their fellow-man to gain the
freedom which is denied them ? In less than a week these pamphlets which lam sending to
you will be distributed amongst all the principal newspapers of Australasia. The power was given to me
to write that and to point out the way to govern ourselves, and I will do it voluntarily. You have got
to come out boldly as one Christian organisation and demand the freedom of the press, and see that this
message which I have delivered to you is not suppressed.
If any man take out of this book, if any man add to it, all tne plagues and diseases which are
written in this book will come upon them. The time is ripe for peace. Put up the sword again in its
place and turn towards thy God. We have been chastened until we are humble. We made laws of our
own. We thought we were greater than the Almighty Lord of Nature which created us. We have crushed
ourselves by our own actions by not obeying the laws of nature and the God of Love which were laid
down for us to follow at the beginning. “Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my word shall not.”
As soon as history repeats itself, the immortal spirit will transmit the word of God to the mortal
man through the law of nature. “He that hath an ear, let him hear what my spirit isayeth to the
Churches.” You are getting it direct now. The symbol of the Apostle Peter was written as a warning
to the Christian organisations to be most zealous. Are you who have taught and prayed the beet
part of your lives for this word to come going to do what Peter did—desert in the hour of need? Your
clear duty is before you. I suppose you will have noticed that the men who are to be arraigned with me
are unmarried men. That is the twenty-four elders as mentioned in the Book of Revelation. I don’t
know who they are, or where they will come from. The whole of the Christian organisations have got
to back this up. I have done nothing, and will do nothing, to place myself in danger of the law.
As soon as the Government challenges me, I will challenge them. The ten days’ internment will
be at my own wish. I will not allow any set of men to judge me lest they judge themselves. I have
got sense enough to know that no man can put off the old and take on the new in less than that time.
The whole spiritual outlook will be changed, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye. But you will
have to reform the Government step by step. If you let anything become disorganised, it will be your
own fault.
It is the hand of God working through the law of nature which is putting the pressure upon us
in regard to our soldiers. We have built up a race of men second to none in valour. That is why the
Imperial authorities are asking for more of them. If we of the Christian Churches do our duty and see
that this message is not suppressed, those men will not be needed at the front.
JOHN BROCK
Inverleigh.
ARBUCKLIE, WADDELL A FAWCKNER. PRINT
MCKILLOP ST. t MELB.
