

T" f J e \al
- f>> :•>
To the Electors of the King Division
OF SYDNEY.
Gentlemen,
More than forty years ago the undivided city of
Sydney, of which you now form so important a part,
opened the door for my entrance into Parliamentary
life by electing me by a majority of two to one to the
seat just vacated by Mr. Wentworth, the author of
our Constitution. Events were then rapidly giving
life and form to liberal thought and opinion, and the
dawn of freedom was shedding its first invigorating
light upon the land Throughout the long period
which has since elapsed, I have laboured side by side
with many of the best men who ever sat in Parliament
for the enactment of sound laws and the honest
administration of Government. If my many Acts
were withdrawn from it, the very Statute Book of
to-day would present a barren record.
To all who know me, and to all fair-minded men, it
may be well understood that I am not a seeker of a seat
in Parliament. I could easily have obtained that object
from my late constituents. But a momentous crisis in
the history of our country has arisen, when a knot of un-
scrupulous men, by arts and artifices that would ill bear
examination, have obtained possession of the offices
of State, and are bent upon securing their own per-
sonal ends, even by carrying disaster and ruin into
the industrial pursuits and productive interests of all
classes of the population. On the invitation of a
large body of your fellow electors, I have consented to
enter into the contest for your suffrages as a direct
and determined opponent of the Prime Minister. By
his advice to the Lieutenant-Governor, Mr. Reid has
brought about what was described by himself in the
Legislative Assembly as a “penal dissolution.” He
had a large working majority, which would have
satisfied the greatest English Minister. But Mr.
Reid, like most small-witted men, is fond of new pro-
jects and new’ methods, without thepporerw r er of brain to
discern their fitness or unfitness, their wisdom or un-
wisdom. Having wantonly embroiled himself with
the Upper Chamber, he has, at the bidding of the
Daily Telegraph , dissolved Parliament, by which he
is certain to banish many of his pliant followers from
the Assembly, but by which he cannot bring a feather’s
weight to bearupon the Council. It is the merechildish
menace of a feeble boaster. But has not Mr. Reid to
thank his own arrogance and his own abusive tongue, and
his notorious incapacity to wisely frame his measures,
for most of his troubles with the Legislative Council ?
Forgetting what is due to the great office he holds,
he began his conciliatory course by describing the
members of the Council as more reckless slaughterers
than any to be found at the Abattoirs ; he next held
them up as mummies, only fit to be stowed away in
the museum ; then he spoke of them as men of sinister
eyes and bull necks (not keeping in view his own
symmetrical proportions); and finally,at thelast sitting
of Parliament, he called upon some imaginary power
to “ sweep the old fossils ” away. Did ever Prime
Minister before speak of his equals in this sort of
language ?
I now beg of you to examine Mr. Reid’s legis-
lative measures. His Local Government Bill was so
crude and ill-drawn, and so wanting in provisions to
meet the wants of the people, that it is fortunate
that he himself laid it aside in the Assembly.
But that Bill never reached the Upper House;
it was killed by the extreme men of the Labour
Party Mr. Reid’s present allies. You will next
look at the Land and Income-tax Assessment Bill.
That measure contained exemptions from the operation
of the proposed tax of all incomes of £3OO down-
wards, which was nothing short of an unblushing at-
tempt to bribe the members of the Assembly. The
Council is denied the right of amending a taxation
bill, and the members of that body had to choose
between giving their sanction to an iniquitous pro-
posal, and rejecting the measure. An intelligent
examination of the defective character of Mr. Reid’s
July 12, 1895.
Turner and Henderson, Printers, Hunter Street, Sydney.
other bills as sent to the Legislative Council, will
disclose grounds of objection similar to those I
have pointed out. But I invite your attention to
Mr. Reid’s plan of reforming the Upper House.
It is a notable thing that the bogus democrats who
have floated to the surface shrink from trusting
the creation of the Upper House to the votes
of the true democracy. But Mr. Reid’s plan is
beyond example the silliest ever submitted to an
intelligent people, and if it were possible for it to be
carried into effect, no man of self-respect and inde-
pendence would accept a seat in the House so formed;
it would be debased to a Chamber of Flunkeys, and
would soon become the corrupt instrument of any
profligate minister of the day.
When seeking election twelve months ago, Mr.
Reid made all manner of wild promises. He would
immediately abolish the Dibbs tariff and bring in free-
trade. Has he done it ? He would manage things
so well that within a month there would be no
“unemployed” in the country. Have they not in-
creased by thousands ? Has he redeemed any one of
his boastful promises ? On the contrary has he not
sent starving men into the public parks to work for
their food without wages ? Has not his criminal
ignorance and folly paralyzed every branch of trade
and industry and brought ruin upon countless families ?
In asking you to elect me as your representative, I
desire to state clearly and boldly what, in my judg-
ment, is the work which Parliament ought to be
immediately invited to do. In view of the early
federation of the Colonies, nothing whatever ought
to be done, which would create obstacles to Union.
After the Colonies become united and occupy the
status of a nation, no provincial customs' tariff can
possibly exist. The very act of union will lodge the
sole power of imposing Customs duties in the Federal
Parliament. Therefore, as I have often stated in
public, no man can be a sincere advocate of Federation
and, at the same time, a champion of provincial tariffs.
The two positions are absolutely irreconcilable. But
Federation would open all the markets of wide
Australia to all Australian producers and manu-
facturers, without let or hindrance. All men of
patriotic spirit will unite, irrespective of differences
of opinion on smaller questions, to hasten the advent
of Australian Union. Then will come the great
struggle for the settlement of the National Tariff, when
men can take sides according to their convictions in
the election of the Federal Parliament.
But the cause of Federation does not stand in the
way of advancing the interests of New South Wales
as a separate colony or state. Undoubtedly one of
the measures most urgently wanted is a comprehensive
and carefully-framed bill to confer upon the country
districts the blessings of Local Self-government.
Such a bill was introduced by me in 1891, and was
lost largely through the machinations of Mr. Reid,
who joined the protectionist Opposition of the day
to destroy it. Any such bill must provide for a
liberal endowment to the self-governing bodies, with
ample powers of taxation for local improvements. In
my judgment, if we inaugurated a wise policy of im-
proving our inland navigable waters, our coastal har-
bours, and of enhancing the value of the public estate
by irrigation works, the preservation of the rain-fall,
and by carrying out cheap cross-country railways,
fields of reproductive labour could be opened which
would absorb every able-bodied man now out of
employment, while our national assets would be
largely increased in value.
These are some of the questions which ought to
engage the attention of Parliament instead of wasting
time by tinkering with impossible provincial tariffs
which cannot feed hungry men and women, or serve
the national cause of Australia.
I remain, Gentlemen, your faithful servant,
HENRY PARKES.
