

TO THE
INHABITANTS OF HOBART TOWN.
Dear Friends, June 2, 1854.
We have now an opportunity of putting an end
for ever to the evils which Intemperance brings upon this land.
It is the chief cause of poverty and misery. It swallows
up the wages of the working man : every man, woman and child
in Hobart Town pays, on an average, £l2 a year for drink —or
JO 50 for each house ; and probably is annually spent
in this colony upon intoxicating liquors.
The money spent on drink would enable working men to sup-
ply their families with comforts, and soon to become owners of
cottages and gardens. If the immense amount of money, time,
strength, and health wasted through drink were profitably em-
ployed, how great would be the progressive increase of trade and
commerce, —of individual happiness and public prosperity ?
Thedrunkard cannot work, he is helpless or vicious: his children
are reared in ignorance and vice ; his wife is a heart-broken
creature, who dies in misery, or becomes a drunkard like her
husband. He has no shame, no regard for himself or his family.
The drunkard is the most wretched object on the earth ; ho
brings shame and misery on all belonging to him.
In this small population there were 279 Coroners’ Inquests
last year, or 5 every week, mostly caused by drink. The
Asylums are filled with idiots or madmen ; the Hospitals with
diseases caused by drunkenness. The Gaols and Police Offices
are kept up by Intemperance.
This very week two murderers were condemned to death —one of
them after drinking all day at the Public-house, broke into his
neighbour’s dwelling with a pick-axe and murdered him before
his family. The excuse oPthe other for shooting a man without
any cause was, “He had been drinking, and did not know what
he was doing.” Such are the effects of Intemperance.
There is one, and one only, sure and effective remedy for this
dreadful evil, and that is to put an end altogether to the sale
OP INTOXICATING DRINKS, EXCEPT WHEN REQUIRED AS A MEDICINE.
The Governor thinks that nine-tenths of the crime committed


fn this Colony is caused by drink. Let us suppose that threer
out of every four murders and robberies, sudden deaths and con-
victions for crime would be prevented by putting an end to the
Public -houses, would not such a law lie the greatest blessing to
the people ? It would save in every future year nine or ten men
and women from being murdered, the same number from the
crime and penalty of having slain a fellow-creature. Hundreds
would be preserved from self-destruction, and thousands of wives
and children who, if the Public-houses are continued will become
victims of Intemperance, would bless God for preservation front
vice and misery.
The State need no longer blush at a revenue paid for licenses
to demoralize the people, lieligion, no longer mourning over
a population deadened to her voice, would lead a willing people
to high and holy things, and man would rise to his proper-
condition of reason and knowledge—of social happiness and moral
good. Literature and education would flourish. The working
classes would become a reading people, and devote their leisure to-
improving pursuits or innocent recreations, which they would
have ample means of providing and indulging. There would be
no need of public provision for orphans and the destitute, nor for
the Institutions required to relieve and counteract the sufferings
and evils caused by drink. Societies and contributions would be
no longer necessary to promote emigration to a country which, if
Intemperance were abolished, would be regarded from the fineness
of its climate, the fertility and beauty of its land, its natural pro-
ducts, and commercial advantages, as among the most favored
portions of the globe.
The people in five States of America have suppressed by law
the sale of liquor. In Washington, the capital of America, all
the Public-houses are abolished. The British Colony of IN ova
Scotia has passed a similar law, and wherever the liquor traffic
has been suppressed crime and poverty have greatly decreased.
Intemperance is far more prevalent and fatal among ns than
it was in America ; why should not wc bo able to adopt the same
measures for abolishing it altogether ?
Are we not accountable for the fatal effects of Intemperance,
if we permit the sdle of what we know will cause death and
ruin ? We license the sale of intoxicating drink in any quantity,
and we punish those who drink it, —we allow it to be sold, and
we condemn as a crime the intoxication which is its natural
effect.
We ask God to preserve our own health and our own lives,
and we persist from year to year in keeping among us an evil
more destructive to our brethren than war and pestilence.


He who should sell a rapid poison to a single individual would
be punished as accessory to his death, but wo license one out of
every twenty houses in the City to sell and tempt poor ignorant
creatures to buy and drink what we know will surely, though it
may be slowly, destroy their lives.
The only effectual remedy for intemperance is to prohibit the
sale of liquor. All other attempts to diminish the evil will be
only partial and temporary. We must not make a compromise
with the cause of crime. It will not relieve us from guilt to
diminish the cause of sin and death, it it be in our power to re-
move it altogether. If we allow fifty of our fellow-creatures to be
annually destroyed, we are no less accountable to God than if we
permitted the destruction of a greater number.
We should regard ourselves as Inhuman monsters if we were
to look upon a fellow-being killing himself in our presence and
not endeavour to save him ; but are we less so it in place ot
endeavouring to preserve the thousands destroying themselves
around us, we supply them with the means of death ?
If the daily scenes which occur in the Public-houses and
dwellings of the drunkards were presented to public view, such a
picture of raving blasphemy, ot brutal violence, of sensual crime,
of death-like stupefaction, would be scarcely less loathsome or
terrific than that of the condemned spirits. Who is there so
inhuman as to feel indifferent to such a mass of degradation and
misery ?
To abolish the liquor traffic would be a great good to all—a harm
to none. To the numberless victims of Intemperance it would bo
present safety. To the thousands now in the innocence of child-
hood, or if yet unborn generations, who if it be continued will
perish through its influence, it would be security and preserva-
tion.
Of all men it would bo the greatest good to publicans and
dealers in strong drink. They can no longer plead ignorance,
the light of reason and religion has unfolded the deadly effects of
their trade. The judgment of God is upon the consciences of
all who willingly supply to man the means of sin and ruin. Can
they hope for the Divine blessing upon themselves or their
families, who for money give to their fellow-creatures the cup of
madness, to inspire them with evil for the commission of every
crime ? How must the God of mercy look upon those who for
profit aid the author of evil in his work of human ruin And,
oh ! how unworthy the name of Him, who gave up himself a
sacrifice for sinners, are they who, for interest and gratification,
unreal and selfish, can refuse to co-operate with the Redeemer in


this design of mercy—this attempt to deliver their brethren from
the power of sin and deatli !
How can we beseech Almighty God to deliver us from evil and
keep us from while*we place before our fellow-crea-
tures the most fatal temptation, the most dreadful evil ?
Can we hope that the Redeemer will save us, while w r e refuse
to save from sin and death our own brethren for whom He died I
The evils of Intemperance are not confined to its victims ; they
spread over the health and morals of the people. The filthy
dwellings and corrupted bodies of the miserable drunkards breed
infectious fevers and epidemic diseases ; while their vices and
example are a continual seduction to the young and weak.
What family does not suffer from Intemperance in some one
connected with it ? Who is secure against its influence ? What
parent can be certain that his children may not be misled, and
become victims of Intemperance ? How many promising youths
apprenticed to trades or business have been seduced to the Public-
house, and led, through drink, to poverty and ruin I How many
youn" women carefully brought up are given over to a life of misery
with a drunken husband ? " The public sale of liquor is as the
gate of hell, swallowing up our brethren and our children before
our eyes.
Fathers and mothers, you have it now in your own power to
preserve your children from danger and temptation. You may
now for ever banish the greatest curse of man—that which
deadens his ear and heart to the voice of religion, and gives him
up body and soul to the Spirit of Evil. Surely to put an end for
ever to*lntemperance is a great duty of Religion and humanity—
a work most pleasing to God and most beneficial to man.
May our Heavenly Father give us hearts to feel for, and
deliver our weak and suffering fellow-creatures, and enable us to
put away this curse from among us.
Your faithful friend,
HENRY P. FRY.


