

Ca % (Bltdoxum Casmania
FOR
The Federal Parliament.
A Warning Note
BY
JOHN HENRY.
■
Tasmania :
PRINTED AT “THE NORTH-WEST POST” OFFICE,
WEST DEVONPORT.
1900.




WHY I WRITE THIS.
As the time is now close at hand when Tasmania must send
six members to the Federal Senate and five to the House of
Representatives, I think that only good can come by directing
the attention of electors to what appear to me the more
important issues that will be submitted for their considera-
tion. Ido this now as a fellow-elector, not as a candidate,
and certainly not as a possible future candidate for a seat in
the Senate. Should circumstances justify me, when the
time comes, in undertaking public work, I will offer myself
for a seat in the House of Representatives for a district on
the North-West Coast, should our Parliament cut up the
Colony into five single electorates for the House of Repre-
sentatives, as it is likely to do. I had intended addressing
the electors through the Press, but on reconsideration adopt
the present form as more likely to reach every elector in
r smania, and secure a more connected reading than is
j .’Si.' ie by a series of letters in a daily newspaper.
iiiarding our State Treasury
and the Federal Tariff
iear to me the more important issues which demand
careful consideration of electors in choosing their repre-
tatives. Both questions are intimately interwoven, yet
distinct, and I will deal with them separately.
Guarding State Treasury.
It is well known that, so soon as the Federal Tariff
comes into force, Tasmania, in common with the other States
(with the exception of Western Australia), abandons all
control of her Customs duties, and it is all important that
such Customs revenue should be collected by the Federal
Treasurer as will enable him to distribute a surplus to each
of the Colonies, sufficient to save them from any serious
financial difficulty. This appears to me the paramount
consideration, above and beyond all differences between
ft i3Ss7 Vte>\Tg
u*s~rr


Freetraders and Protectionists, and candidates through all
the Colonies, whether Freetraders or Protectionists, who
have this strong necessity before them, will have their tariff
views tempered to some extent by the weight of this con-
sideration. I trust that the electors of Tasmania and Aus-
tralia will insist on this being made a paramount question in
selecting members to represent them in the Federal Parlia-
ment. It has been urged that under the clause known as
the “ Braddon Blot” the States are fully protected. I have
previously pointed out the unworkable character of this
clause, and how, in all probability, its provisions will be
insufficient for our wants. Many, I find, do not understand
what is meant by this clause, and it may not be out of place
to state here that it simply requires the Federal Treasurer,
out of every £1 he collects as Customs revenue, to distribute
15s. amongst the States, reserving ss. out of the pound for
carrying on the Federal Government. Thus, if he finds that
one million will pay his charges, he need only collect four
millions, or if he wants two millions then he must collect
eight millions. We do not get our share at so much per
head of the population, but merely in proportion to our
contributions while the very objectionable book-keeping
system lasts, namely, for five years, and possibly beyond,
and as we are smaller consumers of the dutiable goods
that yield the larger Customs revenues, relative to most
of the other Colonies, it follows that our share of the
surplus will thus be diminished. Then, the first year or two
of Federation, unless anything exceptional in the nature
of a great European war should arise, will possibly
require something less for carrying on the Government
than was estimated at the Convention, and the Federal
Treasurer may not raise £<1,000,000, even with Queensland
included, in which event our proportion of the surplus
would certainly be quite insufficient for our wants. I might
go into figures on this question, but they do not interest
electors generally. I therefore avoid them all I can. This
clause cannot stand the test of time, because it imposes a
condition which in the nature of things must be unworkable,
inasmuch as it in effect says that the cost of the Federal
Government shall bear a fixed relation to the financial
requirements of the States Governments one-fourth to
three-fourths. In the event of a European war, and the
Federal Government being called upon to double her annual
expenditure, we should have to either seriously increase our
Customs duties and thus return more surplus to States than
they required, or, what is much more objectionable, force
the Federal Treasurer to resort to land or income tax, which
is one of the possible effects of this clause under conditions I
refer to. Our real safety lies in the several electorates for


the House of Representatives throughout Australia seeing
that no member is returned who fails to recognise the para-
mount importance of guarding our State Treasuries. All the
Colonies require large Customs revenues, New South Wales
excepted, though she can apparently do with more than she
has collected during the last five years. Her large land
revenue from sales and rents of, roundly, two millions, places
her in a very advantageous position.
We may safely count on a majority of public men seeing
to the wants of their States. Tasmania is steadily improving
her condition, and as increased prosperity means increased
power to pay Customs duties, we may hope for such a Federal
Tariff as will not seriously derange our local finances. Com-
paring our position with that of Victoria and New South Wales
in the matter of deficit, we will enter the Federation under
highly favorable conditions. During the period of financial
collapse in all these Colonies, we got behind over £400,000,
New South Wales over £3,000,000, Victoria £2,500,000. Our
deficit is nearly extinguished, thanks to the development of
our mineral fields and general advance throughout the
Colony, and will be a thing of the past when we enter
Federation, while New South Wales has a deficit of some
£2,800,000, and Victoria £2,400,000, with which load both
Colonies are likely to begin their career as States in Federated
Australia. We are at present withdrawing more from the
taxpayer through the Customs than is required for the
government of the country at this time, and the reduction in
Customs duties that may be looked for under a Federal
Tariff, while those reductions are not excessive, is only what
is due to the consumers of dutiable goods in our island.
The Federal Tariff.
Having thus, as forcibly as I can, pointed out to electors
the importance of requiring candidates for seats in the
Federal Parliament to pledge themselves unequivocally to
support only such a tariff as will yield revenue, lest our
State Treasury should be seriously embarrassed, I will pro-
ceed to consider what policy should be followed in framing
the tariff so as, in the first place, to make sure of revenue, and
after that to promote, or rather to least hamper, the industrial
life of our Colony, and I would say here most emphatically
that, though I address myself to my fellow-electors for the
Federal Parliament, and naturally appeal directly to them,
and possibly lay myself open to a charge of parochialism, yet
there is not one word I shall say in connection with this
question that will not apply with equal force to all the pro-
ducing interests of Australia as well as Tasmania. It is
tolerably clear that opposing policies in the Federal Parlia-


ment will be those of Protection and Freetrade, each party
aiming at securing revenue. The Protectionists cannot carry
out their theory to the logical conclusion of prohibition, or
there would be insufficient revenue, and in the same way the
Freetraders would, I fear, at first have a difficulty for the
same reason in adopting a tariff, say, such as that of Great
Britain, though what a few decades may do for Federated
Australia, with its enormous potentialities and undeveloped
resources, in enabling it to follow the example of the mother
land, is only cause for hope in the meantime amongst men
like myself, who earnestly believe that a really healthy
growth of manufactures in Australia will best be developed
in the free air of open competition with all the world, and
that the prosperity of Australia will be such that the future
government will be able ere many decades to raise sufficient
revenue on Freetrade lines to carry on the government of
the country and give the States such surplus revenue as they
require. Seeing, then, from my standpoint that neither of
those opposing parties can hope for extreme measures, the
question arises, what will divide them ? I think that it is
obvious enough from the movement amongst the manufac-
turers, in Victoria especially, who have, I understand,
framed a Federal Tariff in advance, that every effort will be
made to secure a majority in the Federal Parliament who
will endeavor to force on Australia what is called, for want
of a more appropriate term, a scientific Protectionist tariff,
the object of the Victorian manufacturers being, so far as
they can, to stop the importation into Australia of goods
from England or elsewhere, the manufacture of which has
been started under the protective policy of Victoria, and thus
compel the producers and others in Tasmania and all over
Australia to buy Victorian manufactures. I invite the
various sections of our industrial life to consider, first,
whether a tariff framed with such a purpose is likely to be a
safe one for revenue, and, second, whether it is just or in
their interests to attempt to limit their markets for the
purchase of commodities they require in exchange for their
products to, say, the Colony of Victoria, which has got a
certain start in the manufacturing race, and desires to con-
tinue it, no doubt, at the cost of other portions of Australia.
Let us consider the several industries of Tasmania and how
they would be affected by such a policy. I would ask my
readers to bear in mind that all the great exchanges between
countries are made in goods. We in Tasmania, as part of
Australia, will export minerals, wool, timber, fruit, wheat,
butter, &c., and in exchange for these will bring into our
country all the varied foreign commodities in daily use.
Our exchanges with other States in Federated Australia will
no longer be considered imports or exports, any more than


exchanges between Devonport and Launceston are now so
regarded. One naturally asks where will our markets be for
our products that I have named ? There is only one answer
—England or America, or the Continent of Europe, or it
may be Africa. And if those markets are good to sell in,
surely the men or the merchants who are merely agents
practically for those engaged in the various industries should
have the right to make their purchases in the markets that
suit them best, and not be compelled by legislation to buy in
any particular market. Take our mineral industry. Why
should the man engaged in mining in our Colony, whether
the capitalist or the individual miner, be compelled by law
to pay more money for his machinery, tools, clothing, boots
and shoes, or anything he requires for himself or his family,
to, say, a Victorian, or, for that matter, a Tasmanian manu-
facturer, than he can procure them from an English one at ?
Will the miners on our West Coast and elsewhere in Tas-
mania or the toilers on the hot fields bf Western Australia
be content to submit to this ? The same arguments apply
with equal force to every producing interest in Australia. I
quite understand the feeling that led many of the farmers in
Tasmania and on the mainland to favor Protection in the
past ; the fear in Tasmania that the cheap wheat and other
products of the mainland, notably beef and mutton raised on
natural pasture, against ours on pasture requiring costly
cultivation, would swamp our farmers and pastoralists, while
those on the mainland feared that our oats and potatoes would
cause them to receive less for their produce in their own
markets than they otherwise would. Federation has effec-
tually swept away all considerations of that nature, because
we in Tasmania can place the products of our country in
Melbourne or any other Australian market with the same
freedom and on level terms with any resident in Australia,
and they in their turn will have precisely the same freedom
in ours. That we freely and gladly grant. What I trust
farmers will now see, since they no longer have anything to
fear from competition with their fellow Australian farmers,
is that their true interests lie in being allowed to buy their
tools, bags, machinery, twine, spades, and hoes, and every
implement they may require in their business, as well as
their own and their wives’ and children’s boots and shoes
and clothing, &c., in the market they think best, and not be
forced by legislation to purchase in a market they don’t like.
It may be urged as a bait to our farmers that a heavy protec-
tive duty in Australia, on, say, oats and potatoes, or other
farm products, would give them an advantage in Australian
markets over IS ew Zealand growers. I would warn North-
West Coast farmers that they would buy any such advantage
too dearly in what they would have to pay in maintaining a


costly system of protected manufactures in Australia, under
which they would have to pay more for their several
requirements than they would otherwise do if traders could
import from foreign countries. Besides, Victoria is our
greatest competitor in potatoes, and an import duty on that
product would not give our farmers any advantage against
that Colony. But that market will be open to our farmers,
and they can compete there on level terms with Victorian
growers. I know that Protectionists endeavor to prove that
their policy means cheaper commodities, but Tasmanian
farmers will have some difficulty in reconciling that state-
ment with the desire to shut out competition by prohibitive
duties. They know that they relied on the duty on wheat
to keep up the price of wheat, and did not believe that the
immediate effect of a protective duty on wheat was to make
wheat cheaper. Of course the familiar truth is obvious
enough, namely, that production in excess of home require-
ments brings down the price to what the surplus will fetch
when exported. We have had that experience quite recently
in our wheat. While we were importing wheat the protec-
tive duty was operative, but immediately it was realised that
we had a surplus for export the market price for the whole
crop fell to what the surplus would sell at, and the protec-
tive duty ceased to be of any use. This general economic
law is sometimes set aside by Protectionist rings combining
to charge a higher price for certain goods within the pro-
tected territory, and selling the surplus at lower rates to the
foreigner outside. Those combinations rarely last long,
fortunately for the consumer. Having, I trust, satisfied my
readers that the producing interests in Tasmania must suffer
if a Protectionist policy should be adopted by the Federal
Parliament, I would address a few words to
Tasmanian Manufacturers
Who may say they know their own business better than
I do. I can only put, with, I trust, becoming modesty, my
own views on this part of my subject. What manufacturers
have we ? Our woollen mills, foundries, and engineers,
flour millers, soap and candle makers, biscuit makers, and
confectioners, jam makers, &c. I am proud to know that
our woollen mills have flourished and are flourishing,
and that their proprietors are able to sell in the open
market of New South Wales. When they can do that
now what have they to fear for the future ? One of our
largest flour millers informed me that he did not fear
competition with Australia, and certainly that industry
neither expects or could get Protection, having the raw
material so cheap at home. I admired that man’s self-reliant


attitude. Then take the other manufacturers I name. Is it
in their interest to prop up the large manufactures on the
mainland by a further system of Protection when they are
already large enough to threaten under Federation the
smaller local men ? Have our local manufactures not more
to fear from those State-fed institutions on the mainland
than from English manufacturers ? I repeat here what I
said to my fellow-electors in 1898, when addressing them on
the subject of Federation : —“ I admit that certain small
manufacturers may be injured temporarily by being placed
in competition with larger ones on the mainland. That,
however, will not stop the progress of Tasmania as a manu-
facturing country. Federation, I believe, will accelerate our
progress at a rate the most sanguine do not expect. We have
great advantages in our climate, our harbors, our geographi-
cal position, and our water power, which would soon be
recognised by capitalists, and with all Australia open to us, I
see no reason why manufactures should not be carried on in
Tasmania more profitably, certainly, than they can be in
Victoria. In this we have much to gain, and good reason to
hope for a great future for our Colony.” We have these
natural advantages in Tasmania. Why, then, should we not
rely on them, and on the skill and capital t that they will
attract, for the gradual development of manufactures amongst
us rather than attempt by legislation to force on prematurely
an artificial condition which would have the effect, possibly,
of maintaining certain manufactures in Victoria, already
established there, and retarding their healthy normal growth
generally throughout other parts of Australia. The history
of Victoria is an object lesson to us in this matter. That
Colony has tried Protection, and the agitation against sweat-
ing and for minimum wage and her factory acts are all
eloquent evidences of the failure of the policy to secure for
the people what its advocates promised. In building up a
nation is it desirable that the condition of things we see in
Victoria should be taken as an example or a beacon ? Quite
recently in a Colony of one million people there were half
the population gathered together in the great manufacturing
centre of Melbourne. This in a new country, with great
undeveloped resources in her lands. Is it in the highest
interests of this young nation of ours that so large a number,
relatively, should be gathered together in factories in the cities;
so many of the mothers of the coming race cooped up in slop-
made clothing or other factories for so many hours daily, and
then let loose to the temptations of the city ? I can only hope
that Victorian policy will serve as the beacon to Federated
Australia and not the example. I look forward with some-
thing akin to dread to the possibility of being engaged in
passing a “ scientific” Protectionist tariff. I have one before


BOOTS AND SHOES—
Proposed Duty.
Men’s, No. 6 and upwards
... 5s. per pair.
Women’s, No. 3 and upwards ...
... 4s. per pair.
Youths’, No. 2 to 5
... 3s. 6d. per pair
Girls’, 11 to 2
... 3s. per pair.
Girls’, 7 to 10
... 2s. per pair.
Boys’, 7 to 1
... 2s. 6d. per pair
Children’s, 4 to 6...
... Is. per pair.
Infants’, 0 to 3
... Free.
me now, prepared by a Victorian —expert, he calls himself,
as the future Federal Tariff. One specimen of the
worrying work in connection with this business may interest
my readers, but one is quite enough, which is as follows :
All other Boots, Shoes, or Slippers, of
every kind ... ... ••• ••• 30 per c. ad red.
I will leave it to the intelligence of the electors of
Tasmania to determine whether a tariff framed on such lines
will safeguard our Treasuries and promote the general
interests of our producers, or whether our true safety will
not lie in sending men to represent us in the Federal Parlia-
ment who hold that safety for our State finances and pros-
perity for our great producing interests lie in a tariff framed
for purely reyenue purposes only Customs duties on
narcotics and stimulants and the luxuries of life, with
probably a reasonable ad valorem duty, which would serve
the double purpose of yielding revenue and in effect
partially shielding some of those manufacturing ventures
that have been entered on under protective laws. _ Those are
the questions that must, I think, inevitably divide parties
in the House of Representatives and this leads me on to the
main purpose of my paper, in enquiring as to WHICH
House in Federal Parliament should we send our
Strongest Men —
The Senate or the House of
Representatives
Everyone knows that each State or Colony is a single
electorate for returning the six members of the Senate, while
our local Parliament has the power to cut up our Colony
into five single electorates for the House of Representatives,
which the Government apparently intend doing, following
the example of the other Colonies. Should our local Parlia-
ment not so legislate, then the members for the House of
Representatives will be elected in the same manner and by
the same electors as the members of Senate. It is only
reasonable to suppose that the best known and most promi-


nent pnblic men, under ordinary circumstances, would be
most likely to win seats for the Senate, while less prominent
men may, through local district influence, win seats in the
House of Representatives. A conclusion from such con-
siderations might be reached that the Senate will contain
the abler men. I, however, do not think that this will be
the case, because the real governing power will be with the
House of Representatives, and that House will, in my
opinion, attract the best men from all the Colonies. It is in
that House that the important work with which I have been
dealing must be done, because the tariff must be framed
there, and the Senate is powerless to alter a line in it.
Certainly it can veto, but it is not easy to imagine circum-
stances that would justify such an extreme course. It is in
the House of R. that Ministries will be made and unmade.
All the patronage and power of that great governing ma-
chine will be in the hands of the Executive, and they will
be controlled, it is presumed, by the House of Representa-
tives. Having this fact clearly before them, electors will see
how important it is that Tasmania, having only five members
for the House of Representatives, should be most careful in
the selection of the men, and only those pledged in the
clearest and strongest terms to guard our State Treasuries
and preserve our producing interests from oppressive Cus-
toms duties should be selected as representatives. To send
in three men of one color and two of another will be a fatal
mistake.
Probable Strength of Freetrade
Party.
I have recently travelled through Western Australia and
spent some time in Adelaide. In Western Australia they are
in precisely the same position as ourselves. Their great
producing interests—gold, timber, wool—do not require any
protection. They want to buy in England, and we may
reasonably hope that they will send five revenue men in.
Our hope of making our influence as a small State felt in
that great Parliament is by combining with such a State as
Western Australia, whose interests are identical with our
own, and if they are equally alive to their real interests in
this tariff question, as I hope Tasmania will be found, we
may reasonably look for mutual aid in that and in other
matters as well. Having this consideration clearly before
me, I was very much elated when I saw the figures in
Albany assuring me of Western Australia’s inclusion in our
federation. In Adelaide I was much pleased to learn that
revenue Freetraders are confident of a majority in South


Australia. They send seven men to the House of Repre-
sentatives. Mr. J. H. Symon will surely be one—a strong
man, as all Australia knows. Mr. Holder, the Premier, has
publicly given in his adhesion to Freetrade. His name has
been mentioned as Mr. Barton’s possible Treasurer, but
there must be some strange compromises ere that comes
about. Then I met Mr. Woods, a prominent labor member
in the Legislative Assembly of S.A., who is a pronounced
Freetrader, and is most confident of a majority on that side.
Victoria, of course, is emphatically Protectionist, though
Freetraders may possibly win a few seats. Then, New South
Wales, if true to her old creed, should send in a majority of
Freetraders. lam not well enough informed about Queens-
land to say what she may do, but the position is sufficiently
promising to induce the revenue Freetraders to fight reso-
lutely. Tasmania can, united with Western and South
Australia, possibly turn the scale, and my principal object in
writing this paper is to endeavor to impress upon the
electors of Tasmania the very great importance of send-
ing the very best, the strongest, and most reliable
men to the House of Representatives, where our finan-
cial interests will so much require guarding, and this
especially so, in my judgment, for the first session. Much
will depend on the surplus revenue we can secure for our
Colony. Any serious mistake on the part of the Federal
Treasurer might land the State Treasurer with a heavy
deficit, and necessitate oppressive direct taxation. No one
can say at this time precisely how much revenue in the
aggregate will be required, but close approximations can be
made at an early date as to the total sum required and the
probable share by each State of the surplus. With the latest
figures of all the Colonies before our public men at the time
when the Federal Tariff is submitted, they will be able to
judge as to whether the State Treasuries are safeguarded by
that document.
What will Divide Parties.
This tariff question is the one that will divide parties in
the House. It has been suggested, I learn, by very promi-
nent Federalists that the fiscal question should be sunk at
the start. I fail to see how this is possible. The Government
of Federated Australia will be carried on under the Cabinet
system Responsible Government, which means Party
Government. We see the force of public opinion at work
outside amongst Protectionists and Freetraders, and I am
much mistaken if the elections will not be largely fought on
those issues, in which case two separate parties will surely
be formed. Mr Barton, who, it is generally admitted, must


be sent for as first Premier, will select his colleagues, and, of
course, no self-respecting politician would join him before
first learning his policy on this important question. Then
Ministers must submit themselves for election, and must of
necessity declare their policy. Surely no one can contem-
plate our first House of Representatives meeting for any time
without an Opposition. That Opposition, I take it, wifll
require Ministers, at the very earliest possible date, not by
any means unduly hurrying them, to submit their tariff.
Australia will not wait for any unreasonable time for the
boon of free interchange, though the bill provides for a
possible two years within which the tariff must become
law. It is interesting to speculate as to what may cause
us delay in the enjoyment of this boon of free interchange
of commodities. On the 2nd Jauuary, 1901, all the Cus-
toms Departments of the several States in the Federation
pass under the control of the Federal Government, the
Customs officers ceasing to be any longer States’ officers,
although the Customs duties will continue to be collected
under the States tariffs, and placed to the credit of the
respective States (less cost of collection), until the uniform
Federal tariff comes into force. The question arises when is
that likely to be ? The Federal Executive must, early in 1901,
make arrangements for election of Federal Parliament, and
we may reasonably look for a meeting of that Parliament
within the first six months of 1901. Ministers will necessarily
have much to do before meeting of Parliament in taking over
the several departments, but the Treasurer during this
period must certainly devote himself to the all-important
work of preparing tariff, and should be ready some time
during the first session to submit his proposals to the House
of Representatives. To me it is inconceivable that the House
will tolerate any Ministry who fails during the first session
to submit a tariff, so as to secure for the people of Australia
that boon for which they have, as States, risked so much,
and in some cases sacrificed so much, namely, the free
interchange of commodities amongst themselves. So soon
as the Federal Treasurer submits his resolution with tariff
proposals to the House, from that hour, if he carries his
resolution, the Federal tariff, for obvious practical reasons,
must be collected, and the States tariff cease, and we shall
have the boon, for which Australia wearies, of perfectly free
interchange. It is, therefore, as I see it, possible that we may
have this during the year 1901, only there is always the
risk of a change in the Ministry, and it might happen that
the defeat would come on the tariff resolutions. It would
cause a serious dislocation to trade to have the tariff thrown
out after having been in force for some time. This is a
most objectionable experience for a country at any time,


but would be specially so in this instance, for while the
Treasurer’s resolution, if carried, would give us freetrade
amongst ourselves, yet, on its rejection, if such an event
occurred, we should have to revert to the States tariffs,
which would cause much confusion and complications.
Any Ministry in power will, however, I assume, know its
strength before submitting a tariff resolution, or it may be
that steps will be taken before that time to test the
strength of parties in the House and thus save the risk of
any such contingency as I indicate. It would be obviously
inconvenient to wait the submission of the tariff resolution
for a trial of strength, as the tariff could not well be
debated on the evening on which it is submitted. If the
views I have given expression to on this subject have any
weight with Tasmanian electors, then I trust that there
will be sufficient zeal amongst them to combine in every
district in our island, so as to give practical effect to their
convictions by securing the right men as their members for
the first Federal House of Representatives.
I have thus endeavored to make clear —
1. The paramount necessity of our representatives in
the Federal Parliament guarding our State Trea-
suries.
2. That this can be accomplished only by our members
in the House of Representatives seeing that such a
tariff is passed as will yield sufficient Customs
revenue to keep our State finances right.
3. That there is grave risk that a protective tariff would
fail to achieve this object, and, further, that a tariff
framed on that policy will not suit Tasmania any
more than it will suit the producing interests of any
other Colony ; that the true interests of our miners,
pastoralists, fruitgrowers, farmers, and graziers
would be prejudiced by any such tariff ; and that
even our smc.ll local manufacturers would only be
aiding large manufacturers on the mainland by
supporting this policy.
4. That our financial safety lies in supporting candi-
dates who will advocate a revenue tariff on Free-
trade principles that is, in the imposition of
Customs duties for revenue purposes alone, and not
for the purpose of giving one section of the
taxpayers an advantage over another; also, so as
our farmers, pastoralists, graziers, miners, and
fruitgrowers may not be compelled by unwise and
unjust laws to purchase, say, the highly-protected


JOHN HENRY.
Devonport, August 23, 1900,
Printed at “ The North- West Post ” Office , West Devonport.
manufactures of Victoria, when they desire freedom
to buy in the markets of the world, where they sell
their produce ; and that, as regards our future as a
manufacturing State, it is wiser to rely on our
natural advantages for a steady, healthy growth,
than on the fictitious aid of protective legislation.
5. That as the financial and tariff legislation which
will interest Tasmania and Australia so vitally must
be done in the House of Representatives, there
should be an organisation in every electoral district
for the House of Representatives to return five men
of the true color, so as our small strength in that
House may, joined to others, be an effective force
in one direction, and not neutralised by division.


