

[CIRCULAR.]
(Private and Confidential.)
TO THE SHAREHOLDERS
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
171, Macquarie Street,
Sydney, 31si July, 1861.
Gentlemen,
The feeling expressed at the Half-yearly Meeting of
the Shareholders of the Australian Joint Stock Bank, held on the 26th
Instant, that certain Resolutions I intended to lay before you, relative
to the conduct of Mr. Clark Irving, in his capacity as a Director, as to
heavy losses sustained both by the Bank and myself through such con-
duct, rendered it evident they could not then he heard. lam induced
to lay before you a statement of the transactions out of which such
charges arose, and as it is my intention to call a Special 'General
Meeting of the Proprietors, to take these matters into consideration,
would request your serious attention to the whole of the circumstances,
as set out in the accompanying Correspondence and Report, —feeling
sure that, upon discussion, the justice of my charges will be obviously
apparent.
The following Statement of what took place at the Meeting held
on the 26th Instant, furnished to me by a Proprietor, who was present
from the commencent to the close of the proceedings, will shew you
that I was unable to move the Resolutions of which I had given notice,
owing to the extraordinary conduct of the Chairman, Thomas Holt,
Esq., who, after I had obtained his ear, and while I was making my
speech, in pursuance of the notices referred to, permitted me to be
interrupted by a Shareholder; and by allowing him to introduce
another motion, without the usual necessary notice, which, being debated
and subsequently adopted, of course excluded my right to be then heard.


These proceedings on the part of your Chairman are my justification in
placing before you, confidentially, the facts I was so desirous of sub-
mitting to your judgment at the Meeting of the Shareholders, which
was so numerously and influentially attended; feeling satisfied that the
course I had determined to take was one, although it might appear
temporarily to depress the value of your Stock and mine, would lead
to the resuscitation of the public confidence, and ultimately to the Pro-
prietors reaping large advantages, if the policy I intended, and now
recommend for your adoption, be carried out.
My interest in the Bank is large, possessing as I do upwards of
500 Shares; leading every candid mind to the manifest conclusion that
I am influenced not only by a high sense of duty to those Proprietors
who placed me in the position of a Director, but also from considerations
of personal interest, which, in fact, are identical with your own, by
seeking to place the Bank in a position to derive as large an Income
from the Capital employed, as possible, consistent with security; feeling
assured, that if my recommendations are adopted and carried out by
the Proprietors, the Bank will at no distant date be not only a highly
prosperous Institution, but second to none in this Colony,
AT THE
HALF-YEARLY GENERAL MEETING
OF THE
Proprietors of the Australian Joint S tock Bank,
Held on FRIDAY, the 26th July,
THOMAS HOLT, ESQ., M.L.A., IN THE CHAIR.
The Manager having read the Report and Balance
Sheet. The Chairman remarked that the Directors put
forth with pain so unfavorable a statement which was,
however, strictly true; the £25,000 stated at the last
Half-yearly Meeting as estimated to cover all losses was
The Chairman.


found insufficient, and it would be necessary to appropriate
£ll,OOO more. No losses were kept back, but all fairly
stated; the Capital was safe. Before moving the adoption
of the Report, he wished to know if any Shareholder had
any remarks to offer.
Me. Beewstee asked if the Bank could not employ :
its money, whether it was contemplated to lower the
interests on deposits.
The Chairman stated that they had already reduced'
the interests as low and even lower than some of the
other Banks. The question was whether they should pay
interest at all; some would rather see portion of the
Capital returned.
Me. Raphael opposed the return of Capital, but thought
rates of discount should be as low as possible, as that was
the intention of the Bank when first established, and he
wished to know if £ll,OOO would cover all losses.
The Chairman said he had stated that in his opinion
the above sum would cover all losses. Discounts alone
would not return 6 per Cent. They were forced to allow
interest as other Banks did, working merely with their
own Capital they could not pay 5 per Cent.
Me. Irving considered the Assets of the Bank were
valued too low.
Me. T. W. Smart said he had gone through the
Accounts, and the conclusion of the Directors he considered
correct; the Accounts might yield more than they were
put down at, but it was difficult to value them.
After some desultory discussion respecting the qualifi-
cation of the country Directors between Me. Cohen and
the Chairman, Me. Cohen alluded to recent large
failures, as Betteridge and Haydon, and thought that a
Committee should be appointed to investigate the Accounts.
Me. Robey said that Mr. Cohen had anticipated him
in moving for a Committee which he was about to do, to
enquire into this very account, as well as other important
matters.
Me. leving stated he had signed a bond of secresy,
and would offer no further explanation, he hoped other
persons would follow his example.
Mr. Brewster.
The Chairman.
Mr. Raphael.
The Chairman.
Mr. Irving.
T. W. Smart.
Mr. Cohen.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Irving.


Mr. Cohen thought every information should be given
to the Shareholders, unqualified Directors should be re-
moved, and discounts limited, from whom further questions
were put and discussed respecting Local Directors.
The Chairman moved the adoption of the Report.
Mr. Raphael wished first to hear Mr. Robey’s state-
ment.
Mr. Darvall thought Mr. Robey would not agree
to this unless he could bring forward anything to prevent
the adoption of the Report. He thought the losses of
the Bank when compared with those in business generally
would be considered favourably. He considered the power
given to a Branch Manager great, and he thought it better
to have a Director who had some interest in the Bank,
though not even to the extent required, in lending money
in so many places there must be a risk and he thought
the objection to the management of the Branches un-
reasonable. He did not see why Banks should give
interest for money unless they could more profitably
invest it. He thought soon no Interest would be allowed
on deposits. Mr. Robey had intimated to him that he
intended to address the Meeting before the Report was
put, any discussion would he (Mr. D.) thought be in-
jurious to an institution of that kind, and he cautioned the
Meeting as to receiving such address. Under the Deed
a Shareholder could call upon the Shareholders to appoint
a Committee if they thought fit, but if the suggestion was
adopted the Directors would be placed in a position to
resign. He regretted that a personal quarrel between
Mr. Robey and Mr. Irving should not have been settled
in the proper place, the Supreme Court, and if it appeared
to the Shareholders that the conduct of any Director was
calculated to injure the institution, a broad hint should be
given him to retire from the Board.
Mr. Robey moved that the adoption of the Report
stand over till his resolutions were debated.
Mr. Raphael seconded.
Motion put and lost.
Mr. Robey declined to amend the Report, but objected
to the last paragraph as prejudging his case without
investigation. Mr. R. here read the paragraph and added
Mr. Cohen.
The Chairman.
Mr. Raphael.
Mr. Darvall.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Raphael.
Mr. Robey.


that with all respect to his brother Directors it was not
correct.
Mr. Eagar thought the clause referring to Mr. Robey :
involved an unsound principle. Mr. Robey complained
of a grievance and the Directors by inserting the paragraph
got rid of what Mr. Robey had to say. The Share-
holders were the only court of appeal. He should there-
fore move, “ that the paragraph be struck out.”
Mr. Raphael seconded the motion.
Mr. Darvall thought it desirable that the Proprietors
should settle the matter, but having elected Directors, it
would be taking out of their hands what the Shareholders
told them to do, if they permitted any invasion of their
executive duties; and he submitted that it was unusual
and prejudicial for any claim whether by Director or
Shareholder to be brought forward in the public papers.
Mr. Eagar said Mr. Robey’s claim was not before
them, and should not be prejudged.
Mr. Robey —Mr. Darvall is by the course he is taking
causing the Shareholders to prejudge the case.
The Chairman ruled Mr. Darvall in order.
Mr. Darvall was merely pointing out that the Di-:
rectors had only done their duty. It was unusual to bring
complaints forward in the public press, and that a Director
should be careful not to prejudice the interests of others.
Mr. Robey rose to order and attempted without effect
to address the Chair.
Mr. Darvall continued. If they wished to destroy
the Bank they could not proceed more effectually. He
thought the Directors having decided on the matter of
Mr. Robey’s claim, it was unusual for a Shareholder to
bring it before the Proprietary; Mr. Robey had, he
considered, his remedy at law.
Mr. Robey did not consider the course taken by Mr.
Darvall quite fair as he assisted to draw up the Report,
and that if the Meeting would allow him to bring forward
his Resolutions, he pledged himself to prove to their satis-
faction that the steps he was about to take, though unusual,
would be highly advantageous to the Bank.
Mr. Eagar.
Mr, Raphael.
Mr. Darvall.
Mr. Eagar.
Mr. Robey.
The Chairman
Mr. Darvall.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Darvall.
Mr. Robey.


Mr, Eagar.
Me. Eagae’s amendment was here negatived.
The adoption of the Report was carried.
Me. Robey regretted the delay that had taken place
in the matter, but would now with their permission lay
before the Meeting some circumstances which as a Director
he considered it his duty to disclose, and in passing, he
would remark that he was going to law, and had already
given notice of his intention of proceeding against the
Bank. His legal opinion was that he had a case and a
very good one, and he could recover damages if he chose
to go forward, and if his life was spared he would carry
it out. Not only his interest had been damaged, but also
matters in which his name was immediately concerned.
■ Me. Haegeeave rose to order, and moved “ that the
Shareholders now present consider they ought not to inter-
fere in any dispute between Messrs. Robey and Irving,
while the Supreme Court is open to those gentlemen, and
they therefore decline to entertain the question opened.
Me. Eagae thought Mr. Robey in order, and that the
motion could not be put.
. The Chaieman ruled that a motion might be made to
stop a Shareholder putting forward a statement prejudicial
to the Bank.
Mr. Eagae asked if it would not be prejudicial to hush
up the affair.
Me. Daevall said Mr. Robey had brought his action,
so that it was not a question of hushing up.
Me. Robey said he had not yet brought his action, but
could do so; he was trying this course first; and further,
that they would condemn his case unheard.
Me. Kemp thought the point of order should be taken,
with regard to Mr. Robey’s matter. If the Shareholders
appointed a Committee, they would take the management
out of the hands of the Directors ; he thought Mr. Robey
should refer the matter to the Supreme Court.
Me. Beewstee here made similar remarks.
Me. Robey here said that the motion of Mr. Hargreave
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Hargreave
Mr. Eagar.
The Chairman.
Mr. Eager.
Mr. Darvall.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Kemp.
Mr. Brewster.
Mr. Robey.


was entirely ill-timed and uncalled for, and that if the
Meeting would hear his statement, he would prove the
course he recommended would he of great advantage to
the Bank.
The Chairman objected.
The Resolution of Mr. Hargreave was put and carried.
After some lengthened discussion as to the Resolution
affecting Mr. Robey’s case.
Mr. Gordon moved that the Meeting be adjourned to
the next Half-yearly Meeting.
Me. Fairfax seconded.
Me. Robey, before the motion for adjournment was put
to the Meeting wished to read his Resolutions, without
remark.
Me. Irving thought both, as Directors, ought to resign;
he was prepared to do so if Air. Robey would.
Me. Robey : I will not; the character of men serving
the Bank to the best of their ability should not be trifled
with. I will not resign until I have accomplished justice
for the Shareholders; he was not astonished at Mr.
Irving’s offer, as from facts he was prepared to prove ; Mr.
Irving he knew in his heart he must resign.
The motion for the adjournment was put and carried.
Me. Goggs demanded a Ballot, which was, however,
subsequently withdrawn.
The Meeting then separated.
The Chairman.
Mr. Goro u ...
Mr. Fairfax.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Irving.
Mr. Robey.
Mr. Goggs.
At the time of my being interrupted in the way I have complained
of, I was about to read the first of the two Resolutions, the substance
of which I had previously given notice, and which are as follow :
Resolved :—
Ist. —That, looking at the statements just made by Mr. Robey, this Meeting
cannot but view the conduct of Mr. Clark Irving, the Director therein
referred to, with great apprehension as tending to diminish that faith
and confidence which should be reposed in the Directors, as Custodiers
of the interests of the Shareholders, thereby lowering the position of


the institution in the estimation of the general public; and, conse-
quently, consider the conduct of such Director so reprehensible, that
the interests of the Bank peremptorily demand the resignation of his
seat at the Board.
2nd. —That a Committee of Shareholders he appointed to investigate Mr.
Robey’s claim for compensation for the loss alleged to have been
sustained by that gentleman, in consequence of the proceedings which
Mr. Clark Irving induced the Directors to take, in August, 1859, and
that such Committee consist of
with instructions to report the result of their proceedings to a Special
General Meeting of the Shareholders, to be called for the purpose.
I will now proceed to state what I intended to have said in support
of these Resolutions, had I been permitted to do so. You will observe,
that the first aims at the removal from the Board, of Mr. Clark Irving;
facts and circumstances having transpired during the past few months,
which enables me to lay before you this gentleman’s mode of dealing
with the business of the Bank, for purposes and objects which are
obviously incompatible with its interests, and the duty which Mr.
Irving owes to the Proprietors in his position as a Director; although
feeling that this course is a duty I owe not only to myself, but to the
Bank, I had not determined upon its prosecution before I had en-
deavoured to accomplish the objects I have in view, by placing the
matter before your Directors, in the hope that they would deal with
the question ; but this was not successful, chiefly in consequence of my
being obstructed by two other Members of the Board —Mr. Holt and
Mr. Smart, from motives best known to themselves; and as in terms
of the Deed of Settlement, the Proprietors are the final court of ap-
peal, I withdrew my charges from the Board, intimating at the same
time my intention of bringing the whole subject under the attention
of the Shareholders at a Special General Meeting, to be called for that
purpose; when, however, the Half-yearly General Meeting of Pro-
prietors being at hand, I determined to postpone further action in the
matter until such Meeting was held, ■with the result of which you are
already acquainted.
The proceedings of Mr. Irving, of which I complain, are,—that he
advised courses of action to the Directors, which by his influence
have been adopted, and which have resulted in Losses to the Bank, and
thus sacrificing the interests he was bound to protect. If I succeed in
convincing you, that this is so, by every reasonable inference from the
circumstances I shall detail—although it is hard to prove motives —l
feel that I shall have made out a case which entitles me to ask that he
shall no longer have a seat at our Board, or any control over the
management of your property and mine. The Losses, of which I com-
plain, are twofold; the one class comprising a Loss of Profits, in con-
sequence of the Bank having lost some of the best and most paying
accounts it possessed, through that gentleman’s proceedings. I name,
amongst others, those of Messrs. R. and F. Tooth, and Messrs. Robey


D. Johes & Co
■1
Thompson, Symonds, & Co....
... V £2268
0
1
E. M. Sayers
•J
Wm. Handcock
500
0
0
Fairhurst & Co
.. 10,337
10
2
Betteridge & Haydon
2428
8
7
Maitland Branch Accounts....
3302
7
9
£18,836
12
7
and Co., and to a great extent that of Messrs. Mort and Co. The other
and larger class is made up of those cases where Mr. Irving has in-
duced the Board to afford very large accommodation to parties, with
most of whom he was connected more or less, and in some instances, I
am given to understand, as a Partner. During the period referred
to, Mr. Irving had, at times, large amounts owing to him by several,
if not all the Firms, which I shall name. He obtained payment for
himself in nearly every case, while the Bank —whose interest he
was bound to protect —was left a serious loser in all the cases
referred to. It must be borne in mind that during the whole
of this time Mr. Irving had but a small interest in the Bank,
being a Proprietor of a mere qualification : he has also done but a small
portion of his business with this Establishment, while, as a Director, it
was his duty to give it at least the greater portion, if not the whole, of
his business, rather than to deal with other Institutions.
The accounts referred to, amongst others, embrace the following.
The Loss estimated by the Directors, as likely to arise out of said
Accounts being affixed to each. Say—
Mr. Irving was largely connected with Messrs. D. Jones & Co,
Thompson, Symonds, & Co., and E. M. Sayers; having imported, or
arranged for importing, on joint account, no less than seven cargoes of
Sugar from Java and the Mauritius, to the value of some .£30,000,
or more, and yet he contrived to come out without Loss from their
Insolvencies; while the Bank, although it had the three first-mentioned
names on each of the Bills discounted, were losers to the amount of
£2268 Os. Id., which Loss would have been much larger, but from
the Bank having alien on £3,000 Stock, standing in the name of David
Jones, thus diminishing the Loss which would otherwise have beeil made,
by that amount. This was an account brought to the Bank by Mr. Irving,
and always supported by him in the strongest terms, whenever their
Bills were offered for discount even up to the date of their suspension.
Loss by Wm. Handcock, £SOO. It is said, that at the time this
Account was opened, Mr. Handcock owed Mr. Irving a large sum of
money, the whole of which has been since paid, a part, as I am informed,
by Handcock’s Promissory Notes in favour of Betteridge & Haydon, and
which were discounted by this Bank.
Fairhurst & Co. Loss by this Firm is estimated at the large amount
of £10,337 16s. 2d, Ido not charge this Loss against Mr, Irving,
but every Director of the Board at the time, can support my view.


that the extent of business done with this House, was mainly owing
to his representations; and since the failure of Fairhurst & Co., I
consider the Loss has been much increased by a want of proper vigour
in not dealing more promptly with the Assets of this Estate. Mr.
Irving was appointed one of the Trustees of Fairhurst & Co.’s Assign-
ment in company with Mr. Frith, and Mr. Bennett, who were only
small creditors, and who have in some way allowed this Insolvent to
slip through the hands of his creditors with all the available property
he could take with him. This subject is one upon which further
information is much desired by the Board.
Betteridge and Haydon. Loss by them is £2,428 Bs. 7d. having
been adjusted. When this Firm failed, they owed the Bank £10,041
9s. lid. on past due Bills, (besides their cash credit about £13,000,
which was guaranteed and paid eventually by Mr. Irving.) Mr.
Irving subsequently offered to purchase this debt for 14s. in the £,
payable by his own Promissory Note at Twelve Months’ date without
Interest; this offer was accepted, and the account settled by Mr.
Irving’s Promissory Note being taken for £7,029 Is. Od. dated 26th
October, 1860. This transaction I look upon as most disgraceful on
the part of a Director of a Bank if, as is alleged, Mr. Irving
was a partner with Betteridge and Haydon at the time he found they
were in difficulties, and that he has since purchased the Bank’s
claim, and subsequently the whole Assets of the Estate, having made,
I understand, a large profit by these transactions, and, it is said, paid
to Betteridge and Haydon, or is to do so, one-half the amount thus
made at the expense of the Bank and the other unfortunate Creditors
of this Estate.
Maitland Branch Accounts. Loss estimated at £3,302 7s. 9d. The
Loss arising out of these Accounts I do not charge as being directly
applicable to Mr. Irving, but I am satisfied that they are mainly owing
to his proceedings in reference to that Branch, and without going into
particulars, I appeal to my Brother Directors to confirm or deny the
charge.
In closing my remarks on the first resolution, I wish to call attention
to the fact that previous to the election of Mr. Smart in January last,
Mr. Irving and Mr. Holt were all influential at the Board, that
whatever they resolved upon, whether in giving or refusing accommo-
dation, was invariably carried out, and that for most practicable
purposes, the Bank might as well have been represented by these
two gentlemen as the five Directors, who were your legal and proper
representatives; this Ido not hesitate to state, was, in my opinion,
mainly owing to the fact that Mr. Breillat and Mr. Fairfax, my former
colleagues, although intelligent and highly honorable men, were sadly
deficient in resolution and decision, one or both of them generally doing
as Mr. Irving did, and neither of them venturing to vote against a
proposition made and enforced by Mr. Holt.
I trust I have satisfied you, of the propriety of calling upon Mr.
Irving to resign his seat at the Board, as it must be apparent to you


that any Director who hag been instrumental in causing the absolute
Loss the Proprietors have sustained, and also the Loss of Business
and Profits, which would'have been made had the accounts referred to
as lost been retained, is not a fit and proper person to represent your
interests in the Direction of this Bank.
I now come to my second resolution, which requests you to appoint
a Committee of Six Proprietors, to investigate my claim for com-
pensation for loss and damages I have sustained in consequence of
the Bank having committed a breach of faith with my late firm of
Eobey & Co.
The particulars of this claim and the grounds upon which it is based,
are set out in the Correspondence appended hereto, and numbered 1 to
14. From information which has reached me, I believe that Mr.
Clark Irving was the party who recommended the Directors to lake
the course they did with Messrs. Eobey & Co.’s accounts, not in the
usual and proper manner by fair and open discussion, but by private
representation to Mr. Holt previous to the assembling of the Board
on’jthe 2nd of August, 1859, when those gentlemen directed the
Manager to write me the letter of that date, without the usual authority
of a Board Minute, although Mr. Breillat states that the subject was
mentioned to him. The Minutes of that day state that there was a-
full Meeting of the Board, including, of course, myself; but the subject
was never mentioned at that Meeting; thus shewing that Mr. Irving
and Mr. Holt did not hesitate, by their irregular proceeding, to curtail
the Credit given to my Firm, from £12,000 to £7,000 which Credit
had been established upon the security of an expenditure of £30,000,
which had since it was granted, been increased to upwards of £40,000
without notice, although when this account was opened some nine
months previously, it was expressly stipulated that six months' notice
should be given of any alteration the Bank might wish to make, such
curtailment was, however made, without enquiry from me or from
any other party, as I am informed. What this gentleman’s motives
could have been for so extraordinary a course, it is impossible for me
to state with certainty.
I will, however, place a few facts before you regarding this matter, and
leave you to draw such conclusions as you think the facts will warrant.
For some months previous to and after date of the Letters, Nos. 1
to 10 in the Appendix, Mr. Irving was largely interested in the Impor-
tation of Sugars to this market, in connection, as before stated, with
D. Jones & Co., and E. M. Sayers. These Sugars were chiefly of the
class which would compete directly with the leading articles manu-
factured by the Colonial Sugar Eefining Company, and also by Messrs.
Eobey & Co. This latter Firm had decided to sell their manufacture
at very low prices for twelve months or more, if necessary, to accom-
plish a fair understanding and a division of the market with this
Company, who had declared their intention of agreeing to no com-
promise ; and further, that their policy was to crush my Firm, which
they had resolved to do, or perish in the attempt. I accepted


their challenge, and prepared myself for the contest, to the best of
my ability; amongst other means, I determined to extend the basis of
Eobey & Co.’s Establishment, by introducing additional Capital into it,
and consulted Mr. Irving frequently on the subject, and eventually
offered him one-third share of the concern, as a working Partner, upon
what I considered most advantageous terms to him ; after some con-
sideration, he declined this offer, and advised me to sell my Sugar
Works property, which was then in full operation, to the Colonial Sugar
Eefining Company, if they would buy it, rather than encounter the op-
position they were prepared to give, to the further prosecution of my
undertaking. This I declined, but the frequent conferences held by Mr.
Irving and myself during that period put him in possession of my plans
and resources, which were large : besides which, this gentleman knew
much of my movements and position, having for many years been con-
nected with me as a Partner in a former business for Sugar Eefining;
nevertheless, he continued to advise me to sell my Sugar Works
Property, in which the prospects of several members of my family were
deeply concerned, a new Establishment only just completed at a large
cost, and in full working order, for a sum less than half it had cost me.
At the same period, Mr. Sayers, with whom I was on friendly terms,
also advised me, very strongly, to sell this property, both Mr. Irving
and Mr. Sayers knowing well, that the only policy open to me if I
oontinued, was to sell at such low prices for a continuous period as
would have entailed heavy losses upon the Colonial Sugar Eefining
Company, and at the same time cause a loss of many thousand pounds
upon Messrs. Irving, Sayers, and D. Jones' Sugar Importations. A
vary short time before the Bank’s Letter, dated 2nd August, was
received, news of the failure of G. A. Lloyd & Co. reached Sydney,
and it was pretty generally known that this Firm owed me a con-
siderable sum of money; this was in fact the case, for at that time
they were indebted to me about ,£23,000. This was a blow I was
not prepared for, but it did not alter my resolution to push on vigorously
with my Sugar Business; but when after a short interval your
Directors made their attack upon me, described above, through Mr.
Irving’s representations and influence, I must confess I was not a little
astonished for the moment. I enquired from each of the Directors, indi-
vidually, why this course had been adopted towards me, reminded them
of my being entitled to six months’ notice of any alteration the Bank
might desire to make, but did not succeed in obtaining information from
any Member of the Board, all were silent in regard to this proceeding ;
but a few vague remarks as to the opposition of the Colonial Sugar
Eefining Company, &c., chiefly from Air. Holt, who appeared to know
more of my business than any one could do unless he had obtained it
from that Company, who seem to have carefully watched my move-
ments from the date of my first commencing these works, led me
to the impression that Mr. Holt was aiding the Company by striking
this blow at my Credit through my own Bankers. No one could
have stated what he did to me as to my purchases and other matters


connected with this business, without having such information either
from the Sugar Company, or from some gentleman who was in my
confidence and had been in frequent communication with me regarding
this Business at the time. Some time elapsed, however, without my
being able to discover the real author of the injury that had been
done me. At length the investigation I was enabled to make, put
me in possession of the facts, that Mr. Clark Irving, my Partner of
many years standing, who always professed the greatest friendship and
regard for me, it was, who succeeded in damaging my credit, affording
me no opportunity of defending myself, or shewing to my co-Directors,
that no ground existed to induce them to seek an alteration in our
agreement, even if permitted to do so without notice, as, independent
of the fact of my security to the Bank having been increased from
£30,000 to upwards of =£40,000, after the credit referred to was
opened, the Balance Sheet of my Private Estate, taken on the 27th
September. 1859, after disposing of the Sugar Works Property at a
Loss of over ,£12,000, made entirely in consequence of the breach of
faith committed by the Bank with my Firm, and paying off every out-
standing claim against Eobey & Co., and myself, left me with a clear
surplus of .£43,392 125., with an Income arising out of the said
Property of about £3,ooo'per annum; a copy of this Balance Sheet may
be seen at any time, by any Shareholder desiring to do so.
In reference to my claim on the Bank, I do not desire a Committee
of Shareholders to investigate it unless it he the wish of the Meeting,
as I am quite prepared to submit it for decision of a Court of Law, and
only proposed that course out of a desire to serve the interests of the
Bank.
In conclusion, I wish to remove the impression which appears to
exist on the minds of some of the Proprietors, that I have had a
quarrel with Mr. Irving, and am actuated by vindictive motives
towards him, in pursuing the course I have felt it to be my duty
to take, for the interest of the Bank, on the contrary, there is not
one of yourselves who will he more gratified than I shall, to find that
Mr. Irving, is able successfully, to exonerate himself by explaining the
facts and circumstances I have now placed before you, and regarding
which I am desirous of soliciting your calm and unprejudiced judgment.
I have the honor to be,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
Your faithful Servant,
R. M. ROBEY.
N.B. Since the above or greater portion of it was in the hands of the printer,
your Directors received a requisition from certain of the Shareholders asking
them to call a “ Special General Meeting of the Proprietors of the said Bank,
for the purpose of removing Messrs. R. M. Robey and Clark Irving from the
Board of Directors.” This requisition is signed by 19, out of 367 Shareholders,
two of them being, as I am informed, candidates for election to our offices should
they become vacant. Ido not admire the taste which dictated such a course—
still less do I like the conduct of those Proprietors who have signed this Re-
quisition, I feel that it is an insult offered to me, for I was engaged upon their


work, and having undertaken an onerous and disagreable duty with a view of
serving the Bank: these Proprietors, without any knowledge of the facts which
have led rae to take this course, and without having a charge against me, or
assigning any reason for their proceedings, adopted the very unusual and of-
fensive attempt to remove rae from the Directory. Whenever I may retire
from ray position as a Director of this Bank, these gentlemen may be as.
sured I shall not again offer my services to the Bank, unless they or a majority
of them request me to do so, and also apologize for the gross injustice they
have done me. I cannot close this note without expressing, in strong terms,
my dissatisfaction with the conduct of Mr. Thomas Holt, as one of your
Directors; I believe this gentleman, although wealthy, influential, and pos.
sessing several qualifications for filling the office suitably, is nevertheless, so
imbued with peculiar notions, and afflicted with such an ungovernable temper
as to render him, in many respects, a most undesirable Director. Entertaining
this opinion, my first Resolution regarding Mr. Irving included the name of
Air. Holt, whose conduct I also conceived was injurious to the Bank j conse-
quently, I sought his removal, and only withdrew his name at the earnest re-
quest of Mr. Smart. If a meeting should be called to ask Mr. Holt to resign,
I have little doubt of being able to prove to the satisfaction of the Proprietors,
his retirement would be advantageous to the Bank.


APPENDIX.
(1)
Sydney, s th November, 1858.
A. H. RICHARDSON, ESQ.,
General Manager A. J. S. Bank.
Sir,
My Firm, Messrs. Robey & Co., consisting of George
Richard Dibbs and myself, will be ready to commence business shortly
as Sugar Refiners and Distillers, and will require to open-a Banking
Account. They are disposed to do this with the Australian Joint Stock
Bank, providing your Directors will allow them an occasional overdraft,
when required, to the extent of =£lo,ooo to £15,000, at a reasonable
rate of Interest; due repayment of which to be secured by deposit of
my Title Deeds, free from incumbrance, of nearly 22 acres of freehold
land, situate at Sugar Works Bay, North Shore, and upon which the
Sugar Refinery, Distillery, and other buildings., plant and machinery
connected therewith, have been erected at a cost to the present time of
over £30,000 (Thirty thousand pounds.)
It is proper to mention that Messrs. Robey '& Co.’s Account will
be an active one, with considerable Deposits, Discounts, and circulation.
Should your Board entertain this proposal favorably, have the goodness
to inform me what rate of Interest would be charged, and whether the
Bank will agree to a three or six months’ notice, before altering the
conditions upon which the proposed account may be opened.
I remain, Sir,
Yours most obediently.
R. M. ROBEY.
(2)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
Sydney, 2Qth November, 1858.
Sir,
The Directors have fully considered the proposal sub-
mitted in your letter of the sth Instant, for keeping the Banking Ac-
count of Messrs. Robey & Co., Sugar Refiners and Distillers, with this


Bank; and I have the pleasure to say they have agreed to open the
Account, on the understanding that an occasional overdraft, not ex-
ceeding Twelve thousand Pounds, drawn out at any one time will be
allowed by the Bank, —upon deposit of the Title Deeds of the 22 acres
land at Sugar Works Bay, North Shore, upon which Buildings, Plant,
and Machinery, have been placed at a cost, as you state, of over
.£30,000.
The rate of Interest on the Amount of Advance will be for the
present 9 per Cent, per annum, but it will vary with the rates of the
day.
The Board adopt your suggestion with regard to Six months’
notice, in the event of circumstances rendering it expedient to alter the
present arrangement.
I am, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON
General Manager.
R. M. ROBEY, Esquire,
Sydney,
(3)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
Sydney, 2nd August, 1859.
Dear Sir,
Before you joined the Board this morning the Directors
were reviewing the Advances on open Account, and, among others,
your overdrawn Account came under notice. It will recur to your
recollection that the Advance originally authorized to the extent of
Twelve thousand Pounds, on the security of the North Shore property,
was granted not without hesitation, and the Board direct me now to
intimate that it would be agreeable to them were you to restrict the
overdraft within the limit of Seven thousand Pounds, which I am in-
structed to regard as the future limit of the account of your firm.
I am, with respect,
Dear Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON,
General Manager.
Honble. R. M. ROBEY, Esq.,
Macquarie Street.


(4)
Sydney, August sth, 1859.
Dear Sir,
In acknowledging receipt of your letter of the 2nd
Instant, intimating the wish of the Board that the credit or overdraft
authorized to the Firm of Robey & Co., on the security of the North
Shore property, should be reduced from £12,000 to £7,000,1 beg to
state, that under the arrangements made by the Bank with my Firm,
Messrs. Robey & Co. are entitled to six months’ notice of any modifi-
cation the Board may desire to make in the Terms upon which this
account was opened.
I am. Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
R. M. ROBEY.
A. H. RICHARDSON, ESQUIRE
General Manager, A, S, J. Bank.
(5)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
Sydney, sth August, 1859.
Dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of this date,
which has been under consideration of the Board of Directors.
It is not the wish or intention of the Bank to recede from any
arrangement entered into with you on behalf of your Firm of Messrs.
Robey & Co.; but, reverting to your proposal to the Bank for a Credit
or Advance Account, as contained in your letter of sth November,
1858, it is there particularly mentioned that upon the 22 acres Land at
Sugar Works Bay,—the Sugar Refinery, Distillery, and other buildings.
Plant, and Machinery, had been erected at a cost to that date of over
£30,000.
This, therefore, was the security offered, and upon which the
Directors agreed to allow the occasional Credit on the Account of
Messrs. Robey & Co. to the extent of £12,000; but, a Deposit of the
Deeds of the Land only having been made, I am now directed to re-
quest you will execute in favor of the Bank a Mortgage of the whole
property as specified, including Buildings, Plant, Machinery, &c., and
in the mean time I am not authorised to extend the limits of advance
beyond the amount named in my letter of the 2nd Instant.
I am desired hereby to give Six months’ notice of the termination
of the existing arrangement between the Bank and Messrs. Robey & Co.
I am. Dear Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON
General Manager.
The Hon. R. M. ROBEY, Esquire,
Macquarie Street,


(6)
Sydney, August 6th, 1859.
Dear Sir,
With reference to your letter of the sth Instant, and
our conversation on the subject the following day, I now beg to state,
that while I cannot consent to any limitation of the Credit or Overdraft
agreed by the Bank to be given to Messrs. Eobey & Co., until ex-
piration of the stipulated notice; I have no objection to any words
being added to my letter of deposit with the Deeds of my North Shore
property, so as to make it effective as a perfect security, (including the
Buddings, Plant, and Machinery,) which it was intended to be, for the
amount of .£12,000 Credit arranged for my Firm of Eobey & Co.; but
I am desirous of avoiding the expense of a regular Mortgage, as I pur-
pose taking steps to relieve the Bank from the greater portion, if not
the whole, of the Credit before the expiration of the Six months’ notice
received from you on the sth Instant, intimating the wish of the Board
to terminate the existing arrangement between the Bank and Messrs.
Eobey & Co.”
Yours very truly,
R. M. ROBEY.
A. H. RICHARDSON, Esq.,
General Manager A. J, S, Bank,
P.S. —It will be seen, however, on reference to your letter to me of the
26th November, 1858, granting the Credit in question, that
the Bank already possesses what it stipulated for in the
“ deposit of the Title Deeds, &c.
(7)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
Sydney, 9 th August, 1859.
Dear Sir,
Your letter, dated the Bth Instant, was under con-
sideration of the Board this day.
The Directors adhere to their wish that a regular Mortgage of the
Land, Buildings, Plant, and Machinery, at Sugar Works Bay, should
be executed by you in favor of the Bank; and with reference to our
conversation on the subject at this Office on the sth, I beg to intimate
that I am sending the Title Deeds to the Bank’s Solicitors, with in-
structions to prepare such Mortgage accordingly.
The Directors have particularly desired me not to permit any
further advance on the account of Messrs. Eobey & Co.
I am, Dear Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON
General Manager.
Hon R, M. ROBEY, Esquire,
Margaret Street,


(8)
171, Macquarie Street, 9th August, 1859.
Dear Sir,
lam this moment (6 - 30 p.m.) in receipt of your letter
of this date, intimating that the Directors adhere to their wish that a
regular Mortgage of the Land, Buildings, Plant, and Machinery at
Sugar Works Bay, should be executed by me in favour of the Bank,
and that you are desired by the Directors not to permit any further
advance on the Account of Messrs. Eobey & Co. In reply, I beg to
state that lam prepared to meet the wishes of the Board, and will
execute a Mortgage, with usual conditions, soon as ready, provided the
Credit or Overdraft agreed to be given to Eobey & Co. by the Bank, is
not interfered with. I may mention that Cheques are now out to the
extent of about £7OO, which may not have been presented before the
Bank closed; may I beg that you will protect them and the Account,
until I have the opportunity of communicating with the Board during
the next few days. Messrs. Eobey & Co. have some Bills for Discount,
but have postponed sending them in, with the expectation that the rates
would be lower. It is only right that I should add, —Messrs. Eobey &
Co. will hold the Bank responsible for any injury they may sustain by
reason of this sudden withdrawal of facilities they are entitled to rely
upon, and on the faith of which they have made engagements.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours very truly.
R. M. ROBEY.
A. H. RICHARDSON, Esq.,
A. J. S. Bank .
(9)
Sydney, 12 th August, 1859.
A. H. RICHARDSON, Esq.
Dear Sir,
Since writing you, on the evening of the 9th Instant,
in reply to yours of that date, it has occurred to me that the simplest
mode of dealing with the matter under discussion will be by the Bank
discounting my P. notes in favour of Messrs. Eobey & Co., for the sum
of .£4OOO each, at 4,5, and 6 months date, due payment of which to
be secured by the Mortgage in course of preparation: Messrs. Eobey &
Co.’s overdraft to be paid off out of the proceeds. If this suggestion is
adopted by the Bank, I shall hold myself prepared to carry it out at
once.
Messrs. Eobey & "Co. are now in a position to reduce their Over-
draft from ,£4OOO to £5000; but, with the experience of the inter-
ference which has already taken place with the existing arrangements.


they would scarcely feel justified in placing their funds at the disposal
of the Bank, without a clear indication of the course intended to be
pursued with their account during the next six months.
I remain, Dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
R. M. ROBEY.
(10)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK.
Sydney, 12th Avgust, 1859.
Dear Sib,
I have the pleasure to inform you that the Directors
consent to the proposal contained in your letter of this date, and that
your Promissory Notes in favor of Messrs. Robey & Co. for £4OOO
each, at 4,5, and 6 months date, making £12,000 in all, will be dis-
counted by the Bank, due payment of the same being secured by
Mortgage of the North Shore property, now in course of preparation ;
it being understood that the Overdraft on the Account of Messrs.
Robey & Co. will be paid off out of the proceeds; and I shall immedi-
ately give instructions to the Bank’s Solicitors accordingly.
I am, Dear Sir,
Yours respectfully.
A. H. RICHARDSON
General Manager.
Hon. K. M. ROBEY, Esquire,
Macquarie Street.
(11)
Sydney, 11th May, 1861.
Gentlemen,
Referring to the seyeral discussions which have
already taken place at your Board, with regard to the complaints I
have brought against the Directors, for their treatment of my late Firm
Messrs. Robey & Co. in the month of August, 1859. I wish now to
state that my object in the investigations you have so courteously
permitted me to make, has been to ascertain whether the serious losses
I have sustained in consequence of the proceedings referred to were
caused by the Directors, acting on behalf of the Bank, or by some one
or more individual Members of the Board, influenced by considerations
opposed to my interests in the attempt to serve a rival Sugar Refining
Establishment. The result of my investigation leads me to the
conclusion, that, however irregular the proceedings of the Board of that
day were, in causing the letter of the 2nd August, 1859 to be written


co me, without the authority of a minute, and in the absence of at
least two of the Members of your Board, who are represented to have
been present, the subsequent proceedings of the Directors, in dealing
with my letter of the sth August, 1859, and subsequent dates,
fixes upon the Bank the liabilities arising out of these transactions,
and not the individual Directors referred to.
In conclusion, permit me to hope that any steps I may be advised
to take with the view of relieving myself from some portion of the
large and'grievous losses I have sustained in consequence of the clear
breach of faith the Bank committed in utterly disregarding the terms
of their agreement with my Firm, as set forth in the Manager’s Letter
to me dated 26th November, 1858, when Messrs. Eobey & Co.’s
account with the Bank was opened, will not have the effect of producing-
any unpleasant feelings between us. lam aware. Gentlemen, that
you must protect the interests of the Bank by every means in your
power, but I trust it may be done without disturbing those friendly
relations which exist between a majority of the Board and myself,
and which it will be my pride and study to preserve.
I remain, Gentlemen,
Your very obedient Servant,
R. M. ROBEY.
To the Dieectoes of the
Australian Joint Stock Bank, Sydney.
(12)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
• Sydney, 15 th May, 1861.
Dear Sib,
I am desired by the Board of Directors to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter of the 14th Instant, and to inform you that
the Board decline to enter upon discussion of the various matters
alluded to therein.
I remain, Dear Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON
General Manager.
To R. M. ROBEY, Esq., &c,, &c., &c.,
Macquarie Street •
(13)
Sydney, June 13 th, 1861.
Sib,
I am instructed by Mr. K. M. Kobey to apply to
you on the subject of the damage sustained by him by the Board of
Directors of your Bank having at the commencement of August, 1859,


broken the agreement made with him in November, 1858, to permit
an Overdraft to his then Firm, to the extent of .£12,000.
This arrangement was to have been in force until six months’
notice given, and in consequence of the Board having suddenly and
without any notice withdrawn from the agreement, great damage was
caused to Mr. Robey’s Firm, and for this he now seeks compensation.
Will you be pleased to let me know whether you will make any
proposal which may prevent the necessity of litigation ?
Mr. Robey from his long connexion with the Bank is particularly
anxious, if possible, to avoid extreme proceedings, and is willing not-
withstanding the breach of faith which the Board was guilty of
towards his Firm, to entertain favourably any reasonable offer for a
settlement.
I am. Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) EDWIN DAINTREY.
To A. H. RICHARDSON, Esq.,
General Manager cf the Australian Joint Stock Bank.
(14)
AUSTRALIAN JOINT STOCK BANK,
Sydney, 14 th June, 1861.
Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of
the 13th Instant, written on behalf of Mr. R. M. Robey, on the subject
of alleged damage said to have been sustained by him in consequence
of an act of the Board in August, 1859.
I have submitted your letter to the Directors, and am desired to
refer you to the Bank’s Solicitors, Messrs. Holden and McCarthy,
who will accept service on behalf of the Bank in any action you may
be instructed to bring.
I am, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
A. H. RICHARDSON.
EDWIN DAINTREY, Esq.,
Solicitor, Elizabeth Street,




/a , . /./: /2Au. ft.
