

To the Members of the
Australian
Patriotic Association.
Gentlemen,
Having in ray former address pointed out
to your notice some of the disadvantages
which may accrue to your interests from
the want of ready information on local
questions that may suddenly arise, and
which it may be impossible for your Par-
liamentary Advocate to acquire without
reference to this Colony, you will perhaps
allow me to draw your attention to other
considerations as to the expediency of ap-
pointing a Secretary, (or Agent to assist
Air. Bulwer), who is conversant with colo-
nial topics and the feelings of the different
parlies who compose our society generally.
It not unfrequently occurs that a Mem-
ber of Parliament will call for the produc-
tion of documents for the purpose of eluci-
dating some pending arguments or satisfying
bis own mind on some matter in discussion
before the House of Commons or a Com-
mittee of enquiry on some public measure.
These motions are granted as a privilege of
Parliament and are passed accordingly.
The papers are forthwith ordered and when
prepared are_ duly presented,—directed to
“ lie on the Table,” —and if the Member at
whose instance they have been “returned”
requires them for public information he
moves that they shall be printed. As a
matter of course, generally, the motion is
passed ; —but should there exist any objec-
tion to the publication (as frequently is the
case with diplomatic correspondence) the
question is decided by a majority of votes
present. In this manner, the Secretary of
State for the Colonies may be called upon
to produce a document, which having no
reference to any matter that may involve
the policy of his government, he would
instantly concede. Your Parliamentary Ad-
vocate, supposing that document to have
direct referen e to New South Wales af-
fairs, may not see the object of the motion,
nor fee! that it has relation to any subject
contained in your correspondence with him.
He consequently makes no opposition;—
the document is produced and printed, and
he eventually finds that its reception in this
colony, like Pandora’s Box, has scattered
poison and disgust throughout the commu-
nity.
As example is said to be better than pre-
cept, take the following actual occurrence ;
and let that party who are now so opposed
to any but an “ ignoramus” being associa-
ted with Air. Bulwer, answer to himself
what would have been the consequences
had the result been otherwise. On Tues-
day the 26th day of June 1832, Mr. Bris-
coe, M. P. for Surry, moved fur a “ Re-
turn of all persons in New South Wales
and Van Diemen’s Land from the year 1823
to the present period who have received
absolute or conditional pardons, setting
forth their names, the nature of the several
offences for which they originally were
transported, their terms of sentence, and
grounds upon which they have received
such pardons; also staling any Colonial
sentence they may have received and for
what inflicted.” A gentleman who had ac-
cess to the proceedings of the House, and
who knew the object of the motion to have
reference solely to a misunderstanding
which bad arisen among the Secondary
Punishments Committee, felt that such a
document if produced and printed, akho’
it might gratify the curiosity of some, whilst
itsatialed the ill feelings of others, would
nevertheless create pain and misery to ma-
nj meritorious members of this community.
Uncalled upon Air. Briscoe, pointed out
the impolicy of the motion and eventually
persuaded him to substitute the following
as equally well qualified to answer his pur-
pose, viz;—“ Returns of Sentences of the
Magistrates Courts, of those of the Quarter
Sessions and of the Supreme Court in New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land since
3823; also Returns of Punishments at the
Penal Settlements.” These returns were
accordingly presented on the 21st July,
1832, and consisting ofsevenlarge volumes,
were considered too bulky to print.
But without digressing into further
questions of the actual duty of an Agent or
Secretary to Mr. Bulwer, or the necessity
of his possessing some knowledge of our
colonial policy, either as to its form of Go-
vernment; the Administration of its Laws;
its resources commercial, agricultural or
fiscal; the “ peculiar constitution of our
society” as the Anti-Assembly gentry call
it; without any acquaintance with our Land
I!egulations,—-Assignment Regulations,—
Ticket o( Leave Regulations, and all other
matters of Police Govern nent; ignorant
of all statistical information as to popula-
tion, Shipping, Imports, Exports, Revenue,
Customs, &c. &c.; —not knowing whether
wehaveone Bank ortwenty,—one periodical
Journal or fifty ; —whether we require two
hundred or ten thousand Troops to keep
subordination amongst the prison popula-
tion; whether Sydney be a Gamlet or a
vast Metropolis ;--tliese and a thousand such
matters must be passed over as trivial, com-
pered to the three great objections which
are raised to sending Home to Mr. Bulwer
a person who can furnish him on the instant,
with satisfactory information.—These ob-
jections are, —
Ist. That it is “ a deference due to Mr.
Bulwer, to allow him to appoint his own
agent or secretary.” If a mere personal
amanuensis were required, there could be
no question upon the point; but to im-
pose an arduous and responsible duty
upon a Member of Parliament without
affording him competent assistance, surely
cannot be either d sirable on his part, or
complimentary on that of the Association.
In attempting to atebieve an important
public good, in which Mr. Bulwer has
offered his gratuitous services, do the Co-
lonists suppose that he would be unwilling
to receive every aid they could afford
him ? or that he considers the paltry pa-
tronage they would offer him, will be an
incentive to greater zeal and exertion ?
2ndly. That “ he will be duly informed
on every necessary measure.” Where a
complaint is to be preferred for any act of
oppression, ora remonstrance made against
an impolitic proceeding, such matters must
of course be communicated as they arise,
and will doubtless be authenticated by your
committee. But the very information you
will afford, must necessarily call up a host
of interrogatories, which unanswered forth-
with, or unable of being replied to, will
cast a doubt upon your representations,
or create that delay which eventually would
destroy your objects.
Every other species of information can
be better acquired from official records in
the office of the Secretary of State, than
from the correspondence of your com-
mittee, provided the Parliamentary Advo-
cate be properly instructed to apply for
it
On the 3d objection, that “ 100 much
power would be vested in the hands of one
person,” little need here be said, as the
very arguments adduced against the ap-
pointment of Secretary confute this posi-
tion. Without an Agent, Assistant, or
Secretary sent from hence, would not all
the power be at once delivered into the
hands of one man ? True, —but that man
is a Member of Parliament. Yet, it is pre-
sumed, that a Secretary appointed by the
Colonists would have too much power
vested in his hands ; —which argument makes
the office of Parliamentary Advocate a
mere cypher—one that can be controlled
and directed despite the wishes of rhe As-
sociation, and in defiance of the palpable
interests of the Colonists !
But on the other hand, Mr. Bulwer, it
must be admitted, needs no cheque upon
his honesty or his exertions. The honor
that awaits him is too splendid to be sullied,
and the reward too glorious to be rejected.
His opinions, however, as to the Secre-
taryship doubtless extend more to com-
panionship than servility, and the more
respectable you render the one, the greater
degree of importance you will necessarily
attach to the other.
Your obi. Servant,
X Y Z.
Sydney, B th June, 1835.


\
'oney Gazette^
j, f
■■ \ f,
V 1
J
1
| I
_ J
