

THE KIAMA
AGRICULTURAL & HORTICULTURAL
ASSOCIATION
TO THE
OF THE
SOUTH COAST
ELSEWHERE.
f // / Zip c
KIAMA: Printed at the “Independent” Office, Market*
Square.


THE BUTTER QUESTION
TO THE DAIRYMEN OF THE SOUTH COAST DIS-
TRICTS AND ELSEWHERE.
nit ———
Gentlemen, —
The Committee of the Kiama Agricultural and Horti-
cultural Association having had for some time past the
above important subject under consideration have now
matured a scheme which, if it meets with anything like
general approval and is taken up with that energy which
they are satisfied the necessity of the case demands, will
result in such largely increased returns to the producers,
that the present low condition of the dairying districts
will he immediately improved, and instead of unremu-
nerative prices and general stagnation, prosperity will
again he the order of the day. It is a well known fact,
and dairymen are as a rule satisfied, that profits are
made out of their produce between shipment and actual
consumption which do not reach them, but which,
legitimately, should do so ; they are also convinced that
if the agitation now going on does not secure for them
this legitimate profit it will fail in its great object.
Under existing circumstances the producer resigns all
control over his property the moment he consigns it to his
agent; has no voice in its disposal; knows nothing of
the state of the market, or the causes that operate to


lower the price in one day as much sometimes as three*
pence a pound ; but having entrusted the whole busi-
ness to another, without control, oversight, or check of
any kind he must take, per force, such returns as are
sent him. The dairymen know that the question of
supply and demand affects the produce market exactly
as it affects any other branch of trade ; and they know
also that when the supply is greater than is required by
the metropolitan or local market there is a general fall
in prices to enable speculators to purchase the surplus,
either for storing, or sending it to some foreign market
with a reasonable chance of making a profit. By the
adoption of the scheme now recommended by the Asso-
ciation these sudden and in some cases extreme falls in
price will be avoided and the profits, which at present
are netted by speculators, will be secured to the pro-
ducer. Some, through family, or business, or even
friendly considerations may hesitate in giving up the old
agency system, but if another system can be adopted
that is practicable, and economical, and will secure
these great advantages to the dairymen, then the old
system—like the old stage coaches superseded by the
“ iron horse ” —must yield to the march of progress.
It will be evident to every dairyman who gives any
thought to the subject, that if they by any system lose
control over their produce until it actually passes into
the hands of the consumer or shopkeeper, their chance
of securing the profits now netted by the dealers,
“ middle-men,” or speculators, is gone ; but a Farmers'
Co-operative Company, with its board of local directors
and a competent well-paid manager, would secure to the
producer the control and profits referred to. But with-
out the co-operation of at least fifty per cent, of the


dairymen on the South Coast, even this scheme
will end in failure, as would any scheme, however
patronised, that loses control over the sale of
produce before it reaches the consumer. Every dairy-
man should he a shareholder or have a proprietary in-
terest in the Company in exact proportion to the value
of his produce, and this would secure that equality of
interest which is essential to success in all co-operative
movements. The directors would of course he elected
by the shareholders from amongst themselves. The
manager should he the very best man procurable,
thoroughly acquainted with the business, and
the butter markets generally; he should have a
good salary and perhaps a small percentage on the
amount of business done. It is generally under-
stood—indeed in some cases it is known—that
agents have themselves bought the surplus butter and
shipped it to other mirkets. There might not be so
much to complain of in a practice of this kind, if the
surplus only had been bought at a reduced price, but
the reduction affected the whole supply; and if, as is
very likely, the best samples were selected, leaving only
second-class and inferior for the Sydney market, the
producers sustained a double injury. The co-operative
principle provides a complete remedy for this, as the
butter would all be classified in the central Co-operative
market, and the surplus shipped off without affecting
the price of that required for home consumption. The
Committee of the Kiama A. and H. Association are
sanguine enough to believe that if the scheme be pro-
perly matured and well ventilated, nearly every farmer
will join, and willingly venture a month’s produce in the
enterprise. They are equally sanguine of success if the


company is started, a success that, in the first six
months, will he appreciated by every shareholder ; and
all the farmers in the colony would soon find their in-
terest in joining. The affair would then be a mighty
institution ; the producers would he masters of the
situation ; they would secure to themselves every
legitimate profit; and night steamers, cold rooms, &c.,
&c., would all follow, as natural consequences. The
three grand objects attainable hy the Co-operative
system are : first, centralisation of the sale of butter and
other produce in Sydney, including of course a large
central market. Second, the establishment of an export
trade, which, hy absorbing the surplus will secure a remu-
nerative price for all required for home consumption ;
and third, securing to the producer all the profits of his
labour, skill and capital.
The question of expense in so large an undertaking is
an important one, and it may be asked if five per cent,
commission will pay directors, manager, clerks, carters,
rent of central market, &c. ? It would be easy to answer
this query by saying the dairy farmers could as well pay such
a staff as they can about forty agents, and the rent of a
central market would certainly be less than that of a whole
street. But a far more satisfactory answer will be found
on a closer examination of the question. The annual
value of the butter produced on the South Coast is esti-
mated at £500,000; five per cent, on this sum is
exactly £25,000 ; while the half of it, or two and a half
per cent, on the butter alone would pay rent for central
market, £1000; directors, £2600; manager, £1000;
taster or classifier of butter, £IOOO ; chief clerk, £SOO ;
six subordinate clerks, £2OO each; cartage, £2000;
stationery and printing, £IOOO ; telegrams and stamps,


£1000; and contingencies, £IOOO, The above scale,
which is liberal in the extreme, is not given as an esti-
mate of costs hut as an answer to the query, will five
per cent, pay ? and in anticipation that after a time
self interest will secure complete co-operation. It will
he thus seen that by the centralised system the work
couldbe done at less than half the present cost and with full
co-operation prove a gain to the producers in commission
alone of fully £15,000 a year. But the greatest advan-
tage of all would bo that good butter in Sydney need
never fall below ninepence a lb. in summer and fifteen-
pence in winter, averaging one shilling a lb. all the year,
which, with the returns for the surplus from England
and elsewhere and the saving in commission, would
make a profit of £IBO,OOO a year to the producers over
and above what they now get.
The next question is that of capital, hut that would
be met by a week’s produce from each shareholder. Of
course some cash would be needed for the purchase of
horses and carts, office furniture, &c., and if it was
thought unwise to commence with an overdraft the
whole would be fully met by the payment—in cash or
produce —of an entrace fee of £1 by each member.
Monthly payments would he made the same as at pre-
sent, and by charging five per cent, commission until a
sufficient reserve fund is established the company could
pay the producers at once for such butter as might bo
sent to a foreign market. To show the actual money value
accruing to the co-operative central market over the
present system, when the supply is in excess of a colonial
demand, suppose that Sydney and sub mbs consume
2000 kegs of butter per week, and that the country having
for some time past had little or no rain, it readily realizes


9d a pound; a general rain falls, pastures are green
and grass so adundant, that in one week 8000 kegs reach
Sydney. This being 1000 kegs in excess of the demand
down goes the price to Od per lb. 3000 kegs averaging
70 lbs each, at 9d per pound represent £7875. This
amount of butter reduced from 9d to 6d, or one third,
shows an actual dead loss to the dairymen of exactly
£2625 in one week, and the same amount for every
succeeding week that the excess and low price continue,
which (say) in ten weeks would reach the enormous sum of
£26,260. From the above figures it will he seen at a glance
that if the dairymen had thrown the surplus thousand
kegs into the sea, and the remaining two thousand had
been sold at the ruling price 9d, their returns would have
been just the same to say nothing of extra labour, trouble,
wear and tear, and loss of kegs. But what would have
been the case under the co-operative central system ?
The hoard would meet, the manager would report a sur-
plus of 1000 kegs and having unrestricted use of the
telegraph wire he would also report the state of the markets
at Tasmania, New Zealand, South Australia, Melbourne,
Queensland, and perhaps England, The directors with
all this information before them, would order 600 kegs
to he sent to one place, 100 to another, and so on till
all is disposed of. Thus, instead of reducing the whole
supply threepence a pound to enable middlemen or
speculators a profit out of the surplus 1000 kegs, the
2000 required for Sydney and suburbs would be sold at
ninepence, realizing a sum just equal to the 8000 kegs
at sixpence, while the surplus 1000 kegs, would, by the
direction of the board be sent to England or elsewhere,
and, supposing this surplus to realize only sixpence nett
in a foreign market the actual extra gam to the dairymen


would be £1750 for a single week, or for ten weeks
£17,600.
Recently several things have occurred tending to
show not only the feasibility but the absolute necessity
of some such scheme as is here laid down. The recent
unaccountable fluctuation in the butter market is one of
them ; its importance to the dairymen can scarcely be
over-estimated, and it is high time for us to learn the
ins and outs of the matter, that we may understand the
cause as well as the effect. It is clear therefore that full
and complete co-operation in the establishment of a com-
pany for the sale and export of produce will secure to
the producers a saving in commission of £15,000 a year ;
in an improved price for butter £150,000 ; in the sale of
other produce £15,000 —total £lBO,OOO ; and it is equally
clear that if the dairymen do not combine for their own
interest a change of avocation must follow at no distant
date.
The Kiama A. and H. Association respectfully solicit
your hearty co-operation in the projected Company,
and beg to intimate that in a few days after the receipt
of this pamphlet a canvasser will call upon you for
your signature.
(Signed)
I). L. DYMOCK, PRESIDENT,
JAMES COLLEY, Yice-Peesident,
JAMES SOMERVILLE, Secretary.


PROSPECTUS
OF THE
CO-OPERATIVE COMPANY,
For the Sals and Export of Colonial Produce.
The above company, under the management of twelve
local directors (say) one from each of the following
places, Wollongong, Dapto, Albion Park, Shellharbour,
Jamberoo, Kiama, G err ingong, Broughton Creek, Kan-
garoo Valley, Shoalhaven, Milton, and Burrawang,
to be started provided that 50 per cent, of the farmers
of the above places co-operate.
MEMBERSHIP.
Every farmer who shall pay in cash or produce an
extrance fee of £l, and send the whole of his produce to
the company’s depot in Sydney, shall be deemed a mem-
ber of the company, and entitled to all the benefits of
such membership, the said entrance fee to be returned
at the end of three months, provided the reserve fund
will admit of it.
CAPITAL.
The only capital required is the payment of 5 per
cent, commission on all produce sold by the company.
But as it is estimated, even on the most liberal scale,
that, the expenses of the company will not exceed two
and a-half per cent., the payment of 5 per cent, shall
only continue, till, in the estimation of the directors, a
loan and mortgage or reserve fund be formed sufficiently
large to meet all possible contingencies.


ADVANTAGES,
No, I.—The company’s depot will bo a central market
in Sydney, under the superintendence of a com-
petent manager, with classifier and staff, all paid
servants of the company and subject to the directors
who shall meet once a month, or oftener if neces-
sary for the despatch of business, such directors to
be annually elected by the members.
No. 2.—-After the establishment of a sufficient reserve
fund the commission to be reduced to meet actual
costs only, which it is estimated will be a saving
out of commission alone of over ,£15,000 a year.
H®. 3. —By the present system all produce goes from
under the control of the owner the moment it is
consigned to an agent, and if the consignee
brings the owner in debt, which has often been the
case—the latter has no remedy; but under the
co-operative system the owner will, through his
directors, and paid servants, have complete con-
trol over his produce until it passes into the hands
of the consumer.
No. 4.—The co-operative central butter depot having
the whole trade will command the market, main-
taining a uniform price for good butter, say nine-
pence in summer and one shilling to one shilling
and threepence per poimd in winter, except in
times of drought when the supply may sink below
the demand, then the price will be proportionately
higher.
Ho. s. —When the supply is greater than the demand
the Company will ship the surplus to the most
remunerative foreign markets, the profits of which


will come to the producer, instead of as at present
to speculators, by which the South Coast alone
has, through a drop in the price of butter, lost
£2625 in one week.
No. o.—The estimate of £500,000 per annum is at
ninepence per pound for butter. But if a uniform
price of one shilling all the year round is main-
tained, as may under the co-operative system easily
be done, the returns to the producers would be one-
fourth more, or £625,000 a year.
No. 7. —As the butter would all be classified by a com-
petent and reliable person, those wdio make a good
article would reap the benefit; while that of an
inferior quality realizing only what it is worth
would prove an incentive to manufacture a better
article.
No, B.—The Orient Steamship Company trading be-
tween this colony and England have announced
their intention of fitting up each of their magnifi-
cent steamers with a refrigerating room, thus
affording the Co-operative Company not only an
opportunity of sending the surplus butter to a
market, where the demand is unlimited hut also a
guarantee that it will arrive in good condition.
No. 9. —The saving, or gain to the producers in com-
mission alone would be £15,000 a year. The gain
on an improved and uniform price would bo at
least £150,00, —on the sale of other produce
£15,000, —making a total annual saving of
£lBO,OOO.


7Af,
lit uo '
f llliOc
A f
