

To the Honourable the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland t>.(o
in Parliament assembled.
THE HUMBLE PETITION OF JOHN MACKANESS, BARRISTER AT LAW, OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE,
SHEWETH; that your Petitioner having
practiced at the Bar in England, lor
upwards of thirty years, was, in 1823, at the
recommendation of the Right Honourable the
Earl of Bathurst, then Secretary of Stale for the
Colonies, appointed by his late Majesty George
the IVth, Sheriff of the Territory of N ew South
Wales. That your Petitioner arrived in the Co-
lony on the 17th of July, 1824, and on the 21st
of the same month, was sworn into that office
before Sir Thomas Brisbane, then Governor
thereof, in consequence of a letter from the
said Earl of Bathurst to His Excellency, dated
the 22d of January, 1824, containing, among
other things, the following instructions :
'•'His Majesty having appointed Mr.Mackaness
Sheriff of New South Wales, I am to desire you
Will put him in possession of his office, and
afford him every assistance in your power. As
the duties of Sheriff in England expire at the
end of the year, and as the situation of Sir riff
in New South Wales is exactly analogous, vou
Will consider that Mr. Mackaness’ office ex-
pires annually, and will therefore take care to
re-appoint him, without any further instruc-
tion from me.— (Signed) Bathurst.”
That your Petitioner, finding neither system
rior rules in the office, which had hitherto been
exercised by a Provost Marshall, he had con-
siderable trouble in establishing and carrying
into effect the laws as practised in England.
That His Excellency Sir Thomas Brisbane,
having proclaimed, that Quarter Sessions should
be held in certain places in New South Wales,
according to the laws and custom of England,
your Petitioner being the only lawyer who had
practised in those Courts in England, had the
burthen of forming the rules and practice,
which he did, to the satisfaction of the J ustices
and other persons concerned
That your Petitioner, as Sheriff, was several
times called upon to convene public meetings,
and always gave entire satisfaction to the Colo-
nists. That on the last occasion, viz., January 26,
1827, the meeting was the most respectable in
number, wealth, and intelligence. The Attorney
General, Colonel Dumaresque, (the Private Se-
cretary to His Excellency,) Lieutenant-General
Darling, and most of the public officers being
present. That no speaker was interrupted or
called to order, by the Attorney-General or other
officer. That your Petitioner received the una-
nimous thanks of the meeting for his conduct
in the chair, and was deputed with Sir John
Jamison and Mr. G. Blaxland, to attend His
Excellency with the Petition to His Majesty,
and to request His Excellency to support the
prayer thereof. That your Petitioner attended at
Government House, accordingly, on the 80th of
January following, with Sir John Jamison and
Mr. G. Blaxland, when the following answer
was given to the deputation :
Gentlemen,—l shall lose no time in forward-
ing the petition which I have now received, to
the Earl of Bathurst, His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies, in order, as
the petitioners request, to its being presented to
the Throne. 1 can only repeat the assurances I
gave on assuming the administration of the go-
vernment, that I am most anxious to promote
the welfare of the Colony, and the true interest
of the inhabitants; and I shall lose no opportu-
nity of doing whatever may contribute to these
important objects.
I have the honour, &c.
R. Darling.
J. Mackaness, High Sheriff,
Sir John Jamison.
Gregory Blaxland.
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that he
visited at Government House after that neriod,
and was not aware that he had incurred the
displeasure of His Excellency Lieutenant-Ge-
neral Darling, by his conduct at that meeting,
until the 29th of November, 1837, when your
Petitioner received the following letter from
His Excellency :
" Sir, —The Right Honourable the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, having had under con-
sideration your conduct on the occasion of the
public meeting, which was held at Sydney, the
26th of January last; and His Lordship having-
observed, that you had not confined yourself
merely to presiding on that occasion, but
had given your countenance to the proceeding
in which the existing institutions of the Colony,
and the constituted authorities, underwent the
most calumnious and indecent animadversion ;
and His Lordship considering, that such con-
duct on the part of a public officer, cannot fail
to produce the most serious evils in a Colony,
the population of which is so constituted as
this is; has been pleased to desire, should
your conduct appear to render your re-appoint-
ment of Sheriff at the close of the present year
inexpedient, that I should inform you accord-
ingly. It now becomes my painful duty to
apprise you, in pursuance of the orders con-
veyed to me by Lord Viscount Goderick, that I
have determined not to re-appoint you to the
office of Sheriff; considering, that from the cir-
cumstance to which His Lordship has drawn my
attention; from your associations, and intercourse
with certain factious individuals, who, in the
most open and wanton manner, have endea-
voured to degrade the government in the eyes
of the public, and to create discord between it
and the people; as well as from the disposition
you have evinced, to consider yourself inde-
pendent of the local authorities; and not having
rendered that prompt and willing obedience to
the orders of the government, which is indis-
pensable on the part of its officers; (without
entering into other circumstances;) that the true
interests and happiness of the Colony, and the
success of the government, whose interest it is
to protect these, will be promoted, by your being
discontinued a public officer.”
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that in
answer to the said letter, he humbly requested
that His Excellency would send him a copy of
that part of Viscount Goderick’s letter, which
gave him the power to discontinue your Peti-
tioner in the office of Sheriff, and also to cause
the allegations made against liim, to be enquired
into in the presence of your Petitioner; to which
His Excellency replied, that any enquiry would
be unavailing, as he had fully reported to His
Majesty’s government the proceedings taken in
your Petitioner’s case.
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that
as soon as possible, after he ceased to be Sheriff,
he paid to the collector of the Internal Revenue
the balance of fees and fines in his hand as
Sheriff, and made an affidavit in the Supreme
Court, stating his receipts and disbursements,
and shewing the balance so paid as aforesaid, to
be correct. Yet the said Lieutenant-General
Darling commanded his law officers to com-
mence an action against him for the sum of
£516. 2s. 9d. for the purpose of harrassing
your Petitioner, well knowing, as was satisfac-
torily proved at the trial before His Honour the
Chief Justice, that no sum was due to Govern-
ment from your Petitioner.
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that
on the 22d of November, 1825, Sir Thomas
Brisbane, then Governor of the Colony of New
South Wales, directed the then Surveyor Ge-
neral to mark and measure 2,000 acres of land,
and place your Petitioner, or his legal repre-
sentative, in possession thereof; which said order
not being acted upon during the continuance of
the said Sir Thomas Brisbane in his govern-
ment, the said Surveyor General, on or about
the 18th of July, 1827, informed your Petitioner,
that a desirable situation was then vacant at
Goulburu Plains, and that your Petitioner would
be entitled to have the same given him, if he
wrote to His Excellency Lieutenant-General
Darling requesting the same, stating your
Petitioner's claim thereto. And your Petitioner
further sheweth, that on the 19th of the said
month of July, your Petitioner applied by
letter to Alexander IVPLeay, Esq., the Colonial
Secretary, to be considered an applicant for the
said station, and received for answer, that your
Petitioner’s claim should be referred to the
Secretary of State for the Colonies, who would
determine as to your Petitioner’s right.
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that it
appears by the books of the Surveyor General,
that on the 28th of July, Assistant Surgeon
Gibson selected the same station, and that on
21st of September, 1837, such selection was
confirmed by the said Lieutenant-General Dar-
ling, although the said Mr. Gibson was at that
time on full pay of the New South Wales Corps,
and although His Excellency had by letters of
the 30 th of July and the 28 th of November, given
your Petitioner to understand and believe, that
your Petitioner’s claim to the said station, had
been transmitted to His Majesty’s Secretary of
State; whereas, in truth and in fact. His Ex-
cellency did not forward to the said Secretary
any claim of your Petitioner as so promised.
And your Petitioner further sheweth, that
he has made several appeals to the Secretary of
State, earnestly requesting an enquiry into his
conduct as Sheriff, and also proved before the
Land Board, that he had property to the amount
of £2,000 after all his debts were paid. Yet
your Petitioner has never received any answer
either to his request to have his character and
conduct enquired into, or to his just and rea-
sonable demand of a confirmation of the said
2000 acres of land, so directed to be given him
by the said Sir Thomas Brisbane.
And your Petitioner lastly sheweth, that he
is furnished with the most satisfactory testimo-
nial from the Judges of the Colony, of his
conduct whilst acting in all the duties of Sheriff
of New South Wales; a copy of which is an-
nexed to this Petition.
Your Petitioner therefore prays, that your Ho-
nourable House will cause an enquiry to be
made into this case of extreme hardship and
oppression, and grant such redress to your
Petitioner as you shall judge meet. And your
Petitioner as in duty bound will ever pray, &c.
John Mackaness.
(Copy.) New South Wales,
Sydney, February 15, 1828-
Sir, — In reply to your note addressed to the
Chief Justice, dated the 11th instant, request-
ing an official document communicative of our
opinion of your conduct as Sheriff during the
time you held that office; we have much satis-
faction in giving you this testimonial, and in
stating, that your diligence and fidelity in the
discharge of the duties of your office, so far as
they came under our observation, were such, as
to deserve our entire approbation.
In confirmation of our opinion we may state
the fact, that we do not recollect any instance
of any complaint made, or any proceeding com-
menced against you in the Court, during the
three yeai’s and-a-half that you held the office
of Sheriff.
We have the honour to be.
Your most obedient servants,
(Signed) Francis Forbes, Chief Justice.
John Stephen, Judge of the
Supreme Court.
