





To the City of God
“ Right up the sunbeam seeH the Sun
God’s light must lead to God.”
IT' ROM my youth I had heard my parents and friends speak of a “City
of God.” I did not in my early years pay much heed to what they
said, so engrossed was I in all the wonders of the world around me. But,
having listened one day to an earnest preacher who sought to impress upon
his audience that they were all “ strangers and pilgrims,” as their fathers
had been before them, and that they should therefore arise and seek “ a better
country,” I donned a pilgrim’s garb, and with staff in hand set forth to find
the City of my traditions and my dreams.


I had been told that the road to the City lay far up among the mountains
over which the sun rose; so thither I directed my steps.
Having reached the foot of the mountain-range, however, I knew not
which way to turn, for the mountain-side was covered with dense bush, and
I feared to take any one of the many tracks that disappeared among the
scrub and trees, lest I should lose myself.
As I stood in great perplexity, I saw coming towards.me from behind
a little belt of trees one who carried in his hand an open book, from which
he did not lift his eyes. As he came nearer, I ventured to address him —
“ Can you tell me, sir,” I said, “ which of these many tracks through the
bush leads to the City of God?” Scarce lifting his eyes, he answered —“ Here
are full directions as to your journey, and a map of the country. It is a
good thing you met me, for some of these paths that seem to lead up the
mountain lead to the brink of a precipice, over which many a traveller has
fallen into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone.” “ Kind sir,” I
said, “may I go with you, for I am but a poor bushman?” “No need,” he
replied. From a great pocket in his flowing robe the stranger drew forth
another copy of the book he held in his hand. I noticed that his pockets
were crammed full of books. “ Take this," he said, “ and read for yourself.
I have marked certain passages for you." Thereupon this somewhat hard-
visaged stranger disappeared into the bush, having evidently no desire for
my company. On the cover of the book was written “ Holy Bible,” in bright
gold letters.


I never was much of a scholar, but I could read. Sitting down on the
green sward, I opened the book, expecting to find clear and minute direc-
tions. But as I read I became confused. The stranger, I thought, must
have made a mistake, and have given me the wrong book. I read about
Creation, and Paradise, and Wandering Tribes of Eastern people long ago,
and great battles and barbarous Kings, and signs and wonders. There were
beautiful passages that arrested me. and then there were passages I could not
understand, for, as I said. 1 am not learned. I read and read, but found no
Map such as the stranger had led me to expect. At length, looking up. I
saw that the shadows of the trees were lengthening, and that the sun was
now far behind me. “ Night will be on me,” I said, starting up, “ if I do not
make haste.” In my disappointment I Hung the book from me. “ Yonder
lies the mountain.” I cried, “ where I have been told is the City. I will press
up, following the channel of some stream. Surely if I keep ascending I
cannot go far wrong.”
As I was about to take the nearest path into the bush, another traveller
suddenly appeared, approaching along another road than that by which I
had come. He was dressed in flowing robes, and on his head he wore
a hat I had not seen before. A chain of beads hung at his girdle, and on
his breast hung a cross. “What book was that, friend, you flung away?”
he asked. “Well, I thought it was a Map of the country,” I answered.
“It was put into my hands by one whom I met here, reading as he walked.
He said he had received it direct from God, and that it was all I needed


to reach the City of God. It is called ‘ The Bible,’ or ‘ The Rook.’ Rut,
alas! though I have spent hours in studying it, my way does not seem
clearer.” “ Oh, the book is all right,” the stranger replied; “ but you need
a key to it.” “Are you a pilgrim?” I asked. “No,” he replied, “I am the
only authorised mountain guide.” “ Rut how am I to know that you are
a guide, and not perhaps a robber?” I said. The man laughed. “ Oh, I for-
got you must be one of those who have walked from birth in darkness. Well,
here are my credentials.” Whereupon he drew from the folds of his long
cassock a long list of names stretching back two thousand years, stretching
back to Jesus Christ. “What names are these?” I asked. “They are the
names of the holy Bishops and Popes to whom God gave the Keys of the
City,” he replied. “And are you one of them?” I queried. “Yes,” he said.
“ See! my name is on this list. The Keys have been handed on from Bishop
to Bishop in a chain reaching up to God Himself.” “ Oh. sir,” I exclaimed,
“ I am not learned in ancient history, and it would take me too long to ex-
amine this list. How do I know that all you say is true? You are but
a fallible man like myself.” “ You must,” he said, “ submit to the ‘ Society
of Guides.” Turn to that book, and you will see that God has appointed
us.” “ But how do I know that every line in the book is correct —that no
one has tampered with it—and that you are correct in your interpretation?”
Returning the list of Bishops to the inner pocket of his cassock, and devoutly
crossing himself, as he muttered, “ Invincible Ignorance,” this self-styled
guide drew forth a little prayer-book, and went his way, reading as he


walked. Suddenly he wheeled round and cried aloud:—“ O, poor lost soul!
Anathema! Anathema! Everlasting flames await you over the precipice.”
Picking up the book I had flung away in my impatience, I sat down
again and read. My eye lighted on some beautiful passages—some words
of Jesus Christ especially that seemed to speak to my soul. Yet I found
no “ Map,” and no clear description of the path to the City, and no photo-
graph of the City itself. At length I lighted on the passage: —“Strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life.” Then, thought I,
“ I must see which is the narrowest of these paths.” And then I read again :
—“ The greatest of all the commandments is, ‘ Thou shalt love.’ ” Further
on still I read, “ Whosoever shall humble himself as this little child the same
is greatest in the Kingdom of heaven.” The path, I said to myself, must
be one whose opening is very small, and through which I must creep, if the
book says true. Again I read, “By this we know that we have passed
from death to life because we love.” “ God is light, and in Him is no dark-
ness at all.” “He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness.” “ Whoso-
ever taketh not up his cross, he cannot be my disciple.”
Taking up my staff, I began to examine the different paths, hoping to
find one that corresponded to this description. Soon I discovered a little
opening that one had to stoop in order to enter. It passed through prickly
scrub, and on the stones I saw some marks of blood. But the sunshine fell full
on it, and I saw that it led right up the mountain into a bright, beautiful
glade. I was just about to creep in, when I noticed one dressed like my-


self hurrying towards me. who hailed me as a fellow pilgrim. “ Whither
bound, brother?” I cried. “To the City of God.” he answered, cheerily.
“I see you have found the right path.” “How do you know?” I asked.
“ Have you a Map?” “ No,” he replied, with a merry laugh. “The bit of bush
we have to travel through has not yet been traversed by anyone: each has
to make a path for himself. Enough for us to know the direction, and watch
the sunrise always.” “ Then how do you know I have found the right path?”
“My heart tells me,” he answered. “ I have read in that good book you
hold in your hand, how one called Jesus Christ long ago sought the City
of God, and I know He was right when He said, ‘ Take the path of Love,
and go right up.’ I am sure this is the only path by just looking at it, and
that all the other paths must join it somewhere.” Then, pointing through
the trees, he said, “ Don’t you see it going straight up- yonder, and how
bright it is? And have you not read in that book, ‘God is Light?’ So let
us together follow the Light, and have faith that it must lead us to its
own source in the City of God.” As he spoke I looked again, and lo! the
mountain seemed living with pilgrims. “How did these come to be there?”
I cried in astonishment. “ They are ascending,” he replied, “by the same
road you and I must tread. Know that all round the mountain are these
narrow humble entrances, but they all lead to the one main road that goes
up to God. We must make haste and join our fellow-pilgrims. They
need us, and we need them, to cheer and sympathise. Listen! they are sing-
ing together to encourage one another, for the ascent is steep, and they have


to fell trees, and cut steps in the rocks, and sometimes there are those whose
hearts faint.”
“Do we not need this book, then?” I asked. “I flung it away a little
while ago.” “ You did foolishly,” the cheery pilgrim replied. “ You acted
like a petulant child. That book tells you of the wanderings of pilgrims in
other times, their struggles, hardships, faith, and love, as well as of their
errors and failures. I always keep that book by me, and again and again I
love to read such words as those that you seem to have been reading when
you went in search of this narrow, humble path with the blood-marks on
the sharp stones, and the light falling on it through the prickly scrub.” So
saying, he showed me a beautiful copy given to him by his mother and father.
Then I told my fellow-traveller about the first man I had met. “ Oh,
yes,” he said, “ I know him ; he ofifered me a copy of the book marked by
himself, though, as you see, I had a copy of my own, which I had marked for
myself. He means well, but he is ignorant and conceited. His name is
‘ Bibliolater.’ I am afraid he is more anxious not to fall over the precipice
he is always talking about, than to reach the City.”
I asked my companion also about the other man I had met. He smiled
kindly and said, “ I know him, too. His name is ‘ Hierarch.’ Not a bad
fellow. But he, too, is terribty frightened about the precipice. He thinks
God is a God of vengeance, and has brought us here only to burn us for
ever if we do not believe certain things. He is rather conceited, and any-
one who will not do exactly as he does, he says, must fall over the preci-


pice into a great lake of tire. It is a horrible idea, is it not? and dishonouring
to God.”
Stooping down together, my fellow-traveller and I crept through the nar-
row entrance, and ere long we joined the troop of pilgrims, and pressed on
towards the City of God, which we now know is the City of Souls that trust,
and hope, and love, that live, and move, and have their being in the God who is
“ Light ” and “ Love.”
I do not ask any more for a Map. I simply follow the compass in my
own soul, whose needle always points upward and onward towards the
rising sun.
Fraser Jenkinson, Printers, 420 Bourke Street, Melbourne




“Per Cruc«m Ad Lucem."
♦ I *
+
Faith. | Hopa
*
Lot*.
