

to the PRESBYTERIANS OP ADNEY AND ITS VICINITY.
rj o' <?_
r /; 39r Cc
Christian Friends and Brethren, , „ ~ , . „ „ ~ .
I beg to submit to you the following copy of a letter, which I addressed some time since io the Church
Extension and Home Mission Committee of the Presbyterian Church of New (south Wales. ’
Sydney, 25th July, 1866,
I beg to submit to you the following statement of a claim which I think I have in equity and justice on the
surplus of the Thousand Pounds Fund for the bringing out of Ministers from home.
In the month of July, 1862, I sent home a bank draft, which cost me £l2l 165., to the Rev. Dr. George Jeffrey,
Clerk of the Glasgow Presbytery of the United Presbyterian Church, authorising and requesting him to send out two ordained
ministers of that Church, to be settled wherever Divine Providence might open up a door of usefulness for them in this Colony ;
in which 1 showed that additional ministers of our communion are urgently required. And as the Union of the different
sections of the Presbyterian Church was then supposed to be impending, it was expressly stipulated that such ministers should
not be expected to identify themselves on their arrival with any one of these sections, but should remain in a state of isolation
till after the Cniun, and then join the United Church.
The first of the two ministers sent out on this requisition, the Rev. George Graham, arrived in the colony in
June, 1863, and was elected by the congregation of the Scots Church as my colleague; but he only completed twelve months of
his engagement in that capacity, and left us, without previous complaint or warning, on what to many besides myself
mere frivolous pretences. Having gone to Melbourne, where there was no opening for him at the time, he accepted a call to
Maryborough in Queensland, where he repeated the very same act of desertion at the close ot the first twelve months of his
engagement; thus involving both of the congregations with which he had been connected in very serious expenses.
The second of the ministers sent out by Dr. Jeffrey was the Rev. R. S. Paterson, who arrived in the colony in
June, 1864, and was shortly thereafter invited by the Presbyterians of Pyrmont to form a church and congregation in that locality.
Having accepted this invitation, Mr. Paterson has been eminentlysuccessful; a weather-board substantial and commodious
building having been erected for his Church, at a cost of upwards of ,£4OO, while the congregation which he has formed in that
long-neglected locality are already able to give him a salary of £250 a year.
Now, although I was quite willing to regard the sum I had thus expended in bringing out Mr. Graham as a
dead loss to myself, which it really was, I have surely a strong equitable claim on the Assembly’s Surplus Fund, over and above
the sum asked, viz,, £looo,for the expenditure incurred by myself individually on account of the passage out of the Rev. R. S.
Paterson, for I cannot see that his congregation, struggling as they are, successfully, under many depressing circumstances, to
clear their Church of debt, and to support their minister in a creditable manner, should ever be applied to for that particular
item of expenditure.
I resolved from the first that I should not prefer this claim till the Assembly’s Thousand Pounds Fund
should be subscribed and paid; but as I have learned from the Treasurer that there is already a considerable surplus
over and above that amount, I submit that it is but fair and equitable that a portion of that surplus should be appropriated for
the liquidation of the debt incurred by me—for I confess I borrowed the whole of the money sent home by me in
1862, at 8 per cent, interest—for the kindred object of paying the passage out of the Rev. Mr. Paterson.
Although Mr. Paterson came out a full year before the Union, he came out in reality for the now United
Church- having never joined either the late Synod of New South Wales, or any other of the recently divided bodies.
And as' the Rev. Mr. Cameron, who was sent out by the Free Church of Scotland, before the tidings of the Union had
reached Scotland, was nevertheless allowed very properly to be received as one of the ten to be brought out with
the £lOOO fund, I think it but fair and equitable that the case of Mr. Paterson should be allowed to form a charge
upon the surplus of that fund.
The half of the original draft for £l2O, which cost £l2l 16s. for premium at the time, with four years
interest till the 21st instant, at 8 per cent-, will amount altogether to £BO 7s. Bd.—say £BO.
I am, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient servant,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
As the Thousand Pound Fund for getting out ten additional ministers from home had sometime since reached the
amount of £1232 4d. (including the sum of £166 10s. promised by persons both able and willing to pay, but which had not then
been actually paid into the Fund,) 1 thought the Church Extension Committee would at once order the payment of the amount
I had incurred for precisely the same object, although the minister I had sent for had arrived previous to the Union.
But the Committee, pleading their want of power in the case, my claim was referred for decision to the General Assembly, by
whomit was ungraciously, and I think, unjustly disallowed. But asl cannot conceive that my fellow-countrymen, the Presbyterians
of Sydney and its vicinity, would allow me to lose the amount in question, especially when its expenditure had resulted in the intro-
duction into the colony of so able and zealous a minister as Mr. Paterson, I trust they will raise the amount by small donations
in the city and neighbourhood. . „ . , . _ ~
I am, Christian Friends and Brethren,
Your well-wisher,
JOHN DUNMORE LANG.
Sydney, December 6, 1886.
SUBSCRIPTIONS.
