

To the Scottish and other Presbyterians,
and to the public generally, in Sydney
and throughout the Colony.
Sydney, 25th November, 1873.
Fellow Colonists and Friends,—
Having deemed it expedient and necessary, at the close of the fiftieth year
of my ministry in this city and colony, to retire from the active duties of the
pastorate in the Scots Church, Sydney, my congregation have, with my entire
concurrence, elected the Kevd. Dr. Gilchrist, LL.D., a native of Scotland, an
able and acceptable minister, and an honoured alumnus of the University of
Sydney, as my colleague and successor. In these circumstances, lam exceed-
ingly desirous that in thus resigning my pastoral charge, I should leave my
successor a suitable manse or dwelling-house, adjoining the Chuich, as also
that the Tower and Spire of the Church should be completed on its original
plan. And as the non-erection of these ecclesiastical buildings in time past has
arisen entirely from my frequent voyages to England, in the course of which
I believe I have rendered good service to my adopted country in bringing out
to it many hundreds, and even thousands, of reputable and industrious people
who have contributed materially to its welfare and advancement, it is surely
not unreasonable to expect that the public generally, and my own Scottish
countrymen in particular, throughout the colony, will lend the requisite assist-
ance towards the accomplishment of these desirable objects.
Previous to the year 1830, the mechanics of the colony were almost exclu-
sively emancipated convicts, who were generally inferior workmen and regularly
spent a large proportion of their time and earnings in dissipation. I went tp
England in that year for educational purposes ; and, on my return to the colony, I
brought out with me—along with certain ministers of religion, and certain college
bred men as Teachers, to form an educational institution of a superior character
in Sydney—upwards of fifty families of Scotch mechanics, principally carpenters
and joiners, stonemasons, blacksmiths, plasterers, &c., whom I had engaged tp
be employed for a twelvemonth in the colony, in erecting the requisite build-
ings, and to receive as their weekly wages the current rates of the colony, which
were then two pounds a week; beef and bread, as I told them, being then both
selling at a penny a pound in Sydney. There was great distress at the time at
home from want of employment for the industrious classes, while rick-burning
and machine-breaking were alarmingly prevalent in the rural districts of Eng-
land. I felt assured, therefore, that these immigrant mechanics would not only
do well for themselves, but would introduce a better order of things among the
industrious classes of the colony. .
I was not disappointed in such expectations : for the importation of these
mechanics into the colony proved highly successful in various ways. By their
skilled labour, of which the first specimen was the four buildings in Jamison-
ptreet, Sydney, they served materially to improve the architectural taste of the.


colony, and to transform our colonial capital, from being previously a paltry
collection of wooden and brick buildings, into a city abounding in palatial edi-
fices of polished stone.
The success, moreover, of the Scotch mechanics, which they reported them-
selves in their letters home to all parts of Scotland, speedily brought out
hundreds and thousands of their fellow-countrymen of the same class to Sydney
and Melbourne, while their virtuous character and deportment served materi-
ally to raise the tone of society and to promote the interests of virtue through-
out the colony.
I had to visit England again for educational purposes in 1833 ; and brought
out with me on my return to the colony in 1834, along with certain ministers
and teachers for our Institution, a whole shipload of reputable people of various
occupations whom I selected myself on the Bounty System then in operation in
the colony.
The Educational Institution I had formed in 1831, under three able univer-
sity-bred men from Scotland, continued in vigorous and successful operation
for ten years thereafter, and afforded a superior education for the time to
upwards of five hundred of our colonial youth. It was afterwards continued
on a limited scale till 1854, when it became extinct.
I visited England again in 1836, and on my return to the colony brought
out with me, along with twelve Presbyterian ministers and as many school-
masters for the common schools of the colony, a whole shipload of reputable
families whom I had selected myself in Scotland. I also brought out with me
on this occasion, in a second vessel with immigrants of my own selection, a
number of German missionaries, about thirty in all, for the aborigines at More-
ton Bay. A third vessel, which I engaged at this time also, on behalf of my
brother, who wished to form a colony of German vinedressers on his estate of
Dunmore, near Maitland, actually sailed for this destination from Havre de
Grace, in France, with about 250 vinedressers and their families from the south
of Germany. But the French Protestant captain touching at Rio de Janeiro
for supplies, the numerous Germans in that city, anxious above all things (with
the tacit concurrence of the Brazilian Government) to retain so valuable an
importation in their own adopted country, spread all manner of evil reports
about this colony among the people on board, and by thus frightening them
virtually compelled the captain to land them in Rio, to the great loss of this
colony at the time. Don Pedro, the emperor of the Brazils, took much interest
in these Germans, and settled them in an elevated tract of country adjoining
his own summer palace near Rio,' where they formed a town called Petropolis,
in honour of the emperor; all the places around having now German names.
I was much more successful, however, in another effort which I made on
behalf of our colony on this visit to the mother country. For a famine being
then prevalent in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland, a deputation was sent
up to London to solicit Lord Glenelg, then Secretary of State for the colonies,
to send out thirty thousand of the Highlanders to Canada at the public expense.
I was present at the public meeting held in the Egyptian Hall in London,
when the Revd. Dr. McLeod, the father of the recently deceased Doctor, and
the head of the deputation, in appealing to the public for assistance for the
poor Highlanders, told the meeting with great regret that the Government, as
Lord Glenelg had assured them, had no funds to send any of the Highlanders to
Canada. Immediately after the meeting, however, I waited on the deputation
and told them, to their great joy, that although the Government had no funds to
send thirty thousand Highlanders to Canada, they had a fund arising from the
sale of the waste lands of this colony to send so many of them to New South
Wales; furnishing the deputation at the same time with the necessary statistics
of the colony to prove the truth of my statements. A long negotiation ensued
both in Dowuing-street and in the cabinet, but the result was that my suggestion
was received and acted on, and not fewer than four thousand of the High-
landers were sent out to Sydney and Melbourne at the expense of our land-fund
in eighteen different ships during the next two or three years. They were
chiefly employed as shepherds and small farmers in Victoria and New South


■Wales; one of them, since deceased, having become a Minister of the Crown in
Queensland.
In the years 1839 and 1840, during my own absence from the colony in
England and America, a fatal change took place in the working of our Immi-
gration System. Certain merchants in Sydney, wishing to get the entire man-
agement of the very large funds then available for immigration into their own
hands, got up a hue and cry against the local Government and the Commis-
sioners in England, alleging that they could,conduct the service, if entrusted
to them, at a much cheaper rate and bring out a much larger number of immi-
grants than those sent out by the Emigration Commissioners. Sir George Gipps
unfortunately yielded to this cry, and thereby, without establishing the slightest
check upon the proceedings of those concerned, virtually handed over hundreds
of thousands of pounds to irresponsible persons who were merely required to
bring out so many head of adult persons—get them how and where they might.
The London shipbrokers, into whose hands the expenditure of this large fund
then fell, soon found that the cheapest market for emigrants for Australia was
the south and west of Ireland, and they accordingly established their whippers-
in in that country ; collecting emigrants, often of indifferent character, by the
thousand, and shipping them across the channel by the Irish steamboats to
Plymouth, where they were at once transferred to the emigrant ships from
London to Australia. In this way the immigration of the period assumed a
complete Irish Roman Catholic aspect, many vessels arriving in Sydney and
Melbourne with but one English or Scotch Protestant to seventeen Irish Roman
Catholics. From the Ist January, 1841, to the 30th June, 1842, the number of
immigrants imported into the colony, which then included Victoria and Queens-
land, at the public expense, was 25,330; and of these not fewer than 16,892 were
from Ireland, chiefly Roman Catholics from the south and west, while there were
only 8,438 from England and Scotland altogether. Had the same process only
gone on for a few years longer, New South Wales would very soon have become
a thoroughly Irish Roman Catholic colony; but immigration from the mother
country having nearly ceased for a few years thereafter, in consequence of the
temporary exhaustion of its land fund, the colony was happily saved from this
most undesirable consummation.
For although I have always, both in and out of Parliament, acted with
strict justice and the utmost liberality towards the Roman Catholic portion of
our community, I have always maintained that it was the highest interest of
the authorities of this country to maintain as nearly as possible in New South
Wales the same proportion of the population of the three kingdoms respectively
as there is at home, and that any such preponderance of the Irish Roman Catho-
lic element in our colonial field would be disastrous in the highest degree to our
best interests. With this view, when the Land Revenue was reviving and im-
migration was about to be resumed, towards the close of the year 1846, I vaca-
ted my seat in Parliament, of which I was then a member for Port Phillip or
Victoria, and proceeded once more to England to give an impulse throughout
the United Kingdom to Protestant emigration to Australia. In this work I
spent three years altogether, and in the course of that period —besides diffusing
both personally and through the press much useful information respecting these
colonies generally throughout the United Kingdom, at a very critical period in
their history, immediately before the gold discoveries in Australia—l was instru-
mental in sending out three ships laden with thorough Protestant emigrants to
Victoria, and three others to Moreton Bay or Queensland.
It will thus, doubtless, be evident that, while engaged so often and so long
in England in promoting the best interests of the colony at large, the particu-
lar ecclesiastical interests with which I was personally identified —the erection
of a manse for the minister, and the completion of the Tower and Spire of the
Scots Church—could not have been attended to and had to remain in abeyance.
If it should be asked why these objects were not accomplished at a later
period, I answer that in the year 1854 a vexatious lawsuit was instituted against
me in connection with the property of the Scots Church, in the course of which
I had to appeal, as I did successfully, to the Privy Council, in IBG2. It was
/ rnoc.
D-cn 7


•Jnrp
Hl&LlO
ff/350
N't- 4
I have the honour to remain,
Fellow Colonists and Friends,
Your devoted servant,
JOHN DUNMOIiE LANG.
then alleged by the City Architect and Engineer—when we could otherwise
have easily got the Tower and Spire of the Church erected, as we were actually
preparing to do, after my successful appeal to the Privy Council —that as the
foundation of the Tower and Spire had been found insufficient, the City Cor-
poration would not allow us, if it were pulled down, to rebuild it on the present
foundation, as it abutted on the proclaimed line of street. This, however, was
afterwards found not to be the case; but the favourable time for action having
been allowed to pass, the matter has still remained in statu quo.
Permit me then, Fellow Colonists and Friends, if I am supposed to have
deserved well of my country in these respects, to solicit my countrymen and the
public generally to lend their assistance towards the erection of a manse or
dwelling-house for my colleague and successor, and the completion of our tower
and spire on the original plan. It is not for myself that 1 thus plead, but for
the comfort of my successor and for the credit of our nation ; for it would surely
be unworthy of our Scottish nation to allow the first church of our communion
in the colony to remain any longer in its present state. The manse, which must
be erected first, will in all likelihood cost £101)0, and the tower and spire
£1500; but what are these sums to my fellow countrymen and the public gen-
erally both in town and country 1
W. Neill, Esq., J.P., Manager of the City Bank, has kindly consented to
act as treasurer of the funds to be collected.
