

ft a k Queens 3Host (Shallot! 'ffbjtstii.
TFTT? PETITION OP THE UNDERSIGNED INHABITANT HOUSEHOLDERS OP THE DISTRICT OF THE CLARENCE
AND RICHMOND RIVERS, IN THE COLONY OP NEW SOUTH WALES,
Humbly Sheweth,
1. That by the Act of the Imperial Parliament, 13th and 14th
Victoria, Chapter LIX , Section 34, it is declared that “It shall be
lawful for Her Majesty, from Time to Time, upon the Petition of
the inhabitant House-holders of any such of the Territories, in the
said recited Proviso mentioned, as lie Northward of the Thirtieth
degree of South latitude, to detach such Territories from the Co-
lony of New South Wales, and to erect such Territories into a sepa-
rate Colony or Colonies, or to include the same in any Colony or
Colonies to be established under the Powers of the last-mentioned
Act.”
2. That in the forty sixth Section of the Constitution Act of the
Legislative Council of New South Wales, which was sanctioned by
the Act of the Imperial Parliament 18th and 19th Victoria, Chapter
JilV., it is declared, in evident recognition and confirmation of this
Proviso, “ Provided always that nothing herein contained shall be
deemed’to prevent Her ‘ Majesty from altering the Boundary
of the Colony of New South Wales on the North, as to Her Majes-
ty may seem fit.”
3. That in the'Dispatch of the Right Honourable, Mr. Labou-
chere then Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, of date
“ Downing-street, 21st July, 1856,” the following paragraph oc-
curs :
“1. The Boundary between the two Provinces. On this point I have had
the valuable assistance of a Memorandum drawn up by Mr. Be as Thomson
when in England, as well as of the statements of Gentlemen interested in
the Northern Provinces. With the materials thus before them, Her Majes-
ty’s Government will have no great difficulty in fixing on a line which will
run not far to the South of the Thirtieth degree, South latitude, but will be
accommodated to suit the natural features of the countiy.
4 That at a Public Meeting, held at Armidale, in the New En-
gland District of New South Wales, on the 30th December, 1850,
certain Resolutions, of which a copy was forwarded to the Right
Honourable the Secretary of State for the Colonies, were adopted,
urging that that Entire District, or the whole Territory to the
Northward of the Thirty-second degree of South latitude, should be
included in the proposed Northern Colony.
5. That in the month of October, 1856, a petition was presented
to the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales, by " certain Ma-
gistrates-Lessees of Crown lands, and residents in the Pastoral Dis-
tricts of New England, McLeay, Gwydir, and Clarence, and the
various towns therein,” praying for the establishment of an Assize
Court at Armidale, which is situated as aforesaid in the New England
District, Thirty miles to the Southward of the Thirtieth degree of
South latitude.
6. That in that Petition, which was signed by Fifteen Hundred and
Fifty persons, it is declared by the Petitioners, that “ They do
not desire to be included in any section of the Northern Districts
which may be separated from the present Colony of New South
Wales.”
7. That although this Petition was signed by certain of the inha-
bitants of the Clarence District, and was represented and held forth
by the Parliament of New South Wales, as the deliberate and defi-
nitive opinion of the inhabitants of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers
District on the subject of their proposed separation from that Co-
lony, Your Majesty will perceive that it could not possibly be so, for
the following reasons :
Ist. The formal object of the Petition in question, was the estab-
lishment o i an Assize Court at Armidale, in which the whole of the
Petitioners, both to the Northward and to the Southward of the
Thirtieth parallel, were then equally interested.
2nd. A large majority of the persons signing that Petition, were
resident to the Southward of the Thirtieth degree of latitude, and
had therefore no right whatever, under the Act of the Imperial Par-
liament, 13th and 14th Victoria, to sign any Petition affecting the
future position of persons residing to the Northward of that paral-
lel.
3rd. The expression above recited could only refer, in the estima-
tion of the large majority of the Petitioners, to the Armidale Reso-
tions of 1850, in which it was urged that the Boundary between the
two Provinces should be struck at the Thirty-second parallel of lati-
tude.
4th. The expression above referred to was inserted in the Peti-
tion for the establishment of an Assize Court at Armidale, in an indi-
rect and surreptitious manner, for the express purpose, as your Ma-
jesty’s Petitioners firmly believe, of defeating the object of the Peti-
tioners for separation at the Thirtieth parallel; as this could never
have been effected, had the real intentions of its authors been
disclosed.
8. That as -soon as the illegitimate and unwarrantable use which
was thus made of the Petition for the establishment of an Assize
Court at Armidale was discovered, a large number of the inhabi-
tant Householders of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers District
petitioned your Majesty for separation at the Thirtieth parallel of
latitude j in accordance with the prayer of a whole
series of Petitions, commencing in the year 1851, from the inhab-
itants of Moreton Bay, who then constituted a large majority of the
inhabitant Householders to the Northward of that parallel.
9. That in consequence of certain Resoffitidns passed by the Par-
liament of New South Wales on the occasion referred to, ignoring, if
not misrepresenting, the sentiments and opinions of the inhabitants of
the Clarence and Richmond Rivers district, the Right Honourable
Mr. Labouchere was induced to change his mind on the subject of
the boundary between the Two Provinces, and to refer the matter to
the Governor-General, Sir William Denison, who had no authority
under the Act 13th and 14th Victoria to decide in any such case,
but who, nevertheless, recommended as a suitable boundary, the
Twenty-eighth parallel from the coast to the Table land of New
England, and the Twenty-ninth from thence westward; thereby in-
cluding in New South Wale*s the whole district of the Clarence and
Richmond Rivers.
10. That the Colony of Queensland was formed accordingly, with
this boundary to the Southward, during the year 1859, to .the ex-
clusion, and therefore to the great injury and loss, of your Majesty’s
Petitioners; who had an undoubted right, under the Act of Parlia-
ment, 13th and 14th Victoria, to be included in that Colony from
the first, and whose interests were consequently compromised and
sacrificed on the occasion.
11. That when His Excellency Sir William Denison recommended
the said boundary, he had never visited any part of the Territory to
the Northward of the Thirtieth parallel of latitude, and was personally
entirely unacquainted with its physical character, its wants and capa-
bilities ; and that no proper and legitimate means had ever been taken
to ascertain the sentiments and desires of the inhabitant House-
holders of this district onffhe subject of their continued connexion
with New South Wales.
12. That while there is no well-defined natural boundary, such as
there should always be between two conterminous provinces,
at the tortuous and capricious line recommended by Sir William
Denison, there is a stiongly defined natural boundary at the Thirtieth
parallel of latitude, consisting of a ridge of high laud separating the
Northern from the Southern waters, and extending from the Pacific
Ocean to the Table-land of New England ; and that this ridge is also
continuous across the said Table-land, in two conspicuous mountains,
Mount Mitchell and Mount Benlomond.
13. That the country from the said Table-land to the Pacific, to the
Southward of the Thirtieth parallel, is for upwards of a whole degree
of latitude of so exceedingly broken and impracticable a character,
that there is no intercourse whatever between the inhabitants of the
Clarence River and those of the nearest settlements of New South
Wales Proper, to the Southward of that line.
14. That the distance by the Overland Post route from Grafton, the
principal town on the Clarence River, to Sydney, the capital of New
South Wales, is four hundred and seventy miles, by a road for the
first hundred miles from the Northward exceedingly difficult and
almost impracticable ; while the distance to Brisbane, the capital of
Queensland, by a direct and easily practicable route, is only one
hundred and eighty miles.
15. That the distance to Sydney by the said Overland Post route from
Ballina, at the mouth of the Richmond River, is six hundred and
ten miles, while all the settlements on that river, from its source to
its mouth, are within a hundred miles of Brisbane.
16, That the Clarence and Richmond being both bar-mouthed
rivers, and not unfrequently impracticable, either for exit or entrance,
for days and even weeks together, it is a matter of urgent necessity
for the inhabitants of this district to have an easily and constantly
practicable communication by land with their colonial capital; but
that this, which would be of easy accomplishment if they had Bris-
bane for their capital, cannot be effected so long as they form a part
of the Colony of New South Wales.
17. That the position of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers district,
as a mere appendage of New South Wales, and situated as it is at so
great a distance from the seat of (government, is most unfortunate
for its inhabitant s. and detrimental in the highest degree to their
welfare and advat cement; as in such circumstances the district can
never have any weight in the general Legislature, and must always
be, as it has hitherto been, neglected in the apportionment of the
general revenue.


18, That in proof of this allegation, the territorial revenue from this
district, independently altogether of the revenue from Customs, has
amounted during the last three years to £BO,OOO (Eighty Thousand
Pounds), while the whole expenditure in public works and buildings
in the district has not exceeded £4OOO (Four Thousand Pounds).
19. That the superficial extent of the Colony of New South Wales,
exclusive of the whole Territory to the Northward of the Thirtieth
parallel of latitude, is, as nearly as possible, Three hundred Thousand
Square Miles, an area equal to that of all Great Britain and France
together ; and that, although this extensive area includes much barren
land, it nevertheless comprises vast tracts of land of very superior
capabilities for pasture, for agriculture, and for mining, respectively.
20. That, in the opinion of Your Majesty’s Petitioners, it is equally
unreasonable and unjust for a country of such vast extent and such
unbounded resources to endeavour to exercise domination over regions
beyond its own proper limits, and to refuse to their inhabitants the
benefits and blessings of good government, which they can never
enjoy as mere dependencies of New South Wales.
21. That the district of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers, (which
are both navigable for upwards of fifty miles for vessels of consider-
able burden), is estimated to contain a million and a half of sheep,
half a million of cattle and upwards of Twelve thousand horses ; that
it includes a comparatively large extent of land of the first quality
for agriculture, with an extensive auriferous region of great promise,
and a population of upwards of Ten Thousand souls ; and that, in the
opinion of Your Majesty’s Petitioners, the development of its vast
resources and its advancement in general wealth and prosperity would
be greatly promoted by its annexation to the Colony of Queensland.
22. That in the event of such a consummation, Your Majesty’s Peti-
tioners would humbly submit that, in order that this district may have
its proper.weight in the general Legislature, the future Northern
boundary of Queensland should be fixed from the first as nearly as
possible to the Twenty-fifth parallel of latitude, or the nearest natural
boundary between Wide Bay and Port Curtis, so as to render the
Northern and Southern limits of the Colony equidistant from the
Colonial capital; allowing in the meantime the colonists of Queens-
Grafton, Clarence River, \
September, 1860. j
land the use and occupation of the Territories still farther Northward,
till their population and resources should warrant the formation of
another Colony in that direction.
28. That whereas it is commonly alleged, as an unanswerable argu-
ment against the separation of this District from New South Wales,
that the Crown Lands of that Colony are all pledged to the Public
creditor for the payment of the Public debt of the Colony, and that
no part or portion of these lands can be separated from the said Colony
without the consent or concurrence both of the Legislature and of
the Public creditor, Your Majesty’s Petitioners would humbly sub-
mit—•
First—That no part of the Public Expenditure represented by
the Public debt of New South Wales hss ever been incurred for the
benefit of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers district.
Secondly—That, with the exception of a comparatively small
and insignificant amount, the whole of the present Public debt of
New South W ales has been contracted since the passing of the Im-
perial Act of the 13th and 14th Victoria, which authorised Your
Majesty to detach from New South Wales at any time, on the
mere Petition of the inhabitant Householders, either the whole or
any part of the Territory to the Northward of the Thirtieth parallel,
without requiring either the assent or concurrence of the Local
Legislature.
_ Thirdly—That to attempt in such circumstances to pledge any
portion of the Territory to the Northward of the Thirtieth parallel
ot latitude as a collateral security to the Public creditor, for the debt
ol New South Wales Proper, is contrary alike to equity and common
sense, if it is not tantamount to attempting to raise money on false
pretences.
Your Majesty’s Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Your
Majesty will be graciously pleased to take the premises into Your
Majesty’s favourable consideration, and to detach from New South
Wales and annex to Queensland as speedily as possible the district
of the Clarence and Richmond Rivers.
And your Majesty’s Petitioners,
' As in duty bound, will ever pray, &c,, &c., &c.
