

To the PUBLIC. The Death of Captain JAMES COOK.
T'sp FI IS great Navigator, who braved every danger, and whofe genius feemed calculated for
JL difficult refearches, had difcovered a knot of iflands, lying in north latitude 21 deg. 28 min.
eaft longitude 203 deg. 25 min. which, in compliment to his patron, the then Firft Lord of the Ad-
miralty, he called the Sandwich Iflands. One of them was named O-wye-hee; and from the ac-
counts the author collected from the gentlemen, who, during a long ftudy, did him the favour to
live and commune with him, produced every thing that could delight mankind : —They found here a
commodious and pleafing bay, fafe moorings, and a very hofpitable friendly people. On their arrival,
curiofity at feeing fuch wonderful machines, in comparifon with theirs, had drawn together near 600
canoes, with people who gave them a very cordial reception : Flere they ftaid near three weeks, during
which time they lived in uninterrupted habits of intimacy and efteem. The little barter went on
with things moft rare to each other—they received from us a variety of little trinkets, beads, &c.
but the things they appeared moft fond of, were hatchets, knives, nails, and any thing forged in the
fhape of any of their pahooes, which were of hard wood, were highly acceptable. Our great country-
man knew the fhort way to the human heart; he knew (like his fcience) how to conciliate the
tempers and difpofitions of men, whatever were their colour or complexion : —He ordered to be
forged pahooes for their Chiefs, and received from them in return cloaks, fomewhat of the toga,
form ; they were netted with delicate fine packthread, and fo interwoven with fhort and long red,
Frown, black and bright yellow feathers, with cafques, fo elegantly formed to match them,
and fo well calculated to refill: any intended injury from any weapons they knew of, that the
moft refined ages of Greece or Rome would not have gone beyond them, and, when habited in
them, could not fail of commanding attention ; for nothing could appear more noble or more mar-
tial.—Vifits on board, and the treat returned on fhore by the natives, made the time pafs lightly ;
the failors forgot their paft perils, and all was .jov. It will not be wondered at, that when the time
came to depart, to explore perilous icy latitudes, almoft every heart was fad, at leaft thofe whofe only
bufinefs was to live from day to day they were accompanied out of the Bay with every token of
departing friends, and by fome, as I have been credibly informed, with infinite regret, wifhing and
defiring to be left behind. They had failed four days, in hard blowing weather, (all hands em-
floycd in pumping and baling) in examining thefe iflands, when they found their fore-maft
"ung in two places, and which abfolutely demanded reparation, or a new one, before they ven-
’ farther; and as they might not probably find fo convenient an harbour, or fuch friends or
ience to adjuft the matter, it was judged neceffary to return to Karrakacooah Bay, which they
the feventh day.
return filled the Indians with furprife, and fome began to fufpeft the fincerity of their new
•Iheers were eredted, and the top-maft ftruck with all expedition ; and Mr. Clevely and his
*on ftiore, repairing or making new cleets to it. At the dawn of the morning they obferved
boat a-ftern had been ftolen, fuppofed for the iron that was about it. Capt. Cook defired
■ke to go on ftiore, and endeavour to recover it, or bring off the Chiefs. Clarke was in
e, and begged of the Commodore to excufe him on the account of his health, being fo
‘aft flurry would undo him. The unfortunate Cook took the command himfelf, and
boats to be manned and armed, and ftationed in different parts of the Bay, to prevent
efcaping. Mr. Bligh, the matter, was lent in the large cutter to intercept a large
1 was fired at from the fhip, and chaced by the cutter, but efcaped by running into
' of the mates, with four midlhipmen, viz. MefTrs. Charlton, Gilbert, 1 revanion
the fmall cutter, was ordered to lay off the North Point; Captain Cook, with
i nine marines, went in the pinnace to the North Town, where they landed.
Lieutenant Williams was ftationed in the launch off the North Town. When the Captain had
landed, he went into the town and enquired for Terriaboo ; he faw his two fons, who prefently con-
ducted them to his hut. Lieutenant Philips went in and found the Chief juft waking ; the Captain
invited them to go a-board the fhip, which they readily agreed to, and they went toward the water-
fide for that purpofe, where they were flopped by a woman crying, whofe hufband was killed the
preceding day in an affray, and two chiefs, who obliged Terriaboo to fit down. During this time
the natives were arming ; and while the woman was telling her tale to her king, a prieft drew off
the attention of Captain Cook, by finging a fort of hymn to him.—The Indians now came down in
great numbers, and threw an incredible number of ftones with their hands and flings.—The ma-
rines, with Lieutenant Philips, being formed upon a piece of rock, near to the water’s-edge.—The
Captain ordered them to fire ; a volley was given, and he called out to them to take to their boats.
Lieut. Philips was knocked down by one of the Indians, but recovering, while the fellow was aiming
another blow at him, Mr. Philips ftiot him dead, which caufed them for a moment to fall back, and
in that moment Capt. Philips faved himfelf by fwimming to the boat. The Captain was dreffed in a
white jacket and trowfers, and had a double-barrel gun ; he haddifeharged both, and had turned the Butt
end of it, and was defending himfelf and retreating to the pinnace, which he had juft reached, when
he received a ftab in the fhoulder by a Chief, and with an iron tuck, made him a prefent of a few days
before by the Captain. The force of the blow, and his being near the edge of the water, he
flruggled, and at laft fell. They gave a favage Ihout, ruffled into the water after him, and, taking him
by the hair of his head, plunged their daggers into his neck and breaft till he was dead. Mr, Roberts,
whofe portrait as an officer in the pinnace may be feen, ordered the boat to pulh off, taking in at
the fame time fome wounded marines, who had fled from the rock.
During this melancholy rencounter, Mr. Gore, commanding officer of the Refolution, fired great
guns upon the town ; and Mr. Lanyon, and the young gentlemen in the jolly-boat, defended, to the
utmoft in their power, their Captain; and it was with difficulty they could be perfuaded to leave their
perilous fituation. Many of the Indians were killed. Our lofs was four marines killed, and feveral
wounded. One of them was wounded with a wooden fpear, which ftruck him juft between the eyes,
and broke in his head : —The - poor fellow fuffered excruciating pain for fix weeks, when one day
holding his head over his hammock, the piece came out of itfelf, and meafured above an inch long;
the man got well, but loft one of his eyes.
No tongue can exprefs the confternation on board, when the boats returned with the lofs of this
great character,' a lofs, in which not England only, but the whole univerfe, feemed interefted—Her
Imperial Majefty of all the Ruffias paid him every attention, and caufed his difpatches from Kamf-
chatka, to be conveyed over her immenfe territory fafely to England. —And, to the eternal glory of
the French Court, they alfo, in the midft of war, ordered all cruilers, of whatever clafs or order,
bearing their flag, to refpedt thefe fons of peril, and not only to fuffer them to pafs unmolefted, but
to fhew them every attention, and to fuccour them, to the utmoft of their power, flrould they fall in
their way.
Columbus, Vafco de Gama, Americo Vefpucci, Magellan, Davis, Van Dieman, Drake, Raleigh,
Dampier and Berens; Lord Anfon, Byron and Bougainville, Wallis and Lord Mulgrave had tran-
fcendent merit as navigators, went through innumerable difficulties, and explored much!—But Cook
reduced navigation and the prefervation of his men to a certainty, and three times circumnavigated
the world !—when, returning to his native home, that longed to enfold him, after fruitlefsly at-
tempting to find the north-weft and north-eaft paffages, and a voyage of four years, he met this un-
happy cataftrophe ; and where is the breaft that does not heave a figh at the misfortune ?
Entered at the Stationers Hall,
