

Q 0 32 lii i*i Lsi □
OF THE
msimim patristic association
Gentlemen,
In the Australian of the 29th ultimo, are contained
sundry comments upon a subject which has excited
the attention of a large body of the Public, and
caused much discusrion, more particularly among
the Members of the “ Australian Patriotic Associa-
tion” The subject alluded to, is that of the appoint-
ment of the Secretary to Mr. Bulwer, —whether it
should emanate from the Society, or be left to the
nomination of that Gentleman himself.
As a question of so much importance cannot be
too well discussed and considered, a question upon
which in a great degree hinges the future success
of your Association, as regards the attainment of
those objects which you have in view,—it becomes
the duty of every man having an interest in its wel-
fare, to express his opinion upon the matter.
According generally in the views taken by the
fi Australian” upon this subject as being the most
popular—namely, that the choice of a fce« retary
should be left to Mr. Bulwer, but that the Colonists
should be at liberty to recommend an individual to
that office, yet there are one or two material and
weighty reasons why the Association should hold and
exercise the right of that appointment.
It is not a Secretary to the individual that is re-
quired, but a Secretary to the Colonists , —one, who
from local knowledge, can understand and explain
members of Parliament unconnected with Downing
Street, but who from private sources have received
equally erroneous impressions on matters affecting
ihis Colony, and have given utterance to them, which
have obtained full credence accordingly,—and which
from remaining uncontradicted, have had the most
injurious effects upon this community.
Can your Directing Committee by inspiration or
divination anticipate similar unfounded assertions
which failing from the lips of a Minister of the Crown
or one whoso station is supposed to possess authority,
produces consequences the most detrimental to the
Colony? Can they be supposed to foresee every
measure that may originate which in some indirect
manner may be most prejudicial to the mercantile or
agricultural interests of the colonists ? A clause sud-
denly introduced into a Customs Act may pass into a
law, that may impose a duty on our Oils or Wools, or
our Timber, &c. which would effectually stagnate
our trade, and this may transpire without the know-
ledge of the. Parliamentary Advocate unless his at-
tention should be specially directed to the subject.
But on the other hand, it is said that snch an oc-
currence could not happen with an intelligent Mem-
ber of Parliament as our Colonial Agent. Gentlemen
resident out of the Metropolis, and not interested in
parliamentary proceedings beyond reading the de-
bates, but more particularly gentlemen of this colony.
their wants and their circnmstances : for although it i are tofa ßy unacquainted with the mode of proceeding
is intended that your Committee in this Colony shall, i m that assembly even in the most unimportant
from time to time, communicate their grievances and j mea sures.
privations to their Parliamentary Advocate, yet will ! . The y conceive that they have only to send a Pe-
it follow that a thousand questions will, and must ( tltion to a Member tor presentation, praying for trial
aid be- by jury or a representative assembly, with probably
ouse of a draft of the act or bill for the purpose, and that he
satis- ma l {es his speech, lays the bill and petition upon
lumen- table of «he house, and forthwith (if approved,)
and be ; prayer is granted and their bill becomes ihe law
sudden °fthe land. They confound the duties of a parlia-
robably meil tary agent with those of a member of parliament,
ommit- their duties are as distinct as the offices of
such a at,orn cy and judge. It is the duty of the former to
on ap- procure members to support the bill when presented ;
to watch over it in all its stages from its printing to
t them ds receiving the royal assent —to be present ac all the
he pre- Committees upon it—to procure evidence in support
t. He measures on which the several clauses are
itradic- framed, it sent to a committee up stairs—to prepare
[ which briefs for counsel, to be heard before such committee—
arise from those very communications when laid be-
fore the Secretary of State, or before the House of
Commons, which will require immediate and satis-
factory replies. In the next place, the Parliamen-
tary Advocate'will have to guard against, and be
provided with ready information to meet, a sudden
attack from his opponents on points that probably
will never have been contemplated by your Commit-
tee in their correspondence. To whom in such a
case would he have recourse?—His London ap-
pointed Secretary ?
If the Association require an example, let them
read Lord Howick’s reply to Mr. Bulwer, on the pre-
sentation of the last petition to Parliament. He
therein made numerous assertions in direct contradic-
tion to those adduced in the Petition itself, and which
were so adduced on the authority of no less than four
thousand signatures ! His Lordship, moreover, took
so wide a range of debate to arouse the feelings,
whore he could nol convince the judgment, that he
descended from argument to personalities and im-
posed on the head of one respectable Colonist at
least, a denunciation as cruel as it was uncalled for.
In such a case, what could an Advocate like i\Jr.
Bulwer, with his uninformed and “ uninterested”
assistant do to meet with the cheer which that sentence
appears to have been received ? Astounded and mor-
tified he could only plead ignorance, and beg th ■
Members of the House to suspend their opinions
until a reference should he made to his constituents
in Sydney.
Take another instance from the same speech,—viz :
that the high duty on Spirits was more a moral than
a fiscal tax, to prevent its baneful consumption;
•whereas the duty on Tobacco he could not defend.
FI ad there been an accredited agent on the spot, to
whom Lord Howick would have known Mr. Bulwer
could have appealed, his Lordship would have hesi-
tated before he ventured on such fallacious positions.
But none other than such an agent, versed in our
colonial policy, could Lave dared to offer a denial to
them, and one not warmed in the cause, beyond the
mere mercenary consideration of his salary, would
scarcely have deemed a reply necessary.
Take other instances of his Lordships misrepre-
sentations, such as the following;—
That the grand subject of dissension between the
Government and the Emancipists was, as to their
xio-ht of admission to the Balls at Government House.
That the Emancipist body greatly exceeded the
free born and emigrants; —
That the Emancipists were always disposed to
annoy the Government.
That the cause of quarrels principally amongst the
Islands of the Pacific arose from runaway convicts
inciting the inhabitants to make war with each other.
Independently of these “ Official” mistatements,
let the Association review the speeches delivered by
to secure an attendance of members in its several
stages sufficient to form a house, lest its opponents
might manoeuvre its annihilation by delay, or throw
it out by majorities in committee—in shor it is he
duty of a parliamentary agent, to take the whole bur-
then upon his shoulders, whilst the member of par
liaraent is merely its advocate, and like a barrister in
a common law suit, becomes the mouth-piece or his
client. The agent likewise pays all those essential
fees, without which nothing can be effected; and in
return, his “Sessions Bill” to his emploversfor pro-
curing its enactment, will amount from £l,OOO to as
much as £30,000 —which was the sum charged to the
Birmingham Railway Petitioners for the expences of
their bill to parliament. Does the associa ion ima-
gine that these various duties can be performed by a
mere clerk? Do they suppose that a man acting in
that capacity, solely, could inlluence any member of
parliament to espouse the cause ol this colony- or
that such a person would be even admitted to his
presence? Do they consider themselves so unim-
portant a political body, as not to require a “Colonial
Secretary” to assist their parliamentary advocate ?
Or, are they likely to be so well provided with funds
as io be enabled to employ a regular parliamentary
agent ?
But independently of these considerations, there
ar* numerous others arising out of the question, as
to the necessity of the appointment of an accredited
agent or secretary from this colony to assist Mr.
Bulwer, which cannot be answered either on the
plea of its being a “ deference due to him in allow-
ing him the nomination that he “ will be du'y in-
formed on ever necessary measure—or that too much
power would be delivered into the hands of one per-
son as has been manitained. But these must he
deferred to another opportunity when (by permis-
sion) you may be put in possession of them,
m ~
I . V
From your obedient servant,
X. Y. Z.
Sydney, 4 th July, 183 5,
