

TOBACCO MANUFACTURE
IN AUSTRALIA
BY
THE SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES OF
BRITISH TOBACCO Co.(AUST.) LTD.
WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF
BRITISH TOBACCO Co. (AUST.) LTD.
SYDNEY. AUSTRALIA.
1926




TOBACCO MANUFACTURE
IN AUSTRALIA
BY
THE SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES OF
BRITISH TOBACCO COMPANY (AUSTRALIA) LTD.
PUBLISHED BY
BRITISH TOBACCO COMPANY (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED
SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA
19 2 6


Foreword
m O many requests have of late been received from Shareholders in
'British Tobacco Company (oAustralia) Limited for particulars of
the 'various Benefit Schemes in force that the ‘Directors have thought
it an opportune moment, particularly as the Company has recently
completed its 21st anniversary, to have this cAlbum prepared so as
cMy to give to Shareholders and others “who may be interested some
information in regard to the conditions under ■which the Employees of the
Subsidiary Companies carry on this large and important Tobacco manufacturing
industry.


Introduction
?0 make the position clear to those who are not Shareholders, it
should be explained that British Tobacco Company (Australia) Limited,
the Head Office of which is situated at 267-271 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney, and which was incorporated in England in the year 1904, is
not a Trading Company, but holds and owns shares in four Trading
Companies, namely, The British - Australasian Tobacco Company
Proprietary Limited, W. D. 3C H. O. Wills (Australia) Limited, The
States Tobacco Company Proprietary Limited, and S. T. Leigh 6c Company
Limited.
Raleigh Park, which is situate at Kensington, about 3 miles from the Sydney
G.P.0., comprises some 35 acres, and is the largest centre of the Tobacco
Manufacturing Industry in New South Wales.


FACTORIES AND OFFICES:
THE Factories and Offices of the various Subsidiary Companies are situated
as follows: —
RALEIGH PARK, KENSINGTON, SYDNEY:
1. The British-Australasian Tobacco Company Proprietary, Ltd.:
Tobacco Factory and General Office.
2. W. D. &H. O. Wills (Australia) Limited:
(a) Tobacco Factory and General Office.
(b) Cigarette Factory.
3. The States Tobacco Company Proprietary Limited;
Cigar Factory.
4. S. T. Leigh & Company Limited:
(a) Printing Factory and General Office.
(b) Tin Factory.
267-277 CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY:
5. W. D. &H. O. Wills (Australia) Limited:
Cigarette Factory and General Office.


MAIN ENTRANCE TO RALEIGH PARK, SHOWING OFFICES AND FACTORY OF
THE BRITISH-AUSTRA LASIAN TOBACCO COMPANY PROPRIETARY LIMITED


A’BECKETT STREET, MELBOURNE:
6. The British-Australasian Tobacco Company Ppty. Ltd.:
Tobacco Factory and General Office.
7. The States Tobacco Company Proprietary Limited:
Cigar Factory and General Office.
The wholesale selling organisation is undertaken by W. D. & H. O.
Wills (Australia) Limited, which has its own separate warehouses and trained
staffs for this purpose.
The Sales Branches are situated as follows:
NEW SOUTH WALES:
Corner of Kent & Bathurst Streets, Sydney.
VICTORIA:
411-423 Swanston Street, Melbourne.
QUEENSLAND:
99-105 Edward Street, Brisbane.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA:
83-91 Waymouth Street, Adelaide.
WEST AUSTRALIA:
361-365 Murray Street, Perth.
At the present time there are approximately 5,000 persons employed
by the above-mentioned Companies.


Private Road showing on right W. D. & H. O. Wills (Australia) Ltd. " Cigarette ”
Factory; on left (1) W. D. & H. O. Wills (Australia) Ltd. "Tobacco” Factory;
(2) S. T. Leigh &C Company Limited "Tin” Factory; at the end S. T. Leigh dC Company
Limited "Printing” Factory.


Encouragement is given to all Employees to devote their whole
energies to forwarding the interests of the Company, and it is open for every
man in the business to qualify for a managerial position. In this connection,
it should be mentioned that it is the policy of British Tobacco Company
(Australia) Ltd. and its Subsidiary Companies to appoint as Directors only
those who hold, or have held, responsible executive positions in the business.
The wisdom of this course has been amply proved. Quite apart from the
advantages gained by having as Directors those who possess an intimate
knowledge of the business —it has the further advantage that having them-
selves been Employees, they are able to appreciate the aims and objects
of their fellow Employees, and are more likely to have a sympathetic insight
into their needs than a stranger.
In their attitude towards the Employees, the Directors have been
guided by consideration of what scientific management demands under
existing social conditions; in other words, the Employees, while being paid
the full current standard rate of wages, have, in addition, been given an
opportunity of improving their conditions of life—of providing for old age,
and of obtaining a direct financial interest in the business. At the same time,


THE BRITISH-AUSTRALASIAN TOBACCO COMPANY PROPRIETARY LIMITED
FACTORY IN SWANSTON ST., MELBOURNE


the Directors have endeavoured, as far as possible, to avoid anything which
would sap the self-reliance and individuality of the Employees.
On looking back over the years during which the various Benefit
Schemes referred to hereafter have been in operation, it is felt that the
results achieved have been well worth the time and money expended on
them.
Quite apart from the material benefits which the Employees have
obtained from the Benefit Schemes —and which have made for a more con-
tented spirit amongst Employees, with a resultant greater efficiency—the
Management and the Employees have, as a result of the working out of the
Schemes, been brought almost unconsciously into a closer personal relation-
ship, which has made for a wider comprehension and a better understanding
of each other’s point of view.


W. D. & H. O. WILLS (AUSTRALIA) LTD., BATHURST AND KENT STS., SYDNEY


BENEFIT SCHEMES
The following Benefit Schemes are now in force with the above-men-
tioned Companies:—
LODGE SUBSIDY AND SICK PAY.
All Employees are encouraged to join a Lodge, the Company paying
one-half of the contribution for Sick, Funeral and Medical Benefits. In
addition to this, the Company grants Sick Pay for a period not exceeding
30 working days in any 12 months to Employees who are financial members
of a Registered Friendly Society, and also to those Employees who can
produce evidence that they have been refused admission to a Registered
Friendly Society. Should the Employee be ill for a longer period than 30
days, or should the Employee be unable to produce evidence of having been
refused admission to a Friendly Society, the matter is brought up for con-
sideration, and each case is dealt with by the Directors on its merits.
Female qualified nurses are employed at each Factory, and are in
charge of a First Aid Dispensary and Rest Room, where minor urgent cases
are attended to. It is also one of the duties of the nurses to keep in touch
with any Employees who are absent through sickness.


W. D. & H. O. WILLS (AUSTRALIA) LIMITED, "SALES” BRANCH, SWANSTON ST., MELBOURNE


LUNCHEON ROOM AND INDUSTRIAL CANTEEN.
Properly equipped Dining Rooms have been established at the various
Factories, where luncheon and other refreshments are obtainable. The
Management of the Kitchen and Dining Room is in the hands of a Manager,
appointed by the Company, and a Committee appointed by the Employees.
The Company provides the Dining Room, the plant, utensils, and all sundries
other than food, and, in addition, pays a subsidy towards the cost of the meals
A hot or cold three course meal is served at midday, or a cup of tea, or milk,
or soft drinks are served in the Dining Room to those who prefer to bring
their own lunch. In addition, there is a Tuck Shop and Soda Fountain, where
light refreshments can be obtained.
The charges for a Hot Three Course Meal, or Cold Luncheon, as pre-
ferred, vary from 3s. to 3s. 6d. per week of five days, or, approximately, Bd.
per meal.
EDUCATIONAL CLASSES.
FOR FEMALES.
A Female Welfare Officer, who devotes the whole of her time to
various welfare activities, is employed by the Company. Classes are held in


FIRST AID, DISPENSARY, AND REST ROOM


Dressmaking, Millinery, Cooking, First Aid, Life Saving, and Physical
Culture.
FOR BOYS.
In order to aid the boys between the ages of 14 and 18 years, who are
compelled to leave school early, educational classes are held at the Factory
during working hours, without any deduction from the boys’ wages. A whole-
time tutor is employed for this purpose, and the boys receive one hour’s tuition
each day in class. Instruction is given in English Literature, History, Econo-
mics, Arithmetic, Geography, and general subjects. The general aims of the
Scheme are to enlarge the boy’s outlook by encouraging (a) systematic study
and the acquisition of useful knowledge, (b) the reading of good literature,
thereby creating an interest in as wide a knowledge of general subjects as
possible, (c) the exchange of views by frequent discussions and debates, and
(d) the development of powers of organisation and self-reliance through the
various Sports Clubs and Social Evenings formed and managed by the boys.
LIBRARIES.
There are Libraries of standard works in constant use. The charge
to subscribers is Is. deposit and 3d. per month.


STAFF DINING ROOM


SPORTS CLUBS.
The following Sport Clubs have been organised, and are managed by
the Employees: —Tennis Club, Basket Ball Club, Swimming Club, Cricket
Club (Senior and Junior), Football Club (Senior and Junior), Bowling Club,
and Horticultural Society.
PROFIT SHARING.
Adult Male and Female Employees, who have had two years’ continuous
service, and Boys and Girls under 21 years of age, who have had four years’
continuous service, are eligible to participate in this Scheme. Sums have in
the past been set aside each year out of profits and handed to the
Trustees for the purpose of purchasing Ordinary Shares in British
Tobacco Company (Australia) Ltd. At the same time, a list contain-
ing the names of those Employees who are to participate, and the
amount in which each is to benefit, based on wages earned, is handed to the
Trustees. After the yearly allocation of shares, the Trustees issue Participa-
tion Certificates to the Employees participating. The rights attached to a
Participation Certificate are set out in the Trust Deeds. The Ordinary Shares
held by the Trustees on behalf of Participants carry the same dividend as the
other Ordinary Shares, and the dividends received by the Trustees in respect


RECREATION GROUND


thereof are paid annually by the Trustees to the holders of Participation Certi-
ficates.
The objects which the Directors had in view when they brought this
Scheme into force were to provide a fund for old age, and also to give
Employees an active interest in the business,
HOUSING.
The House Building Scheme has been framed on the lines of what is
commonly known as the Credit Foncier System.
Homes adjacent to the Raleigh Park Works are being built for married
male employees by the Company at Kensington. The idea is to form a Garden
Suburb, with a Recreation Ground in the centre, so as to afford plenty of
fresh air and out-of-door recreation for both parents and children.
A deposit of 4 per cent, is required to be paid by the Employee, the
balance being advanced by the Company at 4 per cent, per annum. Repay-
ments are spread over optional periods, ranging from 21 to 29 years, accord-
ing to the table chosen by the Employee.


EMPLOYEES’ DINING ROOM




COTTAGES BUILT AT RALEIGH PARK UNDER THE COMPANY’S HOUSING SCHEME


Table 1, which is usually chosen, provides for repayments of 2s, 4<l.
per week for each iIOO borrowed over approximately 29 years, and this
amount covers both interest and capital.
As this Scheme has been introduced solely for the benefit of Employees
of the Company, they are precluded from selling until the period of 21 or 29
years, as the case may be, has expired, and the Purchase Agreement is deter-
minable on the happening of certain events. In the event, however, of the
Agreement for Purchase being determined, provision is made for a return of
the instalments of the purchase money actually paid at that date, subject to
the Employee having observed all the terms of the Agreement. In the
event of the Purchase Agreement being completed, the house becomes
the freehold property of the Employee.
In Melbourne it is not necessary for the Employee to build in any par-
ticular district. Practically, the only restrictions are that the house must be
of brick or concrete, and on a well-drained allotment of sufficient area to
insure plenty of fresh air and ample room for healthy out-of-door recreation
for both parents and children.


SPECIMEN COTTAGE BUILT AT RALEIGH PARK UNDER THE COMPANY'S HOUSING SCHEME


LIFE ASSURANCE SCHEME.
1. FOR MALE EMPLOYEES.
This Scheme is open to all Male Employees of 21 years of age and
over, who have been in the service of the Company for 2 years. In the case
of Employees whose wages are less than £364 per annum, the Company pays
the whole of the yearly premium or weekly sum, and in the case of Em-
ployees whose wages range from £364 to £520 per annum, the Company pays
one- half of the yearly premium or weekly sum, and the Employee pays the
other half.
The Scheme comprises the following:—
(1) Endowment Assurance.
(2) Savings Bank Trust Accounts for Employees who are refused
or deferred.
(3) Savings Bank Trust Account for Employees who are over 55
years of age.
1. ENDOWMENT ASSURANCE.
The Assurance is effected with the A.M.P. Society, and the Company
pays the whole of the premium in the case of Employees receiving less than


A PRESS ROOM


£364 per annum, and one-half thereof in the case of Employees receiving
from £364 to 1520 per annum. The amount of the Policy, together with
bonuses, is payable to the Assured at 60 if the policy is taken out before the
Assured is 39 years of age, and at 65 if taken out subsequently, or to his
executors or administrators at his death, whichever event first happens. By
this means, not only is provision made for the Assured’s old age, but also for
those dependent upon him should he die before the Policy matures. The
approximate cash values of the policies at maturity range from £595 to £528
if taken out between the ages of 21 and 39, and from £454 to £202 if taken out
between the ages of 40 and 55.
2. SAVINGS BANK TRUST ACCOUNT FOR EMPLOYEES WHO
ARE REFUSED OR DEFERRED.
As it cannot be expected that in such a large body of men all will pass
the medical test, this Scheme was devised so that those Employees who are
deferred for a period by the A.MAP. Society, or whose lives the A.M.P.
Society refuses to insure for health reasons, shall receive from the Company
as much consideration as those Employees who are accepted for insurance.


A STEMMING ROOM


Under this Scheme individual Trust Accounts are opened at the
Government Savings Bank, and the Company pays every week into such
accounts an amount equivalent to that paid by the Company for an Employee
of the same age who is insured. A separate Pass Book is issued for each
Employee’s account, and such Pass Book is retained by the Company, and
will be produced for inspection at any reasonable time during' business hours.
The amount standing to the credit of the Savings Bank Trust Account,
together with accumulated interest, is payable to the Employee at the age of
60 or 65 years, according to the age at which he enters the Scheme, or to his
Executors or Administrators should he previously die.
3. SAVINGS BANK TRUST ACCOUNT FOR EMPLOYEES WHO
ARE OVER 55 YEARS OF AGE.
On account of the very heavy premium, it was found impracticable to
insure the lives of Employees who were over the age of 55 years when this
Scheme was started. It was desired, however, that they should receive from
the Company as much consideration as the other Employees, and accordingly
this Scheme was arranged for them.


A COVERING DEPARTMENT


Individual Trust Accounts are opened at the Government Savings Bank
as described above in the case of No. 2, and the Company pays into such
accounts the sum of 7s. per week, which earns interest at the Savings Bank
current rate.
The amount standing to the credit of the Savings Bank Trust Account,
together with accumulated interest, is payable to the Employee on his leaving
the service of the Company, after the expiration of four years from the
opening of the account, or to his Executors or Administrators should he
previously die.
SAVINGS BANK TRUST ACCOUNT.
2. FOR FEMALE EMPLOYEES.
This Scheme is open to all Female Employees of 30 years of age and
over, who have been continuously for ten years in the service of the Company,
and whose wages do not exceed £260 a year.
Individual Trust Accounts are opened at the Government Savings
Bank as described above, and the Company pays each week into such
accounts a certain sum, the amount of which depends upon the age of the
Employee at the date of entering the Scheme, and ranges from Is, 6d. to ss.
per week.


A PACKING ROOM




CARTON MAKING DEPARTMENT IN PRINTING FACTORY


The amount standing to the credit of the Savings Bank Trust Account,
together with accumulated interest, is payable to the Employee on her attain-
ing the age of 55 years, or to her Executors or Administrators should she
previously die.
GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANK SCHEME.
All Employees are encouraged to open Savings Bank Accounts, and
to facilitate Employees making deposits, a Branch of the Government Savings
Bank has been established on the premises. There are two Schemes in
operation:—
1. Under this Scheme the Company adds \ per cent, to the interest
allowed by the Bank on deposits. There is no limit in this case to
the amount which may be deposited, except as provided by the Bank
Regulations.
2. In addition to the above Scheme there is a further, or supplemental
Scheme, under which the Company subsidises whatever rate of
interest may be paid from time to time by the Savings Bank by
an additional per cent., subject to the amount deposited in each
year by an Employee not exceeding £52.
