

C'l|iim(in; nf lifanufarhirco
(INCORPORATED).
TOBACCO CULTURE
AND
CURING.
ROBERT DIXSON, ESQ., MR,
Read before the Chamber of Manufactures, Adelaide,
On 27t'h September, 1883.
guUlnirtc:
CAREY & PAGE, PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET.
1883.




€(iamlm; of ijfamifattuws
(INCOEPOEATED).
TOBACCO CULTURE
CURING
A PAPER BY
ROBERT DIXSOX, ESQ, MR,
Read befobe the Chambee of Manufactures, Adelaide,
On 27 th September, 1883.
glddaide:
CAEEY k PAGE, PRINTERS, WAYMOUTH STREET.




CULTURE OF TOBACCO.
-< >-
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
As I have noticed that this Chamber does not confine
itself merely to the consideration of the best methods of fostering
products and manufactures, but has also at times had regard to
•other subjects bearing upon the welfare of the people, I should
have liked to have dealt with Tobacco, not merely from an agricul-
tural stand-point, but to have given some consideration to the
medical and sanitary bearings of the question, and to discuss the
often-debated point as to whether tobacco was a great blessing or
■a great curse to the world ; and I venture to think that the evidence
I could have adduced on this point would have shown conclusively
Divine Providence, in permitting the introduction of tobacco
from America to Europe, at a critical time in the history of the
world, had placed in the hands, or perhaps to speak more correctly,
in the mouths of its greatest thinkers and its hardest toilers a
remedial agent which has proved to be one of the greatest comforts
•ever bestowed on humanity, and one which has largely contributed
to the production of that sound mind in a sound body the “ maxi-
mum bonum,” for which philosophers in all ages of the world have
sought. But the time allotted for the reading and discussion of
papers before this Chamber is all too short to allow of much
•divergence from my actual text; “ The Culture of Tobacco/’
THE HISTORY OP TOBACCO.
The “weed,” as it is improperly called, received its generic
name from John Nicol, ambassador of France, at the Court of
Portugal, who obtained some seeds from an adventurous Dutchman
who had visited Florida, which now forms one of the United
States. He presented the first plant grown in Europe to Catherine
de la Medici, and tobacco was known for a long time in France as
the Queen’s plant. It was introduced to England in 1586, by
Ralph Lane, and smoking was first practised by Sir Walter Raleigh,
the favourite of Queen Elizabeth, who had the good taste to sit
•out a pipe smoked by the elegant Raleigh, who sat beside her
philosophically discoursing on the virtues of tobacco. In the
course of the disquisition, Raleigh undertook for a wager to show the
weight of the smoke emitted from his pipe. The Queen promptly
look the bet, whereupon Raleigh, having weighed a pipeful before
/9 s oq


applying a light, and having smoked it, put the ashes in a scale
and by a simple process of subtraction solved the enigma. The
witty Queen, in paying the wager, remarked in allusion to the
alchemists (then very numerous) “ many labourers in the fire have
I heard of who turned their gold into smoke, but Raleigh is the
first who has turned smoke into gold.” Though interdicted by
King James I. of England, of whom it was written—
“ Here lies our sovereign Lord the King,
Whose word no man relied on;
Ho never said a foolish thing,
And never did a wise one ; ”
though the Czar of Russia made smoking a penal offence,
rendering those who indulged in it liable first to the knout, then
to the loss of the nose, and finally to capital punishment; though
Pope Urban Till, f ulminated a decree of excommunication against
all who took snuff in churches; though the Swiss canton of Apenfell
bracketed smokers with adulterers; though the Priests and Sultans
of Persia and Turkey declared smoking a sin against their holy
religion, all efforts to stay the mighty invader were fruitless, and
the use, and I might almost add, the cultivation of tobacco have
spread over nearly all the habitable portion of the world. The
tobacco plant belongs to the order of Solanacece, or nightshades, to
which also pertain the potato, the egg plant, and the tomato.
Louden, in his Encyclopaedia of Plants, enumerates fourteen different
species of tobacco, but only two are generally cultivated : Nicotiana
Tohacun or American Tobacco, and Nicotiana Rustica, which is
generally cultivated in Asia.
Tobacco is cultivated in America, in the Dominion of Canada,
the United States, Mexico, and in most of the West India Islands.
In Africa, it is grown from Algeria, in the extreme north, to the
Cape of Good Hope, in the extreme south. In Europe, it is an
important agricultural product in Hungary, Germany, Elanders, and
France. In Asia, it has spread over Turkey, Persia, India, China,
Thibet, Japan, and it is a valuable factor in the prosperity of the
Phillipine Islands, whence come Manilla cigars, and in Sumatra,
Java, and Ceylon. It was introduced into Australia soon after the
settlement of this continent by Europeans, the cultivation being
commenced by some of the early settlers on the Hunter River, in
Xew South Wales. But although its culture in that neighbourhood
has been continued ever since, and although heavy yields per acre
are garnered there, the tobacco is of a very inferior description,
and created such a prejudice amongst smokers as materially to
impede the success of factories in that colony. Having taken some
pains to import seed of a more reliable description than the U. S. Wales
growers had been using, to direct them as to the best methods of
cultivating and curing, and what was of still greater importance to per-
suade them to seek localities —the climate and soil of which were more
congenial to the production of a merchantable article, I succeeded
in giving an impetus to the industry, which there is every reason


to believe will result not only in the ultimate exclusion of foreign
growths, but in the conversion of colonial leaf into a staph; export.
My acquaintance with tobacco growing in the colony of
Victoria dates from 1869, when I settled in Melbourne and opened
a factory. During the American war, when the only tobacco
obtainable was very dear and most of it very mouldy, vigorous
efforts were made to stimulate the production of the plant.
Innumerable articles appeared in the agricultural press. All sorts
of methods of cultivation and curing, but the right ones, were dis-
cussed and recommended ; and although at one time the production
reached 300 tons in a single year, it was such vile rubbish as to
bring calamity on every manufacturer who used it. In 1870 the
growth had fallen to about 20 tons, when I was induced to give the
matter my attention, and, by pursuing the same methods as those I
had adopted in Hew South Wales, so large a measure of success
was achieved, that at the present time Victoria is in a position to
dispense with supplies from America.
Shortly after opening business in South Australia, I was
requested by the proprietors of the Observer to furnish them with
a series of articles upon tobacco growing, and I offered a premium
for the best sample of tobacco leaf, but up to the present time
no tangible good has resulted, and I have not seen any tobacco
grown in this colony which it would be prudent for me to attempt
to manufacture.
It may be as well to premise that unless farmers here can
produce an article approximating in quality to what is grown in
America, and smoked in the pipe in South Australia, it would only
be a waste of time, labour, and money to enter upon the experi-
ment; and having traversed the colony from Adelaide to Harracoorte,
to Morgan, the Burra, Wallaroo, and Kangaroo Island, I have not
seen any land which will produce the article required. The two
principal varieties of tobacco may be best described as pipe
tobacco and cigar tobacco; they require different climates, different
soils, and different cultivation. The quantity of cigar tobacco
consumed in this colony is so small as scarcely to render it worth
consideration. I may, however, say that cigar tobacco may be
sub-divided into tropical and extra-tropical. The tropical is
mostly grown on islands, the proximity of the sea being
advantageous rather than pernicious to its growth. The extra-
tropical cigar leaf is generally of inferior quality, its principal
value arising from its silky texture, which makes it useful as a
wrapper on the outside of a cigar to cover the finer flavored
tobacco which is put inside. In the United States it has been
found that pipe tobacco of good quality can only be produced at
a considerable distance from the sea coast, and behind the mountain
ranges which shut out the interior from the maritime districts. All
the good tobacco used in the Sydney factories is grown 100 miles
from the sea coast, and the area of available suitable land in
Victoria commences on the north side of the Macedon Ranges.


The general rule laid down in the United States is, that when-
ever maize can he grown pipe tobacco will thrive; but although
maize succeeds admirably in X. S. Wales on the alluvial flats of
the river Hunter and its tributaries, and although tobacco as a
plant flourishes vigorously in that district, when manufactured it is
found to be so rank and acrid in taste, and so hot to the tongue,
that it is vulgarly known as “ Knock me Down.” In the United
States tobacco is generally grown on alluvial flats, or on the uplands
immediately adjoining them. In Virginia, the river bottom, as it
is called, is generally devoted to maize, the adjoining plateau to the
dark tobacco, which is seen here in flat cakes, and figs of negro-
head twist; the hill sides, which are poorer and give but a small
return to the acre, are generally planted with a variety known as
Aromatic, or Virgin Gold Leaf, the delight of the connoiseur, who
cheerfully gives a price which atones for the smallness of the yield
per acre and the great care and labour involved in curing. In the
Western States, which produce the greater part of the tobacco con-
sumed in and exported from that country, the river bottoms, or, as
we shoidd call them, alluvial flats, are preferred to the higher
ground, and in Victoria and X. S. Wales tobacco land is nearly
always alluvial deposit.
Choice of Soil. —The delicacy and slowness of growth of the
plant in its earlier stages demand a soil which can be nicely and
evenly worked; ultimately vigorous it thrives best on ground con-
taining a large quantity of decomposed vegetable and animal
matter, and the analysis of tobacco shows the necessity for the
abundant presence of alkaline matters, such as may be found in
virgin soil. In the northern and eastern states of America very
heavy crops are grown on manured land, but in the southern and
■western, which produce the article loved by smokers here, new or
nearly new is preferred, and manure is dispensed with. In
sparsely-populated districts such a choice is inevitable. Choose a
rich loamy soil with just sand enough to keep it open; “ warm,
deep, rich,” constitute the growers’ sine qua non If your land
has not been previously cleared burn your timber and scatter the
ashes. A rank soil will not do ; the crop will be strong and acid,
and will burn the tongue. In an exposed situation the leaf will be
broken and useless for outer wrappers. It is not customary in
Virginia to grow more than three crops on the same land, of these
the second is best. An old sheep pasture is a gift to the grower.
Preparation of the Soil. —Grass land intended for tobacco
should be ploughed the previous autumn ; indeed all kinds of land
are improved by being turned over as early in autumn as possible,
before the winter sets in. If this cannot be managed plough
early in spring.
Seed Bed. —Choose rich virgin loam with a little sand; a river
flat or a plot by the side of a small stream is the best-—-you will
need the -water. Clear your ground and grub the roots. Cover the
plot thickly with brush and burn it with a strong fire, the hotter the


better. Well burnt ground will raise plants when the same ground
not burnt will fail; where there has been little fire your plants will
be sickly. When the ground gets cool sweep away the coals, but
not the ashes. Break it up 2to 3 inches deep with grubbing hoes,
till it is fine and loose, raking off all the clods. Don’t turn the
surface under; lay it off in beds 4 feet wide, a little elevated if
dry, more if moist and wet. A teaspoonful of home-raised
(colonial) seed or double the quantity of imported should do for
every 25 square yards, and give 2,500 good plants. Mix every
teaspoonful of seed with half a gallon of fine ashes and sow in
two operations, crossing at right angles. Aiter sowing, the ground
must be trodden over closely with the feet and covered thick with
naked brush. If the frost is severe take off the brush a month
after sowing, sift manure (fowls’ dung is best) through a coarse
basket or riddle and replace the brush, which must not be taken
away again till the heavy frosts are over and the leaves of the
plants half an inch in diameter. The beds must now be weeded.
In dry seasons the beds must be irrigated or watered every
evening with a watering pot having a fine rose.
Time for Serving, —Victorian farmers seem to have followed
no settled rule. One gentleman in Gippsland, unable to raise his
plants early enough, sowed in June. How he was to protect them
from winter frosts he did not say. He had either not burnt his
ground or burned it insufficiently. On the Murray a good crop
has been raised from seed sown in October. A safe rule is to sow
six weeks before spring frosts leave off, in average seasons the
beginning of August is about the time.
Transplanting.—Lay off your field into ridges 3 to 3|- feet from
centre to centre ; a single horse plough is best, to prevent the ridges
being trodden by the off horse. Cross the ground at the same dis-
tance. It is safest to wait for rain before transplanting. In wet
weather all that requires to be done is to cut off the top of the hill
and plant like cabbage. In dry weather transplanting must be
left till the evening, and when the top of the hill is cut off a hole
must be made, and a pint of water poured in. Press the earth
close to the root right down to the bottom. If the weather con-
tinues dry, water early in the morning and in the evening. Some
plants are sure not to strike, and their places must be filled up.
There are many disadvantages in transplanting in dry weather, not
the least of which is that some plants grow more quickly than
others, and the constant resetting where the original plants have
failed not only involves much labor but makes the crop irregular in
the time of ripening.
Cultivation.—A week after planting cultivate and hoe ; the
oftener this is repeated and the ground kept loose the better.
Weeds must be kept down. The young plants are sometimes
attacked, especially in damp seasons, or in damp and ill-drained
localities, by the cut worm. This nuisance is very uncommon in
Australia (and not very common in Virginia) but we think we


have heard of him here. Tobacco is not the only crop he attacks.
He is generally found in a small hole or hill and must he destroyed.
He disappears with the warm weather. A more dangerous and
more familiar foe is the tobacco worm, alias the green or horn
worm. He is the greatest tobacco chewer in the world—one worm
will consume a good leaf in one night. When he makes his
appearance the crop must be gone over once a week.
Topping and Priming.—Just before blossoming begins, i. e.,
when the plant commences to form buds, it must be topped and
primed. Topping is taking out the bud with the thumb and
finger nails. Priming is stripping off the bottom leaves, four or
five, leaving a hand’s breadth between the first leaf and the top of
the hill. Early plants may be topped to ten leaves, but very
late plants should not have more than six left on. It is a great
mistake to suppose that the more leaves the more weight you get.
A good plant topped to eight leaves will give more weight than
the same plant topped to sixteen. After topping the plants must
be gone over once a week, as the suckers they will throw out to
form new buds must be plucked off. Suckering and worming can
be done together, and children are as useful here as men.
Harvesting.—The crop ripens on an average three months
after planting out. Australian farmers are more apt to cut it
green than to let it get too ripe. Maturity is indicated by the
leaves of the plant turning down, and sometimes even reaching the
ground; they become mottled or curdled with yellow spots, look
glossy and shining, lose their fur, and become manifestly thicker.
If, when pinched in a fold between the finger and thumb, they
crack or split readily they are ripe. Tobacco cut too green will not
Aveigh half so much as tobacco properly ripened. The practice
here is to cut the crop in patches, but though a little more
laborious it is more profitable to cull out the ripe plants.
Cutting.—This and the succeeding operations will test the
real character of the farmer, and determine the value of the
tobacco. Here, in truth, “the hand of the diligent maketh rich.”
Ho one, as far as I am aware, has in Victoria adhered closely to
the best practice. The plant must be split while standing, and the
splitter must note well the indications of ripeness we have given
so as not to split green plants. Split from the top down to within
six or seven inches of the ground, and cut off just below the
bottom leaf. The most convenient knife for splitting is like a
broad chisel with a very thin blade 3| inches wide, and the same
length, with a thin shank inserted in a handle a foot long, having
a cross piece or handle on the top like a mincing knife. Tobacco
split before cutttng cures better and more quickly, and the leaves
acquire more substance from the stalk ; it is also more convenient
for hanging.
The best weather for cutting is dry and warm but not too hot.
After cutting the tobacco, let it alone long enough to fall or wilt,


i. e., lose its crispness so that it can be handled without break-
ing or bruising the leaves. If the sun is very hot it is not safe to
cut in the middle of the day, as the leaves will be sun-burned.
The parts exposed to the sun will turn white, become dry and
crisp and cure green—they never become tobacco. In very hot
weather cut early in the morning or late in the afternoon, so that
it can wilt without being burned. Don’t cut more in the morning
than you can gather and house before the sun gets too hot. When
the cutting is completed, or when the leaves on one side, that
uppermost to the sun, have fallen or wilted, the plants should be
turned over to give the other side the benefit of the sun. When
both sides are wilted the plants should be piled in heaps, with the
butts towards the sun. They must be handled by the butts, and
handled gently. The butts are put towards the sun because they
take longest to wilt. It must now be removed to the drying barn.
If cut in the afternoon about four o’clock in midsummer, the first
cut may be housed the same evening, but the plants which have
not wilted sufficiently to be handled without bruising must be
allowed to lie without heaping till next day. Close heaping in
hot weather would make it heat and spoil.
Curing. —The tobacco, having been cut and removed to the
barn, now undergoes the process of curing, the first stage being
drying. Two methods of curing are in vogue in the tobacco-
growing states —air curing and fire curing. The former is
generally resorted to by those who are inexperienced in the growth,
as involving no risk and requiring less attention, but the more
experienced prefer the latter, which occupies less time and secures
a larger proportion of yellow or gold leaf.
Air Curing.—The tobacco house for air curing may be either
an open shed, a mere roof upon poles, or a close house. The latter
is preferable, but many a good crop of tobacco has been cured in
the former. The objection to an open shed is that the outside
plants become damaged by rains beating in, by strong winds bruis-
ing them, or by sudden changes of temperature withering them.
It is also difficult in damp, hot weather to obviate the danger of
stem-mould. But the farmer on new ground need not hesitate to
cure in open sheds; the quantity likely to be injured is not very
great. It is better, however, to have a close house so arranged that
the air may be allowed to pass freely through it in fine weather,
or be shut out in damp weather. A bark house so built that some
of the sheets on each side can be readily removed and replaced,
will answer admirably; as also a slab house, with some shifting
slabs. A house 20 feet square and 12 feet high will cure 2,000 to
2,500 lb. The uprights are placed about four feet apart, and light
scantling rafters or poles, nailed right across the shed from one upright
to another, each rafter or pole being about four feet above the one
below it. A building 12 feet high will, in this way, take three


tiers, exclusive of the roof. The tobacco plants, after cutting, are
placed on sticks long enough to rest on two of the poles or rafters.
If split in the field, the stick; is placed between the two halves of
the stalk, but if the plants have not been split, they are fastened to
the stick with twine, and placed alternately on the sides of the stick.
The sticks thus loaded are put up in the building, the ends resting
on the cross poles or rafters. If the plants are large and heavy the
sticks may be 12 inches apart, if small and light 8 inches will be
enough. These are the extremes, but the plants must never press
closely together. In fine weather every door or aperture must be
open, and in ordinary seasons the plants will, after six weeks’
drying, be ready for stripping. The stem takes longer to dry than
the rest of the leaf, and the test of proper dryness is the fragility
of the stem. When this cracks readily on being bent in dry
weather the tobacco may be taken down. Should a damp season
come on while the tobacco is hanging there in danger of stem-
mould. Few tobacco growers are unfamiliar with this. The only
cure, or rather preventive, is fire. Whenever you find that the
tobacco is absorbing a large amount of moisture, you must introduce
a counteracting agency. If the wind is strong, or rain comes on,
close every aperture; if the rain continues, you must not only keep
the building close, but use slow fires ; greenwood or any fuel which
makes much smoke must be avoided. When the drying is com-
pleted, which can be determined by the dryness of the stem, it
should be stripped the first damp weather.
Stripping and Handing.—At the first damp weather after the
curing is finished a quantity may be taken down for stripping,
which is plucking the leaves off the stalk, and as the seasons for
stripping are precarious, enough should be laid aside to keep the
stripper going for some time. The tobacco on being removed from
the sticks should be carefully packed in a temporary bunk, or in
the corner of the shed, being banked up on the open sides with
boards; the points should be in the centre, and the butts of the
stems out next the wood. A layer of straw is often put between
the butts and the wood, or sides of the bunk, to exclude the air.
The top should be covered with old blankets or boards, to prevent
the weather from acting on the upper surface. Tobacco thus
bulked in proper condition will keep in good order for a consider-
able time, but if packed too damp it will heat, and spoil very
quickly. Tobacco is in right order for stripping when the stems of
the leaves are limp, but not wet. This can be determined only by
experience, and novices will do well to examine the bulk the day
after it is packed to see that it is not heating, and if the stripping
cannot be finished in a week, it should be examined occasionally,
and if heating, turned over. Heating utterly destroys both the
color and flavor. The stripper should form the tobacco into
hands. A dozen leaves are taken, one at a time, and the butts put
evenly together, and held firmly in the hand. Another leaf (the


limpest and softest) is taken, and a shake being given to the bunch
of leaves to make them hang out free; the limp leaf is bound round
the butts of the bunch, the butt of this leaf being used to bind, and
the toe or point of the leaf tucked through the centre of the other
leaves, and drawn tight; the leaves should then be gently squeezed
together. The practice of opening out and spreading the leaves-
which has obtained in some parts of Victoria, especially among the
Germans, should be avoided. Leaves spread thus are not so easily
packed, and are almost sure to lie broken before reaching the manu-
facturer. I have seen bales dealt with in this way which did not
show a single sound leaf. When stripping is going on the tobacco
should be sorted—good and bad leaves should never be put in the
same hand or sent to market in the same bale. An ordinary crop-
should be sorted into wrappers and fillers. The wrappers are the
long, well-cured, good-colored, sound leaves. The fillers are the
short, the broken, the badly cured, and the ground leaves. If
there is a good proportion of light-colored or golden leaves, these
should be kept by themselves. A crop sent to market without
being sorted never brings as good a price as it would otherwise do.
It is impossible to judge of the proportion of fillers, and the manu-
facturer has to make a wide margin to secure himself. Large
planters in America are very careful in this respect. Some pack
all the bright and all the dark separately; these again being sorted
into firsts, seconds, thirds, and lugs.
Bulking Down.—The tobacco, having been dried, stripped, and
handed, should now be bulked down in hands in the same way as-
the plants are done when a quantity is to be kept for stripping..
They must be packed in the same way, butts out, covered as before,,
to exclude air, and examined occasionally. This bulking down
finishes the curing. When the plant is cut, it has no aromatic
smell, or resemblance in flavour to tobacco finished; after curing it
has still a raw green smell; the bulking down or dry sweating
developes the flavour and makes it really tobacco. The drier the-
condition in which it is bulked the better, but if quite dry the
leaves would be broken. The longer it is in bulk, if put down in
good condition, the better will be the result. If 'found to be heat-
ing, it must be turned over at once. It should never be forwarded
to market unless it has been in the stack at least six weeks; three
months is the proper time.
Packing for Market.—A strong argument for keeping the
tobacco bulked down as long a possible is that it loses dampness,
and is less liable to shrink when packed. If it shrinks much on
its way to market, the fastenings become loose, and the joltings of
the waggon break the leaves. The form of packing in Virginia
arose from the peculiar circumstances in which the early planters
were placed. A cask with straight staves, and large enough to
hold 1,400 or 1,500 lb. of tobacco was filled and very firmly pressed,
a pair of shafts was attached, and the hogshead drawn to market


by a horse or by slaves. Convenience of transport dictated the
round package, desire to expose as little surface as possible suggested
the large package; and anyone who has experience in tobacco,
whether manufactured or unmanufactured, will endorse the old
maxim, the larger the package the better the tobacco. In the
Northern States all of the cigar leaf is now packed in boxes; and if
the distance to market was greater, carriage cheaper, and boxes more
readily procurable, such a course would be desirable here, and will
have to be adopted when Australians begin to export their leaf;
at present, light Osnaberg or good Hessian wrapping will answer
■every purpose. Any one accustomed to wool baling will have an
idea how to pack tobacco for market. It is generally done with a
bottomless box, or a box with moveable sides. The baling or
wrapping, and rope or binding, is laid in first, the tobacco pressed
down with a lever or screw, and the bindings then fastened ; the
closer and harder it is packed the better. The hands should be
packed with the tips in the middle, and the butts out. The butts
may be exposed, the wrapping being tied or sown round the other
four sides only. The tobacco should be allowed to set under the
lever for some time before being fastened. Don’t fall out with the
carrier if he does not deliver the full quantity entrusted to him.
Tavo parcels Avere shipped at Albury, for transmission by steamer
and train to Melbourne. One Aveighed 65 CAvt., the other about
DO cwt.; the former lost over 5 CAvt., the latter 8 CAvt. Both had,
hoAvever, been packed too damp, and the larger parcel had become
seriously injured by heating in transit. Another parcel packed
in good condition, and Avhich had been bulked doAvn for months,
lost 4 per cent. It is Avorthy of note that tobacco bulked or
packed too damp loses, not only the Aveight of surplus moisture, but
Avhen fermentation commences it loses part of the Aveight of its
proper substance. I remember some farmers in Ncav South Wales,
Avho, having carefully handled their tobacco, anxious to get as
much Aveight as possible, damped it. When the leaf Avas
■delivered in Sydney the Aveight Avas considerably less than before
it Avas damped, and the person Avho had bought it declined taking
delivery, because the moisture had caused fermentation, and des-
troyed the flavor. If tobacco is too damp a loAver price is offered,
or a per centage deducted for the moisture. In Great Britain, in
selling American tobacco Avhich may be several years old, never less
than 18 months, a shrinkage alloAvance of 2 per cent, is made,
although the leaf is so dry that it has to be steamed before it can
be handled.
Tobacco 12 months in bulk is Avorth 15 per cent, more than
that Avhich has only been 2 or 3 months in bulk, and a parcel 3
years old, if good, is worth 25 per cent. more. The difference
should be greater than this, and it will be so Avhen experienced
groAvers are numerous and the Aveed has become a staple product.
The top quotations are ahvays for old and well-seasoned leaf.


MISCELLANEOUS NOTES.
Seed. —It is usual when topping to save a few plants for seed.
These are of course not topped, and are left in the ground when
the crop is cut, at which time the leaves are plucked off the stalk
and the seed pods begin to darken. When the pods are ripe, the
top of the plant must he cut off and hung up in a dry place. It is
usual to choose early plants and to worm and sucker them like the
others. Half a dozen good plants will give seed enough for an
acre. The vitality of seed can be tested by putting a little on red
hot iron; if it pops it is all right. In late sowing, seed is some-
times forced by damping it before use.
Manure.—A lively discussion on the effect of manure on
tobacco has been going on in America. The northern growers, who
produce seed leaf for cigars, manure heavily and get very large
crops, but the southerners say manure spoils the tobacco, making
it too hot for pipe smoking. A cigar which will smoke well may
be made of tobacco which, if used in the pipe, will skin the
tongue. If ever the coast districts are cropped with tobacco it will be
cigar work, for which at present the demand is very trifling.
Seed Bed.—A novice in weeding may not be able to distinguish
the young plants from weeds. The tiny plant throws out its-
leaves, which are nearly round, in pairs; the leaves at first lie-
nearly on the ground.
Worms.—The ground worms, which are also known as foes to-
the grower of cereals in America, are said to be the progeny of the
black bug, found under wheat shocks. They are seldom found in
new ground, but some farmers are of opinion that they may be-
present, but find their sustenance in the vegetation turned under,
and do not therefore attack the tobacco. The green worm or
tobacco worm is generated by a large grey moth, which deposits its
eggs at night on potatoes and tomatoes as well as tobacco. These-
flies may be destroyed by a person going over the ground at night
with a torch; they flock to the light and are easily killed.
Turkeys are found useful in destroying them. The worms are
nearly always on the lower side of the leaf. So particular were
the old Yirgina growers that they would threaten to punish careless
little niggers by making them bite the head off every worm they
left. Sulphur, and a very weak solution of sulphuric acid (vitriol),
sprinkled over the plants, are spoken of as remedies, but we can-
not vouch for their efficacy or the safety of using them.
Transplanting,—The plant should not be planted deeper than
it was in the seed bed and the roots must be kept straight. Many
growers soak the seed bed a day before drawing the plants, they
come up easier.
Cultivation.—Don’t work the ground when it is wet, and don’t
plough between -when the tobacco has grown large. If you have
had windy weather go over the ground and set right all leaves


-which have heen turned over. Tobacco is peculiar in having no
power to restore.its leaves to their proper position. The reversed
leaves, if neglected, will wither.
Drying.—Clear away all plants above the tire or they will he
burned. After ten days’ drying the sticks may be moved closer
together.
Bulking.—lf the tobacco is losing, or has lost, its sweetness
through damp, hang up the hands to dry and use lire if you can.
TOBACCO CURING, &c.
Bt IRA SHELTON, OF VIRGINIA.
Scaffolding.—This should always be done at the bam door.
The scaffold should be made with the poles pointing to the door,
so that there is no necessity of walking across them. It should
be made just high enough for the tails of tire tobacco to touch the
ground, to prevent the air from passing under; and if the weather
be mild, the tobacco may be suffered to remain on the scaffold
until it is sufficiently yellow for firing; but if the weather is cool
and windy, the tobacco should be put in the house as soon as it is
cut. Wind will disfigure the finest tobacco in a very short time,
and make it look common. After the Ist of October (Ist April in
Australia) it is best to house immediately.
When the weather is favourable for yellowing on the scaffold, it
will generally take from three to five days, according to the colour
of the plant on the hill. In the house it will take longer to yellow,
and will take greater care to cure it so. But it can as certainly be
cured yellow by housing from the hill as by scaffolding; but we
are disposed to think that it is not so sweet as when it is suffered
to yellow in the sun.
Curing.—There are only two modes by which fine manufacturing
tobacco can be cured, viz., by flues, and with charcoal. We do
think that to cure tobacco with logs or billets is a disgrace to the
tobacco-making community. It has been totally abandoned in all
the fine tobacco-growing sections; and as for sun curing, we have
very little faith that a pretty article can be cured in that way.
The process of curing with flues is certainly more simple, a greater
saving of time and labour, and of more certain success than any
other known. In some sections the stone for building flues cannot
be secured, and we recommend, as next best, curing with coal


charcoal). With flues we recommend, that as soon as the tobacco
is yellow enough on the scaffold, it be put into the house, the sticks
about six inches apart, and if the barn is clear of dampness, and
the tobacco dry, it may be cured, stalk and stem, in twenty-four
hours, if the flues are properly constructed; nothing is necessary,
when all this is the case, but to heat the flues as quickly as
possible. The door should be left open the first eight or ten hours,
or until the leaf begins to crook, after which no heat short of bad
scorching can hurt the tobacco. But if the tobacco is damp and
clammy, the flue damp, or the floor of the barn moist, the tobacco
should be put in at least thirty-six hours before it is yellow enough
for hard firing, and slow drying fires be applied till the barn is
dry, by which time the tobacco will be sufficiently yellow; then
fire as before directed, and in no case slacken the fires after the
flues are heated until the tobacco is thoroughly cured, stalk and
stem.
If the tobacco is to be yellowed in the house, it will be best to
build a small'fire in the flues once a day, so as to create about
summer-heat, and never more until you begin to cure. It will
take a good deal of patience and care if the weather is cool. If it
is warm and pleasant, it is best not to put fire to it at all until you
begin to dry off. Care should be taken not to let tobacco housed
from the hill get yellow, for the dampness will be almost certain to
turn it red. A day or two before it is yellow enough for curing,
it should have drying fires, not enough to cure it all, for if it
commences to cure, the best plan is to keep it on, so as to prevent
spotting, which is certain to ruin it.
Curing with charcoal is done by the same process; the coal will
raise a heat much quicker than flues, and care must be taken not to
heat the tobacco too suddenly, flues cannot be heated too
suddenly; for under the best circumstances it will take three or
four hours to get them hot, and if the tobacco is right for firing
this is gradual enough.
Construction of Barns.- —We believe in small barns for any kind
of curing. A house built sixteen feet inside, and divided into four
rooms, and sixteen feet high in the body, is the preferable size for
flue or coal curing. For flues they should be built on a very slightly
sloping place, just enough to make the flues draw well; flues four
inches lower at the eye than the chimney will be slope enough.
The door should be always between the flues and in the end of
the house to prevent the drip from falling before the door and the
eye of the flues. The tiers should begin eight feet above each
other at the top; they should be placed across the house so that
the roof tier can conveniently be place above them; the door, three
feet wide and six feet high, furnished with a good close shutter.
A barn of this size will cure about 1,200 lbs. The proper con-
struction of flues is of great importance. They should be built of
any stone that will stand fire without bursting—white sandstone,
or any other that does not contain flint. The size of the flue for


a sixteen-feet bam is generally about twelve inches wide by four-
teen inches inside, blot much care need be taken to have them
smooth on the outside. If stone can be had to make the inside
smooth, so as not to obstruct the putting in of wood, it is all that
is necessary. They should be run just far enough from the outside
not to set the house on fire, and there is not so much danger of this
as may be supposed.
Run the walls of the flue parallel with the house-side, turning
with the corner, so as to preserve the same distance from the
house-side all round, running the stem out at the middle of the
upper side. The stem should be run far enough above the Avail of
the house, to avoid danger of sparks from the chimney. The height
of the inside of the flue should be preserved its Avhole length.
The Avidth may be slightly decreased from the elboAV to the
chimney. The inner Avail is carried all around. But too much
explanation often bewilders. We think avc haA r e said enough.
As before said, avc like small barns; Avhere too much tobacco
is together it all cannot receive the heat alike, Avhich is our main
objection to large barns. As to the number of barns necessary, we
Avould say that there ought to be enough to receive all the crop
Avithout moving any, say, one sixteen-foot barn to every 8,000 plants.
Asa general rule, plant 1,000 hills for every 100 sticks house-room;
that is, if you have three barns, plant 24,000 hills, and, if it is
common tobacco, they will receive it. A much larger quantity
may be saved in this number of barns by curing and moving out,
but this is often troublesome.
Stripping.—Tobacco should be stripped Avhen it is in tolerably
high order (soft), and hung back in the barn immediately, and
suffered to remain until the spring. We don’t like the idea of
bulking the tobacco (putting it in a heap), to lie all the winter.
The “coming and going” is a decided adA r antagc; furthermore, it
cannot be put doAA r n in keeping order until the spring.
Carey & Page, Printers, AVaymouth-street, Adelaide.


E(6c/o
fCUltf-


-V' ■
