

% .
TOBACCO:
ITS CULTURE, AND THE CURING OF ITS*LEAF.
AUGUSTUS MORRIS, Esq.,
EXECUTIVE COMMISSIONER,
PHILADELPHIA INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION OF 1576.
litblishcb bu :
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
10 c* 4—77
"
■ SC f -S
fli S^Lf.
- )■’
. ,T •
\W




Sydney, 7 March, 1877.
Sir,
I have the honor herewith to submit to you so much
of my report upon Tobacco as relates to its cultivation.
My information has been almost wholly derived from
data supplied to me by the'officers of the Consolidated
Tobacco Company of California, whose Manager, Mr.
James D. Culp, has a most extensive and accurate know-
ledge of the cultivation of the tobacco plant, and of the
methods of curing its leaf, in climates and soils and
under atmospheric conditions similar to those which
prevail in Australia. In effect, this paper contains the
result of the successful experience of the most practical
and scientific cultivator of tobacco in the world.
Mr. Edgar Briggs, to whom I am under many obliga-
tions for valuable suggestions on numerous subjects, and
who is the Secretary of the above-named Tobacco
Company, has promised to furnish to me, within a month
or two, the details of Mr. Culp’s methods of treating the
leaf of the tobacco plant in all its various classes, in
order to render it suitable for the manufacturer.
These methods for insuring the “ cure” of the leaf in
dry climates involve the creation of an artificial atmo-
sphere, and are wholly the discoveries of Mr. Culp.
I hope to show at the Metropolitan Exhibition, in
April next, the result of Mr. Culp’s processes, in the shape
of cigars and of manufactured and leaf tobacco, so that
all who are interested may convince themselves of the
possibility of making Australia independent of the rest
of the world for its supplies of tobacco.


It will, I hope, always be’ borne in mind by my readers,
the better to assure themselves of the value of my infor-
mation, that I have merely edited the work of others,
and that no other credit is due to me than that of having
selected, for the instruction of my fellow-colonists, a
system applicable to their circumstances.
In conclusion, I may add that I shall be happy to
correspond with any practical growers of the tobacco
plant who may be desirous of obtaining more detailed
information on the subject of this report. I have deemed
it advisable to suppress certain particulars which appeared
to me not applicable to the circumstances of this Colony,
but which may, nevertheless, be found to be so by men of
practical experience.
I have, &c.,
AUGUSTUS MORRIS.
The Honorable
The Colonial Secretary,
Sydney.


TOBACCO:
ITS CULTURE, AND THE CURING OF ITS LEAF.
The following information relative to the cultivation of
tobacco and its subsequent treatment is wholly derived
from data supplied to me by Mr. Edgar Briggs, the
Secretary of the Consolidated Tobacco Company of
California, which data were gathered mainly from the prac-
tice and experience of Mr. James D. Culp, the Manager of
the Company, who has done so much to make the growing
of that plant and the manufacture of its leaf a great
success in California. He has raised them from a for-
tuitous process to a certain and scientific one. It will
be readily understood that I have had no personal
experience in this matter to guide me, but owe every-
thing to their printed matter and manuscript information
placed at my disposal by the officers of the Company, to
whom all the credit belongs,- That portion of the
treatise which will refer to the curing of the leaf will, as
hereafter explained, be written by Mr. Briggs for this
report, and will be for the first time made public.
Should any errors creep into the narrative they will
be mine, not Mr. Briggs’s nor Mr. Culp’s.
I imagine that the same causes which in California
produced the failures in making tobacco a profitable
crop, or in making it sufficiently good when manufac-
tured to compete with that grown and prepared in the
Eastern States, prevail in New South Wales and


Australia generally. Primarily, the failures there were
due to the difficulties experienced in curing the leaf
successfully after the crop had been grown. The idea
which prevails in Australia that tobacco, in all respects
equal to that which is imported, cannot be grown except
in some favoured districts of the United States or Cuba
will, on consideration, appear to be erroneous.
There are thousands of men in California, from all the
tobacco-growing States, who are practical planters. For
twenty years many of these had embarked extensively
in the enterprise of tobacco-planting, and they raised
successfully heavy crops; but when the leaf had to be
turned into mercantile quality and condition the result
belied its promise. The sources of this failure lay, not
in the properties of the leaf itself, but in the arid and
desiccating atmosphere of a Californian autumn. This
tended, as do similar conditions in many parts of New
South Wales, to remove from the leaf all its moisture
before sufficient time elapsed for the decomposition of the
green colouring matter ( chlorophyl ), that is the partial
conversion of the starch into gum and sugar; the changes,
in short, which, in a moister climate, take place naturally
in the plant after it is cut and before it is dried. These
are the changes which constitute “ curing ” as dis-
tinguished from “ drying up.”
The successful culture of tobacco in California required
that a method should be worked out which would suffi-
ciently promote these changes in the elements of the
leaf, within the comparatively brief period during which
it is able to retain moisture and vitality enough to admit
of their taking place at all.
The great, perhaps the sole, obstacle to success is
encountered after cutting, for none know better than old


planters the hardiness of the plant and how generously
it repays honest and painstaking cultivation. The wide
range over which the plant is grown in the United
States ought to assure the most sceptical that there is
nothing in its own nature to exclude it from the soils
and climate of Australia. From Wisconsin, with its
intensely cold winter, to Florida, with its broiling
summers, and from the rich lands of Missouri to the
poor ones of Connecticut, it is a staple subject of
husbandry.
On the continent of Europe, Asia, South America, and
in the Islands of the East and West Indies, it is grown
of different qualities, cultivated by widely different
methods, and cured by very various treatment, yet in
all, tobacco highly valued is produced.
It is an axiom with old planters that where Indian corn
will grow tobacco will flourish. It was the force of this
consideration which caused them to persist, in defiance
of continual failures, in the attempt to produce in
California as fine tobacco as could be grown elsewhere.
At length, however, the belief became confirmed that
the soil of California was unsuitable to the growth of the
higher classes of tobacco, and its cultivation would have
been abandoned but for the discovery by Mr. Culp of a
new method of treating and preparing the leaf for
manufacture. It was not the lack of experience in the
approved methods of curing the leaf which rendered
abortive the expenditure of so much capital and industry,
but the persistence in applying rigid rules to a set of
conditions to which they were not applicable.
It is to be hoped that the information which I have
been able to communicate may do something to render


New South Wales in a few years independent of all
foreign supplies of manufactured or unmanufactured
tobacco.
A great portion of the following observations on the
husbandly part of the subject, its methods and the
reasons of them, will doubtless be found superfluous by
our experienced planters, but Mr. Briggs advised me to
make use of them, as, without the most painstaking
preparation of the soil the best leaf cannot be grown
successfully; and because the practice advocated is that
followed in all its details by Mr. Culp. Besides, it will
be seen that the system of cultivation set forth may be
applied to cognate branches of husbandry, and, if applied,
success may result where nothing but failure previously
prevailed.
The Soil and its quality ,
The soil for tobacco must be a loam. As has already
been observed, the plant will grow wherever Indian corn
will; although there may be some localities in New South
Wales where the season between the frosts of spring and
those of autumn may be too short to mature tobacco,
yet they may admit the cultivation of maize. As a
general proposition, it may be safely taken that good
corn land may be expected to bear a satisfactory crop of
tobacco.
This loam land should be fairly warm, with sand enough
to work free to the plough. The earlier in the spring
tobacco is planted the better, so that it may be fit to cut
when there is less probability of its being subject to be
met by showers before being housed ; for as will hereafter
be seen, the curing to be effective must proceed under
cover in a building properly constructed and regulated.


If tobacco is allowed to lie out after cutting, and is
caught in one or two heavy showers, the colours will
darken and the leaves will probably spot and mould.
Although the deep loamy soils of New South Wales are not
liable to be exhausted by repeated crops of tobacco, it may
be here remarked that it gives a good rotation for wheat,
and may do well on lands that have been weakened by
continual wheat cultivation, but from which the elements
necessary to form stalk and to mature the seeds have not
been eliminated. Where the soil is suitable for tobacco,
but causes wheat to run too much to stalk, an alternate
crop of the former will improve the out-turn of the latter.
The land, too, must not be too much exposed to the
sweep of the hot winds of summer. The tobacco leaves,
18 to 24 inches long and nearly half as many wide, brittle
of stem and tender of web, present a great superficies to
the wind, and a single strong west wind may thrash out
the leaves, if a fine crop—tearing the edges to rags,
snapping the stems so that all that part beyond the frac-
ture withers away, and reducing the value of the whole
most seriously. A belt of wood, or range of hills to
windward, is sufficient to avert this source of loss.
Preparing the land—first ploughing.
As early in the season as practicable, the land should
be ploughed to a depth of 12 inches, that is, the plough
should make a clean cut of 12 inches deep measured on
the land side. The draught for this will require five good
horses; or, if unusually large and heavy, four may do it.
A gang plough, with one plough removed, will be
found handier than a single plough. With several pat-
terns of “gangs” the plough cannot be set down 12


inches. This must he looked to. To aid in turning the
furrow, a board may be jammed between the mould-board
and standards, and secured so as to prevent the earth
from pouring back over the mould-board into the furrow.
If to this board a sheet of tin or sheet iron be tacked,
the slip will be easier. This is not so important now as
later in ridging, when it is essential to mould the earth
higher up, but is useful in keeping a clear furrow for the
horses to walk in on the next round.
Ploughing should be done only when the land is in
proper condition, and then it would be well if the lands
turned each day be harrowed the same day.
If the work be done by contract, a provision to this
effect may save some disputing in getting the land har-
rowed to the satisfaction of the planter.
Tobacco is a rank grower in January and February,
provided it can get moisture at that time. Ihe amount
of growth made during the last month of summer es-
pecially is the particular growth which should give the
heavy crop. The deeper loamy land is stirred, the more
freely and later in the season will moisture rise in it.
Good loam ploughed 12 inches deep will, at the end of
summer, show moisture from 2 to 3 inches below the
surface. The same land ploughed only 7 or 8 inches
deep may, at the same date, be nearly or wholly dried
out. Again, the deeper land is ploughed the more
freely does all excess of water drain away from the
surface, allowing it to warm by the thorough admission
of the atmospheric air to its pores.
Bearing in mind what has been said of the importance
of having the plants take an early start towards making


growth (which they can only do in warm land), the
necessity for bringing the soil to this condition w ill be
obvious. Further, the chemical action within the soil,
by which the plant food is formed, thus goes on more
rapidly, and tobacco is one of the most avid consumers
of food among all cultivated plants. And, finally, the
larvae of insects are turned up to the frost, which is
probably the most effectual mpans of being rid of them
during the coming season.
Harrowing the lands the same day that they are
ploughed is generally a safe rule for insuring the clods
being properly broken and the soil brought to a proper
condition of culture.
The need of this will be apparent; for if there be clods
in the soil, when it comes to be moulded into ridges they
will be thrown together in the body of the ridge.
When the planter comes to prod or dibble the hole for
the young plant, one of three things will be apt to
happen: either, first, he will find a clod on the top
where his plant is to be set, which he must stop to break
with his foot, and be thereby delayed; or, second, his
dibble will run into a clod that is covered over with loose
earth, into which the roots of the young plant must
pierce for sustenance, when it will not thrive ; 01, third,
the dibble may penetrate into the 'cavity between two
clods, in which the said rootlets will be left dangling,
and the plant will die. It ought to be apparent that the
profit of the crop will depend in an important measure
in getting a good “ stand” at the first planting. Next
to the exercise of reasonable care in setting the young
plants, the best plan is to put the land into thoroughly
good condition to receive them. Aside from the con-
sideration of securing a good and early start to all the


plants, the mere money cost of resetting dead plants
exceeds several times over that of first putting the land
in proper order.
Whether or not this deep cultivation can be done
with equal effect by turning 6 or 7 inches of soil and
running a subsoil plough the remaining 5 or 6 inches,
is a matter for consideration. Perhaps after the first
year’s cultivation this plan would work equally well.
In case the layer of rich surface soil should not be over
6 to 8 inches deep, underlain by a decidedly barren
subsoil, the subsoil plough ought undoubtedly to be
used, and thus avoid bringing up the barren soil. It is
to be remarked that" no saving in labour, either of
hand or team, would be effected by it, but as the draught
would be lighter, the work could be got through by a
lighter team.
This insistance on the necessity for deep ploughing
may appear appalling to some of our Australian farmers,
but it is a very common practice in England.
A tobacco crop is far more valuable than a wheat one,
and the planter should not shrink from doing all in his
power to make it a heavy one.
The cost of all this thorough tillage (including second
ploughing and “ ridging” or moulding up as hereinafter
described) may be taken in California at 50s. per acre ;
that is to say, a farmer could contract to do it at that
price, and would get a fair rate of hire for his. horses and
tools, farm wages for the hands employed, and a reason-
able price for the feed consumed. The cost of planting
in the Eastern States is much greater, because the land
must be heavily manured, or, as in Virginia, allowed to
be fallow for years.


Second ploughing.
A second ploughing in the spring is needed, partly,
to loosen the soil which has settled and compacted
under the winter rains, but mainly for the purpose of
bringing to the top some of the original surface soil that
was turned deep under at the first ploughing, and at the
same time turning back a portion of the subsoil that was
then brought to the surface, thus mixing the old and
new soils well throughout the whole depth. For it is to
be remembered that in most soils the superficial portion
only—varying from 4to 8 inches deep —is really rich in
plant food. There may be exceptions to this in pure
alluvial bottoms, where the soil from almost any depth
appears to be equally capable of nourishing plant life.
While deep ploughing, as described, is necessary to
ensure the vigorous growth of the plant throughout its
life, it is equally necessary that it should have abundant
food at each period of its life; that is, that all the
successive portions of soil throughout which its roots aio
to penetrate in seeking for sustenance shall be capable of
yielding it freely. It may happen that by a single
ploughing a rich surface soil has been turned under and
a poor subsoil brought to the top ; and in that case the
young plants might make a poor and stunted growth,
literally starving, while an abundance of generous food
lay underneath, just beyond the reach of the little roots.
Nor will the need of this second ploughing be obviated
by the next process of ridging; for if it be omitted, the
land will commonly in ridging mould up more or less
cloddy. Again, it will be found that the expense of the
second ploughing will be more than recompensed by the
saving in the mere money cost of ensuing operations,
while it will be returned manifold in the yield and early
out-turn of the crop.


Of course the harrowing should be as thorough and
prompt after the second ploughing as after the first; and
should the harrow not properly accomplish its work, it
must be followed by a clod-smasher. A clod-smasher
may be made by taking two side pieces of 3 by 8 stuff,
10 feet long. Mortise in stoutly a front and tail piece of
the same, 8 feet long, set at an angle of 60 degrees with
the ground, like the bow of a punt or scow. Spike on
between the sides of this frame a series of 2 by 8 pieces
parallel with the two end pieces. The advantage of
setting the cross pieces in this way is, that it gives such
clods as pass under the forward pieces without breaking a
chance to roll between the cross pieces, where they may
be turned over and over, and will not be apt to pass from
under the tail-piece till they have been effectually reduced.
The smasher described is a heavy tool, and will require
the whole team to manage it.
Ridging.
Ridging may follow direbtly on the second ploughing
or it may be deferred, according to the degree of forward-
ness of the young plants in the plant-beds. It should
be done at least two weeks before the plants are set, in
order to allow the moisture to rise in the ridges. And
it is desirable that it should not be done earlier than is
needful, lest the ridges should be subject to rains that
may so settle and compact them as to retard the early
growth of the young plants.
Although the soil which is moulded into ridges is
necessarily moist at that time, yet it must not be imme-
diately planted upon, for it parts with that moisture to
the atmosphere—it dries out —and if young plants have
been set they will die. Afterwards moisture will rise


into the ridge from below by capillary action; the earth
of the upper part of the ridge attracting that underneath
it, and this moisture in which the young plants are to be
set will be permanent. Preparatory to ridging, the land
to be planted should be laid off in rectangular blocks,
(two acres each, or two hundred feet by four hundred,
will be found a convenient size), the larger side running
east and west, and twelve feet of a road should be left
on every side. The ridges will run the way of the shorter
sides —north and south.
Should the lay of the land render it much more con-
venient, their course may vary anywhere with the
quadrant, south-east, north-west, to south-west, north-
east. The object is to so set the plants that the rays of
the sun, as it sweeps to the northward, may penetrate
between the rows and reach all the plants.
The plough for ridging (and a 12-inch one will be found
a good size) must be set to run deep, but held by a slide
or wheel at the end of the beam to run at a depth of 6
inches. A “ clevis ” of the best Swedish iron must be
made for this purpose, quite 9 inches long in the front
vertical bar in which the draught holes are made ; then it
should be set well to the off side of the beam so that the
plough may travel exactly behind the near horse, or, in
other words, the plough should have enough land to travel
in. The directions for ploughing are as follows : —Start
from the south-west corner of the first block and travel
north ; this turns a 6-inch furrow to the east. Turn and
travel south, starting 3 feet east of the first furrow; this
turns a 6-inch furrow to the west, which will be heaped
up on the top of the first one. Next turn and travel
north in the last furrow; the plough being set to run
deep will take up 6 inches out of the bottom of the furrow


and turn it east. Turn again and travel south, starting
in 3 feet east of the last furrow; this, as before, turns a
6-inch furrow west, which is heaped on top of the last
one. Then turn north in the last furrow again, which
ploughs up from the bottom, and so on. For this opera-
tion the extra wooden mould-board spoken of under the
head of “first ploughing” will be found useful, if not a
necessity. The land will thus be moulded up into a series
of steep ridges running north and south, and 3 feet apart.
From this description of.the operation of ridging it
will be seen that the plough cuts and turns only 2 feet
out of every 3 feet of ground, leaving a strip 1 foot wide
under the centre line of each ridge unturned. This'centre
strip, through which the moisture must chiefly rise into
the ridge, is precisely the one that it is most important
to have in a light and free condition.
If the second (spring) ploughing has been omitted, this
strip will have to be left in the compact state in which
the soil remains after having been settled by the winter
rains ; and in this lies the special importance of the
second ploughing.
If a soaking rain come after the ridges are moulded
up, and cause them to settle and become compact, and
there be time before planting to throw them down, mould
up again and have them “ drained,” and it will repay
the labour.
It will be clear from the foregoing that the land should
not be ploughed when too wet, as that would make clods
very hard to pulverize when dry.
The leading object of such cultivators as Mr. Culp is
to bring the land to a condition of culture as nearly per-
fect and uniform as possible throughout a depth of 12


inches ; yet if the land be stirred at all while too wet it
is placed beyond the possibility of being brought to that
state.
Before leaving this portion of the subject I would
remark that this is the system of cultivation with its high
ridges which promises to enable California to succeed in
growing a beet” to advantage for sugar; and if followed
in Victoria will do the same for - it. So also should the
farmers of New South Wales consider whether they, too,
cannot grow beet and other succulents to feed stock, in
soils and climates often thought too dry for the purpose.
Raising the plants— Preparing the seed-beds.
For seed-beds a light, w’arm soil, rather sandy, should
be selected, contiguous to water, that of a pond or river
being more suitable than that from a well. If the water
for watering the beds has to be taken from a well it
should be exposed in a tank to the weather for twenty-
four hours. The best locality for seed-beds should be on
the northerly slope of a slight undulation and near its
summit. A close fence or building on the south side of
the beds will stimulate the growth of the plants, partly
by the protection it affords from the south winds, but
chiefly by the heat it reflects on the beds. Should such
a structure be available it would be well to whitewash it.
The beds should run east and west, being 3 feet wide,
with a path of 2 feet between them. At each 100 feet
of length cross-paths should be laid off. This divides
the beds into lengths of 100 feet, each of wdiich ought to
raise thirty thousand plants, coming on in regular
succession over a period of six weeks.


If it be desired to complete the planting in less time,
proportionately greater length of beds must be sown.
It is well enough, though not essential, to burn over
the ground with a fierce fire in autumn, mainly for
the purpose of destroying foul seed utterly.
Having lined off the land into alternate beds and
paths, the surface of the beds should be chopped up
with a hoe to a depth not over 3 inches. The “ planta-
tion” pattern of tool, cast-steel, will be found more
serviceable than the common garden “ gooseneck.”
Then with rather a long-toothed garden rake work out
thoroughly all lumps and stones to a depth of at least
2 inches, leaving the earth as fine as it can be made.
Work always from the south* line of the bed, to the
surface of which a slight slope to the north will thus
easily be given. The amount of this slope should not
exceed 1 inch in the 3 feet of width. This slope will be
found sensibly to increase the effect of the sun’s rays in
warming the soil and in stimulating growth ; and proof
of this is furnished by the fact that some planters having
made their beds slightly round, it has been observed
that the plants on that side of the bed towards the sun
(the south side in America) were always more advanced
than those on the crown, and these were more forward
than those on the side not facing the sun. This slight
slope is also sufficient against water collecting and
standing on the surface; while if the slope be greater
there is danger that the minute seeds may be washed
away. All bed work should be done by the line.
Along the southern line of each bed, after it is sown, a
6 or 8 inch board should be set on edge, and held in
place by pegs 15 or 18 inches long, firmly driven into
the ground .on each side of the board.


The beds should be covered with light frames, to
which thin unbleached muslin is tacked—such stuff as is
worth not more than 3d. or 4d. a yard. The size of the
frames should be 12 feet by 3 feet.
These covers should be placed over the beds, one of
the sides resting on the boards previously placed to
receive them, the opposite side resting on the opposite
line (north) of the bed.
The frames should not project over the boards, lest a
a strong wind should get under them and tip them over.
As the young plants grow, this (north) side of the cover
can be raised by setting small blocks under it. It should
not be necessary to raise it more than than 2 inches, as
the plants will be ready to set out before they become
large enough to require greater space. If the beds are
where leaves or other rubbish can be blown under the
covers, the open spaces at the ends of the beds should be
closed with boards. This will also prevent strong winds
taking the ends and tipping over the frames.
The different varieties of tobacco, the uses to which
they may be severally put in manufacturing, the methods
that may be followed in curing in order to secure a
product specially fitted to these different ends, will all
be considered under the head of “ Curing,” in a report
by Messrs. Briggs & Culp, hereafter to be furnished to
me. It must suffice for the present to say that for low
alluvial land, in which moisture will be coming freely
throughout the season, the “ Connecticut seed leaf” will
be found specially adapted. On land from which
the moisture begins receding towards the end of the
season, the “ Florida” plant will do better. The
“ Havana” variety ought only to be planted on the most
alluvial. “ Orinoco” (or Virginian) may be substituted


for “ Florida” on upland, but in four cases out of five a
crop of the last-named ought to give the better money
result. A box 6 inches deep and of any convenient size
should be provided, say 6 to 10 square feet area ; and if
more than one variety of seed is to be sown, one box for
each variety should be provided, and each box marked
accordingly. The purpose of this is to avoid mixing
varieties, which is almost inevitable where the same box
is used for all, and will later in the season be found very'
vexatious, as will be seen when the different methods of
handling different varieties are considered.
The next process is to_ sift as much wood ashes as will
fill the box to a depth of nearly 4 inches, which will be
about 8 quarts to each square foot of area. The mass
should be slightly moistened, so that it will adhere just
enough to admit of being sliced down with a paddle
without tumbling over ; this will be damp enough to
prevent the ashes blowing away before light airs, but
not damp enough to stick in lumps. [All this work with
the ashes , as well as with the subsequent sowing , should be
done with buckskin gloves on ; otherwise the damp ashes
will cause ugly sores on the hands.) The seed should now
be added at the rate of one tablespoonful well heaped
up to each quart of the ashes. The seed must be mixed
thoroughly throughout the mass, and, to be sure that
the mixing is thorough, pat smooth 1 or 2 square inches
in different parts of the mass, and see that the number
of seeds thereby rendered visible is about equal in each.
This affords the only guarantee that the plants will
come up evenly in the beds, without which they cannot
be expected to develop with, the desired uniformity.
Finally the mixture should be run through a sieve,
which assists in the uniformity of the distribution. Two


ounces of seed containing twelve tablespoonfuls, will
sow three of the i 00-foot beds ; that is, each bed re-
quires four tablespdonfuls, or two-thirds of an ounce.
Tobacco seeds are so minute as to be quite invisible
when scattered on the ground, and therefore this
mixture of them with ashes is necessary in order
that the sower may be able to see what he is doing, and
get them evenly distributed over the bed.
A light roller should also be prepared, the handles of
3 by i-| inch stuff, about 6 feet long; the roller itself to
be 6 or 8 inches in diameter, and 2 feet long.
When ready to sow, shape out of a shingle a paddle
about 4 inches broad. Convey the box of ashes and
Seed prepared as above to the beds, along with a tin
pan of convenient size—say about that of an ordinary
milk pan. Smooth the ashes to an even depth over the
bottom of the box, and measure it to see that it is even.
Then with the paddle mark off the surface in equal rect-
angles, say io to 12 inches on a side. Each rectangle
will thus become the surface of a rectangular solid of
ashes (which may be called a cube), 4 inches deep ; and
each cube thus indicated will contain 6to 8 quarts. It
is supposed that the quantity of seed contained in each
is also equal; knowing the total quantity of seed put
into the box, and the number of cubes marked off, the
amount of seed in each is also known.
The next step, therefore, is to mark off on the beds
the space that one of these cubes will sow at the rate
above allowed, viz., four tablespoonfuls to each 1 oo-
foot bed. With the paddle transfer one of the cubes
to the tin pan, trimming down evenly the sides of
the mass whence it was taken. Mix it well again in
the pan, to insure the seed being distributed uniformly


over every part of the bed. . Before beginning to sow,
mark off the south line of the bed. Now scatter the
ashes very lightly over the bed, going up one side and
down the other, so lightly as to make the round of the
bed three times before the supply is u'sed up. All these
pains are needed, even by a practical hand, to get the
seed sown uniformly. Sow well up the south line
(marked); but what is sown over the north line (and
some will go over) is allowed for in the above apportion-
ment of seed. When sown, the ashes ought to present
the appearance of a light snow-fall, and not look patchy
and blotchy. After this, roll thoroughly with the roller
already described, allowing it to rest on the bed and act
by its own weight only, not pressing it. In this opera-
tion, if the roller be passed either lengthwise of the bed
or directly across it, it will shape the surface into slight
undulations or form depressions or tunnels to which
water will tend or accumulate ; the roller should there-
fore be worked along the bed so as to make a set of
zigzag curves from one end of it to the other.
Ihe earth must be dry enough not to adhere to the
roller; and sowing should only be done when it is in
this condition. Nor can sowing be done properly when
there is any wind. If winds be persistent, the early
morning before they rise, and the evening after they have
ceased, can be availed of. Should a portion of the mixed
ashes and seed be left over to be sown at a subsequent
time, they must be again damped and again run through
the sieve, for otherwise they are bound to be lumpy.
If these operations be all performed as directed, the
product ought to be a set of plants that may confidently
be expected to yield in due season an abundant supply of
thrifty plants, coming on well together.


Watering.
After the surface of these beds shall be once wetted,
whether by rain or watering, it must not be allowed to
become again dry till the young plants are fairly
advanced. It must be clearly understood that a single
drying out to the depth of an inch or even less will be
fatal to a large part of the sowing. The watering* is of
course most easily done with a force pump and hose, but
where the beds do not exceed in extent 600 yards—say
for a crop of 40 acres or thereabouts—one man can
water them with a good-sized garden watering-pot, pro-
vided he have but a few yards to carry the water. The
water is to be thrown on the top of the covers, through
the sheer material of which it is discharged as a
fine spray on the surface of the bed. The force-pump
ejects its stream with the proper force for this purpose.
Where the watering-pot is used it should be held as high
as a man’s shoulder, in order that the water may fall on
the cover with sufficient force to go through it to the bed
at the point of impact, instead of flowing down on the
under side of the cover to its lower edge. Ten gallons
of water applied daily to each cover will be ample.
Weeding.
%
In two or three weeks after watering begins—the
length of the time depending on the character of the
season—the young plants may be looked for. They
appear with two tiny leaves not larger than the smallest
pin’s head. Before they become discoverable,' weeds
will begin to shoAV more or less abundantly. Ihese
however, can commonly be left till the young tobacco
plants can be discovered quite thickly. Then weeding
must begin. About twelve hours in advance of weeding


wet down thoroughly the beds which are to be weeded.
Rethove a cover and lay a piece of board across the bed,
one end resting on the back board of the bed, the other
on that of the next parallel bed. On the board a man
can recline and draw the weeds rapidly and thoroughly,
moving the board forwards as his work progresses. In
this work, care must be taken not to disturb the
ground. Where a weed appears deep rooted, subject it
to a light steady strain, first in one direction then in
another, not breaking its stalk—and it will come away,
If the earth around it offers to break up, hold it down
with the fingers of the other hand while the weed is
being drawn out. A bed well weeded ought to show no
other sign of the operation than a number of clean round
holes.
Replace each cover as fast as its bed is weeded. After
weeding, wet the beds well down again to settle the
earth promptly. Thus proceeding, two men can properly
tend 600 yards of beds, including watering them.
Bringing on plants.
It may be desired to hasten the maturing of the plants
in a portion of the beds, or in the whole of them. When
the plants appear to be making a generally healthy
growth, the beds being well filled with plants having
four leaves each, and it is merely desired to harden them
to the stage fit for transplanting, the water should be
withheld for a few days, until the plants show some signs
for want of it by the green of their leaves looking wan
and faintish. Then water copiously, and withhold again.
By the second day following this watering, a good many
of the plants, and perhaps a sufficiency, will be found to
have attained the desired condition. It may, however.


be necessary to repeat the operation. By these means
a set of really thrifty beds, which had attained to the
state of forwardness contemplated ought, within a week
of first withholding the water, to be in a condition for
the beginning of the general transplanting.
The leaves of the young plants should show a deep
green colour and a general look of maturity quite distinct
from the tender emerald-green of the younger plants;
r
the. stalk should have exchanged its soft, cellular, watery,
translucent appearance, for a firm, opaque one.
The specific effect of this treatment is to cause the
roots to push out and down in search of the receded
moisture while it is withheld, and to take up food freely
and abundantly as soon as it is again supplied. Should
the plants fail to respond promptly to this treatment, or
should they have failed in ten or twelve weeks at furthest
after first making their appearance to have developed at
least four well-grown leaves, it may be suspected there
is something wrong with the beds. Some difference in
the rate of growth is to be looked for, according to the
character of the season, the coldness of the weather, the
warmth of the soil, &c. Too abundant watering may
have contributed to keep the ground cold and to retard
growth. But after making proper allowance for all
these things, the plants may have failed to have come
forward as they ought. It must then be inferred that
the food needful for them is not within the reach of the
rootlets, and they must be stimulated. Liquid ammonia
added to the water will bring them forward if anything
will, but a strong solution of chicken or pigeon manure
will commonly be sufficient for the purpose.
Dump the manure into the tank or reservoir in which
the water for the plant-beds is maintained, and water


the beds frequently, moderating the quantity given at
one watering; that is, give the soil a chance to get
warmed, taking care that it does not become dry.
Some time after the first stimulus administered in this
way the plants will grow freely with the ordinary
watering. This shows that only the surface layer of the
beds was deficient, from some cause, in plant food. At
other times it may be found necessary to continue the
use of the liquid manure throughout the planting
season.
It was to obviate the chance of this set-back that in
forming the plant-beds the soil was worked for a depth
of only about 3 inches'from the surface.
That superficial layer will rarely fail to contain suffi-
cient food for the young plants, even should there be a
proportionately barren subsoil below, which it was
intended should not be disturbed.
Sprouting seed.
When it is desired to bring forward plants quickly
from the time of sowing, the seed for that purpose may
be sprouted. To do this, sift into a suitable vessel (say
a tin pan with holes in the bottom) rotten wood to a bulk
two or three times that of the amount of seed to be
sprouted. Moisten with milk-warm water, and place
where the temperature can be maintained at 70 degrees
Fahrenheit. When the weather serves, . expose to the
sun. The mass should not be allowed to dry, nor the
lower portion to be much wetter than the upper. Warm
water to maintain the proper moisture should be added
several times in each twenty-four hours. If a few drops
of ammonia be added to it, the sprouting is likely to


take place sooner, and, some people believe, the subse-
quent development of the young plant to proceed more
rapidly.
After the tenth day, examine the seeds daily with a
magnifying glass, and when the brown hulls begin to
crack, disclosing the white kernel, germination has
begun, and the seed is fit to sow. This ought to be in
from ten to twenty days after wetting.
To sow, mix with ashes, and proceed as before de-
scribed.
Seed to be sown later than July ought to be sprouted,
unless the ground be likely to freeze (which is scarcely
to be apprehended in New South Wales), and it would
be well in some localities to take some chances on this
point; and if a killing frost do come the beds can be
sown over again. Sprouting may also be resorted to to
test the vitality of the seed. Another test is to throw a
pince of seed on a hot stove, when, if it is sound, the
seed should pop with a crepitating sound.
Fleas.
During a period of not more than forty-eight hours,
that is, from the day following its first emergence from
the soil to the end of the second day following that, the
young plant is liable to destruction in California (but
whether so in New South Wales I do not know) from a
minute flea, itself scarcely larger than a tobacco seed,
which will appear in the beds in such swarms that the
surface of the ground appears literally “ alive.” Within
twenty-four hours they may sweep away an entire
growth of young plants within the ages specified. After
they are three days old, the plants appear proof against


or safe from the attack of this enemy. He is apt to
make his appearance on a warm, windless day, such as
are always liable to occur at the season of the year when
the tobacco plants are sprouting. He rarely, if ever, shows
himself on a cold or boisterous day. These fleas are easily
destroyed by the dust of tobacco, which should be sprinkled
freely on the beds as soon as they are detected.
As the dust falls the surface of the bed seems to rise
to meet it, as myriads of the little creatures leap into the
air, but they fall back and are heard from no more.
Thus easily extinguished they need not be dreaded,
provided sufficient watchfulness is maintained to detect
their first appearance. The plants encounter no other
serious enemy while they are in the beds.
The total cost of making and tending seed beds (ex-
clusive of cost of covers, but inclusive of that of seed),
is in California about 9s. for each acre to be planted.
One proposition should never be lost sight of: that too
much care cannot be expended in the preparation and
maintenance of seed beds, and all money laid out in this
direction is true economy. Healthy plants, and plenty
of them, form the basis on which the whole enterprise
rests. The planters in New South Wales would do well
to obtain fresh supplies of seed from all the States in
America where the best tobacco is grown, and also from
Havana, which can be done through Messrs. R, W.
Cameron & Co., of 23, South William Street, New
York, whose correspondents in Sydney are Messrs.
Towns & Co. I learned while in Virginia that in two
or three years the seed of the fine Havana tobacco does
not maintain its distinctive character, but yields plants
similar in all respects to the ordinary plants of that
State.


In California the planters invariably import every year
from Havana the seed they require for raising tobacco
suitable for cigars. The seed of plants grown from the
Havana variety in America is never used to propagate
that kind.
I am not able to advise in regard to the seed raised in
California, but it would be well for our planters to test
it in comparison with what they may import direct from
Connecticut and Florida.
The planting gang—management of beds—couering and
uncovering.
During the season each hand may be expected to set,
on an average, 2,000 plants a day. Picked hands, after
practice, may average 3,000 each ; a very expert one
can set 4,000.
Knowing the total number of plants to be set, and
the period within which it is desired to complete the
operation, the number of planting hands to be hired is
first ascertained.
According to the variety of the tobacco planted will
be the number of plants to be set on each acre—6,ooo
of the Connecticut variety, and 12,000 of the Havana.
It will require six hands to set 12,000. plants each day,
and equal number will be required to attend to the beds
and other concurrent operations. The distribution of
these will become apparent as the operations are detailed.
A two-horse waggon and team will also be required.
The beds during planting.
Provide at least a dozen boxes to contain the plants
after they are drawn from the beds, each 24 by 18 inches,


and 6 inches deep. The cracks between the boards
forming the bottom should be slightly open. Each box
will hold about i,ooo well-grown plants.
The plants to be set out one forenoon should be
drawn from the beds the previous afternoon, and a
supply for half a day’s planting thus kept on hand ahead.
The beds from which plants are to be drawn should be
copiously wet down six to twelve hours in advance of
drawing. This wetting is done in order that the roots
may be drawn without breaking, and it must be done
long enough in advance for the water to have drained
away, so that muddy lumps or clods may not adhere to
the roots. The degree of development which a plant
ought to have attained for transplanting has been
intimated in speaking of the management of the beds.
Some have described it by saying that the plant at its
“ crown,” or the point of junction of root and stem,
should show that it had begun to make woody fibre.
As has already been said, the plant is ready when the
stem at this point shall have exchanged the cellular,
watery, semi-translucent appearance of its structure for
an opaque solid one. About the same time the root will
acquire a woody look. The plant will have four leaves,
and is always ready for transplanting before it has six
leaves. Where the plants come very thick (as they ought)
in the bed, they will stretch up tall and spindling, and are
therefore better to handle in planting. The quantity of
root attached will vary with the management of the beds.
If the supply of water has been constant, the season warm,
and the growth rapid, there will be very little root. If it
has been necessary to urge the maturing of the plants by
alternately withholding and supplying water, the roots
will be long, and sometimes come away in bunches or
tassels. One sort is quite as good as another for planting,
where this is done with reasonable care.


Management of plants.
The plants are to be drawn as already described for
weeding by a steady strain, directed (if needful) first one
way then another. The roots ought to come away with-
out breaking, and will, if the beds have been properly
watered in advance. The ground around the root ought
not to be disturbed or broken. If a plant too young be
lifted along with the one meant to be drawn it should
be set back again. As each plant is drawn, clean off any
earth which may adhere to the roots by a fillip with the
finger, and clean thoroughly. This will be tedious if
the beds have been wetted too recently before draw ing,
and it was partly in order that this portion of the opera-
tion might give less trouble that a light sandy land for
beds was recommended. And it is necessary to clean
the roots, for if a bit of wet earth be left adhering to
them it will, when it comes to be set, be contracted , its
excess of moisture having been squeezed out it w ill
form a clod which will effectually arrest circulation and
kill the plant. Place in the bottom of the plant-box
half a gunny or grain sack, folded and well wetted, and
the other half also wet over the top. Set the box with
one end resting on one of the backboards, so that it
inclines away from the sun. As each plant is drawn
with one hand it is placed in the other (the earth being
filliped off the roots), and so held that the root shall not
be exposed to the sun. Each handful is placed in the
box, care being taken not to pack too tight, and the wet
sack cover is immediately replaced. The hand must not
be so full of plants as to risk the squeezing of them.
Should there be much wind the roots will dry quickly,
and they must not therefore be held too long, but placed
in the box as soon as possible. As soon as each box is


filled, moderately water it (on top of the covering|bag),
and convey to a shady place, or put the empty ones on
top of the filled ones. The roots must not be washed (to
clean the dirt off), nor must enough water be given after
they are in the box to wash them. To diminish the risk
of this, cracks are left in the bottoms of the boxes
sufficient to insure the surplus water draining off. The
boxes should be moderately watered every twelve hours,
and after being taken to the field, as each fresh box is
used, a little water should be sprinkled over the cover
before it is removed. Thus tended, plants may be safely
set out two or three or even four days after having been
drawn from the beds ; nor will a journey of one or two
days’ duration affect them to an amount worth speaking
of.
As each plant bed is gone over, its cover is to be
promptly replaced, and its cover wetted down again to
settle the ground thoroughly back about the roots of the
remaining plants.
It may be mentioned here as well as elsewhere, that
as soon as planting is finished the cavers of the plant
beds should all be stacked up, and covered with boards.
There will otherwise be a good deal of torn cover, and
not a few broken frames to repair next season.
Setting out.
Provide a sufficient number of prods or dibbles—best
made from old waggon spokes, and easily shaped with
a draw-knife —15 inches long and inch in diameter.
Draw to a sharp point by a curved or rounding outline,
for if drawn straight it will wear away too fast. Round
off the opposite end to accommodate it to the hand.


Construct also a drag to take off the tops of the ridges
as follows :
Into a piece of timber, 4 by 6 inches, fit a pair of
shafts at such an angle that, when twitched up, the bottom
of the 4 by 6 piece shall be horizontal.
Opposite to the shafts set a pair of handles like plough
handles. When in working positionthey ought to stand
at nearly the same angle as the shaft. If set steeper,
the labour of elevating or depressing the drag, to take
more or less dirt, is increased. Each planting hand
needs also a sort of apron bag to contain his plants, put
on like that used by a carpenter for his nails when
shingling, which plant bag should be only 6 or 8 inches
deep, and should stand well out from the man’s body,
so as not to squeeze the plants. It is best made, per-
haps, of a rice mat, folded over and over again, outwards,
as one rolls up his sleeves. A sufficient bag may, how-
ever, be made of gunny. When beginning planting, a
glove or other protection to the palm of the hands, used
for two or three days, will probably save some trouble-
some blisters.
These preparations being complete, convey the boxes
of plants to the field and set them in the shade, or cover
them up from the sun. Start the drag, taking off the
tops of two ridges at once down to a good solid breadth
of moisture, but not more than necessary.
Each planter fills his apron with plants, the roots
downwards, and sprinkles them lightly with water. He
takes his position in the furrow with the ridge on which
he is to plant extending away before him on his left
hand ; as he plants he therefore works along leftwards.
Ele takes a plant in his left hand, adjusting the roots by


giving them a fillip with his right, and taking care to
knock off any dirt which may be adhering (but of which
there ought not to be any); at the same time he knocks
away with his right foot an inch or so of soil quite across
the ridge at the point at which he is about to set the
plant, and pats it slightly so as to make it firm, but not
compact. Then with the dibble he makes a hole in the
exact centre of the ridge, say 3 inches deep, well open
at the top, by a circular movement of the dibble, so that
he can see the roots when he puts them in and see what
he is doing. The plant is to be held between the thumb
and fingers, exactly at the crown, the leaves being
within the hand, so that the backs of the four fingers may
rest on the surface of the earth at the left edge of the
hole, preventing that side from breaking up when the
pressure of the dibble comes against it, while the thumb
protects the crown of the plant from being buried by the
earth which the dibble will move up. The roots may
thus be laid—each filament being free—against the left
wall of the hole, and the planter can see that they are so.
Then insert the dibble slantwise about 3 inches away
from the hole, so that its point will reach the bottom of
the hole, and by a movement—at once lateral and slightly
upwards—bring the earth up firmly against the roots of
the plant. Withdraw the dibble and insert it again some
3 inches off, and by a similar operation fill up the second
hole; close this third hole in the same way—all this time
keeping the left hand at the plant. Now releasing the
plant and raising the body, close the fourth or last dibble
hole, which should be 9 or 10 inches from the plant, by a
firm pressure of the right foot. As you let go the plant
give it a slight pull, to be sure that its roots are firmly
in the ground. It is likely at first, somewhat to the
planter’s surprise, that they are not, and the plant


must be set again; but in setting a score of plants
a careful hand will acquire the trick. Then take a step
to the left, coming into position to set the next plant, at
the same time drawing the right foot sideways along the
top of the ridge to remove the top earth, so that the spots
cleared to set the plants may not form a series of cups.
In overseeing a gang, keep close up to them, and test
each man’s plant by giving it a slight pull. They must
beset firm , or there will be serious loss. It is as easy as
not to do the planting properly if the hands start right.
Break in the hands to plant well, although they set only
150 or less per hour. Be firm in insisting on having each
point done well; make a “ drill ” of it, as if you were a
sergeant training recruits for the army. Be patient.
When the hands shall have got the knack of doing it all
right, then make them work up to the rate of 200 or 250
an hour. Some will be faster than others ; and if so, let
those who finish their rows first set plants on the rows
of the slower hands, so that they may all start about even
on the return rows. The proper distances between the
plants are, for the different varieties of tobacco, as follows:
—For Havana, 15 inches; for Florida or Orinoco (Vir-
ginia), 20 inches ; for Connecticut, 30 inches. This gives
to each acre the following number of plants: —Of
Havana, 11,616 plants; of Florida or Orinoco, 8,712
plants ; of Connecticut, 5,808 plants.
The faults to be looked for in planting are these
1. Not cleaning off properly little clods of earth or
bits of mud that may be adhering to the roots,
left there by the carelessness of the bed planters.
2. Not making the first hole large enough, so that
the roots are consequently liable to be doubled
up, which is nearly always fatal.


3. Failing to plant straight along the centre line of
the ridge.
4. Failing to set the plants at equal distances; the
slower hands having a special tendency to set
the plants too far apart.
5. Failing to bring the earth firmly about the roots ;
tested by the plant coming away at a slight
pull. This is frequently fatal.
6. Failing to close up the lower part of the hole in
which the plant was set. This comes from not
inserting the dibble, when closing, at a sufficient
slant, or not putting it in deep enough. This
fault is not tested by pulling at the plant, for
the roots may be firmly enough in the upper
part of the hole, while their lower ends are
dangling, or are in earth so loose that the air
will dry it out.
7. Making the three prods with the dibble too near
together, so that the pressure of the foot in
closing the last one compacts the earth about
the plant. This retards early growth. The
plant should be set wholly with the dibble.
8. Setting the plants too deep, so as to bury the
crown. This is a very persistent and vexatious
fault, especially where the plants to be set have
short roots, as they will have if they come on
quickly in the beds.
9. Failing to clear the space on which the plant is
to be set —quite across the ridge, and failing to
drag down with the foot the crest or ridge
between two successive plants. The effect of
this is to have the plants set on a series of cups,


from the edges of which earth rolls down on them,
especially when the time comes to cultivate.
10. Failing to pat the earth firm enough in which
the plants are set, so that it is liable to dry out
if there be much wind when the plants are
uncovered.
This is hardly likely to kill plants, but may retard
growth until the ground has been settled by first culti-
vating and hoeing.
If these faults be avoided, the ground having been put
into proper order, and in the absence of anything
specially unpropitious in the season, the loss of plants
at this first setting may not exceed one per cent. The
hotter the weather the better for planting ,■ but drying winds
are not favourable.
Covering.
Each plant as it is set is to be covered with a small
handful of grass, which is dropped by men who follow
the planters. If the grass be good and not too long, so
as to twist up and tangle, nor yet too short—say from a
foot to eighteen inches in length—one hand will cover
for three planting, or two may cover for seven. But if
weeds, wire-grass, or other trash be relied upon for this
purpose, it may take one hand to cover for two ; or even
if it be attempted to use long wire-grass and clover,
hand for hand. And commonly this stuff will have to be
hauled some distance. Taking all things into account
it is decided economy to sow grain for covering, and it
should be done on land adjoining the tobacco. It should
be sown thick —say 120 lbs. of wheat to the acre—then
one acre will provide for four acres of tobacco. By
sowing early it is sure to be ready by the time it is


wanted, while—should it become apparent that the crop
is going to be too long for “ covering ” by that time—
it can be mown over once in advance. It is well to roll
this cover-land at the proper time to make the grain
stool out more. A horse-mower will cut in an hour a
supply that will be sufficient to cover the planting of six
hands through the day; but if the cover be over two
feet high, it will be economy to cut it with the scythe
and take two cuts at it.
Wheat, barley, or oats make equally good cover.
The cover being cut, a two-horse team will haul within
three hours, a day’s supply for six planters. It is to be
distributed along the road at the long sides of each block—
that is at the ends of the ridges—in convenient cocks. The
men or boys who cover take each as much as they can
carry under the left arm, and twitch out small handfuls with
the right hand, depositing exactly on top of the plants.
The tendency of these hands is to waste grass by scattering
it all around the plant where it is not wanted, increasing
the work of supplying it and retarding their own. It may
also increase the subsequent labour of uncovering.
The cost of setting the crop, including that of tending
the beds during the operation of resetting, value of horse
feed, use of horses and waggon, and all outgoings, may
be taken in California at 4s. per 1,000 plants. It is pos-
sible to work at less cost.
The plants must be left covered until they begin to
root and grow. The plants thus protected from sun and
wind cannot fail to live, and the more so because the
sun’s rays warm the earth round their roots and draw
up the moisture to them. If left alone they will cer-
tainly flourish, but they have two insect enemies to
escape—the cut-worm and the bud-worm.


First cultivating and the covering.
The cover, which soon becomes a wisp of bleached hay,
is a breeding place for insects, most of which, however,
are harmless. Still it is for this reason better to get rid
of if as soon as it is no longer needed. If convenient,
let a shovel plough be run between the ridges within a
week or ten days after setting the plants, and before
they are uncovered. Mr. Joseph Duncan, who is in the
employment of the Consolidated Tobacco Company of
California, has devised a useful attachment to be used
with the plough for this purpose. It consists of a pair of
stout sheet iron wings applied to the sides of the
beam just forward of the share, and reaching down to
touch the ground when the plough is at work. They
separate as they descend, being adjusted at such an angle
that the earth raised by the plough can flow back freely
under them ; at the same time they arrest any clods that
the plough may tend to throw off on either hand on to
the young plants. The plough must, however, be fol-
lowed by a hand who will pick off any clods that may
be thus rolled over on them; but the “wings” will be
found to save both hire and plants.
This first cultivating before uncovering is wanted if
there has been no rain to settle the ridges, which will
have become rather light and porous, and is wanted if
there has been rain to break up the crust which will
have thereby been formed. This crust is a great check
to growth, which it brings nearly to a standstill until it is
broken up. s
When it has been formed, the hoes, therefore, should
be got at it as quickly as possible.


The plough should be run as deep as the ground had
been cultivated, so that the hard subsoil may be felt with
the point.
Perhaps the only practical rule for uncovering to offer
the beginner is this: —When the plants look as if they
had started, uncover one hundred or so, and see how
they stand. If they be all right, go on to the rest; if
they die, wait a few days longer; then uncover a few
more and again wait the result.
The plants will of course hang down during the day,
but if they come up again during the night they are
doing well.
The condition of the plants under the cover should be
looked to. If bud- or cut-worms are found to be operating
freely, the cover ought to come off as soon as practicable.
Frost must not be feared too much. In the first place, it
takes a pretty hard frost to cut down a tobacco plant;
in the second place, if cut down it is only set back—not
killed. The worms, on the other hand, make an end
of it. But if it appears that neither of these worms is at
work under the cover, then there is no hurry at all about
lifting it. And especially the work of planting ought
not to be interfered with for this purpose. Unless there
be a crust to break up, planting may be finished before
the hoes are set to work, but they should start as soon as
ever the first planting is done. By this time the plants
which have died at the first planting can be known, and
a portion of the hands can re-set them. But be in no
hurry to give up a plant for dead. After the plants have
had proper chance to root —say ten days of warm
weather or a fortnight to three weeks of cold—those


that appear dead may be pulled up and looked to.
If a growth of white spicules, like white mould, be
found on the roots, it shows that the plant was start-
ing to grow. When the plant is really dead, the
cause can also be deduced nine times out of ten, and
will be found to be one of the faults in planting pre-
viously enumerated, or the work of a bud- or cut-worm.
If the work of the cut-worm, the plant will have been cut
off at the crown. The earth may in that case be turned
up with the fingers for a distance of 5 or 6 inches, and
about 2 inches deep, and the malefactor found. The
bud-worm, which is very small, operates by eating his
way down the centre of the stalk, leaving it a hollow
tube to the crown, of the plant, where he eats his way
out. It should be learnt as soon as practicable through
what fault plants are being lost, in order that it may be
corrected in the balance of the plants to be set. During
this examination, test the condition of the earth about
the plants that are growing by pressing it, and if it
prove to be very loose and open, by settling an inch or
so under moderate pressure, the shovel plough ought to
be got to work promptly.
Uncovering can be done very expeditiously. A than
starts at the end of a row and picks up the covers with
his right hand, clapping each handful, got from five or
six plants, under his left arm, without raising his body
or breaking his pace, which can be kept at a smart walk
across the block. Care must be taken not to twitch up
plants along with the covers. The armfuls of dry grass
are to be thrown down in the road at the ends of the
rows. If the covering of one row makes more than one
armful, it shows that too much had been put on, thus
causing a waste of stuff and loss of labour in every way.


General Management—Hoeing.
The tobacco fields should be kept free from trash of
all sorts. Weeds growing along fences or .elsewhere
should be carefully mowed down and burned when dry.
All such stuff breeds insects, and the mischief they may
do will become apparent in the losses of plants and the
condition of those that survive in the two or three rows
adjacent to such stuff.
The shovel plough may now be kept steadily running
until the plants become too large to admit its passage
without breaking the leaves. This promotes the free
rise of moisture.
The first hoeing should be given as soon as conve-
nient. An advantage will be found in first striking the
hoe horizontally at a depth of about 2 inches, both before
and behind the plant. Draw the earth snugly up about
the stalks to the stems of the first leaves. Should weeds
come up after this, the crop should be hoed again.
f
At this point there may be a rest of two or three weeks
(and the only one of the season) before the next opera-
tions—worming and suckering. Most likely about this
time the tobacco or horn worm will appear.
Cultiuating — Worming.
I am not aware whether the tobacco worm is prevalent
in Australia, but if it is, a sharp look-out must be kept
for its first appearance. It is easily detected by well-
known signs, and hands must be set to work to pick it
off and destroy it. One man can clear 5,000 plants in
the day of this worm. There is not only a first crop of
these worms but a second, which must also be promptly
dealt with, for a broken leaf is, especially for cigars, a
loss of value.


The only effectual mode of checking the increase of
these and other mischievous and destructive insects is
by deep ploughing in autumn, and thus turning the
chrysalis to the winter frosts.
Suckering.
As the plant develops, a sucker starts at the point of
junction of'each leaf with the stalk, commencing with
the lower leaves. Up to this point the planter might
have proceeded, following successively the methods
pointed out, almost without the exercise of his own
judgment; but from this point on, the degree of his
success will be influenced by the amount of judgment
he brings to bear on the work. As a rule for suckering,
it might be said, defer it until the flower-stalks begin to
sprout, by which time the lower suckers may be a foot
or more long, while those at the topmost leaves will be
sufficiently developed to be got hold of and broken out.
If the plants are making a strong growth, and the
condition and character of soil are such that that kind
of growth can be effected to the end of the season, the
rule above enunciated may be adopted as a working one;
but the rational plan is to take the end aimed at into
view and keep it there.
The end aimed at is the production of the greatest
amount of cured leaves of good quality. In order that
they may be of proper quality, they must not be too
thick ; therefore, where a plant is growing rankly, early
in the season, and all about it looks well, all the leaves
it will produce and all the suckers too (for a time) may be
wanted to dispose advantageously of its exuberant assimi-
lation of plant food, and.formation of plant material.


If, on the other hand, the plant be growing indiffer-
ently, or the season is late, so that it may be supposed
the whole powers of the plant will be required to
mature the leaves, suckers ought to be kept down from
the start. Or suppose the plant to be growing vigorously
enough, yet there may be reason to fear that moisture
may fail it later—as where there are gravelly sub-soils—
then its growth during the fore part of the season is
about all it will make; and in that case the whole
strength of the plant ought to be thrown at that time
into a proper number of leaves.
Or if the planter finds that his soil, from whatever
peculiarity, is actually drying out at a depth of five or
six inches below the surface, he is to govern himself
accordingly, and see that he secures the best use out of
the brief remaining period of growth. For when moisture
is withdrawn the leaves stop growing “ all at once” ; they
begin to yellow, and the plant throws its remaining
strength into the stalk, which then shoots up to form the
seed-pod, with leaflets two or three inches long on it.
Other considerations than those suggested above will
also present themselves to the mind of the planter as he
brings the crop along, and will direct his action. He
may foresee that it will be expedient to send the hoes
through again this month or the next, and to modify the
work accordingly, which suggests the remark here that
no expense, for which the well-doing of the plant appears
to call, should be spared on a tobacco crop. Any labour
expended on the plants which will do them good will be
repaid over and over. In a general way it is the extra
labour which makes the extra growth, and it is the extra
growth which makes the greatest profit. A poor crop
costs nearly as much as a good one. In suckering, the


work is done with both hands, commencing at the top of
the plant and working down, being particular to get
every one, and not to break the leaves. This requires
care, especially in breaking out large suckers, which are
apt to whip the leaf beneath and break its edge. This
work can be done three times as fast as a man thinks it
can when he begins.
The total cost of cultivating, wortning, and suckering,
including use of horses and tools, feed consumed, &c.,
may be taken in California at 4s. per 1,000 plants at the
very most.
Topping and cutting.
The tobacco plant shoots up its stalk at top, sending
out some four or five main suckers branchwise, to bear
its blossoms and seed-pods. About the point of branch-
ing and above it forms a number of small leaves, which
are under merchantable size, and also, too far behind
those of the rest of the plant, in point of maturity, to be
cured with them. At the time the plant is cut, all this
top growth is, therefore, to be broken off. This opera-
tion is called “ topping.” On all but rich virgin tobacco
land the growth of the plant is not sufficiently vigorous
to form all this top-growth and at the same time pro-
perly to mature its main leaves. Not only this, but it is
found further expedient on the poorer lands to break off
several of the lowest and less valuable leaves next the
ground, and this is called “ pruning”—that is, leaving
only twelve to sixteen of the largest and best leaves to
receive the remaining strength of the plant.
But if these operations be performed on a plant which
is growing vigorously, drawing its substance from a soil
capable of supplying whatever amount of food the plant is
able to assimilate, very different results naturally follow.


Under these circumstances, the first effect of topping
at a similar stage of development, is to start a rank
growth of suckers, with which, thereafter, it is almost
impossible [to contend successfully. Besides this, an
of material is formed within the sub-
stance of the main leaves; by which they become thick
and velvety, with heavy wooden stems, curving up strong
and rank in flavour and of low value.
And this, I have been given to understand, is the
defect generally of New South Wales leaf.
The market value of tobacco increases very rapidly
with the improvement in quality.
Thus, when the value of inferior to common Ohio
tobacco is quoted in the market at thirty shillings to
thirty-two shillings per hundred pounds, medium spangled
and fine red is worth 48/ to 52/, and yellow 100/ per 100 lbs.
Kentucky leaf varies from 38/ to 44/ for common to good,
64/ to 72/ for good to fine, and for selections, 80/ to 100/,
and often higher. So also in regard to Virginian, prices
have a wide range according to quality; 24/ to 32/ for
common, 48/ for good leaf, 64/ for selections for shipping,
and for yellow, 100/ per 100 lbs.
The method of sorting different tobaccos will be
explained hereafter; but the practical mind will see in
the light of these market quotations how largely the
profits of tobacco culture may depend on the quality
produced, and how rapidly they rise as the quality
improves.
The price realised for the choice article is fully three
times that of the inferior.
As a first proposition, then, it is to be noted that in all
the tobaccos, except those used in making cigars, light-


ness of colour, approximating to a bright lemon yellow,
controls the class and price of all the better qualities.
Second, that practice, shows that these light colours
cannot be produced from sappy leaves ; and further, that
thick leaves, produced by forcing too large a proportion
of the growth of the plant into them, are sappy. In
order that it may come to a yellow colour, the leaf must
have begun to yellow, that is, must show bronzed patches
while yet on the stalk before cutting. Before it can do
this it must stop growing. Hence those varieties of
tobacco in which these colours are desired should not be
preferred for low alluvial soils, in which, during the hot
close of the summer, moisture to feed the growth of the
plants will continue freely rising. For the cigar tobacco,
on the other hand, deep rich browns are the desired
colours, and greater fineness of texture. To obtain this
last, the plant must be cut often at an early stage
of the process of maturing. At this time the leaves are
necessarily sappy, and the brown colours sought will
come out unavoidably in the curing.
This general glance at the ends which are aimed at in
the work yet to be done will contribute to render the
description of it intelligible, and will, at the same time,
suggest the proper adaptation of its methods to varying
circumstances of soil and season. They will show when
and why “topping” or “pruning,” some time before
cutting, is in some cases in order, and why in others it
is not. Some of the cases in which the planter may
expect to “ top” his plants may be indicated.
If his field be of considerable extent its surface is
likely to be more or less uneven ; if it also adjoin a creek,
the action of which will commonly have contributed to
have formed the soil, it may be underlain in parts by


gravelly sub-soil; in which case the sub-soil will also often
be nearest the surface at its depressions. In any case the
depression will be the coldest spots on the field, owing
to the moisture settling in them ; and the same cause
will there settle and compact the soil, so that during the
later parts of the season the moisture will rise then
less freely; and finally, if there be a gravelly sub-soil,
overlain by a thin covering of upper soil, all moisture
will here first fail and the ground will “ dry out.” On
such spots, therefore, plants will be the slowest to start,
slowest to grow, and first to stop growing. The planter
should watch the development of all portions of his crop,
and give to each the special management its own growth
calls for. Plants may (and will) grow less luxuriantly
in some parts of a field than in others, and yet not
require different treatment. They may be going to grow
all through the season to its end, to mature their leaves at
about the same time with the others ; but they are going
to give a lighter yield. But if, besides being comparatively
stunted, the leaves also begin to yellow, showing bronzed
patches, when the rest of the general crop is a vivid
green ; if several pairs of the topmost leaves are small—
out of proportion to the others —it may be known that
the plant is beginning to fail. It should be topped at
once, the stalk being taken off down to the last pairs of
leaves that are 12 inches long. In ten days or a fort-
night suckers will be started, which should all be taken
out. After this a third set will appear, and then the
plant will hardly have energy to put out any more.
l/l/hen to cut.
The planter who has selected a good soil and got his
plants started early will find them growing vigorously


up to the month of February. Before the end of that
month, however, the first change towards maturing
ought to be visible in the varieties he may have designed
to cure up to bright colours. The lower three pairs of
leaves ought at least to exhibit a general bronzing of
colour, with patches of yellow, and the higher this change
may have proceeded on the plant, and the broader
the yellowing of the leaves, the better. If the month of
March opens before the crop begins to exhibit generally
this process of maturing, there is a poor prospect of secu-
ring bright colours that season. It would often then be
better to abandon all idea of it, and the choice is presented
between proceeding to cut the crop before the leaves have
become too heavy for use in cigar-making, or topping it so
as to get heavy leaves and weight of yield; the dark
colours which have become inevitable will now come in
due accord with cigar tobacco, or will be partly compensated
for by heavy weight. But the Orinoco variety of tobacco
is not adapted to cigar-making, while the Florida is
equally suited for cigars, plug (chewing), fine cut, or
smoking, according to the condition in which it be cured.
For this reason the planting of Florida was, in the
beginning of this paper, recommended for upland. It
offers the option at this later stage of the season of
making a good cigar tobacco, should it become apparent
that a high class article (bright colour) for other uses is
unattainable.
One reason for preferring Connecticut seed-leaf to
Florida for moist alluvials is, that on such lands dark
colours only are likely to be attainable, and when the
product of such variety is at its best, the first-named
ought to be quicker of sale at a better price; and the
Connecticut variety also is peculiarly susceptible of


change of colour during the process of curing—is more
tractable under manipulation in passing to any desired
set of shades.
It is not easy to describe the stage of maturity at
which the tobacco intended for the cigar-makers’ market
may be most advantageously cut. Where it has grown
very freely, it will be ready for cutting about three weeks
after the seed-stalks have begun to branch.
If it has grown more slowly, the maturity of the
leaves may be relatively in advance of that of the seed-
stalks.
The nearest a general working rule can be formulated
for thrifty plants is this:—Break out the seed-stalk at
point of branching when the seeds become fully formed
in their pods, and sucker the plants if they then require
it. Suckers will start in a few days. Break them out
before they have grown so strong as to render the oper-
ation one of difficulty, soon a fresh lot will start; cut
the plant before these shall have grown large enough to
interfere with the main leaves in piling and hanging for
curing.
The old planter recognizes the ripeness of his plants
for cutting by a solid granulated appearance of the
under-side of their leaves, together with their general
strength and firmness of texture. It is desirable to cut
Havana plants as soon as they really become ripe for it,
both because the best quality of tobacco will result, and
because a heavier growth will be secured to the second
and third cuttings which are yet to be made. At the
same time it will not do to cut too soon, or the leaves
will curl up and be deficient in weight.


Although such of them as class into cigar wrappers
will thus, in working up, go much farther to the pound
weight, and for that reason are intrinsically worth more
money, yet in practice, not the grower, but the manu-
facturer, will secure the benefit of that advantage.
A score or so of the finest plants should be selected to
save seed from—those which have grown and developed
most rapidly and finely—and these are not to be topped.
From the time these begin to show brown seeds in the
pods, the condition and development of all their leaves
should be minutely examined, the texture, colour, appear-
ance, and every discernible quality being well considered..
At the time the seeds in the pods are generally brown,
the condition and development of the plant may be
accepted as the standard for the cutting of cigar tobaccos,
and this condition once learned, the planter will be able
thereafter to select plants as they attain this stage, and
mark them for cutting.
Securing seed.
To secure seed, break out the lateral pod branches of
the selected plant, leaving only the central standard to
mature the seeds. When the pods have become brown,
break this central standard off, and place it out of the
reach of mice. Later, at convenience, rub the pods out
in a fine sieve. It is probably best to secure a supply
of seed for four or five years' planting from the first crop
of plants, if fine; that is, save seed from the plants first
raised from imported seed, but never, except for experi-
ment, save seed from Havanna plants, but import it
direct every year. The expense of the operations of


topping and suckering is included in the estimated cost
of “cultivating,” as given farther back, at four shillings
per thousand plants; an estimate rather in excess of the
cost in practice.
In the next division of this subject, the whole process
of treating and curing the leaf will be described in
accordance with the methods of Mr. James D. Culp, the
Manager of the Consolidated Tobacco Company of
California, who intends to secure them by letters patent
in the Australian Colonies.
AUGUSTUS MORRIS,
Executive Commissioner to Philadelphia
Sydney : Charles Potter, Acting Government Printer.—lB77.
