

/j
ffS
JOHN COMFORT








TOBY’S LUCK






Three times he flung his arms up.


JOHN COMFORT
WITH A FRONTISPIECE BY
R. PETHERICK
LONDON
THE SHELDON PRESS
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C. 2
New York and Toronto : The Macmillan Company


*


CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I. Taken On i
11. Toby is Told 8
111, A Clue 17
IV, Recognition 26
V, What he Found 37
VI. A Hitch 50
VII. A Desperate Effort 61
VIII. Bewilderment 72
IX. A Worrying Delay 82
X. An Exciting Moment 92
XI. In a Sore Strait 102
XII. The Mystery Cleared 113


)


TOBY’S LUCK
CHAPTER I
TAKEN ON
TOBY BINNS stuffed his hands deeper in his
pockets and stared straight in front of him,
yet without seeing a single thing, for the eyes of his
mind were just then fixed on his own affairs, and he
had not attention for anything else.
The Binns family were about the most unfortunate
lot of people in creation. Everything they touched
seemed to turn to disaster straight away. Mr. Binns
had lived under a cloud for years. Toby knew this
for a fact, although he had not the slightest clue
to the cause of the shadow which brooded so darkly
over his home. Then Mrs. Binns, his mother, was
a delicate woman, with some affection of the heart
which made it necessary for no doors to be slammed,
while to shout unexpectedly in her hearing would
have been a criminal act of violence. Miss Araminta
Binns, who was ten years older than Toby, had
experienced a disappointment in love, which made
her pensive before other people, and petulant with


Toby, She had even boxed his ears on provocation,
and he resented it right down to the bottom of his
heart. But she was ten years older, so everyone
seemed to think that she was justified in being
spiteful.
Toby had pretty nearly made up his mind to run
away from home just to get out of the ill-luck which
seemed to pursue the family, but so far he had not
done it, because he was afraid that his mother
might have a shocking bad turn if he went away
in such a fashion, and he was very fond of his
mother, even though she was mostly too much taken
up with her heart trouble to take much interest
in him, or his affairs. There was another good
reason why he did not run away, and that was
because he had no money, and there is not much
fun to be got out of running away when the running
has to be done on one’s own feet, and there is not
even sufficient cash for needful food.
He had sauntered on almost unconsciously. He
had crossed Main Street, and plunged into the busy
streets of the business quarter leading down to the
shore, and he was strolling aimlessly along, kicking
at the pebbles as he went, when his eyes were
caught by a notice in big letters on some wide
wooden gates :
WANTED, A TRUCK-BOY. WAGES TO START
AT FIFTEEN SHILLINGS A WEEK. —APPLY
AT THE OFFICE.


Toby read the notice aloud, his voice rising to a
shout before he had finished. What a chance for
him ! He had no idea what a truck-boy would have
to do, and really he did not care. Work had no
terrors for him. But fifteen shillings a week!
Why, it sounded almost like a fortune. He turned
on impulse to the little door by the side of the big
gates, and pushing it open, marched inside to find
his way to the office.
“ What do you want ? ” called out a man, who
was doing something with a shovel and a wheel-
barrow at a heap of mould just inside the yard.
“ will you tell me the way to the office, please."
Toby saluted with such a flourish that the man burst
out laughing, and asked if the boy took him for a
blooming officer.
“ You are big enough, anyhow," answered Toby,
and there was so much admiration in his tone that
the man, who was something of a giant, could not
help being pleased. He pointed out the office, and
gave it as his opinion that if the boy was after the
truck-boy’s place he would have to start on eating
more pudding in order to have strength for the job.
“ I am strong enough, don’t you fret." Toby
put a bit of swagger into his tone. “ Size and fat
may be all very well, but it is muscle that counts
when it comes to hard work, and 1 have plenty of
muscle."
“You have plenty of cheek, too, by the sound of
it." The big man laughed as he stuck the shovel


into the mould again. “ Well, so long, sonny. I
hope you’ll get the job.”
When Toby reached the office and marched in,
the manager stared at him in mild astonishment.
“ Were you waiting outside on the chance of a
job ? That notice has not been sent out from here
ten minutes.”
“ I came along just right, I suppose, and if you
think that I shall suit, 1 will nip out, and take it down
for you.” Toby answered so promptly that the
manager laughed, then began to question him
about what he could do, and finally engaged him
for the vacant post, telling him to be ready to start
work next morning.
Toby went home in high glee. His hands were not
in his pockets now. He was swinging his arms, and
walking with a vigorous stride that took him over
the ground at a great pace. He was wondering
a little what his people would say about his taking
matters in his own hands, and finding himself work
to do. He knew that his father and mother wanted
to apprentice him to a firm of electrical engineers
in Pentock, but the trouble was to find money for
the premium. Even if that could be raised, there
would still remain the problem of keeping him in
Pentock, which was fifty miles away from Wallaby
Creek, and so too far for him to go backwards and
forwards every day.
There was always a shortage of money in the
Binns household, and Toby was sick of the scramble


to look so much richer than they at home really were.
His mother and Araminta scraped and pinched in
order to keep up appearances, his father went without
all sorts of things which would have made life
pleasant in order to have more money for this same
miserable business of looking well-to-do, and Toby,
who had no pride at all, was determined that he
would work his own way in the world, and not be a
further drag on the narrow means of the family.
He ran round to the back door when he reached
home, and not being especially blessed with tact,
he blurted out his news as he burst in at the door.
“ Mother, I have been taken on as truck-boy at
the Bignoll Company’s Works, I am to have
fifteen shillings a week, and I start to-morrow.”
Mrs. Binns was a faded-looking little woman,
and she turned from her task of preparing vegetables
for table to stare at Toby in amazement. “ What
are you talking about ? ” she demanded, as if she
had not understood what he said.
Toby repeated his statement, but he spoke with
less glee now, because of the look in his mother s
eyes.
“ You have been taken on at the Bignoll Com-
pany’s Works ? It is not possible ! ” she cried, and
her face went grey like ashes. She stretched out
her hands to grasp at something, and before Toby
could spring forward to prevent it, she dropped
in a senseless heap at his feet.
His cry for help brought Araminta flying down


the stairs, and the two between them did what they
could to bring her out of her swoon.
“ What did you do to frighten her so badly ? ”
asked Araminta in a reproachful tone as she swung
a fan to give her mother more air.
“ 1 did not do anything to frighten her,” answered
Toby, who was on the offensive now. “ I only
told her that I had been taken on at the Bignoll
Company’s Works. A jolly good thing it will be
for us, too, for I am to have fifteen shillings a week
to start with. That isn’t bad for a boy who has
only just left school.”
“ The Bignoll Company’s Works! ” echoed
Araminta, with positive horror in her eyes. “ Toby,
you cannot go there ; it is not possible.”
Toby stuck out his lower lip with a dogged air.
He thought that his mother and Araminta were
making a fuss because the work was not grand
enough, and he did not mean to sit down under
that sort of thing. “ Why shouldn’t it be possible
for me to go there ? ” he demanded in a stormy
tone.
It was where father worked. It was where he
was working when the trouble came,” answered
Araminta, who was now nearly as white as her
mother.
“ What trouble ? ” demanded Toby. There
was a cold shiver running down his spine. It seemed
to him all in a minute as if he had always known
that the cloud under which his father seemed to


walk was a very black one indeed, and although
he had asked what the trouble was, right down at
the bottom he felt that he really would rather not
know.
“ Hush! ” Araminta held up her finger in
warning. Mrs. Binns began to show signs of return-
ing consciousness, and Toby was quick to understand
that he could not question his sister now.


CHAPTER II
TOBY IS TOLD
I HAVE got to know somehow.” Toby’s tone
1 was more than a little stormy. “If you don’t
tell me what it is, I shall ask father about it when
he comes home.”
“ 0h > Toby, you would not dare speak to him
about it. Araminta sat with her chin propped on
one hand, while tears of actual misery streamed
down her face. “ We, that is mother and I, never
speak of it in his presence because it hurts him so
dreadfully. You would not like to do that.”
“ 1 have got to know, so you had better tell me
yourself and do it quick.” Toby was frowning now
until his brows nearly met. There was something
inside him which cried out against knowing, but
there was another part of him which was just as
eager to learn what the trouble was, so that he
might start straight away at the work of clearing
it up. In his own mind he was quite sure that it
should be capable of being cleared up, if only some-
one had the sense to set to work in the right way.
Of course it was just ill-luck that his father was
under a cloud. They were the most unlucky family
that ever existed. At least the others were. He


did not believe in ill-luck as regards himself.
Indeed, he thought himself uncommonly lucky in
most things. He could master young Billy Howe,
who was a whole year older than himself, and he
had got a job that was to bring him in fifteen
shillings a week ; what more could anyone want in
the way of good luck ?
He had waited until Araminta had helped his
mother upstairs to lie down for awhile in order to
recover from the effects of her swoon. Then, when
Araminta came down to take on her mother’s
interrupted work of preparing the evening meal, he
had made his demand to have the family skeleton
unveiled for his especial benefit.
“Itis a horrid story.” The voice of Araminta
broke in a sob, for the shadow over the home was
a heavy trial to a girl as proud as she was, and the
trouble had cost her very dear, seeing it was that
which had led to the estrangement between her and
the man she was going to marry.
“ Well, out with it.” Toby spoke gruffly. He
was feeling downright sick. There was inside him
a great love for the bowed, patient man who was
his father, and he fairly hated to be told anything
which might seem to reflect in any way on the
character of his dear old Dad. Yet he had got to
know. Oh, yes, he must know everything which
other people knew of this trouble, so he screwed
up his courage, and faced his sister with a very grim
look on his good-natured face.


“ It was ten years ago that the trouble came,”
began Araminta. "We were not living here then.
We were staying all that summer with grandfather
and grandmother at the old house on Dig’s Creek.
Father used to come home every week from Saturday
until Monday, and we used to look for him because
it made the very nicest part of the week. He used
to be so full of fun in those days,” she sighed heavily,
and put her handkerchief to her eyes.
“ Stow the waterworks business,” he said hastily.
“ I can remember all that bit about our being at
Dig’s Creek. I can remember, too, the jolly fun
we used to have when Dad came down. Then I
remember mother being taken ill, and I don’t seem
to recollect having seen Dad really cheerful since
then.”
“ It was the trouble that made mother ill,” went
on Araminta. V There was a big robbery at the
Smelting-Works—Bignoll’s Works, you know —
and father was arrested for being concerned in it.”
“Do you mean they thought he had stolen
money ? ” demanded Toby thickly. His heart was
beating with sledge-hammer violence, for this was
ever so much worse than anything he had thought
of, and it made him feel downright sick.
“ No, it was bars of gold that were stolen, and the
strange thing was that they were stolen from the
safe at the Smelting-Works. Forty thousand pounds’
worth of gold it was, and it has never been seen nor
heard of since that night. Father was the last


person to see it. He was sub-manager at the Smelting-
Works then, you understand. The manager was
ill, so father was responsible. In the morning it
was found that the safe floor had been tunnelled
under, and a hole had been bored in the iron
plating.”
“ How was it proved that father had anything
to do with it ? ” demanded Toby, cutting the story
short because of his eager desire to know how his
father could be implicated in the affair.
“ It was not proved. That is the trouble. Nothing
was proved against him, not even negligence, for
the mouth of the tunnel was outside the walls of
the Smelting-Works. But though nothing could be
proved against him, on the other hand he could not
be cleared from the suspicion of having been a party
to the fraud. That is, he was believed to have been
paid to keep his eyes shut, and the fact of his having
paid five hundred pounds into the bank only the
week before made the case against him so much
heavier.” Araminta sighed again.
“ Where did the five hundred come from ? ”
jerked out Toby. His face was white now, and the
freckles round his nose stood out in strong relief.
Father didn’t know. The money was brought
to our house one evening late by a rough-looking
man. I answered the door when he came. He put
the packet into my hand, and told me to tell Mr.
Bums that he had paid his debt. Then he went
away, and we have never seen him since, though


father advertised for him in all the papers after the
robbery, because of course that man could have
cleared him. There is no one else who could do it;
that is why we have lived under a cloud ever since.”
Araminta flourished her handkerchief before her
eyes, but Toby snorted viciously.
“ What did BignolTs people do to father ? ”
asked Toby. There was a grating sound in his voice,
and he had the helpless feeling a fellow would have
whose hands were tied behind his back.
“ Nothing. They could not, you see, for suspicion
is not evidence, and although Sammy Jay, who dug
the tunnel, declared that he had seen father talking
one day to one of the swells who had arranged for
the digging, that was not proof of father having had
anything to do with the business.” Araminta was
a bit incoherent in her method of narration, and
Toby pulled her up short.
“ What do you mean by the man who dug the
tunnel ? I thought you said the gold had dis-
appeared and had never been heard of since ? ”
“ So it did, but they got hold of the man who did
the work. He was a labourer who had formerly
been in BignolTs employ. He said that he had been
got at by two strangers, real swells they were, and
they promised him half the profits if he would dig
the tunnel for them, and bore a hole in the iron
floor.” Araminta was talking very fast now,
tumbling the words one over the other in her haste
to tell all that there was to be known. “ The work


took a long time, single-handed as he was. Every
shovelful of earth had to be carried away and safely
hidden. At first he could only work on dark nights,
for the windows of the Smelting-Works looked
straight out over the place where this man, Sammy
Jay, had to dig. When the tunnel was done, and
everything was ready for stealing the gold, Sammy
Jay was taken suddenly ill. He came to our house
one day saying that he had a toothache, and asking
father for some stuff to put on the decayed tooth
that gave him the pain. Father gave him the same
kind of thing that he had given him before, but
Sammy Jay declared in court that he had been
poisoned, and that father had given him some stuff
that would have got him out of the way. Anyhow,
he was in bed too ill to move on the night of the
robbery, and a woman was sitting with him all the
time, so it was plain that he had nothing to do with
carrying the gold away.”
“ Did Sammy Jay confess of his own accord, or
was it found out that he had anything to do with
digging the tunnel, do you know ? ” asked Toby,
who was wrinkling his forehead into horrible
frowns.
“ A jacket and pants were found at his house all
caked with the same sort of clay as that through
which the tunnel was bored, and when he was
questioned he told all he knew. He was so fearfully
angry at having been made a victim, you see, for
though he had done all the work, and had made the


way for the robbers to take the gold, he had not
even received pay for his work. Then he was so
bitter against father for having given him the stuff
which he thought had made him ill. Of course he
had been poisoned. The doctors proved that, but
they could not prove that it was the stuff which
father had given Sammy to put on the decayed
tooth which had wrought the mischief. Still, it
helped to make one more cause for suspicion against
father, and that of course made deeper trouble.”
Araminta made a little moan as she spoke, and Toby
frowned harder than ever, for he was fairly out of
his depth in bewilderment.
“ Who were the two men, I mean the swells, who
arranged with Sammy Jay ? ” he asked.
“ That is what everyone wanted to know.
Sammy Jay said that he had seen father talking
to one of them on a certain day, and at a certain
place. Father oould not remember that he had
spoken to anyone specially just then, except
Mr. Lynch Talbot, who used to live at Pentock
and come here for the fishing. But there was
nothing but father’s word to prove that he had been
talking to him, for the poor man was drowned while
bathing on the very day after the robbery, so there
were plenty of people to say that father had only
dragged Mr. Talbot’s name into it because the poor
man was dead, and could not clear himself.”
Araminta s tone was very bitter; the persistent
ill-luck of hei family had soured her ,■ she was


made for the sunshine, and the best of her did not
show in the shadow.
Toby nodded. Then he asked, “ Who was the
other ? ”
“ Sammy said that it was a man called Mr. Neale,
and that he was young, and very nice-looking.
No one else remembered seeing a man like that about,
so people said that Sammy must have dreamed it,”
replied Araminta.
“ Where is Sammy now ? ” asked Toby.
Araminta’s face hardened. “ Where he ought
to be—in prison. Of course he was only the dupe
of clever rogues, and I could feel sorry for him if it
were not for his having tried to throw blame on
father by saying that he had seen father talking to
Mr. Neale’s friend. If only the police had been able
to find Mr. Neale, or if Mr. Lynch Talbot had only
not been drowned, or if that money had not been
sent to father just then. But it all fits in so mad-
deningly ; can’t you see that it does ? And poor
father has had to suffer all these years. It is just
our ill-luck. There never was a family so cursed
with ill-luck as we are, and now to think of your
going and getting a post at Bignoll’s place. Why,
it just passes everything.”
Toby squared his jaw, and set his face in such
stem lines that he looked years older, then he
said slowly, “I am going to meet father when he
comes home from the office. lam going to have a
talk to him. If he will let me, lam going to take


that job at Bignoll’s. lam going to stick it too,
however hard it may be. Perhaps I shall find out
something that may help to clear father. I don’t
believe in ill-luck. I believe in God, and He can
see father righted, only we have got to find out the
way to do it.”


CHAPTER HI
A CLUE
THREE months slipped away. Toby was still
working for the Bignoll Company, but he was
truck-boy no longer. He had stuck the job without
complaint, though it was horridly hard and dirty.
After six weeks of it, during which time he had done
his very best, he was sent for by the manager, and
asked if he would like to be promoted to a junior
clerkship. Would he not just! It was about all he
could do to keep from throwing up his cap and
shouting hurrah from sheer delight, when he came
out of the office to run that old truck up and down
for the last time. . ,
Next morning he arrived at the Works in his best
suit, the clothes he had worn as truck-boy were
much too shabby for office wear, so he would have
to make his best do for Sundays and weekdays
until he could afford to buy some more.
It was his regret that although he had been
working for three whole months for the Bignoll
Company, he seemed just as far off as ever from
finding any clue to what had become of the stolen
gold. He meant to find out, and he was not dis-
heartened yet. He spent much of his leisure in


getting acquainted with the lay of the ground where
the tunnel had been dug. There was f ,
a thin * hn • 5 no fear of such
thm happening again. A new safe of modern
make had replaced the old one. This safe stood on
hree-foot bed of concrete, and it was about the
found. ImPre ° thi " S ° f ‘ he kind that could
Toby had even taken a journey to Pentock
one of his rare holidays and had read up the news-
paper files about the robbery, so that he might l et
exact details. He could not question his father very
much on the subject. It was dreadful to see the
p or man wince. Toby did not like to think of the
pam he had caused when he told his father that he
was going to w ° rk for the Bignoll Company bu
Mn Bums had raised no objection to his going, he
the °" y ““■'mured a plaintive something about
Privily “ Persistently %ed him.
y. Toby was of opinion that ill-luck was verv
to“t and 6 h bark “ g d ° §: “ ° nly y ° u wiU sfand «P
o It and show an undaunted front the ill-luck and
the dog will turn tail and flee.
The papers had not told him much that he had
not heard from Araminta. He read of his father’s
examinat.on before the magistrates, and he wt e d
at the details of the cross-examination, and he
brow-beating to which his father had been sub
Mr Bmn? withT Way to
. Bmns with the mystery of the stolen bars of
go , except the statement of Sammy Jay about


having seen the sub-manager at Bignoll's place in
close conversation with one of the swells who had
contracted with him to dig the tunnel. Mr. Binns
had declared that the only man he could remember
having talked with on that occasion was Lynch
Talbot, the account of whom was interesting
although it did not amount to much. He was stated
to be a man of means, although without any friends
or family connections. He had lived at a boarding
house in Pentock for tw r o years, and before that he
was supposed to have resided in Cape Tow r n. He
\vas charitable, his name figuring on many sub-
scription lists. He w r as fond of fishing, and often
went over to Wallaby Bay for tw T o or three w’eeks,
for the sake of enjo}ing his favourite sport. No one
could be found who had ever seen him talking to
Sammy Jay, nor had he ever been seen in the
company of a man who might answer to the de-
scription of Mr. Neale, as furnished by Sammy Jay.
Altogether, the papers declared that the whole busi-
ness w r as a colossal mystery, and that though Jay
had been prevented by his sudden sickness from
actually taking the gold, he must have a pretty clear
idea as to where it had been taken, and could say so
if he chose. Regarding Mr. Binns the papers spoke
in a different tone, doubtless having an eye to the
law of libel. Nothing wrong had been proved
against him, but his possession of the five hundred
pounds was very damaging, as he could not show a
clear reason for having it. There w r ere hints and


innuendoes in plenty. The papers suggested that he,
like the prisoner Sammy Jay, might tell where the
gold had been hid, and that later on he would
probably disappear to enjoy his share of the ill-
gotten gain.
It was a savage and angry Toby who came out of
the newspaper office. He understood now why his
father had lived on at Wallaby Bay fighting with
narrow means, and bearing the limitations of his life
with such dogged patience. Mr. Binns would not go
away anywhere because people should not have it
against him that he had gone to reap any benefit
from that stolen gold. A glowing admiration for his
father awoke in the heart of Toby. What a fine nature
he must have to go on bearing, from year’s end to
year’s end, all the suspicions and the averted looks
which had come his way.
He is going to be cleared somehow, and lam
going to do it.” Toby was standing out in the
street in front of the newspaper office when he made
the announcement. He had come to a sudden stop
on the side-walk, and he stood with his right hand
stretched upward as if he were a Quaker making an
affirmation. But in all the bustling crowd of
passers-by no one took any notice of him. If it had
been an English city some curious person would
certainly have wanted to know what he was doing,
but in Western Australia people are mostly too
busy to pry over much into the affairs of their
neighbours, and their own business is too absorbing


for them to trouble about what an unknown boy in
the street may choose to do.
It was spring-time, and October being the very
best part of the West Australian spring, Toby was
using his leisure in exploring the country along the
shores of Wallaby Bay. What he was ready trying
to do was to reconstruct the robbery in his own
mind, so that he could arrive at some conclusion as
to how the gold had been carried off, after the safe
had been entered, by the way which Sammy Jay had
made in tunnelling under the outer walls, and
boring through the iron floor of the safe.
Sitting out on the sunny hill-sides with the wild
flowers blooming all about him, Toby studied the
ground, until he pretty nearly knew it by heart. The
place where the mouth of the tunnel had been, was
now covered by a shed with a tin roof, and it had
been enclosed within the boundary walls of the
Company’s Works. Even so it was easy to see from
the roughness of the country round, what a task the
thief, or the thieves, must have had when they
dragged the bars of gold out from the tunnel and
carried them off. The popular theory was that a
boat had been in waiting, and that the loot had been
carried away to a ship anchored out in the bay.
Toby did not believe in this theory. His own idea
was that it had been hidden somewhere close at
hand by one of the unknown men, or perhaps by
both of them. Personally he could not see how one
man could have handled so much weight in such a


confined space as the tunnel, and carried it safely to
some outside hiding-place all in the short darkness
of a summer night.
He took to brooding over what he knew of the
men. Supposing Lynch Talbot had been the thief.
Suppose that single-handed he had brought out all
those bars of gold, and had hidden them in a place
of which he alone had any knowledge. He had been
drowned next day, and so the secret of the hiding-
place might have died with him. Sammy Jay had
spoken of a Mr. Neale too, but if such a man had
ever existed why did no one else ever remember
having seen him ?
“ Bah, it is getting on my nerves, I shall go dotty
with worrying about it all, if I don’t take care ! ”
Toby exclaimed angrily one evening. He had been
lymg out on the hill-side for quite a long time, half-
buned in a bank of fragrant thyme. He got up
hurriedly now, in order to go home, for it was
beginning to get dark, and his mother would worry
if he was not at home in good time.
Then a queer thing happened. He saw a dim
figure start from a spot near the boundary wall of
the Bignoll Company’s Works, and walking as if it
carried a heavy burden, go limping up the steep
hill-side, and round the angle of the thickly wooded
cliff.
Toby felt his heart start thumping like a sledge-
hammer. Instead of going home, he set off across
the top of the hill where he had been lying so long.


He had to wade through thick scrub that came
nearly up to his middle. He was taking a short cut
which would bring him out on the other side of the
angle of the shore, before that dim, shadowy figure
could reach the spot from the lower level. What he
expected to see, he did not know, but some instinct
warned him that his patient search was going to be
rewarded if only he had the sense to understand
what he saw.
He reached the other side of the ridge, and then
crouched low in the long grass by the side of a big
boulder. He would not stand erect because he did
not want to be seen by the dim figure which had
taken its way so mysteriously from the boundary
wall of the Smelting-Works. He waited so long for
the person to appear, that he was beginning to think
his fancy had played him a trick, and that there was
no one on the hill but himself, when he heard a
rustle and a stir not far away. Cautiously lifting
his head, he saw a man with a bowed figure standing
within a stone’s throw of him.
There was something which looked familiar about
the man, but try as he would Toby could not
remember where he had seen him before. From the
spot where the unknown was standing there was a
sheer drop to the water of the bay. Toby was
gripped with a chill fear that the unknown was going
to commit suicide by leaping into the water. He
wanted to spring out of his hiding-place, and drag
the poor man back from such a dangerous position,


he was nearly choked by the violent beating of his
heart, but again something—was it instinct ? warned
him to keep quiet, and to lie low.
“ 0h > the iron Y of it all! To think it is so
near, and yet I can’t get it. But I must, and I
will. There must be a way out of the muddle
somewhere ! ”
The unknown was speaking aloud, and at the
sound of his voice ringing through the silence with
such startling unexpectedness, Toby gave a great
jump which nearly betrayed him. It was the man
who was speaking, and his tones were refined, like
those of a person of culture and education. Three
times he flung up his arms as if he were about to
take a leap downward into the waters of the bay,
where they foamed and fretted on the rocks below.
Each time he drew back with a shudder and a groan.
Suddenly he turned and went back by the way he
had come, and Toby was left up on the hill-side
alone. He listened until all sound of footsteps had
died away, then he rose and followed in haste,
determined to find out what became of this
mysterious stranger. But he had waited too long.
When he came out on the other side of the hill there
was not a trace to be seen of anyone. There was no
sound save the sleepy twitter of the birds, and the
raucous hooting of a steamer at anchor out in the
bay.
Toby was fairly bewildered. What did it all
mean ? The man, who was he ? But chiefest of


all he wanted to know what it was that was so near,
and yet could not be got at. He wandered to and
fro trying to think out some reasonable explanation
of the mystery, until all at once he remembered how
late it was, and then he hurried home to bed


CHAPTER IV
RECOGNITION
course there was trouble at home when Toby
came walking in so late. Mrs. Binns waxed
tearful, and with her hand pressed to her side spoke
plaintively of Toby breaking her heart by getting
into bad company.
But I have been out on the hills for a walk, and
I was quite alone, explained Toby in self-defence.
“ 1 h°P e you do not expect us to believe a story of
that sort,” broke in Araminta tartly; she had an
idea that boys should always be severely repressed,
that their statements should always be taken with
a grain of salt, and that they should be regarded as
a mistake of creation.
Toby says that he has been alone, so why not
leave it at that ? ’ Mr. Binns spoke with an
irritability very unusual to him. “ When a boy
works as steadily as he does, surely he may be
allowed a little liberty in his off-time. He is not
a baby now. You both always seem to think of
him in knickerbockers, and playing with a Teddy-
bear.”
Toby’s heart warmed to his father. How good it
was to be trusted and respected. He went off to


bed, telling himself that it took a man to under-
stand a man’s feelings. He went to sleep quickly,
but his slumber was disturbed by weird dreams of
the scene he had witnessed on the hill-side. He
dreamed that the man had finally flung himself over
the cliff and he had leaped after him with the idea
of saving the poor fellow’s life, but had somehow
got his feet hooked in those bars of gold which had
been stolen from Bignoll’s place ten years ago, and
the weight was dragging him down; he was being
suffocated, he was choking. He struggled and
fought, then suddenly woke, as he and the bed-
clothes rolled on to the floor in company, and he
found that he had got his head down under the
bedclothes, and in struggling to free himself had
rolled out of bed.
He went to sleep again after that, and overslept
himself so badly that he had to scramble in order
to reach the office in time, which vexed him not a
little for he was very keen on establishing a good
record. Work went hard that day, he was very
anxious for evening to come, so that he could go
out on the hill-side again to watch for the mysterious
man. He wondered why the outlines of the figure
had seemed so familiar. He was quite sure that he
had met the man before, but the dim light had made
a mystery of things, and he could not remember
though he tried hard to do so.
Just before closing time, the manager came to ask
him if he would go with a message to one of the


directors, who had a summer camp on the east side
of the bay. Of course he had to go. Yesterday, he
would have been only too glad of the chance, but
to-day it seemed a bit annoying to be sent off
on an errand which it would take him until dark
to accomplish, when he so badly wanted to be
watching for that dim figure up on the lonely hill-
side.
It was a long way to the camp, ever so much
further than he had expected. He had walked fast
too, so that by the time he had reached the cluster
of white tents which were pitched in a hollow that
was sheltered from the strongest of the sea breezes,
he was pretty well fagged out. The director was
very pleasant. He apologised to Toby for having
been the cause of his having such a long tramp, and
then he insisted on his staying to supper. This was
a treat indeed. The camping party was a large one,
many of them boys of Toby’s age, and they gave him
a very good time indeed. There was a Chinaman
cook, but everyone helped, and Toby found himself
helping to make salad with a fellow from Texas, who
had a wandering nature, and had come to Wallaby
Bay to start raising cattle after Texan methods. He
was a nice boy too, despite the " wanderfoot ” which
would not let him sit still for more than a few
months in any one place. Toby chummed up with
him amazingly, and the evening would have been
marked for him with a very red letter indeed, had
it not been for that keen desire of his to be out


watching for that figure which had behaved in
such a strange fashion out yonder on the lonely
cliff that sheered straight down to the waters of
the bay.
He excused himself as soon after supper as he
decently could, though the director pressed him
hard to stay until the morning, as the way was so
long and solitary. Toby would have liked to stay,
but he guessed that his mother would be badly
worried if he did not turn up some time before mid-
night. He had sent a message home when he left the
office, to say where he was going, and she would
certainly not have any sleep that night if he did
not turn up at home.
He was on his way home in the bright moonlight,
which made the solitary place almost as bright as
day, when he was surprised and a bit startled to
hear sounds of violent quarrelling. Who could be
out there having wordy arguments at this time of
night ? Then someone called urgently for help.
“ All right, I’m coming.” Toby sent out his voice
in a cheery shout, and without staying to judge of
the wisdom of mixing himself up in an unknown
quarrel, with the disadvantage too of ranging him-
self on the side of the one who was getting the worst
of it, he started to run in the direction from which
the sounds came. Dowtl a hill he pelted, and across
a narrow valley, then he w 7 as bounding up the next
rise, and getting very much out of breath as he went,
when he was pulled up short by seeing a man lying


on the ground right in his track, lying so still and
motionless, that for the first minute he really
thought the poor fellow was dead.
Bending down he touched the prostrate figure,
and was greatly relieved to hear the man groan.
“ Was it you who called for help just now ? ” he
asked, as the man on the ground opened his eyes
and stared up at Toby as if wondering who it was
that had come to his assistance.
“ Yes, a fellow set on me, as I was coming along
the track, got up out of the long grass suddenly, and
sprang at me before I had time to collect my senses.
He wanted to rob me, I think, though there is
precious little to steal," the unknown said weakly.
Was he unknown? Toby suddenly tingled all
over with excitement. This man w r as the dim
figure he had seen out on the hill-side last night. He
was sure of it. No possibility of a mistake, the
voice was the same, and when he had helped the man
to stand up, it w r as the same gaunt, stooping figure
which he had seen outlined against the evening sky
last night.
‘‘You wall let me help you home ? ” asked Toby.
The man seemed very much shaken, and he w T as so
unsteady on his feet that Toby had to grip him hard
to keep him from falling again.
“ I shall be very much obliged if you wall. I don’t
feel very fit to manage by myself," the man answered,
and he was forced to lean heavily on Toby in order
to get along at all.


“ Do you live very far from here ? ” ventured
Toby, wondering how the journey would be accom-
plished if such were the case, for his companion
seemed hardly able to drag his feet along.
“ Ro, it is not very far now. I have that lone
cabin where Joe Warner died last year,” said the
man. Toby remembered then why the voice had
sounded familiar. It was the new tenant of Joe
Warner’s cabin who had set a savage dog at him
one day when he had gone there to ask for a drink of
water. Well, anyhow it was fine to be able to return
good for evil. Still, as he went slowly along support-
ing the feeble steps of his companion, Toby wondered
mightily why a man who was evidently a gentleman
should have chosen a place like that poor solitary
cabin for a residence.
By the time the cabin was reached, the man was so
spent with the effort of getting there, that he fainted
dead away. Toby had the time of his life fetching
the poor fellow round. But he had often seen men
faint in the Smelting-Works. When he was truck-boy
it had been part of his duty to help bring them
round, so he was not so much at a loss as some boys
might have been. The dog was nowhere to be seen,
for which he was very thankful, as it might have
mixed things up rather. He worked away at his
patient with great zeal and energy, until he had the
satisfaction of seeing him open his eyes again and
then make an effort to sit up.
Toby wanted to stay at the cabin with him for the


rest of the night, as he did not seem fit to be left
alone. This the man would not hear of, so finally
Toby went off on the remainder of his way home,
resolving that he would pay a visit to the cabin next
day to see how it fared with his new acquaintance.
Mrs. Binns and Araminta had both gone to bed
when he reached home, and he found only his father
sitting up to let him in.
“ Sorr y to be 50 late. Dad, but it isn’t my fault,”
he said when he came in at the door, and blinked a
little in the electric light.
“ Been having adventures ? ” asked Mr. Binns,
and there was even the thin ghost of a smile on his
careworn face as he asked the question.
“ Yes, partly,” answered Toby, sitting down on
the edge of the table to talk for five minutes before
going up to his bed, and then he gave his father an
account of the supper party he had been invited to
join at the director s camp, and his after experience
on the hill.
“ 1)0 y° u know anything about the man who lives
in Joe Warners old cabin? ” he asked suddenly
when he had finished describing the swoon of the
man he had helped back to the little lone house
that night.
” No, I did not even know that anyone had lived
there since Joe died,” replied Mr. Binns, and there
was a deepening of the shadow on his face. “ I
don t walk in that direction from choice now-
adays.”


Tobv felt suddenly conscience-smitten as he
remembered that it was in Joe Warner's lone cabm
on the hill that the man Sammy Jay had lived a
the time when he was digging the tunnel to
strong-room at the Bignoll Company s Works.
Then an impulse seized him, and greatly daring,
he yielded to it, and burst into speech Father,
what do you think they did with the gold .
“ Eh, eh, what ? ” Mr. Binns started nervously,
and helooked so frightened, so really scared, that
Toby's pity for his father's nervous weakness grew
to actual pain. ...
“ What is your theory as to where the thiet o
thieves hid that lot of bars of gold which were taken
from the safe at Bignoll's so long ago ? ” he asked
his heart beating violently as he made his attempt
to break down the barrier of silence which existed
between them.
“ I never had any theory,” answered Mr. Binns
sadly, and there was a twitching movement of his
long nervous hands which showed more plainly
than speech how much any reference to the old
trouble upset him.
“ I have, a round dozen of them,” Toby burst
out confidently. “ Sometimes for a day or two I
stick fast to one of them, then something comes up
and makes me change my mind, and I switch off
to another. You don’t think it possible for one
man to have handled all that mass of gold m the
time between sunset and sunrise, do you ? ” He


leaned forward as he spoke and put his question so
earnestly that Mr. Binns answered him instead of
refusing to discuss the matter as he had meant
to do.
I am quite positive that one man could not
have done it,” he said, and he fumed to Toby
with quite a new interest in his face. Perhaps the
life of the poor man would not have been so sad
and desperately hopeless if he could have talked
the matter over with someone. But his wife’s
state of health was the bar to any discussion of the
matter, and Araminta had been too young at the
time of the trouble to be taken into the confidence
of her father to any great extent, while Toby of
course, was little more than an infant.
Now he roused to talk about the trouble. He
even found himself discussing with Toby all the
mystery of the robbery which had shadowed his
life so heavily for ten years past.
You see, boy, the directors thought I ought to
have had my eyes open wider, and in the light of
what happened, of course, I realise that I was too
dreamy and absorbed in other things.” There
an air of apology in the manner of Mr. Binns now
How strange that he should feel he must defend
himself m the eyes of his son.
Still, if you were doing your duty straight and
square what more could they or anyone else expect
of you . Toby's tone was eager. What a wonder-
ful thing it was that his father should be willing


to talk to him about the mystery. The two of them
together ought surely to be able to find some clue
to where the gold had been taken.
Mr. Binns shook his head in a dreary fashion.
“It has always been against me that I am not more
observant. I suppose I ought to have trained my
mind and my faculties better, and then I should
have had myself well in hand, and made a greater
success of life. As it is, I feel that lam an all-round
failure.”
“ I don’t,” broke in Toby, and there was a down-
right surly sound in his voice. “ You don't seem
like a failure to me, Dad, and I know it must have
taken an awful lot of grit to stick on here close
under the noses of all the people who suspected
you, but it was a fine thing to do.”
“It was the only thing I could do to prove that
I did not know where the gold had been taken,”
answered his father. “If I had gone away from
here, it would have been impossible to keep people
from thinking that I was in some way reaping the
advantage of the robbery. Thank God, no one can
say it now ; our poverty is too apparent in spite
of all the shifts we make to keep up appearances.”
“ Oh, bother keeping up appearances. "What
does that matter ? ” burst in Toby impatiently.
“ Look here. Dad, I’m going to find out what
became of that gold, even if it takes me until I am
grey-haired to do it, and it would be a great help
if you would let me talk it over with you. Just think


what it would mean if we found out where it had
been taken. I have somehow got the feeling that
it is still hidden in the place where the thieves carried
it that night. Bars of gold are not the easiest things
to negotiate, especially after the fact of the robbery
has been discovered.”
“ I will talk about it to you when we are alone,”
said Mr. Binns. ‘‘You had better not say anything
in front of your mother. Any mention of the
miserable business brings on an attack of heart
trouble.”
“ I shan’t bother her, don’t you worry.” Toby’s
tone was cheerful, then he yawned widely, and
went off up to bed, more determined than ever that
he would know no rest or peace until he had
found out for himself where the loot from the
rifled safe had been carried.
The trouble was that it had all happened so long
ago. Ten years made so many changes. Of course,
if the theory of a vessel waiting in the bay was
correct, then the gold might have been carried to
the ends of the earth, and turned into cash and
spent years and years ago. Still, he meant to
find out all the same. He would do it, too. Any-
one could find out a thing if only he tried hard
enough.


CHAPTER V
WHAT HE FOUND
T T so chanced that Mr. Binns had a nasty little
1 accident next day which might easily have been
a full-sized disaster. He was knocked down by some
long poles from a timber dray which was turning
the corner of a street too sharply. The poor man
was brought home unconscious, and Toby was sent
for from the Works in a great hurry. The shock
made Mrs. Binns ill, of course, and Araminta hovered
to and fro between her father and mother, quite
at a loss what to do next. It was Toby who had
to fetch the doctor, and it was Toby who had to
help the doctor with both invalids, and afterwards
go to the chemist’s to have prescriptions made up.
By this time Araminta had a little recovered her
head, and took over command, upon which Toby
had to take a back seat. But he insisted on staying
with his father all night, which left Araminta free
to look after her mother.
Next morning there was a terrific thunderstorm,
or rather a succession of thunderstorms which lasted
more or less for the remainder of the day. But the
invalids were both better. Mr. Binns was found to
be uninjured except for the shock of being knocked
37


down, and the house settled back into normal ways
again. It was then that Toby remembered the
strange man who lived up in Joe Warner’s old
cabin. Yith the rain coming down at a pour,
and every street a roaring watercourse, it was not
possible to go walking on the hill-side, and he
reluctantly had to wait until the next day.
It was not until the third night after his encounter
with the man that Toby was at liberty to find his
way to the cabin again.
There was plenty of mud still remaining from the
storms of yesterday. When Toby did start on his
visit of enquiry he found himself obliged to wade
through mud and water at some parts of his way,
but as soon as he began to mount the hill matters
improved somewhat. It took a good bit longer
than he had expected for him to reach the lone
house, and when at last he got there, he found
that the door was standing partly open, but no one
appeared to be inside.
Thinking that the owner must have stepped
out just for a minute and would be back directly,
Toby pushed the door wider open and walked into the
room. He was rather tired from the roughness of
his walk, and he felt it would really be a comfort
to sit down. The evening had turned very hot,
and the sun had been beating straight on his back
all the way up the hill.
He was surprised to see what a good view of the
Works was to be had from the open door of the little


cabin. He could also see round the angle of the
wooded headland, where a few nights ago he had
watched the strange behaviour of the man on the
lonely cliff. Standing in the open door of the cabin,
he wondered again as he had wondered then what
it was that was so near yet so impossible to reach.
He was even speculating whether the new tenant
of Joe Warner’s little lone house was the victim
of some strange delusion.
There was a steamer in the bay. She was anchored
near to the wooded headland. Toby stared at the
vessel at first, wondering why she was there. Then
he suddenly remembered having heard one of the
clerks at the Works saying that she was a Govern-
ment boat, and that she was there for the purpose
of blowing up a part of the headland. Big harbour
works were to be commenced which would make
Wallaby Bay a very important place indeed. It
had been just a sort of understudy of Pentock,
but when this harbour scheme was carried out it
would speedily become a big and bustling port of
call.
What a long time the man was in coming back.
Toby got tired of waiting presently. He yawned
widely. He w r as so tired he felt almost like going
to sleep. He got up from the bench on which he
had been sitting, and began to look round him on
the poor appointments of the tiny room. There
were a lot of books piled on a set of shelves over
in the recess at the back of the bed. For want of


something else to do, Toby strobed over to them,
and proceeded to read the titles aloud. There was
one book in the comer which had the picture of an
engine on the cover. Perhaps it was one of Henty’s ;
he could not quite see. He put up his hand to
reach the volume down, but being a little clumsy
in his movements he pulled out two or three, one
of which fell with a clatter to the floor, while the
others dropped on the bed. He picked up the one
which had gone on the floor, and straightened the
lea\ es winch had been crumpled. It was horrid to
have battered a book which did not belong to him
and he strained his ear for the sound of a footstep
which might warn him that the owner of the house
was coming. But there w'as no sound or movement
from the outside. There was a name on the fly-leaf
of the book. Toby turned back to it, feeling curious
to know the name of the strange man whom he
had come to see that evening. When he read
the name, however, he felt his hair stiffen and stiffen
until it almost seemed to stand erect, for it was
Lynch Talbot !
There w 7 as a sudden shrill whistle from the
Government boat that was anchored near to the
headland, and the unexpectedness of it forced a
sharp cry from Toby, though he w r as not conscious
of having uttered a sound.
A book of Lynch Talbot’s in this little lone cabin !
Then who was it that he had come to see this
e\ ening ? And why had the fellow stood out on the


headland crying out in real agony about something
that was so near yet so hard, nay, so impossible,
to get at ?
The book dropped from Toby’s hands and rolled
unheeding on to the bed. He stood staring out
through the open door, staring and staring, ■while
he gasped for breath as if he had been running until
he was absolutely winded. A wild possibility had
flashed into his mind, and he was for the moment
as one stunned by its greatness.
He must go home and tell his father what he had
discovered, then to-morrow the two of them would
go to the Bignoll Works together and ask that
the matter might be investigated.
Would it be of any use ? Supposing that there
was anything in that wild idea which had flashed
into his mind, to-morrow would be too late. It
had come to him that this strange man who chose
to live in this isolated little cabin must have been
the third man of whom Sammy Jay had spoken,
and that the words Toby had heard him utter on the
hill-side had reference to the hiding-place of the gold,
which might have been dropped into the water
under the headland until it could be removed with
safety.
If the rumour he had heard was right about
Government intending to destroy the headland
to make way for harbour improvements, then that
steamer anchored in the bay would certainly start
on blasting operations at dawn. That is to say


they would certainly start unless he could reach
the camp of the director in time to prevent them.
At this he bolted out of the door as if a big dog
were behind him, and turning into the narrow
track which led across the hills to the summer camp
of the director he ran as hard as he could pelt.
It had dawned upon Toby that a careful examina-
tion should be made by divers of that part of the
ocean bed immediately below the wooded headland,
before any upheaval of blasting took place. If his
wild surmise was right, then the forty thousand
pounds’ worth of gold in bars, that had been stolen
from the Bignoll Company’s Works ten years ago,
might be found lying still in the place where the
thieves had pitched them on that night so long ago.
Lying there still because there had been no chance
to get them away.
How he ran ! In his hurry he got astray in the
bewildering hill-tracks, and he had to retrace his
steps for a whole mile. How maddening it w y as when
he wanted to get on so badly. It had been late
when he went up the hill to pay his call at the lone
cabin. By the time he reached the camp far away
among the hills where the director was staying,
lights were out, and everyone appeared to be asleep.
Finding everything so still, and wrapped in such
profound repose, Toby pulled up short, wondering
what he had better do. Would it be wiser to go
back and wait until morning ? But no. If he
waited, and the idea in his mind was a right one.


then to-morrow would be too late. If he was wrong,
he would have to put up with being laughed at. He
might even be heavily censured. There w r as risk in
most things. He had to face risk now, and he
simply must go on.
How soundly they slept at the camp. Toby,
taking his cautious way between the white tents,
blundered over a rope, and came crash to the ground
nearly pulling one of the tents over, yet no one even
growled at the disturbance. Surely it w T as a bit
strange. Then he stood still, and called out, “ Any-
one about ? ”
To his call there was no response, so finally he
hunted the tents one after the other, finding that not
one of them w T as occupied. Greatly dismayed, he
stood still wondering wiiat he would do next. Then
he noticed a small tent pitched a little distance from
the others, and making his way to it, he found a
Chinaman asleep inside. Waking the fellow with
considerable difficulty, Toby got out of him the
information that the director and the rest of the
campers had started overnight to see the sunrise
from Goat-hill, which he knew must be a good six
or eight miles aw T ay.
He w T as pretty well desperate by this time, and it
did not take him long to resolve that he must make
for Goat-hill himself as fast as he could go. Of
course his mother w r ould be nearly frantic wdth
anxiety on his account, and his father would be
worried and anxious, but it could not be helped. He


simply had to go ahead, and do the best he could.
Once, and once only, had he been to Goat-hill;
would he find it in the night ?he wondered. But he
must find it. Everything depended on his getting
hold of the director as speedily as possible. That
Government steamer must be prevented from start-
ing on blasting operations at dawn. It had to be
done somehow, so panting from haste and anxiety
Toby forged ahead over the solitary hill-tracks, and
the night went on its way.
The Chinaman had given him a small trumpet by
means of which he could arrest the attention of the
sunrise party long before he reached Goat-hill. It
was very uncertain where they would spend the
hours of waiting for the sun to rise, so Toby decided
that it would be wise to herald his coming long
before he reached Goat-hill.
He had clambered the last long range of hills, and
stood at a great height. If it had only been day-time
he would have had a tremendous view, but it was
night, and only the misty outlines of the hills were
visible. He blew a long blast on his trumpet, and
fairly shivered at the noise he produced. A long
minute of waiting, and he was answered from some-
where not far away. One or two more blasts, and
then he heard someone running. A few minutes
later, and a young man came pelting over the hill
to find who it was that was calling to the sunrise
party in such a fashion.
“ I want to see Mr. Barclay, if you please, and my


business is very urgent,” said Toby, trying to speak
quietly yet not quite able to keep his voice from
shaking.
“ I should think it must be urgent to have brought
you all this way in the middle of the night,”
answered the other. “ Come along, youngster, but
don’t be discouraged if you don’t get exactly a warm
welcome. The governor does not feel like doing
business to-night. Like the rest of us, he is out for
play, and he does not want to be even reminded that
there is such a thing as work in the world.”
Toby grunted in an inarticulate sort of way, then
set his teeth hard as he followed his guide. He was
well aware that Mr. Barclay, the director, might
find the story he had to tell, very hard indeed to
believe, but there was no drawing back now. More-
over, it was his chance of setting his father straight
before the world, and he was not going to let it slip.
“ Well, Binns, what is the matter ? ” demanded
Mr. Barclay, rather irritably, when at last Toby
stood before him. He was sitting beside a small
wood fire, or rather he was crouching on his knees
beside it, and he was toasting a rasher of bacon on a
fork. Anything less like his usual employments
could hardly be imagined, and he plainly did not
want to be disturbed by being even reminded of the
usual routine of his daily life. Then, as Toby did
not answer immediately, the great man snapped out,
“ Is anything wrong at the office ? ”
“ No, sir, I think not,” Toby answered promptly,


hesitated a moment, then took the plunge, “ If you
please, sir, is that steamer which has anchored in
the bay to-night, going to lay a mine for blowing up
the headland at Wallaby Point ? ”
The director nearly dropped his bacon in the fire
from sheer surprise at the question, then he answered
curtly, “ I don’t know, and what is more I don’t
care.”
“ Yes, you do, or at least you will do, when you
know what it may mean to you,” burst out Toby in
great excitement. “ I believe that gold is lying
there in the sea somewhere under the headland, and
a diver ought to be sent down to find it before there
is any disturbance of the ocean bed.”
“ What gold ? ” demanded the director, and he
rose to his feet in amazement. He was still clutch-
ing at the fork with the rasher of bacon impaled
upon it and he stretched it out towards Toby as if
it were a sceptre.
Toby looked round rather anxiously. The rest
of the sunrise party had gathered about them to
find out why the boy had come so far in the night.
It was dreadful to have to unveil the family skeleton
in the presence of so many listeners. “ Could I
speak to you alone, sir, if you please ? ” he asked
rather wistfully.
The director frowned, and hardened his heart.
Then he answered coldly, “ There is no one here
before whom you need mind speaking, only make
haste, please.”


Toby gulped hard. He was furious now at the
reception accorded him, but his anger had the effect
of keeping his voice steady, which was of course a
very good thing, then he began to speak quietly.
“ You may remember that my father was manager
at the Bignoll Works ten years ago. He had to
leave at the time when the safe was robbed of bars
of gold worth somewhere about forty thousand
pounds. He was suspected of having been in some
way implicated in the robbery. Nothing could be
proved against him, not even lack of care, but he
had to resign his position, and he has been more or
less under suspicion ever since. A man named
Sammy Jay is now serving time for having prepared
the way for the robbeiy, but even he had no idea
where the gold was taken, nor did he really know
who took it. Another man supposed to be mixed up
in the affair was Lynch Talbot, who was found dead,
supposed to be drowned while bathing. There was
one other man spoken of in the affair, a Mr. Neale,
but he could not be found, and there were plenty of
people who believed that he did not exist.” Toby
paused, and choked a little, this business of explain-
ing was harder than he had expected it would have
been. Yet there was in the eyes of his mind a vision
of his father’s bowed figure, and careworn face, and
it was this which spurred Toby on to do his very-
best.
“ Yes, go on, make haste! ” jerked out the
director. He was bending forward now to hear


what Toby had to say, and he seemed quite un-
conscious that he was holding his rasher still stuck
on the end of the fork.
“ I did not know anything about it until after I
had been taken on at the Works,” went on Toby
who was getting himself in hand again. “ Since
then I have just studied things. I felt certain there
must have been a Mr. Neale, for it was not possible
for one man to have moved all that gold out of the
safe and through the tunnel in the time. A few
nights ago I was up on the headland trying to think
things out a bit, when I saw a man behaving in a
very queer fashion. He was flinging up his hands,
crying out about something being so near, and yet
so impossible to get. I have found out since that
this man lives in Joe Warner’s old cabin on the hill
above the Works. I went up there to-night, but he
was not at home; while I was waiting for him, I
pulled a book from his shelf to look at, and there
was the name of Lynch Talbot written inside the
cover.”
“ Well ? ” the director leaned down closer still,
and in the darkness his face was close to that of
Toby, as if he was trying to get at the thought in
the mind of the boy.
“ I believe that the man is Mr. Neale,” answered
Toby, speaking with a quiet confidence which
carried conviction with it. “ I believe that he and
Lynch Talbot pitched the bars of gold over the
headland into the sea, meaning that they should


be hidden there until the hue and cry had a little
died away. But the death ol Lynch Talbot left
Mr. Neale alone, and alone he could not manage
the business of getting the bars of gold out of the
water again. The only man he could have asked
to help him in the business was Sammy Jay, who is
still in prison, and so out of his reach. He could not
rest anywhere in the world except in the place where
the gold is hidden, but being elderly and broken he
cannot keep the thing so close in his mind as he used
to do. Please, sir, will you stop the explosives from
being laid at the foot of the headland, until a diver
has been down to report whether there is any trace
of the gold being there ? ”
“ Your story is hard to believe,” said the director.
“ But your theories are entirely reasonable. That
steamer must be warned before she gets to work.
“ You will have to be quick then,” broke in the
young man, who had guided Toby down to where
the sunrise party had their fire. “It w r ants less than
an hour to sunrise now 7 .”


CHAPTER VI
A HITCH
/\ FTER all there was no one to watch the sun-
nse from Goat-hill next morning. The party,
who had gone without their night’s rest for the
purpose, w'ere scurrying across the hill as fast as
they could go, before the first rays of sunrising came
to drive away the mists and shadows of the night.
They had divided into small groups, each with a
definite errand. Two had gone to the Telegraph
Office at V allaby Bay, to get into touch with the
requisite Government authorities. Two more had
set off to the Police Station to ask that a warrant
might be issued for the arrest of the man who lived
in Joe Warner’s old cabin. Two more had gone to
the \\ orks, and this left one young man to go with
the director and Toby by the straightest possible
line across the hills to the headland, where, with the
help of the trumpet Toby still carried, they might
communicate with the steamer, and stop her from
getting to work.
V hat a race it w r as ! The director and his
nephew were fairly fresh. They had certainly been
up all night, but they had not toiled across the hills
as Toby had done, and they were not tom as he was


A HITCH
by anxiety and conflicting emotions, nor worried
with the dread of being on a false scent and so
making himself a laughing-stock for the future.
He was so desperately hungry, too, for he had
eaten nothing since his midday meal on the previous
day. There was food at the camp, of course, but
there w 7 as no time to go there for it just now. They
passed the tents a mile or so to the west, as they
made their bee-line to the headland. They had left
food behind them at Goat-hill, but no one had
thought of offering any of it to Toby, who was too
shy and too bothered to ask for it then. Then later
on, when they were getting near to the headland,
and the sun was coming up grandly, the young man
burst out laughing, and with great glee in his
manner called out to Toby to look at the rasher of
bacon sticking out of the pocket of Mr. Barclay’s
jacket.
“ I must have stuffed it in there by mistake, when
the story of the boy took my wind away,” said the
director, and seizing the bacon he w’as going to throw
it away when Toby, who w r as almost at the limit of
his endurance, asked if he might have it.
“ Of course you can. Why didn’t you tell us
before that you w r ere hungry ? ” asked Mr. Barclay
kindly. “We ought to have thought about you,
and seen that you had something, but the fact is
you took our breath aw r ay so completely that w 7 e
have not recovered yet.”
The bacon gave Toby a little more strength to go


on again, and they pelted ahead as fast as they could
go. They were very near to the headland ; the
glitter of the sun on the water was shining in their
eyes, when suddenly they were confronted by a
group of three men who seemed to rise up from
nowhere to bar their progress.
“ What do you want up here ? ” demanded a big
fellow, who carried a thick club, while a pair of
serviceable revolvers showed sticking out from his
belt.
“ We have to signal to that boat out yonder, and
our business is urgent. Let us pass, if you please,”
said Mr. Barclay in a tone of haughty displeasure.
His quick eye had noted the fact that all three men
were heavily armed, and he could not understand
why they should be wandering over those lonely
hills in the dawning.
“ What do you want to signal her for ? ” asked
the man suspiciously as he still barred the director’s
way.
” That is my business, and it can surely be no
concern of yours why I should want to communicate
with a Government boat at work in the bay.”
Mr. Barclay’s tone was very uncompromising, ai;d
he waved the man aside as if he were some obnoxious
insect which had crossed his path and hindered his
progress. The fellow held his ground, however,
just waving his left hand to his companions, who
whipped out revolvers and covered the whole
party.


“It may be your business all right enough.
All the same we have got to know what it is, so you
had better speak, and quick too, we have no time
to waste this morning. ’ ’ There was so much menace
in the tone of the man that in spite of himself Mr.
Barclay gave way before him.
“ That steamer yonder is, I believe, a Government
boat which has anchored under the headland for
the purpose of blasting a part of it away. Certain
facts have come to my knowledge which make it
of the last importance that the blasting should
not take place for a day or two, and I am anxious
to stop the work from beginning.” The director
spoke quietly, and with a sort of courteous patience,
which should have had its due effect on the fellow,
who, however, still menaced him with the heavy
club.
“ There wall be no blasting done this morning.
The work is not ready to begin just yet, so you had
best get back by the way you have come, said
the man.
“ Nonsense.” Mr. Barclay’s tone was suddenly
quick and sharp. He was plainly losing patience.
Time was slipping away ; they might be too late
to stop the steamer from getting to work, and
suddenly Mr. Barclay found himself quite perfectly
convinced that Toby’s theory was right, and that the
gold which had been stolen from the Bignoll Com-
pany’s Works ten years ago was certainly lying on
the ocean floor just under the headland. Oh, it


would be ghastly to have all that mass of earth and
rock which formed the headland pitched down upon
the treasure which had lain hidden there so long !
What did these fellows mean by obstructing his
way ? Who were they ? And where had they
come from ?
He made a quick, impulsive movement forward.
At the same instant Toby, who had been closely
watching, suddenly butted at one of the men who
were covering them with revolvers. The fellow
was so taken by surprise that the revolver was
knocked out of his hand, and he himself was sent
sprawling from the sudden impact of Toby’s head.
The young man, Eric, who called Mr. Barclay
uncle, was hardly less quick in planting a well-aimed
blow just full on the nose of the other man, and
in the confusion the three might have succeeded
in making good their escape, but for the unfortunate
accident of Mr. Barclay hanging his foot in a root
of a ti-tree, and being very tough it tripped him up,
so that he came crash to the ground.
Toby and Eric, who were running close beside
him, pulled up in a hurry to help him rise, but
before they could get him on his feet again, the
three men were upon them, and this time there was
no getting away, for the fellows knocked them down,
and sat upon them, then held a consultation as to
the best means of disposing of them.
“ Tie them up so that they can’t get undone
and leave them here, I should say,” suggested one


man. “ They are far enough away for no one to
hear them if they yell, and if they stay here until
the flesh drops from their bones it won’t make
much difference in the long run.”
“ We can’t leave them here unguarded,” answered
the man who appeared to be the leader. “Who
is to say that one of them won’t succeed in getting
free and releasing the others ? Then there will be
trouble directly.”
“ Shoot them then ; dead men tell no tales,”
said the third man, speaking for the first time. A
lean, scraggy sort of man he was, with a callous
manner.
“ Don’t you make any mistake about that,”
said the leader impatiently. “ Dead men talk
louder than live ones, and their influence reaches
further. If we laid these three out here on the
hill-side for the robin redbreasts to come and bury,
as they did the babes in the wood ”
“ You mean if a flock of kea parrots came and
tore their eyes out before they were cold, and clawed
at their flesh until their bones were picked clean,”
interposed the callous man with a revolting sort
of grin.
“ Shut up, and be sensible, if you can,” growled
the leader. “ What lam trying to get at is that we
must leave no suspicious traces behind us in our
going. We don’t want to raise any dust of talk and
wonderment. If there is a Government boat coming
to work on this part of the bay shore the sooner we


have done our work and taken our departure the
better. We can square the boat if she comes with
some judicious story, but we might find it hard to
account for three dead fellows lying out on the
hills above the bay. The only thing for it that I can
see is to take them on board and give them a sea
voyage for the benefit of their health. It need not
be a long one.”
" Right you are. We had better be moving them.
We will make them toe it down that path to the
shore, and then signal for a boat to take us off.
One of us will have to come back and patrol, but
it will take all three of us to walk them down the
path comfortably,”
It was not the callous man who had spoken, but
a short, thick-set fellow, who had a merry eye, and
did not look so cruel as the other two.
It was this man who helped Mr. Barclay to get
on his feet and supported his steps for the first part
of their walk down the steep cliff to the water’s edge.
The director had been badly shaken by his fall, and
he appeared dazed and stupid from the shock
of it.
Toby and Eric exchanged glances as they were
each roughly hauled to their feet, but in the eyes of
each was the same expression which told the other
that it would be worse than useless to make another
bid for escape just then. The progress down the
steep path to the shore was a nightmare of horror.
Each one had his hands firmly bound behind his


back, and to descend a track so rough without the
help of one’s hands was in itself almost an impossi-
bility, but when added to this came the fact that
a fellow walked behind each of them with a revolver,
the possibility of what a slip might mean was too
bad to be thought about.
Toby had to go first. As he stumbled, slithered,
and slipped on the rough path he thought of the
family tradition of bad luck, and was for the moment
almost inclined to believe that what everyone said
must be true, and that they were the most unlucky
family which had ever come into existence. It was
horrible to think that he had been so near being
able to clear his father’s name, and to show the
Bignoll Company where the stolen, gold was hid,
and then in the moment of achievement, as it were,
to be met with a catastrophe like this. Oh, it was
too bad ! Then he began to wonder what these
armed men were doing on the hill-side at dawn.
They must be watching something, or guarding
something ; but what ?
Was that boat anchored close in under the head-
land a Government steamer ? One was expected,
that was certain, but was this the one ? If the
harbour people saw a boat steam into the bay and
come to anchor under the headland they would
take no notice, believing her to be a craft employed
on Government business. But Government work
was often delayed, and it suddenly dawned on him
that an attempt was to be made to find and lift


the treasure before the work of making the harbour
was started. So that boat down there had been
chartered for the purpose, and the watchers on the
hill-side were there for the purpose of seeing that no
one approached from the landward side near enough
to see what was going on.
He suddenly felt glad that he was to be carried
on board. At least he might have a chance of
knowing whether they found the gold just where he
expected it was hidden. Mr. Barclay would be
there to see it also, and whatever happened after-
wards one thing was certain : his father’s name
would be cleared, for not only Mr. Barclay but
Eric also was there to testify that the treasure
had been lifted from the bed of the sea under the
headland.
Suddenly a cold shiver shook him. They were
going on board certainly, but they were going as
prisoners. Prisoners were not, as a rule, allowed
to see what was happening. Moreover, one of the
men had said with very sinister meaning in his tone,
that the voyage for the prisoners need not be a long
one. What did that mean ? What could it mean
except that the three of them, bound and helpless,
would be thrown overboard directly darkness came
down again. Oh, it was horrible ! Toby felt his
hair stiffen, and his flesh creep, as the certainty of
what was before them flashed into his mind.
It was of no use to show the white feather. It
was of no use to hang his head as if disaster was


already upon him. He must keep his eyes open.
There might chance to be an unexpected way
of escape, if only he kept cool and did not get
flurried by panic. Just then he slipped and the man
behind him slipping at the same moment cannoned
into Toby, sending him headlong down the ~ough
slope, A revolver barked somewhere behind,
there was a hoarse cry, but Toby could not see what
was happening. He was rolling over and over,
unable to stop himself, and it looked as if he
would presently bounce straight into the blue water
of the bay without an atom of chance to save
himself.
Someone had been shot, but whom ? There was
a grim fear in his heart that it was Mr. Barclay
who had been hurt. If only he could stop himself
from this horrible bouncing progress down the
cliff-side. Toby gave a sudden fierce tug, and the
rope which bound his hands was undone. Then he
rolled into the scrub, and for a moment lay breath-
less and exhausted with the bumping he had received.
He had rolled into scrub high enough to cover him,
and his hands were free !
For a moment the possibility of escape did not
dawn upon him. He was too spent with his battering
to be able to think clearly. Then it suddenly came
to him that he might get away if he tried hard
enough, and he started to wriggle through the scrub,
taking an uphill direction in order to get above his
late captors. He had not gone far, and he was very


much out of breath from his efforts, when without
any warning something crashed down upon him
from above, and nearly knocked the breath out
of him.


CHAPTER VII
A DESPERATE EFFORT
WHAT is it ? What is up ? ” gasped Toby
as soon as he could manage to speak.
His mouth was full of dust and dirt, he was so bumped
and scratched, and pummelled out of all presence
of mind mat he hardly knew what he was doing, or
where he .was, and he certainly could not think what
had happened to him.
“ Hush ! Lie low, and don’t speak for a minute,”
said a voice in his ear, or rather from the top of him.
Toby for the moment was in the position of the
bottom dog, and it was not exactly comfortable.
It was Eric who had come crash down upon him,
and Eric for the matter of that was nearly smashing
him flat.
Toby gasped, but kept quiet. He did not even
demand why he was having to suffer Eric’s weight
upon him in this fashion, nor yet why it was
necessary that the toe of Eric’s boot should be
stuffed in his mouth. He realised that he had
got away from his captors, and Eric had also got
away. The next thing which concerned him was
how to keep away, so he lay quiet, waiting to see
what the next move had got to be.


He heard shouts and cries lower down the cliff,
he heard the sounds of men crashing through the
scrub, and the noise of stones and fragments of
rock rolling down into the water ; then these grew
more indistinct. Eric’s weight seemed squeezing
the life out of him. Suddenly it was lifted. Eric
rolled to one side, and dropped lower in the
scrub, saying in a whisper, “Here they come;
now, if they find us you must sham unconscious-
ness, sham it for all you are worth. It is our only
chance.”
Could he do it ? Toby knew that he was not a good
actor ; he had no cleverness at that sort of thing.
He heard the heavy breathing of the men as they
came panting up the steep side of the cliff. He
heard their angry voices as they quarrelled with
each other as to whose fault it was that the prisoners
had made good their escape, and he decided that
it was only a question of minutes before he and
Eric would be back in captivity once more.
Then came a yell from down below, there was
another shot, and a wild scramble of the two men
who had so nearly reached the spot where Toby
and Eric lay hidden in the scrub. The men were
plunging downward as fast as they could go.
The two hiding in the scrub had a few minutes’
reprieve.
“ Come on, let us wriggle further away from this,
but don’t show yourself whatever you do,” said
Eric in a crisp tone of command.


“ But what about Mr. Barclay ? Ought we not
to stop and help him ? ” asked Toby, as the two
wriggled in a cautious way upwards, making for
the shelter of a little spit of woodland which
ran down a steep gully almost to the edge of the
water.
“ Uncle John will not be helped much by our
being taken by those wretches again,” answered
Eric. “ What we have to do is to get away if we
can, and raise the alarm. What do you suppose
is their little game ? Why on earth should a
band of fellows be patrolling this lone hill-side at
dawn to take peaceable people prisoners in this
fashion ? ”
“ I wonder very much whether ” But Toby
stopped short. The wonder in his own mind was
so very wild that he was more than a little bit
afraid that he would be laughed at if he put it into
words. He had a perfect horror of being laughed at,
and this nephew of Mr. Barclay’s had the superior
sort of air which to Toby’s way of thinking was
the sign manual of a scoffer.
“ What do you wonder ? Out with it.” Eric
turned upon him with an air so fierce that Toby
had to speak almost as it were in self-defence.
“ I wonder if that boat in the bay is a Government
steamer at all ? I wonder whether she may not be
a craft chartered for the purpose of getting the gold
up before the headland is blasted ? If that had been
a Government boat down there these men who set


upon us would never have dared to hold us up with
revolvers. Can’t you see that they would not ?
But if it was a boat which had come for the purpose
of getting the gold up, they would be certain to
have watchers on the cliff, so that curious or
prying people should not get an idea of what was
going on,”
“ You have hit it, youngster. I do believe that
you have hit it! ” cried Eric, reaching over to give
him a resounding slap on the back. The slap was
heavy, and hurt a bit, but Toby was not disposed
to think of that in the light of a grievance ; he was
too pleased to think that his idea was regarded as a
likely and probable one.
“ If only we could get Mr. Barclay out of their
clutches I wouldn’t mind,” he said ruefully. “It
is dreadful to think that I have dragged him into
such danger.”
“You could not help it, so don’t fret. What we
have to do is to go ahead and get him out of it as
quickly as we can. How far are we from the town
at this point ? ” Eric was wriggling through the
scrub as he talked, and Toby was creeping along
just close behind him.
“ About three miles if we could go straight, but
to get there safely we should have to go about five
miles round, I guess, and that would take time.”
Toby spoke in a worried fashion. He was in dread-
ful trouble about Mr. Barclay. It was dreadful to
think of the director in the hands of a set of reckless


ruffians who might not stop at anything in the way
of wrong or cruelty.
“We have got to separate then. One must go
the long way, and one the short way, then the
probability is that one of us at least will reach the
town to give the alarm. The question is : which
shall it be to take the long way ? Do you know the
road ? ” Eric snapped his question out in the
curtest of tones. He was horribly worried about
his uncle. He was bothered, too, by being a stranger
in the neighbourhood. The chances would have
been so much more in his favour if only he had been
acquainted with the lie of the land.
“ Yes, the long way round is the easier. You just
scoot across the hills yonder until you reach the
road to Dibneywallah, you turn back on it towards
Wallaby Bay, and just keep on until you reach the
town. The trouble is that it goes inland so far, which
makes the way seem so long, but you cannot very well
mistake it, and it would be fairly safe, too. The
other way, across the hills, I don’t think you would
find. But I know it very well, so that is my job.
Of course, knowing the ground, I can do a bit of
dodging if necessary, so the short cut must be my
business, and the long way round is your job. It
evens things up, too, as I have had more walking
during the last night than you. Toby chuckled
a little. Eric was looking so very disgusted about
having to take the safe way, when all his instincts
were tor facing such danger as might still lie ahead.


“ Then [t mu st be you for the short cut, I suppose.”
Eric’s tone was as grumpy as his expression. “ I
hate to let you have the risky bit. But it is not
ourselves we have to think of to-day. We have just
got to do the best we can for Uncle John. If you
know the short cut, you will certainly have the very
best chance of reaching the town without being
collared again by those gentry who are out on the
hills. If you have not turned up when I reach the
town, you may depend on me to raise the place in
good earnest. Is this the way I take ? So long, then,
keep your pecker up, and do your very best. We
have had a giddy bout of it. But if we find that
gold, we will celebrate in a fitting fashion. Bignoh’s
lot will have to come down handsomely to pay us
for all our trouble, don’t you think so ? ” Eric
laughed just by way of relieving his feelings,
although there was not much mirth in his heart
just then, and the thought of what might be
happening to his uncle made his heart go cold as a
lump of lead.
Toby chuckled in amusement. “ I don’t care
very much about celebrating,” he answered soberly.
“ I do care, though, that Bignoll’s should have to
ask my Dad’s pardon for all the hard things he has
had to suffer at their hands, and he an innocent
man. That is your way over the hill yonder, and
get along as fast as you can. It may be you who
will have to carry the news to Wallaby Bay after
all, so step slippy ! ”


He dived into the spit of woodland when he parted
from Eric, and scuttling through it as fast as he
could go he clambered up the opposite hill, and creep-
ing along under cover of the scrub, crossed the ridge
and dived into the valley on the opposite side. He
was in sight of the bay now. He could see that
there was considerable activity on the boat which he
had thought to be a craft in the employ of the
Government. Had they located the gold, and were
they getting it on board already ? The mere thought
of it made him turn cold. Then he reflected that
anyhow even if it were lost to the Bignoll Company
for ever, his father’s name would probably be
cleared now, and so he went ahead as fast as he
could go.
So far he had seen no one. He was crossing the
second ridge, which would put him about a mile
from the nearest house of the town, when to his
dismay he almost stumbled on a couple of men
lying comfortably nested in a little hollow of the
hills, whence they could command the track from
the town. He might have regarded them as loafers
—just that, and nothing more, but that he caught
the gleam of a revolver sticking from the pocket
of one of them. He dropped low in the scrub then,
wondering what he ought to do, and which would
be the best way to get past without being seen.
He had left behind most of the scrub now and
the remainder of the way would be very open, and
visible both to the watchers in the dip of the hill


and to any of the people of the town who might
chance to be looking up at the hills.
To be safe he would have to veer inland, he would
actually have to go back on his tracks. Oh, it was
maddening! He was suddenly most dreadfully
sorry for himself, for he was tired and footsore, and
as hungry as it was possible for a boy to be. Oh, it
was certainly cruel hard luck ! Then he shivered.
How much harder his luck might have been if he
had not been able to get away from those men who
had suggested taking their prisoners for a voyage
which need not be a long one.
He crawled away through the scrub, thankful that
he had seen the danger soon enough to keep from
running into it. Then he took a straight cut inland
for half a mile or more, coming presently upon the
road by which Eric would have to come later on.
Presently he came upon two fellows who were
sitting beside a cart which had been laden with
boxes, empty apple boxes they appeared to be
going back to some remote farm in readiness for
next season’s crop, but which had been spilled on
the road by having been loaded in a clumsy fashion.
Was it an accident though ? Or were they merely
there as a blind, and to block the road, while they
held up every person who might have to pass that
way for business just then ?
One long, comprehensive look, and then Toby
turned to flee. But he had been seen, one of the
men standing in careless ease regarding the load of


empty boxes which lay scattered over the road was
advancing upon him with the evident intention of
knowing his business, but Toby had got the start
and he did not mean to be taken. Over a fence he
went, which had barbed wire at the top. He left a
portion of his clothing there, as was only natural, but
it was not the first time he had clambered over a
barrier of that description, and he came off a great
deal lighter than the man who followed him, and
who did not appear to be very well up in that sort
of thing judging by the amount of drapery the fence
showed when he had passed. Toby burst into a
ringing shout of laughter and tore away across the
grass of that fenced pasture as hard as he could
pelt, while the man sprinted on behind, the flapping
rags round his legs pointing to the disaster which
had followed his fence-climb.
“ Moo-00, moo-oo ! ” It was a loud and wrathful
bellow, and following the trumpet-like notes of
anger, a huge red bull came dashing up from a little
dip in the pasture land. Making straight for Toby,
the creature shook its great head in a menacing
fashion, and Toby beat his owm record for speed as
he made for the fence at the other side of the pasture.
Without thinking wiiere he was going he had
blundered into the paddock where Lee & Robinson
kept their pedigree bull, winch was known to all the
town as a ferocious animal. Being very nimble he
reached the fence before the bull, and sw T arming up
the high railings clambered over the barbed wire_at


the top in such a hurry that he lost his footing and
rolled to the ground. Luckily for him he was on
the safe side of the fence, and so the accident did not
seem of so much importance, although the fluttering
rags on the wire showed him that his garments had
sustained serious damage from the haste and
clumsiness of his climb.
The fall had knocked all the wind out of him, he
lay for a minute or so staring at the fence, and
grinning to think how disappointed the bull must
be, when he heard a wild shriek, followed by a
bellow from the bull.
What was the beast up to now ? All at once it
flashed into Toby’s mind that the man in pursuit of
him must have got into trouble with the bull.
Clambering the fence in all haste, he looked round
to see what was happening.
At first he could not see the man, he could only
see that the bull was making angry little dashes at
a small tree, and bellowing wrathfully the while.
Then he had a glimpse of the fellow dodging round
the trunk of that very small tree, while the bull
lumbered after him in hot pursuit.
Toby’s first impulse was to break into a great
shout of laughter at the plight of his late pursuer,
his next movement was to slip down from the fence
with all haste, and set out to rescue the man who
was plainly almost at the end of his endurance. He
ran as fast as he could go, shouting to attract the
attention of the animal, which catching sight


of him, turned at once to chase him instead. Now
it was Toby’s turn to flee, but as he scudded back in
the direction of the fence he hung his foot in a tuft
of matted grass, and came to the ground with a
fearful crash.


CHAPTER VIII
BEWILDERMENT
IT was George Dobney and Rowland Perks who
were headed for the telegraph office, which as
everyone knows is at the comer of Blore Street,
which is crossed at right angles by Murchison
Avenue. Of course they reached the place a good
hour before it was open, and they fretted and fumed,
raging up and down outside the closed door of the
office like a couple of captive wild beasts held by
invisible chains.
The hour passed as hours will, and the minute the
office door was opened they hurled themselves inside
the building, demanding to be told whether it was
quicker to telephone to the Government office at
Pentock or to telegraph.
“ That depends,” answered the clerk. “ Because
you may have to wait to be connected up if you try
’phoning. If the business is urgent, why don’t you
do both ? You would be safe to get a hearing
quickly then.”
” A jolly idea ! ” exclaimed George. “You slip
in and phone, Rowland, while I send a wire. We’ll
make things move between us.”
They did. Only the moving was not quite after


the fashion they expected it to be. Rowland was
still waiting to get through on the telephone, when
the reply came to George’s wire, and this was
startling enough.
“ No Government boat at present at Wallaby Bay;
work there does not start until next week.”
“ What a sell! ” exclaimed George. “ That
youngster has us on toast this time, and we have
missed the sunrise from Goat-hill as well. Rotten
I cab it.”
“ Downright putrid, so it is,” answered Rowland.
“ Yet, honest, I don’t think the chap was kidding us,
he was so downright in earnest, and think of the
jaunt he had to find us. A chap had need to have
very good reason for his belief to tramp so many
miles to express himself. Heigho ! I’m sleepy.
Getting up so early, or rather not going to bed at all
does not seem to suit my constitution, but then I
always was a fragile flower.”
“You always were,” George grinned cheerfully,
as he looked at the thick-set figure and strong, hard
face of his chum. “ Like some other fragile flowers,
dandelions for instance, or stinkweed, you always
seem to be sprouting in the wrong place. Well, I
feel as if we had been had, and that pretty com-
pletely. I’m not fond of making an ass of myself
for the benefit of the public. What shall we do next ?
Shall we go along to Bignoll’s place and see how the
other April Fools are getting on ? ”
“We might as well,” drawled Rowland. “If


" eve got to look foolish it will be pleasanter to be
with others who are in the same boat. The more
treacle there is the less the brimstone tastes, so
I find. But you called them April Fools—don’t you
know it is November now ? ”
“ 0f course I’ve got eyes and can see what is the
date of a daily paper,” said George, as the two
turned to leave the telegraph office in company.
But my great-grandfather on my mother’s side
lived in England you know, and I’m a hark-
back to him I expect. They have spring in April
in England, and men are mostly fools in spring so
I’m told.”
They sauntered along to the Works feeling
languid and out of sorts. They had pelted back
from Goat-hill at record speed. They had not
spared themselves in any way. Now, reaction had
set in, and they were feeling desperately sore
because they thought that a practical joke had been
played upon them.
Arnold Ferris and Tom Langley had been deputed
to warn the manager of the Works, and they had
also arrived on the scene before they could do any-
thing, for Mr. Forbes the manager did not reach
the office until about half an hour after they had
been cooling their heels in lounging about the yard.
Iso one at the Works knew them, there was nothing
saving their own statement that they had come
from Mr. Barclay and, to their surprise and chagrin,
the young men found that they were objects of deep


suspicion to the officials whom they encountered.
It was not much better when Mr. Forbes arrived;
they were strangers to him also, and although he
gave them a courteous hearing, it was easy to see
that he did not entirely trust their statements.
“ You say that Mr. Barclay is on the track of
those long-lost bars of gold ? ” he remarked in a
politely incredulous tone. “ Well, stranger things
have happened. WTiat did you say Mr. Barclay
washed me to do ? Send a boat off to the Govern-
ment tug, which has commenced operations in the
harbour ? I can do that of course. Do either of you
gentlemen wish to go out in her ? ”
The tw r o young men looked at each other in mute
enquiry, their own private feeling in the matter was
that they chiefly wanted a good breakfast and then
to go to sleep. But they w T ere game all through, and
so they said that they w r ould certainly go, and the
sooner the boat was ready the better they would
like it.
“ There is a boat ready now, you can start at once
if you choose,” said Mr. Forbes, and then they went
with him out through the back door of the office,
along a cinder path between the smelting-houses,
and down the steps to a little wharf wdiere a boat
with tw r o row r ers waited for them.
“ Did you say the Government boat was anchored
under the headland ? ” asked Mr. Forbes, as he
stood on the steps, and shading his eyes with his
hand looked out over the gleaming waters of the


bay. “ I can’t see any craft there, not even a fishing
smack.”
“ I expect she is further round the bend, and out
of sight from here,” answered Arnold Ferris, who was
spokesman ; Tom Langley never had much to say
for himself, though he was better at doing than
most. “At any rate, the boy said she was there
when he came to Goat-hill.”
“ What boy ? ” asked Mr. Forbes in surprise.
“ Binns, I think he said his name was Toby Binns;
isn’t he a clerk here, or something ? ”
“ A junior clerk, a very good sort usually and
with a fine reputation for steady work, but absent
this morning without leave, and without excuse,”
explained Mr. Forbes crisply. He had been
decidedly nettled by Toby’s lapse, and he felt it
w T ould be a real satisfaction to have it accounted
for.
“ He came sprinting across the hills to us last
night; we had left our camp and gone across to Goat-
hill to see the sun rise, and he followed us up. He
had a story all ready made to order about the boat
having anchored there for blasting operations, winch
must be stopped, as he had a theory that the
missing gold was sunk on to the ocean-bed at
that point.”
“ Humph, I will believe that when I see it,”
remarked Mr, Forbes without any enthusiasm.
“ Well, gentlemen, good morning. You will let me
know if you require any further assistance ? ”


The two answered that they certainly would, and
they got into the boat, and were rowed away by
the two boatmen.
Mr. Forbes walked back to his office in a thought-
ful mood. If Toby Binns had gone to Mr. Barclay,
of course there would be no need to find fault with
him when he came back. The manager liked to live
at peace with those under his rule, and so he was
really glad to be spared even so much of fault-
finding.
He had not been seated at his desk for more than
ten minutes when two rather dishevelled young men
were ushered into the office. Both of them looked
bored and angry, and both of them burst into
simultaneous abuse of Toby Binns, whom they
declared had led them back from Goat-hill on an
April Fool kind of an errand.
“ I maintain we are November Fools,” broke in
Rowland. “ But the main thing is that young
Binns said there was a Government boat anchored
out under the headland in the bay for the purpose
of blasting and that we were to stop it from getting
to work. We have wired to Pentock, and the
officials there say that no Government boat is in
the bay, and work will not begin until next week.
We think young Binns must have a bee in his
bonnet, and we want to know what to do next. Can
you tell us ? ”
“ I can tell you that I have just provided a boat
for two young men to go out to the Government


craft, so it looks as if I also have been dragged into
the April Fool business,” replied Mr. Forbes.
" What does Mr. Barclay say about it all ? ”
They told him what there was to be told. Then
they sat down in the office to wait for developments,
which seemed rather long in coming. The morning
was wearing away, and they were getting furiously
hungry, but they did not like to go about their own
business, or even look after a belated breakfast until
they knew what had happened out there in the bay,
where Arnold Ferris and Tom Langley had gone to
board the Government craft.
One hour, two hours slipped away, and the third
was well on its way, when a watcher at the Works
said that the boat was returning with, the two
young men in it. George and Rowland bustled
down to the little wharf then, and they were waiting
to welcome their chums when the row boat came
alongside.
“ Well,” they both demanded in a breath, “ what
news have you ? ”
“ Nothing, or as good as nothing,” replied Arnold,
in a gloomy tone, for he too was hungry, and an
empty stomach with him always denoted gloom.
“ We have been had all round and no mistake about
it. I wish I had that young Binns here at this
moment, I would make him repent that bee in his
bonnet. When we got round the headland we saw
no boat there at all; there was certainly a craft of
some kind standing away to the north, and we were


soft enough to row after her, but one might as well
have tried to chase a racehorse in a donkey-cart, so
we gave up and came back again, and here we are.
That is all we know, except that we want some
breakfast so badly, that I am inclined to think we
shall start on each other cannibal fashion, if we
cannot soon get some food.”
“ Breakfast, did you say ? ” drawled Rowland,
“ I suppose that you meant lunch. All I can say is
that I hope young Binns is as hungry as we are, and
really there is no need to wish him anything worse.”
It occurred to one of the four that they ought to
give the boatmen something for their trouble, but
they had only a little money with them, and food
they must have, so George suggested that they
should give the men something on account, and
save the rest of the money for food, after which they
walked in company to the Hanley Restaurant in
Blore Street, and there sat down for a square
meal.
They began to feel better when their hunger was
satisfied, and then came the question of what to do
next. Nothing had been heard of the two who had
gone in search of a warrant for the arrest of the
solitary man who lived in Joe Warner’s cabin. They
decided that they would go to the Police Station to
discover what was happening. There was only a
sergeant on duty when they reached the place, and
he could not give them very much in the way of
news, as he had only been on duty for a couple of


hours. He told them that the inspector had been
called out earlier in the day, and had not yet
returned, and that was all that he knew.
The four held a serious discussion in the open
space outside the Police Station. They were com-
pletely out of their depth, and the things they said
about Toby Binns must have made his ears burn if
he had at that moment been in any sort of a plight
suitable for receiving impressions. They did not
know what to do next, whether to wait for Mr.
Barclay in the town, or to go back to the camp
among the hills where the Chinaman was in charge
of affairs. They were still talking matters over, no
two of them agreeing in any suggestion which could
be made, when a little knot of people came along the
road from the hills, which leads into the tow by
way of Bendigo Street and the Police Station at the
comer.
“ Hullo, I wonder what is up ? ” exclaimed
George, who chanced to be looking in that direction.
“ It seems as if there has been an accident, and
someone has been pretty considerably smashed up.
Let us go and see what it is.”
The four stepped briskly down the road to meet
the little procession. There was one policeman
directing affairs, while two men, helped by a couple
of women, were walking along under the burden of a
figure carried on a hurdle.
“ Anything the matter ? ” asked George of the
policeman, a very unnecessary question by the


way, seeing the nature of the burden which was
being carried on the hurdle.
“Itis a lad who has been tossed by a bull, we
don’t know who he is, and we want someone to tell
us; perhaps you may know him; come along to t e
station and have a look at the poor chap/' said the
policeman, and the four turned round to go with
him, although seeing that they were strangers m
Wallaby Bay, it did not look as if they were likely
to be of much use.
Entirely unconscious, the boy on the hurdle had
his eyes closed, and his white face bore still the
strained expression of the effort he had made.


CHAPTER IX
A WORRYING DELAY
W H V is that fellow Binns > lam sure of
V V itl ” cried George, after one long look
at the white face of the boy on the hurdle.
Do you mean Toby Binns, who is a clerk at the
Bignoll Company’s Works ? ” asked the policeman,
becoming suddenly very alert and businesslike.
Why, yes, I don’t know any other Binns,”
replied George, and then he turned to his companions
saying with a worried air, “ It is Binns right enough,
but where can Mr. Barclay and Eric have got to ? ”
Can t say, ask me another,” answered Arnold
Ferris, and then he turned to the policeman asking
so many questions all in a breath, that the be-
wildered official put up his hand in self-defence !
One at a time, if you please; how am Ito tell
you a dozen things all in one breath as it were and
what do you think I am made of to know everything
at a jump ? It was the man in charge of the bull
which by the way is a very valuable animal, who
found him, and a pretty job of it he had to get the
bull interested in something else while the young
chap was removed from the scene of action. How
long he had been lying out in the paddock, or how he


came to be there at all is a mystery. There is a high
fence all round the enclosure, with plenty of barbed
wire, and printed notices in every direction to warn
people of the danger of attempting to go in that
direction. So the young chap brought the trouble
on himself, and no one else is to blame.”
“ Perhaps he couldn’t read,” interposed Tom,
more for the sake of argument than anything else.
“ It isn’t likely that he would be a clerk at the
Bignoll Company’s Works if he could not read, is
it ? ” asked the policeman in a tone of withering
scorn, and Tom subsided into silence feeling very
much sat upon.
The four undertook to assist in carrying Toby to
his home, and on the suggestion of the policeman
one of them went off to warn the family that an
accident had happened to Toby, who was being
brought home.
It was fortunate that it was Araminta and not
Mrs. Binns who came to the door in response to
Arnold’s vigorous peal at the bell.
“ I will trouble you to make less noise next time
you ring that bell,” she said tartly, “ my mother
suffers from heart trouble, and a sudden commotion
like that is not good for her.”
“ I’m sorry I made such a row,” said Arnold, as
he swept off his cap in a hasty salute, and then he
went on gravely, “I am bringing you rather bad
news. You have a brother, I think, who is clerk at
the Bignoll Company’s Works. I regret to tell you


that he has met with an accident, and he is being
brought home; they will be here with him in a few
minutes.”
“ Something happened to Toby ? ” cried Ara-
minta, w r ho turned as wiiite as her blouse, and
backed as if she were going to fall or to faint. “ Oh,
and I was so angry because he did not come home
last night. Is he—is he dead ? ”
“ Oh, dear, no, nothing as bad as that,” replied
Arnold, speaking as cheerfully as possible; “he was
found in a paddock where a pedigree bull takes its
airings, and the bull had tossed him. But he is alive
all right I know, for I have seen him.”
” How did he get there ? ” demanded Araminta,
with a sudden sound of suspicion in her tone.
Toby was not one to do silly or mischievous
things. What has been happening to him, poor
boy ? ”
“ That is what we all are wanting to know, but we
must wait until he is well enough to tell us.”
Arnold’s tone soothing and gentle, then he
remembered that the people bringing Toby home
w r ould be in the street in a minute or so, and he
said urgently, “ Hadn’t you better warn your
mother, and get her out of the way while they bring
him in ? it may upset her you know. Someone has
gone for a doctor, and is there anything that I can
do for you ? ”
“ It w r ould be a comfort if you would go and
fetch father home,” answered Araminta tearfully.


and then she told Arnold where Mr. Binns might be
found, after which she darted back into the house to
prepare her mother for what was coming.
Toby was carried indoors, he was laid on a couch
in the best sitting-room, and the doctor examining
him was able to comfort poor Mrs. Binns by saying
that there were no bones broken, but Toby seemed to
be suffering from concussion owing to the force with
which the animal had tossed him. It was that
which caused the unconsciousness, and there was
nothing to be done save wait until nature did her
own healing.
Arnold and his companions told Mr. Binns what
they knew of the reason for Toby s having been out
all through the previous night, and then they
departed in all haste to see if they could get news
of Mr. Barclay and Eric.
The two campers who had been told off to go to
the Police Station for a warrant for the arrest of the
man who lived in Joe W arner’s cottage, turned up
in due course with the inspector and two constables.
They had been out to the cottage, but they were too
late, for the bird had flown. Not only was the
solitary man gone, but almost all his belongings
were gone also. They had spent considerable time
in turning over and sorting a mass of papers which
had been stuffed into the stove for the purpose of
being burned, only the fire had apparently gone out
before doing its work. These papers were some of
them of great importance to the police, who had


afterwards made quite an exhaustive search of the
premises. This had taken time, and led to the delay.
No one had heard of Mr. Barclay, or of Eric, and
by this time there was considerable excitement in
the town. If only Toby had been well enough to tell
what he knew, it would not have seemed so bad. As
it was, the strain of the waiting seemed almost more
than could be borne.
There were searchers out on the hills now who
were looking for a trace of Mr. Barclay and his
nephew, but although they hunted until sundown,
never a sign did they see of either of them. Oh, it
was a maddening mystery, and every hour added to
the seriousness of it.
Everyone was helpless. No one knew what to do
next and the watchers around Toby’s bed had the
worst time of all. Mrs. Binns remarked tearfully
that they were the most unlucky family in the
world, and none of the others who shared her watch
had the spirit left to contradict her; so the night
wore on to the next day.
Dawn was just breaking, and the watchers in
Toby s room had some of them dropped into uneasy
slumber, when there came a knock at the street
door ; it was not a loud knock, but if it had been a
clap of thunder or the report of a big gun it could not
have had more effect in rousing the house. Every-
one started into instant wakefulness of the most
alert sort, and Mr. Binns hurried to unfasten the
door. It was Mr. Barclay he somehow expected to


see, and he was quite unreasonably disappointed to
find it was only a constable who stood waiting for
admittance.
“ Has the young man come to his senses yet ? ”
asked the constable, with a jerk of his head towards
the stairs to indicate that it was the son of the house
for whom he was enquiring.
“ No, he lies just the same,” answered Mr. Binns,
then he said in a disappointed tone, “ I hoped that
you had come to bring us news of some sort that
would help to clear up the mystery.”
“ I have got news of a sort, only the trouble is
that it only makes the muddle bigger,” replied the
constable gravely, then he went on, “ An hour ago a
young fellow knocked us up at the Police Station, he
was that dead beat he could hardly crawl, and we
had to stick a billy on the gas, and give him hot tea
and food before he could tell us his story. He said
that his name was Eric Barclay, a nephew of Mr.
Barclay, the director at Bignoll’s Works. He was
with Mr. Barclay and this son of yours, and they
were hurrying across the hills by the most direct
route to the headland, to stop the Government boat
from getting to work as they thought. They were
stopped by three men who held them up with
loaded revolvers, and finally took them prisoners.
They were being driven down the side of the cliff to
be taken on board the boat which was anchored
under the headland, when one of them fell, knocking
over another. In the confusion the young man Eric,


and your son, managed to escape, and did a bolt of
it. Your son wanted to go back for Mr. Barclay,
but the young man thought they would only be
taken prisoners again, and that the best thing to do
was to get to the town as quickly as they could, and
to raise an alarm. On the way back, they decided
to separate, so that if one were taken the other
might have a chance of reaching here with the news.
Your son was to come the nearer way because he
was familiar with the hill-tracks. The other was
coming by the road that veers inland. This is a
good way round. He was part of the way back to
the tow, had covered half the distance I should say,
when he met two men driving in a wagon. They
stopped to ask him if he was looking for a friend, and
they described your son so close, that the young
man Eric said it was his chum, though he was
mighty struck to know why this boy of yours should
have set these strangers to look out for him. The
men told him that your son wanted them to carry
him to the Government Station on Weeknor Point,
and as they were going there on business, they would
be glad to give him a lift. The young man thought
tnat it looked pretty queer, but he said he’d go, so
he got up in the wagon with them, and they drove
on and on for what seemed an endless way • the track
dwindled off till it wasn’t more than a sheep-path.
Finally they reached a steep gully between two hills,
and they bade him climb up there, and then he
would find the Government Station round the


shoulder of the hill. He went, but there was no
house, no building of any kind, which of course there
would not be, for that part of the coast has no houses
at all for miles and miles. Of course the young man
guessed then that he had been pretty considerably
had, and he made up his mind that he was not going
to be diddled again in the same way. But he had got
to get back to the town, and he was desperately
afraid of falling in with these gentry again, so he laid
low for a time, then following his general sense of
direction, he tried to make his way to Wallaby Bay,
but it took him nearly all night to do it, and he was
not very far from collapse when he reached the
Police Station.”
“ What a strange story ! ” exclaimed Mr. Binns.
In his excitement he was rumpling his hair wildly
until it stood erect all over the top of his head,
except where he was beginning to go bald, and he
looked the queerest sight. “ Why should Toby have
sent a message like that ? ”
“ He didn’t of course ! ” the constable snorted in
tremendous scorn. “ The fact of the men stopping
Mr. Barclay’s nephew would point to the fact that
they had already interfered in some way with your
son, though how, we can’t say. If only the poor
fellow were conscious we could get at some idea of
what had happened. Of course we do know now
what has become of Mr. Barclay, and we have
already telephoned Pentock to ask that a cutter
may be sent in chase of the boat that was here


yesterday. Even that will be like looking for a
needle in a haystack, as they say in England.”
Mr. Binns groaned in downright misery of mind,
and the policeman tried to comfort him.
“ Now, don’t go taking it so hard, young heads
can recover from hard knocks which would entirely
do for the upper floors of older folk. I expect your
son will be all right again in a few days.”
“It was not Toby that I was worrying about just
then,” Mr. Binns spoke in a protesting fashion. "It
was Mr. Barclay I was thinking about. Even sup-
posing the boat is found that was here, anchored
under the headland, there is only the barest chance
that Mr. Barclay will be found on board. A gang
of desperate men who thought it necessary to take
so many precautions in the way of setting sentinels
on the lone hill-side, would be little likely to spare
the life of a man who was as completely in their
power as Mr, Barclay would be, after he was
carried on board ship.”
“ Taking it so hard won’t help so far as I can see,”
replied the constable. “ You’d much better bear
up and feel as cheerful about it as you can. At least
you will be able to feel that after this folks won’t
be able to point at you as having been in any way
mixed up with the thieving of that little lot of gold,
which disappeared from the Works ten years ago.”
“ Knowing myself innocent in the eyes of God, I
would rather have laid under the suspicion of being
mixed up in the theft, until the end of my days, than


that any harm should have come to Mr. Barclay,”
burst out Mr. Binns vehemently, and he looked so
badly upset that the constable who was a feeling
sort, and a downright good fellow, was just about
to start on some further consolation when Ara-
minta came running down the stairs to call her
father, saying that Toby had opened his eyes and
was beginning to talk.


CHAPTER X
AN EXCITING MOMENT
MR. BARCLAY dropped weakly to the
ground, and sat there. He had seen
Toby nearly squashed by the fellow falling upon
him, and then he had seen that the boy had managed
to roll out of sight into the scrub. Then, when the
men started in pursuit of the missing prisoner, he
sat still on the ground just biding his time patiently.
He knew very well that it was of no use for him to
try escaping on his own. He was not nimble as the
young fellows were, and he did not choose to anger
his captors by giving them any unnecessary trouble.
He did not think that his life was in any special
danger, although it was quite possible he might lose
his liberty for a little while. He had heard what the
men had said about the voyage of the prisoners
being only a very short one, but he had regarded the
utterance as just bluff. Men did not, as a rule,
murder their fellows in cold blood, and in any case
he did not think that serious harm was menacing
him at their hands.
He guessed that Eric must have got away as well
as Toby, for two of the men had disappeared in
search, and he was alone with the very callous-


looking person who had been the one to suggest the
advisability of leaving them all lying dead on the
hill-side. This man crouched on the ground with
his revolver pointing full at Mr. Barclay, a truly
uncomfortable position for one of them, as the
fellow almost immediately began to show signs of
being very drowsy, and to nid-nod as he sat.
Mr. Barclay looked at that gently swaying
revolver until he got fairly giddy. Would the thing
go off, and send a bullet into him ? The strain of
expectancy grew almost too bad to be borne. The
perspiration came out in big drops on his forehead,
and rolled down his face. Ugh, it was a horrible
position !
The man’s head swayed further forward, his hand
relaxed, down dropped the revolver, and, going off,
sent a bullet through the fleshy part of Mr. Barclay’s
leg, causing him to yell suddenly from the pain of his
wound.
At once the man started up crying out in an
excited fashion that his prisoner was escaping. He
flung himself upon Mr. Barclay, who had squirmed
round from the sting of his wound. The two began
to wrestle, but rolled over and over, falling at
length down a sheer descent and crashing on to some
rocks at the bottom. It was little short of a miracle
that the life was not crushed out of the director,
but in some miraculous fashion the body of the man
was underneath, breaking the fall for him. But it
had knocked the sense out of him, and for hours he


lay unconscious down in the deep cleft of the rocks
out of sight of the sea, almost hidden by the mulga
scrub which had found a scanty roothold at the
bottom of the ravine.
The day wore on. Some vultures sailed across the
patch of blue sky visible from the bottom of the
ravine. A kea parrot descended low between the
rocks, and was just about to settle down with a
sinister flop upon the warm and breathing form of
Air. Barclay, when something in the high rock walls
of the gulley scared the wild creature, who could not
brook a cage, and rising on strong, unfettered wing,
with a shrill squawk of fear, it flew away and did
not come back, and again the hours passed on.
It was near to sunsetting when a wavering,
uncertain sort of figure came groping its way into
the gulley, and all but trod upon the two bodies
lying in the mulga scrub.
The man, who was elderly and appeared to be
very weak, uttered a little bleat of terror, and turned
to flee back by the way he had come. At that
moment Mr. Barclay stirred, and moaned from the
pain in his leg.
The elderly man paused in his flight, saying aloud,
“ Alive are you ? Well, if you fell from the top you
ought to be dead, unless you have as many lives as
a cat. I wonder who you are, and how you came to
be here ? ”
Stooping down he put out all his strength and
tried to drag Mr. Barclay out from the bristling


scrub, then he saw that there was another body
underneath, and it did not take long to make sure
that this second man was indeed dead, must in
fact have been dead for hours. The blood from
Mr. Barclay's wound had oozed out upon the
clothing of this other man until he was indeed a
ghastly sight, and once more the elderly man
uttered a bleat of fear, and made as if he would have
run away. But again Mr. Barclay tried to move,
and again he groaned. The instinct of pity in the
elderly man was stronger than the feeling of panic
which tried to sway him. He stooped, and getting
his hands under the shoulders of Mr. Barclay, he
made a mighty effort, and even succeeded in dragging
the limp form of the director out of sight of the
dead body on which Mr. Barclay had been lying
so long.
The movement and the dragging caused the
director’s wound to start bleeding afresh, and the
man went slowly and painfully down on his knees
to bandage the hurt to the best of his ability, and
so to staunch the flow of blood. Then he looked
about him in a vague sort of way as if uncertain
what to do next. It was evident that he could not
carry the wounded director out of the gully, and it
did not seem human to leave him there alone. But
he had been in that place often enough before, and
he knew that there was a small cave in the lime-
stone rocks just a little way above where he had
found the two men lying. The trouble would be to


get the injured man up there, but he managed it
after a struggle which made the perspiration roll in
great drops down his face. Indeed he was so
exhausted that, when his task was accomplished, he
sank on the ground beside the form of the man he
had carried and lay there unable to move.
A long time went by, then Mr, Barclay, who had
fainted from the agony of being dragged along with
his injured leg bumping on the ground at every step,
came slowly back to consciousness again, and
opening his eyes looked about him.
At first, as was but natural, he supposed himself
still a captive, and he thought it was his jailer who
lay by his side. Was the man asleep he wondered,
or what had happened ? Not yet did he remember
that fall down the cliff, and he marvelled in a dazed
sort of fashion that he felt so weak, and so fearfully
battered.
By slow and painful degrees he dragged himself to
a sitting posture, and then leaned over to peer into
the face of the man who lay by his side.
Why was the face so familiar ? Where had he
seen that man before ? “ Gerald Orme, is it you, or
am I dreaming ? ” he exclaimed, and now it was
blank astonishment which sounded in his voice.
The elderly man who had been lying in a state
bordering on complete collapse, started at the
sound of a name which he had not heard for many
a long year, and dragging himself up he stared at
Mr. Barclay with, actual horror in his eyes. “ I never


thought that you would know me,” he said
awkwardly.
“ Why shouldn’t I know you ? ” demanded Mr.
Barclay. “ I have not seen you for a good many
years, but one does not forget a face that has been as
much loved as I loved you, Gerald Orme. Where
have you been hiding for so long ? I thought you
must be dead, seeing how long ago it is since you have
made any sign out of the silence. And in the name
of all that is wonderful, how is it that you are mixed
up in this mysterious business at all ?
“ That is a long story, and it can’t be told to-
night, first things first you know,” and the man
who answered to the name of Gerald Orme laughed
in a weak and mirthless fashion. He had gathered
his knees up in a bunch, and sat with his chin resting
on them, while he peered at Mr. Barclay with his
deep-set eyes. “ The thing that concerns me most
is what to do for your comfort, and the task of
caring for you properly in a place like this seems a
good bit beyond my powers.”
“ I don’t want anything at present, only to lie
still. I should be glad if the pain in my leg would
stop, and it is a bit chilly here.” Mr. Barclay was
frowning heavily as he spoke. His bodily dis-
comfort was so great that he wanted to shriek with
the pain of it all. He was not used to being in pain,
nor was he used to being uncomfortable, and with
every fibre of his being he resented it. Do you
think it would be possible for you to get word to the


town of where I am, and what has happened to me ?
Help would be very quickly forthcoming then.”
“ I couldn’t do the trip until daylight, but I can
make j ou a little fire \ you won’t feel so bad if you
are warmer. As he spoke Gerald Orme scrambled
slowly and painfully to his feet, and going outside
the cave, he started to hack off dry twigs of
mulga, then when he had collected a goodly pile, he
came back, and began to kindle a fire. The sun was
just setting, in less than half an hour it would be
black dark, for what moon there was would not
serve for very much down in that deep gully with
the towering walls of rock. He was a man of
resource too, for when the fire was going he produced
a billy from somewhere, with water and tea which he
proceeded to boil over the embers. He had food too,
but it was only ship biscuit of the hardest possible
variety.
Poor as the fare was, Mr. Barclay felt ever so
much the better for it, and the pain of his leg having
dulled at last, he was able to doze off to sleep
comforted by the warmth and the food. He had
detailed to Gerald Orme the amazing events of the
day, and the man had listened in a stolid, unmoved
sort of fashion, though there had been a lurking fear
in his eyes. He had made no comment, however, and
when Mr. Barclay had once more pressed him to say
how he had got there he again asserted that it was a
story too long to be told that night, and it would
have to wait until the next day.


Very slowly the hours of darkness dragged away.
Mr. Barclay slept but fitfully, the pain in his leg,
although dulled, kept giving him reminders which
destroyed his rest. When he did drop into uneasy
slumber he had the most fearful dreams, and in the
end he felt that he would rather be awake than drop
off to sleep to face such horrors.
Morning at last! When daylight stole down into
the gloomy depths of the gully, Gerald Orme stirred
and rose. Either he had slept all night, or he had
purposely refrained from appearing to be awake. He
asked Mr. Barclay about the hurt leg, kindled a
fire, and put the billy on to boil. When this was
done, he fed Mr. Barclay with the last of the
biscuit, saying that he could get food for himself
when he reached the town.
“ Perhaps you will not have to go all the way to
the town before you can find help,” said Mr. Barclay
weakly. He hated to be left alone in that grim gully
with only the smouldering remains of the fire for
company.
“ Perhaps I shall,” Gerald Orme answered, then
when he was ready to start, he came to the side of
Mr. Barclay, and stooping down he held out his hand.
“ Say, Robert, will you shake hands with me
before Igo? ” he asked. “It is likely enough that
you might refuse if you knew as much about me as
1 know myself. But you were always just and
upright, though you did me a big wrong once
long ago.”


“I did you a wrong? How?” demanded Mr.
Barclay, who had thrust out his hand readily
enough.
“ You married the woman to whom I was secretly
engaged, and you spoiled life for me,” answered
Gerald Orme bitterly. “ Her life was spoiled too,
but that was her own fault, seeing that she married
you for your money, although it was me that she
cared for. I vowed that I would pay you out for
that, and I did my best, but the trouble was that it
was I who had to suffer, and not you.”
Mr. Barclay was still gripping hard at the hand of
the man who had been his friend, “ She is dead now,
poor soul, and we will let her memory rest in peace,”
he said earnestly. “ But I want you to believe that
though I loved her, I would never have sought her if
I had known you had a prior claim. God bless you,
old chum; let the past be past, and we will not lose
sight of each other again. You look as if the world
has not treated you very kindly; it shall be my
business to make things a bit brighter for you if
I can.”
Gerald Orme went out from the little cave with
his head hanging very low. He scrambled up the
steep path out of the gully, and he took his way to
the town feeling that he had somehow missed the
best in life all along, and his mood was very black
and bitter. He could not blame the man he had
just left, he dared not blame the woman, for she was
dead. The only person on whom the blame could


with any show of right be laid was himself. He was
realising as he walked slowly along in the bright
sunlight, that what a man sows that he must also
reap.
He reached the town at last. He had never
thought to set foot in Wallaby Bay again, but
circumstances had been too much for him. He was
heading down Blore Street, intending to make his
way to the office of the Bignoll Company in order
to get help for Mr. Barclay, when someone tapped
him on the shoulder, and turning round he saw a
policeman gripping him with one hand, while with
the other he pulled out his whistle, and blew a call
for help.
“ What do you mean by treating me in this
fashion ? ” demanded Gerald Orme indignantly.
“ Oh, it may be nothing much,” replied the
constable cheerfully. He could see a comrade
coming to his assistance, and so was at rest in his
mind. “ You have been living in that lone cabin of
Joe Warner’s, I believe, and there are a few things
we want explained, about what has been found
there.”


CHAPTER XI
IN A SORE STRAIT
MR. BINNS went up the stairs two steps at
a time and he was followed by the police-
man to whom he had been talking down below.
Toby’s utterances would be public property just at
present. That is to say, so much hung upon what he
might be able to tell, that the policeman judged it a
matter of duty to be present to hear what might be
said, though he had the tact and good feeling to halt
outside the open door of the bedroom, where he was
out of Toby’s sight.
“Aml at home ? ” asked Toby in surprise. He
was sitting up in bed, and staring about in a
bewildered fashion. Then he asked with positive awe
in his voice, “ How did I get here ? Can you tell me
that ? ”
“You were found, dear; you had had an accident,
and you had been tossed by that awful bull of Lee &
Robinson's. Why you should have ventured into
such a dangerous place is more than we can imagine;
why, Toby, you might have been killed by the
creature ! ” The voice of Araminta grew shrill as she
thought of Toby’s danger, but he put up his hand
quickly as if to stay the torrent of her reproaches.


“ The bull was all right, I dodged him the first
time, it was having to go back to keep him from
killing the fellow that was after me that did the
mischief,” he explained weakly, then he burst out,
“ Where is father ? Bring him here quick, there is
trouble, and Mr. Barclay is in the hands of some
fellows who are going to take him on board a boat
and drown him. I wonder who started the idea that
the boat in the bay was there to do Government
work ? It is my belief it was there to lift that gold.
I believe they were getting it stowed on board. I
saw a diver on the deck as we were being driven
down the side of the cliff. If harm has come to Mr.
Barclay I shall never get over it, for it was I who
went to fetch him, and who dragged him into the
danger as it were. Father, can’t you do something
quick ? How long have I been lying here ? And
what has been happening ? Oh, dear, I wish that
silly bull had tossed me some other way, so that I
had not lost my senses. I was coming for help, don’t
you see ? ”
“ It will be all right, Toby, old fellow, don’t you
worry,” answered Mr. Binns in a soothing tone, and
he waved his hand to the policeman, who at once
tip-toed gently down the stairs, and letting himself
out to the street went back to the Police Station,
with the tidings that Toby had come back to
consciousness, and was in dreadful trouble about
what had happened to Mr. Barclay. But there was
nothing really fresh to learn from his statement, it


only corroborated what had already been told by Eric,
and those who waited for news felt more helpless
than ever. The man who lived in Joe Warner’s lone
house had been arrested in the streets early one
morning, but he had been seized with a stroke while
two policemen were taking him to the Police Station,
and so there was not much to be gained from him.
At present he was lying in a bed at the local hos-
pital, and it seemed extremely doubtful whether he
would ever recover sufficiently to speak again.
Meanwhile the cable was at work. Every port
within likely call was warned about the boat which
had disappeared from the bay in such a mysterious
fashion, one or two fast cutters were out in pursuit of
likely vessels, but in those wide seas it was very
much of a hopeless task to search for a ship which
could hardly be described, so little notice had
been taken of the boat which had anchored under
the headland. Mr. Barclay was a rich man, and
director of an important business concern, so he must
be searched for in all possible directions regardless
of expense.
Toby lay in bed for a few hours until the effect of
the concussion had worn off a little, then nothing
could keep him there any longer. His mother
ordered him to lie still, and Araminta threatened to
take his clothes away, but it was all of no use. When
Mr. Binns was appealed to, to use his authority, he
only shook his head and bade them let the boy do as
he liked.


Toby looked at his father in silent gratitude, but
he did not say much, he was feeling a bit too bad for
talking just then. In his heart he was blaming
Eric for having refused to go back to the rescue of
Mr. Barclay, at the time when they made their own
escape. Surely it would have been better for them
all three to have kept together ! There had been
common sense of course in what Eric had said about
their not being able to help Mr. Barclay all the time
they were captives themselves, but to have left him
to his fate in this fashion, seemed to Toby to be
absolutely callous and unfeeling.
He dressed himself slowly; he felt so rotten, that
it was almost as much as he could do to drag his
clothes on. Araminta had flounced away in high
dudgeon, or he would have been glad to have got
her to help him. He did not bother about a collar
and a tie. A scarf round his neck would do very
well, even though it made him look as if he were
suffering from a sore throat.
Once he was out in the open air, he began to feel
better. It was early afternoon when he crept out of
the house. He had no clear idea what he wanted to
do, or where he wanted to go, but no sooner was he
outside than his steps turned as if by instinct into
the road which led to the hills. He was going back
to the place where the three men had tried to drive
Mr. Barclay, himself, and Eric down the steep cliff
to the edge of the water. His mother and sister had
assured him that all possible search had been made


for Mr. Barclay in that direction, but he had not
been there himself to see how the search was made,
and so he could not persuade himself that it had been
as thorough as it should have been.
What a long way it was ! The four or five miles’
tramp over the rough ground tried his strength
severely. But he would not turn back, and he
pressed doggedly on, quite unconscious of the fact
that Araminta was following at a long distance
behind, determined to keep him in sight, while
equally careful that he should have no idea he was
being followed.
Sometimes Toby was forced to sit down and rest
for quite a long time, but he never even thought of
turning back. He was resolved to reach that spot
even though he might have to crawl there. Indeed
when he came to the top of the cliff, he was forced
to go down on all fours to make the descent, the
sheer drop of the ground made him horribly giddy,
and he did not wonder that they had tumbled in
going down it before.
He reached a spot just below where he had
managed to make his own escape. He was sitting
there wondering if Air. Barclay had been taken off
at once to the boat, when his attention was caught
by a little patch of dry blood on the ground. Oh, he
knew it was blood right enough, and a horrible fear
came into his mind that Mr. Barclay had been shot
in that spot and was dead.
Toby shook as if from an ague. He put his head


down on his hands, and tried to blot out the picture
his fancy had stirred up. He felt that he would never
be happy again if Mr. Barclay had died. The
director would never have come to harm if he, Toby,
had not been so keen on clearing his father’s name
from any suspicion of being concerned in the gold
robbery of ten years ago.
“ What a lot of misery and trouble that beastly
gold has caused ! ” he muttered resentfully, as he sat
staring out over the blue waters of the bay, and
thinking of Mr. Barclay. Then he began staring
round him to see if he could detect any trace of a
body having been dragged down the remaining bit
of the cliff. Supposing the director had been shot
on that spot, where would they have disposed of his
body ? But with the sea breaking gently on the
rocks below, that question was easy enough to
answer; they would have thrown him into the water
of course. Would they ? The sea on that coast had
a trick of giving up its dead. The strong tides
running into the bay often washed up on to the shore
the bodies of men who had been drowned many
miles away. Toby knew very well that, supposing
Mr. Barclay’s body had been flung into the sea,
unless it was very heavily weighted with rocks it
would in due course be w 7 ashed up on to the sandy
beach. He shuddered at the thought, and he was
just going to rise and make his way lower down the
steep track to the water’s edge, when his attention
was attracted by the sight of another little patch of


dry blood, and this was on the edge of a sheer drop
into a deep, dark gully which looked as if it had
been scooped out of the cliff-side by a gigantic
shovel.
Suddenly he wondered if the body of Mr. Barclay
had been flung down there ! Again he shuddered,
for it looked such a horrible place. Then lying flat
on the ground he leaned over the crumbling edge
peering into the depths below. The edge was broken,
and crumbling. It looked as if it had been broken
recently. He leaned further over and tried to see
what was at the bottom, but the cliff shelved
inward at the bottom of the gully, and he could
not see.
It was while he lay there peering and peering into
the gloomy place that he thought he heard some-
one talking, or was it crying out ? It was a voice, he
was sure of it. Who was down there among those
bristling rocks ? He tried to shout to ask what was
the matter. To his disgust he found that he had no
voice at all. Was anything ever so silly ? Why he
was as bad as a girl, and he was shaking all over. He
would go down, and he would see for himself if there
was any person down there, or if it was only his
fancy playing him a trick. But how could he go ?
It would not do to risk the sheer descent from the
place where he lay, indeed to attempt it would be
like courting disaster, and he did not mean to do
foolish things which might well bring trouble and
distress to other people. It was useless to try and


reach the gully from the edge of the water, a climb
up from that side would be to the full as perilous as
a descent from here. By going up the cliff almost to
the top he could get round to the other side of the
gully, and from that point there seemed to be
something in the nature of a path leading down-
wards.
What a long way it was ! He was so weak too
that his knees shook under him, as if unable to bear
his weight. He had to sink down for rest so many
times that he began to fear he would not reach the
place before dark if he could not make a little more
haste. If he could not reach it before dark, then how
would he get home that night ? He did not want
to scare his mother and sister into fits. He did not
think of worrying his father, he knew that his father
trusted in him so much, that although Mr. Binns
might be anxious, he would not give way to panic.
He paused to rest again, he was very near the top
now, and the view was very wide. He caught sight
of a fluttering drapery. Someone was struggling up
the steep cliff-path, and the someone was a woman,
or a girl.
A rush of courage came into the heart of Toby.
He was all at once strong again. His shortness of
breath vanished, and oh, joy, his legs did not feel
like doubling up under his weight. Who was it ?
But that did not matter, the main thing was that
there was someone to help if help were needed.
Putting his fingers to his lips he cooeyed so shrilly


that the sound might almost have been heard a mile
or so away if anyone had been listening. The female
figure struggling on the steep cliff-path wavered
and started, seemed as if it were going to lose its
balance and roll down the rocks into the water, then
it grew steady, and there came back a shout in
answer. A faltering out-of-breath sort of noise it
was, but Toby recognised it and pursed his lips into
an amazed whistle.
“ By all that is wonderful it is Araminta ! Fancy
the old girl having the pluck to scramble up there !
What a good old sort she is at the bottom,” he
muttered to himself, for he knew at once that it was
sisterly love and concern which had dragged Ara-
minta so far from the town, and on a track so rough.
He shouted to her to take it steady, but to come up
to him, as he wanted help.
The effect of his shout was to make Miss Binns
scramble upward so fast that she nearly lost her
footing and fell to the bottom, Toby groaned in
sheer wretchedness when he saw her slip and roll
downwards, but she managed to pull up again, and
next time she mounted with more caution, while
he sat and watched her coming. He did not go to
meet her, although he shouted encouragements
from his lofty perch on top of the cliff. He knew
that he had not much strength to spare. He guessed
that he might want it all before he had done, and so
he rested while he could.
“ Toby, what induced you to come to this awful


place at all ? And where are you going now ? ”
panted Araminta, when at length she reached the
spot where he was sitting, and sank down beside
him to get her breath again.
He told her of his fears, and that he was going to
search the gully, and he asked her if she would sit on
the cliff and wait for him.
"No, I won’t, I will come with you, I shall be
useful to pick up the pieces,” she said promptly,
and then they scrambled down on to the other side
of the rift in the rocks until they came to a little
path, quite a well-worn path it was, and fairly easy
to travel.
“ Hark! Did you hear that ? Someone is
railing! ” cried Araminta, stopping short, and
turning very pale.
“ So there is; oh, I wonder!” cried Toby, and
then he darted off in the direction of the sound,
leaving Araminta to follow as best she could.
Toby scrambled up to the little cave, and stooping
down he went in under the low opening to find Mr.
Barclay lying on the ground with a bright fever
flush on his face, while he talked and shouted in
delirium.
“Araminta, Araminta, make haste, he is alive, and
he needs you badly ! ” yelled Toby, and when his
sister came scrambling up the steep place to the cave
he rushed at her, gripping her hands in sheer
ecstasy.
“ Good old Araminta ! What a brick you were to


come. Mr. Barclay seems to be in a dreadfully bad
way, and you must stay and take care of him while
I carry the news to the town.”
“ Oh, Toby, I can’t ! ” she cried, but she was
alone.


CHAPTER XII
THE MYSTERY CLEARED
EVENTS marched swiftly after that. Toby
was able to bring help for Mr. Barclay in
record time, for he fell in with a man driving a cart
over the bumpy hill-track, and inducing the man to
leave for a little while the business on which he was
bound, Toby secured a ride for the remainder of the
way to the town, and was able to get help so much
sooner.
Mr. Barclay was brought out of the cave in the
gully and up the cliff-side by ambulance men. He
was brought back to his house at Wallaby Bay, and
for a couple of weeks it seemed very doubtful
whether he would recover. During this time Toby
haunted the neighbourhood of the house feeling like
a criminal, for he was still of the opinion that it was
he who was to blame for the disaster which had
befallen the director.
Then Mr. Barclay took a turn for the better, and
began to mend rapidly. He sent for Toby one
day, and in fear and trembling, Toby obeyed the
summons, and presented himself at the house. Eric
met him in the entrance hall, slapping him on the
back with the greatest friendliness, which would


have been very soothing indeed if it had not been
for the trouble behind.
Come along, Toby, my uncle’s desperately keen
on seeing you, he has been asking for you for days
past, only the doctor would not consent to his being
excited in any way.” Eric thrust his arm through
Toby s as he spoke, and led him away to the big
room where Mr. Barclay was lying.
“ D° you think that I am exciting ? ” asked Toby.
You easily might be, and he has not been strong
enough to stand very much, but he is getting better
fast now.” Eric opened the door as he spoke, and
ushering Toby in, went away leaving him alone
with Mr. Barclay.
“ Without doubt, boy, you saved my life by
coming to search for me when you did, and I am
grateful, said the director, in a tone so moved, that
Toby felt a most fearful fraud, and blurted out the
thing that was in his mind.
" If it had not been for me, and my silly theories
about that gold, you would not have run into
danger, so instead of being grateful to me for coming
to find what had become of you, you might well
be angry because of the trouble I brought upon
you,” he said rather ruefully.
“ Your theories are going to be proved correct, I
believe; anyhow we shall know next week, when the
Government boat arrives with divers, and other
necessary things for making a careful search of the
ocean-bed,” answered Mr. Barclay. “ You know


the blasting of the headland has been postponed
because of my illness. Eric warned the authorities
of what might be hanging on the delay, and they
were so kind as to say that they would suspend
operations until I was well enough to arrange about
having the gold searched for. We expect to find it
somewhere under the headland, although we can’t
be sure just where it may be, because of the drift
which is always shifting things in that part of the
bay.”
“ That other boat, what was it in the bay for ? ”
asked Toby. His excitement had risen to a white
heat now, but he had to look as calm and quiet as he
could, for it would not do to upset Mr. Barclay who
had been so ill.
“ It was after the gold of course, and doubtless
would have had it, if it had not been for you and
your theories,” Mr. Barclay smiled up at Toby as
he spoke, and then a great weight seemed to slip
from the back of Toby, who left off being miserable
straight away. “ The poor man, Gerald Orme,
came back to consciousness yesterday, and was able
to make some sort of a confession before he died.”
” Is he dead ? ” asked Toby in surprise.
“Yes, he passed away at sunrise this morning,”
answered Mr. Barclay. “ Long ago, when we were
young men, he and I were great chums. Then he
believed that I had done him a great wrong. Instead
of coming to me, and having the matter out with me
straight and square, he went away and nursed his


sense of wrong, looking for a way of being revenged
upon me. Ten years ago he joined forces with a man
named Lynch Talbot, and the two worked out a
scheme for robbing the safe of the Bignoll Company
when the store of gold would be heaviest, waiting
for transit. They hired that wretched man Sammy
Jay to dig the tunnel for them, and then at the
suggestion of Lynch Talbot they gave him something
which should have sent him where he would be no
further danger to them, but they had not reckoned
on the strength of Sammy’s constitution. It was
Sammy who recovered, and it was Lynch Talbot
who died. Gerald Orme in his confession said that
he and Lynch Talbot removed the gold from the
safe after Sammy Jay had dug the tunnel for them,
and they carried the bars of gold up the hill to the
headland, pitching them into the sea, where they in-
tended the loot to lie hid until the quest for it had died
away, and the affair had faded from the minds of
the public. Then came the sudden and unexpected
death of Lynch Talbot, which left Gerald Orme in
sole possession of the secret of where the gold was
hidden. He had gone away directly after the robbery
was accomplished, and only learned of the death of
his confederate from a newspaper, and then he was
afraid to come back, or to in any way identify him-
self with the man who had been drowned. Of
course he could not get the gold, there was no one
he dared to trust with the secret of where it was
hidden. Years passed on, he could keep away from


THE MYSTERY CLEARED
the scene no longer, he was poor, he came back to
Wallaby Bay, he hired the little shack where old Joe
Warner had lived, and he haunted the headland and
the bay shore, thinking of the wealth hidden there
just out of his reach, while he was really very poor,
actually in need of necessary things.”
“ Why, it was like a punishment for him, to have
it there almost where he could see it, and yet not be
able to get at it! ” burst out Toby in a breathless
sort of fashion. This was the most amazing story
he had ever heard, and he was seeing to the full how
great the misery must have been of the man who
had risked so much, and failed.
“ Wrong-doing always brings its own punishment,
lucky for those who suffer for their sins in this
world,” answered Mr. Barclay, and then he went on,
“ A few weeks ago, Gerald Orme confided the story
to a man he knew, promising him half the gold if he
could raise it for him. The man set to work with a
good bit of cleverness; he arranged to have a boat
here, anchored under the headland, a few days
before the Government authorities got to work on
their harbour scheme. Things would have gone
smoothly enough for them if it had not been for you
and your theories. There were sentinels posted in
every direction to ensure that no one outside the
business had any chance of seeing the gold lifted.
We three walked right into the arms of some of these
watchers, and our anxiety to stop the boat from
getting to work at the expected blasting must have


about scared them into fits. They sent their divers
down where they expected the gold to be, and then
were dismayed to find that it was not there. The
man who had the business in hand declared that
Gerald Orme had a bee in his bonnet, and knew
nothing whatever about it; they quarrelled fiercely,
Gerald was put ashore, and the boat steamed out of
the bay just in time to keep from being caught.
Gerald Orme, knowing that his own home was
dismantled, for the few things he wished to keep had
already been put on board the boat which had
steamed away without the gold, and without him,
came down into the gully intending to stay for a
time in the little cave. He found me lying among
the rocks on top of the man who was dead, and
finding a little life in me, he dragged me up into
the cave, and in the morning started to the
town to send help to get me brought home. You
know the rest of the story; he was arrested by the
first policeman he met, and before he could tell his
story, he had the seizure. I might have lain out in
that little cave until I died of exhaustion, if it had not
been for your anxiety about me which brought you
out of your bed to come and hunt on the cliff-side
for some trace of what had become of me. Oh, lam
grateful, and I shall not soon forget what you have
done for me.”
One morning a week later a fussy little tug with
a diver on board, steamed out from the quay at


Wallaby Bay, and stood across for the headland.
Mr. Barclay was on board with Toby, and Mr. Binns,
Eric, and a few other people who were interested.
The present manager at BignolTs Works was also
there, and standing by his side on the deck was the
inspector of police.
Toby’s heart was beating so fast, he felt as if he
would be suffocated. Suppose the gold was not
found after all! But anyhow, his father’s name was
cleared, and nothing else really mattered so much.
He stood looking at the hills with unseeing eyes, and
enduring as best he could the strain of the waiting.
There was an expert on board the tug, who worked
out by means of elaborate calculations how far the
bars of gold might have shifted in ten years, and the
direction in which the movement would probably
have been.
There was a jerking of the cord, the diver was
brought to the surface, some words were said, but
there was such a buzzing noise in Toby’s head, that
at first he could not understand what was being said,
then he got steadier, and he heard plainly enough
the words of the diver, “ There is a great pile of it, I
should say it lies about ten feet below low water
mark, it can be lifted straight away if you wish.”
So the gold was found. Toby looked at his father ;
he saw that Mr. Binns had suddenly straightened his
back, and stood erect. The burden under which the
poor man had walked so patiently for ten long years
was removed at last. But it might have remained


there for always if it had not been for Toby’s hard work
and patient deductions. Oh, it was good to have
helped his father if only by so little as he had been
able to do, and he went back to Wallaby Bay on the
tug the very happiest boy in all the wide continent
of Australia,
The police authorities approached Toby with a
flattering offer that he should go into training for
detective work. This Toby refused. He was
content to work on for the Bignoll Company, sure of
steady promotion there. He had done his very best
that his father’s name should be cleared from the
suspicion so long resting on it, now he realised that
his father would like to have him close at hand, to
enjoy with him the happiness that had tarried so
long. He felt, in some strange way, that it was
only himself that could really make up to Mr. Binns
for all the suffering and the waiting of the past years.
THE END


ILLUSTRATED BOOKS BY
JOHN COMFORT
MATT DESMOND'S BIT. is. 6d.
The story of a brave boy who does his bit in the
War.
ON HIS OWN. is. (id.
The adventures of a little English boy who went to
Canada “on his own.”
NOBBY. A Son of Empire. 2 s.
DON’S DOINGS, is. gd.
A story of life in Western Canada.
THE RIVER TRAMP. 2s. 6d.
The story of a boy’s adventures among the rubber
camps of Upper Orinoco.
London :
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge


Printed in Great Britain at
The Mayflower Press, Plymouth .
William Brendon & Son, Ltd.


BOOKS FOR
BOYS AND GIRLS
FROM SIX TO SIXTEEN
POPULAR WRITERS
ILLUSTRATED BY FIRST-CLASS ARTISTS
LONDON
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
THE SHELDON PRESS
S.P.C.K. HOUSE, NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, W.C. 2
NEW YORK AND TORONTO ; THE MACMILLAN CO.
And of all Booksellers.


Star Maiden. A Tale of Southern India. By Eleanor Pegg. Is. 6d.
A Little Pair of Pilgrims. By Margaret J. M. Borland. Is. 6d.
The Qilroy Family. By Constance M. Spender. 2s.
Lion Hearts. A Sequel to the “ Gilroy Family. ” By Constance M.
Spender. 2s.
The Story of Pat. By Mrs. H. C. Cradock. Is. 6d.
The Bell in the Forest. By Beatrice Radford. Is. 3d.
The Moon Lady. By A. Eva Richardson. Is. 3d.
“Goodbye, Summer.” A Story for Girls. By C. M. MacSorley.
Is. 6d.
The Land of Nod, and Other Stories. By Jean Roberts. Is. 6d.
The Chronicles of Durnford. A Public School Story. By John
Cartwright. 2s.
Guinevere. By C. Ainsley Gillespey. 2s.
Nora. An Irish Story, By C. M. MacSorley. 2s.
With Bligh of the “Bounty”; or, From Tofoa to Timor.
By M. Is ackington. Is. 6d.
The House of Mystery. By Mary Baldwin. Is 3d.
Heroes of the Chitral Siege. By Alice F. Jackson. Is. 6d
Kitty. By A. F. Mount (Mrs. Bricknell Perry). 2s. 6d.
The Stranding of the White Rose. By C. Dudley Dampen.
2s. 6d.
Finding her Family. By Elsie J. Oxenham. 2s. 6d.
Three in a Bungalow. A Story for Girls. By M. F. Hutchinson.
2s.
Barbara Pelham. The Story of an Unselfish Life. By M. E. Shipley.
3s.
Adventures of Marshall Vavasour, Midshipman. By S. W.
Sadler. 2s.
The Treasure of Spanish Villa. By F. Bayford Harrison. Is. 6d


SCHOOL STORIES
An Island for Two. By L. F. Ramsey. 2s. 6d.
The Ardice Fortune. By H. B. Davidson. 2s. 6d
The Lamb House Plot. By D. M. Percy Smith. 2s.
The Three Merles. A Boy’s School Story. By R. St. 0. Page. Is.Sd.
The Stranger in the Train, and other School Stories. By
Ethel Talbot. Is. 3d.
Fellow Fags. By E. Talbot. Is. 6d.
Peggy’s School Pack. By H. B. Davidson. Is. 6d.
The School over the Way. By Wallace Grey. Is. 3d.
Skimpy and the Saint. By Sibyl B. Owsley. 2s.
Eardley House. A Girls’School Story. By Sibyl B. Owsley. 3s.
The Chronicles of Durnford. A Public School Story. By John
Cartwright. 2s.
The School they Handed On. By Sibyl B. Owsley. 2s. 6d.
Westcote Towers. A Boys’ School Story. By Marjorie C.
Barnard. 2s.
Donald Marston. A Sequel to “ Westcote Towers.” By M. C.
Barnard. 2s.
Rosamond’s Qirls. By M. Bramston. 2s. 6d
AMY GREY
Jack’s Baby. A Story of a Kidnapped Baby. Is. 3d.
Dick’s Debt. Tells how a Boy did his Bit in War-time. Is. 6d
Vita. The Story of a Charming Little Girl. 2s.
The Copper Urn. A Story of Treasure hidden in a Copper Urn. Is. 6d
CAPITAL SEA STORIES
BY JOHN A. HIQQINSON
A Broken Voyage, Is. 6d.
A Strange Craft. 2s. 6d
The White Pirate. 2s. 6d.


BROWNIES AND GLIDES
F. O. H. NASH
How Audrey became a Guide. Is.
Audrey in Camp. Is.
The above two books in one volume, Is. 6cL
Audrey at School. Is. 3d.
Rosie the Peddler. Is. 6d.
Some Brownies and a Boggart. Is
Dick’s Hero. Is.
H. B. DAVIDSON
The Camp across the Road. 3s,
Jerry and Joan. A Story for Brownies. Is. 6d.
Pat of Whitehouse. A Story of Girl Guides. 2s. 6d.
The Guides make Good. 3s.
Peggy Pemberton, Brownie. Is. 3d.
Peggy’s School Pack. Is. 6d.
The Ardice Fortune. A Story of Girl Guides. 2s. 6d.
STIRRING TALES
BY W. H. Q. KINGSTON
(The famous writer for boys.)
The Two Shipmates. 2s.
Ned Garth ; or, Made Prisoners in Africa. 3s.
Sunshine Bill. 2s.
Owen Hartley; or, Ups and Downs. A Tale of the Sea.
The Cruise of “ The Dainty.” 2s.
The Frontier Fort A Tale of Canada 2s.
The Mate of the “ Lily.” 2s.
The Qilpins and their Fortunes. 2s.


ADVENTURES AT SEA
W. CHAS. METCALFE
Grit and Pluck; or, The Young Commander. 3s. 6d.
Frank and Fearless; or, Adventures among Cannibals.
3s. 6d.
Dick Trawle, Second Mate. 3s. 6d.
Young Salts. 3s.
Ice-Gripped; or, The “Tomboy” of Boston. 3s.
Blown out to Sea. 3s. 6d.
The Mystery of the “Albatross.” 2s. 6d.
BOOKS FOR YOUNGER GIRLS
BY L. E. TIDDEMAN
Aunt Pen. 3a.
Molly’s Decision. 3s.
Nancy and her Cousins. 2s.
Next-Door Qwennie. 2s.
Ray and Fairy. Is. 6d.
The Story of Dorothy. 2s. 6d.
When Bab was Young. 2s.
SPLENDID STORIES
BY HERBERT HAYENS
A Kidnapped Prince. 3s.
For Rupert and the King. 3s. 6d.
An Amazing Conspiracy. 2s. 6d.
(The hero risks his life to rescue his cousin from a Central American
prison.)
BESSIE MARCHANT
(Well known as a writer of books for boys and girls.)
Athabasca Bill. A Tale of the Far West. 2s. 6d.
A Brave Little Cousin. 3s.
Darling of Sandy Point. 2s. 6d.
The Deputy Boss. 2s.
The Mysterious City. A Story of the Congo. 2s. 6d.
Redwood Ranch. 3s.
The Western Scout. 2s. 6d.


BY ALICE WILSON FOX
Too Near the Throne. An Historical Romance. 3s. 6d.
Love the Leader ; or, Defenders of the Faith. 2s. 6d
Diana’s Decision. A Story for Girls. 3s.
FREDERIC HARRISON
Rupert Dudleigh. A Story of Old Brighton. 3s. 6d.
Within a Year. A Story of the Siege of Acre. 3s.
De Montfort’s Squire. A Story of the Battle of Lewes. 3s
ROBERT DE MONTJOIE RUDOLF
Sylvia finds a Fairy. 2s.
The Treasure League. 2s. 6d.
The Wiltons in War Time. 2s.
A Year of Adventure. 2s. 6d.
EDITH E. COWPER’S
Books for Boys and Qirls
Hunted and the Hunter. Is. 6d
The Black Dog’s Rider. A High-spirited Girl turns Highway
Robber. 3s
The Captain of the Waterguard. Adventures on the South Coast
in the Early Days of the Coastguard Service. 3s.
The House with Dragon Gates. A Story of Old Chiswick in
1745. 2s. 6d.
The Invaders of Fairford. An Historical Story of Cromwellian
Times. 3s.
The Island of RusheSi The Strange Story of a Holiday Mystery.
2s. 6d.
The King’s Double. A Vivid Episode in the Civil War. 2s. 6d.
Leo Lousada, Gentleman Adventurer. Strange Adventures in the
Channel Islands. 3s.
The Moonrakers. A Story of Smugglers in the New Forest in 1747.
3s.
The Mystery of Castle Veor. 2s 6d.
Two on the Trail. A Story of Trappers' Life in the Far North of
Canada. 2s.
Wild Rose to the Rescue. 2s. 6d
M. F. HUTCHINSON
Three in a Bungalow. For Girls. 2a


BY Q. MANVILLE FENN
In Mid Air. A Tale of 1870. Is.
GORDON STABLES
From Greenland’s Icy Mountains. A Tale of the Polar Seas.
2s. 6d.
BY Q. A. HENTY
The Plague Ship. Is.
The Ranche in the Valley. Is.
W. J. MARX
The Gold Hunters. A Story of the Californian Goldfields. 3s.
BY MARJORIE C. BARNARD
Westcote Towers. A School Story. 2s.
Donald Marston. A Sequel to “ Westcote Towers.” 2s.
ALFRED JUDD
The Track of Danger. 2s. 6d.
Wrens on the Trail. Is. 3d.
The Secret of Marsh Haven. A Story of School Adventure. 2s
The Raiders of the Pool. Is. 3d.
The Land of the Firestone. A Story of Adventure. 2s.
Wrens to the Rescue. Detective and other Stories. Is. 3d
E. L. HAVERFIELD
A Brave Endeavour ; or, The Proving of Ysolt. 3s.
Who are the Cromlyns ? A Capital Story about Young People 3s
WALLACE GREY
The School over the Way. Is. 3d.
By NANCY M. HAYES
STORIES FOR CHILDREN
The Boys from Nowhere. Is. 6d.
The Lone Shanty on the Hill. 2s.
Tracked on the Trail. 2s.
The Lost Cave and those Kennards. 2s.


BY WINIFRED PARES
Through the Nursery Gate. la. 3d.
An Everyday Angel. Is. 6d.
Four Winds. Is. 6d.
Hen and Chickens. 2s.
The Creaking Bough. Is. 6d.
FREDERICK BROUGH
The Treasure of the Red Peak. A Tale of the Cordillera,
ETHEL TALBOT
The Family Next Door. Is. 3d.
Fellow Fags. A School Story. Is. 6d.
Holiday Chums. Is. 3d.
The Island Cam;>. A Story for Children, Is,
The Stranger in the Train. Is. 3d.
While Mother was Away. Is.
BY D. M. PERCY SMITH
The Lamb House Plot. 2s.
JOHN COMFORT
Nobby ; A Son of Empire. Is. 6d.
Matt Desmond’s Bit. Is. 3d.
Toby’s Luck. Is. 6d.
BY H. LOUISA BEDFORD
Drusilla the Second. 2s.
Jack, the Englishman. A Story of Tasmania. 2s.
The Siege of Mr. Johnson. 2s.
Under One Standard. A Story of the Maori War. 2s. 6d.
E. M. CHANNON
The Surprising Holidays. 2s.
The Cotton Wool Girl. 2s 6d.
BY FLORENCE WILLMOT
Care of Uncle Charlie. 2s. 6d.
PETER SCARLETT
Bickering with the Dons. A Tale of Bristol Privateers. 2s
Note.—All Prices are Net.


Jo


3,2. VMS.
Cn 2>p~-Lo




»i rr -u ; fs
