

TOC H and
AUST RALIA
POPERINGHE
1915
YPRES
1917
LONDON
1919
CANADA
1922
AUSTRALIA
1925
TOC H cannot be the Youth Movement of
the Empire until Australia adopts it. It
comes therefore to the Commonwealth in
May 1925, at the invitation of the Governor
General, who has written to the Founder and
London Padre as follows.
Government House
MELBOURNE
Dear Padre,
.... We shall all look forward
with the keenest pleasure to your coming,
and hope you will stay with us for a bit
you arrive.... I aim at gathering
together as many as possible who actually
knew Toe H, so that you may find us ready
to help. It would be of great service if I
could have the names of all those Australians
who are introduced to Toe Hat home this year ,
so that I may get into touch with them on
their return.
With all good wishes.
Forster
TOC H is the quaint name for a wonderful
thing that derives from Talbot House of
Poperinghe and Ypres, known and beloved
during the war as Club, Sanctuary, and Common
Ground for that brotherhood-in-arms which, at
the average daily cost of 230 casualties, held the
line in the ever famous “ Salient.” “Toe H ”
is just the army signaller’s way of pronouncing the
initials T.H.
Its four points of the compass are shown within ;
but manifestly its programme in Australia must be
a new one as was the case in Canada in 1922. Yet,
hardly survive their own lifetime, wisely turned to
the still Younger England of School, Factory,
Office, and Workshop, for recruits to “carry on.”
Thus the “ Old Guard ” will die, but Toe H will
be ever young. Already, from London to Winnipeg,
there are 14 Houses and 100 Branches and
Groups, besides Correspondents in every corner
of the world.
YET A LIVING MEMORIAL
In House and Branch (which are self-govern-
ing, and, once first costs are met, self-supporting),
you may see a gas-fitter as Chairman with a Lieut.
General as Secretary. Throughout the family
spirit replaces the vexatious “ rules ” of institu-
tions. The one rule is the pledge to service.
Each House has its Chaplain, who may be of
any Christian Denomination. Each room in it
commemorates an “ elder brother ” who fell in
the war. The Hon. Warden has at his hand the
Branch “ Job-Master,” who finds jobs of service
for members volunteering, and sees they do them.
In these memorial rooms and memorial lives is
something that no stone memorial can ever be :
the ‘dream come true’ of a fallen soldier who wrote
in his diary—
“ Here indeed is death becoming creative.”
THE LAMP OF TOC H
A Lamp of Maintenance, symbol of the light of
personal service lit by the sacrifice of the Elder
Brethren, is awarded, after petition, to each Branch
of Toe H whose social work is held to deserve it.
At every formal meeting, the lights being lowered,
the Lamp is lit, and the beautiful Words of Re-
membrance (from Laurence Binyon’s “ For the
Fallen ”) are spoken :
They shall grow not old as we that are left grow old .
Age shall not wither them , nor the years condemn.
At the going down of the sun and in the morning
We will remember them.
PATRON: H.R.H. THE PRINCE OF WALES.
HON. SEC.: P. W. MONIE, C.S.L
H. Q. OFFICES: 123, ST. GEORGE'S SQ., S.W.I.
HON. PADRE: THE REV. P. B. CLAYTON, M.C.
however different the methods, the spirit must be
the same as the work develops under Australian
leadership. Its founder (Rev. P. B. Clayton, M.A.,
M.C.) is himself a Queenslander by birth and
British headquarters have already had the advice
of some who are wise in their knowledge of the
tremendous problem presented by thousands of
younger men working away from home in great
cities such as Sydney or Melbourne.
It is the first intention of Toe H to establish one
great house in each great city in which a number of
youngsters can live as a happy brotherhood and
from which their team spirit of unselfishness can
radiate to the service of the less privileged boyhood
all around them. Each house covers a great area
of such work and to each main area a chaplain is
appointed, set aside for this work by his particular
denomination.
The splendid results of these Houses (“ Marks ”),
the service they render, the brotherhood they main-
tain, the ideals they uphold, are now recognised in
the great cities of England as one of the most
wonderful practical gains of the period of suffering
and tragedy in which Toe H was born. For
Toe H is not merely an English society migrating
to Australia. It was born in Flanders, in the heroic
salient of Ypres, where the first Talbot House
stood. That ground is the common property of
the Empire towards which Australia paid its full
share of the purchase price. The old Talbot House
in Poperinghe served thousands of the men whose
heirs Toe H now seeks to serve and inspire.
AN INVITATION
Australian visitors are urged to get into touch
without delay with the Rev. P. B. Clayton, M.C.,
All Hallows Porch Room, Byward St,, E.C.5.,
(Opposite Mark Lane Station, Underground Rly.)
in order that they may see something of the work
of Toe Hin the Old Country ; and (if they find it
convincing), to allow their names to be sent to the
Governor General as well-wishers for the establish-
ment of Toe H “ down under.”
A typical House, 23, Queen’s Gate Gardens, close
to Gloucester Rd. (District) Station, and near the
Albert Hall, can be seen any day except Thursdays.
Ask for the Hon. Warden or the Steward.
NOT MERELY “EX-SERVICE”
The youthful veterans of that comradeship in
Pop., keen to keep the old spirit alive, and not con-
tent to remain a merely ex-service body which could


In this picture of the Old House in
Poperinghe is a glimpse of the little
window of that Chapel in the hop-loft
(fitted up by the Queen’s Westminster
Rifles) where over 100,000 troops
worshipped.
The Four Points of our Compass
I. To open a series of self-supporting branches
throughout the country for the fostering of a new
spirit between man and man.
(These branches develop their own life and line of work
in accordance with the chief need of their locality. Their
task is not to compete with existing organisations, but
to supplement and reinforce them. They meet regularly
for supper and discussion, exhibiting by the diversity
of the members in origin, occupation and outlook, a
spirit of reconciliation between the classes). They
are pledged:—
To a wide human interest in the lives and needs of
their fellows.
To the study of local conditions, civic, social and
religious, and to challenge their generation to seek
in all things the mind of Christ.
To mitigate by habit of mind and word and deed
the evils of class consciousness.
To be responsible for the welcome and well-being
of those commended to their friendship.
♦
11. To establish a Headquarters Club in London
and like Open Houses and Tranches throughout the
country in each great city , whence the elder may serve
theyounger , and the friendly the lonely.
(Also, to make possible a Headquarters staff which can
be at the service of the Movement as a whole, especially
devoting its energies to the establishment of mutual
respect and understanding between the student and the
schoolboy on the one hand, and the young wage-earner
and the industrial on the other.)
*
111. To bring the expert to the group , to hear him
and ask him questions; to listen hospitably and
humbly to Everyman's story , and to help the truth to
prevail .
(The representative group thus educates itself, and
what public opinion it can influence; with the object
always that from it social love may radiate, and the spirit
of class war be exorcised, under the redemptive influence
of the common loss.)
*
IV. To spread the Gospel without preaching it.
Round it are grouped views of three
Memorial Houses: typical landmarks in
the progress of Toe H. To-morrow it is
Australia’s Turn
to forge new links in the chain of
Empire Brotherhood.
