

THE LUCIEN WOLF MEMORIAL LECTURE, 1941
TOLERATION
AND DEMOCRACY
BY
A. D. LINDSAY
MASTER OF BALLIOL
Price One Shilling and Sixpence net
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD




THE LUCIEN WOLF MEMORIAL LECTURE, 1941
TOLERATION
AND DEMOCRACY
BY
A. D. LINDSAY
MASTER OF RALLIOL
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON: HUMPHREY MILFORD


The Lucien Wolf Memorial Lecture has been
instituted by the Jewish Historical Society of England in
memory of Lucien Wolf (1857-1930), its founder and
seven times its President. It is to be delivered annually
by some person of outstanding eminence, whether Jewish
or non-Jewish, and is to deal with any of the subjects with
which Lucien Wolf’s interests were particularly associated.
The sixth lecture of the series, on Toleration and
Democracy, was delivered on Sunday, May 25, 1941, by
Dr. A. D. Lindsay, Master of Balliol, in the Debating Hall
of the Oxford Union Society, with the Right Hon. Viscount
Samuel in the chair.
PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
Published 1942
Reprinted 1942


Toleration and Democracy
That there is some connexion between toleration and democracy
is obvious from the plain facts. The democratic government
of Athens in the fifth century B.c. was vastly different from
any democratic government of the present day, but the note of
toleration expressed in Pericles’ Funeral Oration is recognized
by anyone who reads it as what one would expect from a
democracy. The fierce attack upon democracy with which we
are at present contending is made by governments who have
repudiated toleration, and are indeed practising intolerance in
a horrible and unrestricted way. We know too that the begin-
nings of modern democracy coincided with the beginnings of the
theory and practice of toleration. Eoger Williams, who in his
famous pamphlet The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Conscience
Sake first proclaimed a theory of toleration, also practised it in
the new democratic colony of Ehode Island. John Locke was
the author both of The Second Treatise on Civil Government,
which more than any other treatise stated the theoretic basis
of the modern democratic state, and of the Letters on Toleration.
The empirical connexion is plain enough.
But there have been tolerant governments which were not
democratic and democratic governments which were not tolerant.
Seventeenth-century Massachusetts was democratic and in-
tolerant, eighteenth-century England tolerant and undemocratic.
So we need to ask what connexion there is in principle between
toleration and democracy.
Further, the democracies are and have been faced with a
practical issue about toleration. Are they to tolerate intolerance;
are they to allow their toleration to disarm them in their defence
against totalitarian attack? These real problems compel us as
a democracy to consider this question, and to try to understand
the principles and the limits of toleration.
This is not a new question. Eather, recent events have


re-opened an old question: they have unsettled problems which
were apparently settled a long time ago, and we can learn much
for our present guidance in approaching the problem if we go
back to the times when toleration and democracy first began to
appear in England.
The main point I want to make about toleration in England
I owe to a suggestion of Adolf Lowe. I had sent him a paper
expounding the Puritan theory of toleration as it is to be found
in Roger Williams, and Lowe wrote back agreeing with much of
what I said but adding that he thought that toleration in England
owed as much to the tolerant comprehensiveness of the Church
of England as to Puritan theory. I should generalize from this
suggestion and say that there are two different things which make
toleration effective: (1) a theory and practice of demarcation
of spheres —a separation between the functions of Church and
State; a limitation of the functions of the coercive organization
which protects variety and spontaneity elsewhere. That is
the one factor. (2) The other is the conception of an end or
purpose which unites within itself great variety; a wide com-
prehensiveness. The Puritans of the left supplied the first of
those things: the comprehensiveness of the Anglican Settlement
the second. The prophet of the first is Roger Williams, of the
second Richard Hooker.
Let us look first at the contribution made by the Puritans to
toleration. It is to many a surprising source. There were
Puritans of a tolerant spirit—Oliver Cromwell, for instance; but
the majority were not, and the worst showed a high degree of
intolerance. Let me quote in illustration some passages from a
tract entitled: ‘The simple cobbler of Aggavvam in America
willing to help mend his native country, lamentably tattered,
both in the upper leather and sole, with all the honest stitches
he can take.’
The author, on the second page of the pamphlet, launches an
attack upon toleration in the course of which he says:
‘ If the devil might have his free option, I believe he would
ask nothing else, but liberty to enfranchize all other religions,
and to embondage the true. ... My heart hath naturally


detested four things: The standing of the Apocrypha in the
Bible; Forrainers dwellings in my country, to crowd out
native subjects into the corners of the earth; Alchymized
coines; Tolerations of divers religions or of one religion in
segregant shapes. He that willingly assents to the last,
if he examines his heart by daylight, his conscience will tell
him he is either an Atheist or an Heretique or an Hypocrite,
or at best a captive to some lust. . . .
‘Not to tolerate things merely indifferent to weak conscience
argues a conscience too strong: pressed uniformity in these,
causes much diversity. To tolerate more than indifferents
is not to deal indifferently with God. He that doth it takes
his sceptre out of his hand and bids him stand by. The power
of all religion and ordinances lies in their purity: their purity
in their simplicity; then are mixtures pernicious. I lived in
a city, where a Papist preached in one Church, a Lutheran in
another, a Calvinist in a third; a Lutheran one part of the
day, a Calvinist the other, in the same pulpit; the Religion
of that place was but motly and meagre, their affections
leopardlike.
‘lf the whole Creature should conspire to do the Creator a
mischief or offer him an insolency, it would be in nothing more
than in erecting untruths against his truth; or by sophisticating
his truths with humane medleys: the removing of some one
iota in Scripture, may draw out all the life, and traverse all
the truth of the whole Bible: but to authorise an untruth by
a toleration of state, is to build a sconce against the walls of
Heaven, to batter God out of his Chaire. To tell a practical
lie is a great sinne, but yet transient: but to set up a theoretical
untruth is to warrant every lie that lies from its root to the top
of every branch it hath.’
And so on for many pages.
How could toleration grow from a soil which produced such
fanaticism as that ? Not, as is sometimes maintained, by in-
difference succeeding enthusiasm. It is true that when we come
to Locke the enthusiasm has largely disappeared and toleration
and latitudinarianism go together. But the Puritans of the left


were not indifferent. Toleration of others was in part a price
they had to pay for their own passionately held liberty. The
Presbyterians were on the whole intolerant because they thought
they had a prospect of forcing their views on the whole country.
The Independents gave up that prospect. The illuminating title
of one of the pamphlets proclaiming their principles is:
‘Reformation without tarrying for any.’ This meant that they
abandoned the principle of the national Church for the principle
of the sect, and this led them in Roger Williams to a clear separa-
tion between the functions of the Church and the State or of what
they called the civil society.
Let us look for a moment at this social pattern, for a great deal
of democratic theory is contained in it. The State uses com-
pulsion. There are some things which cannot be done without
compulsion and some things which cannot be done with it. The
things of the spirit are not compellable. Persecution for con-
science sake is a ‘ bloudy tenent,’ because it seeks to do by physical
force what can be done only by the Grace of God. The Grace of
God working in the hearts of men is unpredictable, infinitely
various, infinitely diverse. ‘The wind bloweth where it listeth
. . .so is every one that is born of the spirit.’ A religious society
is therefore, and must be, a voluntary society. Any human
standards on which any social compulsion could work would
fetter the free working of the grace of God. Further, inasmuch
as God calls men to perfection, and that perfection surpasses any
standard which any human society may attain at any time,
room must be left in the framework of society for growth, and
for unpredictable growth. The most precious things in society
cannot be controlled: they must be free. Much follows from this
conception. The State, instead of being an instrument to ‘put
across,’ to compel the good life, becomes an instrument to ensure
the necessary conditions of the good life. Properly speaking,
the good life itself can be promoted only by free associations:
compulsion is alien to it. The end of the State is then not to
promote what is right but to maintain rights which are liberties.
Its role is purely instrumental. The State serves society. The
mark of the democratic State is the restricted or limited function
of the State, which follows from the limitations in a society of


the compulsion exercised by the State. Toleration and this
conception of democracy therefore clearly go together.
At the same time, toleration so conceived depends upon this
strict demarcation of spheres. It need not imply a tolerant
spirit. The several sects may each of them be confident that it
alone possesses the truth. There is a pleasant story of an old
Scotswoman who, when asked if her minister was sound, replied :
‘Sound! he misdooted salvation outside the U.P. body.’ A
society which is a federation of free social organizations and
accepts the limitations of State function can be tolerant just
because no one society within it need accept responsibility for
the actions or views of other societies. The members of one
society may admit the right to existence of the others without
thereby being taken to approve of them. Sir Horace Plunkett
used to tell an amusing story of how he managed to induce an
obstinate North of Ireland Protestant farmer to join with Eoman
Catholics in his co-operation schemes. He was inspired to say:
‘Why should we object to co-operating with Catholics in this
world, we know what will happen to them in the next.’ And on
that clear understanding the Protestant came in.
Nevertheless the limitations of this kind of toleration are
obvious just because it depends on a rigid demarcation of spheres:
the sphere of the compulsory organization —the State —is to be
sharply distinguished from that of the voluntary association—
the Church. The State cannot do the work of the Church nor
the Church that of the State. One of the strongest arguments
brought forward in this early discussion about toleration is that
compulsion in the religious sphere defeats itself. It can compel
outward observance. It can destroy ways of thinking by killing
or banishing those who profess certain opinions. But it cannot
produce right belief. And again it is equally clear that if the
Church —the organ of grace —attempts to enforce the law it
perverts its own nature. This distinction can be more or less
sharply maintained in a society where the role of the State is
reduced, and can safely be reduced, to the bare necessity of
keeping order. Democracy, when it first began in modern
Europe, began in simple societies where the action of the State
was almost entirely negative: where in a naturally democratic


society the State was needed to put down disorder and to repel
attack from without. Even in such societies, of course, complete
toleration of all religions was not possible, because some religious
bodies advocated practices which were clearly incompatible with
civil order. However tolerant an Indian government may seek
to be in its attitude towards different religions, it has to recognize
that the determination of Mahommedans that cows shall be
killed during Mahurram and the determination of Hindus that
cows shall not be killed under any circumstances lead to conflicts
incompatible with civil order. Difficulties of this kind will arise.
The difficulty of tolerating those who are intolerant and who
propose to attack the constitution in abuse of the toleration they
enjoy raises questions of the same kind.
These questions are to be solved not by any rigid rules but by
good sense and judgement, but they are capable of solution on
the lines of the demarcation of spheres.
But we have to recognize that the connexion between democracy
and laissez-faire, or what is sometimes called a negative conception
of the State, is accidental, and arises from historical circumstances.
The purpose of the State in a democratic society is to maintain
the democratic nature of that society, to remove the disharmonies
and dangers which threaten its democratic life. If that demo-
cratic life is naturally strong and healthy the State need do little;
but if that democratic life is threatened not just by plain disorder
and crime within or hostile attack from without, but by more
subtle and insidious forces, whether social or economic, the State
is called to assume a much more positive function. When it
does that, as it has had progressively to do in the industrial
states of to-day, the simple demarcation of spheres breaks down.
In a modern State, while we can still say that there are certain
functions —those of maintaining order and defence —which can
be carried out only by the State, and some —the furtherance of
the life of the spirit —which clearly cannot be carried out by the
State, there is between those extremes a large debatable ground
—a number of social functions which it is possible to organize
either through the State or voluntary organization: and we
could produce good reasons for pursuing either course. Let us
consider one of the most obvious of those functions —education.


A modern democracy must be an educated democracy. The
State cannot possibly leave it optional whether its children are
educated or not. It must somehow ensure that every child in
the community is given an education. That education cannot be
merely technical or culturally neutral. It must in some sense
be a democratic education: i.e. clearly distinguishable from the
kind of education given in a totalitarian State. The State cannot
possibly be indifferent to what its future citizens are taught to
believe; for its continuance and strength depend upon the
continued belief in democratic values. There is the real difficulty.
The fact is, I suppose, that the democratic state of Roger Williams,
which left room within its borders for pagans and Mahommedans,
could do that only because its structure was determined by what
we should now call a Puritan ideology. The general views of
Roger Williams prevailed, and had to prevail if the views opposed
to his were to have a chance of existing, but if some of those
diverse religions which it was ready to harbour had got the upper
hand, the framework which made possible their being harboured
would rapidly have disappeared. The belief or beliefs necessary
to maintain democracy may be much wider than any doctrinal
or dogmatically expressed religion, but they are beliefs. Without
a firm belief in what we may call democratic values, democracy
cannot be maintained. It follows then that the democratic
State will be concerned with the fostering and inculcation of those
values; cannot possibly be indifferent to attacks made upon
them; cannot indeed be indifferent—whatever it may do —to the
presence in society of forces which tend to corrupt or threaten
those values. It will therefore obviously have to concern itself
with education and with the values inculcated and encouraged
in this kind of education rather than that, and this whether
itself actually educates or hands over that function to other
bodies. The democratic State shows this concern, and it does so
with approval from almost all of us. There are many activities
which the State encourages because they are in accordance with
the way of life for which the democratic State stands. Take, for
example, what is involved in the encouragement given by the
State through the Board of Education to the classes organized
by the W.B.A. The W.E.A. is professedly a non-sectarian, non


political body. It is at the same time a part of the organized
working-class movement. It is regarded as within the circuit
of the democratic activities supporting and maintaining the
democratic life of the nation. The W.E.A. if it retains a certain
required quality and objective standard is left to work in its own
way. Adult education cannot be all of a pattern. It must
reflect the diversities of opinions which show themselves in the
nation within the general framework of the national life. All
this involves toleration but toleration within limits. The State
—to use a phrase of the Romans—recognizes licitae religiones.
Let us get clear as to the principles involved in this. The
conception of toleration which we were first discussing implied a
sharp differentiation of function between the activities of the
State and the things of the spirit: there were some matters which
were the concern of the State and others, like religion, which
were the concern of the Church or religious bodies. These were
conceived of as not being the concern of the State, with the im-
plication that the State must be neutral towards them, interfering
with them only in so far as they interfered with the State’s
business and threatened civil order.
But consideration of the attitude which the democratic State
takes up, and must take up, towards education suggests a different
principle. Education is clearly the State’s concern, and if the
State cannot be indifferent to the education given to its children
or to its citizens, it does not follow that education should be its
function. The State at present expresses its concern for educa-
tion in the most varied ways. It does so only partly by under-
taking itself the function of education, and it also aids with
grants and inspection the education undertaken by voluntary
organizations of all kinds. Consider, for example, the attitude
of the State to Universities. The State recognizes that the
vitality and efficiency of the Universities are of vital importance
to the nation. It also recognizes that the Universities will do
their work better if they are not controlled by the State ad-
ministration. It expresses this attitude by making a large grant
of money to the Universities and administering it through the
Treasury Grants Committee, a body devised to exercise as little
control over the Universities as is compatible with seeing that


the grant is efficiently administered. • The Grants Committee
has, I think it would be agreed, given the lie to the proverb:
‘He who pays the piper calls the tune.’ It no doubt remains
true that no one will go on paying a piper if he can’t stand the
tunes he plays. But there is all the difference in the world
between the two positions. There are certain social activities
whose vitality and strength are essential to the prosperity of
the nation, which, at least in some of their aspects, are better
accomplished by other than statutory bodies. The State there-
fore must be prepared to support non-statutory bodies and allow
them to do the job at their discretion. The State is not
responsible for the way the job is tackled; though if the job
were not done, or done in a way calculated to pervert and not to
strengthen the national life, the State would no doubt sit up
and take notice.
It will be obvious that this implies that the State —and that in
practice means the heads of the political party at the time in
power —recognizes that parties and organizations of many kinds,
professing views with which the Government in office may not
agree, and of which they cannot be expected to approve, are yet
part and parcel of the common life which the Government exists
to protect.
No doubt we do not always live up to this behaviour. We call
our political opponents Beds or Bolshies on one side or Fascists
on the other, but on the whole we recognize that there is a wide
range of opinion admissible and compatible with the spirit of
the national life, though with extremes on either side which are
clearly incompatible with the national life, and, as incompatible,
not to be allowed the same tolerance. The seventeenth-century
advocates of toleration in England took up this attitude in
regard to Roman Catholics. They maintained that Roman
Catholics were for political reasons outside the pale of tolerance,
and there were of course at that time reasons for that position.
There are obviously to-day in democratic states movements
which must be regarded as outside the pale if democracy is to be
preserved.
Now if we are to keep a national unity, within which party
differences can find scope, we shall have to keep a spirit of


toleration and comprehensiveness. That comprehensiveness, as
I have said, we in this country owe not to Puritanism but
to Anglicanism, not to Roger Williams but to Richard Hooker.
There is a pleasant story told in Headlam’s book on Oxford
about St. Frideswide’s chapel in the Cathedral here. He relates
how in Edward Vi’s time Protestant fervour uprooted the
altar, took out the bones of St. Frideswide and cast them into
the kennel and buried in their stead the body of Mrs. Peter
Martyr, the wife of the first Protestant bishop of Oxford. When
Mary Tudor came to the throne St. Frideswide was restored and
Mrs. Peter Martyr thrown into the kennel. When Elizabeth
came to the throne there was hot discussion in the church between
those who wished to put Mrs. Peter Martyr back and throw St.
Frideswide into the kennel again and those who wished to leave
them as they were. Eventually the dispute was referred to
Elizabeth, who said : ‘Mix ’em,’ and mixed they were, and there
they both remain to this day as a remaining symbol of the
Elizabethan settlement and the catholic comprehensiveness of
the Anglican Church.
But the noblest expression of this spirit of toleration which I
know will be found in a letter from a great Roman Catholic to a
great Jew; from Baron von Hugel to Claude Montefiore:
‘. . . I believe, then, that both you and Ido not read into, but
that we actually find in—you in Judaism, I in R. Catholicism,
heroisms, sanctities, spiritualities, etc., which are actually
present in, and which actually spring from, the deepest life of
these several organisms. Judas Maccabee, Rabbi Akiba,
Maimonides, Sir Moses Montefiore, your own fine first Wife
(I quote only the dead) ar e facts —Jewish facts, Jewish products,
I thank God for them—l do not read them into Judaism, nor
do you: we find them there. Similarly Francis of Assisi,
Joan of Arc, Las Casas, Abbe Huvelin—they are facts, Catholic
facts. Catholic products : Ido not read them into Catholicism,
nor do you: we find them there, and again, we thank God
for them. We can accuse ourselves, or be accused, at all truly,
of “reading into ” our organisms, I think, only in that we doubt-
less keep vividly alive, and we largely live by, such very real


facts and products, as though they were not only real, hut also
prevalent, average —whereas they are, doubtless always, more
or less rare. Yet this is, after all, doing no otherwise than
does the botanist who lovingly dwells upon the perfect leaf,
flower, fruit, seed —the complete plant —i.e. upon —what will
it be? —well, say, three to five in every hundred seeds of that
plant extant in the world !
‘And then there is the third and last strain—we each
think, or tend to think, our own organism as productive
of the deepest or the richest spirituality —and this can hardly
be pressed from each side and not involve a contradiction.
Yet I would cheerfully deny that it is as much of a con-
tradiction. Cardinal de Lugo teaches so finely the genuine
omnipresence of truth and goodness throughout all the various
religions—though this in very various degrees. Were any
one religion (our own) to be held by you or me, as alone
containing truth and power — that would, of course, involve a
direct complete contradiction between you and me. But if
(as most assuredly I do) I am vividly aware of the richness
of truth and power possessed by your religion, and if I am
right in holding that (whatever may be the objective greater
or lesser richness and depth between J. and E.C.) there are
such objective differences and degrees extant between the
different religions: then we hold between us two great root-
facts, root-principles, which lie deeper down even than our
perception or conviction as to J. or R.C. being the richer and
deeper. Also we do well to remember that all those other
truths are vividly, fruitfully tenable only with, and within a
particular Church membership —and of course we do {and
ought to) feel this, our own Church, to be the richest and deepest
—or at least, the one organism which we can manage to
apprehend and to grow by.’
Let us try to take the measure of such toleration as von Hugel
expresses. It is not the toleration of indifference. It means
that you can be passionately attached to your own persuasion,
your own party: strive for it with all your energy and devotion
and yet recognize the necessity to the national life of those with


whose opposing views you are striving—even, in von Hiigel’s
words, thank God for them. This may seem a remote and high
ideal, but it is very largely carried into effect in practice in the
working of British and American democracy. We sometimes
think that party animosities in the U.S.A. exceed anything we
know in this country, but it is clear that American public opinion
can combine with this intense party feeling an almost unanimous
belief in the American way of life; that they regard the differences
and conflicts which go on between parties as part and parcel of
that way of life and would be most reluctant to give them up.
The same sort of thing can surely be said of the working of
democracy in this country. Democracy depends for its success-
ful working on a recognized opposition. That means a tolerated
opposition: that means the assumption that that opposition
should some day form the government. We all know how badly
our system works when there is not really an alternative govern-
ment, critically alert, ready to take over, which we are ready to
accept when the time comes.
This may seem to result in what unsympathetic critics call
the silly party game, one party making a great show of unreal
indignation because its official business is to oppose, and really
dreading nothing so much as to be taken at its word. No doubt
a government whose essence is the tolerance and recognition of
opposition may degenerate into such unrealities —the vice of
toleration is indifferentism. But such unreality and false
compromise are its vice and not its virtue.
There are those who tell us that the spirit of mutual tolerance,
■of diversity, discussion, and opposition within comprehensiveness
and unity, is the fortuitous consequence of England’s fortunate
position in the nineteenth century. I suggest on the contrary
that the spirit of effective and progressive toleration which is
essential to democracy comes out of the progressive understanding
of fundamental social processes and from action taken in the light
of such understanding. ‘Out of the eater came forth meat;
out of the strong came forth sweetness.’ As toleration in the
seventeenth century came from the intolerant but passionate
faith of Puritanism and the double reaction of society towards it,
,so the key to our modern problem lies in a reinterpretation of


that most intolerant of nineteenth-century prophets, Karl Marx.
As we all know, he applied the Hegelian conception of dialectic
to historical processes. Dialectic we sometimes forget means
primarily discussion. That truth comes from purposive dis-
cussion is the essence of democracy. Hegel gave a deeper
meaning to dialectic by using it of the emergence of truth from
the conflict of different ideas and movements of thought. The
unity is not comprehended by the participants in the process of
thought; it emerges as the result of the conflict in action ensuing
on thought. Marx applied the same principle as Hegel to social
conflict. His own intolerant spirit made him an apostle of hate,
and many of his followers have imitated that spirit and lost the
comprehensiveness of his mental vision. They have taught that
mere hatred and class war in themselves will bring about the
classless society —a vain and repulsive dream. The Marxism
of such followers can only destroy. What has given Marxism
such constructive power as it has is not its hatred, but its faith
that there is going on in social processes, even in social conflict,
something which no one mind can fully comprehend, no one party
or body of opinion fully express. This is not to be taken to mean
that we are all to say: There is something to be said for every-
one and everything, not very much for anyone or anything.
That would be to ignore the truth that fruitfulness of discussion
and social conflict comes out of the ability with which each side
pursues its real but limited vision, its real but imperfect claim.
‘ Each mortal thing does one thing and the same:
Deals out that being indoors each one dwells;
Selves —goes itself; myself it speaks and spells,
Crying What I do is me : for that I came.’
But, on the other hand, progress does not come from mere
conflict mechanically, as Marxists seem often to hold. The fully
conscious limited view of individuals or parties must be balanced
by the partially explicit common faith in the unity behind the
limited views. Progress is possible only in so far as through the
dialectical process, whether in discussion or conflict, the social
unity behind is progressively apprehended by all concerned and


progressively affects their attitude towards it and towards one
another. Gerard Manley Hopkins’ sonnet I have just quoted
moves forward from the assertion of self to the further assertion;
‘I say more; the just man justices;
Keeps grace: that keeps all his goings graces.’
Without such progress conflict is mere conflict and generates
only hatred, and is only destructive. Mechanical or materialist
dialectic can have no other issue, because materialist dialectic
implies that the understanding of what is happening makes no
difference to our action, that what is happening is coming about
whether we understand it or not, that we are not capable of
creative conflict.
Marx was not only a sociologist: he was also a revolutionary.
A revolutionary temper demands a blind faith; a faith that if the
revolutionary devotes himself to destruction, someone or some-
thing else will produce the constructive forces. But that temper,
if left to itself, produces what Herr Rauschning has called the
revolution of destruction. Can democracy produce the passion
and energy needed for revolutionary times, and yet retain its
comprehensiveness and toleration? Those who hold that
toleration was the result of favourable and compatible historical
conditions will hold out no hope of this. But history should
give us encouragement. For the times in which toleration first
began to prevail in England were not easy times. Elizabethan
England was, like our own England, fighting for its life. Its
beliefs were not held easily and comfortably. The tolerant
comprehensiveness of the Elizabethan settlement came from
men’s overwhelming sense of the need for unity in a country
faced with a common and tremendous danger, and their common
admiration for all the manly qualities which their England
needed. Devotion to a common cause, more deeply felt than
clearly stated, reconciled and appreciated all those diverse
stubborn qualities.
Cromwell’s toleration rose from a similar sense of the all-
importance of a common cause to which the various sects of
Puritanism gave the most diverse interpretations but to which
their enthusiasm and their very fanaticism gave weapons. We


when faced by a like common peril are, I hope, also coming more
and more to cherish our differences as well as our unity. That
spirit, which is nourished in times of crisis, is very far from the
spirit of the flabby tolerance of indifference which has sometimes
so prevailed among us that we did not know who was for our
cause and who was against it.


THE JEWISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF ENGLAND
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON
President: Dr. Cecil Roth Treasurer : Gustave Tuck, Esq.
The Jewish Historical Society of England, under the auspices
of which the annual Lucien Wolf Memorial Lecture is delivered,
was established in 1893. It was felt by its founders that the
annals of Anglo-Jewry are of very considerable significance in
the history not of the Jews only but also of England, the study
of the subject having thus a double importance. The Society’s
record of achievement during its half-century of existence is very
notable. It has published fourteen volumes of Transactions, and
three of Miscellanies, containing valuable papers on various
aspects of Anglo-Jewish History (some of them lavishly
illustrated), in addition to a comprehensive Bibliography of the
subject and over a score of volumes of more general appeal.
Its headquarters, an exquisite building in University College,
London (constructed and presented by Mr. Gustave Tuck),
formerly housed the Mocatta Library with its great collections of
Anglo-Judaica as well as the Tuck Collection of Jewish Ritual Art.
Though the building and Library were completely destroyed
in one of the first enemy bombing raids on London in 1910, the
contents of the Museum were saved, and good progress has
already been made towards reconstituting the collection of books.
(Further assistance towards this will be eagerly welcomed.)
Meetings of the Society are normally held once monthly during
the session, when lectures on various topics relating to Anglo-
Jewish history and kindred subjects are given: occasional
meetings are also held in the Provinces.
The Society—the last Jewish cultural institution of the sort
left in Europe—has now some 750 members; but it is necessary
to increase this number substantially in order to permit it to
maintain its activities in spite of the heavy blow that it has


received. The annual subscription, which entitles members to
its publications as well as to participation in its other activities,
is £1 Is. o d. per annum (Student Membership 10s. 6 d.\ Life
Membership £l2 12s. o d.).
All communications should be addressed to: —
The Acting Hon. Secretary, the Rev. W. Levin,
16 Palace Court, London, W. 2.
PRINTED BY THE RIVERSIDE PRESS, EDINBURGH


A HISTORY
OF THE
JEWS IN ENGLAND
BY
CECIL ROTH
Reader in Post-Biblical Jewish Studies
in the University of Oxford
Pp. 312 Demy Bvo. 15s. net
Dr. D’Blossiers Tovey’s Anglia Judaica, or the History and
Antiquities of the Jews in England, published by the Clarendon
Press in 1738, has long been out of print. Another member
of Merton College has followed his tradition and produced
a fresh history of the Jews in England, based throughout
upon record material, correcting the accepted account at
every turn, arid presenting what is substantially a new story.
Particular-stress is laid on social history and on the part
played by the Jews in the life of England. It is a con-
tribution to English history, as well as to Jewish history in
its wider sense.
CONTENTS: Settlement and Consolidation (to 1189); The
Beginning, of Persecution and the Organization of Jewry,
1189-1216; The Royal Milch-cow, 1216-72; The Expulsion,
1272-90; Anglo-Jewry in the Middle Ages; The Middle Period,
1290-1609; The Readmission, 1609-60; The Jewry of the
Restoration, 1660-1702; The Jews under Anne and the First
Hanoverians, 1702-60; The Reign of George 111, 1760-1815;
Emancipation, 1815-58; Epilogue.
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
