





'




TOM PAGDIN—PIRATE.
* ME"


.


CONTENTS.
CHAPTER.
I.—Pirates All ... ... ... ... ... I
II. —Under the Tamarind Tree ... ... ... 17
111. —The Pirates' First Cruise ... ... ... 32
IV.—Waiting in the Dark ... ... ... ... 43
V-—The Escape ... ... ... ... ... 2
Vl.—They Take an Oath ... ... ... ... 6 2
Vll.—Tom Conducts a Raid ... ... ... 73
\ lll.—George of the " Greenwich " Goes Fishing ... 88
IX.—George Declines a Task ...
X.—The Story of Jean Petit 106
Xl.—The Sea is Merciful ... ... ... ...
Xll.—Jean Petit Pays a Visit ... ... 122
Xlll.—Captured ... ... ... 128
XlV.—The Genesis of a Dove Story
XV.—The Robbery is Discovered x * 2
XVI.—An Inquest
XVII.—The Rush for the Boat .
XVIII. Tom Pagdin Goes Gunning ... ... ... x yft
XlX.—The Pirate's Last Cruise jBq
XX.—The Ultimatum 200


ILLUSTRATIONS.
The Pirate in Purgatory
Frontispiece
The Murder
The Death of the German
Trapped at Last




The Pirate in Purgatory.
Tom Pagdin, Pirate.
Page 8.


TOM PAGDIN
PIRATE
E. J BRADY
II ith FOUT full-page illustrations by Lionel Lindsay.
SYDNEY
N.3.VV. BOOKSTALL CO.
1911


Copyrighted by ALFRED CECIL ROWLANDSON,
476 George Street, Sydney. —1911.
PRINTED BY SIMMONS-BLOXHAM LTD., SYDNEY.


26546
CHAPTER I.
PIRATES ALL.
THE Broadstream punt was grating gently on the
pebbles at the South Side. Morning, gowned in
silver grey, with trimmings of gold, still slept voluptu-
ously on her divan in the Orient East. The mists were
slowly lifting from the river, but bung yet lovingly
along the creeks and upon the reedy lagoons.
Tom Pagdin, with bis bare legs banging over the
rails of the punt, watched the cork floater of bis fishing
line sleepily. His bamboo rod cast a clear shadow
in the water of the deep Broadstream. It was a new
rod, cut some days before from the lower boundary of
Henry Dobie's garden. Old Tom Pagdin was not on
speaking terms with Dobie, hence young Tom bad taken
that rod; at dusk, knowing that the particular com-
mandment relating to the case was temporarily sus-
pended.
Old Tom (cheerfully so-called by roystering fisher-
men) rented the Broadstream punt from the Govern-
ment, which he regarded as his natural enemy. It was


only at election times that Pagdin, senior, got any-
thing like even with the Government, exercising the
right of secret ballot against the sitting member behind
his back, while pretending absolute fealty to his face.
On these occasions the puntman invariably came home
to the little shanty by the riverside glorious, and next
day young Tom was usually too sore to sit down with
any degree of comfort.
But the life of a boy on the Broadstream could not
possiblj be dull for long, and the thrashings which
Tom Pagdin so regularly received at the hands of the
old man ' possibly gave greater relish to his pleasures.
In the Northern streams the perch bite best in the
early morning, but it happened that the fish were
dainty, or shy, and even the black cricket still kicking
on the hook did not draw them.
So, when a waterhen came out on the broad green
leai es of the lilies, which were just opening their purple
flowers to the rising sun, Tom Pagdin let his rod drop
gently in the water, drew his catapult from the pocket
of his frayed trousers, fitted a carefully-chosen pebble
in the sling, and let fly.
" Hit 'm! " he shouted, triumphantly, flicked the
line out of the water, sprang to the handle of the
windlass, and commenced to work the punt with all
speed to the opposite side.
divajy across when the wheels of a
milk-cart, en route to the creamery with full cans,
grated down the edge, to an accompaniment of com-
plaining brake echoes.
A red-headed boy, with a heavy cartwhip in his hand,


was standing up in front throwing as much style into
the driving as he knew.
" Ere! " he shouted, indignantly, " where y' goin'
with that punt ? "
Tom heard the hail, and looked hack over his
shoulder.
" Hold on a minute, can't yer," he howled. " I just
peppered a coot; I'm goin' acrost for him."
The red-headed hoy was interested immediately.
" Where is 'e, Tom ?" he cried. " I can't see 'im."
"Can't y' see 'im kickin'?" shouted Tom, working
vigorously at the handle; " 'e's in the lilies over 'ere."
" Which side ?" demanded the red-headed boy,
excitedly. " Which side of the punt is he on ? "
" Eight-hand side. I've wounded him had."
"I spot 'im," cried the boy in the cart. "I spot 'im.
Hurry up, Tom; he's goin' to dive."
"Ho he ain't. He's wounded too had."
"Yes he is. He's going to dive. He'll get away
from yer."
"'E can't get away," shouted Tom, perspiring
violently.
"The banks of the Broadstream at the crossing were
not far apart, but the punt was heavy and slow.
"He will get away! '' cried the red-headed boy in a
pained voice. " You've only broke his leg."
Whereat he jumped out of the cart, picked up a
handful of pebbles, and began shying them across
stream.
" Let up! " yelled Tom Pagdin. " Let 'im alone; 'e's
my coot! "


A hunter who has mortally wounded an old man
lion with his last cartridge could not have claimed
possession with greater emphasis.
"He'll get away," pleaded the"red-headed boy in
extenuation. " You've only broke his leg."
"'E won't get awav, 5 ' shouted Tom. "'E's mortal
wounded. \ou let up, Dave Gibson, or I'll punch yer
'ead when I get acrost."
The punt swung in close to the bank. Tom Pagdin
let go the handle, stripped off pants and shirt, and
plunged in after his quarry.
How this was a dangerous thing to do, inasmuch
as the water was not only deep enough to drown a
boat's crew, but the long brown stalks of the giant
lilies growing up from the bottom in netted confusion
might tangle the stoutest swimmer. Many a good
swimmer, in sooth, has lost his life in that fashion
by the banks of the Horthern rivers.
But young Tom Pagdin thought not of depth nor
danger; the wounded coot was a prize of as great
importance at the moment as a kingdom to Alexander.
All the primal instincts of the chase were aroused in
him. He floundered and kicked and splashed among
the flat leaves, turning up their red undersides, making
many bubbles, and frightening the perch and eels from
their feed. At last, puffing and almost exhausted he
got within reach of his game, grabbed it triumphantly
by the neck, and turned about to swim back. And just
then old Tom Pagdin, with his pipe in his mouth,
stepped on to the punt. The old man had been thrice
wakened out of his sleep the previous night to go across


stream and bring late travellers over and even tbe
solace of the extra sixpences over and above his legiti-
mate toll had not soothed his anger.
The animosity of Pagdin, senior, to men and things
was chronic. His grievance was general. The world
was against him, as it is against all and, like
all puntmen, he was against the world.
In the first place he proclaimed loudly that the
Government gave him no chance—the yearly rent ex-
acted by the Department for the right of the crossing
was too high; it was an imposition, an outrage, a
robbery. The victim wailed cursefully at the windlass
from morn to eve. The Member for the district had
promised him that the yearly charge should be reduced.
He was convinced in some indefinite way that the
Member, was in the conspiracy against him—that he
personally pocketed some of the plunder. Then the
tolls which the Department allowed him to exact from
travellers were too low. Threepence a head for foot
travellers, sixpence for horsemen, and ninepence for
vehicles did not pay. Then he never got his proper
night's rest, mainly because the public house was on
the Horth Side, and the fellows who went across in- the
evening never thought about him. They hardly ever
thought about bringing him a toothful, either. They
could come and hail angrily across the water at one
and two o'clock in the morning for the punt, but they
seldom remembered when they were leaving the Rising
Sun that the puntman had a mouth on him.
The fishermen who came down to the Broadstream on
Saturdays and Sundays were no better. The picnic


crowds were worse, and, as for the swagmen and fellows
looking for work along the river, they were an utter
abomination—a poor, struggling cove—to take them
over for nothing, and sometimes even swimming the
Broadstream to avoid paying toll—taking the bread
directly out of a poor cove's mouth.
When old Tom reached this climax he usually spat
in the water and looked up and down the bank with a
smouldering eye to see if young Tom was doing any-
thing that merited punishment.
And as young Tom usually was, his dad would en-
tertain the passing fare for the rest of the passage with
a detailed account of the unregenerateness and general
cussedness of that youth, to whom he was trying to
he both father and mother, and bring up in the way he
ought to go. The old man would explain wrathfully
that whereas his only son and heir ought to be a bless-
ing and a comfort to him, he was nothing but a trial,
and generally before the fare had got to the top of
the long, steep hank the yells of young Tom resounding
through the hush indicated that the way of the evil-
doer, if sometimes pleasurable, was also hard.
So Tom would rather have seen the devil step on the
punt that morning than his father.
The latter seized the situation with angry gratitude.
The Lord had set him a pleasant duty to perform. He
set about it with the air of a Roman dictator who had
been called upon to pass judgment on a conspirator
after a had night.
The old man looked in the water and saw Tom.
Tom had already seen the old man, and was "treading


water" —and thinking. He still held the coot firmly hy
the neck.
"What you doin' there, you whelp ? " thundered the
old man. "Come out 'ere at onct!"
He stooped and picked up the trousers and shirt
which had been shed by his son and heir.
Young Tom realised that he was unarmoured, and
that the full and unmitigated wrath of his parent
would descend upon him as soon as he landed.
He took several quick strokes out into the clear deep
stream, and trod water again, watching the old man.
"What you doin' in there ? " shouted the latter, with
rising wrath. "Come out when I tell ye."
"Are you goin' to whale me ? " demanded Tom.
For answer the swarthy captain of the punt un-
buckled his belt. A despotic grin wrinkled his
shrivelled countenance, and died out in ominous ripples
among his scraggy beard. The red-headed boy got
up on the seat of the milk-cart, and assumed an innocent
air, an air of studied unconcern, an air which was
intended to express complete and absolute neutrality in
respect to impending hostilities.
"You are goin' to whale me!" said Tom, still holding
the coot and treading water.
"You never spoke a truer word in your life, my son,"
replied the old man, in apparent calm. "It ain't
often you tells the truth, Tom, but you've hit it this
onct —accidental like."
There was a pause—embarrassing to both.
"Come out!" cried the old man.


"I won't," replied Tom, firmly; "I'll be banged if I
do."
"What!" yelled the old man. ""What's this—You're
a-goin' to defy me, are you ?''
"I ain't defying you, but I ain't goin' to be wolloped
with the buckle of that there strap, bare, I ain't, I'd
rather be drowned."
Pagdin, senior, drew a long breath.
"Ho, you won't be drowned,'' he said, "you won't
I'm convinced o' that, but (leaning over the rail and
glowing at his progeny in the water) you'll be 'ung!"
"I'd rather be hung than whaled with that strap,
bare."
"If you don't come out," explained the father, in
a tone intended to express sorrow rather than anger,
"you'll get a double allowance, an' I'll stop yer grub
for a whole day!"
"You lemme off this time!" pleaded young Tom,
"an' I won't do it any more."
"You've said that afore,'' retorted old Tom; "you
ain't to be trusted. It's a 'orrible thing to think," he
added, "that a man's only son should be a liar an' a
vagabond—a most owdacious an' 'orrible thing!"
"Dave Gibson wants to come acrost," said Tom, in
the hope of creating a diversion.
"Are you coming out or are you not ? " thundered the
old man.
"Ho," replied Tom, treading the water with greater
resolution. "I'll be hanged if I am!"
"All right," cried old Tom ; seizing the handle and


starting the punt; "you'll get it double an' treble for
this."
"Gimme me clothes," shouted the youth in the water.
"You don't want no clothes," said the old man, in
studied sarcasm; "you're goin' to live in the water.
You don't want 110 more clothes," he added over his
shoulder with fine irony, "no more clothes nor 'a
conger eel."
Tom waited until the punt was well over to the oppo-
site side, and then he Avent for shore,
landing with the coot in record time.
He shook himself like a spaniel, and darted into the
neighbouring scrub.
Old Tom Pagdin brought the milk-cart over in
studied silence. Dave made one futile effort to open up
a com T ersation, leading off Avitli a honeyed remark
about the weather, but the puntman took no more notice
of him than the Suffete of ancient Carthage might
have taken of a crippled slave.
As soon as the punt touched shore and the captain
took the chain down, Da\ r e gathered up his reins, and
got aAvay quickly, and the old man went Up the
bank to the house with his son's raiment firmly gripped
in one hand and the strap in the other.
"I'll wait for ye," he remarked loudly to the adjacent
scenery; "I'll wait for ye if I 'ave to wait till the Day
of Jiniral Jidgmint!"
Meanwhile Tom had cut through the scrub and Avas
waiting for Dave doAvn the road, naked and unashamed.
The red-headed boy pulled up.
"My gosh!" he said, cheeringly, "the old man 'as


got his rag out. He'll flay yer alive, he will, when he
gets you."
"He ain't going to get me," replied Tom.
"But he's got yer clothes."
"I don't care," cried the other boy, "if 'e 'as —'e ain't
got me."
"But y' can't go about like that all day."
"Yes I can," said Tom. "I kin go about like this
for a week —I kin go about like it altogether. I'd
rather."
"But you'll get run in."
"I don't care," cried Tom. "I'd rather be rim in
than whaled with the buckle end of that strap on me
bare 'ide."
"You'd better go back an' 'ave it over," urged Dave.
"Xo," replied Tom; "I'll be sawed in 'alf with a
rusty cross-cut saw furst. I'm full of him. 'E's
always on to me. I got to get up furst thing in the
mornin' an' work the punt. I got to fetch wood and
water, an' bile the beef, an' wash the clothes, an' milk
the cow, an' feed the hens, an' go to school, an' then
in the evenin's I got to read the noospaper for 'im. I
got to work the garden an' hoe the damn corn, and
get whaled reg'lar. Flesh an' hlood," he concluded,
solemnly, "is flesh an' blood, an' it can't be any more.
I'm chock full up of it."
"So am I," said the red-headed boy, developing a
grievance also. "I'm chock full o' mine, too. He's
worse nor yours, because he's only a stepfather. I got
to get up in the mornin' afore daylight an' round up
the cows, an' help milk, an' fetch the cans into the


factory, an' I get whaled if I ain't back in time. Then
I got to go and cut sorghum an' pull pumpkins. Then
I got to get the cows up again in the evenin's and milk
an' 'ump cans, an' round up the calves, an' light fires
to keep the mosquitoes off 'em, an' the ole man 'e whales
me, an' the ole woman she's worse, an'," he concluded,
emphatically, "there ain't nothin' in it, hanged if
there is."
"I'm goin' to run away," said Tom Pagdin.
"Where'll y' run to?" asked the other boy, curiously.
"Somewhere,'' replied Tom, mysteriously, "I know
a place."
"Where is it ?" asked Dave, with interest. "What
sort of a place—a job?"
"Ho," retorted Tom, with scorn. "Work be 'anged!
Ho job fer me; I'm goin' to take a 'oliday—l've
urned it."
The red-headed hoy theught awhile.
"He'll put the police on ter yer," he said.
"Let 'im," replied Tom, with great contempt; "the
p'leese won't find me where I'm goin'."
"Where are y' goin' then ? "
"Down the river a piece," said Tom. "I know a
place."
"Down on the main river? " asked Dave.
"That's my business. I ain't goin' to tell you—
you might put a cove away."
"Me!" replied Dave; "not me. I ain't built that
way."
"Say," cried Tom, suddenly, "let us both run away.


We'll go mates. We'll have an all right time, I promise
yer."
The red-headed boy's face lit up. It was a strong
temptation.
"Look 'ere," cried Tom, leaning his bare arm on the
muddy wheel of the milk-cart; "look 'ere, Dave, if
you promise not to put me away I'll let you into it."
"I promise," gasped Dave.
"On your oath ? "
"Yes, on me oath."
Tom glanced up and down the road.
"Look," he said in a hushed, important voice, "I've
got a boat."
"A boat?"
"Yes."
"Where did you get her ? " asked Dave, leaning over
the wheel.
"She came up with the tide one mornin' lately—about
a week ago."
"What is she—a flat-bottom? " queried the other
boy, leaning over still further.
"Ho, she's a keel boat—a spanker."
"Je-rusalem," gasped Dave. "I wonder where she
came from ? "
"I reckon," replied Tom, in a jportentious whisper,
"that she came off a wreck. She's a ship's boat."
"Where is she, Tom ?" demanded Dave. "Kin I
have a look at her? "
"I've got her planted," said Tom, swelling with im-
portance.
"Where—where did you plant 'er, Tom? "


"I ain't goin' to tell you," replied Tom, firmly.
"Ah, Tom, don't be mean."
"I ain't goin' to tell you —not yet," repeated Tom.
"Are you goin' to run away in 'er ? " asked Dave.
"I might, an' I might not."
"But are you ? "
"You never can tell," replied Tom, "until the num-
bers go up. I say, give us that bag you're sittin' on."
"What do you want the bag for ? "
"I want to make a pair o' trousers out of it," said
Tom.
"It ain't mine to give," said Dave, with sudden
honesty; "it belongs to the old man."
"Couldn't you say you dropped it outer the cart ? "
asked Tom. "A nice sorter mate you are."
"I'll give it to yer," said Dave, "if you tell me where
the boat is."
"Gimme the bag first."
"All right, here you are."
Tom took the bag, and, after spreading it out on
the buffalo grass by the roadside, regarded it with a
quizzical air from one unclosed eye.
"It won't fit like a tailor-made suit," he said, "but
it'll do."
"Are you going to wear that sugar bag?" asked
Dave, with something like admiration on his face.
"How are you goin' to wear it? "
"You'll see," answered Tom. "Lend me yer knife."
«• ,"^ 0n it," admonished the youth in the cart
"it's got a razor edge on."


Tom felt the alleged razor edge critically with his
thumb.
"It's more like the hack of a axe," he said, kneeling
down and stabbing the blade into the right-hand corner
of the bag. He split about six inches there, then per-
formed a similar operation on the left-hand corner,
and holding the mouth of the bag up inserted his legs
into the splits.
"Gimme a bit of string for the waistband," he said.
"Hov 1 does she fit be'ind ? "
"She fits like ole Harry," said Dave. "By gosh!
she fits you all over and don't touch you nowhere."
Tom twisted his neck over his shoulder and caught
sight of the bulge behind.
Then the humour of the thing seized both boys, and
they laughed. Dave sprawled all over the seat of the
cart laughing, and Tom rolled on the buffalo grass
kicking his heels in the air and laughing. Then he
got up and capered round like a clown in a circus to
make Dave laugh more. Hext he stood on his head
against a bean tree and gave Dave still another lease
of joy.
They were as happy and as merry as any two boys
of thirteen summers on the face of the Australian
continent. But the sun was getting high, and presently
Dave remembered.
"By gosh!" he cried, seizing the reins, "I'll get into
it."
"Hever mind," said Tom, improvising a war dance
round the milk-cart; "you might as well be hung for
a cow as a calf."


"Say," demanded Dave, "where is the boat planted—
I got to go. I'll get into an awful row, I will!"
"I'm in a wuss row," observed Tom, "an' I don't
care."
"Where's the boat, Tom?" pleaded Dave. "You
promised to tell."
"I can't tell you now," explained Tom, ceasing his
dance, and coming close enough to unbuckle the horse's
girth on the sly, "I'll tell you to-night."
"To-night? " queried Dave.
"Yes; you meet me down under that big tamarind
tree just inside Dobie's fence in the scrub, an' I'll tell
you."
"But," said Dave, with arising qualms, "I ain't goin'
to run away with you."
"Well, you are a cur," retorted Tom with magnificent
contempt.
"But I never said I would," hesitated Dave.
"Oh, didn't you."
"Leastwise I don't remember "
"Don't do it if you don't want to. Don't do it if
yer afraid, you know. Oh, I wouldn't like you to
come if yer afraid—fact, you'd only be in the road
and spile the fun."
"I ain't afraid," cried Dave, indignantly.
A o Australian bush hoy likes to have his courage
called into question.
"Well, if you ain't afraid, why don't you come?"
demanded Tom with Jesuitical cunning.
"All right," said Dave, throwing prudence to the
winds, "I'll come."


"Be there at dark, then," ordered Torn, "an' bring
yer clothes an' as much tucker as you can git an' we'll
fix things."
"But what are we goin' to do ? " asked Dave.
""We're going," said Tom, "to be pirates."
"Pirates! "
"Yes. You leave me alone; I've a plan in my head,
Dave —I've got a dead, all right plan. You'll see."
"But," hesitated Dave, "we can't really be pirates
and rob ships and all that sort of thing. You can't
do that now, the time's gone by."
"You leave me alone," said Tom, importantly; "I'll
fix that. If anybody's got to be killed or made to walk
a plank, I'll attend to that. I'll be captain and you'll be
first mate. The captain takes all the responsibility, and
the first mate does what he's told. You get some bread
and beef, an' a blanket an' any little odds and ends
you can lay hands on. I've got a tommyhawk an' a
billy can an' a lot of things I've been gettin' ready for
a week —ever since that boat drifted up the Broadstream
at daylight that mornin'."
"I'll be there," cried Dave, with new resolution.
"On your oath ? " demanded Tom.
"On me oath."


CHAPTER 11.
UNDER THE TAMARIND TREE.
IT was very dark in the scrub, and the new moon
had set. The flying foxes squealed in the wild fig
trees, and Tom Pagdin, sitting under the tamarind
heard a night owl complaining mournfully.
The hollow hoot of the owl sent a shudder down
down Tom's spine, because it was unlucky to hear an
owl in the dark of the moon.
Away off on the flats fhe curlew called, wild pathos
in his cry.
The scrub, close-matted and tied by many vines, was
cool and pleasant in the daytime; hut at night its
overhanging canopy of vegetation shut out the stars,
and one walked beneath in an eerie gloom that was
wearing on the strongest nerves.
Tom waited and waited until it was almost eight
o'clock.
He was restless and uneasy. Half the joy of his
proposed expedition would be gone if Dave did not
turn up. There is no fun in the pirating business
without a mate; it becomes lonesome and monotonous.


Tom had just decided to take it out of Dave for
breaking his promise, when he heard a noise somewhere
oft* at the other side of the scrub.
He put his ear to the ground, bushman fashion, and
listened.
It was Dave whistling loudly. Dave had no more
idea of tune than a milch cow; he made up what he
whistled as he went along.
It was weird, but he kept himself brave in that way,
and overcame the temptation to drop the bundle he
was carrying and cut back home as fast as his legs
could carry him.
Tom sneaked through the scrub with the stealthiness
of an Apachee, and hid behind a bean tree, which he
knew his mate must pass. As the scrub drew denser
and darker Dave gave over whistling and started talk-
ing to himself.
Once he caught his toe in a vine, stumbled, and
swore.
Presently he came to the bean tree. Tom was
holding his breath.
As Dave passed he jumped out and caught him round
the neck.
The red-headed boy let out a continuation of blood-
curdling yells, which woke wild echoes in the forest,
and frightened the night owl from his perch on
Dobie's fence.
"Shut up," cried Tom, trying to smother Dave's
outcry by putting his hand over his mouth. "Shut
up, you speckled idiot; you'll have them down on us."
But Dave was so thoroughly frightened that for the


moment lie did not recognise the aggressor. He con-
cluded that a dastardly attempt had been made to
smother him, and determined to die hard, anyhow.
So he bit the hand.
"Let up!" yelled Tom. "It's me, I tell yer!"'
But Dave, sobbing with fright, held on like a bulldog.
"By gosh!" cried Tom, "I'll stouch yer."
He suited the action to the word by punching the
other boy in the ribs.
In retaliation Dave kicked Tom's shins viciously.
It was a rather lively rough-and-tumble for about
a minute and a half; then Dave recovered sense enough
to realise that he was not in the grip of an unknown
assassin, and Tom, with a contused eye and badly-
bitten hand, sat on the leaves and reproached him.
""What yer mean by bitin' my 'and?" he demanded,
angrily.
"Well, what did you mean by comin' be'ind me and
thumpin' me in the dark ? "
"I never; I only just held yer."
"What did you hold me for, then ? "
"Why, I wanted to frighten yer, that's all."
"What did you do it for, then? "
"I wanted to see how you'd act if we was caught
by the police, or stuck up by a gang of bushrangers, or
something."
"Well, you didn't get no good of it, anyhow. It
wasn't a fair thing to do, neither."
"My word, you was frightened, Dave!"
"Me frightened! N"o blooming fear! You couldn't
frighten me like that."


"Gerrout! Why, you yelled louder 'n ole Dobie's
bull!"
"Gerrout; I ~knowed it was you all the time."
"Well, if yer did," demanded Tom, indignantly,
"What right did yer 'ave to bite me 'and? If yer
knew, what did you it me in the eye for with yer
shut fist ? "
"Because you punched me. I don't want to have
nothing more to do with you, Tom Pagdin; I'm goin'
home."
"Xo! " said Tom magnanimously. "Don't go 'ome;
we'll cry quits; we was both in the wrong."
"I wasn't in the wrong," persisted Dave. "You
started it; I only hit when you did."
"Of course, you was frightened," said Tom. "That's
why you did it."
"I was not frightened," protested Dave, vigorously;
"I was no more frightened—nor— nor—nor anything.
You can't frighten me as easy as that!"
"All right," cried Tom, "don't let us say auv more
about it. Shake hands, and we'll make it up."
"I won't try to frighten you any more," said Tom,
generously, rubbing his shin where Dave had kicked
him. We better get down to the Tamarind. [ left
a lot of things there."
It was growing darker and darker.
The two adventurers sneaked stealthily through the
scrub in the direction of Dobie's fence, following as
nearly as they could a track which led across from
Pagdin's.
"Don't make no more noise than you can help,"


admonished Tom. "There might be somebody about.
They might 'ave 'eard that row we kicked up."
The lads stumbled along in the darkness, and every
time one of them trod on a dry stick or on the crisp
leaves, they would both stop and breathe hard. There
was a fearsome mystery about the whole thing which
lent it an additional charm. It is probably the danger
attached to crime which renders evil-doing most attrac-
tive to the criminal.
They came at last to the tamarind tree, and stopped.
Tom sat on the butt of a big hollow bluegum, which
had been blown down by some tornado, and wiped his
forehead.
"It's a hot night," he said. "I think we're going to
have a storm."
"Suppose we do, Tom?" asked Dave, anxiously.
"Well, suppose we do!" repeated Tom, with scorn
in his voice.
"We'll get wet," replied Dave, diffidently. "Won't
we ? "
"No,'' said Tom, "not a wet! I got a tent."
"A tent! Where did you get her, Tom? "
"Never you mind. Pirates ain't supposed to answer
questions like that. I got her, that's good enough."
"Where is she, Tom?"
"I got her planted not ten yards from here," replied
the elder conspirator, proudly.
Dave's admiration for Tom was growing.
"Your a wonner," he said.
"Bet your life," replied Tom. "I wasn't goin' out
in the bush without a tent. It's one some coves that


was down fishin' last summer left with the old man to
take care of. Don't you split!"
"Yo blime fear/' said Dave. "We're mates."
"Let us put tkese things in the boat first/' said
Tom, "an' we'll come back and get the tent."
"Where is the boat, Tom?" asked Dave. "I ain't
seen her yet."
"Foller me!" cried Tom. "We got to be quick. The
tide's on the turn, an' we'll go down with it. Did you
pinch a pair of pants for me? "
"\es; and I hooked one of the old man's shirts, too."
"Good egg!" exclaimed Tom, gleefully. "I couldn't
have gone another night without a shirt. The mos-
quitoes 'as nearly 'et me raw. Gimme the shirt now."
"It's in the bag."
"Is it near the top ? Give us it, anyhow. They've
sucked all the blood out of me back an' legs. I'd a lit
a fire to keep 'em off only I was afraid of somebody
seein' it."
"My crumbs,'' he added, presently, "this shirt comes
all over me."
"Tuck it down in your sugar-bag, fer now," said
Dave; "we'll cut a bit off it in the mornin'. I got an
ole pair of tronsers fer you, too, but they're in the
bottom of the bag."
"Your a all-right first mate, Dave" said Tom. "You
want a bit o' trainin' yet, an' you want a bit more
pursonal courage; but you'll do. I reckon we'll sur-
prise 'em before we're done."
"My oath we will," said Dave. "We'll make 'istry."
"Hist!" exclaimed Tom. "Didn't you 'ear a noise ?''


"No," said Dave, crouching down behind the log,
"did you ?"
"Ssh!" whispered Tom. "I 'eard something along
there be Dobie's fence."
"Might be a cow!"
"Cow's don't cough!"
"I've heard cows cough."
"Well, they don't whistle softly to theirselves. Least-
wise, I never 'eard a cow do it. You might."
"No, I never did. Yhat did she whistle? "
"I don't know the tune," replied Tom, "but it was
a whistle all right. Lie low, there's some people
comin'."
"Don't breathe!" said Dave, in Tom's ear. "I can
'ear 'em. It's somebody talking."
"They're comin' this way," muttered Tom. "Keep
quiet, can't yer! Yer rootin' in them dry leaves like
a wild pig."
"I'm not; it's you," protested Dave,
"It ain't me," denied Tom, sotto voce ; "it's you.
You're makin' enough row to wake the dead, blarst
yer!"
"I ain't!" said Dave, indignantly. "I ain't."
"Shut up!" hissed Tom in his pal's ear. "They're
comin' right this way."
"Who is it, Tom?" asked Dave, in a faint whisper.
The strain was heavy on him.
"'Ow the devil do I know?" replied Tom; "shut
up!"
The boys laid behind the fallen tree as still as mice.


"Get down," whispered Tom presently. "Get right
down."
He spread himself out on the flat of his stomach,
with his chin to the ground.
Dave followed suit.
"They'll think we're two logs," he explained to his
comrade.
The sound of voices became more distinct. The
footsteps of the approaching unknown fell audibly on
the crisp leaves, and when one of them trod on a dry
bangalow leaf it cracked sharply.
Tom and Dave could hear their hearts beat.
Either boy was temped to jump up and run for his
life, but the thought of what the other might say re-
strained him. It is even thus with whole regiments
in action.
It was plain that two men had come up to the log
and were talking.
A smell of strong tobacco told that one of them
was smoking a pipe.
And with the powerful odour of hush weed was
blended the milder perfume of a cigarette.
Tom and Dave watched the flame of the cigarette
like a glowworm not twenty yards away, and once,
when the smoker drew in a long whiff, they saw the
outline of a dark, bearded face.
Scraps of conversation came down to the two trem-
bling youths cowering among the leaves. It had any-
thing but a re-assuring effect on them.
One man, he of the cigarette, spoke with an accent.
"Tell to me," he said, "vat you sink ze best time? "


"About eleven o'clock at night," replied the other.
"He goes to bed early."
"Ah! Zen vere shall ve meet —you an' I, eh? "
"Look 'ere, Frenchy," came the second voice, "I don't
see what you want me for at all."
"Ah! ah!" exclaimed the first speaker in a louder
tone, "zen you air friten now! You have vot you call
concoct ze plan, you leave ze ozzer to open ze door!
You air coward, ees eet not so? "
"Yo," came the response, "it ain't that; but I'm
getting known round here, and you ain't. If anything
happened I might be recognised, an' that would be
bad for both of us."
"So?"
"So I reckon it 'ud be better I didn't go right down _
with you to-morrow night. I've put you up to every-
thing. You know the lay of the land as "well as I
do meself. I've giv you the plan of the place, I've giv
you the impression of the key. You don't have to
make no noise with the safe. All you got to do is
to open it an' shift the stuff. It's as easy as fallin' "
off a log. I'll be waitin' down under the bank with
the boat. We'll bring the stuff off together and plant
it in a safe place. After the row is all over we can
slip away quietly down the country with the spile.
It's a dead cert. It's the deadest cert that ever was
in this world."
"Tres bien,'' replied the black-headed man, "It shall
be as you say. Kemembaire zat I vill not be made
fool of. Xon! Eet ees so?"
"Who wants to make a fool of you ?" demanded


the other man. ""We're halves in this job. We're both
takin' our equal risk, an' we stand in equal. That's
fair, ain't it ? "
"Oui; that ees so! About ze boat! Vat zen? Hav'
you made ze preparation?"
"That's all as right as rain. You leave that to
me. I struck a hit o' luck to-day. "
"Ah! so?"
"I found a boat!"
The spark of the cigarette described a parabola in the
darkness.
"Hist!"
"What's the matter, Frenchy? "
"I think I hear someone. Ah! Vat! Ssh!"
There was a silence. It seemed about a hundred
and twenty years to Tom and Dave.
Yeither dared to speak, but Dave could feel Tom
tremble, and it comforted him in his own quivering
anguish.
After a time one of the men —he who spoke without
an accent—laughed softly.
"There's nobody about'," he said in a quiet voice,
"nor likely to be; an' if there was it's too dark for them
to see us, an' if they did see us, that don't prove
nothing."
"Ah!" said the Frenchman, drawing a long breath;
"so; but ze boad, vere ees it ? "
"I found her tied up among the reeds in a little
branch off the creek here."
"Tied up ! Fastened, eh? "
"Oh, you needn't be afraid. She's a stray boat.


One of these farmer coves has found her. He's just
run her in there and hitched her to a log. By-an'-bye
he thinks to himself he'll take her out and paint her
up quietly, an' let on he bought her new down the
river."
"Yell, vat you think to do?"
"Borrow the boat for to-morrow night."
"So, and "
"Yes; we'll come down here, get her, pull down
quietly to the town. I'll wait at the place I told you.
When you come along with the stuff we'll pull back an'
tie her up again to the log an' nobody won't ever be
any the wiser. The cove that's thinking to hook that
boat for himself won't say anything. It won't he his
game. See?''
"Oui! it is reasonable. Ef so, lie ees accuse, an
accomplice, eh ? "
"Frenchy you got sense. You'll do."
The foreigner laughed—a saturnine laugh. "I haf,"
he said, "ze advantage of moch experience."
"Don't doubt it," replied the other. "You're an
older hand than me. How, listen. We got to meet
here to-morrow night at half-past seven. It's a good
three hours' pull even with a falling tide.''
"I shall be here," replied the foreigner, grimly.
"Ah, most certainly shall Ibe here. Eet ees a bargain,
zen, eh*? "
"That's settled," said the other, "and, remember, no
violence. I got no wish to see you 'ung, Frenchy."
"Hor I you," replied the Frenchman, politely. "Eet
will surely break my heart zat my dear friend terminate


hees career — sacre bleu! —upon ze sgaffold. Yon,
non!"
"Xo but no funny business," pleaded tbe other man,
earnestly. "I ain't used to that sort o' thing, if you
are. Besides, the thing can be done "without any trouble
if you go quietly. It's the safest job was ever put up
in this world."
"You can depend zat eet will be done, mon ami.
Yes, eet will be done. Already I am tired of zis
countree, I would get back to France —to Paris—vere
zere ees vat you call ze scope for mine ability. Eet
is not here zat should remain ze man of parts —non!"
"That's right," agreed the other; "I want to get
down to Melbourne meself. Damn the country! Since
I cleared out o' Trial Bav last June I ain't ad a decent
spree or met a pal, as was a pal, exceptin' that little
cove down the river wot laid me on to this. An' then
'e's turned respectable, and won't take no active part in
it. Sez 'e's only puttin' me on to this fer the sake of
old times."
"Ah! but he has done us ze great service."
"Yes, and that puts 'im in it —so 'e's safe. I wouldn't
trust no converted bloke unless I 'ad a pull over 'im
like that. Goin' with those Salvation coves 'as 6ent
'im ratty. But that's only temporary. 'E'll work it
off. 'E'll come out all right again, will Joe. 'E's too
good a cove to be spiled with religion for long."
"Zen ve meet here at zis place to-morrow?"
"Yes; to-morrow night at half-past seven."
The two strangers went away quietly by the road
they had come.


Tom and Dare might have been dead, they lay so
still. At length—long after the last sound of receding
footsteps had died out —Tom spoke in a hollow whisper:
"Do you know what they was takin' about, Dave?"
"No," replied Dave; "do you?"
"Some of it," said Tom, "most of it, A think."
"Do you think they're gone ?" asked the younger boy.
"Yes; they're gone for now."
"They won't come back again?"
"Not to-night they won't, but," added Tom, vehe-
mently, "they'll be back to-morrow night sure, an'
they'll want the loan of our boat!"
"The loan of it! But you ain't goin' "
"Dave Gibson," cried Tom, sitting up, "you leave
this business to me. T reckon we've struck a big thing.
I reckon we've struck the biggest thing any two young
coves in' Australia ever struck in their lives."
"What is it, Tom?" asked Dave, curiouslv.
/ / i/
"You'll know later on," replied Tom; "you'll 'ave a
hand in it. Are you fit?"
"My oath!" said Dave, bravely, forgetting his recent
fears in the prospect of adventure. "I'm fit!"
"You're an all-right mate," said Tom. "You'll do."
"TV ho were they ? ' asked Dave, after a pause.
"I don't know neither of 'em, but I reckon they
must be coves workin' about here somewhere. They've
got a game on."
"Them coves," said Tom, "is going to do a robbery
down the river. I reckon they're goin' to rob a bank
somewhere not far from here.


"Je-rusalem!" said Dave: "What was that cove that
smoked the cigarette?"
"Some kind o' German," replied Tom, sagaciously.
"He's a bad egg whoever he is. Did you hear them
plannin' it all out?"
"Yes," said Dave, "hut I didn't know what they
meant, a lot of it."
"I did," remarked Tom. "I follered 'em every word.
I say, Dave, we've got to take a hand in this game!"
"What!" exclaimed Dave, "in the robbing of the
bank!"
"Ho, not in the robbin' exactly, but we'll be the
detectives, an', look here, we'll get the reward!"
"What reward, Tom?"
"Why the reward for the recovery of the money."
"But the money ain't stole yet."
"Ho, hut it will he —to-morrow night.''
Dave thought awhile.
"Wouldn't it he better," he asked, "to go an' tell some-
body beforehand?"
"What!" exclaimed Tom, in unutterable scorn, "go
an' tell somebody now and spile the whole thing. You
ain't got no sense, Dave Gibson —no sense whatever.
You're a nice sort o' detective an' pirate, you are."
"Well, I didn't know," protested Dave.
"Ho, an' you've got everything to learn. But you
leave this business to me. I'll fix it."
"What'll we do, then?"
"Do ? Why we'll let 'em take the boat."
" What for?"
"To row down the river and do the robbery with."


"But that ain't right, is it?"
"Why ain't it right? They'll bring the boat back
won't they?"
"I suppose "
"Of course! Didn't they say so? Then we'll see
where they hide the money. Then we'll take the swag
an' go down the river an' hide it in a place of our own
an' wait for the reward. See?''
"I see, but where are we goin' to camp till to-morrow
night ?"
"I've got a place," said Tom.


CHAPTER 111.
THE PIRATES' FIRST CRUISE.
and put your hand in the holler of that log,
vJ Dave," ordered Tom Pagdin.
"What you got planted there," demanded Dave, sus-
piciously.
"Never you mind," replied Tom, in a tone of over-
whelming mystery, "You jist do it." • • 9
"It ain't a tree snake or a jumper ant's nest, is it?
You ain't playin' a lark on me? "
"Pirates don't play larks on one another," replied
Tom. "If one pirate plays any larks on the other, the
other pirates what the lark is played on challenge him
to a duel."
"What's a duel?"
"A duel is like this!" explained Tom. "You take
your pistol and I take my pistol, and we stand about
ten yards away from one another, with our backs
turned, and the referee sings out 'Fire!' and we both
turn round and fire, and I kill you, and you wound me
very had in the sword arm, so's I can't use my sword
for about a month. Then I get in the boat with the


seconds, and leave you 011 the sand of the island dead —
an' "
"Tom Pagdin," interrupted Dave, indignantly, "if
you're goin' to play at any of them silly games, I'm
not on. I don't want to be left dead 011 the sand of no
island with a pistol 'ole in me. I'd rather be whaled by
the old man with a greenhide, I would!"
"Well, you are a cur," exclaimed Tom. "I didn't say
I was goin' to; I only said that's what they did. Put
your hand down the log and see what God'll send you!"
Dave obeyed reluctantly.
"What's this?" he cried. "It's a swag!"
"Yes," said Tom; "that's my swag. It's a bit more
heavy nor yours. I bet you I got more things than you
did!"
"I got a good lot," replied Dave, "considerin' the
ole woman was pokin' round!"
"Pooh! that's nothin'; I got all these things while
the old man wuz 011 the punt comin' back with the milk
carts 'bout dusk. I made seven trips. I'd go in an'
get one thing, and come back and hide in the lantana
bushes; then somebody else would hail, and as soon as
he started the punt across for the other side, I'd slip
in an' nick somethin' else. By gosh, it wuz a heavy
swag when I did it all up."
"Wonder where they'll think we are?" asked Dave.
"The ole man, he'll think I'll try to sneak back,"
chuckled Tom, "I looked through a crack in the slabs
last thing to-night an I see him settin' with his face
to the door an' the buckle strap in his hand. He kin
set. I'm not going back no more."


"Neither am I," avowed Dave.
"We'll take the swags and go down the river a piece
in the boat, and plant 'em for to-night," said Tom.
"Where'll we plant 'em ? " inquired Dave.
"On that little island jest below the bend," replied
Tom. "It's not more than a mile. We'll pull down
quiet, leave 'em there, bring the boat back here, go down
along the bank again, and swim across to our camp.
That'll put 'em off the scent if they're after us."
"Do you think they'll foller us ?" asked Dave.
"They're bound to after we don't turn up to-morrow.
They won't let us go without lookin' for us, you kin
bet. We're a bit too useful for 'em for that. But you
leave this business to me. They kin get a detective
from Scotland Yard, wherever that is, if they wan't to.
They won't ketch us!
"Where's the boat, Tom?" inquired Dave.
"Pick up , r or swag an' foller me," ordered Tom.
"I'll take yer right away."
Dave did as he was told.
The elder conspirator, staggering under a heavy load,
led the way.
They skirted a weedy swamp, disturbing the wild
duck and ibis at their feed, and came out upon a short
creek, which emptied its shallow tide into the Broad-
stream.
The banks of the creek were covered by a dense scrub
of tangled lantana bush.
"We can't get through this," said Dave, as they
paused at the edge of the scrub.
Tom chuckled.


"I can," he said; "stoop down, an' foller me."
He went on his hands and knees, and started crawl-
ing along a track made probably by paddymelons or
wallabies.
The boys wormed their way through the lantana a
foot at a time, dragging their swags after them, until
they arrived at the edge. Here the tall water reeds
rustled their leaves softly in the night wind.
"What do you think of this fer a hiding place?"
asked Tom. "Kin you see the boat?"
"No," replied Dave, peering into the darkness. "I'll
be hanged if I can. Where is she, Tom?"
For answer Tom felt with his hands along a small
log, half hidden in the mud, found a rope, and began
to pull it gently towards him.
"Give us a pull," he said.
The two boys bore on the painter. The reeds swayed
and parted, and out of the darkness came the bow of
a boat.
"By gosh!" cried Dave, "she's a beaut. I wonder
where she came from ?"
"That's got nothing to do with us," responded Tom.
"Git the swags in. She's our boat, anvhow; I found
'er."
"Where's the paddles ?" asked Dave. "Did she have
any paddles when you found 'er?"
"Only a broken one," replied Tom, " but I got two
since. Git in!"
Tom cast loose with the air of the commander of a
man-o'-war.


"I'll pole 'er out of the creek," he said, "and then I'll
let you pull one oar. Sit still, and don't make no row.
"We got to go as quiet as mice," he explained, digging
the blade of an oar in the soft black mud, and pushing
the boat out gently through the high reeds into the
stream. "Ere's you're oar, an' don't make no more nise
with that rollick than you kin 'elp."
They sculled down stream in silence, taking care to
dip the oars into the water as noiselessly as they could,
and keeping in under the shadow of the banks.
It was all splendidly mysterious, and exciting, and
brave, and good. Overhead the skies were powdered
with stars, and when they drew in their paddles and
dvifted, the two adventurers could see the reflections of
a myriad of scintillating worlds mirrored in the dark
waters of the Broadstream.
The island for which the boys were hound was about
three or four acres in area. On one side of it the
Broadstream ran deep and narrow. The other arm was
wider and shallow and gradually choking up with lilies
and water weeds.
On the island, primeval scrub grew in almost impene-
trable thickness, and as the place had the reputation
of being alive with snakes, it was seldom visited.
Tom Pagdin had swum across on the deep side one
day and made a few investigations.
The centre of the island was occupied by an immense
fig tree, a patriarch of unknown age, whose roots were
a study in floral architecture. To the butt of this fig
clung immense vines, which made a natural covering.
The sky was only visible in patches here and there.


Tom had found a track through the jungle to this
tree —a track which was apparently possible only to
bandicoots or paddyinelons—a track which wound in
and out of lawyer vines, rattans, and the thousand and
one spiked and clinging growths of the Northern scrubs.
The roots of the fig formed an excellent hiding-place.
It was there that the runaways had decided to make a
temporary camp.
The boys landed their bundles, pulled the boat up
again to their original starting-place, tied her to the
log, left her hidden among the reeds and started to
trudge back.
They headed the creek, crossed out through the grass
paddocks, where the dairy cows were grazing, skirted
the maize and sugar-cane patches until they arrived
at the last farm opposite the island. Then Tom
stopped.
"Whose place is this?" asked Dave.
Ole M'Dermid s, replied Tom. "I say, can you see
any light in the house ?"
"No,'' replied Dave. "I reckon they must 'a' turned
in."
"Dave," mused Tom, pulling little splinters off the
top rail of the fence on which he was leaning, "I wonder
if any of them watermelons of M'Dcrmid's is ripe?"
"I dunno," responded Dave. "I wonder if they are?"
"Suppose we go into the maize patch and see?" sug-
gested Tom.
It ain't right," began Dave doubtfully, "is it?"
"Not under or'nery circumstances," replied Tom,
"but when a cove's chucked out of house and home an'


druv to turn pirate, lie's got to look out and get tucker
wherever he can. I reckon it ain't right for a cove to
thieve when he's got a good home and plenty of tucker,
but when a cove's druv an' he's piratin' round on a dark
night on his own, I reckon it ain't no harm to take a
bloomin' melon from a stingy ole Scotchman that's got
more'n he can use, do you?''
"I dunno," said Dave. "I don't reckon it ought
to he."
"Well, we'll chance it," said Tom, putting one leg
through the fence. "You stay there and keep 'nit.' "
Dave waited patiently at the fence until Tom came
back with a huge melon on his shoulder.
"We'll take it acrost to our island," he explained.
"It ain't safe to do it in here. You don't want never
when you're out on a pirate cruise to leave no more
evidence be'ind you than you can help."
"Is it ripe ?" queried Dave.
"Kipe!" replied Tom. "You bet it's ripe. I put my
knee on it 'an squoze, and you could 'ear it go kerrack
inside."
The bank opposite the island on that side was steep
and high, so Tom went first and Dave lowered the melon
down to him, and he put it in the water and showed
Dave how it would float.
"You tie my clothes on your back along with yours,
an' I'll shove her ahead of me," he explained.
It was a warm tropic night, and they found the short
swim across freshening and pleasant; so much so that,
when they landed the melon and their clothes, they slid
into the water again and stayed a while floating and


kicking about. Tom said it was no use trying to work
their way through the scrub until daylight, so they
found a little clear grassy place after a lot of trouble,
and Dave got out his pocket knife.
They dug into the red heart of the melon and ate
as much as they could, carefully hurling the rind into
the water as it occurred, because, as Tom said, solemnly,
"Dead melons tell no tales."
At last, tired out, they unrolled their tent, spread it
on the grass, and lay down with a ragged blanket over
them which Dave had "borrowed" from home.
Tom went to sleep at once and snored; but Dave,
who was younger and less hardened, lay there thinking.
The more Tom snored the more restless and lonesome
Dave got.
There is nothing so trying as hearing another person
snoring when you cannot get to sleep yourself.
Two or three times Dave asked his companion softly
if he was asleep, and got no definite reply.
A dog howled away up on the flat somewhere, and
another dog answered him from across the river.
Then they organised a sort of mournful canine con-
versation at long range, and woke a third dog. who
took up the thread of the discourse. Xow and again*
the sharp sound of a Texas bell was carried across from
the hills, where some timber getters were camped.
Some unknown danger caused a mob of wild ducks,
which had come in from the lagoons at nightfall, to
get up quacking loudly.
Dave heat-d the burr of their wings as they flew
over his head.


He could not stand it any longer. He reached down
and pinched Tom on the calf of the leg.
Tom jumped clean out of the blanket.
"What's up ?" asked Dave, pretending to wake out of
a sound sleep. "What's the matter with you ?"
"Light a match!" yelled Tom. "I'm bit! '
"Bit!" cried the other boy. "What bit yer ?"
"A snake!" shouted Tom. "A black snake! I felt
him!"
"Where did he bite you?" demanded Dave, apparently
much concerned.
"He's bit me on the leg," groaned Tom, in a voice
of awful apprehension. "Strike a match, quick!
"It couldn't a been a snake," cried Dave, trying hard
to keep solemn.
"It was, I tell you," insisted Tom. "This island is
crowded with snakes. I felt 'im cold again me leg;
gimme the match; gimme the match, quick!"
"It wuz a black snake," he mourned, "an' I'll die, I
know I will."
"There's no teeth marks on yours leg," said Dave,
holding a lighted match while Tom made a fevered
examination. "You must a been dreamin'."
"I wasn't dreamin'," protested Tom. "I felt some-
thing bite me. See,'' he said in a voice of hollow
despair, "here's a mark on me leg—a red mark!"
"That ain't no snake bite," said Dave. "It's a
moskiteer."
"It's a snake bite!" insisted Tom. "You'll have to
cut the.bit outer me leg and tie a string round, and
swim across an' get a doctor!!''


Dave exploded in ribald laughter.
"You're a dam scoundrel, Dave Gibson!" shouted
Tom, hysterically, "I tell you I am bit by a-snake!"
"Xo you ain't, chortled Dave, "Xo you ain't."
"1 am!" cried Tom. "I tell you I am, an' if I die
I'll come and haunt you, you brute!"
"Oh! oh!" roared Dave. "Oh—ow—oh !"
"Get up, shouted Tom, kicking his mate furiously
in the ribs. "Get up an' tie some string round me! Get
up an' cut the bit out, I tell you! Good God, Dave
Gibson, ain't you got any sense or feelin', or under-
stand^'?"
"Ah, Oh!' cried Dave. "Let up, you fool! You
ain't bit; I only pinched yer!"
Pom rubbed his leg.
Pinched me ! he said, in a suppressed voice. "What
did you do that for?"
Dave noticed the threat in Tom's voice.
"1 thought I heard a noise in the bush," he explained.
"You thought you heard a nise!" repeated Tom,
with great scorn. "I thought you wuz asleep!"
"So I was; but I woke up. Don't you hit me, Tom
Pagdin, or I'll swim back and go home."
"Hit you!" replied Tom; "I ain't going to hit you.
I wouldn't be bothered hittin' you. If you don't know
no better than to act the goat wakin' your mate up in
the middle of the night with a monkey trick like
that, I got nothin' to say."
"'Well, said Dave, apologetically, "I thought it
wuz the best way to. I did hear a nise."
"There wasn't no nise," replied Tom, "an' if there


had a been, you went the right way to put the whole
thing away."
Dave said nothing.
"Gimme some blanket," remarked Tom, disgustedly,
"and lemme go to sleep. I'm sorry I let you come now!"
Tom rolled himself up sulkily, and Dave lay and
thought a while longer, and then fell asleep.
The sun was just rising when Tom woke again,
rather cold and stiff.
He sat up and dug his elbow into Dave's ribs.
"It's daylight," he said; "we'll have to get into the
scrub before anybody sees us."
They rolled up the tent and blanket hurriedly, lifted
their swags, and made for cover, Tom leading the way,
stooping every now and then beneath the brambles, or
pausing to disentangle himself from the insidious clutch
of the lawyer vines, which reached out their long
tentacles armed with strong, curved teeth to stay him.
Very often the boys had to crawl on their hands and
knees under the dense, scrubby growths for yards.
At length they reached the centre of the island.
They were almost under the figtree when Tom Pagdin
stopped suddenly and caught Dave by the arm.


CHAPTER IV.
WAITING IN THE DARK.
DAVE stepped back.
"What's the matter?" he whispered. "What
do"you see?"
"Ssh!" hissed Tom, "Look through the clearin' there
to the right!"
"I can't see nothin'," began Dave. "Yes I do; it's
a man!"
"Yick into the scrub here!" commanded Tom.
"Quick! Lie down."
The two lads crouched in the tangled growth.
"Ouch!' exclaimed Dave, as a lawyer vine caught
him. "Vie ear is tore off!"
Shut up you howlin' idiot," murmured Tom,
angrily. 'T ou'U get us found out afore you're done."
"What is it," queried Dave, carefully hitching his
lacerated ear from the persistent grip of the lawyer.
"How do I know?" queried Tom sotto voce. "I ain't
a clairvoyant; it might be a opposition pirate for all
I know."
"Tom," asked Dave, after a pause, "do you think
there is any pirates now —real pirates, I mean?"


"Of course," replied Tom, "aud if there ain't there
ought to be? We're going to be pirates, anyhow! '
"But," persisted Dave. J'didn't pirates used to get
hung ?"
"Sometimes," returned the other boy, "when they
wuz ketehed; but they mostly got killed after they'd
had an all right rippin* round an' plunderin' an buryin
great piles of sovereigns an' bars of gold in caves on
desert islands. Any pirate that thought anything of
'imself as a pirate would go down into the powder
magazine when he found it was all up an fire is pistol
into the powder, an' blow 'imself up with 'is pirate
crew."
"Was the first mate blowed up too?" asked Dave,
anxiously.
"Of course!" replied Tom, "if he wasn't killed on the
fore-'atch furst."
"What's the fore-'atch?"
"Why, the front part of the ship, Dave Gibson; you
don't know anything. I say, what is that cove doin' ?"
"He's buryin' something," replied Dave.
"Burvin' somethin'!" murmured Tom, raising him-
self on his elbows to get a better view. "By gosh it
must be treasure out of a plundered ship. It is too, a
whole barrel of it! Xo. he ain't buryin' it; he's just
throwin' bushes an' leaves over it. By gosh!" he con-
tinued, breathlesslv. "we've struck it rich."
7 t/
"How?" asked Dave. "How have we struck it?"
"Xever mind," replied Tom; "you leave that to me.
You've got no more sense nor a coot!"
The man's movements were certainly mysterious.


He had apparently selected the island for the conceal-
ment of something; that the cask which he was cover-
ing with leaves and branches contained doubloons Tom
Pagdin was hardly justified in concluding in the
circumstances.
After he had made his plant the stranger looked
round the vicinity carefully, as if taking a mental note
of the position, and went away noiselessly towards the
upper end of the island.
The boys kept quiet for fully half an hour; then
enjoining Dave to stay where he was, Tom crept out
stealthily and followed in the direction the stranger had
taken. Dave lay flattened out among the dry leaves
and waited. His mate ue-appeared at the edge of the
clearing and beckoned him across.
"Who was it ? ' he asked, in a suppressed voice.
"What's in the cask ? "
Tom was on his knees before the barrel smelling it.
"It's whisky!" he said, disgustedly. "I thought it
was gold out of a captured galleon!"
"Whisky!" ejaculated Dave.
"Yes; somebody's runnin' a still round here, an' this
is the plantin' place. I bet 'arf-a-crown somebody else
will come along to-night and take it off!"
"Where'll they take it ? "
"Down the river, I suppose, to some public house.
If we put 'em away to the pleece they'd be fined a
hundred quid, an' their still took an' broke up. We'd
get a reward, too!"
"Why don't we, then ? "
"Because," said Tom, emphatically, "we ain't in-


formers, we're pirates! If a poor cove is makin' a drop
of grog out of his maize on the quiet, let 'im. It ain't
no business of ours. Besides, we'd be putting ourselves
away. An', besides, if we did a thing like that we
wouldn't get no credit for it neither. They're all in
the same boat about here."
"What's became of the cove that hid it?" asked
Dave.
"I followed his trail, all right," replied Tom. "I
never knowed about this track, either. They ain't bin
usin' the island for a plant long, I reckon. The cove
went off in a boat quiet. There's a regular pathway
wore where they been rollin' in the casks; but it don't
take long to make a road like that."
"He might come back ? " said Dave.
"Hot to-day, he won't," observed Tom Pagdin, sa-
gaciously. "He just brings the stuff acrost 'ere an'
leaves it. Somebody else knows where to come, and
they take it away at night. It's a moral they don't
come in the daytime.
"I'm as hungry as old Hick," remarked Dave, rubbing
his stomach.
"So'm I," said Tom; "I'm as hungry as ole Hick's
mother. Let's go an' get a feed."
They went hack, and carried their swags in under
the fig tree, and Tom, after due consideration, pro-
nounced it safe to light a small fire to boil the billy,
providing they didn't use brushwood, because brush-
wood makes too much smoke, and providing, also, that
they put the fire out as soon as the water was boiled.
So Dave gathered the wood, and Tom went down


and filled the billy, and they made tea and brought out
9ome cold corned meat and bread, which Dave had
abstracted from the paternal safe, the paternal safe
being a flour-bag split at one end and fastened up with
a strip of greenhide to exclude flies, with a piece of
bark in the bottom to stand the plates on.
It seemeed to both youths that it was the sweetest
meal they had ever had in all their lives, and after it was
through they lay on the ground feeling good and brave,
and Tom unfolded a plan of campaign.
"We can't stay here no longer than to-day," he ex-
plained. "One thing, it's too close to home, an' another
thing, we can't make a camp, because these fellars that
has the still would be sure to see it. We got to get
right down the river to-night after those other coves
come back with out boat. We got to get right down
as far as we can before daylight. There's lots of
islands in the river where we can make a headquarters
camp, an' if we don't get an island we kin get in the
bush on the mainland. There's all sorts o' bays an'
creeks an' lagoons, an' we'll explore 'em all. We'll go
digging for buried treasure, an' lookin' fer gold, an'
we'll have an all-right time. But, first of all, we got
to organise things. You got to organise things if you
want to make this piratin' game pay."
How are we goin' to do it? " queried Dave, who was
developing a strong taste for pirating.
"Well," said Tom, "I'll look after the tucker. I'll
fossick for the grub an' you'll cook it.
"You got to learn to bake damper," continued Tom,
"and to bile fowls an' fry eggs. That's about the most


of the cookin' there's goin' to be, for a while, anyway.
I reckon if we get an island we'll borry a couple of
settin' hens an' two or three clutches of eggs, an'
raise chickens of our own."
Meanwhile they went and turned over logs to get
black crickets for bait. Then with the crickets in an
empty tin, with a perforated lid, which formed part
of Tom's kit, they tried their luck for perch, and were
rewarded.
As Dave was only a green hand, Tom showed him
how to cook the perch by digging a hole and filling it
with hot ashes, covering them in whole and unsealed.
When the fish were cooked they "peeled" them, and took
the insides out, and they went well. The pigeon
had been duly plucked and roasted on a very small
fire, because it was not safe to light a big fire on account
of the smoke; and the two boys ate their meal with an
additional relish—a relish which is known only to the
true hunter, and they lay down and slept.
Dusk came down quickly, and our two juvenile
adventurers awoke in the warm stillness of evening;
O
Avondering where they Ave re.
"By gosh!" exclaimed Tom Pagdin, sitting up, "it's
comin' night an' it smells like a storm."
"We've slept too long," remarked Dave, anxiously
examining the small patch of red-looking sky visible
through the trees. "We oughter set our watches."
"It don't matter for this time," returned Tom, "be-
cause we ain't likely to get too much sleep to-night.
We got a lot of adventures to go through. I reckon
our real adventures is only just beginnin.' "


"I'm as hungry as old Nick," remarked Dave.
"So am I," replied Tom. "We'll have a feed of
cold meat an' bread an' go."
They refilled themselves, and then, before it was quite
dark, rolled up their bundles and took them across to
the edge of the island.
"Now," said Tom, "we got to swim across and go
back and plant in the scrub an' watch for them fellars
that are going to borry our boat to-night."
The water was dark and felt colder. Both boys
shivered at the brink. They had taken off their clothes
and tied them carefully on their shoulders to keep dry;
but when they got over the river their clothes were more
or less wet, and they shivered again getting into them.
Just as they were dressed the first flash of lightning lit
the sky, bringing out the ice palaces and snow battle-
ments in vivid detail.
"Hist!" exclaimed Tom. "Count!"
"One, two, three," —he went up to sixty.
Then a low muffled sound of thunder and the leaves
of the trees rustled at a passing breath of wind.
"It's a long way off yet," said the elder lad, "an' it
mightn't come this way either. I ain't frightened of
thunder, are vou?"
"No," replied Dave, "thunder can't do you no harm
unless there's lookin' glasses about, but it's gettin'
awful dark."
"Come on," cried Tom, "we'll go up an' hide in the
lan tana. We won't get wet there, even if it does rain."
By the time they reached the creek where the boat
uas moored it was pitch dark, excepting now and then


when a great flash of lightning lit up the whole jungle
in weird bluish light, and made everything visible for
a short second, even to the water shadows of overhang-
ing trees.
Tom and Dave crept in under the thicket and hid
waiting.
It seemed hours and hours.
The lightning flashes became more frequent and
wicked; the thunder grew louder.
"They won't come to-night, I don't think," whispered
Tom in Dave's ear. "We'll wait a while longer an'
then cut across to old Dobie's barn an' shelter till
the storm goes over."
But even as he spoke, in the lull between two thunder
growls, they heard a low whistle, followed by the noise
of someone forcing a way through the scrub.
A voice, which sounded hollow and unearthly in the
dense gloom, called out:
"This way; keep to your right a bit."
"God-dam!" came the response, followed by some
choice curses in French.
"Keep to your right," repeated the first voice. "The
boat's just about here."
"Ze devil," replied the other voice, "I am torn wis
my clothes! Qui and wis also ze arm an' ze leg!"
"You're all right now," said the first man speaking
from the water side. "Hold on till it lightens again.
I can't see the log, it's that dark."
The foreigner stumbled down alongside his com-
panion, copiously swearing.
It seemed to the two boys that the sound of that


unknown tongue added a further mysterious terror to
the drama which was euacting.
Tom was clutching Dave feverishly by the arm, and
Dave was trying hard not to breathe. A great flash
of lightning suddenly lit up the whole scene, and they
saw the faces of both men distinctly. Then before the
thunder came they heard one announce to the other
that the boat was all right.
Tom and Dave, listening and watching from their
cover, heard the sound of feet on the thwarts, heard
the shipping of oars in the rowlocks, and the murmur
of voices dying out in the stream as the paddles dipped
further and further away in the night.
"They've gone!" said Tom, in a hollow whisper.
"My leg's asleep," remarked Dave, sitting up and
rubbing it.
"So's both mine,'' observed Tom, following suit.
"I've got cramps all over me."
""What are we going to do now ? " asked Dave. "The
storm's comin' !"
"Can't be helped," exclaimed Tom. "When you're
out piratin' your're got to put up with storms. Pirates
ain't supposed to take any notice of 'em. We'll wait
till them two fellars come back, storm or no storm."


CHAPTER V.
THE ESCAPE.
IT was lonesome and dark. An impressive, significant
stillness hung over all Xature. The night animals
and birds, which ordinarily filled the bush with
noises, seemed to have retired to their lairs and nests.
Xo morepoke called, and no scrub-wallaby hopped
through the undergrowth.
After each lightning flash a shudder ran through the
forest, the branches murmured softly, and the leaves
sighed.
Tom thought the matter over, and calculated.
"It'll take them an hour and-a-half," he said, "to
get down where they want to go. They won't be more
than half-an-hour breakin' into the bank and openin'
the safe. Then they'll come up with the tide in an
hour. They'll be in a bigger hurry to get away than
they were to go down. That will fetch 'ein home some
time before twelve o'clock. Je-rusalein! "
"I say," asked Dave, as the storm began to abate,
"do you believe in ghosts ?''
"I dunno," said Tom, peering round the barn; "did
you see anything ? "


"A T o," replied Dave, looking round also; ''did you?"
"Xo; I thought you did. I've heard a good deal
about ghosts, though. There used to be a ghost of a
woman up at Mackenzie's Crossing. She used to stand
just by the fence goin' down to the punt. I heard
the old man and Jock Mackenzie talking about it.
Lots o' people seen her. Jock Mackenzie he seen her
'imself one night coinin' home from the pub, an' he
swore off the liquor, an' never teched a drop; an' twelve
months to the day he seen the woman's ghost he died."
Dave shuddered.
"That woman must a' been murdered," he said.
"les," replied Tom, "I never heard of a ghost that
hadn't been murdered. They never ketched the man
tnat did it yet, but he will be ketched, because murder's
got to come out."
"I say," queried Dave, presently, "suppose these
coves that s goin down the river to-night murders
somebody ?"
"Well, suppose they do? " repeated Tom.
"It 'ud be awful wouldn't it ? "
Tes, said Tom, it would; but it 'ud be a throw-in
for us."
"I don't see how it would."
"STo, you don't, because you got no sense, but I do.
I reckon there'd be a big reward, and we'd git the
money."
But," asked Dave, after consideration, "they might
say ive oughter gone an' told about it when we heard
'em plannin' to do it."
"Who's to know Ave 'eard 'em plannin' ? " asked Tom.


"Look 'ere, Dave Gibson, it strikes ine you better leave
things to me, an' keep your mouth shut, or you'll put the
whole game away. You know as much about this detec-
tive an' pirate business as a dog knows about Sunday."
"Well," retorted Dave, "I ain't frightened, or I
wouldn't be 'ere."
"No," replied Tom, magnanimously. "I give you
credit for what you deserve, but an ounce o' dis-
cretion's worth a pound o' taller, as I heard the old
schoolmaster say, an' you got no discretion to speak
of."
"Anyhow," replied Dave, in self-defence, "you're
older than me twelve months; but I ain't funked any
more than you 'ave."
"Ain't I givin' you credit for it ? " said Tom. "I say,
the storm's breakin.' It's gettin' quite bright out
under."
The rain fell less heavily, the thunder was not so
loud and frequent. Gradually the heavy pall of black
cloud lifted, and the stars shone out brightly beneath.
As soon as it cleared up and the drip was finished,
the lads shinned down the pole, and went back and
hid in the lantana again.
Tom said they'd go watches. Dave could have
first watch.
It might have been near midnight when Dave woke
out of a doze to hear the sound of oars coming up
stream.
He put his hand over Tom's mouth and pinched him.
Tom let out a muffled roar.
He had been fast asleep and dreaming.


"Hist!" exclaimed Dave. "They're comin'."
"I wasn't frightened," whispered Tom, in explana-
tion, "but I thought you was the devil. Yes, that's
them. They're close in too."
The boat came in quietly.
The men landed. One of them struck a match and
lit a lantern. The light flickered round the bushes,
and Tom and Dave by a spontaneous impulse tried to
make themselves invisible.
"Give us the lantern, Frenehy," said the man who
was holding the match, "and let us have a look at the
spoil."
The other man lifted a heavy bag out of the boat.
"Sovereigns!" cried the first speaker; "must be four
or five hundred of 'em."
Tom's heart thumped against his ribs.
"Yere shall ve cache our riches? " asked the foreigner.
"Eet ees not for long, but ve must get ze place of
safety. Oui."
"That's so," replied the other. "Along the bank in
the scrub 'ere's as good as anywhere. We don't want,
to go too far in. We'll leave the boat just as we
found her."
They stumbled along the edge.
The foreigner carried the bag, and the other man
went ahead with the lantern.
"It ain't good to hang round any longer than we
can help." he said, presently. "Somebody might see the
light. There's a myrtle with a hollow butt about here
somewhere. Let's see! Yes, here it is. This is good
enough for now."


"Oui, zat vill do," agreed the Frenchman.
Tom and Dave, looking through the bushes, saw two
shadowy figures apparently scraping at the foot of a
tree!
"They're hidin' the money there," whispered Tom in
Dave's ear.
He could hardly speak for excitement.
Dave was trembling like a top-heavy jelly in the
hands of a hurrying waiter.
"What will we do if they see us ? " he asked.
"Run," replied Tom. "Them coves wouldn't think
twice alxmt cuttin' our throats. The German cove's
got a knife in 'is belt. Keep quiet!"
The admonition was unnecessary. Dave was devot-
ing all his energies to keeping quiet. His whole soul
was in it.
The robbers took some time to hide their booty. Tom
and Dave could see that the foreigner was holding the
lantern against the trunk of the tree, shading it with
his body on one side and concentrating the light as
much as possible on his companion, who knelt down,
and was carefully covering the bag over with loose
soil and leaves.
The faces of both men were towards them.
Suddenly they saw the Frenchman, acting, perhaps,
on some swift murderous impulse, draw his knife and
plunge it to the hilt in his accomplice's back!
The latter, uttering a choking cry, fell forward. The
light went out. The bush was in darkness. The boys
clung to each other in a convulsion of fear and horror!
A murder had been committed right before their


Jj2n 1
jHb^ £ \
B -* *jfl
The Murder.
Tom Pagdin, Pirate
Page 56.


■


eyes! A human being had been stricken down, knifed,
killed, almost at their feet.
Either boy felt that he could have screamed aloud,
but the icy hand of fear was on the heart of each.
They dared not utter a word, but held one another,
trembling, palpitating, sick with dread.
Then they heard other sounds. A groan, as if a
dying man in agony, a muffled voice—which Tom
described after as if someone had thrust a knife into
cold meat —the noise of somebody dragging a heavy
body along the ground, and then an ominous splash
in the water, which sent their blood cold.
After this came an interval seemingly centuries in
length. The murderer was groping for the lantern.
He found and lit it, and holding it close to the ground,
began scraping over the loose soil about the tree with
his foot hurriedly—as Tom told Dave afterwards to
cover up the blood.
Something, a wild animal, stirred in the bush. The
assassin blew out the light again quickly. The stillness
which followed was almost beyond their endurance.
They were impulsed to get up and run for their
lives, but their fears held them chained, glued to the
spot.
Having waited long enough to assure himself that
there was nobody about, the murderer crept to the
water's edge. They could hear him softly washing
his hands, and then at last he sneaked away in the
thick darkness.
The younger boy, overwrought and almost crazed
with fear, commenced sobbing bitterly.


Tom held him in his arms and tried to soothe him
in hollow whispers.
His own voice was broken and hysterical.
"Let us go home and tell them," sobbed Dave. "I
wish I hadn't come. Oh! I wish I hadn't ever gone
piratin', Ido ! It's awful!"
Tom thought a while.
"Ho," he muttered. "We better not do that; not
yet."
"Why?" asked Dave. "Why not? I will if you
don't! "
"You'd better not," said Tom.
"I will!" protested Dave. "I will!"
"If we do," said Tom, grimly, "that cove will kill
us both. Besides Ave mightn't be believed. An' besides
they might say we did it ourselves."
"Us?" said DaA T e, a new horror overtaking him.
"Yes," replied Tom; "an' it's ten to one Ave'd both
get 'ung."
"But Ave ne\ T er did it," cried Dave.
"Ho," responded Tom; "but there's many an innocent
cove gets 'ung."
"What'll we do ? " sobbed Dave. "It's too horrible
for anything. What will we do? "
"I dunno," replied Tom, in a shaky voice. "I never
reckoned on anything like this. I wouldn't a' come
either if I had. I'd rather be larruped!"
"So would I," moaned Dave, "I'd rather be whaled
every day an' twice on Sunday all me life, I would."
"Lemme think a minute," said Tom. "I'm all
froze."


"I'm sick and froze," groaned Dave.
"So'm I. I saw the knife. Did you?"
"Yes," sobbed Dave. "I saw bim draw it out an'
stick it into 'im."
"Yes," shuddered Tom, "an' I saw bim fall on bis
face."
"Ob!" exclaimed Dave. "Did you 'ear 'im ? "
"Don't!" said Tom, "I can 'ear 'im now. Hist!
what's that ? "
Dave lay still and shivering.
He was too terrified to speak.
"It's only a paddymelon," remarked Tom, presently.
"Do you think he's gone ? " whispered Dave.
"Yes," replied Tom. "I beard bim go. He wouldn't
stay round after doin' a thing like that."
"Do you think the other cove's dead?"
"Yes," replied Tom. "He must be. He killed him
first and drowned him afterwards."
"Good Gawd!" said Dave.
"Look 'ere," observed the elder lad, after a pause.
The best thing we kin do is to get in the boat and
pull down the river an' get our swags, an' go an' hide
for a while, anyhow."
"But," argued Dave, ruefully, "if we're ketched we
might get 'ung just the same."
"We musn't get ketched," said Tom, sententiouslv.
"It's this way," he went on, after further considera-
tion. "Murder will out. That German must be found
out sooner or later. Suppose you an' me went up
an' told on 'im now. He might a' got away before we
told. Or even if 'e didn't, 'e might be arrested an'


break out of gaol. Then he'd lay for us sure. He'd
know he wuz goin' to get 'ung any'ow, an' it wouldn't
matter to 'im killin' a couple more. He wouldn't think
twice about stickin' 'is knife into you and me. He'd
lay for you when you were roundin' up the cows one
night and cut your throat—like a bull calf——"
"Don't!" interrupted Dave, "Don't!"
"'Well, 'e would," persisted Tom. "An' he'd cut miue
too. I don't want to be round with my throat cut,
Dave Gibson, if you do."
"I don't," protested Dave, "I don't."
"Vary well," continued Tom. "The only thing to
do is to go down the river and 'ide till we see what
turns up. Let us go an' get the boat."
Tom stood up shakily, and Dave trembling in every
limb, followed suit.
They crawled rather than walked to the edge of the
creek. Tom drew the boat up to the log as noiselessly
as possible and helped his mate in.
Poor Dave was likely to faint at any moment.
"I wish I never came piratin'," he sobbed.
"Piratin's right enough," muttered Tom, sticking an
oar in the mud and pushing out, "but these Germans
in ruinin' the country. I've heard the old man say
that often when he wuz talkin' politics on the punt,
but I never see the meanin' of it afore—not the true
meanin'."
They slipped out into the middle of the stream and
breathed a trifle easier.
The sky was clear, and white with stars. They could
hardly realize what had happened. It seemed like


a dream —a horrible nightmare, or some tragedy that
had been played on the stage.
The boys pulled hard until they got abreast of the
island. Each stroke which took them further away
from the scene of that sudden horror lifted a weight
off their minds.
It was almost daylight when they got there. But a
thick fog came up with the dawn, and hidden under its
friendly canopy they rowed round until they struck a
little reedy bay, where they could not be seen from the
opposite bank or noticed by chance steamers. Tired
out, they ran in here, and, getting their tent unrolled,
spread it over them in the boat, and stretching them-
selves out on the bottom, with a seat for a pillow, fell
fast asleep.


CHAPTER VI.
THEY TAKE AN OATH.
THE dreams of the adventurers were troubled.
Their minds went over the recent tragedy, of
which they had been the unwilling and unexpected
witnesses.
They heard again the low groaning of the departing
storm, saw the wicked glare of the sheet lightning, the
darkness, and the deed.
At times either lad would start up and murmur in
his sleep; but they were young and healthy, and it
was not till the sun rose high overhead that they awoke.
The morning was cool, bright, and lovely.
Tom suggested a swim before breakfast.
They stripped and dived out of the boat, and paddled
round, and then they went ashore and boiled their billy
in the scrub, and had breakfast.
Dave had commandeered two or three bottles of home-
made jam from the farm and they had enough
bread to do for the meal.
After breakfast, Tom called a council.
"Look 'ere," he began, "I reckon we better go an'


explore tliis island for a start. If she turns out all
right we'll stav on, and make it our headquarters till
we see what happens."
Tom, on a good sleep and a well-filled stomach, was
already forgetting the tragic event of the night before.
Yot so Dave, who was younger, and probably less
hardened.
"But," he argued, "what about the people that'll be
goin' up an' down the river lookin' for the cove that
did the murder ? "
"Yobody knows he did a murder except you an' me,"
responded Tom, "an' we ain't goin' to tell till the trial.
Then we'll come up in court an' be put in the box,
an' swore.
"Y hat box,' asked Dave. "Do they put you in a
box ? "
"Of course; the witness-box, you coot."
"I don't want to go in no box," replied Dave.
"What's it like?''
"Something like a hen-coop," exclaimed Tom, cheer-
fully inventing. "You got to put your tongue out
through a hole and kiss the book."
"Y hat book?" asked Dave, innocently.
"Why ? the Bible, you fool."
"What do they make you kiss it for? "
"Y hy, to take an oath, you ass."
"What is an oath? " asked Dave.
"Callin' God to strike you dead if you tell a lie,"
exclaimed Tom reverently. "You don't want to tell
no lies when you're on your oath. There was a cove
in Bourke who was struck dead in the witness-box."


"Where's Bourke ? " queried Dave, who happened to
be in a more than usually inquiring mood that morning.
"Bourke," replied Tom, scratching his head;
"Bourke! Oh, Bourke's away up iu Northern Queens-
land somewhere. It's so 'ot all you've got to do is to
put your eggs iu a pan, and lay the pan out in the
sun to fry 'em."
Both boys were silent for a while thinking. Then
Dave spoke.
"Don't you think we better give up piratiu'?" he
asked.
"What for?" queried Tom.
"Well, it don't look lucky!"
"Of course, it ain't lucky. It never is lucky; not
at first; but after you get properly goin' it's all right.
When we get a proper pirate ship an' a crew "
"Crew!" exclaimed Dave, "where we goin' to get
'em ? "
"You leave that to me, Dave Gibson; I'm runnin'
this show; you just got to do what you're told, and
don't you talk 110 more about goin' an' giving' evidence
in this murder case. When the time's ripe I'll be there,
and you kin come along an' back me up."
"I'll back you up" replied Dave, promptly. "I'll
say anything you say; I'll swear it, too."
"Y'see, it's this way," Tom explained confidentially,
"we might get into a bit o' trouble ourselves about the
boat an' one thing an' another, an' if we was to come
forward jist at the right time an' tell the true story
about the murder, we'd be let off, an' maybe get a


reward, too, or get a billet in the Government, or some-
thin'."
"What'll they do to the cove?" asked Dave.
"Hang 'im!" replied Tom, emphatically. "By gosh,
if I thought they wouldn't, you wouldn't catch me goin'
an' puttin' 'im away!"
"Why?"
"Why, ain't you got no sense at all? Suppose he
got off. D'you think it 'ud be safe for you an' me to
stay round anywhere ? "
"Ho," said Dave, candidly, "I'll be hauged if I do!"
"Look 'ere," said Tom, "we better not talk about this
any more till we got to."
"How's that?" asked the junior pirate. "Why bet-
tern't we?"
"Because," replied Tom ; looking into the scrub, "trees
'as got ears. We'll have to take a oath not to do it."
"We ain't got no Bible," ventured Dave.
"Pirates don't always take a oath on the Bible," ex-
plained Tom. "They take some oaths, 'specially oaths
like this, on a knife."
Dave turned a trifle pale.
"It sounds horrid," he said.
"So it is," observed Tom, "but it's got to be done.
'Ere, you take the knife an' 'old the pint towards me
an' swear."
Dave did as he was told, repeating an elaborate
formula, which Tom made up specially for the occasion.
Then Tom held the point of the knife to Dave,
pressed it against where he judged his mate's heart
to be, and swore in the same way.


"Now," lie resumed, when the vow of secrecy had been
thus solemnly taken, "that's done, an' it can't he
undone, an' we better go now an' have a look round
the island."
"We better look out an' get some tucker for dinner,
too," ventured Dave. "There's nothing left except
about three inches of crust an' an inch an' a half o'
jam."
"Well, we'll whack that now, an' start fair," sug-
gested Tom. "I'm as 'ungry as ole Nick.''
"So am I," agreed Dave. "I'm 'ungry all the time."
It was true. The free, open-air, healthy life, the
exercise and the freshness acted like a tonic. They ate
like cormorants, and felt like trained pugilists.
Care cannot dwell long at the door of youth and
health, and the wild and gloomy impressions of the
previous night faded rapidly from their minds, especi-
ally as each was under a vow to his fellow not to
mention the subject.
They took their tomahawk and bows and arrows and
set out.
The island was nearly a quarter of a mile wide, and
perhaps something more than half a mile long. Neither
Dave nor Tom had ever been ashore there before, so
they proceeded cautiously, arranging as they went
along that in case they were surprised by any casual
resident or visitor they should separate and make back
to camp by different routes.
This scheme, Tom Pagdin announced, would be sure
to put possible pursuers off the track.
"If anybody's lookin' for us," he answered, "they'll


reckon on findin' us both together, an' if they come
acrost only one set o' tracks they'll reckon it's somebody
else."
Dave did not question the logic of this argument.
He had confidence in his senior.
They might have gone about five hundred yards when
both boys stopped.
Before them, plainly visible through the scrub, was
a clearing, in the centre of which stood a deserted hut.
To make sure that there was nobody hiding there,
Tom made a detour and crawled up through the long
"bladey" grass till be got quite close.
After a careful survey he stood up and beckoned
Dave to come on.
"Some cove's been doin' a bit of cultivating an' give
it up," he explained.
"It's an all-right slab house," cried Dave, exploring
round. "Got a chimney in the kitchen an' a old
Colonial oven, set on bricks. It's an all-right oven
only the bottom's burned out of it."
"Yes," said Tom, "an' there's two good rooms; they've
left a table an' a couple of stools. I say, we'll take
possession of this place."
"Hooray!" cried Dave, capering round the earthen
floor. "I'm on."
"I reckon it's all right," said Tom, enthusiastically.
""We'll call it the Pirates' Camp. I reckon we could
stay 'ere twelve months an' nobody w T ould find us."
"There ought to be a well round somewhere," re-
marked Dave, "that we can get fresh water out of."
"Let's go an' see," shouted Tom. "This is all-right.


I reckon if we 'ad a gun we could use the cracks in
the slabs for loop holes and stand a siege."
"What's a siege?" asked Dave, whose education had
been neglected.
"It's this way," explained Tom, sitting on the kitchen
table (which consisted of the top of a packing case
nailed at the corners to four stakes driven into the
ground), "a siege is like this. When one side takes
up a position—"
Just here the stakes,—which had rotted in the
ground, gave out, and Tom and the top of the table
came down together.
Dave laughed. Xot just ordinary laughter, either. He
sat down on the floor on his hams holding his sides
and laughing, and then he laid on his back and kicked
his heels over his head and laughed, until Tom, dis-
covering that he had broken no bones, got up and kicked
him.
And even then, every time he- thought about Tom
clawing the air, and the comical look of surprise on
his face, he laughed again.
They went round the site of the deserted home-
stead exploring. There was a well about twenty yards
from the back of the kitchen, and they got a tin and
attached it to a piece of rusty fence wire and dipped
up some of the water, and it look clear and tasted
good.
"There's plenty of wood an' water," said Dave, "an'
them's the main things."
<r Yes," said Tom, "an' I spot a lemon tree with
lot of lemons on it."


Dave spotted it at the same time, and they had a
race for it.
There were plenty of lemons and they filled their
pockets and chewed.
Anything in the shape of fruit is edible to the
Australian bush boy. Tom and Dave thought the
lemons sweet until they discovered an orange tree soon
afterwards.
They sat under the orange, and filled themselves.
The original resident had evidently gone in for
planting an orchard. There were guavas and ripe
mangoes, which had run wild, some banana trees, and
a lot of pineapple plants in bearing.
They found a charm about the exploration which
kept them pleasured all the afternoon.
Their delight was complete when they discovered
that they could bring the boat right up a little creek
nearly abreast of the hut. and within less than a hun-
dred yards of it.
Tom declared that the place had been just made
for a pirates' camp. He said he had no doubt that it
was really occupied by pirates in days gone by. It
was pirates who had planted the orchard and dug the
well, and when he came to think of it, it stood to
reason that they had left those cracks in the slabs pur-
posely, so they could stick their muskets out through
them and shoot when they were attacked. He even
found traces of gunpowder on the walls and outside,
where the whitewash had fallen off, he discovered the
marks of bullets.
"Them fellars had a all right time," said Tom; "tliev
must 'a' had lashin's o' fights."


"I sav," Dave asked, "was there ever any wimmen
pirates ? "
"No," replied Tom, scornfully; "it wuz only men."
"Well," went on Dave, "there must 'a' bin some
women pirates here, because here's a piece of a woman s
dress an' the husk of a woman's stays!"
"Where?" asked Tom, incredulously.
"Here," replied Dave, rooting out the articles which
had no doubt appertained to the late resident's wife
or one of his grown-up daughters.
Tom examined them with the air of a detective.
"They're women's things," he admitted; "but how did
they get here ? "
He thought a while.
"I know," he resumed: "it was one of the beautiful
captives they took out of an Indiaman. She fell in
love with the captain of the pirates an' followed 'im
through thick an' thin. All the most beautiful
captives did. Then, when he was hard put,
she saved the ship. Then the ship got wrecked,
an' 'e swum ashore with 'is arm round 'er neck. Half
of the crew wuz drowned an' the other half wuz saved,
and they got in 'ere and built this place an' fortified
it while they wuz buildin' a new ship outer the timber
that wuz washed ashore. That's how them things come
to be 'ere."
"But," said Dave, " 'ere's a ole washin' tub an' a
piece of washin' board."
"Well, couldn't they 'ave come ashore out of the
pirate's ship?" asked Tom.


"I didn't know they had washtubs an' things like
that 011 pirate ships," pleaded Dave.
"Of course you don't know —you don't know nothin'
about these things. You ain't read nothin' about
'em, but I 'ave; I've read stacks of books about
pirates. The ole man 'e uster make me read out of
'em, too, at nights."
"I say!" exclaimed Dave, "we better get our swags
up and bring the boat round."
"Yes, we better," agreed Tom, "we got to hook round
an' pirate some tucker, too, as soon as it grows dark."
They went back to the landing-place and brought
the boat up the creek.
Then Tom said they'd have to bake a damper with
some of the flour he had borrowed from the old man.
So he stripped a short sheet of bark off a tree with
his tomahawk, measured out about a pound of flour,
wetted it, and began to roll the damper. The paste
was too thin first, and seemed to be trying to get away
from him. Dave received orders to stand by and pour
011 more flour gently. And Dave let the bag slip and
lost half the flour in the grass, and Tom said, wrath-
fully, that he was the biggest fool of a pirate on the
river, and it seemed that he was never going to get
any sense either.
At length the pirate captain evolved a sticky, stringy
sheet of paste, which looked more like variegated marble
than anything else, and he raked out the ashes and
dropped it in and covered it over.
For about an hour the pirates kept raking the ashes
off and covering the damper up again, and then Tom


pronounced the dish cooked. It was afternoon, and
proceeded to have some four o'clock damper and
tea.
"It's all right damper," said the chief architect; "only
a bit burned on the bottom. If you scrape the charcoal
off the bottom, though, it'll be good."
Da\e absent-mindedly chipped the chunks of charcoal
and cinders off the lower side, and then he cut into the
daily loaf and it cut queer. Ihere were streaks of
dry flour, and streaks of wet dough, and what wasn't
powder or paste was old Silurian rock.
"It don't look none too good," ventured Dave, doubt-
fully.
"It's all right," insisted the elder boy, "only a bit
underdone in spots."
Dave took a slice and toyed with it.
It don't taste like it was properly mixed up," he
said.
"Oh, it's all right," replied Tom. "It's real good, I
reckon, for the first try. Shake the dry flour out, an'
cut the sticky part off and scrape the black off the
crust."
"But it's all dry flour an' sticky part an' crust,"
argued Dave.
"Oh, dammit, then, throw it away!" exclaimed Tom,
who had gotten a piece in his hollow tooth. "You're too
soft for this piratin' game, an' the way you whine an'
go on puts me off me feed, too."
"Well, I'm dashed hungry," persisted Dave.
"So'm I," replied Tom. "We'll take the boat an' go
acrost to the mainland."


CHAPTER VII.
TOM CONDUCTS A RAID.
out of the creek in their boat, Tom and
V- 1 Dave caught sight of the new moon hung like a
silver horn in the dusky western sky.
"Hold on," said Tom, "till I turn me money."
"I've got fourpence," replied Dave, drawing in his
oar also; "I reckon I'll turn it, too."
And just at that moment a thought struck Tom.
"Good Lord!" he cried, "we've forgot all about them
hags o' sovereigns that was stole and hid."
"I didn't," replied Dave; "I thought about 'em this
mornin', an' I been thinkin' about 'em all day, but we
Ptook a oath not to talk about it, didn't we?"
"That wuz only about the —the—you know what wuz
done," replied Tom; "the money's different; we kin
Ktalk about that."
"Well, it's hid," said Dave.
"Yes; it's hid again the myrtle tree."
"I clean forgot till this mornin', and then when you
wuz talkin' about pirate hoards I thought of it."
"I never thought of it till now," said Tom, passing
his hand across his forehead in an anguished way.


"Seein' that —that —you know the thing we ain't got to
talk about must a sent me ratty."
"What are you goin' to do about it?" asked Dave.
"I dunno," replied Tom, doubtfully; "onless we go
back there by night an' dig it up."
Dave shuddered.
"I wouldn't go near that place at night," he said;
"not for all the money in Australia."
"Neither would I," said Tom, "but I'd go an' get it
in the daylight."
"We can't go nosing round there in the daytime,"
remarked Dave; "we might get ketched."
"Well, if we don't go an' get it soon," pronounced
Tom, "it won't be there long. That cove won't leave
it there. Soon as he's ready to git away, he'll go an'
dig it up. An' he won't stay round no longer than he
kin help, you take yor oath."
"It's a bit rough," said Dave, "after all we've went
through."
"Pirate's luck," sighed Tom. "It wuz always that
way. Jist when a pirate wuz gettin' up to a ship loaded
chokker-block with gold-dust an' dubloons an things,
a gale of wind u'd come an' she'd get away. Or sup-
posin' they'd bin firin' their cannons an' fightin' 'er fer
a whole day, she'd sink an' take all er' cargo down with
'er jist as they got alongside. It's pirates' luck, an'
you got to put up with it."
"I dunno," mused Dave; "we mightn't get ketched if
we was careful. Suppose we did go there in the day-
time? We could sneak up near in the night, and camp
in the scrub, an' go acrost an' get the sovereigns, and


•wait till the next night to come down the river again."
"You leave it to me," said Tom, after some thought;
"I'll fix up a scheme. You can't organise a piratin'
expedition like that in ten minutes. It wants thinkin'
out."
The boat's nose ran into the mud on the opposite
side, and the boys landed.
Having climbed the bank they found themselves in a
field of maize.
Presently Dave stooped down and felt something
with an affectionate touch.
"Melons!" he said in a glad, soft voice.
"Good shot!" ejaculated Tom; "we'll load some into
the boat, and take 'em acrost to the pirate's camp.
We'll gammon they're chests of gold and plate and
ingots of silver."
They loaded half a dozen large water melons into
their pirate barque on this principle, and it added to
their joy.
"That'll do for the ballast," said Tom, when the cargo
was aboard. "Now, we're got to go and make a raid
for provisions." \
"How will we ? " queried Dave.
"We'll sneak up through this corn patch, and storm
the fowlhouse," said the older pirate grimly. "We got
to get meat to eat."
They approached the farmhouse cautiously, sneak-
ing round between the tall rows of rustling maize till
they located the chicken roost at the rear.
"You stay on watch," whispered Tom, an 111 nick
in an' cop a couple o' young hens. I'll ketch 'em be


the necks so they can't sing out. If you hear any
noise, whistle three times loud an' cut to the boat."
The first mate hid behind the fence, and the pirate
captain crept softly upon his prey.
It was pretty dark inside the fowlshed and the
feathered occupants stirred uneasily, and made some
enquiring remarks, when Tom fell over a box which
had been left for the hens to lay in. The chief pirate
waited for the row-to subside, and then put out his
hand quietly and grabbed a likely-looking rooster tightly
by the neck.
The bird uttered a gutteral cry, which the adventurer
stilled by revolving his quarry round on its own axis
several times "with great rapidity.
He was just preparing to commandeer further poultry
when three shrill whistles echoed through the night, fol-
lowed bv the sound of voices and a noise of somebodv
«/ «/
running through the maize.
A second later, Tom, beating a retreat through the
fowlhouse door, ran right into the arms of a burly
figure.
A strong hand grabbed him by the collar, and a strong
voice remarked, with vengeful satisfaction :
"I've ketched ye, ye varmint."
Tom dropped the birds and endeavoured to wriggle
out of his captor's clutch.
"Lemme go," he whined; "I ain't done nothink to
you."
"Ain't you," cried the enraged farmer; "ain't done
nothink, eh? "


"No," replied Tom, endeavouring to kick the cap-
tor's shins. "I wuz just comin' up to the house to ask
vou about somethink."
v
"An' you thought you'd wring a couple of my fowls'
necks an' bring 'em with ye, to make you welcome."
"I never wrung 'em," replied the Pirate Captain.-
"Well, I'm struck!" exclaimed the farmer; "after I
ketched ye with a fowl in each hand."
"I heard a noise in the fowlhouse," said Tom, speci-
ously, "jist as I wuz comin' along. I knowed it wuz a
native cat after the fowls. So I went in "
"An' you found the cat 'ad killed two of 'em," inter-
rupted the farmer.
"Yes," said Tom; "I did."
"An' you thought you'd bring 'em along an' show
'em to me."
"That's jist what I did think."
"So you picked 'em up, an' wuz goin' out when I
stopped yer ?"
"Yes," I wuz goin' straight up to your house with
'em."
"Maria!" cried the farmer, loudly; "fetch a lantern;
I've ketched somethink!"
"What have you ketched, Jacob? " called back a
woman's voice from the kitchen of the farmhouse; "a
tiger cat ? "
"No!" hollered the farmer; "I've ketched the infer-
nallest liar thet ever wuz on the Clarence River! I
doubt if another infernal liar in the world."
The farmer's wife, shading a candle with her hand,
peered out into the dark.


""Where is it ? " asked the woman, who was hard of
hearing.
"It's here! You needn't be frightened, Maria; he
can't get away."
"What is it, Jacob? " asked Maria, bringing the light
carefully.
"I dunno rightly," replied Jacob, "what breed it is;
but I kin see it's death on fowls."
"How many has he took?''
"Two. One of 'em's your best Spanish rooster!"
"Why didn't you shoot the thing? " asked Maria.
"Fetch the light an' I'll show you," eried Jacob, who
was pleased with his catch. "This is where our laying
hens an' pullets has been goin' lately."
"Why," exclaimed the woman, "it's a man! Xo, it's
a boy!"
"Yes," agreed the farmer, screwing Tom round to
the light; "it's a boy all right."
"Ow!'' yelled Tom, "Leggo, yer 'urtin' me."
"I'll 'urt ye a dashed sight more afore I'm done with
ye," observed the farmer; "ye thievin' young varmint."
"I ain't," whined the chief pirate; "I ain't a thief!"
"Poor child!" said the farmer's wife. 'T)on't hurt
him, Jacob!—ah, don't hurt him!"
"The varmint's done his best to hurt me!" cried
Jacob. "He kicked a few inches of bark off my shins!"
"Well," howled Tom, "you nearly choked me!"
"Whose boy is he ? " asked the farmer's wife.
"He's got a ugly face," replied the burly farmer,
holding Tom up to the candle light; "a ugly face that


a cove ought to know anywhere; but I don't recognise
'im."
"Do you think he really was at the fowls, Jacob? "
"I dunno," replied Jacob, "what kinder evidence
you'd want to prove it; but I ketched him with a Leg-
horn hen in one hand an yer Spanish rooster in the
other, coming' outer the fowlhouse, an' I reckon that s
strong enough for me; I reckon it's strong enough to
'ang the varmint on."
"Whose boy are you?" asked the farmer's wife.
"Where do you come from ? "
"I can't speak," growled Tom, "he's chokin' me."
"Don't hurt him, Jacob!" pleaded the good wife, in a
sympathetic voice. "He's only a child."
"He's a derned old-fashioned child," observed the
farmer, taking a fresh grip of his prize. "There, now,
let's hear what you got to say for yourself. Who are
you? What is your name? "
"Robinson," replied Tom, tearfully, "Will Robinson."
"Robinson!" repeated the man. "There ain't any
Robinson's round here. Where did you come from ? "
"I came from the Richmond," replied Tom, readily.
"What were you doin' up there ? "
"Workin' on a farm."
"Has your people got a farm? "
"Ho; me father and mother's dead."
"You was with your relations, eh? "
"Ho; I got no relatives; I'm a orphan."
"Poor child!" cried the farmer's wife softly. "Re-
member, Jacob, the Lord hasn't blessed us."
"Yes, I'm a orphan," cried Tom, tearfully. "I got


110 father an' no mother, an' nobody in the world. I
wuz put to work for a cove up there milkin' cows an'
pullin' maize an' ploughin' "
"Ploughin!" interrupted the farmer. "Mean to say
he put you ploughin' ? "
"Yes,'' sobbed Tom; "an' he treated me bad, too —
uster knock me about an' larrup me with a cartwhip. I
never hardly got enough to eat —never —so I couldn't
stand it no longer, an' I run away."
""What was the cove's name you was workin' with?"
asked the farmer.
"Smith," said Tom, "Mr. Smith."
"What Smith?''
"I dunno his other name," replied the captured pirate,
suspecting a trap; "I never heard 'im called anythink
except Mister Smith."
"Hum," said the farmer. "An' how long is it since
you run away ? "
"'Bout two weeks," replied Tom. "I bin hidin' in
the bush so's they wouldn't ketch me. I didn't want
to be ketched an' took back an' knocked about. I'd a
rather died. I nearly did die, too! I got starved —
I'm starved now. I ain't 'ad nothink to eat all day ? nor
yesterday 'ardly. I wouldn't 'a come 'ere to take them
fowls only I wuz 'ungry, an' that's the truth. I never
stole nothink in me life before."
"Poor child!" murmured the woman; "perhaps he
couldn't help it, Jacob."
"Tin," said Jacob. "I thought you said it wuz a
native cat arter the fowls? "
"Yes," replied Tom; "I did say it."


"An' now you admit you did it? "
"Well, I wuz frightened, an' I thought you wuz goin'
to whale me."
"How were you goin' to cook them chickens ? "
"I wusn't goin' to cook 'em."
"You wasn't! What, then, goin' to sell 'em?"
"Ho, I wuz goin' to eat 'em raw!"
"My God, Jacob," exclaimed the farmer's wife, "the
poor boy's starving! Can't you see the wolfish look in
his eye ? "
Tom glared and looked as famished as he could.
"Look 'ere," cried the farmer, "where is this cove
Smith's place on the Richmond?"
"It's about Lismore," said Tom, readily, "at the he-
ginning of the Big Scrub. Ain't you ever been there? "
"Ho," said the farmer, still keeping a firm grip of
the pirate's coat collar, "an' I doubt if you 'ave either.
How did you get down to Lismore?"
"Tramped it," said Tom.
"How long did it take you ? "
" 'Bout two days."
"Two days? What did you have to eat?"
"I got lilly-pillys outer the hush, an' berries, an' I
uster pull corn cobs an' roast 'em over a fire an' uster
get a drink of milk at the dairy farms in the mornin'."
"Ah! Weren't the police looking for you in Lis-
more ?"
"I dunno. I never went into the town. I stayed in
the scrub till it was dark an' then I got acrost the bridge
an' sneaked on to a boat that wuz goin' out to Sydney.
I nleant to go right down in 'er, but they found me out


an' put me off at Woodburn, an' I walked acrost an'
sneaked on the punt at Cliatsworth, an' kem on this
side of the Clarence. I been prowlin' about the bush
ever since."
"Why didn't you go into the towns and look for work
or something ?''
"Because I wuz waitin' for it to blow over. I thought
my boss up there above Lismore might put an adver-
tisement in the paper or set the police onter me."
"Hum," said the farmer. "It's either a true bill, or
your the cleverest young liar outer gaol at the present
moment."
"I ain't no liar," protested the pirate: "I ain't. Au'
its true, everv word."
7 v
"Hum," said the farmer; "We'll see."
"You ain't goin' to give me up?" asked Tom, anxi-
ously. "I say, mister, don't give a cove up."
"We'll see; we'll see."
"Don't!" pleaded Tom; "please don't. Look, I won't
never shake any more fowls, I won't. Only T don't
want to 'ave to go back to that Smith up there above
Lismore, an' get knocked about."
The farmer's wife was regarding the culprit with pity.
"Are you hungry now? " she asked.
Tom rubbed his stomach.
"I'm nearly dead," he murmured woefully; "I'm
empty as a 'oiler log."
"Let him come inside, Jacob," pleaded the wife "Let
me give him a feed first before you do anything with
him."
The man relaxed his grip on Tom's collar.


"Look 'ere," lie said, "if what you say turns out to
be true, I won't give you in charge to the police, like I
meant to do."
"It is true, every word," said Tom solemnly.
"Every bloomin' word of it."
"What did you say your name was again? " asked
the farmer's wife.
"Stevenson,'' replied Tom; "Joe Stevenson."
"Why you said Robinson first," exclaimed the
farmer.
"Ho, I never," protested Tom; "I said Stevenson."
"I think it was Stevenson, Jacob," said the wife.
"I'll swear he said Robinson," muttered the fanner.
"Anyway Stevenson or Robinson, it don't matter which,
for now, you go straight up to the house there in
front o' me. If you try to get away, I'll give you a
good hidin' first an' give you in charge to the police
afterwards. D'yer hear?"
"Yes," replied Tom, meekly. "I hear. I won't try
to run away. I wish I could get a good home," he
added on a second inspiration.
"If yer honest about that, meybe I'll find a home for
you," said the man. "I want a good lad about the
place."
"You give me a show, an' don't whale me like that
man Smith did, an' I'll work" said Tom, throwing as
much eagerness into his voice as he could.
"I'll make some enquiries about you in the mornin',"
said the farmer as they entered the kitchen door; "an'
the missus'll give you a feed for now."


The good-hearted woman set down a loaf of bread
and the best part of a leg of mutton before Tom.
Then she asked him if he would have tea or milk, and
he said he'd take milk so as not to put her to any trouble
and he was so polite and softspoken, and looked so peni-
tent, that her heart went out to him still more.
Tom rolled his eyes about when he saw the food,
and put out his hand and seized a piece of bread and
wolfed at it.
Then he grabbed the piece of meat which she had
just cut off the joint and tore it as if he were famished.
"Poor thing, poor thing!" said the woman. "Don't
eat so quickly. You'll be ill. There now, take your
time; don't gulp it. There's plenty more. You can
have as much as you want."
The pirate chief slowed down, and went steadily to
work on the bread and meat. It was not much trouble
to him to act the part, because his appetite was good,
and the fruit he had eaten on the island that day had
not proved too staying. All the time he was eating, he
thought and thought.
He ate on in a sort of reverie, taking slice after
slice of bread and meat as the farmer's wife cut them
off.
The woman watched him with tears in her eyes.
"Poor boy" she murmured from time to time. "Poor
boy; he must have been starving!"
The loaf of bread disappeared. The last of the leg
of mutton disappeared. The good wife went to the
cupboard and got a great piece of seed cake and cut
it in slices.


lorn dealt with it slice by slice. The woman's face
became soft and more pitiful. She went to the cup-
board again and brought out half a roly-poly.
Tom put his hand secretly down under the table cloth
and let go the top button of his trousers.
"Poor boy," reiterated the farmer's wife; "poor boy."
Ivo great womanly tears gathered in her eyes and
slowly overflowed.
Tom, conscious that he was playing a star'part,
choked down a lew more morsels of food; then he
laid aside his knife and fork, wiped the perspiration
Irom his forehead, and sat staring into vacancy with
bulging eyes.
"Could you eat a piece of pineapple 1 " asked the
woman.
Her intentions were kind, but she did not know.
Tom Pagdin groaned. He felt that any refusal of
food might be a weakening of the evidence in his favour.
He tried to display as much appetite as possible, and
furtively letting go another trouser button, replied that
he could.
The woman went to a case in the corner, and selected
a fair-sized pineapple from it.
It was freshly cut from the pineapple patch in the
gaiden in front, but its fragrance failed to awake any
enthusiasm in Tom. He stowed away a couple of
slices as a matter of form, and then he pleaded, in a
thick voice, that he couldn't eat any more.
"Well," said the farmer, "I reckon if ye did, you'd
be like that cow o' mine that got into the lucerne patch
yisterday.''


"Why," asked Tom, in an anxious voice. He was
not feeling well within.
"Good enough reason why," said Jacob Cayley; "the
blamed animal's dead as a dern door-nail."
"What happened to 'er ? " queried the inflated pirate.
"Busted!" replied Jacob, grimly.
Tom turned pale.
"I ain't feeling none too well," he murmured, placing
a hand 011 his lower deck. "Do you think a cove 'ud
bust like—like a cow ? "
"I dunno," replied the farmer. "If 'e'd et too much
he might."
"Oh, Lord!" groaned Tom.
"How do you feel? " asked Mrs. Cayley.
"I got a pain," he said, " 'ere, an' 'ere—all over me
stummick."
" 'E's over-et 'imself, Maria," remarked Cayley.
" 'E'd better go to bed."
"I'll put him in the spare room," said Maria, re-
garding Tom with a motherly eye.
"Yes," replied Jacob, "an' I'll lock the door an'
padlock the winder on the outside till we find out
whether his varn is true or not."
Tom's face fell. He forgot everything —even the un-
timely end of Cavley's cow. While he had been feeding
he had thought over a plan of escape. It was simple
enough. As soon as the farmer and his wife had gone
to bed he would slip out, get quietly down to the river
bank, and if Dave had taken the boat across to the
Pirate's Camp, swim over and rejoin him.
But now this scheme was baulked. He was to be


locked up for the night like a prisoner in a cell, per-
haps only liberated on the morrow under strict surveil-
lance, and his chance of escape reduced to a minimum.
Meanwhile enquiries were to be made about him. He
was not far away from home. Somebody would know
of him, and he would be found out and ignominiously
dragged back.
Then again, if he did not succeed in escaping quickly,
Dave would probably find solitary pirating too lone-
some, and give it up.
The farmer marched Tom off to hunk while he was
reflecting over these things, and having seen him un-
dress, gave him good-night, and told him to make him-
self comfortable. He turned the key as he went, taking
the candle and Tom's clothes with him. A few minutes
after the prisoner heard the wooden shutters, with
which the window, as in old-fashioned country houses,
was provided, bang together, and the sounds which
followed told him that they were being secured from
the outside.
Tom sat 011 the bed-side in his shirt, the only garment
which the farmer had left him, and pondered. It was
an awkward fix.


CHAPTER VIII.
GEORGE OF THE "GREENWICH" GOES FISHING.
I 'HE little river-boat Greenwich was loading freight
and passengers at one of the Grafton wharves.
Across the Clarence, on the south side, winches rattled
bales of wool and bags of potatoes and maize into the
coastal steamer, which traded weekly between Svdnev
and the fertile Vorth Coast.
On the river bank above, blocking the roadway, were
yet standing some of the teams which had brought
the wool down from the New England tableland.
l he dusty whips of the carriers cracked no longer,
and their tired horses dozed contentedly in the sunlight.
Some of the carriers were at the water-side pub.
beerily quarrelling over the merits of rival "leaders."
One was in the backyard of the hotel conducting amor-
ous negotiations with a black gin, and another, who
did not drink, had gone down to see about back loading.
It was three in the afternoon, and Donald Mac., the
skipper of the Greenwich, took his place at the wheel.
On the river, up and down, there was no boat more
popular than the Greenwich. The crew of the little


steamer consisted of Sam, the fat engineer, George and
Bill, and the skipper. George and Bill were the deck
hands, who put the cargo and passengers ashore at the
various landings.
There was a general air of courtesy and good humour
about the Greenwich. Nothing seemed a trouble to
little Donald Macpherson, but the fact of the matter
was that Donald's troubles had made him lean, and
somewhat sad.
He had all the responsibilities of a deep-sea skipper,
with less than the pay of a third mate. It had taken
him his life to learn the river, its depths and bars, its
shallows and reefs, and banks, and currents, and as the
river had a habit of changing its geographical features
after each flood, Donald was always at school.
Then there was ever the possibility that some day,
as he brought the Greenwich round the Devil's Elbow,
between the reef and the bar at the mouth in a swamp-
ing southerly, despite all his knowledge of the game,
the Greenwich would stand on her head and kick her
propeller at the Milky Way.
It was three in the afternoon, and the skipper swung
the nose of his ship out from the wharf.
Sam, the engineer, with his ear at the gong, and
his hand on the lever, stood to his post. George, the
senior deck hand, who ranked as first mate, ran his eye
down the cargo list. Bill stood by. There were coils
of fencing wire to drop here and there, boxes of gro-
ceries, tins of kerosene, all sorts of sundries, mails,
and newspapers.
Where the local newspapers had regular subscribers


along the banks, it was George's custom to tie the paper
round a stone (he kept a small pile of ballast for'ard
for the purpose), and threw it ashore as the steamer
slid by. He had become so expert at this practice that
he could generally land a newspaper or a small package
right at the farmer's door.
Most of the farm houses were built on the river's
brink. Cool, comfortable-looking weatherboard cot-
tages, surrounded by shade and fruit trees with maize
paddocks, banana groves, or cane fields behind them.
As the Greenwich steered past she would give a blast of
her whistle, and the farmer, or his wife, or his boy, or
often his pretty daughter, would come out and pick up
the package and wave pleasantly to the skipper and his
crew.
The skipper, with one hand to the wheel and one eye
on the river, would wave back, and George and Bill
and Sam mostly kissed their hands, in the case of a
lady, and smiled cheerfully.
The skipper's eye caught the waving of a handker-
chief at the edge of a cane field on the opposite bank,
and crossed to pick up a passenger and a consignment
of produce. So they worked down the river. It was
almost dark when the steamer tied up at the wharf,
where she stayed for the night.
Donald, his duties over for the dav, took his tucker
7 1/ /
basket and went ashore. His fancy went ahead of him,
along the street of the little river town. He saw the
wife standing aCthe front door, and in the lamplight
behind her a white cloth laid for two, and a child's
chair drawn up to the table.


And Donald forgot that lie was tired.
Sain and Bill went ashore also, and left George to
mind the ship.
George, being a bachelor, slept in the after-cabin 011
the transoms, and tuckered for himself aboard.
His chief amusement was fishing; mostly with heavy
lines for dog sharks and "jews."
So when he had had his tea he took his shark line,
and baiting it with half a mullet, threw out astern.
Having passed a loop of the line round an empty
kerosene tin, and placed it so that a tug at the bait
would upset it and make a row, George filled his pipe
and went for'ard to smoke.
After an hour's lounge the first mate thought he
would stroll aft and look at the line.
"I'll bet," he said to himself, "that the cursed bream
have eaten my bait off."
«/
He drew in the slack of the line and commenced to
haul up. The line tautened.
"Hullo!" cried George, "I'm snagged!"
He pulled steadily.
"Ho," he added, "I've hooked something. It's coming
up," he resumed, peering over into the water, "What-
ever it is it's dashed heavy; must he a log, I reckon."
There was a kerosene lamp on the wharf which threw
a dim yellow light over the water astern.
George dragged the line around over the rail so that
he would be enabled to see what he was bringing up.
"By gosh, it's heavy," he soliloquised. "Dashed good
thing this line is strong."


The line was strong; it had held an eight foot grey-
nurse shark.
Foot by foot the first mate hauled in.
"Here it comes!" he ejaculated, "what the devil is
is it, though!"
'"Why, my God!" screamed the horrified deck-hand,
"IT'S A MATT! !"
George had leaned over the rail to examine his haul,
and at the last pull a human head, ghastly and horrible,
with livid face, and dank, dripping, matted hair, had
risen to the surface. His horrified gaze met the open
staring eyes of a corpse!
For one moment he was petrified, fascinated, frozen
with horror!
Then he let the line run through his fingers, leaped
on to the wharf with a mighty bound and coatless, hat-
less, charged up the street in the direction of the police
station.
The Sergeant had gone to bed, but he rose in his
Pjjamas and came out on to the verandah in answer to
a loud, insistent knocking.
""What's up? "he cried. "Who's there? "
"Me!" cried George. "Get up, quick!"
"Who's me? " demanded the officer.
"George!" said the first mate, still hanging on to the
knocker.
"What George? "
"Greenwich; come quick, for God's sake!"
"What's up? What do you want?"
"Come down to the wharf-quick. I've hooked
man."


"Killed a man ? " said the Sergeant. "Has there
been a row; I didn't hear anything ? "
"Ho, no!" exclaimed George, "there hasn't been any
row. I was shark fishing, and I caught a man—a dead
man."
"Hum!" said the Sergeant, doubtfully, "have you
been drinking ? "
"Ho!" shouted the excited deck band, "I don't touch
it; but I swear to God it's true I did catch a man!"
"Where is he now?"
"On the line; I hooked something and pulled it up.
I couldn't make out what it was; it came so dead and
heavy. When I got it to the top I leaned over the stern
and looked. My God, I never got such a fright in my
life!"
"What did you do then?" asked the Sergeant.
"I let go the line and run up here!" said George.
"All right," said the officer, in a grieved voice—he
hated inquests—"some fellow's gone and drowned him-
self in the river, I suppose."
"I dunno," replied George. "He's dead, anyway,
by the look of it, I reckon he's been dead some time."
"You ought to have made the line fast," said the
Sergeant; "he might have got off the hook. Hope to
Heaven he has," he added, "and that he gets down to
Palmer's Island, or somewhere; I don't want him.
Wait till I get my trousers on, I'll go down and see.
It might have been fancy with you. Sure ym weren't
asleep, George?"
"Ho!" exclaimed George, emphatically, "I wasn't
asleep; I hadn't even made my bunk up."


The Sergeant re-appeared in a few minutes with his
boots and pants on, and the two men wended their way
to the riverside where the Greenwich lay rocking gently
on the night tide.
On the way down George went over the details two
or three times.
"Where's the line?" asked the Sergeant, as they
stepped aboard.
"Here," replied George, leading the way aft.
"I thought so," he said, as yard after yard came aboard
without resistance. "You fell asleep and had a night-
mare ; nice thing to come and call a man out of his
bed like this. I've ridden over thirty miles to-day."
George vowed and protested that he had not been the
victim of a delusion.
"I saw him as plain as I see you," he answered, men-
tally assuring himself.
"There!" as the last yard of the line was drawn in,
"what's that! What's that on the hook ?"
The Sergeant threw something on deck wet and
slopping.
"Fetch a light," he cried, "till we see what it is."


CHAPTER IX.
GEORGE DECLINES A TASK.
uJ I 4 HERE !" exclaimed George. "I knew I had
J- something at the end of my line."
"Knew you had something?" ejaculated the Sergeant.
"You knew you had something! Why, hang it, man,
do you think I am going to he dragged out of my bed
after a thirty miles ride because a blamed fool with the
horrors or something hooks a handkerchief off the
bottom of the Clarence."
"It was more than that!" cried George, firmly. "I'll
swear I had a dead man on the hook."
"I've a mind to put you on your oath about it," said
the Sergeant, tartly.
I'd swear it in Court," averred George.
"Xice Crown witness you'd make, wouldn't you."
"There!" cried George, suddenly stepping hack and
pointing tragically at the lamp-lit water.
"What!" ejaculated the Sergeant, gazing intently
over the stern of the Greenwich.
"There!" repeated George, in the attitude of Macbeth
locating Banquo's ghost —"there! I told you so."


"BY gad!" cried the Sergeant, with a start. "A
floating corpse!"
"The same one I hooked," said George, in a hollow
voice."
"You'll get a name as a fisherman if you keep on,"
observed the officer.
"I suppose it's an inquest."
"What'll we do?" asked the first mate, excitedly.
"Hook him again!" replied the Sergeant, in a matter-
of-fact voice. "You must have had him by the neck and
the cloth gave way. The disturbance floated him.
"Ugh!" cried George; "I'll never throw out a blamed
line in this river again as long as I live."
"Well I will!" said the Sergeant. "I'll throw one
now. Lend me that shark hook a minute."
The officer who was paid, not too liberally, by Govern-
ment, to act either as assistant pathologist or under-
taker, as occasion required, jumped upon the after grat-
ing with the end of George's shark line in his hand.
A human head could he seen bobbing gently up and
down with the swell and fall of the tide. It drifted
neither to right nor left, hut in a sort of ghastly
oscillation Avaited —waited. There was a sardonic smile
on the parted lips. The smile that is seen on the face
of the murdered dead Avho come up again from under
the earth, from the depths of the Avaters, anywhere.
The dead who come for justice.
Livid and ghastly, and utterly unreal and horrible
AA r as the face of the corpse floating steadily in that pool
of yellow lamplight. And Avhen the Sergeant, after
several throAvs with the line, succeeded in hooking on,


it came towards the stern without resistance. The man
of law leaned over the low rail to make an examination.
"Fetch the lantern!" he called to the deck-hand,
"and a rope."
The tide lapped by softly, the little town lay wrapped
in darkness, broken only by an occasional lantern in the
main street, and the dim lamp at the hotel.
"Hold the light over till I see, can't you?''
"Ugh!" cried the deck-hand.
""Well, turn your head away if you don't want to look,
or shut your eyes."
"It's horrible!" murmured George, whose face was
deadly pale. "I don't want to look at it."
"Well, don't!" exclaimed the officer.
"I can't help it "
"Great Scott!" ejaculated the Sergeant, taking
another pull on the line.
"What!" cried George, his heart in his mouth.
"Murder!" exclaimed the officer, with a new interest
in his voice.
"Murder!" cried George, hoarsely.
"Look!" Yes, by Gad! the man's been stabbed."
"Stabbed! Oh, Lord!"
"Hold the light, can't you?"
"Ho," said George, sitting down suddenly; "I can't
I'm hanged if I can !"
The Sergeant was busy with the rope, notwithstand-
ing his ride of thirty miles, he had become active and
alert. He passed a slip-noose over the stern presently,
drew it tight, and tied the end securely to a stanchion.
"How," he said, his mind already full of business;


"You 11 have to stay here and keep an eye on this while
I go up town and make arrangements!"
"Me?" exclaimed George.
"Yes you! I'll send the constable down by-and-bye."
"How long will he be before he comes ?" asked George,
anxiously.
"Couple of hours at the outside; I've something I
want him to do first. "
"Two hours!" cried George. "Here by myself, at
night, with that—that —that 'thing tied up to the
Greenwich! I wouldn't do it for ten pounds!"
"But," argued the Sergeant, "you must. I don't want
the town to know anything about it. I want to keep
everything dark till I make a few inquiries. This is
a very serious matter. There is a big case hanging to
it —a big case for me!" v
"I don't care," cried George doggedly, "What's hang-
ing to it or who! I won't stay here by myself—that's
straight!"
"Oh, confound you!" exclaimed the Sergeant. "All
right if you're such a coward as that I'll send someone
down as soon as I go up to the barracks!"
"I ain't a coward," said George; "but I haven't
engaged with the owners of this boat to mind floating
corpses. It ain't part of my duty, and I won't do it."
"Remember you are to be a witness—an important
witness—in this case," said the Sergeant, severely.
"All right," replied George; "but I'll wait ashore
up under the lamp, till somebody comes, I wouldn't stop
on the boat —and another thing, I'm hanged if I think
I'll sleep aboard of her after this!"


Whereat George stepped on to the gangplank and got
ashore, so placing himself when he landed that various
opaque objects would come between hie line of vision
and the stern of the steamer.
Tom Pagdin sat on the edge of the bed in Jacob
Cayley's farmhouse and thought hard.
Once he got up and tried the door very gently.
It was firmly locked.
He went to the window and pressed against it.
"There's an iron bar or a chain across the outside,"
he muttered to himself, "and the shutters is an inch
thick. It's no go!"
He felt the boards along the wall with his feet care-
fully; one of them seemed a little loose.
"If I could raise a bit of the floor and burrow out, like
they do in some of those detective yarns, it would be
0.K.," he reflected; "but I got nothin' to burrow with—
unless I break the handle of the washin' jug," he added
as an after-thought, "an' sharpen one end."
But another minute's consideration convinced him of
the futility of this idea.
"It's all up," he cried at last in despair. "I'll be
found out an' took back or sent to gaol! I wonder where
Have is, anyhow.''
Just at this moment Tom heard a bird calling off
somewhere towards the river bank.
"Morepoke," he said listening. "I misremember ever
hearin' a morepoke callin' so late at night."
The cries of the night bird were repeated at regular
intervals; they seemed to come nearer.


"A morepoke don't walk about whoopin' like that,"
muttered Tom, " 'specially this hour of the night. 'Sides
he's down in the corn. I never heard a morepoke in
the corn before.''
A thought struck the elder pirate.
He slipped to the window, and putting his mouth to
the shutter, called : "Mo'poke! Mo'poke!" softly.
"Mo'poke! Mo'poke !" came the answer.
"Mo'poke! Mo'poke! Mo'-o-poke!" repeated Tom.
This time he varied the call, putting in an emphasis
where no night owl was ever known to place it.
"Mo'-poke! Mo'-poke! Mo'-o-poke!" came the reply.
"By gosh, it's Dave!" cried Tom, excitedly.
He put his mouth to a crack in the wall and repeated
the cry.
Dave answered, drawing nearer and nearer.
He was trying to locate Tom's exact whereabouts.
The people of the house were sound asleep.
Dave, guided by the sounds uttered sotto voce by his
commander, came as Blondin to the call of Richard.
""Where are you?" he whispered at last, outside the
wall.
"In 'ere," responded Tom. "Come round 'ere close;
there's an opening in the weatherboards. I'm locked
in," he explained. "See, if you can get the fastenin-
off the winder-shutter."
"It's a padlock an' chain," explained Dave from out-
side. "What will we do?"
"Do!" muttered Tom. "There's only one thing to
do —I got to get out somehow! Have a look at the
door."


"It's locked," whispered Dave through the keyhole.
"Ain't the key outside?" v
"No; there's no key "ere."
"He's took it to bed with him," muttered Tom in an
injured tone. "It's outrageous!"
"Can't you get out through the roof? ' asked Dave.
"No, I can't," replied Tom; "it's a lined ceilin'. If
it wuz calico or bags I'd cut through 'em an' find a ole
somewhere; but it ain't."
"What about the floor?" asked Dave; "ain't there no
boards loose? The house is built up on piles 'ere at
the back "
"Is it? " asked Tom, eagerly. "Make sure."
"Yes," responded the lieutenant pirate. "If you
could lift a couple o' boards you could crawl out under
easy enough."
"They're all nailed down," mourned Tom; "I been
trvin' 'em. Say," he went on —"how thick is the chain
on the winder?"
"It's only a dawg chain," said Dave through the
crack; "but it's too strong to break."
"You won't have to break it," responded Tom, "if
you can get a file."
"A file!"
"Yes; there's sure to be a tool-shed round the back
there somewhere. All these cockies does a bit o'
tinkerin'. You go round and see if you kin pinch one. "
Tom waited anxiously for his mate to return, and
when at last Dave announced that he had got a file, the
prisoner's heart leaped.
"Git to it!" he urged in an excited whisper. "Git


to it as quick as you can! Pick the thinnest link, an'
git to it! Don't make any more row than a dead snake,
but 'urry up!"
Dave got to it.
He worked away as rapidly and noiselessly as possible
encouraged by frequent whispered inquiries and
admonitions from inside.
The report that one side of the link was filed through
caused Tom to remark emphatically, in a subdued
voice, that Dave had the makings of a true pirate in
him.
He also implied that his mate was destined to do
great things in the business.
Thus encouraged, Dave worked on till the other side
of the link gave way.
The chain was removed, the shutter opened, and Tom
climbed out of the window in his shirt.
""Where's yer clothes?" asked the exhausted first
lieutenant.
"He's took 'em," replied Tom, "'E
'adn't no right whatever. I could summons 'im if I
wanted to. But I don't want to. We've got to get out
of this."
"A es," agreed Dave; "I reckon the sooner we get
out of it the better. It ain't lucky."
"I wouldn't wonder if that holey sixpence had some-
thing to do with it," observed Tom. "But the bad luck
oughter to run itself out now. I wish I 'ad a pair o'
pants though. Let's go round to the washshed an' see
if we can nick a pair o' the old man's. This is the


- second time since we bin piratin' I've been done in
for clothes."
They found some of the farmer's working clothes in
the shed and appropriated them.
Tom rolled them into a bundle and tucked them
under his arms.
They fossicked round for a few minutes longer, and
picked up some eatables, including the commandeered
fowls which had caused the trouble.
They were hanging up by the feet in the stock-shed,
and Tom reached them down with a grunt of satis-
faction.
"These'll pay for my togs," he said; "that makes
'im an' me square. 'E's got my trousers, an' I got 'is
fowls."
The pirates chuckled over this joke as they took their
way to the boat.
As they went Dave explained that after the skirmish
in the fowl-shed he had fled back to the boat and
waited for his chief. When the latter failed to turn up
he came to the conclusion that he had been captured,
and was perhaps held as a prisoner of war.
"Then," said Dave, "I sneaked round by the corn an'
give that mo'-poke call. My word I was glad when I
• 'eard \ou answerin'."
«/
"I reckon," said Tom, "that we're gettin' adventures
all right; but it ain't nothin' to what we will get when
we're right down the river."
Dave was silent.
The fact was that the second pirate felt very tired
and sleepy.


They got back to the Pirates' Camp safely, hid the
boat iu the creek, and lay down, thoroughly worn out,
and slept the sleep of youth and health.
Next day they lay close in case Jacob Cayley should
have tracked them to the water's edge and started to
look for them along the river. It was unlikely that he
should discover that they had come up to the raiding
of his poultry in a whale boat like true buccaneers, but
theii experiences were making them cautious.
So they kept under cover, fed largely on stewed
chicken, and laid in a stock of strength for the work
which was before them.
They regretted leaving the camp, but a pirate's life,
like a policeman's, is not all roses; so when evening
came they pulled out softly, and started paddling down
stream with the falling tide.
The breeze came fresh and cool across the river.
They kept their boat in the middle of the stream, and in
most places there was a wide stretch of open water
between them and either bank.
It was nearly daylight before they reached the island
which the chief pirate had in view as a new basis of
operations, and they made a bad lauding.
They ran in among some young mangroves and
grounded.
It took pushing and hauling to get the heavy boat
clear of the clinging mud —there is always mud where
the mangroves grow —and they were very tired.
At length they found a place where they could get
ashore and secure and hide their craft.
Day had broken. The east was reddening with the


sun as they staggered along with their traps through a
track in the lantana which seemed to lead towards a
shady jungle closely covering the centre of the island
Dave was in front.
He stepped back suddenly, white to the lips, stum-
bling over Tom, who was close to his heels.
""What's up?" cried the latter. "What is it —a
snake?"
"Ho," choked Dave. "Ho —him!"
"Who?"
"Him!" said Dave, who seemed about to faim.
Tom elbowed him aside and peered ahead through
the bushes.
"Oh, cripes!" he muttered, and dropping his load
turned about to run.


CHAPTER X.
THE STORY OF JEAN PETIT.
I ' 0 get a better conception of one of our characters
* we must change the scene.
It is a long harkening from an island in the Clarence
to the Faubottrg St. Antoine of Paris. But the threads
in the wool of Life run far and wide.
In the Faubourg St. Antoine, twenty years before,
dwelt one Jean Petit.
Petit's mother had belonged to the lowest class of
Frencn criminals; his father was a person understood.
Bied in the gutters of that City by the Seine, where
sit the seven devils of Christendom, with the collected
devils of Heathendom to keep the watches when they
go below—Jean Petit developed in crime.
Let it be said that the criminals of Paris are at once
the most degraded and the cleverest in the world. Lon-
don, Xew 1 ork, and Melbourne produce ruffians and
rogues, but these be as little children to the sons of the
sewers by the Seine.
The French criminal has all the cunning and the
cruelty of the wild beast in addition to his own. In


fact, lie is more often than not a human tiger, preying
not as tigers do upon the outside world, but upon his
own kind.
He is steeped to the lips in the vices of his breed, a
wild biped prowling the mazes of a great city; an ob-
scene devil-worshipper who cracks indecent jokes at the
very steps of the guillotine; a midnight murderer, who
does not hesitate to redden his hands for a few sous.
Such was Jean Petit.
He had existed by thieving since he was little more
than seven years of age. At twelve he was apprenticed
to one of the worst house-breaking gangs in Paris; at
seventeen he had taken his diploma, and at twenty-two
he was a master of arts in the College of Crime.
For three years Petit reigned in his native city as an
Emperor of Thieves. He was the most daring of the
Black Confraternity, the hero of a thousand nefarious
escapades; the pivot on which the world of ruffianism
revolved. Again and again he eluded capture.
robberies were so cleverly organised and carried out that
he appeared to be more than a match for the detectives,
even to those astute officers who devote their lives to the
study of Jean Petits and their methods.
But at last, as must happen, the perpetrator of a
catalogue of crimes, in which arson and murder found
a place, fell a victim to a slight personal miscalculation.
In escaping from a window by means of a rope
ladder, he dropped into the arms of four gendarmes,
and, despite a stubborn resistance, was overpowered.
Various offences were proven against Jean Petit at
his trial, and the upshot of the matter was that he took


a voyage to tlie island of Xew Caledonia in company
with some other citizens for whom the French Republic
had no use.
Petit escaped the guillotine, but he was transported
to Xoumea for life.
It had happened that in the struggle with the
gendarmes the robber received a heavy blow on the base
of the skull. The consequence of this was that he lost
much of the pantherine vivacity which had been a part
of his character, and became of a more morose, hyaena-
like nature.
He was feared by the prisoners with whom he was
associated, and always regarded as a possible source of
danger by the authorities.
Unlike those well-bred ruffians whose money or ante-
cendents make them the pets of Convict Xew Caledonia,
and a source of revenue in lower official quarters, Petit
was compelled to undergo all the rigours of his sentence.
The man who had ever scorned the idea of labour,
who had lived for twenty five years by the labours of
others, was set to the quarrying of stone!
So the thoughts of Jean Petit, —who had everything
to gain and nothing to lose by the attempt —shaped
themselves time after time towards escape.
Petit had heard that Australia was a good country,
and he longed to go there.
One difficulty, and one only, stood in his way—oppor-
tunity.
I wice in ten years he had endeavoured to escape, and
each time the attempt had proved a failure.
He had been pronounced an incurable criminal. The


Republic had experimented on him in vain. He was
beyond hope, outside the pale. It was only necessary,
therefore, to see that he secured no opportunities to com-
mit crime. Like the wild beast in its cage, it was no
longer a question of what would happen if he got out.
But Jean Petit, to whom liberty was as much as to
the imprisoned tiger, watched and waited.
It it said that everything comes to him who waits,
and after many years, in which the morose criminal-
lunatic had grown grizzled, hard of flesh, and still
harder of heart, time brought him his opportunity.
Petit, watching Fate from the corner of a red eye,
saw the road open.
"At the most," he explained to -the three comrades,
"we can but die, and be damned into hell. From the
hell here to the hell there —it is but a passage.
The comrades being each desperate criminals like
himself, were agreed.
So they succeeded in stealing a whaleboat, and having
matured their schemes, they fled one night lor liberty,
leaving fresh blood-stains behind them.
At sunrise in the morning Jean Petit and his three
friends found themselves, with a scanty supply of pro-
visions and water, afloat on the Pacific without eithei
chart or compass.
Petit assumed the leadership without formality of
election. He was captain and commander. His word,
supported bv the sharp knife in his belt, became lav.
He sat sullenly at the tiller, and as the sun rose at
the sea margin, headed the boat south by west.


Thus commenced one of the strangest voyages in
history.
All that day, and the next, and the next, and the next,
the boat, 'with its crew of four, headed south, south and
south by west.
They had taken count of food and water, and to
each was apportioned his share.
Each morning Jean Petit, at whose feet lay the pro-
\ isions, grimly doled out the scanty portions.
At the end of the week a change had come over the
four.
They were lean and weatherbeaten; their hands and
faces "were blistered by the sun. Their cheeks were
sunken. There was an anxious look in their hollow
eyes.
At the end of fourteen days the change was still more
lemarkable. Their hair and beards had grown strangely
long; their hands had taken the appearance of claws,
tipped with long sharp, carnivorous-looking finger
nails. Their lips were dry and broken, and their skins
had turned from bronze to an uglv yellow.
lor ten days there bad fallen not a drop of rain;
the\ had leit but a pint and a half of impure water.
On the morning of the fifteenth day Jean Petit di-
vided this, together with the remnant of the food, into
four even portions!
Xever had the grim red-eyed man at the stern been
more exact and precise.
It is well, comrades," said he, weighing the last
crumb of bread, "that we pronounce a benediction.


'Eat, drink, and be merry!' " he cried solemnly, " 'for
to-morrow we die.' "
The morrow fell and the next morrow.
Upon the rim of the Lower Immensity the rim of the
Upper Immensity rested, without break in either of
sail or cloud.
The next day Jean Petit leaned forward towards the
gaunt, motionless, skeletons which gazed with fixed,
burning eyes towards the south.
Jean Petit leaned forward, with his hand upon the
haft of his knife, and spake.
His words sounded dull and hollow —coming as it
were, from the depths of a vault in the awful under-
world where lie the mysterious dead.
"There is no reason,' said he, "that all should die.
The human spectres answered not. Perhaps they had
not heard. Perhaps their thoughts were away by cool
mountain springs, by spread banquets.
Jean Petit, with strange feverish insistence, repeated
his assertion, which was also a question:
"There is no reason that all should die."
The spectres turned their hollow eyes to him.
Petit read the faces of his three comrades slowly.
The waves, intensely blue and sparkling, rose and fell
with awful monotony.
Again, and for the third time, the carniverous face
was thrust forward and the swollen lips framed its sen-
tence :
"For what reason should all die? '
In the ears of the others the words sounded like the
tolling of that bell which heralds criminals to execution.


They looked not at the waters, not at the sky, not upon
each other, but at Jean Petit.
And on the faces of the three was the same question-
ing, anxious stare.
The red eye grew redder and more devilish.
The man at the tiller tongued his lips and went on
in a harsh croak, like the croaking of some foul bird
of prey which had scented a carcase:
"Unless we eat soon there is an end!"
The spectres nodded.
"We cannot live another day!"
*/
The spectres passively assented.
The mouth of one of them was marked with a dark
stain, where he had been endeavouring to masticate the
leather of his shoe.
Jean Petit, not looking from one to the other, but
holding all three with his eyes, continued:
"Others have been as we."
There was a long pause. The whale boat rose slowly
upon a wave crest and slid silently into the hollow.
The sun poured out his fires upon the ocean in intense
silence.
'Others," murmured Jean Petit, finishing his sentence,
"have done it."
A shudder of repulsion passed from one wretched
frame to the other.
Petit alone did not shudder. He appeared calm—
eager, but calm.
"To-morrow," he said, "it will be too late!"
"To-morrow," muttered the three, "we will be dead,
what matters."


"To-morrow," said Jean Petit, forming his meaning
more precisely, "one will be dead. The others will
live."
There was a long, long silence
The boat rose and fell, rose and fell, rose and fell.
It was fully a quarter of an hour before the convict
spoke again.
Scanning closely the faces of his companions, he
asked:
"Is it agreed?"
They answered not, "yes," nor "no."
"It —is —agreed!" said Jean Petit, slowly.
His voice was the voice of command, of authority,
of organisation.
The slave had become a master. The subject was
at last a king. The man loomed up in the cold bulk of
Power!
It was a case of survival, if not of the fittest, at
least of the strongest.
With a deep-drawn sigh of satisfaction the leader
drew his knife —which his hand had never left—from
its sheath, and stooping forward split out four splinters
of uneven length from the timbers of the boat.
He closed his left hand upon them, clutching the
hilt of the naked knife in his right.
The ends of the splinters alone were visible.
"Come forward!" he ordered.
The three men —their gaze riveted on Petit's left
hand as if fascinated —crawled towards him. It was
terrible picture, all the more terrible for the glory


and beauty of its setting, for the sparkle and colour and
sunshine which were the picture's frame.
More terrible, too, in its tragic, portentous silence.
"Draw!" he commanded.
The man under whose face the clutched fist was
thrust sucked in a deep breath which was almost a
moan.
He extended a trembling hand and drew forth
single splinter.
"Draw!" repeated Jean Petit, offering to each in
turn.
The lots were drawn. The spectres waited, sitting
silently, their eyes upon the face of their commander.
"The shortest!" snarled the man with the knife.
Their sallow features were full of anguish. Four
men knew that it was the mission of one to die. To die
—at once.
For man born of woman death is at all times ter-
rible. But with these death had also a sequel!
Already one was doomed.
Who?
The voice of Jean Petit rang grim and unearthly.
At the word each man unclosed his hand. The open
palms lay side by side.
"Thou!" said the helmsman.
The head of the victim fell forward. A shudder,
followed by a sob, convulsed him.
Against a background of blue sky and water rose
the hand of Jean Petit, clasping a knife!
Two men turned away their heads!


CHAPTER XI.
THE SEA IS MERCIFUL.
BY the winds and currents, and mayhap, in nautical
phrase, by the "act of God" also, the boat in which
Jean Petit and his three convict companions had
escaped from New Caledonia was carried south.
She drifted down outside the Great Barrier, was
blown off the land to the eastward of Sandy Cape,
and blown back again towards Point Danger.
Jean Petit, alone, and grown strangely like a wild
beast, looked out and across with bloodshot eyes one
morning and saw a hazy blue line at the far western
verge. A fair wind filled the tattered sail. Hour by
hour the line grew up and up like a bank of cloud,
with uneven summits—up and up out of the desolate,
silent ocean.
The solitary convict gazed at this bank of cloud
with eager, fascinated eyes.
Often enough during the aAvful past weeks he had
watched in the same way, only to see the bank change
shape and disappear as the sun grew stronger.
But this time the vision became every hour more


definite and real. At last he uttered a deep growl of
satisfaction, which was his nearest approach to a
prayer, and a shudder of relief, of thanksgiving passed
through his lean frame.
Petit presented an illustration of the possibilities
which underlie the smooth, well-fed exterior of civilised
humanity.
His hair fell down in matted skeins about his bony
shoulders; his beard almost covered his chest, and below
its ragged edges his ribs stood out one by one like the
ribs of a corpse which has dried in the sun until the
tightened skin shows the outline of the skeleton be-
neath. His lips fell back, and showed his yellow fangs.
The nails of his hands and feet were as long as eagles'
claws. He was burnt copper-colour by the sun, and
against the dark background of his skin stood numerous
significant sores.
The land which this horrid corpse-like figure re-
garded out of hollow eyes was that portion of New
South "Wales which lies to the north'ard of Woogoolga
—a land alternating along the immediate coast, be-
tween hardwood forests and scrubby sand-hills.
All day long the emaciated convict watched eagerly.
Before nightfall he was close enough to discern steep
beaches on which the rollers broke in white anger,
and dark spray-wet headlands glistening under then-
bath of seas.
The sun, with banners of scarlet and gold, sailed
out through the gates of the west, lending the white
rollers a faint pink blush —the sea answering to the
wooing of her departing lover.


Snipe called along the edge of the sands, littered
with brown sea-weed, shells, pumice, and sponges.
Across a bank of thin fleecy cloud went a moving
line of black swans, going inland to the fresh water
lagoons. They flew with their long necks stretched
forward, and as they passed over his head the man in
the boat could see the white on their wings and the
scarlet of their beaks. The swans were followed by a
mob of black duck and teal.
Petit noticed that all these birds followed a certain
direction, and studying closely he observed a break
in the surf where a narrow channel ran inland, to
broaden out again in a great spread of creeks and
lagoons.
A red rock showed conspicuously at the mouth of the
channel, and keeping this to the port side of the boat,
he came about and let the insetting tide take him
through. i
The keel grated on the sand, and Petit rose up gaunt
and unsteady in the starlight and crawled ashore.
The escaped convict discovered that the rocks 011
the foreshore were covered with oysters, and he fed.
Refreshed, he crossed the beach in search of fresh
water. After walking some time he found it trickling
from a rock—clear and cold.
And again Jean Petit growled in thanksgiving, and
throwing himself full length on his back like a drought-
stricken beast, he let the little rill trickle into his mouth,
overflow his lips, and moisten his chest.
At last, with a deep-heaved sigh, he rolled away


from the spring and with his head resting on the green
damp moss, fell asleep.
In the morning Petit woke with the young sun on
his face.
He rose, and with his hand shading his eyes, looked
up and down. As far as his eye could reach there were
no signs of human habitation; no evidences of life.
He had landed upon a lonely and unsettled part of
the Xorth Coast.
Hunger was still strong in him. He moved his
cramped limbs in the direction of the beach.
When he reached his landing place of the previous
night he found the boat gone! The tide had carried
it out. He could see it drifting on the swell of the
deep Pacific, just beyond the edge of the breakers.
It was as well, he told himself, inasmuch as he had
intended to stave her in and sink her. The boat was
a piece of evidence which he was not anxious to leave
behind him.
In a few hours no doubt it would be washed bv the
V
incoming tide against the rocks and smashed to pieces.
As a matter of fact, the boat was, by a little series
of coincidences, in which the ocean sometimes indulges,
carried round into the mouth of the Clarence River
to fall at last into the hands of Tom Pagdin. She was
first picked up by a fisherman near the Heads. He
sold her to a dealer, who had a little trade steamer
running up one of the creeks. She had broken adrift
one night from the stern of the steamer, and the tide
brought her into the Broadstream, where a farmer
found her with her nose stuck in the mud next morning.


The farmer, in hope of a reward, in turn, had hidden
her in the reeds, and it was there Tom Pagdin found
her. He surmised that she was a stray boat, unhitched
her, took her further up the stream one evening, and
planted her again in the reeds of the opposite bank.
Jean Petit presented a peculiar appearance as he
slunk across the sand in his rags, and disappeared in
the bush.
The bush has seen many strange characters, of
comedy and tragedy; has witnessed in her solitudes
many ludicrous and awful things, but none, perhaps,
more ludicrously awful than the hairy figure in stream-
ing rags, which stalked slowly along, like a bedraggled
bird of prey, beneath the shade of honeysuckle and gum.
For three days this beast-man, whom the clean sea
had spewed up on the land, went northward.
He made himself a lair under the rocks, or in the
thick bushes at night, and fed upon roots and berries,
now and then descending the sandy hills to the sea for
shellfish and oysters.
Gradually those livid sores which had corroded his
flesh as verdigris corrodes copper, began to disappear.
H: * * *
Hans Holterman had run away from his ship an
Hobson's Bay to the goldfields in the time of the gold
fever. He had, like many more, followed the Yellow
Butterfly for years aci-oss mountain and gully and
plain, till at last the growing stiffness in his joints
told him that it was time to think of old age.
So Hans, who had never been a practical man, went
prospecting for a selection as he went prospecting


for gold—in the further places, —and at last pegged
out his land.
It was not particularly good land, although heavily
timbered; but Hans believed it would grow vines, and
he remembered the days, before he ran away to sea,
when, with his German brothers and sisters, he had
worked amidst his father's grape vines by the banks of
beloved Rhine.
So Hans set to the growing of vines, without thought
of market.
It was not till the fourth or fifth year, when all his
capital was gone, that he realised he was thirty miles
from a town.
But a vigneron he had decided to become, and
vigneron he must remain.
He had cleared and fenced and planted a twelve-acre
block with Isabella vines, which, being phylloxera-and-
odium-proof, are certain to crop. But the Isabella was
not yet a popular grape in this country, and Holter-
man's Isabella proved a drug even on the local market,
which was not fastidious. After five years the grapes
flourished, and bore marvellously—soil, climate, and
position being all eminently favourable. Each latter
vintage Hans added fresh barrels to the row of stained
casks in the outroom which served as a cellar.
His wine-press was a home-made box, tin-lined, with
a long sapling for a lever. He tied bags of stone to
the sapling to get pressure, and drained off the purple
juice in a kerosene-tin bucket.
Hans Holterman soon discovered that his wine was


practically unsaleable, and this took the heart out of
him.
He retired within himself, living in solitude, and
worst of all—consuming his own stock.
He drank a jug of wine when he rose, a jug at break-
fast, a jug before going to work, and thereafter
throughout the day and night jugs at frequent intervals.
Sometimes on Sunday afternoons would ride up to
Holterman's door bushmen from the neighbourhood,
and these in return for unlimited quantities of new
wine, supplied in opposition to the Licensing Act,
they would leave him a little silver.
This was practically Hans Holterman's sole medium
of existence. The few shillings which he received from
casual drinkers bought him flour, and occasionally
meat. The man who can buy flour and meat can live
on the land.
One evening at dusk, a ragged figure crept out of the
shadow of the forest and listened.


CHAPTER XII.
JEAN PETIT PAYS A VISIT.
THE eyes of Jean Petit, like those of a glittering
tiger cat, peered intently through a crack in
the slabs of Holterman's wine-room.
The escapee saw in the twilight a stout figure
mounted upon an empty soap-box.
This figure held in one hand a jug. As the hand
moved in response to the man's words, a dark liquid,
looking like blood, splashed from the jug. It was the
blood of Holterman's vines.
Holterman was holding forth to an imaginary audi-
ence on the corrupt state of the Government.
The speech was given in English and German. A
marvellous speech, full of strange thoughts, but lost
for lack of an audience.
Excepting an opossum, which came down the chim-
ney, and sat gravely on the kitchen mantlepiece, op-
posite the wine-room door each evening, Hans the
orator was usually without listeners.
While he babbled, Jean Petit —eye and ear alter-
nately to the crack in the slabs —listened attentively.
It was weeks since he had heard the speech of man,


and the sounds seemed to throw him into a grim
reverie.
The speech within the hut was strangely like tne
last talk of the men who had been with him in the boat.
Petit, wise in experience, smiled fiendishly as he
realised how matters stood with the man inside. The
lower stars began to appear like live diamonds set in
the dark leaves of the gums. The skeletons of ring-
harked trees stood up in spectral silence against a hack-
ground of darkened skv.
O i/
Hans talked on and on. Much of his madness was
about his treasure, the money he had hidden in the
tea tin in the kitchen chimney.
At last Petit drew his knife from its sheath, and
looked at the edge in the starlight. Then he slipped
off his shoes and began to creep stealthily round to the
kitchen door. When the man in the wine-room stopped
to take breath or to refresh himself, Petit would stop
also, his eve to a crack in the wall. His breath came
7 «/
and went noiselessly like an animal of the bush. He
created no more disturbance than a panther creeping
through the forest on the trail of a prey.
The door creaked a little, but Holterman took no
notice. A dark figure skulked across the doorway, and.
hidden in the cover of the wall, moved towards the
open fireplace. But Holterman observed it not.
The shadow of the escapee drifted darkly across the
uneven floor. Once, through an opening in the slabs,
the light of a star flashed brightly for a second upon
a naked blade, as if a fire-fly had gone by.
The hand of the prowler went up, and began to feel


upon the adzed-slab which formed the chimney shelf.
It crept along inch by inch until suddenly it encoun-
tered fur and claws.
The 'possum jumped frantically from the shelf. Jean
Petit, taken by surprise, swore aloud as the tea tin
fell upon the floor with a clattering noise, and the
German leaped from the soap-box into the middle of
the kitchen floor.
Hans was a powerful man, and the madness which
worked in him with the wine gave him additional
strength. He clutched the invader by the throat with
both hands. Petit was thrown backwards upon the floor,
partially stunned. But the next moment, feeling the
tightening grip of strong hands on his neck, his strength
and savagery came back to him in a wild, combative
rush. The knife had fallen from his grasp. He put
out his hands instinctively, and grasped his opponent
also by the throat.
He stuck his knees into the German's ribs and
squeezed with all the strength of his lower limbs, at
the same time using the power of his backbone and
thighs in an endeavour to turn over upon his adversary.
They writhed and struggled like pythons close-locked
in a combat to the death.
It was a question merely of time and endurance —
one maniac against another; fighting to kill in silence
—a duel with the hands.
"Which would be choked first?
Jean Petit's fingers were embedded in the German's
neck like talons.


\ MLS.
RSKSS
The Death of the German.
Tom Pagdin, Pirate
Page 12-k




Holterman's hands clasped Petit's throat like a com-
pressing band of steel.
The Frenchman gasped. He had not the staying
powers of the Teuton. In a few seconds more he would
be overcome. They had overturned a stool in the
struggle. The legs were broken out, and rolled under
Holterman's elbow as they fought. Holterinan, feeling
the resistance of his foe lessening, and being not too
clear of thought, released his hold and picked up one
of these to beat out the other's brains.
But before he could deal the blow, Petit was on his
feet again, knife in hand.
As the German lifted his arm to strike the blade
went home to the hilt in his neck.
He fell like a beast at the stroke of an axe, and with
a horrid growl of satisfaction Petit finished the busi-
ness by cutting his victim's throat.
There was silence. . . . Presently the murderer
crept to the door and looked out cautiously.
He heard no sound except the night noises of the
bush, and already the escapee was familiar with many
of these.
He found water for his hands —and the knife. Upon
the latter he bestowed great attention. Before replac-
ing it in its sheath he lifted it to his lips and reverently
kissed the blade! The soul of Jean Petit was not
absolutely without gratitude.
Petit moved quickly, silently back to the hut. The
figure, lying face down upon the floor, had not stirred
in the least.
A pool, which would in daylight have glowed angrily


red, was slowly spreading around it, darkening the
slabs of the floor as if someone had overturned a bottle
of ink.
Jean Petit studied the position narrowly. He first
of all picked up the tin and removed the lid.
There was certainly some money inside rolled up in
a rag. Petit undid the rag, using his teeth to loosen
the knots, and turned out a handful of pence. Again
a curse of disappointment escaped him.
He glared angrily at the figure on the floor.
Hans Holterman had deceived him!
He had gone to the trouble of killing a man for less
than three shillings in coppers!
For this he had nearly lost his own life. From which
it may be seen that it is unwise to place credence in
words of those who have dwelt too long in the tush
—alone.
The convict moved about the house searching and
thinking as he went. Xear the dead man's bunk, on
the packing case which had served him as a dressing-
table, lay a razor. Petit put this in his pocket; but
a second later an idea came to him, and, going out,
he stooped down by tire body, with the razor open in
his hand, dabbling the blade.
The reason of this was not made apparent until
may days later, when the body of Hans Holterman
was found with a blood stained razor in its hand, and
the coronial inquiry resulted in a verdict of suicide
whilst of unsound mind.
Petit cold-bloodedly lit a match and found a candle-
end, and surveyed the scene without a shudder.


The light danced up and down the walls, throwing
fantastic shadows as the murderer set to work.
Having emptied the pence into his pocket, he re-
placed the tea-tin on the mantel-shelf, mended the
broken stool, and removed all trace of the struggle.
He neglected no detail, even to sweeping of the floor,
lest any evidence of trampling feet should remain in
the dust.
It was nearly midnight before Petit loped off into
the bush with a bundle over his shoulder.
He strode forward without once looking back. As
he turned northward, heavy drops of rain began to
pelter down from a passing thundercloud, which had
suddenly obscured the stars, and a ghastly grin of
appreciation crossed his face when a livid flash of
lightning reddened his path.
The elements were with him.
Before an hour a violent rainstorm had washed out
all tracks, and the Tiger of Paris curled up in the
shelter of an overhanging rock, slept as calmly un-
troubled by remorse as any other beast of prey.


CHAPTER XIII.
CAPTURED.
TOM PAGDIX admitted afterwards that when he
looked through the lantana on the island, he
wished he had borne with paternal corrections, and
never gone pirating.
Dave, who was in front, actuated bv kindred senti-
-7 / V
inents, tried to push past Tom; but the latter was
ahead of him, and broke for the boat first.
They raced through the lantana, scratching their
hands and faces and tearing their clothes as they went.
Their craft was aground in the black mud among
the mangroves, and when they tried to shove her off
they found the task beyond their strength.
Tom hurriedly led the way into a thick patch of
jungle, and they crawled under a low clump of young
stinging trees, where it would be almost impossible for a
full-grown man to reach them, and held a whispered
consultation.
"It's him," said Dave.
"Yes," agreed Tom, "there ain't no doubt of it."


"Do you think he seen us ? " asked the second pirate.
"No," replied Tom, "I don't think so; he had his
ugly mouth open like he waz asleep." /
"What's to do ? " asked Dave.
"Dunno, 'less we leave everything an' swim ashora.
Then we might get ketched with sharks, and if we
wasn't ketched with sharks, we'd most likely be ketched
be the traps."
"I wouldn't sleep ere a night, cried Dave, with
that cove on the island, not for anything."
"I'd rather sleep on a jumper ant's nest," agreed
Tom. "The only thing we got to do is keep quiet, an
wait till the tide rises. Then we'll shove the boat off
quietly and go further down the river.
Having decided on this plan, they felt more com-
fortable. After a while Tom even got courage enough
to sneak back to where he had dropped his swag.
He returned to report that the black-bearded man was
still sleeping. Tom said he looked more awful and
wicked than ever.
Thev munched some food quietly, and feeling almost
secure in the heart of the thicket wherein they had
crawled, Nature asserted herself, and they both fell
asleep.
It was past noon when Tom started up and woke his
mate.
"The tide's up," he whispered. "We better run the
risk of bein' seen from the shore in the boat than stay
'ere and be killed by a cold-blooded murderer like
that."


They crept through the scrub and lantana as quietly
as they could.
Tom took a good look round, and announced that
the coast was clear. The water was well up astern,
and they began to push at the bow of the boat to
launch her.
"Give "er one more shove!" cried Tom, in a glad
voice, " an' we're clear."
"Just then each boy felt a strong hand on his
shoulder.
The convict had crept up behind them.
Slowly, dreading what they knew they were going
to see, each turned his head.
They met the inquiring gaze of Jean Petit. His
face was adorned by a grin which was intended to be
amiable, but Tom and Dave felt that thev had never
' v
witnessed anything more hideous.
"Ah, ha!" cried Jean Petit, in his own peculiar
English, "what are you doing here, my children? ''
"A—n —nothink, s —ir." spluttered Tom, vainly try-
ing to wriggle out of his captor's clutch.
How, when an Australian boy uses the word "sir"
he is certainly afraid.
"Aha!" cried Petit, in a rasping voice
"X—n —nothink!" repeated Davt, wriggling in such
a way as to create the impression that he really did
not mean to. "Ho, sir, n—rothink. "We only just
landed 'ere."
Tom gave his mate a look of gratitude,
''Yes," he cried, "we only jist landed. You let —let
us go an' we'll go right away at once."


But Petit was thoughtfully studying the boat.
"Does zat boat belong wiz you?" he asked.
"X —no," replied Tom, in anguished tones, "we jist
borryed 'er to .come acrost to the island after wild figs."
"Borree," repeated the escapee, "borree? I not
understand."
"Yes," repeated Tom, "we jist borryed—took the
loan of 'er, like —meanin' to give her back again."
"Ah!" said Petit, "you vat he call shake, steal it,
eh ? "
"Xo," cried Tom; "we're honest, we are! Dead
honest. Xeither of us never shook nothink in our
lives —leastwise, not that we knowed of."
"Ah!" exclaimed Petit, "vat is your name?"
"My name's Jack Stevenson. This cove's name is
Bill Stevenson. He's my cousin."
Tom gave Dave another look to impress this fact on
his memory.
"I'll tell you how it is, without any lies," he volun-
teered, in a tone of utter confidence. "We borryed
this boat off Bill's father yesterday to come up the
river a piece fishin,' an' we stayed out too late, an'
was caught in a fog. This mornin' we started back,
an' we jist pulled in 'ere to look for figs —that's a
solemn fact. We ain't been 'ere more than a half a
hour at the outside. You kin ask 'im!"
Petit examined the hovs, the boat, and the sur-
%/ 7
roundings. He saw that they were telling lies.
His natural instinct told him also that they were
terribly frightened, and his criminal method of reason-


ing put it down to the fact that they had committed
some offence against the law.
It occurred to Petit's mind that the boys might be
useful to him. His grasp tightened on their shoulders
till Tom winced with pain and Dave cried out.
Then, holding them firmly in front of him, he put
his face up to them and said, in a terrible voice: "Eet
is so; you have stolen zis boat!"
They were silent.
"For which," he continued, "you air both liable to
be put in ze prison!"
Jean Petit hissed the word "prison."
"Suppose," he continued, "I gif word to ze po-lice—"
When the escapee came to "police" he snarled
viciously. "Vat zen?"
Neither youth ventured to speak.
"I tell to you —you go to chail!"
Petit put dreadful emphasis on the gaol.
"Oui—to chail. Zere you will be treat mos' ill; you
vill rot an' starve an' die! You will starve an' rot
an' die:
"But, non," resumed Petit, after allowing the picture
time to soak in, "I vill not gif you to chail. You air
too young, too tendaire; I vill keep you viz ME!
Sacre!" he ejaculated, shaking them both violently,
"I shall be fazzair and mozzair vis you."
This prospective parentage did not seem to fill either
Tom or Dave with gratitude and joy. Two more wret-
ched-looking children of adoption it would be difficult
to see anywhere.


"Bud," concluded Petit, "if you do not obey me vis
all thinks "
He threw them from him and drew his knife.
"Oh," sobbed Tom, "No, don't! Don't kill us. I'll
do anythink you want me to. Anythink as long as you
don't stick that knife into me."
Dave shut his eyes and shuddered. Speech was be-
yond him.


CHAPTER XIV.
THE GENESIS OF A LOVE STORY.
CHARD had been transferred from the
red desert of Gilgargerv to the Rivers. The bank
for which he laboured was one of the institutions of
the country. Its clients lay chiefly among the Western
pastoralists. The bulk of its business was done on
mortgages.
When George entered the service of the bank, through
the influence of his uncle, Tobias Chard, his prospects
had appeared in the colours of the dawn: now thev
' ».
were set in more of a winter-grey perspective.
Tobias Chard was the proprietor of an immense run
in the nor'-west. His younger brother, George's father,
having no business instinct, and a depraved taste for
Vater-colour, was a clerk in the Crown Lands Office.
He was blessed with a family of five girls and a boy.
Tobias, the bachelor, declared that his brother had been
improvident in all things.
It was impossible to give young George a profes-
sion, so the uncle was persuaded to use his influence —


ungraciously —with the Bulk and Bullion, Limited, to
secure his nephew a junior appointment.
As the balance of Tobias Chard was great, and his
herd and flocks numerous, this was a mere matter of
an interview with the directors.
Xext week Chard, junior, received a note from the
Board to say that his application for service had been
favourably considered.
He entered upon his duties at the copying press with
a strong determination to work himself up to the po-
sition of city manager.
His chances were not too remote, inasmuch as that he
had Uncle Tobias's big account behind him.
Xothing in this world will help an ambitious young
man along in a bank like the influence of a solid bank-
ing account.
But three consecutive droughts struck Uncle Tobias,
and he mortgaged.
That was the beginning of a rapid end. The Lord
sent him a rot among his sheep. The devil followed
with a law suit. The homestead was burnt out. Mis-
fortune followed misfortune, and Tobias, being 110 Job,
lost patience, and died of a sudden stroke of paralysis.
Everything remained in the hands of the bank. The
stoop-shouldered brother in the Lands Office got noth-
ing. The patient little, white haired old-young woman,
for whom George would have laid down his life at
any moment, got nothing. Xone of the five girls,
nor George, received a shilling.
And the property turned out to be one of the worst
speculations in which the bank had put money.


If George liad had any station experience he might
have been sent up to look after things, and having some
sort of personal or family interest in the matter he
might have recovered on the bank's bad investment; but
as he had no experience on the run, the B. and 8.,
Ltd., transferred a man from one of their foreclosures
on the South Australian Border to act as manager.
This man had no organising faculties; he was, more-
over, out of his latitude, and the property began to
rapidly represent a dead yearly loss to the B. and B.
These things did not improve the prospects of George
Chard.
In some indefinite way he was connected in respon-
sibility "with Uncle Tobias, who it was felt at head-
quarters, had deceived the Board of Directors.
The Directors did not know that Tobias's run, with
proper handling, might be made to pay twenty or thirty
per cent. But the lesson had been pretty clearly taught
in Hew South Wales and Queensland during past
years that financial institutions cannot conduct stations
from a metropolitan head office. Xor is it good for
either institution or the country that they should make
the attempt.
As George Chard grew in years and knowledge, he
learned that merit is most frequently its own reward.
He saw his juniors the sons of rich men or of men
who had rich relatives, promoted over his head. He
tvas sent out relieving in the far back country in sum-
mer time.
His father died, leaving the mother and five girls
mainly dependent on him. The girls were good girls,


and they wanted to sell up the home, representing all
the Chard assets, and to leave the country town, where
they had spent so many tranquil years, and go to
Sydney and earn a living.
But George had been in the head office in Sydney for
six months before the demise of Uncle Tobias, and he
knew what making a living in Sydney meant for girls
like his sisters.
So he existed cheaply, and sent the balance of his
cheque home every month —to keep the house going.
He applied for a removal to the country town where
his people were, but there was no vacancy. The chief
grocer's son was in the bank and as he showed decided
proclivities to the wa9te and loose-living of cities, his
people wanted to keep him under personal surveillance.
The grocer had an account in the bank. The transfer
of his son against the family wishes meant a transfer
of the family accounts, which were large. The mana-
ger stated these facts to the Board, and the Board inti-
mated to George Chard that his application for re-
moval had been taken into consideration, and the
Board could not see its way clear to comply with his
request.
George allowed a decent interval of two years to
elapse, and respectfully applied for a rise in salary.
The Board was pleased to graciously consider his
request, added £lO a year to his salary, and sent him
up north to a small branch under an acting-manager
who was known throughout the B. and 8., Limited, as
"pig."
George Chard, leaning over a ledger in his box of


an office by tbe river bank, tbe galvanised roof above
him crackling under tbe awful beat, considered the
general injustice of things with a sore heart.
But Avhen the pig was more hoggish than usual, he
forced up before his mind a picture. It was a homely
enough picture of a cottage with a pepper-tree growing
in front and a grapevine trailing over the porch, and
it was a long way off, but it steadied him.
Xow the average bank clerk in the average country
town is an insipid animal who plays tennis and
"Haw!"
As a rule he belongs to the "inner set," in which
revolve a dozen or so of social suns, very much dazzled
by their own individual and mutual splendour.
The bank clerk is regarded as a catch by country
young ladies, and as his commercial training stands him
in good stead, he frequently manages to matrimonially
annex a good banking account.
The minor bank official, whose wife can transfer a
big account at pleasure, is a greater man than the
major bank official whose wife like the little pig in the
nursery rhyme, "got none." The Pig's wife under
whom George had been sent to serve was lean and
yellow and rich, in her own right, and in the right and
light of a tribe of money makers with whom she was
related and connected by marriage, which comes to the
same thing.
The Pig's wife's people were the people of the place;
in fact, the place pretty well belonged to the people
of the wife of the Pig.
Hence the Pig, in spite of his delinquencies, was


desirable manager for that branch on the Bulk and
Bullion.
Now, the Pig's wife had several lean, yellow sisters,
and a host of yellow-lean cousins of the feminine gen-
der, and George Chard, who accepted social evenings as
a painful duty, and loathed tennis, found himself tan-
gled in the meshes of a family cobweb, wherein the
spider in the multiplex personality of the Pig's people
by marriage threatened to extract the substance from
him.
In such a situation, to succeed, a man must be either
a born diplomatist or a born fool —George Chard was
neither. For preference he ought to have been a fool.
A fool who could ape city fashions, talk idiocies, and
affect the manners of a cheesemonger who has unex-
pectedly won a Tattersall's Sweep (which is the manner
of the little shoddy aristocrats of country villages),
would have been accepted as a social Pygmalion, before
whom the plaster Galateas might decently become flesh
and blood at the first invocation. Nineteen out of every
twenty bank clerks would have fitted such a position
naturally, but George belonged to the twentieth section,
which is rare and unpopular —unpopular because rare.
Inside the office the Pig, of his general nature, made
life bitter, and outside, the Pig's people did their best
in the same direction.
It was a negative relief when Number One set of
Wharf dale Society finally decided that George Chard
should be "cut" altogether.
Number Two Set would have accepted him with open
arms, but as Number Two Set was only a shade less


objectionable and vulgar than Xumber One Set, George
elected to spend bis Saturday afternoons fishing.
So he chummed with the Postmaster, who was un-
married, and reported to be an Athiest, or something
equally awful, and they grew wise together on the
matter of dragon flies and crickets and cockroaches,
and other occult bait.
In the intellectual desert of Wharfdale, Dan Crey-
ton, the Postmaster, was to George Chard the only
oasis—Dan Creyton and his sister Xora.
Dan Creyton represented three generations of native-
born Australians.
His grandfather had grown corn on the Hawkesbury
in the old convict days; his father had been a farmer on
the Hunter, and had left Dan and his sister a little
property equally divided.
With a hundred and fifty pounds a year each in
rent and interest, and another hundred and twenty-five
from the Government, Xora found no difficulty in
keeping house for her brother, and saving money. The
Creytons came of good stock, and because of the Breed,
which can be transplanted to any climate without de-
generation, and which carries its mark on the mouth
and the hands. Dan was a gentleman and Xora a lady.
And there will be ladies and gentlemen—of Xature and
the Breed —just as there will be cads and she-snobs to
the end of all time.
Dan Creyton was a reader. Poor George had found
little time for the ennobling education of literature, but
he recognised the superior intellect, and regarded Dan
as his elder friend.


Creyton had watched the play of life in its local
relation to George with an amused interest, and when
the Meanness-of-Small-Things was sitting on the stool
beside the young man one day at the bank, and George
was regarding it out of hollow, hopeless eyes, Dan Crey-
tou dropped in and shook hands with him without
saying anything.
Thereafter George Chard was Dan Creyton's friend
for weal or for woe.
After all, life and death are" small matters.
It is the other things which count —love and hate,
and the sunlight down the water.
Xora Creyton, with the warm sympathetic blood of
the Celt in her veins; Xora Creyton, with the high,
white forehead and the red lips and lustrous soon
became the sunlight of George Chard's life.
Nora Creyton was a sensible girl. She knew that
the prospects of George Chard, bank clerk, with a
mother and five sisters dependent on him, "w ere not
worthy of serious consideration from a matiimonial
point of view. She knew that and a lot more, but she
could no more help her heart beating ridiculously fast
011 occasions, or her cheeks reddening or her eyes
sparkling than she could help her breath.
George did not see these things, or, if he had, the
last thought that would have entered his mind would
be the presumption that his presence accounted foi
them.
And George and Nora might have gone on for ever
caring for one another in secret but for an accident,
which will be detailed in another chapter.


CHAPTEK XV
THE ROBBERY IS DISCOVERED.
CHARD slept 011 the bank premises. The
keys of the bank safes were kept by the manager
during the day. but when he left the office for his
private residence they remained in the custody of his
junior. George made it a particular rule to see that his
superior officer opened the safe in the morning.
The manager's carelessness was a continual source oi
uneasiness to the young man, who had been brought up
in the strict commercial school, where carelessness is
set down as the cardinal sin.
Duiing banking hours the keys were sometimes left
111 the safe, sometimes hung upon the wall, and more
otten carried about loose in the manager's pocket.
It happened one day, previous to the opening of the
?tory, that bile his assistant was absent from the
office, a particular friend of the manager's came in
and invited him across the road for a drink.
The manager had been having a night, consequentlv
the suggestion of a whisky and soda came at "the right
moment.


Without waiting to put on his coat, he stepped across
the road with his friend.
As he passed into the bar parlour a little squat man,
with a cast in his eye, entered the bank. He had not
been long in the town, but he was full of religious zeal,
and was always addressing the townspeople in order
to save their souls.
He was standing with his back to the counter, de-
voutly whistling a hymn, when the manager re-entered.
The little man explained that the Lord had moved
him to come and ask a small subscription towards his
religious crusade. He was doing the Lord's work, and
the smallest remuneration from the Devil would be
most thankfully received.
The manager donated a shilling, and the crusader,
after piously promising that the shilling would be put
to his dear brother's credit in Heaven, picked up the
hymn where he had left it and went out. His squint
eye was elevated towards the insulators on the telegraph
posts as he walked along the street, and a light of satis-
faction gleamed therein. He might have been thank-
ing Heaven for some fresh mercy or thinking out a
scheme for wireless telegraphy.
Whatever his thoughts were, he carried in one hand
a piece of wax, and 011 the wax was the newlv-made
impression of a key.
* * * * '
About a week later, George Chard in Assam silk
and helmet paused at the door of the office. Although
it had thundered and stormed up the river the night
previously, it was a suffocating morning. The mercury


at Wharfdale stood already at ninety in the shade, and
the vapoury atmosphere seemed to take all the energy
out of one's body.
George looked across to the islands in the river and
hungered for the shade of their jungles, where the day
might be worn through in comparative coolness.
A boat put out from the bank upstream, and he recog-
nised Xora Creyton in a white frock and sun-bonnet
rowing gently towards the point of the furthest island,
whereon, as George knew well enough, she was used to
spend many a hot forenoon under the fig trees with a
book for company. George sighed drearily and entered
the bank.
The manager came down and unlocked the safe.
Then occurred the crisis of the young man's life.
Five hundred pounds in sovereigns laid upon the floor
of the safe the night previously by the manager in the
presence of his assistant, were no longer there! "
The canvas bags containing the money had disap-
peared. Yet the door of the safe had certainly been
locked.
The manager's face expressed blank astonishment
anger, incredibility.
George Chard's face was pale and anxious.
This was a serious matter. The manager's influence
might avert the anger of the directors from his own
head, but would not it descend upon George?
-Might he not be held responsible? He had slept
upon the premises that night, as usual, and during that
night the money must certainly have been removed.
These ideas flashed through his mind instantly, but


the thought that he might be directly accused of dis-
honesty had not yet occurred to him.
At first the two men had refused to credit their
senses. They hurriedly unlocked the other safe, pulled
out the ledgers, opened the drawers, counted their petty
cash, which had not apparently been touched, and in a
sort of forlorn hope checked their previous day's figures.
The money was undoubtedly gone.
The manager sank into a chair and wiped his fore-
head with a trembling, nervous hand.
George went round the room, examined the fasten-
ings of the windows, turned and re-turned the key in
the lock of the outside door leading into the street.
"Whoever has done it," he cried, "must have come in
by the front way. They could not get through the
back without me hearing them."
"Let us see if there are any signs of footprints. ' said
the manager, going to the door.
The rain had obliterated Jean Petit's tracks. He
had come and gone like a cat in the darkness, opening
both the outer doors and the safe noiselessly with his
skeleton keys while George Chard slept soundly in the
next room.
His accomplice had waited under the shadow of the
river bank half a mile up stream;, and the boat had
taken them quietly away with the gold.
"If anybody came in," mused the manager, presently,
"they must have come in by the outside door."
"If!" repeated George. "There can be no doubt
about it!"


But the word had brought him a strange thrill of
apprehension.
Good God ! Was it possible ?
He endeavoured to catch the manager's eye.
"What do you mean by saying if?" he demanded
suddenly.
The eye —it was always inclined to be shifty and
uncertain under a direct 100k —remained averted.
"Xothing," replied the manager, "only this is a
very serious matter for " he hesitated, and added,
"for both of us?-"
"Someone got in with a false key," exclaimed George,
positively, "unless "
He stopped.
An idea had come to him.
"Unless what?" asked the manager.
It was his turn to look at George
"Unless," said George, injudiciously, "someone got in
with the key of the door."
v
"And opened the safe?" said the manager.
"With the key of the safe," added George, meeting
him square in the face.
The i nan was not guilty, as far as the direct robberj
was concerned; but there were many little acts of carb
lessness which he would prefer should not come to
the ears of the directors. He had the favour of the
Inspector certainly, but a bank robbery is a bank rob
bery, and the fact remained that five hundred pounds
had been removed from a safe of which he held the
key, and the safe showed no signs of violence. But


George C'hard had also had possession of the key at
different times.
And the manager resolved inwardly that if suspicion
fell on anyone, it would not be upon him. In his
heart he probably believed that his subordinate was
innocent, but in his heart he was also a coward.
"It is a deuce of a mess," he observed presently, in
a friendly tone, "but we must stick together."
"Yes," replied George, abstractedly.
"Our evidence," the manager went on, watching the
young man narrowly, "will have to tally."
"What evidence?" asked poor George, whose mind
was in a whirl.
"Any evidence we may have to give! There is bound
to be an inquiry."
"I will tell the truth," cried the other. "I can do
neither more nor less than that."
The manager reflected. The telling of the truth
meant possibly the telling of those certain acts of care-
lessnes of which he was at that moment painfully
conscious.
"That's right!" he replied, amiably; "we must both
tell the truth."
So after some further thought, he went over to the
telegraph office and wired:—
"Five hundred sovereigns unaccountably missing
from bank safe. Locked safe yesterday afternoon be-
fore leaving. Found locked on opening bank this
morning, but money gone. Chard says slept premises
last.night. Await instructions."
The same afternoon came a reply wire bidding the


manager place the matter in the hands of the police,
and the Xorthern Inspector of the Bulk and Bullion
received instructions to proceed to Wharfdale at once
and make full inquiries into the alleged robbery.
George Chard thought of his years of service that
day, and of his mother and the girls.
Before midday all Wharfdale knew that the
bank had been robbed, and the news had travelled up
and down the river before sunset.
Business in the little riverside town was practically
adjourned for that day. The citizens gathered in
groups or sat on their heels under the shade of a tree
opposite the bank door, formulating theories and dis-
cussing them.
The religious crank took advantage of the oppor-
tunity to address the assemblage upon the state of its
immortal soul. Despite the great earnestness of his
prayerful speech, little attention was paid to him.
It was old Dugald M'Donald who first whispered the
theory that perhaps the coves in the bank knew more
about where the money had gone to than anybody else.
Dugald put out this view of the matter with a
mysterious wink which would have convinced anv
twelve men in the place.
The audience agreed that, after all, Dugald had no
doubt hit the mark, and, thus encouraged, the astute
M'Donald with many a "Mind, I'm no' for savin' that
it is so," put forward enough arguments to shake the
reputation of an archangel.
As people shouted for Dugald, he became less discreet


and choice in his hints, and before nightfall Wharfdale
was evenly divided into three factions.
The first faction held that the manager had taken
the money. The second faction was convinced that it
was George Chard, basing their conclusions on the
assumption that because the latter was quiet and
reserved he must be deep and clever, and capable. The
third party contended that the manager and George
were in a conspiracy together. Some went so far as
to say that the manager got £350, and George £l5O, the
swag being divided according to seniority.
Everybody was convinced that there would be more
sensational developments.
Consequently Wharfdale hung around the bank
premises sympathising at every opportunity with its
two officials, and offering its services generally to the
bank and the police.
People who met at the post-office exchanged views on
the bank robbery. It was the first that had ever
occurred in Wharfdale, and the evil rumours probably
arose from the fact that the inhabitants felt it as a
general stigma on their own honesty, so that it was not
long before Dan Creyton overheard a qualified hint
which roused his Irish anger.
He took his hat and went down to the bank.
George was sitting on his stool with an open ledger
before him, but the pen did not move upon its pages.
Dan took his friend's hand and held it as he had done
once before in a day of trouble.
George listened to what Dan had to say to him, by
way of sympathy. It seemed that there was a fire in


his throat, but it "was only when he spoke that Dan
knew how badly he was hurt. Then Dan Creyton
shook hands with George again and went- away.
"This has got to be cleared up," Dan told himself in
a resolute voice as he went up the street. "He can't
have have any indefinite charge like that hanging over
him. Heither can the other fellow!"
At that moment he came face to face with the "other
fellow," who had been taking more whisky than was
good for him. Dan stopped him and unburdened his
mind. He was perhaps the only man in Wharfdale who
would have dared to do it, because he was the only
man who was convinced that George Chard was inno-
cent. Xor did he suspect the manager, whom he
believed to be too great a coward to run risks. But Dan
had not exchanged a dozen sentences with the man
before he knew that he was quite prepared to sacrifice
George to save himself. The knowledge brought him
more anxiety than he cared to confess. But his anxiety
reached a climax when Rumour, in a female tongue,
sharp and bitter, told him that a warrant was to be
issued for the arrest of his friend, George Chard!
Dan stood by the door of the office irresolute. He
turned at his sister's voice. She had just rowed over
in the cool of the afternoon breeze to get their tea ready.
George Chard was to have sat to table with them.
Dan, who guessed at many things, could not see his
way clear for the moment; but when it occurred to him
that if he were not the news-bearer another would be,
and before long he called his sister in.


"I have something to tell you, Xora," he said,
simply; "better sit down."
"What is it?" she asked. "You look worried; is
anything wrong. The heat to-day has been awful!"
"I haven't felt it," said Dan. "It is not the heat;
something else. The bank has been robbed!"
"Robbed! The bank! Tell me!'' she cried, springing
up. '"Has anything happened? Is George Chard
hurt?"
Xora's hand grasped her bodice tightly. Her fact
was pale. A wild concern showed in her eyes.
Dan noticed these things, and his mouth tightened.
"Xo," he said, "he is not hurt in body, but in mind.
His character—"
"Character!" ejaculated the girl, wonderinglv.
"What! What do you mean, Dan ; I don't understand ?"
"Five hundred pounds have been removed from the
safe!" said Dan, tersely. "The money was put there
yesterday. George had the keys in the afternoon.
Bullen went away early, I believe. When he went to
the safe this morning the money was gone!"
"Gone! But who could have taken it, Dan ? "
He explained the circumstances of the robbery.
"Could not the doors have been opened with a skele-
ton key?" asked Xora.
There was a note of exaggerated anxiousness in the
inquiry at ivhich Dan would have smiled under more
pleasant circumstances.
"Xo doubt," he said, "they could, and were; but
the trouble is that the keys are never out of the pos-
session of one or other of them."


"But I cannot see " Xora began and stopped,
looking»closely into her brother's face.
"No, nor I," mused Dan. "But one thing is cer-
tain: George Chard never had anything to do with it!"
"George Chard!" cried Nora, all her woman's feel-
ing rising up in her soul, "Who says George Chard had
anything to do with such a thing? Who dare say "
"Hush, Nora!" interrupted Dan, gently. "They are
already saying it!"
Nora was Irish, too, and a great wrath grew upon
her.
"Do you mean to tell me that you stood by and
listened to a cruel lie like that? It is a lie, a malici-
ous, horrid lie, and I —I —I. Oh, I'll tell them so!
Tell them in their teeth!
"George Chard a thief! Good God! Who could
be so wicked to dream of such a thing! The best, the
bravest —and truest—why, Dan," she blurted out,
"Don't you know I LOVE HIM! I love him more
than anything or anybody on earth!"
And Nora, her face as red as fire, threw her arms
round Dan's neck and burst into a perfect maelstrom
of thoroughly feminine sobs.


CHAPTER XVI.
AN INQUEST.
GEORGE CHARD felt it bitterly hard that after
his years of service he should earn not only
the reproof of the head office, but that suspicion should
in some way indefinitely be attached to him.
There had been an inquiry into the robbery, and
although there was nothing in the evidence to directly
implicate either himself or his manager, the tone of
head-office letters was by no means comforting.
George had done his best to clear his superior
officer. Truth is good, but it is not always a matter
of telling the whole truth in every-dav life.
If people were to say all they knew about each
other, society would fall to pieces rapidly —as rapidly
as an iceberg might melt in a volcano.
George Chard knew this, and certain matters of
carelessness on his manager's part had not come out.
It is one thing for a directorate or a department to
frame an elaborate code of rules, and another thing
for their servants to follow them to the letter.
Ho rules, natural or man-made, can ever be exactly
adhered to.


11l repayment for Lis subordinate's fealty, the Pig
had whispered certain private insinuations against
George to the inspector.
Consequently he became a "marked man."
In every branch of Government employment, in
every big commercial organisation there are "marked
men." They remain in the employ, pending a valid
excuse tor their dismissal, perhaps for years, but they
do not get on. They are never promoted; they never
receive an increase in salary, and they are never placed
111 any position of responsibility.
George Chard knew this, and he saw, as soon as
the inquiry had closed, that his career in the Bulk and
Bullion was practically at an end.
The thought stung him like nettles. He was a proud
man, and his pride had been humbled; he was a con-
scientious man also, and the thought of his responsi-
bility ot the mother and the five girls dependent on
him—alone prevented him writing at once to the head
office and demanding either an honourable acquittal or
an honourable discharge. But then, again, what charge
was he to be acquitted of? Hone had been brought
against him. Ho one had accused him. Ho one had
dared insinuate to him openly that he had anything
to do with the removal of the money from the bank
safe, yet he felt that an unseen sword of Damocles
hung over his head.
It is this anticipation of disaster—this hourly ex-
pectation of something going to happen—that wears
out the strongest energy and shatters the strongest
nervous system.


The town of "VYharfdale, unknown to George, was still
indefinitely divided into factions upon the question of the
bank robbery, and it "was not improbable that in a very
little time someone would have accidentally given him
evil news if the matter of the robbery had not sunk
into insignificance before the discovery of the body
of a murdered man down the river.
The news was brought up by the Greenwich the
morning after George, the deckhand, had had such
remarkable fishing.
First came the outlines which Kumour filled in for
herself, dwelling lovingly on the knife wounds.
Then gossiping tongues began to shape fancies into
main facts. A body had certainly been discovered,
and people who saw it were convinced that a foul and
brutal murder had taken place.
The craving for sensation, like the . craving for
opium or chloral, is progressive—the patients must keep
on increasing the dose. The newspaper down the
river published an "extraordinary" on the morning
following George's discovery. The "extraordinary,"
printed on a "galley-slip," was sold all over the district
at a penny.
As the day wore on a second edition of the "extra-
ordinary" was issued containing two or three addi-
tional paragraphs of news, and the opinion which the
"authorities" were supposed to entertain on the subject.
The publication of the paper proper was deferred a
day to enable the particulars of the inquest to be
inserted.
Then the little sheet put up a record circulation.


The editor congratulated himself oil the headlines.
Years afterwards, when strangers came into the office,
he would take down the file and point them out with
pride. The first word, "Murder," was set in wood-
block type an inch and a half deep; "And Inquest,"
in the German decorative capitals usually used for
illuminated texts by printers of religious literature.
The actual evidence adduced at the inquest was
meagre.
George, the deck-hand, was examined by the Cor-
oner at great length. The court went into the minutest
details regarding the finding of the body, even bringing
out the witness's private opinions about the matter —
what he thought and what he felt at the time and
afterwards.
The Sergeant was sworn. He corroborated George
in respect to the fishing; detailed the appearance of
the corpse—to which the audience listened lovingly—
told how he had left the body tied up by the wharf
until daylight, removed same with the assistance of
a constable to a shed, and summoned the doctor.
The doctor was an heroic figure at the inquest. It
was with difficulty that the crowded court refrained
from cheering when he stepped into the witness-box.
With the greatest urbanity the presiding J.P., who was
acting Coroner, requested him to explain the technical
terms he used in his evidence. The doctor bowed —a
perfectly splendid bow it was generally admitted—and
courteously gave the common English of the thing to
his audience.
A sigh of satisfaction went round when he swore


positively that it would be impossible for deceased to
have inflicted upon himself the wounds as detailed.
The district had not had such a sensation for years.
The identity of the deceased would have remained a
matter of absolute doubt had it not been for an acci-
dent. A religious crank, whose name was casually
"Joe," happened to arrive in the place on the morning
of the discovery.
Numbers of people had been taken to the shed by the
police.
Some thought they might be able to say who it
was, and others wanted to tell their friends in future
years that they had seen an approved hall-marked
murder in cold flesh.
None of those people had thrown the least light on
the subject. The body remained unrecognised until
the religious crank went in.
He kissed the book with a reverent smack, and
stood awaiting the interrogations of the Sergeant and
the J.P.
The audience, with bated breath, leaned eagerly for-
ward to catch every word of the religious crank's low
replies.
"Tt happened quite accidentally," he said, "that he
had gone into the shed where the body on which en-
quiry was being held had been conveyed, he believed,
from the wharf. He could not swear that it was the
same body which had been taken out of the river in
the morning.
He knew Contable Flanagan. He was upon the


Lord's work when he was requested to enter the shed.
He had not heard the constable's evidence.
It was not a fact that he had recognised the body.
(Murmur of disappointment ran throughout the court).
All he had said to Constable Flanagan- was that he
believed he had seen deceased before at a meeting in
one ot the river towns. He would not swear positively
that it was deceased, but he believed it was. If he re-
membered rightly, the man's name was Gooch—Peter.
He could not say what occupation he followed. This
happened about six or eight weeks before. That was
all he knew about the mattej. The name might have
been Good; he was not sure.
The witness, instead of throwing light upon the
caes, seemed to have added to its mystery.
Nobody knew of a person named Good or Gooch
along the river, not even the oldest residents, and
oldest residents know ei'erything. Still, the crank had
given the police a clue. Up to that they had been
hopelessly fogged. N"ow there was some sort of a trail
to follow.
The Sergeant applied for an adjournment and wired
up the river. He wired to various persons; none of
them could positively swear that they knew a man
answering to the description of deceased.
The crank held a great revival meeting opposite the
courthouse that night. He spoke eloquently, and his
testimonies drew a hat full of small change from the
crowd. He preached mostly about the evils of murder
and homicide, and strong drink.


The jury considered the evidence carefully, and then
brought in a verdict to the effect that deceased, whose
name was supposed to be either Good or Gooch, met
his death at the hands of some person or persons un-
known.
They added a rider to the effect that George, the
deck-hand, the Sergeant, and the witnesses generally
had behaved themselves with credit, and thanked the
coroner and the doctor for their kindness and attention.
Altogether, it was a very successful affair, and the
jury got more or less drunk, because everybody wanted
to shout for them and be seen talking to them.
In Australia you cannot expect to talk very long to
any distinguished person without shouting for him.
The excitement remained at fever heat for some days,
during which the movements of the police were
watched with absorbing interest.
The police did their best, but the mystery of the
murder remained as it was at first. The people began
to get impatient for developments. On the advice of
the authorities, the Government issued a proclamation
offering £5OO reward for the conviction of the mur-
derer, adding a free pardon to any accomplice who
would turn Queen's evidence.
Placards to this effect were posted up on the trees
and cross roads, at the approaches to punts, on
wharves, and other places.
Scores of amateur detectives were at work following
out all sorts of impossible theories, and suspicions were
cast on almost every doubtful character on the whole
country side.


But day followed day, and the mysterious puzzle
still remained without a key.
Jean Petit had formally adopted Tom and Dave.
So terrified were the lads of the convict and their
secret knowledge of his crime that they obeyed him
in fear and trembling.
It was not until the morning after the capture that
they managed to get together and talk. Petit had for-
bidden them holding converse with one another, and
any signs of communication had brought out the knife.
So Tom and Dave lived for twenty-four hours on
that island in awful bad company, hardly daring to
look at one another.
Petit had drawn the boat up in the scrub, hidden
it, and so secured it that they could not launch it
without his knowledge and aid.
They might have swum ashore, and each prisoner
meditated it, but the opportunity had not offered, and
thev were, moreover, still too terrified to make the
«/ 7 7
attempt.
But now Petit was asleep and snoring, and Tom
motioned Dave to sneak after him into the lantana.
They had almost reached the opposite edge of the is-
land before they drew together and spoke in scared
whispers.
Dave broke out first: "I'll never go piratin' no more,"
he said, with a dry sob.
"Nor me!" said Tom. "Not without a gun, any-
way."


"Suppose he wakes up now," said Dave, and shud-
dered.
Tom had taken the precaution to pick up the billy-
can. There was a swamp in the centre of -the island,
which Petit had brought them to the evening before.
"We'll say we went for a billy of water to bile
tea for him," replied the elder adventurer.
"What are we going to do ? " asked Dave
"Get away," replied Tom, "as soon as we see a
chance."
"Why can't we go now? " queried Dave, looking long-
ingly across the bank of the river. "I ain't never
swum so far; but I'd as lief be d'rowned as stay here.
What is he stayin' here so quiet for ? "
"He's hidin'," replied Tom, sagaciously. "He's
waitin' here for a chance to escape. I say, did you
notice the belt ? "
"That canvas thing around his waist? I see the end
of it stickin' out when he stooped over the fire last
night."
"Hsh!" said Tom. "He's got the money in that!"
"The money that he stole?"
"The money that him and the other cove stole.
The money he killed his mate for!"
"Hush!" cried Dave, looking anxiously around.
"Don't get talkin' about that; for God's sake, Tom
don't."
"I don't want to talk about it," said Tom emphati-
cally. "I wish I never see it, nor him either. We'd
had a all-right time only for him. 'E keeps croppin'
up, croppin' up just when things is goin' straight, and


now 'e's nailed us 'ere an' took our boat an' our tent,
an' our tucker, an' everything!"
"Yes," agreed Dave, feeling his neck fearfully; "an'
the next thing he'll do is cut our throats an' dig a
hole an' bury us, or throw us in the river. I'm dead
full of the whole thing."
"Shut up!'' retorted Tom; "you're a nice kind o'
cove to start yelping like this."
"Well, so did you last night."
"I never. It was the smoke got in me eyes."
"Well, the sun's got in mine now. What are we
goin' to do ? "
"We'll have to swim!" said Tom, sadly.
"An' leave 'im the boat? We can't do any more
piratin' then ? "
"There was a note of gladness in Dave's voice.
"Yes," replied Tom, savagely; "an' I'll have to go
back to the old man and get whaled. It's his fault,
and I'll—l'll "
The boss pirate clenched his fist angrily.
"What'll you do ? " asked Dave, anxiously.
The first mate was not for taking any risks.
"You'll see what I'll do," cried the chief, "an' so
will he!"
A vengeful light shone in Tom Pagdin's eye.
Dave started.
"What's that nise ? " he whispered.
"Rollicks!" ejaculated Tom, peering through the
bushes. "Hist! There's a boat! Two men in it!
They're comin' across the island! They got guns!
They're after flock pigeons! As soon as they get in


near enough we'll make a bolt for the edge, an' swim
out to 'em an' tell 'em!"
They were breathless with excitement and hope.
"Hide!" cried Dave. "Hide! He might a' heard
them coming!"
They heard a soft footstep close behind them, turned,
and saw Jean Petit!


CHAPTER XVII.
THE RUSH FOR THE BOAT.
THE look in Petit's eyes when he perceived the boat
was not calculated to reassure Tom and Dave.
Dave's face showed gruesomely pale in contrast with-his
red hair, and no one would have recognised in Tom
the high-spirited youth, who, garbed in nothing but a
sense of injury, had defied his tyrannical parent only
a few days before.
Dave, who had got into the habit of taking his cue
from his superior officer, was ready to bolt, but Tom
made no sign. After a visible effort to control his
emotion, he began to gaze abstractedly round at the
fig-trees.
Petit crept up to them.
"Hist!" he exclaimed, with a significant glance at
the boat, which was making towards the point of the
island.
"We just came acrost for a billy of water," ex-
plained Tom, sotto voce, "we was goin' to have the
tea biled again you woke up."
He wa9 trying to catch Dave's eye.


Petit had crouched down beside them; his knife be-
tween his teeth.
"Make ze leetle noise," he hissed; "make ze evair
so leetle an' I will keel you both."
"I ain't goin' to make no nise," said Tom, em-
phatically.
"Neither am I,'' pleaded Dave, in an earnest voice.
"TVe never seen the boat till just when you came
along."
This attempt to allay Petit's suspicions may have
been successful or otherwise. The Frenchman made no
sign.
Dave fully expected that his throat was to be cut
at last.
He dared not look at the boat, but watched the face
of the escapee as a condemned criminal might watch
the face of his executioner.
The boat was within twenty yards of the shore, and
not more than a hundred from where they lay in the
scrub.
It happened that the day being a public holiday,
Dan Creyton and George Chard had decided to go
out shooting. On all the large islands in the river
Moreton Bay figs grew profusely, and the pigeons and
flying foxes came down from the hills to feed on the
ripe fruit.
They had determined to try this particular island
before breakfast. Hence all that followed.
The boat was certainly going to land. Petit, watch-


ing with lynx eyes, scowled angrily. Conflicting emo-
tions of hope and fear surged in Tom Pagdin's breast.
The rowers turned the corner of the point, and were
hidden from view, hut they could hear the noise of the
oars beiug drawn in; hear the voices of two strangers
in conversation; hear them taking the gear out of the
boat, and making her fast.
Again and again Tom tried to catch Dave's eye.
At last he succeeded.
Dave saw that his mate meant to run.
It was only a lightning glance, hut it said plainly
enough, "chance it."
Dave trembled all over.
He withdrew his eyes guiltily; they had only wan-
dered for a second—and looked again in Petit's face.
He seemed fascinated, as a victim might be in watch-
ing the axe of a headsman waiting for its descent—
were he permitted to see the axe. Petit was actually
meditating killing the two boys, but he was also cal-
culating the after chance. As far as the act was con-
cerned he had no qualms once he made up his mind
that it would he better for him to have them out of
the way. The youth and presumed innocence of Tom
and Dave would not deter a person of his gentle
nature for a moment. He would have no more com-
punction about the matter than he would about the mat-
ter of drowning a couple of blind kittens. Had he the
slightest inkling of the knowledge possessed by his hos-
tages regarding the murder of his accomplice on the
night of the bank robbery the career of the pirates
would have ended abruptly the previous day.


But Petit was a true criminal—lie only killed when
be thought it necessary. It is the act of a lunatic, he
had often explained to his fellows, to do otherwise.
Why make evidence against oneself without reason.
The career of the true professional was a game in
which he played his life and liberty against Society
and the Law. He could not, therefore, afford to throw
away a chance. But if any of his crimes had been
discovered—if these strangers in the boat were come to
arrest him—of course there would no longer be any
need for caution.
He questioned Tom with a threat.
"Zese men in ze boad," he growled in a low guttral,
"know you, eh? Spik me visout untruth," he added,
"else "
The knife in his hand was sufficient termination for
the sentence.
Tom understood.
"Yes," said the latter, looking right into Petit's
eyes. "I know 'em both. One's name's Joe Saunders,
an? the other cove's Dan Creed. They're duck
shooters."
"Yat?" exclaimed Petit.
"Shooters," interposed Dave, with a quivering lip
and an exaggerated expression of veracity. "They go
shooting ducks in the swamps for the market, and
pigeons."
"Yes," observed Tom, "they come up the river a
piece. That cove in the nose of the boat, he's got a
bit of a farm up there."
He was looking at Dave.


Dave took up the story.
"Yes," he went on; "that's Dan Saunders."
"Joe Saunders," interrupted Tom.
"Joe Saunders, I mean," replied Dave, correcting
himself quickly; "an' the other cove's Dan HacCreedy."
"Dan Creed," said Tom.
It would have delighted him very much to punch
Dave's head.
"That's what I said —Dan Creed,'' resumed Dave.
"TTe know 'em both."
Petit silenced them by a motion.
The sportsmen were trooping along the track, gun in
hand, with their eyes in the air looking up at the
fig-trees, watching for pigeons.
It had been Dan Creyton's idea, that expedition.
He wanted to get George out in the open air, away from
his troubles, to occupy his mind in some sport. There
is no medicine like this for the mind and nerves, and
already George was forgetting the black cloud which
had recently lowered upon him. The primal instinct
of the hunter can always be reverted to by a sane man,
whom civilization has in one way or another made
sick. An hour's fishing, by some shady pool, under
the open sky, is worth more than a bottle of drugs.
They strode along in the cool morning air, making
little noise on the jungle path, carpeted with leaves.
Closer and closer they came to that group of three in
the scrub.
Tom and Dave could hear their hearts beating in
their heads. Petit lay upon the ground, flattened out
like a panther, his knife ready to his hand. He had


put Tom on one side and Dave on the other, within
reach of his arm, giving them to understand plainly
enough that at the first attempt to communicate with
the strangers he would choke the life out of them.
The hoys knew well enough they would have little
chance in the strong clutch of those vice-like fingers,
because Petit had given their necks a sample squeeze
with his huge forefinger and thumb.
So they lay still, fearing, hoping, despairing—both
more or less hysterical, both experiencing great diffi-
culty in restraining something which kept rising up in
their throats—something choking and unpleasant which
would otherwise have developed into a sob.
Dan Creyton and George passed them within a dis-
tance of ten yards, and they dared not cry out or give
the slightest sign of warning. Tom said afterwards
that he never felt like he did then except once, and that
was when he crawled down a hollow log after a bandi-
coot and got stuck. It was just the same smothering,
suffocating feeling.
The shooters went by and entered a clump of figs.
They sat there a long time waiting for pigeons. The
trio laying concealed in the hushes could hear the
murmur of their voices occasionally. They talked in
very low tones, because it is good not to make any
noise when one is out hunting; hut as they were not
many yards little hits of conversation drifted down to
Tom, whose ears were strained to catch it.
Presently they shifted their position to the butt of a
big fig-tree not more than ten yards outside the scrub


in which the others were concealed. Tom almost cried
out when Dan Creyton said suddenly:
"Do you know, George, I've got an idea that there
were at least two men in that business."
"I don't know," replied George. "God knows I
have thought the thing over and over night and day,
and it is still the greatest mystery on earth to me.
What makes you think that, Dan ? "
"I'll tell you later," said Dan, "when I work my
theory out. I'm not going to let the matter rest, even
if the police give it up. This murder case has put
everything else out of their heads. It is my opinion
that the murder and the robbery were carried out by the
same man!"
Tom Pagdin started, and stole a glance at Jean
Petit.
The look he saw on Petit's face made his hair stand
on end.
Dave was evidently engaged in trying to swallow
something without making a noise. What Dave was
trying to swallow is not quite certain, but it was
probably a yell.
"I don't know," said George Chard, thoughtfully.
"I cannot see anything at present to connect the two
crimes."
"Xeither can the police," resumed Dan. "But that
is simply because the police, like everybody else along
the river, have got a wrong theory about the robbery."
He did not say that the theory was that either George
or the manager, or both of them together, had removed
the money.


"I believe," resumed Dan, "that that body was the
body of an accomplice. He was put out of the way,
either because he knew too much, or because the other
man wanted all the plunder for himself, and, what's
more, I'm convinced that whoever did it was a
stranger."
"It is a pity that religious crank could not properly
identify the murdered man," exclaimed George.
"What is that jumping in the bushes ? "
"A paddymelon," said Dan; "these scrubs are full
of them."
It was Jean Petit. He had involuntarily half-
jumped to his feet.
Tom and Dave thought the critical moment had
come. But the convict sank softly to the ground again.
His face was working horribly. Tom Padgin said he
looked more like a devil let loose out of hell than any-
thing, and a boss devil, at that.
"Well," said George Chard, with a sigh, "I wish
you could clear it up, Dan, for my sake, if for nothing
else. You'd be welcome to the £250 reward offered by
the bank as well as the £5OO the Government are
giving!"
"I am trying my hand at a little amateur detective
work," said Dan, quietly; "but it is not the money I'm
after."
"And you wouldn't have to apply for the pardon,
either," said George, smiling.
"Ho," replied Dan; "the bitterest old woman in
Wharfdale would hardly accuse me of being an ac-


complice to a brutal murder. So the pardon would
have to go to someone else who wanted it!"
Tom Pagdin started in turn, but checked himself.
He dreaded Petit's eyes.
But Petit, like a listening wolf who has caught the
bay of pursuing hounds on his trail, thought of other
things. His mind was so crowded with serious re-
jections that he did not notice the discrepancies be-
tween the boys' account of the strangers and the latter's
conversation about themselves and their business.
Presently Dan and George shouldered their guns and
continued their walk along the track which led directly
to the convict's camp.
Petit stirred uneasily, and sat up. His face betrayed
conflicting emotions of fear, anger, and hate.
He was evidently looking for a way of speedy
escape without attracting the notice of the strangers.
Suddenly he caught both boys and shook them.
"Come wis me!" he growled. "Make no noise!''
He made towards the boat in which the young men
had rowed over.
He had made up his mind that there lay his best
chance of getting away.
It would be some time before the young men re-
turned from the other end of the island.
When they came back the boat would be gone.
They would probably discover the camp. Their
suspicions might be aroused. One of them at least
had a theory about the murder. The incident might
be connected with the crime, and lead to a sure clue.
The loss of their boat would, however, delay them.


Perhaps they would not discover the boat in which
the boys had landed —his, Petit's boat —which he had
hidden very carefully.
Petit so argued, and arriving at his conclusion,
acted without delay.
He strode along the jungle path, driving the boys
noiselessly before him like a couple of sheep.
They were within ten yards of the point when the
convict, putting his hand to his waist, uttered an im-
precation.
The money which he had been carrying about with
him in a canvas belt was gone.
He had left it at the camp whither the two strangers
had directly gone.
With fearful oaths and threats he bade Dave and
Tom stay where they were until he returned, and
wheeling about, he went back quickly along the track.
Tom waited until the jungle hid him from view,
and then he grabbed Dave by the hand.
"Quick!"
They sprang to the boat together.
"Off with the painter!" he gasped, and stopped.
Standing against the seat aft was Dan Creyton's
Winchester rifle, and beside it was a box of cartridges!
At heart Tom Pagdin was not a coward.
Real cowardice is a thing few Australian hush lads
have any use for.
Tom had been out kangaroo shooting, and he knew
the mechanism of a Winchester.
In less time that it takes to write, the pirate had the


rifle out of the boat, twelve cartridges in the magazine,
and tbe balance of tbe box loose in bis pocket.
His band sbook witb excitement but tbere was a fire
in bis eye that boded no good for Jean Petit.
"Let bim come now!" sobbed Tom, pulling tbe
bammer back to full cock. "Let tbe d bound
come! ! "
"What are you goin' to do?" asked Dave from
behind.
Tom laid down behind the drifted log, and sighted
tbe Winchester along the track.
"Keep down be'ind me," be said excitedly, "and lay
close!"
"Suppose you kill im, we might get 'ung," ventured
Dave.
"I don't care," replied Tom. "I'll 'ang for 'im, tbe
blood-thirsty bound. 'E'd a' killed us afore 'e left the
island most likely.''
"Are you goin' to call on him to surrender first?"
"Xot a call! 'E's an outlaw. They can't touch you
for shootin' outlaws."
"Suppose you miss 'im," whimpered Dave.
"I ain t goin to miss 'im," replied Tom, grimly.
"If you do he'll kill us both."
"'E won't never get the chance!" said Tom. "I got
her lined jest in front of that myrtle, in the clear.
E's got to come by there. It ain't more'n sixty yards
at the outside. If I don't drop 'im first shot, there's
eleven more, an' I got a pocketful o' cartridges, an'
we're between 'im an' the boat.
Tom shut his left eye and sighted. His forefinger


was crooked over the trigger. The barrel of his rifle
rested steadily on the log.
Jean Petit broke into view, running. The canvas
belt was in his hand.
"They've seen him," whispered Dave. "Maybe
they're following him."
Tom made no reply. He held his breath, as a
kangaroo shooter does just before he squeezes the trigger
gently to him.
Petit rounded the myrtle tree.


CHAPTER XVIII.
TOM PAGDIN GOES GUNNING.
I f OM PAGDIN'S crooked forefinger closed on the
J- trigger. The sharp cr-r-rack of the Winchester
was answered by a howl of pain from Jean Petit.
The bullet had penetrated the fleshy part of his arm.
Tom wrenched back the lever, ejected the smoking
shell, slid another cartridge out of the magazine into
the barrel, and lifted the rifle to his shoulder again.
Petit, taken by surprise, had pulled up short.
The unexpected had happened!
"Shoot him in the stummick!" yelled Dave. "Shooi
him in the stummick, Tom!"
The love of Avar is in our Australian youth. When
first the Colonial troops rode on to the veldt, seasoned
British veteran? admitted this.
Ihe first mate had armed himself with a paddle, and
Avas standing behind his chief Avaving his clubbed
oar above his head in a state of great excitement.
He shouted defiance at Petit, and Avildly urged Tom
to kill the latter without benefit of clergy.
George Chard and Dan Creytoa, hearing the shot


and the shouting, were running in the direction of the
boat.
Tom covered Petit with the Winchester.
They were not twenty yards apart.
The expression on the convict's face as he grasped
the situation would under ordinary circumstances have
turned the pirates cold.
But a bush boy of thirteen with a loaded Winchester
at full cock and a grievance such as Tom Pagdin was
labouring under, had to be reckoned with.
Bang! went the rifle.
Petit leaped into the air like a kangaroo which had
been shot through the body by a Martini, and sprang
into the scrub.
At the same moment Dan and George broke into
sight through the jungle.
"After him!" yelled Tom.
He re-charged his rifle as he ran, with Dave close
at his heels.
"Look out!" cried Dave, frantically waving and
shouting to the two strangers. "Head him off!"
At that moment Petit, twice wounded, desperate,
and murderous, hurled himself upon Dan and
attempted to seize his shot gun.
Dan was an athlete, but this unexpected attack took
him at a disadvantage. He stumbled, caught his foot
in a vine, and fell backwards.
The gun was loaded with number six shot in both
barrels.
Dan Creyton's hand was on the triggers and as he
went down the two charges exploded, tearing out the


twigs and scattering green perforated leaves in the air
overhead.
As Dan Crevton fell, George threw himself upon
Petit.
The frenzied convict fought and struggled like
mad lion.
He was more than a match for them both. Besides,
this unexpected development of a morning's peaceful
sport had taken them completely by surprise.
They did not know whether their assailant was an
escaped lunatic, a murderer, or a law-abiding citizen,
who was labouring under an impression that he had
struck an island of homicides. The question was, who
was justified? They had heard the shots fired and
the shouting, hut they were absolutely ignorant of the
meaning of it all.
However, the average Anglo-Saxon does not pause
to reason about things when he is attacked—he hits
out.
They struggled with the escapee, who knew his only
chance of making things even was to get possession of
a gun. Escape from the island, his instinct told him,
had been cut off. He was in a tight place, wounded
and must kill and smash a way out. One murder more
or less did not matter to him. He fought for a little
longer life, a few hours' further liberty—that was all.
He bled, hut he did not feel his wounds. Tom's bullets
had not hit him in any vital part of the body.
Dan Crevton was stunned bv the force of the fall,
l) V /
by the weight of the aggressor, and by Petit's rapid
blows.




* JL*
|R- > ' Y >
Trapped at last.
Tom Pagdin, Pirate
Page 179.


The convict shook himself free from them as an
infuriated boar will shake off a brace of dogs, seized
the empty fowling piece by the muzzle, and swung it
aloft to club out George Chard's brains.
George, pieceing rapid events together afterwards,
remembered that a wild-eyed youth, armed with Dan's
rifle, suddenly appeared on the scene, followed by a red-
headed youth waving an oar.
The boys sprang out of the scrub right behind Petit.
George, whose head was in a whirl, declared that the
red-headed boy brought the oar down with all the
strength he was capable of on the convict's neck, and
that the gun flew out of the latter's hands, and the
stock struck him (George) on the side of the head.
The next minute the other boy was holding the
muzzle of a smoking rifle to the prostrate convict's
ear, and inviting Dan and George to get up and bind
that person, and making all sorts of statements and
charges against the prostrate man's history and
character.
"Get the painter out of the boat!" cried Tom to
Dave. "Move as much as an eye-lid," he observed to
Petit, "an' I'll shoot the top of your skull acrost
the bloomin' river!"
Petit was dazed. He did not offe/ to move.
"There's ten shots in her yet," Tom informed the
prostrate foe, "an' I'm too close to miss yer. I've got
a little account with yer, any'ow. That knife ain't no
good to you no more," he added sarcastically, "I got
a better kind of knife to-day."
He pressed the muzzle of the rifle closer against


Petit's ear to assure him that he was stating facts.
The argument was convincing. Petit looked per-
fectly diabolical, but he did not offer to put Tom's
-repeated promises of blowing his head off to the test.
Dave came running back from the boat, breathless,
with the painter in his hand.
"Make a slip knot in it," ordered Tom, who had
assumed control of the proceedings. It was his hand,
and he meant to see it played.
"Put his hands behind his back!" he ordered, "draw
it tight!"
George found himself obeying, without further ques-
tion, the orders of the strange wild-looking youth, who
seemed to have good and valid reasons for all he was
saying and doing.
"Tighter!" cried the pirate captain; "draw it as
tight as it will go. Don't be afraid of hurtin' him!"
"Ho," said Dave who was buzzing round; "don't
trouble about him, he didn't trouble about us, nor any-
body else."
"How, Sour Krout " cried Tom, when he had seen
the murderer's hands securely bound behind his back,
"I'm goin' to walk be'ind yer with this Winchester till
I see you into the lock-up."
Dan Creyton, recovering from his stupor, sat up on
the leaves. The whole thing looked like a dream to
him. He was trying to collect events and identities.
George was on his knees beside him, inquiring if he
were hurt.
"Ho," said Dan slowly; "not hurt much; I think


no bones broken. But what is it? What's all this
about? Somebody fell on me, didn't they?"
"Yes," said Tom, grimly; "somebody did. If you
knew as much about him as.we do you'd reckon you
was lucky you ain't got a knife in your neck."
"He would, too," corroborated Dave, "only I see
'im drop it when you fired the first shot."
"I must 'a' hit him then," said Tom, in a glad voice.
"I knowed I couldn't 'a' missed him clean at that
distance. Why it wasn't more'n fifty yards at the
outside, an' I killed a wallaby with a pea-rifle at
fifty five."
"Yes," said Dave, "he's hit on the arm; see the
blood on his shirt."
Petit scowled.
"What is the meaning of all this?" demanded Dan
Creyton, rising painfully to his feet.
Petit broke into a torrent of words. He declared, in
rapid, broken English, that he had been attacked by
the two boys—they were his children by adoption.
They had run away, he was following them; they had
turned upon him, fired at him, and wounded him in
two places. He had leaped upon the strangers not
knowing where he was going or what he was doing,
thinking, too, that they had joined the attack. He was
innocent of all things. Let them release him at once;
dreadful punishment would be meted out to them if
they persisted. It was murder, outrage, against the
law of the country. Would these gentlemen conten-
ance such things ? Compel that boy to remove the


firearm; it might go off —then they would all be hung
for murder. Let them untie the bonds at once.
'"Hold on!" interrupted Tom Pagdin, turning to
George and Dan. "I got something to say, too. I
got," he began, stepping back three or four paces, but
still aiming at Petit's head, "that is, me an' my mate,
'as got to turn Queen's evidence. We got to do it some
time, so we might as well do it at onct an' have done
with it."
"Say," he went on, "have either of you chaps got a
Bible on you?"
George shook his head. Dan regarded Tom with an
air of attention, almost of respect. With returning
perception he saw that there was something important
behind all this—that some mystery was going to be
cleared up, and instinctively he connected the group
before him with the bank robbery—the murder, per-
haps.
"Yo,'' said Dan, humouring the boy, "neither of
us carry Testaments about with us when we go shoot-
ing. C-ouldn't you swear on something else?"
"Yes," said Tom, after a moment's thought. "We
might swear on a knife. Gimme that sheath knife."
Tom took the knife in one hand and held the rifle
towards Petit with the other.
"It's a private oath," he exclaimed. "Come here an'
swear on it Dave; we got to before we can break the
other oath we took up the river."
Tom solemnly turned the haft of the knife to Dave's
heart and swore him to tell the truth, and then Dave
did the same thing to Tom, repeating the elaborate


oath which they had concocted on the island after the
murder.
"Now," said the pirate captain, aiming steadily at
the convict all the time he was talking, "you_begin at
the beginning, Dave, and I'll back you up."
"It's this way," began Dave, keeping a wary eye on
Petit, and looking now and then at his mate to see
if he was going right. "Me an' Tom run away from
home because we got whaled. We reckoned to do a
bit o' piratin' down the river—piratin' and odd jobs that
turned up. We found a boat, Tom, he was captain,
an' I was first mate."
"I found 'er floating up the Broadstream one
mornin'," explained Tom. "She's hid in the lantana
now. He took her away from us and hid her. You
kin go an' see her if you don't believe us."
"Go on," said Dan, picking up his gun and re-load-
ing it. "We'll see all about everything afterwards."
"We was hid in the lantana," resumed Dave, "the
night we ran away from home, an' we heard this
German feller an' another feller talkin'."
Petit started.
"Keep still, Sour Krout!" admonished Tom. "I
told you there was ten shots in this rifle, didn't I."
"You shoot 'im in the stummick, Tom," enjoined
Dave, stepping back, "if he tries to get at me."
"Don't yon fret! He won't never get within three
yards of you!" replied Tom, "I'll down him the first
step he takes!"
"Well, we was hid in the scrub," resumed Dave,


speaking quickly, "an' we heard 'im an' another cove
plannin' to rob a bank!"
Dave paused to consult Tom with his eye.
"Go on!" cried Dan and George, eagerly.
Tom nodded.
"Go on," he said. "Tell the whole truth, an' nothink
but the truth, so-'elp-you. We've turned Queen's
evidence. They can't tech us; besides, we had nothink
to do with it. We only seen it."
"We heerd 'em plannin' to rob the bank," resumed
Dave, "an' we was frightened. We hid on an island
nest day, intendin' to come an' get our boat an' go
down the river; but these coves knowed where the boat
was, and they came next night and took it, and did
the robbery.
"How do you know they did the robbery?" asked
George Chard, eagerly.
"We was there when they came back with the boat,"
replied Dave, watching Petit closely.
"Yes," said Tom, taking up the story; "it was an
awful rainy night first, but the storm cleared off before
twelve o'clock, and they brought the money back with
them, and "
"How do you know ?" cried George and Dan, in one
breath.
"We see it. It was in a canvas bag. Keep cool,
Sour Tvrout! There's ten shots in 'er—ten lovely
shots, an' "
"Never mind him," said Dan Creyton, cocking his
gun, "it will he bad for him if he attempts anything."
"That's right," said Tom, giving Dan a look of


gratitude and friendship, "an' if you see what we see
you wouldn't 'esitate about it neither. We was layin'
in the scrub when they came back with the money what
they robbed from the bank. They had a lantern
keep quiet Sour Ivrout; she's got ten shots in 'er, yet
I tell yer —an' they went to bury the money. Least-
wise, this cove gammoned they ought to do it. Then —
keep quiet, Sour Krout; you'll do that onct too often —
then we seen "
Tom paused to admonish the Frenchman once more.
"We seen him do it! !"
"Yes," said Dave, solemnly; "we seen him do it!
Both of us!''
"What?" asked Dan. "What was it he did?"
"Keep yer eye on him,' said Tom. "He's a cold-
blooded murderer an' a robber, an' worse! He killed
his mate with a knife, that's what he done!"
Petit's face was a study in hate and rage.
"Keep cool, Sour Krout," observed Tom, grimly.
"You've had your innings. Yesterday we was your
prisoners. You 'ad the upper hand, you did, and you
treated me an' Dave bad. That was your picnic, and
me and Dave was invited. Now this is our picnic, an'
we've invited you!"
Dave proceeded to do a nervous war dance round the
captive.
"Yah!'' he cried. "Twice yesterday an' once this
mornin' you offered to cut our throats didn't yer?'
"After we see this cove murder his mate," explained
Tom and Dan, "we was frightened to go an' tell. We
thought he'd lay for us an' kill us, too. So we came


down the river in our boat an' landed here; but he'd
got here before we did some bow or another, an' be
ketched us and took the boat from us, an' drawed it up
m the scrub so's we couldn't get away. He said he'd
cut our throats with his knife if we didn't do what be
told us to, and we was frightened. We never let on
to him we knowed what be done. We was goin' to
swim for it when we see you come in the boat. He
was just goin' to collar that boat an' get away when be
remembered about the money he stole, an' went back
for it. It's a lucky thing be did. Me an' Dave might
a been dead now only be forgot that money."
"The money!" exclaimed George. "Where is it
now?"
I dunno," said Tom; "unless be dropped it by the
tree when I fired at bim first."
"I took your rifle out of the boat and fired at bim,"
he added, apologetically, "because if I hadn't got the
rifle be d have bloomin' well got it, an' it's my opinion
he'd a cleared the whole camp out afore he'd a
stopped!"
"See what you missed, Sour Krout!" cried Dave,
using the paddle as a jumping pole, and leaping about
in a delirium of derisive joy.
Petit ground his teeth savagely and glared at bis
captors.
Wouldn t you like to be loose!" yelled Dave, who
was more or less hysterical. "Wouldn't you like me to
untie you! Yah!''
Dan turned to George:


"Let us go and see if the money is really there!"
he said.
"It's there!" cried Dave. "I see him drop it when
Tom fired! You wait!"
The excited first mate made a bolt into the scrub,
and returned in a few minutes heavily laden.
"There!" he cried, triumphantly, throwing the
canvas bag containing the plunder of the Bulk and
Bullion on the ground at Dan Creyton's feet. "Now
you'll believe what we say is true!"
"There does not seem to be any reason for doubting
it," observed Dan, "in view of the evidence before us.
George, you'd better take charge of the B. and B.
property for the present. This looks like a providen-
tial coincidence for you!"
"It looks," replied George, in a bewildered way, "like
a story out of a book!"
"My young friend," remarked Dan to Tom Pagdin,
vou had better allow me to uncock that rifle; there is a
danger of it going off at present."
"No," said Tom, positively, "I'm goin' to keep this
rifle to his hind ear; I ain't goin' to trust him, now,
after we've put him away."
"No," said Dave, "we ain't goin' to trust him —not
more'n six inches from the barrel, anyway."
"Well," said Dan with a dry smile, "as you seem
to be the leader of the party, you will be good enough
to say what we are going to do next?"
"Will he be hung?' asked Tom in an anxious voice.
"I am not prepared to pronounce judgment," replied
Dan; "but if the statements you have just made fit


with certain facts I have in my mind, the case will
probably present important developments."
"I don't understand all that," replied Tom; <c but
I reckon the best thing to do is to give this cove
in charge!"
"A very reasonable suggestion, my young friend,"
observed Dan. '"How will you proceed to do it?"
"I'll show you," said Tom, with the air of a
general. ''You let your mate take his gun an' go with
Dave for our boat, and bring her round the Island
'longside yours."


CHAPTER XIX.
fHE PIRATES' LAST CRUISE.
said Tom Pagdin, "is the pirate's
1 hour!"
It was. If any disinterested chronicler of piratical
life could have beheld Tom —that ragged buccaneer in
miniature —holding the muzzle of Dan Creyton's Win-
chester to the prisoner's ear, and seen Dave's red head
bobbing about the jungle in the nervous restlessness of
victory, he would have got to work on the picture
without delay.
"How, Sour Krout!" continued the victorious pirate,
"I'm goin' to give you sailin' orders, an' remember
she's got ten shots in her yet!"
He issued his commands. George and Dave were
to launch and bring the pirates' boat round the island,
Dan was to walk in front with the shot gun, while he
urged Petit on from behind with the loaded Winchester.
When Tom broke this news to the escapee the latter
appealed to Dan with threats. Dan observed briefly
that Tom was taking all the responsibility, and hinted
that he had the best end of the argument. If the boy
was wrong and Petit was right, the matter could be


adjusted afterwards. Meanwhile he advised him to do
as he was told. Thereat Tom, perceiving that his new
found friend was not going to interfere with him,
pressed the cold muzzle of the rifle against the convict's
head, and convinced him that obedience was good.
It was an interesting procession, but Petit did not
seem to appreciate it thoroughly. Every time he as
much as looked round Tom would prod him in the
back of the neck with his gun, and order "eyes front."
When Petit growled he girded him with unpleasing
remarks and uncomplimentary nicknames. As soon as»
they reached the boats Tom disposed his prisoner in
the bow with due ceremony, and sat facing him, with
the Winchester, while Dan rowed.
For further security he commanded the other boat
to keep in close attendance, and ordered Dave for'ard,
armed with Dan's gun, giving him strict instructions
to open fire at the first sign of hostilities. And Dave
knelt down while George rowed, and took frequent aim
at Petit to assure him that he was prepared to obey
orders.
"All we want now," observed Tom, as the boats
pulled out slowly into the stream "is a band. It don't
seem quite right without a band, but I reckon they'll
fix that up afterwards."
"Yes," observed Dan, "I daresay you'll get a recep-
tion in Wharfdale if that rifle don't go off accidentally
before we get there!"
"Pity we couldn't send 'em word we was comin',"
mused the pirate chief. "They might make up a pro-
cession."


"Very likely they would/' said Dan. "The Mayor
would probably attend, and the aldermen and the
principal citizens. You'll be a hero, Tom, anyway."
"That's all right," remarked Tom; "but we ain't
done half what we was goin' to do, me an' Dave.
We ain't made no raids, nor fought with any man-o'-
war, nor had any duels with other pirates, nor any-
thing."
"Yever mind," said Dave, by way of consolation,
"You've made a pretty valuable capture."
"Him!'' said Tom, with contempt, flourishing the
rifle at Petit. "Oh, he's nothing—only a cold-blooded
German. It's the Germans that's ruinin' this country,
and spoilin' the pirate business. I've heard the old
man talkin' about the way them Germans was makin'
things hard for white folks, but I never understood it
like I do now."
When they came within hail of the shore Tom com-
manded Dan and George to cease rowing.
"We ought ter hold a consultation of war," he said,
"afore we give up the prisoner; we oughter get it in
writin' that the admiral will have him 'ung at the yard
arm before six bells. That's the way they uster do."
"I am afraid," replied Dan, "that we'll have to leave
out that part of the ceremony. Besides the admiral is
out of town and has taken the fleet with him."
By this time a small crowd of curious people had
commenced to assemble on the bank. This was what
Tom Pagdin wanted.
He lay off and waited, killing time with trifles of
persiflage and badinage until the entire town turned out.


Then he stood up in the boat, and with one eye on the
scowling i ace of Jean Petit, he gave the crowd a little
of that gentleman's history, and instructed them to get
the strongest cell in thb lockup aired at once for his
reception.
When the people got an inkling of what had hap-
pened, they howled questions at Dan and George.
But Dan simply referred them to Tom Pagdin. He
said that Tom was the commander of a pirate fleet
which happened to be in the offing, and that he had
just dropped in at At harfdale to clear up the mysteries
of the bank robbery and murder which had been agitat-
ing their minds. He added dryly that it was mainly
for the sake of giving his friend Chard an opportunity
to bring libel actions against some prominent amateur
detectives in AVharfdale that he had taken a temporary
commission under Captain Thomas Pagdin.
•'Why it's that young Tom Pagdin that was lost up
the river!" cried an excited citizen.
''An' the red-headed kid's Dave Gibson," said
another. "They've been dragging the Broadstream for
'em the last two weeks, everybody up there thought they
was drounded!''
'"P. ell I never!'' ejaculated a woman in hearing.
1 hem two. Aou don't tell me that they had anything
to do with the robbery of the bank?"
And every youth in Wharfdale wished at that
moment that he was Tom Pagdin or Dave Gibson.
"Hadn't we better go ashore now," suggested Dan.
"Hold on! cried Tom. "They've got to give me


and Dan a free pardon first, I'm going to hold him as a
'ostage until we get it.'
"You have already turned Queen's evidence, said
Dan, gravely, "and the free pardon comes as a matter
of course. I am the Postmaster here, and I keep the
free pardon forms in my office. I'll see to that. All
you have to do is to tell the truth, or as much of it
as vou can remember, and instruct Dave to do the
same."
The excitement at the landing of the prisoner was
such as Wharf dale in all its history had never knovn.
The news was telegraphed from one to another, and
from the very outskirts of the town breathless inhabi-
tants, young and old, came running to the river bank.
Even the town cripple was in attendance.
Dogs followed their owners, met enemies and fought,
but for once a dog-fight went unnoticed.
The keel of the boat stuck in the mud at the edge.
Tom ordered the crowd off and they obeyed. Then
he comanded Petit: "Right turn! March !" and Petit
cursed and obeyed also.
The pirate captain was tasting the sweets of power.
The people fell back and made a lane. Dan went
up to the policeman and spoke to him.
The constable stepped beside the prisoner
He did not raise any objections when Tom and
Dave, still armed, walked behind until they came up to
the lock-up, with the crowd at their heels, talking
excitedly, and jostling one another along the roadway.
When Tom and Dave passed inside the station with
Dan and George Chard, the people lined along the


fence, theorising and arguing. It was nearly an hour
before Dan re-appeared, and he had to get up on a
stump and tell the people what had happened. The
town would have signed a unanimous petition to the
Postmaster-General to remove him at once if he had
not done it.
So he got up and spoke all he knew about Petit,
and about the way Tom had acted on the island. He
said that he probably owed his life to Tom, who was a
juvenile hero and a credit to the district. There had,
he believed, been a lot of talk in "Wharfdale about the
bank robbery, and suspicion had fallen on an innocent
man, but the recovery of the five hundred sovereigns
(which he had just had the pleasure of handing over
to the officer in charge, until such time as the whole
matter was dealt with by a jury) showed that they had
been wrong. It should be a lesson to them. The
matter of the bank robbery was practically cleared up.
The prisoner inside, on being questioned by the police,
had admitted the robbery. He was a desperate man,
an escapee from Xew Caledonia, and a charge of
murder would be preferred against him at once.
The crowd cheered Dan. When George Chard came
out of the station a prominent resident rushed and
caught him by the hand. He was a J.P., and con-
gratulated George fervently. When the people saw
that the law as well as the evidence was with George,
they all wanted to shake hands and congratulate him,
too.
But George said simply that it was Tom Pagdin who
deserved their congratulations and applause. Only


for Tom the affair might never have been cleared up,
and he might have lived on for years under a vague
cloud of suspicion. It was Tours pluck and promptness
which had brought them all out of the mess, and
probably saved more than one life.
The constable brought Tom and Dave to the door of
the station, gave them a good friendly clap on the
back each, and handed them over to Wharfdale. And
Wharfdale made a rush and got hold of the boys and
lifted them shoulder high and carried them up the
street in the direction of the principal hotel.
They made Tom get on the table, and tell the whole
story, and the Pirate proved equal to the occasion.
He spoke continuously for two hours, with frequent
pauses for the absorption of soft drinks, and cakes and
gingerbread. And Dave stood at his right band, like
the trusty Sancho Panza he was, and corroborated
every word, and more.
He told them how he and Dave had been driven by
parental tyranny from home. Of the adventures they
had had pirating, and of others that they had not had,
such as an encounter with a bunyip, and a mid-night
fight with wild blackfellows. HOAV he was bitten with
a snake, and Dave sucked the wound, and tied string
round it and saved him, and when, after a preliminary
flourish he came to the storv of the murder, the men
held their breaths and the women became more or less
hysterical.
The dramatic instinct was strong in the pirate chief.
He neglected none of the local colouring. Dave sub-


stantiated everything, and threw in suggestions of his
own.
Wharfdale mentally collected every word —cleaned
him out, as a prospector might clean out a placer of
diamonds—and when they had heard everything they
went away to find somebody to astonish with the
story.
Dan Creyton had gone up to the post-office to tell
Xora, and send wires up and down the river, and by
and-bye buggies and sulkies began to trot into town
loaded with people who wanted to see and hear for
themselves.
Tom had retold his yarn —with improvements, as
they occurred —so many times'that he was quite hoarse,
and Dan took him and Dave away to his own place.
And when he presented his young guests to Xora,
that young lady so far forgot conventionalities as to
throw her arms round the pirates and hug them, in
spite of their blushes and protests.
It was an hour of triumph, but its climax came
when Dan asked Tom Pagdin if he would accept the
"Winchester as a gift!
The pirate chief was so overwhelmed with joy that
he had to go out of the room, and turn Catherine wheels
in the yard.
Dave said, jealously, that Tom ought to have better
manners, but when George promised him a single-
barrelled shot gun as a memento, he went out and
turned Catherine wheels also.
Xora would not be satisfied until she heard Tom tell


her it all himself. The pirate was over-stuffed and
weary, but he complied.
When he came to the part where Petit fought with
Dan and George 011 the island, iNora turned red and
pale, and had to go out of the room for a while, which
fact Tom duly noticed.
It was late that night when the adventurers retired.
Tom sat on the bed unlacing his boots.
"That girl!" he remarked to Dave, solemnly, "ought
to be the queen of a pirate island. She's too good an
too pretty not to be."
"She give me a pound note, said Dave. "1 reckon
when we go piratin' again an' capture a treasure-ship
we ought to stand to her."
"Stand to her!" exclaimed Tom. "My word we will!
If ever that girl gets carried off by another pirate an'
marooned on a desert island, because she won't become
his wife, let her send for me!"
"An' me !" said Dave.
"For both of us. But 1 ain't goin' to wait for that!"
"How?"
Tom slotvly drew off his sock. They had both been
rigged out with new clothes by an admiring population.
"I'm going to do something now."
"What?" asked Dave. "I don't see what you can
do."
"Don't you? That's because you got no sense, Dave
Gibson. Did yer see how her eyes opened when I was
tellin' her how Sour-krout was going to kill that cove
Chard ?"
"Yes, I see."


"And did you notice how her face went red an'
pretty, like a peach when it's ripening ? "
"Yes."
"An' did you see how she had to go out of the room
to dry her eyes ? "
"Yes, I see her go out of the room, but I "
"Of course not. You don't know nothing about these
things. I tell you what it is, Dave Gibson, that girl's
dead in love with that George Chard!"
"Did she tell you that ? " asked Dave.
"No," replied Tom, loftily. "She did not, but I
know it. And what's more, if he don't marry her she'll
get sick and die of a broken heart."
"How do you know ? "
"How do I know? Ain't I ever read anything?
That's what a girl does when she's in love. But I'm
goin' to stop it. I'm goin' to go to him and put it to
him straight. If he's anything of a man he'll up and
marry the girl, an' if he don't, well, I'll challenge him!"
"Challenge him, how?" asked Dave, pausing, with
his boot half off.
"Challenge him to fight a duel with Winchester rifles.
You'll have to be my second, an" if I fall on the field
of honour you've got to avenge me."
"How am I going to do it, then ? "
"If he shoots me you'll have to challenge him next."
"But suppose he shoots me ?" asksed Dave, doubt-
fully.
"You'll have to get somebody to avenge you! That's
what they call a vendetta."


"But how can I get anybody if I'm dead? I don't
want to fight any duel, anyway.''
"It doesn't matter what you want. You leave it to
me. I'll fix somebody to carry on the vendetta if we're
both shot!"
Tom considered for a long time, sitting on the bed,
half undressed, his chin on his hand.
"I'll tell you what!" he cried, jumping up, "we'll
issue an 'ultermaterm.' "
"A what ? "
"A ultermaterm. Gimme some pencil an' paper,
quick."


CHAPTER XX.
THE ULTIMATUM.
GEORGE CHARD was somewhat taken back when
a small boy, acting as emissary for the pirates,
handed him an unclean scrawl next morning. It was
written with blue pencil, on a sheet of brown paper.
Deciphered, it read as follows: —
ULTERMATERM!
To -Mister G. Chard. Whereas It is came to to the
nollege of us, Captain Thomas Pagdin an* Captain
David Gibson, pirates, that Miss Xora Crayton, which
is the prettiest Girl along the River, an the best, is
ded in luv with u, and you are uot treating her fare an'
Onerable as a gentleman. In knott telling Her so
without farther delay that u are ded in luv with her
an' Will marri her, Captain T. Pagdin an' D. Gibson
do herebve chalenge you to fight a duel with me,
Captain T. Pagdin an' D. Gibson, pirates, this day
behind the post office, at one o'clok. P.s. I Captain
Tom Pagdin will ave first shott, and Captain d Gibson
will ave seckond shott.


N.B. —this is a vendetter, so be wair!
Sined captain thomas pagdin an' Captain d gibson.
P.S. —if it is becawse u ain't got any munney to
Mary Miss Nora Creyton with me and Dave as got
sum wich u can ave, wich she give us erself for savin
ure life from the Gorman cove."
George read and re-read this epistle several times,
and then be despatched the emissary in search of the
chief pirates.
Tom was closeted with George in bis room at the
bank for a good half hour, and then be came out with
a satisfied and important air.
"What did be say ? Is be going to fight us ? " asked
Dave, anxiously.
"No," replied Tom, "worse luck. 'E caved in."
"Is be going to marry er then ? "
"Im on a oath not to say anything about it," replied
Tom mysteriously. "But it's goin' to be all-right."
And it was.
Jean Petit got bis deserts in due time. The story of
bow Tom gave bis evidence at the trial and bad bis
name and a photograph of himself in the papers would
make another book. The old man came down the river
to claim bis progeny and the latter's share of the re-
ward, but Tom bad a strong friend in Dan Creyton.
The latter took Pagdin, senior, in band, and reasoned
with him, ultimately effecting a compromise.
Dan said Tom was a clever boy, and bad the making
of a good man in him, and be bribed the old man to let
bis son stay down the river and go to school. Tom's


share of the reward, minus the bribe, was invested in
his own name in such a way that no one, not even Tom
himself, could draw it out for a number of years.
Then the old man got drunk, and went round telling
people that he had been done in by Tom and his friends.
He stayed about constituting himself a general nuis-
ance, until the constable went to him and advised him
to get away back home. And as Padgin, senior, had
a wholesome respect for the law, and perceived that he
had made himself unpopular in Wharfdale, he went
back to the punt, and left his son down the river to
carve out a career for himself.
Dave Gibson's stepfather came down on the quiet
after Pagdin, senior, had gone home and endeavoured
to abduct Dave; but Dave escaped from parental cus-
tody and hid in a cave in the bush for three weeks,
during which time Tom Pagdin, by various stratagems,
secretly kept him in tucker and necessaries. It was a
royal time. So the stepfather accepted a compromise
also, and Dan Creyton was left free to carry out a
scheme which he had formed in his mind for the civilis-
ing of Tom and Dave and turning them into useful
and law-abiding citizens. Dan found that there was
any amount of scope for his labour, but whenever he
and George lost patience with the boys, Hora would
remind her brother and her lover that through our
Younger Quixote and his Sancho Panza one had re-
tained his life and the other gained his happiness.
Which was a good deal to say. So they continued to
have a good time, and Tom Pagdin shot all the cats in
Wharfdale with his Winchester.


-
*
.
-




3 1508 02063375 1


