









FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
TONGA GOVERNMENT BLUE BOOK.
CONTAINING A LIST OF CHARGES, BROUGHT BY THE PREMIER
OF TONGA (REV. S. W. BAKER), ON BEHALF OF THE TONGAN
GOVERNMENT, AGAINST THE REV. J. E. MOULTON, WESLEYAN
MISSIONARY, TOGETHER WITH THE REPLY OF THE REV. J. E. MOUTON, AS MADE
BEFORE THE DISTRICT MEETING OF THE WESLEYAN CHURCH, AT LIFUKA, HAAPAI,
OCTOBER 24, 1883, AND THE REPLICATION OF THE REV. S. W. BAKER TO THE SAME.
Haapai, Friendly Islands, November 7, 1883.
His Majesty in Council lias been pleased to command that the charges brought
against the Rev. J. E. Moulton, by the Tonga Government, to the President of the
Wesleyan Conference, Sydney, together with the reply of the Rev. J. E. Moulton,
before the District Meeting of the" Wesleyan Church, held at Lifuka, Haapai, and the
reply of the Premier to the same, be printed in the Tongan Government Blue Book.
By His Majesty’s Command,
W. G. TUBOU MALOHI,
A.D.C. to His Majesty.
FIRST SERIES.
CHARGE I.
In printing and publishing certain strictures on the Tongan Government, in his introduction to a
work called “The Local Preachers’ Paper, No. 2,” pages five and six, as per pamphlet enclosed, calculated
to lead the subjects of His Majesty King George to disaffection towards his Government, and tending to
bring into hatred and contempt His Majesty’s Government, as established by the law of Tonga, viz.:-
"Kohai oku fokotuu Kavega ihe g. aho ni, oku ahai ae a manu, moe tabùi oe kilikite, moe toloi oe
tukuhau moe tukuhau kihe lautohi, moe g. ala mea behe, Lolotoga ene i heni naa tau a bogibogi moe
hohaa,” Koe abi ahai nai kuo faao, “Koe kolo fe e vete.” “Koeha nai ha lelei kuo tabui, mo ha lao foou
kuo fokotuu?” i.e., “Who is it that imposes burdens now-a-days? Who put up the pounds, and forbade
cricket, and increased the taxes, and the educational tax, and such things? Whilst he was here we awoke
of a morning in disquietude, —As to whose land had been taken away, what town would be pillaged,
what good will be forbidden, and what new law would be put up?”
With regard to the first clause I would here officially state that the law, with reference to “The
Pounds,” “The Regulations concerning Cricket.” “The Tax for Educational Purposes,” were all
passed by His Majesty and Privy Council in Council assembled according to the Law of Tonga.
The increase of taxes was passed by His Majesty and Legislative Assembly in the Legislature of the
Kingdom assembled, and in influencing the minds of the natives of this Kingdom against these ordinances,
Mr. Moulton was not acting in opposition to me only, but to His Majesty and Privy Council, and also the
Parliament and law of the land, and has therefore, in the opinion of the Tonga Government, been
guilty of abetting the people in sedition, and has most seriously disturbed the peace of Tonga, and
indirectly influenced the seditous action of the prisoners now awaiting their trial for sedition; for had they
not had such conduct before them, and that from a missonary, it is hard to believe that even they would have
acted as they have done.
With reference to the second clause, the statement is so gross a libel that it carries its own denial
the face of it, —“We awoke of a morning, asking, ‘Koe abi o hai nai, kuo faao; koe kolo fe e vete?’ ”
“Whose land had been taken away; what town would be pillaged?”
Mr. Moulton protested against Peter Vi voting as being too deaf.


MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
(1.) As soon as I heard of them I wrote to Mr. Oldmeadow, to ask the King if it was true that his
Government had laid charges against me. The King denied it; and, on my asking the Prince, he denied
it too. Therefore it is plain that the charges are not laid by the Government.
Mr. Oldmeadow affirmed that he received a letter from Mr. Moulton at the time the charges appeared,
for him to ask the King whether the charges were from the Government or not, and the King said they
were not.
Charge I.
The King was the first person to whom I gave the book referred to (“Local Preachers’ Book”),
which I was not likely to do if it was to excite sedition.
(2.) My reason for writing thus was the strictures of Mr. Baker that appeared in the “Boobooi,”
on the church laying burdens on the people; therefore, I wrote those sentences to show how
inconsistent it was for him to talk thus, while he himself was laying burdens on the people. For
although they emanate from the Privy Council, yet who is ignorant of the fact that they are Mr. Baker’s
doings ? Moreover there is not one word in the Book about resisting the orders; but when was it made
an offence to criticise such things? And His Majesty knows, and so do all his people, that although I
disapprove of some of the Government regulations, yet I always exhort the people to comply with them.
For instance I have altered our quarter day, so that the people may be perfectly free to attend to their taxes,
and I urge them to pay them quarterly; and have endeavoured to exalt the Government by preaching
that its institutions are from God, &c. But lam an Englishman, and claim my liberty to criticise.
(3.) With respect to waking in the morning in disquietude, wondering whose land had been taken
away, and what town had been pillaged, such was actually the case in Tongatabu. Some premises belonging
to David Tonga and Yalu were taken from them by force. The Government asked them to give it up, but
they were not willing, and then the Premier took it from them by force, and sent the convicts to clear it.
With respect to the pillage of a town, it was reported all over Tonga that it had been proposed
in the Privy Council to lead an army and pillage the town of Mua, and it would have been done but for
Tuibelehake. That was the talk of Tonga at that time, and was the cause of my speaking thus. As to
the young men who were tried for sedition, I had no connection with them, and I was not aware of their
movement until the King had stopped it.
Voting —
Not guilty .. . . • • • • 7
Guilty . . . . . . . . • • 5
Did not vote .. .. .. .. 3
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton, in his reply, states that the charges are not brought against him by the King and
his Government, but intimates by myself only. lam aware that Mr. Moulton wrote on to Mr. Oldmeadow,
and that Mr. Oldmeadow saw the King, who, in the course of their conversation, remarked that the charges
were not brought by the King, specially referring to that of David Finau. But, for the information of the
President and the Conference, I would say that, before the first series of charges were sent, that a Cabinet
meeting was held, and it was unanimously resolved by that meeting that the charges should be preferred by
the Tongan Government, and by me, officially, as representing the Tongan Government.
The second series of charges, that of using imprecatory language against the King, was brought by
the King’s express command; for, when it first transpired, he requested me to report the matter to the
President of the New South Wales and Queensland Conference, which I did; but, in consequence of the
changes in the secretaries, was, I presume, not gone into. And again, before the charges were brought
before the present District Meeting, the whole of the charges were gone into by the Privy Council, adopted
as its own, and I was commanded to press them, and to proceed to Sydney during the sittings of Conference
respecting the same. But, that they are brought by the King and his Government, I need only refer
to the letter addressed by the King to the Wesleyan Conference through the District Meeting,
which is as follows :
Lifuka, October 30, 1883.
To the President and Elders of the Conference in Sydney.
I write this in all respect and reverence to you. There is something that I wish to speak to you,
because of the Wesleyan Church, now-a-days in Tonga; and also the manner of our relations with Mr.
Moulton You will have seen by the charges brought by Mr. Baker, that Mr. Moulton has used imprecatory
language against me, and anathematised me, calling me “Uzziah,” and saying, “ I have touched the Lotu,
and therefore my son, David Uga, and my grandson, Albert, have both died.” But what evil have I done?
Is it wrong for me to desire for my land to be both a Church and a Government ? Is that a sin m the sight
of the Lord forme and my house to be cursed by Mr. Moulton? And his again saying in the District
Meeting “he did it because of my threatening or persecuting the Lotu.” In what way have 1 threatened
the Church? Who has supported the Lotu as I have done? Am I not grey-headed, working for the
Wesleyan Church ? And does it become Mr. Moulton to speak thus to me ? And, not only so, but the work
he is doing now-a-days, his continually fighting the Government; and also the language he has ]ust used in
the District Meeting now being held“ Mr. Baker is my enemy ; I have fought him ;I am fighting him,
and I will fight him.” Is there anyone who will expect that the land will be at peace, or the Church in a
good state, by such language or such work ? And therefore I earnestly beg, and my Privy Council earnestly
begs, for you to have love to me and Tonga, and recall Mr. Moulton; for Ido not stiff wish to see him, or wish
to hear him preach : he is no longer of any service in Tonga. I therefore beseech you to recall him, and to
let Mr Watkin return to Tonga, to reside with me. If you grant my request, I hereby promise that you
will never repent it; but if you do not, it will be plain enough to me and my people you do not ■ wish
for Tonga to be at peace and prosper : and therefore you must pardon me,—although I have desired to finish
my days in the Wesleyan Church,—yet, when my church, which lam building in Nukualofa, is finished, I


shall seek a minister of another denomination to conduct my services and that of my people. But I trust
you will have respect to the petition, and tears of an old man, who has almost completed his year of jubilee
in the Wesleyan Church.
(Signed) George Tubou.
We, the undersigned, hereby witness we support this petition: —
Tubou Maloiii,
Governor of Vavau (Crown Prince.)
David Ahomee,
Chief Justice.
Sekonaia Tuuhetoka,
Minister of Police.
Josateki Toga,
Paymaster.
Mr. Moulton in his reply, says
(1.) The first person whom I gave the book referred to was the King, and gives this as a proof,
that his article was not likely to excite sedition or he would not have done so. I can easily understand
now from Mr. Moulton’s explanation, why the King was so angry, that not only had he the audacity to write
it, but even to present it to the King; but that it was calculated to excite sedition, is not only the opinion
of the Tongan Government, but also of His Majesty’s legal advisers as well.
(2.) Mr. Moulton says the reason of his writing thus was some strictures of mine, which appeared in
the “ Boobooi” on the church laying burdens on the people. How Mr. Moulton can make such a statement
as this, I cannot conceive; and I challenge him to prove the truth of his statement from the article
complained of. In the said article I showed how the evil of the old state of things would no longer exist
under the regime of an independent district, the Government compelling the people (as slaves) to build the
churches, the houses of the native ministers and teachers; but now trustees would be appointed and
have charge of the church properties, and that they would be supported by the free-will offerings of the
people ; and as to their burdens, why the whole article was an appeal to the people to support the new
state of things, by contributing to the Foreign Mission Collection, Home Mission Fund, Children’s Fund,
and Supernumeraries’ Fund, and that it was their duty and privilege to do so; and in the said article I
translated the resolutions of the last General Conference, and exhorted the chiefs and people to carry them
out in their entirety, and yet this is the reason that Mr. Moulton gives for wilting his infamous, seditious, and
libellous article; and although, as Mr. Moulton says, there is not one word in the book about resisting the
orders, yet the whole tenor of his article was to influence the minds of the natives against the ordinances;
and I would ask Mr. Moulton if he has not denounced the pounds again and again, and solemnly declared
that he would never pay for any animal of his which might be impounded.
The last clause but one of Mr. Moulton’s reply is an enigma, that he has endeavoured to exalt the
Government by preaching that its institutions are from God. If he preaches thus, why does he destroy the
good effects of his preaching by writing and printing sedition ?
(3.) Mr. Moulton’s explanation of his saying whilst I was in Tonga, “They awoke of a morning in
disquietude as to whose land had been taken away ; what town would be pillaged?”—only makes matters
the more serious and libellous. He says, “Such was actually the case in Tongatabu; that some premises
belonging to David Toga and Yalu were taken from them by force ; the Government asked them to give it
up, but they were not willing, and the Premier took it from them by force, and sent the convicts to clear it.”
Mr. Moulton knows as well as I do that the said land never belonged to David Toga or Valu ; but was the
private property of King George, and was only lent them by the King for their use as long as he did not
require it. They had asked the King to lease it to them, which he refused, and they had no legal claim
whatever to the ground in question; paid neither rent nor taxes for it, it was not their inheritance in any
way, they had their own lands in their own places, and when the Tongan Government College was started,
the Crown Prince, who was deputed to seek a site for the same, chose this one, and David Toga and Yalu
were informed the King wished to have back his land; and it was not, I believe, till after the deed of lease
to the Tongan Government had been signed by the King, and, if I mistake not, the first year’s rent paid,
that prisoners were sent to clear the land prior to the erection of the college. How far Mr. Moulton is
justified in making such a statement as this, I leave the Conference to decide. With regard to
Mr. Moulton’s other statement “ What town would be pillaged,” he says in reply: “It was reported all
over Tonga that it had been proposed in the Privy Council to lead an army and pillage the town of Mua,
and it would have been done but for Tuibelehake,” This, I must confess, is about the most extraordinary
statement that I ever heard, and shows how little reliance is to be placed on Mr. Moulton’s most solemn
statements. The whole thing is a most perfect fabrication, and most passing strange if it had been so reported
all over Tonga, that it should not have reached my ears, or have been heard of by any of the members of the
Privy Council. In refutation of Mr. Moulton’s statement, I enclose two affidavits, one of the said Tuibelehake,
George Fatafehi, denying that any such proposal was ever made in any Privy Council meeting, or that he
had ever prevented such a proposal being carried out; the other, an affidavit signed by the Crown Prince,
the Chief Justice and the Paymaster, denying that such a proposition was ever made in any Privy Council
in Tonga; and yet on some vague report, without knowing its truth or otherwise, brands me with a libellous
statement like this, “ Whilst he was here” (referring to my having left for New Zealand) “we awoke of a
morning in disquietude“As to whose land had been taken away; what town would be pillaged.”
THE AFFIDAVITS AEE AS FOLLOW:—
Lifuka, Haapai, November 8, 1883.
I, George Fatafehi (Tuibelehake), hereby swear on oath and solemnly declare that I never heard of
any proposition being made, in any Privy Council Meeting of His Majesty, for an army to be led to pillage


the town of Mua, and for it to be said that I prevented it is false in the extreme.
Witness my hand, this eighth day of November, 1883.
mi. mi (Signed) George Fatefehi.
I his affidavit was sworn in my presence this eighth day of November, 1883.
L.S. (Signed) David Ahomee,
Chief Justice.
ixr , x -i ,™ . „ „. . . , _ . _ Lifuka, Haapai, November 9, 1883.
We the undersigned Chiefs of his Majesty’s Privy Council, hereby swear on oath and soiemnlv
declare that never has a proposition been made in any Privy Council Meeting of this Tonga for an armv to
be led to pillage the town of Mua, and for it to be said that it was prevented by Fatefehi is
false in the extreme. v
Witness our hands and seals this ninth day of November, 1883.
I Tubou Malohi,
Governor of Yavau (Crown Prince).
David Ahomee,
Chief Justice.
Josateki Toga,
Paymaster.
, of the above char 8 e ’ 1 be S t 0 challenge the votes of David Toga and James Havea, who
voted for Mr. Moulton being not guilty. I challenge David Toga’s vote as he was an interested party in the
case, and hence had no right to vote; and I challenge the vote of James Havea, as he was not legally a
member of that District Meeting, his name not being on the Minutes of Conference, and having only
arrived in the district a few days before from Fiji, and ought to have had simply a seat in the District
Meeting only out of courtesy, but no vote.
These two votes being challenged reduces the number, who voted “ Not Guilty” from seven to five, thus
making the vote a tie, and, as I have reason to believe that the chairman was prepared to give his casting
vote with those who voted guilty, and not only so, but if Peter Vi’s vote had been counted, there would
have been a majority without the chairman’s casting vote. I claim, therefore, that Mr. Moulton has
been found guilty by his District Meeting on this, the first charge.
CHARGE II.
In translating secretly, and unknown to His Majesty and Government, a petition to Her Majesty the
Queen of England, containing as it does :
(1.) Strictures on His Majesty King George.
(2*) A malicious libel on the Rev. S. W\ Baker, saying he was deposed from his position, for
wrongdoing.
With regard to Mr. Moulton translating the petition I need not present proof, as Mr. Moulton has
pleaded guilty of doing so.
(1.) With respect to the strictures on His Majesty King George, I forward a certified copy of the
petition, from which it will be seen that the petition says :
(1.) “ The Kang is advanced in years,”—intimating His Majesty is no longer able to
govern righteously.
(2.) “It is no use our saying anything,—we the people of the land,” —intimating also they
can no longer get what is right, so they appeal to the Queen of England. The
Tonga Government, in bringing the above charges against Mr. Moulton, think
his conduct most reprehensible in the extreme, that he, a missionary sent by the
Conference to this kingdom, should see fit to give the influence of his position and the
mission in translating such a petition. The Tonga Government therefore think they
are justified in saying, as a missionary to Tonga, his conduct is treasonable to His
Majesty King George.
(2.) A malicious libel on the Rev. S. W. Baker, by translating, “I was deposed for wrongdoing.”
Mr. Moulton may object,—he is not responsible for what the petitioners choose to say. But Mr. Moulton
is responsible for translating what he knew to be a falsehood, and ought to have objected to translate what
he knew was untrue. The minutes of Conference distinctly state “ I voluntarily resigned.” I have,
through Sir A. Gordon, written to Her Majesty the Queen, stating —
(1.) It is untrue that I was deposed ; for I voluntarily resigned.
(2.) That the Conference did not convict me of wrongdoing; but that in consequence of wishing to
help the Tonga Government my resignation was accepted.
ME. MOULTON’S REPLY.
The petition in question was brought to me by the British Consul, with several other papers, to be
translated for his Government, —a thing I had frequently done. I was not previously aware that such a
step had been taken. I translated it; returned it to the Consul, and there my participation ended. As to
the petitioners, I have not met them before or since. With regard to the charge of secrecy, I need not say
that all such papers are translated secretly ; and it is a serious breach of faith in our country, and, indeed,
anywhere, to disclose such a thing to another.
I have frequently translated papers for the Tongan Government, —more than ten, I should say,—but
have I gone and talked about them ? Also, for Europeans, and of course have not said a word; and, not
myself only, but all the Missionaries have done so, from the commencement of the mission until now.
“Since the world began” who ever heard that the translation of a paper made me responsible for its
contents.


With this charge, also, His Majesty and the Crown Prince have nothing to do.
It is no use my taking in detail the subordinate parts of this charge ; for it is nonsense to say that
that petition expresses my sentiments, simply because I translated it for the British Government; but I wish
to make a reply, because the charge states that I translated what I knew to be untrue.
Mr. Baker has left out one word of the sentence which he says is false. He quotes: “I was deposed
for my wrongdoing;” that he “voluntarily resigned.” But he has left out some words of the petition,
which read, “deposed from that position,” —which was the Chairmanship of the Friendly Islands District,
which was the consequence of his wrongdoing, —and where is the falsehood ? As to the talk about treason,
I shall not condescend to answer it, for it is rubbish.
But, perhaps some may say I ought to have known it was not a proper document. I assert that it did
not seem so to me. I thought that people in any land were at liberty to send such a petition. And when
Sir Arthur Gordon visited us, I took occasion to ask him what was the law on the matter. His reply was
“ That individuals were at liberty anywhere, if they were not agreeable to the residence of an Englishman in
their land, to petition Her Majesty the Queen to remove her subject for fear of complications.” He also said
such a course had been taken in several places; nor had people been punished for doing so. And he illus-
trated it by reference to the stay of Finau in England, saying: “If it had appeared to me that Finau
was likely to come into collision with the people, would it not have been kindness on my part to write to the
King to order his subject to leave England lest something should happen?”
Yoting —
Guilty .. .. . . . • 7
Not Guilty . . . . . . .. 5
Peter Yi voted “ Guilty : ” the meeting had decided that Peter Yi’s vote was valid.
Mr. Moulton protested that the subject of the voting should be recorded. It had been put thus from
the chair, —Whether Mr. Moulton was guilty, or not guilty, in translating secretly, and without giving-
information to His Majesty and the Government, the petition to Her Majesty the Queen of England.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton again states that with this charge His Majesty has nothing to do. Does Air. Moulton
forget that terrible scene that took place between himself and the King, when it became known that he had
translated this petition ? Does Mr. Moulton forget how the Minister of Police interfered on that occasion,
and remonstrated with him for his conduct towards the King ? Does Mr. Moulton forget how the King told
him he had undone all the good he had ever done in Tonga, and said in reply the words of Scripture, “ E
Isileli kuo ke maumaui koe e koe,” that is, “ Israel, thou has destroyed thyself,” And yet he says with
this charge also His Majesty and the Crown Prince had nothing to do. To which I would say, this also
was reported to the authorities in Sydney, shortly after it transpired, at the King’s command, and is now
brought by the King’s command, by the unanimous vote of the Privy Council (of which the Crown Prince
is a member), and by the unanimous vote of the Cabinet. Mr. Moulton singularly remarks in his reply,—
“Whoever heard that a translation of a paper made me responsible for its contents ?” True, if Mr. Moulton
be a public or paid interpreter, he would not be responsible, but when a person holding Mr. Moulton’s
position, lends the influence of that position as a kind of guarantee of the justice of the petition, he certainly
is responsible, to a great degree, for what that petition contains; but I must emphatically demur to Mr.
Moulton’s special pleading, saying that I had left out one word of the sentence complained of, or that it
bears the construction put on it by Air. Moulton. The whole sentence in the petition, as translated by Mr,
Moulton, reads as follows :—“ Because he does not perform the duties of his office according to the laws, and
yet it was he that composed the laws that now exist in Tonga ; and he accomplished that work while he
was head of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga, and now he is deposed from that position for his wrong-
doing, and is at the present time Premier of the Tongan Government; and we are certain that he does not
act at all according to law, but, on the contrary, tramples upon it.”
Will anyone reading the above paragraph for a moment deny that the impression it presents is—
that I was deposed, as a Wesleyan minister, from my position for wrongdoing. Such was the impression
made upon the native minds, and such, I am persuaded, must be the impression of all those reading it,
for if I had been guilty of wrongdoing, should I not have been deposed, not only from being chairman, but
also as a Wesleyan minister; but as Mr. Moulton’s District Meeting has found him guilty, as accused in
this charge, I have only now to leave the matter to his Conference.
CHARGE III.
In using the Mission Press against His Majesty and his Government.
(1.) By printing Mr. Hanslip’s ease.
(2.) By assisting the “Niu Yakai.”
As to the first, whatever may he the decision given by the High Commissioner of the Western Pacific
in Mr. Hanslip’s case. His Excellency being bound to decide in accordance, not with the merits of the
case, but upon the evidence produced, yet Mr. Hanslip’s antagonism to His Majesty, and his well known
opposition to the Government, ought to have prevented Mr. Moulton from giving the influence of the mission
in favour of Mr. Hanslip, and against His Majesty and his Government.
(2.) It is reported that College lads assisted in setting up the type of the “Niu Yakaiand type is
also lent from the College to print the “Niu Yakai.” The character of the “Niu Yakai” is too well
known to need comment from me. Mr, Moulton, by countenancing such, is not only injuring the mission,
but abetting and aiding the enemies of the Government in their conduct, and thus disturbing the peace of
Tonga. I would also observe the continuous agitation which Mr. Moulton keeps up by his sermons and
his addresses, is not only destroying the confidence of many in the lotu, but is keeping the islands in a
state of agitation such as would never be permitted in any part of the civilized world.


ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
Our reason for printing the “ deliverance ” respecting Mr. Hanslip was, that we were requested to do
so by the European residents, it being an important document,—the decision of the distinguished individual
to whom the Oueen of England had committed the protection and guidance of her subjects in these seas
and it not only contained the decision in Mr. Hanslip’s case, but also directions to Europeans as to what
they were to do and avoid ; and I am surprised at the Government making a complaint of printing- of
such a document, when they had just concluded a treaty with Great Britain. Therefore I wish it to be
clear that neither His Majesty nor the Prince take part in this charge; for England is’sure to resent my
being charged thus. J
As to Hanslip’s enmity to the Government, alll know about it, is his criticisms of the Premier’s
doings, which is surely lawful in a country that professes to be civilized and free. The worst of Mr Baker
is that, if any opposes his plans, he calls him an enemy of His Majesty 1
(2.) As to the “ Niu Yakai.”
Mr. Hanslip requested me to print it, and I refused. The type with which it is set up was got from
the tutor of the Government College. All that they have had from us has been a dozen k’s or so when
they are short, —a help which all printing offices afford one another.
I do not know of any collegian who has helped them, except John Manu, who has finished his
course. He came and told me that they had asked him to help them. I replied that I did not wish to place
restrictions on one who had finished his work ; “Do as you like ; but lam not quite clear about it.” So
he used to work at it at night, when his duties at the College were over. After a while I took up one of the
“ Niu Vakai’s,” —for I seldoni read them, —and I disliked many things in it, and said to John, “ I don’t
wish to prevent your trade (printing), but I wish you would have nothing to do with itso he gave it up
and I am not aware that he has taken to it again ; I believe not.
I should be very glad to see an opposition newspaper in Tonga, for it would be of great use to the
country ; and I often spoke to some that were engaged in it, and remonstrated with them for allowing such
low words as “ fokofokai (liar) to appear; but they replied that they were only following Mr. Baker’s
example, for he had commenced using such language in the “Boobooi.” I am not aware of keeping up
any agitation, as averred, only that I have criticised any regulation that appeared faulty.
It is plain to me that all these charges have sprung from Mr. Baker not being able to bear any
criticisms on his doings. With regard to the “Niu Yakai,” it should not be forgotten that the High
Commissioner said, “ He wished that it could be read by King, chiefs, and people.”
I annex herewith copy of judgment we printed, referred to in No. 3.
Yoting—
Guilty . . . . .. .. 5
Not Guilty .. .. .. .. 0
Did not vote, 9.
It was proposed by Mr. Oldmeadow, and seconded, “ That many were unable to vote on the Third
Charge, because it appeared to them that he was not guilty of all the charge, or altogether free.”
But the chair ruled that the charge could not be altered.
PEOTEST BY ME. MOULTON.
I protest against the frequent ruling of the chair, —confining the meeting to voting on the charge
altogether, for it is evident the ministers are perplexed by seeing that some things are correct, and others
not. So I submit that they should be put in portions, or that it should be allowable to frame a resolution
which would meet the opinions of the meeting on the charge.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
I feel I cannot denounce in too strong terms the line of pleading which Mr. Moulton has adopted
with regard to this charge, his evident desire being to inveigle the Tongan Government in complications
with the British Government; for he winds up his reply with this remark : ‘ ‘ That England is sure to resent
his being thus chargedtherefore, “He wishes it to be clear that neither His Majesty nor the Crown
Prince take part in this charge.” I have already proved that His Majesty and the Crown Prince do take
part in this charge, and I need not go into explanations again; but what the Government of England has
to do with this charge I know not. The matter lies in a nutshell. Mr. Moulton is charged with improperly
using the mission press. Had the press been Mr. Moulton’s private property, he could have printed what
he liked with it; but his being a British subject does not give him the right to misuse what belongs to the
Tongan mission. And, I would ask, —“ Who paid for the mission press ?” and, “ Eor what was it bought ?”
The press was paid for partly by myself, partly by moneys collected by myself, partly by moneys
collected from native subscriptions and missionary meetings; and a great part of the original type, and some
of the present type was purchased by myself whilst in connection with the mission ; and it was given to the
College to be used for mission purposes, in carrying on mission work. I have therefore a right to complain
that the mission press has been used for other purposes than those for which it was purchased, and that it
has been misused by Mr. Moulton. And I maintain, as a member of the Wesleyan Church, as one of those
who helped to pay for the press, I have therefore a right to complain to the Conference of the conduct of
Mr. Moulton ; and that the King, the Privy Council, and the Cabinet, who are all adherents of the
Wesleyan Church, and who have directly or indirectly subscribed towards the purchase of the press, have
also an undoubted right to complain likewise of the conduct of Mr. Moulton in his using the mission
press for political purposes, and thus becoming —in opposition to the laws of the Church —a political partizan.
And I again most strongly denounce Mr. Moulton’s conduct in thus dragging political matters into his
reply, and present it to the Conference as another proof of Mr. Moulton’s trying to produce complications
between the British and Tongan Governments.


With regard to the second charge, —of assisting the “ Niu Vakai,” —as Mr. Moulton admits that his
head printer, John Manu, has assisted in printing it, and that with his knowledge and consent, this charge
therefore is proved.
I am pleased to hear that Mr. Moulton says, “ There are many things in it which he disliked;” but
astonished to find, a few paragraphs afterwards, that he should advocate its cause by using the High
Commissioner’s name, and saying, '‘That it should not be forgotten that the High Commissioner said ‘he
wished it could be read by King, chiefs, and people.’ ” lam sorry that Mr. Moulton has dragged the
High Commissioner’s name into it, and hence I feel lam bound to reply to his remark. Are we to suppose
that the High Commissioner approves of what even Mr. Moulton disapproves? For he says that, “After
a while I took up one of the ‘Niu Yakai’s,’ for I seldom read them, and I disliked several things in it.”
Yet it is well for Mr. Moulton to say that he disliked it; and certainly, if the High Commissioner ever
made the remark which Mr. Moulton refers to, he must have done so without knowing the character of the
paper, —having been grossly misinformed of the libellous nature of its articles, the obscenity and filthiness
of some of its language. But in order for the Conference to understand whether Mr. Moulton, as a Wesleyan
missionary, is justified in the course he has pursued, I need do no more than give a copy of the protest
which I had lately to present to the High Commissioner’s Court, with respect to the conduct of the editor of
the “ Niu Yakai.”
PEOTEST OF EEY. S. W. BAKEE.
Before giving my evidence I beg to protest against the person employed by the plaintiff, viz., Mr.
Hanslip, putting any question to me, in consequence of his having grossly insulted me and also my wife,
and in such a manner that is most unpardonable, viz.;—Whilst driving out with my wife on Monday last,
November 19th, I called with her to see the sick child of one of the native chiefs, named Josateki Toga, and
whilst standing at the door of the house with my wife, Mr. Hanslip having entered the house at another
door, and having first poked me on my hat with his stick, then turned round, and, according to native
custom, insulted me most greviously, by stooping down and showing his posteriors, or, as the natives call it,
o afi uji,—the greatest and filthiest insult that can be offered by a native. Any solicitor or lawyer guilty of
such conduct to a lady would be scratched off the rolls, but as Mr. Hanslip holds no such legal status, no
professional usage can be brought to bear upon him. I have, therefore, to ask the protection of the Court
against being compelled to answer any question he may put; and, as the plaintiff is here, his cause can
suffer no injury by such a course. I have also to request that this protest may be forwarded to His
Excellency the High Commissioner of the Western Pacific ; also, the Judicial Commissioner of the Supreme
Court of Fiji, and the Secretary of State. lam prepared to answer any question put by this Court, but I
respectfully ask to be excused from answering any question put by the person employed by the plaintiff, for
the aforesaid reasons.
I might add, that the chief, referred to (Josateki Toga), has taken an affidavit on oath before the
Chief Justice, proving the above statement, and some other witnesses have done so as well.
CHARGE IV.
That of uttering a gross libel against my character in a sermon delivered by him on Sabbath,
November 19, 1882 ; when he preached from the text Luke ix, 25, reading for his lesson 1 Samuel, xviii.
I enclose an affidavit (exhibit 1) signed by two of his congregation, which affidavit is also corroborated by
my wife, who was present, and many others who also heard Mr. Moulton’s sermon, can be brought forward
to prove that the words complained of were uttered by Mr. Moulton.
Mrs. Baker, who was present through the whole of the sermon, remained in the church until Mr.
Moulton had descended from the pulpit, when she addressed him thus, “ I have to thank you, Mr. Moulton,
for your remarks this morning ; why did you not fakamaumau (i.e. restrain) yourself ? then you would not
have made the remarks you did. Why did you not tell all the truth ? It is true, part of what you said is
true (referring to my giving David Finau a cut with the whip), but why did you not tell all the truth?”
The case is all the more aggravated inasmuch as Mr. Moulton has publicly denounced me three times
in his ministrations at Zion, and yet has never asked me for an explanation concerning the matter as to my
laying the whip across David Finau’s shoulders when he so grossly insulted my wife in my presence, in her own
house, and on her verandah. David Finau’s insolence to me I care nothing about, but I am not going to
allow him or any other man to insult my wife. And even when I went outside and took the whip from the
buggy, an(i said, “ I suppose you want me to use Tonga law to you,” I did not run to him, but he jumped off
the verandah and ran to me, and dared me to whip him, and said ai mai (i.e. give it me), and I gave him
one cut of the whip, and though he dared me again and again, I did not do so. David Finau’s conduct was
most insulting in the extreme, both to myself and Fatafehi (a chief who was present), and in days gone
by he would have been clubbed for his insolence to so great a chief. I presume David Finau did not tell
Mr. Moulton that when my wife bade him to go and leave the premises, that he told her to go, that she was
a foreigner (muli) and that it was his own land, and he could do as he liked.
I consider Mr. Moulton has made a breach of all ecclesiastical usage, has entirely forgotten his
position as a minister; and his ungentlemanly conduct in denouncing before a lady in his public ministrations
her husband, whose only fault was to shield her from the wild insolence of an excited man, and that in
her own house, brands Mr. Moulton not only as a coward, but guilty of most ungentlemanly conduct,
such as would only become one to ill manners born.


Even supposing David Finau is a probationer on trial, and received by last Conference, David Finau
is only entitled to respect as long as he behaves like a probationer, but I frankly say David Finau ought
never to have been allowed to enter the ministry, and certainly his conduct on this occasion proves that
he ought not. 1
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
The circumstances which led to my preaching thus was the trial of the three college students for
stealing. It was on a Saturday, and one of the senior ones said to two new boys, “ Come and help to get
some yams for our Sunday’s dinner.” While they were getting them a man came and said it was his patch
they were digging up, and he should bring an action against them. lam not sure about the one student,
whether it was a theft or a mistake, for his brother had a yam patch in that place, but the other two seemed
altogether innocent, and when I heard they were sentenced to work on the roads for six months, an appeal
was lodged in a higher court. The chief justice said he was unwell, and could not attend to it at once, and
he ordered the gaoler to set them at liberty until the appeal had been tried. But Mr. Baker interfered and
ordered that they should go to work at once. So I sent David Finau to Mr. Baker to ask the reason. In
the interview that followed he was horsewhipped. I began to think how his cause could be taken up. The
matter couldn’t be judged; I knew no Tongan court could try Mr. Baker, yet it was intolerable that a
Tongan minister should be horsewhipped without any one standing up m his behalf, so I resolved to do it
from the pulpit. It was no new thing; many people had been reflected on by Mr. Baker. Certainly if a
minister in Sydney was to be thrashed by the Premier of that country, methinks every pulpit would ring
with it.
As to the sermon, I drew an analogy between the state of our souls and of our bodies, which latter one
pulled in different directions by muscles, so our souls are drawn to evil by Satan and his followers, and are
drawn to the good by heaven; and when that drawing becomes feeble, through our being at a distance
from the Lord, then we fall to the bad; and I illustrated it from the life of Saul. At the close I applied
it to Mr. Baker, for I did not wish it to appear a blow in the dark ; and what I said was in the main as
stated in the affidavit. One phrase, however, I distinctly deny using, namely, that “He was possessed by
an evil spirit.” lam certain of this, for I carefully avoided it, and said that a man’s backsliding arose
from the growing feeble of the drawing of heaven, in consequence of not living near to God. There are
some in this meeting that heard me and can easily bear witness to it. I concluded thus, “ And what shall
we do now in the matter ? Shall we indulge revenge or retaliate? No; let us pray to Grod that his goodness
may speedily be restored, that we may be at peace.”
I have a difficulty in speaking about the affidavit, as Mrs. Baker is connected with it. I wish the
lady’s name had been left out, but as she has corroborated the affidavit, I must say something on the point.
I have already said that it agrees in the main with what I said ; but I deny having used the words “ evil
spiritand although Mrs. Baker says it sounded so to her, yet as she sat quite behind me and below, —and
the pulpit is a huge box, as everyone knows, and as she was evidently much agitated, so I must be excused
for saying she did not hear me correctly. I say the same thing of the two who have made the affidavit;
for it seems the first affidavit they made was to the effect that I said “ Let us pray for something to happen
to Mr. Baker.” But when Mr, Baker tried to get other witnesses to it, these chiefs spoke up at once, and
said Mr. Moulton did not say so ; but he said, “Let us pray for Mr. Baker, that his goodness may return.”
So I say they evidently did not hear me correctly. As to the impropriety of my animadverting upon a
man in the presence of his wife, I reply that I was not aware that Mrs. Baker was present, for they had
given up attending Zion, and I was surprised on coming down from the pulpit to see her there.
Jotham Havea, one of the ministers present at the District Meeting, was called upon by Mr. Moulton
as a witness. He said, “ I heard those things, but not that which Julius Afu and Daniel Otukolo have
made affidavit to. And Ido not say this because I side with Mr. Moulton or against Mr. Baker, for Ido
not know that Mr. Baker has injured me in any way. This is what attracted my attention in the conclusion
of the sermon, ‘ Mr. Baker was useful and good, and let us pray that he may get his goodness back, that
we may be united.’ ”
The chair then asked whether he was certain that Mr. Moulton did not use those words, “ He has got
an evil spirit,” which the two men had made affidavit to ? Jotham Havea answered, “I am positive he did
not say so.”
The chair then put to David Finau, one of the members of the meeting, a similar question to that ho
had put to Jotham, and Finau answered, “I am positive the words ‘evil spirit’ did not issue from Mr.
Moulton’s lips.”
Voting —
Guilty . . . . .. .. 7
J. B. Watkin, Wickliffe Fusi, John Latu, Philip Taufa, Abel Kaufuji, William Lagi, Paul Yi.
Not Guilty .. .. .. .. 0
Did not vote —6
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
I consider Mr. Moulton’s reply to this charge most disingenuous. He intimates that the reason I
laid the whip across David Finau’s shoulders, was because of his coming to me and asking the reason why
the young men who had been found guilty of stealing were set to work at once, instead of being set at
liberty until their appeal had been tried; whereas Mr. Moulton knows the whip was laid across David
Finau’s shoulders not because of his impudence to me, personally, but because of his impudence to a
lady, and that lady my wife; and that no insolence of David Finau to myself would cause me to feel
annoyed ; for even on that day I had borne the insolence of David Finau to an extent which would have
provoked most men beyond measure ; for on that very morning he came to the Government Offices, and I
sat listening to his impudence for a considerable time, and, after asking him to go, several times, I got
up myself, left the office, and left him sitting there.


Again Mr. Moulton’s strictures on the Tongan Courts is a gross and unjustifiable libel; and knows
himself that they would be no more afraid to deal out justice to me than to the meanest native in King
George’s kingdom.
I certainly agree with Mr. Moulton in saying, “That if a minister in Sydney were to be thrashed by
the Premier of that country, every pulpit would ring with it.” Yes! but not in condemnation of the
Premier, but demanding that a man guilty of such insolence to a lady, was no longer worthy of being
called a minister of Christ.
But Mr. Moulton acknowledges having preached the sermon, saving one phrase, namely, that “I
was possessed of an evil spirit,” and goes on to an explanation of the same, to which I will now reply.
Mr. Moulton brings two witnesses, namely, Jotham Havea and David Pinau. As Jotham Havea was not
put on oath, and has, since the District Meeting, so explained away his statement to other native ministers,
whom I am prepared to call as witnesses, I must ask that, in Conference, his evidence be disallowed ; and
also that of David Pinau, —whom I am surprised that Mr. Moulton should have brought as a witness,
seeing that he was the cause of all the trouble, and an interested party in the case, —therefore any evidence
he might give must necessarily be illegal and invalid. I forwarded to the District Meeting the solemn
affidavit of two witnesses, who sware as follows; —
TRANSLATION OF AFFIDAVIT.
Office of Minister of Police,
November 20th, 1882.
We, the undersigned, make oath and affidavit that we distinctly heard Mr. Moulton say these
words, in a sermon he preached in Zion Church, Nukualofa, on Sunday, November 19th, 1882. “We all
abominate the Premier’s act in striking a minister. Was such a thing ever heard of either here or
elsewhere ? For Mr. Baker was a good man, —a minister, —had a position. We all of us, both you and
myself, acknowledge that he was very useful to you ; but how do we see him now ? Isn’t his goodness
gone? As we read in our lesson, the evil of Saul arose from his not restraining his jealousy; for he
threw the first thing he saw —the javelin. Even this week I have had letters and communications; even
the priests say there was never such a thing in the world as to strike a minister. But, although they
ask me to do this and that, Ido not say do it; but he has fallen into evil. He has not retained his
goodness; he has an evil spirit; but I say to you and myself, let us pray for him, —for it is only by
faith it will be accomplished.”
Witness our hands and seals, 20th November, 1882.
(Signed) Julius Afu.
Daniel Otukolo.
Sworn in my presence, on the 20th November, 1882.
David Ahomee.
If they have committed perjury, why does not Mr. Moulton prosecute them ? Or, as one of them,
Julius Afu, was at Lifuka during the District Meeting, why did he not demand that he be brought before
the District Meeting and examined, seeing he was a local preacher and a class-leader ? But, not only am
I prepared to produce these two witnesses, but also twelve (12) others, who will swear solemnly on oath
that Mr. Moulton uttered the phrase (which Mr. Moulton now denies having uttered) from the pulpit on
that occasion, in the presence of Mrs. Baker and the whole congregation, consisting of some hundreds.
Again, Mr, Moulton says, “For it seems the first affidavit they made was to the effect that I said,
Let us pray for something to happen to Mr, Baker. But when Mr. Baker tried to get other witnesses
to it, those chiefs spoke up at once, and said Mr. Moulton did not say so, but he said, Let us pray for
Mr. Baker, that his goodness may return. So I say, they evidently did not hear me correctly.”
(1.) Mr. Moulton has been wrongly informed; it was the Minister of Police who investigated the
matter, not myself.
(2.) Julius Aiu and Daniel Otukolo never made any other affidavit on this subject than the one now
produced.
(3.) Never did they say to me that Mr. Moulton ever said, “Let us pray for something to happen
to Mr. Baker.”
I am sorry that Mr. Moulton has not given the names of those that reported this to him, so the
matter could have been investigated in Tonga, before the Conference.
I must also point out to the President the manner in which Mr. Moulton presents his pleading.
Instead of giving the names of persons, he uses such vague expressions as these : “It seems,” “It was
reported,” a mode altogether unbecoming the conduct of a man against whom such serious charges are
brought, as against Mr. Moulton.
But as Mr. Moulton’s District Meeting has found him guilty on this charge, notwithstanding his
special pleading, Ido not see that I need say anything further on the matter; saving, that I wish to point
out to the President that not even one of the white missionaries voted “Not guilty;” and also, notone
vote was given that he was innocent of this charge.


SECOND SERIES.
CHARGE I.
For using imprecatory language to King George in anathematising him as Uzziah. The words used
were these:— ‘ Ko Usaia hoe, koeuhi kuo ke ala kihe lotu,” i.e., “You are Uzziah, you have touched the
iotu; and also added, “ The Lord has visited you; your son, David Uga, has died, and your grandson, Albert,
will die (who was then lying ill).” His Majesty meekly replied “I am not the only one that death has
entered his house. The feeling this has created in His Majesty’s mind will never be removed, nor, should
Mr. Moulton remain in Tonga fifty years, will it ever be effaced from the mind of the King’s family.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
00. This ought not to be brought to this meeting as a charge, for three District Meetings have been
held since it happened, and this is the fourth, and it is not right to go back as far for charges. Nevertheless
I am willing to make a reply, that I may not appear to shirk it, or take refuge behind a technicality, for I
am conscious of being quite innocent in this thing,
(2.) The circumstances that led to my going to the King at that time was the illness of his grandson
Albert, to whom I was much attached. When I visited him (Albert) one day, I saw he was near his death,
no medicine seemed to give him relief, and I thought that perhaps the reason was that God was angry at the
King’s threatening the church. For lam one that believe that God’s dealings with His people are stiff
somewhat after the fashion of Jewish dispensation; that is, that some sins are sometimes punished in this
world. And I know that such has been the belief of other missionaries also who have been stationed here.
I also think it is a very serious thing to threaten the church, so I went to see the King, and said that if
there was anything that he was anxious that the church should do, that he should tell us, and we would give
his wish every but on no account to threaten, for I was afraid lest his family should perish—David
was dead, Albert was dying. I said also that interfering in church matters was the besetment of able kings.
Saul was an able king, and so was Uzziah, and so were some kings of England in later times who had acted
so, and the Bible shows clearly God’s attitude towards such. This was the way in which I spoke. A
warning, not an imprecation. Even the words which stand in the charge are not an imprecation, but a
warning of what is likely to happen. I spoke with tears out of my love to the young man, and the King
did not resent my speaking, but thanked me, using also the words quoted in the charge. I had not the
slightest idea that His Majesty viewed what I said in the light mentioned, certainly no such feeling existed
in my mind, only affection for His Majesty and all the Eoyal Family. It is not at all apparent that it is
His Majesty’s wish to bring this charge against me.
Voting—
Not Guilty.. ~ .. I—Mr. Oldmeadow.
Guilty .. . . 8
J. B. Watkin, Peter \ i, John Latu, Philip Taufa, Abel Kaufuji, Wickliffe Fuji, Paul Vi, William Lagi.
Did not vote—s
John Faubula, Jotham Havea, David Toga, James Havea, Paul Fukofuka.
PROTEST FROM MR. MOULTON.
I wish it to be recorded that two who voted guilty, did not believe it to be an imprecation, viz.,
Philip Taufa, John Latu.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
With reference to Mr. Moulton’s remark, “This ought not to be brought to this meeting as a
charge, for three District Meetings have been held since it happened, and this is the fourth, and it is not
right to go back as far for charges.”
I would reply, lest any advantage might be taken of this technicality, that I reported the matter to
the authorities in Sydney after it happened, and at the King’s request. As to Mr. Moulton’s remark, “ That
it apparently is not His Majesty’s wish to bring this charge against me,” I need only refer to His Majesty’s
letter to the Conference, demanding Mr. Moulton’s recall, to prove it is brought by His Majesty’s wish and
command; and to affirm that His Majesty has over and over again required me to bring these charges
against Mr. Moulton ; and not only so, but His Majesty and the Queen have both distinctly stated over and
over again, that as long as Mr. Moulton resides in Nukualofa, they will not go back there to live but will
remain in Yavau or in Haapai.
As Mr. Moulton does not deny having used the words, and as his District Meeting have found him guilty
of using the words, I need not present proof of his having done so ; and as to Mr. Moulton pleading that they
were a warning,, not an imprecation, is an absurdity; the very phrase used is an imprecation. He used it
in a positive form, —as something which was, not something which would be. It is therefore not a warning,
but an imprecation,—the statement of a fact. From the first hour it took place till now, His Majesty has
been unwavering with respect to the words and imprecatory language used. With regard to His Majesty
thanking him, I am astonished at Mr. Moulton’s simplicity and apparent ignorance of the native character,
not to understand that the thanks were used ironically, as must have been apparent to him from the King’s
reply, as quoted in the charge which Mr. Moulton admits.
I would again press on the President and the Conference the serious nature of this grave charge, of
which Mr. Moulton has been found guilty by his District Meeting.


CHARGE II.
“ With having appointed a young man as tutor to the College, named Josiah Mau, whilst a charge
was impending against him for embezzling Government moneys.”
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
I was not aware that there was any charge against him when I engaged him for the College. I had
heard that his books had been examined, and enquired of the Chief Secretary how they had passed, and he
told me that he was all right. He had been with me more than a year without a word being said, and I
was greatly surprised to hear that he had a summons to appear at court.
Voting. —It was carried unanimously that Mr. Moulton was not aware of the fact when he engaged
him.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton says, “He enquired of the Chief Secretary,” May I ask Mr. Moulton the name of the
Chief Secretary ? for I do not know who he is, and had Mr. Moulton mentioned his name, I should have
obtained his evidence before the sittings of Conference.
The fact of the matter is, that the impression made in all Government circles was, that he was only
taken into the College as a screen from the action of the Government.
CHARGE III.
For permitting a public collection to be made at a missionary meeting, beld in the College, to express
their sympathy with the said Josiah Man after he had been judged by a jury of twelve of his countrymen,
and sentenced to imprisonment for a term of fourteen years; and so convinced was the jury of his guilt
that they added a rider to their verdict, saying that they hoped the judge would sentence him to the longest
term the law allowed; but the judge reminded them it was his prerogative to sentence, theirs only to
find guilty; and instead of twenty-one years he sentenced him to fourteen years imprisonment.
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
In holding the College missionary meeting, all the arrangements are left to the students. It was
arranged that one plate should stand in the name of Josiah Mau, and when afterwards he was tried and
taken away, the students resolved his name should stand and they would contribute. So, when it was
called out on the night of the meeting, it did not strike me as a thing to be stopped, for he was much beloved
by the students.
As to his trial, I was not present; but I have questioned those who examined him, and from what
they say, I believe that had his books been examined in a European court he would have been cleared.
Let it be clearly understood that it was not a collection on behalf of Josiah Mau, but for the Home
Missions, and even the Chief Judge who tried him put something into the plate.
Voting.
Mr. Oldmeadow proposed, and David Toga seconded, “ That the collection was made, but not intended
as an affront to the Government.”
Six (6) voted for this resolution :—H. C. Oldmeadow, David Toga, Elias Lagi, Jotham Havea, James
Havea, John Latu.
Two (2) voted guilty J. B. Watkin, Wicklifie Fuji.
Four (4) did not vote: —Philip Taufa, Abel Kaufuji, William Lagi, Paul Vi.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton’s reply to this charge is far from satisfactory. How a person holding his position, and
knowing the facts of the case, could allow a collection to be made under the circumstances as that was made,
I cannot conceive ; and why should he wish for it to be clearly understood, that it was not a collection on
behalf of Josiah Mau, but for the Home Mission, is certainly an enigma ; for the charge says nothing of
its being a collection for J osiah Mau, but a collection at a missionary meeting. And certainly if words have
a meaning, the words used at the Missionary meeting mean sympathy with Josiah Mau—“ Ka ai ha taha
u °^ u ne °^ a < kia Josaia Mau hau o li”—“ If any one has love or sympathy for Josiah Mau, come and give.”
I again draw the attention of the President and the Conference to another of Mr. Moulton’s remarks,
viz., “As to his trial, I was not present; but I have questioned those who examined him, and from what
“ they say, I believe that had his books been examined in a European court he would have been cleared.”
I consider this a most unwarrantable assumption and assertion on the part of Mr. Moulton, and
another proof of his persistent antagonism to everything in connection with the Tongan Government. And
I would ask for this to be contrasted with the charge which the Rev. George Minns brought against me in the
presence of witnesses :—“ Why did I not prosecute a man whom I knew to be a thief ?” But, in order to
show the leniency with which J osiah Mau has been treated, I would state, months and months were allowed
mm to prepare his books, and he was requested to balance them. Certainly, after having allowed the time
the Tongan Government to get his books right, and produce evidence and witnesses ; and now when on
his own admissions, —proofs in his own handwriting,—the circumstantial evidence of the discovery of money, to
£ om Ar u^ (^re(^s dollars, "which he had secreted under rubbish in the offices over which he had supervision,—
for Mr. Moulton to throw a libellous slur such as he had done on the action of the Tongan Government and
Courts, is most unjust and unwarrantable, and justifies the action of the Tongan Government in bringing
these charges against Mr. Moulton.


CHARGE IV.
With failing to carry out the decision of the last General Conference. For Mr. Moulton does not
allow the Quarterly Meeting to pay himself and the native ministers, but pays the native ministers before
the Quarterly Meeting is held; and, as to his own salary, neither the Circuit Stewards nor the Quarterly
Meeting know who pays him, or how he gets his salary.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
PROTEST BY MR. MOULTON.
It is not right for Mr. Baker to bring this charge ; for what business is it of his ? I am willing to
make reply ; but not as a charge.
The chair ruled that they must obey the injunction of the President in Sydney, and bring the charge
before the meeting.
REPLY.
The way in which the Tongan ministers are paid is this :—The ticket-money is paid into the two
Stewards, and they pay the ministers, —just as is done in Haapai, Yavau, and everywhere else ; and I, too,
get my quarterage from them, which all the ministers of my circuit will prove.
Proposed by Mr. Oldmeadow, and seconded by William Lagi, “ That Mr. Moulton and the Tongan
ministers have received their quarterages this year from the Stewards.”
For this, eight voted, —H. C. Oldmeadow, William Lagi, John Latu, Elias Lagi, James Havea, Philip
Taufa, Abel Kaufuji, David Toga.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
lam surprised at the protest Mr. Moulton has entered with regard to this charge, viz.—“ It is not
right for Mr. Baker to bring this charge, for what business is it of his ? lam willing to make reply, but
not as a charge.”
I consider I have every right to bring this charge, and that it is my business to do so.
(1.) Because the General Conference decided that the Friendly Islands should become an independant
district, and hence, that Methodist circuits and Methodist Quarterly Meetings should be established.
(2.) As I am a member of the Wesleyan Church, and stand as senior trustee in the model deed of
the various trusts of the Wesleyan Church in the Friendly Islands, it is my right and business to see the
decision of the General Conference carried out; and I may add that one of the conditions on which the
properties were leased to the Wesleyan Church, was that I should be one of the trustees, and ever remain
so.
But I consider that both Mr. Moulton’s reply and the resolution passed by the District Meeting are
simply begging the question, for the resolution says, “That the Tongan ministers have received this year
their quarterages from the Stewards,” proving that when this charge was brought, such was not the case;
hence, this charge is proved.
Again, no reply is given to that part of the charge which says that they are paid before the
Quarter Meetings; and, although it may be true this year that the Stewards pay the ministers, yet does
the Quarterly Meeting pay them ? — i.e. Are they not paid before the Quarterly Meeting is held ? Are the
accounts properly presented to the Quarterly Meetings ? For the sum and substance of the charge is this, —
That Mr. Moulton does not carry out the decisions of the last General Conference, and hold properly
constituted Methodist Quarterly Meetings ; which charge, I maintain, has not been disproved, but the whole
matter will no doubt be gone into by the Conference, in consequence of a letter sent by the King to the
District Meeting, and which has been forwarded to the Conference. A copy of which I now append.
Uiha, October 25, 1883.
To the Wesleyan Missionaries and Native Ministers
Assembled at their District Meeting, at Lifuka.
Brethren,
I wish to remind you of the reply which I received to my letter from the President of the General
Conference at Adelaide, Dr. Waugh, viz.:—“ That it had been decided by that Conference, for the Wesleyan
Church here, to be the same as the Wesleyan Church in Sydney and New Zealand.” And, therefore, I
wish to know what is the reason why your District Meeting has not done accordingly ? Why the Church
here has not been so constituted ?
(1.) Why the Quarterly Meetings here have not been constituted as according to the law of the
Church, to be held in the same way, and the same authorities and powers, and to keep and govern the
money (funds).
(2.) Why is it that some appointments are made here which are burdensome to the land,
appointments which are unknown in the colonies—that is of head teachers (Stewards) and exhortors as native
ministers (catechists) —for if it were not for these appointments, the salaries of the native ministers themselves
could be increased, and their homes and premises could be better cared for.
(3.) Why is it that there is such a difference between the arrangements for the collecting of moneys
in Tonga from the usage of our church, which allows every man to please himself as to what he will give
his money ? Why is the money here divided into three parts, and divided compulsorily ? Why not
according to the usage of the church ? Different collections to be made. He who wishes to give to
the missionary collection, give to the missionary collection; he who wishes to give to the church trust,
give to it; he who wishes to give to the home work in Tonga, give to it; he who wishes to give to the
circuit collections, give to it. Why cannot we do as they do in the Colonies ?


Brethren, this is my mind, for us to act entirely in accordance with the letter which the President of
the General Conference in Adelaide sent to me, saying that the elders had decided for our church here to
be the same as in Sydney and New Zealand. Why do you prevent it? Let the letter of the President of
the Conference be carried out; and if it should appear by and by, we are not able to bear it, it will be
easy for us to go back ; but this, neither the one thing nor the other, is perfectly grevious; and, therefore, I
wish for your District Meeting to constitute things at once, and act in accordance with the decision of the
elders, for the Wesleyan Church in Tonga to be the same as the Wesleyan Church in Sydney and New
Zealand.
(Signed) George Tubou.
CHARGE V.
In altering the district minutes of 1881, after the District Meeting was over, and after they were
signed; in altering the station of the native minister at Nukualofa; changing the name of Apollos Moumau
and putting John Faubula ; and saying it was the King’s wish that John Faubula should be at Nukualofa,
but it was really done because John Faubula was supposed to be opposed to myself.
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
It is quite true that I altered the minutes, but I did it in all good faith; I had previously spoken to
the two superintendents, who, with myself, drew up the station sheet, and as they were willing I thought I
was at liberty to do it. I was induced to change John Faubula’s appointment to Nukualofa by hearing
that His Majesty wished it; if I had not heard so I should not have disturbed the appointment, for Apollos
and I were good friends, and I know he would loyally stand by me.
Voting—
Guilty . . . . .. .. 9
Peter Vi, John Latu, James Havea, Philip Taufa, Abel Kaufuji, William Lagi, Paul Vi, Wickliffe Fuji,
Jotham Havea.
Did not vote, 5.
H. C. Oldmeadow, John Faubula, Elias Lagi, David Toga, Paul Fukofuka.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
With regard to this charge, and Mr. Moulton’s reply, I am sorry that I was not present at the District
Meeting, so that I might have called one of the superintendents, to whom Mr. Moulton refers, to give
evidence in the case. The whole of the evidence, I presume, is not recorded in the minutes, for Mr. Moulton
is found guilty by his District Meeting of altering the district minutes, and therefore the charge is proved.
CHARGE VI.
> ln breaking the rules of the District Meeting, in admitting to the College young men not members
of society, and in filling the College with more young men than the rules of the College permitted, and not
in the way laid down in the rules.
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
I assert that Mr. Baker has no business to bring this charge, but I reply to it in consequence of the
ruling of the chair on a previous charge.
With reference to my having admitted to the College, youths who were not members of society, I was
not aware that that was still one of the regulations, for the practice referred to has prevailed for a long time;
though I cannot remember how many years it is, or at what District Meeting it commenced, but it is long
ago.
As to the students being too numerous, I am not aware of it, for it was resolved that the number
should be about one hundred, not counting extra year’s men and those who pay ; and the number at the
present time, excluding those, is not more than a hundred ; as to their entering in ways not laid down in
the rules, I know nothing of it.
It was resolved that Mr. Moulton had admitted non-members of society; but he says he was not
aware that the other was still the law.
For this there voted—
H. C. Oldmeadow, Peter Yi, John Latu, James Havea, Abel Kaufuji, David Toga, Jotham Havea, Elias
Lagi John Faubula, Paul Vi.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
In reply to Mr. Moulton’s remarks, I again protest to his saying that I have no right to bring this
charge, and would advance the same reason which I have given before ; and also in addition would add, that
when an institution is supported from methodist funds, and those funds are misappropriated by being
expended in carrying on an institution contrary to the rules of that institution, every member has a right, as
a member of the Wesleyan church, to bring a charge and demand an investigation. However, the District
Meeting has found Mr. Moulton guilty of this charge,—in admitting young men to the College not members
of society,- proving what I wish to point out to the President and the Conference, the College is no
longer an institution for training young men for the work of the church, but is, as it is at present carried on,
a political institution beyond the control of the District Meeting or Methodist Church; an institution for the
dissemination of Mr. Moulton’s views and politics, yet supported by the funds of the church.


THIRD SERIES.
CHARGE I.
In misrepresenting to the Wesleyan Missionary Committee in Sydney the meaning and import of
certain articles in the “ Boobooi” concerning the Jiaji Tauataina (Independent District), thereby leading the
said committee to pass certain resolutions condemnatory to the said articles and reflecting most unjustly and
unrighteously on the Tongan Government, such resolutions being sent to the various affiliated conferences.
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
With regard to the third series of charges, I shall not reply to them as charges, for I only received
them on the morning of the District Meeting, and have had no time for preparation, besides being at a
distance from home, and not being able to get witnesses; but lam willing to give the meeting an explana-
tion of the various matters.
Charge I.
As to charge No. 1, it does not say what the articles are or what the criticisms thereupon, so I know
nothing at all about it.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
I beg to call the attention of the President and the Conference to Mr. Moulton’s conduct in respect to
these, the third series of charges, his refusing to reply to them as charges, retaining the chair of the District
Meeting whilst these charges were before the meeting, thereby preventing the District Meeting from
investigating them or recording their vote on the same, giving as his reasons, ‘ ‘ He only received them on
the morning of the District Meeting, and has had no time for preparation, besides being at a distance from
home and not able to get witnesses, but he was willing to give the meeting an explanation of the various
matters.”
I therefore appeal to the Conference against the conduct of Mr. Moulton, and request a deliverance
of the President upon this breach of methodist discipline.
With reference to this charge, I beg to appeal to the Conference against the very cavalier-like way in
which Mr. Moulton has dismissed this charge. It is of the utmost moment to the Tongan Government be-
cause of the resolution which was passed by the missionary committee of Sydney, and through the general
secretary forwarded to the various affiliated conferences, and thus, through Mr. Moulton’s representations,
have unguardedly circulated a most grevious accusation, and I may say a libel on the Tongan Government.
Were this case before a court of law I could demand the production of this resolution which passed the
missionary committee, and also of Mr. Moulton’s official letter, which was the cause of such resolution being
passed ; but Ido not doubt that the Conference will demand the production of such document. I therefore
respectfully request that the matter may be investigated before Conference, and these unjust remarks
rectified. I again enclose a copy of the “ Boobooi ” referred to.
CHARGE II.
In establishing a Ladies’ College in connection with the Young Men’s College, without the sanction
of the District Meeting, and using church moneys in carrying on the same.
MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
As to the Girls’ College, it is no business of Mr. Baker’s, besides you all know that the Haapai
District Meeting asked me to try and establish one. I have not yet received one penny towards the
expenses.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
With regard to this charge Mr. Moulton again asserts that “it is no business of mine.” I have
already shown it is my business.
If the so-called Ladies’ College is a private institution of Mr. Moulton’s, the Government will know
what to do ; if it be a methodist institution, all that is wanted is that it be under methodist discipline and
jurisdiction; and lam quite certain no Friendly Island District Meeting will ever sanction the present
course of procedure. Many years ago Mr. Moulton commenced something similar, when I was Chairman
of the District, —that of mixing native young men and women in the same college and classes. The scandal
was so great that I and the other missionaries had to interfere, and the girls were expelled the College.
Now, since Mr. Moulton has been in power, he is doing the same thing again, with what results may be
seen from these charges, clearly showing that the scandal will not be less on this the second trial, but con-
siderably greater than it was before. Believing that the Conference will not for a moment sanction a
procedure which any unprejudiced missionary must condemn, I need not present proof of the immorality
which such a course of procedure has engendered and will engender.


CHARGE III.
In failing to expel from the so-called Ladies’ College Sarah Maealiuaki, and several other girls, for
drunkenness, they having been guilty of drinking spirits to excess, with some lads from Mr. Moulton’s
Young Men’s College,—one being eventually found guilty of fornication, and one of the others using the
most fearful English oaths.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
With regard to the drinking, it did not take place in the College, but in the house of the of
the girl referred to. She was sitting there with some others eating, and, on one of the young men going
by they called him to partake, according to the Tongan custom. After they had finished, Sarah took a
bottle of gin and gave them each some,—a very little, it turned out on enquiry. As this was the first thing
of the kind that had occurred at the Girls’ College, I admonished them severely ; told them that drinking
foreign spirits was absolutely prohibited, and if any one did so again she would be expelled. As to the
reported fornication and swearing, I have heard nothing of it, and don’t believe it.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
With regard to Mr. Moulton’s reply to this charge, Mr. Moulton refers to one drinking affair of the
College girls, I refer to another. Mr. Moulton gives an account of an affair that took place in the house
of a chief in Nukualofa. My charge refers to an affair which took place in the Nukualofa school-house.
Had this charge been properly before the District Meeting, as it ought to have been, the Conference would
have had the case clearly before them, and I have no doubt that Mr. Moulton would have been found guilty
of failing to expel the girls who had so committed themselves from the so-called Ladies’ College.
CHARGE IV.
In inducing the children in the Government day schools to break the established law of the land, by
leaving such schools without a permit, as by law required, for the purpose of entering both the Young Men’s
College and Ladies’ College, thus causing a collision between the Government and the Wesleyan Mission.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
Ido not act as alleged in fourth charge. It is with the parents of the children to see after that
matter.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton says, “That it is with the parents of the children to see after the matter.” How is it then
that Mr. Moulton has permitted one of his catechists, named Joshua Lolohea, to go through several of the
circuits of the Friendly Islands, inducing the children to leave the Government schools without having
first obtained a permit to do so ? materially upsetting all the regulations of the schools, and causing an
unpleasantness between the mission, chiefs, people, and Government.
It is not to be supposed that any catechist would have dared to do so on his own responsibility, and
as the young man is one of Mr. Moulton’s catechists, the only inference which can be drawn is that he has
done so with Mr. Moulton’s permission and knowledge.
CHARGE V.
In causing complications between tbe British Government and the Tongan Government, by making
representations to the British Government concerning the leases given by H.M. King George to the
Wesleyan Church, as is proved by the official circular issued by Mr. Moulton, and signed officially and sent
to the other missionaries of the Friendly Islands District; such representations being made without the
knowledge or consent of the other trustees, but on Mr. Moulton’s own responsibility; the Tonga Govern-
ment never having refused the mission the use of such lands, and having, moreover, in their last parliament
confirmed the legality of such leases as were in possession of the mission when the law in reference to such
leases was originally passed.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
I deny this charge. It appears from the extracts from the new act, which the Premier sent me, that
the Government were contemplating taking away the unleased lands of the church. So I asked the Consul
what was the rights of the case, for it seemed to me that they were as good as leased, having been in our
hands for so long a time, especially as no lease had as yet been issued for that kind of holding, and yet they
were considered to belong to those that had them. After some time, the Consul informed me that these
holdings would stand just as if they were leased.


ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
r i^ Ir ’ Moulton’s reply to this charge is most singular, he first denies, then admits all the charge asserts.
1 would most respectfully ask the President and Conference seriously to consider this grave charge. I
consider this to be one of the most serious accusations brought against Mr. Moulton, the consequence of
which, if endorsed by the Conference, will be most disastrous in the extreme; I need not remind the
Conference that there is nothing of which the native mind is so tenacious as their lands, and let the
Conference but endorse the action of Mr. Moulton, I am certain that the Methodist Church in Tonga will
receive the greatest blow it has ever received, or, shall I say, can ever receive.
The facts of the case are these : After I succeeded in getting His Majesty to set his people free, one
part of my scheme was, that every native who paid taxes should have the means of doing so, by having a
portion of land allotted out to him; but in carrying out the mission work, as many native ministers, stewards,
and schoolmasters were sent into the work away from their own land, it was also arranged that a portion
of land should be portioned out for their use in the towns or villages in which they were stationed; but
these lands were neither leased, nor was there any promise to lease given ; it was a part of the system then
in v Jgue, a semi-state aid, the churches, the missionaries’ houses, and the native ministers’ houses being built
by the Government; in fact, everything was done by the Government, and all had to unite,—members,
adherents, those willing, and those unwilling,—and many a native has been thrashed and punished for not
doing his portion. But in the new state of things which I have been working for years to introduce,
viz.;—For the churches to be less dependent on the Government, and for the people to build their churches
voluntarily through their trustees, and not through the Government officials, a new era has of course
commenced, and state aid may be said to be withdrawn in Tonga, and when the new land law passed
the last Parliament, nationalising the lands, the King had power given him to grant lands to hereditary
chiefs on certain conditions. J
(1.) That the land shall never be alienated.
(2.) That every adult native paying taxes shall have a certain amount of land, which should also, on
certain conditions, be hereditary.
(3.) That the said chiefs could not lease to foreigners without the consent of the Government, and the
Government claiming a royalty for lands so leased. Certain new regulations concerning these lands were
therefore introduced.
But what Mr. Moulton in his reply says, that from the extract of the new act which I sent him, that
the Government were evidently contemplating taking away the unleased lands of the church, is far from
being correct or true, for in these very extracts which I sent him it states, —the same law gives the
Government authority to lease to the church, wherever a native minister is settled, a portion of garden
ground for his use ; and such payment to be the same as is charged to the natives for their lands, which
is at the rate of two shillings per annum, or on the average three pence per acre. And, as the Government
have to pay to the said chiefs for the gardens of the schoolmasters on the same condition, I cannot see where any
wrong is committed; but no permission is, however, granted to the Government to lease any garden grounds
for the use of the Tauhi’s—that is the head leader or steward in the various villages. The King wishing
Methodism in its entirety to be established in Tonga, and for the stewards in future to be appointed from
amongst the office-bearers of their own village, not stationed from other villages on the itinerant system,
the same as native ministers, I would again ask the Conference what wrong has the Tongan Government
or the parliament done to the church ? None whatever. Mr. Moulton’s conduct is thus most culpable in
the extreme. If in opposition to the Bang’s wish, and the wish of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga, and I
may say of the native ministers and Quarterly Meetings and also of the almost unanimous expression of the
last District Meeting, Mr. Moulton persists in carrying on the old state of things, for reasons well known
to many, is it right for him on his own responsibility, without the sanction of the District Meeting, without
the consent of the general trustees of the church, to try and create complications with the British
Government, by appealing to the Consul, and thus try to compel the King and chiefs to unjustly give up their
lands by force. Would any missionary dare to claim lands lent under such circumstances in Fiji, or even
in New Zealand? Such a thing would be scouted as a glaring robbery, and an unjust oppression of the
weak. I would again express a hope that, for the sake of the mission, for the sake of the prosperity of the
church in Tonga, and for the sake of right and justice in the eyes of the natives, that the deliverance of the
Conference will be clear and distinct on this matter that it has nothing whatever to do with Mr. Moulton’s
action in the affair, nor will it in any way sanction an attempt to bring in foreign and political influence in
carrying on the affairs of the Wesleyan Church in Tonga.
CHARGE VI.
In distinctly breaking the law relative to newspapers and periodicals, as passed by the late parlia-
ment, and which became law on the 23rd October, 1882, and now stands as October 23 in the Statute Book
of 1883, by printing and publishing, in the 37th number of the “ College Magazine,” pages 21 and 22,
an inflammatory article on the conduct of the Tonga Government, commencing with —“ Kuo loa ene ha ki
mamani,” and ending with “ke hao mei he houhou ni,” and dated July 8, 1883, —an article calculated to
most seriously injure the friendly relations existing between Great Britain and Tonga, and to disturb the
good order and peace of the Tonga natives; and as the aforesaid law has not been complied with, by
obtaining a permit for the publishing of the same, and procuring approved bondsmen as required by said
law, Mr. Moulton has rendered himself liable to both imprisonment and fine for the breach of such law.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
As to the infringement of the newspaper law by printing the “ Magazine ” :
(1.) I haver seen said law; nor has it been officially announced by the Consul up to this date.


(2 ) The Consul informed me that he had suspended the operation of all the laws passed at the late
parliament as far as British subjects are concerned, until he had communicated with his Government.
(3.) I am told that Her Majesty the Queen of England will not permit such a law to be imposed
on any of her subjects.
(4.) The “ Magazine ” is of long standing, and is not a newspaper.
(5.) The paragraph was a warning of danger, and where was the evil of it ?
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton’s logic in reply to this charge is certainly at fault, for he first says, “His printing that
article was no infringement of the Tongan newspaper law, because he had never seen the said law;” yet, in
his reply marked 3, he admits he had heard of the law, and says, “I am told that Her Majesty the
Queen of England will not permit such a law to be imposed on any of her subjects,” and thus, on his own
confession, he wilfully broke the law. But as to what representations may have been made to the British
Government, we have nothing to do with here, the Tongan Government only wishing to prevent seditious
libel and unfit literature being circulated, and to require the publishers to procure bondsmen, so as in case
of any law expenses, the Tongan Government not to be the losers.
But the question is, —Is it right for a missionary to violate the law of the land to which he goes, and
to shelter himself under the pretence that such is not the law of his own country ? But so as the Conference
may be able to judge whether the Tonga Government are justified in their complaint, “ That Mr. Moulton’s
conduct is calculated to most seriously injure the friendly relations existing between Great Britain and
Tonga, and to disturb the good order and peace of the Tonga natives,” I will translate the article
referred to.
“ It has been long apparent to the world that New Guinea would belong to the Europeans, tor who
will say its own people are able to govern it ? The important part of the matter is, it has become apparent
the big countries are seized with the sickness of wishing to seize land ; for instance, France, Italy, and
Spain (the last country having just seized the Sulu Islands and the adjacent islands); but whoever thought
Germany would be one of them ? And then Britain also, many of its people trying to persuade the Govern-
ment to seize the islands of this sea. The missionaries of the London Missionary Society have gone to the
Minister of State, whose province it is to look after these parts, and have entreated him to persuade Victoria
to seize the New Hebrides. It has not taken place yet, but it is apparent these are difficult times for such
countries as this. I tell you, I breathe with trembling, because of Tonga: there is only one escape, and that
is to take care of the friendship with Britain, and that is what is not done. The Commodore has just been
here with a British man-of-war, with an important document from Her Majesty the Queen of Great Britain.
I shall not speak to it, because I translated it; but this is the report of the Europeans that came in the
vessel, perhaps, or from somewhere else. They say, “It appears Great Britain is very vexed with Tonga,
and if the conduct of the Government is not changed, their friendships will be broken. Never has any
Government so illtreated my representative.” Such is said to be Her Majesty’s word, and for Tonga to be
quick and bring the pockethandkerchief to the Consul. It is ail the more important because the Consul is
trebly supported, —by the Governor of Fiji, by the High Commissioner, Sir Arthur Gordon, and by the
Minister of State of Her Majesty, whose word is equal to the word of the Queen. That chief is one whose
mind never changes. Many of the people are tired of him, because he is never hot in anything. The time
that Russia was saucy, the people of Great Britain made up their minds to fight: he alone, of all the chiefs,
was not hot, and stopped the rushing feeling ; and he is always like it; and his father, when the chiefs
presented Borneo, would not have it, and all the world knows when he speaks importantly, it is truly
important. And is it wrong for me to respect my language, and try and stop the wave? Would that
attention were paid to the steering, lest Europeans shall have Tonga. Who says such was determined to
be ? There are many little kingdoms alongside of our kingdom, and they are still well, but what is the
reason ? They do those things which are not displeasing to Great Britain. They therefore chose a Premier
which they see is a man pleasing to the great kingdom, and when they pass any laws, they seek from the
Consul how they will be approved of by Her Majesty; they are therefore able to stand, although they are
alongside the great kingdom which owns one-fourth of the world. Therefore, let us pray to the Lord
for him to influence the mind of Tubou, for him to steer well his vessel, so as to be clear from these
agitating currents.”
After reading this article, I am certain the Conference will admit that Mr. Moulton has gone beyond
his province as a missionary, and whatever Mr. Moulton may call his periodical, it is not simply a literary
magazine, but a political pamphlet as well; that is, a newspaper, and a newspaper printed at the mission
press, and at mission cost; that is, at the expense of the Tonga Wesleyan Church.
But before I dismiss Mr. Moulton’s reply to this charge, I would like to observe that I do not think
either the British Government or the New South Wales and Queensland Conference will expect the Tongan
Government to permit, without some kind of restriction, the publishing of newspapers in the native language
for distribution among the natives, —I say distribution, because they are principally distributed not sold, —
containing articles of a libellous and seditious nature, and using language which has already been observed
to be sometimes filthy and obscene; papers that would not for a moment be permitted by the Government
of Fiji to be circulated in Fiji.
CHARGE VII.
In circulating an inflammatory report concerning the visit of H.B.M.S. “ Miranda,” tending to intimi-
date the natives, to injure the Tongan Government, and to hold up British men-of-war to ridicule and
contempt, by saying to certain chiefs named Yaea and Saula Loko, whose affidavits are in possession of the
Government, “Ka ikai tali lelei e he Tui ae Kamotoa bea tukuage ae kau bobula i Haapai” (that
the Commodore would return with a fleet of vessels and bombard Nukualofa and burn the houses).


ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
t n T °t circulate such a report. I heard from the Europeans that Commodore Erskine had said to
the Prince, “If the King does not give a favourable answer, and release the prisoners, that he would return
and bombard the Government Houses.”
One day Loko (the chief referred to) came to my house on some business, and while he was with me
some one shouted from the top of the house, “ A man-of-war.” I exclaimed, “ Oh, dear ! then the town will
be bombarded. Loko asked me what I meant, and I told him what I had heard. After a hour or so Yaea
(the other chief referred to) came and asked about it, and I made the same reply. I would remark on the
fact that the affidavits of these two chiefs have not been put in for us to see.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
In Mr. Moulton’s reply to this charge he states three (3) things :
(1) He did not circulate the report complained of.
(2) That he admits that, as stated in the charge, he made the statements to the two chiefs of
which he is accused in the charge.
(3) Notwithstanding having admitted it exactly as stated in the charge, yet complains that the
affidavits of the two chiefs are not put in, proving that he said so.
I wish to know what lam to understand by such a reply as this ; one feels to wish that instead of
such quibbling Mr. Moulton had frankly admitted he had done so, but had made a mistake. It would have
been then more honourable, and certainly more in keeping with his character as a minister of religion.
As to what the British Government or the Commodore think of Mr. Moulton’s conduct, I cannot say.
Had there been a pestilence or a plague in the land the feeling could not have been more intense. Some of
the traders inform me that it was difficult for them to obtain crews to man their copra boats lest they might
be in the town when it was being bombarded; and it was not until the Crown Prince, who assembled the
people together in a fono and told them that they had no brains if they believed such a report, and those that
originated and circulated the report had less brains still, that they became at all pacified; but they were still
in a state of anxiety and alarm on my arrival, and it was not until I had met the officials and ridiculed the
idea of the British Government or Commodore acting so unjustly, that the thing to a certain extent died out.
But certainly Mr. Moulton could not, if he had tried, have injured the good name of the British nation and
the prestige of the British navy for fairness in the minds of the natives so seriously as he has done in this
instance; and then to coolly reply he heard the report from one of the Europeans, and on such a foundation
malign the Commodore, brand the British Government with injustice, disturb the peace of the country, and
upset trade and commerce.
CHARGE VIII.
In having raised missionary moneys at Niuafoou and Niuatobutabu by a system which met the
distinct disapproval of the New South Wales and Queensland Conference of 1880, that of pledging the
p-owing crop of nuts for their missionary meetings, the same being done in direct opposition to the
instructions given by His Majesty in Council and the orders of the Government; and by so pledging
the growing crop of nuts, causing complications to arise between the Tonga Government and the foreign
residents, Consuls, and the mission, in consequence of the natives, from the system enforced, being unable
to pay their just debts, some of many years’ standing, and judged by the Debtors’ Court, and their taxes
to the Government; for as soon as the nuts commence to ripen, the names of the defaulters whose nuts
have been pledged—in some cases by themselves, in many instances only by their chiefs, —are called out
from the pulpit on the Sabbath morning, and at meetings held during the week, and thus for very
shame, and in fear of ecclesiastical punishment, they make the copra, or in many instances, if they not
do it themselves, the native ministers, teachers, and preachers go and make copra on their lands, thus
preventing, their paying their debts or complying with the decision of the Debtors’ Court, the consequence
being —
(1.) The Government have instructed their law officers that the nut plantations of all those who are
in debt, and have been judged by the Debtors’ Court, shall be considered as sacred until
such debts are satisfied.
(2.) That any native minister, teacher, or preacher who shall take the nuts, or cause the same to be
taken, shall be prosecuted for robbery.
(3.) That all fines, damages, accumulated interest, or other expenses which may arise from any
native minister, teacher, or preacher taking the nuts of another person, and thus preventing
the said party from paying his lawful debts, taxes, &c., shall be charged to the account of the
said native minister, teacher, or preacher.
In case of Niuafoou, the circumstances are all the more distressing, as the place is, and has been for
some time, in a state of famine ; the people living upon roots, their debts unpaid, whilst the mission store
is full of copra, and wrung from the people by the most unjustifiable coercion and ecclesiastical despotism.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
As to the missionary meetings at the two Niuas, I did as Mr. Watkin had done, and as had been
done from the commencement. As there is little money, and the visit is made at a time when the crops are
not ripe, therefore the collection has consisted of promises. It is quite true this was formerly abused, and
a charge was brought against Mr. Baker for it; but I avoided all such abuse, and let each one speak for
himself, and not let the chiefs promise for all the community. Besides, I did not allow them to be lavish in
their promises as formerly ; and when one got warm and named a larger sum, I asked whether he could
easily afford it. Formerly each island’s contribution amounted to ten thousand dollars; now it is not


five thousand both together. As to my action being in direct opposition to the “ instructions given by His
Majesty in Council,” I have never heard of any instructions on the point. Moreover, I waited on His
Majesty with one of my colleagues and enquired about it (our mode of action at Niuas) and it was quite
plain that we were free to act as we did.
The conduct of the people at Niua is worthy of all praise. Although the chiefs were asked to vote that
none of them should take the chair at a missionary meeting, or act as a trnstee, yet several did act so, and
the people stood and testified their love to the “lotu,” and their determination to support it. I have just
received a letter from the minister in charge of one of the islands, who reports that Mr. Baker has punished
severely the people that took part in the missionary meetings. Some of them have been put down,
and the whole island punished.
With regard to the famine, it is simply a famine of yams and “kabe.” There are plenty of nuts.
The copra he speaks of, in the mission store, was made before the famine came on ; and before they make
the copra they have promised there will be plenty of everything. As to their fulfilling their promises,
through fear of ecclesiastical punishment, it is nonsense. No one has been punished in my time, whatever
may have been done in Mr. Baker’s. As to the preachers going en masse, and making copra: Mr.
Baker, it seems, complained of that practice to Joel Nau, the minister in charge, and Joel said, “Is that
wrong? Then why did you not stop it yourself ? for it was done in your time.”
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
Mr. Moulton says it is quite true that a charge was brought against Mr. Baker for it, but he avoided
such abuse. Yes, the charge brought was that I allowed them to pledge their growing crop of nuts; now,
Mr. Moulton says “He avoided all such abuse;” yet what I did he admits he does. How then can he say
he avoided all such abuse ? If it were wrong for Mr. Baker to allow them to pledge themselves for
SIO,OOO, it is certainly equally wrong for Mr. Moulton to allow them to pledge themselves for $5,000;
and I maintain a greater wrong, because what Mr. Baker did was to allow them to pledge themselves for
their own benefit; for, as the result of such pledging they have one of the largest and prettiest churches
in the South Seas, beautifully finished, and a native minister’s residence and study unequalled in any of
the Wesleyan mission stations of the South Seas : but what do they get for pledging themselves to Mr.
Moulton; I answer, nothing, but fleeced to pay debts which ought not to have been contracted, and some I
maintain were not owed. I refer to a great portion of Mr. Moulton’s expenses to England. And
charges made for freight per “Wesley,” of timber used for Rev. George Minn’s house at Yavau, which, whilst
I was chairman I refused to pay, and maintain now, ought never to have been charged or paid, seeing that
the mission received thousands upon thousands from the islands, and it was the proper work of the “Wesley”
to bring timber for European missionaries’ houses.
But again, with regard to Mr. Moulton’s reply, that everything which he says he avoided as an abuse,
is the very thing which the Government complains that Mr. Moulton has done, and did do, on his last visit,
at places both at Niuafoou and Niuatobutabu, namely:—To allow the chief to promise on behalf of the whole
community, and then portion out to each individual certain amounts, thereby causing the complications to
which the charge refers; and thus, I maintain, if it is wrong when the natives themselves reap the benefit,
it must be doubly wrong when the natives themselves do not reap the benefit; and if Conference was
indignant at Mr. Baker’s conduct, certainly it must be more than indignant at Mr. Moulton’s proceedings.
Mr. Moulton’s statement that Mr. Baker has punished severely the natives who took part in the
missionary meeting, that some of these had been put down and the whole island punished, is an unjust
misrepresentation of facts. Before Mr. Moulton’s arrival at the Niuas, I had told the chiefs of the towns
—mayors —that in consequence of their indebtedness, and the indebtedness of the people to the Europeans,
—amounting to some thousands of dollars, —and the complications arising therefrom, that they were at
perfect liberty to give what they liked to the missionary meetings ; but if the missionary meetings were to
be held by pledging the growing crops —that is, going into debt—l should command, until their
indebtedness was paid to the traders, that not one of the mayors of the towns should take the chair at the
missionary meetings, or go into debt for the same—that is, give a pledge on his growing crops. One mayor
did so. I kept my word, and put another in his place, as I maintain I had a right to do ; especially as,
since Mr. Moulton’s visit and the pledging of the coming crops, the Government have been informed that
accumulated interest on the debts owing by the natives will be demanded by the firms to whom the debts
are due, for many of these debts have been owing for a considerable time. And thus complications have
arisen in consequence of Mr. Moulton’s conduct, and distress warrants will be issued as the result.
Mr. Moulton says that it was a famine of yams and kabe only, that there were plenty of nuts. Ido
not wish to charge Mr. Moulton with deliberate untruth, but I am prepared to state that at the time Mr.
Moulton visited the islands there was a famine of yams, kabe, and nuts, and I had to stop the action of the
Courts until the new crop of nuts came to maturity.
As regards the remarks of Joel Nau, there was a difference between the time to which Joel refers
and the time referred to here : the natives were not so involved then in debt to the Europeans as they are
now. But as I did not stop it during my chairmanship, the Conference said I ought to have stopped it;
and what I want to know is, if I erred in not stopping it, whether Mr. Moulton does not err likewise in not
stopping it ? and if I were reproved for allowing the natives to pledge their crops, then Mr. Moulton must
be reprimanded likewise, for allowing them to do the same.
CHARGE IX.
With trading at Niuafoou, selling building materials, lumber, nails, kerosene, &c., &c., to the missibn
there without a license, as required by the 22nd law of the Statute Book, 1883 ; the said goods being also
sold to the mission at higher prices than the purchase prices, and at higher rates than could be supplied
by the traders resident there. I hereby enclose a petition from the European residents there, relative to tho
trading transactions of Mr. Moulton, dated Agaha, 15th of August, 1883.


MR. MOULTON’S REPLY.
About my trading, I utterly deny having done so. I heard that Joel Nau had been accused of
doing so by the traders there, and I went to them and collected them together to enquire into it, and then I
found that they had accused me, too. As to the timber I had bought, they acknowledged that it had
been always done by all the missionaries in succession,—Mr. Watkin, Mr. Baker, Mr. Lee, Mr. Davis, as
it was for the churches and the native ministers, and they could not bring one single case of a sale that I had
effected. It was the same with the charges against Joel Nau, the native minister. I examined them one
by one. “ About the kerosene.—What was that ?” Joel explained before them that he was short of yams,
and that he told a man, who had plenty of money, to bring some for his children to eat, and he would give
him some of his oil for his lamp. That was all he had done. It was the same with the alleged sale of
paint; it was given to a man as payment for work he had done.
With regard to the vessel laden with lumber, which was to arrive, and which they expected would be
for sale, I answered them that they should wait until I had done wrong before they charged me with it.
Before embarking, the traders sent me a letter apologising for what they had done, as it was plain
that I was quite clear of the charges that had been made.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
With reference to the ninth of this, the third series of charges, it was a charge brought by
the Europeans, and as such I leave it to Conference. What I have to say about Mr. Moulton’s trading I
will bring under the head of the next charge.
CHARGE X.
With importing goods to some thousand of pounds into Tonga during the past year, including lumber,
building materials, paints, carts, merchandise, &c., and selling the same to the various trusts, and certain
persons (in some instances, it is reported, at advanced prices and higher rates than could be supplied by the
resident traders) thus injuring the local traders, and breaking the 22nd law of the Statute Book, rendering
himself liable to imprisonment and fine for not having taken out a trading licence, as required by law; in
proof whereof I beg to refer to W. Yon Treskow, Nukualofa; J. Marten, Esq., Eogoloa; and Captain
Moeller, Kologa.
ME. MOULTON’S REPLY.
The same with regard to No. 10. What I have done in Tonga is what has been done by all mission-
aries from the commencement: was done by Mr. Baker himself, and is now being done by Mr. Watkin and
Mr. Oldmeadow. I order from the colonies goods for the church, the native ministers, and the employees of
the mission, such as carpenters. As to my charging commission; on the contrary, several of the traders have
told me that their complaint is, that Ido not charge commission, but ask only the cost price. And I
solemnly affirm that Ido not get one penny by it, I protest, too, against the form of this charge. Not
one single instance of my trading has been given, nor is anyone’s affidavit produced; but we are told,
forsooth, to inquire of some of the traders. Is that the way the thing is to be done ? Moreover, one of the
traders to whom we are referred, —Mr. Marten, —distinctly told me that he repudiates any participation in
the complaints.
MR. BAKER’S REPLICATION.
With reference to this charge, I think it would be best to take Mr. Moulton’s remarks seriatim. He
first says—“ What I have done in Tonga, is what has been done by all the missionaries from the commence-
ment ; was done by Mr. Baker himself, and is now being done by Mr. Watkin and Mr. Oldmeadow. I
order from the colonies goods for the church, the native ministers, and the employees of the mission, such
as carpenters.”
It is certainly true, that formerly, when the mission had the “ Wesley,” and the missionary committee
in Sydney paid the native ministers, the native ministers were allowed the same privileges as the mission-
aries, and their goods were ordered through the general secretary, and brought down without freight being
charged to them. But that was a very different state of things from the present, when there is no mission
vessel, and they get larger salaries and paid by the native churches, and not by the missionary committee ;
and then the present law, as regards trading, was not in existence, and circumstances were altogether different.
But what was then done in a small way, Mr. Moulton now orders by thousands of pounds. Should the
Conference wish confirmation of this fact, let them send a telegram to Messrs. McArthur & Co., of Auckland,
or apply to Mr. Palser, of Sydney, or Captain Mansell, of the “ Flirt; ” and again, what was then only the
privilege of the native ministers, Mr. Moulton now grants to the employees of the mission, such as
carpenters; and, as will be seen by the statement of Captain Moeller, also to others in no way connected with
the mission.
In the charge it states, that Mr. Moulton rendered himself liable to imprisonment or fine for not
taking out a licence for trading, as required by law. Section 10, of the law referred to, states, “No person
shall engage in selling goods, wares, and merchandise, or in purchasing copra, coffee, cotton, candle nuts,
cocoanut oil, or whale oil, in this kingdom, unless he shall have first taken out a licence for permission to do
so ;” and section 9 says, “ Any person breaking this law is liable to fine or imprisonment.”


As to whether a person’s trade pays, or he sells at cost price, is not for the Government to say.
Mr. Moulton admits that he orders goods for other people, and that they pay him for these goods. He is
therefore guilty of trading; and as to whether he makes a profit on it or not is not for the Government to
enquire. It is clear he trades, and as he has no license, therefore he breaks the law of the land and renders
himself liable to fine or imprisonment. But whilst the Government maintains that no missionary is at liberty to
import goods for others, yet they do not consider a missionary breaks the law by importing goods for him-
self and for the use of his own family, but only when he imports goods for others and receives cash in payment.
This certainly is a breach of the law, and the traders who have to pay heavy licenses to permit them to trade
have a just cause for complaint.
Mr. Moulton in his reply also says, “As to my charge and commission: on the contrary, several of
the traders have told me that their complaint is, that I do not charge commission, but ask only the cost
price; and I solemnly affirm that Ido not get one penny by it.” In reply, I would say, Ido not know what
Mr. Moulton thinks, but the traders to whom he refers are perfectly justified in their complaint, and that
he himself brings evidence to that part of the charge which says, he is thus injuring the local traders.
There is some justice in Mr. Moulton’s complaint —that the statements oi Messrs. Treskow and
Marten were not presented to the District Meeting. The fact is, since it was determined to bring this charge,
the German Vice-Consul has informed the Tongan Government that complaints about Mr. Moulton’s trading
have been made to the Imperial German Consul; and thus, as it will become a matter of correspondence
between the two Governments, I did not wish to complicate matters by referring myself to their state-
ments ; But I would like to observe, that I had a visit from Mr. Marten the day before I left Tonga, and
he says he does not remember having made the statement to which Mr. Moulton refers.
But with respect to Mr. Moulton selling at cost price, he must be a very bad business man according
to Captain Moeller’s account, who says, “On one occasion I went to see the painting of the Church at
Kologa, and asked Nuku, the chief, from whom they got the paint and oils, and he said from Mr. Moulton.
I then asked the price, and he told me they paid dollars ($) per tin of 28lbs.—6d. per lb. I then said,
‘ I can let you have it for that,’ and then asked the price of the oil, and they said $lO a drum. I told them
* I can let you have it for that,’ and I then asked the price of the brushes, and they said 2s. 6d. to 3s. 6d., and
then I told them ‘I can let you have it for that.’ ”
Again Captain Moeller says, “ On another occasion a native named Moses, a local preacher of Kologa,
came and asked Captain Moeller if he would allow him (Moses) to bring bread and kerosene up in Captain
Moeller’s boat, from Nukualofa. Captain Moeller asked him where he bought it; he told him at Mr.
Moulton’s. The captain asked what he paid for it; the native told him him 16s. a tin for bread, and 20s.
a case for kerosene. The captain said he could supply the kerosene at the same price, but not the bread.
The captain then told him he would not allow it to be brought up in his boat without paying for it. The
native went to Nukualofa, and brought it up in Mr. Marten’s boat, and Captain Moeller saw the native
Moses carrying the bread and kerosene from the boat to his home. It was landed at Nuku’s landing
place.”
Again Captain Moeller says, “ On going to Talafoou, saw a dray there, and the Tauhi Stephen Tolo
told him that they belonged to his kaiga in Nukunuku ; and Captain Moeller asked him where they got
the dray, and Stephen Tolo told Captain Moeller that they got it from Mr. Moulton, dray and harness, for
($110) one hundred and ten dollars.”
Again Captain Moeller says, “ Mr. Barnard sold a boat to the natives at Atata, but the next day Mr.
Moulton came on with a boat from Vavau, and they threw back the boat on Mr. Barnard’s hands.”
Again Captain Moeller says, 1 ‘ Mr. Jenkins sold a dray to some natives, and they afterwards went
and bought a dray from Mr. Moulton, and refused to take the dray they had bought from Mr. Jenkins.”
The above information was presented officially to the Tongan Government by Captain Moeller, who
resides at Kologa Tongatabu, from which it will be seen—
(l.) That Mr. Moulton sells goods to others besides native ministers and employees of the mission.
(2.) That he sells at such prices that the natives are not benfitted thereby, because they can get many
of their things at the same price from the traders; therefore Mr. Moulton’s trading can be
of no benefit to the natives or the mission, and hence he has no excuse whatever for trading.
(3.) It must be inferred from the above prices that Mr. Moulton charges something above cost price
for expenses, such as landing, handling, exchange, insurance, interest, &c.; not that these
are illegitimate charges, only they are ordinary trading charges; perhaps Mr. Moulton has
some other name for them, hence his plea,—he does not trade, he only asks or charges.
CHARGE XI.
f° publish a detailed account of the moneys received on account of missionary meetings at
Nmafoou, Nmatobutabu, and Tongatabu, and also of failing to present to the District Meeting or Home
Mission Meeting an account of such moneys, or how the same are disbursed.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
M . to a detailed account of the Niua moneys, I have simply followed in the footsteps of
Mr. Watkm and his predecessors. Had they done differently, I should have done differently; and what
business is it of Mr. Baker’s ?


ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
As Mr. Moulton has cast an imputation against his predecessors, I would refer the President and the
Conference to the evidence given by me before the deputation that investigated the case of Mr. A. P.
Maudeslay, HJB.M. Vice-Consul, in October, 1879. See resume of inquiry, page 18, second column, viz.:—
lhat Mr. Watkm was financial secretary for the year 1877, when the Niua accounts for 1876 were
presented to the District Meeting; and that Mr. Minns was financial secretary last year, and audited the
Niua Mission copra accounts for 1877, and pronounced them correct; but since then I have asked the
present chairman of the district, my successor, the Eev. J. B. Watkin, to audit the whole of the Niua
account, both Nmafoou and Niua, from 1869 to the present time, 1879, and he pronounces them correct.
1 hand in his statement:—
“ ‘[Copy]
“ ‘ Nukualofa, October 16, 1879.
1 do hereby certify that I have examined the accounts of Niuatobutabu and Niuafoou from the
year 1869 to the year 1879, and have found them correct.
“ ‘ (Signed) J. B. Watkix.’ ”
But I would observe that any appropriation of the Niua money which was made during my
chairmanship for the payment of any debt was not made by myself personally, but by the District Meeting,
as the financial statements of the District Meeting prove. But Mr. Moulton admits that such is not the case
with himself ; the money is disbursed by himself, and the District Meeting does not know for what.
Mr. Moulton has thus unfortunately given a colouring to the complaints that some of the trusts,
and in Tongatabu as well, do not receive their full share of the missionary collections—namely, one-third U)
—as assigned by the District Meeting; being otherwise expended.
I, therefore, consider this charge proved.
CHARGE XII.
That Mr. Moulton, on his own responsibility, retranslated the New Testament in Tongan, and
printed the same without the sanction of the District Meeting, whereas he was only sent Home to revise the
old translation, but not to retranslate ; and also of introducing into the said new revision—
(l.) Expressions and idioms quite foreign to the Tongan language ;
(2.) Numerous interpolations, not to be found either in the authorised version or new revision of the
English Testament, and thus it cannot be called the Word of God but the word of man;
(3.) Eow slang and language applied to the Saviour, which ought not to be spoken in the presence
of any chief.
With reference to this 12th Charge, I shall be perfectly satisfied to place it in the hands of a
committee of Wesleyan Tongan missionaries, and to abide by their decision.
ME. MOULTON’S EEPLY.
In the same strain is my reply to the charge about the Testament: Is it any business of his ? Why
does he interfere? And even if he had a right to interfere, that is not the way to bring the charge,
without giving one single instance of the things that he believes wrong.
ME. BAKEE’S EEPLICATION.
As Mr, Moulton has challenged me to give instances of things which I believe to be wrong in his
translation, I accept his challenge to do so.
1. I maintain that Mr. Moulton had no business, as contained in this charge, to re-translate the New
Testament and print the same, without the sanction of the District Meeting. I was in the chair of the
District Meeting when it was proposed for him to be sent Home to superintend the reprinting of the
Bible, and I myself prepared the resolution which was adopted by the Meeting, viz.:—“That Mr. Moulton
should go Home and superintend the reprinting of the whole Bible.” Never for a moment was there a word
said that he should retranslate, but that he should superintend the reprinting of the present Bible; and
we stated in that meeting that, should there be many alterations, the Bible was not to be stereotyped
until they had been referred back to that meeting; and yet Mr. Moulton, on his own responsibility, takes the
liberty to retranslate the New Testament, and print the same without the sanction of the District Meeting.
2. I will take the clauses in the order in which they appear in the charge.
(1.) Expressions and idioms quite foreign to the Tongan language.
To give proofs as regards the idiom, I shall have to transcribe the whole of the New Testament, from
the first chapter to the very last. The idiom is so purely Moultonic, and so very different from the idiom of
the old Bible and the old missionaries, that it is really impossible to read it correctly; and in fact, for a person
to understand what is meant, he has, in many instances, to sit down and think whatever is intended;
whereas, the Testament printed by the British and Foreign Bible Society, a joint production of many of
the old missionaries, is so beautifully simple, and in such perfect Tongan idiom, that it may, as far as the
natives are concerned, be said, “A wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein.”
And as to the expressions quite foreign to the Tongan language, I would refer to Eomans i., Ist verse,
where he uses the words “Tuko au Baula;” the same in I. Corinthians i., Ist verse, “Tu ko Kimaua;” and
the same again in 11. Corinthians i., Ist verse, “Tu ko Kimaua ;” and again in I. Ephesians i., Ist verse;
in fact, the same may be said all through the New Testament where the words “I, Paul,” or “I, James,”
or “I, Peter” are used. This is an expression foreign to the Tongan language, the putting the word “Tu,”
as Mr. Moulton has used it; it is, I believe, a Papuan expression, and has been introduced into the Tongan
language for the purpose of proving some favourite crotchet of Mr. Moulton’s. He has also introduced
several Fijian words, such as “Matakali,” in Luke xxii., 30, instead of the pure Tongan word “ Faahiga,”
for tribes.


But these are trivial in comparison to the misuse which Mr. Moulton has made of many Tonga
expressions, giving altogether a different meaning to many passages from what was intended by the writers
of Holy Writ.
One of the most reprehensible is the frequent use of the work “ tokua.” This very terse and powerful
Tongan word may be translated “He or they say so, but Ido not know if it be true “you may believe it or
not, as you like.” The occurrence of this word several times at the commencement of the history of the
birth of our Saviour, gives a terrible atheistical appearance to the whole narrative. Luke i., 5, ii., 1., iff., 1,
and also in Luke xiii., 11., and xvii., 11, &c.
Another instance is the use of the word “ jiana,” which means a chap or fellow, and is generally used by
the Tongans in a jocular sense. Thus, in Luke v, 18, instead of saying “ behold men bring on a bed a man
that was palsied” (new version) ; he has rendered it, “ behold the chaps brought on a bed a man that
was palsied.” The same word is also used in John xi, 3. Instead of “ Lord, behold he, whom thou lovest,
is sick;” Mr. Moulton has translated it, “Lord, behold the chap whom thou lovest is sick.”
I will now give several instances of Mr. Moulton’s “misinterpretations.” In Matthew ii., 16, he has
translated all the children, for “ all the male children.”
In Matthew ix., 18, he has translated my little girl, for “my daughter.” She might have been a
big girl for all Mr. Moulton knows.
In Matthew xxi., 5, has translated “ and upon a colt, the foal of an ass ” (new version), as yes, upon
A LITTLE ANIMAL, THE FOAL OF AN ANIMAL THAT PULLS THE PLOUGH.
In Mark vi., 8, he has translated “ no money in their purse,” as “ paaga kaba”— no metal money
IN THEIR PURSE.
In Mark vi., 9, he has translated “Put on two coats,” as put on two shirts; actually using the
English word shirt Tonganized. But this word shirt is all the more objectionable when applied to the
garment of our Saviour, in John xix., 23, where Mr. Moulton has translated, “ And also the coat, now the
coat was without seam” (new version), as, and also his shirt, the manner of the shirt was without
SEAM.
In Mark xiv., 45, instead of saying, “ And kissed him,” and using the Tongan word for kiss alone—
uma —as the old missionaries did, he uses the words uma lolomi, which means a pressing kiss, or literally
a buster, —for it is never used save in jocoseness. I feel all the more vexed about this, for since this
chapter was read at Zion it has become a standing joke throughout Tonga, “ Give me a buster!”
In Luke v., 16, he has translated “But he withdrew himself in the deserts” (new version), as he
went about the bush in the deserts. A most abominable translation.
In Luke xi., 38, “ And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first washed before
dinner,” he uses the English word baptize for wash, and translated it thus, when the Pharisee saw it, he
MARVELLED THAT HE HAD NOT FIRST BAPTIZED AND THEN ATE.
In Luke xv., 22, he has translated “Bring forth quickly the best robe,” or, as in the authorised
version, “ Bring forth the best robe,” as bring from the box the best robe. How does Mr. Moulton know
that they kept it in a box ?
In Luke xxii., 66, xxiii., 35, and xxiii., 39, he has translated Messiah for “ Christ.”
But one of the most abominable misinterpretations is that in John iff., 29, where he has translated
“the friend of the bridegroom” by the Tongan low word moauli, which simply means “bawd,” and is
fully as obscene a word in Tonguese as in English, —the bawd of the bridegroom.
In John v., 19 and 20, he has translated his majesty for “he,” referring to the father.
In Acts ii, 13, he has translated sweet wine for “ new wine.”
In Acts ii., 33, he has translated for “ Being therefore by the right hand of God exalted,” by the
OMNIPOTENCE OF GOD EXALTED.
In Acts iv., 13, he has translated that they were not collegians and without position, for that
“ they were unlearned and ignorant men.” A most unwarrantable translation this.
In Acts x., 2, he has translated “who gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God alway,” as
WHO GAVE MUCH ALMS TO THE PEOPLE ISRAEL, WHO WERE IN TROUBLE.
In Acts xiv., 23, he has translated “ And when they had appointed for them elders in every church”
(new version), as when they had chosen ministers for them by a show of hands in every church. How
does Mr. Moulton know they were appointed by a show of hands ?
And another awful translation, —I say awful, because it is approaching to blasphemy
Mr. Moulton has translated these words, Romans i., 9th verse, “For God is my witness,” Seuke
koe Otua, e, dear me by god; the very same expression as Mr. Moulton uses in translating his
“Pilgrim’s Progress,” I swear by my infernal din, Ko hele e! This word “seuke,” which is used in
this passage, and in Rom. vii., 18 and 22 verses, and many other places, is put in for what purpose I know
not. There is no exclamation approaching the same to be found either in the authorized or new version •
and, not only so, it is a word that is never used in reverence, and as an exclamation is most unsuitable to
appear in the Word of God, —Dear me, oho !
The same may be said of another exclamation which Mr. Moulton apparently is very fond of
that is aua, which, as in Hebrews xiii., 15th verse, he has introduced without any authority whatever the
meaning of the word aua being “just so”—“ to be sure.”
I would now remark that the President will observe that I have given upwards of twenty instances
of m°st egregious mistranslations. I have still on my list more than seventy other mistranslations, and
yet half of the New Testament has not been gone through ; but I have not time to add more at present.
I will now proceed to give a few illustrations of the various “ interpolations ” which Mr. Moulton has
seen fit to add to the Word of God.
In Mark iv., 41, he has added to the words “and they feared” an expression meaning, and was it
not a fear; the same, also, in Mark v., 42, after the words “and they were amazed” an expression
meaning and was it not an amazement.
In Mark vi., 28, he has added, of John (not in new version).


In Mark vi., 54, he has added the word Jesus (not in new version).
In Luke x,, 30, he has added ikai gate ai —that is, did not end here.
Luke xi., 14, he has added and on another day.
Luke xvii., 31, he has added, after the words “ And let him in the fields likewise not return back,’ r
TO BRING THINGS WHICH HE HAS LEFT IN HIS HOUSE.
Acts ii., 6, he has inserted the words, like a babel.
Romans i., 7, Mr. Moulton has put in this interpolation, my book “ to all that are in Rome.”
Ephesians ii., 12, another interpolation, where he has added “ having no hope, without God in the
world,” without hope, “solitary ones in the universe” without God. This is also the more noticeable as I
heard Mr. Moulton preach from the words which he has put in as an interpolation, and his remarks were
something like this: That a lost soul went about in the universe all alone, piercing through clouds, shooting
through space, looking at that star, then going to another star ; but all alone—a solitary one. After the
sermon a native remarked, “If that be the case, it will not be so bad to be damned, after all. I should like
to travel, and if I can go on and on I will not care about going alone.”
In Revelations v., 6, instead of “ Elders ” he says twenty-four and in the same verse he
says, instead of “ a lamb,” a little lamb.
In Revelations vii., 15, instead of saying “shall spread his tabernacle over them,” he says the
tabernacle of his Shekinah.
Revelations vii., 17, he inserts, like a flock of sheep.
I have here given fourteen (14) illustrations of Mr. Moulton’s interpolations; I have upwards of forty
still on my list, and yet, as already mentioned, not one-half of the books of the New Testament have been
referred to —in fact, only six books.
I have now to present to the President a list of some of the “ omissions” which Mr. Moulton has
made in his translation.
Matthew xiv., 3, Philip (omitted).
Matthew xx., 30, Lord (omitted).
Matthew xxvi., 44, Third time (omitted).
Mark ii., 22, But they put new wine in fresh wine skins (omitted). New version.
Mark x., 37, Hand (omitted).
Mark xvi., 20, Amen (omitted).
Luke xii., 53, They shall be divided (omitted).
Luke xx., 45, Disciples (omitted).
Acts x., 19, Three (omitted).
Acts x., 48, Jesus Christ (omitted).
Revelations v., 6, All (omitted).
I have on my notes many other omissions, but the President will see a great part of the New
Testament has to be gone through, but the above will suffice for the present. But there are also many
omissions which Mr. Moulton has made, not following the text of the new version but the marginal
references of the new version, and whether he is justified in doing so, I leave the Conference to decide.
In the charge it states low slang, and language is applied to our Saviour, which ought not to be
spoken in the presence of any chief, this will be seen by referring to Mark xiv., 65 ; translating, “received
him with blows of their hands,” —“ Bea bekalae’i ia ’ehe kau ofisa The ’enau buke ia.”
This is an expression which, even at this very day, no Tongan dare use to any chief, of any chief,
or in presence of any chief; and if he had done so years ago he would have been clubbed on the spot.
Some of old Mr. Thomas’s classleaders wept when they read these words as applied to Our Saviour.
But I would also observe, one of the principal reasons why we sent Mr. Moulton home to super-
intend the re-printing of the Bible, was in consequence of our being informed that the British and Foreign
Bible Society refused to print another edition until some of the typographical errors had been corrected. It
is true that there are some typographical errors in the old edition, but none approaching, or of any moment
in comparison with the typographical errors in Mr. Moulton’s translation. There are some in his transla-
tion which, if a poor preacher manages to unfortunately read as his lesson, he will have (as has often
occurred in Tonga since Mr. Moulton’s book has been in vogue) the whole congregation laughing. In John
xxi., 17, and Acts xiv., 19, words are used than which no words are more obscene in the Tongan language
—tole and malaho. In John xii., 26, the word swim is used for if ; and in fact the typographical errors are
so many that it would be waste of time to enumerate them. I have already a long list, and in many
instances they are of such a nature as to entirely alter the meaning of Holy Writ.
I am aware that Mr. Moulton has said to his students I don’t understand Greek so well as he does.
I am free to admit that I have not kept up my Greek as I ought to have, but I presume that Mr. Moulton
will not challenge the combined wisdom of the committee that assembled in the Jerusalem Chamber to
revise the New Testament; and, in my remarks above, I have taken the new version as my standard.
I would therefore observe, I think in the charge before us, that Mr. Moulton’s translation cannot be
called the Word of God, but the word of man. The President will not be surprised to hear of Mr. Moulton’s
translation being denounced by many of the chiefs in the late Parliament, and that some of them should go
so far as to say that they would not use it. . . . .
But just one word in reply to the remark of Mr. Moulton, “Is it any business oi his . i maintain
it is my business, as it was through me he went home, and I have had to bear no small amount of twhtmg
inconsequence. As Minister of Education, —and as the Parliament has decided that the Protestant Bible
is to be used in Protestant schools, and the Roman Catholic Bible in Roman Catholic schools,—! am
responsible for what books are used in the Schools; it is therefore my business ; and it was because 1 was
not willing to take any decisive steps, until the Conference has been able to give its deliverance in the
matter, I suggested, as contained in this charge, that I should be perfectly satisfied to place it in the hands
of a committee of Wesleyan Tongan Missionaries, and to abide by their decision ; but Mr. Moulton was not
willing to adopt this suggestion. I have now to appeal to the President for a deliverance on the matter.


LETTERS REFEREED TO IN CHARGE No. IX, THIRD SERIES.
Agaha, August 15th, 1883.
To the Premier of Tonga.
Sir,
We beg to draw your attention that Mr. Moulton has, and is, importing goods, &c., &c., and is
selling to the natives, viz., payment has been received by native ministers for locks, hinges, paints, &c.; and
also a vessel is expected in from Tonga with a large consignment of lumber and kerosene, and which no
doubt will be sold.
We are, Sir,
Yours obediently,
(Signed) Edgar Peed.
W. T. Jarves.
Carl Pullock.
Niuafoou, 24th September, 1883.
Eev. J. E. Moulton.
Dear Sir,
When Mr. Baker, the Premier of Tonga, was here, we wrote him a note complaining of some
supposed trading transactions of yours, or your native ministers ; but, since he left, we find that the native
reports were greatly exaggerated; and now, since your arrival, everything has been satisfactorily explained.
If in consequence of said letter you have been caused any annoyance, we sincerely beg to offer an apology.
And remain, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) Edgar Peed.
W. T. Jarves.
Carl Pullock.










