

Seven years have passed, since at the urgent request of
the principal chiefs of Tonga, and with the approval of the
late King George, Shirley Wablemar Baker, (self-styled
‘The Homumble and Riczrui'i") was prohibited from remain-
ing in the Islands over which lie had long wielded an almost
despotic sway. During those seven years, the little Kingdom
of Tonga has advanced in prosperity hy leaps and bounds, as
is amply shown by the ‘-Official Statistics of the Tongan
Government” published at irregular intervals during that
period. On the death of Sir John Thurston the late Governor
of Fiji, and High Com nissioner for the Western Pacific, —in
whose term of office the “Order of prohibition” referred to
above was made—an abhortive attempt was made by Mr Baker
to reinstate himself in his former sphere of influence. The
unseemly haste which characterised this apparent endeavour
to take "advantage of the temporary suspension of the office
of High Commissioner has already been commented upon
by the Fiji and Australian Press. The reception ho met
with at the hands of his former adherents in Tonga so
clearly indent'd the feeling of the Tongan people towards
him that he returned to Auckland by the first opportunity.
He was given clearly to understand that, while his one time
adherents were willing to employ him as a commission
agent in Auckland, they did not desire his presence in the
Friendly Islands. His position as Agent for the Free Church
of Tonga naturally gives him a certain amount of influence
wtih sundry trades-peoplein Auckland: and, as there is a
considerable amount of printing to be done, possibly it might
even be inferred that the printing offices of the Auckland
newspapers have been, to some degree, prejudiced in his
favour. From time to time some unwary and gullible
traveller passing through Auckland, and possibly the Friend-
ly Islands, on a flying visit, allows himself (or herself) to
be hoodwinked by interested and not too scrupulous
individuals. Forthwith, the Island world is astounded to


learn from such a traveller, posing as a authority on
Tongan affairs, that Mr. Baker is the only man who has left
his mark in the Pacific, or who has done any good for Tonga
Not long ago a prominent hut over-credulous and mis-
guided ex-premier of New Zealand fell into the the snare,
and through the medium of the Au kland papers referred
to the above, told an astonished world that to Mr. Baker is
due much credit for the flourishing condition of Tonga,
the perfect Laud Laws, Land Nationalisation One-man-one-
Vote-Franchise, the Constitution, Roads and Wharves, Public
Buildings and other blessings of modern Civilisation. Sir
Edwin Arnold has well said—“lt is an unpardonable arro-
gance for a man to imagine that he, a human bird of passage,
however well-accustomed to bird’:''rye-views of public life
and public problems, can pick up information worth impar-
ting upon national questions as he speeds through” (I take
leave to alter the locality and to say) the .Pacific, in a
passenger steama\
On December sth and 6th 1895, the aforementioned Auck-
land papers informed us that their “respected townsman
Dr. Baker has received his diploma from the University of
Chicago in appreciation of his great work in framing the Con-
stitution of Tonga ” and that “ho introduced the Single-Tax
and Land Nationalisation on the 4th. of June 1862.” [ Kind-
ly note this date.] They continue, in laudatory style, to
in form their readars that Dr. Baker secured to the people of
Tonga Ist. Manhood Suffrage with an Educational qualifi-
cation .
2nd. One-nmn-one-vote franchise.
on/. „ t declaration of the Rights and Liberties of
the people.
4th. The establishment of Courts of Justice.
They enumeiate and describe at length the Educational
Works published by him, and wind up their eulogies by
“congratulating Dr. Baker on the honours he so richly de-
serves. "
The most cursory glance over the two articles referred
to is enough to convince the most casual reader that both
have emanated from the same source. It is hardly possible to
avoid the inference that, in both instances, the Herd. Doctor if)
has modestly sheltered himself under the editorial We.
They go on to tell us that the Rev. 8. W. Baker I).I),
has received the diploma of L.L.D. from the Univesity of
Chicago, and that of M.D. from the College of New Jersey.


Whence the 13. D. comes does not appear : but Mr. Labou-
chere has, in London “Truth,” under dates 13th. Sept. 1894
and 19th. March 1896, exposed what would otherwise ho a
profound enigma. When it is known that D.M. ot
Jersey is the degree of Doctor of Music, the exquisite satire ot
the “ honour so richly deserved ” will be at once apparent
to any one knowing aught of Mr. Baker's musical attain-
ments. We hare the authority of a member of the Council
of Gradation of the University of Chicago stating that Mr.
B aker has never received any diploma from that Institution.
One of the articles already quoted, states that “Dr. Baker
was a very young man when, in 1562, he first induced the
Irte king to set his people free from serfdom.’ Mr. Baker
was a “ very young man” in 1862 : but that he had any part
in inducing the late King of Tonga to free his people or
indeed, in any of the reforms of 1562, is manifestly absurd,
as may be seen from the following brief sketch ot his early
colonial experience and connection with the Friendly Islands.
Our first trace of this gifted and erudite compiler and trans-
lator of “Educational Works,” framer of Laws and Consti-
tutions is in 1852 as an unknown stowaway, employed as scul-
lion and general rouse-ahout on board the British ship “ States-
man ”, bound from London to Melbourne,less than ten years
prior to the time when he was (according to his own account)
called upon by the late King of Tonga to become h:s Adviser
General and Lawgiver and Liberator to the nation.
“Honour and worth from no condition rise” sang the sage
of Twickenham, and all will agree that there is no reason
why, under certain conditions, Mr. Baker should not have de-
veloped into all that he represents himself to have been. Punch
says “Poverty is no disgrace to the industrious but it is
hardly a gilt-edge testimonial cf ability.”
The questions naturally present themselves: —
Were those conditions fulfilled ? Did he possess the
requisite education ? Did he receive the necessary training ?
Was lie industrious P Was he found to be worthy of land
and “Honours” ? Who conferred the “Honours” ? Did he
“act well his part” ? The testimony of the passengers of
crew of the ship “Statesman” goes to show that he certain-
ly was not industrious ; and that, up to date, lie did not
seem to have had quite the education that one would na-
turally look for in the boy destined to become, in the course*
of a few years, the spiritual guide and teacher of thousands
of Australian Colonials and - still within the same decade-


the leading Missionary in one of* the most important Mis-
sions in the Pacific, to say nothing of his political aspira-
tions. Apart from minor considerations of educational abili-
ty, the general impression of his shipmates seems to have
Inen similar to that left upon Sir Charles Mitchell, 35 years
later, recorded in his official report as certainly “not fa-
vourable to Mr. Baker.”
In the decade referred tc (1852 —18(12) we find the -Rever-
end” Lawgiver’s course of Theological and Diplomatic train-
ing very clearly defined. On landing in Melbourne towards
the end of 1852, bo was employed by Mr. Picton (one of
the passengers per “/Statesman”) as a cowherd and, after
a lapse of years, we find him “ studying medicine ” as a
small Apothecary’s “assistant ” and employed in various other
jobs in the vicinity of Ballarat and Bendigo. Suddenly
he became converted, joined the Methodists, and, in the short-
est time on record, went through the various grades and
blossomed forth as a duly qualified, medical, Missionary
and political Pooh-bah in that paradise of Mission-fields,the
Tougan or Friendly Islands.
It is a matter of history that. Tonga, up to that date,
bad been kept well supplied with missionaries of exception-
al educational ability—men, who translated the Bible, and
furnished the people of Tonga with a well-illustrated and schol-
arly-written educational literature. Missionaries were numer-
ous : they were on the best possible terms with the king and
chiefs, and they spoke ana wrote the language idiomatically
and fluently.
It is also a matter of history that, as far back as 1853,
King George had formulated a code of laws and bed ex-
pressed his desire to establish a constitutional form, of govern-
ment. In that year, Mr. St. Julian, who was afterwards Chief
Justice of Hawal, furnished the Rev. T. West with a copy
of the Constitution and Laws of Ifawai, which Mr. West
duly translated into Tongau for the King’s use and this
translation formed the basis of the Constitution of 1875, which
is the only one that Mr. Baker had anything to do with.
We know the difficulty of acquiring even a very imperfect
knowledge of the Tougan language and the much greater dif-
ficulty of mastering the intricacies of the “chief’s” language.
We know the natural reserve, the want of confidence in stran-
gers amounting to distrust that has always been a marked
Tongau charaeeristic. W r e know, too, the supreme contempt
of the chiefs of Tonga, and particularly of the late king.


himself, the old chiefs, the missionaries of that period, and
oth r old residents, that the process of reform had been
grad uil. extending ov r a p*rid of at least ten year ; prior
to * arrival >f Me sak i r :to it fch reforms of 183 1 had been
dso ass *d iiddoodM ip )i ! )ig bdbre VTr. Baker came to the
Friendly Islands; and fh t these reforms were carried into
effect on the 4th of .lime 1882 without the slightest possible
consideration for his opinion in the matter.
It wts not until more than ten years later that Mr. Bak -r
began to have a voice in th ; politics of Tonga, and there ho
wis only listened to out of respect of for the position which he
happ or-d to occupy as Chairman of the Friendly is ands
District of the Wesleyan Church.
It was on this account rather, th m as a mark of special
favour on the pirt of the Ki ig that Mr. Bik-r was allowed to
remodel the existing Laws and Constitution. The result was
the unsuitable, unworkable, and abortive Constitution of 1875,
which assuredly reflects n > credit upon any one connected
with it, the original Constitution of 1882 being much more
suitable to the ne< ds of a o unparative'y primitive people.
I have made carefn enquiry into this matter, from people
whose exp.T.ence dat s from before 1382, out I find no instance
of the "vug’s seriously disregarding th 1 Law or of his acting
independently of the chiefs, prior to the time when Mr. Baker
worked himself into power, and completely disorganised a good
government by his pern cions counsels, his sham
constitution, and his subsequent utter disregard of its first
principles.
Under Mr. Baker’s tyrannical rale these people have been so
oppressed in the name of the King, that their ideas are all
perhaps more or less confused as to the King’s rightful relation-
ship towards themselves and towards their own chiefs, from
whom they have gradually become estranged. They cun
instinctively tell that they have Oeen wronged, but few can
understand the contradictions of the frequently altered Con-
stitution ad Law Book to see clearly how their troubles
have been brought about or their oppression legalised. As
an instance of the change wrought in the condition of the
people since Mr. Baker has had the power to meddle with
the Government of Tonga, I may mention the law quoted by
Sir Charles Mitchell in his Report to the British Government
on the affairs of Tonga in 1887. He alludes to this as a
Land Law under which the chief of any district, or of a
particular piece of land, may summon to return to the culti*


nation of that land any persons whom he may discover
elsewhere who are “kakai totonu” that is, whose ancestors
lived on the land.
Prior to 1875 the people had a right to hold and live
Upon land rt any place, and to bequeath the same to their
successors. The’“Constitution” of 1875 deprived the people
of these rights and of their comparatively fixed tenure by
making them ail leaseholders to another newly created class
of chiefs called “Nobles” By the gradual introduction of
such Laws as I have here instanced, the people were, for the
time being, reduced to a state of serfdom, and, not content
with this, the laws were altered and re-altered, until they
became a hopeless tangle. In this state they still remain
Owing to the difficulties of the position to which Mr. Baker
has brought the country.
A system of Laws Tenure , closely allied to Land Nationa-
lisation in its truest sense , had been in force from time immemorial.
Mr. Baker has succeeded in establishing a chaos as far removed
as possible from any system of Nationalisation. Mr. Baker
had absolutely no influence in inducing King George and the
other chiefs of Tonga to abolish serfdom in lSBv : but he
has in the frequently altered Laws and Constitut on, succeed-
ed in again reducing the people to serfdom. The Constitu-
tion was “ amended ’ in 1882 : again in 1885 : again in 1888 I
During the last tin years of Mr. Baker’s regime* it was
practically a dad letter, aid it is so to a large ex tut even
at the present time (September 1897). When in 1891, Mr.
Basil H. Then son undertook to remodel these lows ai d
Constitution, “The English Ycrsioi of the constitution of 1888”
(I quote from the authorised Version of the Tongan Laws)
“was found to be so inaccurate and so grammatically incorrect
that a new translation has been madeL Turf italics are mine;
I give them in view of Mr. Baker's pre-eminent educational
scholarship.
Roads. —There have been good roads throughout the
Friendly Islands from very early times, but daring Mr.
Baker’s regime, they were disgracefully neglected. Be
not only failed to utilise the opportunity his position
afforded to improve the roads, but left them in a much worse
condition than when he took office.
G ourtt of Justice. —lnstitutions so-called were in existence,
but under Mr. Baker’s control, Justice was markedly
absent fxom their proceedings. In the first year of Mr.
Baker’s rule as Premier we find the following “Minute of


Conversation” between Sir Arthur Cordon and Mr.
Baker, officially recorded at the British Consulate,
Tongatabu; a copy of which was sent to Mr. Baker;
I (Sir Arthur Gordon) also told him {Mr. Baker) that
no civilised state could he expected to subject its citizens to the
absolute jurisdiction of such tribunals as those of Tonga. The
words in brackets are mine, of course there is no need for
them in the original “minute”.
In the British Blue Book on New Guinea and the Western
Pacific we find that Sir Win. Des Yoeux has under consi-
deration a number of Tongans who have been imprisoned,
fined, and treated otherwise with gross injustice by the Rev.
S. W. Baker.
The next Governor of Fiji, in his Report on the affairs
of Tonga in 1887, in reference to a statement made by Mr.
Baker to the effect that he had not attempted to defeat tho
ends of Justice tells ns plainly that “the evidence bears out
the contrary assertion. 5 ' Other equally reliable authorities
might be quoted, but sufficient may be gleaned from those
referred to—to convince even the most sceptical that Justice
was an unknown quantity in the Tongan Law Courts during
the regime o’ : Mr. Baker.
Public Works-The “Honourable and Reverend 5 ’ S. W. Baker
has always manifested an earnest desire to “gather gear by
every wile 55 whether “justified’’ “by honour 55 or not, and ho
certainly cannot be accused of having neglected any oppor-
tunity afforded by his position to turn it to personally
profitable account. While chairman of the Wesleyan Mission
in Tonga he not only exacted heavy “commissions 55 on pur-
chases made for the Church, but after his summary dismissal
double sets of invoices were found in the Mission safe proving
clearly that he had charged his Church considerably more
for the Mission House at Nukualofa than be had actually
paid for it.
Similar discoveries were made after his dismissal from the
position of Premier of Tonga, and Were published in the
Tongan Government Gazette of 9th. November 1890. With
opportunities such as these it is not to be wondered at that
the amount of money spent on “Public works” was only
limited by the resources available. Whether the country
received value for that expenditure is a very different matter.
The Government Gazette last mentioned also informs us of
sums of Government money paid to the editor of a since
defunct Auckland paper “The Evening Bell”, The only visible


cowsideration for these psymenti was 11 a senes of articles
violently antagonistic to the Wesleyan missionaries”. A‘so. of
a sum paid to Julian Thomas “the Yaga bond” for a similar
series of articles that appeared in the Melbourne “Age”. Tlv se
latter articles were also reprinted in p impli'et form and a
large quantity ordered and paid for with Tongan Government
money by Mr. Baker. After his downfall, the Government
ordered their destruction.
This .Tongan Government Report from which I quote was
printed in December 1890 bv Messrs. Wilsoi s and Horton, the
proprietors of the New Zealand Herald, which, in Dec. 6th.
1895, in a sort of sub-leader, congratulates “on the honours
which he so richly deserves” that same ‘ Honourable and
Reverend Doctor” whom the official records of both church
and state prove to have been “ alike impervious to public or
domestic , morality ”.
Manhood Suffrage ; one man ore Vote. The principle
was unknown (except on pgpa) in T<rga during
Mr. Baker’s regime. 1 have thus briefly traversed all
the “great” “works” in appreciation of which Mr. Baker
professes to have received the various American dph mas
mentioned above. Brief as my reference to each has necess-
arily been, 1 trust that I have churly shown that all these
“great works” had been carried into effect before his time,
with the exception of sundry “Public Works”, for which the
motive has been amply proved, and which, were the motive
purity itself, in auy case would hardly have merited recog-
nition of a University nature.
With , one- exception I have not yet referred to the
“EdncMignal Works''’. Leaving out of the question the necessity
or otherwise of these books, I quote from the Auckland Evening
Star of December sth. 1895, a list of them. Commenting
on them, for the sake of convenience, seriatim ;
1. “A large Geography of the World, embellished with
several-gnaps drawn up to date". (Size 4| inches by 7|, 79-
pages in a paper cover, t\pe Long Primer, one map, (Europe,)
7f ipches by inehes-a fair specimen of an average Fourth
Form school boy’s work in map-drawing).
2. “Arithmetic on lines of Barnard Smith and other cele-
hrated Arithmetician^'. (68 pages of the same size as the
“Geography” in a paper cover.) It takes the mathematical
student as far as the “Rule of Three” or “Simple Proportion.
3. “Anoimt History, being brought down to Modern Times".
(This paper covered volume consists of IXB pages of the same


sizfi as the preceding “works”. It is printed in Brevier typo,
mid evidently deems that the Tongau scholar has a suffici-
ent knowledge of Modern History when lie lias learned a
lew' anecdotes of the late Queen Cleopatra, and of the lamen-
ted Alexander the Great (of Macedon, not of Russia,
for it treats of nothing more modern),
4. The Medical and other Pamphlets ‘have ■ not as yet
appeared in Tonga. (1897). Possibly the Universities which
delignt to honour Mr. Baker have bought up the entire
editions for use in their Colleges.
The Lexicon and other looks “in the press’'" in 1895,
are evidently still there ; all the other “Works” are before
mo as I write.
The Geography and the Arithmetic hear .the impri-
matur of H. Brett, who is the proprietor of the “Auckland
Evening Star”; his 1 i ist >ry wa>. printed by Wilsons and
Horton, who rim the Auckland “Weekly News” and New Zealand
“Herald.” To the uninitiated, the necessity for these books
seems somewhat obscure, unless it w *re to assist in developing
the “Educational qualifcation” for tue much-vaunted Man-
hood suffrage which never existed.
The Educational history of Tonga is briefly as follows;
Prior to Mr. Baker’s assuming the rems of temporal gove-
rnment as Premier, the education of the Tongai.s w'as in
the hands of the Wesleyan Mission. Under its care a most
liberal and advanced system was devised and ad.nira .y
carried on. The educational literature was not only wide
in scope but carefully selected, contained the fruits of much
valuable original research, and supplied the T-mgans with
an immense variety of well-illustrated and interesting
reading matter. It was in every way infinitely superior
to any thing since produced by Mr. Baker, or-to be more
correct-by his employes who compiled and translated “his
works”. Even Mr. Baker himself tacitly admits this by
transferring bodily whole passages from Wesleyan text-books
to his owm, —naturally without acknowledgement.
Soon after Mr. Baker assumed office, he also assumed
possession of the schools. He caused some school books to be
compiled and printed, and made their use compulsory through-
out the kingdom as an additional means of extorting money
from the Tongans.
It is a well-known fact that the majority of Tongan stu-
dents do not treat Mr. Baker’s text-books seriously. They are
compelled to buy and use them in class, but, for purposes of


private study infinitely prefer the text-books of the Wesleyan
Mission.
Naturally Mr. Baker is keenly alive to the profits ac-
cruing to himself and to his friends of the Auckland‘‘Evening
Star” and New Zealand “Herald” from the sale of his “works”
and does all in his power to foster it, but this state of affairs,
profitable and pleasant though it may be to him, would
hardly seem to warrant such recognition as the conferring,
of University Degrees upon him.
Possibly the advance sheets of the “Lexicon” in the
press may have influenced the learned convocations which
granted them; in that case 1 can only hope that we in
Tonga may soon be gratified by a perusal of such an inva-
luable work. I for one will examine it with “very much
pleasure”.
I may aptly conclude with a short summary ‘of the state
of affairs in Tonga when Mr. Baker left the country in
disgrace, and of affairs as they are at the present time." At
the date of Mr. Baker’s dismissal from office, the Govern-
ment of Tonga was heavily indebted to its employers ; to
business people in Tonga and elsewhere, especially in New
Zealand.
The people were, so far as their volatile nature would
permit, in a state of seething discontent. Memories were
still burning over the remembrance of appalling judicial
murders, of persecutions and general wrong-doings which
had commenced in 1875 and culminated in 1887, Political
offenders and Wesleyan adherents were still living in exile ;
some in foreign lands, some on almost barren out-lying
islands of the Tong;.n group but all separated from all they
held dear.
Numbers bad died in exile, principally from the after
effects of the ill-treatment received before banishment.
Tribal jealousies which had slumbered from 1845 to ] 875
were reawakened to violence. The Laws had become a
farce. Justice in the Courts was non-existent; the Courts
of Law were used as a means of oppression, and for raising
revenue which Mr. Baker expended on “Public Works”.
Religious animosity was rampant and bitter. The so-
called “Free” Church, started by Messrs. Baker and Watkin
in 1885 was striving by every underhand means to cause
the Wesleyaus to appear as enemies of their rulers. The
people were impoverished through oppressive legislation and
dishonest administration. Today, the position is briefly


this The Government ot‘ Tonga owes no man at home
or abroad any thing, and there is a large surplus in the
Treasury.
The material prosperity of the people is much greater
than has ever before been known. Weatherboard houses,
buggies, carts and other expensive luxuries, are now obtain-
able and their use has become the rule rather than the
exception.
Census statistics show a steady increase in the popula-
tion, instead of the constant decrease which was caused to
a large extent by incessant oppression, and extortion by
iniquitous taxes, fines, and penalties. It is a hopeful sign
for the little kingdom that, for the first time on record,
freedom of speech was permitted and encouraged in the
late session of Parliament ; and it is a significant fact that
one of the first uses made of this newly-found liberty by
some of the Free Church Members of Parliament was to
denounce Mr. Watkin for having misinterpreted the good
advice tendered them by the late Governor of Fiji : and for
instigating Tougans to various acts of lawlessness in the name
of religion during the past seven years. “The evil that men
do lives after them” and, if the Government, the Civil
Service, and the Department of Justice, is not quite as well
administered as the growing contact with civilisation requires,
the faults are chiefly traceable to the former example and
teachipgs of their Reverend Councillor and Lawgiver, and
his equally talented successor as Resident Adviser to the
Kin g—Mr. Wat kin.
As regards the Eriks , immediately on the dismissal of Mr.
Baker from office in July 1890, the late King George ordered
an amnesty of all prisoners suffering unjustly. He prohibited
the flogging of women which had been customary under Mr.
Baker’s administration ; he granted freedom of worship which
had been for years unknown ; and he requested the late Gover-
nor of Fiji to make arrangements for the return of the exiled
Wesleyans to their homes as soon as possible. When making
this request the late King was visibly affected, and said
“I never sent them away !” “I did not want them to go
away I” “They were driven away !” “Do you bring them
back to their homes and friends I” (Vide official Report
of this case.)
They were then a little over one hundred all told, men,
women and children.
There are now three thousand two hundred and fifty-five^


oral steadily increasing.
Some of tlie former exiles are now Members of Parlia-
ment, hold other prominent positions, and all are held in
general respect by chiefs and people of all sects and
classes.
Time, and the absence of Mr. Baker have already toned
down to a great extent the hitter animus which existed
between the churches : between chiefs and chiefs : between
chiefs and people; between families and families : and between
members of the same families during the dark uays of the
Relgious Persecutions initiated and instigated by Messrs
Baker and Watkin: and whatever discord and covert
persecution still exists is directly attributable to these
“Reverend” Counsellors.
If these disturbing influences could but be removed
from Tonga, there is no doubt but that all political and
religious differences would gradually die out although it
will necessary take some years to thoroughly eradicate the
whole of the deplorable effects of the' Baker-Watkin
administration from Church and State.
A. W. Mackay.
Evdney, N. S. W.
Aug. 1897.
