

SvS MARIE ;> > > : :■.."■
f*,, J %• 3r®
ImTa.. i . 'J *i:sss
‘ ,r si


*v
Bt Vl
VX 3fj©fc v^C


f) C)L_
1
■ kc_4t .
k Lg ,gg ; \ ■. •' l /Ji
T/j/s £oo& is dedicated to all dogs
and to all tlx>se who love them


* d^i
I Wore a Blue Bow.


Tti€ STORY OF A SCOTTIE
MARIE MARSHALL
DRAWINGS
JOHN MAGRATH
SHEPHERD and NEWMAN PTY. LTD., SYDNEY.


ls£ Edition published 1943. 20,000 Copies.
2nd Edition published 1944. 10,000 Copies.
Printed and Published in Australia
Shepherd & Newman Pty. Ltd.
Yurong Street, Sydney.
Copyright, 1943.
Registered in Australia for transmission by
post as a book.


$
y
5k id id a .Secret
N, /
(But you may whisper it to your friends )
Almost every important person writes his life story. If he’s rich
as well as important (and sometimes, but not always, the two go
together) he may pay someone to write it for him.
Tony Tithers is important, but not rich —in money. He is rich
in all the things that matter. He is rich in the love he has for the
Armstrong family; the love the family has for him; and in all the truly
valuable things such as sunshine and rain, and the fresh brown earth.
Tony doesn’t like being caught in the rain, but he looks on it as a friend
that visits the garden. He stares out at it from the verandah, watching
it dancing merrily on the garden path . .' . Yes, Tony counts these
things as his riches.
He had no money with which to pay someone to write his story, so
he knew he would have to do it himself —generally the best way of get-
ting anything done. He supposed a member of the Armstrong family
might do it for him, but he didn’t want that. He wanted to give them
a surprise. He longed to hear them say (just as the friends of some
authors do): "Fancy Tony Tithers writing a book!”
Tony thought and thought about his book. Often, when people
imagined he was dozing or watching a fly crawling up the wall, he was
thinking of serious things.
If all people thought as long over a book before starting to write
it, as Tony did, many uninteresting books (such as some they give to
boys and girls at school) would never be written. The authors would
say, "I’ve thought it out, and it’s too dull.”
Well, Tony had the book all in the back of his little black head, so
to speak, when he visited a wise old Toad who owned a rock home beside
a lovely blue-green pool.


Toads are mysterious creatures and know all sorts of strange and
wonderful things.
The Toad told Tony how to write his story so that humans would
be able to read it, laugh with it, and cry with it a little.
"You must be able to do all that with a good story,” said Toad,
who knew several languages, including Dog Language. He was very
learned! Some said he had been studying for hundreds of years in a little
back room of his rock home.
"Mind you,” warned Toad, "we don’t want every dog writing his
life story. Some dogs know too many family secrets and don’t care what
mischief they make by barking about them.”
Tony nodded his head understanding^.
Toad went on solemnly: "Promise me, by your four paws and all
your whiskers, that you will keep the secret of how you were able co
write your book for a long, long, long time.”
"About how long is that?” asked Tony.
"Say, until you’ve had your four thousandth leg-o’-mutton bone.”
"I promise,” said Tony, and he held up one paw after the other, and
thought of all those leg-o’-mutton bones. If only he could have them
at once!
And that’s all we can tell you of how Tony Tithers, a most import-
ant dog, came to write the story of his life.
If your dog ever meets Toad, and if he’s an extra special dog like
Tony (which we’re sure he is), then Toad may tell him how he can
write his life story, too. It’s a secret any dog would give his bones for .. .


nJkssi&m
I LOVE
Billy.
Mr. Armstrong.
Alicia.
Mrs. Armstrong.
(And nobody else very much.)
I also love
Meat and big bones (plenty of them!)
Dog biscuits.
All scraps from the dinner table—especially roast pork.
Cool water.
Sleep (and a lot of it!)
Being made a fuss of.
Dozing in front of the fire on cold nights.
Games (but not work such as carrying newspapers).
Snapping at flies and other bite-ies.
Digging holes.
Burying bones—and digging them up when they smell very old.
Going for walks and swims.
Chasing birds.
Growling at strange dogs and all cats
Having my back brushed.
Barking at all tradesmen except the butcher
Growling at strangers and other people I don’t like. I show them
who’s boss in my garden!
I HATE
Being laughed at.
Being "shooshed” out of the house.
Waiting for my dinner when I’m hungry (which is always).
Waking up in the night to bark at noises and hearing someone in the
house call out angrily, "Lie down, Tony!”
My favourite colour is green—the colour of the soft green grass.
My favourite music is the sound of a kind human voice—like my Billy’s voice.
My one ambition is to be loved forever by everyone in the Armstrong family.




&arl? One
ALL ABOUT ME
My name is Tony Tithers.
Perhaps you know me. If you do, don’t forget to say hullo when
you see me trotting down the street. I’m not handsome, although I’m
a Scottie. I should say that I’m a Scottie ALL BUT —all but the legs.
They are rather long legs for a Scottie. I could never win prizes at a dog
show. But who wants to win prizes? They only make others jealous of
you. For the rest, I’m just like any other Scottie: rather square about
the jaw, and covered with black wiry hair. My eyes are intelligent, I
hope. They do say I’m as round as I’m long, and that I eat too much, but
that’s beside the point.
I began my career in a dogs’ home. It had a high wire wall all
round it, and the person in charge had the worst bark you could imagine!
If I remember correctly, her name was Mrs. Elton.
How she did bark at us! Not in the same language our mothers
used, but some sort of a bark. It was very shrill and angry most of the
time. I felt somehow that I wasn’t wanted. One day, after she had
given me a bone with barely any meat on it, she said: "You’re always
hungry! You should join your mother!”
This pleased me, for I missed my mother. I longed for
her, and my heart swelled with hope. I imagined myself
lying beside her warm body again; I could feel her lick
ing my face. Oh, the time couldn’t go fast enough.
But I did not join my mother, and I’m glad, too.
One day in the future I shall see her though, for I’m old
now, and some day I’ll fall fast asleep and never wake
again. Billy explained it all to me, when he bought me.
Billy came with his father to the home one Satur-
day afternoon, and Billy’s father gave Mrs. Elton ten
shiny shillings for me. I didn’t think it much for a
whole dog, but when Billy picked me up and said,
ax "You’re a little beaut!” I was quite satisfied.
I was very young when all this happened—just a
■» months old, but I found the world a lovely place
of light and shadows. There were sweet scents and
sharp smells, too thousands of them. I liked the
grass best when the dew was on it, and next to my bone,
„ I liked the warm sunlight that I blinked at from my
Mrs. Elton.


S: Jhr'
" Ww ■
shelter in the shade. I dreamed away the days and just
woke to eat and bark now and then.
In a way, I was sorry to leave the dog’s home. I
had one or two friends there. They were all much older
than I was. They knew the world and I didn’t, so there
wasn’t much I could discuss except sleep and food.
There was one old dog I’ll always remember.
He was a tan-and-white Beagle with tremendous
ears, of which he was very proud. His nose twitched
with emotion every time he told me some of his adven-
tures. Like most old chaps, he told the same story over
Billy
again, but this didn’t worry me, for I didn’t always listen
He was nearly blind and could just tell when it was night
or day. He had worked very hard for his master. One
day everything went strangely dim. Everything
looked misty, as if in a cloud. His master, instead of letting him
retire and live without work, sent him to the dogs’ home. But
Emperor (that was this Beagle’s name) wouldn’t hear a word against
his cruel master. Yes, he was a loyal old fellow! And quite an aristocrat
He had hardly any appetite, was very fussy about what he did eat, had
a deep voice, and kept to himself.
Another friend I left behind was a Cocker Spaniel named Daniel.
He was young, and had run away from home for some reason or other.
He never told me the full story, except that a potplant had been hurled
at him. Daniel was a smart fellow and could talk to Emperor about
going out with a "man and a gun.” Daniel was black, with some white
on his chest. This white shirt he kept spotlessly clean. He had long,
hanging ears, and the wisest brown eyes I’ve ever seen. He loved rivers
and swamps, and I was sorry he found everything so dry at the
dogs’ home. He was very rich, for he told me of hundreds of buried
bones, and he said he’d dig up his treasure when he left the home. I
hope he found someone to love him, and take him away from the home,
and I hope all the bones were still there where he had buried them.
Before I stop telling you about the dogs’ home, I
must admit that Mrs. Elton actually patted my head as
I rested in Billy’s arms. Her thin lips smiled, too
And she said, "Bless him!”
And now I come to Billy and his family.
Billy was nine years of age, and bigger than any
dog I had ever seen. His father was much bigger
than Billy again, and he had the same kind of blue
eyes as Billy, and the same smile. I felt very proud
to own them, and I made up my mind to look after
them day and night.
Emperor.
T‘ J f
J*X * i
K" Z J '


7s~r* . / vt
(i # fr ’,
_
It would be a big job, but SnifFmewhiskers
I’d do it.
I’m afraid I felt very conceited when I saw
the size of the huge kennel these humans lived
in. It was green and white, and there was a
beautiful green lawn all round it, with bright
flowers here and there. I became quite swelled-
headed when I found there were other humans
for me to look after as well as Billy and his
father.
They all came down to the gate. And what
a fuss they made of me! I met Billy’s big
sister. She was sixteen and so pretty. I liked her better than Billy’s
mother at first, and do you know why?
Billy s mother picked me up and looked at me most sternly.
"He’s not ALL Scottie!” she said, disappointed. "His legs seem too
long.”
"I think he’s lovely!” cried Billy’s sister, whose name was Alicia.
"He’s so quaint!”
I noticed that she had long legs.
"You’re not taking him back to the home!” cried Billy, and he
snatched me into his arms and held me tight.
I suppose it was rude of him to snatch, but I knew that from that
day onwards Billy and I would be the best of pals.
"What will we call him?” asked Alicia, the big sister with the long
legs.
Tony Tithers,’ said Billy quickly. "Tony Tithers!”
"But our name is Armstrong,” said Alicia. "Call him Tony
Armstrong.”
Tony Tithers! ’ persisted Billy. "It suits him better.”
And Tony Tithers it remained.
111 never forget the first day of coming into all this fortune. They
washed me (I didn’t like that much!) and they brushed me (I liked
that!) and they gave me so many bones that I had to bury some.
I wished Daniel could have seen me as I started to dig in my treasure.
How proud I felt! I was on the way to becoming a self-made dog.
Already I was rich. I had a beautiful house in which lived four won-
derful humans; I had a tiny house, painted white and green to match the
big one in which the family lived. Best of all, I had Billy to love me.
Sniffmewhiskers! What more could a dog bark for?


MAKING myself at home
1 found my new life very exciting.
First, I explored the garden and noted all the shady spots where I
could snooze without the sun making my eyes blink.
The shadiest spot of all was under the big tree, and I became
very friendly with the tree. It had one fault. It sighed too much about
the weather. It liked a slight breeze, but not strong winds.
I rubbed my back against its trunk, and this was lovely.
The tree and I spent many long hours together in silent friendship.
I liked to feel it was always there when I wanted it. Often when Billy
would growl at me for doing something wrong, I’d lie down by the tree
and fall asleep beneath the shade of its leafy boughs, and wake up, for-
getting everything that had happened. Billy was quick to forget, too.
I hate people who remember too much, don’t you?
As well as the tree, there were many flowers, but they did not stay
long; Billy said they died. There was a vine that did not die, and it
became so thick that I found I could jump on it and swing to and fro.
As I grew older I forgot to play this game, but it was good fun while
it lasted. The vine grew from the woodshed to the fence, and Billy
would play underneath it, and call it his cubbyhouse. We played won-
derful games —noisy ones, too, and I’d rush about and give my loudest
bark.
The woodshed was interesting. It was packed with odds and ends
such as broken chairs and bicycle pumps.
One day I made a great discovery in this shed. A fowl from down
the road had crept under our fence and laid an egg among some old
cushions! How I barked to tell everyone! I was sorry I didn’t see the
fowl. I’d have made some feathers fly, I can tell you!
A garden is all right, but it takes some looking after. I often hear
Billy’s father pass this same remark.
I was run off my legs for the first few days. However, I soon
learned all about the regular visitors and took no notice of them.
I liked the butcher boy who brought my bones. He had a friendly
smell about him. He was a fat boy in a blue-and-white apron. "Hullo,
old boy,” he’d say to me. "Why, you ARE getting fat!” This seemed to
please him, because, I suppose, he was so fat himself.
The baker was a nasty old man. He never smiled or took any notice


f
of me at all. I would growl at him from under the house. He kicked me
once. When I could, I’d snap at his heels. He pretended not to be scared
of me, but I noticed how quickly he walked away!
The grocer and fruiterer were friendly, but they weren’t very inter-
esting. The butcher boy was my favourite. Besides, it was worth keeping
in with him. I noticed that my bones were bigger whenever I wagged my
tail at him in an extra friendly way.
I learned early in life that people can be very fussy over a garden, I
couldn’t scratch up the garden near the flowers without having the
whole household after me!
One afternoon I saw a caterpillar—a big furry
one —on a plant that Mr. Armstrong was particularly
fond of. Every night I watched him water this plant.
I knocked the caterpillar off the plant with my paw,
and saw it fall to the ground. Then it disappeared.
I was scratching in the earth, trying to find it,
when Mrs. Armstrong came to a window and
saw what I was doing.
"Billy,” she said (and her tone of voice gave
me a scare, I can tell you). "Billy, if that dog
starts tearing up the garden, he’ll have to go!”
So that was all the thanks I got for looking
after the old plant!
I resolved there and then never to do an
ounce of work in the garden again. Cater-
pillars and snails could crawl everywhere, and
I wouldn’t so much as look at them!
Billy was very upset at what I had done,
and pleaded with me to be good. He rubbed
his chin against my nose and said in a whisper
that he’d run away from home if they sent me
away. Of course, I knew that would never
do, and made up my mind to be as good as the
tree, which never seemed to get into trouble.
It was the only thing in the garden that re-
mained undisturbed.
They were always digging round this and
that, and pulling this up, and putting that in!
Old Jilks was to blame. He planned every-
thing.
The butcher hoy was
my favourite.


M
He came one day every week to do the gardening. I liked him, for
he had a dog of his own. I could tell that the first day I sniffed at him.
I saw some dog hairs on his trouser legs, too.
I did not meet Jilks’s dog for quite a while. Then, one day, he came
along with Jilks, who kept telling him to go home.
As much as I liked Jilks, I could not have strange dogs in my garden,
and I chased the stranger.
How that rascal could run! He was a Fox Terrier and, like me, had
long legs. He went like the wind! I have to admit I couldn’t catch
him, and when I came back to the gate, there was Jilks, with a self-satisfied
grin on his face. I sniffed.
“You’d never catch my Caesar, if you ran for a thousand miles!” he
chuckled, giving one of my ears a squeeze. Your legs aren t long
enough fpr THAT!”
I was hurt, I can tell you, and made up my mind
to show Jilks that I could not only catch his smooth-
haired Caesar, but make mincemeat out of him!
Although I never caught Caesar, it gives me
great satisfaction to say that he did not pay the
garden a second visit. I had scared him! I
looked out for him when I went for my walks
down the street, but I never met him. This
was lucky for him! Jilks said he was on the
chain, but that was just an excuse.
I grew very fond of Jilks. He was with
me so much in the garden. You see, Mr.
Armstrong would go to his office early in
the morning, and then Billy and Alicia
would go to school, leav-
ing me all alone with Mrs.
Armstrong. For some
reason she didn’t love me
very much just then.
Well, you can imagine
how I looked forward to
Jilks’s one day a week. I


would lie close to his spade while he was digging, and never once did he
hurt me with it or accidentally dig me into the ground when I was asleep.
Jilks talked to himself a lot, and I heard a sad story. He couldn’t
make enough money to keep his wife as he wanted to keep her. She was
very ill, too, and had to have all sorts of medicines.
"It’s a hard world, Tony,” he would say, knocking off to pat my
head. "Me and the missus find it a very hard world, Tony, me boy.”
Sometimes I felt I would like to give up my fine home and live with
poor old Jilks and go with him from house to house. He must have seen
and heard some interesting things, working in so many gardens. I knew
of two gardens where he worked, and I wanted to see what was happen-
ing on the other side of the fences. I passed the fences often, and some-
times I’d meet Jilks coming out of a gate, very tired, and with mud on
his boots.
We always recognised one another in the street.
Yes, the garden was a grand place, everything considered, but I
think I liked the house better. I was not allowed in often, and some-
times, when I would sneak in through an open door, I would be hunted
out as if I were a burglar instead of one of the family!
Billy was very good. Some warm nights he would smuggle me
indoors and I would lie as quiet as a mouse near the long curtains in the
lounge room. Then I would do my duty and bark or growl at some
strange noise outside, and I would be discovered and pushed out on to
the verandah. But you’ve got to do your
duty, even when you suffer for it.
In the cold winter nights, Mr. Armstrong
would let me come in to the fire. How
warm it was! I heard the family talking
and I listened to the wireless, with my
head on Billy’s knees. Billy would sit on
the mat in a friendly way, and leave the
others to be stiff in their chairs.
Like me, Billy knew what comfort really
was.
Everything was going along smoothly
when a most unwelcome visitor came into
the garden and spoilt my whole life for
three, long, weary days.


THE SURPRISING
VISITOR
I was dozing in the shade of my old friend, the tree, and keeping
one eye half open to watch a big ant that was trying to carry away a
dead butterfly, when I heard a strange noise above me. It came from the
tree.
I looked up and saw something white on a bough. When it moved,
my ears stood straight up.
Then it spoke, and my ears became so stiff in surprise that I didn t
think I’d ever get them down again!
"How’s your old man?” said the white thing in a high voice. Aw,
go and bury yourself!”
I had never heard or seen anything like this before.
When I got my breath, I gave the household a warning, barking
and growling all at once.
"How’s your old man?” cried the white thing again, and there was
a great fluttering among the leaves. Then it came down on to the lawn,
and I realised it was a bird.
A bird that talked!
It was certainly an amazing world, I thought, and full of the
strangest things.
I know several birds. Very quick they are, and keep out of my
way. I have tried to catch sparrows that have the cheek to come into
the garden, and I have made one or two springs at a pair of wrens, who
live in the tree. I’m not so hard on them though, because, after all, they
do live here, and that makes them relatives of mine.
I was wondering whether I should treat this big white bird in the
same way as I treated the wrens, when all the family came out. You
never heard such a noise!
"It’s a cockatoo!” cried Billy. "Hurrah!”
"Nice bird,” said Mr. Armstrong, in a tone that made me quite
jealous.
"It’s escaped from someone’s cage,” said Mrs. Armstrong.
"Oh, can’t we keep it?” asked Billy—too eagerly, I thought.
All this time I was wagging my tail and looking at the strong beak
of the cockatoo. I was getting ready to snap at it! I had made up my
mind. He was no relative!
The bird didn’t seem at all surprised at the fuss being made of it. Up


It just sat in a cage I
and down it walked, puf&ng out its head-feathers and muttering,
"How’s your old man?”
"Now we’ll hide and watch,” whispered Billy. "Come away,
Tony, and don’t you dare hurt Cocky!”
This decided me! I leapt at that bird and nearly caught it. With
a shriek of "How’s your old man?” it flew back into the tree. Sniffme-
whiskers! I was mad at it.
The family growled at me as if I had done something terrible.
"Take him inside,” said Alicia. "The big bully!”
"Bad dog!” said Billy, grabbing me and carrying me into the house.
I struggled, but it was no use.
He locked me on the back verandah and returned to the garden,
where everyone was standing round the tree and using stupid language
to that idiotic bird.
I was disgusted and curled myself up on the mat. I tried to forget
the whole business, but couldn’t. They were actually smooging to that
bird! So I wasn’t good enough for them! They locked me up while
they talked to a bird!
I was thinking of running away —just for a day or two to make
them anxious—when I heard Billy give a yell of delight.
"He’s in the cage!” he cried. "Pretty cocky!”
I tried to close my ears to all this, but it was no use
Then they came on to the verandah, not even noticing me! My tail
wouldn’t wag, and I felt absolutely miserable. Nobody cared. Only
that white bird in the cage mattered now.
"How’s your old man?” it kept saying in a high, screeching voice.
"I’ll teach it lots of things!” said Billy, excitedly.
I felt sorry that I had refused to learn tricks. But after all, I’m
not a circus dog. And if I had learned to carry the paper and parcels,
I’d always be working. I know I’m lazy in some things, but nobody


could work harder than I work round the garden! I bark when I hear
the slightest noise, and I chase all the cars that pass the house —that is,
when I can get out. Billy doesn’t like me chasing the cars, but they
deserve it —the great big bullies, taking up nearly all the road.
I’ll never forget how they all treated me that day. If I hadn’t
been there, they couldn’t have taken less notice of me. And when
Cocky came out with a new sentence, "Shake a leg!” you never heard
such a lot of praise for a silly old bird in all your life!
Mr. Armstrong was just as bad as Billy. I love Mr. Armstrong
almost as much as I love Billy. But how men stick together! Billy and
Mr. Armstrong just left me out in the cold. I didn’t blame Alicia and
Mrs. Armstrong so much. Girls are changeable anyway.
The cage was put where I couldn’t reach it, which just showed how
suspicious they were!
After a few hours, I thought I could say, "How’s your old man?”
myself, I had heard it so often. I grew tired of Billy and all of them
going to the cage and scratching cocky’s head, and when I went to sleep,
I dreamed of the blessed bird —and it was chasing ME!
It was dark when I awoke, and Billy was pulling at my tail.
"You’re going to be locked up in the shed to-night,” he said. "We
don’t want you going for poor Cocky.”
Before I could dart away, Billy picked me up and carried me to the
shed. Mr. Armstrong brought my dinner, but I couldn’t eat anything.
Billy said I was jealous. I was —and I was broken-hearted to think a bird
could come into the garden and that, in a few minutes, they should all
make such a fuss of it. I wouldn’t make up to a stranger like that!
Sniffmewhiskers, I wouldn’t!
I worked hard for my bones. It just sat in a cage, puffed up its
feathers and talked! It seemed very unfair. I thought of Jilks, the
gardener; he wouldn’t desert me.
With this thought I went to sleep. I woke up after a few hours and
thought I had better eat my dinner, so it wouldn’t be wasted. Besides,
they might think I was ill, and give me medicine.
Mr. Armstrong let me out of the shed early in the morning and told
me that I had to be friends with Cocky. I swallowed my pride and crept
on to the verandah, trying to keep my tail up, but it would hang down!
Cocky was walking round and round in his cage as if he wasn’t too
happy, either. Mrs. Armstrong noticed this, and said to Mr. Armstrong:
"John, you’ll have to buy that bird a stand; it doesn’t like the cage.”
"I’ll wait a while, Myrtle, and see if anyone advertises for the bird,”
was his reply.


I ' , 5/ ■ ' :
-Jiff -
■ ■■■•
'
£k
.4K ■’*■ .■’■*•, % ■. 3r> - 9* 9E
w — iUF A.1 v Nk jp w
jjBh*: 5 Tt W~ ; ~
1®
m* '%' g '
BP * *»_. • &kfe% *s# *fe- A’ •»»
A, ' 'K ..
* :^'^m'r ifistL \ ■' , ' >- c* - 4 dfe '■’'Hsfr
■•-■' J ; -J*y '•'" ■:■./* ,;.
y »- *
9 1 Irj^BV
v*'"^ : • _ ■ ■» ,y * 'jrtj
» . V,-, *Ffb$fei ‘ii—wpj ]| " .--oak
~ j -'— - - w
When it moved my ears stood straight up.




I had been waiting for days for dog biscuits, and here was Mrs.
Armstrong thinking of buying a stand for the cocky!
I was considering plans for running away, when I nearly fell over
with shock.
"Tony!” screeched Cocky. "Tony!”
By nature, I’m a very obedient dog, and when that bird yelled at
me, I came to attention.
The family thought the bird the most wonderful, the most mar-
vellously quick, the brainiest bird that ever was!
Even the butcher and the baker noticed it, and Jilks said it was "a
mighty fine talker.” I hadn’t expected THAT from Jilks.
I wouldn’t have minded Cocky so much, if he had been kept in his
proper place. The trouble was he took up so much of everyone’s atten-
tion that nobody had time to notice me. Worst of all, he had me run-
ning to him every time he cried "Tony!” It was habit on my part, I
suppose. When I was down at the front gate, it wasn’t easy to tell
who was calling "Tony!”—Mrs. Armstrong or Cocky. When Mrs.
Armstrong spoke loudly her voice was very like Cocky’s—but don’t
tell her that!
So there was I, running to a bird in a cage!
If I stayed in the house much longer I would lose my self-respect.
I thought I’d pack up the few bones I’d hidden in the back of the garden,
say good-bye to them all, including the tree, and set off along the road. I
wouldn’t mind if a car ran over me!
I was surprised to find one night that Alicia really had an under-
standing heart even though she was a girl.
I was sitting on the verandah, looking through the wire door of the
kitchen, and watching Mrs. Armstrong cooking, when Alicia said: "I
think poor Tony is upset about Cocky. I wish we could find the owner
of that bird.”
My heart beat high with hope, then I felt miserable again.
"We’re going to keep Cocky!” cried Billy, who was sticking his
finger in a tin of jam that had just been opened.
"We can’t keep him if someone else owns him,” said Alicia firmly.
"How would you like anyone to steal Tony like that?”
My heart nearly stopped as I waited, almost breathless, for what
Billy would say.
Billy said nothing. He came out of the kitchen and picked me up
and squeezed me so tightly that I thought I would die with joy. I licked
his hand and snuggled my head against his chest.


— x
__ N.
"We can have some good times with Cocky,” he said to me. "You’ll
soon be pally with him.”
I barked, trying to tell him that the silly bird was no pal of mine,
when Cocky, up in the cage, screeched, "Tony! Tony!”
That was the last time that bird called my name. I heard someone
at the gate. I struggled away from Billy and rushed out to see who it was.
I met a big boy coming up the path. He was a bit scared when I
snapped at his heels.
I heard him ask for Cocky. I could have leapt for joy, but I did no
such thing. I keep my personal feelings secret if I can.
"We heard you found our Cocky,” said the boy. "Mum will be
glad if he’s safe. You don’t know how we’ve missed him.”
I crept through Billy’s legs when we came to the verandah, so that
I could watch everything.
Billy was silent and sad. Why he should bother about a bird puz-
zled me. How could he play with a bird or go for picnics with it? Boys
are certainly strange animals!
It would take too long to tell you how they all talked, and how
Cocky joined in. Cocky was really pleased to see that boy, and he
hopped on to his shoulder and said: "How’s your old man?”
"I taught him that,” said the boy proudly, and away he went, with
the bird still perched on his shoulder.
The last I heard of Cocky was a faint
"How’s your old man?” as the boy and his
bird entered the street.
Billy almost cried, and said he wanted
another bird so that he could teach it to
talk. I rested my head on his knees and
pleaded with my eyes. Oh, I hoped that
no other bird would come to the house!
Love can’t be shared with too many and
still be love.
From that night onwards I had great re-
spect for Mrs. Armstrong; in fact, I began
to love her, even though she was disap-
pointed because I wasn’t ALL Scottie.
"You’ve got Tony,” she said to Billy.
"You don’t want any more pets round the
house.” She did add, "One’s a nuisance,”
but I forgave her for that, and only re-
membered her saying, 'You’ve got Tony.”
Away he went.


MY SWIMMING ADVENTURE
If there is one word I like better than my own name, it is "swim.”
I first heard this word one hot afternoon while I was dozing on
the lawn.
"Come on, Tony!” cried Billy. "Swim, Tony, swim!”
I did not know what that word meant then, and I was curious. At
first the one thing that interested me was that Billy wanted to take
me for a walk, I could see him walking down the path.
I bounded after him through the gate, and ran round in circles to
let him know how pleased I was, then shot off ahead.
I was surprised when Billy did not follow me. He called to me to
come back as he crossed over to a vacant piece of land. I had been all
over this place and knew there was nothing there to interest anyone,
except an old rabbit burrow, where no rabbits lived.
I came up to Billy and gave him a gentle nip on the heel, just to let
him know that he wasn’t completely the boss.
We passed this land without stopping, except when I paused to sniff
at the burrow and make sure it was still empty.
All the way, Billy kept talking about swimming. It sounded so
nice that I felt sure it was something to eat.
It was not easy to get this "swimming,” because we had to walk
a long way through trees and sweet grass and bushes. My whiskers were
full of burrs in no time, and how it hurt when Billy pulled them off!
Billy picked me up in his arms when we came to some rocks and he
climbed over them almost as well as I could have done.
On the other side was a big pool of water. I thought, "Now, I’ll
have a drink,” but Billy said just one word, "Swim!” I was puzzled
and barked to tell him so.
"Look over there at Jock,” said Billy, pointing.
I growled, for I saw a dog moving through the water with just his
head showing. As I didn’t know the full size of the dog, I didn’t make
too much fuss. It’s best to pick your fights carefully.
Suddenly I realised that this dog was —swimming! I was disap-
pointed. All this way just for a big basin of water!
Billy put me down and I trotted towards the water, for it was a big,
moving thing, and I didn’t know what it might do to me.
I found a rocky ledge at the edge of the water and dipped in a paw.
How cold it was! This was quite different from the bath tub at home


Jock came past unth a stick in his jaws.
The colour looked blue, and there was no soap to get into my eyes or
sting my ears.
"Good boy!” cried Billy. "Swim like Jock!”
Jock came past with a stick in his jaws. A man who was sitting
on a rock in the sun cried, "Catch it, Jock!” and threw down a stick
which splashed into the water near where I was paddling my paws.
If Jock could get it, so could I!
I rushed at it —and oh, what a splash!
I thought I would never stop falling. Water was everywhere,
right up over my collar and over my eyes!
I scrambled towards the rocks, forgetting all about the stick, and
found I could see what was going on. The water was quiet now. My
heart was making a lot of noise but I felt I had done something grand.
"Good boy, Tony!” I could hear Billy shouting. "Good boy! That’s
the way to swim!”
I knew for certain now what swimming meant. I was happy as I
could feel the cool water near my ears and all over my tail, and at the
back where I couldnt scratch. It was so soothing!
I did not get out of the pool. Instead, I swam towards Jock, who
was carrying two sticks in his jaws. I could see that he was very proud
of himself, and the man on the rock was very proud of him, too.
Then Billy threw me a stick. It fell on the water just near Jock.
It knew how to swim for it didn’t sink. I made up my mind to fight
Jock if he touched it.
He didn’t touch it; he was too busy watching his master.
It was a proud moment in my life when I caught that stick between
my teeth.
I could hear Billy shouting, "Good boy! Clever boy!”
I’m afraid I became swelled-headed. As Jock came swimming past,
I snarled at him and lost my balance, or my paws didn’t keep the right
time for swimming. I turned on my back and went down, down, down!


,s iijbr s
• J ~^'7 N ""
We sat licking the water from our paws.
How I came to the top again I don’t know. The water was friendly,
and seemed to push me up.
How glad I was when I could see Billy and Jock and the man on
the rock! I was still in the world and able to breathe.
I wanted to feel my paws on dry land again, and came out quickly,
finding a nice low rock on which to jump.
Jock came out, too, and I looked small beside him. I was sorry I
had snarled at him, and wondered what he would do.
He was a friendly dog, and as he was bigger than I was, I wanted to
be friendly, too.
We sat licking the water from our paws and shaking ourselves
while Billy and the man talked. They were talking about us, because
we could hear them saying "Jock” and "Tony” a number of times in a
very pleased way.
Billy and the man, whom he called Mr. Wright, sat on the rocks,
each dangling a fishing line. Then Billy said, "They aren’t biting. I’ll
have a dip.”
He took off his blue trousers and I saw that he was wearing a bright
red pair of little pants underneath. He dived from a rock into the
water and my heart nearly stopped beating. Then I saw his head come
up. He swam this way and that, and I ran here and there, barking and
threatening to follow him in. But I had had enough of swimming for
one day.
Billy wasn’t long in the water, and soon we were going home with
Mr. Wright and Jock. Mr. Wright talked about Jock all the way,
and Billy talked about me.
Jock was older than I was. He was half spaniel and half cattle
dog—black with a white vest, and one white paw.
1 liked Jock; he was the sort of dog you could trust. You knew
he wouldn’t fight you.


3 /X ’77,/' ~
/=■/ j J In ‘s c icf '
/ /'S'* , /' I ' / -■v-.'- -.
r /// /fX/’ X( "1 . x
iiwfvVii.
#V/i -v and our P icnj
>,./ { However, the
because I wa:
When we arrived home, Billy brought all the family out to see me.
"He went into the water like a duck,” he told them. "He swam
better than old Jock.”
I knew this wasn’t true, but it pleased me just the same, and I
wagged my tail. Compliments seem nicer when they’re not all true.
"He must have some Spaniel in him,” said Mrs. Armstrong thought-
fully. "Remember he’s not ALL Scottie.”
Sniff me whiskers, this annoyed me. But when Billy stroked my
nose and said: "We’re going to have some good times, swimming,” I
forgot all about it.
We went for many swims that summer and I met Jock often.
Jock was a lucky dog. His master had retired from work and
could spend the whole day with him. I hoped that Billy would soon
retire from school and stay home with me every day, but I didn’t want
him to have so many wrinkles as Mr. Wright, nor did I want him to
have white hair.
I loved the big pool, and soon knew every rock round it.
Jock and I would dry in the sun after our swim and look on at the
.1
k
water glistening in the sunlight. I would watch
the fishing lines that Billy and Mr. Wright dan-
gled in the water. One day Billy caught a tiny fish,
and what a fuss there was! Mr. Wright looked at
it and said it was a good catch. I had often
fish!
glanced at one another and wagged
We didn’t think much of the
ti I could tell you about the pond
there, but it would take too long.
about water I must tell
the hero, and was actually given a
t I did.
occasions, I wear the medal on my
collar, and on it is written in big gold
letters the words, "Tony Tithers—
For Bravery.” Billy is so proud of it,
and so am I.
You will learn all about this medal
in the next bark.
Are you curious? Then hurry
on and read some more.
Mr. Wright and Billy.


5? ’a
v |f
- __
7 was being
carried
along.
Ijafli
LOST!
away from home the day my great
Everybody was
Billy left me on the front verandah
after the house while the family was
adventure happened,
and told me to look
away.
I barked and tried to follow them all out of the gate,
but it was no use; they made shooing noises at me and scolded
me so much that I made up my mind to sleep the whole time
they were away, and if anyone did come to steal the house —
well, they could take it.
Of course, I didn’t really mean this, but it gave me great
satisfaction just to think it.
I went back to the verandah and watched them walking
down the street. Billy looked back once or twice, but the
others seemed happy to leave me alone. I could hear them
talking as if I didn’t matter in the least.
I was soon asleep. I was dreaming of a whole leg of mutton which
was being handed to me by Mrs. Armstrong, when I woke up.
The gate clicked and I growled my deepest growl.
Rushing down the verandah steps and along the path, I barked
loudly, and then stopped, puzzled.
Standing in front of me, and not the least bit frightened, was a little
girl. She was smiling, and the afternoon sun shone brightly on her fair
hair.
I knew she had no right in my garden, so I growled again. She took
no notice, and when I tried to bite one of her shoes, she picked me up in
her arms just as if I were her own property.
I should have been dog enough to resist, I know. She stroked my
head and called me pretty names I don’t remember now, but they sounded
so pleasant! The family had deserted me —and I’d show them!
She opened the gate and, in a few seconds, before I could realise
that I was leaving the house to look after itself, I was being carried along
the street. It was all very nice, and although my conscience was troubled,
I just snuggled down in her arms and let her take me wherever she
wanted to go.
I wished the family could see we now. Someone appreciated me and
wouldn’t leave me all alone!


I^ ;*>• _ .
The little girl talked to me all the time and stroked my nose and
pulled my ears. I felt glad she wasn’t scared of me.
After a while she must have thought I was too heavy, and she put
me down in the street.
I suppose I should have turned for home, but I didn’t; I wanted to
know more about this little girl, and so I followed her.
She was a great girl for walking as well as talking.
She took me along some narrow tracks and up among tall trees on a
hill; down the hill on the other side, and across some soft green grass; up
another hill, and along a shady lane.
I thought she would go on long after my dinner time, and I barked
to tell her I was tired of all this walking.
She snatched me up in her arms before I could dart away, and walked
on and on —along a cool path, up and down another hill, and into a forest
of thick trees whose branches were high up in the sky.
The little girl grew tired. She sat down on a grassy patch and began
to talk to me in a drowsy tone. Soon she was fast asleep.
I grew weary of lying stretched out at her feet, and thought I
would explore the forest. I had never seen so many trees all together.
I wandered off, sniffing at this and that. One tree was very much
like another, but not so good for a back scratch as my tree at home. I
would liked to have caught some of the birds I saw flying home to their
nests, but they were cowardly, and wouldn’t come near me. They kept
flying high in the air.
The sun went down and the forest was full of shadows.
I wasn’t a coward, but I wanted to go home. I wondered if the
house would still be there, and tried to imagine what the family would
say at my absence. Billy would be sure to say I had been stolen. If he
missed anything—a ball or a pencil—he always said, "Someone’s stolen
my ball! Someone’s stolen my pencil!” He didn’t mean it, but he just
Soon she was asleep


could not say he’d lost anything. Some mysterious thief was always to
blame.
I nosed round some logs and sent hundreds of earthy insects and
slugs scurrying away to new homes in the deep grasses. I scratched up
some soft soil and buried my nose ip it, but I just couldnt find anything
really interesting, and I wondered why the little girl had taken me so far
for so little.
I remembered thinking the same way after I had travelled in the
family car on one occasion. I was very tiny then, and I had to push and
scramble before I could look out of the car window. The car went on and
on, and I thought it would never stop! When it did come to a standstill,
the family got out and sat down on some grass beside a river, which was
not anything like so pretty as the pool where Billy and Mr. Wright tried
to catch fish. Of course, the river was far from home, and this made all
the difference, I suppose.
With my mind full of the happy hours I had spent at the pool, 1
wandered on, hoping to find water. I was thirsty, and my paws were hot
after all the walking. I sniffed the air and felt sure I could smell water
somewhere.
I was right! Suddenly I stood on a rock and, looking down, saw a
stream. It was shadowy, too, like the forest. The trees and ferns that
grew near it seemed much bigger and prouder than all the other trees and
ferns.
I found my way down to the water, and tasted it. My thirst van-
ished as the cool water ran down my throat. I did not want to swim, for
there was nobody there to encourage me with shouting, "Good boy,
Tony! Bravo Tony!”
I did not intend to waste my cleverness on the trees alone. I merely
stood in the water and let it lap against my legs and tail.
Presently I thought of the little girl, and away I dashed to tell her
what I had found. The shadows were growing thicker and thicker, as if
they were all coming home for the night, after being away all day.
The little girl was crying when I found her. She was in the same
spot where I had left her a little while before.
I licked her hands and she patted me and cuddled me as if she had
not seen me for years and years.
Why, you re all wet! she cried. There must be some water
somewhere. Where, doggie? Where?”
She stood up and I barked louder and louder. I was again thirsty,
so I thought I would go back to the stream and take her with me. She
seemed a little frightened as the sky turned from light blue to pearly


grey, and said something about wanting to go home, but she followed
me, saying, "Where’s the water?”
When she saw the stream, she bent close to it and scooped the water
up in her hands and drank with gurgling noises that sounded very loud,
out there in the stillness of the forest*
She was not a very sensible girl. She sat down and cried and cried.
I did not know what to do. I wished to go home, but I did not want to
leave her all alone. So I curled up beside her and fell asleep. If you
want to forget anything, go to sleep if you can.
I woke up once or twice during the night, for creatures were stirring
in the forest. The little girl slept on and did not open her eyes until
darkness had gone out of the forest, and the sun was shining^
"Were lost!” she said, stroking my head. "I’m hungry.”
I was more than hungry—l was starving! I looked at my tumnvy
and saw that it was half its size. This was most alarming. I was losing
my figure! Sniffmewhiskers, I was fading away.
By now I had given up worrying about Billy, the rest of the family,
and the house itself. I had other things to worry me. I did not know
what to do with the little girl, and to tell the truth, I did not know the
way home.
I shall never forget that long sunny day.
It was really lovely in the forest, and there were shady spots every-
where, but my empty tummy was troubling me, and I guessed the little
girl was worrying about her tummy, too.
We filled our tummies with water and this helped a little. I found
a few grubs that I swallowed quickly (like Billy swallows his castor oil)
so as not to taste them, and thought of all my buried bones. If only I had
some of them now!
The night came. Although we tried very hard, we could not find
our way out of the forest. I kept close to the river, and the little girl
kept close to me. We found a small cave and crawled inside.
We were dozing, sympathising with one another, when we heard
voices. I pricked up my ears and barked loudly.
"That sounds like Tony!” I heard someone say in the distance.
I dashed out of the cave and ran straight into Billy!
"You rascal!” he cried, picking me up in his arms. "What have you
been up to, Tony?”
"She’s here! My little Yvonne is here!” shouted a man, who had
rushed to the cave. "Oh, my darling!”
There were three men with Billy, and they had all come to search
for the little girl. I hoped they had come for me too, but I was wrong.


"I never expected to see you again,” murmured Billy as he
pulled my ears. "Fancy running away with a girl! We’ve
been so worried about you, and thought that you’d been stolen —or
something dreadful had happened to you!”
While Billy made a fuss of me, the three men made a fuss of the
little girl. I learned from their talk that the little girl’s father (who was
one of the men) and his two friends and Billy had been searching all
through the forest for her. I was pleased to know that Billy knew the
little girl, for I thought we might have lots of fun together at the pool.
However, this was not to be, for the little girl was only spending a holi-
day in our district, and would soon go far away to her home in the
country.
I blink to think of the way she praised me, as we all stood there,
with the torches held by the men lighting up the forest.
"She might have died of thirst if she’d been here much longer and
that dog had not led her to the water,” said Yvonne’s father. "Billy, I
would like to buy your little dog.”
My heart stood still. As much as I liked girls, I didn’t like them as
much as I liked Billy. Besides, I’m a man’s dog.
"Oh, you couldn’t buy him,” laughed Billy. "He’s my pet —and
the best dog in the world.”
"Come on, I’ll give you ten pounds for him,” went on the little
girl’s father, who was a big, strong man. He held the whole of Yvonne
with one arm, and played his torch on me with his other hand. "You
could buy a new bike with ten pounds.”
"I —I couldn’t sell him,” said Billy flatly, and I loved him more than
ever before "He’s my dog, you see.”
"And a fine dog, too!” said one of the other men. "To think that
he stayed with Yvonne all that time!”
"I want him! I want him!” sobbed Yvonne.
"We’ll buy you one just like him,” said her father. "I would like
your dog, Billy, but I understand how you feel. He deserves a medal
for this, and, by jove, I’ll see that he gets one! You’ll put it on his
collar, Billy.”
Billy was pleased at this, and I was pleased, too. Still, I thought
they were wasting too much time talking, and barked. My tummy was
still shrinking.
"He must be starving!” said Billy. "Come on, Tony, and you’ll get
the best feed of your life to-night. Brave boy! Good old Tony Tithers!”
I often think of Yvonne, and Billy does, too. They write letters to
one another, and every time Yvonne comes here for her holidays, they see


( mE*£m*J9£. -J&M?
"tfty
each other. Every Christmas she is bigger and nicer; and she always
looks at the medal on my collar and strokes my head and says, "Good
old Tony!”
Sniff mewhiskers, I like the way she says it!
I wear the medal on special occasions only, for it is made of gold,
and Mrs. Armstrong is frightened some nasty person will steal it. As
if I would let a burglar come so near me. It’s an insult!
Sometimes I wish I could meet some other little girl and take her
into the forest and lose her, just so I could have another medal and heaps
of praise and loving pats from everyone in the family from Billy
most of all.


■■ > ■ .
She would wash me in a huge tub.
Bari,
I RUN AWAY FROM HOME
Living in a house with humans is rather trying at times.
Not that I blame Billy or even Mr. Armstrong, although on Sunday
afternoons Mr. Armstrong was a nuisance. You see, he went to sleep,
and everyone in the house walked about quietly (except when they let
the doors bang!) and kept saying to me: "Don’t bark, Tony! Ssh!
Daddy’s asleep.”
It was unreasonable, and I wondered what they would say if I’d let
a burglar come in and rob the house. If the same rule was obeyed when
everyone was asleep at night, I would have no work to do at all, and
then they mightn’t want to keep a dog. Everyone should do some work
for his tucker.
I blame women for most of my troubles.
Mrs, Armstrong was very particular about her floors, and if I had
a few specks of mud on my paws, she’d say; "Don’t let that dirty dog
inside!”
Dirty dog! And Alicia was worse. She said I was ALWAYS dirty.
But, Sniffmewhisers, I’m used to insults!
As I grew older, Alicia became very fond of me, and I must admit
that I liked her —next to Billy, of course. But she was always wanting
to wash me and brush me, and then take me for a walk on a lead —just
to show me to everybody.
She would wash me in a huge tub that I couldn’t see out of unless
I jumped up and put my paws on the rim. She bought special soap for
me, and lathered and lathered my coat until I was all white and a mass of
soap bubbles. She let the soap get into my eyes and nose so much that


I resolved to run away, where there would be no soap, and no tubs and
no anybody!
They all gathered round when I was in the tub and said the same
things over and over again. Alicia would remark: "He’s really not a bit
f at _ lt ’ s j us t his hair. Why, he’s almost skinny when his hair is flat-
tened down with the soap. And his head isn t square it s pointed. Oh,
he’s such a good boy!”
I didn’t feel good. Just the opposite!
I stood with my tail down and endured it. I knew it was no use
doing anything else. There were too many against one.
A dog can’t call himself his own!
When the soaping was over, I was rinsed and rubbed down. I
would wait my chance and then dart away and roll in the dust. I don t
think Billy minded, but Alicia would threaten to bath me all over again.
"Anyway, the smell’s gone,” she would say. That s something.
After a long day’s tramp with Billy, or after I had almost barked
myself hoarse, keeping intruders out of the front garden, Mrs. Arm-
strong would say: "Keep that dog out. He smells! Sometimes she
would cry: "Tony stinks!”
Smells don’t worry me—l like them—but they worry some people.
A dog can stand a certain amount and no more. I admit that all
dogs are not allowed inside the house, and that as the family was kind
enough to let me in on certain occasions, I should have been more care-
ful. The trouble was I didn’t know the smells they liked and those they
didn’t like. Alicia used perfume—an awful smell! —but nobody minded
that; and sometimes Mr. Armstrong put oil on his hair that would make
my nostrils twitch, but it didn’t do anything to Mrs. Armstrong s nose.
"That hair oil is good for your hair,” she would say to her husband.
"I told you it would keep your hair in place.”
When she was angry with him, she’d say, "Keep your hair on! So
the oil wasn’t so good!
Being a Scottie, I’m rather independent. One afternoon, after a
bath, I decided to go away for a day or two. As a matter of fact, I
thought I might have another adventure like the one with the little girl.
I had hidden the soap, hoping Alicia would not bath me when she found
it gone, and was just snoozing in the shade of my old friendly tree, when
she came up to me.
"We’re going to the chemist’s for some dog soap,” she said. "Billy’s
too lazy to go. Come on, Tony! Walk! Walk!”
At any other time, the word "walk” would have made my tail wag.
To-day it was different. I hadn’t a wag left. I was fed up with every-


I
I ■ i
, I i
|| HE I
thing, except food, and there wasn’t much of that. It was a butchers’
holiday.
I thought I would show her where I had buried the old cake of soap
under the house, but changed my mind. You see, she usually left my
soap on a ledge, low down in the washhouse. It had been easy for me to
get it and carry it away.
Alicia was all dressed up, so I knew she just wanted an excuse to
parade me down the town.
She put the lead on, and away we went. I barked at Billy but he
took no notice. Perhaps he knew Alicia was going to buy soap and
didn’t approve of all this washing business. I preferred to think this,
than that he was lazy. He was sitting on the verandah steps, blowing
up a football bladder. I licked his ankles and was then tugged away by
Alicia, who had a firm grip of the lead.
It was pleasant walking, with the shadows from the trees that lined
the street dotting the footpath. At any other time I would have been
satisfied to trot at Alicia’s side and listen to admiring remarks from old
ladies and little girls who passed by. They did not know I wasn’t ALL
Scottie; they thought I was a champion. Anyway, I had a gold medal.
Alicia did not think much of my fighting ability because, whenever
a big dog came near, she snatched me up in her arms.
I admit I didn’t struggle much
I was planning how I could run away from
home when we entered the chemist’s shop.
Alicia bought my soap and weighed her-
self (and seemed pleased) and then weighed
me. I liked the scales, but not the shop—it
smelt like soap.
"You’re getting too much to eat!” Alicia
said to me, frowning.
This made me huffy. My meals never sat-
isfied my hunger, so I knew this couldn’t be
true.
She walked over to the counter, where there
were bright bottles, and I saw my chance.
She let go the lead to examine something shin-
ing brightly—a bottle of scent, I think. I
dashed out of the shop before she could turn
round.
I was free!
I trotted down the street with my lead
1 liked the scales.


4 * \*ia i .
' 'p Z' •»'
V yJL,
i/ t, ’ %», , v
JSrStiLf _ ~*~ ini■rVlEr" ii
trailing behind, and my tail up as high as it would go.
I saw several people look at me, but not being vain, I didn’t take
much notice of this. I felt pleased and important. It s great to feel
you can walk alone.
I had not gone far when I saw a car, with the door open.
A little girl was sitting on the back seat. I could see that she was
waiting for someone who had, perhaps, gone into one of the shops.
"Hullo, doggie!” she said, sweetly. "Pretty doggie!”
I jumped in beside her and lay down. I knew Alicia would never
find me here. The little girl was pretty, too, and I like pretty girls.
There was a cushion on the seat and it was very soft and comfort-
able. I was trying to make up my mind whether I had rested long enough
before going on with my travels, when someone slammed the door, and a
man got into the front seat of the car.
"I’ve got a doggie!” said the girl, who was about five years of age.
"A real Scottie, daddy!”
A REAL Scottie! I stuck out my whiskers.
The man, who had a kind face, turned and looked at me.
"A Scottie!” he exclaimed, interested. "Nice little fellow. He must
be lost. I’ll open the door and let him out.”
"No! No, daddy, no!” cried the girl, and she put her arms around
my neck.
I wriggled away from her and, standing up, stared out the window.
I could see Alicia coming towards the car, and I dropped down again.
"He seems happy,” said the man. "We’ll take him home, Jessie.”
There was nothing more I could do but to lie still. The car began to
move and gather speed.
At first I thought it a great adventure, but
hoped the car wasn’t going too far. I could
easily find my way home if I wanted to.
Hadn’t a dog in our street travelled home by
himself after a ride in a train? I could do the
same, and then the family would boast about
me as much as that dog’s family boasted about
him. Sniffmewhiskers, I could walk home
from anywhere!
However, I was to be a very sad, conscience-
stricken Scottie before I saw Billy and Alicia
and Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong again.
I jumped in.


%%
_ r
'even.
WITH STRANGERS
Jessie’s mother and Jessie’s brother were very pleased to see me,
and made such a fuss of me that I decided to stay a little while before
trying to find my way home. However, I soon found out that these
people treated a dog just like a dog and nothing more.
I was never allowed inside the house and I was spoken to rather
roughly at times, when I tried to push in the verandah gate with my
muddy paws. At home they would have thought it very clever of me to
try to do such a thing.
I discovered after a lot of listening that Jessie’s mother and father
were Mr. and Mrs. Simpson. Jessie’s brother was called Tom, when his
mother didn’t call him "a lazy good-for-nothing.”
The Simpson family thought I was ALL Scottie and Mrs. Simpson,
who talked a lot, told the lady next door that I was "valuable.” This
word sounded very important.
It made me stick up my ears and trot about very proudly. But
pride isn’t so good as love, and after a while I began to long for Billy and
home.
Jessie did not go to school. A little of her was all right; but she
played with me all day long, and I had no time for proper snoozes. The
worst thing about her was that she was always "changing” me for some-
thing else—l mean, she pretended too much.
She dressed me up in one of her frocks and
called me a princess, which I thought very
stupid; she put me in her doll’s pram and said
I was a baby, and when I tried to struggle out
of the pram she tried to tie me in with her
skipping rope. She pretended I had run
away from a circus, and made me stand on
boxes in the woodshed; she tried to make me
walk on two legs and run after her ball for
hours. Too much play makes you tired like
too much work.
To add to all my troubles, there was a very
low fence between the Simpson house and the
houses on each side. At night time I did the
work of three dogs by barking at every sound
in the three houses!
She dressed me up.


— - ~^s3
Instead of thanking me, the family said they would have to get rid
of me. Then Mr. Simpson read the morning paper and said I had been
"advertised for.”
You may wonder how I learned all this. Well, it was easy. Like
most families, the Simpsons talked loudly, and you could hear everything
that was said, no matter where you were in the small garden. The
words floated out of the windows all day.
I was surprised when Tom said he wouldn t let anyone take me.
We were all round the kitchen door, waiting for Mr. Simpson to drive
to his office in his car. I sat on Jessie’s play stool, and listened with
both ears.
"We can’t keep a dog that belongs to someone else,” said Mr.
Simpson. "I’ll take the dog back to-night.”
"But you can’t!” cried Tom angrily. "We found him you didn t
ask him to get in the car. It’s their funeral if they leave a pure-bred
dog to get lost. Come here, Scottie.”
I barked, trying to tell him that I wasn’t ALL Scottie, for I sus-
pected that he wanted to keep me just because he thought, like his
mother, that I was "valuable.”
Mr. Simpson was used to having arguments with his family every
morning. He gave a long, long sigh.
"I’ll leave it until I come home to-night,” he said. "But we can’t
keep the dog now that we know who owns him.”
They all kissed him good-bye and away he went. I rather liked
Mr. Simpson. He looked as if he needed comforting. There was always
a worried, puzzled sort of look about him.
Mr?. Simpson had a good read of the paper, just as she always did
after breakfast. She sat on the verandah where the sun was warmest.
1 sat on Jessie’s
play stool.
Tom looked over her shoulder.
"What’s the reward for the Scottie?” he
asked.
"Why, they’re offering ten pounds!”
was her reply.
"Ten pounds!” cried Tom, and I saw his
eyes grow small as he looked at me. "Why,
I could buy a bike with that! Let’s take
him back!”
Mrs. Simpson looked at him and did not
speak for a little while. Jessie, who was sit-
ting on a step, stroking my head, held me
tight.


1
"He’s my dog!” cried Jessie, and I liked her for that. She didn’t
want ten pounds to buy a bike!
"Tom, you will wait until your father comes home,” said Mrs
Simpson. "I thought you liked the dog.”
Tom, who was a little older than my Billy, kicked his foot against
the verandah gate.
"What else does the paper say?” he asked sulkily.
"It says that his name is Tony and that he is not ALL Scottie,” was
the reply. "Fancy, a reward of ten pounds, and he’s not a real thorough-
bred!”
I knew by her tone that this was a lot of money, and my heart
swelled with pride.
"If he’s not ALL Scottie,” mumbled Tom, "we don’t want him
anyway. I thought you said he was valuable, mum.”
Mrs. Simpson walked inside to pile up the breakfast dishes.
"The people who own him must think he’s valuable,” she called
out. "Or else,” she added, "they must love him a lot.”
Sniffmewhiskers, I was trembling with excitement and all sorts of
feelings that I can’t describe. I just wanted to rush home and bury my
nose in Billy’s shirt, lick Alicia’s ankles, run round Mr. Armstrong and
bark joyfully at Mrs. Armstrong, and rub my back against my friend
the tree.
Jessie walked to the shed, where I guessed she was preparing to make
a circus platform for me to stand on, and Tom started pleading with
his mother about his bike.
I saw my chance and slipped off. I had scooped away a lot of soil
at the side of the front gate, and found I could easily get through. In
a few seconds I was in the street —free!
I did not know which way to turn. Cars and lorries were passing
up and down. Some were going one way; others were going in just the
opposite direction. I turned round and round, and then went straight
ahead.
I trotted quicker and quicker, so eager was I to be home with dear
Billy and the others. There was a lump in my throat when I thought
of them, and I felt proud to know that my name had been in the paper
and that I was worth ten pounds.
A bike dashed past me and I snorted at it. One time I would have
thought it a very superior thing. Not now. I was as good as any bike!
I was worth as much. I was "valuable.”
I kept to the footpath and raced on ahead when anyone tried to


stop me. I thought the road must lead to my home, but it did not. It
just went on and on, as if it had no particular place to go to at all, and
ended where a number of streets crossed into one another.
For the first time I was frightened. I stopped near an empty shop
and looked at all those streets and the traffic going this way, that way,
and every way. There was not much space for me to get through any-
where, and such a noise going on that I felt a pain dart across my fore-
head. I had gone through too much excitement, I suppose.
I decided to wait at the entrance of the empty shop until there was
not so much traffic. At first it was interesting, seeing all the wheels
going round and round, but soon I had to shut my eyes. I felt giddy
and tired, and oh, so miserable —and lonely. There sno ache so hard
to bear as an aching, lonely heart.
At last I fell asleep in the corner of the shop entrance.
How long I slept Ido not know. "When I awoke, the traffic was
still there —more of it, in fact.
I was thirsty and hungry, and so lonely. I could not wait any
longer. I must hurry home to Billy!
I saw a little space between the cars. I plucked up all my courage
and ran forward. The noise was terrible, and for a second I paused,
not knowing what to do as a big lorry came towards me. I thought
of Billy and wished (oh, how I wished!) that he was with me to help me
at this awful moment. Suddenly I felt the lorry wheel touch my side
and hurl me to the side of the road —and then I went into a long sleep,
different from my ordinary sleep. It was a black sleep, in which I
did not dream at all.


(tjarb C^iaLt
MY TARTAN COAT
The first thing I heard when I woke up was a voice I faintly
remembered.
"He’s still alive,” this person said, and I opened one eye, which was
heavy and paining me dreadfully .
Then I knew I was back in the dogs’ home, and that the person was
Mrs. Elton. She looked just the same.
I gave a faint yap to let her know that I knew her, but she did not
seem to know me. I suppose I had grown so much.
Her hands were rough and not at all gentle, but I knew she meant
to be kind.
"Buck up, old chap,” she said. "You’ll soon be all right. Ah,
you’re the dog I read about in the paper. Ten pounds reward! That
will do some good for the home!”
As Mrs. Elton knew so much about dogs, it was natural that she
should read about "Animals Lost and Found.” I suppose that was the
most interesting part of any paper to her.
I was placed in a warm kennel, and there I slept for hours and hours.
I woke up feeling hungry, and I knew I was better again.
I came out of the kennel and looked for some of the old friends 1
had known when I was a wee puppy. I looked everywhere for Emperor,
the Beagle, but he no longer lived there; nor did I see Daniel, the Cocker
Spaniel. Mrs. Elton saw me nosing about and said: "You seem to know
this place!”
There were many new faces in the dogs’ home, and I felt so sorry
for them. Ido wish someone would find homes for all the dogs in every
dogs’ home in the world! There must be many houses where a dog
could find someone to love him.
There should be a law which says that nobody can have a home
without a dog.
I was very excited, not knowing when to expect Billy and the
others. I had an idea that Mrs. Elton wanted the ten pounds and that,
being a strong-minded sort of person, she would get it.
While I was waiting to be found again by the family, I had a very
long think. I would have to be extra good in future. I was proving
expensive. Ten pounds! I was pleased to be worth so much. I knew
Mrs. Elton thought this was a great deal of money, just by the way she
said "Ten pounds!” It sounded like hundreds!


I was licking my paws, and laughing to myself at the way I had
escaped from Jessie and her family, when I heard voices that made my
ears prick up.
I heard Billy!
"Tony, Tony!” he called, and I saw him running towards me.
I rushed forward and stood up on my back legs and wagged my
tail, wishing I had a dozen tails to wag, just to show him how happy
I was. I couldn’t bark, for I had lost my voice in all the excitement.
What a greeting it was! I’ll always remember it. Billy hugged
me until it hurt, and stroked my nose and pulled my ears. Mr.
Armstrong had come with Billy. He gave me a big pat, too, and
called me a "good dog,” and a lot of other nice things.
I couldn’t look him in the face, knowing how I had run away in
the first place; and when they put me in the car with them, and Billy
started talking about AJicia and saying that never, never, NEVER
would he allow me to go walking with HER again, I hid my head in
shame. I made up my mind to be very nice to Alicia in future.
But I’m not one to worry over anything for very long, and by the
time we were home, I had forgotten all my badness.
•
Sniffmewhiskers, I was like a new dog without a stain on my paws!
Mrs. Armstrong and Alicia cried over me, and made such a fuss
that I felt very important. Alicia said I was the cleverest and bravest
dog she had ever heard of.
"Fancy, he found his way back to the dogs’ home!” she ex-
claimed proudly. "That was wonderful!”
I was a bit annoyed when Mr. Armstrong explained that I had
been picked up on the road and taken there in an animal ambulance.
My stay with Jessie was to be a secret from Billy and the others,
and this was on my conscience for a long time.
But it’s a poor dog who hasn’t some secrets in his life! I soon
forgot my conscience.
I changed my opinion of Mrs. Armstrong from that day. She
could not have been kinder.
"He looks ALL Scottie to me now,” she said, pulling my whiskers.
I heard voices


A beautiful
Tartan coat
to keep me
warm.
"We must take every care of our little pet. Remember, Billy, he’s been
ill and we must look after him.”
My kennel was put on the back verandah, and another cushion —
the third best on the lounge—placed inside it to keep me cosy. I was
given milk to drink and beautiful meat, juicy and tender.
I thought it wouldn’t be a bad idea to be an invalid all the time,
except that I wouldn’t be able to run about with Billy, and Billy had
some wonderful plans for outings and swims.
That night Mr. Armstrong brought me home a beautiful Tartan
coat to keep me warm. I was not pleased at first, thinking they were
trying to dress me up. I had had enough of that from Jessie. But the
coat was so soft and comfortable that I made up my mind to accept
t. Everyone admired me in it, too, and this made me want to wear it
all the time.
I’m sorry to say that I did not have this coat for long. I fell into
disgrace over it. The family never knew the true story —and don’t
tell them!
I left my kennel one morning early, when the dew was on the
grass, to bark at a passer-by—a cheeky little dog who was barking at


me through my own fence, mind you! I found a loose paling and, like
a flash, I was in the street. I forgot I was still in my night attire, until
my coat began to fall down at one side.
The cheeky dog who had brought me out, made a grab at it and,
before I could snap back, away he went with it!
Frightened of getting lost again, I crawled through the paling to
my garden. I was met by Mr. Armstrong.
"Why, Tony!” he said sharply. "Where is your coat?”
I wagged my tail, trying to pretend nothing had happened, and
slunk away to my kennel.
There was a great ado about that coat, and I don’t think I’ll ever
hear the end of it.
"To think that someone actually stole his coat!” cried Alicia. "A
fine watchdog! How could he keep a burglar away when he lets some-
one steal the very coat from his back!”
Billy stuck to me, and said the coat must be "somewhere,” but
though they looked for it all over the garden, they couldn’t find where
"somewhere” was. This was just as I expected. I vowed vengeance on
that strange dog who had brought this disgrace upon me, but by the
evening I had forgotten all about it.
Alicia grumbled at me, but she made me another coat. It wasn’t
so smart as my Tartan coat. It was made from one of her old flannel
nightdresses, and was so big on me that Billy said I looked like a tortoise
carrying a big shell! I’d had so much worry lately that this did not dis-
turb me over much. The coat was warm, and that was all that really
mattered.
I made up my mind that nobody would steal it, and growled when
anyone tried to take it from me. I even growled at the family. This
pleased Billy.
"Why, he’s growing into a fierce dog!” he said, delighted. "Real
fierce.”


" - N '*- v - -’ «r-
-< J - <-e “' *'■'»—■■' *
,,
.< wwWK*L' ’ • s 1 ,a» -»*Sr J jfc JR?- \
jgSpW r «?£ \ .,
-'r - : -' tTJj*.- <“ : "*rS^
• p*.->jnS ■-. i3-
~k




Bj, flint
SOME DOGS I KNOW
Life is very pleasant on the sunny days, when you have all the
tucker you want and nobody annoys you. Mind you, I like a row now
and then. Yes, rows are good for you sometimes —if you feel better
after them. I feel better after a row with a snob or a bully, because they
deserve rows and I know I’m in the right.
One week passed into another, and I began to realise that my
adventures were over, and that I would have to settle down.
It was a soothing thought, just to think of sleeping and eating
through the future.
I did not realise how serious schooling really was until one morning
Billy hugged me close to him and said sadly, "Hols, will come round;
I’ll be home again. Alicia will look after you, and she has promised
me on her word of honour that she’ll never lose you again. Goodbye,
Tony Tithers.”
Mr. Armstrong shook Billy by the hand instead of kissing him, and
I felt something was happening to my Billy. He seemed older. This
made me sad. Somehow I couldn’t quite catch up with what was hap-
pening to him all the time. He was changing. His legs were growing
longer and he was forgetting all sorts of games that I loved so much.
I daresay I was changing, too. But while I still liked to jump for
joy and go for swims and bury my bones, Billy started going out
more often with some boys he knew, and he was making things, like
big model aeroplanes, and reading books that had no pictures in them.
He would let me go for walks with him, but I guessed he’d rather be
with the boys. He wanted someone to talk to —and fight with.
Billy had a number of fights with the boys who lived in the street,
and although Mrs. Armstrong was upset about them, he liked them.
He would talk to me about these fights and tell me how he almost killed
some of the boys!
Billy stayed away from home a long time, and by listening to the
conversation I learned that he was at boarding school. He should have
taken me with him!
Had he known all the times I listened for his footsteps, and waited
and watched for him to come home, I’m sure he would have managed
to smuggle me into the school somehow.
After a while, the ache for Billy stopped, and I took more interest
in the other man of the house —I mean Mr. Armstrong. I found it was


easy to get on the right side of him. All I had to do was to take a lot
of notice of him —play with his shoe laces, and lie close to his feet.
Mind you, I was never a dog to smooge to anyone. Right from the
beginning, I had trained members of the house to smooge to me.
As the days went on, I found that Mr. Armstrong was very like
Billy in lots of ways. He was just a grown-up Billy. He would puff
at his pipe when we were alone together and say, "Good boy, Tony!
Good old Tony Tithers!”
If I happened to be asleep at his feet, I would open one eye, just
to let him know that I was taking notice.
There was only one thing that annoyed Mr. Armstrong when he
was in his chair, and that was when I would play with his newspaper.
Sometimes a sheet would drop to the floor, and I would lie on it and
growl a bit when he would try to pull it from under me.
Mrs. Armstrong talked to me a lot during the day, when nobody
else was at home, and we grew to understand each other very well indeed.
I would stand outside the kitchen wire door and look inside, while
she did her cooking. My favourite spot was the doormat. I grunted
if she opened the door and disturbed me. This annoyed her, but
she wouldn’t like to be in the house without me. She told Alicia one
day that I was great company for her, and that she would be lonely if
anything happened to me.
She was a little too anxious about me, considering all I had gone
through, and would almost bite the head off anyone who left the front
gate open.
"I don’t want Tony running into the street and getting run over,”
she would say.
Although it was against the rules to give me snacks during the day,
Mrs. Armstrong saved all the tasty bits from her lunch for me. Some-
times, when Mr. Armstrong fed me at night, he would mutter: "Must
get Tony some dog pills; seems off his tucker.”
Mrs. Armstrong would never give me away by explaining that I
bad enjoyed a big feed during the day, for you see, Mr. Armstrong was
boss of the house, and he insisted that I be fed only once
a day.
So long as he thought people were taking notice of
what he said, that was all that mattered. He would feel
upset for forgetting my pills day after day, and say he
had been busy at the office. Mrs. Armstrong would say I
was frisky enough, and why worry.


fll-l ***
W^A
y? T% i
/ft*' y' > ■ :>'
His name
Knight
I noticed Alicia was changing. She left school and started teaching
little boys and girls at a school not far away, and I’m sure she told them
about me. She went out a good deal, and had a number of visitors,
some of whom I didn’t like at all. There was a tall young man I did
like, though, and Alicia liked him, too.
Some nights I would go to the front gate with them and they
would stand talking. They did a lot of whispering and stood very close
together, and forgot all about me. I would wander indoors, and Mrs.
Armstrong would say sharply: "Has that fellow gone yet?”
This young man took up all Alicia’s attention, and she had very little
time to spare for me, so we drifted apart.
I realised that the only two people in the house who weren’t chang-
ing were Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong. But perhaps I was wrong. They
were changing, but in a different way. They were growing to like the
house more and more, just as I was doing, and they did not go out
so often.
Billy came home every few months and looked different each time.
Once I hardly knew him as he stood at the front gate in his long trousers.
His voice was growing deeper and he talked of very important things,
like examinations, rowing, and football and cricket matches.
Every time he came home he would say, "And what’s Tony Tithers
been doing? Goodness, he IS getting fat, the dear old thing!”
Yes, I was growing old, too. I liked it. It gave me time to think
of things. Some days I would lie on the mat and just think of people
and dogs.
Although my life has been mostly concerned with people, there
are several dogs I know, apart from those old companions of my first
days at the dogs’ home.


r - v
\
Among the friendly dogs is a Dalmatian, a quiet
dog who doesn’t start fights. Perhaps
he is sensitive of all those spots he \
wears, and this may make him consider-
ate of the feelings of others. His name y ' * s s'
is Spotty, so he can never forget those \ * \\ f V •$:
spots! Some people like those spots, but Ir "hi
I don’t, and I’m sure Spotty doesn’t like 1|- V* 1
them either. His owner, a girl about fVJ \ V
Alicia’s age, told Mrs. Armstrong that Jo }j
when he was a puppy he would spend jL" ...
" — - '
I can’t say that I love all dogs like I love some
humans. And few people can say they love all humans
as much as they love their own dogs.
I don’t love many dogs; some I dislike very much.
There are two snobs in the district I would like to
fight. However, their owners never let them off the
lead, and when I go near them they are snatched up into
protecting arms or shielded by walking sticks until I
could run round and round in rage! But —Sniffme-
whiskers! —I just walk past in disgust. And no dog can
look so disgusted as a Scottie!
One snob is a French poodle who has won cups at
dog shows. His name is Knight, and what a dandy he
is! His hair is clipped in the silliest way, with tufts left
here and there. He’s white all over. One of these days
I’ll roll him in the mud just to show him he can’t stick
up his perky nose at me. His owner, an old lady whose
back is very stiff, takes him for a walk past my gate
every day. She is very proud of him. Her name is Miss
Tibbs, and when people try to describe her, they say,
"You know —Miss Tibbs, the one with the French
poodle.”
The other snob is a Pekinese owned by a nice little
lady who tries to make her dog friendly with other dogs,
but who can’t. Peko has a perpetual sneer on his face
and has no courage. Like a lot of snobs, he looks down
on others, but he would really like to be sociable. He
just can’t pluck up the courage to be seen talking to
any stra*y dog.
Tarzan.
Grit.
hours trying to lick them off!
Spotty.


Two dogs I like —and am a bit scared of —are a Bulldog and an
Alsatian.
I’d like to look as ferocious as the Bulldog, and as strong as the
Alsatian.
There is a story that the Alsatian has got his owner so under his paw
that he has taken complete charge of the house and even orders the meat
from the butcher! I wouldn’t like to be that butcher if I didn’t deliver
good meat and plenty of it!
1 don’t know the Alsatian very well, for I keep a distance away from
him as a rule —not that I wouldn’t take him on any day! But it’s silly for
a little dog to fight a big one unless he has to. The Alsatian’s name is
Tarzan.
Sometimes, when there is a lot of barking in the night, Mr. Arm-
strong will say: "It is that Tarzan again! They’ve no right to keep such a
big dog in so small a yard. One of these days he will break out and go
fighting mad —see that Tony doesn’t go near him!” As if I need such
advice!
The bulldog, whose name is Grit, has sharp teeth that gleam. He
is always on the chain, and this has given him a sad look in his eyes. He
is very brave and once bit a big piece out of a burglar’s leg—so I’ve heard.
There are other dogs in this district, but they don’t pass my gate very
often, and there is a cat next door who was a terrible scratcher and
screamer until I gave her a good scare.
She came into my garden one day and I chased her out after giving
her tail a nip. After that, she had a lot of respect for me, and kept well
away. I often see her licking her fur and examining her paws. She’s a
good cat, and stays at home to catch the mice instead of running round
all day and night with cats of bad character. She’s half Persian, and if
I were a cat, I suppose I’d consider her handsome. Her name is Fatima.


I GO TO A WEDDING
It is a long wait between holidays.
While Billy was at school, I thought of him so much —so much, in
fact, that I dreamed of him.
I was generally trotting beside him in my dreams, or swimming. He
usually carried a big, bright bag full of bones —all for me.
One dream that I must mention was not at all pleasant. I was sick,
and I was sent to a dogs’ hospital. Something was wrong with my neck,
and it had to be cut off and put on again. The veterinary surgeon, who
had to do this difficult operation, was a little thoughtless, as he put my
head on back to front! It was awful! I couldn’t see in front of me!
I was looking over my back all the time!
Those clever people, who say they know the meaning of dreams,
will probably say I was looking backwards too much, to the time when
Billy was a little boy. But I don’t believe in dreams anyway. They
don’t come true, and I’ve proved it.
I’ve dreamed hundreds of times of owning a whole butcher’s shop!
If anyone would like to make my dream come true, I would be very
glad to own a butcher’s shop. Of course, I would serve only dogs.
Although I do think a lot of the jolly times I’ve played with my
Billy, I do enjoy life more and more with Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong.
They seem to know how I miss him, for they talk to me about him.
"We must keep you fit, Tony Tithers!’’ Mrs. Armstrong says.
"Billy will soon be home again. If anything happened to you, he’d never
forgive us.”
I suppose you are wondering about Alicia. Well, she married the
nice young man who used to stay so late, talking to her at our front
gate. His name is Richard Singleton, and he now looks after Alicia in
a dear little red house not far away.
They haven’t a dog of their own yet, so they share me.
I often trot over to see them, and when they visit us, Alicia never
forgets to bring me a lovely bone. I know that if I ever have a big row
with Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong (which I’m not likely to) I can go to stay
with Alicia,
I’m forgetting to tell you the most important thing about Alicia—
I mean her wedding. Oh, she looked beautiful! She wore soft, white
flowing things. Bill} was there, and all the rest of the family, and
all the people who are our friends. Such excitement!


I
I wore a blue bow, and I crept into the church.
After the wedding, Richard (they call him Dick but Richard is
his big name) gave me as much as I could eat. What a lot of eating and
talking! And everyone was so happy!
Sniffmewhiskers, it’s not every dog who is a guest at a wedding! I
felt very proud of the way I had looked after Alicia all the years. She
told everybody that she simply HAD to have Tony Tithers with her
on the happiest day of her life.
I could tell you much more about the wedding, but my thoughts
don’t stray long from Billy.
School days are long, but university days are longer. Billy goes to j
university and is studying very hard. He will be an engineer, and build
wonderful things some day —like mighty bridges. He told me a little
about it. I’m sure he will be very important.
If you meet an important person named Billy Armstrong any time,
tell him you know me —Tony Tithers, his dog. He’ll be your friend.
Billy still loves me, but not like he once did. I mean, he shows his
love differently. He doesn’t confide his secrets to me any more, or
hold me to his chest and cry over me when things go wrong. When he
is worried, he sits so still, like his father, with a far-off look in his eyes. I
have to jump on him to make him remember lam with him, and sym-
pathising with him.
I go for quiet walks with him, when
he comes home from the university,
and on very hot days he takes me for a
swim in the old pool.
I am now complete master of the
house. I have discovered how to open
the wire door of the kitchen!
I don’t know whether I made this
great discovery because the door was
old, and not so sprightly on its hinges,
or because I was growing clever in my
old age. Anyway, it happened late one
afternoon.
Mr. Armstrong was in his room
reading, and I heard him say, as I rat-
tled the wire door: "Is that Tony
Tithers?”
Then it happened!
It happened late one afternoon.


ut my paw on the wire door, gave it a tug, and found that, if I
was qu k enough, I could squeeze through my nose. Once having done
this, the rest was easy!
I entered the kitchen and looked back at the door as it closed behind
me with a bang.
Sniffmewhiskers, I had opened the door all by myself!
Mrs. Armstrong, who had been too busy cooking to notice what
was happening, suddenly turned round from the stove.
"Why, Tony’s opened the door!” she cried excitedly, and there
was so much surprise and admiration in her tone that I pricked up my
ears'and trotted through the house feeling very important. No one
could keep me out now!
Mr. Armstrong was delighted, too, and told Mrs. Armstrong that
he always knew I had more brains than ten dogs put together.
It was a great occasion, and that night, when the family letters were
written to Billy, the whole story was told, with a lot of extra. When
Alicia came over she heard the story, too. By this time, they said I had
more brains than a hundred dogs!
Now that Mr. and Mrs. Armstrong are by themselves, I notice they
are not so fussy as they were, when I first came to look after the house.
Except on wet days, when I must admit my paws are muddy, I am
allowed to enter and leave the house when I wish. This is easy, now
that I can open the kitchen door. Even the carpet isn’t important any
longer. It’s getting old, and has a little hole in it where I sit by the fire
in winter, so I suppose that’s the reason.
I notice that the radio doesn’t play so loudly now that Billy and
Alicia are not at home. Also, there are more talks than music, which
doesn’t please me much. I can doze to music so easily.
There is not much more I can tell you about my life. At present
I am waiting for Billy to come home from the university. I expect he
will look more like a man than ever.
I must take the pen from my paw, which is very tired, after writing
so much. I don’t expect many more adventures to come my way, but
if they do, I’ll tell you about them.
One of these days I’ll let you into the secret of how I was able to
write my life story. It is very big secret, and I must keep it to myself
just a teeny bit longer.
Like all old dogs, I have my secrets.
Yes, I am old now; so is Mr. Armstrong and the carpet, and it’s
all very pleasant. Sniff mewhiskers, what a lot I have to remember!
old men together.”
As Mr. Armstrong says, "We are two
The end.


sk \ \ HBIIIIIIillllN
xc


t®SSs\
/ jay. y£
K v Hp
§ M |b
I > jW*f*irTr*' I
CfltNliln wft m Ip < :,v M £■■
