

TOURISTS
POCKET
GUIDE
To the Blue Mountains,
Jenolan Caves,
Hawkesbury River,
and sights of N . S. Wales.
Issued by
THE TOURIST BUREAU,
6 BRIDGE ST., SYDNEY.TOURISTS
BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
J, L HOLMES A CO , TYP . SYDNEY.




TOURISTS
POCKET
GUIDE
To the Blue Mountains,
Jenolan Caves,
Hawkesbury River,
and sights of N . S. Wales.
Issued by
THE TOURIST BUREAU,
6 BRIDGE ST., SYDNEY.
(1888)


WHERE’S A GO? WHAT’S A GO?
WHY! GO TO
Newport, Narrabeen, and Pittwater!
How Do You Go ? —Here’s a Conveyance from BLACK,
at Manly.
When to Go.—Any day you please.
Why to Go. —Because you get Fresh Air, Beautiful Scenery,
and a Pleasant Drive.
What will it Cost to Go ? —Ask at the Tourist Bureau,
6 Bridge St.; they are BLACK’S Agents, and will make
all necessary arrangements.
BLACK’S THE MAN Right next the Grand Pier
Hotel. Conveyances provided for any number.
GOOD FISHING AND SHOOTING AT NARRABEEN.
BLACKS REGULAR DAILY COACHES,
AS UNDER:
LEAVE MANLY—Monday, Wednesday', Thursday, and Satur-
day, 10 a.m.; Tuesday and Friday, 830 a.m.
LEAVE NEWPORT—Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and
Saturday, 4 p.m.; Tuesday and Friday, 2.30 p.m.
SATURDAY SPECIAL TRIP.- Leave Manly, 3.15 p.m.;
Return from Newport, Monday, 7 a.m.
Regular Coach to Newport every Sunday, leaving Manly on
arrival of 10.15 a.m. Steamer from Sydney to catch
5.15 p.m. trip from Manly.
Fares; Narrabeen Rocklilly Newport (14 miles)
2s. Single. 2s. 6d. Single. 4s. Single.
43. Return. ss. Return. 6s. Return.
When you have been, go and tell your friends, and make
them go too.
Excellent accommodation is to be had at Newport, either at
the Newport Hotel or Scott’s Boarding House (Bay View'
House. Coupons for either house obtainable at
THE TOURIST BUREAU, 6 BRIDGE STREET.




Ease, and Durability.
Comfort, Convenience,
s: \ ~1' ■ -
Q|. '^Hr"
M'W
H
m\ j
in.
THE PATENT HAMIMOQUETTE RECLINING CHAIR.


Index:.
j, ' Pasre -
Preface ----- 5
Introduction
How to Spend a Fortnight in Sydney - - 11
Sydney
Sydney Harbour ------ 32
Blue Mountains 39
Jenolan Caves . - - . - - 59
Hawkesbury River - - - 89
Illawarra District - - - • 103
Lake Macquarie - - - - * - 111
Melbourne ----- 115
Biisbane - - • * - • * 137
199?


Secure one of our £6 6s. sets of 20 N.Z. Views (18 x 16).
WITH THE CAMERA.
Under the above title we are publishing by sub-
scription a series of Photographs of the Cities and
.Remarkable Scenery of Australasia. Subscribers
can select FIFTY-TWO or more PHOTOGRAPHS
which will be delivered weekly at the rate of ONE
SHILLING PER VIEW, single copies at slightly
increased prices.
Our collection of OVER 600 VIEWS comprises
photographs of New South Wales, Victoria, South
Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Europe.
We have now added Photographs from America,
Europe, and the British Islands.
These Photos, can also be supplied in handsome
Albums made up to order. A traveller will call at
any address in town or suburbs with samples, or
they may be seen at any time at
THE TOUBIST BUBEATJ,
6 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY.
All communications to be addressed to “The Manager.”
Our set of 20 N.Z. Views (18 x 20) and Portfolio, £6 6s


Preface,
numerous enquiries for an accurate and re-
liable Guide to the principal sights of this
colony, have induced me to issue this little volume,
in the hope that it may prove of service to travel-
lers in these regions.
The information has been carefully compiled, and
from rqy intimate knowledge of the places des-
cribed, I can guarantee its accuracy.
Though nominally a Guide to the Blue Mountains
and Sights of New South Wales, I have inserted a
few pages about Melbourne, Sydney, and Brisbane.
With regard to Melbourne, I have copied
Messrs. Whitehead’s Guide to that city, by their
permission, as I consider it and the map which ac-
companies it, the best works of their kind obtain-
able in the Victorian capital.
1 trust that in issuing this book I shall supply a
want which undoubtedly exists, and that it will be
supplied in as concise a form as is compatible with
clearness.
I shall be pleased to receive any suggestions
which may enable me to improve a future issue.
WILLIAM C. WOOLCOTT.
Tourist Bureau, 6 Bridge Street.


THE
TOURIST BUREAU,
6 BRIDGE STREET, SYDNEY,
(Melbourne Address: Care of Bray Bros., 17a Queen St.)
is TIIB
BOOKING OFFICE
FOR THE
JENOLAN (late fish river) CAVES,
HAWKESBURY RIVER,
BLUE MOUNTAINS, and
ILLAWARRA DISTRICT.
BOARDING HOUSES and HOTELS
IN TOWN AND COUNTRY.
COUPONS issued for MELBOURNE HOTELS at
a reduction upon ordinary rates.
CONVEYANCES engaged for any number at all
the principal tourist resorts.
LUGGAGE received, collected, stored, or delivered
at low rates.
Save time, trouble, and expense by
booking at this office.
W. C. WOOLCOTT, Manaoer.


Introduction.
many persons are ignorant of the nature of
the business of this office, a few of the facili-
ties it offers are appended for their information.
The Tourist Bureau, an institution similar to
those of Messrs. Thomas Cook and Son, in London,
and the American Baggage Express Companies, was
established about three years ago. Speaking gener-
ally, the object of the office is to undertake all the
work and worry connected with travelling; but few
persons are aware of the extent to which it may be
used with advantage to themselves. The following
are a few of the conveniences it offers You can
use it as your address while in Sydney, and letters
so addressed are more certain of being delivered to
their owners than if sent to the Post Office, where
several people of the same name may apply.
On sending instructions by letter or wire to the
Manager, you will be met on arrival, advised where
good accommodation is obtainable, either in hotels,
boarding houses, or private houses ; your luggage
taken charge of and delivered (or stored) at reason-
able rates ; and the benefit of the experience of
those who know the place and its ways given,
thus avoiding all chance of extortion. This is
invaluable to ladies travelling alone, and


not to be despised by those who are more inde-
pendent. ,
Your apartments can be secured in advance, on
sending full particulars of your requirements (by
letter or wire), such as position (city or suburbs)
number of rooms, price, number and sex of persons
requiring same. ,
You can have your sight-seeing mapped out tor
you so as to make the most of your time, as by tak-
ing places of interest in proper sequence much time
and money can be saved. .
You can book your tickets for all places of interest,
including the Jenolan or Fish River Caves, Hawkes-
bury River, Blue Mountains, &c., and learn the
latest particulars regarding amusements and any
pleasure excursions which are on hand. You can
also have picnics or fishing parties arranged for you
on giving instructions to that effect, and paying a
small deposit as a guarantee of good faith.
Our tickets include all travelling and hotel ex-
penses, and are issued at a less rate than the public
are charged if travelling on their own account, and
as each person through whose hands the party has
to pass is duly advised of their movements, every-
thing is in readiness for them throughout their trip.
You can store your heavy luggage, which is ac-
cessible at certain hours, and to save the expense of
keeping on your rooms when away on short trips.


For the foregoing there is no charge except for stor-
age or cartage on baggage and in case of deposits,
which are always allowed for in settling
as the profit is derived from those to whom we bring
business. Personally conducted tours are not part
of the scheme, the proprietor believing that in post-
ing the stranger with the latest and best informa-
tion, and enabling him to pay for his trip before
starting, he is satisfying the wants of the traveller
in Australia. We are prepared, however, to start
such a tour at any time that sufficient inducement
is offered.
Hotel coupons are issued on Melbourne and Syd-
ney hotels at a considerable reduction on the
ordinary rates, and the visitors have the advantage
of only paying for what they actually get, as meal
coupons are only surrendered for the meals taken.
Bedroom coupons must be given up for each night of
visitor’s stay, whether room be used or not.
Such an office has supplied a want which has long
been felt in the colonies, and is now becoming the
recognised rendezvous of strangers in Sydney.
Above all things, we would impress upon you the
fact that by putting yourself into the hands of the
Tourist Bureau, besides adding to the comfort and
pleasure of your visit, you will actually save expense,
instead of incurring more, as many erroneously
suppose.


PAINE’S
pctori&Hllliotsogi'&plig
OF NEW SOUTH WALES
COMPRISING
Sydney Harbour Blue Mountains
Hawlcesbury National Park
Fitzroy Illawarra Sfc., fyc.
ALSO A GRAND
Collection of Views of the Jenolan
Caves.
Speciality —A Panorama of Sydney and Harbour.
SYDNEY AGENTS:
Turner & Henderson, 16 Hunter Street
W. Bullard, 342 George Street
G. Robertson & Co., 361 George Street
C. E. Fuller & Co., 387 George Street
J. W. R. Clarke, Market Buildings, George St.
Stewart & Co., 470 George Street
W. C. Penfold & Co., 183 Pitt Street
The Tourist Bureau, 6 Bridge Street.
THE CAVE VIEWS to be had of Mr. Jeremiah
Wilson, at the Caves.
J. PAINE, Guinea Street,
West Kogarah, Sydney.


How to Spend a Fortnight in Sydney
WITH A TRIP TO
HAWKESBURY RIVER, BLUE MOUNTAINS,
and JENOLAN CAVES.
Monday (or Ist day).— Visit Town Hall, Cathe-
dral, Tost Office, and Botanic Gardens in the
morning. Start 2.30 p.m. from Circular Quay
for a trip round the Harbour, and the head of
Middle Harbour. Fare, Is.
Tuesday (2nd day).— Tram to Coogee in the morn-
ing, and visit the Museum in the afternoon.
Wednesday (3rd day).— Steamer to Parramatta,
starting from foot of King-street, visit the Park
and return by rail to Sydney, or hire conveyance
and drive round the Park and on to one of the
Orangeries in the neighbourhood. If a return be
made to Sydney before lunch, Bondi may be
seen in the afternoon, the Aquarium there being
one of the best in Sydney.
Thursday (4th day).— Steamer to Watson’s Bay,
starting from Circular Quay, or ’bus to Vaucluse
and walk the remaining distance, about a mile


and a half. See the Gap and lighthouse ; return
to Sydney to lunch, and visit the Art Gallery in
the afternoon.
Friday (sth day).— Start for Manly by 11.30
steamer, see the Aquarium and ocean beach, and
after lunch at Manly, start for Newport en route to
the Hawkesbury River, by special coach, leaving
the pier on arrival of the 2.30 p.m. steamer from
Sydney. As this coach only runs when there are
any passengers from the Tourist Bureau, it is
necessary to secure tickets at that office before
starting. These tickets include all expenses for
the Hawkesbury trip, with the exception of tea
at Windsor, which costs 2s. 6d. Friday night is
spent at Newport, visitors having the choice of
staying at either the hotel or accommodation-
house.
Saturday (6th day). —Start by steamer from
Newport about 8.30 a.m. for Sackville Reach,
stopping at Peate’s Ferry en route. Sackville is
arrived at about 4.30 p.m. Coach to Windsor,
and train to Sydney, arriving 9 p.m., or stop off
at Blacktown or Parramatta, and proceed to
Mount Victoria by train leaving Sydney 8 p.m.,
and arriving 11.55.


Sunday (7th day).— Spend at Mount Victoria or
in Sydney, or a start may be made from Mount
Victoria for caves.
Monday (Bth day).— lf at Mount Victoria start by
coach for caves about 8.30, arriving in the after-
noon. If Sunday has been spent in Sydney, start
9 a. m. train for Mount Victoria, arriving 1.47
p.m. lunch at Imperial Hotel, and drive to
Govett’s Leap in the afternoon.
Tuesday (9th day).— This day’s programme de-
pends upon whether the previous day has been
spent in travelling from Mount Victoria to caves,
or from Sydney to Mount Victoria. If the for-
mer, see caves, if the latter, drive to caves.
Wednesday (10th day).— Spend seeing the caves.
Thursday (11th Day).— Return to Mount Vic-
toria. The start from the caves can be timed so
as to enable the party to reach Mount Victoria in
time for lunch, and visit Govett’s Leap in the
afternoon, returning to Mount Victoria to dinner.
Friday (12th day) —May either be spent in driving
to Mount Wilson, which would take the whole
day, or take train about 10 o’clock, over the Zig-
Zag and back in time for lunch, and in the after-
noon see Mount York or Mount Piddington.


Saturday (13th day). —Start at 9 a.m. by buggy
for Govett’s Leap (unless already visited) Katoom-
ba Falls, and Wentworth Falls, catching the
train at the latter station at 2.34 p.m., and
reaching Sydney about 6 o’clock.
Sunday (14th day). —Sit still and think over what
has been seen, unless time admits of an extra day
being spent in the mountains. Trains leave
Mount Victoria 5.15 and 7.45 a.m. Monday, and
reach Sydney by 9.30 on Monday morning.
The foregoing rough outline of trips has been
drawn up with a view to saving visitors to Sydney
the trouble of arranging “ what to do next.” It is
of course very easy to alter the order of the excur-
sion, and pleasure-seekers with more or less time
than that stated, cannot do better than call
upon us at No. 6 Bridge-street, where all arrange-
ments will be made for them, and tickets issued to
the Hawkesbury, Mountains and Caves, at a
cheaper rate than they can possibly do the trip on
their own account.


Sydney
the capital and seat of Government of
New South Wales, is the site of the first settle-
ment in Australia. It is picturesquely situated on
the southern shores of Port Jackson, which is gener-
ally admitted to be one of the finest harbours in the
world. The city is named after Viscount Sydney,
who was Secretary of State when the territory was
taken possession of, on 26th January, 1788. The
first settlement consisted of 1,030 persons, princi-
pally convicts and soldiers, who landed at Sydney
Cove, now known as Circular Quay. The popula-
tion of the city and suburbs is estimated at 300,000,
a remarkable record for 100 years, especially as
Sydney has been the parent of so many other large
cities. The principal streets are George, King and
Hunter-streets for shops ; Pitt, Bridge and Castle-
reagh-streets for offices ; and York, Clarence and
Sussex-streets for warehouses. The buildings of
this, the oldest city, having been erected alongside
the tracks of the original settlements, the streets
of Sydney abound in curves and short-cuts, render-
ing it what is called much more English-looking,
than the other Australian cities, such as Melbourne,


and Adelaide, which are built upon the useful, but
inartistic, chess-board plan.
The principal hotels are Petty’s, Pfahlert’s,
the Langham, Imperial, and Grand, in Wynyard
Square ; Crown and Anchor, and Royal, in George-
street ; Oxford and Metropolitan in King-street.
The “Grosvenor,” on Church Hill, will, when
finished, rank foremost among the Sydney hotels.
The principal boarding-houses are Mrs. Symington’s
and Mrs. Llewellen, in Victoria-street; and Mrs.
Pechey, Craigend-street, Darlinghurst; Miss Stuart
and Mrs. Edgar, Macquarie-street; Mrs. O’Driscoll,
and Mrs. Evans, Dawes Point; and Mrs. Cowell,
Phillip-street. Accommodation will be secured by
the Tourist Bureau on receiving instructions as to
number and sex of party, description of room, posi-
tion desired, and the amount to be paid. It is
necessary to forward a deposit with instructions, in
case of visitors not arriving. The amount paid is in
all cases deducted from the bill, no charge being
made to visitors for securing their rooms.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
The principal public buildings in Sydney are :
The Art Gallery, in the Domain ; the Museum, in
College-street; the Town Hall, St. Andrew’s
Cathedral, Post Office, and Joint Stock Bank in


George-street ; the Mint and Parliament buildings
in Macquarie-street; Free Public Library, Bent-
street ; the Government Offices and Exchange "in
Bridge-street; the Observatory on Flagstaff Hill;
the Synagogue in Elizabeth-street ; the Uni-
versity in Victoria Park (reached by Newtown,
Leichhardt, Glebe, or Forest Lodge tram, from
Bridge-street) ; and Custom House on the Circular
Quay. S The railway station is situated in Redfern,
at the southern end of the city, and is reached by
tram or omnibus. Railway tickets may be pur-
chased at the central booking office, next the Post
Office in George-street.
The public conveyances in Sydney are omnibuses,
hansoms, and trams. The latter are driven by
steam, and resemble railways, with an upper deck
to the cars. They are not all that could be desiied
in the way of comfort, but have proved a very great
convenience to the travelling public. They are
worked on the section principle, the first section in
all cases being two-pence by ticket, or three-pence
by cash ; the remaining sections one penny by
ticket or two-pence by cash. In addition to the
street conveyances there are numerous ferries ply-
ing to all parts of the harbour at low rates.
All trams start from Bridge-street and most of
the ’buses for the eastern suburbs start from Mac-


quarie Place and go up Pitt-street. Those running
south and west going along George-street.
Cab Fares.—One shilling per quarter of an hour,
or part thereof, half-fare in addition after 10
p.m., 50 lbs. luggage free, or 84 lbs. if only one
passenger. Hansoms are, with few exceptions,
the only style of cab in use, and, therefore, much
lu ggage cannot be carried. Spring vans, how-
ever, may be obtained in almost any part of the
town, at rates as below. The least troublesome
way to dispose of luggage is to place it in the
hands of ffhe Tourist Bureau, who work upon
the same system as the world-renowned American
Baggage Express Companies.
Van Fares.— From any wharf or stand, first half-
mile, 3s. ; for every additional half-mile, Is. 3d.,
or by the hour, 2s. 6d., and Is. 3d. for every
additional half-hour, or part thereof. Half-fare
in addition after 10 p.m.
Arrival of Mails. —When a mail first reaches the
coast the Carrying Company’s flag is hoisted over
the Post Office. When the mail has arrived, and
is ready for a delivery, a flag with a large D on a
white ground and the Company’s colours in the
corner is hoisted. Letters may be addressed c/o


Tourist Bureau, 6 Bridge-street, and will, if so
directed, be kept in the office till claimed by the
owner.
Postage Rates. —Id. per £-oz. in Town and Sub-
urbs. Country and Intercolonial, 2d. per £-oz.
Newspapers printed in the Colonies transmitted
free to any part of the Colonies. Letters to
United Kingdom, France, and Egypt, 6d. per
£-oz. by all routes. To Italy, 7d. per £-oz. by all
routes. To United States and Canada, via
Frisco, 6d., via London, Bd. per i-oz. To
Austria Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Russia,
Sweden, and Switzerland, via Marseilles, 7d ; via
Italy, 9d. per £-oz. To Spain and Portugal, via
Marseilles, 7d. ; via Italy, lid. per
Telegraph Rates to Town and Suburbs, 10 words,
6d., and Id. each additional word. To all Sta-
tions in the Colony and Victoria, 10 words, Is.,
and a penny each additional word to places in
New South Wales, and 2d. in Victoria. To all
Stations in Queensland and South Australia, 10
words, 25., and 2d. each additional word. To all
Stations in Tasmania and Western Australia, 10
words, 35., and 3d. each additional word. To all
Stations in New Zealand, 10 words, 75., and 9d.
each additional word. To all Stations in Eng-
land, 10s. lOd. per word, including name and
address.


Theatres.— Sydney possesses six Theatres : The
Royal, in Castlereagh-street, near Market-street;
The Criterion, corner of Pitt and Park-streets ;
Her Majesty s, Pitt-street, near Market-street ;
The Opera House, corner of York and King-
streets ; The Royal Standard, in Castlereagh-
street, between Bathurst and Liverpool-streets ;
and the Gaiety, also in Castlereagh-street,
between Park and Bathurst-streets. The prices
charged for admission are : Dress Circle, ss. ;
Stalls, 3s. ; Pit, 2s. ; and Gallery, Is. ; and the
performance begins at 8 p.m., generally finish-
ing shortly after 10.30. Besides the above-men-
tioned Theatres there are many Halls of enter-
tainment in Sydney, the principal being : The
Masonic Hall, York-street; Protestant Hall, and
New Masonic Hall, Castlereagh-street; Y.M.C.A.,
Pitt-street; Academy of Music, Castlereagh-
street ; and Alhambra, at the Haymarket.
Gardens. The Botanic Gardens are among the
most interesting and picturesque of their kind in
the world. Situated along the shores of Farm
Cove, in the heart of the City, they are an
especially favourite resort of both residents and
visitors. They are open daily from 7 a.m. to 5
p.m.


The Zoological Gardens are situated in Moore
Park, and may be reached by Randwick or
Coogee tram from Bridge-street, fare 3d. Though
but a few years established, there is already a
very fair collection of animals, birds, and reptiles,
30 that a visit to these Gardens is sure to prove
interesting. The tram stops at the gates.
Parks.—The Public Parks in the city are : The
Domain, occupying a point of land running out
into the harbour, and containing an area of 82
acres. Hyde, Phillip, and Cook Parks, extending
North and South from King to Liverpool-streets,
and East and West from Elizabeth to College-
streets. At the Northern entrance is a statue of
the Prince Consort, while another of Captain
Cook is erected opposite the Museum. Wynyard
Square—the site of the Old Post Office—has been
converted into a Public Park, and affords a
pleasant recreation ground for visitors staying at
the various hotels surrounding it. Victoria Park,
in which the University is situated, and Moore
Park, the site of the Zoological Gardens, Association
Cricket Ground, and Agricultural Ground are just
outside the city. The Centennial Park, now in
course of formation, adjoins Moore Park, and
will, when finished, be a most beautiful addition
to our public parks.


SUBURBS.
Alexandria. —A populous suburb to the south of
Sydney, adjoining Redfern and Waterloo. May
be reached, by tram from Bridge-street, or ’bus
from Wynard Square. Fare, 3d.
Annandale. —A large, though sparsely populated
suburb, S.W. of Sydney, extending from the
Glebe to the railway line. Rail to Stanmore,
fares, first 4d., ; second, 3d. ; return, first 7d. ;
second, sd. ; or ferry from Lime-street, fare 3d. ■
ArnclifFe. —A large suburb S. of Sydney, extending
to Cook’s River. Trains run about every half-
hour ; fares, first 6d., second sd. ; return, first
9d., second 7d.
AsHfield. —An aristocratic suburb, on the main
line of railway, five miles W. of Sydney. Fares,
first 6d., second sd. ; return, first 9d., second 7d.
Balmain. —One of the largest suburbs to the W. of
the city, extending for some distance along the
shores of Darling Harbour. Reached by ferries
from foot of Erskine-street, that on left side
running to Stephen-street, Reynold-street, and
Bald Rock ; that on the right to Darling-street,
Snail’s Bay, and Mort's Dock. Fares 3d., in
either case.


Bondi.— A seaside suburb, about 4£ miles from
Sydney, is well worth a visit. The view from it
is most extensive, and the beach a very fine one?
There is also a good Aquarium, with pleasure
grounds of some 10 acres in extent. Tram from
Bridge-street, fare 4d.
Botany. —An extensive suburb four miles S. of
Sydney. Its lack of beauty is compensated for
by the interesting historic associations connected
with Botany Bay, at which place Captain Cook
first landed in 1770. Until recently, Sydney was
supplied with water from the Botany swamps.
Trams run at intervals of about an hour, fare 6d.
Burwood. —A large and fashionable suburb on the
main line 7 miles YV. of Sydney. Fares, first
Bd., second 6d. ; return, first Is., second 9d.
Coogee. —A small, though picturesque, seaside
suburb six miles S. of Sydney, which should on
no account be missed. A beautiful crescent-
shaped beach terminates at either end in bold
rocky headlands against which the sea continu-
ally dashes and produces a fine effect. Tram
from Bridge-street every hour, fare 6d.
Croydon. —A rapidly increasing suburb on the
main line, 6 miles YV. of Sydney. Fare, first 7d,
second sd. ; return, first lid., second Bd.


Darlinghurst. —A large and pleasant suburb to the
east of the city, reached by ’ buses from Mac-
quarie Place and King Street; fare, 3d. ;or by
any Woollahra, Waverley, Bondi, or Coogee tram.
Fare, 2d.
Darling Point lies to the east, between Rushcut-
ter’s and Double Bays ; it is the most fashionable
suburb, and in it many of the wealthy citizens
reside. Reached by Double Bay ’bus or, steamer
from No. 3. Jetty, Circular Quay. Fare, 3d.
Darlington. A large and thickly populated
suburb to the south-west. Its population con-
sists chiefly of artizans ; tram from Bridge Street,
2d., or ’bus from Miller’s Point, 3d.
Double Bay is one of the largest bays on the
southern shores of the harbour. It is also the
name of a large, fashionable, and certainly pic-
turesque suburb which lies along its shores. It
is reached by 'bus from Macquarie Place or
Woollahra tram. Fare, 3d. ; or by steamer from
No. 3 Jetty, fare, 6d., return, 9d.
Elizabeth Bay. —A small Bay between Woolloo-
mooloo and Rushcutter’s Bay. Though close to
the city, it is a quiet spot, and the neighbour-
hood is occupied by the houses of well-to-do
citizens. Reached by ’bus ; fare, 3d.


Forest Lodge. —A very thickly populated suburb
to south-west; is reached by tram. Fare, 2d., or
’bus fare, 3d.
Gladesville. —A suburb on the Parramatta River,
at which the principal Lunatic Asylum is situated.
Reached by Parramatta steamers from foot of
or Circular Quay (the latter twice
daily). Fares, single, Is., return, Is. 6d.
Glebe. —A large suburb to the south-west, and the
locale of the city abattoirs. Tram fare, 2d. ; or
’bus from Miller’s Point, 3d.
Homebush. —An extensive suburb on the main
line, 8 miles west from Sydney, in which are the
Metropolitan Cattle and Sheep Sale Yards.
Train fares, Ist, lOd. ; ‘2nd, 7d. ; return, Ist,
Is. 3d. ; 2nd, lid.
Hunter’s Hill, on the Parramatta River, is an ex-
ceedingly pretty suburb, almost entirely consist-
ing of gentlemen’s residences, surrounded by
large and beautiful gardens. Reached by Parra-
matta steamers. Fare, 9d. ; return, Is. This
suburb also extends to the Lane Cove River, the
ferry on that side starting from Erskine Street.


Hurstville. —A new and rapidly increasing suburb
on the Illawarra line, 9 miles from Sydney.
Fares, Ist, lid. ; 2nd, Bd. ; return, Ist, Is. 4d. ;
2nd, Is.
Kogarah. —Also on the Illawarra line, 7 miles
from city. From this station coaches run to
Port Hacking, and trams to Sans Souci and
Sandringham. Fares to Kogarah, Ist, Bd. ; 2nd,
6d.; return, Ist, Is. ; 2nd, 9d.
Lane Cove. —Though called a suburb is more pro-
perly a large fruit growing district, well worth a
visit. Conveyances leave Milson’s Point (reached
by North Shore ferry from Circular Quay) 3 or 4
times a day. Fare, Is. 6d. return.
Leichhardt, some 2 or 3 miles to west of Sydney,
is of considerable size, and reached by tram.
Fare, 4d., or steamer from Erskine Street, fare, 3d.
Lewisham.— A new suburb on the main line, be-
tween Petersham and Summer Hill. Fares, Ist,
sd. ; 2nd, 4d. ; return, Ist, Bd. ; 2nd, 6d.
Macdonaldtown. Another large and populous
suburb of the lower order, to south-west of Syd-
ney. Train fares, Ist, 3d ; 2nd, 2d. ; return,
Ist, sd. ; 2nd, 4d. ; or ’bus from Erskine St., 3d.


Manly.—The most popular of all the seaside re-
sorts of New South Wales, is a pretty township
of some 1500 inhabitants, situated on North Har-
bour, 8 miles east from Sydney. It possesses two
beaches, one on the ocean, the other on the har-
bour. The town being upon a narrow neck of
land between the two, is a delightful place to
stay s at, the access to Sydney being so easy.
There are many pretty drives in its neighbour-
hood, coaches being obtainable from Mr. Black,
of the Grand Pier Hotel stables. Steamers leave
every hour. Fare, single or return, Is. Sun-
days, 6d.
Marrickville.—A large, though not very thickly
populated suburb to S.W. of Sydney, on Cook’s
River; may be reached by train ; fare, Ist, 4d.;
2nd, 3d. ; return, Ist, 7d. ; 2nd, sd. Tram, fare
4d., and ’bus, fare 4d.
Mossman’s Bay.—A beautiful little Bay on the
north shore of the Harbour, round which a thriv-
ing suburb is rapidly growing. Steamers run
from No. 4 Jetty, Circular Quay, every half-
hour. Fare 3d.
Neutral Bay.—Also on the North Shore, is a very
favourite suburb, on account of its proximity to
the city, and is reached by fast steam launches
from Circular Quay at frequent intervals. Fare 3d.


Newtown. —A suburb on the main line, is one, if
not the largest, of the surroundings of the city,
though it possesses no attractions from a scenic
point of view. Train fare : Ist, 3d. ; 2nd, 2d.
Return, Ist, sd; 2nd, 4d. Tram fare, 3d. ’Bus
fare, 3d.
North Shore is the name generally given to the
suburbs which lie upon the shores and heights on
the northern side of the Harbour, opposite the
city. It is a beautiful and healthy suburb ; a
fine ferry service connects it with the city, fare,
Id., and a cable tramway runs from the ferry to
the heights at the Reserve.
Paddington. —Another large and densely populated
suburb; lies to the S.E. of Darlinghurst, and is
reached by tram, fare, 2d., or ’bus fare, 3d.
Parramatta can scarcely be termed a suburb, as it
is actually a large town of 8,500 inhabitants, and
next to Sydney the oldest town in New South
Wales. It lies 14 miles along the Western Line,
and is also reached by steamers up the Parra-
matta River. The principal places of interest
are the River, the Park, and the Orangeries,
which have an almost world-wide reputation.
The best way to see Parramatta is to take the
steamer from Sydney (fare, Is. 6d. single; 2s.


return), hire a conveyance and drive round the
town and park, and return to Sydney by rail, the
fares being, Ist, Is. sd. ; 2nd, lid. Return, Ist,
2s. 2d. ; 2nd, Is. sd. A very large number of
city business men reside in Parramatta.
Petersham. —A suburb on the Main Line, three
miles W. of Sydney ; is also thickly populated.
Far&: Ist., 4d. ; 2nd, 3d. Return, Ist, 7d. ;
2nd, sd.
Potts’ Point. —An aristocratic suburb to the E. of
Sydney ; is reached by ’bus from the corner of
Bridge and Pitt streets. Fare, 3d.
Pyrmont. —A small suburb to W. of city, being
connected by bridge, via Darling Harbour, or
reached by ’bus from Circular Quay. Fare, 3d.
Randwick. —Situated to the S.E. of the city ; is an
important suburb, and within its boundaries is
the leading Racecourse in the colony, the pro-
perty of the Australian Jockey Club. Tram
fares on ordinary days, 3d.; special trams and
’buses on race days.
Redfern. —At the immediate southern end of the
city, is the site of the Railway Terminus of all
lines running into Sydney. It is reached by
tram, fare, 2d. ; or ’bus along George-street,
Pare, 3d.


Rose Bay.—A small suburb called after the bay of
the same name, and chiefly inhabited by the
better class of people. ’Bus from Macquarie
Place about every hour, fare, 6d, ; or steamer
from Circular Quay, return, Is.
Ryde. —A pretty little township on the Parramatta
River, 12 miles from Sydney. Rail : fare, Ist,
Is. 3d. ; 2nd, lOd. Return, Ist, Is. lOd. ; 2nd,
Is. 3d. ; ’bus from Clarence and Erskine-streets,
Is. ; or by Parramatta River steamers ; fare, Is.
single ; Is. 6d. return. •
Stanmore. —A thriving suburb on the Main Line,
three miles VV. of Sydney. Train fare, Ist, 4d. ;
2nd, 3d. Return, Ist., 7d. ; 2nd, sd.
St. Peters. — A suburb on the Illawarra Line, three
miles S. of Sydney. Train fare, Ist, 3d. ; 2nd,
2d. Return, Ist, sd. ; 2nd, 4d.
Tempe. —Also on the Illawarra Line four miles S.,
and bounded by Cook’s River. Fare, Ist, sd. ;
2nd., 4d. Return : Ist, Bd. ; 2nd, 6d. ; or by
’bus up George-street to Marrickville. Fare, 5d.,
from which it is but a short walk.
Ultimo. —A thickly populated district W.S.W. of
city. Reached by tram. Fare, 2d. ; or Pyrmont
’bus from Circular Quay. Fare, 3d.


Waterloo. —One of the southern suburbs of the
city, between Redfern and Botany, and chiefly
inhabited by the lower classes. Reached by
tram or ’bus. Fare, 3d.
Watson’s Bay.—A suburb on the southern shore
of the Harbour, immediately inside South Head.
It is well worth a visit, as in its vicinity are the
Macquarie Lighthouse, and “The Gap,” where
the Dunbar was wrecked, in 1857, through the
Captain mistaking the lights and running straight
on to the rocks in a heavy gale. Steamers run
from Circular Quay ; return, 6d.
Waverley. —A pleasantly situated suburb to the
S.E. of Sydney. Reached by tram, fare, 4d. ;or
’bus from Macquarie Place, fare, 3d.
Wooilahra. —One of the eastern suburbs; is
thickly populated, most of the inhabitants being
of the better class. It is reached by tram ; fare,
4d. ; or ’bus from Macquarie Place. Fare, 3d.
Woolloomooloo. —A very densely populated sub-
urb, lying between the city and Darlinghurst,
I he Fish Markets are near the shores of the Bay.
and further round, towards Lady Macquarie’s
Chair, are situated the principal open-air swim-
ming baths of the city. ’Buses run every 3
or 4 minutes up William-streef. Fare, 3d.


Sydney Harbour
Harbour of Port Jackson is generally
acknowledged to be one of the finest and most
picturesquely beautiful in the world. The entrance
is about two miles in width, and the harbour runs
inland for a distance of some 18 miles. Its shores
are indented with innumerable pretty bays, and
there are three branches or arms, known as Middle
Harbour, Lane Cove, and Parramatta rivers, which
extend to distances of eight, ten, and fifteen miles
further inland. Though Port Jackson is only eight
miles long, with a surface of twenty square miles,
its coast line measures 165 miles. The principal
shipping centre is Sydney Cove, generally known
as Circular Quay, at which are the principal wool
stores, and where the largest steamers of the Orient
and P. and 0. Companies come alongside the
wharves. From “The Quay” steamers run to
Manly Beach, Mossman’s, Neutral, and Watson’s
Bays (the latter boats calling at the principal places
along the south shore of the harbour), North Shore,
and twice a day to Parramatta. Steamers for Cos-
ford and Brisbane Water also start from No. 4
jetty;. Darling Harbour and Miller’s Point are also
important shipping localities, the former being


principally devoted to the intercolonial produce,
and the latter to eastern and European commerce.
The railway runs to Darling Harbour where a large
goods depot is established. Balmain, on the western
shore of Darling Harbour, is the great shipbuilding
and repairing centre, and it was at Mort’s dock
where the “Garonne ” was repaired, after her col-
lision with the “ Lucinda. ”j A large. Government
dock is now in course of construction at Cockatoo
Island. s ln Farm Cove (round the shores of which
are the Botanic Gardens) the various ships of war
have their anchorage, and Neutral Bay is the moor-
ing place for the incoming Orient or P. and 0.
steamers should the berth at the Quay be occupied.
There are six islands in the harbour, all of which
belong to the Government. That nearest the
heads, Shark Island, is used for a quarantine sta-
tion for sheep, Clarke Island, which comes next, is
not used, while Garden Island, a few hundred yards
off, is the site of large naval stores and buildings.
Goat Island, at the entrance to Darling Harbour, is
a powder magazine, Cockatoo Island, on the Parra-
matta River (on which recently stood a reformatory
for girls) is the site of the Government docks,
while Spectacle Island near it is used as a maga-
zine. From its formation, Sydney Harbour affords
endless opportunities for picnic and boating parties
to find some charming spot at which to lunch or


camp, and quite a flotilla of sailing and rowing
boats, yachts, and steam launches, may be seen or
its surface in every direction on a fine public holi
day. Two large regattas are held annually, th«
one on Anniversary Day (26th January), the othei
on Prince of Wales Birthday (9th November), wher
the harbour is quite en Jete. There are numerous
holiday resorts at various points, the principal ol
which are Manly Beach and Watson’s Bay, of
which a description is given in the list of the
Sydney suburbs.
Athol Gardens are small grounds on Bradley’s
Head, and a favorite resort of Sunday School
picnics.
Clontarf— At the entrance to Middle Harbour, is
also a very favourite resort on public holidays,
the grounds are of considerable extent, and a
good pavilion admits of dancing being indulged
in. It was here O’Farrell attempted to shoot the
Duke of Edinburgh, in 1868.
Chowder Bay —A little nearer Sydney, boasts of
a very fine hotel and pleasure grounds, and is a
deservedly popular place.
Fern Bay and Cabarita—On the Parramatta
River, are both beautifully situated, and well
attended throughout the year.


Middle Harbour is a long narrow arm of Port
Jackson running about 8 miles inland, in a N.W.
direction. As in the harbour proper, this branch
is also a succession of pretty little bays. The
shores are of considerable height, rising abruptly
from the water’s edge, and being clothed with
vegetation from base to summit. A steamer runs
up Middle Harbour from Circular Quay twice
daily. sFare, Is. return.
Parramatta River is the longest arm of the har-
bour, extending to a distance of about twenty
miles from the heads. The trip up stream is a
most enjoyable one, but should be made when
the tide is high. Steamers leave from foot of
King-street at frequent intervals ; fares, Is. 6d.
single, 2s. return. A tramway of about three
miles in length, connects the steamer terminus
with the town of Paramatta, fare 3d.
The champion rowing course is on this river, and
extends from opposite Lord’s boatshed to a
beacon on “The Brothers,” half-a-mile below
Hen and Chicken Bay.
The shores of the river are dotted with villas and
fine mansions in all directions, and at Ryde it is
crossed by the railway bridge, while a little lower
down a bridge for passenger and vehicular traffic,


joins its northern shore to the western suburbs
the city. The Rosehill racecourse is on the wi
from the wharf to the town of Parramatta.
Lane Cove River, which joins the Parramatta
Greenwich, is a pretty inlet of some 10 miles
length, and well repays a visit. Steamers run
Fig Tree wharf, from which point the journ
must be completed by rowing-boats. There a
numerous very fine houses along the river, me
of them having water-frontages. The channel,
the upper part of the stream is extremely pu
zling to a novice as it winds about in all direction
At the head of the river are some fine caves ai
a large lagoon, a very favourite resort for cam
ing parties.
The Lane Cove River “ Avenue ” is, thou,
small, well conducted and conveniently situate
THE FORTIFICATIONS AT MIDDLE AN
GEORGE’S HEADS.
These forts may be reached by ’bus from tl
North Shore to Buena Vista, from which it
but a short distance to walk ; or by steamer fro
Circular Quay. The drive affords one of tl
finest views to be had of Sydney Harbour, and tl


forts themselves are of considerable interest. They
are cut in the solid rock, and so well protected from
an enemy’s shot, as to be almost indestructible.
Visitors wishing to inspect the underground works
must obtain permission from the Brigade office, in
Phillip-street. An enjoyable trip is to drive out,
and return by steamer. The Mossman’s Bay ferry
is withiji half-an-hour’s walk of the forts, if the
regular steamers should be missed.


The Sydney and Provincial
land <Sf Building Qompang,
LIMITED,
303 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
:
B. H. CHAPMAN, Esq., Chairman.
J. B. GIBBS, Esq., Vice-Chairman.
GEORGE CRAWSHAW, Esq.
H. FRENCH, Esq., J.P.
T. MOORE, Esq., J.P.
J. J. SLADE, Esq.
CAPI X A J: - ,-V £lOO,OOO
With power to increase to £500,000.
Subscribed Capital £57,460
Capital (uncalled) and Reserves ... £39,472
Highest Rates of Interest on Deposits.
Mansions, Cottages, & Shops for Sale, or to Let.
Suburban Subdivisions for Selection.
Farms and Orchard Blocks, 200 acres to 300
Acres, at Parkes Platform, on the Great Western
Line.
. Every information given to Buyers or Investors by
interview or by letter.
WILLIAM DAVIES, Manager.


The Blue Mountains
I {Jj'IHESE Mountains, which run parallel to the
j coast, at a distance varying from 30 to 100
I miles, contain some of the finest scenery in the
colonies. They are called “The Blue Mountains ”
on account of the colour which some atmospheric
j peculiarity imparts to them, and are from 2000 to
4000 feet in height. The climate throughout their
I extent is most salubrious, the air being pure and
bracing at all seasons of the year. As there is
direct communication by rail to all the principal
points, the Mountains have become the favourite
sight with all our visitors, and are the most fre-
quented of all the places of interest near Sydney.
There are numerous good hotels and boarding-
houses at the principal stations along the line, and
the visitor wishing to make a stay may rely upon
obtaining first-class accommodation. A list of all
the best boarding-houses is kept at the Tourist
Bureau, and as the various proprietors generally
keep that office informed of the accommodation
vacant, intending visitors save much unnecessary
trouble by calling at No. 6 Bridge Street, where,
in addition to giving the information required, the


Woodford Hotel,
(©LOSE TO STATION
BLUE MOUNTAINS.
T VISITORS will find FIRST-RATE PRIVATI
V ACCOMMODATION with all HOME COM
FORTS and PERFECT QUIET.
FRESH EGGS, MILK, AND BUTTEF
FROM OWN FARM.
FRUIT in SEASON from WOODFORD ORCHARDS
WOODFORD is 2100 FEET above SEJ
LEVEL. Its CLIMATE is BRACING 11
SUMMER; and in WINTER (when th(
cold of the Upper Mountains is severe
GENIAL, SUNNY, and DRY.
Communication with the Chief Sights of th
Mountains is Easy.
oix-A RDycinsro- scenery.
WINES AND SPIRITS OF BEST QUALITYI
TERMS on application to
Mrs. FARR, Woodford. I
Or at THE TOURIST BUREAU,
6 Bridge Street. I


Manager will make all the necessary arrangements
for their visit, leaving them nothing further to do
than start at the time arranged.
To reach the Mountains, the visitor proceeds by
■ the Great Western Line from Redfern Station,
'(three trains leaving daily, Sundays excepted).
Passing through Parramatta and Penrith, both very
old towns, after leaving the latter sta-
tion, the ascent of the Mountains is commenced by
is known as the Little, or Knapsack Gully
Zig-Zag. As the train passes from Zig to Zag, an
ever-extending view is presented to the eye, and
from the top of the hill the outlook is magnificent.
As far as the eye can reach, the broad fertile Emu
Plains stretch out with their towns, villages, home-
steads, and orchards, mapped out as it were at one’s
feet, while the Nepean River, winding through the
Plains like a broad silver belt, completes a scene to
which for calm and peaceful beauty it would be
hard to find an equal. To view this sight about
sunrise on a summer morning is to create an im-
pression which can never be effaced from the
memory. The following are the most noteworthy
stations in the Mountains, and we have given a few
words of information about each, together with the
principal sights in their vicinity. The figures im-
mediately following the name of the station denote


s o.Wforth§ otf
Five Minutes’ Walk from Falls
9e
Reserve.
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION
FOR VISITORS.
Every convenience. Buggy kept.
TERMS MODERATE.
THE GRANDEST SCENERY
IN THE MOUNTAINS.
MRS. CRONIN,
orth


the number of miles from Sydney and the height in
1 feet above sea level:—
Springwood (48 —1216) is reached after pass-
ing through Glenbrook, Blaxland, Karabar, and the
Valley, and in its vicinity is the Sassafras or Flying
| Fox Gullyy so named on account of the number of
sassafras trees growing there, and also from the
fact of its having been an old “ camp ” of the flying
foxes. Springwood is more of a sanatorium than a
resort of sight-seers, the climate being beautifully
mild throughout the year. It also bears the repu-
tation of being one of the best places in the Moun-
tains for ferns, lycopods, etc.
Lawson (58 —2399) is the next important sta-
tion, and is arrived at after running through Faul-
conbridge, Numantia, Linden, and Woodford.
There are many sights in its neighbourhood which
are well worth a visit, the principal being the Ade-
lina balls, Dante’s Glen, and Waterfall. There are
no less than nine waterfalls in the immediate vici-
nity of Lawson.
Wentworth Falls (62—2856) is the next sta-
tion from Lawson, and though not of any import-
ance in itself, is the stopping-place for the Falls of
the same name, which take a prominent position


among the show places in the Mountains. TW
Tails, which were formerly known as the Weathen
board Falls, are about a mile distant from the sta,
tion, and lie at the head of an immense valley, ef
closed for the most part by precipitous walls <4
rock. The scenery at the Falls is regarded, art?
justly so, as being equal to any to be found in thj
Mountains, though opinion is divided as to whethej
this, or Govett’s Leap, near Blackheath, is thj
finer. The road from the station runs through tF
bush for the greater part of the way, and emerge
upon the top of a hill, from which an unsurpass j
view is obtained of the valley and its surroundifli
mountains. To see the Falls, the visitoi must wall
through the reserve (in which is a shed erected V
Government for the accommodation of the publl
to a point of rock immediately overhanging iJJ
valley, the Falls themselves lying to the left in tj
centre of a vast amphitheatre of rock. Thj
height is about 1200 feet, and there are three bre#
or leaps between the top of the Falls and the bott4
of the valley, though only the first and part of 4
second are seen from here. The water, after takl
its first leap, becomes broken into fine feath4
spray, and in this form falls upon the rocks beW
Looking down into the ravine, the trees benei
appear mere shrubs, though they are actually I


conoi<Wable size. An iron railing firmly fixed into
the point enables rloitors to look down in perfect
safety from the very brink of me pvaopoice. An-
other very fine view of the valley is obtainable iroin
this look-out, the visitor being enabled to look round
to right and left over the expanse of timber-covered
country, with the mountains enclosing it on every
side. Having satisfied themselves with viewing the
immensity of this sight, there is yet another most
attractive spot to be visited, known as the Weeping
Rock, which is really a charming specimen of Dame
Nature’s handiwork. The road lies to the right
past the shed, and brings one fairly in front of a
small hollow with a large flat rock in the back-
ground, over which the water trickles in the finest
streams on to a ledge beneath, while innumerable
ferns spring from every available crevice and greatly
enhance the beauty of the scene. By following the
road past the Weeping Rock the visitor is brought
to the top of the Falls, and may follow the stream
Wl th his eye from its first leap to its final disappear-
ance into the ferns at the bottom of the valley.
Katoomba (66—3349) is the next station
along the line, and also takes a foremost position
among the mountain resorts. In its neighbourhood
are numerous sights of great beauty and interest,


among which we may mention the following >
The Leura Falls and Meeting of the Waters
lie at a stance of less than a mile from the station!
the road branching to the left shortly after passing
the Carrington Hotel, and entering the bush oppoj
site Leura Cottage. At a short distance from the?
top of the Falls two streams unite and flow over a
huge rock of some 200 or 300 feet in height, down;
which the water trickles in an inconceivable nun>|
ber of small threads gleaming and sparkling in the
sunshine like silver. The valley into which the
water flows is filled with ferns of every description,
while sassafras and other fine trees may be seen in
all directions. Visitors to these Falls should not
fail to notice the wonderful echo to be heard frotf
the Echo Tree, Signboards will indicate its posij
tion, as they do most of the sights in the Moun-
tains.
The Katoomba Falls are about the same distant
from the station as the Leura, the road turning oi
to the right hand, a little further along than tha ;
leading to the Leura Falls already mentioned. Th<
height of the Falls is about 500 feet, and several
smaller leaps carry the water into the valley 1300
feet beneath. It is somewhat difficult to obtain }
good view of the whole height of the Falls from tb fl


enclosed space, which is considered as far as it is
advisable for visitors to go, but by one possessed of
strong nerve they may be seen by going on to the
point of rock outside the railing. Following the
road to the right which leads to the engine shed of
the coal mine, a most magnificent view of the
Orphan Rock is obtained. The “Orphan” is a
huge mass of rock 1000 feet in height, which seems
to have become detached from the parent cliff by
some convulsion of nature, and stands out in soli-
tary grandeur like a huge monolith. A mass of
r °ck on an eminence some miles out in the valley is
known as the Ruined Castle, from the peculiar re-
semblance it bears to an old ruin. Still following
the same road, and passing to the point beyond the
® n gine shed, the best view of the Katoomba Falls
Is presented to the visitor, and should on no account
. e missed. Between the “ Orphan ” and the cliff
18 a zigzag road leading to the miners’ huts in the
valley, which may be seen from the points already
mentioned. A walk into the valley by this track
Ul gs many interesting sights under the notice of
e Pedestrian, while the mine at the bottom may
visited on obtaining permission from the man-
ager or foreman.
rpi
e ,remaining places of interest are the Ex-
°rers Tree and Nellie’s Glen. The tree, which is


The IMPERIAL HOTEL,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
P. G. WHITTALL Proprietor
DISTANT from Sydney 77 miles, 3600 feet above
the level of the sea, is in the immediate
vicinity of all the most romantic and charming
scenery to be found on the
BLUE MOUNTAINS,
And is most Centrally Situated for getting Trains to
all the Principal Sights.
The Hotel contains over Sixty Apartments (no
expense having been spared by the Proprietor to
make it as homely and comfortable as possible), com'
prising spacious and comfortable Dining and Drawing
Rooms for Public Use, and Suites of Rooms fo*
those who prefer privacy.
THE BILLIARD ROOM IS FURNISHED WITH ONf
OF ALCOCK’S BEST TABLES.
TEhe Cellar is stockeb hriih SKints, (Spirit*, an*
gteers of the berg best branbs.
THE STABLES ARE IN THE CARE OF AN EFFICIENT GROOM.
An Attendant will meet each train. £3T Letters an
Telegrams promptly attended to.
THE NEAREST ROUTE TO THE CAVES - DAILY
Terms—los. 6d. per day ; £3 3s. per week-
SYDNEY AGENCY, TOURIST BUREAU, j
6 BRIDGE STREET.


on the way to the Glen, marks the farthest point
reached, by the early explorers, Blaxland, Went-
worth, and Lawson, in their efforts to discover a
road into the interior of the colony. They origi-
nally cut their initials deeply into the wood of the
tree, but the weather has now rendered them illegi-
ble. The tree has, however, been enclosed by a
railing on a stone foundation, and a tablet let into
the stones bears record to its historic associations.
Nellie’s Glen is a huge rent in the sandstone cliff,
about 1000 feet in depth and 60 feet in width. A
zigzag path leads to the bottom of the Glen, the
sides of which are clothed with ferns from top to
bottom, while a tiny rivulet murmurs and gurgles
over the stones and through the trees to the ex-
treme depths of the valley.
The Carrington Hotel, at Katoomba, kept by
Mr. F. G. Goyder, is a very popular and well con-
ducted house. The terms are 12s. per day.
Blackheath (73—3494).— A few miles further
along the rail is the station at which to stop for
tbe famous Govett’s Leap, to reach which a walk
or drive of about a mile and a quarter is necessary,
d’he road is good, and on a fine day a walk to the
Leap is a most enjoyable excursion. As with Went-
'v°rth Falls, so in this instance the road brings the


visitor abruptly to a point of rock immediately in
front of the valley into which the water falls, and
by many this is regarded as the great sight of the
Mountains.
It certainly is a magnificent scene, and one which
cannot fail to leave a lasting impression in the minds
of all who see it. An immense valley, walled in
by perpendicular cliffs, stretches away as far as the
eye can reach. At the bottom is a perfect sea of
foliage, with a cool and shaded stream meandering
through its depths, a thousand feet below. Immedi-
ately to the right is the Fall, which descends to such
a depth (about 500 or 600 feet) that the sheet of
water is broken into spray long before it reaches
the bottom. As a rule, there is comparatively little
water going over the Fall, and it looks like a long,
flowing bridal veil, which sways to and fro with
the breeze. The great height of the Fall, the con-
trast of colour, and the peculiar motion so pro-
duced, give a very striking effect to the scene. At
certain times during the day the rays of the sun
form a rainbow, which hovers round the descending
mass of feathery spray and materially adds to the
beauty of the sight. Near the look-out point a shed
has been erected by Government to afford shelter
from sun and rain, and is largely patronised by
picnic parties. All places where an aeeident might


happen have been protected with railings, either of
wood or iron, firmly fixed into the lock. By the
side of the shed runs a road leading to the top of
the Falls, and it is quite worth walking there to
obtain a closer view of them and to see the valley
from another point. By continuing the walk across
the creek and on to the point beyond, a good view
may be had of another fall in a sort of “bay” or
recess in the further corner, which is not generally
noticed.
There are several stories told as to the origin of
the name, “ Govett’s Leap.” The most generally
accepted and the most reasonable is, that the place
was discovered by one W. R. Govett, a surveyor,
about the year 1832, and named “Govett’s Leap „
or “Waterfall,” “ leap ” signifying “waterfall.”
Another, and far more romantic tale is to the effect
that a famous bushranger named Govett, being
closely pursued, and finding escape impossible,
boldly leaped, like another Curtius, over the preci-
pice into the valley, and was of course dashed to
Pieces. Another sight worth visiting at Blackheath
is the Mermaid’s Cave, on the opposite side of the
iine to the Leap. It is a trip requiring some agility,
as the ascent is rather severe.
Mount Victoria (77—3422), the next stopping-
Place, is the most important station on the Moun-


Kern Cottage,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
E?private Residence.
Mrs. HOWELL, Proprietress.
IS situated only five minutes’ walk from the Railway
Station. Visitors will not regret paying this
homely retreat a visit during their trips to the Blue
Mountains, as Mrs. Howell makes it her special study
to provide in the best manner possible for the wants
of visitors.
SWINGS FOR CHILDREN.
Fresh Eggs, Butter, & Milk. A Good Bath-
Terms, 6s. per day or 355. per week each person.
Well Furnished, Faithfully Built
COTTAGES TO LET
From ,£3 10s. to 10s. per week.
SPECIAL TERMS FOR LONGER PERIODS-
Everything found except Bed and Table Linen.
Water Laid on.
Photographs and Plan at
TOURIST BUREAU,
6 Bridge Street.
Particulars on application to
Mrs. HOWELL,
Mount Victoria:


tair.s. There is quite a small township, with a post
and telegraph office and some shops, besides
branches of some of the Sydney banks. Of the
two hotels, the Imperial is the better. The sights
in the vicinity are Mount Piddington, from which
a very extensive view of the Kanimbla V alley may
be obtained; Fairy Bower, at the foot of Mount
Piddington, a most beautiful place, but one requir-
ing a good climb to return from ; the Little Zigzag,
or Kanimbla Pass, leading down past the Bush-
ranger’s Cave into the Kanimbla "V alley, and the
Mount Victoria Pass, leading into Little Hartley.
A most beautiful drive or walk is that to Mount
York (about four miles), from which may be ob-
tained a most extensive view of the surrounding
country and a glimpse of the township of Little
Hartley, with its rich cultivated fields lying at the
foot of the mountain. A peculiar circumstance in
connection with Mount York is that there is only
one tree upon it, which is quite a landmark and
*nay be seen from a long distance ; it is particularly
noticeable on the drive to the Jenolan Caves fiom
Mount Victoria. The Shale Mine and Kerosene
Works at Hartley are worth a visit, and tourists
may engage horses or vehicles at the Tourist Bureau
prior to leaving Sydney. (This also applies to all
the principal tourist resorts on either line.) An-


EXETER HOUSE,
MOUNT VICTORIA.
Mrs. GIBSON Proprietress
THIS New Residence, built by J. B. Benson, Esq.,
has had no expense spared to make it a com-
fortable home for Families and Tourists. It contains
a spacious dining-room, and the Bedrooms are large,
well ventilated, and comfortably furnished. The view
from the verandah is magnificent.
Cleanliness a Special Feature.
Liberal Table. First-class Cuisine.
Special Attendance for Invalids.
Plentiful Supply of Fresh Milk
and Eggs.
Plunge and Shower Baths.
Tee, ms.
7s. per day, or 2 Guineas per week.
Private Suites, Guineas.
AN ATTENDANT AND VEHICLE MEET EACH TRAIN.
HORSES and VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.


other very pleasant drive is that to Mount Wilson,
about sixteen miles, for which a day should be set
aside. On a clear day the country can be seen on
either side for a distance of upwards of sixty miles.
The remaining place of interest is the Great Zig-
zag, eleven miles further on than Mount Victoria,
and is the greatest engineering work on the IST. S.
Wales railways. There are three slopes between
the top and the bottom of this Zigzag, a distance
of three or four miles, and the descent is estimated
at 600 feet. The view on the way down is very
remarkable, and no visitor to this colony looks upon
the Mountains as being properly “ done unless the
Zigzag is seen. At Eskbank, near the bottom of
this Zigzag, are interesting iron works and a coal
mine alongside the station, while at Lithgow, a
mile further on, are pottery works well w ortby of
a visit if time permit.
Full particulars as to the time occupied in seeing
the Mountains, and the cost of the trip, may be
had on enquiry, either personally or by letter, at
the Tourist Bureau, so that intending visitors may
know before starting what to see, how to see it,
a nd what it will cost. To those wishing to take
furnished cottages at any station in the Mountains
110 better place can be found at which to obtain in-
formation upon such a subject than the above office,


If you really wish to enjoy yourself
and have some good Shooting,
GO TO OLD NICK
DELANEY’S
Mount Victoria Hotel,
LITTLE HARTLEY.
THE new brick building has recently been com-
pleted and comfortably furnished throughout.
The Bedrooms are large, light, and airy ; and the
hotel, being situated at the bottom of Mount Victoria,
enjoys a most genial climate during the whole year.
AN EXCELLENT TABLE PROVIDED.
BEST BRANDS OF WINES AND SPIRITS.
SPLENDID SHOOTING-
WALLABY, HARE, PLOVER, PIGEON, and
Various Species of Small Game abound.
The Proprietor being an enthusiastic Sportsman, j
takes great pleasure in showing his patrons the
BEST SPORT OBTAINABLE
In the Neighbourhood.
Good dogs ;e :e> t.
Saddle Horses and Buggies for Hire.
Parties driven to the Jenolan Caves.
Conveyances sent to meet Visitors at Mount Victo-
ria Railway Station.
For terms, etc., apply N. Delaney,
Mount Victoria Hotel, Little Hartley. ’
Letters and Telegrams promptly attended to.


as most of the furnished cottages have been per-
sonally inspected, as have also the boarding-houses
and hotels. By visiting the Tourist Bureau you
save the time wasted in waiting for replies, to-
gether with all trouble, and, if nothing else, t
expense of postage.


CAN YOU SHOOT f
IF SO, GO TO
WHITTALL’S HALF-WAY HOUSE,
ON THE
Mount Victoria Route
TO THE
JENOLAN CAVES,
WHERE
EXCELLENT SPORT
MAY BE HAD,
TOGETHER WITH
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION.
FULL PARTICULARS AT
THE TOURIST BUREAU,
6 BRIDGE STREET.


The Jenolan Caves
SIf,HESE wonderful Caves, lying as they do in the
heart of the mountains, were discovered by Mr.
Jas. Whalan in 1841, and are distant from Sydney
about 100 miles. From the great variety of extra-
ordinary shapes and brilliant colours exhibited in
the stalactite and stalagmite formations, and from
the numerous natural phenomena contained in their
dark recesses, they may justly be regarded as one
of the Wonders of the World.
They are under the control of the Government,
who appoint guides and caretakers for the conveni-
ence of the public and the protection of the Caves,
which would otherwise become distributed all over
the globe in the shape of specimens. Large sums
of money have been spent in making paths, cutting
steps, and protecting any dangerous places with
strong iron railings, and the electric light has
recently been fitted up in the Imperial Cave,
a dding very materially to its beauty.
The Caves are situated on the eastern side of the
Great Dividing Range, in a limestone belt, lying in
a valley from which the waters eventually flow into
Gre Hawkesbury River. The w'ork of exploring


them has been one of considerable risk, and it has
taken a long time to accomplish what has already
been done, though beyond doubt there are many
undiscovered wonders yet to be revealed. It is but
recently that new caves of great beauty and con-
siderable size have been discovered. Before entering
upon a description of the caves themselves, it would
be well to say a few words as to how they are
reached. Particulars as to fares, &c., being
obtainable at The Tourist Bureau. Intending
visitors have the choice of three routes, one via
Katoomba, another via Mount Victoria, and the
third via Tarana.
Via Katoomba. —This route is only available
for riding or walking, the steepness of the ground
rendering it impossible to construct a coach road.
The distance by rail to Katoomba is 66 miles, and
thence to Caves 26 miles, making a total of 92 miles
from Sydney to the Caves. The journey takes
about 6 or 7 hours on horseback, and the better
part of two days on foot. The scenery en route is
most romantic and well repays any little trouble
which may be occasioned by the roughness of the
road.
Via M ount Victoria. This route is rapidly
becoming popular with tourists and visitors to the


Caves. Until recently comparatively unknown, it
has come well to the front within the past two
years, and large sums of money have been spent
upon it, so that it is now in good order from end to
end. The distance to Mount Victoria by rail is 77
miles, thence to Caves 36 miles, making a total
distance of 113 miles from Sydney. By this route
the passengers generally leave Sydney by the 5
p.m. train, arriving at Mount Victoria 9.44 p.m.,
stay one night at the Imperial Hotel, and leave next
morning about 9 o’clock for the Caves, stopping en
route for lunch, and arriving in the afternoon
Leaving Mount Victoria the coach runs through
the Victoria Pass, where a most magnificent view
of the Kanimbla Valley is obtained, while the peaks
of the dividing range form the western back ground
to the picture. At the bottom of the Mount is the
township of Little Hartley, and further on is Hart-
ley Vale, or Big Hartley, near which are extensive
shale mines and kerosene works. A very notice-
able feature in the landscape is a solitary tree
standing on the extreme point of Mount Y oik
(near Mount Victoria) which is not lost sight of for
some hours. After crossing the Cox River an as-
cent is made on to the top of a spur, and the road
continues for some distance along its summit, and
after a pleasant drive of about hours the half-


way house is reached, where lunch is taken while
the horses are being changed. The journey is then
resumed, and after a series of “ ups and downs,”
the final descent to the caves is made, the road
running round the side of a hill for a distance of
about five miles, and the scenery being most
beautiful all the way down. The road at present
terminates about 200 yards from the caves, the
passengers walking that distance to the house, and
their baggage being carried on horseback.
Via Tarana and Oberon. —For a long time
this was the only route by which visitors could go
to the caves with safety and comfort, and the Gov-
ernment have spent a large amount of money upon
it. Distance by rail to Tarana, 120 miles ; thence
to Caves, 36 miles. Total distance from Sydney, 156
miles. Going by this route visitors cross the great Zig-
Zag, one of the “sights” of the mountains, and pass
through Eskbank and Lithgow, with their iron
mines and pottery works. Tarana is reached at
4.15 p.m., and passengers are met by a coach (if so
arranged), and after a drive of 18 miles reach
Oberon, where dinner is in waiting at the Royal
Hotel, a most comfortable house, where a stay is
made for the night. A start is made about 9
o’clock next morning, and the Caves (18 miles) are


reached in time for lunch. (We might in passing
mention the necessity for visitors impressing upon
the driver the hour at which the start is to be made
from Oberon'in the morning, as punctuality is not
one of his strong points). The scenery along the
Tarana route is not very striking, with the excep-
tion of Evans’ Peak at Tarana, and the descent of the
zig-zag at the Caves. The road lies through some
very pretty country, and passes several farms and
selections, with their patches of various sorts of
grain, &c., under cultivation. On arriving at the
fop of the hill immediately above the Caves, a most
e xtensive view of the surrounding country is ob-
tained, and the Cave House is seen at the bottom
of the valley, 1500 feet below, where are also the
masses of limestone rock, in which the Caves
themselves are contained, while on the way down
the zig-zag the various and ever-changing scenes
ex cite the passenger’s keenest interest. The coach
stops at the door of Cave House, and lunch is served
shortly after arrival so as to admit of a visit being
ITla ' <^e to one of the Caves in the afternoon. The
Va riou s places of interest are briefly described in the
° r der in which they are generally visited.
The Grand Arch, immediately in front of Cave
° Use > is about 60 feet high and 100 feet wide,


being a natural irregularly-shaped tunnel, running
through the mountain (which is about 900 feet
high). Near the eastern end of the Grand Arch, is
a peculiar stalactite formation, called the Organ
Gallery, and it requires very little imagination on
the part of the spectator to trace the resemblance
to the pipes of an organ in the mass of rock before
him. Next to the Organ is “ The Lion,” another
mass of rock, very much resembling the king of
beasts. A short distance further on are two
flights of wooden stairs leading to the Imperial
Cave, while on the opposite side near the roof, are
the Bacon Cave and the Dormitory, and on the roof
itself are many small lichen-like stalactites. In [
times of heavy rain, a tremendous volume of water j
rushes through the Grand Arch, which is the
natural channel of the two creeks passing Cave j
House.
Passing through the Arch and turning to the left* J
the Devil’s Coach House, which is the most mag» 1- 1
ficent of all daylight Caves, is reached. The nai» e
of “Devil’s Coach House” is given to this Cav e
through an incident in connection with one of tMj
early discoverers —one Luke White. A story is told
that he camped one night in the Cave, and j uS j
about the time “when churchyards yawn
graves give up their dead,” he heard a noise, al **l


upon looking round, beheld his Satanic majesty
cracking his whip and driving a coach and four
through the Cave. He was so frightened by this
apparition that he rushed away, leaving his cooking
utensils, &c., literally to go to the devil. Luke’s
veracity was not doubted, but it is generally sup-
posed that “the spirits ” must have had consider-
able influence over him. However the tale has
been handed down, and it accounts for the peculiar
appellation the Cave has received.
The entrance from the Grand Arch is neither
grand nor striking, but after a few yards travelling
over some stony ground, the main portion of the
cavern is reached, and an almost involuntary stand
ftiade to take in the scene.
The Coach House is a huge irregular arch, about
200 feet high at the highest point, and being colored
w ith almost every possible tint, with many-hued
stalactites hanging from roof and sides, the pre-
vailing color being a beautiful pale pink and green-
lsh brown. In that part of the Cave beneath the en-
trance near the Grand Arch, may be seen several
ar ger caverns or recesses, in which are stalactite
an d stalagmite formations of every conceivable
®bape and color. In the back ground are the
e ttle and Arch Caves, the staircase into the latter
e^n g plainly visible ; immediately to the left of it


being an opening through the hill, into which, at
certain hours of the day, the sun shines, producing
a most beautiful effect. The Coach House, illu- I
minated at night with coloured fires and Koman
candles, is a sight never to be forgotten, and visitors
are strongly recommended to provide a few of either ;
for the purpose of seeing this effect.
Making an exit by the same way as they entered,
and turning to the right, a flight of steps is ascen-
ded, terminating at the entrance to the Nettle and j
Arch Caves, which are in the upper portion of the I
Devil’s Coach House. Immediately after pass- I
ing through the iron gates, a descent is made for I
about 40 feet over some very dusty ground, after
which a slight rise brings the visitor upon a plat-
form of rock, from which a splendid view of the
Coach House is obtained. Directly in front i 9 j
a peculiar mass of slalagmite formation known as
the “ Willow Trees, ’’ the coloring and general ap j
pearance of which is extremely beautiful. Agar®
ascending by means of steps cut in the rock, the
“ ball room ” is reached, and its many grotesque and j
fantastic formations cannot fail to excite the inter-
est of the visitors. It is only necessary to give th 9
imagination a little scope, and resemblances m»y j
be traced among the stalactites, &c., to
every known object. Leaving the Ball Bo° 1 ’ 1


and ascending a flight of wooden steps visitors find
themselves in the Arch Cave, which runs in a north,
westerly direction from the Carlotta Arch. It is
about 150 yards long, and 10 to 15 wide, its roof
being covered with numberless stalactites, the floor
studded with stalagmites and about an inch thick
m dust, which, however, does not rise. There now
remains but one complete column in the centre,
though at one time there were five of them, the
survivor is formed by a stalactite extending in a
straight line from the roof to the floor. It is sur-
rounded by a number of other beautiful pendants of
a similar kind, more or less ornate, and crowded
together in the richest profusion. Several of them
have grown to such an extent as nearly to reach
s °me rocks which jut out from the walls at this
Ptace, anc i the spaces between the larger forms are
e< l by small stalactites, some of which are figured
as to represent festoons of flowers. The perfect
Pfilar tapers from top to bottom, and for about two-
tit' • own * s ma(^e U P °1 severa l stalac-
Qes ’ remainder being a simple column with
surface, To the right is a peculiar
tarnation, resembling the head of a lion, with
f /> legs and hoofs of a bull, which
C «L. “ Bg “ ts some ancient sculpture,
floor of the cave revei’berates very much,


especially if heavily struck with the foot. An
object of great interest is contained in this cave,
and consists of a stalactite, of which the keeper of
the caves has been carefully watching the growth for
eighteen years, during which time nearly half an
inch has been added to its length, the new formation
being about as thick as an ordinary pencil. This
cave illustrates the damages done by careless
visitors, and the necessity for carefully guarding
against future destruction. Many of the stalactites
are smeared and blotched with black candle drop-
pings, while others have been wilfully broken for
“specimens.” At the far end of the cave is a pas-
sage through a mass of stalactites which leads into
“The Belfry,” where are three large stalactites
which, when struck with a hard substance, sound
like church bells. There is only one which pr°'
duces a perfect sound, the others not vibrating
sufficiently to do so, and consequently suggest 8
very ch cracked bell. Emerging from the ca^ 6
the party find themselves immediately beneath tW
Carlotta Arch, a mighty natural bridge of rock
joining two mountains together. It is a delight!
place to sit on a hot day, listening to the murmur 0
the river in the valley beneath, and watching
birds playing about among the stalactites on
roof of the Arch, but let visitors be careful wh ef |


they sit, as the place abounds in nettles. From here
there is a choice of routes back to the house,
one being directly over the Carlotta and down a
path immediately above the Grand Arch, the other,
over the hill in front of the Arch. From the bridge
across the Carlotta Arch visitors look down upon
the beautiful valley, through which the river flows,
and up to the Zig-Zag on the Tarana route, while at
their feet, is the gate through which they have just
passed out of the Arch Cave, and lower down the
e ntrance to the Devil’s Coachhouse. The road
directly over the hill passes by the Elder (or as it
Was called, the Easter) Cave. Its present name
Was bestowed upon it in consequence of the alder
frees which grow about it and conceal its entrance,
"diich lies at the bottom of a most inviting hole,
thickly filled with foliage, like a large bouquet in a
Natural vase. The cave itself is rough and some-
what difficult to explore, and has not had very
wnich done in the w r ay of improvements, as later
iscoveries have revealed more interesting and
feasible caves. The first portion contains several
ai -ge chambers, one of which, “ The Chapel,” con-
lns some very fine stalactites called “shawls,” on
acc ount of their similarity to that article of feminine
Ek| mos t interesting sight in “ The
Pas “ ora * Cave,” terminating in a long
a ß e which it is very difficult to traverse on


account of its height, being in places not more than
two feet. The cave itself may best be described as
a hole about 12 feet in diameter, and 15 in depth,
the formation from floor to roof being magnificent-
There are a few fine stalagmites, but its chief
features are the stalactites, many of which hang
from the lower shelving rock to the floor, and form
an alabaster palisade. Immense bunches of snow-
white limestone droop from the roof, and one un-
usually large conical mass tapers off until it becomes
joined to another which seems to rise from the floor
like a pyramid to meet it. A marked contrast to
these hugh masses is presented by the numerous
straw-like glassy tubes which abound in this cave,
while portions of the floor are covered with beauti-
ful coral. Near this cavern is an aperture leading
into the Imperial Cave, 90 feet below, throug l
which it was first entered in 18/9.
The Lucas Cave is generally visited after the Net* 1 *
and Arch Caves, the Elder not being explored excep
by thorough enthusiasts. The Lucas presents a vetf
varied assortment of natural wonders, and iu j
recesses may be seen almost every peculiarity "1
“formation” to be found at Jenolan. It i 3
more dazzling and attractive than either the Ar c
or Elder Caves. It is reached by a track lea®
from Cave House, over the hill above the Cr a ._l


Arch, arid down a short zig-zag on the opposite side.
The cave was named after the Hon. John Lucas,
M.L.C., who took great interest in the caves, and
through whose influence the reserve was dedicated,
and a caretaker appointed. The entrance to the
“Lucas ” resembles a tunnel, and immediately after
passing through the Gate, visitors commence a des-
cent of about 80 feet, which as they have to start on
their own account, while the guide locks the door
(as there is not standing-room on the top of the
steps), is anything but pleasant to nervous per-
s°ns, though the steps are well made and pro-
tected by an iron railing. The descent ter-
minates in the floor of “ The Cathedral,”
an immense cavern, the roof of which rises
t° the height of 300 feet. The walls are of
'mestone, terraced with tier upon tier of stalag-
mites, their formation being brought into bold
Relief by the darkness of the surrounding recesses.
r °m the roof hang stalactites of various colours,
u t the vast size of the place makes it difficult to
Bee its beauties.
A peculiar appearance is presented by the stalac-
es on either side of a passage leading from the
edral to the Music Hall, those on one side
b lD ® P ure white, while their opposite neigh-
rs are so deeply stained with iron oxide as to


present the appearance of a boiled lobster. The i
Music Hall (so called on account of its fine acoustic
qualities) is a cavern about 14 feet high, running off
to about 2 feet, and if even a weak-voiced person be
singing in it his voice becomes full and sonorous.
Returning to the main passage, a descent of about
40 steps brings the tourist into the “ Shawl Cave,
a most beautiful chamber, with a sloping roof.
All the adjacent rocks are covered with fin*
sheets of formation of the most varied colours
which hang in such a manner as to suggest drapery.
On a far off wall is more formation of a similar kind
projecting down perpendicular rocks, and present'l
ing an even finer coloring than those close at hanAj
The “shawls” hang parallel to each other, au<i|
vary from 6 inches to 3 feet in depth, and from
to 15 feet in length. They appear from a distant
almost as though painted on the walls, but when tb e
light is put behind them it is seen that they are J®‘
dependent, semi-transparent slabs, of equal thick I
ness and graduated width. Though they are
doubtedly very beautiful, there are finer specime®!
of the same formations in the Imperial Cave.
mediately beyond this Cave is the “ Butche®
Shop, ” so-called from the peculiar resemblance tj* I
“ formation ” bears to joints of meat in a shop jj
chilling room. Passing this underground fl 1 ®!
market, and ascending a short flight of steps, t, j


visitor enters “ The Exhibition,” which is of con-
siderable size (about 200 feet each way by 20 feet
in height), and contains the greatest variety of
specimens to be met with in any one Cave. There
may be seen both white and coloured stalactites
and stalagmites, shawls, diamond walls, and dull
rocks, while in the foreground is a beautiful column
which has been broken near to its base, owing to
a subsidence of the rock upon which the pillar rests.
The fracture, though slight, makes the column an
°bject of great interest, and serves to illustrate the
irresistible power with which the rock must have
nioved. A most beautiful fungus growth, somewhat
like enormous powder puffs, has formed upon the
ste Ps leading up to the Exhibition; but it is of such
a fragile nature as to preclude the possibility of re-
moving a perfect specimen. Near the Exhibition
ls “the Jewel Casket,” a small recess, which well
the name bestowed upon it. The entrance
is very small, being about 18 in. by 10 in. The roof
as a beautiful brown tint, and gradually slopes
a^ a y from the entrance till it joins the bed rock at
e back of the grotto, which, by the aid of the
a gnesium lamp, is seen to be of considerable ex-
• The floor appears to be covered with bril-
1s °f a ii co i ourS) diamonds, opals, pearls, and
es °f pure amber lying scattered around in the
est Profusion. No pen can convey an adequate


idea of the dazzling splendour of the casket, nor is
it possible for sketch or photograph to do full jus-
tice to this, one of Nature’s treasure houses. An
involuntary exclamation of delight is uttered as the
visitor gazes upon what seems a vision of fairyland,
and which, though certainly “a thing of beauty
cannot be said to be “ a joy for ever ” in this case,
as the guide gives the order to “move on” long
before the visitors have any inclination to do so.
From the “ Jewel Casket ” the road lies along a
passage leading from the “Exhibition’ to “ th*
Hall to the Bridge,” and after ascending a flight
of steps, passes under a low archway, through
which it is necessary to crawl on hands and knees.
In the “ Hall ” are some of the many beautiful
stalactites to be found anywhere in the caves, many
of them being as white as snow. Near the roof | 8
a piece of beautiful lace like “ formation,” which 18
naturally an object of great interest to the gently
sex. The bridge itself is constructed of iron, » n
spans a chasm about 40 feet wide, and 50 feet deep-
with a pool of beautifully clear water at the bottom
The rocks near the bridge are of greater size th» 8
in any other part of the caves, and seem to ha
been thrown about in all directions ; in fact, thj
particular cave is the roughest place (except t
Devil’s Coach-house) that is usually visited. C r °
ing the bridge, and ascending yet another fligh V


steps, the Lurline Cave is reached, which is one
of the most beautiful of the chambers in the
“Lucas.” The formation resembles the finest
coral, variously coloured, with numerous grottos
and recesses, which all suggest the “ coral bowers ”
°f the ancient legend. The Fossil Bone Cave is the
oext halting place, and contains a bone of some
targe animal firmly embedded in the lime. The
stalactites and wall draperies are so perfect and
beautiful as to excite the warmest admiration of all
visitors. One fine stalactite, in particular, about
feet in length, is unequalled in the writer’s
opinion by any similar formation in the caves.
J'here are only two more chambers in the “ Lucas,”
°ne being the Snowball and the other the Wallaby
ave Bone, the former deriving its name from the
of the “formation” to snowballs, and
e latter from the number of wallaby bones scat-
p' ec about it. An iron staircase leads from the
v ossil Bone Cave to the Cathedral, whence the
i ors leave the Lucas Cave by the same steps as
£ m^‘ Pntere d, proceed to Cave House for rest
refreshment,” prior to entering the Imperial
v , | e ’ w hich contains the most varied and mar-
°us collection of natural beauties to be found in
he colonies.
Th
entr ance to the “ Imperial ” is in the Grand
> at the top of the two flights of wooden stairs


already mentioned. Each flight has 21 steps, and
a strong railing on either side. An iron gate guards
the entrance to the “ Imperial,” and the first place
of interest in the cave is the “ Woolshed,” a cavern
about 70 feet long by 20 wide and 15 high, the for-
mation on roof and sides resembling the fleeces of
sheep hanging about and covering the rocks in all
directions. A little further on the junction of the
right and left hand branches is reached, and as the
passage to is usually the first visited, it wil
be first”described. The Gravel Pits are the
places of any interest, and they would not claim
more than a passing glance from anyone but *
geologist. There are two more flights of stairs
which bring the visitor into a passage, from which
a subway leads into the Architect s Studio, a most
romantic and beautiful cave, some 20 or 30 yard*
long. It resembles two temples or aisles, and col
tains some lovely stalactites, while the beautify
formation of the walls defies human skill to imita
it. There is a long thin stalagmite in one of *
recesses, which forcibly suggests the idea that
fishing-rod of alabaster has been left there by
disciple of Isaac Walton. The electric light, wh»J
is now in use throughout the Imperial Cave, sho
off the beauties of the place to the greatest
tage. From the “ Studio ” the Bone Cave is
and contains numerous bones embedded in the 1 1


of the floor, while the care taken to rail off the
beauties of the cave before admitting the public,
bas preserved the walk from disfiguration by candle
smoke and dirty fingers. From the difficulty of
approach, this cave deserves the name of the
“Knee-bone” Cave, a portion of the journey
between it and the Studio having to be performed
°o hands and knees. The “ Marguerita ” is next
inspected, and is chiefly remarkable for the size
and beauty of its stalactitic formation, the principal
portion being fenced off with wire netting. The
name of Marguerite Cave was given in honor of the
w ife of the Superintendent of Telegraphs (Mr.
Bracknell), who first illuminated the caves with the
electric light in 1880.
The next cave, the “Helena,” was named after
rs> Hart, whose husband accompanied Mr.
p r acknell, and took the first photographs of the
,n terior of the caves. The length of this portion
ef the Imperial is about 60 yards, the breadth from
' 0 to 60 feet, and the height 20 to 30 feet, while the
lection of stalactites, coral grottos, and columns
* e huge tree trunks, is most strikingly beautiful.
18 cave contains a peculiar stalagmite, known by
e narne of “ The Madonna and Child,” t from its
f PP°sed resemblance to a female carrying an in-
• The road from the Helena to the Grotto


Cave, which comes next on the list, passes some
very “ ticklish ” places, which have been protected
by strong wire netting, otherwise the visitor might
fall through into the Right-hand Branch, some 70
or 100 feet below. The Grotto Cave is about 30
feet high by 10 or 15 wide, and contains many
beautiful grottos and vaults which seem carved
out of snow, and glitter and sparkle in the light
like so many diamonds. A feature of interest io
this cave is the Cauliflower Rock, so named from
the masses of limestone on its surface, bearing *
great similarity to that vegetable. After having
inspected the grottos, a visit is paid to the Lucinda
Cave, which, with Katie’s Bower, forms the mos*
beautiful sight in the whole of the caves. Th®
Lucinda is about 20 feet high, by 50 feet wide, a»
20 feet long, and its roof is crowded with counties 9
thousands of stalactites, most of which are very
minute in comparison with the majority of thos e
previously seen. On the side of the cavern is
immense mass of pink formation, which resembl
a frozen water-fall, with huge brilliants dispers®
over its surface. There are also some peculi®
natural basins in this cave, the rims of which
of every imaginable shape, while the bottotfjß
which are now perfectly dry, are filled with _ J
tals, every facet of which reflects the light 111
dazzling manner. The Jewel Casket in this cav e *1


another marvel of light and beauty ; its splendours
can only be appreciated by those who have seen it.
Leaving the Lucinda, for Katies Bower, a flight of
steps has to be descended, and about half way down
is an extraordinary mass hanging from the roof
like a Chinese pagoda or the canopy of a throne ; in
fact the name of “ The Canopy ” was bestowed upon
it by Mr. John Young, who visited the caves during
the time of his reign as Mayor of Sydney (1886).
Woolcott, manager of the Tourist Bureau, who
accompanied the party, inscribed the new name
u pon the wall in good round hand, but the damp
a i r has caused the letters to run, and become indis-
tinguishable. The colouring of the mass is very
'’aried, and the formation of the most delicate des-
cription. Katie’s Bower, which is entered imme-
diately after passing the canopy is about 200
° r 300 feet long, 30 feet high, and 25 wide,
7 e principal beauties of the cave being
at the furthest extremity. It is a
S r and cavern, with massive pillars, large sta-
tutes (some of which resemble gigantic carrots),
elaborately ornamented masses of alabaster,
e side which the glories of the famous “ Taj ” sink
t insignificance. The dome commences near the
with a conical mass of glittering formation, to
. are attached many fine stalactites, which
O to hold in suspension a solid mass, upon which


they rest. This second mass is ornamented with j
stalactites like frozen jets of water, and so the pro-
cess continues till the points of the lowest stalac-
tites rest on a lovely white mass, level with grace-
fully curved and coloured rocks, which descend
right to the bottom of the Bower. With Katie’s
Bower, the left-hand branch concludes, and a re-
turn is made to the Cave House for rest.
In the right-hand branch, the first object of in-
terest is the underground river, situated at the
bottom of a chasm 40 or 50 yards from the junction
of the two branches. It is reached by climbing
down a wire ladder some 60 feet in length, and its
waters are so clear as to be almost imperceptible, so
that many a person “puts his foot it it” before J
knows where he is. A very pretty sight is afforded
by cutting thin sections off a candle, lighting t
wick, and allowing the pieces to float down th e
stream, when the surrounding walls with thei
numerous stalactites are brightly illuminate ,
and clearly reflected in the limpid stream.
pieces of candle finally disappear beneath an arc»-
way, through which the waters flow prior to thei
exit from the cave. Ascending the ladder, an
proceeding about 20 yards along the passage,
Fossil Bone Cave is arrived at, and is found to c°Hj
tain a very interesting collection of osseous i eniai
Some 70 yards from the cave is the “ Sparkli°S


Rock,'’ the upper part of which is slightly eoloure ,
the lower portion being pure white. The formation
in this portion of the cave suggests the idea ot
sheepskins having been thrown carelessly over the
surrounding ledges. Near this rock-is the bottom
of the shaft already mentioned as lying alongsi e
the road to the Grotto Cave, in the left-hand
branch. Still further on is the bottom of the ho e
leading from the Coral Cave (in the Elder Cave),
through which the curator was lowered into ie
“ Imperial.” Next comes the Shawl Cave, abou
feet long, 12feet high, and 15feet broad, containing
the most magnificentshawls to be found in the caves
one of which is 14 feet long by 18 inches deep, an
resembles a beautiful piece of tortoise-she . e
others are, though not so large, extremely varied
in colour, and the stalactites are of enormous size.
An interesting object in the vicinity of the Shawls
is the “ Lady’s Finger,” which forms the extremi y
of a stalagmite, some 12 inches high, situated under
a shelving rock, beautifully fringed with coloured
stalactites. The forearm is white and chubby, ant
the hand itself of a waxydooking flesh colour, wit i
the thumb and first finger pointing upwards
tittle beyond the Lady’s Finger is Lot s
beautiful alabaster pillar about 5 feet in hel § l ’
standing in the middle of a long passage. The for-
mation of this remarkable object somewhat re-


sembles the trunk of a cabbage palm tree, with its
irregular joints or divisions, and the whole mass
owes its origin to the drippings from a minute sta-
lactite in the roof. From here to the “ Crystal
City ’ is about 30 yards, the passage being of fair
width, and the road good. The city is of Lillipu-
tian dimensions, its buildings being of dazzling lime
crystals, and having been formed by a similar pro-
cess to the basins in the Lucinda Cave, presents
the appearance of being protected by irregular bat-
tlements. Passing on to the “ Show Room ” there
are several noteworthy objects, among which are
conspicuous a glittering stony cascade, coloured
terraces, and a most beautiful pure white shawl
hanging from the roof.
The Grand Stalactites are visited after leaving
the Show-room, in a cave 10 feet by 13 feet, but their
wonderful beauty is such as to make a lasting im-
pression upon the mind of the beholder. Their
dazzling whiteness and enormous size produce a
feeling of awe and pleasure, which would be diffi'
cult to describe, which must be experienced to be
properly understood. “The Fairies’ Bower” and
the “ Diamond Walls ” are a continuation of the
“Show-room,” and reveal more sparkling beauties
to the eye. The walls seem literally covered with
innumerable gems, each of which flashes and
sparkles as the light strikes it.


Passing on, the “ Selina Cave ” is reached, and
presents a slight change in the formation of the
stalactites, which appear to be stuck all over with
gnarled and twisted tubes resembling roots.. A
beautiful mass of formation reaches from the ceiling
on the left hand, down to the floor, while in front o
the Cave is a huge stalagmite, 8 feet high and 2 feet
thick, which bears the name of “ Lot.” There are
also some beautiful basins in the floor of the cave,
which are filled with crystals, and the most beauti-
ful shawl in the caves may be seen hanging from the
roof. It is pure white, and very transparent-
Prom the “Selina” to the “Mystery” is a dis-
tance of about 25 yards, the path passing some
walls in which may be seen numerous shells, like
cockles. The “Mystery” is more appropriately
named than anything in the caves, on account of
the extraordinary diversity of the formation. It is,
indeed, a puzzle, and consists of a mass of delicate
white and creamy formation, with numerous stalac-
tites, which are as white as snow. In their midst
is an endless confusion of most fantastically shaped
tubes and threads, while thousands of fine lines may
be seen in all directions, which look like spun glass.
Some of the stalactites present quite a hairy appear-
ance, so thickly are they covered with this fine for-
niation. “Nelly’s Grotto,” a few yards further on,
is about 4 feet high and 25 feet long ; and the chief


features of interest are the beautiful stalactites which
depend from the roof, and rest upon conical stalag-
mites. From the “Grotto” the “Vestry” is en-
tered, and bears its name from the proximity to
some “formation’ greatly resembling ecclesiasti-
cal architecture, and is the last place visited in this
wing of the Right Branch, visitors returning to the
junction, near the Fairies’ Bow’er, and taking another
path leading to the “ Crystal Palace,” a long, nar-
row passage, about 8 or 10 feet high, from the roof
and sides of which hang innumerable coloured stal-
actites, which are protected from the touch of the
too curious by strong wire netting. The floor of
this portion of the cave is beautifully white, and
from many of the stalactites hang drops of water,
which, when brought into the light, rival the
sparkle of the walls. There are also some very fine
“Shawls,” variously tinted, the lower end of one
being a splendid stalactite, while the walls and
sides seem to have a net-work of stone. From the
“ Palace ” another “Jewel Casket” is visited,
and is considered by many to be the finest of all the
“Caskets” in the caves. Its entrance is protected
by overhanging stalactites, through the spaces
between which may be seen many varieties of crys-
tals. Some are of different colours, others resemble
diamonds, whileyetothers are perfectly transparent.
After the Jewel Casket comes the “ Bridal Veil,” a


beautiful reproduction in stone of the finest lace, and
an object of the greatest interest —(to young ladies
especially.) Then comes the “ Flowering Column, ”
a mass of formation about 20 feet high, of the most
peculiar shape, and covered with figures resembling
flowers. The “ Garden Palace,” which is but a
few yards from the Flowering Column, is quite a
small place, but of most exquisite beauty. The
stalagmites are snow-white, and appear to be cover-
ed with hoar-frost, while some resemble sea eggs ;
and right in the foreground is a queer little pink
formation, called the “ Princes’ Statue. The pre-
dominating colour in the “ Palace ” is pink or pale
red. Some 20 or 30 yards from this grotto are the
“Stalagmite Cave” and “Gem of the West.
Each stalagmite seems to have been formed by fits
and starts, the sections being very distinctly mark,
ed. The “Gem of the West” is, though small,
one of the most attractive objects seen in the caves,
and consists of numerous stalactites of various
thickness, some being transparent, others resem-
bling alabaster, while a beautiful cascade forma-
tion” occupies one side of the grotto, which, in
parts, seems filled with snow or frost. Another 30 or
40 yards brings the visitor to the “ Fairies’ Retreat,
which is at the end of the Right Hand Branch, and
°ne of the most inaccessible of the sights usually
visited. An ascent of a short ladder terminates on


a rocky ledge, where there is a small opening and
narrow passage, through which it is necessary to
wriggle feet foremost, until the victim is landed
in a small cave where his nose and toes nearly meet,
and from which he looks into the “ Retreat,” which
contains the largest crystals found in the caves,
some of them being 3 or 4 inches long, and as sharp
as a needle. The discomfort which is experienced
usually prevents a very long stay in this place,
which should be made more easy of access. The
only sight remaining after the “Fairies’ Retreat”
is the “ Queen’s Diamonds,” which is quite beyond
description. The prismatic forms are wonderful,
and a perfect blaze of light greets the eye when the
myriads of crystals are illuminated. To see these
“ Diamonds ” it is necessary once more to return
to the Junction, near the Grand Stalactites, and
ascending a flight of steps, lie down and put one’s
head and shoulders into an aperture about 2 feet
long by 1 foot high, when, having feasted the eye on
the beauties revealed, a return is made to daylight
and the Cave House, where visitors may rest and
reflect upon all they have seen in “ doing ” the
Jenolan Caves.
The Cave House is capable of accommodating
about 60 people, but it is advisable to make all
arrangements for rooms, &c., at “The Tourist


Bureau,” prior to leaving Sydney. The charges for
accommodation and lights are fixed by Government,
the scale of prices being painted on a board outside
the house. No “ grog ”is obtainable at the Caves,
visitors having to take it with them from Mount
Victoria or Oberon.
The model of the Jenolan Caves in the Melbourne
Exhibition, which was made by Mr. W. P. Noonan,
an artificial rock artist of Frankfort Street, East
Richmond, Victoria, is a very faithful representa-
tion of the general formation in the caves, and re-
flects the highest credit upon the maker, who is well
known in Melbourne, having fitted up the orna-
mental rock work at the Aquarium, &c., while
specimens of his handiwork may also be seen in
Sydney. The Curator of the Caves, when in Mel-
bourne, expressed his surprise that any man could
produce such a resemblance to the beauties of
Jenolan.


THE
Jenolan Caves
ARE THE
Eighth Wonder of the World,
AND THE
MOUNT VICTORIA ROUTE
IS THE
SHORTEST, MOST PICTURESQUE,
And LEAST EXPENSIVE.
THE NEW ROAD IS NOW COMPLETED.
Coaches Stop at the Entrance to the Grand Arch.
Excellent Accommodation at Whittall’s
New Half-Way House.
Whittall’s Royal Mail Coaches
Leave Mount Victoria Daily-
o—o
Boohing Office:
THE TOURIST BUREAU?
6 Bridge Street■


The Hawkesbury River
®F all the rivers of Australia, none can boast of
such picturesque scenery as the Hawkesbury.
Indeed many travellers have compared it favourably
with the finest rivers in the world. Anthony
Trollope, the famous novelist who made an extended
tour of the colonies in 1872, gives it a very pro-
minent place in his book of travel, “ Australia and
New Zealand,” which he wrote on his return to
England, and from which the following is an extract:
“Govett’s Leap astonished me very much, but not,
I think, so much as the scenery of the Hawkesbury
ft| ver There can, I think, be
no doubt that among rivers the Rhine has the
highest character for sustained beauty. There may
be special points on other streams which have en-
deared themselves to the world—such especially as
the Falls of Niagara—such as the Inn at Innspruck
—or the Rhone at Geneva—or the Upper Lake at
Killarney, which is in truth a river. But for con-
tinued scenery the Rhine stands fiist. There is a
Hver, or rather a portion of the river, known to
very few tourists, which, I think, beats the Rhine,
this is the Upper Mississippi, for about 150 miles
below St. Paul. It is not my business here to des-


Who is BLACK? Don’t you know?
WHY BLACK’S THE MAN
WHO KEEPS THE
BEST HORSES AND CONVEYANCES
IN MANLY.
BLACK’S DAILY COACHES FROM MANLY
TO
NARRABEEN, ROCKLILY, NEWPORT
and PITT WATER, as under:
LEAVE MANLY—Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Satur-
day, 10 a.m. ; Tuesday and Friday, 8.30 a m.
LEAVE NEWPORT—Monday, Wednesday, and Thursday, 4
p.m. ; Tuesday and Friday, 2.30 p.m.; Saturd 2.30
and 5 p.m.
SATURDAY SPECIAL TRIP.
LEAVE MANLY—3.IS p.m. ; Return from Newport, Monday,
7 a.m.
Regular Coach to Newport every Sunday, leaving Manly on
arrival of 10.15 a.m. Steamer from Sydney ; returning to catch
5.15 p.m. trip from Manly.
FARES ;—NARRABEEN, 2s, Single ; 4s. Return.
ROCKLILY, 2s. 6d. Single ; ss. Return.
NEWPORT (14 miles), 4s. Single ; 6s. Return.
GOOD FISHING AND SHOOTING AT NARRABEEN.
THE STABLES ARE NEXT THE GRAND PIER HOTEL.
BLACK’S Sydney Agents are—
THE TOURIST BUREAU, 6 Bridge Street,
Where all arrangements may be made for HtRING
CONVEYANCES.
DON’T FORGET THE ADDRESS—
J. E. BLACK,
GRAND PIER HOTEL STABLES, MANLY.


cribe the Mississippi; but I mention it with the
object of saying that in my opinion the
beats the Mississipi. I should not ma e
trast unless there were many the
ItrirsuXly.’someiimes covered with timber
and sometimes bald-sometimes sloping and som
times precipitous-but at all of them the banks
broken here and there into lateral va leys whmh
give to the imagination the idea that th g y
the scene is far spread, and would repay pursuit.
Unless it can convey this vague fee mg o ’
unapproachable, and almost mystenou g ’
scenery loses half its charms. On the Eton .
the Mississippi, and on the HawkestaOr ahke
there is created an idea that if the ravelle wo»U
only leave the boat and wander mland, he would
he repaid by the revelation of >narvello“s Wtie»
of Nature-beauties which have, perhaps, nev
yet met the eyes of man.
“The lower part of the river-that between
Wiseman’s Ferry and Pittwater, which is a large
inlet of the sea running southward from Broken
Bay-is very much finer than the upper reaches.
“The Rhine has its castles and its islands an
it has, too, in its favour the bright colour of its
waters. Tho Upper Mississippi has no castles, nor


are its waters bright; but it has islands, and in-
numerable bluffs and headlands, and varied valleys,
and park-like timber, and its own fast-running rush
of waters, which are to me more than compensation
for castles and the colour. The Hawkesbury has
neither castles nor islands, nor has it bright, clear,
water like the Rhine. But the headlands are higher,
and the bluffs are bolder, and the turns and
•manucevres of the course which the waters have
made for themselves are grander, and to me more
enchanting than those of either the European or
American River.”
The river rises in the mountains near Bulli, about
four or five miles from the coast, some 20 miles to
the south of Sydney, and after running a tortuous
course of over 300 miles, and passing under the
various names of Nepean and Hawkesbury, dis-
charges into Broken Bay, an inlet of the sea, lying
18 miles to the north of Sydney.
There are several ways by which the Hawkes-
bury may be seen ; but the best and most enjoyable
is to take the regular weekly excursion arranged
by the Tourist Bureau, which starts every Friday
afternoon for Manly, whence passengers are con-
veyed to Newport, a distance of 14 miles by special
coach. The night is spent at either the Newport
Hotel or Bay View House, both being comfortable


Eincl well kept. The steamer starts from Newport
about 9 o’clock on Saturday morning, and runs up
to Sackville Reach, from which place the passen-
gers are taken on to W indsor in another special
conveyance, and stay for tea at the hotel, aftei
which the journey is continued by train, and Sydney
reached about 9 p.m.
Tickets covering all expenses are issued at No. 6,
Bridge Street.
Passengers so desiring may join the above excur-
sion at Peat’s Ferry, by taking the train leaving
Sydney on Saturday morning, but they should
secure their tickets before Friday afternoon, in
order that coach accommodation may be provided
at Sackville Reach.
The trip may also be made outside the Heads,
but this route is not very often made use of except
by good sailors. The foregoing trips can also be
fun on Wednesday by special arrangement with
the Tourist Bureau.
The following short description of the Friday and
Saturday trip, as now run, may prove interesting
to intending visitors :
Leaving Sydney, the steamer passes down the
Uiain channel of the harbour by Fort Denison,
Bradley’s, George’s and Middle Heads (on the
latter two of which are the fortifications), across


i4i ?fiiw sms,
NEWPORT, PITTWATER.
This locality is one of the loveliest places to spend a
day, a week, or a month at.
A Coach runs from Manly to Newport every day, and returns
every day (Sunday excepted). Additional Coaches can be had
from Mr. Black, at Manly, at any time.
Our establishment is Strictly Private, so as to make it as
much like home as possible. Our accommodation is limited,
so that Friends and Visitors may be comfortable. There is
plenty to see and do, with Bathing, Boating, Fishing, Riding,
Shooting, and pretty Walks. A Splendid Ocean Beach, far
superior to Bondi, Coogee, or any of the beaches south, with
plenty of beantiful sea-weed, shells, &c. This beach is within
a quarter-of-an-hour’s walk of Bay View House, and the views
on the river from Bay View House are very lovely, and
altogether just the place to get to when used up with the
worry and bustle of the city, bracing one up to renew the
battle of life. Mothers worn out with domestic cares would be
much benefitted by a short stay in this locality, and being so
near Sydney, can return easily at any time within three hours.
The Winter here is very bracing, without the frosts and
severity of the mountains.
Black’s Coaches leave Manly for Newport every day (Sunday
excepted), landing passengers at our door as follows
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Saturday, meeting the
9 a.m. Steamer from Sydney. Tuesday and Friday (mail
days) meeting the 7.15 a.m. Steamer from Sydney, until
further notice.
"Perms Moderate.
P.S, —Please remember that this is not an Hotel, and we
do not keep WINES, SPIRITS, dec., but anything of the
kind can be procured from the Hotel in the neighbourhood.
Telegrams can be sent via Manly or Barenjoey.
D. D. SCOTT, Proprietor.


the entrance to Middle Harbour, the steamer jour-
ney for the first day terminating at Manly, where
a special coach awaits the arrival of the party, and
conveys them to Newport at the end of Pittwater,
an arm of Broken Bay, distant 14 miles frem Manly.
The drive from Manly to Newport is one of the
prettiest and most interesting near Sydney. The
road follows the coast for the whole distance, cross-
ing Dewhi and Narrabeen lagoons, and passing 01 ei
several hills from each of which splendid views o
the coast are obtained in both directions. At Nar-
rabeen a long white beach stretches for some dis-
tance north and south, and at each end terminates
in lofty cliffs, at the foot of which the waves come
rolling in, only to be dashed into foam and flung
back upon the seaweed-covered rocks. In t e
summer season fish swarm in the lagoon, an
all along the beach, and there are few places near
Sydney where a bigger catch can be ma ewi a
line in one day. Black’s coaches run regularly
every morning from Manly, and return m the even-
ing, the intervals between the journeys being su
ciently long to admit of a good haul of fish being
""After having enjoyed the drive along the edge of
the beach, the traveller is taken through the bush,
and looks down into gullies luxurious with cabbage-
i palm trees, ferns, and a dense mass of shrubs,


WHERE CAN I GO
To spend a fewvdays’ holiday, or stay from Saturday
till Monday ?
WHERE CAN I GO
To get some good Fishing, Shooting, and Boating ?
WHERE CAN I GO
To secure comfortable quarters near Sydney at a
moderate charge ?
WHY!!
To the NEWPORT HOTEL, of course,
(Now under entirely new management).
THAT’S THE PLACE FOR ME!!
HOW CAN I GO?
BLACK’S COACHES run from MANLY daily, re-
turning to catch the evening steamer, and '^ aV
NEWPORT on Monday morning to get the 0.15
steamer to Sydney.
DON’T FORGET THE ADDRESS !
The NEWPORT HOTEL,
NTEWPOET.
Proprietor W. BTJLFIN
Sydney Agents : Toubist Bureau, 6 Bridge-street.


which tempt one to call a halt and go exploring.
A few minutes afterwards, Newport, the terminus
of the coach journey is reached, and the first
section of the Hawkesbury trip completed, the
party remaining there for the night. The accom-
modation here in former times was exceedingly bad,
but we are glad to be able to say that the Newport
Hotel has passed into new hands, and is now con-
ducted in a proper manner, the rooms being c ean
and comfortable, and the table plentifully provided
with well-cooked country fare. Visitors, too, have
now a choice between the Hotel and Bay lew
House, a comfortable and well-conducted boarding-
house, standing in its own grounds, where most
excellent accommodation and fare is piovi e y
Mr. Scott, the proprietor.
The steamer starts about 9 o’clock next morning,
and after a run down Pittwater, passes behind
Elliot Island, sometimes called Lion Island rom
its resemblance to a crouching lion, and leaving
Barranjoey astern with its lighthouse crowning e
rocks at the entrance to Broken Bay, rounds Juno
Head and enters the Hawkesbury River. Aew
minutes later Peat’s Ferry is reached, and here
may be seen the new bridge now in course of con-
struction, which will, when finished, com P^ e . the
railway connection between Brisbane and Ade ai e.


The fourth span has been recently placed in
position, and it is expected that the work will be
finished by the end of the present year. Passengers
who have left Sydney by the Saturday morning
train are here picked up and the journey continued,
the “ Ferry ” being shortly hidden from view by
an abrupt bend in the river. The scenery at this
lower end of the river is very grand and beautiful.
Lofty hills rise abruptly from the water’s edge, in
some instances to the height of 700 feet, and are
well wooded from base to summit. Some of the
caves and rocks are very grotesque and remarkable,
and as the river unfolds itself fresh beauties are
continually coming into view. In places it is quite
lake-like, and it appears as though the steamer
were completely shut in, but at the moment when
egress seems impossible, down goes the helm, and
she rounds a sharp bend into another miniature
lake.
On the way up the river, an old tidal mill on the
left hand bank forms an object of interest, as being
a relic of the “ old times.” The whole course of the
lower part of the river is a succession of cliffs and
hills, and it only wants the ruined castles and
romantic legends of the Rhine to make it a worthy
rival of that historic river. The nature of the sur
roundings affords little encouragement to the agt l
c ulturalist, but every here and there, where ther e


does happen to be a patch of level ground, the
cottage of the settler is seen, surrounded by its
maize field, melon patch, or garden of peach or
orange trees.
After about two and a half hours’ run from
Peate’s Ferry, the steamer arrives at Wiseman’s
Ferry, a small village opposite the mouth of the
Macdonald River, and a well-known place in the
old convict days. Just abreast the village, is
the longest unsupported stretch of telegraph wire
in the colony, the line reaching from the top of a tall
mast on one side of the river to the summit of the
opposite cliff, a distance of about half a mile. As
a rule, a good lunch is provided on board the
steamer, but when there is time a stay is made at
the ferry, and the passengers adjourn to the
Hawkesbury Hotel.
From Wiseman’s Ferry the scenery gradually
changes from lofty hills to rich alluvial flats, the
settlements becoming larger and more numerous as
the river decreases in width. Presently the mouth
of the Colo River is passed on the right hand, and
ten miles further on Sackville Reach is arrived at,
tod the steamer journey ended. A special coach
is in waiting to convey the party to W indsor, a
distance of nine or ten miles, the road passing through
some splendid agricultural land on the way, the


4lik>eman’6 -‘fljemj.
MRS. BLACK,
r?O!PELi.
FIRST-CLASS ACCOMMODATION,
E'V'ERTT COMFOBT.
Meums ]^[ofleiiate.
GOOD FISHING, SHOOTING, AND BOATING.
If you want to spend an enjoyable
clay ov two, this is th& ~plac&.
BUGGY AND HORSES KEPT.
All particulars on application to Mrs. BLACK by
letter or wire ; or at
TOURIST BUREAU,
6 BRIDGE STREET


maize fields extending for miles, and at certain
seasons presenting a very beautiful appearance.
A good view of the Kurragong heights is obtained
as the coach nears Windsor, and sometimes visitors
extend their trip until Monday, in order to have an
opportunity of visiting them and spending Sunday
out of town. At Windsor a stay is made for tea,
the coach waiting to take the party on to the Rail-
way station in time to get the evening tram to
Sydney, where they arrive about 9 o’clock, after
having “ done ” the complete tour of the Hawkes-
bury River. Full particulars of cost of trip may
be obtained at the Tourist Bureau, at which office
all the necessary arrangements are made, and all
trouble saved to the pleasure-seeker.


AT
JOHN GREY’S
LIVERY STABLES,
BOW JR-A. Hi,
YOU CAN GET
The Best Saddle Horses
AND
MOST COMFORTABLE CONVEYANCES
TO BE HAD IN THE DISTRICT
AT MOST MODERATE CHARGES.
Horses and Vehicles always on Hire at the Shortest
Notice.
FIRST-CLASS FOUR-IN-HAND for PICNICS,
EXCURSIONS, Etc.
Travellers between Sydney and Melbourne, by stop-
ping one day in Bowral, can see the Fitzroy
Falls (the finest in N. S. Wales) with the greatest
comfort.
SIGHTS IN THE DISTRICT.
Fitzroy Falls Belmore Falls
Macquarie Pass Lake Illawarra
Four Days’ Drive through Illawarra Dis-
trict, starting from Campbelltown, ter-
minating at Bowral.
Full particulars of Charges from
JOHN GREY, Bowral.
Or at TOURIST BUREAU, 6 Bridge Street.


Illawarra District
t»T is a common remark amongst travellers that all
t Australian scenery is alike, but a visit to tie
above beautiful district, which lies between the
Southern Railway and the coast, will at once
that idea, as it contains some very fine scene y
which is of a distinctly different nature from that
of the Blue Mountains. Situated as 1 is
line of Railway, it is as yet almost unknown excep
to residents in the neighbourhood, although of easy
access when one knows how to set about it. _
There are several lines of coaches running within
the district, but as they mostly travel for ma
purposes they run at th“ - s
night 1 and do not admit of tn y
neSlry to enjoy the sights which lie all along the
route and not at any to'visit
For the convenience of those wnu
the district, the Tourist Bureau, of 6 nge re ,
arranges a driving tour by private conveyance,
starting from Campbelltown station and finishing
at Moss Yale or Bowral. The tour occupies our
, i f d-Vip travelling is done in day
days , the whole o the travell. 8
light, and a stay is made at a comioi


each night; the total cost is £6 each, including rail,
coach, and hotel expenses for a party of four or
more, and the following is a short description of the
trip :
First day. By morning train (about 9 a.m.) to
Campelltown, 34 miles, where sociable with two
good horses or other suitable conveyance, according
to the number of the party, will be in waiting, a
start being made about 11 o’clock. The road for
the first few miles lies through pleasant undulating
country, but of no particular scenic beauty ; a stop
for lunch being made at a way-side house beyond
the village of Appin, 8 miles. When close to the
Bulli Pass, a halt is called to visit Webber’s look-
out, and a walk of a few yards through the bush on
the left suddenly opens up one of the finest views
it has ever been the lot of the writer to witness.
Emerging from the trees, on to the edge of an
immense precipice, the whole of the land between
the mountains and the sea lies like a map at one’s
feet. The coast-line in both directions may be
traced for many miles, and the farms, villages, and
town look like children's toys, so miniature do they
seem. A platform with a stout rail has been
thoughtfully erected, to afford the spectator the
best possible view without danger ; but although
the rail is stout and the platform strong, so great is


the depth that it is quite a few minutes before most
people can muster up courage enough to make use
Returning to the coach, a few minutes brings the
party on to the celebrated Bulli Pass, during t e
descent of which a series of delightful and ever-
changing views is displayed. As they descend a
remarkable change is visible in the vegetation. The
trees are of nobler proportions, the undergrow 1
more luxuriant and varied, and the palm rees,
which are a distinguishing feature of the district,
begin to be plentiful.
At the bottom of the Pass the road runs throug
the colliery township of Bulli, and after a seven-
mile drive along the level, Wollongong is reached.
A stroll round the thriving little port comp ees ie
programme for the first day.
Next morning a start is made about 9 or
o'clock, and as there is no half-way house between
this and Kiama the next resting place, it is
necessary to pack up some lunch Lea ™ g
town on the southern side the coach proceeds along
the coast through a dairy, farming, an coa
producing country, the mines for working e ’
high up on the hills on the right, being a n °*» cea
feature* of the landscape. The road he. through
Dapto, the home of Beach, the Champion Sculler,


and skirts the shores of Lake Illawarra, h
practising ground, and the scene of his earlk
victories before he became famous.
For those who take an interest in the industrie
of the colony, there is an alternative route a litt]
further inland via Albion Park, the site of a larg
co-operative dairy and cheese factory, whic
visitors are shown over if they desire it.
About midway a halt is made, a fire kindled b
the road side, and the billy and pannikins, togethe
with the lunch from the hotel, provide a regula
Australian meal.
A drive of 24 miles terminates at Kiama the en
of the second day’s journey. Kiama is a very sma
place, and a walk down the main street soo
exhausts it, but if the walk is continued on to th
common or village green, which occupies th
promontory opposite the town, a remarkabl
natural curiosity called the Blow Hole is to be seer
which should on no account be missed. Near th
point a long and narrow cavern bearing a strikin
resemblance to Fingal’s Cave on the Island c
Staffa in Scotland, runs inland for about a hundre
yards, gradually narrowing till it ends in a sort c
crater, which every now and then vomits forth
volume of water, sending it high into the air. Eve:
on a calm day the sight may be seen, but when th


sea is rough, or when there is a heavy swell on, the
scene is one of intense grandeur. Those who do
not mind a little rock climbing, will find it worth
their while to go further out on the promontory and
view the entrance to the cavern from the sea. A
splendid view of the coast can be had from the
pavilion of the Agricultural Society’s Grounds.
Next morning about 9 or 10 o’clock, a start is
made for Nowra (27 miles) the third stage of the
journey, and a short run of miles on the Shell
Harbour Road brings the party to Bombo, or Hill’s
Quarry, where they dismount to see another freak
of nature similar to the Blow Hole. This is an
immense rift in the rock about 30 yards wide at
the mouth, narrowing to a few feet at the head.
Into this the water rushes spouting high into the
air like a geyser.
Resuming their journey the scenery improves as
the coach nears the pretty little village of
Broughton Creek (17 miles) where a stoppage is
made for dinner. Nine miles of pleasant driving
terminates with a surprise in the shape of a
Very fine iron bridge over the Shoalhaven River,
and once across, Nowra is reached in a few minutes.
It is a dull and uninteresting town only visited as
a resting place for the night.


Next morning as the journey is a long one (38
miles of mountainous road), and as plenty of time
en route is required to enjoy the beautiful scenery
of this the crowning day of the whole trip, it is
necessary to make an early breakfast and start not
later than eight. The route for a short distance
lies over the road of the night before, crossing again
the graceful bridge, another view of the river is
obtained as it lies smiling in the morning sunshine,
and shortly after, wheeling to the left, the party
fairly start on the homeward journey. For some
distance, the road lies through the bush and calls
for no special remark until past the village of
Cambewarra, when it commences to ascend, and
looking back, splendid and ever-changing views of
the coast and intervening plains open out. Once
on the Cambewarra Mountains, up which the road
winds in and out the gullies, the eye is quite
distracted by the beauty of the immediate
surroundings and that of the distant views. The
luxuriance and beauty of the sub-tropical bush,
which clothes these mountains, cannot be imagined
by those who associate Australian scenery only
with the monotony of the gum tree. Palm trees
and an infinite variety of ferns abound, magnificent
tree-ferns are “ as plentiful as roses in summer,
while the whole bush is matted together by a perfect
net-work of creepers, forming an almost impenetrabl e


undergrowth, which reminds one of the descriptions
written by travellers in tropical climes.
At the top a halt is made to enjoy the panorama
and take a last look at the coast before descending
into the Kangaroo Valley. Down the other side of
the mountain the coach travels at a brisk rate, and
soon reaches the valley.
Kangaroo Valley comprises a large tract of very
rich pasture land lying between the Cambewarra
and Barrengarry ranges, and the route for the next
few miles lies amongst thriving dairy farms. About
mid-day a halt is made at the township for lunch.
Leaving the valley, a long climb of three or four
miles up a beautiful mountain pass terminates at
the top of the Barrengarry Range, and it is then
but a short run to the sight of the trip, the Fitzroy
Falls. The view is brought under notice with
astonishing suddenness, as, emerging from the bush
the horses are splashing through the river, almost
before the party realise that they are there, the
road crossing it within a few yards of where it
takes its leap into the valley 600 feet below. Once
on the other side the last halt is made, the billy
started for tea, and an hour or more spent in
viewing the falls from different points of vantage.
When time permits of it, those who do not mind
the climb up again should take the path on the left


which leads to the bottom. The Fitzroy Falls are
by far the finest and most worth seeing in Australia,
from their height, the volume of water, the beauty
of the surroundings, and the accessibility of the
various points of view, and it seems strange that
they are so seldom visited. The valley into which
the waters fall is very beautiful, but similar to
those seen in the Blue Mountains. It is in order to
have an hour or two here that an early start is
made from Nowra, which should always be done, or
one may find themselves at dusk, with but a few
minutes to stay, at a spot so beautiful that one
would fain linger there for hours. Leaving the
falls the beautiful scenery is at an end, and the
uninteresting bush, which covers so much of
Australia is entered upon. Eleven miles of it and
Moss Vale is reached, where a good tea and a journey
by rail to Sydney finish the tour, which everyone
who takes the trip will admit to be one of the
most interesting and enjoyable excursions to be
had in New South Wales. The cost of the trip aS
described is £6 each, including hotel expenses, f° r
a party of not less than four persons.


Lake Macquarie
af.HIS beautiful sheet of water, named after one
4. of the early governors of this colony, is a
magnificent and picturesque salt-water lake or
lagoon, about twenty miles long, with an average
breadth of six miles. Like Port Jackson, its shores
are indented with innumerable charming little bays,
while various creeks run inland for many miles.
Some idea of its irregular formation may be
gathered from the fact that its coastline measures
nearly 200 miles. At its northern extremity the
lake is entered by Cockle Creek, which is navigable
for vessels of considerable size, to within a few
miles of the mining townships of Wallsend and
Plattsburg. On the western side of the lake, near
the mouth of Cockle Creek, is a large dairy farm,
the white buildings of which, together with the
extensive area of undulating cultivated land, run-
ning right down to the water’s edge, form a pleasant
feature in the landscape, while a number of pretty
villas, dotted here and there, along each side of the
lake add to the general beauty of the surroundings.
On the eastern shore, a few miles from Cockle
Creek, is the Village of Belmont, and it is here that


enormous quantities of fish, caught in the lake, are
packed and sent to Newcastle for sale or shipment
to Sydney. Opposite Belmont, on the western
shore, is the beautiful Toronto Estate, where the
first coal ever mined in the Newcastle district was
obtained years ago by the Rev. Mr. Threlkeld.
The old drive may still be seen on the point which
juts out into the lake for a distance of about three
miles. This is beyond doubt the most beautiful
part of the lake, and the views obtained from the
hotel and various points of the Estate are most
charming and interesting. The hotel is a pleasant
and commodious brick building, containing about
thirty bedrooms, besides sitting, dining, and
billiard rooms, with a commodious bar and parlours.
Standing on its own grounds of about twenty acres,
and on one of the prettiest spots upon the shores of
the lake, it commands a fine view of a splendid
reach of waters, extending right across the lake to
Belmont, while on a clear day the masts of passing
vessels may be seen over the low ground lying
between the lake and the sea. A fine asphalt tennis
court forms a great attraction to most visitors, and
an excellent billiard-table affords amusement to the
lovers of the green cloth. Those whose tastes are
of the musical order can indulge them to the fullest
extent, as a good piano is one of the luxuries to h 6
ound at the hotel. Steam launches and pleasure


boats are also available, so that visitors will be
enabled to go picnicing or rowing, as they may feel
disposed. A large and substantial wharf has been
erected, which not only affords accommodation to
parties landing, or for the discharge of cargo, but
may also be used as a promenade for visitors. Two
commodious bath houses have also been erected,
with dressing-rooms and other necessary accommo-
datien, one being for ladies and the other for
gentlemen. It is proposed to run a tram from the
hotel to the nearest railway station, the surveys for
which have just been completed.
Lake Macquarie is a veritable paradise for boat-
itigmen, and very good fishing may be done almost
anywhere on it. The hunter may also get good
dnck and wallaby shooting, while parrots and gill-
birds are very numerous at certain seasons of the
year. All arrangements for the trip to Lake Mac-
quarie may be made at the Tourist Bureau, who
are always ready to furnish intending visitors with
the fullest information, and relieve them of all
trouble.


WHAT A LOVELY DRIVE
MAY BE HAD
Through the Orange-Growing District
BY TAKING BLACK’S COACH
From PARRAMATTA to CASTLE HILL,
Starting as under:
From Parramatta. From Castle Hill.
9.45 a.m. 7.30 a.m.
2.30 p.m. 1.0 p.m.
5.45 p.m. 4.0 p.m.
Daily, Sundays Excepted.
FIRST-CLASS CONVEYANCES AND HORSES
ON HIRE FOR PRIVATE TRIPS
AT VERY MODERATE RATES.
Castle Hill Picnic Grounds,
WOOD AND WATER FREE.
SPECIAL TRIPS
TO THE
PROSPECT WATERWORKS.
For full particulars apply—
E. J. BLACK, Castle Hill,
Or, the TOURIST BUREAU, 6 Bridge Street.


Melbourne
Ifc «BLBOURNE,tI.e M pit»lofVictom,»«tu»ted
» on the Hirer Yarra, some six or: sevennodes
from its month. Its population,
is Shout 300,000; its street, ™ ’ imx .
those of an,
other Australian city,
Hotels : —The prineipal hotels are
tal and Union Club, in Collms-s reeti Wavertoy,
tai, anu > in William-street; fort
Collins plac , ’ . . white Hart, and
Parer’s, S^ouU-streetFoxall’s Ballarat Star,
Swanston-street.
Cafes :_Parer's Crystal Cafe, Bourke-street.
re ffoe Palaces Melbourne Coffee Palace,
Bourke-street, Victoria and
Collins-street, and Grand Hotel, Spring
Full particulars as to charges and accommodation
obtained at the Tourist Bureau, Sydney
W „L C »"P°” thet own
addition to which they only pay for


what they actually get at which ever hotel they
stay.
Sights and Places of Amusement :—The following
list of the principal sights and places of amusement
is taken (by permission) from the Guide to Melbourne,
published by Messrs. Whitehead and Co., of 53
Collins-street East, whose map of the city and
suburbs is the best obtainable in Melbourne.
Sights of Melbourne,
And Places of Amusement or Recreation.
Alfred Graving Dock. —By rail, either from
Spencer-street or by Flinders-street Station,
thence per steamer every hour. In this trip may
be included a visit to the Cerberus Turret Ship,
also 11. M. S. Nelson, and one of the Steamers
which may be at the pier—P. and 0., Orient, or
Messageries lines of mail.
Aquarium, Carlton Gardens.— From Spencer-
street Railway Station by Nicholson-street or
Collingwood tram. Fare 3d. Admission to the
dome, 3d., from whence a good view of Melbourne
is obtained.


Bank of Australasia, corner of Collins and Queen-
streets. , , .
Bank of New South Wales, Collins-street west.
Bank of New Zealand, Queen-street.
Bank of Victoria, Collins-street east
City of Melbourne Bank, corner of Collins and
Elizabeth-streets.
Colonial Bank, Elizabeth-street.
Commercial Bank of Australia, Collins-street
west. . .
Comptoir d’Escompte de Paris < d
English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered
Bank, corner of Collins and Queen-streets.
Federal Bank of Australia, corner of Collins ant
Elizabeth-streets.
Land Mortgage Bank, Collins-street east.
London Chartered Bank, Collins-street wes .
Mercantile Bank, Collins-street west.
National Bank of Australasia, Collins-street ea .
Savings Bank of Victoria, Market-street.
Union Bank, Collins-street west.
Botanical Gardens.-Open daily from sunrise to
sunset, and on Sundays from 1 pan. These
gardens are on the banks of the Upper Yarra
about li mdes from town, and can be reached by


South Yarra Omnibus, fare 3d, ; the Government
House and grounds being in close proximity.
Custom House. —This building stands in a
prominent position, being close to the wffiarves
and railway stations, and comprises a complete
suite of offices for that Department, the long-room
being 88 ft. long by 54 ft. wide.
Churches.— The principal in the city are St. James’
Cathedral, St. Paul’s (Pro-Cathedral), Scots’
Church, Independent Church, Baptist Church,
Wesley Church, St. Francis’ Cathedral, St.
Patrick’s Cathedral, Jewish Synagogue, Austra-
lian Church.
Exchange, Collins-street west.—lts members are
the leading merchants and financial agents. Here
also congregate the members of the Stock
Exchange and mining speculators.
Fitzroy Gardens, rear of Treasury and Govern-
ment Offices, at the top of Collins-street east,
are well worth seeing and can be reached by the
Richmond Tram.
Government Offices.— The Treasury, Crown
Lands, Police, Mining, Victoria and Yan Yean
Water Supply and Public Works Departments.


ffi a a are all concentrated for the con-
” ot the public in lunge handsome buildings
venience of the puuno & ton of Collins -
in the Treasury Gardens at the top
street east.
Bridge.
Hospitals and Asylums
Bukp Asylpm, St. Kilda Boai-Can
bv St. Kilda omnibus; fare 3d. Visiting y
Tuesdays and Fridays, from 2 to 5 p.m.
BbM vol. OT Asylum, North Melbourne^— Can
r„:rv^f g ty“xuesday S a„d F ,days.
Hospital corner of Lonsdale and
M =srrv«n gnB;r^
a ™ Hospital, St. Kilda Road. -Route by
Kilda omnibus, passing near Vsitmg
Days : Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sunday .
AusTIN Hospital fob Incurables, Heidelburg
-Visiting Days : Tuesdays, Thursdays, Satur-
days, and Sundays, from 2 to 4 p.m.


CH ™*’ S Hospital, Rathdown-street, Carlton,
from” to 4 jjT WedneSd ‘ yS ” d S “ d^
HoMCEoPATinc Hospital, St. Kilda Road-
a”d w ' d "“ d “«
St. Vincent de Pace's Bov's Orphanage, Cecil-
street, South Melbourne. -Visiting Days;
Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thurs-
days from 11 a.m. to 1 p . m . Sn „ dayB fam
4 to o p.m. {except second Sunday in month).
Women's Hospital, Madeline-street, Carlton -
Visiting Days : Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays
and Sundays, from 2 to 3 p m
Lunatic Asvlcm, Kew.-Visiting Days : Daily
(Sunday excepted),'9.3o a.m. to 12.30 n m
and 2.30 to 4 p.m.
Lunatic Asylum, Yarra Bend. -Visiting Days :
Week days, 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m., and 2.30
to 4p.m. Sundays, 9.30 to 11 a.m.
Deaf and Dumb Asylum, St. Kilda Road -By
bt Kdda omnibus. Visiting Days: Tuesdays
and Thursdays, from 10.30 to 11.30 a m and
from 2 to 3 p.m.
Protestant Orphan Asylum, Brighton.-By
rail. Visiting Days: Tuesdays and Thursdays,
between 2 and 4 p.m.


Law Courts (New)— Corner of William anil
Londsdale-streets. —This is one of the handsomest
and most imposing buildings in the city; is
surmounted by a dome, and situated on one of
the highest points of the city, where the finest
view can be obtained of Melbourne and suburbs.
The architecture is Italian, and the special
attention of visitors is directed to'jthe allegorical
figures which surmount the front in William-
street.
MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL EX-
HIBITION BUILDING, Carlton Gardens.—
From Spencer-street Railway Station by
Nicholson-street or Collingwood tram. Fare 3d.
Admission to the dome, 3d., from whence a
grand view of Melbourne and surroundings is
obtained.
Melbourne Athenaeum, Collins-street east.-lo
this institution is attached a large Circulating
Library and Reading-room, being supplied with
all the current periodicals. The large hall is use
principally for concerts and private balls.
Melbourne General Cemetery.-Take Bruns-
wick tram.
National Museum, at the University. -Open
daily from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Take Brunswick


Station StartinS fr ° m Fl i»ders- S treet Railway
Parliament Houses. -These buildings were
commenced in January, 1856, and have from time
to tune been added to, even now being i„ an
unfimshed state. The Legislative Chambers are
76 ft. x 40 ft. and 30ft. high, and fitted up and
ecorated in a chaste ornamental manner.
Strangers admitted when Parliament is in recess
rom 10 to 4. To hear a debate, an order from an
M. P. is necessary to gain admittance to the
Stranger’s Gallery.
P °*' b ” ildb * waa on July
Ist, 1867 and isi one of the handsomest structures
eCI y. ias a c l°ck in the tower which is
a very useful ornament, it chiming the quarter,
anoth f UrS ' At PreSeQt they are addin S
TToZ 7 to ! he bui,diDg> at a cosfc of ab -t
440,000 Special application is necessary to
inspect the building.
p ubllc Library & National Gallery, Swanston-st.
the foundation-stone was laid by Sir Charles
Hotham on July 3rd, 1854, and the library now
contains a Reading-room with Balcony 240 ft. x 50
otZl f eS ’ R °° m adjoini “S' 11 contains
one of the finest collections of books, 4c., in the


world, amongst which are some antiquated
collections of great value. The Picture Gallery
is 165 ft. x4O ft. and 37 ft. high. Here you will
find a choice collection of original paintings,
including those of some local artists. There is
also a Sculpture Gallery, and Technological
Museum attached. Open from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.
Picture Gallery from 12 to 5. Admission Free.
Royal Observatory is near Government House, it
being admirably situated for astronomical
purposes, being in the charge of Mr. Ellery, who
has a very complete set of astronomical and other
instruments, the Melbourne telescope being one
of the largest and most complete in the world.
Visiting Hay : Wednesday, from 2 to 4.
Royal Mint, William-street.—Orders to view can
be obtained from the Deputy Master or Member
of Parliament.
Telegraph Offices. (Temporary Offices,
Elizabeth-street, next General Post Office.) This
Department is very complete, having 411 telegraph
offices in the colony connected by 9,617 miles of
wire, through which 1,624,666 messages were
transmitted for the year 1885.


Theatres and places of Amusement:
Opera House.
Theatre Royal.
Bijou Theatre.
Alexandra Theatre.
Princess Theatre.
Temperance Hall.
St. George’s Hall.
Victoria Hall.
Waxworks.
Town Hall.— The foundation stone was laid by
H. R. H. Prince Alfred, Nov. 29th, 1867, and
opened in August, 1870. It possesses, besides
ample accommodation for the civic officers, a large
hall, capable of seating 1,900 persons, with a
grand organ built by Hill and Sons, of London.
Orgau recitals by City Organist every Thursday
afternoon, and Saturday evenings.
University.— From Flinders-street Rail. Stn. by
Brunswick tram. This building was founded in
1853, and has an annual endowment of £9,000.
In connection with this the Wilson Hai.l,
erected by Sir Samuel Wilson, and the Ormond
College, by Francis Ormond, Esq., M. L. C.
Trinity College (affiliated) and Queen’s College
(affiliated) have also been erected on a portion of
the land set apart for University purposes, and
which has been apportioned to the several
religious denominations.


Zoological and Acclimatisat.on Society s
Gardens, Royal Park.-Can be reached by tram
starting from Flinders-street Railway station,
passing General Post Office every few minutes
en route for Brunswick. Open from 9.30 a.m. to
6 p.m. summer, and 4.30 winter. Admission-
On Mondays, Is.; children, 6d. All other days
of the week except Sunday, 6d., children, 3d.
Sundays free, from 1 to 6 summer, 1 to 4 winter
Saturday afternoon Promenade Concerts, from
to 6, held during Summer months.
SUBURBAN TRAINS.
Trains to Essendon stopping at North Melbourne,
Kensington, Newmarket, Ascot Yale Moonee
Ponds, from 5.38 a.m. to 11.50 p.m., about every
half-hour.
Trains to Williamstown stopping at North
Melbourne, Footscray, Yarraville, Spottiswoode,
Newport, N. Williamstown, from 4.20 a.im to
12.15 p.m., about every 40 minutes. More
frequently morning and evening.
Trains to Oakleigh, stopping at Hawksburn,
Toorak, Armadale, Malvern, Caulfield Rosstown,
Murrumbeena, from 5.50 a.m. to 11.30 p.m.


Trains to Brighton Beach, stopping at Richmond,
South Yarra, Prahran, Windsor, Balaclava,
Elsternwick, North and Middle Brighton, from 5
a. m. to 11.50 p.m., half-hourly. More frequently
morning and evening. Express trains morning
and evening.
Trains to Port Melbourne, stopping at North
Sandridge, from 7.15 a.m. to 11.48 p.m., half-
hourly. More frequently morning and evening.
Trains to St. Kilda, stopping at South Melbourne,
Albert Park, Middle Park, from 6.13 a.m. to 12
p.m., every 20 minutes. More frequently morning
and evening.
Trains to Hawthorn and Camberwell, stopping
at Richmond, Hawthorn, Glenferrie, Auburn,
from 5.45 a.m. to 11.43 p.m., about 20-minute
intervals. More frequently morning and evening.
Trains to Coburg, stopping at North Melbourne,
Flemmgton, Royal Park, South Brunswick,
Brunswick, Moreland, from 6 a.m. to 11.35 p. m ,
Trains to Mordialloc, stopping at South Yarra.
Hawksburn, Toorak, Armadale, Malvern,
Caulfield, Glen Huntly, North Road, McKinnon,
East Brighton, South Brighton, Highett, Chelten-
ham, Mentone, from 5.55 a.m. to 11.15 p.m.


POST AND TELEGRAPH.
Rates of Postage.
Victoria and Intercolonial— Letters, for every
ounce or under, 2d. Packets, Two ounces, Id
Newspapers, each.
United Kingdom —Letters, per J oz., 6d. Packets,
1 oz. Id., 2 oz. 2d., each additional 2 oz. 2d.
ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.
Victoria.—Six words 6d. Extra words Id.
TRAMWAYS (Cable.)
Melbourne to Richmond. —From Spencer-street
via Flinders-street, Wellington-parade, and
Bridge-road. Fare 3d.; from Spencer-street to
Swanston-street, Id. Blue lamp at night.
Melbourne to North Fitzroy.— From Spencer-
street via Collins, Gisborne and Brunswick-streets,
and St. George’s-road to Barkly street. Fare 3d.
Green lamp at night.
Melbourne to Victoria St. Bridge, Colling-
■wood. —From Spencer-street, via Collins, Gis-
borne and Victoria-streets. Fare 3d. Red lamp
at night.


Melbourne to Brunswick. —From Flinders-street
Railway Station, via Elizabeth-street, Sydney-
road, to corner of Moreland-road. Fare 3d.
Red lamp at night.
Melbourne to Nicholson St., North Fitzroy.—
From Spencer-street Railway Station, via Bourke,
Spring, and Nicholson-streets to corner of Park-
street. Fare 3d. Green lamp at night.
Melbourne to Carlton and Abbotsford. —From
Flinders-street via Swanston, Lonsdale, Russell,
Lygon, Elgin, and Johnson-streets to Bridge.
Fare 3d. White lamp at night.
Melbourne to Clifton Hill.— From Spencer-
street via Bourke, Spring, Gertrude, and Smith-
streets and Heidelburg-road to Northcote Bridge.
Fare 3d. Red lamp at night.
Melbourne to Kew (horse). —Connecting with
Victoria-street tram, thence via Barker’s-road
and Bulleen-road to Cemetery Gates. Fare 3d.
extra.
Other lines will be opened during the year.
OMNIBUSES.
Run every few minutes.
Ascot Yale, Flemington, Moonee Ponds— via
Elizabeth-street and Flemington-road ; red side
light. Fare 4d.


Hotham and Flemington Bridge— via Elizabeth,
Victoria, Errol, Queensbery, Abbotsford-streets,
and Flemington-road ; green side light. Fare 3d.
North Carlton— via Elizabeth, Bourke, Swanston,
Madeline, Queensbery, Lygon, Elgin, and
Rathdown-streets, to corner of Richardson-street.
Fare 3d.
Northcote.— Connect with Collingwood tram at
Clifton Hill. Fare to Northcote, 3d. extra.
From Royal Arcade, Bourke-street, to
South Melbourne (late Emerald Hill) and
Albert Park via Bourke, Swanston, and
Fiinders-streets. Fare 3d. At night lamps show
E.H.
South Yarra, Prahran and Windsor— via
Bourke and Swanston-streets, St. Kilda, Domain,
Toorak-roads, and Chapel-street; red light.
Fare 3d.
From Bourke-street East, to
Port Melbourne —via Bourke, Swanston, Collins,
Elizabeth, Flinders, Yarra Bank, Ferras, and
Bay-streets. Fare 3d.
From General Post Office to
St. Kilda —via Bourke and Swanston-streets, St.
Kilda-road, and High-street. Fare 3d.


Heidelberg, Northcote and Preston, froi
Britannia Inn, Lonsdale-street.
Prahran Town Hall to St. Hilda, connectin:
with Town line via Chapel, Wellington, Fitzroy
streets, Esplanade, Acland, to corner of Barkly
street. Fare. 3d.
CAB FARES.
Chargeable for hiring vehicles plying within th<
city, and within eight miles of Melbourne.
By Time— Day of 12 hours, 30s. ; half hour, 2s.
one hour, 3s. ; each subsequent quarter-hour, 9d
Applicable (unless by agreement) for driving withii
a radius of two miles from stand.
ByD istance—
One Two, ok Three Persons.
One mile ... ... ... ... j q
Two miles ... ... ... ... 2 0
Per mile beyond 1 3
If party return ... 1 6
Four or More Persons.
One mile .. 2 0
Two or more miles per mile 1 6
If party return per mile 2 0
No back fares allowed.


Calling off stand and not further employing, Is.
Detention —Five minutes without charge; 6d.
per quarter-hour afterwards. Half-fare extra
between midnight and 5 a.m.
Luggage— so lbs. allowed (or if hiring party less
than full number 100 lbs.) Excess luggage Is. per
50 lbs. extra.
Memo, for Visitors— We advise arranging with
cabman before starting.


THE CENTENNIAL
Printing & Publishing €o.
LIMITED.
Head Offices and Works—
Melbourne Place, off Russell St., Melbourne.
Branch Offices—
SYDNEY : 311 George Street.
ADELAIDE : King William Street.
LONDON : Walbrook, E.C.
Capital - - £,100.000.
GARNET WALCH, Editor.
NAT. J. BARNET, Manager.


fjhe gentennial printing $ jfubli6hing
gompang, gimited,
With which has been
business lately carried
Boyce, are now trading
incorporated the extensive
on by Messrs. Kemp and
at the aforenamed addresses
IgubliAherS general Sprinters
lithographers fngraVerA, bookbinders
Manufacturing S? f eneral f tationerA,
AND
JSidvertiAing |l|gent&.
The Company are prepared
To read and advise upon original composi-
tions, whether literary or commercial,
or a combination of both.
To revise and prepare Manuscript for pub-
lication, either in serial or book form.
To act as Correspondents for
Colonial, European, and
newspapers.
Provincial,
American


|fhe fjentennial i rinting §• j§ubli6hinc
fompang, gimited,
ARE PREPARED—
To contract for placing Advertisements
whether journalistic or mural, in all
parts of the world.
To furnish manuscript or design for intel-
lectual or artistic advertisements.
To execute Printing in all its branches.
JHelbourne + ©enbeniiial ❖ Inbernabional
Exhibition, 1888 = 89.
The Company have issued a
SPECIAL CATALOGUE
of all the most NOTEWORTHY EXHIBITS
and have secured the right of publishing
the
Official Daily Programme,
under authority from the Exhibition Com-
missioners.


The CENTENNIAL PRINTING AND
PUBLISHING COMPANY have now in
the press, and. will shortly publish;
"Australia’s Century, 1888,”
A Grand National Work,
which for size and finish will surpass all
works hitherto brought out in the Austral-
asian Colonies,
Among other works in stock is
“From Melbourne to Melrose,”
By James Smith.
The following will shortly appear:
“The Story of Jim the Penman,”
By Tennyson Smith and Percy Hcbburd
and
“ My Weird Wooing,”
By T. Y. Foote,


ON ARRIVAL IN SYDNEI
MAKE YOUR WAY AT ONCE TO
THE TOURIST BUREAU,
No. 6
BRIDGE STREET,
Within a few minutes’ walk or drive of all Wharves.
SAVE TIME, TROUBLE AND EXPENSE
IN
SELECTING SUITABLE APARTMENTS fron
our Register of Boarding Houses, &c.
IN DEALING WITH YOUR LUGGAGE. W<
collect, store, or deliver.
IN ARRANGING YOUR EXCURSIONS, by
taking them in proper sequence.
NOTE—We make no charge for Booking or
giving information.


Brisbane
B RISBANE, the capital of Queensland, is situ-
■ ated on the river of the same name, about 25
or 30 miles from Moreton Bay. It was originally a
penal settlement, but was opened to free selection
about 1842, and has gone on steadily increasing
since that date. The population of city and sub-
urbs is now about 80,000. The principal street is
Queen Street, running right through the city, and
terminating at the Victoria Bridge, a splendid non
structure of 1080 feet in length, connecting the
suburb of South Brisbane to the city.
There are several other important thoroughfares
in the city, namely, Ann, Adelaide, Elizabeth, Wil-
liam, George, Edward, and Eagle Streets, in the
latter of which are the principal shipping offices.
Horse trams, omnibuses, and cabs afford means of
transit in the streets, wffiile the river is crossed by
several ferries, principally large rowing boats, the
fare being Id.
Hotels.— The leading hotels are: The Belle
View, Lennon’s, Imperial, and Shakespeare, all in
George Street.


The principals public buildings are: Parliament
and Government Houses, immediately opposite the
Botanic Gardens; Post Office and Queensland
National Bank, in Queen Street; the Supreme
Court, between George and Quay Streets ; and the
Museum, in William Street. The New Treasury
Buildings, now in course of construction near the
Victoria Bridge, will, when finished, be a most
beautiful addition to the public buildings of the
city.
The railway station is situated near the markets,
at some distance from the heart of the city ; but
it is proposed to carry the line to a central sta-
tion, and run a branch to Petrie’s Bight, which
is the principal shipping centre.
The chief suburbs are : South Brisbane, Wool-
longabba, Kangaroo Point, Breakfast Creek, and
Enoggera, in addition to which there are several
of lesser importance.
The public parks and gardens are : Queen’s Park,
Botanic Gardens, and Albert Park, in the city;
while the Acclimatisation Society’s grounds, in
Bowen Park, some three miles out, are well worth
a visit. The Exhibition Building, near the latter
grounds, has recently been destroyed by fire.
The favourite watering-place is Southport, oppo-
site Stradbroke Island, near the entrance to the


Bay. Splendid fishing may be had anywhere in
the neighbourhood, and good shooting on Strad-
broke Island. There are several good hotels at
Southport, the principal being the Pacific, near the
wharf. A comfortable and commodious steamer
runs from Brisbane, taking about six or seven
hours to do the trip. A coach also runs from
Beenleigh, which is connected to the city by rail.
The line is now in course of construction between
Beenleigh and Southport, and will shortly be com
pleted.
A very pleasant and beautiful trip may be
taken to Toowoomba, a station on the Southern
line, situated at the top of the Main Range. From
the town it is but a short walk to Picnic Point,
which is quite a show place, whence a most ex-
tensive view is obtained of the surrounding moun-
tains, with the “Tabletop” in the foreground.


LINTON C, PALMER,
c--#r Lieenged 1
Under Real Property Act.
MUTUAL FIRE CHAMBERS,
127 KING STREET.


, A
ARCHITECTS/Q
a
BUILDING, 'V
Surveyors,
. T 0Q%.... .
PITT STREET,
-Q, 4* SYDNEY.^


The GREAT REMEDY of the NINETEENTH CENTURY
ABRAHAM’S PIXIES. 1
Prepared from
Dandelion, and not a
trace of Mercury or
Minerals, simply culled
from Dame Nature’s
Garden, have now been
taken successfully in
the Colonies and India
for the last 20 years,
and are admitted by
thousands to be the
safest & only Genuine
Pills for all that may
be wrong with the
Liver & Kidneys, with
Its inevitable conse-
quences, Biliousness,
Indigestion, Headache,
Sickness, Shoulder
Pains, Heartburn, Diz-
ziness, Constipation,
and Flatulence.
A SAFE MEDICINE
FOR LADIES.
The reason is they are
purely a vegetable
composition of Dan-
delion, and expressly
suited to the constitution and requirements of women. This ex-
plains the great success and golden opinions which follow their
use. Thousands say they save all trouble, effectually remove all
impurities of the blood, beautify the complexion, no headache,
no pain, no flushing, no giddiness, no anxiety. They make work
a pleasure, and existence a joy. Superior to any other know 0
remedy.
Sold everywhere at Is., 25., and ss. per box. If
tS" Beware of imitations, and do not be deceived by misrepresentations.
Ask for ABRAHAM’S PILLS, and let no explanation or solidtati° n
induce you to accept a substitute.
Prepared only by
J. S. ABRAHAM, 434 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
a
