

fiolidaysj ?
• my
)IQ. LIU
Wentworth Falls.
10,000 distributed by the Government Tourist Bureau.
Phillip and Bridge Sts., Sydney.
C. D. PATERSON, Tourist Agent


Burns Philp Line.
In addition to their many Shipping Agencies,
Messrs. Burns, Philp & Company, Limited,
despatch their own steamers
From SYDNEY for
Singapore, via Torres Straits, Dutch East Indies,
Java, etc.—Monthly.
New Hebrides and Banks Islands, via Lord Howe
and Norfolk Islands—Monthly.
Solomon Islands, Samarai and New Britain.
Gilbert & Ellice Islands, via Vila, New Hebrides.
Marshall it Caroline Islands, via Vila, New
Hebrides.
From CAIRNS (North Queensland) to:—
British New Guinea and Woodlark Island.
These steamers run to a regular time-table and afford
an excellent opportunity for tourists and others
to visit these interesting Islands in comfort and
at little expense. The trips are of varied dura-
tion but all equally attractive.
ENQUIRIES ARE SOLICITED.
Time-tables and descriptive pamphlets will be supplied on
application and full particulars furnished by
Burns, Philp & Company, Limited,
10 Bridge Street, Sydney.
AGENTS FOR:
Australasian United Steam Navigation Company, Ltd.
British India Steam Navigation Company.
American and Australian Line (Oceanic Company).
Nippon Yusen Kaisha (Japan Mail Steamship Company),
&c., &c., &c.


INTRODUCTION.
IT IS the intention of this booklet to give in
a brief and concise form particulars of
a few of the principal holiday resorts in
this State, with the cost of travel and accom-
modation. •
If further particulars are required, of
these or other places not mentioned, the
Government Tourist Bureau, Phillip &- Bridge
Streets, will gladly supply same on application.


.. Popular..
Round and Combination Trips.
HAWKESBURY RIVER EXCURSIONS—
(The Rhine of Australia)
100 Miles of rail and river travelling for 3/6 & 5/6
Every Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Holiday.
HAWKESBURY RIVER-WINDSOR EX-
CURSIONS— I24 Miles for 7/6
By rail, steamer and coach. Frequently as advertised during the
Summer.
SYDNEY - HAWKESBURY - PITTWATER -
MANLY EXCURSIONS— 7O Miles for
7/4 and 8 -
By rail to Hawkesbury, launch to Pittwater, coacli to Manly and
ferry to Sydney, or vice versa. Every Wednesday, Saturday and
Holiday in the Summer.
NEPEAN RIVER COMBINATION TRIPS-
95 Miles by rail, coach and motor launch
for 4/- second class ; 6/6 first.
Every Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday and Holiday.
SYDNEY TO PARKESVALE-40 Miles for 1/6
Sydney to Como by rail and steamer up the George’s River to
Parkesvale. Every Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday and Holiday.
ROUND TRIP, Sydney and Moss Vale—
Special cheap tickets issued at 7/8 and 15/4 each Friday, Satur-
day and Holiday, available for return via either route. Coach
fare, 12/6.
SYDNEY-COOMA-TUMUT ROUND TRIPS
588 Miles for 39 6 and 58/- Coach be-
tween Tumut and Cooma, 112 Miles, £ 2.
Via the famous Yarrangobilly Caves, Thermal Springs, Kiandra,
Monaro country, and the finest trout streams in the State. A most
popular summer excursion. Tickets issued daily.


INDEX.
Appin I*
Balmoral ... • ... 19
Bel more Falls ... .. ... -1
Berowra ... ... 22
Berry ... ... • ... 13
Blackheath ... ... • • 33
Blaxland ... .. ... 29
Bowral ... ... ••• 19
Bull! 11
Bundanoon ... .. ... 21
Burragorang ... .. ... 17
Oaves —
Abercrom bie ... ... ... 42
Bungonia ... 42
Jenolan ... 39
Wellington ... ... ... 43
Wombeyan ... ... . 41
Yarrangobilly ... ... 41
Combination Trips—
Hawkesbury River ... .. 22
Hawkesbury, Pittwater
Manly .. ... ... 23
Nepean River ... ... 27
Parkesvale & George’s River 7
Camden ... ... .. ...15
Campbelltown ... ... ... 17
Colo Vale 19
Como ... ... ... • 7
Cooma ... ... ... 32, 47
Cowan ... ... ... ... 22
Fit/.toy Falls ... ... ... 20
Glenbrook . ... ... ... 29
Gosford ... ... ... ... 23
Government Tourist Bureau... 4
Green Point ... ... ... 25
Hawkesbury River 22
Hill Top 19
Introduction ... .. ... 1
Jervis Bay ... ... ... 15
Katoomba . ... ... 32
Kiama ... ... ... ... 13
Kuring-gai Chase ... ... 22
Kurnell ... ... ... 7
Lake Macquarie ... . 25
Lawson .. ... ... 29
Leura ... ... ... ... 32
Marulan ... ... ... *2l
Mediow Bath ... ... ... 33
Mittagong ... ... ... 19
Moss Yale ... ... ... 20
Mt. Kosciusko ... ... 37
Mt. Victoria ... ... ... 34
National Park.. ... .. 9
Nowra ... ... ... 15
Nepean River ... ... ... 27
Penrith... ... ... ... 27
Penrose ... . ... 21
Picton ... . ... ... 17
Point Clare ... .. ... 25
Port Hacking . ... ... 9
Railway arrangements Xmas 5
River Trips—lllawarra and
North Coast ... ... 48
Shellharbour ... ... ... 13
Springwood ... ... .. 29
Stan well Park ... ... 11
St. George’s Basin ... .. 15
Sutton Forest... ... ... 21
Tallong... ... ... ’ ... 21
Terrigal Haven .. ... 25
The Oaks ... ... ... 15
Thirroul ... ... ... 11
Thirlmece ... ... ... 19
Toronto ... ... ... 25
Tourist Information Bureaux 4
Trout Fishing in N.S.W. ... 45
Tuggerah Lakes ... ... 25
Valley Heights ... ... 29
Wentworth Falls ... ... 31
Wollongong ... ... ... 11
Woy Woy ... ... ... 23
Wyong... ... ... ... 25
Yetholme ... ... * ... 36


government Conrlst Bureau
Phillip and Bridge Streets, Sydney,
Supplies free all information regarding
N.S.W. Tourist Resorts.
Row to get there and cost.
Guide Books, Pamphlets, Lists of Hotels and Boarding:
Houses, Trout Fishing Guides, Caves Pamphlet, 50 trips
round Sydney, &c. Splendid Collection of Tourist Views.
G. D. PATERSON, Tourist Agent.
TOURIST INFORMATION BUREAUX.
Berry —H. Shaw, Tobacconist, Queen Street.
Blackheath— A. Slatyer, House Agent.
Bowral— Ebb. Davis (Morris & Coy.), Property Agents, Bong Bong Street
Bundanoon- W. A. Nicholas, Golden Cross.
Colah— C. B. Jackson.
Cooma-H. Nicholson, Coach Proprietor.
Dora Creek— R. Wepler, Storekeeper.
Helensburgh —W. Freebairn, Centennial Hotel
Katoomba —H. R. Goyder, House Agent.
Kiama— C. J. Cousins, Federal Palace.
Leura-C. L. Dash.
Lawson— J. Geggie, House Agent.
Mittagong —Miss Rush, Station Street.
Moss Vale —E. B. Hawkins, School of Arts
Nowra —T. R. Peak, Chemist, Nowra.
Shellharbor —W. J. McCoy, Tobacconist.
Springwood —T. F. Smith, House Agent
Stanwell Park —S. Crossley, “ Hillcrest."
Tallong— H. P. Davenport, Storekeeper.
Toronto— C. H. Unthank.
Wollongong —E. Allen, “ Illawarra Mercury.”
Wyong —A. Wilkenson, School of Arts.
Wentworth Falls— E. H. Green, House Agent.
Yetholme —J. Pearson, “The Bangalow.”


Railway Arrangements for
Christmas.
Holiday Excursion Tickets will be issued from and to
all stations from 13th December, 1905, to Ist January,
1906, available to the end of January. Similar tickets are
issued daily to all stations in the tourist districts, available
for return for three months, under 20 miles, and six months
20 miles and over.
lid. and Id. per mile return tickets will be issued
from Sydney to the country, and from country stations
to Sydney by a special series of trains from 13th to 19th
December, 1905, available for one month.
Week-end tickets, at 2d. and Id. per mile return, are
issued by trains specified on pages 15 to 21 of the public
Time Table book, available for return for one month.


(T ==
Visitors to Sydney should call
Sargents
FOR . .
Hot Dinners,
Cold Luncheons
Light Refreshments.
Grills and Oysters
obtainable AT ALL HOURS
in our Cafes,
GEORGE KING STS.
SARGENTS
, . High-class Pastrycooks.
Branches throughout the City.


Tourist Resorts.
Kurnell, the now historical landing-place of Cap.t. Cook
on the shores of Botany Bay, is easily reached by steamer
from Sans Souci, Brighton-le-Sands, La Perouse and Botany
Pier, on Sundays and holidays, return fare, I/-. Boats
may also be hired for a row across the bay. Good fishing
and pleasant picnic spots. Arrangements are also being
made to run excursions from Sydney to Kurnell, particulars
of which are duly advertised.
Como, George’s River, is about 12 miles distant from
Sydney, on the Illawarra Line, and is prominent among the
attractions. It is situated on the George’s River, which is
itself very beautiful. Boats and steam launches may be hired
at a very moderate rate. Parkesvale Pleasure Grounds are not
far from the station, being served by a steamer which runs
up the river every Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday and
Holiday. The excursion fare is 1/6 first, and 1/- second
class return ; and holiday fares, 2/3 first, and 1/6 second,
for the rail and boat trip from Sydney. Dancing pavilions,
summer houses, boating and fishing. Refreshments
obtainable on the ground.


8
When You Visit Sydney
Don’t fail to have Luncheon or
Afternoon Tea at the “ Fresh Food.”
92 KING STREET
Finest Quality Viands.
Best Appointments and
Service in the City.
Wedding Cakes
When You go to
(on the Block).
Our Christmas Cakes and
Puddings are unap-
proachable in quality.
from a Guinea.
Live There
Bear in Mind to Order
Fresh Food Milk,
“Golden Star” Butter, Vienna Bread, Clear Crystal
Ice, Fish, Game, Poultry, Cakes, Pastry, and all
kinds of Dainties for the Table Supplied Daily.
The N.S.W. Fresh Food and Ice Company, Ltd.
HIGH CLASS PURVEYORS, SYDNEY.


National Park, contains an area of 36,300 acres, lying
between the Illawarra Line from Sutherland to Waterfall
(nine miles), and eight miles of ocean frontage. The Park
abounds in nearly all native animals and plants, which are
carefully looked after, and presents attractions which are
not excelled by many places on the face of the earth.
There is only one larger in the world —that is the Great
Yellowstone Park of America. Situated 18 miles from
Sydney, it is very convenient for picnickers, who are well
provided for. Boats may be procured at 3/- per half day,
5/- per whole day; and on holidays, 8/-. The railway
fares are especially cheap—2/6 first, and 1/6 second class
Warumbul, National Park.
return, and on Wednesdays, Saturdays and Holidays, the
rate is 1/6 first, and 1/- second, return. Warumbul, on
Port Hacking, is the great fishing resort of National Park.
There is good accommodation for visitors, with hot and
cold water baths, at Audley and Warumbul. Audley, a
favourite spot, is about three-quarters of a mile from
National Park platform. Refreshments may be obtained
from the Caterer at moderate prices. The coach fare to
Audley is 9d.
Port Hacking.— The fisherman is in his element at
Port Hacking, where he will find a great variety of fish.
The schnapper, red bream, jew fish, black rock cod, tar-
Fairfax & Roberts, Yice-regal Opticians, 23 Hunter-st., Sydney


SECRETIN.
/ OF MY SUCCESS X
/ is"
D?WAU®^
V BAK,NC Pfl lc^~~ %
°
All Tourists, Naturalists and Curio Collectors
should visit
Coles' t\ useurp
where a varied stock of
Native Birds, Animals, Insects, Entomologists’ Requisites,
Shells, Eggs, Rugs, Furs, Native Weapons and Curios,
is always on view.
Specimens scientifically named, and every assistance given to
collectors. Birds and animals stuffed and artistically mounted.
CC Taxidermist, Furrier, and Curicr*
* vULC/O, Dealer,
VICTORIA ARCADE,
GASTLEREAGH ST., SYDNEY—opposite Hotel Australia
Also at Melbourne.


whine, whiting, flathead, flounder, black bream, flying gurnet,
etc., are very plentiful. Good fishing with rod and light
tackle is procurable on any of the sand flats, or in the
channels. Oysters are also in abundance. At Warumbul a
dressing-room and diving platform are provided for bathers,
and visitors are also allowed to amuse themselves in any
portion of the salt-water streams in proper costume. Boats
may be secured at National Park, and a very pleasant row
made to Port Hacking. Regular trips are run in the launch
on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays from the dam at
Audley, toe Port Hacking, leaving at 11.30 a.m., farel/-
return.
Stanwell Park is a popular and pleasant seaside resort
about 32 miles from the Metropolis, on the Illawarra Line.
Good fishing is to be had from the rocks and almost num-
berless enthusiasts indulge in this sport or pastime during
the seasons when fish are most plentiful. The surrounding
bush abounds with luxuriant ferns and other wild native
growths. The view as the train emerges from the tunnel
through Bald Nobb is one of dazzling beauty, coming with
such suddenness on the traveller it literally takes his breath
away. Five waterfalls are within a two-mile radius of the
station, and there are one or two excellent boarding houses —
terms, £1 to £2/2/- per week. Railway fares : —Holiday
Excursion, first, 4/11 ; second, 2/10 ; Week-end, first, 4/11;
second, 2/8.
Bulli Pass is accessible by either of the roads from
Bulli or Thirroul —the latter is the nearer, while the town
of Bulli is about 4 miles distant. Tourists should not fail
to see this interesting scene.
Thirroul, a very quiet township, 40 miles from Sydney,
and Bulli, two miles farther on, have abundant accommoda-
tion for tourists ; the hotel and boarding-house charges
are moderate.
Wollongong, 48 miles from Sydney, is situated in a coal
mining and dairying district, and possesses a small harbour.
A favourite fishing and picnicing resort —'Lake Illawarra —
is within a few miles of the town. Within a few minutes one
may reach Stuart Park (a park of 50 acres, much patronised
by picnic parties), the Three Mile Beach, Brighton Beach,
the Children’s, Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s Baths, the Show
Ground, the Cycling Grounds and Golf Links, and Tennis
Courts. The Five Islands are off the coast, a little below


Fairfax & Roberts, The „ s “ ry
Isct Gold, whole Pearls, New Art design Brooch, isct with Fire Opal, iBct
5 I Ain. lone 21/- Tourmaline or Peridot, and setting, £2 2s.
whole Pearl 55/-, i size.
We Specialise on Australian Gems. We Cut them from the Rough.
One oerfert^Diamond whole “ Chiastolite” Lucky Opals and Olivines
Pearl, £13105; Smaller £6 6s. Stone Signet Ring 55/- to 68/- our own make, £4 4s
We Mount Them. We Set Them. We Sell Them at Half London Prices.
Set with Pearls, Opals, or
Turquoise 21/-; 15c! 32/-
There never has been sold a Watch to come anywhere
near the “ Fx & R” Watch for profound accuracy and
strength (except those at ten times the price). It is in
Mechanics the Greatest Wonder of the age. It is a |-plate
Lever—has 15 jewels. It has a ruby roller jewel. It has
Brequet Hair Spring. It has compensated and adjusted
balance. It is guaranteed for 15 years and kept in order
for 2 years (breakages excepted) without charge. It will
stand Hard Riding and Knocking About. It is made in
every style of case. It is 50/- in Silver Hunting Case,
Gent’s size. It is 55s in Silver Half-hunting Case, Gent’s
size. It is 30/- in Open-face Oxidised Case, Gent’s size.
. . ~ c ■ o „ It is 42/-in Open-face Silver Case, Gent’s size. It is 40/-
Au l*f allal L S v k - nlr SP°° s ’ in Open-face Silver Case, Lady’s size. Any Initials in
febS™“A K y “ e S: Monogram, 2/6 extra.
Swan, 5/6
Our Stock of Pearls is One of the Largest in Australia
Fairfax & Roberts, Theo,d tsX e . ryHouBe
23 HUNTER STREET.


V •■■■.., MSI 7
Wollongong, and are a well-known fishing ground. Railway
fares —Holiday Excursion, first, 9/11 ; second, 6/6 ;
Week-end, first, 8/- ; second, 4/-.
Shellharbour, a quiet holiday resort, is equally handy
to the various sights of this district, and is growing more in
popularity with the travelling public daily.
Kiama, 71 miles from Sydney, lying between Lake
Illawarra on the North and Crooked River on the South,
is pleasantly situated in close proximity to the now famous
Jamberoo Valley. It is the second town, as regards popu-
Shoalhaven River , Nowra.
lation, on the Illawarra Line, has a splendid water supply,
and also two commodious salt water free public baHis. The
famous natural curiosity, “The Blowhole,” Minnamurra
River and Falls, Saddle Back Mount, &c., are among the
atti actions. First-class hotels and boarding houses from £1
to £3/3/- per week. Holiday excursion fares, 16/-and 10/6 ;
week end 11/10 and 5/11.
Berry may be visited by land or sea. By the latter
Fairfax & Roberts, for Wedding Presents, 23 Hunter-st., Sydney


TRY HALL’S
UP-TO-DATE
Turkish •
Baths
159 ELIZABETH STREET.
Open daily, for Ladies or Gentlemen,
from 7 a.m., close 9 p.m.
Saturday, 10 p.m.
Sundays, close noon.
HOT R always ready . /
nu I DA i for LADIES or GENTLEMEN, 1/"


route, the Canal, Shoalhaven River, and Broughton Creek
are passed through. Travelling via Moss Vale, the tourist
passes the Fitzroy Falls, enters Kangaroo Valley by the
great pass of Barrengarry, and then the Cambewarra Pass.
The district is surrounded by glorious views, and Broughton
Mill Creek affords good sport for the line. A delightful
drive of four miles will take you up along the ridge of the
mountain and back through Cambewarra, the views em-
bracing Jervis Bay, the Shoalhaven River, and fifty miles
of sea coast. Hotels, £1 to £2/2/- per week, and boarding
houses, 15/- to £l. Railway fares : —Holiday Excursion,
first, 19/6 ; second, 12/9 ; Week-end, first, 14/- ; second,
7/-. Coach fare to Kangaroo Valley, 5/- ; Moss Vale, 13/-.
Nowra is delightfully situated on the south bank of the
Shoalhaven River, about 9 miles from the coast. The Shoal-
haven is the largest river in the southern portion of the
State. It offers illimitable attractions to the tourist,
and many parts of it approach the beauties of the majestic
Hawkesbury. It is a pleasant drive to the Yalwal Gold
Mines,." The Gap ” being passed en route. Railway fares :
Holiday Excursion, first, 21/6 ; second, 14/3 ; Week-end,
first, 15/4 ; second, 7/8. Week-end tickets are available
for return via Moss Vale. Coach fare, 12/6.
St. George’s Basin is about 17 miles from Nowra, and
is connected with the Ocean at Wreck Bay, by a narrow
inlet called Sussex Inlet. Good fishing, bathing, sailing,
rowing and shooting are the features of this beautiful lake,
which is, of late years, becoming very popular with pleasure
and beauty seeking tourists. Good accommodation from
£l/10/-to £2/2/-per week, with use of boats. Launches meet
coaches from Nowra by arrangement. Coach fare about
7/6 per head.
Jervis Bay. —Visitors to Nowra should not fail to make
a trip to Jervis Bay, which is about 15 miles away over a
good road. Hotel and boarding-house accommodation,
£l/10/- per week ; vehicles by arrangement, 7/6.
Camden, one of the old historic towns in New South
Wales, is situated 42 miles (served by a tram from Camp-
belltown, on the Southern Line), from Sydney. It is noted
for its health sustaining climate and beautiful scenery.
There are many pleasant drives in the neighbourhood, the
principal places of interest being—The Oaks (nine miles),
Burragorang (24 miles), Picton, Nepean Towers, Bargo


The Coolangatta..
.. Stud Dairy Cattle.
The Greatest Ayrshire Herd in Australia.
The iProperty of. .
Dr. JOHN HAY, Berry, New South Wales.
We have pleasure in reproducing three of
the most recent photos, of some of the famous
Coolangatta Stud.
Champion Group of AYRSHIRE CATTLE, Royal Show, Sydney.
The Property of Dr. JOHN HAY, Coolangatta, New South Wales.


River, and the Razorback. Trains leave Sydney at difl erent
periods daily for Campbelitown (34 miles), whence the
journey to Camden is made by tram (8 miles). There is a
coach service between Camden, The Oaks, and Burra-
gorang, leaving Camden each Thursday at 6.30 a.m., fares
12/6. Both the town and surrounding districts have
abundant accommodation for visitors, and the charges are
very moderate, viz. : —Hotels, from £l/5/- to £2/2/- per
week, boarding houses, £1 to £l/10/- per week. A vast
amount of dairying is done in this district. Railway fares :
—Daily, first, 8/1 ; second, 5/- ; Holiday Excursion, first,
7/6; second, 4/6.
From Campbelitown, one of our oldest townships, a
coach runs regularly to Appin (2/-) and Cataract (3/-), in
the neighbourhood of which there is some beautiful scenery,
which will amply repay a visit, especially at Broughton’s
Pass, Jordan’s Pass, Pheasant’s Nest and the Friendly
Falls. A pleasant round trip may be made to Bulli on the
Illawarra Line. Railway Fares: —Daily, first, 5/10;
second, 3/6 ; Holiday Excurison, first, 5/3 ; second, 3/- ;
Week -end, first, 5/3 ; second, 2/10.
Picton, which lies about 53 miles from Sydney is another
very fine health resort, situated on the Stone Quarry Creek.
About four miles from Picton is the Thirlmere Home for
Consumptives, which is a strong testimony to the excellent
health giving qualities of the district. Six miles out from
the township lie the Lakes, which spread over a five-mile
stretch of country, affording the Railway Commissioners
an ample supply of water. The Burragorang Valley (25
miles), may be conveniently reached from Picton. Coach
to The Oaks daily, 3/6, thence by vehicle by arrangement
with the local hotel proprietor. Excellent views are ob-
tained en route —an exceptionally good one of Cox’s River,
which flows through the Valley; at some points, the pre-
cipitous banks rise to the height of 2000 feet above the
river bed. The places of interest that may be easily visited
are The Oaks (9 miles), Camden, Burragorang Valley, the
Razorback, and Nepean Towers. Good shooting is ob-
tainable within a short distance of the town, while at
Burragorang it is exceptionally good and varied. The
hotel charges range from £1 to £2/2/- per week, and
boarding establishments, £l/1/- to £2/2/-. Railway
fares :—Holiday Excursion (daily), first, 11/3 ; second,
7/6 ; Week-end, first, 8/10 ; second, 4/5.


n j^hw»:
IjL.-: > ‘. r ’fi i'l Vv-*\ * ' I
■' \ , ., ’ -- ’“ ' '
The Unbeaten Champion Ayrshire Bull of Australia JAMIE OF OAKBANK.
The Property of Dr. JOHN HAY, Coolangatta, New South Wales.
The Ayrshire Cow, REALM, Champion Sydney, 1905.
The Property of Dr. JOHN HAY, Coolangatta, New South Wales.


Thirlmere, Balmoral, Hill Top and Colo Vale, are all
healthy spots in which to spend a quiet holiday. Hotel or
boarding house accommodation available at each place.
Mittagong, like Camden, is a delightful health resort,
about 78 miles from Sydney, on the Southern Line. The
district is rich in minerals and a fair amount of dairying is
done. The Fitzroy Falls, Macquarie Pass, Robertson, Car-
rington, and Belmore Falls, and Wombeyan Caves (44 miles),
may all be visited from the station. The Chalybeate or
mineral spring, within a few miuntes from the railway
station at Mittagong, is situated on the top of a small
grassy knoll, the surrounding scenery alone well repaying
the tourist for the trip ; but the chief attraction is the
medicinal quality of the spring. The waters contain
a considerable quantity of iron in solution which is readily
assimilated into the system. The spring has been built
round to prevent the risk of contamination, and sheltered
shed with comfortable seats provided for the use of in-
valids and visitors. In addition to the Chalybeate Spring
there are a number of charming waterfalls, including
the 60 feet or Curtain Falls, the Ten Feet Falls, and
bathing pool, and delightful views and nooks for picnic
parties, etc., in and round Mittagong. The charges in town
and district, are ; —Hotels, from £l/5/- to £2/2/- per week,
and boarding establishments, £l/5/- to £2/2/-. Several
farm houses in the vicinity are also available for visitors.
Railway fares ; —Holiday Excursion (daily), first, 18/- ;
second 11/9 ; Week-end, first, 13/- ; second, 6/6.
Bowral —slightly higher than Mittagong—is one of the
most picturesque resorts on the Southern Line. It is only
three miles from Mittagong and 81 from the Metropolis.
It is within easy distance of the “ Fitzroy ”, “ Belmore,”
“ Carrington,” and “ Macquarie ” Falls, while a pleasant drive
to the South Coast railway may be made, via Robertson and
Jamberoo to Kiama, or via Macquarie Pass to Albion Park
or Dapto. Excellent provision has been made for tourists
in the shape of recreation and sports grounds. The coach
fares to the surrounding districts are very moderate, and
this class of j ourneying very interesting—the eye and mind
of the tourist being wholly taken up with the grandeur and
picturesque views, which are at every point appearing and
re-appearing before his gaze,- The Wombeyan Caves are
43 miles distant by a good road. Vehicles can be hired to


i
f <. Vi $h J
convey visitors to the
various falls, or shooting
parties, ranging from 10/-
per day for one person, to
20/- for a party of five.
Railway fares —Daily, first,
18/6; second, 12/3; Week-
end, first, 13/6 ; second,
6/9.
Moss Vale may be called
a twin sister of Bowral as
both townships possess
practically the same char-
acteristics. Good roads
lead from it to all the
sights, the distances being
—Fitzroy and Twin Falls,
10 miles; Belmore Falls,
22 miles ; Macquarie Pass,
19 miles / Carrington Falls,
21 miles ; Kangaroo Val-
ley, 22 miles; and Nowra,
38 miles. The Wombeyan
Caves are about 43 miles
distant. A round trip,
visiting Fitzroy, Belmore
Falls, and Robertson can
be made in one day.
Berrima and Wildes Mea-
dow are six and ten miles
respectively from Moss
Vale Station. A regular line
of coaches runs between
Moss Vale and Nowra, on
the South Coast —Fare,
13/-. The hotel charges
range from £1 to £3/3/-
per week, and boarding es-
tablishments from £1 to
£l/10/-. The distance
from Sydney is 87 miles.
Fairfax & Roberts, for
presentation silver,
23 Hunter-st., Sydney
The Twin Falls, near Moss Vale.


g»r-" <■ • - - jr — ■> ■»
Look Out. Knro.nn-nnr (tham- - —■— 11 ■
The coach fare to Berrima is 1/6. Vehicles for hire
similarly to Bowral. “ Hill View,” the Governor’s
country residence, is situated at Sutton Forest, about two
miles away, and there are also many interesting landmarks
of the old convict days in the vicinity. Railway fares —
Holiday Excursion, first, 20/3 ; second, 13/3 ; Week-end,
first, 14/6 ; second, 7/3.
Bundanoon, with its gullies, falls, grottoes, and
healthy climate is much frequented by invalids and others
in search of a quiet holiday. Accommodation from £1
to £l/10/- per week.
Belmore Falls are about 14 miles from Moss Vale, and
from Bowral. They are near the Fitzroy Falls, and
connected by a charming route, at different parts com-
pletely arched over by spreading trees. There is a very
good view of Kangaroo Valley from the Lookout.
Look Out, Kurang-gai Chase.
Penrose and Tallong are popular holiday resorts, the
former being well provided with farm houses, where visitors
can be accommodated from £1 per week, while at the latter,
fine shooting is to be obtained, and the Shoalhaven Gullies
are within three miles of the station. Several boarding
houses from £1 per week.
Marulan is the nearest station to Bungonia Caves —
coach fare, 6/6 return, by arrangement. Good hotel
accommodation, 4/- to 8/- per day, and shooting plentiful.
Fairfax & Roberts, the oldest jewellery house in Sydney
23 Hunter-st.


Cowan and Berowra. —From these stations the Cowan
and Berowra Creeks —one on each side of the line —may
be reached. Fish of all kinds, may be caught in both
creeks, and during the fishing season many people spend
weeks on the creeks in house boats. Berowra is 28 miles
from Sydney, and Cowan 30. Ferns and wild flowers may
be obtained in abundance, and the scenery is indeed very
beautiful. Good roads lead down from fthe station to
Kuring-gai Chase. Railway fares —Berowra : —Holiday
Excursion, first, 4/3 ; second, 2/6 ; Week-end, first, 4/3 ;
second, 2/4. Cowan, —Holiday Excursion, first, 4/7 ;
second, 2/8 ; Week-end, first, 4/7 ; second, 2/6.
View on the Hawkesbury.
Hawkesbury River. —This river is, no doubt, the most
beautiful and picturesque in New South Wales, and prob-
ably in Australia. Hawkesbury Station is 36 miles from
Sydney, via Strathfield. The main attraction is the broad
majestic bridge, which crosses from Long Island to the
northern side of the river. It is the longest in Australia,
the total length being 3000 feet, is about 45 feet above the
water at high tide, and has one of the deepest (if not the
deepest) bridge foundations in the world—which is 162 feet
below high-water mark. Excursionists disbark at Sack-
ville Reach, about 56 miles from Long Island, and from
thence to Windsor by coach (nine miles), and train to Syd-
Fairfax & Roberts, for silver toilet requisites, 23 Hunter st.,
Sydney


: ; \
ney(34 miles). Th. 3 whole trip is done in about 11 or 12
houis, and the tourist has the opportunity of witnessing
the most varied and beautiful scenery in the world. The
total cost of this round trip is 10/6 and 7/6. The Excursion
rate to Brooklyn station is 5/6 first-class, and 3/- second
class return. A new round trip has been arranged on the
Hawkesbury : —Rail to Hawkesbury Station, steamer to
Newport, calling at Fowler’s Bay, Church Point, Bay View.
Thence by coach to Manly, and ferry to Circular Quay, or
vice versa. Fares 8/- and 7/4, first and second class,
covering the whole trip. This excursion is run every
Wednesday, Saturday, and holiday, and will prove the
most popular day trip in the State.
Woy Woy. —As a fishing resort, Woy Woy is better
known than any other place in the State, and is extensively
patronised by lovers of this sport. It is situated 45 miles
Brooklyn, Hawkesbury River.
from Sydney on the South side of Brisbane Water, and
about a mile after leaving the Woy Woy tunnel, which is
over a mile in length, and one of the longest in Australia.
Railway fares: —Holiday Excursion, first, 8/6; second
5/6 ; Week-end, first, 7/6 ; second, 3/9.
Gosford and district attracts its quota of visitors. A
number of delightful localities are available for a change of
air, and scene, with the home comforts of the many up-to-
date boarding establishments. Vehicles meet visitors at the
station by arrangement, and abundant facilities for an
Fairfax & Roberts, for fashionable jewellery, 23 Hunter-st.»
Sydney


f
THIS LIX ’EM.
Sole Contractor to the N.S.W. Government Institutions.
TRY THIS BOTTLE DEPARTMENT FOR YOUR
Xmas Supplies s Rampm.
All Our Lines are of the Highest Grade.
'tiur Prices are the % ead the lowing %ist, then
X(ou will tfend Hour
fewest. Orders to Us.
Walker’s Cardhu Whisky, ... 5/- per hot.
„ Red Collar ... 4/6 ,,
~ ® Begg’s “ Loch Nagar” Whisky 4/6 „
Dickens’ Whisky... 4/9 ,,
TOURISTS Mac’s Special Whisky 5/- per flag., Imp.qrt.
, , . „ „ 2/6 per £ flag. „ pt.
can obtain a Mac’s Extra Special 6/- per flag., Imp. qrt.
Single Bottle „ „ „ 3/- per \ flag „ pt.
at Wholesale Wolfe ’ s Celebrated Schnapps
2/6 a 4 6 per bot.
Price, Shamrock Whisky, £ flag. 2/6, 4/6 per flag,
and have Loch Dhu Whisky \ flag 2/6, 4/6 per flag.
Penfold’s Wines, 2/-, 2/3, & 3/- per bot.
their y. C , Whisky ... ... 4/- per bottle
Hampers Kaiser Pilsener Lager Beer, i/-, per bot.,
forwarded to
any Address. try my special line.
Mac’s V.O.S. Whisky,
(gg. 'ZS) Guaranteed 15 Years Old,
4s. 6d. Per Bottle—25s. Per Gallon.
. . W. jYfacphersoq, . .
parley JYfow 2{otel, park Street,
Sole Agent for D.S.O. (Distinguished Service Order)
Whisky, 4s. Per Bottle. TELEPHONE 2007.


enjoyable spell are ready at hand. Railway fares : Holiday
Excursion, first, 10/- ; second, 6/6 ; Week-end, first, 8/4 ;
second, 4/2.
Green Point (four miles from Gosford), and Point Clare
(two miles from Gosford), are also favorite holiday resorts,
with attractions similar to Woy Woy and Terrigal. Ac-
commodation at similar rates. Railway fares to Point
Clare: —Holiday Excursion, first, 9/11; second, 6/6;
Week-end, first, 8/- ; second, 4/-.
Terrigal Haven is a prettily situated village about
nine mile from Gosford, which is 50 miles from the Metro-
polis. It is on a lake or inlet of the same name, and beau-
tiful scenery is afforded the visitor both on land and lake.
There are many attractions —fishing, boating, cycling,
bathing—beside the many beautiful drives that may be
done. The journey from Gosford is made by coach, which
passes through a succession of forest grandeur. Within a
short distance is the village Reserve, which covers an area
of about 25 acres. A number of accommodation houses
are in the vicinity, ranging from £1 to £l/15/- per week.
Tuggerah Lakes. —What are known as Tuggerah
Lakes are three sheets of water (more correctly described as
immense lagoons) the native names of which are Tuggerah,
Munmorah, and Budgewah. The three are connected with
each other, and finally with the Pacific Ocean, by narrow
channels. Fish of nearly every kind that may be caught
on the Australian coast, are in abundance. The station,
which is 61 miles from Sydney, is about 1| miles from the
nearest water of the lakes, and boats may be hired at
moderate rates from the boarding houses. Two miles from
the station is the township of Wyong. Beautiful scenery
abounds everywhere The hotel charges range from £1
to £l/10/- at Tuggerah, and £1 to £2/2/- per week at
Wyong. The boarding establishments’ rates are from
£1 to £l/5/-. The hotel launches run from Wyong to
Tuggerah, and will convey camping parties and others to
different points on the lakes as desired. Railway fares to
Wyong ; —Holiday Excursion, first, 13/- ; second, 8/6 ;
Week-end, first, 10/6 ; second, 5/3.
Lake Macquarie. —Reached from Cockle Creek or
Toronto, is the favourite sea side resort of Newcastle resi-
dents. Steamers run round the Lake daily. Fare 1/3
return. Splendid boating and fishing, hotel and boarding-
house accommodation.


HENRY AYRES, Manager.
HOTEL
GRAND
CENTRAL
Pacing the Gr.P.O.,
CLARENCE ST.,
SYDNEY,
Quiet, in very heart of City
300 Rooms.
Electric Light in Every
Room. Lifts Running all
Day and Night.
The European plan of
charging for Rooms and
Meals separately. In-
clusive rates can be ar-
ranged for at the Booking
Office on the ground floor.
S Single Bedrooms from 2/6
per day, 15/-, 20/-, 25/- per
week.
Double Bedrooms 5/-, 6/-,
7/6 per day; 30/-, 37/6,
45/- per week.
The main dining hall is
the largest and finest in
Sydney.
Bars open from 7 a m. till
11pm.
B. Mountcastle & Sons,
Hat and Cap Manufacturers,
IMPORTERS OF
Gent.’s High-class Hats.
New Address:
305 George Street, Sydney
(Opposite Old Premises),


■
The Nepean River. —At Penrith, which is 34 miles from
Sydney on the Western Line, is a magnificently broad
stream —the Nepean River—which is hemmed in by high
and forbidding hills for a great portion of its length. This
river is well-known to sculling champions and enthusiasts,
as at one time it was on this course that championship
Norton’s Basin , from Donoghue’s Cave, Nepean.
races in New South Wales were rowed. The hotel charges
range from £l/1/- to £l/10/- per week, andj boarding
establishments from £1 to £l/5/-. Railway Fares: —
Holiday Excursion, first, 5/3 ; second, 3/- ; Week-end,
first, 5/3 ; second 2/10. A combination rail, coach, and
launch is run every Wednesday, Saturday, Sunday, and
holiday, up the river, fares, 6/6 and 4/-, enabling visitors
to view the junction with the Warragamba, Donohoe’s
Cave, and the Basin.
Fairfax & Roberts, Yiee-regal Opticians, 23 Hunter-st., Sydney


THE DEADLY
TRUSS
It IS deadly, too. Those who have been cured
by DR. J. A. SHERMAN’S METHOD OF
CURING RUPTURE say so in their letters,
which YOU can read. The Sherman Method is
the oidy Permanent Rupture Cure in the world—
scientific men say so, medical men say so, the
public say so. and you can read all this for your-
self in the two books which I will send you free
for your name and address. No pain. No
trouble. No operations in the Sherman Method
of Curing Rupture.
Send for TWO BOOKS ON RUPTURE-FREE.
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
As I intend visiting the centres of N.S.W. after the
New Year, early application is necessary.
After Tour is Finished
Either Sydney or Melbourne will be Headquarters.
HOURS —Daily (Sundays excepted) from 10 a.m., 12.30,
2.30 p.m. to 5.30 p m.
EXTRA HOURS—Tuesday and Friday Evenings, from
730t0 9. Saturdays, 10 to 12.30 noon.
A. W. MARTIN,
Sole Controller for Australasia,
St. Aubyns, 82 Hunter Street,
SYDN EY-
ONLY MEDICAL


typn
Glenbrook, Blaxland, Valley Heights and Springwood.—
Here are many mountain residences of Sydney business men,
owing to the bracing climate, which is not severe even in
the depth of winter. Many interesting sights are within
easy access of the railway station, and comfortable accom-
modation is provided for visitors.
Camping on the Nepean River
Lawson, which is situated 57 miles from the metropolis,
and 2,399 feet above* sea> level, is a place which,, tourists
should not fail to pay a visit. The district abounds in
luxuriant growths, and possesses many scenic attractions.
Blcho Point, about a mile and a half from the station, is well
known among tourists. Close to the township on the
Northern side are Dante’s Glen, Fairy Falls, and Frederick
Fall. On the other side are Adelina, Amphitheatre,
Fairfax & Roberts, for unique jewellery, 23 Hunter-st., Sydney.


Employ us. .
to
Remove your
Luggage
Store your
Luggage.
’Phone 476.
Anything
j Removed
Anywhere.
Remove your
Furniture. )
Store your
Furniture. \
and get
your interest
well served.
! - ~ u
Head Office: 43 KING STREET? SYDNEY
CHARGES MODERATE, MIND
(Corner Kent St.)
YOU.
Nothing
Too Heavy.
1 Nothing
Too Large.
■


Federal and Junction Falls, and Cataract—all are well worth
visiting. A feature is that all may be reached easily afoot.
There is excellent accommodation afforded visitors, the
tariff running from, hotels, £l/10 to £2/15/- per week, and
boarding establishments, £l/5/- to £l/10/-. The Railway
Fares : —Holiday Excursion, first, 12/6 ; second, 8/3 ;
Week-end, first, 9/6 ; second, 4/9.
Wentworth Falls.
Wentworth Falls lie 61 miles from Sydney, and four
from Lawson. The Falls are a mile and a half from the
Fairfax & Roberts, for Australian Gems, 23 Hunter st., Sydney


station, andboth they and the surrounding cliffs have been
made accessible by the opening up of paths. Another
beautiful sight near the Falls is the “ Valley of the Waters.”
Wentworth Falls were at one time known as the “Weather-
board Falls.” The “ Weeping Rock ”is a very pretty sight.
The “ Water Nymph’s Del 1 ,” in Woodcutter’s Glen, is also
a feature in this locality. The hotel charges range from
£l/10/- to £3/3/- per week, and boarding establishments,
£l/5/- to £2/2/-. The station is 2,900 feet above sea-level.
Railway Fares: —Holiday Excursion, first, 13/6; second,
8/9 ; Week-end, first, 10/2 ; second, 5/1.
Leura is a very popular tourist resort, lying between
Wentworth Falls and Katoomba, and 64 miles from Sydney.
It is rather a quiet, though exceedingly healthful and
picturesque township. Like the other mountain resorts
it has many attractions which prove interesting and in-
structive to the eye and mind of the visitor. Among the
sights to be seen are the Jersey Fall, Silver Lake, and
Minnie-ha-ha Fall—these are on the Northern side. On
the opposite side of the line are Leura Park and the Leura,
Linda and Gordon Falls. From the heights of Leura one
may view the Valley of the Jamieson and Glen Arcadia—
two very pretty scenes. Being only one mile from Kat-
toomba, Leura has been called a suburb of that popular
mountain town, which is accessible by a fine road. A
great attraction of the visitors to the Katoomba district is
found in the excellently laid out golf links. The accommoda-
tion at the hotel coffee palace, and boarding establishments,
is first class, the prices ranging from £l/10/- to £2/2/- per
week. Railway Fares :—Holiday Excursion, first, 14/3 ;
second, 9/3; Week-end, first, 10/-; second, 5/4. The
trip through the Federal Pass should be done ifrom the
Leura end, thus saving the stiff climb up the ladders.
Katoomba is the largest town on the mountains, and
possesses a great number of attractions, which would take
the tourist some time to visit. It is situated in a central
and handy position, and one may visit all the mountain
attractions from Katoomba. Locally the sights which
attract great attention, and which visitors should not lose
an opportunity of witnessing are Katoomba Falls, within
half-a-mile of the station —Orphan Rock, Fern Gully, the
Three Sisters (near Jamieson Valley), Nellie’s Glen, the


Megalong Valley, Pulpit Hill, and the Federal Pass. In
the neighbourhood one has a variety of places to visit,
some of which are “ Medlow Bath,” (four miles), Black-
heath, and its many attractions, and further, Mount Vic-
toria and Jenolan Caves, which may be reached by a bridle
track, the distance being about 33 miles. The places
already mentioned in Leura, Wentworth Falls and Lawson,
also may be reached within a short space of time, by train or
coach direct from Katoomba station. The town, which
has a standing population of about 2200 is very up-to-date,
and many hundreds visit Katoomba and stay there during
the summer. The accommodation is about the best of
any town in New South Wales. The tariff for hotels ranges
from £l/10/- to £6/6/- per week, and boarding establish-
ments, £l/1/- to £2/2/-. The distance from Sydney is
65 miles. Railway Fares : —Holiday Excursion, first, 14/6 ;
second, 9/6; Week-end, first, 10/10; second, 5/5.
Medlow Bath is a very picturesque little township 69
miles from Sydney, four from Katoomba, and three from
Blackheath. An immense and finely equipped Sanatorium
has only a few years been opened. Many scenic places may
be easily visited afoot. Wall’s Cave lies three miles away.
Motor cars leave the Baths for Jenolan Caves, which are
about 45 miles by a fairly, and in some parts very good road,
daily. Many sports may be indulged in—billiards, golf,
bowls, tennis, croquet. Railway Fares :—Holiday Excur-
sion, first, 15/6 ; second, 10/3 ; Week-end, first, 11/6 ;
second, 5/9. Motor cars also run between Medlow Bath
and Sydney, traversing 100 miles of the most beautiful
scenery in the world. The accommodation at the Hydro.,
is at the rate of £3/3/- per week upwards.
Blackheath. —Situated 73 miles, on the Western Line,
from Sydney, is next in size, as regards population, to
Katoomba, and distant by seven miles. It is the highest
elevated resort, the figures being, 3,945 feet above sea-level.
Other towns in the State that are noted for their cool
climate, consequent to their altitude, are Springwood,
1218 feet; Lawson, 2347 feet; Wentworth Falls, 2844 feet;
Katoomba, 3336 feet; Mount Victoria, 3424 feet; Bowral,
2210 feet, and Moss Vale, 2208 feet. Parts of the town are
much higher at places ; these figures are those of the Rail-
way Station altitude. The town is well provided with


pleasure grounds, parks, tennis courts, etc., for the use of
visitors. There are many attractions in and around the
town, the one most visited and renowned being Govett’s
Leap—so named after the Government Surveyor, Govett,
in 1832, and not after the supposed bushranger, who is said
to have made the jump by way of evading arrest. The
hotel tariff ranges from £2/2/- to £2/15/-, while boarding
establishments can accommodate one from £l/1/- to £2/2/-
per week. Railway Fares : —Holiday Excursion—first,
16/3 ; second, 10/9 ; Week-end, first, 12/- ; second, 6/-.L,
Valley of the Grose.
Mount Victoria is a starting place for the world
famous Jenolan Caves. The road, which is in good
order, passes through very interesting scenery—the dis-
tance to the Caves being 36 miles. Fares, 25/- ; by motor,
Fairfax & Roberts, for the Australian “ Luck Stone,” 23
Hunter-street, Sydney.


35/-. The coach service to all points worth seeing on the
mountains, is very well and regularly carried out. “ The
Darling Causeway,” Hartley Yale, Mount York, Mount
Clarence, Hassan’s Walls, Mounts Bell, Wilson, and Toomah,
Mount Victoria Pass —all these neighbouring places may
be visited by coach. Other sights in close proximity to
Mount Victoria are Mount Piddington, Fairy Dell, Witch’s
Glen, Cox’s and Bushranger Caves, the Little Zig-Zag, and
Katoomba Falls. The Victoria Falls are five miles from
the Station. The town, though not so large as either
Katoomba or Blackheath, is very prettily laid out. The
distance from Sydney is 77 miles by rail. The climate is
very cool and invigorating. The hotel charges are from
£l/15/- to £3/3/- per week, and boarding establishments,
£l/5/- to £l/15/-. Railway Fares : —Holiday Excursion,
first, 17/3; second, 11/3; Week-end, first, 12/8; second,
6/4.
Description of the Grand Hotel, Mount Victoria.
The hotel, which is a two-storey building standing in
the centre of five acres of nicely laid-out grounds, and in
close proximity to the Mount Victoria Railway Station, is
yet far enough away to avoid the noise of the trains. It
contains about 70 rooms and one of the most handsome
Dining Halls and Smoking, Writing and Reading Rooms ;
I think I am safe in remarking that there is nothing like
them in Australia. There is also a spacious Drawing-room,
splendid sanitary arrangements, hot and cold water baths,
and a large music hall and ball-room and billiard room.
The bedrooms are reasonably large and well-ventilated,
the cuisine all that can be wished for. The attendance is
good, and everything is done to make the guests at home.
Suffice to say the business has been under the same manage-
ment for the past 17 years. A most perfect line of coaches
run daily to the famous Jenolan Caves and various sights of
the mountains, capable of carrying at one time as many
as 60 persons, and are run daily if only one passenger.
Having such a splendid coach service, it was not thought
advisable to run motor-cars, as the traffic on the road did
not warrant the company expending large sums of money


r~- ' — - "” r ” n
and dispensing with a certainty for an uncertainty. The
scenery within walking distance of the hotel is very grand
and rugged, in the valleys relieved with greenery. The
outlooks from Mount Piddington and Mount York are un-
equalled, See advertisement page 40.
Yetholme. —Seven miles from Wambool (131 miles from
Sydney), has lately come into prominence as a health
resort. Vehicles meet visitors at the station by arrange-
ment, conveying them to comfortable boarding-houses in
the village. Terms, from 25/- per week. There are a
number of interesting convict relics in the neighbourhood,
and plenty of shooting is available for sportsmen. The
country around is particularly adapted for driving, and the
climate dry and bracing.


f' ’ '
The Australian Alps.
Mount Kosciusko. —The Snowy Mountain trip, with
Kosciusko as its terminal point, and chief object of interest
is another excursion quite unique among the opportunities
of Australian travel. The route lies through Cooma and
Jindabyne, and thence up the mountains. A good road
Sport at Mt. Kosciusko and Kiandra.
leads to Jindabyne, thence visitors may ride to the top ofjthe
mountain (7,328 feet). The coach proprietors will convey
tourists at £1 per day, covering camp and equipment,
saddle horses, food, etc., after leaving Jindabyne. The
finest summer holiday trip in the State. Hotel accommoda-
tion at Cooma and Jindabyne, 4/- and 8/- per day.
Fairfax & Roberts, the leading cash jewellers, 23 Hunter-st.
Sydney


The Caves Hotel,
JENOLAN,
And N.S.W. Railway Refreshment Rooms.
Lessee . . HARRY SMITH.
First-Class Accommodation. Special Arrangements for Parties
and Families. Reasonable Tariff. Hampers arranged as requested.
Hot and Cold Water Baths Day and Night.
Through Trips to the Caves arranged by the Lessee.
Visitors can stay as long as they desire over the time booked
or by paying the ordinary tariff.
It will be necessary for visitors to take whatever spirituous
liquors they require as the sale of same is prohibited at Jenolan.
First-Class Bedrooms and Attendance at Mount Victoria
Railway Refreshment Rooms and Jenolan Caves Hotel.
Coaches Daily,
inspection of the Caves Daily, at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.
Tourists are reminded that they will find first-class attention
at my Hotels and Refreshment Rooms on the Railway Stations at:
SYDNEY Parramatta Penrith
Bathurst Blayney Wellington
Orange Murrurundi Werris Creek
Armidale Glen Innes Mount Victoria
Nyngan Narrabri JENOLAN CAVES HOTEL
For all particulars address :
Harry Smith, Railway Refreshment Rooms,
SYDNEY RAILWAY STATION.


The Caves of New South Wales.
Jenolan Caves lie 36 miles by coach from Mount
Victoria. The journey is by way of the Victoria Pass, from
which fine views of the Kanimbula Valley, Hussan’s Walls,
and the old town of Hartley, are obtained. The Lett and
Cox Rivers are crossed, and a mountain spur ascended.
About 19 miles from Mt. Victoria is the Half-way House,
now called Hampton. The greater portion of the route is
at a high elevation—one point —that at Bendo Pinch —
being 4,632 feet above sea-level. About seven miles from
the Caves, the road begins to wind down the mountain
slopes. The Grand Arch is passed, and the Cave House is
reached, where comfortable accommodation is provided
at moderate charges, viz. : from £2/10/-to £3/10/- per
week. Special concessions are granted to parties of ten
and over. From here the various cave systems are visited
in regular order. From the Grand Arch, the Imperial Cave
is entered. Then taking passages to the left are the Archi-
tect’s Studio, Margarita, Wilkinson, and Lucinda Caves,
and the Madonna and her Child, while from the right passage
are the approaches to the underground river, Shawl and
Selina Caves, Carol Grotto, Crystal City, Gem of the West,
Fairies’ Retreat, and other natural marvels. Everywhere
are found masses of stalactites and stalagmites in endless
variety of beauty. Other caves that may be visited and
the sights therein, are : —The Lucas Cave, in which may be
seen the Cathedral, Shawl, Lurline, Snowball, Jewel Casket,
and Crystal Fountain, the Nettle and Arch Caves, the
Devil’s Coach House, Elder Cave, and Mammoth Cave.
All charm the eye with their fantastic combinations of shape
and color, their dazzling brilliancy and seeming vastness.


l,f , 1 >u r Coaches ru
\J% Caves, irrespective c
W t ! ’ ,! JrVll' 1 iV’lft k 9 a - m -< aial return f
The Hotel Accc
JBMfe Fuii > p art ’ cuiar
- * Street, Sydney, op]
HOTELS <6
Ltd.
n daily from Mt.
f numbers, leavin
rom Caves at 12. 1
mmodation is ri$
ider the manage m
rrangements by (
tisfaction for a im
mt for Visitors to
we offer a libera
s at our City Boo
msite G.P.O.
Victoria to Jenolan
'Ml. Victoria about
;ht up to date.
mt of Mrs. Cooper, ' ’ iii
1. H. Cooper, juu., ■ j.
m be r of years. 1 11] |||
spend the summer liliial
1 reduction on our
ting Office, 108 Pitt L*^mEt^m3r MAT 1 0 N S j*J^S


To visit the whole of the explored portions of the Jenolan
Caves would occupy several days, in consequence of the
numerous winding passages and chambers. There is
plenty of shooting to be had ini the district, also trout may
be caught at Oberon, 18 miles distant, by coach. Visitors
are recommended to return by coach to Tarana, via Oberon,
thence by rail to Mount Victoria, the round journey pos-
sessing many additional features of interest. The trip
from the Caves to Tarana is about 36 miles. The coach
fare from Mount Victoria is 25/- return. By motor car
the return trip costs 35/-. Similar arrangements may also
be made to visit the Caves from Katoomba, Medlow Bath,
Blackheath or Tarana.
Yarrangobilly Caves. —The caves are situated on the
side of the hill overlooking the Yarrangobilly River, a
tributary of the Tumut River, about 15 miles from Kiandra.
They are 47 miles from Tumut, and 65 from Cooma, and are
approached by means of a coach from either town. It is
the general opinion of those who have visited both Jenolan
and Yarrangobilly, that the latter are equally as beautiful
as the world famed caves of the West, and probably more
extensive, but the same amount of exploration work has
not been carried on as at Jenolan. The charges for inspec-
tion are —One visitor, conducted alone, 2/6 ; two visitors,
1/3 each ; three, lOd. ; four, Bd. ; five, and over, 6d. each.
Good shooting may be obtained. The round trip fares are—
From Sydney to Tumut and return, via Cooma, or vice versa ,
first, £2/18/- ; second, £l/19/6 ; from Tumut to Cooma,
via the Caves, by coach, and vice versa, £2/-/-.
Wombeyan Caves. —These Caves are regarded by many
to equal the world famous Jenolan Caves in grandeur,
though not in facilities for inspection. They are situated
about 43 miles from Bowral, Mittagong or Moss Vale, and
50 from Goulburn, by an excellent road, which cost about
£16,000. At the Wollondilly River crossing are excellent
camping grounds for lovers of such life. About 19 miles
along the road is the Burragorang “ Look-out.” From
here one may have a splendid view of the valley below, —
the Wollondilly appearing like a silver streak in the distance.
Six caves are constantly open to visitors. Of these, prob-
ably, the Wollondilly is the largest and the one that capti-


vates the eye of the tourist most. The opening is somewhat
like a shaft of a mine, and is protected by an iron grating,
from which, iron ladders lead down to the chambers below.
The Fig Tree Cave is also very interesting on account of its
remarkably fine shawl formations. Its ballroom is 132 feet
long, 25 feet wide, and 40 feet high. The Arch, Chalkers,
Victoria Arch, the Kooringa, the Guineacar, the Tinted
Caves, and the Basin, will all draw the attention of the
tourist, which will occupy two or three days to carefully
inspect. The Bouverie and the Junction Caves, which have
only a comparatively short while been discovered, are new
additions to the list. The journey in the coach is very
pleasant, the visitor having his eye always on some interest-
ing gulley or picturesque mountain scene. The coach fares
are by arrangement. One passenger 10/- per day ; 5
passengers, 20/- per day ; 8 passengers, 30/- per day.
Charges for inspection similar to Yarrangobilly.
Abercrombie Caves. —These are the attraction for
Newbridge, Bathurst, and Blayney residents and visitors.
They are 26 miles from the station, and are best reached
by coach to Trunkey (daily, 6/-), and vehicle thence to
Caves, or Tuena (Monday and Friday, fare 12/-), and short
walk to Caves. Hotel accommodation at Trunkey, 4/- per
day. Camping grounds at Caves, and dancing platform.
The caves were originally occupied by bushrangers, who
surrendered at Bushrangers’ Hill, two miles west of caves,
and ten of whom were subsequently hanged. The caves con-
tain many interesting chambers, and beautiful and varied
forms of stalactites of varied hues.
Bungonia Caves. —These are situated 17 miles from
Marulan (6/6 return), and 22 from Goulburn, conveyances
by arrangement. The Bungonia, Drum, Cyprus, and
Chalk are the principal caves, and are well worth a visit.
The surrounding scenery alone attracts many visitors—the
Look Down, Cardinal View, Rocky Point, and Coo-eeing
Point are vantage points from which magnificent views
of the Valley, Shoalhaven and Bungonia Creeks are ob-
tained. Splendid shooting in the district, and good camp-
ing accommodation. Hotel at Bungonia (six miles, 4/-
and 8/- per day. Similar accommodation at Marulan and
Goulburn.


Wellington Caves are five miles from Wellington, and
vehicles meet all trains. Fare, 2/- per head return. A
shelter shed is provided at the Caves, and dancing platform.
There are several interesting caves, amongst which are the
Main, Gaspipe, Water, and Bone or Breccia Caves. These
caves are remarkable for the number and variety of fossil
remains found there. The Caves and neighbourhood is a
popular picnic resort of the townspeople and Western Dis-
trict.


ICK SIMMONS for Sporting Goods
MANUFACTURERS AND IMPORTERS OF FISHING TACKLE
Anglers in search of
Reliable Tackle are
invited to inspect
our Up-to-date
Stock of Fishing
Tackle, Split Cane,
Steel, Greenheart,
Hickory, Lance-
wood, Ash and Cane
Rods, suitable for
Fly, Minnow, Bait,
Sea and Bottom
Fishing. £
The New Nottingham Wood Reels, °
brass bound to prevent wood swelling, fitted with
line-guard, brake, optional check, secure handles,
and fittings are up-to-date.
New Trout Reels in Aluminium,
Light and strong, specially adapted for Fly Fishinig,
also Gunmetal and Brass Reels.
Our Stock of Trout and Perch Flies
specially made to our own patterns —including imitat-
ions of Grasshoppers, Moths and Flies, mounted on
best hooks, turn-down-eyed, looped eyed, also with
gut attached suitable for these waters.
Superior Artificial Minnows, Spinners
and Spoon Baits, fitted with suitable tackle
for Trout, Perch, Murray Cod and Sea Fish.
Best Artificial Insects, made of pure rubber in good imitations
of Frogs, Grasshoppers, Crickets, Locusts, Beetles, etc.
Our Selection of Fishing Lines in Silk, Hemp and Flax,
Waterproof Plaited Silk, Plaited Hemp, Waterproof Flax, Pure Twisted
Silk, Waterproof Twist Lines suitable for Trout, Perch & Murray Cod.
Murray Cod
“Sure Catch Lines” for general fishing are the best procurable
All our Lines are Guaranteed. . .
Angling Guide for Trout Fishing—Posted Free.
We Stock Millions of Fish Hooks specially manufactured for us by the
leading Fish Hook makers.
Guns, Rifles, Revolvers and Ammunition.— The largest and
most varied stock in the States. Send for our Illustrated Catalogues
of Fishing Tackle, Sports and Tobaccos. Post Free.
Mid Simmons,


New South Wales.
lovers of this enjoyable
A sport need go no more to
Tasmania, New Zealand and elsewhere
in search of trout. The rivers of New
South Wales have been stocked with
various species and are easier to get at than in the New
Zealand and Tasmanian fishing spots. The journeys also
are more interesting. On the one hand nothing but water
is seen for a few days, the time of the angler being spent
uselessly except for the benefit he may obtain by the sea
trip, which he could easily get on our own coast. On the
other the train rushes through the most beautiful country,
always attracting the interest of the traveller, and the
coach drives provide excellent and better opportunities of
viewing the picturesque views which are always befoie his
gaze. All the rivers and creeks that have been stocked
with fry are close handy to the tourist centres. The centre
which attracts, probably, the most visitors and tourists
throughout the year from all parts, viz. : Tarana and
Jenolan, is now very well stocked with rainbow trout. The
traveller proceeds to Tarana, a distance of 120 miles, by
train, and from thence to Oberon (18 miles) by coach,
whence he can easily reach two or three good trout rivers,
afoot or by vehicle. The rivers in the district available for
anglers ,which provide this pleasant sport, are the Duck-
r *tjk


EASTWAY’S FISHING TACKLE
Is the Best.
Have your Tackle hall-marked
with Eastway’,s name.
In Fishing Tackle the word
“ EASTWAY ” stands for all
that is good and reliable
Don’t Worry,
But go to Eastways for
all Fishing Tackle.
EASTWAY BROTHERS, 409&411 George-st, Sydney
moodbill Printing merits
(F. Q. WHITE. J. W. SIMMONS, Proprietors).
Artistic Letterpress
A
A
*«
Printers
127 V' rl ' Sired :r:".
TELEPHONE 1142.


water, Wiseman’s River, the Little River (just stocked by
Mr. M. Hanrahan), Brisbane Valley Creek, Fish River, Fish
River Creek and the Abercrombie. The Jenolan River is
now visited by many anglers, who after doing the Caves fit
their rods together and whip the stream for lusty trout,
which run to as much as 51bs. in weight, and are often seen
jumping up falls nine feet high. Good shooting is also
obtainable throughout the district. In the Queanbeyan
centre the streams from which anglers may find the trout in
abundance are the Molonglo, the Goodradigbee, the Quean-
beyan, Cotter and the Gudgenby. The Goodradibgee is
38 miles away. The other streams are easy to reach. Good
camping grounds are a feature of this district. Queanbeyan
is 194 miles by train, and the fare is £2/18/3 first-class, and
£l/18/9 second return; or £2/31/9 holiday excursion,
first, and £l/14/3, second.
The Cooma district is a fine one. The rivers in which
the trout are plentiful are the Murrumbidgee, Umeralla,
McLachlan, and creeks and tributaries of these rivers. The
Yarrangobilly Caves are 65 miles by coach, where excellent
fishing may also be done. The coach fare is 35/-.
Bombala, a 54 mile drive from Cooma, is also a very
good trout fishing centre, many very large and weighty
fish having recently been caught. The rivers in which the
trout are to be found are the Bombala, Craigie, Delegate and
Lachlan. Delegate is 22, and Craigie 18 miles from Bom-
bala, the roads being in good condition. The coach fare
from Cooma to Bombala is £l.
The Tumut centre is growing a very popular one with
anglers. The Tumut, Journama, Goobragandra and Peak
Rivers are fairly well stocked with fry and yearlings. The
Yarrangobilly Caves are 47 miles distant, where many
anglers put in a good time. The coach fare to the Caves
is 15/-. The fares to Tumut are —£4/13/- first class ;
and £3/2/6 second ; or £4/2/6, first excursion holiday, and


£2/15/6 second class return. Tumut is 322 miles from
Sydney. Round tickets at £2/18/- and £l/19/6, Ist and
2nd class, are issued daily in Sydney, enabling travellers
to journey to Tumut and return via Cooma or vice versa.
Other parts where trout may be caught are the Snowy River,
and streams flowing into the Murray. Up North, at
Walcha Road, and Armidale, are good trouting centres, and
Glen Innes is also famed for its trout.
The Fisheries authorities of the State have done a
great deal to encourage trout fishing, by stocking over one
hundred and forty streams with fry, yearlings and two-year
olds, in the tourist centres, and the anglers should appreciate
their action by visiting our streams and rivers instead of
going elsewhere.
ILLAWARRA AND NORTHERN RIVERS TRIP.
The Northern rivers of the State and the beautiful South-
ern lllawarra district, afford splendid opportunities for a
complete change of scene from city life. The glorious stretches
of water along the coastal rivers; the peaceful dairy farms; the
shooting, and many other attractions, as well as the reduced
fares offered by the various companies, should tempt many
to choose these portions of the State for their summer
holiday. Well appointed and up-to-date vessels ply to
the different ports, and very little time is lost in travelling,
and now that the comfort of their guests is made such a
study by the various companies, what might be a trying
time on board ship is made a pleasurable break.
FARES ON APPLICATION.
THE WOODHILL PRINT. SYDNEY.


GOOD
TAILORING.
£he )\cme 0/ ZTastc and fashion
Our features—
Correctness in pelail,
Purability in jMaterials,
and Skil/ul Workmanship.
SAC SUITS from £3 3s.
£atest Pesigns in Materials always Showing.
Ve have attained
perfection in tailoring.
faultless pit,
and finish.
HOWES
AND
HOWES,
High-class Tailors,
PITT ST., SYDNEY.


Australian Mutual Provident
Society.
The Leading Mutual Life Office in Australasia, and the largest and
Most Successful In the British Empire.
STANDS FIRST for ..
Liberality of Contract
Magnitude of Bonuses
Strength of Reserves.
Annual Income:
£2,710,000.
Accumulated Funds:
£20,600,000.
A CASH BONUS
Is distributed among the participating Policy-Holders
every year.
Every kind of Ordinary & Industrial Business transacted
Policies issued from £5 to £lO,OOO.
DIRECTORS;
THOMAS LITTLEJOHN, Esq., Chairman.
Hon. A. W. MEEKS, M.L.C., Deputy Chairman.
Senator the Hon. J. T. WALKER. BENJAMIN SHORT, Esq
Hon. R. J. BLACK. M.L.C. i JAMES BURNS, Esq.
E. E. WINCH COM BE, Esq.
RICHARD TEECE, F.I.A , F.F.A., F.S.S., General Manager and Actuary,
'Die Society is precluded by its By-laws from issuing Policies to non-memhers
resident outside the Commonwealth of Australia, New Zealand and Fiji.
Visitors to the States should therefore seize the opportunity while here of
effecting the necessary assurances on their lives in this office.
ROBERT B. CAMERON, Secretary.
Head Office: 87 PITT ST., SYDNEY.
