





quest's Guide
TO THE
HAWKESBURY,
GOSFORD, TUGGERAH LAKES,
LAKE MACQUARIE.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
4m 450-89








I 14
THE HAWKESBURY AND NORTH COAST
LAKE DISTRICT.
Few persons travelling north by rail will miss the absence of the
steamer “General Gordon,” which for the fifteen months prior to
May last made with praiseworthy regularity its daily trips across
the Hawkesbury to connect the severed portions of the North
Coast Railway. Pleasant as the passage across the charming
river by this means undoubtedly was, still it was a most incon-
venient break in the journey to Gosford, the Lakes, or Newcastle,
and most troublesome, as the tourist or picnic party had to
make the double transfer from train to steamer and steamer to
train with their parcels. The opening of the bridge, happily
consummated on the Ist May, 1889, put an end to this dis-
comfort, and the excursionist can now be taken by train almost
from his door at Sydney to within easy distance of the most
charming points in the North Coast Lake District.
One great advantage of the Hawkesbury and North Coast Lakes
is their convenient location, as they lie within a couple of hours
of Sydney. The arrangements for travelling are most comfortable,
trains leaving Sydney and Newcastle at most convenient hours
morning and afternoon.
STRATHFIELD.
The journey to the Hawkesbury River is a very pleasant one.
A ride of 7 miles through the thickly-populated western suburbs of
Sydney brings the traveller to the junction station, Strathfield,
where the North Coast Line branches from the main railway.
The line then runs through a pleasantly varied country for 3
miles, when it reaches the Parramatta River, which is crossed by
a handsome iron lattice bridge, consisting of six spans of 150 feet
clear span each. The bridge is 40 feet above the water, and is said
to be the best example of modern English bridge construction in
the Colony. A splendid view is had here from the railway
carriage. Beneath lie the placid waters of the Parramatta, and


it is to be noted that almost immediately underneath the bridge
the start for the champion boat-races of the world takes place.
Here, on several occasions, thousands have watched with intense
interest the meeting of the champions, Beach and Hanlan, Kemp
and Searle. Down the river glimpses of pleasant river-side
retreats are to be seen —the homes of busy city men, who can
here enjoy quietude after the bustle and burden of the day.
HORNSBY.—THE HAWKESBURY.
Bronx the river the line commences to reach a more undulating
country, not as yet extensively populated, but offering unlimited
choice of beautiful sites for pleasant suburban homes. A large
part of the country is kxxown as the “ Field of Mars Common,”
which has recently been sold, and will no doubt before long be
largely built upon, and several stations have been erected between
the river and Hornsby in anticipation of this settlement. The
line itself runs along a ridge of rather poor land, but the soil of
the district on either side is very fertile and is largely cultivated,
the principal industry being fruit-growing. From Hornsby the
line commences to get into rocky sandstone country. The scenery
is wild and picturesque, and near Berowra platform a charming
view of Cowan Creek, cx-adled between high precipitous hills, is
had, and further on again distant glimpses of the Hawkesbury
relieve the rugged highlands. From near Berowra the line com-
mences by a long descent to make direct to the river. Soon the
railway whistles signal the Hawkesbuxy River station, and imme-
diately the river comes before the tourist in all its exquisite love-
liness. To the left is Peat’s Ferxy, the old settlement before the
railway came, but now eclipsed by the township that is being built
up at the railway station. The township boasts of decent hotel
accommodation. A number of boatmen live in the village, and
fishing and shooting parties can always be accommodated. The
Hawkesbury has long been noted for its fishing, and in the lower
reaches fishing has been the principal industry followed, the fish
being sent to the Sydney market. The station is at the com-
mencement of the long embaxxkment connecting Long Island with
the mainland, and it is from this island that tlie handsome bridge
spanning the river is built.




*■ ■*£&& -
HlMMIMMiMIlHbfc'
mtt]
ggg|
RAILWAY
EMBANKMENT, HAWKESBURY RIVER


The opening view on our frontispiece gives a general idea oi
this magnificent bridge, and a short description of it will not be
unacceptable. The crossing of the Hawkesbury was a matter
that caused much concern to the railway engineers, and it was
after much consideration decided to erect it on its present site.
THE BRIDGE.
The bridge is 36 miles from Sydney, about 7 miles from the
sea, and a few miles below the old main crossing over the river.
After passing over a shallow branch of the river on an embank-
ment, the railway enters a tunnel through Long Island and
emerges on the bank of the main channel about 45 feet
above high-water. After passing over the bridge it enters a side
cutting on the projecting promontory of Mullet Point, and
leaves the banks of the river at the head of a short creek
running back from the main stream. At the site of crossing the
scenery is extremely wild and picturesque—high, rocky cliffs
generally springing direct from the water’s edge, backed by hills
rising to 600 feet, the banks of the river being cut up by innu-
merable creeks, the country round being still uncleared and
covered with timber.
The total length of the bridge between abutments is 2,896 feet,
and the bridge consists of seven spans of 410 feet between centres
of bearings, the piers being 416 feet centre to centre. There is a
clear headway of 40 feet from high-water mark to the under side
of the girders. The cost of the bridge has been about £350,000.
The most difficult part of the work in connection with the
construction of the bridge Avas the great depth to which it was
necessary to sink the piers to secure a good foundation. The body
of the pier is 48 feet by 20 feet, with rounded ends, enlarged at
the base to 52 feet by 24 feet, and some of the piers are sunk to
a depth of no less than 162 feet below high-water mark—the
latter being the deepest bridge foundation in the world. The
abutments are built of local free-stone, and are very fine examples
of stone-work, and the piers from 3 feet below low water are built
of masonry. The superstructure of the bridge is built for a double
line, and the main girders or trusses are 410 feet long between
centres of end pins, and 58 feet effective depth at centre. The
bridge is built of steel throughout.


The bridge was designed and erected by the Union Bridge
Company of New York, although the greater portion of the steel-
work was manufactured in Glasgow by Messrs. William Arrol
& Co.
The Hawkesbury Bridge is one of the largest and finest examples
of engineering skill in the Southern Hemisphere, and embodies all
the latest improvements in bridge design.
Bor the excursionist who does not wish to go beyond the river,
ample facilities exist. Many varied and pleasant spots for pic-
nicing are to be found near the railway, or a boat can be had at a
reasonable rate, and some of the bays in the vicinity of Brooklyn
visited, or the luxury of fresh rock-oysters enjoyed.
It is hardly necessary to say that the scenery of the Hawkes-
bury is considered to be equal to anything in the world. Anthony
Trollope, when visiting the Colonies in 1872, spent a couple of
days on the river, and his opinion is well worth quoting. He says:
“ Govett’s leap astonished me very much, but not, I think, so
much as the scenery of the Hawkesbury Biver . . • _• • •
There can, I think, be no doubt that among rivers the Bhine has
the highest character for sustained beauty. There may be special
points on other streams which have endeared themselves to the
world —such especially as the Falls of Niagara—such as the Inn
at Innspruck— or the Bhone at Geneva —or the Upper Lake at
Killarney, which is in truth a river 5 but for continued scenery
the Bhine stands first. There is a river, or rather a portion of
the river, known to very few tourists, which, I think, beats the
Bhine: this is the Upper Mississippi, for about 150 miles below
St. Paul. It is not my business here to describe the Mississippi;
but I mention it with the object of saying that in my opinion the
Hawkesbury beats the Mississipi. I should not make the contrast
unless there were many features in the two which are similar.
.... At all of them the banks rise suddenly, sometimes
covered with timber and sometimes bald—sometimes sloping and
sometimes precipitous —but at all of them the banks are broken
here and there into lateral valleys, which give to the imagination
the idea that the glory of the scene is far spread, and would repay
pursuit. Unless it can convey this vague feeling of distant,
unapproachable, and almost mysterious delight, scenery loses






half its charms. On the Rhine, on the Mississippi, and on the
Hawkesbury alike, there is created an idea that if the traveller
would only leave the boat and wander inland, he would be repaid
by the revelation of marvellous beauties of Nature—beauties
which have perhaps, never yet met the eyes of man.
“ The lower part of the river—that between Wiseman’s Ferry
and Pittwater, which is a large inlet of the sea running southward
from Broken Bay—is very much finer than the upper reaches.
“ The Rhine has its castles and its islands, and it has, too, in
its favour the bright colour of its waters. The Upper Mississippi
has no castles, nor are its waters bright ; but it has islands, and
innumerable bluffs and headlands, and varied valleys, and park-
like timber, and its own fast-running rush of waters, which are to
me more than compensation for castles and the colour. The
Hawkesbury has neither castles nor islands, nor has it bright,
clear water like the Rhine; but the headlands are higher, and
the bluffs are bolder, and the turns and manoeuvres of the course
which the waters have made for themselves are grander, and
to me more enchanting than those of either the European or
American river.”
Ample opportunity is now afforded to all to view the river
scenery. Steam launches are to be had at the Hawkesbury, and
excursionists are enabled to take a pleasant trip through the most
delightful of the river scenery. The fare from Sydney is remark-
ably low—ss. first-class, and 3s. second-class, return.
Any one who can spare the time will be well repaid by taking a
trip up the Hawkesbury River and returning by rail vid Windsor.
Steamers leave the Hawkesbury railway wharf, as a rule, on
Saturday morning on the arrival of the morning train from Sydney,
and at times occasional trips are made by arrangement with the
Tourist Bureau, of 6, Bridge-street. The glories of the river so
happily pourtrayed by Anthony Trollope, will be seen to the best
advantage, and the journey throughout is one succession of beautiful
scenes. The steamer trip occupies about four hours, a halt being
made at Wiseman’s Ferry for lunch, the steamer afterwards going
on to Sackville Reach, which is the head of navigation for large
boats. The distance from Sackville to Windsor, where the train
is taken for Sydney, is about 9 miles over a good road, coaches


meeting the steamers as they arrive. The character of the
scenery is very varied and beautiful, and excursionists, by taking
the river trip, see it in all its phases. The railway station may
be said to be at its mouth, the river here being wide and majestic ;
further up, the river runs in a narrower channel, shut in by bold
and well timbered hills rising abruptly from the water’s edge, at
times the naked rock crowning the hill tops and looking in the
distance like the battlements of some old baronial castle. As the
river reaches the upper part, the land becomes more open,
widening out into the valley of the Hawkesbury, which has long
been celebrated for its extreme fertility, and the excursionist will
have views of many a pretty farm-yard surrounded by waving
fields of corn before he takes his seat in the railway carriage. It
may be added that the total cost of the round trip, rail and steamer,
does not exceed <£l.
The journey across the river by the train is very delightful, the
structure of the bridge allowing, in contradistinction to the Penrith
Bridge, the river to be seen in all its beauty.
MULLET CEEEK.
After leaving the Hawkesbury the railway passes for some dis-
tance along the edge of a tributary of the river known as “ Mullet
Creek,” presumably so called on account of the quantity of that
kind of fish found there. The line is then carried on to an
embankment over a deep gorge, which on the left presents a scene
of considerable beauty, the sides of the gorge being abrupt and
broken and clothed with trees to the edge of the limpid water
which flows at the bottom.
About 4 miles from the river is Mullet Creek Station, formerly
the transhipping station for the steamers, and a place of con-
siderable activity; but now that the train is running there its
mission has departed, and its population is rapidly leaving. There
are, however, many pretty little spots in the vicinity, and it is rich
in beautiful ferns. Soon after leaving Mullet Greek the train
enters the Woy Woy tunnel, over 1 mile in length, and probably
the longest in Australia. A heavy cutting in the solid rock
is also passed there, and after the darkness of the tunnel and






cutting, the traveller is pleasantly surprised to see before him a
lovely water view, a reach of the Brisbane Water. This is soon
left, and the line is then carried through a densely wooded
country which continues until 45 miles from Sydney where is
situated Woy Woy platform, which serves a small and scattered
community in Woy Woy.
After leaving Woy Woy we pass a succession of small cuttings
in the spurs of the hills, and further glimpses are obtained of the
noble expanse of water known as Brisbane Water, round which
the line is ultimately carried by a bold curve. Brisbane Water at
this curve presents a view of special beauty. On the right, a wide
expanse of water, having the aspect of an immense lake quivering
and sparkling in the beams of the summer sun; on the left,
hills of varied outline, clad with living green of many shades; in
front, the shore consists of gently undulating ground partly cleared,
but free from unsightly stumps, giving the whole a park-like
appearance. A white building here and there gives variety to
the scene. This locality, now that access to it is so easy, should
be a favourite place of resort to persons desirous of getting away
for a few days from the heat and dust and turmoil of the city.
Before arriving at the next station some thriving plantations of
oranges and bananas are passed, giving an earnest of an industry
which at no distant day will probably be carried on here.
GOSFOKD.
The next station, Gosford, 50 miles from Sydney, may be said
to be the key of the district, as it is the centre of what is known
as Brisbane Water.
This district extends from Broken Bay and the Hawkesbury
Elver on the south to Lake Macquarie, Dora Creek, and the Olney
Forest Reserve on the north, and from the Pacific Ocean on the
east to the Great Northern Road (Wiseman’s Ferry-Wollombi
Road) on the west. It is about 40 miles each way, contains about
1,500 square miles, or nearly 1,000,000 acres in area.
The North Coast Railway intersects the district, entering it by
the Hawkesbury Bridge and leaving it by the Dora Creek Bridge,
the distance between these two points being some 42 miles.


The district contains about one-half agricultural land, the rest
being barren sandstone uplands ; but it has been recently shown
that considerable stretches of the latter are well suited for orchard
purposes. Of the more fertile parts, the Wyong and Jillibi
Valleys, the valley of Ourimbah Creek, and those of the Narara
and Erma Creeks, and a large proportion of the Cockle Creek
watershed may be noticed as being exceedingly rich alluvial soils.
Brisbane Water with its offsets, Cockle Creek, Woy Woy,
Erma Creek, and Narara Creek, form a most lovely and picturesque
locality. Besides this immensely varied inlet, a chain of lagoons
stretch along the coast—Cockrone Lake (M‘Master’s Lake),
Bulbararing Lake (Moore’s Lake), Terrigal Lake, Wamberall Lake,
Tuggarah Lakes (a chain of three lakes, in all 20 miles in length),
and Lake Macquarie, constitute this the most beautiful lacustrine
district of the Colony. Tourists could spend at least a month in
exploring the lakes indicated, and the intervening beaches.
The brushes (dense jungles of a truly tropical character) of
Kincumber, the Narara, Ourimbah, Wyong, and Jillibi Creeks,
are the haunts of the magnificent lyre bird (minura alberta), the
most wonderful mocking bird that exists, the wonga, brown
crested flock, and a large variety of other pigeons, the bower bird,
cat-bird, magnificent regent bird, parrots, cockatoos, and innumer-
able others of the feathered tribes. The lakes swarm with water-
fowl and fish. Wallabies and kangaroos are extremely numerous,
and even emus are found on the table-lands.
Of vegetable products, the eucalypti form the chief of the forest
species, but the various brush timbers, including the red cedar,
rosewood, and beach, are to be found. Of palms, the cabbage-
tree, bangalo, and boorowong grow in such number as occasionally
to give a veritable tropical character to the forests. Ferns and
orchids are in abundance, while mosses, lichens, and innumer-
able lilies, growing plants, and shrubs of exquisite form are every-
where found.
The District of Brisbane Water is eminently suited to agri-
culture, and particularly fruit-growing, but unfortunately large
areas of lands are locked up in the hands of land syndicates and
capitalists, and settlement has to some extent been blocked. The
cost of clearing land is also exceptionally heavy in this district, as


the timber grows very thickly on the land, is very large, and
much of the wood very difficult to burn. Dairy pursuits are
impossible until clearing is effected, as the dense undergrowth
prevents the growth of pastures.
The climate of Brisbane Water is probably the most equable
and moist in the Colony. Its proximity to the ocean and its
hilly character conduce to a phenomenal rainfall, and at the same
time tend to equalize the temperature. The salubrity of the
climate was humourously illustrated by a local clergyman, who
stated that during a residence of a couple of years he had baptized
eighty-two children and buried four only.
The Brisbane Water district was settled early in the history of
the Colony. Some fifty or sixty years ago Mr. Hely, a superin-
tendent of convicts, obtained large grants of land there and formed
a homestead. Several other grantees took possession of their
lands and, by aid of convict labour, cleared and cultivated part of
their holdings. But the extremely irregular communication with
O « o
Sydney rendered agriculture unprofitable, and the encroachments
of underbrush on the naturally grassed lands gradually caused
pastoral pursuits to be abandoned. The timber trade became
almost the sole resource of the people, and has supplied profitable
employment for a limited population till the present time. The
facilities for communication with the metropolis supplied by the
railroad are now inciting to agricultural pursuits, and no incon-
siderable number of orchards are beginning to spring up in the
district. Visitors will no doubt largely patronize the district and,
possibly too, the shores of Brisbane Water will be found to offer
attractions to city men upon which to make their homes, now
that the train has brought the place within a two hours’ ride of
Sydney.
The geological formation of the district is that of the Hawkes-
O O ,
bury Basin generally—sandstones and clay slates alternate with
each other. Throughout the basin trap-blows occurs irregularly,
though it may be found that there is at least one great series of
dykes. The Illawarra range, on the southern margin of the basin,
and Mount Warrawolong, on its northern margin, are masses of
trap, rising to a height of nearly 2,000 feet. Under a line con-
necting these two places, and which would run almost north and


south, a series of trap-dykes will be found. Perhaps the most
noted of these is the Prospect Hill, where the dam in connection
with the Sydney Water Works has been constructed. Another
that is well known is that near Hornsby. Beyond this may be
mentioned one at the head of Patonga Creek, and not more than
a mile and a half from the northern end of the Hawkesbury Bridge.
The next appearance is in the head of Popran Creek, where the
loose blocks of fractured columnar basalt forms a hill 200 or 300
feet high, while in the creek the smooth waterworn surface of the
massive rock shows the hexagonal fracture of which such noted
examples exist in the Giant’s Causeway in Ireland, Pingal’s
Cave in the island of Staffa, and the Organ Mountain of Bio
Janeiro.
Continuing on northward, the small outcrops of trap become
frequent. Warra Warra, Kooree, and several other known dykes
occur; and at length the great cone on which Sir Thomas Mitchell
fixed his theodolite, Warravalong, forms the culminating point
of the series of coastal uplands.
On many of the higher ranges and peaks of the Hawkesbury
Basin remnants of a basaltic formation can be traced. Usually,
it is only to be recognized on the red or chocolate soil, whose fertility
demonstrates its origin; but, in some few cases, nodules and blocks
more or less numerous are found. The fact that this formation
occurs on the higher land would justify the inference that at one
time no inconsiderable portion of the sandstones of the Hawkes-
bury Basin had been overlain by a basaltic formation derived from
the dykes mentioned, which formation has, however, by denudation,
disappeared, leaving only the traces mentioned.
During the progress of the railway works, an old lake or estuary
bed, filled with compacted mud forming a shale, was cut through
in a quarry in Gosford, in which great quantities of fossil fish of
unknown species were embedded. The black mud of this fossil
bed would further indicate the existence of a superincumbent
basaltic strata.
Gosford is a town of 400 inhabitants. The district (Brisbane
Water) is said to have a population of 7,000 persons. The town
offers ample hotel accommodation, boasting of six hotels, and it has
some very creditable public buildings and stores.




I E
1 <
I §
E
[ p
o
I ffi
? <
» w
I z
I o'
I z
U H-i
I ffi
I <
w
i p
o
p
I £
<
i w
m z
i w
» o
(/}
X
51 m
P
i ffl


ISTAEEAEA.
The country through which the line passes after leaving Gosford
is heavily timbered, evidencing the fertile nature of the soil. Three
miles out is Narrara platform, and a few miles further on Ourimbah,
both places being convenient for numbers of timber-getters, the
latter place annually sending away a considerable amount of
different woods.
OUEIMBAH.
There are few evidences of habitation in the vicinity of
Ourimbah Station; but at a short distance the line crosses a fine
and well made road, showing that although the line is carried
through an almost uncleared tract, there is at no great distance a
considerable amount of settlement, and a thriving population.
Ourimbah possesses a comfortable hotel, and the locality is
especially rich in ferns and palms.
After leaving this station the line enters upon a tract of forest
land, which is succeeded by a long stretch of level land, having
the appearance of alluvial, and evidently well suited for farming
operations. A good deal of clearing is in progress, with some
cultivation.
WYONGL
At 62 miles, Wyong Station is reached. The township is situated
at the intersection of the railway line with Wyong Creek, and
is distant from Gosford 12 miles. The population of the district,
including Yarramalong, is about 400. Here agriculture is
followed to some extent, maize being the staple prod action; but
the soil is capable of growing well almost anything which can be
grown in the tropical zone. A large quantity of timber is also cut
in the district, and the timber industry may be said to be still young,
although it has recently swelled to very large proportions, in
one month 400,000 feet of timber being sent away, chiefly in round
logs, girders, and piles.
The pretty little stream known as Wyong Creek, which passes
by the township, enters, about 4 or 5 miles distant, the waters of
Tuggerah Lakes. These lakes have long been celebrated as one
of the best shooting and fishing grounds in the Colony. A
number of men are now engaged in the fishing industry, about


10 tons of fresh fish being sent away monthly; and the fish
smoked at Tuggerah are perhaps the best known in the Sydney
market. The lakes consist of three distinct bodies of water (more
correctly described as immense lagoons), known by the native
names of Tuggerah, Munmorah, and Budgewah, and the three are
connected with each other, and finally with the Pacific Ocean, by
narrow channels. They abound in fish of almost every kind to
be found along the Australian coast, and at times the surface of
the water, often for miles, is covered with the graceful form of
the black swan, while wild ducks and other game, although not so
numerous as formerly, are still very plentiful in places. Every
inducement is offered to sporting parties, and for their convenience
there are in Wyong tAvo hotels and an accommodation house.
The mineral wealth of the district is knoAvn to be vast, but is
as yet untouched. It is not long since a diamond drill put down
on a portion of Mr. C. Alison’s estate brought to light the existence
of three splendid seams of bituminous coal, and it is thought that
the time is not far distant when this will be profitably worked.
In addition to the pleasure of boating, fishing, or shooting on
the lake, Wyong, like all other parts of the Brisbane Water
district, has exquisite woodland scenery, and a drive through the
district roads is most enjoyable.
Leaving Wyong the line runs through a fairly level and
pleasantly wooded country which no doubt will ere long be largely
devoted to farming purposes, as the soil appears most fertile.
This is succeeded by hilly country, the line being carried through
a succession of cuttings of greater or less magnitude, and then the
excursionist finds fresh variety in entering some virgin forest
land to the right and left of the line. In the midst of this is
Wyee platform.
WYEE.
After passing Wyee the bush presents a very pleasing appear-
ance, the unbroken forest extending in all directions as far as
the eye can see, and the hills being clad with foliage to the very
summit. At 76 miles Morissett is reached, which is pro Added with
a neat station. Here again a large traffic in timber is carried on.


MORISSETT.
At Morissett the traveller is again struck, and in a more marked
degree, by the absence of evidences of settlement and population.
The station would almost seem to have been set down at random
in the bush ; but appearances are delusive. The timber-getter has
his home in the woods, and he is the pioneer of settlement. The
forest giants have to be felled and sent to do useful service even
as far as the other Colonies before the land can be handed over to
the fruit-grower and agriculturist; and no doubt now that direct
railway communication is afforded, and the Sydney market is easy
of access, settlement will, here as elsewhere, follow the iron horse.
DORA CREEK.
After leaving Morissett the line again passes into the unbroken
forest through which it runs for some distance. This is succeeded
by an area of cleared land with some cultivation. Soon Dora
Creek, which runs into Lake Macquarie, is passed, and the scene
is here one of quiet beauty. The creek itself is a nice sheet of
water, and the land surrounding it is fertile and well cultivated.
In the vicinity are several farms and comfortable-looking home-
steads. Dora Creek is crossed by an iron bridge, and a platform
is provided to enable visitors and others to leave the train here for
the upper part of the lake or for the district.
AWABA.
At 84 miles is Awaba Platform, with a waiting-shed and office.
In this locality also the timber industry is carried on, and there
are few evidences of occupation beyond the tents of the timber-
getters. The line now enters upon a long stretch of undulating
and broken land, still densely wooded. This is followed by land of
a more elevated character, through which the line is carried by a
deep cutting, the exposed strata in which exhibit a narrow band
of coal, an earnest of the mineral wealth which pervades the
district which the traveller is rapidly approaching.
FASSIFERK
At 87 miles Passifern Station is reached. Here a siding gives
access to the mainline from the colliery works of the G.N. Coal
Company.


After leaving Fassifern, cuttings of moderate depth are passed,
in which again traces of coal are to be seen, such traces as we
approach the extensive coal-measures of the Newcastle district
becoming more frequent.
The timber-cutting industry on a large scale is carried on before
the next station is reached. A siding to connect the scene of
operations with the railway having been laid in.
TERALBA.
At 89 miles is Teralba, with a neat station and many good
houses, and other indications of a prosperous community. The
scenery in this neighbourhood is eminently picturesque, and to the
right the traveller will get occasional views of the placid waters
of the lake, the land well wooded gently sloping to the water’s
edge.
COCKLE CREEK.
Two miles from Teralba is Cockle Creek (so named from the
adjoining body of water), with a waiting-shed and office. Cockle
Creek may be said to be the gateway to the magnificent sheet of
water known as Lake Macquarie.
‘ ‘ Behold, all placid as an angel’s smiles
The noble lake, an azure sea for miles.
From Cockle River to the headland pass,
The whole transparent as a sheet of glass ;
Where every cloud that glides in heavenly space
Sails also imaged on the water’s face,
And every beam that hails the going day
Gives forth its beauty with a double ray. ”•
LAKE MACQUARIE.
The lake itself is said to have been named after one of our
most famous Governors, and is a magnificent and most picturesque
saltwater lake, some 20 miles in length, and averaging about
6 miles in breadth. To give an idea of its size, it may be stated
that it has about 200 miles of foreshores. Very irregular in
shape, at no one point can the whole of the lake be seen; but
its numerous smiling bays, its charming points and promontories,
with their gently sloping banks clad in nature’s vivid green, are
* Sydney Mail.


;i
i


4
i
qniki hi rtf jj
UUHUMJll
IJ9BHI
Wm
1
**V. *U ~
’■- >'■/.!
TORONTO HOTEL
LAKE MACQUARIE.


marvellously beautiful. Cockle Creek flows into the lake at its
northern end, and the creek is navigable for good sized vessels to
within about 3 miles of the flourishing mining towns of Wallsend
and Plattsburg. On the western side of the lake, near the mouth
of Cockle Creek, is a large dairy farm, the white buildings of
which, together with the extensive area of undulating cultivated
land running right down to the water’s edge, forms a pleasant
picture in the landscape; and a number of pretty villas, dotted
here and there along each side of the lake, add additional charms
to the beautiful scene. On the eastern shore, a few miles from
Cockle Creek, is the village of Belmont. The village is about 12
miles from Newcastle, by a good road, and it is here that large
quantities of fish, caught in the lake, are packed and forwarded to
the northern capital, to Sydney, or sent by rail to the flourishing
towns of the north. At Belmont there are post and telegraph
offices, hotel, and a number of private residences. Opposite
Belmont, and on the shore nearest the railway, is Toronto, at which
a splendid and well-kept hotel, capable of accommodating sixty
people, has been erected, and in addition private boarding cottages
are to be had.
The lake steamers can come right up to the railway, so that
travellers have only to walk a few yards from the railway to the
boat, and after a pleasant run of about 2 miles the excursionist
finds the splendid expanse of the lake before him. The steamer
then heads direct for Toronto, which is reached after about
an hour’s run, and at all times the trip across the lake is most
enjoyable. The visitor has the alternative of staying at Toronto,
where excellent hotel accommodation, choice picnic grounds,
bathing houses, or bathing facilities are to be found, or
he can proceed by the steamer to the village of Belmont, near
the entrance, which, lying on a promontory, has on one side
the Pacific waters and on the other the lake it self. There are
several smaller settlements which can be visited if the visitor can
find time to spend a few days on the lake. Boats are always
obtainable, and the pleasure of boating or sailing enjoyed, and
fishing parties can always depend upon securing a good catch.
Mr. Tenison-Woods, in his work on the “Fish and Fisheries of
New South Wales,” says : —“ A few miles to the northward of
Manmura commences the still larger expanse of waters known as
Lake Macquarie. This lake is nearly 20 miles in length, by an


average of about 3 miles in width, but its contour is so broken by
deeply indented bays and recesses as to give a perimeter of about
300 miles. Unlike Tuggerah, Lake Macquarie possesses a very
tolerable entrance, available for craft drawing up to 6 feet of
water, and when the works now in progress in the river channel
and at the entrance are completed, Lake Macquarie will probably
be navigable for vessels up to 10 feet draft. The average depth
of Lake Macquarie is about the same as that of Tuggerah. These
lakes are the great nurseries of almost all our winter supplies of
net and line fish. Here unquestionably the sea-mullet, bream,
tarwhine, whiting, flathead, tailor, and garfish find their most
congenial spawning grounds; and here also are their natural
sanctuaries from sharks and other predacious fishes which devour
them in the offing. Here also, it is believed, is the chief spawning
ground of the schnapper, which afterwards haunts the numerous
reefs, bumboras, and rocky patches which lie between Broken Bay
and Newcastle. It is almost impossible to find a square furlong
untenanted by the schnapper or other equally good fish.”
After leaving Cockle Creek and Lake Macquarie the interest
on this section of the line, as far as the excursionist is concerned,
is almost ended ; but most metropolitans or people from the south
will no doubt consider their journey unfinished unless they run
into the growing and important city of Newcastle, 12 miles
beyond Cockle Creek. As the line goes north, evidences of the
coal industry, which has so largely assisted in the progress of
Newcastle, are seen. Just beyond Cockle Creek the siding leading
to the West Wallsend Mine is noticed.
CARDIFF.
At 94 miles is Cardiff', a platform with waiting-shed and office,
and a sparse population. After passing a further stretch of land
in course of being cleared, the traveller enters upon a tract of
broken country, with low but steep hills covered with wood.
Further on the line enters a stretch of luxuriant forest, not
exhibiting the somewhat sombre hue which is usually attributed
to Australian bush scenery, but every conceivable shade of tender
green, presenting a succession of glimpses of sylvan beauty that
even New Zealand—her covering of ever-living green notwith-
standing—need not despise.


HAMILTON.
We are now approaching Hamilton, the junction of the new
line with the older portion of the Northern line. Adamstown
and Broadmeadow, both having considerable settlement, are
passed. Tall chimney stacks are seen, leading the traveller to
believe that he is approaching a large manufacturing centre.
These, however, are connected with the numerous collieries which
stud the surface of this district.
The traveller over this line, notwithstanding the sparseness cf
the population, will he struck with the immense capabilities of
the district. Bor many years to come it will be an important
source of timber supply. The fertile flats, before many years have
passed, will be under crops of corn, while the slopes of the hills
are admirably suited for viticulture, and the existing orchards
of orange and other fruit-trees, in their luxuriant growth, are
living proofs of what may be accomplished in this way.
NEWCASTLE.
It is hardly necessary to describe Newcastle in detail; suffice it
to say it possesses large hotel accommodation, and its manu-
facturing and mining industries, its magnificent shipping facilities,
its busy port and coal mines, well repay a visit.


Mu O
(U - NOV 1992 ") H3*?»
fi 3A a*r
. ~yA> 18 AJ«*y
iW GOVERNMENT RAILWAYS.
THE attention of TOURISTS, PIC-NIC PARTIES, and OTHERS is
called to the facilities offered for visiting THE HAWKESBURY
visiting THE HAWKESBURY
RIVER, GOSFORD, TUGGERAH LAKES, and LAKE MACQUARIE,
Unsurpassed Scenery—Excellent Shooting and Pishing,
Persons can conveniently travel at the Excursion Fares by the following trains
Express
Sydney Dep.
Hawkesbury Biver Arr.
Gosford
10- 10-45
11-
Wyong (for Tuggerah Lakes)
P.M. P.M.
12-39
Cockle Creek (for Lake Macquarie)
Newcastle
ITS 12-25
Express
A.M.
Sunday.
Newcastle Dep.
A.M. A.M.
1- 8-25
2- 8-53
3- 10-9
3- 10-40
4- 11-44
Cockle Creek (for Lake Macquarie) Arr.
Wyong (for Tuggerah Lakes) „
Gosford ~
Hawkesbury Biver
Sydney „
5-35 1-25
A special train on Saturday leaves Sydney
reaching Sydney at 9-35 pan. A special leaves 1
Visitors to Lake Macquarie can return by the
1-25 p.m., returning on Sunday evening,
Newcastle on Saturday at 1"30 for Sydney.
6'5 p.m. train from Teralba on Sundays.
The 9'25 a.m. express from Newcastle stops at Cookie Creek ip
PASSENGERS.
Excursion Fares are issued as follows: —
REQUIRED
TO SET BOWK
Ist Class. 2nd Class,
s. d. s. d.
Sydney to Hawkesbury Elver and return 5 0 3 0
~ Gosford ~ 10 6 6 9
„ Wyong „ 18 9 8 9
~ Cockle Creek ~ 18 9 11 3
„ Newcastle „ 18 9 11 3
By order,
DAVID KIRKCALDIE,
Chief Traffic Manager.
[Map.]
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB9.


(4-a +SO~ 89)
PHOTO-LITHOGRAPHED AT THE GOVT. PRINTING OFFICE.
SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.


TAff
fiitkio
p/ Z^Sih


■ii ii hi n
3 1508 01368997 6


