

A.j ( / /, .
/ V \ /, y )
( '-f ICj -
NEW SOUTH
WALES
GOVERNMENT
TOURIST BUREAU
Tourist
Excursion to
Leaving MELBOURNE
Saturday,
19th August, 1911.
Issued by . . . THE NEW SOUTH WALES
GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU
Challis House, Sydney.
PERCY HUNTER,
Director.


1911 Season.
GRAND PERSONALLY ft IT
CONDUCTED TOUR iViCIDOUriIC
FROM
j AND THE FAMED
TO OVCInCV TOURIST RESORTS OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
AUGUST 19 TO AUGUST 26. 1911.
Inclusive Fare £lO : 10 : 0 First Class.
EIGHT DAYS OF DELIGHTFUL SIGHT-SEEING
UNDER IDEAL CONDITIONS,
THE TOUR INCLUDES
A Day on Sydney Harbour.
Hawkesbnry River—Round Trip.
National Park and Port Hacking.
Two Days on the Blue Mountains.
Accommodation at the Hotel Metropole, Sydney,
Hydro Majestic, Medlow Bath,
Ah almost entire change of programme.
EXTENSION TO JENOLAN CAVES
TOUR £3 - IQ S O BY MOTOE
Arranged and conducted by the New South Wales
Government Tourist Bureau, in conjunction with
the Victorian and New South Wales Railways.
Booking Agents, THOS. COOK & SON,
269 COLUNS-STREET, MELBOURNE.
All Information may be obtained at
VICTORIAN TOURIST BUREAU.
Collins St Swanston Streets, Melbourne


—■■nwiaii ill im nnii irniriir"i rinii— i—— —inn nr 'iiin"r"r r 11 mitt
Person ally-con ducted
Tours.
THE Government Tourist Bureau of New South Wales has
for several years made a specialty of personally-conducted
tours, and such excursions from the other States to
Sydney and the Tourist Resorts of New South Wales are looked
upon as the great travel events of the year. The brilliant
success of the tours arranged during the past few years has made
these journeys increasingly popular with residents of Victoria
and South and West Australia. The second excursion of the
present season will leave Melbourne on Saturday, 19th August,
1911, and will afford a splendid opportunity for a change of
air and scene under the most comfortable conditions of travel.
A special itinerary has been planned by the expert officials
of the Government Tourist Bureau, and visitors who take
advantage of this trip will spend from eight to twelve delightful
days among some of the most interesting and picturesque of
the renowned scenic resorts of New South Wales. They will be
enabled to see what is most worth seeing, in the shortest time
and in the best way.
To join this tour is to realise the perfection of comfort and
ease of travel. Every detail has been arranged beforehand, and
there is no worry, no bother, and no trouble. The tourist
proceeds from point to point, and everything works out with
machine-like smoothness. His rooms are booked, his •whole
time is filled, and he is spared any anxiety in regard to the
transit of his luggage.
Tourists from Tasmania, New Zealand, South Australia, or
West Australia may also join this tour in Melbourne. Visitors
to Sydney may also take the whole or any of these excursions.


Programme.
This Programme, together with the
notes on each day f s trip, should he
arefuiiy studied .
SATURDAY, Melbourne (Spencer-street), dep. 6.15 a.m.;
August 19. Seymour, arr. 8.47 a.m. {2O min. for
breakfast), dep. 9.7 a.m.; Albury, arr.
1.53 p.m. (67 min. for lunch); change
into N.S.W. train; Junee, arr. 6.21 p.m.
(24 min. for dinner).
Tourists will leave Spencer-street Railway Station, Melbourne,
uy the mail train on Saturday, 19th August, and arrive Sydney
next morning. The journey in the spacious, airy carriages of
the Victorian and New South Wales Railways is a most interesting
one, especially for those making it for the first time. The
railway traverses some of the best grazing and wheat-grow’ing
country of Victoria, and the Murray River, which divides the
two States, is crossed about 2 p.m.; Albury, the border town
in New South Wales, is entered immediately after, and from
there to Junee, another important country centre, the inter-
vening lands are extensively farmed, anel embrace one of the
most thriving districts in the State. From Junee sleeping
berths are available for those requiring them (cost, 10s. each)
and in the early morning tourists wake to find themselves at
the great railway station at Sydney.
SUNDAY, Sydney, arr. 6.25 a.m. Vehicles, will meet
August 20. train and convey luggage to hotel free;
all luggage must be labelled to Hotel
Metropole. Special tram to hotel at
6.40 a.m.
Note. —All hotel and transportation expenses will be paid by
the Tourist Bureau, but such hotel expenses will be limited to
meals and sleeping accommodation. The fares do not include
sleeping berths or cost of travel between Svdnev hotel and
railway station, unless specially provided for.
On Sunday a quiet day will be spent in Sydney. No definite
programme has been drawn up and visitors may follow their
own inclination.


f'TIHESE Trips may be joined in Sydney at a
cost of £3 10s. from Monday, erst August,
to Friday, 25th August, 1911 (exclusive of
accommodation in Sydney).
ALL DAY ON SYDNEY HARBOUR.
MONDAY, 10 a.m. Special Harbour Excursion on observa-
August 21. tion steamer. Steamer leaves wharf at
Fort Macquarie (east of Circular Quay).
Lunch at Correy’s Gardens, Cabarita, Parra-
matta River. Afternoon tea on board.
returning about 5 p.m.
A DAY ON PORT JACKSON.
Visitors will embark on a special tourist observation steamer,
the “ Kookaburra,” and visit the most beautiful and charming
bays and coves of the peerless harbour of Port Jackson.
The glories of this world-renowned waterway will thus be seen
under the most favourable conditions, and visitors will be shown
more during the day than they could hope to see in a week
by the ordinary means of transit. The main Harbour will be
traversed, where will be seen the extensive wharfage systems,
and the mammoth ocean liners at their berths or at anchor;
Government House; the picturesque Botanic Gardens; Mrs,
Macquarie’s Chair, as well as the array of beautiful dwellings
on the hilly foreshores of the maritime suburbs. The placid
upper reaches of Middle Harbour, Lane Cove, and Parramatta
Rivers will be visited, with their long branching tranquil inlets,
locked by hills covered with trees and undergrowth to the
water’s edge, or fringed with beaches of white glistening sands.
Lunch will be partaken at one of the numerous pleasure resorts,
and afternoon tea will be served on board.
World travellers by common consent place Port Jackson as
one of the grandest harbours on earth, both for continuous
beauty and interest, and for its spaciousness. Victorians who
have not yet seen it should embrace the opportunity which this
tour offers, as they will thus gain a better acquaintance of it
than they could otherwise do.


HAWKESBURY RIVER THE RHINE OF AUSTRALIA
TUESDAY, 9.5 a.m. train from No. 1 Platform, Sydney
August 22. Station, to Hawkesbury River. 10.30 a.m.
steamer to Newport, via Broken Bay and
Pittwatcr; lunch at Newport; and 3 p.m,
coach drive to Manly, and ferry to Circular
Quay.
THE HAWKESBURY RIVER TRIP.
Tuesday will be devoted to the delightful trip round the Lower
Hawkesbury River, Broken Bay, and Pittwater, The landlocked
waters of the Hawkesbury River bear a strong resemblance to the
Norwegian fiords, and they have a peculiar and striking beauty.
Anthony Trollope, the novelist, has, for its sustained beauty,
placed the Hawkesbury before the Rhine or the Mississippi.
There is no place quite like the Hawkesbury. Its dominant
note is its air of peace and restful quiet. Its numerous narrow
but navigable estuaries penetrate far by sandstone gorges into
the heart of the hills. Dark and unruffled lie these fiord-like
waters, overshadowed by cliffs half a thousand feet high, and
thickly wooded to the rocky foreshores. Here and there are
beaches of ruddy gold, which brightly contrast with the sombre-
green of the foliage within the background. Writing of the
.Hawkesbury, Anthony Trollope says; —“The banks rise sud-
denly, sometimes covered with timber and sometimes bald, some-
times sloping and sometimes precipitous, but they are
broken here and there with lateral valleys, which give the
imagination the idea that the glory of the scene is far spread
and would repay pursuit.”
From Hawkesbury Railway Station, near the mammoth steel
bridge which spans the river, tourists will proceed by launch to
Broken Bay. As the launch glides over the glassy surface of
the quiet reaches, varied natural pictures unfold themselves, as
the foot of each headland is circled. The Pittwater, a long
estuary of Broken Bay, wall be traversed for 7 miles to Newport,
where lunch will be served. In the afternoon coaches will convey
the party to Manly, the premier watering-place of Australia.
A good road, 12 miles in length, connects Newport and Manly,
and skirts the coast the whole way. From the top of each rise
glorious views are opened up of the magnificent chain of golden
ocean beaches, and bold, rugged headlands. From Manly a
palatial ferry steamer will be; taken for Sydney, bringing the
voyagers to the city in time for dinner. The Hawkesbury
round trip is one of the finest in the State, and is enc of never-
failing interest and pleasure.


Page
NATIONAL PARK AND PORT HACKING.
WEDNESDAY, 8,30 a.m. train (No. 11 platform, Sydney Station)
August 23. to Loftus Junction (National Park) ;arr.
g. 15 a.m.; drive to Dam at Audley;
oysters on arrival at “ The Rest,” boating
on river; 12.30 p.m., lunch ; 2 p.m., launch
trip to Port Hacking; 4 p.m., afternoon
tea; 4.30 p.m., coaches to Loftus; 5.14
p.m., train for Sydney, arriving at 6.5 p.m.
The National Park of New South Wales is one of the most
magnificent recreation grounds in the whole world. In point
of size it is second only to the Great Yellowstone Park of the
United States. Its area is 36,300 acres. Here, the native flora
and fauna are preserved in all their natural beauty, and
visitors will be delighted with the glimpses of nature revealed.
The pristine beauty of the scenery has been preserved and is
jealously guarded by the trustees, who have made the various
parts accessible by means of unobtrusive roads and footpaths.
From “ The Rest,” at Audley, the Government accommodation
house, visitors have a full view of the meeting of two valleys
and two rivers. Above the dam silvery stretches, w'ith scarcely
a perceptible flow, extend between wooded heights and jungle-
like vegetation growing in luxuriant beauty to the water’s edge.
The Freshwater is delightful. It threads its way through
sylvan scenes of fascinating beauty. The glasslike surface of
the stream perfectly reflects the hillsides and their prolific
covering of trees, shrubs, and ferns which in places meet over-
head in graceful arches through which the sun breaks, mottling
the water with gold. So clear cut are the reflections here that
from photographs taken of some of the spots it would be
difficult to say which way the lens received the image.
Visitors will be regaled on arrival with some of the celebrated
Port Hacking oysters, and before lunch boats will be obtained
and a few hours’ excursion enjoyed on the beautiful upper waters
of the Freshwater river, while a launch trip will be made to Port
Hacking in the afternoon, returning for afternoon tea and
joining the coaches for the station at 4.30 p.m..


THE BLUE MOUNTAINS BLACKHEATH & MEDLOW.
THURSDAY, 8.27 a.m. train (No. 3 platform) to Blackheath,
August 24. arr. 12.15 p.m.; drive to Ivanhoe Hotel
for lunch at 12.30 p.m.; 1.30 p.m., drive
to Govett’s Leap, inspect, and drive to
Evan’s Lookout, walk to Fernery and
round Grand Canyon to Neate’s Glen, and
rejoin vehicles for Medlow Bath; stay night
at Hydro Majestic.
FRIDAY, Inspect Hydro Grounds, Kanimbla Valley, and
August 25. the Coliseums; lunch, 12.30 p.m.; x. 20
p.m., train to Sydney, arr. 4.9 p.m.
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS.
The last two days (Thursday and Friday) have been allotted
for the visit to the famous Blue Mountains. This magnificent
Tourist District has gained a world-wide reputation. The Blue
Mountains have a twofold fame. In addition to their wonderful
scenery, the rarefied, health-giving air of their high altitudes has
earned for them solid esteem as a sanatorium. The beauty and
grandeur of their peaks and headlands, their sunken valleys and
deep ravines, the tinkling cascades, and fairylands of fern, com-
bine to make this region one of surpassing interest.
Tourists on this excursion will be given the opportunity of
seeing some of the grandest and most inspiring sights on the
Mountains. A night will be spent at the Hydro Majestic, Medlow
Bath, a palatial hotel which combines the splendour of the
Casino at Monte Carlo with the comfort and homeliness of a
first-class English hotel. A visit will be paid to Blackheath,
where the mammoth Grose Valley will be viewed at Govett’s
Leap and Evan’s Lookout. There is no more stupendous drop
or awe-inspiring scene on the whole of the Blue Mountains,
The Grand Canyon, where the towering cliffs are only separated
by a chasm several feet wide, will be traversed; as well as the
Fernery, for which Blackheath is famed.
Of the Blue Mountains Darwin has said:—“ It is not easy to
conceive a more magnificent spectacle than is presented to a
person walking on the summit plains, when, without any notice,
he arrives at the brink of one of these cliffs which are so
perpendicular that he can strike with a stone the trees growing
at a depth of between r.o'jo and 1,500 feet below him. On both
sides he sees headland beyond headland of the receding line of
cliffs, and on the opposite side ;of the valley—often a distance of
several miles —he beholds other lines rising up to the same height
as that on which he stands.”


EXTENSION TO JENOLAN CAVES,
Motor.
FARE, £3 10s., covering all expenses.
THE JENOLAN CAVES.
Arrangements have been made to afford the opportunity to
any who so desire, to extend their tour to Jenolan Caves. This
journey will be undertaken in speedy motor-cars from Medlow
Bath, over a route traversing some of the finest mountain scenery
in Australia. The Jenolan Caves are, perhaps, the most widely-
known object of interest to visitors to New South Wales. The
fantastic formations of the Caves, their fascinating grottos and
recesses, filled with crystals of dazzling brightness, with sparkling
stalactites and glistening pendants, are unsurpassed in beauty
and attractiveness.
The Caves are in a limestone belt, which varies in thickness
from 200 to 400 yards, and . through this formation the creeks
have worn subterranean channels, and have through countless
ages carved huge chambers and weird tunnels. Within the Caves
are beautiful stalactites and stalagmites in endless variety
marble pillars, miniature cities, statues, frozen cascades, shawls,
caskets of jewels, and curtains of delicate lace. Some of the
formations are snowy white; others are grey, deep red, yellow,
or the colour of an apricot. These Caves must be seen before
the mind can receive an adequate impression of their beauty
and grandeur. A first-class Government Accommodation House
at Jenolan offers the highest degree of comfort.
On Sunday, a return will be made to Medlow Bath, and next
day, Monday, Sydney will be reached before lunch.
Programme.
FRIDAY, 1.30 p.m. motor from Medlow Bath to Jenolan
August 25. Caves; Stay Caves House; 7.30 p.m.
inspection.
SATURDAY, Stay Caves House; 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. in-
August 26. spection of Caves.
SUNDAY, 10 a.m., inspection of Caves; 1 p.m., lunch at
August 27. Caves House; 2 p.m., motor to Mt. Victoria;
dinner and bed at Hydro, Medlow Bath.
MONDAY, Breakfast Medlow Bath; dep., 10.6 a.m.;
August 28. Sydney, arr. 12.50 p.m.


HINTS TO TOURISTS.
Read your Programme carefully each day.
Bring your Kodak with you. j|-
Notices will be posted in the hotels each night regarding the
following day’s arrangements, and should be particularly noted.
Luggage of Passengers is limited to 56 lb.; all over that amount
will be subject to an excess charge. Luggage should be labelled
to their Sydney hotel, and cut down to the lowest possible extent
on side trips. Only 28 lb. of luggage can be allowed on Caves
Trip. Vans will attend at hotel at 7 a.m. on Thursday, August 24,
to convey luggage to 8.27 a.m. train. The balance may be left
in the room carefully labelled for storing at hotel till return.
Passengers should see that luggage intended for the Mountains is
labelled to Medlow Bath and placed ready for the vans.
Sleeping-berth tickets may be obtained at 10s. each for both
the forward and return journey.
All expenses are paid after the excursion leaves Melbourne on
May 20, as per programme, unless otherwise specified.
Passengers must make their own arrangements regarding
further hotel accommodation in Sydney after the fulfilment of
the programme.
The return portions of the railway tickets which will be issued
when booking for this trip will be available for return from
Sydney within a month from date of issue.
Country cheap excursion tickets are issued to enable excur-
sionists to have two days’ rest in Melbourne before starting on
this trip. These tickets will be made available for return within
one month.
Break of journey on this tour is not allowed in either direction.
Tickets may be made available for six months, with break of
journey within their currency, for return by express between
Sydney and Melbourne on an extra payment of 255.
Passengers must keep to the appointed times, as the programme
will be strictly adhered to, and anyone failing in this respect will
forfeit the particular trip, and no allowance will be made in
respect to trips so forfeited,
Book early with
THOS. COOK & SON.
269 Collins-st., Melbourne.
96654 Sydney: W. A. Gullick, Government Printer.


Melbourne to Sydney
Fare £10 : 10 : 0
COVERING ALL EXPENSES FIRST-CLASS.
Intending Tourists from the country when remitting
should send either P.O. order or bank draft.
Passengers wishing to travel by Express in both direc-
tions may do so on payment of £2 10s. extra.
Arrangements may also be made to travel
bv Steamer if desired.
Tickets at single fare for the return journey
will be issued from Victorian country stations
to Melbourne to holders of tickets for this tour.
NO REBATES WILL BE ALLOWED
ON EXCURSIONS NOT TAKEN.
Ideal Travel!
Every year more attractive!
Attractive change of programme
No trouble, no worry, no bother !
Travel reduced to a fine art!
Good company, jolly companions !
Hill Suitable for young or old!
jd and supervised by the New South
nment Tourist Bureau Officials.
■st renowned resorts visited.
3 1508 02236130 2 '


From Melbourne
£10:10:0 IN St yE
EIGHT DAYS’ TOUR.
From Sydney
no . //)•/) ALL EXPENSES
X . ± 1/ . t/ OUT OF SYDNEY
FIVE DAYS' TOUR.
m %£ %£
Extension to Jenolan Caves
£3:10:0 X ™ E
FOOT DAYS’ TOUR.
The railway ticket for the tour outlined in this booklet
is available for one month, and ample opportunity is
afforded for a tour to the wonderful vicinity of Mount
Kosciusko after the return from the Jenolan Caves.
Book with THOS. COOK & SON.
269 Collins-st., Melbourne.
Agents for N.S.W. GOVERNMENT TOURIST BUREAU,
Chaixis House, Sydney,
