

TOWARDS A
A REVOLUTIONARY
FEMINIST
ART
1Qp


For further information contact
MONICA SJOO
if? , PRINCESS VICORIA STR. BRISTOL, 8
LIZ MOORE ,
96 , FELLOWS RD. LONDON NWS phone (01} ?9if-2if62
ANN BERG
5 , SHERWOOD AVENUE
FALLOWFIELD MANCHESTER lif phone (061)- 22if- ifl6s
Pamhlet printed by Monica Sjoo - Bristol


ARTISTS CONNECTED WITH THE WOMEN'S LIBERATION MOVEMENT
It is difficult to become a serious artist if you are a woman* The idea
is a contradiction in terms for ?°oplci culture is created by men for
men, and woman dabble on the fringe| excluded from the mainstream by their
own demonstrable lack of heavyweight talent go goes the commonly accepted
myth, and women internalize this belief and submit to it. It*s hard to do
otherwise, when struggling against it means confronting discrimination end
hostility and contemptj it gets to be easier to believe that one Just hasn't
got. what it tabes, and from there it's a short step to not having what it
takes. Many women get bogged down in this process and stop producing
anything; often they are forced into an inauthentic choice, between being an
artist and undertaking marriage and parenthood - a choice which is not
demanded of mole artists. The role of women in art has been that of the
model, the idealized object; or of the wife who cooks and cleans while the
master creates; or the mistress who combines hoth functions.
But things are changing. Women artists are making contact with each other,
coning out of their isolation. We are beginning to acknowledge the validity
of our own and of each other's work; to learn to do without male approval,
to bo proud to show in company with each other. Wo are learning to provide
each other with the confidence to explore and develop our own vision, born
out of a new consciousness: and wo believe that the existing male-oriented
art world, distorted as it is into a sort of international stock-market,
needs the transfusion of this new vision and new consciousness in order to
survive.
This statement was written by Liz Moore for the first Women's Liberation
*
show at the Woodstock Gallery, March 1-13, 1971.


women together
a feminist critique which seeks to explain the absence of women from the
field of male-dominated art in terns of oppression nay bo wanking off the
wrong devil
because women have not written nay not be a comment so much on the
uselessness of women as on the uselessness of writing
(although I would venture to suggest, that in a world where women reign
supreme and take the reins from men and assume a tyrannous role as men do _
now, in that world, literature would not be dismissed on the assumption that,
as women hod not written it, it was not worth the studying)
literature, criticism, fame, 0.r.. some women have learnt to play the man’s game
but the old games are played out
to take the women I s.revolution seriously is to play the acceptable gane_
the voices we hoarsen screaming for recognition
arc best used now for laughing .
our situation is ludicrous
’and can now longer be taken seriously
the women’s revolution is the ultimate in absurdity
when we start from thepoint of - absurdity, our art begins
we cannot hang it in halls or perform it on stages or publish it
in hard or softback or get it reviewed in the best Sundays
our art must be our lives:
underground and groovy and intangible
refusing --dl bourgeois concepts and established games of respectability
that keep us so nicely in our place
accompanied by the laughter we have been taught to despise -
the laughter of frivolity
the laughter that refuses to take things seriously
the laughter of joy
the laughter that says no to recognition
for once recognized, they have got you
an elusive, turned-on, life is groovy
and only the groovy can laugh at itself
becoming a writer is about sitting alone In a .room and doing it
written words will not change much
those who are in control of our consciousness can afford us a writer or two
don't think that because liberated things get said, we have got liberation
a life full of creative energy IS art
only a drucied massed audience needs the artist^
just as the artist needs the dre :pd massed audience
each one of us is an ariist \ I }
pat van twest


LETTERS CONCERNING REFUSAL OF SHOW AT ARTS COUNCIL GALLERY
Dear Susan Grayson,
Thank you for your letter and returned photographs of work. lan extrenely sorry
that "your committee regretfully feels unable to give WOlill POWER an exhibition in the
gallery in 1972" 0... not only for myself, arm Derg, and ioonica Sjoo (ed.note - more
wonon were to be included" these were the inittatars) but for the thousands and thous-
ands of women it would have been a source of hope and inspiration for as well as for nen.
I an asking you to please present this letter to your connittee in the hope that they
nay reconsider their decision not to give us a show, What is the proportion of nen ter--
women in your connittee? are you and inn Couri the only female nenbers? Can you not
discuss this important natter with the wonen once again? Is it possible that your own views
are intinidated by the prevailing nasculine attitudes of the nen? (It happens to- many, many,
Wonen.) Also, what is the proportion of accepted applicants for shows this year and say,
the past two years? If, as I suspect there are nore accepted male artists than flenale artis
istsa, you will surely see for yourself that sone kind of discrimination is going on,
regardless of the 'rational' reasons given, and that the art world is as guilty of this
prejudice as are other spheres of life.
In general, the history of humanity is as a vast cesspool, stinking of diabolical
prejudice and outrageous stupidity. Will the human race never learn? Is it doomed to this
vicious circle of repeated mistakes, nad blunders either because it cannot or will not
learn from its post mistakes, until it is too late to save our race from universal chaos.
Is it not tine for humanity, for ALL OF US TO caKE UP aKD LOOK CLOSELY aT WEUT IS KEALLY
GOING MIOUND i*ND INSIDE OF US?
Your rejection of our art is nore than the Serpentine's Gallery's rejection of just
another throe painters amongst the thousands that must occur due to lack of insight or
space and tine or money. Your gallery is rejectin the Female Principle in one of its
most creative aspects and at a tine when it requires universal recognition and express-
ion, for we are at a most crucial point in the history of the world because the Female
Principle has been denied and oppressed for centuries. This has caused a terrible imbal-
ance in our ninds the world over, and is directly responsible for most of the misery that
afflicts hunanity today, including innumerable wars, pollution, overpopulation, starv-
ation, the rising crine rate, and nany other unnecessary catastrophes.
And so, at this dangerous point in tine, and in keeping with past and present decadent
tradition, rejected the ARTISTS OP WOKEN'S LIBHuTION and the contents of our *JiTS
I‘ii.KIFESTO | and whatever your reasons nay be , financial or otherwise,- you can still manage
to show male artists, who in general have a much easier tine in the art world because they
are accepted as thinking and accomplished human beings, whereas apparently female artists
are not, for it has been shown tine and tine again, that our contribution is considered
either irrelevant or dispensable because it is female.
Olir work is concerned with even nore than half of the human race - to the whole human
te.ee - to those who use their brains and hearts when studying our work.- Ue are artists
of the present and the future for we have vision. To regard us as being self-seeking,
snail-tine dabblers would be making a monumental mistake, one which your gallery will ■
one dry view with regret and enbarrassnent. Is it really possible that you are all-
oblivious to the strong renewed interest in the Female Principle that exists in both men
and women? Have you really no idea of the great need to know and understand- this better,
a need felt by many, many people - even if it is often misunderstood through fear or a ■
conditioned hostility? Gan you not really see the connection between this denied express-
ion and the terrible wars that are still with us? Can you not see the connection between
the Feminine Principle and the daily increasing interest in Eastern neligions and their
arts ns well as the restlessness and fear that increases daily? Have you not yet^
observed that Women's Liiteration is one of the most vital issues of the day at this point
in Humanity's highly uncertain future and that any gallery who show our work is bound to
do well because there is on enormous amount of interest in our work, both conscious and
subconscious - for both hostile and hopeful reasons. Can you not see for these reasons
that the public and the 'elite' would flock to see whet these women can do and 'what has
all this fuss been about' - provided the advance publicity has been relatively adequate
and not necessarily expensive. And just as Picasso is known for being an innovator
so ,we will be known for vitally important reasons. ' ' .
Apparently the Serpentine Grillery is not aware - "being uneer so much pressure from apjili
plicants for exhibitions in the coning year". Yes, I know there are too many artists and
too few galleries to show then. It is highly probable that most of the male artists will
be male artists. If this is not the case then I will be glad to be told- that- I am wrong«
You.are simply carrying on this terrible prejudice at a tine when theexoeption-to- the
rule should be made and for far more important reasons than for- just bettering your let,
and ours. It would be to your honour and profit if-you choose-to make this- exception..
lan asking you to reconsider your VERDICT, to please give us an opportunity-to reveal
to this world some of the OTHER hopes, dreams, and visions of its soul - for the first
time in the last two thousands years at least. An exhibition of our work will be unique
and the beginning of many things but most of all the beginning of hope for many people.
TO DENY US YOU Alffi aDKITTUG YOU AliS IN FAVOUR OF HUSAJIITY'S SELF-DESTRUCTION.
3


To deny us is to admit that you ore in favour of humanity's self-destruction.
PLEASE RECONSIDER. Awaiting a further reply,
Beverly Skinner
The original letter fom the Arts Council on the 17th August '7l with the first
refusal. _
" Photographs ofyour work were seen by ny committee at their recent meeting
held to consider proposals for the 1972 season at the Serpentine Gallery.
They were under so much pressure, that they regretfully felt unable to offer
Womanpower on exhibition in the Gallery ih 1972. If however it eventually
becomespossible to keep the Gallery open throughout theyear, we may be able
to reconsider your work for exhibition at some future date.
flours sincerely.
Sue Grayson. "
Second refusal from Arts Council following Beverly's letter. (23Dec.)
"Of course 'some kind of discrimination is going on'. That is what the
Serpentine Committee is for and we would claim thatit discriminates not
against women but for quality. You are probably right in assuming that more
men than women get exhibitions at the Serpentine, but then we also get more
applications from men than from women, and in asty case no one keeps xount on
the sexuai—fa?entiar any more than on that of race or creed. We nay, of course,
haste-mfiefea mistake in not offering you and your friends a show at the Serpentine.
It seems worth pointing out to you, though, that your message is scarcely a
new one and that vehemence in itself is not interesting. This nay sound brutal
but I assume you would expect an honest reply to your questions.
Sue Grayson. "
IMAGES ON WOMANPOWER - ARTS MANIFESTO
(trying to give a rough and necessarily incomplete idea of what we are about.)
We are the artists of the oppressed peoples.
We as women bear on our shoulders oppression stretching back into the ancient
past. WE WERE THE FIRST OPPRESSED
We reject the abstract researches, playful gimmicks characteristic of contented
and successful male artists. Although aware that these pursuits are not entirely
without purpose and interest, we feel that it is NOT possible as members of an
oppressed group - half of the human race - and with powerful means of communication
in our hands to sit around playing games with the surface of reality.
We accept that early 20th. century artists hod to escape from Victorian
romantic illusions and embrace reality (beyond illusion) via cubism and collage.
Like scientists they were trying to get at the reality of vision on the level of
atoms and cell-structures, the light and forms that make up what we consider to be
the everyday world. In the early 20th. century painters were also enthusiastic
about technology because it seemed to hold the seeds of the future. Futurism,
constructivism sought to explore technological reality - but NOW technology is
emerged in a commercialism so obsceneand decadent that for artists to embrace
such values is beyond our comprehension.
Commercial life is the enemy of art and art cannot accept its visual signs as
part of our language. DEATH TO THE PLaSTIC CULTURE. Our century has tried to_
make art a part of reality, but the reality in our culture is crass, exploitative,
capitalistic reality and our function as artists should be to expose the sickness
of this culture and NOT to embrace it.
Perhaps the only thing that can serve us now is sort of tragic realism which
is not expressionism because it is too real.
Nature and Machine cannot live together - the living tissue is ground to dust..
"A small and beautiful child walks thru the blasted scene of disaster - a scene
that is atomised and disintegrated by the last convulsions of a society that will
not die, but hangs on, desiring to bring everything to dust, amongst violent tombs
of sordidlty and despair, supermarkets and bingo-halls. " Where is the glorious
new -world of the machine?
Art, like science, must explore the world, attempt to heal it; abstract art now


serves the ruling classes because it mystifies reality, it is undangorous, undisturbing
- it has beeone like patterns on the level of interior decoration, the tedious tech-
nicalities of advertising. It cannot be used as a. tool either exploring mystical reality
or exploring social reality. MS UJECT IT. ME Ski NO TO si ITI USTI ACT IONS, to the
'art for art's sake' philosophy of the privelcged white niddle-class male artworld.
WE THE OPPRESSED cannot afford this empty play with words and forms, for us the import-
and task is to convey to people to WOMEN - their dignity and strength and beauty -
OUk FkST kKD FUTURE. God - Woman giving birth to the universe out of her bloody womb,
life, death, rebirth - the eternal mystegy of life and its richness.
HOW DOES ONE COMMUNIQUE WIEN'S STRENGTH, STRUGGLE, USING UP FkOM OPPKESSION^
BLOOD, CHILDBIRTH, SEXUUITY - IN STUPES kND TRLJGLES, the tine is past when women
dared not portray their fears, hatred, experience of oppression - we are no longer afraid
to show in images, the violence of our anger and remorse, and also our great sadness and
love.
True love and inspiration know no false limits and prejudice cs to technical, means,
klnost every male artist in theprst was a member of the elite. Their leisure was
bought at the’ cost of mothers, daughters, sisters, wives - who were allowed to be
workers, models, supporters, secretaries, drudges but NEVER allowed themselves to create,
(as well, as reaping the wealth created by the working-class and third-world peoples)
Wo, the ones, who have been subjected to humiliation every day of ourlives, denied
our identity, history, and tradition, are not the ones to stand back coolly and ana-
lytically talk of objectivity and abstraction. So-cislled objectivity - what is it but the
separation of thought and reason from our real desires and wishes? hen use the terns
to hide they have desires and wishes. Women ere expected to follow suit and deny their
own, PUCK YOUR "OBJECTIVITY" kND YOUR MUDLERCLkSS CULTUREI
We want to give expression to the IwikL hopes neods and beliefs of women - of people-
struggling to escape from oppression both material and psychological - servitude end
contempt.
Even our history must bo rewritten, kre we to continue bearing the myth that women
are, have been, end will be passive, uncrentivo, and mentally inferior? The split between
body-soul, material-spirit is a. false separation of patriarchal civilizations who have
formulated theories end philosophies over thousands of years excusing and re-inforeing
our oppression by saying that women represent the neg tivo, the dark, the passive, the
non—creative and non— spiritual aspect end matter that men have to surpass and exploit
in order to become pure spirit, pure activity, pure artist, aggressive - and defined
by men - positive energy.
LIES UID LIES kRS WE BLED ONI We were slaves with the consciousness of slaves.
But myths are not destroyed solely by social change and logic.
Wpnon painters wish to destroy the myth of inferiority and replace it with a new pride
and joy in womanhood - in sisterhood - and of all aspects of life that have been deformed
and brutalised by capitalism and the patriarchal, atomised family. We also want to
release men from their narrow, pseudo-scientific dogmatism, the need to assort and sub-
jugate in order to feel strong (some non canhot get a 'hard-on 1 unless they can degrade
and humiliate a w'man sexually and mentally). Womankind, like the surface of this eorth
has been ravaged because of this fUse need.
But now WS kldi USING to re-create at last our strength, dignity, wise on, and creat-
ivity of women of the ancient past. ME WISH TO kCHIEVE WOiiLD VIEW. ... -
In ancient cultures life and art wore integrated. Art was the great religious rituals
- the initiation dramas that expressed the collective dreams and experience of the
whole community concerning life and the universe. Music, dance, masks, carvings, nura s,
nil served a purpose end together created a vholenoss. But... art which had once been
the. expression of both sexes boc-me later divided into the Sacred and the Profane.
Sacred art beca.no a male province in thehrnds of a male priesthood, when the priestesses
of the Great Mother wore deposed at the beginning tg the patriarchal ora, and women
were left with the ’lessor arts’ of pottery, weaving, etc. #
Our dreams, hopes, feelings, cannot be realised in present patriarchal, capitalistic
society that denies ill experience or expression-that does not serve the exploitati -n ox
human beings in the service ,of capitalism, knd the most denied of all are the creams,
aspirations, feelings, intuition and experience of women. WDM® LlVii, ®UOW LIFE.
There is n one—sox view in art today; what we always sac is the men s vision o
himself, the world, and women. We are sick, sick, sick, of the continual visual exploit-
ation of women’s bodies, of women as objects. "I paint with my prick" saia uenoir -
only too true,........ . , „
But we are women and WE kIS SUBJECTS and will portray ourselves as such and so at
last wo will end the ages of pornography-vision of women. If a woman dares to portray
a non as her sexual object there is an outcry heard all over tho land. Uo. note -
Monica Sjoo did just that and her work was ordered to be taken down by the police -
in the haven of artists - St. Ives, Cornwall)
We are told we arc not in tho mainstream of artistic exploration, th t wa-x ~
exploring modern forms; that wo ’ere out on a limb’ - but we toll y that IT IS YOU
TTUA r-T? ATW nw L T.TKTR!


What you have now Is a half—world imagery at the point of stagnation. Women
are presently accepted into the art world only if they conform to the accepted
attitude of the already dominant male art view of whet art is and wnsj again
HIS vision. Male artists have explored every aspec# of the half world view
and expression, they express frustration in thrusting big, bigger, and biggest
objects and canvasses, all with no content whatsoever and with no relation
to real human feelings or aspirations. They have reached a dead-end.
3ut for women our explorations start now - we do not identify creative
energy with phallic thrusting aggressiveness. Perhaps women have-in-fsot
great artistic traditions in the ancient past. Who created the cave-paintings?
If one knows that the cave was the womb and the sanctuary of the Great
Mountain Mother, who was served by female priests and who was the mother of
nil animals, one can -.'ell ask if the murals were not 'the work of women.
Pottery was invented by women and the forms and patterns of cncieny pottery
are some of the greatest treasures of the past. The palaces of Crete with
their beautiful murals and central heating systems - were not they the work
of women printers and architects? In i-.frica women are musicians and dancers,
they have secret songs and dances. ' Why so little is known about female
cultures is because the majority of anthropologists have been men and these
women's initiations and secret societies are not open to men obsevers.
.■ln folk music in England a great many of the recorded folksongs were taken
down from women singers. In America there was a whole tradtion of blues
singers like Bessie Smith and Mr. Rainey. So little is known about women’s,
art because male historians have little interest in recoiding what women
have created and achieved. It has been opositive embarrassment to them,
but human life is an inter-action between two sexes. Art must be the express-
ion of the total human world and only art fed by female and male views
inter-acting c. nbe vital. The time is MOW and it is overduel
Ann Berg and Monica Sjoo.
Because of the KIALISTIC ALTSIkOTS ATTITUDE, which asks: black or white? ■
left or right?, heaven or hell? good or bed? wrong or right? inferior or
superior? because of this deformed and deforming prejudice, we live in an ■■
increasing danger of self-annihilation instead of living in a paradise on
.earth. The question which the human race must ask itself is not which, but
HOW? How can I be? How cm we fully be? How can we express andexpsnence
our inner richness. We should explore the ways which make us fully aware,
take risks, and be prepared to fight for the freedom of the human soul.
We must overcome our fears of Being. Only by being, only by discovering an
creating in the*way we want to, need to, will we feel our strength, our self,
our capacity for laughter and passion, perception, creative energies end powers.
Unfortunately for us the patriarchal authoritarian society casts aeep shadows
over thehumcn heart - these fuller expressions of human beings cannot take
place} therefore our potential is enormous. Human bexngs _tomorrow will not
be like they are today for we will be fuller people. Our ideas of_f otmihjrty
and masculinity will be quite different from what they are now. Presont
ideas represent our stunted, crippled, and imprisoned selves, we-ar*. cari-
catures of what we could and should be, ' : '
. Beverly Skinner.
» in the Womb of the Mother there was the undivided world that precedes form.
i-.t birth we forget but we never forget completely. The memory of the
undivided primordial world lingers on ns *a secret image of desire’ and this
is the real meaning of the ’wish to return to the womb’. It is not at all
a sign of unhealthy pathology but it represents a natural longing to re-
establish the cosmic connection. 1 ’
Perhaps one day we will be able to .control technology and live in peace with
Nature again .... but perhaps it will be too late: THE SEAS ARE DYING
and the Sen is the MOTHER - out of the Sea was created ALI - the Earth is
scorched and crumbling, the'Earth Mother; is dying and so are all her creatures
that crawl and fly and •walk''and run - and so is all her vegetation.


WHEN ONLY THE SON OF THE SUN IS " RIGHT "
THEN ONLY THE CONSCIOUS MIND STAYS " RIGHT "
THEN ONLY WHITE IS " RIGHT «
THEN ONLY DAY IS « RIGHT "
THEN ONLY SPIRIT IS " RIGHT "
AND THE SOUL IS LEFT TO CRAWL (DN MISERY ON THE RIGHT.....
FOR WITHOUT COLOUR AND THE OTHER
THERE IS GREAT DIVISION IN THE WORLD.
the daughter of the moon is " left "
THE UNCONSCIOUS IS" LEFT "
THE SERPENT OF WISDOM IS " LEFT "
AND BLACK IS " LEFT "
AND NIGHT IS " LEFT "
AND " LEFT " IS WRONGED
AHD OUR FLESH IS WRONGED
WHEN ONLY RIGHT IS RIGHT.
SO THE SOUL IS RIGHT
TO BE IN MISERY,
LEFT AS IT IS,
IN AGONY
ON THE RIGHT LINE,
IMPRISONED ... ON ITS TCKECSTASY
WITHOUT COLOUR .nWifi/teE/)THER.
FOR OUR HEARTS ARE
ON THE LEFT OF US
AS IS THE EAR,, EYE,
HAND AND FOOT OF US.
AND IF WE KILL OUR LEFT
WE DO IT WITH OUg RIGHT TO DIE
BUT HOT WITH 0U& RIGHT TO LIVE
BUT IF WE LOVE OUR LEFT
AS WE DO OUR RIGHT ~
THM WILL THE WWAIN MEET .
THEM WILL THE TWO FUSE
AND LOVE AND LIGHT AND LIFE
IS RIGHT AS WELL AS LEFT...
AHD -PARADISE IS EVERYWHERE.
BEVERLEY SKINNER JUNE 10th 1971.


TOWARDS A REVOLUTIONARY FEMINIST ART
It is difficult to write about revolution and art, to write with clarity and
cohesion on feminism and art presents a real challenge. I have begun this article
with two quotations from a pamphlet called 'Towards a Revolutionary Art'.
ON REVOLUTION AND ART "Art is always the expression of a particular
culture. It is not some kind of creation of mankind in the abstract; but it is made
by particular artists dealing with specific social conditions and in class society
art will always be narked by the expression of different classes. It is important
to stress this fact as many bourgeois apologists are ontinuall# attempting to-
place art in a world of its own, removed fion hunan history, removed from different
cultures, removed fion the class struggle. It is easy to understand why they di.
It is what the ruling classes of all eras do; by attempting to 'universalize 1
their world outlook as being in hunan nature they hope to preserve that power firever
which of course is absurd, as history clearly shows who rules one day nay not the
"xiext'l an’l'will nost assuredly fall eventually. The bourgeoisie at this tine in
U.S* have a monopoly on art and use it to their own benefit."
ONJdQMSN'S REVOLUTION,, AND ART "The necessity and importance of the women's
struggle can also be dealt with through art. Issues which have cone out of the
■wemeh's struggle which haVe rSLsed the level of struggle higher should be pointed
out. As with the different cultures works should be structtnddthrough the eyes
of the wonen then&elves; and as with the different cultures the issues of women's
liberation should be place within the context of the class struggle. Many of the
mssues in this area have been presented fron a middle-class perspective by the
nedia and this in turn has been used to create divisions and confusion among
the people, radical whites particularly. Art works can be useful here also by
creating works which present the different class consciousness among woman, and by
pointing out the different forms of oppression women suffer in different classes.
All this should bo d.oue however as mentioned above through the yyes of the wonen
ond, : -preferably to women artists." \
TO THE ABOVE QUOTES
Art in our'society has not only been the expression of bourgeois culture - it
has been the expression of male culture. The particular artists dealing with
specific social conditions have been-male; whil individual men did not create
patriarchal society they have all benofitted from it - albeit in extremely
varying degrees - in ways that no woman could. (MALE = SUBJECT FEMALE = OBJECT)
hen have even defined creative-energy ns phallic energy and if we are talking
about the ruling classes what about guns, missiles, rocketships? Question the
relationship of masculinity to classoppression. Successful (wealth and power,io.)
non 1 feminize '-poor men", black men, by placing then : in situations whore they are
impotentsto control their own lives, economically dependent on the few with
groat wealth and power, are nearly all wonen. This pamphlet has a strong male
bias not so much in what it says but in what it does not say. (TEA)
"-•-Jdhy should "I* a radical feminist artist, be told by a nan to place issues
o£ Women's Liberation within the context of the class struggle? I have not only
been oppressed.by capitalism but by individual revolutionary male artists,
just like yourselves, brothers. Let's say if I do a painting about rape,
brothers, are you telling no that is not political? Too subjective, too personal
perhaps? Are you getting what I mean? .-A huge part of our oppression has been
our total definition by men, we are worth as much in this world as our father
or our husband is worth. Whereverei there is a black or a. poor i-ian there is his
wofaen down just that bit lower. It is naive and dangerous to attack 'class'
society without placing an equal emphasis on sexism. And the pamphlet does not
attack the nuclear family, sex-role conditioning, Romantic Love, and monogamy
(§.e. seeing the loved-as'■An object, a possession).
\ Your pamphlet has a calm, measured, passionless tone to it - with the exception
ofVthe poem article. Take this step and that step and things will be okay;
gSt rid of all the bourgeois pigs in the art world (and maybe the feminists like
lie who divide the class'' struggle?) and everything will be revolutionary—pure*
/ No real sensitivity’is shown'to artists of oppressed groups in that
(female and black ropy'resent these guilty white-male-revolutionary- - -
trying trhzrn in our time. The latest ego-tripping stance for men.
kevolut ionapie'S^and/ artists at one go. Super. Don’t condescend to tell us what
4p paint either; after being shut up for thousands of years ue have plenty of
material, thank yptf. YOU could paint and write about losing dominance over wonen,
your growing interest in children (?), your lessening competitiveness with
the death of your obsessions with phalluses and phallic energy« Thank you
also for suggesting to female revolutionary artists that they


paint the different ftaJs r us
painting the different ferns if sexist consciousness present‘ anong' nan; perhaps thing's
night, get a. little too- heavy for you# But I thought I heard ’art of. the people* ~ /
sanewhoro bask there* Surely c. streetwalker qualifies os one. of the proletariat? had
what if J3SE started painting her nightnares, dreans, cud visions? How could she dare
without 'haring a niddlo-class Dale -.revolutionary artist standing aver her shoulder
telling her to put her ideas into the context of the class struggle?
There arc.' differences between us, yet. I an not advocating total cessation of
connunicction between nale revolutionary artists and fenale revolutionary artists.
I ask for greeter sensitivity towards us. frora you and yet I on pessimstic about this
denand. The society you attack is run by nen whon you dpcct hostility towards. let
you cannot ask us to feoi-tho sane hostility towards the wives of those nen. Although
sons arc in aposition to oppress other wonen (donostics,etc ■) these wpnen have-no
identity of their own except through the nen they are 'owned* by. i-J.though a few
wansn nay really go overboard in internalising the values of the ruling class -
racisn and classisti their status is such that they could find thensolvcs living on
the dole with several kids if their narriages cracked up. This is already happening ,
in Wonqn's Lib- - wonen leaving woll=off husbands and choosing to take the^oc onortic •
consequences. My awn nother was a niddl e— class wife who opted for 3&00 dollars c
year with throe kide, and at that tine in North Lnarica 3500 dollars was the poverty
level lino.
IMMEDIATE PARCTICAL THINGS WE CMN DO TO COMBAT SEXISM AS FEMINIST ARTISTS
■l . Find ways wo con be independent econonicalXy of the gallery systen (and husbonaa,
boyfrionds,fothers). It is a novor-nentienod n t s novonent
(and left-wing groups in general) ihat we find it 'dirty* to discuss honey. I would
estimate that over three-quarters of wobsn | have nen in the ijavqnont jospccirJu.y the
active wonen) ore either in sono way .ccsajocvod directly with lnstitutions
(students,teachers,lecturers, on grants ? etc.) or haVe family (husbpna.,prx6nts,live-
with-boyfriond) they carl share with, projects that art a^isticalilsatisfying,
connunicatc to wonen feninist-sbcirlisi and bring In ehougK.Gcqbohic return to
cover :tho project and living, expenses are necessary, ' 1 1 ; ‘
t.Posters and prints.- Those arc ideal political nediuns. Thoy .•an- he sold at low*prices
- accessible to elk In the case of posters end loss eonplox prints. At conferences anc
in gnnil shops. k political criticism of 60*3 posters would bo tho crass exploitation
of LOVS/PSuCE and Che Guevara’s pretty face by large companies. id so tho gullibility
of left-wing people who bought those postersl the aesthetic side has not boon utilizco
too inaginctivoly; nearly nil the Women’s Lib posters I have seen have boon dona from
literature, k printing .press wbuld jarebubly bo convenient hero. Lists of
new non-sexist children’s books could be run«off and distributed to. schools, at t.l.n.
nootings,door-to-door,at nootings of wolfr.ro nothers. , these boo„s,so avento-
garde educationally, will probably be expensive) Mo coult. write am. and
man-off little books oUrsolvos!, I ,So»>-no renson rrvblutionnry artists shoLla b... ,
excluded fron projects such as-this; lot .then show equal concern for chp.trcr s
conditioning and counter-conditioning, iuid those new bonks arc being put out by liberal
publishers wtto*-acy refrain fron assoilJn# the nuclear family, non agony, and
flonontic Love. , , a , ~ .
/, Interruption of gallery shows that rrc dopt-ding V* v:>rmu This has kr. opened _
already in the TJ-.S-. Have a canbinntlon r.rtifftic/political happening* Street, -^untru,
" a. feminist rap/ presentation of demands, sell sono posters utc. temy owners
with their, superficial desire to-be hip - politically awcrc, lay themselves wxde-
onon to this kind of tfekoover. : .
One artist who is naking a nano for hinsclf at the oxponp-of wonen s
the aslishlrtia# Ulon Jones. Ho aifl o sculpture chill fSJmm fOJf, *M>
CHi*in. Mr.do out of throe wonen dressed in tho usual bi.-ck f.' rt;T-b...1t spike- ..o
style. Now sono could-say this is a conmon of wonen as both •
and household objects dxqcpt for the "fact that is ffft
in a nirror on the floor.\Look at the. vanity and the^stupidxty, of wonenl few work iw
called ’erotic’; obviously eroticisn is. synonynous-*with\saaisr^to + this .oe uty.
c Plndinp out why wonen have never boon able to do very ouch.-an. tho worlc .. *.<ll . j
Lnffblt of question to ask why is out creativity so uncertain and
to tOnoks, <M spoils. Wo. caiU hwo series of noottocs open to ns «.ny vor..n
ns oosslKlo (and snail groups too) and perhaps suepest certato vonon for discussion -
Inals Kin Doris Lossing, Kc-thcrino Hansfiold, Doris losoing (particularly re-even
S“he Sldto Sotebookjrsylvia Plath. iood wo arc even now seeing oicollorrt writers
arising out of the fontolst novonont - Robin Morgan, Rita Mao Brown, .c.
- -Thn oxprosaton 'fenale artist' with its dlninuitive nalo connotations h..s not in
the wonen with children. Perhaps non
n2oh P to have wonen whoeoreato kids and pea.t art aboutl b- cu . ■
SS wonen with children to fontolst artists' groups - ba.bysLbttog etc.


THE DOUBLE OPPERSSION OF FEMLE ARTISTS
... ~TM> \r±fr -Salrjgas-;-ha^wTiirt:sn"tfaartrln- thermals artist fenr-l^-traits--mm
However on a pedestal-a.,malm,artist .may be, the real power lias..in-thatrands of the
and„critics. -Men-irr of the world - from-the
generals thraugh-thejMlosophcsrs - have split It with 'dinhxrt.ominß. MLSCDL INS-FBHII'TINE'.
INT3LI^TUiJ[^2Mn , IONiL.
UXildiX^-IKTUTTOTI.- The description forced by the .second qurliidos in-the..preceding pairs.
~appLias-ta..women. ..and -dso .partially to rjolc-.artiste. (ILL n«r> cfa ; oig.e of
activ& over passive),.,. The- description of q. person..having- - one- of th-nsn qnal-it■i a
thc'-tmtalah»2nce-of''the.polarized quality.
... -I on defined.by dl the negative, (non l s definition icu). foml*o - qualities,, .'and-if X' ”
atso-tm-n..painter who. works in a.-surrealist stylo, well I can forget forever being
iKaaaded,,in...intellectual.d.lscussi,on.-.Ta- be rr - & female .double..-. -
this has not been written about before and I think it is. very important somehow,
fha. occurring in the .women's movement now that .obliges us-to label women as
’ male—identified • and * female^identifiedS when after all we are all women and-oppressed es
w0men...,.,. Women ..who-nttonpt to become-counterfeit non may think they arc accepted and
respected .by men but wo know that whole scene., leads nowhere and have sympathy. We do not
see how the issue., of 'wamen-with-aon,won.en-without-nGn is in a shbtle- way T/.rpr, our
DEFINITION FROM ]JSHw..ThG. dichotomy men made we. reduplicate unless-wc taka-core.
>wa£ Eleii '^^artists are..doubly emotional^irrational, intuitive,etc. - ever in need of Big
teddy gallary owner>-art patron, critic, etc. Sane women nay bend over backwards -to
«rvoad - iaxts- stereotype - ruthlessly checking,anriysing-/teashing their emotions which is
ateo unhealthy and anti-creative. (Every tine I was upset as a child case or both of ny
parents would explain it away as my • artiness’)
Brother artist is. also ’feminized’ in a negative way by the men with power does not
went to know about our problems-, After playing all dry at having feminine qualities
ho wants to ho Klngcock. when he comes hone.
lo bo an artist, (human oveAT) -should, nearr being sensitive-to other people:, perceptive
of one’s environment. For women to have- been sensitive fully to their situation prior
to the emergence of a Women’s Liberation Movement would surely have driven the most
perceptive ones to suicide or madness. Bom into a world our sex in no way made, our
sexuality repressed to enable us to be better possesions of the sox who defines our
places, to bo then expected to smile, laugh, and not grumble in any way about' our-lot
or wc would not be ’real women’.... UfD THEN HE ISKSD' WHERE, IRS YOUR mr.'P./.T
■ARTISTS-?. _ '
AECESSITY FOR WOMEN'S COLLECTIVES TO CHANGE ART
The, art world of the international— investment gone is The sickly and arrogant
egos of male artists nr.ko one last phallic stab to cash in on Big Money. Half of the
world has been excluded from the art world; half of humankind ’ s vision hr.p bean lost
until now. • "
W 533 'our groat talent emerge in some Utopian society where wo no longer use words
like Mon and Women (Women and hen) but rather People. Ifter all our battles have been
f ought and won? When wo all. walk hand. in hand in International PaoplehoodS NO NO NO
NO NO NO .......... t ....but maybe even now within the next few years when wo ere tom.
by the-old and cxlvou ■Howards the new. Realizations and discoveries. Overcoming our
dependence on.men and idoxiW.fyjn fc : with- other women.; painfully/j oyously seeking sisterhood.
Renouncing our definition by non end starting to define ourselves. Analysing the ways
wa turn our .hostilities on one another rather on the nen/institutlons that oppress.
Ana the ways and wiles ef horizontal oppression are many and wondrous, as.we have
witnessed. ( also the emphasis on •masculinity* in Black Power )
Wo are only beginning to emerge os whole human beings, to define ourselves as the svibje
of our. lives. Wc must gain strength from our sisters who will not resent our growing
visions raid talents in a way that most non would.
Wocjon could share studios^ together or rent, .studios near one another; it is more
economical to buy cameras, film equipment, etc. together - . Discuss common problems
(negative backgrounds of art-school, close relationships with non jealous of female talent
and subsequent creative blocks, depression over quality, and quantity of orroSs work)
In a worlc. in which- so many are enslaved,economically and mentally, wc will never
probably attain perfect freedom (whatever that is I) within our lifetimes. let if we «nn
manage to stop looking over our shoulders at the Man and look sideways to the sisters
holding out their hands. - while still of course keeping the class struggle within its
proper context of. the women's struggle - our vast reservoir of hitherto untapped female
talent will emerge as our struggle to become self-realizing, total human beings crumbles
the violent phallic nightmare threatening us with death.
ROSLYN SMXTHI : : ’
BRISTOL ENGLuNDJ nPRIL 10. .


after the parting
not broken ny heart
but heavy
with the sagging weight
of years over-distanced
bearing too much
not lengthened ny day
but narrowed
on this particular journey
j 4 which conpanions
have nore importance
than destinations
not ill-fitting ny grief
but tinely
signifying'the shift
into alternative tenpos
and the birth of the angle between.
pat van twest
the death throes of humanity
she vacillates - ; he struts
she whispers; he chuckles
she soothes; he condescends
she plans; he takes
she worries; he yells
she capitulates; he demands
she apologizes; he dramatizes--
she waits; he dominates
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks; she is fucked
he fucks, she is fucked, etc., etc.
Roslyn.Snythe
on hearing art is dead one too nany tines
what' 'could she do that would please then, pull out her fenalo inpersonation
act yet one more tine, having thought it was all right to drop the penitences
the endless apologies for self, creativity, intelligence
no nore would do, than to stand and nunble those defenses
guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guilt guiljs
are you questioning ny allegiance to wonen-revolution-wonen shall I pull out
the old much shuffled cards, the mother struggling with throe kids, _
'the suicide attempt, the nervous breakdown, the abortion, the miscarriage,
the police, the narried nan, the dominating father,
and all before the age of twenty.
nv life arranges itself arranges itself before ne, the only ace ny talent,
surrender the self they dictate; naked then would I be ready for rape and assault
not even for you ny sister will I continue to be stripped d>wn, denied ny identity
iustify .explain defend apologize repent ....
ny tongues once cut by nen grow back; they will not be stilled again.
Roslyn Snythe .
Arns akimbo, hips akimbo, knees splayed;
Trunks, articulate, thrusting the apple
rounds of breasts and buttocks, laughing faces
and eyes, bright coloured, fringed anemones,
sea-washed,, seen to .say "We have freed ourselves,
finding each other. You are not as we.
Tides that ebb and flow in us are blood-warn
and we are water and by blood.
We need you still but, having found ourselves,
we need you less; now we are no longer
desperate." flowing bodies.
Gentle feet-*- -slip-shod,v-pejind to drum, string
and wood-wind -voices-.--Women are dancing
their own rhythna, univalent, undismayed.
Angela Bodaway


A WOMAN'S STRUGGLE TO CREATING FEMINIST IMAGES - A STATEMENT
(an attack on the theory, that test-tube babies will solve 'the problem
of women's oppression')
I have a Marxist approach to the question of what are the causes of women's
oppression. But since I consider that the only True Revolution will cone about
when the silent mass of women finally rise I will not join a leftwing group but
work with women in the Women's Liberation Movement.
One can sea women's oppression as caused by biology, in that case any revolution-
ary changes will make no difference to our oppression and test-tube babies will be
the only way out OR one can see economic caused for the oppression of women and in
that case changes in the economic structure, the end of private property and the
development of other forms of living together other than the father-centred family
which is relatively recent, will lead to the end of our oppression,
I, accept Evelyn Reed's reasoning in the Myth of Women's Inferiority and Is
Biology Women's Destiny? She soys; " Females in nature stiffer no disabilities
compared to males.... It was with the rise of patriarchal class society that the
biological make-up of women became the ideological pretext for keeping then
in a servile status. " " Out of the maternal brood in the animal world, there
arose the maternal clan system or 'matriarchy' in the ancient world. "
( read also Robert Briffoult 'The Mothers', Rachel Levy 'The Gates of Horn'.)
" It is only in patriarchal class society, which came a million years after the
birth of the human species, that women were reduced to an animal-like level,
forced to procreate and preoccupy herself with her maternal functions AT THE
EXPENSE OF the higher human values developed in the ourse of human life."
She also points out that it was BECAUSE of the human females nnternale
functions - which led to the division of labour where men were away for long periods
hunting and enabled women as a group - collective - toodevelop the first crafts
and industries. Women dug the earth which led to agriculture and got to know the
plants and herbs from which they developed nedecine etc. Women's work laid the
foundation for all human culture. IT WAS THE FEMALE WHO BEGAB „_L.IFE AND
THEREBY FOUNDED THE NSW *ND UNIQUE HUMAN SPECIES. U
The religious collective projection of these groups of women producers and
creators was- the ancient Great Goddess - the cosmic mother. The First religious
concept was of the Great Goddess. Her symbol, the cunt-triangle, is found in the
cave-dwellings. The cove itself was her womb, tomb, and temple. When women
developed agriculture around 10,000 B.C. the ancient Mother of the wild places,
caves, mountains, and wild animals now emerged as the all-powerful Goddess who
mokes the earth fruitful, the great serpent bringing wisdom and new foods, the
labyrinth of death and the door to the other world. The Irst mediators with the
Godhead were ecstatic women and still today priestly clothes are 'women's clothes 1
even in the most advanced of religions - . .? male historians have implied that
the Ancient Great Goddess 'Our Lady' of matriarchal civilisations was qjdte simply
a fertility goddess and mother-earth. This was NOT sol In ancient Egypt, ISIS
was the Mother of the Deep, depicted carrying a vase on her head which represented
the watery abyss out of which all things cane. SHE was The Lady of Light and
Heaven - the Great Cow - containing the heavens and the stars, who sustains the
creation by her milk. She was also the God of Wisdom. Isis has a rather
unimportant half-sister, Nephthrys, who represented the more earthly aspects of the
Divine Mother. She is referred to as the Mother of the Body, and as one of the
'nursing mothers of Horrus'.
Isis was Mother in totality as the Christian 'god' is Father in totality.
BUT the concept of mother was .obviously NOT the meek and mild, the subdued and
passivel She was orgiastic, protective, intellectual, austere, loving, creative
but also cruel and destructive. Creation is dangerous and ruthless; you have to
die in order to be reborn. "The world is the sport of my mad mother Kali".
(As Robert Groves points out in The White Goddess that In one of her aspects
the sow is a sacred animal because it will eat i£s own offspring.)
Why I find this still of importance for us today is - since the Great Goddess
was the projection of a community who were NOT sexually repressed or economically
dominated - She can give us a clue to what women were like before they came to
conceive of themselves and define themselves iaru male eyes. She is a projection
of a type of woman that has vanished with the destruction of matriarchal civil-
isations. ......
In much of my painting I have searched for the strong faces, intellectual,
beautiful, of women of the ancient past. I became obsessed with the images of
the Theban Sphinx - half—lion, half-woman, the extraordinary feeling ofpower.
I have searched and tried to understand what the ancient women's mysteries were
centred around. Ester Harding; "Women's Mysteries, Ancient and Modem
gives a bit of a clue. As always so little is known about what women produced in the
past or present. Male historians have not been interested to” investigate, they
have assumed that all thought, all religions, all art and philosophies were
instigated by men - sadly to say many women h®e accepted Ms.
12


Jehovah god - father, on the other hand, is a projection into heaven of
the earthly patriarch father, owner of cattle, wonen and children. God-the father
cannot give birth physically to the world but creates sddski by his breath or
is serviced by Dale priests living in celibacy. He is the destroyer of
tho Mo*bhQj? (read Robert Graves 'Hebrew Legends')*
Surely one cannot say that it is unimportant to try and understand what kind
u f con:,nic structure and ideas of fenaleness and naleness which lie
behind the whole concept of Christian morality and philosophy of life since these
ideas have influenced everything wo think and our whol attitude to life. What
beeones very obvious that the Christian idea of he Godhead is that of the male.
This is also true of all the other so-called higher religions - are they seen as
higher because they are patriarchal?
nnv’ °^ er children, are forced to say prayers and sing songs
mum DAY Our Father, who art in heaven...’ The Godhead is seen as a feudal
lord, no less. Religious instruction is the only compulsive subject in English
schools, while education to sexual and bodily understanding is not allowed in
most schools. Everytime anyone says ’I am against abortion on religious grounds’:
what do they mean? Surely they are NOT talking of the ’sanctity of life’ in a
Christian world which has just about exterminated all life - animal, vegetable,
and human - and wrecked the Third World, all in the name of the Almighty Father.
(First the missionaries entered Africa with the Bible and were soon followed with
the sword.) So what they are talking about is a. generous Jehovah - owner of all
women to dispose according to his desire. The question is of the patriarchal
male’s right to his 'term's body, hid total legal and other rights over her and
the children.
Now imagine that the concept of the religion was thatof the Great Mother:
we should have imagined life as created in the birth pain of God the Mother,
then we would understand then we would knww that our life's rhythm beats from
her fereat hec.rt torn with the agony of love and birth..... Then we would understand
why we her children have inherited pain and we would feel that death meant a
reunion with her, the passing back into her abstance, the blood of her blood again
the peace of her peace" .
Think about it - would not sexualit, birth, death - have beeh conceived of
entirely differently when the Godhead was conceived of as the Great Mother?
In our society women have after thousands of years after thousands of years
of propaganda and oppression come to accept the male theory that women are biolog-
ically handicapped xxdx by the organs and functions of motherhood. Women have
come to identify their degradation and oppression with being PHYSICALLY WOMEN.
We have ALL of us been brought up with a terrible Puritan hatred of our bodies
and our sexuality - particularly so in us women - all the functions of a woman's
body have beenme hateful and distasteful to us. In the same way blacks in the
past have one to identify racial oppression with having physical characteristics
of a black skin and kinky hair but no amount of straightening one's hair or
bleaching one's skin OR denying one's female body will make on ounce of difference
to what ACTUALLY lies behind the exploitation, which is a question of land-
ownership, power, and economic privelege. 50.... it is about tine that we also
say that women are proud, beautiful, strong, that there is a dignity and renewal
in menses (perhaps even a communion with the noon 'the Moon—Woman who bleeds'
- there is a great mystery in giving birth- the creation of new life ......
I have been told that to prtray birth would be to perpetuate ' the myth of
motherhood ' but those myths are the blatant lies of.patriarchal society which
forces women to boar children through ignorance and fear - half of all children
were unplanned and unwanted - imprisons us, renders us powerless to even protect
our children and frankly kicks us up the ass for being mothers! (read Dr. Dick-
Read's book 'Childbirth Without Fear') this society had made it virtually
impossible for women to give birth to children. A painful childbirth was even seen
by doctors and priests as a rightful punishment for wonen who were sinful.)
The Victorians had even developed a theory about how this was the price women had
to pay for civilisation - when in fact it was because wonen were physically stunted,
imprisoned, inhibited by clothes, lack of movement, diet, sexually starred,
emotionally full of fear and loathing for their bodies - all of this as a result
of male-dominated society. Hadn't the God-Father commanded in the Bible to Eve
"I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow shalt you
bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband; and he shall rule over
thee."
This is not how WOMEN would have experiencedchildbirth and sexuality in societies
where they were the producers, independent end sexually free.
My own painting is based on my experiences as a woman. I have borne three
children and found the experience of birth dignified and incredible. But most
women' s birth experiences in our society are destroyed by being treated as an number
on a conveyor belt in large impersonal hospitals. There is some basis for
thinking that this is intentionall Wonen have to take control over his aspect
of their lives. We have to decide under what circumstances, in what environment
we want to give birth - we must control medicine to do with women's bodies.


Erich Neumann says in his book 'The Grset^Mother- 1 — "The earliest-sacred
precinct of the prinordial age was probably that in which wonen gave birth,
it is 'the place where the Great Goddess rules nd from which - as still in
the later female mysteries - all males ore excluded. Not only is the place
of childbearing the sacred place of female life in early and primitive cultures;
obviously it ±s also stands at the centre of all cults that are dedicated to
the Great Mother, as the Goddess of Birth, fertility, and death.,... The
nysreious occurences of menstruation end pregnancy and the dangerous episode
of childbearing make' it necessary for he inexperienced women to be initiated by
those who ore informed in these natters„ The monthly 'segregation* in the
closed,ie,taboo, sacral female precinct is only a logical continuation of
the initiation that has occurred in this place at the first menstruation.
Childbearing occurs in the same precinct, which is a natural, social* psychologic
ical centre of the female group, ruled over by the old, experienced wonen.
And, it is perfectly naoural that the knowledge ofthe effects of herbs, fruits,
and so on,.should have led to the first blood stanching, healing of wounds,
and soothing of pains. In the beginning, at the height ag the natriarchal epoch
the collective existence of the goup stood in the foreground; individual
relations between women and men were relatively undeveloped. In this period
the female mysteries consisted largely in fertility rites oriented twards the
community as a whole. Later ho prinordial rituals were traditionalized into
cults which, ns we know, were kept secret by wonen (os &ill in African tribal
societiea). Still later rules governing sexual intercourse, methods of preventing
contraception, and finally love magic were added to these original secrets of
female initiation.".....*.So there was a time when the delivery of a pregnant
woman WAS a sacrament I
In fact it was AFTER giving birth to a child that I started to develop a
* feminist consciousness' because I could not reconcile this experience of
extreme strength, dignity, and violence with the feebleness, weakness, and
lack of creativity which is expected of wonen in this society. In fact, to
give birth is an 'unfeninini act the way femininity is defined in our societyl
Up until then I had been doing a series of 'abstract' paintings, only
working with colour and form, but now I wanted t do an image to convey my
feeling about birth as a spiritual and physical experience. I exhibited the
image at on exhibition and was amazed at the strong reaction against it.
Apparently birth is obscene and disgusting in our society, it is a taboo
subject in art. This set me on a decision that I wanted to explore in my work
my experiences as a wman, without beatifying it. It was an incredible struggle
to learn to see through my own eyes and not through male definitions. I was for
a long tine obsessed with the sexual aspects, wanting to shwo sexuality from
my point of view, men as sensual, sex as taking and gving from both side, woman
as active sexually, woman NOT as titillating sexual-object for male viewers -
woman as subject, I tried to explore the idea of God the Mother, ancient
cultures, inter-racial love, women guerilla-fighters,. The issue is not
only about women's art but 'socially-involved'art versus the 'ivory tower
art-for-art's-sako' sterility Sf the male arts 5cene.......1t is interesting
that black artists find that they have to use a figurative way of painting
and they are also finding that abstrract art is now a useless tool for struggle,
A .way of avoiding the real issues of oppression.
Within the Women's Liberation Movement there is another trecnd of thought as
represented by Shulanith Firestone in 'Dialectics of Sox'. As Evelyn Reed
says;"'Firestone has fallen lock, stock, and barrel for the 'uterus theory'
of female inferiority, and says that 'it was woman's reproductive biology
that accounted fir her original’ oppression and not some sudden patriarchal
revolution'. Firestone the feminist parrots the anti-feminist theme that
'biology is woman'p-destiny' without bothering :%o critically examine the facts,"
It seems to me that much of the theorjr of ihk Women's Liberation Movement
is being developed by women who have not had children, who are academics,
who are professional - single, intellectual, middle-class women,
I am not making a statement only putting Some questions.
My paintings and thinking, as well as though of Ann Berg and Beverly Skinner,
have developed out of my life experiences as a wman. We are all in our thirties
and have had 2-3 children each. Neither Beverly or I have had further educetion
the age of sixteen, are living in relative poverty on the dole, and so
I would not call us priveleged or particularly professional, educated, etc,
(educated in the narrow academic sense) Wo are mainly self-taught as artists -
which women.with children, cm spend years in institutions to become specialists
in ANX FIELD? So we had to develop our own sensibility, techniques, and
understanding. What we fiund extraordinary is that the three of us have a vision
in common of women's strength., beauty, and dignity - and our images have a
strange amilarity although wo never knew each other ear1ier,,,,,,,, , It seems
to me that women are allowed to express terr pain, neurosis, and misery in


public, that is only comforting to the oppressors, after oil wonen are supposed
to be the victins. What is feared is when wonen stand up and say FUCK 100 and
atari to recreate their strength*•••. Our work is not only about being mothers
p-nri birth but those appear to be the aspects hat many viewers get hung up about
yynd that -±s why I have dwelt on it.
I hove no belief in science ond technology that Shulomith Firestone has.
The whole conept of nastery over nature Is repugnant to me. By trying to dominate
nature wo are killing ourselves and only by co-operation with nature will we fcrvive.
The concept of test-tube babies was created by male scientists and itsure is a
3ne~sex world that is envisaged. An all-male world - in spite of Valerie Solanas’
vision of on nil female world. Already in the 1880’s Strindberg said the day men
ocn create life without the help of wonen, then men can get rid of wonen
altogether. Don’t forget that science and technology are almost entirely in
men’s hands on well as serving capitalistic interests solely.^
Surely wo wont to work towards a ocioty where non are ' feminized*, brought
dose to woman end child - the nan also taking part in the whole process ofl
pregnancy end birth as well as being totally close to the child’s experience of
the world, ’.hat has kept women still human seems to have a lot to do with
having bom closer to oho child, having to listen, learn, understand. Ben crust
oI BC learn to bo ’maternal’. This implies a totally different work structure
and children at the centre of the community, decentralised communities, all
women men as aU mothers and fathers of all children - a play, orgiastic,
joyful, living producing together collectively, A society where the pleasure
principle is alive and thriving. The adults have to be brought back-forward to
the child's level of total and uninhibited experience - sexual, intellectual,
spiritual••••••• I have probably parted company with the orthodox Marxists
a long tine ago - too badl . , ... ,
Surely what wo do not want is a society where women have to buy ’opality
in a male society by denying their women’s bodies, by trying to become
physically male. That would be the final triumph of patriarchal society which
has in thousands of years attempted to destroy woman as mother - a long tradition
from Johovah to- Freud. The necessity to destroy the Mother - both the Goddess and
the human mother - came about when men seized power, took over women* s lend,
farming, crops, and Instituted the father-6antrod family. The man could take over
all women’s earlier functions except for the childbearing. ’Bead Bruno Bettelhein
in Symbolic Wounds how non’ had invented initiation cultsaand inflicted wounds
on their sexual organs to appear to bleed and have menses as the women did.
Men in primitive societies had trie d to take on every attribute of women end
when the attempt misfired they turned their hatred on women and said; if we
cannot be like you we will destroy you.
This is- what Simone de Beauvoir says; "It fas as the mother that woman was
fearsome, it.is- in maternity that she must be transfigured and enslaved.
She virginity of Mary was hbove all. a negative value; that through mien the flesh
has been redeemed is not carnal; it has not been touched or possessed.
Asiatic Great Mother was not supposed to have a husband; she had engendered the
world and reigned over it in solitary state; she could bo wanton at her caprice,
but her grandeur as z Mother was not diminished by any wifely servitude....
But Mary will be glorified only in accepting the abordinate role assigned bar*
U. an the servant of the Lord.’ FOR BE ERST H HUMAN HISTORY THE MOTHER KNEELS
BEFORE HER SON; SHE FREELY ACCEPTS HER INFERIORITY. This is the supreme masculine
victory consummated in the cult of the Virgin -it is the rehabilitation:of woman
through the accomplishnont of her defeat .... Ishtar, Astarto, Cybale were
cruel, capricious, lustful; they wore powerful. As much the source of death os
life, in giving birth to non they made men their slaves. Since women has been
'subjected as mother she will bo cherished and respected first of all as mother
(the myth of motherhood of fascism). Of the two ancient aspects of maternity
non today wishes to knwo only the smiling, attractive face. Women s erotic magic
is dissipated by the marriage rites and abordlnated economically and oclcliy
to her husband, the good wife is nan’s most precious treasure. Mon is delighted
- -with his domination oVer women.” I think that non are oven more
" delighted over not only having made he mother vrship her own son but made
finally want to reject her womanhood altogether ond desire h become like ccstra od
' ’ - For women to accept and give in to the Dale’s attempts to destroy her ond
finally in her childbearing aspect is the most incredibly masochistic and final
annihilation of her feeing end of nan’s. (Nine million witches were
and burnt during throe centuries - most of then resisted the Catholic Church).
• So let us- Si be respectable ’mem’ and let our future finally emerge
. packaged ’Sri •tfdliophano bags from the press-button machine. BUT if those
'children' turn their frustrated humanity and loveless lives into hatred ona
destruction of all life they will only be the end product of a process started
when Apollo declared reason, light, abstract thought, sciaioe and s« 1
nsn uo Nj uporior to Jala, the Earth Mother and her Python temples ond rites in


night by the noon between ecstatic men and women had neant in terms of life
philosophy. Also Dionysius, the son of the mother and his band of mad,
orgiastic, drunk-drugged women revelling in the sexual mysteries of their wild
bodies would soon be destroyed and give way to the cool, reasonable, objective
sharp-glare of the scientific, patriarchal age which is now in its ultimate'
death throes and on the verge of also killing all other life of this and other
MDNICA SJOO. - march 1972 yr
Bristol
Woman beautiful my
unsurpassed tigress sf
I want to melt into your being \j/*\
your burning i
furnace x|
in the \
body body whereV come from
children fruit of
your body & mine V
your lips juice to drink
merciful rich f r If
your being J f
the true giving fa ft
love 0 u if
I can’t catch it so difficult to ft
break through the barriers f
to true being | A a
beyond beyond beyond \t jjk i
social accepted being a
Henry Miller Ram,alfkrishnan i/I
. a fart on the surface ....
Where are you ? I
Then came the day , when life to me , the Mother , became a
You, my child , was not welcome / // \
You , -my child ■,' mow born into this society of death ,/ / \
this society , usurped by the forces' of destruction & death , /
Bearing you was a pain to me , a misery , t si 1
because of you I was treated with disdain , L/\ L
you were looked upon as my weakness , a handicap , 1
while earlier you were my great strength « / S' r
My body became rigid , enstaanged to itself , I forgot that /^p/ bleed
is Holy . is Life , to be alive \
my body wouldn't bear you forth but in great pain •
My body became shameful to me , birth a dirty joke ,
sex became like masturbation , because you , man, /
al&eniied yourself from me & made me , woman , into the Other f — ■"
an object - something to debase’& hunt & rape ,
—-A Monica Sjoo
