

BRIGI
SOUTH A
TOWNSEND HOUSE
SCHOOLS FOR DEAF AND FOR BLIND CHILDREN
South Australian Institution for the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb Incorporated


TOWNSEND HOUSE
Townsend House, Brighton, South Austra-
lia, was built 72 years ago under the influence
of William Townsend, M.P., with money raised
by public subscription to enable blind and
deaf boys and girls to be educated so that they
could earn their independence and become
useful citizens. It is a monument to the people
of South Australia for their readiness to accept
responsibility for the care and proper training
of these children.
Townsend House is undenominational, and
its doors are open to all deaf and blind children
of South Australia and Broken Hill, no matter
what the creed or circumstances of their
parents. No child has ever been excluded or
refused admission because of the inability of
his parents to pay school fees. For admission,
a child must be of sound mind, and either deaf
or blind.
The school age is from five to sixteen years,
but children are admitted earlier providing
they are capable of dressing themselves and
caring for themselves under supervision. The
earlier deaf children are admitted the better
will be the results of their education.
For educational purposes there are two
schools, one catering for the educational needs
of deaf children and the other of blind children.
The children are given a thorough, special and
general education designed to reduce, as far
as possible, the handicaps imposed by their
physical disabilities. The aim is to train the
deaf and the blind children of this State to
become useful and self-supporting citizens.
Both schools are staffed with competent
teachers who keep abreast with modern
developments of the special work in which
they are engaged and who give interested and
whole-hearted service.


OFFICE BEARERS AND COMMITTEE
Patron:
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR LT.-GENERAL SIR WILLOUGHBY
NORRIE, K.C.M.G., C. 8., D. 5.0., M.C.
Patroness:
LADY NORRIE
President:
SIR LAVINGTON BONYTHON, Kt.
Vice-President:
K. W. NEILL, Esq., J.P.
Hon, Treasurer:
E. A. TILEMANN, Esq.
Hon. Ophthalmic Surgeon:
Dr. G. H. BARHAM BLACK
Hon. Surgeon Ear, Nose and Throat:
Dr. W. SANGSTER
Hen. Physician and Surgeon:
Dr. M. E. GOODE
Dental Surgeon:
S. BOYLE, Esq.
Auditors;
Messrs. R. G. NEILL & H. STEVENS, Chartered Accountants (Aust.)
Committee:
Hon. E. ANTHONEY, M.L.C. F. N. SIMPSON, Esq.
J. R. CORNISH, Esq. F. C. WADE, Esq.
J. G. DUNCAN-HUGHES, Esq. W. S. WALSH, Esq.
Ladies' Committee;
Mrs. OWEN CROMPTON (Chairman and Hon. Secretary), Misses A. H.
BROWN, JEAN TAYLOR, Mesdames E. A. BRUMMITT, J. A. MUDGE,
N. P. OWEN, LEONARD MARRIOTT.
Secretary:
Mr. E. L. MITTON, F.C.A. (Aust.)
Trustee Buildings, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
Telephone: C. 7147.
Principal:
Mr. A. V. WEBB, Dip. Com.
Townsend House, Brighton.
Telephone: X 7503.


THE EDUCATION OF THE DEAF
Education of the deaf is an imperative need. Education enables the deaf to com-
municate with other people, developing those principles which help them to become self-
respecting and respected citizens.
The knowledge of language, because it is linked with every activity and is the chief
means of communication, is of paramount importance to the deaf. The acquisition of lan-
guage by the deaf child is the big problem that confronts the teacher of the deaf. Language
is normally acquired by hearing and imitating, and the normal child begins his schooling
with a language background which he has acquired in his early infancy by hearing and
imitating those around him. The deaf child, because of his physical disability, that of loss
of hearing, comes to school with no background of language but with a few crude gestures
with which he tries to express himself. In most cases the deaf remain in intellectual infancy
until school days commence.
The acquisition of language may be regarded as covering the whole field of the edu-
cation of the deaf, and every lesson, whatever the subject, is a language lesson. The acqui-
sition of language does not mean the mere memorisation of words; the words must have
some connection with ideas existing in the mind. Language taught to our deaf children is
derived from actual experience, and the opportunity for this experience is arranged for.
The education of the deaf at Townsend House is done on accepted lines, and those
children with suitable residual hearing receive acoustic training. The school is equipped
with an audiometer and group hearing aids. One of the group hearing aids is one of the
most up-to-date in use in Australia.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


AUDIOMETRIC TESTING
All deaf children are audiometrically tested and retested to ascertain their hearing
loss. These tests are carefully recorded and classified, and any child whom it is thought
might benefit with acoustic training is given the opportunity.
The above picture shows a child being audiometrically tested.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


An acoustic group using the new group hearing aid. This aid embodies the latest
improvements in sound amplifying equipment and incorporates a unit known as a "fre-
quency equaliser," which enables us to give the child extra amplification at the frequencies
in which the hearing loss is greatest.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


Miss Helen Keller speaking to some of the children in the
acoustic group.
The hearing-seeing method. The child is watching
her own lips as she speaks into a mirror microphone.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


THE EDUCATION OF THE BLIND
The blind are taught in a separate building from the
deaf. end have their own special teachers. They are
taught on similar lines to the normal child and the
ordinary State school syllabus, with certain qualifications
as demanded for blindness, is followed. The loss of sight,
however, is a barrier to rapid progress at first. The
blind have no visual memory and their sensations are
muscular and tactual. In the initial stages of their school-
ing the blind have to be taught to use their fingers.
These, to the blind, are their ''eyes.'' Their sense of touch
has to be developed and they have to depend on the
use of Braille for their reading and writing.
Some blind children develop peculiar characteristics,
needing strict and constant correction. We aim at train-
ing them to overcome these objectionable mannerisms
and to be as natural as their handicap will allow.
In the blind school there are sometimes children who
have varying degress of sight, but not sufficient to be
taught in a normal school, and they are given sighted
education. At Townsend House a classroom has been
specially equipped with fluorescent lighting for the benefit
of these children.
These pictures depict some of the work in our blind
school.
An out-of-door lesson.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


Studying the embossed map of S.A. made by Mr.
Tunley, of Queensland, and presented by the Shell
Coy. of Aust.
Using the Arithmetic Slate.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


Handwork is taught in both schools. The importance of hand and eye training in schools such as Townsend
House, where all children have been deprived of the use of one of the essential sense organs, is obvious. Occu-
pations are graded and varied and are made as interesting as possible.
The first picture on this page shows a class occupied in weaving, and the second shows a deaf boy finishing
off a raffia basket.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


Matron and the House staff are respon-
sible for the health and care of the chil-
dren. Regular examinations are made of
all pupils.
Here we see Matron attending to a boy
who has hurt his arm.
Junior deaf children
at play.


During the past two years the children have been given lessons in dancing and rhythm. The first picture
shows two deaf boys rehearsing for a display given at the Christmas Tree Function, and the second one shows
Miss Helen Keller and Miss Polly Thompson congratulating the girls on the performance given in their honour
when they visited the School.
TOWNSEND HOUSE


Well-balanced menus contribute
to the general health and physical
development of our pupils. Our
farm supplies the table with an
abundance of milk, eggs, fruit, and
fresh vegetables.
This picture shows one of the boys
in the cauliflower patch.


HEARING AIDS
Group hearing aids have been used in this School
for the past 10 years, and individual aids have been used
in this country for five or six years.
Since hearing aids reached the stage of real useful-
ness to so many people, there has been a general ten-
dency for the public to look upon them as miracle
workers. There is more or less common conception
among laymen that a person who hears sound can use
a hearing aid, and after a period of practice will come
to understand speech.
There is a vast difference between:—
1. SOUND PERCEPTION; which means the ability
to differentiate between sounds without attaching
meaning to them; and
2. SOUND DISCRIMINATION: which means the
ability to understand speech sounds as meaning-
ful words (usable hearing).
After long practice and much repetition a child who
possesses sound perception, but not usable hearing, can
learn to recognise certain sounds, phrases, and expres-
sions. This does not mean that he understands speech.
He can react through the ear to sounds of various kinds—
he can react to the call of his name and to a list of
words taught him through the ear. He may even be
able to react to short commands and sentences which do
not involve a true language sense of concept. He will
never develop such ability into ability to understand a
normal flow of conversation.
Now those children in whom the sense of hearing,
although defective, is functional with or without a hearing
aid, possess sound discrimination and can interpret
speech sounds as meaningful words, according to the
amount of loss of their hearing acuity.
A child whose hearing is impaired at so early an
age that the rhythm and meaning of words and sentences
have not become fixed in his mind, cannot possibly ac-
quire this knowledge unless his hearing loss is relatively
slight, or unless special efforts are made to teach him
through the auditory power that remains to him.
Now, even if the aid should bring all speech sounds
to him with absolute clarity (which is most unlikely), he
could not interpret their meaning, because he has not
heard them in this form before.
After long practice and much repetition a child who
possesses sound discrimination can, by the use of the
group aid (which they use for part of every day), learn
to react through the ear alone without the use of lip-
reading to speech sounds, and thus build up a large
vocabulary of single words.
After we have taught the child this basic vocabulary,
the problem really begins—this is the development of
LANGUAGE whereby he can express his own ideas and
receive the ideas of others.
To help the deaf child to use spoken words con-
nectedly and correctly is the problem which faces any
person who attempts to educate the deaf or deafened
child.
We can see that although a child is fitted with a
hearing aid and can hear speech, he still has to pass
through the same stages of development as his hearing
brother, but that his progress must naturally be slower.


SUGGESTIONS TO PARENTS
Quite often we are asked to suggest ways and
means of preparing a child of pre-school age for entrance
to our schools.
The child should be taught to dress, undress, wash,
and attend to the ordinary bodily needs, without assis-
tance, before coming to school. Our supervisors do not
have the time to devote two or three hours each day
to the training of any one child. Teachers cannot leave
their classes to take care of one child.
The child should be taught to respect the rights of
other children and should not be favoured over normal
children in the family. It makes it very uncomfortable
for others when a child comes to school with the idea
that other children must give up any toy which he may
desire.
The child should be taught to mix and play with
other children so that when he comes to school he will
delight in taking part in games with his school mates.
Should any parent require any further information
regarding the preparing of her deaf or blind child for
entrance to our school, the Superintendent will be happy
to supply it. in him iii m mi
APPLICATIONS
Forms of admission for either deaf or blind children
are obtainable from the Secretary, Mr. E. L. Mitton,
Trustee Building, Grenfell Street, Adelaide, or from the
Superintendent, Mr. A. V. Webb, at Townsend House,
Brighton. The Superintendent will be pleased to interview
parents of deaf or blind children regarding admissions
in the mornings of school days or at other times by
appointment.


A Suggestion.
FORM OF BEQUEST
I give and bequeath to the South Australian Institution lor
the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb Incorporated the sum of
to be used for its general
purposes. I direct that this bequest shall be paid without
deduction for succession duties.
Donations of £1 and upwards are deductible for income tax purposes.
Donations can be paid to the Secretary, Mr. E. L. Mitton, Trustee Buildings,
Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
H & J 40739
