

By W. F. REID.
Dedicated to the People of New South Wales.
No. 1. Thoughts on Individual Liberty.—
Liberty is a gift from God, and like every other gift
it is given in order to be used. If a man gets a thing,
it is not right to trample it under foot. By doing
this he makes light of the gift, and insults the giver;
so when a man gets the divine gift of liberty from
God it is his duty to use it, and to do what he can to
prevent any one wresting it from him. He is re-
sponsible to God for that use of it which has a
bearing upon his character, and which is exercised in
the spheres of moral and religious duty. Of course
liberty must not be used suicidally, liberty must not
be used to extinguish liberty, a citizen must not use
his liberty to extinguish the liberty of others. He
must not so exaggerate his rights as to impinge upon
the rights of his fellows. Conscience operatively
resolves itself into the golden rule “ Do unto others
as ye would others do unto you,” and this further
resolves itself into practice, which effectually prevents
any encroachments upon the rights and liberties of
others. The dragooning of people into morality and
religion by tyrannous enactments, or by terrorism,
is doing evil that good may come, and in Holy Writ
it is affirmed of those, who do evil that good may
come, that their damnation is just. Christianity
forbids any dragooning of men into righteous paths,
their going therein is a matter for free choice, and
their will is not done violence to in moral or religious
matters by Him who has the best right to coerce.
This reducing of men to things, or to children
under the pretence of improving them, this belittling
of their manhood in order to make them outwardly
better, is doing evil that good may come. The rational
liberty-endowed being becomes, by the process of
dragooning, an automaton set in motion by laws,
impelled by fear of consequences. Doing right
according to the dragooning mode is a virtuous
grimace set in motion by selfishness, not a loyalty of
mind to duty, an homage of soul expressed in
conduct, or the supremacy of conscience over.mind.
The moral and religious dragoons who would coerce
men to moral rectitude by terrorism, the apostles
of force and high priests of tyranny, are enemies of
the people, and should be resisted. Christianity
does not impose its dogmas "and practices by force.
It does not say “do this,” “believe this,” or take
the consequences. It does not commit the wrong of
robbing a man of his divine birthright of liberty in
order to transform him. In other words it does not do
evil that good may come. Exhortations, influences,
commands are plie-, but the mind has full freedom to
resist these. Christianity does not divorce the will from
its vantage ground of supremacy, it does not pounce
tiger-like upon those who make light of its precepts ;
it respects the fact that man is a probationer, and
that probation is not possible without freedom of
will. Morality and religion with some are robes
woven of mechanical acts of decency, and the heart
may be a smothered volcano, emitting the spume of
malice and hypocrisy. Morality strikes beneath the
surface, and deforces insincerity, malice, and
covetousness. The happiness of the people is one of
the ends of government, and people cannot be happy
who are mercilessly tied down by an interlacing net-
work of laws and bye-laws. Freedom is essential to
happiness. Deprive a man of liberty and you make
him miserable. Make a man obedient under penal-
ties to the arbitrary will of his fellow man, and the
consciousness that he has a right to be free, clothes
his brow with thunder, makes his nostrils to dilate,
and his chest to heave with indignation. Conscious-
ness will assert his right to liberty; if he dare
not assert it, it will assert his right to a voice in his


own disposal. Many apostles of morality, under the
pretence of making men better, deprive them of their
rights and liberties, and squarely contradict the
practice of the Founder of Christianity, com-
mitting a sin at the very threshold of philan-
thropic effort, and embittering the cup of
beneficence with the gall of tyranny. Those
who would make men saints and purists by force are
enemies of their kind, enemies of the body politic,
and enemies of Christianity. The virtue they incul-
cate is skin deep, and consists merely in a grimace of
conformity to certain regulations. When the heart
recoils from the outward imposition under the influ-
ence of fear, what is left but hypocrisy and the
hard crust of formalism. Without liberty their can
be no self-respect, there can be no progress in heart
—deep vir-tue. The philanthrophist, who would
benefit his fellows, must conserve their self-respect.
This is the fulcrum which, used in conjunction with
the lever of philanthropic effort, will elevate the
masses. Tyrants and oppressors rejoice in the re-
pressive force of terrorism, for they know that when
the instinct of liberty is strong in a people, they dare
not carry on their evil capers with impunity. Reform
men by individual example, moral and spiritual
suasion. These are the legitimate weapons of phil-
anthropic effort, not the dragonades of intolerance.
Religion is the remedy for moral and spiritual
diseases, not social purity societies or Contagious
Diseases Acts that would destroy the liberty given
by God to men in order to reform them. Let philan-
thropists use the methods of Christ and his Apostles,
and not their own notions, in making men better,
and they will be signally successful. When philan-
thropists set themselves to make men better in God’s
own way, then they will have God’s own blessing.
No. 2. Judges. —Judges, chief and puisne, take
an oath, upon assuming office, to hold the balances
evenly, to do what is just and fair, and they have no
more liberty to commit an act of injustice, than the
humblest magistrate in the land. They have no
discretionary power to do wrong, to perpetrate an
act of injustice, or to set their fiat, however desirable
it may seem, above the law of the land. They are
appointed and paid to do justice, and all the specious
pretexts in the universe will not make an unjust
action a just one. They are appointed and paid to
administer the laws of the land severally and singly,
and any judge that traverses by his action any law
is a law-breaker. Any judge that wilfully and de-
liberately commits any act of injustice, commits wilful
and corrupt perjury. It may be desirable in the
interests of morality to drown in the Pacific Ocean
all the bad characters in the community, but it would
not be just to do so, because these, whatever their
character, are British subjects, witli the rights and
liberties of British subjects, and to sacrifice their
rights and liberties in order to compass ulterior good,
is an act of judicial immorality, is a doing evil that
good may come, and the damnation of those that do
evil that good may come, whether on or off the
Bench, is just. Judges are on the Bench simply to
do justice, and judicial morality consists in the doing
justly. Judges have nothing to do with what is
desirable or undesirable, they have simply to do
with the execution of justice. All the legislation in
the universe will not atone for an act of injustice
committed by the judges of the land. Make any
laws you please, laws of shining excellence, but what
does it matter if they are maladministered, or nulli-
fied, or traversed. The statute laws of a country,
being the supreme expressions of the mind of the
people, cannot justly be set aside by notions, or
traditions, or fictions. To rake up an old law against
any single citizen, and suspend it in favor of every
one else is damnable injustice. Laws were made for
communities, not for individuals, and the injustice
consists in the revival and mal-application of an
obsolete law to indulge personal spite. Villains who
would behave in such a manner should be hurled
from the judgment seat. An instance of this kind is
supplied by the prosecution of T. O’Kane, of Charters
Towers, Queensland. Suspend statute laws and you
strike aside the safeguards of individual liberty.
Supersede, traverse, nullify statute laws for a single
moment, by notions or traditions, or assertions of
arbitrary self-will, and you at once place the rights
and liberties of citizens at the mercy of an individual
or set of individuals. Tyranny and despotism be-
come officially canonized facts. Men may plant the
tree of liberty, but if they allow the fruit of it to be
plucked, if they are prevented enjoying the fruit
of it, what does it matter ? Kings, queens, rulers,
judges, magistrates are not above the laws of the
land; they are as amenable to them as the humblest
citizen in the community, and people, who stand by
and allow the laws of the land to be trifled with, are
traitors to their country. Judges should hold aloof
from organized societies for the reason that members
of these may use them, or attempt to use them, as
catspaws, in their own behoof, or as instruments to
work out their own purposes. All men are, or
should be, equal before the judges of the land, and
if judges are members of organized societies,
there is danger of their viewing their fellow members
with a partial eye. It is well known that justice is
often defeated through juries being packed by mem-
bers of a society of which the prisoner, or defendant,
is a co-member. Judges are on the Bench by the
will of the people; they are appointed by a com-
mittee of the people’s representatives. They are paid
by the people, and their duty is not to administer
traditions, or notions, or fictions, or the malicious
wishes of interested cliques, but the will of the people
expressed in certain dogmatic propositions termed


laws. Any judge who suspends or traverses a law is
a law-breaker, and occupies, with respect to law, a
position similar to that of the criminal that confronts
him.
No. 3. Jail Discipline. —Jails, we are afraid,
are places that fence in prisoners, but at the same
time fence out British laws. The arbitrary will of a
jail governor, and certain regulations expressive
thereof, being the constraining forces operative in
lieu of statute law. The laws of the land should be
paramount inside jail walls, as well as outside them.
The objects of imprisonment are the protection of
society, and the reformation of the prisoner. Present
protection is supplied by incarceration, future protec-
tion by letting the prisoner, at the appointed time,
loose upon society, reformed and self-respecting.
Flog a prisoner, brutally ill-use him, and you ruin
him, for the simple reason that you take away self-
respect. When discharged he drifts back to jail
because his self-respect is gone, and he sees the utter
hopelessness of attempting to retrieve his position.
If a man is sentenced to imprisonment with hard
labour, barring this he should be treated with the
consideration due to any ordinary citizen. Is his im-
prisonment any reason why he should be scrutinized,
and made the subject of 50 brutal pranks? If dis-
eased, send him to the hospital, and keep him there
till cured; if ill-behaved, handcuff him night and
day, if necessary, or starve him into submission. A
gentleman is incapable of taking a mean advantage,
and we commend this to the notice of sundry officials
who call themselves gentlemen. The bodies of priso-
ners should be kept inviolate for the simple reason
that this is no part of their sentence, that it degrades
and destroys them, and defeats their reformation, and
that it is not necessary to discipline and good order.
To sentence a man and then under covert of a sentence
to play brutal pranks upon him to outrage his manhood
under specious pretexts, and make his whole life
miserable and useless, this is the height of hypocrisy
and tyranny, and is conduct in keeping with that of
the savages of New Guinea, and is utterly incom-
patible with Christianity and civilization. As jail
regulations are substituted for statute laws inside jail
walls they should be annually revised by Parliament
and adopted unalterably for a twelvemonth, and no
one should have the power to surreptitiously add to
or amend them. Let a sentence be inflicted in its
entirety, but outside the sentence let a prisoner be
treated with ordinary decency and kindness ; and let
prolonged periods of good behaviour be rewarded by
some little trifle, say some trifling addition to the
dietary scale, and let well-behaved prisoners be released
a year or two prior to the expiration of their sentence
and set to work on a Government model and experi-
mental farm, or on some Government work, to see
TRACTS FOR THE TIMES.
- vC> * |
how they shape, and to gently break the sudden
bound from imprisonment to liberty. A Parlia-
mentary committee should be appointed to make
inquiry into the management of our jails and the
methods of jail discipline.
No. 4. A Purpose of Government. —A legiti-
mate purpose of Government is the happiness of the
people. To churches, schools, philanthropic agencies
belong the duty of bettering the people, and the in-
struments to this end should be, not enactments but
prayer, spiritual and moral suasion, individual ex-
ample and reason. To secure the happiness of the
people laws must be protective, that is to say, they
must protect each individual citizen from the malice
of his enemies; they must form a barrier against
which hellish plots and conspiracies will expend their
force in vain. A law to be protective must be essen-
tially just; secondly, it must be immutable in the
iron pertinacity with which it interposes its force;
thirdly, it must be non-suspensory, that is to say, it
cannot be suspended for a single moment. A citizen
is protected by the iron firmness of the barrier of law
and by the iron firmness of dispensers of law, in
keeping to the path of duty, heedless of cajolery, or
of menaces, or of bribes. If judges are supple, if
laws are rendered plastic and secretly remodelable,
then there is the incoming of a reign of terror. The
integrity of judges and magistrates, the supremacy
of law is essential to the protection of citizens, and
protection, or a sense of protection, is essential to
their happiness; and when their happiness is com-
promised, one of the ends of Government is defeated.
Citizens cannot be happy who are kept on the tender-
hooks of suspense and anxiety, because of the un-
certain character of men in power. Hence the import-
ance of putting conscientious men in public offices.
Citizens cannot be happy who know that ordinary
good behaviour and compliance with statute law can
not guarantee them from injury at the hands of their
foes under colour of law, that malice may fish up
obsolete laws from the depths of bygone ages, and
may draw upon falsehoods for motive power to render
them operative. Citizens cannot be happy whose
liberty is unduly stinted, who are involved in an
interlacing network of laws and by-laws, so that an
untoward motion brings them face to face with the
penal side of a law. Anxiety, terrorism, uncertainty
are no inevitable concomitants of Government in a
free, civilized, and Christian community; and people
who would use these as instruments to subserve their
own designs, should be checkmated. The best men,
morally and religiously, no matter what their faith
may be, should be elected to the Legislature, pro-
vided their opinions on political subjects are in the
main consonant with those of their constituents; and,
were this the case, people would find that happiness


as a fruit of Government had been translated from
the airy regions of speculation to the earth-besetting
regions of fact.
APPENDIX.
As the powers of Legislation and of Government, as at
present expressed, tend to unduly narrow individual liberty
under specious pretexts, and as sundry individuals shew a dis-
position to enlist those high in office to carry out their tyran-
nous plans, it is desirable to form Civil and Religious Liberty
Clubs, on the following basis ;
(1) Every British subject shall be free to utter his convictions,
and to act upon them ; and it shall be a misdemeanour
for any one to intimidate a British subject for his utter-
ances and action thereupon. i
(2) No British subject shall be punished for his misfortunes
or his opinions, whatever these may be.
(3) The bodies of British subjects, whether prisoners or free,
shall be held inviolate and inviolable, and shall not be
tampered with under any pretext whatever.
(4) Obsolete statutes, which have fallen practically into
disuse, shall form no ground of action against a British
subject.
(5) Citizens in all cases shall be notified of any action taken
against them by any judge, magistrate or official.
(6) Character and ability, without reference to party, or
country, or creed, shall be deemed to qualify an Australian
citizen for a seat in the Legislature.
(7) Penal inflictions shall be limited to fines, imprisonment
with or without hard labour, total or partial deprivation
of food for limited periods, such as will not produce fatal
results, and hanging in case of murder only.
(8) Espionage of domiciles shall be a misdemeanour, punish-
able with imprisonment.
