

TRACKING}
by the /AUSTRALIAN
/BORIQINE
F 3 /\ F 3 Er R
READ BEFORE THE
flf
Australasia,
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH,
A. T. MAGAREY, ESQ.
Adelaide:
BONYTHON & CO., “THE ADVERTISER” OFFICE. KING WILLIAM ST.




Tracking bg the Australian Aborigine.
55 /
i3-b-17
By A. T. Magaeet, Esq.
Read October 2Qth, 1897.
The imperative necessity to procure food to sustain life is the
powerful incentive amongst savage races of the earth, moving
them to go in search of the needed supplies. In prosecuting
the search for food the savages must employ craft, and they
naturally become skilled in all the arts of the chase. The need
for skill in the pursuit of game is proportioned to the difficulty
of capture, or the scarcity of supply. Since the continents of
Asia, Africa, and America possess, each of them, comparative
abundance of food supply, the aboriginal inhabitants of those
countries do not manifest special aptness in the art of tracking.
In America, where powerful rival tribes waged frequent war
for possession of favored hunting grounds, their craft was
mainly developed in the direction of tracking enemies over
prairies, through the forests, and in guarding against surprises
from their wily foes. In the winter season of the northern
regions, the American Indian had to exercise his best hunter
craft in tracking, by following traces left by game in the snow.
He exhibited special skill when the trails were rendered difficult
through being partially obliterated by fresh falls of snow. All
such tracking, however, is child’s play in comparison with the
perfectly marvellous skill in the art possessed by our truly
gifted genius, the Australian aborigine.
The African “ spoor’’-artist is good; the American “trail-
hunter ” is better; but our own soft-tongued aborigine
tracker ” is a prince in comparison with them all. Keen-eyed,
watchful, patient, tireless, dogged, sure, he seldom fails to run
his prey to earth, whether it be lizard, snake, wallaby, kangaroo,
«mu, camel, cattle-killer, goal-breaker, or murderer.
In large areas of Australia, and especially amidst the arid
regions of its central interior,' the food supply for
man is very scant. In order that he may keep body
and soul together, and obtain even a bare subsistence.


the native has to bring into play, at times, all the
forest lore and hunter craft that is in him. It is neces-
sary that every member of the tribe should be skilled in the
hunt that he may do his share in obtaining supplies. Each one is
trained from early infancy in the difficult, but most necessary art
of earth sign reading. No sooner does the dusky child of the
wilds of Australia begin to leave his mother’s head-borne coola-
min cradle, or netted shoulder-hammock, than he is set to chase
and capture some living thing. A small lizard, for example, will
be secured by his lubra mother, and placed close before his baby
fingers. The lizard being released, runs away and hides beneath
a handy stone, a sheltering grass-tuft, or in a hole in the sand.
Upon hands and knees the embryo hunter tracks the game to
its hiding-place. The triumphant capture is effected, aided no
doubt by elder brother, or sister, or admiring lubra-mother.
When a little older the youthful hunter is rewarded by being
allowed to feast upon the captured prize.
Thus step by step the youngster rises in proficiency until
beetles, spiders, ants, centipedes, scorpions, and such like fairy
trackmakers are followed over the tell-tale ground. Such
training is continued until manhood is reached ; until of gliding
snake, high-stepping iguana, bounding wallaby, flying euro,
stately emu, or the crafty, dangerous, lurking foeman, all the
earth signs are seen, noted, interpreted, followed, or avoided, as
circumstances may demand. To his vigilant eye the fresh,
sharp-cut imprint, the up-stringing grass blade, but newly bent
by the swiftly passing foot-tread, each tells in its own way its
own story.
Blown* sand, or grass blade, or whirled leaf, resting on the
imprint, tells to the dusky searcher its tale of hours that have
vanished since the trail was made, whether to-day, yesterday,
or weeks ago. The tiny fleck of fur, of opossum rug, caught on
the hanging bush as the fleeing wearer passed along; the cast-
out “ pituri ” from the mouth of the aboriginal tobacco-chewer ;
the fresh-fallen ash or cinder from the lubra's firestick; each
of these tells its own tale of when, and by which way, the
passer, man or woman, had gone by.
The trail of the wily dingo, as he skulked along the wild
man’s path, often proves an aid in tracking natives, for this
cunning prowler of the bush is often alert to find the leavings
which his aboriginal countrymen may have cast aside, and fol-
lows their trail for the purpose.
When engaged in tracking upon anything like a clear trail
(“ clear ” to his eye, not so to ours) the native expert scans the
surroundings, not down on the ground close to him, as a white
man would do, but casts his glance ten or twenty feet, or more
away to the front. Where trodden grass, or twig, or imprint
in the sand, shows by the sheen of successive prints the trail he


so eagerly seeks to keep in view. Viewing the track in this
way the mounted native tracker will go cconfidently forward at a
hand-gallop, with head leaning now tco one side, now to the
other, of his horse’s neck, keeping this ujip for long distances, or
until more difficult country is reached, when the pace slackens.
The white comrade by his side often womders whether he is not
being taken along on a false scent, butt usually an old camp
fire, or other evidence of being “ wanm ” on the trail, will
prove that the darkie knows what he is aihout.
The newly turned-over twig, pebble, sand grain, or grass
shaft, utterly unrecognisable by the whiite man, is readily seen
and appreciated by the aborigine. So skilled in his work is the
native, that the footprints in the sand of any of the members of
his tribe, or of any acquaintance whose print he has seen, is as
certainly recognised as would be the photograph of an
acquaintance by any of our “ civilised ” race. Any slight
peculiarity of toeprint, foot-pattern, solemark, or heelmark is
noted. So also is the length or style of stride ; and “ That one
is Munn-gin-a, or Tok-i ” (indicating a footprint) is as
confidently asserted as though the face of the owner of the foot
was before him. A mother, or a sister, missing sight of a child
in camp, instantly picks out the track of a baby toddler from
amongst all the others, and quickly runs down the little
rambler if it has wandered away into the scrub. Whether a
trail was made before or after rain or windstorm, whether there
is new or old grass growing in the footpad, these are points of
value and interest in seeking for lost bushmen.
So, too, if a bird, or dingo, kangaroo, or camel is thirsty
and travelling eagerly towards water to drink, the stride is
long and direct. If after it has had a drink at a water the
animal is satiated or browsing, the trail is wandering hither and
thither, and the shortened stride shows leisure and presence of
water at the time the trail was made.
A gentleman states that many years’ since he was travelling
north of Adelaide, accompanied by a native lad. The lad’s
father lived south in the vicinity of the city. After a wearying
ride, at the close of hot day they came upon a waterhole at
which they proceeded to water their thirsty horses. Suddenly
the lad sprang from his horse, uttering an exclamation of sur-
prise as he did so, and stooped low to examine the mud at the
edge of the water. He excitedly informed his master, “My
father been long a this waterhole to-day.” Knowing that the
father had been left near the city when they had started on their
journey, the gentleman expressed his incredulity. He got down
and narrowly examined the impress of an adult human foot
stamped into the mud at the edge of the waterhole. He noted
a peculiar small round knob of the mud rising up in the heel
print of the footmark, and wondered how it had been caused.


A short ride to the top of a ridge, a glance around, and a smoke
was seen rising at no great distance. Riding over to the smoke
a camp was discovered, and sure enough the lad’s father was
one of those encamped. Re had been suddenly summoned to go
North. An examination of the man’s foot revealed the fact
that he had an old wound near the heel resulting in a peculiar
sunken gap in the flesh. It was this wound which had so
moulded the yielding mud as he stooped to drink as to form the
peculiar protuberance seen at the water. The lad was right in
his identification, and also as to the time the visit had been
made.
Eluding Pursuit. —ln order that he may elude the vigilance
and craft of these trained sleuth-hounds of the desert, the
cunning native has devised the puzzling death shoe, or devil
shoe, by use of which he may, to some extent, conceal his tracks,,
and throw the pursuer oft' the scent Named in the North
“ Koo-dichee,” in the West “ Kooll-ea-wypp-ea,” this shoe is
intended to enable the tribal avenger of blood, or the wife-
hunter, to effect his purpose and slay his doomed victim or steal
his coveted bride, as the case may be, with little risk of successful
pursuit. The death shoe is shaped very like the hull of an old
Dutch vessel, blunt at the ends, broad at the bottom. The
main, or under portion of the shoe is formed of felted emu
feathers, and is usually 9or 10 in. long, in. wide, and 2 in.
thick. A netted web made from fur, or of human hair, is-
fastened round the outside edge, forming an “upper” to the
shoe, with a narrow strap of the same material passing across
the instep, holding the shoe in place. The imprint made by the
foot, shod with this footgear, is so light, so faint, and so closely
resembles the impress of blown grass, that it becomes most
difficult, and often impossible, to trace the wearer. No indica-
tion of direction is given by the shoeprint, since both ends are
alike, neither toe nor heel being indicated. When a raid is in-
tended, or a murder is to be committed, these shoes are carried
by the intending perpetrators until the vicinity of the victim’s
camp is reached. The shoes are now put on, the camp is stealthily
entered, the deed done. Amidst the ensuing confusion, if the
camp is aroused, the marauder steals off, and usually gets clear
away. Sometimes sixty or one hundred natives will be on the
warpath in a body. They will walk in Indian file, with death
shoes on, each one stepping carefully into the foot-tread of the
man in front, so concealing their numbers.
Desert Sandals. — Somewhat similar to the death shoe is the
desert sandal, only recently brought to light by Mr. L. A,
Wells, in the Great Sandy Desert, in the vicinity of Joanna
Spring. They closely resemble the South Sea Islands coral
shoe. The sandal is made from the bark of the stem of the
bird flower shrub (Crotolaria Cunninghami) woven so as ta


form a fairly substantial sole, with cross ties of the same
material passing over the instep to keep it in place. The
purpose is to protect the foot from the scorching heat of the
sand, which in those tropic regions in summer is so intense
under the direct rays of the sun as to be well-nigh unendurable,
even by the toughened feet of the aborigine.
Hiding Tracks. —A native desirous to elude pursuit resorts
to various methods to attain his end. Amongst others are the
following;—The pursued steps from rock to rock in favorable
country, never, if he can avoid it, setting his foot on the tell-
tale sand. He does not keep a direct course, but doubles and
twists, so as to baffle his pursuers. This method is very com-
mon amidst the rocky ranges of the interior of Australia. If
hard pressed, and the facilities offer, the fugitive conceals his
trail by planting the fore part of his foot right underneath the
down-sweeping stems of tuft grass, or black grass, springing
forward, and to right to left, covering thus his trail at every
stride. At times the foot is planted right on the tuft, if the
grass will yield, and spring up into place again and not break.
Following up such a trail is most tedious and difficult work. It
alls for a surprising amount of patience. The tracker has, in
such cases, with a stick in each hand, to press aside the drooping
grass, and peer under the sheltering tufts, to discover the
hidden track of his wily quarry. It may take hours to follow
up only a few hundreds of yards trail, and much valuable time
is lost in unravelling such a tangled line of footprints. An
Ouldabinna (West South Australia) native states that the
aborigines of that region obliterate tracks when eluding pursuit,
by the use of branchlets of bushes. A forked twig with the
leaves on is placed across the ankle, the foot in the fork, and
the trailing leaves sweep the sand, so disguising the wearer’s
footprints.
Illustration oe Skill in Tracking. —M.C. Cowle, when
pursuing the would-be murderers of Mr. Beattie, of Old Glen
Helen station, Far North, had the trying experience of having
to deal with both of these last forms of concealment of
trail. His trackers were, however, skilled aboriginal experts.
They followed the trail of the fugitives until they found by
tracks that they had joined another mob of roaming natives, for
a few days. The trackers ran these down, and discovered that
the pursued had again changed their company, and had joined,
and hunted, and camped with a new mob. The trail was still
kept, and slept on, followed through scrub, over sand, across
rises and ranges, until at length the men wanted were actually
seen, covered with revolver, and taken prisoners. The dogged
perseverance, the tireless patience, the constant strain of alert-
ness and vigilance in carrying on such pursuit amidst such
surroundings, and with such wily subjects for test of their skill.


all prove the pre-eminence of the Australian aborigine as a
“tracker.” A member of the Horn Scientific Exploring Expe-
dition had secured a “clutch” of emu chickens. These were
placed under a coop at one of the stations, and a black boy was
told off to feed and look after them. Mr. Cowle, who tells the
incident, was away for some hours on duty. On his return he
discovered that the chickens had gone off. “ Hick,” the native
lad in charge, was told that he must find his missing charges,
and Mr. Cowle decided to accompany him, partly to watch his
methods in the search and partly from interest in the tiny fluffy
wanderers. After a preliminary ruu round Hick picked up the
trail and started off in pursuit. Yard by yard he worked along;
at times he would point to an indication and ask his white com-
rade, “ You see Tim that one?” “No I my no see um.” The
eye of the white man could detect no sign. On again. Presently
Hick pointed eagerly at the ground, calling out excitedly and
half-scornfully, “Now you see um that one?” as much as to
say “ You stupid fellow you, you no see ’um now ? ” Mr. Cowle
replied now, “ Y es, my see Tan that one." “ That one ” was a
faint baby-emu toe-tip print, impressed by the tiny foot in a puff
of sand lying on the rock, the sand patch equal in size to a half-
crown. Hick soon ran down the frail and recaptured his emus.
Sand Pictures. — It is the custom of aborigines to indicate
to comrades in the chase their success in hunting by making
sand pictures on the ground, beside the path. If an iguana,
snake, wallaby, emu, or kangaroo has been captured, the picture
of the prize tells those following that they may cease hunt-
ing and make for camp, as enough food has been secured.
Some of the artists are perfect adepts at drawing these sand
pictures. Air. David Lindsay’s boy Hick, in IBS7, was fond of
drawing such pictures. Representations of lizards, snakes,
wallaby, and emu footprints, of the human footprints, and of
camel pad was delineated with marvellous rapidity and accuracy.
Natives frequently engage in games of sketching, beside their
camp fires. The youths of both sexes delight in exhibiting
their dexterity. Fingers, palm of the hand, elbow, knee, or
pieces of stick are used in executing these works of art. There
is often considerable rivalry, and amidst merriment and excite-
ment the onlookers decide who is the best artist. A sweep of
the hand over the sand face clears the space for the next
picture.
Change oe Direction. —When a native is travelling on
before his comrades and desires to indicate a change of direc-
tion, he goes straight on for a short distance, then turns
through the segment of a circle, crossing his previous track,
and so forming a loop in the trail, then goes on again in the new
direction. The purpose of the “ loop ” is to indicate to his
friends that he is changing his course, thus preventing their


overrunning. A native will come to the side of a wide river of
an evening and camp. In the morning he will raise a smoke,
drive a stake in the ground near the fire, then planting his foot
close to the stake with the toe pointed in the direction he in-
tends to travel, leaves beside the camp fire the footprint which
indicates his course. His comrades, crossing the river later on,
examine the sight of his camp, and gather the import of the
message he has left for them.
Tracking on Trees.— Natives, when in quest of game, search
the bark of the trees for indications of the presence of the
opossum in a tree. If the creature has gone down, and left the
tree, there are no scratchings on the bark. If the opossum has,
however, recently climbed up into the tree, and is at home,
there are on the bark marks of clawing by the fore-paws as it
drew itself upwards, and in the clawmarks, light bark dust, and
loose stringlets or frayiugs of the bark, showing that the scent
is warm. A side puff of the hunter’s breath tests the freshness
of the dust, and quickly decides whether it is ’possum or no
’possum.
Value of the A rt of Tracking. —Some may raise the ques-
tion of value now in the art of tracking. It may be answered
that it is often of the utmost value. Without the aid given by
the aborigine trackers the fate of the lost explorers, Messrs.
Chas. F. Wells and George L. Jones, could not have been
solved. Air. G. A. Keartiaud, Naturalist of the Calvert
Expedition, in a recent most interesting article,* speaking of
the identification of the tracks of three murderers on the
Oscar Eange, AV.A., says : —“ Several footprints were noticed
close to the body, and when asked whose they were, the
boy (an aborigine) said, ‘That one ‘Pigeon,’ that one
‘ Dick,’ that one ‘ Bull.’ ’ The issue was the killing of
the first-named, he offering armed resistance to arrest,
and the capture of the two latter. In connection with
the search for the survivors of the recent (21th April, 1899)
“ Loch Sloy ” wreck at Kangaroo Island, the aboriginal tracker,
“ Boko,” a Kangaroo Island native, was of great service. He
led the search party over a patch of rock quite confidently, and
when questioned as to the grounds for his confidence pointed to
a tiny fluff of material caught on the points of the rough-faced
rock, torn from the covering with which the shipwrecked
mariners had encased their wounded feet. He was puzzled and
baffled in tracking the poor lost passenger Kilpatrick. The ex-
planation of his difficulty was forthcoming, when on the dis-
covery of the dead body later on it was found that the unfortu-
nate wanderer had covered his feet with two pairs of socks, so
* The Leader, page 33, of 27th May, 1899.


protecting them from the cutting rocks, but at the same time
rendering his track so faint that it was as effective as though
he had donned the aborigines’ death-shoes.
The subject has been very cursorily dealt with in the forego-
ing paper. Much remains still to be gleaned. There is ample
room for all workers.
Whilst the white race of Australia avails itself of the skill of
the eminently intelligent aborigine, it should be careful to
attend to the claims and best interests of a race that will ere
long have passed away from us for ever.




