

TRACK FROM KATOOMBA
Jenolan Caves.
W. M. COOPER, ESQ.,
SURVEYOR OF PUBLIC PARKS.
SYDNEY; THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
i hi? i




THE JENOLAN (FORMERLY CALLED THE FISH
RIVER) CAVES.
w s*>ss f see/
ItS 77
Many inquiries have been made as to the
new route from Katoomba to tbe remark-
able caves which lie at a distance of about
18 miles in a straight line, and in a S.W.
by W. direction. As the journey via Tarana
and Oberon is about 90 miles in length
from Katoomba, a shorter cut has long
been a desideratum, and as a step in this
direction, the hotelkeepers of Mount Vic-
toria some years ago constructed a buggy
track from that place to within 2 miles of
the caves. The distance between the two
places is 44 miles, and from one cause or
other this track has not been made much use
of by the public. Of course, from Katoomba
this route, though shorter than that by
Tarana, would also be very roundabout, and
several attempts were accordingly made to
find a track direct; among others by Mr.
Peter Eitzpatrick, of Burragorang, who was
connected with some mining operations near
Katoomba, and who brought the matter
under the notice of the Premier on one of
his visits to that favourite resort. The result
was that first Mr. Eossbach, road surveyor,
and, later on, Mr. W. M. Cooper, Surveyor
of Public Parks, were sent to inspect and
report on the feasibility of the route and to
find the best line for a horse track. Mr.
Eossbach’s inspection was only a prelimi-
nary one, extending over a single day; Mr,
Cooper, who followed, spent ten days on the
work, and marked out a line from end to
end. The number of detours necessary to
carry a track with reasonable gradients
over so mountainous a country caused the
distance traversed to be 25 miles from the
starting point, or from the Great
Western Hotel, Katoomba. Special care
was taken to mark the line, so that it could
not easily be mistaken, by blazing trees in
a distinctive manner, and by affixing to the
trees at various intervals, corresponding
to the nature of the ground, squares, or
rather diamonds, of white calico, with black
figures conspicuously printed thereon, run-
ning consecutively from 1 to 105. The
work was completed in April, 1884, and
the following is a description of the route
lla 113—85
which has been adopted between the two
places, and of the country passed through
on the way. A number of persons have
already made the journey on foot; any one
accustomed to walking can do it comfortably
in twelve hours; and as the track becomes
opened up, an increasing number of seekers
after health and pleasure combined will pro-
bably follow their example. When the
proposed horse-track is completed it will
be a very enjoyable ride of five hours.
There is a good deal of variety and interest
in the scene en route , and a short account
of its principal features will doubtless prove
acceptable to tourists, whether on foot or
horseback.
Of the nature of the country passed
through it may be generally remarked that
it consists, first, of the great depression of
the Cox Valley, some 7 miles wide and 2,500
feet deep, and then of three spurs of the
Main Dividing Eange of the Colony, the
range itself being followed for about a
mile, but not crossed, and attaining the
summit level of 4,040 feet at 21| miles from
Katoomba.
On leaving Katoomba, the Main Western
Eoad is followed for 1\ mile until the
Explorer’s Tree is reached. This is a
venerable relic of the early history of the
Colony, an old battered W and L cut in its
trunk (the B which was originally also there
having become obliterated by decay) telling
the story of the first successful attempt made
to surmount the hitherto impassable Blue
Mountains and penetrate the unknown in-
terior, by Wentworth, Lawson, and Blaxland.
The tree is fenced round and buttressed
with masonry, and bears the following in-
scription affixed thereto :
This wall and fence has (sic) been erected by the
Hon. J. S. Farnell, Esq., Minister for Lands, to
preserve this tree marked by
Blaxland
Lawson
Wbntwoeth,
being the farthest distance reached in their first at-
tempt to cross the Blue Mountains in the month of
May,
AD. 1813.


The expedition, which consisted of William
Charles Wentworth, Gregory Blaxland, and
Lieutenant William Lawson, started from
South Creek, near Penrith, the residence of
Mr. Blaxland, on May 11,1813, and reached
its farthest point on June 1. The following
passage from Oxley’s Journal refers to the
state of things at this time: —
They now conceived that they had sufficiently ac-
complished the design of their undertaking, having
surmounted all the difficulties which had hitherto
prevented the interior of the country from being ex-
plored. They had partly cleared, or at least marked
out, a road by which the passage of the mountain
might be easily effected. Their provisions were nearly
expended, their clothes and shoes were in very bad
condition, and the -whole party were ill with bowel
complaints.
The expedition completed its return to
South Creek on June 6, having thus been
out less than a month. In order to do justice
to the courage, perseverance, and public
spirit displayed on this expedition, it should
be remarked that many previous attempts to
penetrate the barrier of the Blue Mountains
had returned unsuccessful, the first of which
was undertaken by George Bass in 1796.
Bass reported, on his return, that it was
“ impossible to find a passage, even for a
person on foot.” In consequence of the
success of the former expedition, Governor
Macquarie dispatched George William
Evans, Deputy Surveyor of Lands, to extend
the discoveries. He crossed the Nepean on
the 20th November, 1813, arrived at the ter-
mination of Messrs. Wentworth, Blaxland,
and Lawson’s journey on the 26th, and pro-
secuted his undertaking for about 100 miles
further to the west to the Bathurst Plains.
On December 18 he commenced his return,
and on January 8, 1814, he arrived home
again. The construction of a road across
the mountains was immediately commenced,
and carried on so vigorously that on January
21, 1815, it was completed from Sydney to
Bathurst.
At this point the route to the caves com-
mences, following at first a cart track, which
turns off to the left, and presently turning
off to the left again it arrives (2 miles from
Katoomba) at the head of the Megalong
Cleft. This is a narrow chasm in the great
sandstone wall, which is so remarkable a
feature in the Blue Mountain scenery. It
is quite practicable for travellers on foot,
though steep and slushy, from the constant
trickling of water from its head and sides,
and almost filled with magnificent tree and
other ferns, which thrive luxuriantly in the
constant shade and damp. Halfway down
the steep incline the musical sound of
falling water is heard, and a cascade of
some 30 ft. in height is seen on the left.
The cleft is about 3,280 ft. above the sea at
tire top (Katoomba is 3,350) and 2,690 at
the foot, thus making a descent of some
600 ft. in 21 chains, or an average grade of
1 in 2J, which might be improved by zig-
zaging to linsor 6. On emerging from this
gorge of gloom, profound even at mid-day,
and from many points further on, striking
views are obtained of the long line of sand-
stone cliffs behind and on each side, the
outlines and the great masses of light and
shade being very bold and varied, and the
colouring of yellow, red, purple, and green
superb. In many places the cliff overhangs,
and one craggy mass to the west of the cleft
bears a strong resemblance to a huge castle,
with its great square towers, battlements,
buttresses, and turrets, even the lines and
joints of the masonry being distinctly visible;
and another to the east, on which has been
conferred the name of the Boar’s Head, is
curiously like the head of an heraldic dragon,
with pointed ears and open jaws. When
flushed with the morning or evening glow,
this mighty natural rampart is a sight worth
going far to see.
Proceeding onwards, a mile or so of rough
ground is passed over, a slope strewn with
angular rocks of different shapes and sizes,
the accumulated wreck of ages from the cliff
above, and covered with rather thick bush
and scrub. After this the track passes
through capital walking country, with sandy
or gravelly soil, open bush, and no scrub.
It is almost level for the next 3 or 4
miles to Megalong Station, where some
huts are seen on the right. After striking
the S.E. corner of the paddock fence the
track runs alongside the fence for about
a mile, and at the S.W. corner (6f miles
from Katoomba, and 1,870 ft. above the
sea) leaves the course of Megalong Creek,
which we have followed from the cleft thus
far, and, bearing to the left, sidles the
sloping ground on the left bank of the


Cox, which foams along its rocky bed far
below. An easy gradual descent for 31-
miles takes us to the crossing, passing on
the way, between marks 47 and 48, some
picturesque granite rocks, which have in
past ages come tumbling down from the hill
above (called the Pinnacle) like colossal
nine-pins ; one group, to which, from its
shape, the name of the Toad has been given,
being curiously perched one upon another,
whilst across the river a ridge, with three
prominent knobby peaks, attracts attention
on the right. At 10i miles we arrive at
the crossing of the Cox, at its confluence
with the Gribraltar Creek, the level of which
is only 940 ft. above the sea, so that we
have descended no less than 2,500 ft. since
we left the Western Eoad. The river bed is
well worth noticing: it is composed almost
entirely of grey granite, mostly solid, but
with loose rocks and boulders strewn about,
some of them of huge dimensions, whilst the
clear green water forms deep mirror-like
pools among them, or tumbles over in
brawling cascades. A mile or so further up
the stream the valley is crossed by a dyke of
red granite, of a lovely rose colour, well
worth turning aside to see, if time allows,
or it could be taken on the return journey,
and a cut across made afterwards to rejoin
the track above. In its ordinary state the
river can be crossed dryshod, and if the
water should be unusually high a log which
spans the stream a few chains below is
available, but in the case of a flood it would
not be wise for an inexperienced person to
attempt the passage, whilst it is needless to
say that during a high flood nothing can
cross without swimming. Half a mile below
the crossing is the comfortable hut of Peter
Eeilly, a free selector, who acts as stock-
rider on the adjacent hills, which are well
grassed. He and his wife are the only resi-
dents on the route, for Megalong Station is
only occasionally inhabited. Any traveller
who spends an evening with Peter will be
entertained with a number of racy anecdotes
concerning the wild bush life which he and
so many others have led in the days gone by.
The track follows up the Gibraltar Creek,
and after crossing it three times, sidles up
the steep slopes of its right bank. It is easy
going, with the exception of two sharp
pinches, which can be avoided by side cutting
when the track is made, and brings us at 12J
miles to a low saddle (2,310 ft.) across the
Mini Mini Eange, an off-shoot of the Main
Divide, forming the northern boundary of
the Little Eiver Yalley, into which we
descend by an easy spur, and at 13f miles
we reach the bank of the river, 1,830 ft.
above the sea. Here, bordered by low hills,
is a small flat, which will be a capital position
for a half-way house hereafter. Eollowing
the left bank of the clear, pebbly, musical
stream for half a mile, we cross it and com-
mence the ascent of the Black Eange, another
off-shoot of the Main Divide, running easterly
from it, and separating the waters of the
Little and Jenolan Eivers. By a long easy
spur we rise 1,400 ft. in the next mile and a
half; this gives an average grade of lin 0,
so that it is a task of no difficulty, except
for one stiff pull, where the grade of the
natural surface is about 1 in 4 for 60 chains,
and where the going condition of the traveller
is put to the proof. On reaching the top
(15i miles, height 3,200 ft.) the broad and
apparently flat range extends westward for
4 miles, then turns north for a mile so as to
head a gully of great depth, in which rises
one of the heads of the Jenolan Eiver; and,
bending to the west again for half a mile,
joins the Main Dividing Eange of the Colony
at 20f miles, and at a height of 3,980 ft.
above the sea. All along the Black Eange
an old cart track is followed, used in former
years for the transport of bark to Bindo and
Hartley. Although, as might be expected,
pursuing a very serpentine course, it makes
a capital walking track, quite equal if not
superior to the average Sydney foot pave-
ment, and much better than the Sydney
macadam. Here and there, where the track
approaches the edge of the ridge, extensive
views are obtained to the north, north-east,
and south —deep gullies plunging steeply
down into the great valleys, seas of dull
green foliage out of which rise the blue-
green hills, with light yellow scars on their
distant flanks, plainly denoting the sandstone
formation. About a mile further, at a point
4,040 ft. high, the Main Eange, which in this
part of its course forms a remarkable (\)
curve, turns to west and north-west, and our
track leaves it and follows a spur trending
almost due south right away to the caves.
Along this spur runs the buggy track from


Mount Victoria before alluded to, which,
being cleared 10 or 12 ft. wide, and the ridge
being nowhere steep, affords another miles
of excellent walking. Some extensive views
to the eastward are to be had from several
points on this part of the route, embracing
to the left Katoomba, with the Great
Western Hotel standing out against the
sky; to the front the Cox Range, Medlow
Gap, and the striking two-peaked hill of the
Brothers visible through it, reminding the
travelled Australian of the My then on Lake'
Luzern; and to the right the profound re-
cesses of the great Jenolan Gorge, termi-
nating in the mount of that ilk, one of the
hills which has the honor of being named
on Sir Thomas Mitchell’s excellent feature
map, still by far the best in existence of
the mountain district within 100 miles of
Sydney. On the west is the deep gorge of
the Jenolan Creek, clothed in luxuriant
timber, and on its further side the long wall
of the Main Range stands up high against
the sky. The descent of the spur we are
on is so easy that at 25 miles we are still
3,770 ft. above the sea; and then commences
the descent to the caves, which are 1,200 ft.
below. The spur plunges irregularly down
to its termination at the caves, so that it is
inexpedient to follow its ridge, and hence a
narrow track has been trenched in its side,
up or down which it is easy for man or horse
to walk except after dark. This brings us
to the Easter Arch of the caves —a natural
bridge of limestone striding over the Jenolan
(MTCeown’s, or M‘Ewan’s) Creek, from the
spur we have come down, to another which is
followed by the road from Oberon. The
top of this archway is strewn with slippery
limestone rocks, and sundry holes descend
to the regions below, so that wary walking is
necessary in this neighbourhood. A track
is, however, marked out which there is no
difficulty in finding by daylight; and follow-
ing this down we come at last, after a journey
of 261 miles, to our destination. In harmony
with the philosophy of the American, who
said that there was no prospect, however fine,
which was not improved with a good hotel in
the foreground, the traveller who has come
thus far will probably deem the sight of the
accommodation house stretching across the
narrow valley in front of him one of the
pleasantest on the journey, the more so as
for the last 13 miles since leaving Little
River there is only one place where, excepting
just after rain, water is conveniently to he
had. He will he sure to receive every com-
fort and attention from Mr. and Mrs. Wilson,
and under the experienced guidance of the
former or his brother can proceed next
morning to explore the caves, which may
he aptly termed the Australian fairy land,
and to the examination of whose charms
several days should be devoted. For extent,
variety, and wonderful beauty combined, this
series of caves has few equals in the world.
The present writer is aware of only one, the
grotto of Adelsberg, in Carniola, 12 miles
S.E. of Trieste, where the features are very
similar, and command the unbounded ad-
miration of travellers from every paid of
Europe. Considering their attractions, it
seems surprising that our caves have not
been visited by every intelligent person in
the colony who possesses the time and means
necessary to enable him to make the expedi-
tion. No doubt a large number have been
deterred by the tedious and roundabout route
at present employed, and the limited number
which the house at the caves has hitherto
been able to accommodate. Both these diffi-
culties are in course of being remedied to
some extent: the one by the horse track
which is in course of construction along the
line marked out by Mr. Cooper, and the
other by an enlargement of Mr. Wilson’s
house, which has been recently completed,
though it appears to be still inadequate to
public requirements on special occasions.
It is understood that arrangements are in
contemplation to exhibit their marvellous
beauties in the only way by which anything
like justice can be done to them, —by lighting
up the caves by electricity. This, if carried
out, will add tenfold to their charms, and
cannot fail to induce a much larger number
of persons to visit what will then certainly
be one of the sights of the world.
The following extract from a paper fur-
nished to the “Railway Guide of New South
Wales,” by Mr. Wilkinson, Government
Geologist, conveys to the uninitiated an
idea of the scientific theory of the causes to
which first the limestone rock, and afterwards
the extraordinary series of caverns by which


it appears to be honeycombed, owe their for-
mation, and forms a fitting close to this
article; —
It is not uninteresting to reflect that this limestone,
now a compact grey marble, was once a mass of
living corals, “stone lilies,” and molluscs, revealing
the former existence, in the Siluro-Devonian epoch,
of conditions of marine life somewhat resembling
those which support the beautiful living forms which
build up the reefs in the coral seas of the present
day ; and it is significant of the vast changes that this
part of the surface of the earth has undergone, when
w r e see fresh-water streams, at an elevation of several
thousand feet above the sea, now flowing through
rocks that were originally formed beneath the waves
of the ocean, at a very remote period of the earth’s
history. First, the decaying vegetation of some
ancient forest is invisibly distilling the gas known as
carbonic acid; then a storm of rain falls, clearing
the air of the noxious gas, and distributing a thou-
sand streamlets of acid water over the surrounding
country, which as it drains off not only wears the
rocks it passes over but dissolves them in minute
quantities, especially such as contain much lime ; and
then, laden with its various compounds, flows off to
the distant sea wdiere reef corals, lying in fringing
banks round the coast, are slowing absorbing the
lime from the water around them and building the
fragile coatings that protect them during life. Slowly
as the land sinks the coral bank increases in height,
for reef corals can only live near the surface of the
water, and soon a considerable thickness has been
obtained ; while below the upper zone of live corals
lies avast charnel-house of dead coral coverings. Then
comes a change ; suitable temperature, or some other
essential condition, fails, killing out all the corals, and
through long ages other deposits accumulate over
them, gradually crushing and consolidating the coral
bank into a firm rock. At last a convulsion of the
earth’s crust brings it up from the buried depth in
which it lies, leaving it tilted on its edge, but still,
perhaps, below the surface of the ground. Fain,
frost, and snow slowly remove what covers it, until
it lies exposed again to the sunlight, but so changed
that only for the silent but irresistible testimony of
the fossil forms of which it is composed, it were hard
to believe that this narrow band of hard grey rock
was once the huge but fragile coral bank glistening
in the bright waters with a thousand hues. And now
the process is repeated; the decaying vegetation of
the surrounding forest produces the carbonic acid,
the rains spread it over the ground, which is now the
most favourable for being dissolved, and the conse-
quence is that the acid water saturates itself with the
limestone rock; and whenever the least evaporation
takes place, has to deposit some of its dissolved
carbonate of lime in one of the many stalactitic
forms before it can flow off to the sea and distribute
its remaining contents to fresh coral banks. Thus
the old coral reef melts away far inland, and the
lime that formed the coatings of its corals is again
utilized for the same purpose. What a simple succes-
sion of causes and effects ! and yet, before the circle
is completed, long ages of time have come and gone.
And what a fine example of the balance between the
waste and reproduction that take place in nature!
In conclusion, we can confidently recom-
mend any one of good health and vigorous
constitution, who has an eye for natural
beauty, and a love of fresh air and exercise,
to take this trip. By starting early, say 6
o’clock in the morning, it can be comfortably
made in the day on foot, and it will probably
be of assistance to him and give an additional
interest to his journey if he will carry with
him these notes and the accompanying map,
showing the natural features of the country
traversed by the track. It will be observed
that it is intersected from north to south
and south-east by the great depression of
the Cox Yalley, from 2,000 to 3,000 feet
deep, bounded on the east by the long wall
of sandstone cliffs which is so well known
to tourists in the district. The remarkable
shape assumed by the island-like hills here-
abouts cannot fail to strike the observer —•
islands and promontories they once were,
no doubt; they once bathed their feet in
the surge of the Pacific, and the oceans of
ancient days hollowed out their cavernous
sides, at the time when the coral insects
were slowly building up the limestone ridge
which now contains the wonderful series of
caves that are the object of the journey.
On the west of the valley, and at an average
distance of about 8 miles, it is bounded by
the line of the Main Dividing Range, about
4,000 feet in height; numerous lateral spurs
rising from it divide the intervening space
into tributary valleys, and along one of
these spurs, called the Black Range (from a
dark-coloured stone found upon it), the
track is taken to its junction with the Main
Range. As the range at this point bends
almost back again on itself in a curious C\J
curve, the track leaves it and takes advan-
tage of a spur running southwards right to
the caves themselves.
A sum of £2,500 has been voted by Parlia-
ment for the construction of a horse track
by this route, and the work has been com-
menced at the Megalong Cleft, where a zig-
zag is being cut, partly in solid rock, which
when completed will be usable by horses
without difficulty, the steepest gradient
being 1 in s|.




BLUE MOUNTAINS,
TOURIST MAP
OF THE
NEW SOUTH WALES. Two miles to an inch. (One-mile squares.)
Compiled from Parish, Railway, and other Maps, by W. M. Cooper.
Photo-lithographed at the Government Printing Office, Sydney.






