

TRADE DEPRESSION
AND WASTED RESOURCES;
With some remarks
On Popular Government in
New South Wales.
BY
C. M. SMITH.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Sydney:
TURNER & HENDERSON,
1887.




TRADE DEPRESSION
AND WASTED RESOURCES;
With some remarks
on Popular Government in
New South Wales.
BY
C. M. SMITH.
Sjjtmeg:
TURNER & HENDERSON,
HUNTER STREET.
1887.




PREFACE.
My Publishers tell me that disappointment is the abiding lot
of anyone who tries to write a book here, whether large or
.small. Within these covers I have, however, tried to say,
according to my lights, some things which seemed to me
worth saying, and I leave them to their fate.
C. M. SMITH.
Hardie’s Buildings,
Hunter Street, Sydney.




TRADE DEPRESSION AND
WASTED RESOURCES.
With some Remarks on Popular Government in
New South Wales.
Suddenly arriving in New South Wales if I may
be permitted the supposition —from some distant
planet, I hear on every side of bad times, trade
depression, closed factories, the unemployed, ad
'valorem duties, increased taxes, and the like. I
bethink me that this poor, unfortunate, overcrowded
people must be surrounded by quarrelsome neigh-
bours. Doubtless, all that they can contrive to
wring from an exhausted soil is given up to the
maintenance of great battalions—one to watch their
frontier on the north ; and another to guard their
fords on the Murray from the fierce tribes of the
south. The pirate rovers of Zealandia and Tasmania
hover about their ports, robbing harassing and
destroying their merchantmen ; hence the necessity
of a vigilant, although rather expensive navy. And
when these millions of fertile acres were surrendered
to them by the great mother of nations, I expect to
find that she placed them under the yoke of an
exacting ransom, which weighs upon and crushes
them. But I inquire, and, great Heaven ! what do I


find ? The whole acreage of a noble territory placed
without money or price, in the sole and undisputed
control of this million of people; nobody who cam
be conveniently quarrelled with nearer to them than
the howling deserts of mid-Africa; and the nett
result, nothing better than a continually accumu-
lating load of public and private debt, with the
consciousness in men’s minds that they are stead-
fastly drifting from bad to worse, and that such a
conclusion has to be accepted with the dismal resig-
nation of the fatalist, instead of being struggled
against in a manful and resolute spirit.
If you believe that, by some inscrutable decree
of Providence, it is a settled thing that these afflic-
tions have to be suffered, by all means let them be
accepted in a spirit of humble reverence. But lam
about to ask a hearing for the contention that they
are the work of our own hands, and that, but for the
huge and unnecessary waste continually going on in
the diversion of the means and resources of the
country into unreproductive channels, there would
be work, bread, and house-room in it for every
person deserving of these blessings.
A country may be governed from the point of
view of the economist, or from that of the senti-
mentalist. In submitting my allegiance to the first
of these alternative methods, I of course at once
acknowledge myself to be a poor-spirited kind of
creature, scarcely fit to sit at meat with our men of


war. The economist does not seek to pose in stage
.attitudes before an admiring universe, as the saviour
of empires. Comfortable homesteads and well-tilled
fields —the restoration of the breath of life to perish-
ing industries —the means of living for every willing
worker —peace, contentment, and prosperity within
our own borders, —these are the triumphs which he
looks for, and the ambitions to which he limits him-
self. But they are bright dreams which can only
be converted into realities at the expense of a much
more active and intelligent interest being taken in
public life, on the part of the more capable and self-
respecting section of our fellow-citizens. Pointing
towards Macquarie-street, and thanking God they
are not as these others, will no longer fulfil the
measure of their obligations to that community in
which so many of them have prospered.
I do not know that under any system which has
prevailed since the world began, or which, indeed,
will ever prevail in it, there can be at all times so
well graduated a relationship between demand and
supply as that intervals of industrial depression will
not succeed to those of great activity. But surely,
in a country like this, oppressed by no evil inheritance
from the past in the shape of war-created debt; with
millions of fertile acres in it as yet untouched by
spade or plough ; with rich and accessible coal-beds
under her surface ; with her wool, her vines, her gold,
silver, tin, and copper ; in a land, in short, over-


flowing with rare and diversified natural gifts ; it
would seem that one might almost be justified in
looking for a more even, steadfast, and uninterrupted
flow of prosperity than in any country under the
sun.
It becomes us to ask why then is the reality so
different from the reasonable anticipation ? It is
because the expenditure of the Government which you,,
the people, have set over yourselves, is largely applied
to objects purely wasteful and extravagant, having-
no relation to the comforts, the necessities, or the
well-being of the governed. Because the taxation.
necessarily following that extravagance is wantonly
applied in such manner as to injuriously affect both
trade and industry. And because both the amount
and the nature of the taxation threatened in the
immediate future are such as may be calculated to
paralyse at the fountain head every possibility of a
healthy reaction, and to dissociate capital in the first
instance from its alliance with industrial enterprise,,
and, if successfully persisted in, to drive it from the
country.
It is not my intention to write an essay on Free
Trade. At the same time, no paper set forth under
the present heading could properly omit a passing
reference to the wasted resources involved in that
arbitrary and reactionary interference with the free
use of ou,r faculties, our possessions, and our oppor-
tunities, which poses itself under the name of


protection to native industry. I took an active part
in the advocacy of Free Trade principles in this
community more than twenty years ago, and I well
rememember that one of the things then alleged
against us was that we had nothing new to say about
it. There was, I think, some justice in this. Possibly
some of us may have waited for the old arguments
to be answered before starting new ones. For my
own part, it is a difficulty which I feel still clinging
to me, and it is one which would equally beset me
if called upon to find some fresh language for the
demonstration that the sum of the angles of any
triangle equalled two right angles. The first demon-
strator of that problem was happy in dwelling
among a people apparently ready to concede his
fundamental postulates. But what are you to do
with a set of persons who think it no reflection upon
their intelligence to gravely dispute the economic
advantage to a country of gratuitous gifts. They
refuse to adopt in its naked simplicity the perfectly
consistent and, from their point of view irresistible
proposition of an eminent French economist, that
the untaxed light of day should be excluded from
their dwellings; but they will gravely tell us that
it is a thing not to be tolerated that America
should be allowed with her cheap kerosene, to do
that for us partially at night, which the sun does
for us altogether, and with our thankful acceptance,,
at noon-day. There is obviously some remarkable


distinction in their minds between blessings bestowed
on us by the direct fiat of Heaven and those accorded
us through the less direct instrumentality of England,
America, or Germany; and it may I think be set
out with almost the force of certainty that if the
kerosene were to come to us gratuitously from above
and the sunshine at some comparatively nominal
price from New York, our friends would accept the
first boon with grateful hearts, and at the same time
vote for such a duty on the daylight as would give
the importers of it a lesson to be remembered. There
is, of course, no distinction in principle between
cheap light, cheap steam-engines, cheap trousers, or
cheap boots; and, from the Freetraders’ point of
view, it is a matter of indifference whether they
come to us in ocean ships, or in fruitful abundance
from the sky.
The Protectionist section have, so far as I know,
advocated and voted, and their Parliamentary sym-
pathisers do habitually advocate and vote, for the
almost reckless extension of our railway system.
But are we not entitled to ask them for some
explanation why they should thus do violence to
their own most cherished principles. If Protec-
tion be in reality and truth the summum bonum
there is no necessity whatever why it should be
conterminous with political boundaries. Take the
case of such places as Bathurst or Orange. Just
contemplate for a moment the glorious future which,


from the Protectionist standpoint, awaited them.
With the stern barrier-range of the Blue Mountains
shutting them out from serious competition alike on
the part of the Sydney manufacturer and of the
merchant importer, they might have looked to com-
mand the eventual supply of every requirement of
luxury or necessity to the vast region in their rear.
The deafening whirr of wheels and the crashing of
looms should have been heard in their land, while
the smoke of their numberless factory chimnies
should have been seen curling towards Heaven.
But with your inconvenient aid, gentlemen Protec-
tionists, the possibilities of this fair vision have been
obliterated, and if your brethren beyond the
mountains should ask you the reason why, I for
one, shall be curious to see your reply. A range of
mountains is nearly as good an obstacle to the free
interchange of commodities as a Custom-house
•officer. Why then set your contractors upon it,
and devote millions of money —wasted resources
certainly from your point of view—towards the
piercing and levelling and tunnelling of it ? Had
your advocacy of the Protectionist case been in the
interest, or supposed interest of the artisan and
manufacturing class of Sydney alone, one could
have understood your attitude towards these
notable conquests over material obstacles, but as
it is professedly put forward in that of the whole
•colony, it seems remarkable that you should have


exhibited yourselves as the willing accomplices
of those who have gone to so great an expense in
practically reversing a set of conditions in which
nature had so greatly served your more distant
brethren. Any attempt to reconstruct an artificial
barrier between Bathurst and Sydney, in substitution
of the natural one which has been removed, would,
in a country within the same autonomy, be too
nakedly ridiculous to be accepted even by a Protec-
tionist. I almost regret the impossibility, because
much is lost by the absence of a good present con-
crete example of the reductio ad absurdum. But
perhaps we can correct the deficiency by permitting
our minds to roam for a moment over European
soil. Between France and Italy there stands out,,
in majestic relief, the towering line of the Alps.
Millions upon millions have been spent, and the
finest efforts of engineering skill expended, in doublv
piercing this great natural barrier. France and Italy
meet in the open tunnel, hand offered to hand. But
in rushes a Custom-house officer from each end
breathless with excitement. I can imagine a most
effective operatic scene being wrought out from the
incident thus :
Officers (recit.) —
Oh ! no, this cannot, must not be,
For here are we,
Our native industries to see
Protected.


France and Italy (to each other) —
For why should you
Us try to do ?
France (excitedly) —
Withyour cheap silks, sour wines, —Mar-r-rie! T
Italy (sneeringly) —
With your cheap rubbish de Paris-
Officers (sadly) —
Our duty cannot, must not be
Neglected.
Slow music. Banners, with “Fraternite, Egalite,”'
&c., &c., are torn down by the officers. France and
Italy—each with appropriate long cloak, rapier, slouch
hat, and ostrich feather —retire scowling, and the
Protectionists of both countries appear on the stage
restored to happiness.
But my effort to place the whole business in the-
light of an absurdity is feeble indeed, when contrasted
with the melancholy aggregate of folly which intrin-
sically pervades so stupendous an exhibition of wasted
or rather neutralised resources.
There must, of necessity be taxation sufficient
to meet expenditure. But the object of Protection,
thoroughly and consistently applied, beingto annihilate
the competing import, the revenue derivable there-
from is one which, if we are to assume the success,
of that operation, must be appreciable by those only
who are familiar with the peculiar formulae of the
homceopathist. Say that an impecunious Minister
wants some trifle of a couple of millions or so, and


as government with us is apparently conducted on
the principle of the running tap, his needs in that
way are more likely to increase than diminish. If
then the advocates of protected industries are sin-
cere in their belief that the Custom-house is the
proper machine to help him out of the difficulty, they
must necessarily rely on a continuous inflowing
stream of foreign manufactures to supply his neces-
sities. If this should so happen where is the pro-
tection ? In the contrary event the Government
must find that asking for bread, they are likely so
far as that particular section of their friends are
concerned, to get nothing better than a stone.
Those of us who protest against reactionary
legislation in this department of economical science
owe a great debt of gratitude to the Free Trade
Association of New South Wales, for their able
and persistent advocacy of the free trade case.
But important as may be the considerations involved
in it, a warning note in which Mr. Wise, their presi-
dent, has I perceive anticipated me, seems very
appropriate to the present circumstances of the colony.
It may be that free trade is better than protection.
It may be that protection is better than free trade.
The decision between the two is not to be regarded
as other than important. But it is an importance
which is rather relative than absolute, and the
fear is that amidst the dust raised by the dis-
cussion, questions of even more pressing moment


may get themselves overlooked. There is nothing
to prevent a country otherwise well governed
from being prosperous under the worst of these
alternative economic conditions. There is nothing
to prevent a country otherwise badly governed from
hastening to decay under the best of them.
Taxation as I have said must be sufficient
to meet expenditure. But what about this expendi-
ture in itself? Is the Gaul at our gates that the
money of our people should be fooled and muddled
away as it has been ? In private life the theory has
to be accepted, whether we like it or not, that
expenditure has to be reconciled to income ; and if
we have really come to the point that the exact
opposite of this process is the proper and inevitable
t hing in the sphere of government, and that there is
consequently no other alternative than to have
recourse to modes of taxation coming plainly within
communistic lines, and the development of which
must necessarily operate as a discouragement to the
accumulation of wealth or its retention in the
country when accumulated ; it may be as well to
admit at once without needless qualification that
Parliamentary Government in New South Wales
stands confessed among men as a shameful failure.
Up till now it has been the distinguishing feature
of European as opposed to Oriental political systems,
that the accumulation of property, of wealth, in


words of abundance, is not of the nature of
a punishable act. It has on the contrary been
regarded rather as a merit among us; and as an
economic organism apart from any feeling of social
repulsion towards him, the most grasping miser has
perhaps unknown even to himself, a legitimate demand
upon our gratitude. Every pound capitalised by
him, or indeed by anyone else, is an addition to the
wages fund of the country, and to what I may term
its industrial potentiality, no matter whether
passively lent out at interest or directly used in
some more active form of enterprise. But the
apparent determination of ministers—literally the
word I believe means servants, but we may as well
call them what they appear to be, our masters, is in
the current vernacular to go for the rich man. In
recently attempted legislation which has so far been
happily rejected by that branch of the legislature
representing the better and more self-respecting
section of our national life, but with a renewal of
which we are peremptorily threatened, the principle is
plainly asserted that as tax-gathers, the Government
are no longer under any obligation to content them-
selves with what can be spared from the floating
income of the community, but that they have a right
to concern themselves with the principal. In Persia
or Morocco the man who is fool enough to dangle
his prosperity too obtrusively before his neighbours
knows well enough what to expect when a message


reaches him from the palace that he is “wanted.”
But in point of principle there is no appreciable
distinction between a confiscatory demand upon your
property whether made by Shah Emperor or Vizier, or
by the legalised tax-collector of a constitutional state.
It is the more necessary to dwell on this side of my
subject because I can see no evidence of the
existence of any sufficient appreciation in the public
mind of the grave issues and far-reaching mischiefs
really involved in it. Nor does it seem to have
occurred to any one as out of place that a Cabinet
Minister should have cultivated the applause of his
hosts at an “eight-hours demonstration” banquet by
the intimation that it was the intention of himself
and his colleagues so to dispense the burdens of
taxation as to fall especially “on those who had gained
“ great wealth, and that capital would have to pay
“ for its own production.”
I hope that no one among my readers will lay
hold of the supposition that I am writing in the
capacity of the rich man’s advocate. He forms one
of a happy minority of people whom unhappily for
myself I can only admire at a respectful distance,
and it is precisely because my active sympathies
are with the more struggling sections of our social
system that I have put together these words in the
hope of being able more especially to serve their
cause. I have tried in a modest enough spirit, to
study the events of the world from both men and


books, and if I have done so discreetly, I should be
led to pronounce as the lesson of universal expe-
rience, that under such circumstances as those now
under review, the poor man will be the earliest as
well as the most permanent participant in the de-
solating effects which must surely follow the conver-
sion of the of the last Parliamentary session
iito the realities of the immediate future. Do not
allow yourselves any false comfort from the circum-
stance that the first move is likely to be directed
more especially against the land. If capital placed
in land or what may be erected thereon, be regarded
as a fair mark for attack, there is no possible show
<>f reason why for example bank stock or other
forms of accumulation, —even the goods in your
warehouses, —should be spared. Nor will they be
spared. The land of course cannot run away, and
it need not be disputed that in an initiatory raid
upon it you may capture some very big fish. But
it will be once for all. Idle land is a useless pos-
session, either to its owner or to the community in
which it exists. In a state of healthy and progres-
sive development the tendency would be sooner or
later to devote every available acre or allotment to
some fructifying use. But do you suppose that
people with money either to invest in or to lend upon
possible houses, shops, hotels, engine works, fac-
tories or the like, are so fatuous as to disregard the
signs of the times ? Do you suppose they are


likely to put their necks over the edge of an openly
baited trap ? No. They will for a time play the
waiting game. Everything they have will be turned
as nearly as possible into cash in the like spirit in
which a rich Persian may be supposed to concentrate
his means into diamonds ; and if forced to the
eventual conclusion that there is no sufficient body
of active resistance to such schemes in the better
sense and more active political morality of the com-
munity, very many of them will probably solve the
problem by removing both themselves and their
possessions to some safer anchorage. The mere
suspense engendered while such a problem is evol-
ving itself is a calamity, and the industrial depres-
sion which empties our workshops and fills our
streets with idle, although in many instances willing
candidates for work, I do not hesitate largely to
attribute to the unstatesmanlike boast—l care not
whether conveyed in or out of Parliament —that
“ Capital is going to have things made warm for
it.”
The attempt to discriminate between free and
mortgaged land for purposes of direct taxation is
one that will not for a moment hold. The land
itself forms the corpus of the proposed taxation, and
if the tax were founded on any principle capable of
being economically defended it would justify no
such distinction. And indeed for a Government
under any circumstances to try and adapt their
B


collections to the complicated interests bound up in
nearly every considerable landed estate would be
about as practicable and sensible as if they were to fix
one rate of duty to be paid on a hogshead of brandy
cleared by its owner, and a different one on some
■other hogshead because it may happen to be pledged
to a banker.
There has of late years set in a disposition
among leading English and Scottish corporations,
with large accumulations for investment, to come
among us with the purpose—of course in their
own legitimate interest—of supplying our market
with that comparatively cheap capital, the scarcity
■of which has for many years operated as a standing
obstacle to any large spirited enterprise. They
have without doubt been influenced in this course
by reliance on the moral security of a system of
■Government under which the right of people to hold
their investments by an indefeasible title should be
regarded as a fundamental admission. Does any
one suppose that the able men who control these
great accumulative reservoirs of cash will not hesi-
tate when they see the tendency of your threatened
legislation, and perhaps in the event withdraw their
future operations altogether, in amazed disgust at
your stupidity and folly. To them such an outlet
for their lendings is at the best no more than a
convenience. To you, the people of New South
Wales, these and similar lendings are as the breath


of your industrial life. And if you can seriously
deceive yourselves into the belief that it is your local
rich man who will have the greatest reason to deplore
your success in driving competitive capital from
your shores, and the absence of which will permit
him to rejoice over the prospect of a return to the
fine old days of io per cent.; you will be the victims
of an infatuation so crass that sympathy would be
wasted upon it.
I can understand that having parted with every
acre belonging to the State, a very unprincipled
“Government could afford themselves the luxury of a
sardonic smile at the prospect of pouncing upon the
unlucky people who had perhaps placed their whole
means of existence in the land, on the implied faith
of being let alone. But I suppose quite half the
surface of the country —I really do not know what
the proportion is—at all events there must be
immense territories still in existence as the public
domain; and what are we to think of the wisdom of
those whose threats amount to nothing short of an
advertisement to every future competitor at a
Government land sale, that he will at all times be
the first to be remembered when some gaping void
•created by extravagance and folly has to be filled up.
In the event of the confiscatory designs of the
Government being endorsed by the deliberate voice
of the country the implied warning will no doubt
operate as a useful caution, but it is likely enough to


cost the country a substantial diminution in the
revenue from land sales as soon as the true effect of
threatened legislation has time to percolate into the
minds of those whose preferences if let alone would
always incline to that form of investment.
When these words were first written I was
unaware that they were already in process of being
abundantly verified. The following is from the
speech of the Premier, Sir Patrick Jennings, to his
constituents at Dubbo, 20 November, 1886:
“In making up the Estimates for the present year
it was calculated that £350,000 would be received
from auction sales of land ; but it was ascertained
that although the Government offered all the statutory
quantity of land for sale there was no demand for it.
If they were ever so willing to sell the land, they could
not make people buy it unless they could afford to pay
for it. Instead of the land being greatly sought after,
not a third of the quantity offered by public auction
had been sold. The quantity estimated to be sold
was £350,000 worth, whereas the quantity sold, and
that which it was estimated would be sold, during the
rest of the year was £118,693 worth.”
As surely as you expel political economy by the
door it will manage to get back by the windows.
After a series of disastrous experiments it will be
found that after all there are but two alternatives to
choose from. The one is to restore to competitors
for the purchase of the public estate the confidence


of which your threats and avowed intentions have
deprived them ; the other is to find that the country
will be without a market when next it has any con-
siderable quantity of land to offer. I must presume
to differ from Sir Patrick Jennings on the point that
the question is one of people being able to
“ afford” it. It is a fact sufficiently well known that
there are hundreds of thousands —I do not think it
would be a great exaggeration to say millions—of
pounds lodged with banks and lent to companies of
various kinds, a large proportion of which would,
with any feeling of restored confidence, flow readily
into a form of investment which in this colony has
always been a highly favoured one. But no machi-
nery which their ingenuity can devise will enable
ministers to combine the luxury of indulgence in
threats against the investing classes for the sake of
vulgar applause, with that of obtaining fair prices for
what the country has to sell. The principal charm
of these ministerial admissions consists in the
apparent absence even of the germ of an idea in the
minds of the speakers that ordinary human cause and
effect have anything to do with this kind of business,
such as that of foolishness producing its natural fruit.
Oh no ! The note which pervades the whole thing is
that of a good People’s Ministry being thwarted at
every turn by the enmity of opponents, the perversity
of circumstances, and the inscrutable ways of
Providence.


In the speech already quoted from is
given as the expense, so I read it, of administering
the public lands for one year. The figures are
appalling, but their detailed analysis would be a task
beyond my province on this occasion. Exposed to
the dissecting knife they would probably support a
view of the land legislation of the colony already
familiar to our minds. Instead of being based on
some simple and intelligible fundamental principles,
capable of being applied in practice with economy
and efficiency, the Acts constituting that legislation
seem to consist of a mass of complications requiring
on behalf of that section of the community more
immediately affected by them, the creation of a set
of experts specially educated to the not always
possible task of comprehending them. Acts which
render such machinery a necessity stand self-
condemned. The Premier in a very candid spirit
contrasted his figures already quoted with the
spent upon similar departmental work in
Victoria. And in offering the explanation that “in
Victoria the land was nearly all alienated,” the context
shows with sufficient clearness that Sir Patrick was
too honest a man to accept it as satisfactory to his
own mind.
Capital is to have things made warm for it!
“ Capital is to pay for its production,” says the
Minister. Note the beautifully rounded circle in


which the argument moves itself. The protectionist
vote, obviously to be exercised a la Parnell, is in the
market. Let us tor a moment do outrage to the
better sense of the people and assume that it is
likely to prevail. Mills, factories, foundries, and the
like, are by the hypothesis to be seen rising up all
over the place. But these very things are the visible
and tangible embodiments of “ capital. So that it
comes to this. Capital is to be first enticed into
large and necessarily speculative enterprises by
protective imposts, and when once nailed to the soil
it is to be vulgarly speaking “ rounded on on the
occasions, likely enough to be perennial, when an
empty treasury wants replenishing. I may venture
to express the opinion that under the circumstances
now present to us you will have to catch your
capitalists before you operate on them to the extent
you would like. It would almost seem as if the sense
of humour were departing from us when we fail to
see the hollow artificiality of a set of systems so
mutually contradictory and self-destructive as this*
1 -J
* We have among us so many doctors to whos® raids upon
“ capital ” and “ the land” constitute the first resort of statesmen
in difficulties, that an extract from a recent lecture by Professor
Leone Levi on the “ Economical Administration of the Resources
of the British Empire,” may not be out of place.
He ventured to say to the colonies First determine what
are the true functions of the State; reduce such functions to a
minimum, and abide by your decision. Be sure that you do not
undertake what private individuals can best do for themselves. Take


Many hitherto untouched sources of taxation
unobjectionable from the economist point of view
are open to any set of ministers aiming with single-
ness of purpose at the good government of the
country. But underneath this there stands the
question whether with a return to a more modest
conception of the functions of government much
more than half of even existing taxation is really
necessary. I assert without hesitation that any set
of men, be they from one side of the house or the
other, who find themselves unable to govern this
colony including the payment of interest on her debt,
with a total revenue of all told, and with
a margin to carry forward at the end of the financial
year such as may be seen in the balance-sheet of any
successful joint-stock company —do by that fact
proclaim themselves unworthy of their high functions.
I do not mean government in a poor cheese-paring
fashion, but government with every recognition of
care to secure and maintain a perfect equilibrium in your revenue and
expenditure, and do not accumulate debt. In the levying of taxes do
not touch the instruments of labour and wealth; do nothing to
discourage accumulation. Let all articles necessary for food or
manufacture come in duty free ; let all your products go out also duty
free. Do not attempt to use the Customs revenue as a blind for a
protective policy.”
I should perhaps apologise for setting forth anything from such a
source in the presence of the eminent local authorities quoted by
Mr. Abbott, M.P., and of others whose instruction in the economic
sphere it is almost our daily privilege to receive in the shape of
letters to the press. But let it stand.


what is liberal and dignified in the public service,
and without prejudice to the prosecution of every
needful public work. It cannot be done by men
content to purchase parliamentary subserviency by
the erection of expensive and frequently superfluous
post-offices court-houses and railway stations in
-every Pedlington and Mudlington where two or three
are gathered together. Nor by men whose concep-
tion of our railway systems is so majestic as to shut
out every possibility of their paying their own way.
Nor by men in the habit of expending year after year
the revenue of a considerable province on the unin-
terrupted flow of unnecessary and mostly childish
cablegrams between the Treasury in Sydney and the
Agent-General of the colony in London. Nor by
ministers whose expressed theory of necessary public
works is not that the country should require them,
but that occupation may be created for the unem-
ployed* And above all it cannot be done by men
* Thus the Colonial Secretary in his place in Parliament on
19th October last: —
“ If hon. members would take the trouble to look at these estimates
they would find that the £3,000,000 was not to put money into the
pockets of the Government, but to find labour for the people. The
hon. members opposite were doing the best they could to starve the
people into rebellion,” &c., &c.
As this is a style of argument which would cover any and every form
of expenditure involving the employment of labour, it would seem
Tight to Mr. Dibbs that any honourable member in whose sincere
opinion the heroic schemes of the Government are hastening the
country into ruinous difficulties is only entitled to give expression to
his sentiments at the expense of a peculiarly odious imputation.


who regard it as within the legitimate province of
frew South Wales statesmanship to save the empire
at all times that it requires saving. Of all things
that kind of idea is the most fatal to the hope of a
return to sober and well-ordered prosperity. I know
that in touching on this point I touch something
on which the sympathies of my readers may be
divided : but I do not write with any view to the
cultivation of popularity, and I shall decline to be
guilty of such an affront to them as to assume
that they can only tolerate one side of a discussion.
It is by no means in the spirit of one seeking
to initiate a gratuitous controversy that I include this
subject within the range of my remarks. Some
English war in the creation of which we will certainly
have no voice, may at any time arise in some remote
section of our planet, and it becomes the people of
this country to seize a convenient opportunity when
the question can be approached from a hypothetical
stand-point, of expressing their settled conviction
upon the question, whether —given another set of
conditions similar to those in which the Soudan
expedition originated,—the colony of New South
Wales is to feel itself called upon to repeat that
experience. It is not a question to be decided on
the spur of the moment by any impulsive senti-
mentalist who may happen to be in office for the time
being. It should be given to no single man among
us to arrogate to himself a prerogative which even


Her Majesty the Queen is content to possess rather
than to exercise. No one wishes to reflect in any
ungenerous spirit on the past, but it cannot
be left altogether out of view if we are to regard
the question involved in it as of serious moment for
our guidance in the future. It would be travelling
out of my course to do more than refer in the most
superficial way to that modern history of Egypt
which began with the bombardment of Alexandria
by an English fleet. The subsequent invasion of
Egyptian territory was the act of an English minister
who in his first clear definition of the circumstances
which would justify that course, set them out —I use
his own words spoken from his place in Parliament
—as the “ maintenance of all established rights,,
whether they were those of the Sultan, the Khedive,,
the people of Egypt, or the bondholders.” The
question whether an expedition for these kind of
purposes is the proper occupation of English sol-
diers and sailors, is one which lam not called on ta
discuss. I merely give the quotation, to shed such
light as it may upon the fraudulent afterthought that
the integrity of the Suez Canal, which I believe
to have been in precisely the same danger from
Egyptian molestation as Westminster Abbey, was in
any way prominent in the minds of the originators
of that expedition. But the relations between
Egypt and the Soudan never left room even for con-
troversy. That Egyptian administration which was


saved by the armed force of England from the proper
fate of Governments which have become intolerable
to the governed, was one which pursued a policy of
remorseless, systematic, and exacting tyranny to-
wards their comparatively recent conquest of the
Soudan, which happily can only be realised by
Englishmen from what they read in books. If it
were not for the fear of extending this paper beyond
all tolerable limits, I could quote authoritative ex-
tracts bearing on this which would fill the minds of
my readers with horror and disgust. The Soudanese,
forsooth, did not like their lot in life. They turned
upon their tormenters, and this was the “ rebellion ”
which seemed so intolerable to a then all-powerful
English minister—for the English people had really
nothing to say in the business—that it must be put
down. And this was the ignoble quarrel in which our
people here thought it right to take their share, amid a
swinging of censers on the part of your press, your
pulpits, and your swaggering rhetoricians, which has
scarcely ceased to the presenthour. If itwere England
with her back to the wall defending her soil against a
combination of foes, I think it would be a respect-
able even if an impracticable to run to
her aid. But the case is surely of another com-
plexion when she sends an expedition to some distant
clime, and disposes the scientific slaughter-machinery
of Woolwich towards the perforation of a brave
people, wholly void of offence towards her—guilty of


no other crime than that of defending their own inherit-
ance —a people who, in Mr. Gladstone’s inscrutable
language at the very time when he was having them
pounded down in squadrons by English mitraille —
were “ rightly struggling to be free.” One would
like to know as a matter of simple curiosity, what
ulterior fate he had in reserve for any set of people
whom he might find “wrongly struggling to be free.”
Future wars may possibly not consist of a walk
over the course and a few pot-shots at the horizon,,
and if our people could for a moment realise to them-
selves the absurd inadequacy of our means and
resources to cope with really serious and protracted
warfare in its aggressive aspect, there would not I
think be much difficulty in forecasting their decision.
There are always latent possibilities of mischief in
the perverse activities of the English “ Foreign
Office,” as any one may gather who observes the
language of the press cablegrams from day to day
about such places for example as “ Bulgaria/’ The
theory of its functions accepted by that department
of State is one which has descended to it in an
unbroken tradition from the time of the third William
or probably a hundred years before. Not even a
surgical operation would remove from it the idea but
that it must mess and muddle about in every wretched
squabble in which such names occur as Greece,,
Turkey, Bulgaria, Servia, the Principalities, &c., &c.
Quiescent but strong powers like Germany and


Austria, the borders of which are within touch of the
scene of the disputes ever and anon arising in that
section of Europe, and which might be supposed to
-estimate most accurately any seriously disturbing
cause against the interests of peace—these, although
vitally concerned with the ever-shifting diplomacies
of the business, never appear to excite themselves
in the least. But nothing is too ridiculous for
a Downing-street official to connect in his mind
with the everlasting question of “our road to
India,” one to which every movement of the
solar system is supposed to be subservient. And
because his foolishness may some day precipi-
tate the country into an unnecessary war, as it has
many times done before, are we to shoulder arms
and take shipping for the Hellespont, the Danube,
the Ganges, or the Indus ? Because if so, any further
discussion connected with “Wasted Resources”
would be in itself a needless waste of mental energy.
If New South Wales is to hold itself in readiness to
embark in aggressive warfare for some such reason
as that Lord Iddesleigh and M. de Staal have a
difference of opinion abouttheproperendfrom which to
break into an egg in Bulgaria, it would really not be
worth while to argue seriously on behalf of economy
in the application of our resources in time of peace.
They would be so hopelessly mortgaged sacrificed
and dispersed by our taking part in any serious
operations beyond our own borders, as to make the


preservation of what might remain scarcely worth an
effort.
The treatment of my subject has had chiefly in
contemplation the question of “ Trade Depression
and Wasted Resources” within the colony. To
give it a more cosmopolitan application, although
tempting to me, would carry me beyond present
possibilities. We can do very much to minimise the
causes of trade and industrial depression among
ourselves, but within certain lines they must neces-
sarily stand affected by events outside of our control.
A perfect conspiracy of waste seems to have got its
grip upon the world. If we saw all the railway vans
in Sydney employed for weeks together emptying
the contents of the great shops and warehouses in
York, George, and Pitt Streets, and shooting them
into the harbour, we could not possibly misunder-
stand the nature of the operation. Not only the
immediate owners of the goods, but the larger world
beyond them would have lost so much of its accumu-
lated wealth, its wage fund, its capital, by an act of
incomprehensible madness. But there is no essential
distinction between such an act and many others
which are daily accepted among the facts of life
without apparently the smallest recognition of their
desolating effects upon the trade, the industry, and
the personal well being of whole peoples. The
•emptying, for example, of some of
money upon the hopeless task of piercing the


Isthmus of Panama.* The spectacle of the French
and German peoples taxing themselves to the extent
of annual hundreds of thousands of pounds so that
English colonies may be provided with wholly
superfluous mail and passenger services. Or France,.
Russia, Germany, Holland, and America, each heavily
taxing themselves so that refined sugar should be
shot upon the English market at about the price of
sea sand. Then look at the appalling expenditure
upon the war services of Europe. That of England
alone, exclusive of her Indian establishment, exceeds
an annual total of One of the most
mischievous of the English weekly prints which
is always on the war path, characterises this
stupendous outlay as the necessary sacrifice
which a great country imposes upon itself by
way of premium of insurance. Well, it is a
pretty big thing in the way of premiums, and
that such expenditure is needed for any legitimately
defensive purpose is altogether too ridiculous. Half
the money would do this, and do it well. But it suits
the governing people at home to multiply their
garrisons everywhere and to cruise about crea-
tion a constant menace and terror to Powers and
* M. de Lesseps not long since shewed much soreness and
disappointment at the refusal of the French Legislature to sanc-
tion a public lottery scheme for the raising of an additional
! (reckoned in English money), with a view to the
further prosecution of these works.


Principalities of the weaker sort, and hence the
diversion of resources to purely destructive pur-
poses, which otherwise would constitute a very
perceptible restorative influence to industry and
commerce. I should not have deemed these
remarks as appropriate to my subject were it not
that the baneful inheritance of the aggresive spirit
is obviously enough exercising its influence on our
own government, and that—jointly with neighboring
colonies—there seems to be in active contempla-
tion the formation of a colonial navy. We have
had a good many expensive toys in our time, but
nothing as yet to compare to this. The idea seems
to prevail that in case of European war, some power
—France and Russia are the favourite bug-bears
with our panic-mongers—will have such a super-
fluous amount of force on hand as to enable it to
send a considerable fleet many thousand miles clean
away from its base to attack us. Well: I suppose
our harbours are in an adequate state of defence.
At all events they ought to be so, or if otherwise, no
reasonable expense necessary to that end should
be spared. Has an enemy then only to ask us
for what he wants in order to get it ? He will
require food coal and water, not to speak of many
other things, and if you have properly provided for
these harbour defences how is he to come by them.
Even assuming the absence of Her Majesty’s
cruisers, what could he do to us beyond perhaps at
c


the first go off plundering and destroying some few
merchant ships in the open sea: or, in the wildly
improbable event of his being able to blockade our
coasts, I am unable to see howl at the worst he could
do more than inconvenience us for a time. The
four principal colonies will before many months
are over be connected throughout by the junction
of their various railway systems. With the free inter-
change of commodities peculiar to each, would it
be so very dreadful to have to live for a few months
deprived of those which come to us from abroad ?
At all events, to the protectionist section, such an
eventuality should seem a thing of ideal bliss, almost
worthy of a war for its realization. But the most
comprehensive war which we can possibly imagine
would leave some neutral nations outside its sphere.
It would for example be safe to assume the United
States of America as occupying that position. Is
it supposable that the keen traders of New York
and San Francisco would not know the value of your
market to them, at a time when others would by
the supposition be excluded from it. And do you
think the Americans would care a brass farthing
for imaginary blockades. And do you think that any
combatant with his hands already full would care to
add that great nation to the list of his enemies, by
laying a finger on the smallest “ Yankee notion ”
which might find its way to the neighbourhood of
your ports.


It is necessary to lay stress on these over-
whelming chances in favour of our practical immunity
from the consequences of any war other than such
as we ourselves may provoke, because in no other way
is it possible to protest with any chance of success
against the ambitious schemes now being hatched
in the war compartment of that patent incubator of
folly which we call by the name of a Government.
I' have a strong suspicion that we owe the
inception of many of these unwise schemes to the
desire on the part of many of the Agents-General
of the colonies in London to magnify their office.
Some of them seem to spend a considerable portion
of their existence in dancing attendance upon
H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, and in the exercise of
similar indispensable functions of their high calling;
and with few exceptions it seems a practically impos-
sible feat for any of them to contemplate a festive
plate of turtle-soup without emitting a flood of vapid
nonsense about Royal invitations, Exhibitions, Feder-
ation, Imperial Institutes, and other ridiculous and
pernicious fads. And as if there were not already
a sufficient amount of machinery in motion for the
manufacture of wasteful outlay and idle talk, there
comes flashed to us under the sea, even as I write,
the brilliant thought of a London Conference. If
one could only hope to see these inflated officials
restored to the humble although honourable function
of buying locomotives and steel rails, and never


suffered to come within a hundred yards of a Royal
Highness or a book of telegram forms, the moral
effect upon themselves would be a happy one, at the
same time that the gain to the various colonies would
represent economised instead of wasted resources
to the extent of hundreds of thousands of pounds.
On the other side let us glance for a moment at
the benefactions which now and again fall to our
lot. Every new form of natural wealth, wherever dis-
covered —be it petroleum wells, gold, tin, copper —is
just the same to us as if we were left a moderate share
in a great legacy. Every great invention operates in
the same direction. Each individual in this country
or in this world is, for example, the richer for such a
discovery as that of the Bessemer steel process.
While bestowing on its inventor a fortune beyond the
dreams of avarice it constitutes an inheritance to
humanity almost beyond the power of figures to
convey. An actuary employed by the Times esti-
mated its value to English railway shareholders alone
as equal to a free gift of And it is
quite credible. The ever increasing annual outlay
on permanent way in what may now be looked back
upon as the iron age threatened to wipe the ordinary
English railway shareholder out of existence. He now
thrives upon a moderate dividend at the same time
that men cattle and merchandise are wheeled from
end to end of the country at rates which, in point of
qioderation, would, under other circumstances, have


been impossible. I have not the means of knowing
how many steel rails have been imported into New
South Wales: probably not less than 500,000 tons.
If that is in any way near the mark it would be no
extravagant estimate to recognise the Bessemer
invention as equal to a free gift to the people of
this colony of from £10,000,000 to £12,000,000 in
first cost alone, leaving out of the question the vast
indirect saving in maintenance of permanent way.
So much for resources economised instead of those
so freely wasted for you.
And there are those among yourselves who
pursuing the even and undemonstrative tenor of their
way, render the country a most worthy service in
developing its industrial capacities. Such names as
those of Mort, Wyndham, Lindeman, Byrnes, occur
to me in connection with this remark. I daresay
there are many others. You do not hear of
these gentlemen on the stump calling aloud to be
“ protected.” To my mind they recall the self-
sustaining type of people who made England’s
greatness —men who at a time when it was the
fashion to nurse and coddle industry with all sorts of
nonsensical prescriptions, made it the limit of their
ambition simply to be “ let alone.” Capital to pay
for its own production indeed ! When you succeed
in improving away from your little section of earth
this kind of representative of capital—and if you
try hard it is just possible you may succeed —the


shutters may as well be put up without needless
delay.
In enumerating certain destructive forces, or
what I should like to call “ wasted resources” as well
as restorative forces which I wish to class as
“ economised resources,” it is more with the idea
of offering you a sample rather than a category that
I have selected illustrative specimens of each. That
on which I desire to lay stress here is that neither to
the destructive nor to the recuperative force can we
possibly assume an attitude of indifference. Every
million squandered upon an impossible or imprac-
ticable or un-reproductive enterprise in any part of
the world is, whether we like it or not, a million
subtracted from that fund which gives your wool,
your copper, or your tallow, the chance of a rising
market. Every invention given to the world by the
bright genius of a Watt, a Bessemer, or a Siemens, is
a benefaction, the finer vibrations of which penetrate
to the humblest hut in the Australian bush. Our
part in the world is, within the measure of our ability
to guard and not waste the resources which are
within our control. Beyond that we can afford to
take our chance.
But one sadly feels that the assertion of certain
principles and the legitimate effort to place one’s
arguments in a convincing light, represent so much
wasted exertion unless political life can be purified
and separated from much which now degrades and


defiles it. If I may partially repeat myself, it cannot
be done if laissez faire is to be adopted as a per-
manent motto by the many worthy and competent
men we have among us. If the country of their
birth or their adoption is to become a fit inheritance
for their children, they must find their into the
more combative section of parliament and be seen
and heard among the ranks of those who should join
together in making the place intolerable to the mere
rowdy, whether drunk or sober. The second chamber
provided by the constitution has a high and useful
place in it. But an objection to it consists in the fact
that it drains off in some instances, men who can be
ill-spared from the more active side of our parliamen-
tary system —that side of it which, as at present
constituted, unfortunately presents itself to the world
as an advertisement of all the worst traditions of the
country. Why should it be tolerable for scenes to
be continually endured at the hands of those elected
by the people for a most honourable service, which
would cause them to be summarily expelled from any
decent club. lam well aware that there are gentle-
men in the Assembly who would do credit to any
legislature, but they do not appear to be sufficiently
numerous to make their influence predominant. . It
is not at their hands that I shall look for resentment
as the reward of any honest effort, however feeble
it may be, having for its end the placing of the forces
of decency and order in an overwhelming majority.


The colony is after all not so very young in years. It
is about to celebrate its coming of age. A large
wealthy class has existed in it for as long as any one
now living can remember, a class able to bestow
every educational gift on their children which money
could command. Schools and universities, not things
of yesterday, have been maintained by the country
at a lavish cost. And all to what end ? Has no
one a right to expect that these things should bear
fruit in many ways not yet made manifest to us; —
that they should give us something beyond expert
cricketers and clever yachtsmen. Would it not
indeed be a reasonable enough hope that they should
provide us in moderate measure with statesmen of
culture prescience and ability whom we could see
in our high places with some kind of pride, and with
the material of an elected chamber sitting in which it
might be competent to people to feel themselves in
the society of gentlemen—a word I use in no invidious
sense as to the limits of its application. I should
not hesitate to contend that if these kind of anticipa-
tions were not reasonably within the probabilities of
the future we may well commence our economies by
dismantling and disendowing institutions which in
the case supposed merely cumber the ground. If
self-sufficient and illiterate incompetency constitute
the best preparation for public life and the indispen-
sable condition of obtaining its highest rewards, why
go to an enormous outlay for no better purpose than


that of disqualifying the rising generation from their
chances of distinguishing themselves in it.
It is time to be up and doing. If there be a
boast in this world unworthy to come from the lips
of a grown man it. is that in which he takes credit to
himself for being “no politician.” There are poli-
ticians and politicians. There is too great a
disposition to identify the word with the tactics of
the caucus and the tricks of the election-monger.
But there is surely another and better sense in which
it would ill become any member of a free community
to reject it as signifying nothing to him.
If any one were gravely to argue the proposition
that we should tamely, and without an effort at
defence, submit ourselves to foreign conquest, he
would justly be the object of your mingled indigna-
tion and contempt. But if the better sense of the
country is to confess itself a thing standing aloof
and divorced in every possible way from any con-
trolling influence upon the machinery of State,
permit me to ask in what essential respect we differ
from the subjects of a conquered province. Unless
there can be found some reversing gear in that
machinery it will take less than another five years
to land the country between the alternatives of
repudiation, or a grinding and exhausting taxation
which will undermine by the roots every industry
and interest by which men live and thrive, and
thrust back a noble possession into the political rank
of Fiji or Jamaica.






