

TRADE AFTER
THE WAR.
Benj. Hoare.
THE NEED OF TRUE THOUGHT.
Unless we are to sit down and confess ourselves to be a
muddleheaded people, we shall tackle the task of protect-
ing Australian trade after the war. It may need a good
deal of protection. It has always needed it, and has not
got it, when we were importing between £70,000,000 and
£80,000,000 worth of goods into the Commonwealth.
People are talking about a boycott on German goods.
It is a big thing to talk about this proposed boycott on
German trade after the war. It requires a big man,
perhaps many big men, to tackle the job. Mr. Hughes,
like another Don Quixote, is Avrestling with it in England
almost single-handed. But even his enemies will con-
cede that he has made a Homeric struggle for it. He
carries his protectionist propaganda right into the camps
of freetrade, and never fails to score an oratorical triumph.


But, so far, there the triumph ends. Or, rather, it seems
to end. If we look a little closer we shall discover that
thought is fructifying. Mr. J. Havelock Wilson, General
President of the National Seamen’s Union, states that the
Union in a fortnight obtained more than 1,200,000 votes
in favour of an anti-German boycott. He expects the
support of 10,000,000 qualified electors before the
General Elections are held. We have also learned from the
cables that members of the French Seamen’s Union have
unanimously decided to boycott Germany after the war.
This follows the similar decision on the part of British
seamen.
What attitude is the Australian Labour Party adopting
towards this great movement ? A very great movement
it is, fraught with issues which might well occupy the
strained attention of Labour here as it does in England.
There different sections of Labour take different views,
as we shall see.
The war and its lessons seem to have hardly touched
the fiscal prejudices of some sections of dear old John
Bull’s family. The recent Trades Union Congress, held at
Derby, while firm as adamant against any war compromise
with Germany, was just as firm against setting up a post
war boycott against the Hun. In spite of the accumulated
proofs which have been set forth in scores of ways of Great
Britain’s loss of trade to Germany in .consequence of her
open ports and Germany’s closed ones, some sections of
British working men are as closely bound to the old
Cobdenism as ever.
At the Derby Congress there was present a Mr. Naylor,
representing the London compositors. He put before
the Congress a resolution reaffirming that the war had not


altered the fundamental truth of the soundness of free-
trade, and urging upon the Government the danger of
imposing a tariff. Mr. Naylor strongly protested against
Mr. W. M. Hughes’s campaign. The Congress reaffirmed
in favour of freetrade by 2,214,000 to 591,000.
To us Australians, knowing all we know, that insular
attitude of the British trade unionist mind is very
curious. We are not impatient with it, because we under-
stand it to be a part of that mental stubbornness which
makes the illogical Englishman so sturdy and reliable in
other phases of his character. Mr. Barnes, the Labour
Minister, who was present when that freetrade affirmation
was made, was not dismayed by it. On the contrary,
though the Congress was fiscally futile, it had been very
firm in saying it would have no negotiation with Germany
till the Hun had evacuated France and Belgium ; and
because of this the Labour Minister told a Glasgow audi-
ence that the trade union congress at Derby, on the
whole, was very satisfactory. He was particularly pleased
at the adoption of the resolution pledging the rank and
file of the country to a vigorous prosecution of the war
until the Germans were cleared out of France and
Belgium.
Mr. Massey, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, like
Mr. Hughes, believes in a policy of Imperial Preference in
trade, and he has contributed an article on those lines to
the Dominion’s number of the “ Empire Mail.” In the
same publication the Commonwealth Prime Minister
has an article advocating a policy which will prevent the
Empire from becoming a dumping ground for German
goods. “ I don’t pin my faith to tariffs,” he states, “ but
to organisation. But if the remedy for competition is a
tariff or bonus, why should we hesitate to apply it ?”


In the meantime the Hughes propaganda is forcing its
way in America, and in Canada. The Americans have
not yet made up their minds, but the Canadians are
whole-souled. Strong organisations have been formed
in Vancouver and other Canadian cities to advocate the
immediate passing of legislation by the Dominion Parlia-
ment to provide for the total exclusion from Canada after
the war of all Germans, German goods, and shipping, and
the prohibition of exports of raw material to Germany.
Speakers at a Vancouver meeting warmly supported
Mr. Hughes, Prime Minister of Australia, in his plan to
exclude Germany from the Pacific. It is considered that
if Germany gets back her Pacific possessions, Canada,
equally with Australia, will be face to face with the
German menace.
These things are an indication of the current public
opinion. They encouraged Mr. Hughes to persevere, in
spite of the harsh criticism which he received at the
hands of the British freetrade press.
If Australian Labour were only led by men of brains,
capable of comprehending large issues, we might hope
that the party would grapple with this vast economic
question, apart from personal prejudice, and as it affects
the future of Australia and the Empire. We cannot
leave these great issues to chance, nor wait for the end of
the war before we begin to understand their inner mean-
ing. Germany is most anxiously considering the trade
policy which her people are to push on the signing of peace.
Are Australians to be less prescient ?
The Australian Prime Minister, in spite of discourage-
ments, will not hear of waiting for peace to come before
preparing for it. He says that the blood of our best and


bravest will have been shed in vain, our treasure spent in
vain, and all our tremendous efforts made in vain, unless
peace finds us in a position to deal with the tremendous
and complex problems that would inevitably confront
us when peace comes.
What he means is that there will be a time of fierce
competition after the war, and we must have our methods
ready to put into prompt activity, as Germany will have,
in her former manner of “ peaceful penetration.” He
says : We were becoming mere caretakers in a house
whose ownership had passed into German hands. The
very foundations of that magnificent edifice of commerce
and trade which we had reared until its topmost storeys
towered to the clouds was honeycombed in its most
luxurious apartments as well as its basement by German
influence, power and money.”
He will not allow the British people to forget the danger
from which they have escaped. Surely the Labour
section of the people here will not shut their eyes to the
Australian danger. Our great basic industries, notably
metal industries, passed wholly into German hands, so
that they determined the amount of output, the prices
it should fetch, who should sell it, who should buy it.
Will not all sections of the people be determined that that
shall not recur after the war ? This thing is so far above
party that men of all sections should join for the national
good. Mr. Hughes told an English audience : —“ lam
not concerned with rival fiscal theories, except so far as
they make for the national safety and economic welfare
of the nation. It is useless to babble about what this or
that economic writer said fifty years £go. As a matter of
fact, those who now turn to Adam Smith in this hour of
tribulation, and abase themselves at-his shrine, declaring


that he pointed out this or that, are doing him a grievous
wrong. He was a great man, and if you will turn to his
writings and look at them fairly you will see he always
had in mind the national advantage first, the welfare of
the nation first, and all other things after.”
Notwithstanding that the freetrade papers of Great
Britain are pretty hostile, Mr. Hughes knows that a great
change has come over a very large section of British
thought. Mr. Massey, Prime Minister of New Zealand, in
an article in the “ Pall Mall Gazette,” says ; —“ While
the adoption of a moderate Imperial preference might
mean slightly rising prices in a few commodities, the
increase, rightly viewed, will be a premium that will pay
for our security. The only measure of protection that
preference involves is protection of the Empire, and
not of specially favoured industries. Surely the security
of the Empire transcends any fiscal creed or policy ?
Unless we achieve unity in commerce, the Empire will be
gravely prejudiced.”
Before the war Great Britain would not 'listen to the
idea of giving any preference in trade to the oversea
portions of her Empire. Now, according to Bonar Law,
the British Cabinet has adopted that policy. Years ago,
Lord Rosebery said there was no evidence that the
Dominions wanted preference. It would have been just
about as pertinent had Lord Kelvin asserted a dense
atmosphere in the moon.
The broad facts concerning colonial views of preferential
trade were known to all the world. Canada gave to
England a preferential entry to her ports as far back as
1896. She desired reciprocity and couldn’t get it.


The Cape Colony and Natal have both shown the same
spirit. More recently New Zealand has done the same.
So far, then, as the examples of four out of five of these
colonial possessions could guide us, the evidence all points
to the earnest desires of the Greater Britain beyond the
sea for a system of Imperial Reciprocity.
Everybody knows how r Australia feels about Imperial
Trade Preference. This Continent supported the late
Joseph Chamberlain all it knew. Prior to 1908, that
great British statesman had never considered the policy
of Preferential Trade. Then, seeing how Germany was
undermining British industries, he made minute investi-
gations. Those investigations convinced him that an
unrestricted system of commercialism must result in loss
to the Empire as a whole. This fact came home to him
still more forcibly after the close of the Boer War, when
England, having spent some £250,000,000 on the war,
saw the German traders garnering in a large share of the
harvest of the trade which flowed from it.
THE CULT OF THE DUMPER.
Closely touching this question of the German trade
boycott is the question of Dumping. It is the study of
dumping which makes Mr. Hughes so earnest about the
shutting out of Germany. Dumping is something the
Australian Labour Party should be keen to oppose.
Dumping is not a new thing in trade. There were
dumpers half a century ago, when British merchants
deliberately set themselves to stamp out Indian cotton
manufacture by selling for a time at a loss in order to
gain command of the market.


But dumping in those days was a mere shadow of what
the Germans made it. By means of Government sub-
sidies or subventions, they enabled German shipping
companies and foundries or factories to cut into sub-
sidised trade and kill it or threaten it with extinction.
Dumping became a new science. A century-ago dumping
was an occasional practice. Now it is a perpetual and
permanent trade menace. We have as warrant for this
statement a report of the British Tariff Commission.
That report is at the root of the Australian Prime
Minister’s present agitation in England, when he wants
to prepare safeguards against Germany’s dumping after
the war. The report referred to said :—“ We find that
dumping is of the most widespread character, and may,
contrary to the view held by many, be profitable to the
countries which practise it; that unless checked it is
likely to remain one of the permanent incidents of trade ;
that it has already caused serious loss of employment
and wages, diminished profits, and brought about a
feeling of insecurity throughout the iron and steel
industry ; and that there are no advantages to con-
sumers of dumped products which in the long run can
compensate for a lasting injury to the iron and steel
industry.”
Surely these are considerations which should stimulate
thought in Australia.
NO GERMAN PEACE FOR US.
Peace is visibly near. German power has been
smashed, and its boasted fleet tamely yielded up
under terms of humiliation such as no power has
suffered in modern times. Australian Labour demanded


a German peace on negotiated terms. It asked for a
peace “ without penal indemnities.” That meant that
German}' was to escape scot free from all the con-
sequences of her desolating cruelty.
We are not to have such a Peace ! We are to have
a just peace, and a permanent peace, and as we hope
a preference against German goods !
Every intelligent Australian worker is most seriously
interested in this vital question. The Germans deman-
ded as the first condition of peace that they should
have free access to all foreign markets, while their own
German market was to be kept sacred to themselves.
One of their most able mercantile writers, Herr Feiler,
laid down the conditions of a German peace. Germany
was to direct the course of trade in the wo,rld. He
said :
“We must be able after the war to carry on world-trade
as we did before the war, buying from every foreign
country what we need, selling to every foreign country
what our work can offer in payment for our imports,
moving freely on every shipping route and in every port —
and all this without paying any special dues, without
any differentiation, with absolutely equal rights, and
with entire most-favoured treatment such as we ourselves
are ready to accord. The very peculiarity of our foreign
trade before the war—the predominance in our imports
of a comparatively small number of great staples, food,
raw materials, and half-manufactured goods, and the
predominance in our exports of an extraordinarily large
number of the most various finished manufactures —makes
Germany the natural champion of such an economic
peace in the world as would be secured by establishing


in all peace treaties most-favoured treatment and the
open door.”
That was a German merchant’s idea of what we Aus-
tralians must concede. We must open our ports to the
Teuton and take what he may please to send us. But he
says one thing that we may take to heart. Germany
hopes to survive the losses of the war by two methods.
They are to “ work and save.” Will our Australian
workers take that hint ? Herr Feiler says :—“ Times of
scarcity will come upon mankind. But there is one good
way to bear them—no longer to desire luxurious living.
Want will force us to practise renunciation, and we hope
that higher things and purer joys than in the past will
be sought and found. Life will be hard and serious.
But the German people will have the courage and the
strength to bear this also. Having held out through
this war, we shall be able to stand the peace.”
That is the very peace that Britons are exhorted to
prepare for—to prepare against an economic invasion of
their markets.
THE LAW OF THE SURPLUS.
These things aforetime did not weigh much with British
producers. The war has changed their views. They
know- now what it means for one country to be almost
dependent on another which may be its mortal enemy.
The growth of great Trusts and Kartels has placed
production on a scale of magnitude that was never
known before. A country which is enclosed behind a
tariff wall can offer all its home markets to its home pro-


ducers at prices regulated by internal competition.
The great combines, having made their profits at home,
can afford to dispose of their surplus abroad at any
price which it may bring in freetrade or neutral markets.
This is a double-edged sword of surprising keenness.
The “ Law of the Surplus” is one that neither Cobden
nor Mill nor any of the classical economists ever took
serious note of. And yet there it now stands, a domin-
ating factor in modern industrial life. It startles minds
like those of Mr. Bonar Law and Mr. Balfour. It is a
snag in the stream of trade which they had never charted.
But it has to be reckoned with. Both men have looked
it in the face. Each of them separately has worked out
his remedy. It wanted courage to do it. The new facts
cut clean across the old fiscal maxims. America and
Germany were cases in which countries which stubbornly
refused to “ Buy in the cheapest market” were out-pacing
in jieutral marts the one which adhered to that venerable
formula.
. And they did it by the “ Law of the Surplus.”
For half a century it was accepted as a self-evident
maxim that a protectionist country, making production
dear, could.never compete abroad with a freetrade one in
which cheapness had been the master factor in all cal-
culations. But all that is proved to be a fallacy.
Germany and America have both proved it by the “ law
of the surplus.” That law may be defined as “ a profit-
able and exclusive command of the home market, so as
to sell the surplus abroad at a discount.”
What lies at the root of Mr. Hughes’ strenuous economic
campaign in England, and Mr. Bonar Law’s acceptance


of Preferential Trade in the Empire, is the fear of future
German dumping. They know now that under the guise
of free imports, it is a method of stamping under the
industrial features of national life, as it did in England in
the metal trade, and in that of the aniline dyes. Aus-
tralians will watch this development with great interest.
Is Labour in Australia prepared to take all the risks of
a future German trade invasion ? Is it not clear that if
German dumping be not guarded against that many
Australian industries may be ruined as were the English
ones ? Germany is basing all her hopes of economic
rescue on her power of living frugally and working hard
for trade profits earned abroad. She had hoped to
make the Allies pay her war expenses to the extent of
£4,000,000,000. That hope has now vanished. She now
looks to exploiting the world in her foreign trade, and
building up Germany again at the expense of her neigh-
bours. President Wilson, in his New York speech of
September 29, says there should be no economic boycott
or exclusion “ except as the power of economic penalty
as a means of discipline and control.” That exception
is all that the advocates of the boycott have in their
minds, when they advocate it as a policy of self-defence.
IS IMPERIAL PREFERENCE PRACTICABLE?
The Australian worker has a very real interest in this
controversy that Mr. Hughes has pressed on British
thought. Mr. Hughes denies that he speaks as a pro-
tectionist. He says that he used to be a “ fanatical
freetrader.” But, he says, the question quite transcends
any fiscal controversy. It touches the safety of the


Empire after the war shall be over. His critics are very
keen upon him, but he is quite equal to meeting them,
describing them as of the same importance as the ‘ ‘ three
tailors of Tooley Street.” “They speak,” he says, “as if
they still live in the days of Heptarchy.”
This question which Mr. Hughes has started to agitate
in Great Britain would never have arisen from him but
for the war. The late Joseph Chamberlain once said :
“ Freetrade is a kind of political religion, and like many
other religions, it has suffered from annotations and
commentators and false prophets. In 1881 I was much
influenced by Lord Farrer, and believed in his predic-
tions, every one of which has been falsified.”
After the war the contest for trade will be as keen as
is now the contest for victory. Great Britain will need
the Dominions’ trade. Before the war the Dominions
were good customers in foreign markets. They were
taking goods from foreign countries to the extent of
£90,000,000 a year. Very much of that England could
supply under the system of preferential trade. To accom-
plish that it was necessary to secure protection at home
and Preferential Trade with the colonies. But how were
these great things to be accomplished ? England had a
settled Cobdenist policy. The colonies were certain to
demand some substantial concessions of their side of
this great bargain. It must be on their foodstuffs, and
this could be given only on the plan of taxing the food
imports from the foreigner. Yet a tax on food was quite
certain to array all the ignorance and all the prejudice of
England against such a daring proposal.
Mr. Bonar Law says the British are going to tackle that
business. It is pretty certain that they will go upon the


Customs Duties
Chicory
£54,459
Cocoa
271,285
Coffee
193,007
Corn and Grain
491,779
Plums, Currants and Figs
452,578
Spirits
.. 4,663,414
Sugar
.. 6,000,015
Tea
.. 6,572,634
Tobacco and Snuff
.. 12,889,420
Wine
.. 1,340,069
£32,928,660
lines mapped out by Mr. Chamberlain. England puts
Customs Taxes on some eight or nine articles of food for
personal consumption to the extent of some £32,000,000.
The figures as given a few years ago were as follows
If Great Britain gives preference to the meat and
wheat of the Dominions, she will take off those taxes
on foodstuffs to compensate the British consumer. But
a greater thing than this, in the opinion of the Australian
Prime Minister, is to shut the British market against
German trade. The war has shut it. He wants to see
that Peace shall not open it.
It is abundantly clear that if, as freetraders assert,
consumers pay all such taxes, it would be possible to remit
on tea, sugar and tobacco more than would be imposed on
wheat and meat, thus ;
Foreign Corn and Grain .. 2s. per quarter.
Foreign Meat and Dairy Produce 5 per cent.
Maize, Bacon, Colonial Corn .. Free.


Colonial Dairy Produce .. Free.
Raw Materials .. .. Free.
Colonial Wine Duty .. .. Reduced.
Tea Duty (reduced) .. .. 75 per cent.
Sugar, Coffee, Cocoa (reduced) .. 50 per cent.
It is calculated that this scheme would rather reduce
than increase taxation. It is estimated that it might
put some 2|d. per week on the bread and meat pf the
working man, but would give him a reduction of 4|d. to
4|d. on other articles of daily consumption.
Therefore, when Australians and New Zealanders and
Canadians tell Great Britain that they want Imperial
Trade Preference, the} 7 are not asking for anything that
will raise the cost of living in England. They don’t
seek to penalise their kin in the old land. They are not
asking for a deal in which all the profit is at the one end.
Any preferential duties levied in favour of the Dominions
can be balanced by the remission of revenue duties.
The suggestion is in favour of the oneness of the Empire
and not against any section of it. It means that English-
men would drink more Australian wine and less German
and French wine ; that they would eat more Australian
meat and less American meat.
It has hitherto been forgotten in England that every
commercial transaction has two profits. It has a profit
at both ends of the deal. The buyer makes a profit. The
seller makes a profit. If that deal is half in the Empire
and half out of it, only one profit comes to the Empire.
If both parties are within the Empire, the* whole gain is an
Imperial gain.
Adam Smith himself has pointed this out as a reason
why the home trade is always so much more profitable


than a foreign trade. By a parity of reasoning, of course,
an inter-imperial trade is twice as profitable to the
Empire as a trade between the Empire and foreigners.
Before the war Great Britain used to say that in trade the
utter alien was as much to her as her own children.
A great deal of water has run under the bridge since that,
quite enough to carry away many fallacies.
Pass this on to a Friend.
Issued by the Progressive and Economic Association,
34 Queen Street, Melbourne.
/
McGarron, Bird & Co., Printers, 479 Collins Street, Melbourne.
