

TRADING BANES,
INFLATION and
DEPRESSION
A Statement on National Monetary Policy
published by the
Fabian Society of Victoria
This statement is intended to help secure full
employment without inflation and to help retain
full employment in face of conditions which
would lead to depression.
A most vital power in the maintenance of full
employment is the flow of money—a “nation’s
bloodstream”.
The important question is: “Who shall have
this vital power in Australia—Governments which
are responsible to the people, or non-government
private trading banks which must be concerned
mainly with their own private advantage?”
Melbourne, 1953


The statement is set out in this order of
comment:
Its title and aim Front cover
Introduction Page 3
Your interests are affected by
Inflation and Depression . „ 5
The Power of Money ~ 6
What is Money and how is it
Controlled? ~ 8
How the Trading Banks work „ 8
The Final Power in the Control
of Money . „ 9
The Social Nature of the
Banking System ~ 14
The FABIAN SOCIETY OF VICTORIA consists
of democratic socialists who support the Austra-
lian Labor Party. Beyond that the Society, as
such, has no policy.
The Society welcomes the use of any of its
material from reports, statements or bulletins,
either verbatim or incorporated into comment.
The Society would appreciate acknowledgment
of material so used.
Secretary, A. G. Serle, Box 2707 X, G.P.0.,
Melbourne, C.l, Victoria.
The Industrial Printing and Publicity Co. Ltd.. Carlton. N. 3.


TRADING BANKS, INFLATION
AND DEPRESSION
Introduction
The sudden onset of the GREAT DEPRESSION in 1929,
showed a conflict of interest and policy between the Com-
monwealth Government of Australia and the associated
private banks, in which the Commonwealth Bank, although
Government owned, was unwilling to co-operate with the
Government, and in fact was on the side of the private
trading banks.
Since then the successive Commonwealth Governments
have been involved in a pronounced struggle with the pri-
vate banks, both with respect to national monetary policy
and in the development of the Commonwealth Bank as a
Central Bank. (See The Growth of the Central Bank, by
L. F. Giblin.)
The law and the political climate of Australia have
changed since the GREAT DEPRESSION when the asso-
ciated private trading banks were able to win in a clear
issue of whether they or the Commonwealth Government
of Australia should decide national monetary policy. Con-
sider the statement of Professor D. B. Copland (now Sir
Douglas Copland) in 1931:
“Confidence in the currency has been sustained mainly
because the policy pursued was controlled by the banks
and not by Governments.”
This statement appeared as the centrepiece in a paid
advertisement in the Melbourne Argus on December 12,
1931, exhorting people to vote for the United Australia
Party.
But the GREAT DEPRESSION stayed on through 1932
and 1933, and for many through 1934. Indeed, depression
was still in Australia for the 9 per cent, of breadwinners
who were unemployed when the 1939-45 War began. How-
ever, the Depression and particularly the War has brought
about a revolution in economic thinking. No longer do
economists argue that employment cannot be provided for
thousands of unemployed because doing so would cause
inflation.* They have been converted by the late Lord
* They did do so in 1931. See an article by Professor D. B. (now
Sir Douglas) Copland, Australian Quarterly, March 14, 1931; “How
the _ Government proposes to increase the note issue (by £l5
million) for the purpose of loan expenditure and render assistance
to necessitous farmers without involving inflation is a matter
upon which the country will be rightly sceptical.”


Keynes. But the war itself was the main influence. People
everywhere saw how it was possible to create hundreds of
millions of pounds of money and pay it out to the com-
munity for war purposes. Still there was no inflation des-
pite the fact that there was almost no unemployment when
this was done.
Inflation and depression in Australia can be prevented.
The means are known. What is needed is that the people
must prevail through the Commonwealth Government over
the sectional property owning interests which have stood
against the control of inflation and the prevention of de-
pressions in the past.
The political climate in Australia has changed a great
deal over the last twenty-five years. But how much we
cannot be sure until it has been tested.
The most important change in the law was the Common-
wealth Bank Act No. 13 of 1945. This was the work of the
Chifley Labor Government. This Act provided (Section 9a)
that in the event of a difference of opinion between the
Government and the Commonwealth Bank as to whether the
monetary and banking policy of the Bank is directed to the
greatest advantage of the people of Australia, the Treasurer
shall prevail.
In its amendment to the Commonwealth Bank Act in 1953,
the Menzies-Fadden Government left the above principle in
operation. But as in all the banking amendments of 1953,
they made the machinery of operation more complicated.
In the event of any difference of opinion, the matter now
has to be decided by the Governor-General in Council and
not the Treasurer as in the 1945 Act. What is more the
Menzies-Fadden Government restored a Board to the con-
trol of the Commonwealth Bank, in place of control by a
single Governor. The re-introduction of a Board, and the
location of the final power in the Governor-General in Coun-
cil, makes the machinery more complex and the chances of
it “seizing” under the influence of a barrage of propaganda
more likely. Perhaps the Governor-General in the tense
circumstances of crisis which would prevail, may, on con-
stitutional grounds, refuse to agree to what the Government
of the day requires. But the situation has changed. Now
the law says that the final authority lies outside the banking
system. The final authority lies with the Government.
During the GREAT DEPRESSION no such law existed.
But the Government of the day could have prevailed. It
did not do so because the Commonwealth Bank Board
(made up of men of similar background and interests as
those who controlled the private trading banks), the private
trading banks, the Press and the experts like Professor Cop


land, all working for the same interests as the United Aus-
tralia Party opposition, represented a political force of great
power. The Government of the day was over-ruled. Such
an event could happen again notwithstanding the change
in the law.
The matter will be determined by the relative political
strength of the parties as it has always been determined.
Not only did Professor Copland believe rightly that the
banks did prevail in the determination of the outcome in the
GREAT DEPRESSION, but he, with many others of similar
influence, believed that the banks and their friends should
have prevailed. This was because they believed that the
economy depended upon the banks and their friends. And
if they could not get conditions which would suit them then
they would not co-operate sufficiently to make recovery
possible.
The evils of inflation and depression can be prevented in
Australia. But the private trading banks and associated
interests will be economically affected in much the same way
as before. In a crisis, the propaganda and the pressure will
be on again. Full employment, in such circumstances, can
be maintained only if public opinion is well informed, and
if the LABOR MOVEMENT (upon which the outcome de-
pends) is sufficiently clear about the policy and action
needed. The Labor Movement will need to maintain con-
fidence in itself against the weight of wealth, conservatism,
and timidity which will be in the scale against it.
This statement deals \vith matters involved as far as
MONETARY POLICY is concerned. But there are import-
ant matters which cannot be dealt with by MONETARY
POLICY alone. A statement soon to follow this one will
deal with those matters.
Your Interests ore Affected by Inflation and
Depression
For many years people were taught to believe general wel-
fare would be greatest if economic forces were left to
operate without any interference at all. Inflation and de-
pression are both results of the economic system working
without interference.
It suits the economically strong to have the economic
system left to them. They can profit from inflation. Then
when depression comes they have sufficient capital to buy
out the thousands of small producers and sellers who go to
the wall. The economically strong have money to sell and
they want to see its price kept as high as possible. They
do not want to see the Commonwealth Bank financing the
Commonwealth Government and those in difficulties at low
rates of interest


There are powerful economic groups which pay hundreds
of thousands of pounds a year in Press and radio advertising
to pour out propaganda to assert that we cannot do the
things necessary to prevent inflation and depressions. They
do this because they know that success cannot be achieved
without the Government taking action to modify and con-
trol private power and private profit. These groups and
their professional propagandists call the action which has
to be taken SOCIALISM. Well, it is Socialism. Let them
call it that. Every action taken by Governments to im-
prove social and economic conditions for the majority of
the people since the passage of the first Factory Acts to
limit exploitation of child labour has been described by such
people as Socialism. Well, it was Socialism.
But it is in the interests of the majority of the people—
all workers in factories, shops and offices, most professional
people, all those who, because of age or illness live on social
service income, as well as most farmers and small shop-
keepers—to have inflation and depression prevented. This
can be understood by casting our minds back over the past
three or four years to see how price increases have leached
away our real standard of living.
To understand how depression harmed the majority of
the people we have to cast our minds back twenty years.
Then half a million adult Australians were unemployed.
Thousands of small shops were empty and covered in dust.
Houses everywhere were vacant. Streets were studded with
“To Let” boards. Those who were in business slaved long
hours, or sold out to the big fellows who emerged from the
depression bigger and wealthier than ever.
There are many people, however, whose interests are
severely harmed by inflation and depression who can be
encouraged to vote for a policy in the interests of the
moneyed people, because the opposing policy is called
Socialism. Have the conditions described above to return
again before they will learn not to be deceived in this way?
The Power of Money
The power of money operates through the Banking System.
In Australia the Banking System consists of eight private
trading banks, the Commonwealth Central Bank, and the
Commonwealth Trading Bank (both owned by the Com-
monwealth Government). There are several Savings Banks,
owned by State Governments, and other financial institu-
tions which carry out some banking functions, which al-
though important, will not be dealt with in this statement.


Most of the private trading banks were founded in Aus-
tralia and a majority of their shareholding is held here.
But several of them, such as the Union and the Australian
and New Zealand Banks, were established in England or
have links such as a large part of their shareholding being
held in England.
The Commonwealth Central Bank exercises certain powers
over the private trading banks which were brought in by
the Banking Act No. 14 of 1945 as amended by the Menzies-
Fadden legislation of 1951 and 1953. The law provides that
the Commonwealth Central Bank must give support to the
trading banks, and, in the event of a bank’s inability to
carry on, to assume control of that bank. The Special Ac-
counts provisions are to the effect that each private trading
bank can be required to hold a part of its Deposits (it was
Assets under the Chifiey law) in the Commonwealth Central
Bank. This allows that bank to exercise some control over
the trading banks, power to raise the level of their business
operations.
Then, the law provides that the Commonwealth Central
Bank may determine the Advance policy of the trading
banks. It may give directions to them about the total money
they can lend and the particular purposes for which they
can lend. Another important provision in the law is that
the Commonwealth Central Bank can make regulations
about any aspect of foreign exchange. At the present time
Foreign Exchange regulations provide for the trading banks
to make periodical statements of all their transactions in
foreign exchange and to pay over to the Commonwealth
Central Bank any excess of receipts over payments of foreign
exchange in the period. The Bank is also empowered to
make regulations for the control of the interest rate.
Just as in the case of the control of the Commonwealth
Central Bank itself, exerciseable by the Commonwealth
Government, the control that the Bank can exercise over the
private trading banks has been made more complex and
difficult to operate by the Menzies-Fadden amendments of
1951 and 1953. Indeed it is a common saying that no one
knows the meaning of Menzies’ amazingly abstruse section
defining the Special Accounts powers.
The Commonwealth Trading Bank was separated from the
Commonwealth Central Bank by the Menzies-Fadden law.
The function of the Commonwealth Trading Bank is to carry
on the ordinary business of banking as the private trading
banks do. But in the Industrial Finance Section of the
Commonwealth Central Bank there is great power to lend
money in large quantities for industrial purposes. This
Section has exercised these powers recently in making mil-
lions of pounds available to Australia’s largest industries
like Broken Hill Proprietary. The Industrial Finance Sec


tion of the Commonwealth Central Bank would be an im-
portant source of finance for an anti-depression policy.
The main problem in the control of the power of money
remains to be solved. But we have progressed a long way.
The solution of the problem of the control of the power of
money will be achieved only when a serious inflation has
been controlled and when forces which would produce a
depression have been prevented from operating.
What is Money and How is it Controlled?
Money is really anything which can be used in the settle-
ment of a debt. Notes and coins are the simplest form of
money. They are legal tender—they must be accepted by
everyone. But by far the most important form of money
is cheques. Bank deposits and overdrafts are transferred
from one person to another in making all kinds of pay-
ments, and the cheques are used for the purpose. Perhaps
90 per cent of all the payments that are made by the com-
munity are made by cheques. But the trading banks must
be able to provide a certain proportion of all the payments
they make in notes and coins. The ratio between deposits
which can be drawn by cheque and the quantity of notes
and coins required tends to be fairly steady. If this ratio is,
say 10:1, then the trading banks can produce 10 times as
much money in cheques as any increase in notes and coins
they acquire. Basically they can do this because they act
on the perfectly safe assumption that only something like
l/10th of the increased supply of money will be drawn in
notes and coins and the rest will be drawn in cheques.
In Australia, notes are issued by the Commonwealth Cen-
tral Bank. The trading banks are supplied with notes as
they require them for ordinary business purposes. But the
necessary and unavoidable link between the amount of notes
and coins they hold and the amount of business the trading
banks can do by cheque provides a means through which
the total quantity of money might be controlled. The trad-
ing banks regard ordinary deposits at the Commonwealth
Bank as equivalent to notes and coins, for they can with-
draw these deposits on demand.
How the Trading Banks Work
The trading banks accept deposits from the community.
They also make loans (called advances or overdrafts) to the
community. One impression that exists is that the trading
banks only act as a kind of passive intermediary between
those who save by making bank deposits and those who
borrow by getting overdrafts from the banks. It is often
said: “The banks can only lend what is lent to them.” This
is far from the truth.


The task of linking lenders and borrowers is an important
function of the trading banks. But none is more important
than their power to create money. This the trading banks
can do by granting overdrafts to borrowers. Once the over-
draft is granted, the borrower takes away his cheque book
and can make out a cheque as though he has a deposit in
the bank. He will pay this cheque to another person for
some service or goods. This person may hand it on, but
sooner or later it must be paid into a bank. This will in-
crease the total of bank deposits. So we see that the grant
of the overdraft has resulted in an increase of bank deposits
by an amount of money which did not exist before. The
limit of the power of the trading banks to grant overdrafts
in this way, and so create money which was not in existence
before, is determined by the fact that about l/10th of all the
business they do must be done in notes and coins—and the
total of notes and coins they can get at a particular time
sets the limit.
The Final Power in the Control of Money
Relative to Inflation
The power of the trading banks to create money, we
have seen, is exercised in their granting of overdrafts. This
depends upon their holdings of notes and coins (cash as it
is called). This is limited by the extent of the deposits they
hold with the Commonwealth Central Bank, and by their
holdings of securities like Treasury Bills which the Com-
monwealth Central Bank must take in exchange for cash.
If the trading banks exhaust all their deposits with the
Commonwealth Central Bank and if they dispose of all
their securities, then they might still obtain more cash from
the Bank by borrowing it. But they would have to pay
interest on the amount they borrow. The Bank may refuse
to lend or it may raise the rate of interest charged on the
loans. It might become impossible or unprofitable for the
trading banks to borrow—although it must not be for-
gotten that they can lend about ten times as much as they
actually borrow in cash.
In fact, control of the trading banks’ money-creating
activity is not well exercisable through control or restriction
of the amount of cash they can get. Generally they are able
to get as much cash as they need. If the banks are to be
refused cash this would in itself create a crisis. If the rate
of interest is to be raised high enough it would mean that
all sorts of other consequences would follow which would
be undesirable.
In order to avoid these problems and to make control of
the private trading banks’ money-creating activities more
efficient, the Special Accounts and Control of Advances pro


visions were introduced. These controls operate directly
upon the advance or overdraft activity of the trading banks
and upon their deposits.
This is most necessary during any period of prosperity
and expansion. The money the trading banks lend out in
overdrafts flows back into the banks again as deposits and
provided there are no independent controls the trading banks
go on lending more and more until some crisis occurs in
overseas payments. In such times many people are anxious
to get money from the trading banks, and with price rises
going on all the time, the prospects of profit are always good
and the banks will be inclined, in such favourable circum-
stances, to lend more and more. Individual bank managers
compete with one another, and often despite the existence
of controls, they can find a way to meet the needs of the
market.
Normally the private trading banks have always regarded
the money they have created in such a process to be their
own private property over which they should have com-
plete control. The money they create can be lent out and
thereby they acquire a tangible asset, or they could pur-
chase property directly. When after 1942, instead of all
the money created during and after the war by the banking
system accruing to the private trading banks in the form
of increases in their assets, some £575 million of it (in May,
1951) was held in Special Accounts with the Commonwealth
Central Bank. Some of this created money could be needed
for future normal banking operations (particularly for over-
seas transactions), but the private trading banks wanted to
get their hands on as much as possible of it. This they
succeeded in doing during 1952 and 1953 by transfer from
the Commonwealth Central Bank to the private trading
banks of a large volume of Treasury Bills and a marked fall
in their Special Accounts balances. In 1953 the Menzies-
Fadden Government repealed Section 28 of the 1945 Banking
Act. This removed the power to prevent the trading banks
from dealing in government securities. As soon as this
legislation became effective, the trading banks began to in-
crease their holdings of government securities.
This means that the trading banks greatly increased their
power to act independently of the effort of the Common-
wealth Central Bank to control them, and adds considerably
to their power to make profits out of their financial opera-
tions. In both respects the Special Accounts powers are
weakened.
The effect of the Special Accounts procedure is that the
Commonwealth Central Bank can impound or neutralize
some of the private trading banks’ funds so as to reduce their
power to go on lending more money or acquiring more assets
in other forms. But it is not sufficient to be able to operate
upon the totals in this way. Sometimes steps have to be


taken to ensure that the money that is lent by the private
trading banks is lent for some purposes and not for others.
Control of bank advances (perhaps the most important of
the bank controls that exist) was devised for this purpose.
Hence it can be seen that the Special Accounts procedure
and control of trading bank advances can be used to check
the upper limit of lending that can be undertaken by the
trading banks and to control the direction in which funds
are supplied. In these ways inflation can be kept in check,
funds directed to where they are most needed, and the
power of the trading banks to profit from the process can be
kept within reasonable bounds.
Relative to Depression
The Commonwealth Central Bank and the Commonwealth
Trading Bank, backed and controlled by the Commonwealth
Government, can exercise considerable power to prevent de-
pression. But it is one thing to be able to control the banks
in their money-creating activities, and very much another
to deal with the situation if they refuse, or are unable,
to lend.
We have seen that when prices are rising, most borrowers
are regarded as good prospects and the banks lend willingly.
If one bank manager refuses another will lend. This is some-
thing on which the trading banks pride themselves. But if
the opposite is the case and prices begin to fall, then there
are declining profits and potential borrowers are not likely
to be popular. The trading banks cannot be expected to lend
when chances of profitable use of the money they might
lend are bad. But their very refusal to lend makes the ad-
verse conditions worse.
In other words the private trading banks, because they
are profit-making institutions, tend to aggravate booms by
lending more and more on favorable markets (which they
make more favorable by their own activities); but then they
aggravate depressions by refusing to increase their lending,
or even by cutting down their existing loans.
Now the banks do not cause depressions in Australia. But
they do aggravate them. Depressions in Australia are
caused by falling prices for our exports—mainly wool. This
fall in demand for Australian goods, leads to other people
cutting their spending because they are not going to be
caught with too great an .outlay. It is not long before at
least three other important things occur:
(i) Governments need more money that they can raise by
taxation and loans;
(ii) many private borrowers seek assistance from the
banks, but, in the circumstances the banks will not
be willing to lend; and
(iii) there will be assertions that Australian “costs are too
high” and there must be cuts in this and cuts in that.


In the 1930-34 Depression this was the case. A critical
stage was reached in Commonwealth finance and the Scullin
Labor Government sought further money from the Com-
monwealth Bank to pay for public works and to pay a small
subsidy to the wheatgrowers. It was not only that the
Commonwealth Bank, backed up and supported by all the
rest, refused to lend to doubtful private borrowers whom
they regarded as financially unsound. They refused to lend
to the Commonwealth Government of Australia.
Now we have seen that the private trading banks can
create money. But the Commonwealth Central Bank and
the Commonwealth Trading Bank can create it too. If the
Commonwealth Government requires money to provide work
for the unemployed, or subsidies for wheatgrowers, or for
any other type of producer, it can and must obtain the
money it wants from the Commonwealth Bank, at rates of
interest no greater than that necessary to cover the cost of
issue. If private borrowers are unable to obtain assistance
from the private trading banks, then they must be assisted
at the lowest possible rates of interest by the Common-
wealth Central Bank and the Commonwealth Trading Bank.
No doubt the private trading banks would be disturbed at
the competition of the Commonwealth Bank and so would
be provided with strong reasons to seek the defeat of such
a policy.
What is the limit, if any, to this sort of re-employment
policy by loans from the Commonwealth Banks at low rates
of interest?
The limits are derived from the fact that the process must
necessarily be related to two things: (i) the level of em-
ployment and production, and (ii) the balance of our over-
seas payments.
More money can be brought into existence and loaned to
Governments and members of the community as long as
there are men and materials to be put to work. The new
money put into circulation (which will increase incomes,
and therefore, what is spent) will be offset by the goods and
services which are produced. But once a point is reached
when it is no longer possible to get more output of goods
and services by lending more new money, then further loans
beyond this point; will cause prices to rise in what is pro-
perly called inflation.' But the chance of financing an anti-
depression policy to a point of inflation is extremely un-
likely.
In fact inflation could only occur if private employers so
far refused to co-operate that production began seriously to
fall. In fact some of those who were regarded as experts in
1931 did take the view that the conservative business policy
should prevail, because if it did not private directors of
business would not co-operate to the extent necessary for


recovery. Hence, the policy pursued was “controlled by the
banks and not by Governments”. Such a situation might
occur again. But if it does, it is not unlikely that much
more revolutionary changes in control of the economy might
take place than those who are inclined to resist a “full
employment” policy bargain for. That is a risk they would
have to take.
The balance of our overseas payments also limits the ex-
tent to which money could be created in Australia to main-
tain full employment in the face of world conditions pro-
ductive of a depression.
The balance of overseas payments is the difference be-
tween what we receive for our exports and services we
supply to people overseas, and what we pay for our im-
ports and services we receive from people overseas. This
balance is affected both by the prices obtained on each side
of the account and by the total volume of goods and services
bought and sold. If we have to pay more to people overseas
than they have to pay to us, it is said that we have an ad-
verse balance. The adverse balance comes about if our
prices are higher than those abroad and if we buy more
overseas than people overseas buy from us. Both prices in
Australia and our capacity to buy overseas are determined
by the level of total income in Australia. The higher total
income is in Australia, the higher our prices are likely to be
and the more money we will have to buy goods from over-
seas. Now if we succeed in keeping our level of employment
at “full” by the policy outlined above, and if at the same
time depression is spreading overseas, then it is certain that
an adverse balance of payments would sooner or later come
about.
In the past, the “free” play of economic forces always
handled this situation by bringing about a great deal of
unemployment—then prices in Australia fell, total income
fell too, and so our capacity to buy from overseas fell and
our lower prices made it more likely that overseas buyers
would buy more here.
However, this problem can be solved even if the adverse
balance of payments was likely to last a long time. We
would acquire a certain (but lower) return from the sale
of our exports and services, and the job is to keep the total
of what we buy from overseas within that limit. This does
mean a loss of income compared to the position before the
onset of depression. But a loss of income cannot be avoided
if depression comes. The old method was to make the un-
employed carry most of that loss. The new method is to
keep people in employment and distribute the loss equitably.
To achieve this the direct means are to impose controls
on imports to achieve two aims: (i) to ensure that not more
is spent on imports and services than is received for ex


ports and services; and (ii) to control the imports and ser-
vices we do buy to make sure that money is not wasted on
unessential things.
The critical point would be in the early stages. Once the
crisis is handled there is time to work out ways and means
of getting the imports we want and of re-arranging pro-
duction so as to make up for losses as far as possible.
In the event of a serious loss of income from the sale of
exports, Australian National Policy should be to maintain
full employment and then to share equitably the losses in
national income which take place. In the years 1930-34,
the sham that was put over as a policy of sharing equitably
the losses of national income allowed unemployment to remain
between 300,000 and 500,000. The income that was lost was
the loss from the fall in export returns, and the loss coming
from unemployment. This was shared after the unemployed
had carried directly most of the burden. It was not even
shared fairly then.
The Social Nature of the Banking System
The banking system differs very much from all other
forms of business. All property, and even personal abilities,
have values, prices or earning capacities which are very
much influenced by social factors. A great deal of all in-
come is in fact socially created—in the sense that no in-
dividual can make .a valid claim that it is alone or mainly
the result of personal or individual effort.
The banking system is specially influenced by these social
factors. Fundamentally the successful operation of the
banking system depends upon the state of public confidence,
not in the banks themselves, but in the Government of the
day and the state of the economy as a whole. It reflects in
this way, and depends upon, social factors much more than
other businesses do. It is supposed to depend upon reserves
today, just as it was supposed to depend once on gold. But
it depends really upon the successful function of the Central
Bank and an appropriate supply of notes and coins, in re-
lation to the supply or acquisition of which, reserves are
becoming more and more of a formality.
In addition to reflecting social factors the banking system
has the power to create money—and by so doing to create
its own income and assets. It has very considerable powers
to influence the total level of income and employment of
the community as a whole—to exaggerate booms and de-
pressions, as well as to control them if it could be so used.
Not only this but it has considerable powers to determine
in which directions the funds the community has available


will, in fact, be used. In these powers it has a great deal
of the power to determine the rate and direction of national
development.
Determination of the actions to be taken by the banking
system in all these matters is much more than a matter of
economics. The actions of the banking system penetrate
throughout the community today and leave marks upon the
future. They become central to the issues which divide the
people politically.
Since 1911 when the Commonwealth Bank was first estab-
lished there have been great changes in the banking system.
More than anyone, the late Mr J. B. Chifley has been re-
sponsible for these changes. They have meant that the
banking system has been brought round slowly towards a
position where it can serve the public interest and be less
determined by the private interests which in the earlier days
exclusively controlled it. Whether it does serve the public
interest in the future, however, is still a political matter.
Laws do not enforce themselves. Newly found enlightenment
does not stand against economic interests. The outcome will
be determined by the relative political strength of those
who stand for the public interest and of those who stand
mainly for the numerically-small financial interests.
It is certain that changes in the nature of the banking
system will continue, and it appears inevitable that private
ownership of the banks will eventually come to an end.
However, in Australia such a change will only come about
after the majority of people have realized its necessity. At
present, the hankering of many after the known, even if
unsatisfactory alternative, makes a better solution one of
the future, rather than of immediate application.
Realistically, the banking problem has to be treated with-
in the present framework. Our attention has to be directed
towards the best available means of controlling the private
banks in the public interest.
It has been explained that in the two situations where the
interests of the private banks and the community most
significantly diverge, it is easier technically to control in-
flation than to prod a reluctant banking system into provid-
ing the necessary cheap money to fight a depression. But
the social problem of controlling inflation has proved diffi-
cult. This may still be the case with depression. But the
problem that will face a Labor Government will not only
be the one of controlling the private trading banks with
law made as complex and difficult to operate as the mind
of ingenious lawyers can make it, but it will extend to
strengthening and forthright use of the Commonwealth
Trading Bank and the Industrial Finance Section of the
Commonwealth Central Bank.


An incoming Labor Government should take into con-
sideration at least four main factors for creating the ma-
chinery and climate for applying a “full employment”
policy:
• It has to retain, but simplify and strengthen, the Special
Accounts procedure whittled down and complicated by
the Menzies-Fadden legislation. Effective control mea-
sures require a larger “uncalled liability” than at pre-
sent exists. Section 28 of the 1945 Banking Act giving
power to the Commonwealth Central Bank to control
the trading banks’ power to deal in Government se-
curities should be restored.
• The power of the Government to control and direct the
activities of the Central Bank, and thereby indirectly
the activities of the private trading banks, must remain
unimpaired. It should not be control operated through
the unwieldy process of parliamentary debate or even
subject to consent by the Governor-General. There
were provisions in the 1945 Banking Act for full accept-
ance of responsibility by the Treasurer and the Govern-
ment. This is adequate.
• Control and direction of advances granted by the bank-
ing system is a vital piece of control machinery. Techni-
cally it is satisfactory, but more attention should be
given to training officers of the Central Bank to be able
to administer it to achieve national aims in the event of
a shortage of essential imports.
• The .Commonwealth Trading Bank should be rescued
from the Cinderella role to which it has been relegated
by the Menzies-Fadden Government. It should enter
into full-scale competition in the provision of funds for
industry so as to be able more effectively to play the
role which must be be assigned to it in a depression—
that of the people’s bank which grants the right credits
where they are most needed.
In addition a Labor Government must devote attention to
the development of those parts of the public service which
carry out the job of controlling and selecting imports so
that this vital part of an anti-depression policy can be
carried out efficiently.
It is just as well to conclude on a note of caution. The
role of money and the power of banks have been discussed
in this statement. But inflations and depressions cannot be
prevented by use of the power of money and banks alone.
There are vital requirements which are
system altogether. These will be discus«r6d«kr, lurfher
statement in this series. S/\ O**
