

->Q tCO C
TRADES’ UNIONS.
DELIVERED BY
ME. W. E. MUEPHY,
Secretary of the Trades’ Hall Committee,
ON MONDAY, 36th JANUARY, 1880.
G. D. LANGRIDGE, Esq., M.P.,
IK THE CHAIR.
“ Trades’ Unions have been regarded as a formidable power, menacing
our social order and our national existence. Those who have not thought
thus; who have, on the contrary, regarded Trades’ Unions as the one
real safeguard against the one formidable danger, may point with satisfac-
tion to the vast change in opinion and legislation which has been effected
in a short time by the most peaceful use of Trades’ Union Organisations.
“ The danger lies in unorganised masses outside and foreign to the
social and political fabric of the nation. , . . . Hitherto an erroneous
policy was pursued. Trades’ Unions which had grown uy to meet the
definite wants of the laboring people should have been protected, enlight-
ened, and moralised. Instead of that, every attempt at legislation and
otherwise was made to crush them—was made by governing capital on the
still subject workmen. We hope we have seen the last of this.”— Henry
Crompton on “Trades’ Unions.”
WHITELAW AND SON, PRINTERS, ELGIN STREET, CARLTON.




|®§>.
To JOHN B. GRIGGS, Esq.,
President of the Eight Hours’ Anniversary Committee,
One of the Trustees op the National Trades’ Hall and Library
Institute of Melbourne.
In looking for a subject which might prove interesting to my
fellow-workmen, with a desire to expound it in the form of a Lecture, I
was somewhat perplexed.
However, I decided in due course that no question of social importance
could claim precedence of the “History of Trades’ Unions,” delivered,
as I intended it should be, to those who, like myself, sought the advantages
of union in some of those fine bodies that meet in the Institution of which
you are deservedly one of its most respected conservators.
In dedicating, therefore (with your permission) the following pages to
yourself, I was actuated by a desire to recognise, even in this humble way>
the high regard in which you are held by all classes of the “ horny-handed
sons of toil,” and the esteem which your patriotic devotion and uncompro-
mising honesty in their interests commands from
Your obedient servant,
WILLIAM E. MURPHY.
Trades’ Hall,
June 7th, 1881




TRADES’ UNIONS
By Mb. W. E. Mubphy.
(Delivered as a Lecture, at Trades’ Hall, Carlton, on 26th January, 1880.
Mr. Langridge, who occupied the chair, in introducing the lecturer
said it had afforded him great pleasure to preside that evening, as he had
reason to believe that the request to do so, emanating from the Carpenters
and Joiners’ Society, was dictated by the confidence which all sections of
the working classes reposed in him. Personally he ventured to say he was
well informed on the subject on which Mr. Murphy was about to speak.
He had been engaged in the settlement of many difficulties between
employers and employes, and, as a general rule, when either party sought
an advantage, he found the latter usually displayed the most moderation.
He could not understand the desire of some employers to take every
opportunity to reduce the standard rate of wages ; and his experience in
this colony had proved that profits were r bctter at a high, rather than at a
low rate of wages. In the building trades especially he was opposed to the
system of piecework, as it had a tendency to have an inferior class of work
executed.
Mb, Chaibman and Gentlemen —
In nearly all the books that have been published —the voluminous
Parliamentary papers that have been compiled—the reports of Royal Com-
missions that have been presented, and the countless thousands of pamphlets
that have been circulated on the condition of the working classes, it is
somewhat remarkable to observe that the element of impartiality seems
neglected,in their compilation, consequently the general reader'can have no
groundwork on which to form an unbiassed opinion of those immense masses
which form at once the great preponderance of the male population of all
countries, and their wealth. The tendency of writers on this subject seems
to be to advocate the views of that side to wh ch their predilections incline
and to draw conclusions based on one-side examples of the excesses com-
mitted by the party opposed to their views, whether that party be represented
by capital or labor.
Among the few works on the subject which I have read with pleasure,
I may mention the very excellent book by the Comte de Paris, written for
the French nation, and that written by ,Wade, and published about the
year 1833, in which the writer confesses that “he is not an indiscriminate
admires of trades’ unions,” on the ground that he “ mistrusts the honest
exercise of all power that is not open and responsible.” It must be remem


bered that he wrote nearly half a century ago, while penal enactments were
still in force against trades’ organisations, and it is, therefore, all the more
refreshing that, while making this confession, he associates with it an
honest desire for impartiality. In a chapter which he devotes to trades’
union, he says : “ Similarity of pursuit offers so many motives for associ-
ations that it may be safely assumed that the unions of trades are hardly
less ancient than trades themselves. The builder of a hut or a canoe would
naturally seek the assistance of other builders, either for help or improve-
ment. Inducements of a like kind have consolidated other classes of society
into castes ; the learned for the advancement of science, merchants for the
promotion of commerce, and the wealthy and aristocratic orders for the
pursuit of pleasure and ambition. So constant and universal has been the
operation of this principle that I can hardly find a single division of society
that is not associated—the shipowners, coalowners, mine proprietors, and
the West India planters.” To those he might have added merchants, with
their “halls of commerce,” metropolitan gas companies, and banking
institutions, the object of which is their own special conservation and
advantage.
It is not necessary, however for the purpose of this lecture to deal
with any of these latter classes, and if I refer to them at all it will be only
in their relation to that part of my subject touching on capital. It would
also be useless, in any attempt to establish the origin of the trades’ unions,
to carry inquiry into a very remote period ; although it has been assumed
that instances have been furnished of the instances of unions of workmen
under the Roman Emperors and during the times of the Anglo-Saxons ;
my own opinion being that such combinations were rendered impossible by
the semi-barbaric state of the people in those epochs, when fully two-thirds
of the population were in serfdom or slavery as absolute as that of the
negros in the Southern States of America, before the war of emancipation
gave them life and liberty. It is moreover true that the subdivisions of
Anglo-Saxon Society were not materially altered for a long time after the
Conquest, and that slavery was not abolished by statute until the reign of
Charles II; but the loss of one hundred thousand souls, said to have been
swept away by the Conqueror in devastating the northern countries of
England, was perhaps the first blow directed against the dark form of
slavery, and the dawn of civilisation in the mother country. It is therefore
since the twenty-eight of September, 1066, the day on which William I. set
foot on the shores of Britain as its invader, that we can with any degree of
accuracy trace the existence and development of those vast organisations
which have been productive of so much good in the amelioration of the
condition of the working classes, and which must now be recognised as an
integral portion of the body politic, to be protected, enlightened, and
fostered ; to whom the misrule of past ages can no longer apply, for it
would be no longer wise—no longer safe to despise them.
Possibly the earliest examples of associations of workmen were the
the trading “guilds” which are said to be of Scandinavian origin. Northern
historians ascribe their formation to the feasts of the German tribes from
Scandinavia—the term signifying a feast or banquet. Dr. Brentano
states that England is the birthplace of the guilds; although something akin
to them, but in a ruder form, existed elsewhere, on the continent of Europe.
However, the first to introduce the subject into England were doubtless
the Flemings (as early as the Conquest) in the manufacture of woollens. It
would appear that their associations were more for purposes of personal
security from indignity and popular outrage at the hands of an unenlightened
people, than for the promotion of their commerce, and it is probable that
the privileges confered by the Sovereign on weavers, fullers, and clothiers,
in allowing them to carry on their occupations in walled-in towns, and form
themselves into guilds and companies, governed by coporate laws, were
intended to consolidate these primitive unions. It is to be regretted that
no remains from the past exist to teach the eharacter of an Anglo-Saxon
town. It is probable that the different trades occupied different portions of


the area, which portions were named from the occupations of the inhabi-
tants. In the middle ages these several parts of the city are often fortified,
and served as strongholds, behind whose defences —or sallying forth from
which, the crafts fought the battle of democracy against the burgesses or
the neighbouring lords. We have evidence that the streets which
afterwards did, and do still bear the names of particular trades or occupations
were so designated before the Roman Conquest, in several of our English
towns. It is thus only that we can account for such names as Fellmonger,
Horsemonger, Fleshmonger, Shoewright and Shieldwright— and
Salter streets, and the like, which have long ceased to be exclusively
tenanted by the industirous pursuers of those several occupations.
The guilds, however, forming, as they did, a favoured portion of the
community, differed very materially from what is understood by the word
“trade-society” of the present time. They were common asaociations of
masters and workmen in the several branches of the same art or mystery ;
they were governed by by-laws which regulated the taking of apprentices,
the admission of new members, the prices of their manufactures ;in short
they performed all those functions in common that now performed
separately by masters and journeyjnen, and the combination thus formed
was a union of both against the community. The monoply thus established
against the public, made them objects of several legislative enactments
during the reign of Richard 11, and Edward 11, and in that of Edward 111,
Ist statute, c. 9, declares “that the franchises of guilds are prejudicial to the
King, prelates and great men, and oppressive to the Commons.” Howell
says that the craft guilds became a family monopoly—raised the price of
admission —and the great idea of mutual assistance gave way to the narrow-
minded spirit of the mere acquisition of capital.”
The terrible plague of 1348-9 carried of one-quai’ter of the population,
and plunged the remainder into a frightful state of misery, but, as is
generally the case in the course of human affairs, the evil brought its own
remedy. The scarcity of labor soon increased its value, and would have
secured to the fsurvivors the means of retrieving their losses, had not
Parliament, taking the alarm, intervened and passed the “ Statute of
Labourers,” by which they empowered the justices of the peace to fix, from
time to time, the maximum rate of wages to be paid to workmen, as also
the class of food the / should use, and the quality of the material from
which their clothes should be made. These tyrannical laws gave rise to
secret societies for the purpose of raising wages, and in 1437, during the
reign of Henry VII, the Commons, in a petition to the King, declare'd
‘ ‘ that the craft guilds had abused the privileges granted to them by
enacting ordinances hurtful to the common profit of the people.” The
guilds, however, in their origin were productive of much good ; they may
be looked upon as the cradles of the manufacturing arts ; they were the
germs of our trades’ unions, as they were the examples of the great power
of association. The various immunities granted to cities and boroughs—
the introduction and firm establishment of the woollen manufacture —
the dawning, however faint, of the polite arts, and the humanising tendency
of Christianity are causes which must have powerfully and beneficially
operated on the condition of the community. Their misfortunes first arose
from an excessive estimate of their power. Their combinations partook of
a character of a brotherhood, and so the purposes of a friendly society were
severed ; mutual help and friendship being their leading characteristics in
all vicissitudes of life. It was only when they became rich and powerful
that they became hurtful to the community by the monopolies they created.
The more powerful among them soon learned to opppress the weak, and
the degeneracy that usually overtakes nations, classes, or individuals that
give themselves up to the worship of the Yellow God, became their lot, and
they fell, as I trust all monopolies will ever fall—in degradation and defeat.
As Goldsmith says,
“ 111 fares the state, to hast’ning ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.”


Before we pass away from the guilds, let it be understood that they
were not at all times well treated by the legislature, or even by the
Sovereign himself. Henry VIII made them useful on occasions when the
royal exchequer was exhausted, by borrowing from their well-filled coffers ;
but when the reckoning-day came, he had recourse to a “new way to pay
old debts ” by causing an act to be passed, confiscating the whole of their
property to his Majesty’s private purse. The example thus was not lost on
Elizabeth, who had recourse to the same means to defray the extravagance
of her court. However, the medieval guilds in England were about this
time being superseded by trades’ unions, and although they survived
on the continent, with varied successes, for a long time, they were
ultimately swept away by the people of France on the night of the 14th
August, 1798 ; while in Germany they were brought piecemeal j,to death
by several bureaucratic enactments ; the last remnant of the once famous
and powerful guilds being destroyed by the North German Industrial
Code, 1869.
The first instances of combinations of workmen alone occurred in the
year 1548. The 2nd and 3rd, Edward VI., C. 15, of that year, premises
that “artificers, handicraftsmen, and laborers have made confederacies and
promises, and have sworn mutual oaths not only that they should not
meddle with one [another’s work, and perform and finish that another hath
begun, but also to constitute and appoint how much work they shall do in
a day, and what hours and times they shall work, contrary to the laws and
statues of this realm, and to the great hurt and impoverishment of His
Majesty’s subjects.” The wages at this period were, for a mason, carpenter,
bricklayer, tiler, plumber, glazier, and carver, fourpence per day, with
diet, and sixpence without, the length of the day’s work being from five in
the morning till seven in the evening. If _any unemployed person refused
to work at this wage, he might be imprisoned till he found sureties
according to the statute, and if he were convicted a third time of having
joined a trade society, he had an ear cut off. I sometimes think I have met
those in later years who would consider it advisable to re-enact the law
against some of the members of these abominable unions. The claim to
regulate the rate of wages without regard to the variations of the labor
market (which is the charge now-a-days against trades’ unions) is a legacy
from the legislature of the middle ages ; and it was expressly to resist this
tyranny that the first workmen’s combinations were formed. Acts were
subsequently passed expressly to restrain combinations for raising wages.
The frequent occurrence of statues of this nature only serves to show their
futility ; for combinations multiplied, and union and secrecy were forced
upon them by their illegal character, till after having withstood the viscis-
situdes of ages of tyranny and oppression, and acts from the 2nd and 3rd
statues of Edward VI., to the 40th of George 111., directed against all
associations of workmen, trades’ unions had the satisfaction of seeing the
entire system abandoned by the legislature in 1824, as it was at length dis-
covered that to make laws against the combinations of workmen, and to
grant immunities to the associations of their employers was manifestly un-
just. In the spirit the sth of George IV., cap. 96, repeals “all laws pre-
viously made against combinations of workmen to advance or fix the rate
of wages ; to alter the hours of working ; to decrease the quantity of work :
to induce others to quit or return to work, &c., provided no violence is
used.” This was the first measure insuring the democratic independence of
trades’ unions. It was no longer lawful to yoke their members in teams as
bullocks, a circumstance mentioned in Turner’s history of the Anglo-
Saxons. They could no longer be bought and sold in the open market, as
they were for many years subsequent to the Conquest. They could not be
whipped nor branded—their ears cut off, or their noses sliced, for the high
crime of fraternity. They might not be imprisoned and placed in the
stocks for refusing to serve under a tyrant master. They were henceforth
to be free in the disposal of their own labor, and magistrates could no
longer dictate the maximum rate of wages they should receive. They were


'free as the manhood of a noble race should be—to labor for the prosperity
of the great Empire to which they belonged —a prosperity inseparable from
their own ; free at last to proclaim to the world that British workmen were
no longer slaves.
Associations now took a definite form, their numbers increased and
their ramifications extended far beyond the most sanguine expectations of
their promoters. Local societies that were formed in many towns in the
old country have extended their branches to the continent of Europe, while
some, like the Amalgamated Engineers,” extend to almost every country
in the world. This society numbers over 45,000 members, and at the close
of 1878 it had 399 branches, distributed as follows ;—ln England, 291 ; 41
in Scotland ; 14 in Ireland ; 8 in Australia ; 1 in the East Indies ; 3 in New
Zealand ; 1 in Queensland ; 6in Canada ; 1 at Malta ; 2 in Turkey ; 30 in
the United States ; and lin the North of France. The Amalgamated
Society of Carpenters and Joiners has over 15,000 members, and 191
branches ; the London Society of Carpenters and Joiners, 150 branches s
the Masons (1869), 278 branches ; the National Association of Miners claim;
to have 45,000 members, and there are, besides, some other immense
amalgamations, the statistics of which I have not collected, such as the two
freat societies of Ironworkers of Staffordshire and the north of England,
'he Society of Ironfounders, the Lancashire Spinners, and numerous other
societies of lesser strength, contribute to an approximate total of nearly two
millions, enrolled under the flag of trades’ unions in England.
This is the power which, combined with what our late respected
Governor, Sir George Bowen, aptly called “the dogged perseverance of the
Anglo-Saxon race,” has exalted the British workman in the estimation of the
world. The power that in 1868 swept away the ‘ ‘ Master and Servant s
Act”—that promulgated the “ Employers’ liability for injury to Workmen
Bill,” and carried it against the private feelings of an almost unwilling
legislature—and that finally insisted on a “Trades Unions Act” being
carried into law, for the further protection of workmen against the ever-
varying constructions placed on existing laws by judges, recorders, and
magistrates. The common law of England declares that every engagement
“ opposed to the common weal” is null and void, and courts still hold that
combinations of workmen with a view of controlling the labor market are
in restraint of trade and “ opposed to the common Aveal !”
Leaving England for a time, let us see how Trades’ Unionism succeeds
on the continent. The Societe des Ouvriers of Berlin, founded in 1859, is
composed of 60,000 members. Amongst that number there are nearly
10,000 employed by one firm which I notice by recent telegrams is likely
to be in active operation for some time to come. I allude to the monster
iron and steel works of Krupp, of Essen, in Rhenish Prussia. Mr. Krupp
provides his employes with schools and dwellings’constructed on the most
approved principles. Workmen may retire after twenty years’ service on
half pay, and on full pay after thirty-five years’ service. Bakeries
distribute bread at 15 per cent, under trade tariff, and a sound beer—free
from strychnine, of course—is brewed and supplied at cost price. Mr.
Krupp also spends annually some thousands of pounds in presents to
meritorious workmen.
In Austria, the coal-miners and brickmakers on the works of Mr.
Brasche testify that Southern Germany is not behind in a due appreciation
of the power of union, while their spirited employer encourages and assists
them. He, like Mr. Krupp, employs about 10,000 hands, for whom he
builds homes, erects reading rooms and clubs, and establishes bursaries for
enabling successful competitors to proceed to higher schools and universities.
So much is he loved that when, in 1848, other employers were having their
factories burnt down and pillaged by their own paid hands, the union
men of Mr. Brasche formed themselves into armed bands to protect their
master’s property, I mention this fact to show that trade unionists are not
incapable of amelioration ; on the contrary, they can thoroughly appreciate
justice and moderation when they find it exhibited. Another instance


which will serve to show that unions, instead of fomenting differences
between employer and employed, often prevent strikes and their ruinous
consequences to both sides, may be cited. On one occasion a contractor
was building two hotels in Aberystwith, Wales, and the plasterers took
advantage of the pressing nature of the work to demand an advance in
wages, and a reduction in hours. The contractor appealed to Mr. Williams,
secretary to the union, and that body, considering the workmen were
wrong, refused to uphold them, and supplied the place of the deserters.
The contractor, subsequently, before a Royal Commission, acknowledged
his gratitude to the union for their moderation and justice.
The Typographical Society of the Netherlands, which is the largest
union in that country, was established in 1859, Its head-quarters are at
Utrecht, with branches at Amsterdam, Arnheim. Breda, Deventer, Dort,
&c. Its objects are—lst, the general promotion of the material welfare of
all its members in the several branches of the printing trade ; 2nd, the
establishment of a pension fund ; 3rd, to endeavor to procure work for
members ; 4th, to enable every promising member to study his trade abroad
and bring home to Holland the latest improvements ; sth, to promote zeal
and good workmanship by prizes for meritorious work ; 6th, dissemination
of knowledge by the publication of a weekly newspaper.
This latter object was, perhaps, the most advanced reform resorted to
by the unions of England and the Continent. A workman’s paper has a
charm for him. He is in weekly receipt of information on the subject
which of all others most interests him. The swift development of the
principles that have made him, as far as freedom is concerned, the equal of
his employer—education, political and domestic economy ; the causes which
operate for good or ill on his career in life—supply, demand, wages,
inventions, improvements, &c., are here discussed from his own point of
view, apart from the distracting elements that pervade general press litera-
ture, which is often calculated to set man against his fellow man, and
cause disunion amongst those whose motto inculcates the maxim, ‘ ‘ Divided
we fall.” There are thousands who, before this step was taken, knew
comparatively little of the claims of the two great forces, capital and
labour, with whose reverses or fortune they are so closely identified, and
who would have remained in ignorance of the laws of supply and demand
in connection therewith, but for this fortuitous provision. I have no desire
to reflect on the general public press, or any section of it—it performs its
duty according to the interests it represents. It contains unpalatable
truths for both sides occasionally, but the working classes should do it the
justice to remember that to it in a great measure we owe the freedom of our
institutions, and that long before a workman’s paper had been in existence
it was the workman’s advocate and his friend.
Having now traced some of the various forms of associations of
workmen from an early period of our history to the present time, it will be
necessary to dwell at some length on the character of the unions as they
exist now The first duty of a union is to maintain an equitable rate of
wages, according to the laws of supply and demand, governed by a
knowledge of their true economical principles; to foster and encourage the
benefits of association ; and to prevent the insidious reduction of wages by
an extension of the hours of labor, or otherwise, without a corresponding
increase of remuneration. It must be admitted that the objects are laudable
so long as they are obtained by lawful means. Wade says:-—“As a
consideration bearing on the aggregate happiness of mankind, it is better
wages should be higher than profits.” The number of employed exceeds the
number of employers in every occupation. If, then, either profits or wages
must give way-—if either masters or workmen must submit to a reduction of
income, it is a less evil that the minority should undergo a reduction of the
luxuries, than the majority should of the necessaries of life.”
But no class of workmen is justified In adopting measures which are at
variance with the legalised institutions of the country, and which involve
an invasion of the rights of others. Supply and demand, with all their


surrounding circumstances, should be the standard by which the value of
labor under all forms should be regulated. Any attempt on the part of
unions to create an artificial rate of wages is sure to end in injury to
themselves. If the profits of an employer are reduced below the average
returns he expects from his capital, he will either withdraw his money from
so unprofitable an investment, or remove his business to another place.
The practical examples that might lie cited of the injury to unions and their
members from unreasonable demands are numerous. The destruction of the
guilds of the middle ages may be traced, in a great measure, to this cause,
by raising the price of their labor and manufactures beyond what the
community could pay, they created a monopoly which caused foreign
workmen to be introduced, and Birmingham and Manchester were built on
the ruin of their principles.
It must not, however, be understood that it is in the power of workmen
alone to create a monopoly. The large coal mine proprietors of England
and Wales, and perhaps some of our gold mine proprietors of \ ictoria, as
well as some metropolitan companies, form some of the most detestable
monopolies against the commnnity. In young countries like 'Victoria
monopolies may be created in a variety of ways. In times of extreme
depression in the great manufacturing centres of Europe, advantage is taken
to flood the colonial market with their products, and notwithstanding a
tariff that was framed for ordinary protective purposes, the law is evaded
by cunningly devised schemes —such as those known as “salting of
invoices,” “border freedom,” &c., by which a glut, as it is called, is
produced; this is one of the common monopolies of capital. While I pass
over without comment the claims of capitalists to these advantages, I
strongly deprecate the anathemas hurled against the working classes for
the very mild attempts made by them to insure the means of a respectable
living, without many of the luxuries of life—they being perforce the
largest consumers, and in almost a primary degree, the source of the wealth
of the former.
The second object is to extend the objects of association. How far they
have succeeded, the figures I have already quoted will show, and I shall here
allude to another form of association which has been attempted on several
occasions. It is the amalgamation of several trades under one head. As
early as 1830, a meeting of delegates from unions was held at Manchester,
to form a national association for the protection of labour. From
circumstances which I shall immediately explain, it failed to realise the
great expectations formed of it, and although the scheme is still considered
practicable, the difficulties by which it is encompassed render the
undertaking of doubtful value. In this colony three organisations of this
nature were attempted, and the opinion I have formed of the cause of their
failure is set forth in an essay I wrote some twelve months ago, on the
practicability and advantages of a union of the building trades alone,
portion of which I will read for you. The first organisation of which I
have any record was the Eight Hours League, in which the late Charles
Jardine Don took a prominent part; the second was the Board of Trade,
established October 28th, 1858, and becoming defunct January 26th, 1860 ;
and the third was the Trades and Labour Council, established a few years
ago. The lecturer then read the following extracts :
“It is a matter of regret that the efforts of Charles Don, 'and the perse-
verance of many by whom he was surrounded, failed to complete the great
object for which they struggled. It is further to be deplored that the men
who for fifteen months sought to inaugurate a Grand Scheme which should
permeate the whole social fabric of labor, were at la«t forced to give way
from inability to cope with the task they created-
Again, on some occasions since the collapse of the Trades and Labor
Council, have not disastrous strikes with all their ruinous consequences
occurred, which would undoubtedly have been averted, had unity of action
on the part of a representative organisation existed and been resorted to.
Take the first case of the Eight Hours League. This organisation


which appears to have been established four years subsequent to the
acquisition of the principle by the Building Trades, was instituted on a
resolution of Mr. Douglass’s, in the following words :—“ That in order to
fully establish and to insure the continuance of the Eight Hours System in
its integrity, it is expedient that an Eight Hours League be immediately
formed the advantages and membership of such League to be extended to every
class of labor throughoid the colony of Victoria."
This resolution couched in generous and sympathetic language (for he
was a plasterer advocating the cause of coachbuilders) was impracticable
under the proposed system. Every elms of labor throughout the colony of
Victoria could not be represented, nor their interests promoted, unless by
a permanent staff of officers and an executive, who should devote all their
time to the duties of such an arduous undertaking. No attempt was made,
nor any means adopted to provide for this desideratum, and the consequence
was that the Eight Hours League, which was intended to be the incarnation
of a grand general embodyment, was strangled in its birth.
The Board of Trade said to hare fallen through from a similar cause to
that assigned as the first reason of the failure of the League. It was not
too general, for although no restrictions were placed on the extent of the
system, there were but six trades availed themselves of the amalgamation,
viz., masons, bricklayers, carpenters, plasterers, plumbers, and painters.
However the second reason adduced in the former instance was most
likely to have been the cause.
An Irresponsible Committee or Board was appointed, that could rarely
be got together for the transaction of business, while a deplorable amount
of apathy seemed to be manifested about the principles for which the Board
was formed. However the non-attendance of members of the Board, their
inability to advance the difficult problem which they ventured to launch on
the contributing societies, and the continual change of officers of the execu-
tive, was doubtless the cause of the collapse of a Board which was started
like the League, with the best intentions, but became doomed almost from
its inception to fatal consequences from internal weakness and bad
management.
The Trades and Labor Council follows as next in order. This body,
like the Eight Hours Labor League, started with the proposition, “To
better the condition of the working classes of Victoria.” It therefore
included all classes of labor, and consequently the interests became too
dissimilar. The Building Trades, with the exception of the carpenters,
declined to join the Amalgamation, and although it was conducted with
more than ordinary efficiency, considering the diversity of interests arising
from the inability of delegates to clearly comprehend the intricacies of
Trade matters in no way identified to their own, it scarcely survived the
term of the existence of the former Board.
Indeed it is difficult to conceive how carpenters and printers could
understand the best method of adjusting a dispute between the Tanners
Society and the employers, or how curriers and hatters could do justice to
their Societies or the Amalgamation in the settlement of a Typographical
Trade problem. Yet both of these cases actually occurred during the exis-
tence of the Council, and work been thrown upon the shoulders of a few, it
was impossible to expect proper attention to the cases, even were they
sufficient!} 7 understood, and no provision being made to give force or import-
ance to the movement, by the appointment of a perfectly responsible
executive, the efforts to restore the wages in the one case, and to obtain the
Eight Hours principle in the other, failed, and the Trades and Labor
Council soon became a thing of the past.
Such has been the fate of three organisations concerned in the
apparently feasible, but under the circumstances, delusive hope of laying
the foundation of a great federal union of the working classes, calculated to
produce results commensurate with the objects sought to be attained, and
the philanthrophy of the men by whose enthusiasm they were promul-
gated. ”


It will thus be seen that while I consider an amalgamation of those trade*
whose different customs and circumstances preclude the probability of a
union being successful, except under the operation of the method I poin
out; still grand organisations where identity of interest and uniformity of
action are possible, might be attended with the most gratifying results, and
I have a sincere desire that the suggestions I ventured to embody in that
essay for the consideration of those trades with which I am more
immediately identified should yet be carried into effect.
Doubtless the most jealously guarded principle in this colony is the
Eight Hours System. From the day when the Statute of Laborers
prescribed that mechanics should toil from five in the morning till seven in
the evening, there has been no question of greater concern to the working
classes, than that of the abridgement of the hours of labor. It has been a
matter of slow progress certainly, going step by step with the education of
the people, till we find such men as Crampton,. Brassey, and Plimsoll
meeting prejudice by argument, and that still more powerful agent—the
force of example. It is told of Mr. Brassey that one day, while he was
advocating the Nine Hours Movement in London, a contractor, who was
listening, exclaimed—“ Nine hours; indeed! Think of our yards and our
machinery standing still at four o’clock on a summer’s afternoon.
Monstrous !” I wonder what he would have said had the Eight Hours
System been suggested. Possibly an extensive auction would be held
within the few days next following, a certain banking firm would inquire
into a mysterious order for the transfer of a large amount of capital to
some institution in the moon, and a consultation of the medical faculty
would be held, and regard with gravity the value of a proposition that the
poles were coming together.
But apart from jesting, the Eight Hours System is an established fact
in this colony, that cannot be uprooted, It may occasionally be disturbed,
but its progress cannot be arrested till all classes of labor come within its
provisions ; and the man who would wound association through its sides
by an infringement of its principles, not only deserves the censure of every
society man, but also of every good colonist throughout Australia.
I feel that my subject would be incomplete without touching upon the
means usually employed by unionists to enforce respect for their principles.
The first and the best is mutual forbearance and concession, exerted by
arbitration ; the second, and the worst, is by having recourse to the
machinery of a strike. In the former case it is to be regretted that
employers are usually opposed to this system of adjustment. While they
expect an intimation of the intentions of workmen to advance the rate of
wages, they frequently employ the most covertly laid schemes to reduce
the value of labor, regardless of the fact that it is only a temporary
ex pedient, and that a fall in the price of labor is sure to be followed by a
rt iuction in the price of commodities, and after committing great injury to
the workman to obtain the immediate advantage, the employer, on his
next undertaking finds his profits unimproved, and must have recourse to
some similar proceeding. I have been informed recently by a contractor
who is now a member of the legislature*, that his profits were far greater
when he paid £2 per day to mechanics than they were when reduced to
125., and he regretted the loss of the good old days. Anotherf, wfio by
honesty of purpose towards the working classes, while maintaining with
integrity his principles as *an employer, assured me that he should ever
regret to see wages in this colony reduced to an English standard.
° It would be invidious to allude to the honorable position the chairman,
Mr. Langridge, has raised himself to, without forfeiting his character for
consistency and honesty in his dealings with the working classes during
the many years he was an employer of labor in this colony ; but the
enthusiasm by which his presence is greeted whenever he appears in public,
amply testifies to the respect in which he is held.
•Mr. 3s T immo, M.u.A.
tMr. Pigdon, Ex-Moyor of Melbourne,


The system of arbitration, if entered upon with a due regard for the
principles that should subsist between both parties, should also be the
means of a better feeling being exhibited ; and while pointing out the road
to mutual protection, it would consolidate the interests of both. A story
is told by an ancient Greek author which bears strongly on this point:—
“It happened formerly,” says Plutarch, “that several members of the
body rose in rebellion against the belly. They thought it hard that they
should do all the work and receive so little reward. The legs carried it
from place to place with the easy swing of a sedan chair ; the hands fed it
with dainty morsels ; the ears cheered it with delicious music ; the eyes,
the palate, and the touch, like so many sentinels, guarded it from all
internal and external injuries. For all these; services the belly made no
return. Nay, worse, it consumed everything ; all the hands could catch
or the feet could reach, passed into its devouring exchequer. This was not
to be borne ; it was intolerable, there was no equality ; it was downright
aristocracy, or monarchy, or worse ! Discontent spread rapidly from one
member of the community to another, till at last the whole commonwealth
became violently agitated. Murmuring and petitioning were not enough ;
remonstrance followed remonstrance in quick succession—some of them of
the most seditious and inflammatory character, till at length the
malcontents broke out into open acts of tumult and rebellion. The legs
refused to do their office; the eyes put up the shutters ; and the arms
were suspended in the air. A terrible crisis was evidently at hand ;
society was on the eve of dissolution, and everything fast verging to a state
of nature. In fact it was soon found to be mutually destructive to all parties
and all interests. The belly itself was not exempt from suffering, and
grumbled internally ; but the arms, legs, and other members of the body-
politic became totally powerless for both good and evil. Friends
interfered ; a parley ensued, and terms of peace were agreed upon. It was
discovered they had no separate interests; that they were bound by
reciprocalities ; that there could be no production without consumption ;
and that the legs, arms, and eyes, were really as much benefited as the
stomach itself by the produce it received and distributed through the
different channels and conduits of the social state.” “ A similar issue,”
says Wade, “it is probable will result, until the relations of Capital and
Labor are better understood, and when that desirable end is attained they
will assuredly act harmoniously together.”
With reference to the second course, viz., strikes—it is often the
most inoperative, and always the cause of animosity and strife. The
earliest strike I have read of occurred in the building-trade guilds in the
reign of Edward 111. during the building of the palace of Westminster;
but the summary method that existed in those days of dealing with
workmen—as I have already pointed out —soon brought the strike to an
end. I have endeavored to keep both sides of the question before you, and
it will be necessary as a set-off against the character of strikes to mention
one of the retaliatory measures adopted by employers to compel submission
to their views, and known by the name of a “ lock-out.” The first great
lock-out in the building trade occurred in 1833, nine years after the repeal
of the Combination Act. The master builders, jealous of the growth of the
societies, formed what in Yankee phraseology is called a “ring,” and
decided to employ no union men. Hundreds were starved to death in the
streets of Liverpool, and the survivors—forced to submit—were obliged to
sign a declaration that they were not union men before they were
employed. It was a cruel and unjustifiable proceeding, and one which has
attached the brand of infamy to these tyrant masters to the present day.
The years of 1813, 1841-42, and 1859 were remarkable for more of these
terrible disasters ; each side vied with the other in atrocity and outrage.
In the former year eighteen men were executed at York for breaking
looms. In 1841 a strike of masons took place at the building of the new
Houses of Parliament at Westminster, although every effort was made on
the part of the workmen to avoid the calamity. The cause arose from the
tyrannical conduct of one Allen, the foreman to Messrs. Grissoll and Peto,


The Sheffield outrages, and the lock-out against the Nine Hours System,
instituted by Messrs. Trollope and Sons, of London, and the lock-out in the
cabinet trade in Liverpool—all in 1859—are matters of too dismal moment
to dwell upon. I was a witness of the scenes of suffering in the last-named,
and in the Liverpool Workhouse many of the best artisans of England
{terished during that memorable year, from whom I obtained my first
essons in mechanics, and who watched with a workman’s pride the
mutation from the school-boy to the artisan. I saw them, with their
families, starving in garret and cellar—the victims of a cruel, relentless,
remorseless tyranny; in that depdt of the commerce and the wealth of
nations.
Having well considered both sides, I maintain that arbitration, guided
by intelligence, is the remedy which should be resorted to in case of a
dispute arising, and a vote of every member of a society should be obtained
(as required by the Amalgamated Engineers) before resorting to extreme
measures.
I now draw to a close; but before I sit down let me impress on all my
non-society fellow workmen, the advantages to be derived—the good
feeling to be fostered —and the grant ends to be attained, by the principle
of union. Let us endeavor, in this fine young country, to promote our
interests ; not by strikes—not by coercive measures that are often pregnant
with the worst consequences—but by forbearance, intelligence, and the
collective wisdom that is sure to result from the progression of deliberative
unions, based on some of the models I have endeavored to describe; and to
employers of labor and capitalists, who behold in the growth of Trades’
Unions the multiplication of hives of infamy, where rampant demagogues
assemble to spread broadcast the seeds of contention between employers
and employed, I would say, let true patriotism take the place of narrow-
minded prejudice ; and see what Stuart Mill, and Bright and Cross, and
Brassey have seen before —the British Workman still holding his own
against all the nations of the world ; and by a just appreciation of political
economy, let them be prepared to practise in his regard moderation, good
feeling, and even-handed justice. Let them refrain from taking every ill-
judged opportunity to drag him back in his onward march through life, in
which they are equally interested. Let them refrain from sending to other
countries (for a mere temporary advantage) for commodities that, with a
little patriotism and a little more confidence in our own resources, could be
supplied by our own labor. lam a sincere admirer of the philosophy that
dictates ‘ ‘ the greatest happiness to the greatest number, ” and, in
conclusion, let me hope that a true estimate of the value of association may
take possession of the youth of this great colony, and that Capital and
Labor will see that neither is safe but in the other’s weal. If they differ
on occasions, I trust the course I ventured to point out will solve the
difficulty ; the laborer will be satisfied, and while the employer will be
served without loss of dignity or means, he will realise a true pleasure in
the text’of the old song :
“ Let wealth look kindly on labor—
Give the poor man a smile—not a frown ;
‘ Live and let live,’ be your motto,
Don’t keep the poor working-man down I”
Mr. Charles A. Fuller, of the Y, 0. Bricklayers’ Society, moved a Vote
of thanks to Mr. Murphy, for the very able and interesting lecture he had
given. He was sure there were very few men in the colony who had
devoted so much time and close application to this important subject. The
references he made to the various forms of Trades’ Unions should be
thoroughly ventilated throughout the several ramifications of the working
classes, especially the extract he read from the excellent essay on the
practicability of a Building Trades’ Union, which he hoped to see carried
into effect. The Carpenters and Joiners’ Society should be complimented
on the course that it had adopted, as the value of lectures on such subjects
was undeniable.
Mr. James Stephens, of the Masons’ Society, seconded the resolution,
which was carried unanimously, and Mr. Murphy, in reply, moved a vote
of thanks to the chair.


CARLTON :
WmTELAW & Son, General Printers, Elgin Street.
