

TRAMWAY GUIDE
SYDNEY and SUBURBS
BY AUTHORITY OF THE RAILWAY COMMISSIONERS.
•n
./ S'
7
<
DECEMBER, 1900
gtUbtjcjl; i
W. E. SMITH LIMITED, BRIDGE STREET
r(3-i*2 7
\
■ .




TRAMWAY GUIDE
SYDNEY and SUBURBS
BY AUTHORITY OF THE RAILWAY COMMISSIONERS
DECEMBER, 1900
W. E. SMITH LIMITED, BRIDGE STREET


INDEX.
Through Distance
from City.
Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Sydney Tramway System .. .. .. .. 4
George Street and R ait.way Station .. .. 5 .. 2 miles
Harris Street (Pyrmont) .. .. .. .. 6 .. 3 j
Glebe Point .. ~ .. .. .. .. 7 .. 3|- ~
Forest Lodge and Balmain .. .. .. .. '8 .. 5|
Leichhardt .. .. .. .. .. .. 9 .. b\ ~
Five Dock and Abbotsford .. .. .. .. 10 .. ~
Newtown, Marrickville and Dulwich Hill ~ 11 .. 6{, ~
St. Peters and Cook’s Riyer ~ .. .. .. 12 .. 6i ~
Redfern, Alexandria, Waterloo and Botany- .. 13 .. Bjj ~
Crown Street .. .. .. .. .. .. 15 , .. ,,
RANDWICK AND COOGEE .. .. .. .. .. 16 .. 6 ~
Paddington and Waverley 18 .. 5| ~
Bondi .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 18 .. 5| ~
King Street to Ocean Street, Rose Bay and Dover
Road.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 21 .. 4| ~
North Sydney. From Milaon’s Point.
Gore Hill 23 .. 3| ~
Willoughby .. .. .. .. .. .. 24 .. 4| ,
Milson’s Point to Mosman .. .. .. ~ 24 ~ 51 y
The Spit .. .. ~ .. .. .. ~ 26 .. ,
Fares North Sydney Lines 28
Points for Tramway Travellers .. ~ ~ 27
Maps, inside of end cover.


TRAMWAY GUIDE
SYDNEY AND SUBURBS.
SYDNEY, with its Suburbs, is so diversified and extensive that a
stranger would be at a loss as to the method he should adopt to
obtain a fairly comprehensive idea of its extent and many beauties,
particularly if the time at his disposal were limited. Fortunately, the
Sydney tramway system, which covers nearly seventy miles of line
having branches in all directions, affords a means of making a rapid
survey of many of the principal suburbs at once convenient, expeditious,
and economical. This pocket guide is now issued with the view of
indicating in a brief manner the routes traversed by the different lines,
with some of the walks and connecting trips that may be made.
It might here be mentioned that at present all electric trams ter-
minate at Circular Quay, and proceed along George-street—the
terminus of all steam trams is at Bent-street, whence the trams proceed
along Elizabeth-street. All the tram lines are divided into penny
sections, the fare being one penny for the whole or any portion of a
section; but for convenience the through fare may be paid in one
amount on entering the cars.
The times shown for trams are intended merely to indicate the
average period between trams during the greater part of the day; the
exact times of departure can be seen by consulting the sheet time-
tables exhibited at tramway waiting rooms, or in the small pocket
time tables that are obtainable free of charge.
The destination of trams is printed on boards in front of motor and
on sides of cars. The motors also carry in front indicating colored
flags, with correspondingly colored lamps at night, ihus a Glebe
Point tram exhibits a sign with two red circles by day, and carries two
red lio-hts at night; a Coogee tram will have a green indicator by day,


and a green light hy night, and so on. The motor head lights of all
trams also show hy a stencilled plate the name of destination by night.
All trams returning to the city show the word “ Sydney ” on front of
motor.
In the first place, a few words about the
SYDNEY TRAMWAY SYSTEM
itself may not be out of place. It may be stated that the inauguration
of the present system of tramways in Sydney dates from the year
1879, when the first line was laid from Hunter-street along Elizabeth-
street in connection with the Great Exhibition held that year. This
was worked by steam motors, and, with the large number of visitors
to the Exhibition proved a very successful and lucrative investment,
so much so that demands were soon made for extensions in various
directions, and piece by piece these have been added to until the
present considerable system has been built up.
The lines have always been in the hands of the Government, and
are now vested in and under the control of the Railway Commissioners.
Including the Newcastle system there are at present 77 miles of
tramways in operation, their capital cost being, in round figures,
£2,000,000. That they are extensively used is shown that for the
year ended 30th June last no less than 66,244,334 passengers were
conveyed. The earnings for the same period amounted to £409,724,
and the net profit after paying working expenses £68,597, which
represents a return of £3 16s. sd. per cent, on the capital then
invested. The revenue and number of passengers conveyed for the
present year will greatly exceed the figures mentioned.
At the present time three systems of traction are in operation in
Sydney, viz., steam, electric and cable, but in a year or two the work
of conversion to the electric system which is now being carried out
will be completed, and a really up-to-date tramway system will be in
operation. The steam tramways are worked by independent steam
motors or locomotives, and though they have done excellent service in
their time are now decidedly behind the times, being replaced
everywhere by electricity. The electric system in Sydney is on the
what is called “overhead wire ” system, a stout copper wire running
about eighteen feet above the centre of each track, supported by
poles at frequent intervals. This wire is provided with the necessary
electric current from the generating station at Ultimo, and from the
wire the current is conveyed to motors on the axles under the cars by
means of the pole which rises from the top of the car to the wire, along
which it runs by a small trolly wheel.






The cable cars, which appear to run of their own volition, derive
their motive power from a long endless wire cable or rope which runs
in a shallow tunnel under the centre of each track. A narrow slot
in the centre of the track permits the bar of the “grip” passing
through. The grip is a kind of mechanical hand which the gripman,
by operating his levers, causes to grip or let go the cable at will.
When tightly gripped of course the car is borne along at the same
speed as the cable; when released, the car comes to a standstill. The
large steam engines operating the cable are situated in the power
house at Rushcutter Bay.
TRAMWAY SYSTEMS.
The various systems may be summed up as follows: The City
lines, Greorge-street and Harris-street electric, and King-street cable
line; the Western system, namely, Grlebe, Balmain, Leichardt and
Abbotsford; South-Western and Southern system; Newtown and
Dulwich Hill; St. Peters and Cook’s River; Redfern, Waterloo and
Botany; and the Eastern system: Paddington, Waverley and Bondi,
and Coogee. Then on the Northern side of the Harbour there is the
detached North Sydney system, all worked by electricity.
The following is a brief description of the routes traversed
Qeorge=street and Railway Station (Electric.)
Indicating color, white.
Fare, Id.
Trams every two and three minutes throughout the day.
Last tram from the Quay, 11.55 p.m.
Time of journey, 16 minutes.
The trams on this section run from the terminus, Circular Quay,
to the Railway Station, Redfern, and return to the Quay. The vicinity
of the terminus is one of the sights of Sydney. Here are the wharves
of the principal mail steamer companies, P. and 0., Orient, Messager-
ies, American, Japanese and Chinese, etc., and there are always
magnificent specimens of marine architecture to be seen. Many of
the cross harbour ferry companies’ wharves are here also, viz., to
North Sydney, Mosman, Neutral Bay, Manly, Watson’s Bay, Middle
Harbour, etc., and the scene, particularly on a holiday occasion, is
always an animated one. Immediately fronting the Quay will be
seen the Customs House and several large wool warehouses.
Sweeping into Greorge-street from the Quay, past the Fire


Brigade Station on the left, the tram proceeds along Lower
George-street, past Bridge-street, up which, to the left, a glimpse
of the large Government offices is obtained. Passing Hunter-
street the heart of the business portion of the city is readied,
and the tram soon stops at the General Post Office, immediately
before reaching which one will not fail to notice the magnificent pile
of buildings of the Life Insurance Companies, ihe Post Office build-
ing will not fail to attract admiration, and the stranger to Sydney
should by all means see the magnificent view to be obtained from its
tow r er. Continuing along, the next stoppage is at King-street, whe re
the cable tramway is crossed; then on past fine business premises to
Market-street. Here on the right commences the magnificent pile of
buildings, erected by the Sydney Corporation several years ago, and
known as the Queen Victoria Markets, its large central dome forming
a very prominent architectural landmark of the city. Immediately
across the next intersecting street —Druitt-street —stands the Town
Hall, a very fine pile of buildings, with jts high clock tower. The
Centennial Hall in this building is said to be one of the largest
municipal halls of its kind in the world, and contains an organ in
keeping with the Hall. Immediately after the Town Hall, and
adjoining it, is passed the St, Andrews Cathedral (Ang.) The tram
now runs down what is known as Brickfield Hill to the Haymarket,
then uphill to the square in George-street, fronting the Railway
Station, thence passing through the station yard, stopping right at the
railway platform, it runs round a loop and returns to the Quay.
Harris-street (Pyrmont) Line (Electric).
Indicating color, black triangle.
Pare, 2d (to Railway Id, Harris-street Id).
Trams every 10 minutes throughout the day.
Last tram from Quay, 11.35 p.m.
Time of journey, 25 minutes.
The route for this line is the same as that for George-street, as far
as the Railway Station. The line thence continues along George-street
West past the Railway Station, and having on the right the Cyclorama,
after passing which the line turns sharply to the right into Harris-
street. Harris-street is almost unique amongst Sydney lines in that
there is not the suspicion of a curve in its whole length of over 1] miles.
Soon after entering it the Technical College and Technological Museum
are passed on the left, and nearly opposite are the large car sheds and
repair shops for the rolling-stock of the George and Harris-streets
tramways. Adjoining these is the power-house, where is generated
the electric power for running the whole of the Sydney electric tram-
ways. Passing this the tram runs along past large wool warehouses


and places of business, and the large terminal railway premises of
Darling Harbor, which will be seen adjoining the waters of Darling
Harbor to the right. Glimpses of shipping are obtained passing the
cross streets, with the city beyond. Pyrmont is essentially a business
centre, and a walk round on leaving the tram will disclose much com-
mercial activity. The city may be reached on foot if desired, a short
walk to the right down Pyrmont Bridge Road, leading to the Pyrmont
Bridge, which crosses Darling Harbor, the great centre of the inter-
colonial shipping trade.
Glebe Point Line.
Indicating color, two red circles.
Fare, 2d (to Railway Id, thence to terminus Id).
Trams about every 10 minutes.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.17 p.m.
Time of journey, 25 minutes.
At time of writing this suburb is reached by steam tram, although
the work of conversion to electric traction is almost complete. The
terminus of all the steam trams is at Bent-street, where are situated
the Hotel Metropole, Union Club, Government Printing Office, and in
close contiguity the Public Library, Australian Club and Government
Offices, Botanical Gardens, Domain and Art Gallery ; also residence of
the Governor-General. The line passes into Elizabeth-street via
Hunter-street, and at the King-street intersection crosses the cable
tram. On the left is the Supreme Court and St. James’ Church. The
line now skirts Hyde Park on the left, Synagogue on right, to Liver-
pool-street, where the eastern suburbs line branches off. Continuing
along Elizabeth-street the tram enters and crosses Belmore Park,
passing the large Belmore Markets on the right, and by way of Pitt-
street reaches the Railway Square, where the first section ends. The
journey is continued along George-street West, passing along a busy
thoroughfare until the Newtown-road Junction is reached. Here the
Newtown line branches off to the left. On the left is the Victoria Park
and University Grounds, in which are situated the fine buildings of the
Sydney University and its affiliated colleges. Continuing the tram
takes the first turn to the right into Glebe-road, down which it proceeds
to the terminus, through a business and residential thoroughfare. A
few yards from the terminus the street ends at the waters of Rozelle
Bay. Immediately opposite is seen Glebe Island (really a peninsula),
upon which are situated the Abattoirs, whence comes the great bulk of
Sydney’s meat supply. If desired the return to town may be made by
ferry steamer from wharf at foot of the street, or a walk may be taken
to the left across a level tract of reclaimed land to the head of the bay.
Here the Balmain tram can be picked up, and the journey continued


either on to the Balmain terminus, or hack to the city. An alternative
is to walk up Johnstone-street at the head of the Bay, through
Annandale, until the Leichhardt tram is met, and return to town in
that way. This is a pleasant walk past many attractive residences.
Balmain Line (Steam).
Indicating color, red and white.
Fare, 3d (Ist section, Railway; 2nd section, Johnstone-street;
3rd section, terminus.
Trams about every 20 minutes.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.29 p.m.
Time of journey, 46 minutes
The route for this line is the same as that for the Glebe, the turn
off to the right from the main Leichhardt line being the second street
past Glebe Road. The line proceeds through a residential thorough-
fare to Forest Lodge, just beyond which, on the right, is the Forest
Lodge pony-racing ground. Flat reclaimed land is here met with,
and if the visitor be of an engineering turn of mind, he will be interested
in seeing, on the left, a series of light, graceful arches on the Monier
principle, carrying the main western sewer across the valley. The
whole of the land hereabouts has been reclaimed by building a
retaining wall and pumping in sand with dredges, thus effecting a
douple purpose—deepening the neighbouring bay and transforming
what was once a noxious swamp into a healthful park for the residents
of the vicinity. At Johnstone-street, at the head of the bay, whence a
line view of the Glebe Island bridge is obtained, the second section
ends.
Continuing across more reclaimed land to the right, the tram
turns into Evans-street, and up the hill to the Weston-street post
office. This is the stopping-place for visitors to the Callan Park
Asylum, to which a short walk along Darling-road, in the opposite
direction to the tram, will lead. It is one of the finest public buildings
in the colony, and is beautifully situated amidst spacious grounds on
the shores of Long Cove, or Leichhardt Bay. The bay may be reached
by a walk down Weston street, at the foot of which is a fine road
bridge, spanning the waters and leading across to Drummoyne. If
desired, ferry steamer can be taken, and return to Darling Harbour
effected that way, or a pleasant walk of about three miles can be
taken through Drummoyne until Lyons-road is met, following which to
the left will lead to the Five Dock tram line. This may either be
taken to its terminus at Abbotsford, and return made by Parramatta
River ferry, or the return be made by tram through Five Dock and
Leichhardt.






To return to the Balmain line, which we left at Weston-road.
The line is now on top of the ridge, and as it proceeds many fine views
are to be obtained as it passes cross streets, glimpses of the harbour
and shipping alternating with distant wooded hills on one hand and
the city on the other. The tram passes on the right a fine block of
public buildings, which include the Municipal Chambers, Police Court,
and Post and Telegraph Offices. The line now passes into the business
portion of Balmain, terminating in the heart of the business centre at
Gladstone Park, a small reserve on the right.
Balmain is one of the most important suburbs of Sydney, both by
reason of its population and the very large number of important
industries carried on, and the visitor will be well repaid by a ramble
in any direction. To the left of the line, before passing the Post
Office, nearly all the cross roads will lead down to the waters of Leich-
hardt Bay, whence ferry boats connect with the city. At the
mouth of the bay will be seen Cockatoo Island, with its large graving
docks ; Spectacle Island, on which is situated an ammunition magazine ;
also a little islet known as Schnapper Island. On this side, at the
waterside will be found many large business establishments, notably
the chemical works of the Messrs. Elliott Bros., Limited, and the coal
mine of the Sydney Collieries Company. This colliery will be far the
deepest in Australia when completed, as the shaft will require to be
sunk about 8,000 feet before any coal is raised. It is already
down considerably beyond 2,000 feet, and the work of sinking is being
vigorously prosecuted. A deepwater wharf is right alongside, so that
the coal will be raised and placed direct on shipboard. A walk to the
left from the terminus will lead to Waterview Bay, at the head of
which is situated the large works of Mort’s Dock and Engineering
Company, the largest works of their kind in Australia, and employing
a very large number of hands. The roads to the right of the tramline
lead down to the waters of Johnstone Bay, whence ferry may also be
taken to Darling Harbour. ‘The shores on this side also are lined with
many large timber yards and works of various descriptions, the recently
constructed Sunlight Soap Works of Lever Bros, being a very fine
example.
Leichhardt Line (steam.)
Indicating color, white ground, red cross.
Fare 3d, (Ist section, Railway; 2nd section, Johnstone-street;
3rd section, terminus.)
Trams, about every 15 minutes.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.27 p.m.
Time of journey, 39 minutes.


The route is the same as for Balmain, up to where the latter turns
off. The main line to Leichhardt continues along the Parramatta-road,
skirting the Victoria Park and University Grounds on the left, to
Johnstone-street, where the second section ends. From this point a
walk may be taken down Johnstone-street to the waters of Eozelle Bay,
whence ferry may be taken to Sydney, or Balmain tram joined.
The line continues along the Parramatta-road to Norton-street,
where it turns at right angles to the right, continuing along to Marion-
street, where is the junction of the connecting tram to Five Dock and
Abbotsford. Opposite the junction will be seen some fine public build-
ings, namely the Town Hall and the Leichhardt Public Schools.
Immediately below, on the same side, are the Post and Telegraph
Offices, and opposite, the Anglican Church. The waters of Leichhardt
Bay may be reached by a walk to the left from the terminus, about
half a mile further on, and a stroll should be taken on to the Leich-
hardt Park, occupying a fine position on the shores of the bay. This
is a very popular resort for family picnics. Boats may be had for hire
at several points on the bay, and as the bay is sheltered the water is
usually placid, and boating may be safely indulged in.
Five Dock and Abbotsford (Steam.)
Leichhardt connecting trams carry small white circular flag
with red cross, over the ordinary destination flag.
Fare, od. (3d. to Marion-street; Ist section, Lyons Eoad, Id.;
2nd section, terminus, Id.)
Trams about every hour.
Last connecting tram from Bent-street, 10.33 p.m.
Time of journey, 54 minutes.
The Leichhardt tram is taken as far as Marion-street. Here a
change is made to the branch tram which turns off at right angles to
the left down Marion-street. Crossing the head of Long Cove or
Leichhardt Bay by a bridge, a view is obtained of the bay to the right.
The line continues along the main road, soon getting into open country,
with patches of woodland. Five Dock is a somewhat scattered district,
but the scenery is generally attractive. Continuing through a good deal
of bush and cultivatad land, the line runs parallel with Hen and Chickens
Bay, a large inlet of the Parramatta Eiver, glimpses of which are seen
through the trees at intervals. At the terminus of the line is the fine
property of Sir Arthur Eenwick, whose park-like grounds are largely
availed of by excursion parties. Many attractive walks may be made
through the bush and round the foreshores of the bay, or a boat can
be hired, and a trip made on the river ; or if desired, a trip may be
made in one of the Parramatta Eiver steamers, which call at the wharf,
proceeding up the river to Eyde and Parramatta (whence return can
be made by rail to Sydney), or down stream to the City.


Newtown, Marrickville, and Dulwich Hill (Electric.)
Indicating color, two green circles.
Fares, to Newtown and Enmore, 2d.
~ to Marrickville and Dulwich Hill, 3d.
Trams, to Newtown bridge every 2 and 3 minutes. Last
tram from Quay, 11.50 p.m.
~ to Enmore every 3 and 4 minutes. Last tram from
Quay, 11.32 p.m.
~ to Marrickville every 6 minutes. Last tram from
Quay, 11.26 p.m.
~ to Dulwich Hill every 12 minutes. Last tram from
Quay, 11.26 p.m.
Time of journey, Circular Quay to Newtown Bridge, 29 min.
~ ~ ~ Enmore, 33 minutes.
~ ~ ~ Marrickville, 42 minutes.
~ ~ ~ Dulwich Hill, 49 minutes.
The route of this line is from the terminus at Circular Quay along
George-street to the Railway Station, for the first section. Thence the
route is along George-street West on the main western line to the
Newtown Road Junction, where it turns sharp to the left along
Newtown Road. On the right is passed the Victoria Park and Uni-
versity grounds containing the fine buildings of the Sydney Univer-
sity and affiliated colleges. On the left, immediately opposite, is the
Institution for the Deaf and Dumb and the Blind, a fine pile of
buildings wherein is carried on a noble work. The tram now enters
the business portion of Newtown, King-street, which will attract the
attention of the visitor by the busy appearance it usually presents.
The line continues between rows of busy shops to the Newtown
Bridge, under which passes the main suburban railway line. Here
are situated the Newtown Railway Station, and opposite the Town
Hall, Court-house and fine bank buildings. Mention may also be
made of the large car shed just across the bridge to the left, which
has storage accommodation for no less than 112 of the bogie combina-
tion type of tram cars used on the Newtown system. The line to St.
Peters and Cook’s River branches off to the left from the Newtown
bridge, while the Newtown tram continues on, passing into Enmore
still along a business street. The Enmore trams terminate here, while
those for Marrickville and Dulwich Hill continue on, passing down the
hill with the Enmore Park on the left. A walk across this will bring
one to the large woollen mills of Messrs. J. Vicars and Co., which turn
out a large quantity of excellent woollen goods annually. The line
soon reaches the low T er portion of Marrickville, known as Tramvale.
It will be noticed to lie very fiat and low, and at times of heavy and
long-continued rains used to be transformed into a large lake.
Matters in this respect, however, have been improved by a system of


drainage. Coming to the rising ground again the business portion of
Marrickville is entered upon, and is followed by a residential district
as far as Dulwich Hill, many fine residences and comfortable villas
and cottages being passed. From the elevated terminus at Dulwich
Hill a wide view, down to the level of Cook’s River and the wooded
heights beyond, is seen to the left, while to the right stretches the
residential suburb of Petersham. A ramble can be taken to the left
down to Cook’s River, crossing the Belmore railway line, or to the
right through the pleasant suburbs to the main suburban line, taking
train back to the city from Petersham, Summer Hill or Stanmore.
St. Peters and Cook’s River (Electric.)
Indicating color, two green crosses.
Fares, to St. Peters, 2d.
~ to Cook’s River, 3d.
Trams, to St. Peters every 12 minutes till 2 p.m. and after
6 p.m.; every 6 minutes afternoon.
~ to Cook’s River every 12 minutes.
Last trams from Circular Quay 11.28 p.m.
Time of journey, Circular Quay to St Peters, 35 minutes.
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ to Cook’s River, 48 minutes.
The route is the same as for Newtown and Dulwich Hill, as far
as the Newtown Bridge. Here the line branches off to the left, and
proceeds along King-street to the St. Peters terminus at the St. Peters
Bridge. Here the road crosses the Illawarra suburban railway line,
and at the station train may be taken for any station on that line.
St. Peters is the centre of the brick-making industry of Sydney and
suburbs, and the many tall chimney stacks by day, and the illumina-
tions from the kilns at night, are prominent features of the landscape.
The line to Cook’s River continues on past St. Peters Bridge by a
single line, and the country soon opens out to the left, until, approach-
ing the terminus, an extremely wide view is obtained over a broad
plain, which stretches out to the shores of Botany Bay in front. To
the left, the visitor looks over Botany to the high lands of Randwick.
The terminus is at the Cook’s River dam, quite close to Tempe station,
on the Illawarra suburban line. Here a fine bridge carries the road
over the river, the lower portion forming a dam, which, by means of
automatic flood-gates, keeps out the tidal waters, and yet permits of
the water of the river escaping at low tide. A great deal of work has
been carried out in this vicinity in reclaiming land and forming
embankments, and work is still going on which will form a very great
improvement on the natural aspect of the foreshores. Boats may here
be obtained, and a trip taken in either direction. On the left access is




SSBk lli
~WKL >
frjß cc
WSt <
mmj h
iSni h
HSIijS <
ISKtU 2
»gP!?ca <
MWfrJI x
3B»a! dc
' ' a * a *-' <
Q.
i, *■ Jag q’
J 4 DC
fat, u.
r* k r 1:0
Imr H
pft\ ‘ o
(Sst S
lo4E <


obtained to Shea’s Creek, the upper portion of which has of late years
been transformed into a fine canal; following the Creek down to the
right, Botany Bay may be entered. On the upper side of the dam
boats can also be obtained, and, although Cook’s River is hardly an
imposing stream, a pull of several miles can be made up stream. If
not inclined for boating, a walk straight along the road over the
bridge will in about a couple of miles lead one to Rockdale. Here a
private tramway runs down to the famous Lady Robinson’s Beach, on
the shores of Botany Bay. The beach is some seven miles in length,
and fronts the entrance to Botany Bay. A dip in the fine baths here,
and return to town by the Illawarra railway from the Rockdale station,
into which the connecting tramway runs, would fill in a pleasant
afternoon.
Redfern, Alexandria, Waterloo,* and Botany (Steam).
Indicating colors ; White and green.
Fares; To Redfern, Alexandria, and Waterloo, 2d. ; to Bay-
street, 3d. ; to Botany terminus, 4d.
Trams ; For Redfern, Waterloo, and Bay-street, about every
15 minutes.
For Botany, 7 minutes past each hour.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.22 p.m.
Time of journey to Waterloo, 27 minutes; to Bay-street,
44 minutes ; through journey, 59 minutes.
The route for these suburbs is the same as that for the Western
steam lines as far as the Railway Gates. Here the line turns sharply
to the left into Cleveland-street, passing on the left the Benevolent
Asylum, with the main entrance to the station on the right, the trams
stopping at the subway. Proceeding, the old burial ground is passed
on the left, wearing a very neglected appearance; to the right is the
large railway produce shed, and, abutting on the roadway, the fine
building of the Railway Institute. Turning to the right, the line
skirts the Prince Alfred Park on the right, and the large Exhibition
building will attract attention standing in the near corner. At the end
of the park a line branches off; to the left along Cleveland-street, and
runs across country connecting with the Randwick tram-line, fly this
route passengers are conveyed from and to the station and the Sydney
Cricket Ground, Agricultural Association Ground, or the Randwick
and Kensington racecourses on days when sports meetings are being
held at either of those places. The Redfern line keeps on past
Cleveland-street until a turn at right angles is made into Redfern-
street. On turning, Redfern Park will be seen on the left. The
Post Office and Court-house are soon passed on the left, and presently
another turn, at almost right angles, is made, and the tram runs
quickly down into and through Waterloo. The scenery does not call


for special mention until the lower level is reached, when it opens
out, and one passes numerous and large market gardens. Across
them, to the right, can he seen the stacks of the St. Peters brick works,
and, on either side, at intervals works and factories of various descrip-
tions are passed. Passing through North Botany, the country keeps
open in character, and presently a bridge across a reed-banked lagoon is
crossed. This is known as the Waterworks, and not so many years ago
formed the main source of Sydney’s water supply, the swamps draining
down here from as far north as the spot where now stands the
Centennial Park, and being pumped up to the city reservoirs from the
pumping station, which is seen to the right of the bridge, its tall stack
rising from a clump of fine pine and other trees. The third section
ends at Bay-street, whence the line approaches the shores of the Bay,
and runs through Botany proper. To the left a wide view is obtained
over undulating sandhills paisSt Kensington and away to Randwick,
while on the right glimpses of the Bay appear through the trees. The
Bay soon appears in full sight, and though the tram runs some little
distance further, the visitor should alight at. the pier and walk to its
head, several hundred yards out in the Bay. Here a splendid view of
the whole Bay is obtained, sweeping round from the Heads in an
almost circular sheet some six miles in diameter. To the right can be
seen the whole stretch of Lady Robinson’s Beach, together with the
populous Illawarra suburbs that fringe the Bay and rise to the hills
behind. To the left is the entrance to the Bay, and the broad Pacific
lies beyond. Prom the Northern Head a bold jutting prominence is
seen; this is Bare Island, and strongly fortified in case an enemy,
instead of trying to effect an entrance to Sydney through its front gate,
might be so minded as to try the back entrance via Botany Bay. On
the inside of the Southern Head an obelisk can be plainly discerned,
which marks the spot where the great navigator, Captain Cook, the
first European to set foot on the Eastern shores of Australia, landed
from the '* Endeavour ” on the 28th April, 1770. A large reserve has
been dedicated close by known as Kurnell, and on holidays and special
occasions steamers make the trip across from the pier, thus affording
visitors a convenient opportunity of inspecting a spot rendered so
interesting by its historical associations. Although such a magnificent
sheet of water, Botany Bay is unfortunately very shallow, and can
never be of the commercial value of Sydney Harbour.
Mention may also be made of the Sir Joseph Banks’ pleasure
grounds, two stoppages before reaching the pier. Some years
ago, when pedestrianism was still a live sport, many big races
were held here. Though its glory has departed in this respect it
is still a very favorite spot for excursions, for which its ample grounds
and pavilions render it very suitable.
Botany is not a line where the visitor will be impressed by any
architectural pretensions of the majority of houses along the route. It


is essentially a business district, and of many businesses not at all of
an aesthetic nature, such as glue works, soap and boiling down works,
tanneries, wool scouring establishments, and such like, but even if the
breezes are not at all times exactly reminiscent of Araby, the trip to
the historic Bay is one that should be undertaken by the visitor.
A good walk can be had from the terminus bearing towards the
right to La Perouse about three miles, a spot inside the north head-
land and adjoining Bare Island. A cable station of the Eastern
Extension Telegraph Company is situated here, and an obelisk is here
erected to the memory of the brave French navigator, from whom
the place is named, this being the last spot from which any tidings
of him were received.
An alternative good afternoon’s ramble is to take the road bearing
slightly to the left from the terminus, continuing till the cross roads are
reached. (The cross road leads from Kensington to La Perouse, and
some distance past the cross roads, in the direction of La Perouse, a
branch to the left leads to the Coast Hospital.) Continuing straight
on over the cross road a turn off to the right is met half a mile or so
along. This will lead to Long Bay, a pleasant spot; but the road to
the left should be taken which leads along the coast to Coogee, passing
Maroubra Bay, and farther on the Long Bay cemetery. There is some
fine scenery along this road, and the prevailing north-easter, even in
the middle of summer, generally makes the walk of about four-and-
a-half miles enjoyable. From Coogee, tram can be taken direct to
Sydney.
Crown Street (Steam).
Indicating color : Two white circles.
Fare, 2d. (to Crown-street Junction Id., thence terminus Id).
Trams every 12 minutes.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.23 p.m.
Time of journey, 19 minutes.
This line follows the steam route from Bent-street to Liverpool-
street, where it turns round to the left, with Hyde Park on the left
until turning into Oxford-street. Two stoppages up and the line
branches oft into Crown-street on the right, which it follows for a
distance of nearly a mile to its junction with the Cleveland-street line.
Turning into Cleveland-street, on the left, the tram continues a little
distance to Dowling-street, which borders Moore Park. Its journey
here terminates, and the tram returns to Bent-street. The journev
does not call for any particular mention, although the reservoir and
pumping station for large portion of Sydney water supply, on right-
hand side after passing Campbell-street, will probably attract
attention.


Randwick and Coogee (Steam)
Indicating color, green
Fare, 3d.
Trams about every 20 minutes.
Last tram from Bent-street, 11.25 p.m.
Time of journey : Randwick, 30 minutes; Coogee, 40 min.
This line follows the steam route from Bent-street as far as
Liverpool-street, where it turns sharp to the left, still skirting Hyde
Park until it turns into Oxford-street. Oxford-street, especially in
this lower portion, is an exceedingly busy thoroughfare, and, being
somewhat narrow, the traffic at times is very congested. The line
traverses between a double row of shops of a good class, passing the
Crown-street tram-line junction on the right, until the top of the first
hill is reached at Darlinghurst, where the first section of all eastern
trams ends. To the left is here seen the Darlinghurst Court-house,
and behind it Darlinghurst Gaol. St. Vincent’s Hospital is close to
the gaol, but is not visible from the tram. The tram now turns off to
the right into Flinders-street, the line straight on leading to Bondi and
Waverley. Passing along a residential street, the line emerges at
Moore Park, which is first seen on the right. Presently the tram
enters the Park, the line, as well as the Eandwick-road, which runs
parallel, passing through its centre. On the left will be seen the
Victoria Barracks in the background, bordered by Moore Park road;
more to the front, and still on the left, will be seen the pavilions of
the Sydney Cricket Ground, the scene of many an historic international
and intercolonial cricket and football match, and generally conceded to
be the best appointed ground of its kind in the world. A fine cycle
track surrounds the oval. Immediately beyond, and adjoining, is the
Royal Agricultural Society’s Ground, which also possesses a fine cycle
track, and is the scene every Easter of an immense exhibition of
agricultural products, live stock, and machinery. Right opposite, on
the right-hand side of the line, is the Zoological Garden. It contains
a splendid collection of animals and birds, and is, besides, most
attractively laid out, and is, naturally, a very favourite resort for
visitors and family parties. The tram stops right at the door.
The garden terminates at Cleveland-street, where a branch line is seen
running to the right. This leads to the railway station, and is used
for conveying the railway travellers to and from sports meetings at
either of the grounds mentioned, or the racecourses farther on. The
traveller will probably have noticed that between the tram and the
parallel road on the right is a fenced enclosure with a double row of
fine trees, and between the trees has recently been constructed a “ cycle
trabk ” for the sole use of cyclists. The track runs between the trees
alongside the tramway line for about two miles, and affords a
splendid surface for wheelmen. Passing Cleveland-street, with


z
Q
>
0)
6
H
0
1
Q.
>
x
*
pi 5
V DO
v a
5Mi o
o
I *.,» o
f °
<
X
o
■* <
UJ
CQ
*rt.
Hi
x
H
z
O




its avenue leading to the left into the Centennial Park, the tram
continues through Moore Park until, on the left hand side, the presence
of a small lagoon close to the track denotes that the tram is now
skirting the Centennial Park, across which some nice views are had.
On the right, Kensington platform is soon reached, and this pretty
suburb is seen stretching away to the distance. Shortly before reach-
ing this, however, a branch line will have been noticed leading off to
the right. This is the extension to the Rifle Butts, and on big
meeting days the tram drops competitors down right on the ground.
The extension also passes the Randwick and Kensington racecourses.
Returning to the main line, the next stoppage after Kensington is the
racecourse. Randwick, as most visitors to Sydney will be aware, is
the principal racecourse of the colony, beautifully appointed and kept
up. Another entrance to the Centennial Park is now passed on the
left, and the tram then passes the tramway workshops. Here repairs
are effected to the steam motors, and tram cars are repaired and kept
in order. When rising the hill after this a fine view is had right over
the racecourse, and away out to Botany. Some fine residences are
passed on either hand, and Randwick is entered at Allison-road. A walk
round this beautiful suburb will disclose many fine residences and
extensive views in all directions. A cross-country tram may be taken
at Allison-road which goes across to Waverley and Bondi, fare 2d.,
and the city may be regained by that line. The trip to Coogee, how-
ever, must not be overlooked. This is gained by a continuation of the
Randwick line, which after running through Randwick, passing the
large school for Destitute Children on right, descends the hill to the
charming Coogee Bay, the distant glimpses of the blue ocean being
very inviting. From St. Paul’s-road, where the tram turns to the left
to go down to the Bay, a short walk will give access to the Rifle
Range. Arrived at the Bay the visitor has a choice of attractions.
There is a well-kept aquarium and grounds, with inclosed swimming
bath. There are also on the two points of the bay tine swimming
baths hewn out of the rock, that on the north end being for gentlemen,
and the one on the southern for ladies. A small fee is made for the
use of either. There are small reserves or parks at either end of the
bay, and there is a beautiful beach on which to sit and watch the
rollers or paddle at will. Charming walks can be had along the cliffs
in either direction, and if the visitor be a fisherman a boat may nearly
always be had, and out about the rocky islet which is seen some
distance out good hauls are generally made. Another good walk is
along the road to the left from the southern end of the bay, up a steep
hill, past the Long Bay cemetery, until the outlines of a broad bay
appear in sight. A track through the bush will soon bring one down
to Maroubra Bay, which possesses a very fine beach.


Paddington, Waverley, and Bondi (steam.)
Indicating colors, Paddington (Queen-street), red with, white
centre.
Indicating colors, Waverley, red.
M Bondi, white, with red centre.
Pares, Paddington and Bondi Junction, 2d.
~ Waverley, 3d.
~ Bondi, 3d. , , , in
Trams, Paddington and Bondi Junction, about every o to 10
minutes.
~ Waverley, about every 25 minutes.
” Bondi Beach, about every half-hour.
Last trams from Bent-street, Paddington, 11.20 p.m.; Waverley,
11.20 p.m. ; Bondi, 11.10 p.m.
Time of journey, Paddington, 23 minutes; Bondi Junction,
29 minutes ; Waverley, 39 minutes ; Bondi Beach,
42 minutes.
This route is the same as that for Randwick as far as Darling-
hurst, where the latter line branches to the right. The line to
Paddington keeps straight on past the front of the Darhnghurst Court-
house, seen on the left, and soon after the foot of Barrack Hill is
reached. This is so called from the Victoria Barracks, which line its
ascent on the right, until at the summit of the hill the tram stops in
front of the Paddington Town Hall, a fine structure, which, from its
elevated position, is visible for miles from many parts of the city and
Harbour. Continuing, the line still ascends, passing always through
a double line of business premises of a thriving character, several fine
places of worship of various denominations being passed on the ngfit,
until Queen-street is reached. At this spot is the mam entrance to
the Centennial Park, on the right, a fine view of which is seen from
the tram immediately Queen-street, the terminus of the I addington
trams, is left behind. This magnificent pleasure ground covers just
over one square mile, and is beautifully laid out, the skill of the
landscape gardener being greatly assisted by the large lakes formed
by draining swamps at one time part of the source of Sydney s water
supplv These are tenanted by water fowl of all descriptions, adorn-
ed by picturesque islets, and fringed by plantations and glowing
parterres. There is a fine drive running right round the 1 ark, some
21 miles in circumference, and always kept in excellent order, forming
an ideal track for the cyclist, who patronises it in very large numbers.
Only light vehicles are permitted in the 1 ark. This road is bordered
all round with a broad asphalt footway, inside which again is a wide
riding track for equestrians. The road is fringed by double rows of
trees: which have already made great growth and give promise of the
magnificent avenue that is to be in the years to come. Considering
that the Park was only dedicated on Anniversary Day, 1888, by


Governor Carrington, tlie transformation from the scrubby waste it
then was to its present attractive appearance is wonderful. The
dedication of this Park was due to the efforts of the late Sir Henry
Parkes, to whose memory it will be an everlasting and eloquent
monument.
The tram line skirts the northern boundary of the Park, and the
view from the tram to the right is a particularly fine one. The
elevation is very high, and one looks forth across the beautiful Park,
over the Randwick Racecourse, Kensington, and the long stretch of
undulating scrub-covered sandhills to Botany Bay. Beyond this are
wooded hills rising to the skyline, and more to the right the populous
Illawarra suburbs. On a clear day, certainly, a lovely prospect.
Before leaving the outskirts of the Park a large reservoir is passed,
whence issues the greater part of the elevated water supply of the city,
the water having first been forced up to this elevation. Here is
another fine entrance to the Centennial Park, while to the left one
obtains vistas down the well-kept villa-lined streets of the fashionable
suburb of Woollahra. The tram again enters a busy thoroughfare,
Waverley-road, and passes between business premises to the end of
the second section at the Bondi Junction; or, as it is otherwise known,
the Tea Gardens. The Bondi Junction trams terminate here, and
return to town. Connection is here made with the cross-country tram,
known as the Waverley and Randwick extension, fare 2d.
A very enjoyable w T alk can be taken from Bondi junction, follow-
ing the tram straight on past the Church on the left for a couple of
hundred yards where the tram turns to the right to go to Bondi.
Leaving the tramline, and keeping straight on, a little park is soon
seen on the right. Entering this, from the summer-house at the crest
of the hill, a magnificent view is had of the harbor on one side, and
Bondi Bay and the ocean to the right. Rejoining the road, it now
skirts the brow of the hill and passes down Belle \ue Hill, past many
fine residences. The electric tram to Rose Bay may be joined at the
foot, and the city regained on the one hand, or a trip to South Head
made on the other.
From Bondi Junction the line to Waverley turns sharply to the
right along Cowper-street, which maintains a mixed business and
residential character, until at what is called the Waverley Junction, at
Macpherson-street, it turns off to the left and proceeds to the terminus
at the Waverley Cemetery. The line continuing past Macpherson-street
is the Waverley and Randwick extension line, a cross-country line
connecting these suburbs.
The Cemetery at Waverley is well worth a visit, being undoubtedly
the most pleasantly situated God’s acre of the city and suburbs. It
falls gradually from the entrance down towards the seashore, and the
rising sun which it faces, the broad Pacific stretching out to the horizon
beyond.


A pleasant walk from near the Waverley terminus may be had to
the left to Bronte, where is a fine swimming bath ; or a pleasant stroll
can be taken along the road bearing to the right, running parallel
with the coast, to Coogee, and return to town effected in that way.
If, instead of turning off to Waverley, the journey be continued
past Bondi Junction by means of the Bondi tram, the line will shortly
turn sharply to the right, and, after rising a slight hill, proceed down
a straight road towards the ocean, which appears stretched away in
blue immensity at the foot of the hill. On the right will be seen the
picturesquely-situated Waverley Park, from the highest points of
which a magnificent view is unfolded in all directions, and is well
worth visiting on that account alone. The line passes many very
fine and comfortable residences, until, after making a sudden turn to
the right, the ocean appears close underneath, and the Aquarium is
reached. Down through a steep, rocky cutting, and the tram emerges
alongside the Little Bondi Beach reserve, close to the water’s edge,
and in full view of the beautiful Bondi Beach, yhich stretches away to
the north, where its sweep is checked by a line of cliffs, marked on the
outer edge by the rugged headland known as Ben Buckler. At the
southern end of the bay, at the tram terminus, is a picturesque rocky
nook, where one may sit in shade, while the whole stretch of the bay
affords unlimited opportunities for paddling, fully availed of, by
juveniles particularly, on a holiday. A very large swimming bath is
also situated right of the terminus. The Bay is, at the same time, a great
place for sharks during the season, and some exciting sport in the way
of shark-fishing can be witnessed almost any night during the hot
months, when the sharks come inshore after the migratory salmon.
There are a number of fine rambles to be taken from this terminus.
A good one is to walk along the beach to the farther end, then make
one’s way to the top of the cliffs and wander northward. The cliffs
are very high and rugged, and afford some splendid views, while to
north and south is seen the rugged outline of the coast. The walk, if
desired, can be continued to the northward by the Military-road,
running parallel with the coast to South Head and Watson’s Bay.
This is really a grand walk, giving, in addition to the magnificent
seascapes, some of the finest views of Sydney Harbour and its islands
that can be procured. Nearing Watson’s Bay, the large Macquarie
Lighthouse is passed on the right. Standing at an elevation of over
350 feet from the water, its powerful electric flash is visible for 30 miles
at sea. Passing on, Watson’s Bay Park is passed through, and one
will not fail to notice and inspect the famous “ Gap,” that huge
indentation into which the good ship “ Dunbar” crashed one night in
August, 1857, one sole survivor being rescued froiu the rocks to tell
the tale. Return may be made to the city by steamer from the wharf
on the Harbour side of the village ; or an alternative trip may be made
by retracing one’s steps past the Lighthouse, anti, instead of going


k f
JL )
*■*«
-' • f*m*iiiii * v '^CI; - t:‘'
- \ ~ v ' <^1
RIP” -
SHS^sr;
Jfc
*
**| M
1 •—
s^|
-e*JBF
rf W ■
* .**
”
•
j-
Bronte
Beach. Waverley,
Kerry, Photo, Sydney.




back along tbe Military-road towards Bondi, bear to the right and
continue along what is known as the New South Head Road. From
all points about here are to be had the most magnificent views of
Sydney Harbour, and seen on a Saturday afternoon or a holiday with
the bright waters dotted with hundreds of yachts and small craft it is
indeed an entrancing spectacle. The road drops rapidly, passing on
the right a very fine pile of buildings, the Rose Bay Convent, a
prominent object from nearly all parts of the Harbour. Just at the
level ground at the northern end of Rose Bay the terminus of the Rose
Bay electric tram is met, and after a walk round from Bondi the
visitor will probably decide to continue his return to Sydney by that
means.
King-street to Ocean-street (Cable),
And Rose Bay and Dover-road (Electric).
Trams, King-street to Ocean-street (cable), every three
minutes ; through fare, 2d.
A one-minute service is run to Victoria-street during business
hours; fare, Id.
Ocean-street to Rose Bay and Dover-road (electric), every 20
minutes till 2 p.m., every 10 minutes afterwards.
Fare: Ocean-street to Rose Bay, Id; Rose Bay to Dover-
road, Id.
Last cable tram to Ocean-street, 11.25 p.m.
Last electric tram from Ocean-street, 11.20 p.m.
Time of journey : King-street and Victoria-street, 12 minutes ;
Victoria-street and Ocean-street, 8 minutes ; Ocean-street
and Rose Bay, 8 minutes; Rose Bay and Dover-road,
4 minutes.
The cable tram commences at the foot of King-street, at the wharf
of the Parramatta River Steam Ferry Company, and rises up a steep
hill, crossing over several intersecting streets to George-street. Here
the George-street electric tramway is crossed, and the line continues
through a busy city thoroughfare to King-street. Here the steam
tram lines are crossed. Immediately on the right is the Supreme
Court, and adjoining it St. James’ (Ang.) Church, one of the oldest
places of worship in the city. The line now enters Queen’s Square, so
called from its central ornament—a fine statue of Her Majesty. Hyde
Park is right opposite, on the right, and at the entrance to the main
central avenue and walk is seen the statue of Prince Albert looking
out across the square towards that of the Queen. Immediately to the
left is Macquarie-street, down which one gets a glimpse of the Royal
Mint, the fine building of the Sydney Hospital, and the Houses of
Parliament. Just past this on the left the old Immigration building,
now used in connection with the Chancery and Bankruptcy Courts, is


passed on the left. Turning round to the right the tram passes the
entrance to the Domain, on the left; then past the splendid St. Mary’s
Cathedral (Roman Catholic) on the left, Hyde Park being still on the
opposite side. Taking a sweep to the left the line passes between Cook
and Phillip Parks on the right and left respectively, down Boomerang-
street, at the foot of which, on the left, is seen the Benevolent Blind
Institution, where numbers of blind of both sexes are taught trades
and enabled to earn a fair living by their own industry. The
institution is a very deserving one, and possesses a good library for the
use of the inmates, as well as having a trained band of blind execu-
tants. The busy thoroughfare of William-street is now entered, at
the upper end of which, topping a steep hill, is Victoria-street, where
the first section ends. Turning into Bayswater-road, a street bordered
with fine residences, the line drops downhill again, until on the left
is seen the large power-house, where are situated the large boilers and
engines which run the cable. Rushcutter Bay is now seen on the left,
with the shipping on the Harbour, and to the right are market gardens
worked by the inevitable John. The heights of Paddington appear in
the back ground. Rising up the hill the view across the Harbour
continually expands until at, the top a stop is made at Darling Point
Road A visitor should certainly leave the tram at this point and take
a walk down Darling Point Road to the left. Besides giving fine
views of the Harbour the road is bordered with some of the finest
residences in Sydney, and the visitor will be almost inclined to envy
the fortunate people who have their lines cast in such pleasant places.
Returning, a stroll along the tramline will, in a few yards, lead to the
terminus of the cable line at Ocean-street, the second section also ending
here. To the right is Edgecliff and Woollahra, one of the favorite
residential suburbs of Sydney.
From this point the line is an electric one. Immediately after
starting it drops down a steep hill to the level of Double Bay, a fine
view down the harbour being seen on the way. Quickly rising again
past many fine residences, the line continues along a well-kept and
picturesque winding road, which shortly drops gently to the level of
Rose Bay, close to the verge of which it continues. The scenery is
very fine" hereabouts, the broad bay and the harbour, dotted with
shipping and backed by high wooded hills on the left hand, and on
the rio-ht open and bush land. The third section ends at the Rose
Bay Wharf, at the near end of the bay, thence to the terminus
forming the fourth and last section. Nearing the end of the line, the
tram passes Lyne Park, an area of 18 acres, now in process of reclama-
tion from the harbour. AVhen this work ts completed and well tuifed,
Rose Bay will be even more popular as a holiday resort than it now is.
The present terminus is shortly beyond, at the point known as Dover-
road. The whole line affords "one of the prettiest journeys to be made
out of Sydney, and should certainly be traversed by the visitor.


If disposed for a ramble or drive after reaching the terminus,
continue right on to Watson’s Hay by the route described in the
Bondi tour, and return to Sydney by steamer; or, retracing one’s
steps back along the line a few yards from the terminus, a road will
be seen branching off to the left. This will lead to the Old I-'Outh
Head-road, which will lead past the Bondi golf links up to Waverley,
and tram to the city can there be taken from the Bondi Junction.
NORTH SYDNEY LINES.
The beautiful suburbs of North Sydney must claim early attention
from the visitor, both on account of the peculiar charm of their own
scenery and of the magnificence of the views of the city of Sydney and
the harbour which are commanded from the higher points on the
northern shore. North Sydney is reached by several ferries, one to
Lavender Bay, one to Milson’s Point, one to Neutral Bay, and a fourth
to Mosman Bay, the steamers all starting from the south-western
corner of Circular Quay. A ferry for road vehicles also runs from Fort
Macquarie, near the P, and 0. wharf, across to Milson’s Point. The
great bulk of the passenger traffic is carried via Milson’s Point, and
at the busy morning and afternoon hours the large steamers are taxed
to their full capacity.
A choice of delightful trips is offered by means of the tramway
system here, North Sydney being undoubtedly first from a scenic point
of view of any of the Sydney lines. A fine round trip may be made
without leaving the cars, by taking steamer to Milson’s Point, and
tram thence to Mosman, or vice verm, the tram in either case ascending
to the top of the ridge, and running along the elevated plateau which
commands so many fine views.
Taking the various lines in detail, the following is the route to—
Gore Hill.
Take steamer to Milson’s Point, thence tram. The line immediately
commences to ascend a steep hill, which soon unfolds a fine view of the
harbour and city to the rear, a particularly fine view being obtained as
the line curves round to the left into Blue-street. Shortly aftei a turn
is taken at right angles to the right, and the tram continues in a
straight line to Ridge-street, situated, as the name denotes, on the top
of the ridge. Here is situated the tramway power-house, where
portion of the power for working the trams is generated ; the remainder
is transmitted over the harbour from the main power-house at Ultimo.
Ridge-street is the end of the first section, for trips in any direction.


Joining the connecting tram for Gore Hill, the line proceeds,
passing the St. Leonard’s Park on the right, to Falcon-street. Here
a junction is effected with the line which runs at right angles to Gore
Hill or Willoughby to the left, and Mosman Bay to the right.
Turning to the leit the line continues to Lane Cove Eoad, where is the
junction of the line to Willoughby, branching off to the right. Keep-
ing on, the line for Gore Hill presently drops to the bridge, which
carries the road over the Milson’s Point railway line, just at the St.
Leonards railway station. Rising past a bush-covered recreation
ground the line reaches the summit of Gore Hill and terminates along-
side the cemetery, lying to the right. From the open ground to the
left the visitor will obtain one of the finest views of the city and
harbour it is possible to obtain. To the right is a fine expanse of
comparatively open and wooded country, with the waters of Lane Cove
River immediately in front. One looks past Mortlake and Parramatta
away to the distant ranges of the Blue Mountains. Immediately in
front is a wide view of the harbour, and beyond lies the city. It is a
scene difficult to adequately describe, but once seen will hardly be
forgotten. An alternative mode of returning is to walk down the first
road to the right, Greenwich-road, to the ferry at the foot of the hill,
and take steamer to Darling Harbour.
Willoughby.
The route to Willoughby is the same as for Gore Hill as far as
the Lane Cove Road, where the line turns to the right along the North
Sydney Road. The line soon passes into bush country, dropping to a
bridge crossing Flat Rock Creek. Rising, the same kind of country
is passed for some distance, but later on its character improves and
the line runs through orchards and cultivated land of a rich descrip-
tion to the terminus at Willoughby. The population is only scattered,
and there is open bush land in front and to the right of the terminus,
which is at Victoria Avenue. A walk down this, to the left, of some
ten minutes, leads to the Chatswood Railway Station, on the Milson’s
Point railway line, whence return may be made to Milson’s Point. Or
the road to the right may be taken, and a pleasant stroll through the
bush towards the waters of Middle Harbour indulged in.
MILSON’S POINT TO MOSMAN.
The former route is taken to the cross road at Falcon-street. It
may here be mentioned that a sight well worth seeing is the suspension
bridge over an arm of Long Bay, Middle Harbour, which is reached
by leaving the tram here and walking straight ahead along the road
hitherto followed by the tram. The walk is a short and pleasant one,


. /* "i
iiCMB
" '', -^V‘*
Su.
4
JtfC
»rM--
B -
WlWN| j i t&* * 'i\
•'3tj- f’^S.^;^SffiPP^S
rirl^ 1 ’ jjypflf
Mfe* 0^, f >. #tlt» -vWf 4
s *^%, j f? i|IJ^V r 4Kj ■' '%mMy|* '■*'&$&
*ti jif/ ' '•*, "'* /-I.ml-% JSI
,.,*, *to - f #\ J“ ! dKy
Hb'v,
|Mp <\
I|
vBB
>■ l^ts^m
33Slr V ■ ' s IjJKJg
iStc^li'dSwiiiL-' 11 tw^-sSHwyKjiy
>t’. , • -r '■ ' • , -'
'"w
'-**•
•r ■*£•_
* r
1 ■-* i ~ '****.
g|fl ' ’" *<■ V »:*■>. • ' - A ? '-At v*V - ■ '■" -,•
B&t*■ k a f f, • i jMPftltgySfc J5 • -■■
. *. * .• * 1
fcVA t *
Mosman
Bay.
Kerry, Photo, Sydney.




and the view from the bridge very fine. The bridge spans a very deep
ravine, and is a fine specimen of engineering. It may he inspected on
application to the caretaker.
From the intersection of Falcon-street the road turns to the right,
and continues along the top of the ridge. At Benboyd-road a very
fine view of the city of Sydney is obtained across the harbour, all the
prominent buildings and points of interest showing out very clearly.
It is indeed worth while leaving the tram here and wander towards
the brow of the hill to the right; or continuing along the tramline for
a short distance the branch tramline to Neutral Bay can be taken.
This line, which branches off at right angles to the right, also affords
some fine views, and return to Circular Quay may be made by ferry
from the wharf at the foot of the hill. Folly Point, on Middle Harbor
may be reached by a pleasant walk to the left from Alfred Street, at
the corner of the St. Leonard’s Park.
The line for Mosman Bay continues along the road on top of the
ridge, now called the Military-road, and the scenery throughout is very
fine, owing to its elevated position. Vistas of the harbour and city are
constantly opening up and changing on the right, and at times a
glimpse of the waters of Middle Harbour are seen between the trees
on the left. At Spit-road Junction the line to the Spit branches off to the
left. Curving round to the right the line now opens up some of the
finest scenery of the Harbour. The waters of Middle Harbour are
seen to the left, while more to the front in the distance towers up
North Head. Near the Post Office, where the tram turns sharply to
the right to descend the hill to the bay, the view is particularly fine,
and the visitor will be well repaid by leaving the tram here, and
rambling about the neighbourhood. Turning down to the left he may
walk down to Middle Head, almost any point on the way affording the
most glorious of scenes ; Manly to the left, the entrance to Sydney
Habour with the noble North Head in front; South Head and Watson’s
Bay, and the heights of Woollahra and Paddington across and to the
right up the wide expanse of the Harbour ; before and beyond all the
ocean, “darkly, deeply, beautifully blue.” Truly scenes to be
remembered, and the visitor is not likely to wish soon to leave them.
By bearing to the left the beautiful Balmoral Beach may be reached,
and the scenery of Middle Harbour admired. This is a very favorite
picnic spot.
Retracing one’s steps to the tram line the next tram down to the
Bay may be taken, or the walk is not a long one if so inclined. The
line drops rapidly past many pretty red-tiled villas on either side,
until after passing some bush on the right, with steep rock cutting on
the left, the tram arrives at the terminus alongside the steamer wharf.
A pleasant sail across the harbour of about a quarter-of-an-hour’s
duration and the traveller is landed at Circular Quay.


The Spit Tramway.
This trip may be made either via Milson’s Point or Mosman s
Bay. The latter is the more direct, and for a pleasant afternoon s
excursion the trip via Mosman Bay and Spit Tramway to Manly is
perhaps the finest that can be taken. Taking steamer from western
end of Circular Quay (fare 2d.) an enjoyable quarter of an hour’s
cruise will land one at the Mosman Pay W hart. This part of the
journey is not the least pleasurable, the steamer crossing, as it does,
one of the prettiest parts of the harbour, fine views being had of
Government House and Grounds, Farm Cove, with men-of-war at
anchor, Garden Island (the Imperial Navy depot) and Fort Denison
(popularly known as “ Pinchgut”), all to the right; Admiralty
House and Neutral Bay are passed on the left, until, rounding
Cremorne Point Mosman Bay is entered. The head of the Bay is, at
the time of writing, in process of reclamation, a work which will add
another to the many reclaimed parks around the shores of Sydney
Harbour. The township of Mosman will have been seen on the trip
across rising and crowning the high hill behind the bay. Of late
years Mosman has gone ahead in a wonderful manner, as will be
guessed by the bright new appearance of many of the comfortable-
looking villas, mostly covered with bright red tiles, which contrast not
unpleasantly with the interspersed foliage. The tram stands alongside
the wharf, and rapidly rising the road described in the last tour soon
gains the crest of the hill, and runs along to the left to the Spit Eoad
Junction. The connecting tram is here taken, turning sharply to the
right down the Spit Road. A fine view of the heads is opened up
almost immediately after starting, and the harbour view to the right
unfolds rapidly as the tram continues. Soon one obtains glimpses of
the waters of Middle Harbour on the left, lying far below, girt ith
thickly wooded banks which fall steeply down to the water’s edge.
The waters of Middle Harbour and the entrance to the harbour are
next seen to the right through the trees, and too soon the tram reaches
the terminus and runs along the Hat jutting sandbank known as The
Spit, where is the terminus. The scenery here is very lovely, lo
the right one looks down Middle Harbour towards the Heads; im-
mediately opposite, with its fine shining beach is the pleasure ground
of Clontarf, celebrated as the scene of the attempted assassination of
the late Duke of Edinburgh in 1868. Looking up Middle Harbour
appears a great landlocked lake with steep wooded banks, but which
on investigation would disclose miles of winding tree girt water. Ihe
little bay on the inner corner of The Spit is Pearl Bay, a very popular
excursion ground. If disposed for boating, boats may here be hired
and Middle Harbour explored, or the disciple of gentle Isaac Walton
may ply his art, usually with a good measure of success. The destina-
tion being Manly, however, the steam punt is taken to the other side,
where the road is seen zig-zagging up the steep bank, whence a


nice walk of about three miles along a good road will brmg the
visitor to Manly, which has been described as the “Brighton of
Australia. The views along the road are very tine, and one will not
fail to notice, when about to descend the final hill into Manly, the
very extensive view which is to be had right up the harbour. Manly
itself, with its grand ocean beach, and its no less atttractive beach on
the harbour side, will repay a great deal of investigation, and the
afternoon concludes by a trip in one of the fine Manly steamers to
Circular Quay.
POINTS FOR TRAMWAY TRAVELLERS.
The following are offered for the information and guidance of
tramway passengers :
Do not attempt to enter or leave a car in motion. Attempting
to do so is the cause of by far the great majority of accidents
to passengers, or intending passengers.
Trams follow the rule of the road, crossing each other to the
left, consequently always leave a car on the left-hand side
in the direction in which it is travelling ; there is then no
risk of being knocked down by a tram travelling in the
opposite direction. Similarly, wait on the same side to
join a tram, and thus avoid having to cross a line of rails
to enter the car.
Endeavour to have some small change, and tender Conductor the
exact amount of fare if possible. He is a busy man as a
rule, and a little consideration in this respect will facilitate
the working.
Retain the ticket given by Conductor until journey is completed.
Its non-production if tram should be boarded by an Inspector
will necessitate the payment of another fare. Destroy the
ticket on leaving.
Smoking is not permitted in the central compartment of the
steam cars or the closed —in portions of electric and cable
cars. On the George and Harris-streets lines, however,
where the cars are of the closed type, the rear cars are
intended for smokers.


1 f fr ' 1 c?
ht&UO K - NOVW92
P&3X7 \ *
// .
Inquiries for lost property left in city or suburban trams should
be made at the Office of the Tramway Traffic Superintendent,
comer of Bridge and Phillip-streets, between the hours of
9 a.m. and 5 p.m. on ordinary week-days, and 9 a.m. and
1 p.m. on Saturdays. Inquiries in respect of property lost on
the North Sydney trams should be made at the Office of
the District Superintendent, Power-house, Ridge-street,
North Sydney.
In case of inattention or incivility on the part of a Conductor,
his number should be noted and the incident reported to
the Tramway Traffic Superintendent, Bridge-street, Sydney;
or the District Traffic Superintendent, Power-house, Ridge-
street, North Sydney, as the case may be.
FARES AND RUNNING ON THE NORTH SYDNEY
LINES.
MILSON’S POINT TO MOSMAN, or vice-versa.—Through fare 4d,
divided into four Id sections. Time of journey, 40 minutes.
Trams every 20 or 30 minutes during greater part of the
MILSON’S POINT TO GORE-HlLL.—Through fare 3d, divided
into three Id sections. Trams half-hourly. Time of journey,
25 minutes.
MILSON’S POINT TO WILLOUGHBY.—Through fare 4d, divided
into four Id sections. Hourly service. Time of journey,
34 minutes.
NEUTRAL BAY TO MILITARY-ROAD.—Fare Id. Service
half-hourly. Time of journey, 8 minutes.
MOSMAN BAY TO THE SPlT.—Through fare 2d, in two Id
sections. Service half-hourly. Time of journey, 25 minutes.
FROM MILSON’S POINT TO RIDGE-STREET.—The service is
10-minute one, trams connecting with all ferry steamers.
Fare to Ridge-street is Id.


MAP OF NORTH SYDNEY LINES.
MAP OF CITY, AND SUBURBAN LINES CONNECTED THEREWITH


