

TRANSPORTATION.
(No. 12.)
1853.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
MESSAGE No. 2.
DESPATCHES FROM THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE
SECRETARY OF STATE.
Ordered by the Council to be printed, 12th July, 1853.




MESSAGE No. 2.
W. DENISON,
Lieutenant-Governor.
The Lieutenant-Governor lays before the Council two Despatches from the
Secretary of State relative to the discontinuance of Transportation to Van Diemen s
Land.
By the first of these it would appear to have been the intention ot Her Majesty s
Government that some short period should elapse during which Convicts would continue
to be sent to this Colony, in order that the Government might have time to make the
necessary arrangements for their coercion and maintenance in England: but, by the
Despatch from His Grace the Duke of Newcastle, the Council will perceive that an end
has been put to the Transportation of Convicts from England to this Colony; and the
Lieutenant-Governor has written to the Secretary of State requesting that instructions
should issue to the Authorities in India, and in those Colonies from which Convicts have
been occasionally forwarded to Van Diemen’s Land, directing that the practice should be
discontinued.
The change thus introduced in the arrangements of Her Majesty’s Government with
relation to the Convicts will require corresponding alterations in the Penal System in this
Colony.
Hitherto all those who have committed offences subjecting them to the punishment
of Transportation have been supported at the expense of the Home Government; and the
system of discipline enforced has had especial reference to those arrangements which have
been found to work advantageously upon the Convicts, and economically as regards the
charge upon the Military Chest.
From henceforward the system of Secondary Punishment to be enforced should have
especial reference to the wants of the Colony,—due attention, of course, being paid to
the proper discipline of offenders.
All the Establishments for the care of Lunatics,—the maintenance of the Aged and
Infirm,—the treatment of the Sick, —the education of Orphans, &c. have hitherto been
maintained at the expense, in a great measure, of the British Treasury; and large
contributions have been made from the same source towards the maintenance of the Police
and the Gaols of the Colony :—the principal portion of the expenses attendant upon these
Establishments will, within a short period, have to be defrayed from the Colonial
Treasury.
The Lieutenant-Governor has not had sufficient time to mature the arrangements
consequent upon the change of system, nor to ascertain the views of Her Majesty’s
(No. 12.)


Government upon the several points alluded to above; neither has it appeared to him
necessary to introduce any measure in the course of the present Session, or to make any
great alterations in the Estimates for the forthcoming year, except in reducing the number
of the Police.
In the course, however, of the ensuing twelve months all the necessary preparations
will be made; and in the Session of 1854 the subject will be brought in all its completeness
under the consideration of the Council.
Government Souse , Hobart Town ,
Y2th July , 1853.
[Enclosure No. 1.]
(No. 137.)
Downing-street , 14th December , 1852.
Sir,
From the terms of the Speech delivered by Her Majesty to Parliament at the opening
of the present Session, you will have learned that Her Majesty’s Confidential Servants had
felt it their duty to advise that the attention of Parliament should be called to the existing
system of Secondary Punishment, with a view to the abolition at no distant period of
Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land.
My object, in the present Despatch, will be to convey to you the considerations which
have weighed with Her Majesty’s Government on this subject, and the views which they
entertain on the proper course to be adopted for giving effect to their conclusions, should
those conclusions meet with the approval of Parliament.
When I assumed the Seals of this Department, no subject appeared to me to require
more anxious deliberation, both on account of the gravity of the moral considerations which
it involved, and of its general importance to this Country and to the Colonies, than the great
question of Transportation. The subject, in its bearing on the repression of crime in this
Country, had previously demanded much of my attention both in the practical adminis-
tration of justice, and also in Parliamentary enquiries, in which it fell to my lot to take a
share, into Prison Discipline and the system of Secondary Punishment.
It now became my duty to study more particularly the Colonial part of the question,
and to review the records of past experience, and the course of the discussions upon it in
the Colonies.
I found that, for some years, there had undeniably been proofs of a growing public
feeling against the continued introduction of Convicts; and that this feeling was not
manifested in Van Diemen’s Land alone, but in all the adjacent Colonies. Various indi-
viduals in Van Diemen’s Land had protested against the moral injury which they conceived
the society in that Island to suffer from the introduction of Convicts ; large public
Meetings petitioned against it, both in Van Diemen’s Land and on the main-land of
Australia; associations were formed for the exclusive purpose of opposing the practice;
and, finally, I observe that the Legislatures of Van Diemen’s Land, of New South Wales,
and of Victoria, all have remonstrated against the continuance of Transportation.
On the other hand, I am not unaware of the arguments which have been adduced on
the opposite side. The extent of the feeling which a few years ago was excited on this
subject in Van Diemen’s Land may, perhaps, not unreasonably be ascribed to the preva-
lence at that time of one deplorable crime, in consequence of the temporary over-crowding
of the Convicts and want of proper accommodation, which evil would appear since to
have been effectually checked by better arrangements. In fact, it is a tribute which I owe
both to yourself and Mr. Hampton the Comptroller-General, by whose talents and exer-
tions the public service has been so much benefitted, to say that I have observed with
peculiar pleasure the constant and repeated evidence that, under this vigorous adminis-
tration, the discipline of the Convicts in Van Diemen’s Land has been brought to a state
of great perfection.
In some able Despatches also, in the performance of what you consider your duty
to the Colony over which you preside, you have powerfully vindicated the order and
industry and the good conduct of the population of Van Diemen’s Land.
(No. 12.)


Th—^attested
expressed against ‘"duction of Convmte yet ■
has been your duty to ship that arrived have been engaged
which the services of the Conv nresumution that opinions on the subject in the
b Jolty S a redWdet’ there must be" many 'who are glad of an opportunity to secure
the advantage of this description of labour.
and on Transporta'tiorn
But, whatever may be their value taken Dieme'nVS
tst r^dssrtf sss: iv- * ** of them.
Whatever may be *£%£**£
this question, numerous public Meet g ;, d Tra g sportation . H er Majesty’s
Colonies, have declared themsel ‘ as ma £ enable Her Majesty, with
?h°e~f Parhament to comply -» • " a " d S ° f0rClbly
Her subjects in those Colonies.
The propriety of this decision b “wSheTnSn oflJ
r£;:s: —
thousands of honest labourers are m vam striving to reac .
It is unite true that the offenders have to undergo a preliminary period of imprison-
ment and of labour, —but these are not likely to daunt reckless mm .
Making every allowance for Snta
still subject to control, it 19 to ®/ e . be adm ittedby every impartial observer that
Conditional Pardons; and I think y J undesirable impression
Transportation would be dtamned of’ifc tenors, and tna f ghou]d , continae
rifse k n7ml U Mand b nthe“immediate neighbourhood of the Gold Colonies of Australia.
Yon will readily perceivethalU must be impossible, numS^i
date for the end of Transportation t admit 0 f their being disposed of in the more
of Convicts sentenced to Transportation so lt t i 0 ns in the Law must be submitted
limited field which will remain availab e the larger number of
to Parliament,—new buildings mu Country; and it cannot be expected that
Prisoners who would have to be de a ” e “ “ Law can be accomplished
•XllffllW the extensive changes which it will retire.
On the time by which we may hope that these can be completed, I shall probably
address you again when the arrangements are further mature .
i TTpr Maiestv’s Government are sincerely convinced of the
the large alterations required for its abolition can ne auiy piuviu
I maystate,in conclusion, C.3“f
you a decision so " reC in it the desire of the Govern-
- strengthen their loyalty to the Crown,
and attachment to the British Empire.
I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
JOHN S. PAKINGTON.
Lieut.-Governor Sir W. Denison,
£c. $c. $c.
(No. 12.)


[Enclosure No. 2.1
(No. 32.)
Downing-street, 22 nd February , 1853.
&IR,
From the terms of my recent Despatch, No. 17, of the 7th instant, you will have
gathered that Her Majesty’s present advisers had concurred in, and adopted, the intention
which was announced by my predecessor in his Despatch, No. 137, of the 14th December
last, of discontinuing Transportation to Yan Diemen’s Land.
When my predecessor addressed that Despatch to you, he declared his purpose of
putting an end to Transportation at the earliest practicable moment; but there had not yet
been time for him to make the necessary enquiries, with sufficient accuracy, to admit of
his fixing the exact date for carrying his intention into execution.
The subject has not failed to receive the earnest consideration of Her Majesty’s
present Government. After collecting the best information in their power from official
sources, they are led to believe that, although considerable time must be required to
complete more permanent arrangements, there will be no insuperable obstacle to finding
room in the existing Prisons in Great Britain,‘.aided by the other Establishments abroad,
for the number of Convicts likely to come on the hands of the Government.
Considering, then, that there would be much inconvenience in continuing in Yan
Diemen’s Land, for a short but indefinite term, a system avowedly condemned for
the future, by which course the social arrangements of the Colony would be left in
an unsettled and uncertain state; knowing also that the majority of the inhabitants of
the Colony itself, and almost the whole population of the neighbouring Colonies,
whose interests are deeply involved in the question, are in favour of the discontinuance
of the system ; and feeling that the altered circumstances of Australia since the dis-
covery of gold must wholly change the penal character of Transportation, Her Majesty’s
Government have come to the resolution of putting an end at once to the removal
of Convicts to Van Diemen’s Land.
The requisite arrangements at home and elsewhere will require much care and
activity; but into these it is unnecessary that I should enter, as they will not concern
the Colony.
■ ~
It Mill necessarily be a long time before au the Prisoners Row in the Colony will
be absolved from their Convict condition ; and the Establishments can only be gradually
reduced, taking care to maintain a sufficient strength for the due preservation of discipline
amongst all who remain as,Convicts in Yan Diemen’s J.and. Both in superintending
the actual duties, and in suggesting the principles upon which progressive reductions
may be made, I am satisfied that the able services of Mr. Hampton will continue to be as
valuable as they have been throughout his administration of the arduous Department
entrusted to his charge. You will call on him for a Report of his views of the best
course to be taken for the future; and I shall be glad to receive this from you at an
early date, with your own observations on the same subject.
In the meanwhile I have to announce to you that no more Convict ships will be sent
out: and, though I am well aware that this decision is at variance with the opinions
which you have been led to entertain as to the real interests of the Colony, I am equally
confident that your accustomed zeal and discretion will be exercised in endeavouring
to introduce the new order of things successfully, and to promote all such measures
as may seem necessary in order to modify the temporary inconvenience which must
necessarily attend any such great alteration in the social condition of a people.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
NEWCASTLE.
Lieut.-Governor
Sir William Djj^nison^
<fc. $c. qr.
TRANSPORTATION.
Message No. 2.
Ordered by the Legislative Council to be printed ,
12 tli July, 1853.
JAMES BARNARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
