

TRANSFER OF CONVICT BUILDINGS.
(No. 14.)
1855.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
SECOND SESSION.
DESPATCHES.
Laid upon the Table by the Colonial Secretary, and ordered by the
Council to be printed, 13th December, 1855.




(No. 160.)
Van Diemen’s Land, Government House, Bth September, 1854.
My Lord Duke,
The arrangements which, under instructions from Your Grace, are now in operation
for the reduction of the various Convict Establishments in this Colony will have the effect
of placing at the disposal of the Government several of the buildings which are at present
occupied by Convicts.
2. It would be desirable that instructions should issue relative to the disposal of these
buildings, where they may be no longer required by the Convict Department, so that no
unnecessary delay may take place in either transferring the charge of them to the Colonial
Government, or in disposing of them when the proper time might arrive.
3. The buildings to which I more specially allude at present are those which have
been erected at Launceston and at other detached stations for the detention and discipline
of male and female Convicts, —several of which will in the course of the next twelve months
be vacated by the Convict Department.
4. There are other buildings in Hobart Town and its vicinity of a different character, such
as a Hospital, Lunatic Asylum, Infirmary for aged women, &e. which will, under ordinary
circumstances, be required for some years to come ; but to which, perhaps, the same rule
may apply as that which may be decided upon with regard to the buildings first mentioned.
5. This rule, I would submit, may, with justice to the Mother Country and the
Colony, be stated as follows:
. Buildings which have been erected by the Convict Department for the detention and
discipline of male and female Convicts, or for any purposes connected therewith, shall,
should they be required by the Colony for similar purposes, be transferred to the charge of
the Colonial Government; such stores and implements as may be required being paid for
by the Colony at a price to be arranged between the Commissariat and the Local
Government.
Such buildings as may not be required for the service of the Colonial Government
shall be sold, and the proceeds appropriated as follows :—The value of the land on which
the buildings are placed to be carried to the credit of the Land Fund, while that of the
buildings themselves shall be paid into the Military Chest.
I have the honor, &c.
W. DENISON.
His Grace the Duke of Newcastle.
(No. 11.)
Downing-street, 22nd August, 1855.
Sir,
With reference to your predecessor’s Despatch, No. 160, of the Bth September last,
reporting the arrangements which he would recommend for carrying into effect the transfer
of the various buildings no longer required by the Convict Department to the Local
Government, I transmit to you herewith, for your information, copies of a correspondence
which has passed upon the subject between this Office and the Board of Treasury; and I
have to acquaint you that the arrangements proposed by Sir William Denison appear in
themselves fit and expedient, but that, before any final measures are taken by you for
carrying them into effect, it will be necessary that you should ascertain from the Officers of
the Ordnance on the spot that none of the buildings are required for Military purposes.
I have, &c.
W. MOLESWORTH.
Governor Sir H. E. F. Young,
Van Diemen’s Land.


Downing-street, 10th January, 1855.
Sir,
I am directed by Secretary Sir George Grey to transmit to you, for the consideration of
the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, the enclosed copy of a Despatch from the Governor
of Yan Diemen’s Land, reporting the arrangements which he would recommend for carrying
into effect the transfer of the various buildings no longer required by the Convict Depart-
ment to the Colonial Government; and I am to state that Sir George Grey does not
perceive any objections to the proposed measure.
I am, &c.
H. MERIYALE.
Sir C. Trevelyan.
Treasury Chambers, 10 th February, 1855.
Sir,
I am commanded by the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury to transmit
copy of a letter from the War Department, of 31st ultimo, for the information of the
Secretary of State with reference to your letter of the 10th ultimo, respecting the transfer
to the Colonial Government in Yan Diemen’s Land of various buildings no longer required
for the Convict Department; and lam to state that my Lords have transmitted the papers
to the Board of Ordnance, with a request to receive their opinion thereon with the least
possible delay.
I am, &c.
C. E. TREYELYAN.
Herman Merivale, Esq.
War Department, 31 st Jamiary, 1855.
Sir,
I am directed by the Secretary of State for this Department to request that you will
state to the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury, in answer to your letter of
the 26th instant, respecting the disposal of Convict Buildings in Yan Diemen’s Land, that,
taking into consideration the want of public buildings at the disposal of the Ordnance
Department at that station for the Staff and Departmental Officers and others, whereby
lodging allowances are necessarily required to be issued to them, it appears to be desirable
that their Lordships should inform the Secretary of State for the Colonies that, before the
Convict buildings are transferred to the Colonial Government, the Ordnance Officers at
that Station should have the opportunity of examining these buildings for the purpose of
ascertaining whether any of them could be adapted as quarters for the Staff and Depart-
mental Officers and others now in the receipt of lodging-money, in which case such buildings
should be transferred to the charge of the Ordnance Department for that purpose.
If their Lordships should concur in this suggestion, it will be proper that the Board of
Ordnance should be informed thereof, in order that the necessary instructions may be
given to their Officers accordingly.
I am, &c.
HENRY ROBERTS.
The Assistant Secretary to the Treasury.
Downing-street, 25th June, 1855.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the 10th February, on the subject of the transfer to
the Colony of Yan Diemen’s Land of certain buildings previously belonging to the Convict
Department, I am directed by Lord John Russell to request that you will acquaint me if
the expected intimation from the Ordnance has yet been received on the question whether
such buildings are needed for the Military Departments. Should the question not admit
of being answered in this Country, Lord John Russell would propose to inform the
Governor that the arrangements suggested by Sir W. Denison appear in themselves fit
and expedient; but that, before they are carried into effect, it must be ascertained from the
Officers of Ordnance on the spot that none of the buildings are required for Military
purposes.
I am, &c.
H. MERIYALE.
Sir C. E. Trevelyan.


Treasury Chambers, 31 st July, 185*5.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the 25th ultimo, relative to the transfer to the Colony
of Van Diemen’s Land of certain buildings previously belonging to the Convict Establish-
ment, I am directed by the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury to transmit
to jou, for the information of the Secretary of State, the copy of a letter from the
Ordnance dated the 10th instant.
I am further to state to you that their Lordships approve of the proposed instructions
to the Governor of Van Diemen’s Land, as stated in your letter in reference to these
buildings.
©•t 0 _
1 am, &c.
C. E. TREVELYAN.
H. Merivale, Esq.
Office of Ordnance, 10 th July, 1855.
Sir,
With reference to your letter of the sth instant, and its enclosure, respecting the
transfer to the Colony of Van Diemen’s Land of certain buildings previously belonging to
the Convict Establishment, I am directed by Mr. Monsell to acquaint you, for the
information of the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty’s Treasury, that the correspondence
which accompanied your letter of the 12th February was referred to the Commanding
Royal Engineer, Van Diemen’s Land, for an early report, but has not yet been answered.
I am to add that, as soon as received, no delay will take place in communicating the
result.
I am, &c.
J. WOOD.
Sir C. E. Trevelyan, K.C.B.


TRANSFER OF CONVICT BUILDINGS.
Ordered by the Legislative Council to be printed,
13 th December , 1855.
JAMES BARNARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
