





TRANSACTIONS
OF THE
Jxeltr Hateralists’ Section
OF THE
ROYAL SOCIETY
SOUTH AUSTBALIA,
For 1883-84.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED BY WEBB, TARDON, AND PRITCHARD, GEESHAM-STREET.




TRANSACTION S
OF THE
Jjieft Naturalists Section of % Jagal Society
OF SOUTH AUSTEALIA-
This Section was established by a resolution of the Eoyal
Society of South Australia on September 4th, 1883, and the
rules adopted at the following meeting held on October 2nd,
as recorded in Yol. VI. of the Transactions. In the first week
of November Prof. Tate delivered a preliminary lecture in the
Town Hall, under the auspices of the Eoyal Society, on the
objects of this Section, Dr. H. T. Whittell presiding. The
Chairman said that the establishment of the Section was owing
to the desire of the Eoyal Society to meet the wishes of a
number of studiously disposed persons who wished to undertake
the study of Natural History from a more elementary point
than that pursued by the Eoyal Society. Prof. Tate, in the
course of a very interesting lecture, stated that it was not
intended to exclude those who solely sought pleasant com-
panionship and agreeable change, and that ladies as well as
gentlemen would be welcomed. The lectures should deal with
subjects alike entertaining and instructive, and that one of the
chief features should be the microscope. Mr. W. H. Selway,
jun., proposed a vote of thanks to the Professor, which was
carried with acclamation, when the proceedings terminated
with a similar vote to the Chairman.
E U L E S.
1. The general management of this Section shall be con-
trolled by a Chairman, two Yice-Chairmen, a Secretary, and a
Committee of eight, five to form a quorum.
2. The Chairman, Yice-Chairmen, and Committee shall be
elected at the annual meeting in October.


3. The Chairman shall not he eligible for office for more
than two consecutive years, and one of the Vice-Chairmen
shall retire each year.
4. Candidates for admission, not being members of the Royal
Society, must be proposed and seconded by two members of
the Section at one meeting, and be balloted for at the next
ensuing meeting; one black ball in five to exclude.
5. Evening meetings shall be held on Tuesdays, at the dis-
cretion of the Committee of Management, for the purpose of
reading papers, dealing with the natural history of Australia
(more particularly of the neighbourhood of Adelaide), or for
the purpose of mutual instruction.
G. there shall bo at least eight Eield Meetings during the
year; the time and place to be arranged by the Committee.
7. At the annual general meeting a statement of accounts
shall be submitted by the Secretary and duly certified by two
auditors appointed at the previous ordinary meeting, pre-
paratory to being handed to the Treasurer of the Royal Society.
8. The Section may from time to time elect as lion ora r v
members those who have been proposed and seconded in the
usual way, and have been unanimously elected by ballot. This
shall also apply to corresponding members.
9. Any member owing the subscription to the Section and
neglecting to pay the same on or before the first day of January,
shall be liable to have his name removed from the list of
members of the Section ; provided always that written appli-
cation for the same shall first have been made by or on behalf
of the Treasurer of the Royal Society; and, provided also,
that the Committee shall have power to restore the defaulter’s
name at his request, after payment of arrears.
10. The rules and regulations of the Section shall not be
altered unless a written notice of motion, signed by not less
than five members, be given at a meeting of the Section ; and
thereupon such motion maybe brought forward at the’next
meeting.
11. Any resolution passed under rule 10, altering or re-
pealing the rules of the Section, shall be in force until the
meeting held in the month of October following; and if not
then confirmed, shall thereafter be held void and of no effect.
12. On the written requisition of twenty members, delivered
to the Secretary, an extraordinary general meeting may be
called to consider and decide upon the subject mentioned in
the requisition.
13. The Committee shall be empowered to frame rules for
the conduct of excursions arranged for by them.


RULES EOR THE CONDUCT OF FIELD EXCURSIONS
1. Each member shall have the privilege of introducing twa
friends ; such privilege not to extend to any person who shall
have been a visitor at two successive meetings.
2. A Chairman to be elected as at ordinary meetings.
3. The Secretary to act as conductor, or in his absence, some
member of the Committee nominated by him.
4. No change to be made in the programme, or extra expense
incurred, except by the consent of two-thirds of the members
present.
5. No fees, gratuities, or other expenses to be paid except
through the conductor.
6. Every member or visitor to have the accommodation
assigned by the conductor. Where accommodation is limited,
consideration will be given to priority of application.
7. Accommodation cannot be supplied unless tickets are
obtained before the time mentioned in the special circular.
8. Those who attend an excursion without previous notice
will be liable to extra charge, if extra cost be thereby incurred.
9. No intoxicating liquors shall be provided at the expense
of the Section.
EXCURSIONS.
First Excursion—Saturday, November 24, 1883.
Just before 2 o’clock p.m., about 60 members met at the
Railway Station, North-terrace, and proceeded in a reserved
■carriage to Belair, where the party was met by Mr. Cooke, the
keeper of the Government Farm, under wdiose guidance the
party was placed. After passing a short distance along the
line, a halt was called, and Prof. Tate explained that they were
in the centre of a curiously formed basin. The sides of the
railway cutting indicated that the soil ivas decomposing talcose
slate, and that in the next cutting they would find the debris
of this talcose slate, viz., angular gravel and sandy beds with
underlying clays. The vegetation was entirely different from
that of the surrounding area, being similar in character to
heathy scrub lands. Judging from the lithological evidence,
he considered these superficial beds, which were generally gold-
bearing, to be of fluviatile or lacustrine origin, and co-eval with
the Upland Miocenes of the (Jawler district. The elevation
at which they stood was just on the verge of the upper limits of
the Peppermint Gum (Eucalyptus odorata) and the lower limits
of the White Gum (E. leucoxylon). The characteristic flora of
the heathy ground were indicated by the Grass Tree (Xauthor-


rhoea semxplana), the Scrub Sheaoak (Casuarina distyla)',
Hakeas, and other proteaceous plants, and the fact that
Leptospermums and other myrtaeeous plants grew here was.
always an assurance that the ground was amply supplied with
water. The season was too late for most orchids. The pro-
fessor pointed out a very rare one, Diuris sulphurea, which
until last year was not known westward of the South-Eastern
District. Mr. Tepper secured a specimen of Pterostylis rufa,
a sensitive orchid, otherwise only occurring in the mallee
regions. Professor Tate also drew attention to the most curious
and interesting Pterostylis barbata, which he roughly described
as a flower resembling a hood-like trap with a shutter. Should
any small insect alight on this shutter, or irritable labellum,
it flew up and imprisoned the insect without hurting it.
For a period of some twenty minutes it would he encased, and
by its efforts to escape would cover itself all over with the
pollen. At the expiration of the period mentioned, the tension,
would be relaxed, and the fly escape, only to be caught by some
other orchid, where the pollen it had brought would be utilised
to secure cross fertilization. The higher slopes and the water-
fall w r ere visited, which latter is formed by an escarpment of
quartzose sandstone. The following plants were found, viz.:
—Native indigo (Indigofera australis), Yerbena officinalis,
Cynoglossum australis and suaveolens, Meioneetes Brownii,.
and the rare Cyperus tenellus, only added to our flora in 1882.
Eich fern banks were met with, and six species collected.
At half-past 5 the party assembled at the Railway Station,,
and returned in a reserved carriage to town.
Second Excursion —December 8, 1883.
Between 60 and 70 members proceeded to Crafers by the 2"
p.m. train in a reserved carriage. On arrival the party pro-
ceeded under the leadership of the Hon. Secretary, Mr. Pickels,
to the neighbourhood of Mount Lofty, when, after walking-
about a mile, Prof. Tate called attention to the fact that they
were now in the region of the stringybark forest, and indicated
the soft coarse-grained sandstone that appeared on the surface
of the stringybark country, and that so far as the Mount
Lofty Ranges were concerned, both were co-terminous. Of
the stringybarks, two species existed here, viz., Eucalyptus
obliqua and E. capitellata. The sandstones rested unconfor-
mably upon the slaty rocks. Both had a dip to the south-east,
but that of the former was much the less inclined of the two,
and in consequence water was encountered all along the eastern
slope of the range in the form of springs issuing from the
junction of the two sets of beds At the heads of gullies.


especially on the eastern flanks, ferns, lycopodiums, and other
plants characteristic of humid stations abounded. With res-
pect to the geological age of these formations little had as yet
been forthcoming to replace conjecture with certainty. It was
often thought by the inexperienced that the underlying slate
rocks contained plant remains, and these were appealed to as
affording conclusive proofs that the series contained coal.
These plant-like markings are produced by the infiltration of
oxide of manganese, and are not of organic origin.
Though the stringybark country was not rich either in animal
or vegetable life, yet in the course of the day many
characteristic species of this tract were found—notably Aster
Sonderi, with its large oak-like leaves and glorious white
flowers supported on stalks a foot in length, the only known
locality for this plant being the stringybark forests of the
Mount Lofty Eanges ; the graceful Marianthus bignoniaceus,
with pendulous, yellow and orange flowers ; and the Stylidium
(Candollea) graminifolium. The last-named, being a sensitive
plant, amused and interested many of the party on testing its
irritability. The style, crowned by two anthers, hangs down
through a notch in the corolla. When touched by an insect,
or anything else, it assumes an horizontal position with great
rapidity, and then rests upon the corolla. The object to be
gained by this action was stated to have remained a mystery,
in spite of the earnest attention which scientific men have
given to the matter, and that its discovery would be hailed
with satisfaction by botanical students.
An alfresco business meeting was then held, Professor Tate
presiding, when eighteen new members were elected unani-
mously, after which the meeting terminated, and the party
returned to Crafers.
Third Excursion —New Year’s Day.
About 90 ladies and gentlemen proceeded by three coaches
to Hallet’s Cove for a whole-day excursion, noting by the way
the thinly bedded slaty rocks and limestones interstratified by
thick quartzites which compose the ascent to Tapley’s Hill, and
the highly crystalline arenaceous marbles occupying the higher
levels. Drawing up at a house on Mr. EymiH’s estate the
party walked down to the valley of Eicld’s Eiver, a small rivu-
let with high and steep banks, except near the mouth where it
enters the sea at Hallett’s Cove, named after Capt. Hallett,
who had an interest in the now deserted Worthing Mine, about
a mile inland from the shore.
After lunch Professor Tate led the way to the shore. The
river empties itself into the sea between two bold headlands


about a mile apart, the beach being strewn with stones from
the size of a pebble up to large boulders. The presence of
granite was noted among these shore pebbles, having been prob-
ably transported from a distance by some natural agency, as
granite does not occur in situ in the neighbourhood. The
larger boulders were seen to be massive conglomerates contain-
ing pebbles of gneiss and quartzites. Professor Tate explained
that this conglomerate was to be seen in situ some distance
northward, and that it formed part of a series that occupied a
much lower position in the sedimentary rocks of the colony.
The southern headland, appropriately called Black Point, is
formed of dark shales of a purple color standing nearly on edge.
By approaching this point from the rear, the crest was reached,
and, by looking down, it was seen that the stratification is inter-
rupted by curves and intricate foldings.
Proceeding along the top by a narrow terrace, hemmed in
above by the second cliff of horizontally stratified grey sand-
stone, the party arrived at a place scarcely a quarter of a mile
distant from Black Point, where the surface of the underlying
slate was laid bare, quite smooth, and scratched and grooved
in a generally north and south direction. These polished and
scratched features Prof. Tate explained as duo to the action of
ice at some former period, whereupon a lively discussion took
place, those members well versed in recognising the toolmarks
made by ice acquiescing with the opinion of the Professor.
On returning, the party proceeded to examine the second line
of cliffs, composed of red and grey Tertiary sandstone, and
found that the sandstone, at about half the height of the cliffs,
contained a number of fossil shells. Prof, Tate said that he had
found between 50 and 60 species of fossils in this formation,
which could be seen to better advantage at Aldinga, where cor-
responding beds rest on older fossiliferous rocks. This upper
series he referred to the Miocene period, and the lower, at
Aldinga, to the Eocene. It was the nearest place to Adelaide
where the formation could be studied. The surface was of an
arid character, but in spring yielded many interesting plants.
Of these the following were more particularly observed, viz.: —
Groodenia amplexans, GK albiflora, Myoporum parvifolium,
Pittosporum phylliraeoides, Ptilotus nobilis, Sida corrugata,
Boerhsevia diffusa.
On re-assembling at the encampment by the stream a
meeting was held, Prof. Tate presiding, when several
members were elected. After tea had been partaken of
and an early return party taken their leave, the remain-
ing members were conducted up the gorge, where Pro-
fessor Tate pointed out the rocky walls of massive lime-
stones, here and there crumpled and bent in a most intricate


manner. Attention was also directed to a plant growing
among the rocks, and gathered by Mr. Tepper, viz,, Euphorbia
eremophila, which the Professor said was well known to the
sheepfarmer of the Ear North on account of its poisonous
qualities, but has rarely, if ever before, been seen in the
southern parts of the colony.
At about 6 p.m. the coaches started on their homeward
journey, and the city was reached at an early hour.
Fourth Excursion —February 2, 1884.
About 90 ladies and gentlemen proceeded in reserved car-
riages to Aldgatc, from whence a special engine took them on
to Bridgewater. Here they were met by Mr. E. Guest, of Bal-
hannah, who had consented to undertake the guidance of the
party through the grounds of Messrs. Dunn & Co., who had
kindly granted permission. Following the mill-race the direc-
tion towards Mount George was taken. Around the sheet of
water known as Dunn’s dam, the following introduced plants
were noticed, viz., the ribwort (Plantago lauceolata), Dutch
clover (Trifolium repens), chamomile (Matricaria camomilla),.
sheep’s sorrel (Rumex acetosella), dock (R. obtusifolius), and
the yarrow (Achillea millefolium). An unsuccessful search
was made for a lamprey inhabiting Cox’s Creek, and believed
to be a species at present unknown to the scientific world. The
following native plants were pointed out by Prof. Tate as rare,
viz., Siegesbeckia orieutalis, Gratiola Peruviana, Prunella vul-
garis, Polygonum minus, Juncus prismatocarpus, Scirpus inun-
datus, and one of the native fuchsias, viz., Correa decumbens,
the latter said to occur nowhere else than in the valley of the
Onkaparinga River.
An open-air meeting being called, presided over by Prof.
Tate, ten new members were elected ; and a few unimportant
business details being disposed of, the party proceeded towards
Mount George. On arriving at the summit, Prof. Tate stated
that the upper part of Mount George was a grand rocky bluff
of quartzose grits, as were also those of all the peaks in the
Mount Lofty Range, whilst the slopes were composed of talcose
slates. The contour was obviously due to the difference of the
structure and composition of the two sets of beds. This bluff,
like all the high ground around, was covered with stringybark
forest, seemingly of one species, viz., Eucalyptus capitellata,
corroborating the observations of Mr. .1. E. Brown, F.L.S., in
the “ Forest Flora,” that “ trees of this species are more
numerous in the inland stringybark forests than those of its
compeer, E. obliqua.” Few shrubs and plants were in flower,
except Bursaria spinosa, a myrtaceous shrub; and Ixodia


achilleoides, an everlasting composite. Here was also seen in
great abundance a leafless orebid, Dipodium punctatum, about
two feet in height, bearing numerous purplish flowers with
darker spots. A few plants of Tetratheca were still found in
bloom, and special attention was directed to a white double
variety gathered. A few specimens of the rather rare legu-
minous shrub, Yiminaria denudata, -were found, Prof. Tate
stating that its specific name alluded to its want of leaves,
whose functions were performed by its long, green, filiform
leafstalks, several of which were found with a small oval leaf
still attached to their ends. After accomplishing the steep des-
cent from Mount George, the members left Bridgewater by
the 6.16 p.m. train, and arrived in town at half-past seven.
Eipth Excursion" — Saturday, March 1, 1881.
Eighty ladies and gentlemen proceeded in reserved carriages
by the 2 p.m. train to Aldgate, and were then, by the courtesy
of Mr. A. G. Pendleton, the Traffic Manager, sent on to
Ambleside by a special engine. Here they were met by
Mr. Guest, of Balhannah, who had consented to take the lead.
Eollowingthe Onkaparinga, a large red-gum tree was pointed out
by Mr. Guest as one of the largest, if not the largest gum tree in
the district. It was estimated to be 150 feet high, and the stem
25 feet in girth. In one of the main forks of the branches,
high above the ground, a tuft of the common Bracken (Pteris
aquilina) was seen growing. Under this giant of the forest a
meeting was held, Prof. Tate, b'-G.S., &c , presiding. Eight
new members were elected. Mr. Guest exhibited the following
ferns collected on his way there, viz., Gleichenia circinata,
Grammitis rutsefolia, and G. leptophylla.
Proceeding along the river, Prof. Tate called attention to the
fact that it was margined by thickets of the Teatree (Lepto-
spermum lanigerum), Silver Wattle (Acacia retinodes), and
the native Raspberry (Rubus parvifolius). On and near the
banks w 7 ere the native Daisy (Brachycome graminea), Cyperus
lueidus, Goodenia ovata, Hydrocotyle vulgaris, H. asiatica,
Cladium glomeratum, the Maiden Hair fern (Adiantum
aethiopicum), and Potentilla anseriua, hitherto not known in
South Australia except in the South-East.
The Onkapringa "was fairly rich in aquatic species, among
wdiich the following were collected : —Helioeharis sphacelata,
Potamogeton natans, Trigloetim procera, Myriophyllum varise-
folium, and Ranunculus rivularis, to which some others
succeeded in adding Polyganum prostratum, Ottelia ovalifolia,
and Potamageton crispus as rare plants about Adelaide. A few
fresh water molluscs were obtained, viz., the river mussel


(TTnio ambiguus) and a small water snail (Bulinus bullatus).
The forest trees consisted chiefly of the Eed Gum, Eucalyptus
rostratus, B. goniocalyx, and E.' capitellata. _ln open grassy
spots were seen Calocephalus lacteus, Eryngium vesiculosum,
and Lagenophora emphysopus.
The members started for town at 6 p.m., and arrived about
half-past 7.
Sixth Excursion —Saturday, March 22, 1884.
The party, consisting of 35 members, including two ladies,
proceeded in a reserved carriage to Alberton by the 1.50 p.m.
train. On arrival Mr. Councillor Kestel met the party, and
conducted them to a gravel pit near the Station sunk through
two feet of loam and fourteen feet of gravel. Mr. Kestel
exhibited a piece of miocene limestone containing Turritella
Aiding®; pieces of jasper, quartz crystals, and titaniferous
ironsand as found in it; also some valves of the Victoria
cockle or Area trapezia. Prof. Tate said he had no hesitation
in regarding the gravel as of fresh-water origin, and of the
same character as that intercalated with the red loams forming
the drift or pliocene deposits of the Adelaide Plain. The shells
of the Area trapezia had doubtless been found at or near the
surface, and he would hazard the theory that they had been
left by the aboriginals at some time, who had cooked and eaten
the mollusc at their camp, as evidenced by the number of pel-
lets of burnt clay found with the shells. Exhibiting a geo-
logical map, he showed that they were standing on the margin
of°a marine formation about fourteen feet above sea level, and
embracing the Dry Creek marshes. It was rich in fossils, all
of which, as far as known, belonging to living species. The
Area was one of the most characteristic of these, but no longer
a denizen of our waters.
A business meeting was then held, at which Prof. Tate pre-
sided, when the following gentlemen were elected as honorary
members, viz.:—Messrs. 11, Watt and 11. Best, Vice-President
and Hon. Secretary of the Victorian Field Naturalists’ Club
respectively, and three new ordinary members. A vote of
thanks was offered to Mr. Councillor Kestel for his kindness
in calling attention to the gravel pit.
Prof. Tate having indicated that the route they would follow
was restricted to the marine deposit just referred to and its
littoral sandhills, the party proceeded through Eosewater to
the North Arm, noting the characteristic vegetation by the
way. Amongst these were Salicornia australis, S. arbuscula,
Kochia oppositifolia, Atriplex paludosum, Erankenia Isevis,
Su®da maritima, Mesembrianthemum australis, and Polyene-


mon (Hemichroa) pentandrum. Approaching the level of
ordinary tides, thickets of Avicennia offcinalis were met with,
now in full bloom. Prof. Tate explained that the seeds mature
in November, and germinating before shedding, the young
plants were wafted by the wind to the mud flats, where they
rooted at once. A large number of these, with their remark-
ably large embryonic leaves, were gathered by the party.
Among the samphire shrubs near high water mark some
novelties peculiar to this station were obtained, viz., the pul-
moniferous snails, Alexia meridionalis, Brazier, Plecotrerna
ciliata, Tate, and Ampullarina Quoyana ; also, an undescribed
Assiminea and a Modiola, the latter anchored in the mud by
its byssal threads or beard.
Returning from the powder-magazine the party followed
the railway loopline to Dry Creek. Along the line and inter-
secting the sandhills, at a low elevation, fragments of shells and
sea pebbles were observed, and the Professor stated that about a
quarter of a mile from the Dry Creek Station che margin of
the elevated sea-bed was traceable as a white earthy limestone
highly charged with Ampullarina Quoyana, Blandf ordia striatula,
Truncatellae, and other estuarine species of mollusca.
The ground here being comparatively dry the difference of
vegetation was most marked. The Salsolacese were most con-
spicuous, such as Kochia brevifolia, K. sedifolia, K. aphylla,
Bassia diacantha, Atriplex semibaccatum, Chenopodium cari-
natum, Salsola Kali, and Angianthus tomentosus, the latter
being very rare here. A quantity of the fruits of Nitraria
Schoberi, the Native Grape bush, was gathered, and Euphorbia
Drummondi, a spurge, specially pointed out by Professor Tate
on account of its poisonous qualities.
Reaching Dry Creek the party returned in a reserved car-
riage by the 6.52 train to town.
Seventh Excursion —Eastbe Monday, Apeil 14, 1884.
At half-past eight a.m. 60 ladies and gentlemen started in
two coaches for Noarlunga jetty, which was reached near noon.
After luncheon a meeting was held, when one member was
elected, and then a start made for Whitton Bluff. On the
road along the beach a dead specimen of the cuttle fish was found,
considered as undescribed by Prof. Tate, who had attached
the MS. name —■ “ Sepia brevimana” —toit on account of
its short tentacles. The tide prevented a near approach to the
Bluff, which is very picturesque, and presents a grand and
complete section of the older Tertiary rocks. The beds of the
detached islet, known as the Gull Rock, were stated by the
Professor to have the same dip as at the Bluff, and it was not


therefore a part fallen from the latter. Fossils abounded in the
cream-coloured chalky rock, but mostly ill-preserved. Among
them the fragments "of the stem of a Pentacrinus, or Stone
Lily, were abundant. The upper part of the cliff was formed
of mottled sands, which by the weather are worn into fantastic
shapes. Moving on to the mouth of the Onkaparinga, great
numbers of small Crustacea were noticed in the pools, and
numerous fossils were obtained from a very fine exposure of
polyzoan limestone in the cliff near the mouth of the river. Two
cannons were also noticed that had been left by the “Rapid”
in the early years of the colony, their rusty condition showing
the neglect with which these historical relics were treated. A
rare salsolaceous plant —Threskeldia diffusa —-was found here,
almost its only station. Prof. Tate mentioned that in his drive
from Aldinga he had met the purple amaryllid, Calostemma
purpurea, and also Atriplex semibaccatum —the latter on the
dry hillslopes of Pedlar’s Creek, a very long way frorn its
usual habitat. Conchologists were rewarded by finding various
shells, almost peculiar to this station, among them being
Marcia faba.
At half-past four the members assembled at the rendezvous,
had tea at the Eeynella Hotel, and arrived in town at a quarter
past eight.
Eighth Excursion —Saturday, May 3, 1884.
A large number of ladies and gentlemen proceeded to G-lenelg
in a reserved carriage at 1.45 p.m. After crossing the bridge
over the Patawolonga Creek at St. Leonards, a short business
meeting was held, Prof. Tate presiding, at which eight new
members were elected. The party then walked along the
banks of the Patawalonga and the sandhills skirting it towards
Henley Beach. Attention was directed by Prof. Tate, E.G-.5.,
to the shell-beds and their contents, indicating several changes
of level since they had lived at the localities where now _ seen.
Near highwater-mark was found the remarkable pulmoniferous
snail, Ampullarina Quoyana; and higher up in less brackish
water, Bythinella Victoria;, globose in shape, and not much
larger than a pin’s head ; and Tatea rufilabris, pyramidal, and
about a quarter-inch long. Many objects interesting to the
microscopist were also taken. Among the plants in the sand-
hills, Melaleuca parvifolia and M. pustulata were noticed, and
the rush lily (Xerotes leucocephala) was found in full flower,
the attention of the members being directed to the difference
in the male and female flowers. Beaching the rich flat of the
Eeedbeds, the party was disappointed as to the expected rich-
ness of this locality, drainage having converted it into a


desert for the naturalist. A few plants of some interest were
found in flower, viz., Mimulus repens, Heliotropium Ourassavi-
cum, L. (the latter previously unknown in the Adelaide dis-
trict), and Polygonum minus. Of introduced weeds, Solanum
nigrum and the Bathurst burr (Xauthium spinosum), were
specially noticed.
On arrival at Henley Beach the special tramcar ordered did
not make its appearance, owing, as subsequently ascertained, to
the carelessness of the manager of the Tram Company ; and
the party had to crowd into an ordinary car, reaching town
about a quarter-past seven.
Special Excursion—Saturday, Mat 17, 1884.
About 50 ladies and gentlemen proceeded by special tramcar
to Unley at 2.30 p.m, in order to visit the apiary of Mr.
Eobertson, at his residence, Unley Wurlio. On arrival, the
company were met by Mr. Eobertson, who most courteously
conducted them to his collection of hives, showing them both
the common dark bee and also the Ligurian, and explained the
structure of the hives as well as the interesting economical
points connected with the bees and their keeping. When the
examination was completed, a vote of thanks was tendered to
Mr. Eobertson for his kindness.
Ninth Excursion—Saturday, August 2, 1884.
Between 50 and 60 ladies and gentlemen assembled at the
Holdfast Bay platform about 2 p.m., and proceeded to Gllenelg
in a special carriage. On arrival at the beach a business meet-
ing was held, presided over by Mr. W. Howchin, P.Gr.S., when
two new members were elected. The Chairman stated that in
the absence of Prof. Tate they were favoured with the presence
of Mr. W. T. Bednall, who had kindly consented to give the
party the benefit of his extensive knowledge respecting Aus-
tralian conchology.
After some time the members were again called together,
when Mr. Bednall named the specimens obtained, mentioning
interesting facts connected with their life history. The follow-
ing were the more noticeable : —Murex triformis, Trigonia
margaritacea, a shell never taken alive in South Australian
waters as far as known, though not uncommon in Tasmania,
Mactra polita, Soletellina biradiata, Phasianella australis (the
Pheasant Shell), and species of Pecten, Chama, Trochus,
Haliotis, -Eusus, Nassa, Purpura, Natica, Conus, Cypraea, Bit-
tium, Turritella Siliquaria, Anatina, Venus, Lueina, Mytilus,
and Spondylus. Along the Patawalouga empty shells only of
Marcia laevigata and Tellina decussata were found.


A detour among the sandhills was now made, when Mr. J.
G-. 0. Tepper, F L.S., explained their formation and the fixing
of the loose sand bj the roots of various peculiar plants, such
as Spinifex hirsutus—(the “ Spinifex” of explorers is a grass,
Triodia irritans) —Scirpus nodosus, Fepidosperma gladiatum,
Aster axillaris, Styphelia australis, Kunzea pomifera, Myopo-
rum parvifolia, &c., all of which were indicated. Other
plants collected were Banksia marginata, Calocephalus
Browui, Tetragouia implexicome, Atriplex ciuerius, and Sali-
cornia australis. Attention was directed to the uniform
slope of the sheaoaks, indicating the prevalence of south-
west winds.
Tenth Excursion —Monday, September 1, 1881.
Thirty members started at 8.30 a.m. per special coach for
Clarendon. The morning promised fair weather, but a heavy
shower on arrival and the prospect of more to follow made it
unadvisable to proceed, as was contemplated, to the botanically
rich scrublands between Clarendon and Kangarilla. It was
therefore decided to inspect and examine the river scenery
along the Onkaparinga, east of the bridge, instead. After
lunch a meeting was held, presided over by Mr. J. G. O.
Tepper, E.L.S., at which one new member was elected; and
then the members proceeded up the right bank under the guid-
ance of Mr, Tepper and Dr. Schmid. At the first bend it was
observed that all the pines peculiar to the valley of the river
—Callitris cupressiformis—had been cut down, and thereby
the beauty and interest of the place much marred.
Attention was directed to the unequal denuding action of
the atmosphere upon the alternating texture of the rocks, viz.,
micaceous and talcose shales and quartzites. The following
were the more remarkable plants gathered (mostly in flower),
the names of which, with a running commentary, were fur-
nished, by Mr. Tepper: —Stypheliavirgata, serrulata,australis,
fasciculiflora, Callistemon salignus, Melaleuca decussata,
Accacia melanoxylon (the Blackwood, occasionally overloaded
by the parasitic Loranthus linophyllus or Preissii), verniciflua,
retinodes and obliqua, Anguillaria dioica, Csesia vittata, Cym-
bonotus Lawsonianus, Microseris Forsteri, Spyridium micro-
carpum, Correa decumbens, Adriana quadridentata (female
flowers just opening, male blossoms still immature), Glycine
clandestina, Kennedya prostrata and monophylla, Hibbertia
stricta, acicularis and fascicularis, Logania longifolia, Mesem-
brianthemum sequilaterale (depending in long festoons from
some of the inacessible rockwalls), and Cassytha melantha,
which spread over whole shrubs in an intricate network of


cords. Of orchids only Pterostylis nana, Caladenia carnea and
difformis, Diuris palustris and maculata were observed. Of
sedges only one specimen of Cladium mariscus was noticed
along the river bank, but very many of the pretty Luzula
campestris (in flower) on the hillsides.
At 4 p.m. the coach started homeward by way of Chandler’s
Hill, Happy Valley, and the South-road, pelting showers at
times greatly marring the pleasure of the drive.
Eleventh Excursion—Saturday, October 18, 1884.
Some 30 ladies and gentlemen assembled at the Hail way
Station, North-terrace, and proceeded by the 1.10 p.m. train to
Belair, and from thence walked over the Government Earm or
Park. The special object was the collection of Orchids, of
which fifteen species were obtained, among which were Thely-
mitra grandis, T. longifolia (blue), T. antennifera (yellow),
T. McKibinii (blood-red), Glossodia major (blue to white), and
several Caladenias, among which latter a large one with white
flowers and pink streaks may prove an addition to our flora.
In the shade of the forest composed of red-gum (E. rostrata),
white-gum (E. leucoxylon), and peppermint (B.odorata), were
found plants of almost every temperate clime, as Gnaphalium
Japonicum, Geranium Carolinianum (North America), Oxalis
corniculata, Cape Dandelion (Cryptostemma lavendulacea),
Sherardia arvensis, and numerous others to which Prof. Tate
drew attention, as also to the fact that the vegetation of the
scrub lands was very different from that of the Park, owing to
the difference of soil and the moisture retained by it.
"Wandering along the watercourse, and crossing the scrub
lands at the foot of Steep Hill, the party passed into the
gorge of the southern branch of Brownhill Creek, the passage
of which was exceedingly rough. The most notable plant
found here was Logania longifolia. In due time the members
arrived at Mitcham, and returned to town by the tramcar,
arriving about half-past 6 p.m.
EVENING MEETINGS.
Eirst Evening Meeting—Tuesday, April 22, 1884.
This was held in the University, when about 60 ladies and
gentlemen attended. Prof. Tate presided, and in his address
reviewed the work done, advised that the proposed conversazione
be postponed till they had better collections, and intimated
that he was prepared to devote several evenings during the
session to lectures on subjects he had made a special study.
After the Hon. Secretary, Mr. W. E. Pickets, E.8.M.5., had


read the correspondence, one new member was elected, and the
announcement made that two excursions were being arranged
for. Mr. J. G. O. Tepper, F.L.S., exhibited fresh specimens
of two orchids, the earliest of the year, viz., Eriochilus autum-
nalis, from the Mount Lofty Ranges, and Prasophyllum despec-
tans, from Clarendon, its only known station in the neighbour-
hood, where it Was discovered by him a year or two ago ; also
a new sundew, Drosera aphylla, from the same locality, and a
beautiful lichen from Kangaroo Island, Cladonia retepora.
Mr. E. Davies brought some pink rocksalt and crystals
of selenite. Mr. IV". Howchin, F.G.S., showed some micro-
scopical preparations of recent South Australian Foraminifera,
illustrating the genera Biloculina, Triloculina, and Quinquelo-
culina; and Mr. Pickets, F.E.M.S., exhibited a fine Phasma,
Tropidoderes iodomus, and some spiders sent by Mr. Guest, of
Balhannah. Prof. Tate then delivered an instructive lecture
on the Australian Lamprey, Geotria australis, which was fol-
lowed by an animated discussion.
Second Evening Meeting—Tuesday, Mat 20, 1884.
This was held at the University, North-ter race, when about
30 ladies and gentlemen attended, and Prof. Tate presided.
The Hon. Secretary read some correspondence, and three
new members were elected. A formal vote of thanks to Mr.
Robertson was passed for his kindness in inviting the members
to view his apiary.
A number of plants collected by Miss J. R. G. Rogers, some
200 miles north of Farina, were exhibited. Among them were
Marsdenia Leichardti and Eremophila maculata.
Mr. W. Howchin, F.G.S.. showed under a microscope a
number of micro-ichthyolites and other objects from the Tertiary
beds underlying Adelaide, obtained from a bore in the Water-
works yard at Kent Town. An interesting specimen of an
Aphrodite, or Sea Mouse, was shown by Mr. W. H. Baker, and
some letters were read from America, Russia, Switzerland, and
Germany desiring exchanges of entomological and botanical
specimens.
The President then called upon Dr. Haacke to deliver his
lecture on “ How to Preserve Zoological Specimens.” The
lecturer explained that only the best spirit and pure water should
be used ; that at first weaker and gradually stronger mixtures
should be used; that occasionally the glass with the specimen
should be shaken, as the water tended to gravitate towards the
bottom, and the spirit at the top, so that the lower part of the
specimen was in danger of becoming damaged. Too many
specimens should not be put into the same glass. A cordial


vote of thanks to the lecturer, and the exhibition of an Aus-
tralian Ant-eater, or Echidna, terminated the proceedings.
Thied Evening Meeting—Tuesday, June 17, 1881.
Professor E. Tate, E.G.S., in the chair. About 60 ladies and
gentlemen were present. Two new members were elected.
Mr. T. C. Magarey, jun., showed a marsupial, popularly known
as the mallee opossum, which was pronounced by Professor
Tate as the only authenticated specimen of the species outside
of New South Wales. The Hon. Secretary exhibited a number
of galls from Eucalyptus leucoxylon.
Dr. W. L. Cleland, E.E.M.S., delivered a short lecture
on the microscope, in which he explained the action of the eye
in reference to that instrument, illustrated by diagrams as well
as sketches on the blackboard, and indicated the use of the
various parts of single and compound microscopes.
(! Mr. J. G. O. Tepper, E.L.S., then read a paper on the
‘ Collection and Preservation of Entomological Specimens,”
denoting the various orders of insects, and how to catch, kill,
and mount them. _ A discussion followed this lecture, succeeded
by scientific gossip, and the examination of microscopical ap-
pliances and mountings brought for the occasion by Dr.
Cleland.
Eoueth Evening Meeting—Tuesday, July 15, 1884.
This was held in the room oyer the Picture Gallery in the
Institute Building, North Terrace. Some 50 ladies and gentle-
men attended, and Prof. Tate, E.G.S., presided.
The Hon. Secretary exhibited a gall of the olive tree, and
Dr. W. Haacke some specimens of pumice stones, collected by
Mr. A. Zietz, the preparateur at the Museum, at Diego Garcia,
one of the Chagos Islands, where they had been driven ashore
a short time after the eruption at Krakatoa.
Prof. Tate then called upon the Eev. \W Howchiu, E.G.S.
to deliver his lecture on “What is a Poraminifer ’?” The
lecturer explained the nature of the Eoraminifera, where oc-
curing, how classified, and how they were mounted for exami-
nation, illustrating the subject by numerous diagrams. The
President at the close of the lecture tendered the thanks
of the Section to the lecturer for his valuable and interesting
paper. °
Eipth Evening Meeting—Tuesday, August 19, 1884.
A large number of ladies and gentlemen attended at the
Eoyal Society’s room, and Prof. Tate, E.G.S., presided.


' Mr. T. C. Magarey, M. 8., exhibited a number of shells, in-
cluding a valve of the Pinna, or Razor Shell, covered with
.aviculse or butterfly molluscs. Mr. W. H. Selway, jun,, showed
an interesting collection of coralline algae, and a specimen of
;a brilliant species of Stigmodera. The Hon. Secretary showed
•galls of the golden wattle (Acacia pycnantha), and a remark-
able specimen of a fungus mycelium taken from decaying
timber in a cellar in Currie-street.
The President then vacated the chair, which was taken by
the Rev. W. Howchin, F.G.S., whilst Prof. Tate proceeded to
the members on “How Plants are Fertilised,” and
“The Mode How to Preserve Herbarium Specimens.” The
•lecturer explained the various modes in which fertilization was
brought about, especially noticing the provision in nature to
prevent self-fertilization of plants. On preserving specimens
the lecturer said a large amount of care had to be exercised in
the collecting, and that the specimens must be dried between
sheets of paper without the use of any hot iron. Exhibiting
his own collecting case and travelling press, the Professor ex-
plained their working, and said that he would always be glad
to assist the members in their botanical investigations. After
showing some microscopical slides illustrating the structure
•of plants the proceedings terminated with a vote of thanks to
the lecturer.
Sixth Evening Meeting—Tuesday, Septembee 16, 1881.
The meeting -was held in the Royal Society’s room, in the
Institute. About 70 ladies and gentlemen were present.
Prof. Tate, F.G.S., in the chair. Mr. G. Mayo, F.R.C.S.,
■exhibited some lizards from Hergott Springs, which Prof. Tate
stated were a species of Grammatophora, or some allied genus.
Mr. S. G. Magarey, M. 8., a number of shells (Bulimus imbri-
cata), and Helix Bednalli found near Stirling. Mr. R. H.
Pulleine showed the nest of a trapdoor spider found near
Hackney and Mr. H. A. A, Dombrain a rare Australian bird
(Pratincola australis), at home in the deserts of the interior, but
•occasionally migrating southward to the coast. Mr. Tepper,
F.L.S., exhibited Eriostemon pungens and a showy species of
Aster (teretifolius) found growing near the highest ridges of
the Mount Lofty Range. A number of dried plants brought
from the South-East were shown by Mr. A. Molineux, among
which were some specimens of the poisonous Swainsona, and
canes of the “ bulb-oak” (Casuarina suberosa?)
Mr. R. L. Mestayer, C.E., F.R.M.S., delivered a very in-
structive lecture on “Mounting Objects for the. Microscope,”
in which he described some of the most useful methods em-


ployed, and enumerated the appliances necessary to ensure-
success. At the conclusion the members evinced their appre-
ciation by long and continued applause.
Mr. H. C. Mats, C.E., brought for examination a number of
microscopic slides received from America, for which purpose-
Mr. F. Wheeler had kindly lent a number of Armstrong;
microscopes.
Seventh Evening Meeting—Tuesday, October 21, 1881.
A considerable number of members were in attendancey
Mr. W. Howchin, E.G-.5., in the chair. Prof. E. Tate, E.G-.S.’.
delivered a lecture on the “Jaws and Tongues of Snails,” in
which he explained their very curious structure, illustrating
the subject by diagrams, and by the aid of some fresh specimens
showed how to dissect the organs for microscopical examina—
tion. Eef erring to the common black slug (Limax maximus),,
he said it was possessed of the extraordinary number of 28 960-
teeth.
At the close of the lecture, which was listened to with great
interest, the Chairman announced that the annual meeting
would be held at the present meeting instead of on the
28th, as had been advertised, when the following report was
read by the Hon. Secretary :—-
Annual Eepoet.
The Eield Naturalists’ Section of the Eoyal Society was
inaugurated at_a meeting held on November the 18tb, 1883,
and the following officers were elected to control its affairs
CH AXEMAN :
Professor Tate, E.G-.5., E.L.S.
vice-chairmen
Mr. H. T. Whittell, M.D., E.E.M.S.
Mr. W. Howchin, E.G-.S.
COMMITTEE :
Mr. T\ r . L. Cleland, M. 8., D.E.M.S.
“ H. Dean
“ W. Haacke, Ph D.
“ G. E. Hussey
“ A. Molineux
“ W. H. Selway, jun.
“ J. G. O. Tepper, E.L.S.
TREASURES:
Mr. Geo. Collis, jun.
HON. SECRETARY :
Mr. W. E. Pickels, E.E.M.S.


Though only in existence twelve months, there are 165 mem-
bers on the roll.
There have been eight half-day and three whole-day excur-
sions in connection with the Section, all of which were well
attended, and very gratifying in results.
The syllabus for the winter session embraced nine papers by
distinguished Fellows of the Royal Society of South Australia
on various subjects intimately connected with Natural History.
The interest’ exhibited by Professor Tate in the formation of
the Section and in the work undertaken by its members has
greatly stimulated the efforts of scientific students, and
there is every probability that the Section will ultimately be
of considerable service to the parent Society, the Fellows of
which have so kindly fostered and encouraged it.
POSTAL MICROSCOPICAL SECTION
OF THE
geo ill of Australia:.
W. E. PICKELS, Hox. Seceetaey.
A box of miscroscopical objects has been received from
Victoria and duly circulated among the members of this Section,
and a box of South Australian objects has been made up in.
this colony and forwarded to Victoria and New South Wales.


FIELD NATURALISTS’
SECTION OF
ROYAL SOCIETY OF
S.A.
ANNUAL
BALANCE-SHEET, 21st
OCTOBER, 1884.
Dr.
Oct. 1, 1883.— To Grant from Royal Society
Jan. 1, 1884— “ “ “
Aug. 1,1884.— “ ** «
£ s. d.
... 10 0 0
... 20 0 0
... 20 0 0
1 Cfi. £ s.
Oct. 1, 1883.— By Hire Town Hall ... 3 10
“ Expenses therewith 1 0
“ Petty Cash to See. ... 2 0
“ Advertising Crafers 0 11
Jan. 1, 1884.— “ Loss on Hallet’s Cove
Expedition ... 1 12
Feb. 23, 1884.— “ Sharing & Co.—
Printing 13 15
Ang, 20,1884.— “ Ditto n u
“ Postages ... ... 9 5
“ Register, Printing, 8s.;
Petty Cash, 12s. ... 1 0
d. £
0
0
0
6
6
0
0
0
0
s.
d
8
12
-
Balance
in hand of Treasurer
5
0
£50 0 0
£50
0
0
Audited and found correct.
W. J. EVANS, ) .
JOHN T. BISHOP, f Andltorfi -
Adelaide, 20th October, 1884.
W. E. PTCKELS, Hon. Secretary.
GEORGE COLLIS, JUN. } Ifon. Treasurer.


LIST OF MEMBERS
FIELD NATURALISTS’ SECTION
OF THE
ROYAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Those names marked t are Fellows of the Eoyal Society, S.A.
Those names before which the letter F appears are foundation members,
fFAdamson, Mr. D. 8., Angas-street, Adelaide.
FAdamson, Miss S., Angas-street, Adelaide.
FAdcock, Mr. D. J., Currie-street, Adelaide.
Addison, Mr. H. M., King William-street, Adelaide.
FAitken, Mr. J., Parkside.
Bailey, Mr. W., Smith & Parker, Hindley-street, Adelaide.
FBaker, Mr. W. H., 34, King William-street.
Bakewell, Mr. B. W., Elder’s Wool Co., Adelaide.
Barker, Miss, St. John’s Wood, Nailsworth.
rßathurst, Mr. P., Register Office, Adelaide.
Beazley, Mr. Geo., The Museum, Adelaide.
Beresford, Mr. D. J. D., Parliament House, Adelaide.
Best, Mr. D. (Hon. Memb.), 16, Little Collins-street E., Melbourne.
Bevilaqua, Mr. L. W., Melbourne-street, North Adelaide.
rßeythien, Mr. E., Moonta.
Birks, Mr. G. F., 59, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
pßishop, Mr. J. F., Union Bank, Adelaide.
Blair, Mr. J. 8., Port Adelaide.
rßottomley, Mr. W. D., Savings Bank, Adelaide.
rßoulger, Professor, University, Adelaide.
Bowcher, Mr. J., The Museum, Adelaide.
Bowen, Mr. F. 0., Freeman-street, Adelaide.
Brady, Mr. J. W., Olive House, Bdwardstown.
Brook, Mr. W. J., J.P., King William-street, Adelaide.
Brown, Mr. T. G., King William-street, Adelaide.
frEruer, Mr. J. J., King William-street, Adelaide.
fßussell, Mr. J. W., P.E.M.S., Railway Station, Adelaide.
FCalf, Mr. P., Public Works Office, Adelaide.
FCarey, Mr. T. 0., Waymouth-street, Adelaide.
FCargeeg. Mr. G. H., 87, King William-street, Adelaide.
Chipp, Mr. H. E., King William-street, Adelaide.
frCleland, Dr. W. L., Parkside.
Cleland, Mrs. W. L., Parkside.
FCollis, Mr. G., jun., Gawler-plaoe', Adelaide.
Coppin, Mr. E., Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Cornack, Mr. T., The Museum, Adelaide.
rDaneker, Mr. P. W., Grenfell-street, Adelaide.
FDane, Mr. F. N., Eliza-street, Waymouth-street, Adelaide,
frDavies, Mr. E., Currie-street, Adelaide.


Dr. C., Davies, Beaumont.
rDean, Mr. H., Carrington-street, Adelaide.
Dixon, Mr. 1., Ashley-street, Gover-street, North Adelaide.
Dixon, Mr. S., c/o Luxmoore & Co., Limited, Adelaide.
fpDobbie, Mr. A. W., Gawler-place, Adelaide.
Dombrain, Mr. H. A. A., Knightsbridge.
Dowie, Mr. A., Wakefield-street E., Adelaide.
Edmeades, Mr. T. A., National Bank, Adelaide.
fpEvans, Mr. T., King William-street, Adelaide.
rEvans, Mr. W. J., National Bank, Adelaide.
pFabian, Mr. T., City Treasurer, Adelaide.
pFarrar, Mr. G. 8., C.E., Victoria-square, Adelaide.
pFleming,. Mr. D., Mackinnon-parade, North Adelaide.
-fpFletcher, Eev. W. R., M.A., North-terrace, Kent Town.
Fornachon, Mr. C. L. F., Y.M.C.A., Adelaide.
Franklin, Mr. Geo., Edward-street, Norwood.
pFrayne, Mr. N,, c/o Messrs. D. & W. Murray, Adelaide.
pFrench, Rev. S., M.A., Glenelg.
pFryer, Mr. C., Melbourne-street, North Adelaide.
pPuller, Mr. W., University, Adelaide.
fGall, Mr. D., Tynte-street, North Adelaide.
Gallagher, Mr. W. E., Kadina.
Gee, Mr. L. G. E., c/o Surveyor-General’s Department, Adelaide.
Grasby, Mr. W. C., Oakbank.
Guest, Mr. E. (Hon. Memb.), Balhannah.
Gurner, Mr. J. R., North-terrace, Adelaide.
pHall, Mr. T. G., Edshall-street, Norwood.
Hammond, Mr. H., Childers-street, North Adelaide.
pHampson, H., Leigh-street, Adelaide.
Harvey, Miss, Parkside.
pHaslam, Mr. J., C.E., Pirie-street, Adelaide.
Hill, Mr. C., Alix House, South-terrace, Adelaide.
Hill, Mr. W. H., South-terrace, Adelaide.
pHooper, Mr. W. G., Hindley-street, Adelaide.
fpHowcbin, Mr. W., F.G.S., Goodwood E.
Howell, Mr. F. 1., H.M. Gaol, Adelaide.
Howell, Mr. Geo., Pirie-street, Adelaide.
pHunwick, Mr. Charles, Hindmarsh.
pHussey, Mr. G. F., G.P.0., Adelaide.
Jacobs, Mr. Geo. W., Currie-street, Adelaide.
Jacques, Mr., Dr. Robertson, North-terrace, Adelaide.
Jameson. Mr. Geo. E., Union Bank, Adelaide.
Kelsey, Mrs., Palm-place, Hackney.
fKelly, Rev. E., Port Adelaide.
Kirby, Mr. E., Farina.
fKnight, Mr. G. C., Durstan House, North Adelaide.
di-Lamb, Professor H,, M.A., University, Adelaide.
Lawranee, Mr. V., J.P., Lefevre- terrace, North Adelaide.
Lawrauce, Mr. C., Lefevre-terrace, North Adelaide.
Lawson, Mr. J. D., Divett-place, Adelaide.
pLeader, Mr. C. S., King William-street, Adelaide.
■(Leary, Mr. J. L., M.A., South-terrace W., Adelaide.
Light, Mr. W„ Wentworth, N.S.W.
Lindow, Mr., Messrs. J. S. Sanders & Co., Hindley-street, Adelaide.
pLlewellyn, Mr. R., Riverton.
pLocke, Mr. E. FI., Register Office, Adelaide.
Lucas, Mr. R. 8., King William-street, Adelaide.
fpMagarey, Dr. S. J., North-terrace, Adelaide.


Magarey, Mr. T. C., jun,, Waymouth-street, Adelaide.
Manthorpe, Mr. C. E., National Bank, Clare.
Marshall, Mr. A. W.. 52, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
rMatters, Mr. C. H., Victoria-square, Adelaide.
rMatters, Mr. T. J., Victoria-square, Adelaide.
frMayo, Mr. G. G., Morphett-street, Adelaide.
McCallum, Mr. S. J., 71, King William-street, Adelaide.
rMcEwin, Bev. J. } Medindie.
McKenzie, Mr. 1., G.P.0., Adelaide.
McLean, Miss, Prospect Hall, North Adelaide.
Meggy, Mr. P. 8., c/o Advertiser Office, Adelaide.
irMestayer, Mr. B. L., C.E., F.B.M.S , Hydraulic Engineer, Adelaide
rMilford, Mr. J, S., B.Sc., Pirie-street, Kent Town.
rMillar, Mr. A. P., Wayrnouth-street, Adelaide.
tiMohau, Mr. J. H., Craters.
fFMolineux, Mr. A., Kent Town.
rMoliueux, Mr. A. E., Kent Town.
Moore, Miss F., Telegraph Office, Adelaide.
prMunton, Mr. PI. St., North-terrace, Adelaide.
rMyers, Mrs., Halifax-street, Adelaide.
rNelson, Mr. G., 59, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Newman, Mr. J. H., 12, Currie-street, Adelaide.
Packer. Mr, G., Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Page, Mr. H. J., Mitcham.
t Parker, Mr. T., C.E., St. Vincent’s Chambers, Port Adelaide.
rPeatt, Mr. 8., Nailsworth.
Penney, Mr. J. Kemp, Bank-street, Adelaide.
Phillips, Professor, M.A., University, Adelaide.
Phillips, Mr. E., Telegraph Office, Port Adelaide.
irPickels, Mr. W. E., F.8.M.5., Box 128, G.P.0., Adelaide.
Poole, Mr. W. 8., Savings Bank, Adelaide.
IrPoulton, Dr. 8., Adelaide Hospital, Adelaide.
Pullein, Mr. B. H.. King William-street, Kent Town.
Bead, Mr. A. W., The Museum, Adelaide.
Bead, Mr. Geo. A. G., Telegraph Office, Adelaide.
Boberts, Mr. J. P., Victoria-square, Adelaide.
Bohertson, Mr. J., Angas-streec, Adelaide.
Bobertson, Dr. W., North-terrace, Adelaide.
Bobin, Miss, St. Jacques, Flinders-street, Kent Town.
Bobin, Mr. A. 8., St. Jacques, Flinders-street, Kent Town
sTlogers, Mr. A. L., 3, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Bosenhaiu. Mr. O. W., Box 11, G.P.0., Adelaide.
Saint, Mr. E., Ward-street, North Adelaide.
FSansom, Mr. P., Currie-street, Adelaide.
Scoular, Mr. J., Union Engintering Co., Adelaide.
rSelway, Mr. W. PL, jun., The Treasury, Adelaide.
rShapter, Mr. W. T., King William-street, Kent Town.
fSmeaton, Mr. S., 8.A.. Bridgeport.
FSmeaton, Mr. T. PI.. Flinders-stieet, Adelaide.
Smith, Mr. G. W., Port Adelaide.
FSmiih, Mr. T. J. S., Mackinnon-parade. North Adelaide.
rSmith, Mr. W.. Stephens-place, Adelaide.
rSowden, Mr. W. J., Register Office, Adelaide.
trStirliug, Dr. E. C., M.A , Lefevre-terrace, North Adelaide.
FSunter. Mr. J., J.P., Messrs. J. Colton & Co., Adelaide.
irTate, Professor, F.G.S., F.L.S., Dawesley, Nairne.
rTate, Miss, Dawesley, Nairne.
Taylor, Mr. G., South-terrace, Adelaide.


rTepper, Mr. J. G. 0., F.L.S., Somerset-place, Norwood.
iThomas, Mr. W. K., Register Office, Adelaide.
■(Thomson, Mr. 8., Register Office, Adelaide.
Thwaites, Mr. F. J., National Bank, Adelaide.
fTodd, Mr. C., C.M.G., Postmaster-General, Adelaide.
iTneker, Mr. H. J., Model School, North Adelaide.
fVarley, Mr. A. K., Kirtonville, Mount Gambier.
iWaddy, Mr. 8., G.P.0., Adelaide.
fWainwright, Mr. E. H., Collegiate School of St. Peters, Hackney.
Walker, Mr. A., Y.M.C.A., Adelaide.
Watts, Mr. H. (Hon. Memb.), Wellington-street, Collingwood, Melbourne.
iWhatham, Mr. F. G., Freeman-street, Adelaide,
i'Whitmore, Mr. S. J., Register Office, Adelaide.
rWhitney, Mr. F. M., Messrs. J. Colton & Co,, Adelaide.
fiWhittell, Dr. H. T., F.8.M.5., Astor House, New Glenelg.
rWilcox, Mr. S., 49, Bundle-street, Adelaide.
Willmott, Miss Amy, Glen Osmond.
Wilson, Mr. 1., F.E.1.5., Goodwood.
Wilson, Mr. S. P., XJraidla.
Wiseman, Mr. A., Freeman-street, Adelaide.
Witherick, Mr. J., Waymouth-street, Adelaide.
Wordie, Mr. "V. A., Flinders-street, Adelaide.
fWragge, Mr. C., F.8.G.5., The Observatory, Torrens Bank, Walkerville..
Webb, Yardon, & Pritchard, Printers, Adelaide.




f t
