

* .... —' -V.




his son would be allowed to reside with him in the island. But
he never saw either again.
The Prince of Neufchatel, Berthier, entered the room to demand
permission to go to Paris on his private affairs; he would return
the next day. After he had left the room, Napoleon said with a
melancholy tone: 4 Never !he will never return hither !’ 4 What,
sire !’ replied Maret, who was present, 4 can that be the farewell
of your Berthier? 1 4 Yes! I tell you; he will not return, 1 He
did not.
At two o'clock in the afternoon Napoleon sent again for De
Bausset, Pie was walking on the terrace under the gallery of
Francis 1., which many of our readers, no doubt, remember Avell.
He questioned De B. as to all he had seen or heard during the
late events; he found great fault with the measure adopted by the
council in leaving Paris; the letter to his brother, upon which
they acted, had been written under very different circumstances;
the presence of Louise at Paris would have prevented the treason
and defection of many of his soldiers, and he should still have
been at the head of a formidable army, with which he could have
forced his enemies to quit France and sign an honourable peace.
De B. expressed his regret that peace had not been made at
*» Chatillon. 4 I never could put any confidence, 1 said Napoleon,
4 in the good faith of our enemies. Every day they made fresh
demands, imposed fresh conditions; they did not wish to have
peace —and then—l had declared publicly to all France that I
would not submit to humiliating terms, although the enemy were
on the heights of Montmartre. 1 De B. remarked that France
within the Rhine would be one of the finest kingdoms in the
f" world; on which Napoleon, after a pause, said — 4 I abdicate;
f but I yield nothing, 1
He ran rapidly over the characters of his principal officers, but
dwelt on that of Macdonald. 4 Macdonald, 1 said he, 4 is a brave
and faithful soldier; it is only during these late events that I have
fully appreciated his worth; his connexion with Moreau preju-
diced me against him; but I did him injustice, and I regret much
that I did not know him better. 1 Napoleon paused; then after a
minute's silence — 4 See, 1 said he, 4 what our life is !In the action
, _ at Arcis-sur-Aube I fought with desperation, and asked nothing
> but to die for my country. My clothes were torn to pieces by
musket-balls—but alas! not one could touch my person ! A death
fK which I should owe to an act of despair would be cowardly;
suicide does not suit my principles nor the rank I have holden in
the world. lam a man condemned to live. 1 He sighed almost
to sobbing;—then, after several minutes 1 silence, he said with a
bitter smile — 4 After all they say, a living camp-boy is worth


more than a dead emperor,’—and immediately retired into the
palace. It was the last time De Bausset ever saw his master.
‘ En reportant,’ says he, ‘ les yeux sur les epoques memorables
dont je viens de donner une si faible idee, j’ai cru, meme apres
tant d’annees, assister aux scenes pompeuses des contes arabes et
des mille et une nuits. Le tableau magique de tant de splendeur
et de tant de gloire a disparu, entrainant avec lui tousles prestiges
de I’ambition et du pouvoir,
‘ Ce n’est plus qu’un songe!’
Art. V.—l. Report from the Select Committee on Criminal
Commitments and Convictions. 1828.
2. New South Wales. Return to an Address of the Honour-
able the House of Commons , dated 1 May 1828, for a Copy
of a Report by the late Major General Macquarie , fyc. and
an Extract of a Letter from Major General Macquarie to
Earl Bathurst in October 1823, in answer to a certain part of
the Report of Mr. Commissioner Bigge on the State of the
said Colony , fyc.
3. Two Years in New South Wales; comprising Sketches of the
actual state of Society in that Colony ; of its peculiar advan-
tages to Emigrants; of its Topography , Natural History,
Sj-c. Sfc. By P. Cunningham, Surgeon, R.N. 2 vols. Second
edition, revised and enlarged. 1827.
WE remember to have heard an anecdote of a gentleman who
’ * in riding through the deep and shady Devonshire lanes,
became entangled in the intricacies of their numberless windings;
and not being able to obtain a sufficiently wide view of the
country to know whereabouts he was, trotted briskly on, in the
confident hope that he should at length come to some house
whose inhabitants would direct him, or to some more open spot
from which he could take a survey of the different roads, and
observe whither they led. After proceeding a long time in this
manner, he was surprised to find a perfect uniformity in the
country through which he passed, and to meet with no human
being, or come in sight of any habitation. He was however
encouraged by observing, as he advanced, the prints of horses’
feet, which indicated that he was in no unfrequented track ;
these became continually more and more numerous the further
he went, so as to afford him a still increasing assurance of his
being in the immediate neighbourhood of some great road or
populous village; and he accordingly paid the less anxious
attention to the bearings of the country, from being confident
that he was in the right way. But still he saw neither house


nor human creature; and, at length, the recurrence of the same
objects by the roadside opened his eyes to the fact, that all this
time, misled by the multitude of the turnings, he had been
riding in a circle; and that the footmarks, the sight of which
had so cheered him, were those of his own horse; their number,
of course, increasing with every circuit he took. Had he not
fortunately made this discovery, perhaps he might have been
riding there now.
The truth of the tale (and we can assure our readers that we
at least did not invent it) does not make it the less useful by way
of apologue : and the moral we would deduce from it is, that in
many parts of the conduct of life, and not least in government
and legislation, men are liable to follow the track of their own
footsteps , —to set themselves an example,—and to flatter them-
selves that they are going right, from their conformity to their
own precedent.
It is commonly and truly said, when any new and untried
measure is proposed, that we cannot fully estimate the inconve-
niences it may lead to in practice; but we are convinced this is
even still more the case with any system which has long been in
operation. The evils to which it may contribute, and the
obstacles it may present to the attainment of any good, are
partly overlooked or lightly regarded, on account of their fami-
liarity, partly attributed to such other causes as perhaps really
do co-operate in producing the same effects; and ranked along
with the unavoidable alloys of human happiness, the
niences from which no human policy can entirely exempt us.
In some remote and unimproved districts, if you complain of
the streets of a town being dirty and dark, as those of London
were for many ages, the inhabitants tell you that the nights are
cloudy and the weather rainy : as for their streets, they are just
such as they have long been ; and the expedient of paving and
lighting has occurred to nobody. The ancient Romans had
probably no idea that a civilized community could exist without
slaves. That the same work can be done much better and
cheaper by freemen, and that their odious system contained the
seeds of the destruction of their empire, were truths which,
familiarized as they were to the then existing state of society,
they were not likely to suspect. 4 lf you allow of no plun-
dering,’ said an astonished Mahratta chief to some English
officers, 4 how is it possible for you to maintain such fine Armies
as you bring into the field ?’ He and his ancestors time out of
mind had doubtless been following their own footsteps in the
established routine; and had accordingly never dreamed that
pillage is inexpedient as a source of revenue, or even one that
VOL. i, no. i. T


can possibly be dispensed with. Recent experiment, indeed,
may bring to light and often exaggerate the defects of a new
system ; but long familiarity blinds us to those very defects.
What we would infer from these general remarks, is the
importance of reviewing, from time to time, those parts of our
legislative system which are supposed to have the sanction of
experience, but to whose real consequences our eyes are likely to
have been blinded by custom. Custom may bring men to
consider many evils unavoidable, merely because they have nevei
hitherto been avoided ; and to reason like those Arabs of whom
the story is related, who concluded that a country must be mise-
rable which had no date-trees, merely because dates had always
been, to them , the staff of life. Nothing, indeed, should be
hastily altered on the ground merely that it is not, in practice,
perfect; since this is not to be expected of any system. And
we should remember also that custom will often blind men to the
good, as well as to the evil effects, of any long established
system. The agues engendered by a marsh, (like that ancient
one which bore the name and surrounded the city of Camarina,)
and which have so long been common as to be little regaided,
may not be its only effects : it may be also a defence against an
enemy. The Camarinaeans having drained the swamp,* their
city became healthy, but was soon after besieged and taken.
The preventive effects, indeed, whether good or evil, of any long
established system, are hardly ever duly appreciated. But
though no law or system, whether actually existing or proposed,
can be expected to be unexceptionable, or should have its defects
pointed out without any notice of corresponding advantages, it
is most important to examine every measure, whether new or old,
and to try it on its intrinsic merits; always guarding against the
tendency to acquiesce without inquiry into the necessity of
any existing practice. In short, we should, on the one hand,
not venture rashly on untrodden paths without a careful suivey
of the country ; and, on the other hand, be ever on our guard
against following in confident security the track of oui own
footsteps.
We have no intention of entering, at present, on so wide a
field as the examination of the subject of crimes and punish-
ments generally : but we wish to call the attention of our readers
to the consideration of one particular class of them with reference
to the existing state of the law among ourselves. The subject is
not an agreeable one; but as long as crimes exist, and punishments
are, in consequence, necessary to check them, there can haidly
* In opposition to the oracle
Ml; /ciVei Kapipivav, aKivtjros yap aps'im «•


be one of much greater importance. The theory of punishment
is usually regarded as too elementary to require or admit of a
detailed discussion : but it often happens that principles are, in
practice, overlooked, from the very circumstance of their being
so obvious as to be never disputed, and, consequently, seldom
adverted to. And it will be found accordingly in this, oftener
perhaps than in any other subject, that the same truths which,
when stated generally, are regarded as truisms not worth insist-
ing on, will, in their practical application, be dreaded as the
most startling paradoxes. We are convinced, therefore, that
those who are best acquainted with the subject, will be the least
disposed to complain of our laying down distinctly in the outset,
the principles from which our deductions are made.
We may be allowed then to premise the remark, that there are
three, and only three objects, with a view to which punishments
can be inflicted or threatened: Ist. Retribution , or vengeance;—
a desire to allot a proportionate suffering to each degree of moral
guilt, independent of any ulterior consideration, and solely with
a view to the past ill-desert of the offender: 2dly. What may be
called correction; —the prevention of a repetition of offence by
the same individual; whether by his reformation or removal:
3dly, The prevention of the offence, generally, by the terror of a
punishment denounced; whether that object be attained by the
example of a culprit suffering the penalty, or, simply, by the
mere threat and apprehension of it. To these appropriate objects
may be added another, incidental advantage, not belonging to
punishments, as such, but common to them with other legislative
enactments; —the public benefit, in an economical point of view,
which may be, conceivably, derived directly from a punishment;
as when criminals are usefully employed on any public work, so
as to make in that way some compensation to society for the
mjury done to it. Such a compensation, however, we should
remember, must necessarily be so very inadequate, that this object
should always be made completely subordinate to the main end
or ends proposed in the denunciation of punishment.
And what is to be regarded as the great object ? All probably
would admit, in the abstract, whatever they may do in practice,
that it is the prevention of crime. As for the first of the purposes
just enumerated, the infliction of just vengeance on the guilty, it
is clearly out of man's province. Setting aside the consideration
that the circumstances on which moral guilt depends, the inward
motives of the offender, his temptations, and the opportunities he
may have had of learning his duty, can never be perfectly known
but to the Searcher of hearts, —setting aside this, it does not ap-
pear that man, even if the degrees of moral turpitude could be
i 2


ascertained by him, would have a right to inflict on his fellow-
man any punishment whatever, whether heavy or light, of which
the ultimate object should he, the suffering of the offender.
Such a procedure, in individuals, is distinctly forbidden by the
Founder of our religion, as a sinful revenge: and it does not
appear how individuals combined into a community can impart
to that community any right which none of them individually
possessed;—can bestow, in short, on themselves what is not theirs
to bestow. Our Saviour and his apostles did not mean to deprive
even an individual of the right of defending (when there is no
other defence to be had) his own person and property; anti this
right he is competent to transfer, and is considered as having
transferred, to the community; but they meant to forbid the
‘ rendering of evil for evil,’ for its own sake: and as no one man is
authorized to do this, or can authorize others to exercise such a
right, even over himself, so neither can ten men or ten millions
possess any such right to inflict vengeance: for 4 vengeance is
mine, saith the Lord.’
Of the other two, which are legitimate objects of punishment,
the prevention of a repetition of the offence by the same indivi-
dual, whether by his reform or removal, is clearly of incalculably
less importance (desirable as it is in itself) than the other, the
prevention of crime generally, by the terror of example or of
threat. If we could ever so completely attain the other objects,
by some expedient which would yet fail of or very inadequately
accomplish this last, such a system must be at once pronounced
inefficacious. Could we be sure of accomplishing the reformation
of every convicted criminal, at the same time making his services
available to the public, yet if the method employed should bo
such as to deter no one from committing the offence, society could
not exist under such a system. On the other hand, if the punish-
ment denounced had no other tendency whatever but to deter,
and could be completely effectual in that, it is plain that it would
entirely supersede all other expedients, since it would never even
he inflicted. This truth, though self-evident, is frequently over-
looked in practice, from the necessary imperfection of all our
expedients. Hardly any denunciation of punishment ever was
thus completely effectual; and thence men are often led to look
to the actual infliction as the object contemplated. Whereas it is
evident that every instance of the infliction of a punishment, is an
instance, as far as it goes, of the failure of the legislator’s design.
No axiom in Euclid can be more evident than that the object of
the legislator in enacting that murderers shall be hanged and pil-
ferers imprisoned or transported, is, not to load the gallows, fill
the jail, and people New Holland, but to prevent the commission


of murder and theft; and that consequently every man who is
hanged, or transported, or confined, is an instance ‘ pro tan to,’ of
the inefficacy, i. e. want of complete efficacy of the law. The im-
prisonment may reform the offender; death removes him from the
possibility of again troubling society; and the example may in
either case operate to deter others in future; but the very neces-
sity of inflicting the punishment proves that the dread of that
punishment has, so far at least, failed of producing the desired
effect. This absolute perfection indeed—the entire prevention of
crime—is a point unattainable; but it is a point to which we may
approach indefinitely; —it is the point towards which our mea-
sures must be always tending, and we must estimate their wisdom
by the degrees of their approach to it.
We have dwelt, at the risk of being thought tedious, on these
first principles, because many of the maxims inevitably resulting
from them are so perpetually violated in practice, that some persons
would even be startled at the inculcation of them:—because, in
short, the present case is one where the premises pass for truisms,
and the conclusions, frequently, for extravagant paradoxes. Even
those who are too intelligent and too well taught not to be fully
aware of the true end of human punishments, are perpetually liable
to be led into a forgetfulness of it by the circumstance that the
same action may be at once a sin and a crime —an act of moral
turpitude, and also one calling for legal punishment on grounds
of political expediency;—yet may be of incalculably different
magnitude according as it is viewed in this light or in that; and
may be even aggravated in the one point of view by the very cir-
cumstances which extenuate it in the other. So that if we lose
sight for a moment of the precise object with which we are con-
sidering any offence, we are liable to draw a conclusion not only
wide of the truth, but exactly opposite to it. E. g. it is plain
that the strength of the temptations to any offence is an extenua-
tion of the moral guilt of the offender; and it is no less plain,
and is a rule on which legislators act —as in the case of stealing
sheep and other necessarily exposed property —that this very cir-
cumstance calls for the heavier punishment to counterbalance it,
in order to prevent the offence. Yet we have known an intelli-
gent writer, doubtless well aware of this principle, but losing
sight of it through the inadvertency just alluded to, contend for
the justice of a more severe punishment in the case of offenders
whose temptations are less, in consideration of the increased moral
guilt of the offence. After remarking that confinement to hard
labour, &c. is a far severer infliction on persons of the higher
ranks, he adds, that rank and education ought not to lighten
punishment, because if they make the feelings more susceptible


to an equal infliction, it must be remembered also that the moral
restraint and social obligation were the stronger, and that the
violation of them merits a severer suffering. And so it does, in
a moral point of view; which is evidently that which the author
was inadvertently taking; forgetting, for the moment, the proper
end of legislative enactments. Into the very same error no less
a writer than Adam Smith has been betrayed, in condemning the
punishments denounced against smuggling for being more severe
in proportion to the strength of the temptation; which, he says,
is contrary to the principles of just legislation. (Wealth of
Nations, p. v. c. 2.)
But to proceed to our inquiry; there is no question perhaps
more perplexing to the legislator than the treatment of that class
of offenders whose crimes fall short of capital, and yet are such
as cannot be adequately repressed by pecuniary mulct, or such
corporal chastisements as are now in use among us. The majority
of offences of this description are at present visited by sentence
of transportation. We say ‘ sentence of transportation,’ because
in a large proportion of cases, including a great majority of those
in which the sentence is for seven years only, actual transportation
is not the punishment inflicted; but confinement with hard labour,
either on board the hulks or in the penitentiary, is substituted,
either for the whole term, or for some part of it.
‘ Die, .... quo discrimine, ripas
Hae linquunt, illae remis vada livida verrunt.’
There may be reasons to justify such a system of uncertainty;
but they ought to be very strong ones; for it seems on the face
of it open to many objections. It is universally admitted that the
certainty of punishment, i. e. of receiving some punishment, is far
more effectual in deterring from crime than severity; because the
same kind of disposition which leads men to venture in a lottery,
viz. the tendency to calculate on their own good luck, makes them
more willing to run some small risk of a very heavy penalty,
than to encounter a certainty, or nearly a certainty, of the lightest.
In fact, if every man could he quite sure of being speedily visited,
though with a moderate punishment for every transgression,
hardly any would ever incur it. And this is the point to which,
though not perfectly attainable, we should always endeavour to
approach as nearly as possible. Now it seems to be consonant to
this principle, that we should remove, as far as can be done, every
kind of uncertainty in reference to punishments. And though it
is out of man’s power to insure the detection and conviction of
every offender, it evidently is possible to let every one know before-
hand the precise meed of punishment which will await him in case
of his being convicted. This, we say, is possible to be done to


the fullest extent; but should that be, for any reason, judged in-
convenient, at least there should be as little uncertainty as possible.
For otherwise, may it not be inferred from the natural character
of man, that each malefactor, in addition to the chances of escap-
ing conviction, will, and does console himself with the hope of
undergoing that species of punishment which, to him, is the
lightest ? Like a party of gamblers at rouge et noir, all buoyed
up with hope, some in the confidence that success will attend the
red, others the black, convicts who have taken tickets in our
penal lottery, flatter themselves with opposite hopes; he who
dreads nothing so much as a penitentiary, that he shall only be
transported; and he who is most afraid (if there be any such) of
expatriation, that he shall not be transported, but left in the
penitentiary or the hulks.
We are aware that no penalty can be devised which shall be of
precisely equal severity to every one who undergoes it: a punish-
ment which is the most dreaded by one man, on account of his
peculiar feelings and habits, is to another, of opposite habits,
comparatively light. Nor, again, can any system be framed which
will allot, with perfect regularity, to each class of characters, the
punishment most dreaded by each. But one of the inconveniences,
and perhaps one of the greatest, of the system of complete uncer-
tainty to which we have been objecting, is that it precludes the
legislature from profiting by experience; indeed, from acquiring
any, concerning the respective efficacy of different kinds of punish-
ment. For it should be remembered that, with a view to the
main object, prevention, it is, in all cases, the expectation , not the
infliction of the punishment, that does good; the only benefit that
can arise from the example of the infliction being, the excitement
in others of this expectation;—the wholesome terror of suffering
the like. Now this benefit can only exist as far as men are led
to anticipate for themselves, in case of a similar offence, a similar
suffering. The infliction of a whipping is no example to thieves
on the mere ground that the person so chastised is a thief and is
whipped for it, but on the ground that other thieves may expect
hereafter to be whipped. Yet this maxim, truism as it is, is
practically violated in every instance in which it is left to chance
to decide which, out of several different punishments, a certain
convict shall receive There are then no means of judging whicli
of these are more, and which less efficacious in deterring offenders.
A certain kind of punishment we will suppose may be inflicted
on a considerable number of convicts, without any diminution of
that class of offences; and yet, for aught we know, this very
punishment may be an object of dread to those very men, and
might have deterred most of them, if they had been assured what


punishment awaited them. The labourer at the hulks, if we
could dive into his thoughts, might perhaps be found to have
offended, not in defiance of the hulks, but of transportation : and
he who groans under solitary confinement, might prove to be one
who thought little of imprisonment among good company on
board the hulks. As long as this uncertainty remains, all our
judgments respecting the comparative efficacy of punishments
must remain involved in equal uncertainty. No legislator can
decide what penalty malefactors most dread , unless he knows
what they expect. On the other hand, any penalty which should
be invariably inflicted on a certain class of offenders, even should
it prove wholly ineffectual, would at least have served the purpose
of an experiment; we should have ascertained its inefficacy, and
might proceed to change it for another. But on the opposite
plan, our practice neither springs from experience, nor tends to
produce experience; we cannot refer effects to their causes; but
are left to proceed by guess and at random from beginning
to end.
Now if it be the fact, and we shall presently proceed to show
that it is at least highly probable, that actual transportation is,
to most offenders, either a very slight punishment, or a reward ,
it will be evident from what has been just said that this circum-
stance will not only nullify the effect of transportation itself as a
preventive of crime, but will also impair the efficacy of such other
penalties as are liable to be commuted for it. It is opening a door
to hope. And in legal enactments the same rule holds good as
in mechanics: nothing is stronger than its weakest part. If a
poor man is convinced (we wish the supposition were impossible
and inconceivable) that a trip to Botany Bay would be the best
thing that could befall him, he may be even tempted by such a
belief to steal a sheep in the hope of a free passage, and to run
the risk of being sent to the hulks instead, trusting that he shall
have better luck than that: especially if there be some aggravation
in his offence, which will procure him a sentence of fourteen in-
stead of seven years; in which case actual transportation is much
the more likely to be the consequence.
But can there be any, some of our readers will perhaps say, to
whom transportation really is no punishment? Doubtless to a
person in a tolerably comfortable situation in his own country,
and whose habits are quiet and regular, a four months 1 voyage,
and a settlement, either permanent or temporary, at the antipodes,
is likely to be felt as a grievous exile; to say nothing of the
abridgement of liberty and compulsory labour. But the higher
classes, or indeed those in any class, will fall into great errors if
they judge too hastily of the feelings of others by their own, and


conclude that every thing must be felt by all as a punishment,
which would be such to themselves. If a fine lady or gentleman
were promised a sight of a criminal sentenced to hard labour, and
were to be shown a man occupied all day in raking mud out of a
ditch, and dining on hard dumpling with dripping poured over it,
(the Suffolk dainty,) they might perhaps tbink his punishment
too severe, and might be surprised to be told that he was after all
no criminal, but an honest labourer, who was very well satisfied
to get such good employment; and that, though probably he
would be glad of better diet, more beer, and less work, he would
find himself as uncomfortable if confined to the mode of life and
occupations of those who pitied him, as they would be in the scene
of his highest enjoyment, the chimney-corner of a dirty alehouse.
In fact, the great mass of mankind are sentenced to hard labour
by the decree of Providence. And though a tolerably steady cha-
racter, in tolerable circumstances, will usually prefer undergoing
this lot in ‘ his own, his native land,’ to the chance of even bet-
tering his condition in another, it is well known that all men are
not steady characters, nor all in even tolerable circumstances:
multitudes are every way exposed to the trials of ‘ malesuada
fames, ac turpis egestas.’
The man who is able and willing to work hard, yet is unable
with his utmost exertions to provide bare necessaries for his wife
and family without resorting to parish relief, —the man who, with-
out being incorrigibly idle, has a distaste for steady hard work,
rewarded with a bare subsistence, and a taste for the luxuries of
the lower orders, yet cannot acquire them by honest means, —the
man who by his irregularities has so far hurt his character that
he cannot obtain employment except when hands are scarce, —
these, and many other very common descriptions of persons, are
so situated that transportation can hardly be expected to be viewed
by them as any punishment. As a punishment, we mean, when
viewed in comparison with the alternative of living by honest
industry : for it would be absurd to say that, to lazy vagabonds,
the necessity of labour is itself a punishment: they dislike it in-
deed, but they cannot avoid it by abstaining from crime. Labour
they must at any rate, or else steal or starve; and that only can
operate as a preventive punishment which it is in one’s power to
avoid by good conduct. It would be ridiculous to exhort a poor
man not to subsist by stealing but by hard labour, lest he should
be condemned to hard labour ! If every thing that a man dislikes
is to be regarded as therefore a punishment to him, we might
hope to deter people from stealing by the threat of merely com-
pelling them to restore what they steal; for they all probably
would agree with Falstaff in 4 hating restitution, as double trouble.’


Vet a man would be reckoned an idiot, who should say, ‘brave
the cold contentedly in your own clothes, and do not steal my
cloak; for if you do, I will—if I can catch you —make you pull
it oft* again.’
We should apologize for noticing a truth so obvious were we
not convinced that it is often overlooked, in consequence of the
difference, in effect, of the same sentence, on different persons.
To one brought up in refinement, a sentence to wield the spade
or axe, and live on plenty though coarse food for seven years,
would be felt as a very heavy punishment for flagrant miscon-
duct, and might induce him to abstain from such misconduct;
to the majority of mankind, it is the very bonus held out for
good conduct.
To the great bulk of those, therefore, who are sentenced to
transportation, the punishment amounts to this, that they are
carried to a country whose climate is delightful, producing in
profusion all the necessaries and most of the luxuries of life; —
that they have a certainty of maintenance, instead of an uncer-
tainty; are better fed, clothed, and lodged, than (by honest means)
they ever were before; have an opportunity of regaling themselves
at a cheap rate with all the luxuries they are most addicted to; —
and if their conduct is not intolerably bad, are permitted, even
before the expiration of their term, to become settlers on a fertile
farm, which with very moderate industry they may transmit as a
sure and plentiful provision to their children. Whatever other
advantages this system may possess, it certainly does not look like
a very terrific punishment. dEsop, we are told, remonstrated with
a man who, when bitten by a dog, attempted the superstitious
cure for the wound by giving the beast bread dipped in the blood:
if the dogs, said he, find this out, they will all fall upon us in
hopes of these sops. We fear the shrewd old fabulist would en-
tertain similar apprehensions from what is called our humane
system of laws.
Perhaps therefore, all things considered, it is as well that the
execution of such a sentence should take place in the other hemi-
sphere, that the lower orders in England may have the less oppor-
tunity of comparing their own condition with that of the convicts:
if the punishment really were a punishment likely to strike terror,
there would be a very serious objection to its being removed so
far from the knowledge or notice of those whom it is designed to
deter. But let any man of common sense judge how far those
under a temptation to any crime are likely to be deterred, by a
knowledge of such facts as Mr. Cunningham among others lays
before us:—
‘ I question much, however, whether many English labourers live


better than our convict servant here, whose weekly ration consists of
a sufficiency of flour to make four quartern loaves at least; of seven pounds
of beef; two ounces of tea, one pound of sugar, and two ounces of tobacco,
with the occasional substitution of two or three quarts of milk daily for the
tea and sugar allowance. Numbers of the English working poor would
doubtless be happy to bargain for such a diet; and thus their situation
might in these points be bettered, by their being placed upon an equality
with convicts /’
The natives of the sister-island, it seems, have their eyes more
speedily opened to the advantages of their lot than ourselves:—
‘ The Irish convicts are more happy and contented with then* situation
on board than the English, although more loth to leave their country,
even improved as the situation of the great body of them is by being
thus removed, —numbers telling me they had never been half so well off
in their lives before. It was most amusing to read the letters they sent
to their friends on being fairly settled on board, (all such going through
the surgeon’s hands,) none ever failing to give a most circumstantial
account of what the breakfast, dinner, and supper, consisted of; a minute
list of the clothes supplied, and generally laying particular emphasis on
the important fact of having a blanket and bed to “ my own self
entirely,” which seemed to be somewhat of a novelty by their many
circumlocutions about it. One observed, in speaking of the ship, that
“ Mr. Reedy’s parlour was never half so clane,” while the burden of
another was, “ Many a Mac in your town, if he only knew what the
situation of a convict was, would not be long in following my example !
thank God for the same ! I never was better off in my life !”’
This dangerous knowledge however does, not unfrequently,
reach this country also; and may be expected to be more and
more generally diffused, and to lead to its natural results.
Sundry instances have come under our own observation, (and
many of our readers probably could multiply them to a great
extent, if each would note down such as he hears of on good
authority,) of convicts writing home to their friends in England
in the same style of self-congratulation, and exhorting such of
them as are in a distressed situation to use their best endeavours
to obtain a passage to a land where such cheering prospects
await them. Two instances we know, of a master, and a mis-
tress, who had each been robbed by a servant subsequently
transported, receiving a friendly greeting, in one of the instances
personally, in the other, by a letter, accompanied by a present,
with acknowledgments of former kindness, from these very ser-
vants, who had realized large property, one of them in New
Holland, the other in Van Diemen’s Land. The latter seriously
urged her mistress to come out and join her, promising herself
to patronize and assist her, and holding out the certainty of
making a fortune ! It is most consolatory, no doubt, to reflect
how thrifty and well conducted these individuals must, in all


likelihood, have become, and to observe their dutiful gratitude.
But gold may be bought too dear. Is it worth while to hold out
a temptation which will be the means of spoiling one thousand
servants, for the sake of trying how effectually we can reform
half a dozen of them :
‘ Only to shew with how small pain,
A wound like this is healed again P’
Shall we, in short, to cure one bite, throw a sop to the dog,
which will bring a whole pack upon us ?
It may perhaps be said, that such instances of rapid accumu-
lation of wealth must be very rare; and that many of the
accounts transmitted are probably much overcharged. We
should answer, so much the worse. The mischief is done, not
by the attainment of these advantages in New South Wales, but
by the expectation of them excited at home : a very few prizes
of twenty or thirty thousand pounds will induce multitudes to
take tickets; false descriptions may excite real hopes; and if
the credulous are allured by these hopes, it is no comfort to
think that they are ultimately disappointed; on the contrary,
it is an aggravation of the evil, since our object is, not the
infliction of suffering, but the excitement of a salutary dread of
it, at the least expense of actual pain that is compatible with that
object. If it were possible that we could carry offenders to an
Elysium, and at the same time succeed in keeping up the belief
that they were carried to a Tartarus, this would be of ail
things the most desirable; but if they expect , whether truly or
not, a passage to Elysium, our object is completely defeated: as
long as such hopes, however visionary, are kept up, we must
expect to find the distressed or discontented part of the commu-
nity resembling (according to the felicitous allusion to the JEneid
by one of our contemporaries) the disconsolate ghosts on the
banks of Styx :
f Stubant orantes primi transmitter cursum
Tendebantque manus, ripae ulterioiis amove.’
We find Mr. Cunningham, whose testimony is the more im-
portant, on account of his being a decided advocate for the
system of colonizing with convicts, distinctly admitting that
hitherto, i. e. for about forty years during which this system has
been in operation, it has totally failed of the main object, the
deterring of offenders by the fear of punishment; but he con-
soles himself with the hope that hereafter a better method will be
pursued, and so that transportation may begin to be really penal.
‘ A penal colony, however, to prove fully beneficial to the mother
country, must be regulated so as efficiently to punish the crime com-
mitted, before the reform of the criminal is thought of; and in this par-


ticular has hitherto consisted the gi*eat defect of onr New South Wales
system; for transportation here could scarcely he called a punishment,
and indeed, in half of the cases at least, proved a reward. The judicious
measures, however, commenced by our present governor, promise a
speedy reform in these matters, and will, I hope, convert the colony from
a paradise, into a purgatory, for criminals/
We do not dispute that improvements may be introduced into
the system; but the only effectual one, we are convinced, will be
to abandon it altogether. Means doubtless may be used to
make transportation no longer altogether a reward; but it does
not follow that even then it will operate as a punishment; and
we must be ever on our guard against concluding at once
(according to the fallacy above noticed) that it does so, on the
ground of criminals beginning to dread and dislike it; they
must dread and dislike it more , much more, than a life of honest
industry, before it can operate as a check to those whose only
alternative is such a life, or one of dishonesty, and who are dis-
posed to prefer the latter. We have said that this penal labour
ought to be much more dreaded than honest industry, for two
reasons; first, on account of the uncertainty of the criminal’s
detection: he who had rather steal than submit to ordinary hard
work, will take his chance of being sent to Botany Bay, unless
his punishment there is apprehended to be something far beyond
ordinary hard work: second, on account of the hope held out,
(and which is a principal design of the system to hold out,) that
at the expiration of his term, if not sooner, he shall be located
on a farm, and placed in a situation exceeding the brightest
dreams of an English cottager. This hope will need much to
counterbalance it, if transportation is to become a dreaded
punishment. Mr. C. trusts it will become a purgatory ; but he
must remember it is one which, like the Popish purgatory, leads
to a paradise.
Supposing this point however to be fully attained, and to
suppose it, is what Johnson would call i the triumph of hope
over experience,’ still it would be a long time after the comple-
tion of this change, before the character of it would be so fully
understood in England as to do away the impression produced
by forty previous years of impunity and reward. And till then—
till the reformation of the discipline in New South Wales were
fully appreciated in England, no good whatever would be
effected by the change : for, as we must once more repeat, it is
not suffering, but the expectation of suffering, that does good.
Generation after generation of criminals would be shipped off
before the truth was completely learned, that the same sentence
which formerly implied nothing terrific, was at length become a


serious penalty. And lastly, the effect must even, after all, be
comparatively trifling, of a punishment undergone at the distance
of a four months 1 voyage.
That a system, on the face of it so little calculated to secure
the great end of punishment, the prevention of crime, should
have been so long persevered in, indeed, should have ever been
resorted to, is to be attributed, we conceive, chiefly to the hope
of attaining those other objects which we have already noticed
as of a subordinate character: viz. first, reform, or at least,
removal of the individual culprits ; and, secondly, the benefit to
the colony resulting from their labour. It may, perhaps, be
thought scarcely necessary ever to notice these supposed advan-
tages, because, as we have above remarked, could these be
attained in the utmost perfection, yet if the great object, pre-
vention, were not accomplished, the whole scheme must be
regarded as a failure. We shall, however, venture on a few
remarks relative to these subordinate objects, because, we con-
ceive, that the expediency of the present system, even with a
view to them alone, is greatly overrated.
With respect to the reformation of offenders, that it has been,
in some instances, more or less perfectly attained, there can be
no doubt: but that, in the generality of cases, the discipline
undergone in the colony should be sufficient even to undo the
evil of the passage —to remove but the additional contamination
contracted during the voyage out —is more than either reasonable
conjecture, or experience, would allow us to hope. For let any
one but consider the probable effects of a close intercourse for four
months, of a number of criminals of various ages, and degrees
of guilt, with nothing whatever to do in all that time but to talk
over their exploits of roguery ! They must be like grass heaped
together in a green state, and suffered to become mow-burnt
before it is spread out and turned. That would deserve to be
called a mighty reformation, Avhich should ever bring them back to
their former state, and leave them merely no worse than they
were before the voyage. Of the sort of life led by the convicts
during the passage, Mr. C. gives nearly such an account as
might have been anticipated.
‘ A man being estimated in this kind of society according to the
amount and adroitness of his villanies, it is no wonder that the yet
“ mute inglorious" Barringtons of the day should crown themselves
occasionally with the bays appertaining to other brows, or boast of rob-
beries committed only in their imagination, in order to elevate themselves
to something like a par with more dignified culprits. Almost all their
conversation is of the larcenous kind, —consisting of details of their
various robberies, and the singular adventures they have passed through;
but generally one-balf of these are either sheer invention, or dressed up


in such a way as to show off in the most flattering point of view before
the eyes of their associates.’
‘ The adventures of some of these men are certainly both extraordinary
and amusing; and the tact with which they will humbug the very indivi-
duals whom they are plundering, might serve to entertain even the plun-
dered party. It is the rogue’s interest, of course, to make the adventure
tell well to his own credit, and therefore considerable deduction must
generally be made for the embellishments wherewith he garnishes his
tale. I once listened unobserved to the relation of an adroit and face-
tiously-managed robbery, which the hero was detailing with great glee;
and the admirable manner in which the whole was wound up, called forth
such a spontaneous burst of laughter and applause from the throng
around, that he rapturously exclaimed, while striking the bench with his
flrmly-clenched fist, (his whole countenance beaming delightedly,) “By
Gr—, I could steal a shirt off a fellow’s back without his knowing it!’”
‘ It is, in sober sadness, time fruitlessly expended, to attempt the
reformation of these people when crowded thus “ knave upon knave
those who may be seriously inclined are jeered out of it by the rest, and
the reformation you bring about is a mere bam meant to be turned to
gainful account by making a dupe of you. All you ought to attempt,
under such circumstances, is to bring about regularity and decency of
conduct. If you aim at more, you only make hypocrites, which is ten
times worse than permitting them to remain (as you found them) open
downright knaves.’
Accordingly, those convicts who return after the expiration
of their sentence, or who escape before, are generally found
to be the most perfect and accomplished villains.
Many, however, remain and settle in the colony; but the
majority of them appear to turn out just such settlers, as from
their previous habits of life, might be anticipated.
‘ The thriving and fertile distiicts of Airds and Appin are situated in
the county of Cumberland, immediately beyond the Cow-pasture, look-
ing from Camden. They are chiefly occupied by small settlers, who
have been originally convicts, out of many of whose hands the grants are
slowly passing through the thoughtless, spendthrift conduct of the
occupants.’
Their posterity, however, appear to be considerably improved.
Of the cwrrmcy-population, (as the natives of the settlement
are called,) Mr. C. seems to think very favourably; and indeed
no class of mortals are more likely to meet with an indulgent
judgment, since even tolerable conduct presents a striking con-
trast to that of their progenitors. They are described as remark-
able for honesty: query, in what degree may this be attributed
to the total absence of all hope of being rewarded for dishonesty,
by being sent to New Soutli Wales ? Honesty , however, in
another sense, is represented as far less common than black
swans. The females, it seems, are cleanly and active, but 4 do not


reckon chastity as the first of virtues.’ But though they cannot
boast that e the women are all virtuous,’ 4 the men are all
brave.’ By Mr. C.’s account they excel as pugilists; practising
that noble art with great valour and skill from their childhood,
and generally proving victorious in a boxing-match, ‘ between
sterling and currency !’ Who knows but that in addition to her
exports of merino-wool, Australia may one day furnish a
‘ champion of England.’
It is, however, considered by some as a matter of great self-
congratulation, that these persons are so much superior to what
any children of such profligate parents would have proved if
they had remained in England. But this proceeds on the mani-
festly false assumption that, in that case, the same numerous pro-
geny would have arisen; whereas reason and experience show
that (to say nothing of the boasted fecundity of the worst
description of females in New Holland) whenever settlers are
placed in an unoccupied territory, where consequently the supply
of subsistence is practically unlimited, population increases with
vast rapidity ; as in the North American States, where the num-
bers advance as much in five-and-twenty years, as in Europe in
five centuries. The immediate progeny of one thousand repro-
bates of both sexes, reared in England in one generation, would
hardly much exceed, probably would fall short of, the number
of their parents: in a new colony, they are likely to be four or
five times as numerous. Whether, therefore, these are better
than their parents, is not the question; but whether they are the
best population with which we could stock the country —whether
it be wise to save for seed the worst plants—whether they are
better than none at all—and whether, if they are, the advantage
is worth purchasing at such a cost as that of holding out a bonus
to criminals, and consequently shaking the very foundations of
social order.
But to return to the consideration of the actual convicts: we
are inclined to think that transportation is looked to not so much
with a sanguine hope of their reform, as with a view to the
getting rid of them. Now supposing we could (which is not
possible) clear the kingdom at once of all criminals, by shipping
them off to New South Wales, and that every sentence of
transportation were for life, (which should clearly be the case if
riddance be our object,) still the country would be no gainer
unless we got rid of the crimes as well as the individual criminals;
and this could never be done unless the transportation were a
dreaded punishment. For it is not to be imagined that thieves
are a distinct species, like wolves, so that if we could but exter-
minate them all, (as the Saxon king did our four-footed sheep-


stealers,) the breed would be extinct. ‘ Man' (says the legal
maxim) c is a wolf to man.’ While human nature remains, pro-
perty, as far as it is not protected by fear of punishment, will
ever offer a temptation to depredation. Fresh offenders would
immediately arise; not indeed corrupted by the example and
instruction of those sent out of the country, but encouraged by
their impunity; and thus we might go on till we had peopled
iVew Holland with rogues, without the least diminishing the
number at home. ‘ Uno avulso non deficit alter? To think of
diminishing crime by simply removing the criminals, without
holding out an effectual terror to future offenders, is like under-
taking to empty a lake by baling out the water, without stoppin ti-
the river which flows into it. Now the existing system exactly
corresponds with the above supposition, except in two points:
first, that as we cannot transport all, or nearly all offenders,
there are always enough left at home to train successive genera-
tions of tiros in villainy; and, secondly, that as most sentences
of transportation are only for a term of years, we do not effec-
tually get rid even of those who are sent out. We do indeed
get rid for ever of such of them as are disposed to lead a
reformed life; they seldom fail to become settlers; but the most
incorrigible are sure to return. So that this system of 4 riddance’
not only fails of its object, but, by a kind of whimsical perver-
sity, fails precisely in the instances in which its success is most
desired.
Some writers express wonder and alarm at the increase of
crime: we wish they were more alarmed, and less astonished; to
us, the wonder is, that crimes do not increase much faster; and
we look forward with great alarm to the continuance of the
present system, as one likely to bear its poisonous fruits in con-
tinually greater abundance and perfection as it advances toward
maturity of growth.
Haying now arrived at our conclusions, by an analytical exa-
mination of the subject, it is time that we should compare them
with those of the Select Committee, whose Report we have men-
tioned at the head of this article. In this comparison we regret
to And a most essential difference, between the Report and our
own views. In regard to transportation for fourteen, and for
seven years, the views of the Committee may be said to coincide
with ours; but the coincidence is more of detail than of prin-
ciple. Their objection to the former term of years is that ‘ for
those who dread the loss of their native country, it gives a hope
of return, which greatly diminishes the value of the punishment.’
With this they couple the consideration that ‘ the returned trans-
port is generally a very abandoned character, and he usually
VOL. I. NO, I. . K


returns to his old criminal society, thus forming a link, as it
were, between the thieves at large, and the thieves under punish-
ment. 1 (p. 14.) In regard to the shorter term of transportation,
4 the Committee would be inclined to recommend that the pu-
nishment should be abolished;’ but as some convicts had lately
been sent to Bermuda, and the result of the experiment was as
yet unknown, they thought proper to suspend their judgment.
Of transportation commuted into labour on board the hulks, the
Committee expressed their disapprobation, at least in its present
state, on account of the lightness of the labour enforced, and
the want of separation between the different sorts of criminals.
But the approbation which the Committee give to transporta-
tion for life, is most positive and unqualified.
‘ Transportation for life is an excellent punishment in certain cases.
Where a man has made crime his hahit and profession, where he has
become the chief, or a member of a band of thieves, and has no resource
on his return from imprisonment hut to herd with the same gang, and
pursue the same practices, it is both mercy and justice to spare his life,
and remove him to a distant colony, where he may first afford an example
of punishment by hard labour, and by degrees lose his vicious propen-
sities in a new state of society.—Much has been said of the advantages
enjoyed by the convicts in New South Wales, and the little effect which
the punishment inspires. Still there are numbers to whom the notion of
being banished for life, with several years of convict labour in addition,
is very formidable, nor would it he wise to abandon such a punishment.’
(p. 14.)
No power of argument, or even demonstration, can avail
against such decisions. The conclusion amounts to
this: much has been said against transportation for life, but still
‘itis an excellent punishment. 1 Experience seems to prove that
the threat of such a punishment inspires no fear; but ‘ still
there are numbers to whom it is formidable. 1 To what class the
individuals belong who form these numbers , the Committee do
not stop to enquire. The notion of banishment for life, and
convict labour, is far from being agreeable to themselves, and on
the strength of this feeling they assert the existence of numbers
to whom this notion is formidable. How the Committee are
prepared to prove that it has that effect on that sort of men in
relation to whom they ought to have settled the question—how either
from reasoning or experience they can show that a man who has
made crime his habit and profession , who has become the chief
or a member of a hand of thieves , which in ninety-nine out of
a hundred cases is the effect of his not being able to subsist
by labour as hard and much more hopeless than that with which
he is threatened—how they are to persuade the world that such
men are so attached to their native soil as to dread the exchange


of it for one more fertile, mild, and cheerful—one besides of the
same language as their own—one, in fine, where, as far as
country means any thing connected with the intellectual and
moral part of man, an Englishman will find himself more at
home than if he was sent to many parts of Ireland, or the He-
brides, we are at a loss to guess.
But we cannot take leave of the Committee without adverting
to the unsteadiness of their views in regard to any standard by
which to ascertain the usefulness of the punishment which they
were considering, and which they so strongly recommended.
The excellence of transportation for life, to judge by their
statement, consists, Ist. In the example of punishment afforded
by the temporary hard labour of the convict; 2ndly. In the
probability that by degrees he will ‘ lose his vicious propensities
in a new state of society. 1 This is a striking example of unphi-
losophical investigation. The question is, whether transportation
for life is good as a punishment ? Good in respect to what end
of punishment ? ought to have been the first question. A
glimpse of the true end, prevention of crime, seems to have
crossed the minds of the Committee, and accordingly they en-
deavour to make out transportation useful as an example. On
finding this impracticable, they seize on an incidental circum-
stance of transportation, i. e. hard labour, and on this they fasten
their conclusion. But it happens unfortunately for the argu-
ment, that the hard labour , which, as we have observed, is a
mere incident in the case, wants every one of the circumstances
which are essential to useful example: it is not seen by those
who should be deterred; it is an evil with which they are
familiar; it cannot be much worse than the hard labour to which
they must submit if they abstain from crime; and being to their
minds at an indefinite distance of time and space, it loses in the
gay hues of hope every harsh feature of punishment. So much
tor example. The weakness of this argument being probably
felt by the Committee, they turned to the usual resource in such
cases—accumulation of reasons. If removal for life to Botany
Bay (they seem to say) should not be found to act powerfully as
an example, it is, at all events, conducive to the reform of the
convict. But what is the ground of their* hopes on this score ?
The influence of a new state of society. Now if a new state
of society can have any chance in correcting vicious habits,
its novelty must consist in the removal of every thing that che-
rished the evil propensities, and smothered the good ones of the
individual to be reformed. One half, and perhaps more, of our
worst characters would be reformed, could they be placed among
a set of virtuous and industrious people, who, from their igno-
re 2


ranee of the previous misconduct of the strangers, should be
ready to treat them with kindness, and able to give them a
share in their industry and profits. But what is the new state
of society to which the convicts are removed ? What is there
new to them in their place of exile, but what, if transportation
is not to be a reward instead of punishment, must necessarily
increase their viciousness P Are they not introduced into a
society in which depravity is the general rule, and honesty the
exception ? Are they not to be reduced to a kind of slavery , the
greatest corrupter of the human heart? Are they not to be
branded with a mark of infamy which even a thorough reforma-
tion, supported by all the influence of the first authority of the
country, can never remove ? Let any one who doubts it, read
the parliamentary report on the state of New South Wales, and
he will find that the main source of all the disturbances occa-
sioned by the government of General Macquarie, was his leniency
towards reformed convicts—his (as we think) benevolent yet
mistaken view of the penal end of transportation. It is curious
indeed to observe how two men, in bitter opposition to each
other, agree, though unawares, in furnishing proofs of our
position, that if convicts are treated in New South Wales, as
they must if transportation is to be a punishment to them, it is
morally impossible that they should be reformed.
Commissioner Bigge observes very justly, that
‘ A propensity to violence of language and abuse, insensibly becomes
a habit in those to whom the irksome task is committed of enforcing
compulsory labour, or wholesome restraint against refractory and vicious
men; such conduct indeed certainly has no tendency to the improvement
of a depraved character, and as certainly debases and hardens the heart of
others.’ (p. 30.)
It is most true, and it has long been known both from theory
and experience, that slavery corrupts both the slave and the
master. Now take the picture drawn by General Macquarie.
‘ I have no doubt that many convicts who might have been rendered
useful and good men, had they been treated with humane and reasonable
control, have sunk into despondence by the unfeeling treatment of such
masters; and that many of those wretched men, driven to acts of violence by
harsh usage, and who by a contrary treatment might have been reformed,
have betaken themselves to the woods, where they can only subsist by
plunder, and have terminated their lives on the gallows; but with every
indulgence that can reasonably be extended to convicts, transportation is
far from being a light sentence ; it is at best a state of slavery; and the
fate of the convict, as to misery or comparative comfort, depending on the
will of his master, the constant sense of degradation and loss of liberty is
a severe punishment, which has no remission while he is in a state of
bondage.’ (Ib. p. 31.)


The natural, inevitable inference from these statements is,
that the improvement of such convicts as are generally trans-
ported, is incompatible with an adequate punishment of their
crimes : so that the additional reason adduced by the Committee
to prop up their lame defence of transportation as punishment ,
namely the probability of reform, excludes, and is mutually
excluded by that argument which it was meant to support- It
is like the advice of a physician who prescribed ice to his patient,
and then, fearing that might be too cold a remedy, suggested, as
an improvement, that it should be warmed.
But what is to become of the colony, on which we have
already expended so much, if we cease thus to supply it with
labourers at the public expense ? It would be a pity to check
its rising prosperity, to which convict labour so much con-
tributes.
* Nothing, in fact, (says Mr. Cunningham,) ever created greater dismay
among us, than the announcement, some two years ago, of a project for the
future disposal of convict labour in the furtherance of government works at
home, and in other colonies in preference to this; while our colonial wags
still occasionally delight to work upon our fears, by propagating alarming
reports of the increasing morality of the people of Great Britain, or of
the lightness of the last jail-deliveries there—reports which the visiter to
England will soon find quite destitute of foundation/ (Vol. i. p. 12.)
Aristotle long since remarked this principle—the high value
set on any thing that has cost much ; which is recognised in the
proverbial expression of ‘ throwing good money after bad. 1 And
so powerful is this principle, that if we were not prepared to point
out a mode of much more effectually benefiting the colony by a
different procedure, we should almost despair of obtaining a
fair hearing for the reasons against the present system. And
yet the object of affording aid to the settlers is clearly and
confessedly subordinate to the main one—the prevention of
crime. Indeed, the colony was first settled with a view to that
very object; so that it would evidently be an absurd incon-
sistency, when that object is found not to be promoted, to
continue sacrificing the end to the means; first to found a
colony for the sake of transporting convicts, and then (following
our own footsteps ) to transport convicts for the sake of the
colony. We remember an old country squire, who kept a
number of horses, and, of course, a great many servants to look
after them. For the last forty years of his life he never rode ;
but he still kept the horses, to find employment for his servants
in exercising and grooming them !
To adhere to a system which cherishes, or at least does not
keep down violations of the laws here, in order that we may be
enabled to keep up a supply of useful labourers for New South


Wales, is the same sort of economy which Swift recommends in
his ‘ directions to the groom,’ for the benefit of his master’s
service, viz. to 4 fill the horses’ rack with hay to the top, though
perhaps they may not have the stomach to eat; if the hay be
thrown down , there is no loss , for it will make litter , and save
straw?
In the present instance, however, the spoiled hay does not
appear even to make good litter. The emancipists, as they are
called—those who have come out as convicts, are described, in
an extract already given, as for the most part idle, unthrifty
settlers ; and the currency , those bom in the colony, are repre-
sented as generally preferring a seafaring life, having the odious
associations of crime and slavery connected with agricultural
pursuits ; a feeling perfectly natural under such circumstances,
but the very last one we would wish to find in a colony. This
particular disadvantage was not especially pointed out, among the
rest, by Lord Bacon; but the system has, on other accounts,
his decided disapprobation. 4 lt is,’ says he, 4 a shameful and
unblessed thing to take the scum of people and wicked con-
demned men to be the people with whom you plant.’ One
of the results, not, we apprehend, originally contemplated, is
that these 4 wicked condemned men,’ have planted for themselves
several volunteer-colonies; escaping in small craft, either to the
South Sea Islands, (in many of which, for a good while past,
each native chief has for a prime minister some choice graduate
of the university of Newgate,) or, more frequently, to some part
of the coast of New Holland, or some of the small islands
at a little distance from the main, particularly one called
Kangaroo Island; where they settle, and subsist chiefly on wild
animals; especially seals, whose skins and oil form a pro-
fitable article of traffic with the small traders from the mother-
colony. Several more of these lawless settlements are supposed
to exist besides those generally known ; as it is clearly the
interest of the above-mentioned traders, when they discover such
a one, to keep the knowledge to themselves, for the sake of
monopolizing the commerce. A most profitable trade they of
course find it; as their customers are not only willing to pay an
enormous price in oil for the luxuries of rum and tobacco, but
when once intoxicated, are easily stripped of all. Another
article, it seems, has been found more profitable in this trade
than even rum ; viz. women ; who, if kidnapped at Botany Bay,
and carried off to one of these settlements, will sell for a whole
ocean of seal oil! This infernal traffic was betrayed by the
wreck of a vessel, from which, in consequence, tw r o women, who
had been thus carried off' from Sydney, made their escape, and


it is to be hoped put others on their guard against the detestable
fate designed for them. These volunteer settlers, however, it
seems, resort to another expedient to supply themselves with
wives; viz. seizing on the native black women, after, we pre-
sume, knocking on the head the males of the tribe.
* At Kangaroo Island, on our southern coast, about four hundred miles
to the west of Bass Straits, a settlement of this kind has long existed, as
I have before mentioned; (by the latest accounts, this settlement con-
tains a population of forty individuals, —men women, and children;) the
men having reached that point by coasting along in boats, and having
seized and earned off native women. During the seal season they live
upon the coast, feasting upon the seal-flesh which their ivives procure for
them; and on the season being over, retire to their village, built in a
valley in the interior, and subsist upon the produce of their gardens and
what game they can destroy. They lead a most slothful, idle life,
obliging their women to perform all the drudgery, but occasionally assist-
ing vessels calling there to load with salt, which is found covering the
bed of a lagoon six inches deep; and bartering their seal-skins for rum,
tea, sugar, and so forth, with the crews. The senior individual upon the
settlement is named Abyssinia, and has lived there fourteen years and
upwards. Various islands in Bass Straits are also peopled in like man-
ner; Blinder's Island, according to the latest accounts, containing twenty,
including women and children.’ (Two Years in New South Wales,
vol. ii. p. 203.)
So that we may hope in time to have the coast of New
South Wales, surrounded by a fringe , as it were, of colonies
of half-castes, consisting of a mixture of the blood of the most
debased of savages, with that of the more refined and intelligent
scoundrels of civilized society; and exhibiting, we may antici-
pate, a curious specimen of the worst possible form of human
nature. And thus it is that we are proceeding to people
Australia; the land is certainly planted, but it is planted with
the worst of weeds, according to the ingenious experiment
suggested in the Tempest for Prosperous Island—
‘ Gonzalo. Had I plantation of this isle, my lord
Antonio. He’d sow it with nettle seed.’
4 But all these, 1 we have heard it replied, ‘ are merely inci-
dental evils; they are no part of the design.’ If this means
merely that no system should be at once condemned solely be-
cause some incidental evils are connected with it, as some must be
with every system, in this we heartily concur. Navigation is a
good thing, although ships are occasionally wrecked, and men
drowned. But if it be meant that incidental evils are, on that
ground, to be totally disregarded , and left out of calculation,
the best mode we can think of for disabusing one who holds such
an opinion, is, that he should take up his abode next door to a


soap-boiler, with a brazier on the other side of his house, a
slaughter-house over the way, and a store of gunpowder in the
vaults beneath him; being admonished at the same time to re-
member that if his eyes, nose, and ears are incessantly annoyed,
and he is ultimately blown up, these are only incidental evils.
But we must hasten to redeem our pledge of pointing out
(which our limits warn us must be done in a very few and brief
hints) a mode of even improving the situation of the colony
without this every-way-objectionable supply of convicts. The
persons we would have sent out (we would not have it called
transportation ) are able-bodied paupers ; those who are capable
and desirous of labour, but cannot get employment, or not
sufficient to maintain a family without parish aid. These are
precisely the description of persons to whom a colony, with a
practically-boundless extent of territory, is best suited ; because
there, a moderate degree of industry will furnish a more
abundant subsistence, and a better security against future want,
than the most severe and unremitting toil in a full-peopled
state; and because a large family is there an aid instead of
a burden, and a source, not of gloomy anxiety, but of cheering
anticipations. Many a man so circumstanced, and provided for
in the way here suggested, would probably be one, who, under
the present system, would ultimately have found his way, in
another character, to Botany Bay; but not till after having
yielded to the temptations arising from distress, he had been led
on, step by step, to the commission of crimes which would have
gone far to disqualify him for becoming a useful settler. Had
the system recommended been pursued from the beginning,
many of the same colonists would have now been there who are
there now; with the difference of an unstained character
and undepraved disposition; with those evils, in short,
prevented , which we are how, too often in vain, labouring
to cure. And no one who was reduced to apply to the
public for relief, could complain of its being bestowed in the
mode most convenient to the public. The community would
say to these persons, ‘ we do not force, or even ask you to leave
your country; stay and welcome, if you can maintain yourself
by your labour at home ; but if you cannot, it is both allowable
and kind to send you to a place where you can.’ And as there
would be no compulsion to go, so there would be no prohibition of
return ; if, as would probably sometimes happen, a man should,
in tlm course of years, have realized enough to place him above
want in his own country, and he had a desire to end his days in
it. Only, every such emigrant should be made, in the eye of
the law, a native of that country (whether New Holland,


Canada, or the Cape—for we would not confine the system to
any one colony) to which he had been conveyed at the public
expense. He should, if he chose to return, have no claim to
parochial relief.
One objection has been suggested to us, which, though at first
sight formidable, will admit, in theory at least, of a ready
answer: it is, that such a measure as we are recommending
should be preceded by a repeal of the corn-laws; on the ground
that it is unreasonable to send a man to earn his bread in a
foreign land, who could earn it at home, if you would let him
buy it as cheaply as others would be willing to supply it. This
is not the place for discussing the question of the corn-laws;
but it is sufficient for the present purpose that it should be
admitted, which is surely undeniable, that they either are, or
are not necessary for the public welfare; that if they are not ,
then, however profitable they may be to any individuals, they
ought at any rate to be altered; and that if they are a public
benefit, no one has a right to complain of being obliged to sub-
mit to the consequences of them.
But what shall we do with the convicts ? This is a question
truly important, but of which the full discussion does not seem
necessary, if the foregoing conclusions be admitted as established.
If what we now hold out as a punishment be proved to be in
some cases a very inadequate punishment, in more, a reward,
that is surely a sufficient reason for beginning to turn our
thoughts towards the adoption of some system of punishment,
and of effectual punishment; though we may not be able at
once to point out which is the most effectual.
The traveller, whose case we adverted to in the opening of
this article, when he discovered that he was riding in a circle,
was not probably able to decide at once which was his best road ;
but he did not, we imagine, for that reason continue contentedly
to follow his own track, round and round ; it was plain he was
going wrong , whichever way might be right.
But, in fact, it cannot be said that we should be even for
a moment utterly at a loss how to dispose of criminals, should
actual transportation be discontinued ; since, as it is, a majority
of those sentenced to it do not actually undergo it. And of all
the substitutes that have been resorted to, unequal as their
recommendations may be, we will venture to say the very worst
is far less objectionable, in many respects, than actual trans-
portation.
With respect to every sentence of confinement to hard labour,
whether at the tread-wheel, or of any other kind, we would
venture to suggest what we cannot but consider as a most


important improvement, viz. that instead of a certain period
of time, a convict should be sentenced to go through a certain
quantity of work. We mean that a computation should be
made of the average number of miles for instance which a man
sentenced to the tread-wheel would be expected to walk in
a week; and that then, a sentence of so many weeks' 1 labour
should be interpreted to mean, so many miles ; the convict to be
released when, and not before, he had ‘ dreed his weird ; ’ whether
he chose to protract or to shorten the time of his penance. In the
same manner he might be sentenced to beat so many hundredweight
of hemp ; dig a ditch of such and such dimensions, &c.; always
exacting some labour of all prisoners, and fixing a minimum suffi-
ciently high to keep up the notion of hard labour, but leaving
them at liberty as to the amount of it above the fixed daily task.
The great advantage resulting would be, that criminals, whose
habits probably had previously been idle, would thus be habitu-
ated not only to labour, but to form some agreeable association
with the idea of labour. Every step a man took in the tread-
wheel, he would be walking out of prison; every stroke of the
spade would be cutting a passage for restoration to society.
Among other kinds of penal labour, we would hint at one not
much different from the best kind of employment of the trans-
ported convicts, viz. the draining, paving, and burning, and
otherwise fitting for cultivation, of the Irish peat-bogs ; not with
a view, however, to their being afterwards settled by the con-
victs ; as it would be easy to people the territory thus reclaimed
with far better colonists, and with such as would ultimately
prove of eminent service to that country.* We are aware that
in most instances the land thus reclaimed would not be worth
the cost of the labour bestowed on it, were that labour to be
hired; but that is not the question; if worth any thing , that
worth would be all clear gain. The convicts must be maintained
at the public expense, even though kept in idleness. Though
their work, therefore, should amount to less than their main-
tenance, it is yet desirable that it should diminish that public
expense, which it is sufficient to cover. The first object is penal
labour; the next point is, that that labour should be at least of
some use. And if the expense of a four months’ voyage to New
South Wales be taken into the calculation, it will probably be
found that every acre cleared by convict-labour there, costs the
public many times more than an acre reclaimed from an Irish
peat-bog, which is thenceforward of many times greater value to
the country. And it is to be observed, that all the principal
* On this subject, see some remarks (with most of which we fully coincide,
though not with all) in a ‘ Letter to Mr. Malthus,’ in No. 17 of the Pamphleteer.


bogs in Ireland (amounting, it is supposed, to between one and
two millions of acres) are capable of being not only drained,
but brought into a state of great productiveness. Peat contains
abundance of vegetable matter, the main material of fertility,
but is barren through its constant wetness, its spongy texture,
want of decomposition, absence of a sufficient mixture of earthy
matter, and the occasional presence of sulphate of iron. This
last, which is poisonous to vegetation, is decomposed, and ren-
dered salutary by the addition of lime, which also is a powerful
decomposer of vegetable fibre; gravel, sand, or clay, in fact
any earthy substance, forms a most effectual and permanent
manure for peaty land; at once decomposing its parts, and
giving firmness to the soil. And in most cases such a manure
is at hand; most peat-bogs resting on a clayey substratum.
We are ourselves acquainted with a peat-bog in Yorkshire,
which, after draining, was converted into good corn-land, at the
expense of seven pounds per acre, by overspreading the surface
with clay, which was found at the depth of six feet.
But whether this, or any other scheme of penal labour be
thought worth trying, or whether in any, or in all instances,
corporal chastisement should be considered preferable, there
are two important conclusions which we think both reason and
experience will fully warrant, and which we hope to see prac-
tically admitted: Ist, That the particular kind of punishment
allotted to each offence should be as far as possible fixed, and
known with certainty beforehand, in order that the execution of
the sentence may at least furnish an experiment , and may serve
to guide our judgment as to its efficacy :—2ndly, That we should
not be too anxious to accomplish several objects at once; but
keep steadily in view the main purpose of penal legislation, lest
we sacrifice that, in the pursuit of subordinate objects, and lose
sight of the prevention of crime, in the midst of our schemes for
reclaiming hardened villains and Australian forests.
Art. VI.— A Treatise on Diet: with a view to establish , on
practical grounds , a System of Rules for the Prevention and
Cure of the Diseases incident to a disordered state of the
Digestive Functions. By J. A. Paris, M.D. F.R.S. Fellow of
the College of Physicians. Third Edition, corrected and
enlarged. London. 1828.
TN the progress and growth of the present rebellious spirit
against the privileged persons belonging to what, in the
statutable language of our universities, is emphatically called
the faculties, we well recollect the period when popular favour


was secured to works on subjects formerly reserved to the mem-
bers of those faculties, by titles which removed every fear of
difficulty. We cannot be sure that any work with the title of
Divinity Made Easy , was actually published; probably because
authors who might be tempted to court public patronage on that
delicate ground, were aware that most people find no difficulty
in settling theological questions to their own taste. But even
law was made easy; and at the moderate expense of a guinea,
every man might become his own lawyer. Such, at least, was
the explicit and solemn promise which that tribe of books made,
in large capitals, at the title-page.
We will not take upon ourselves to trace the history of the
gradual change which has softened both the graduates of medi-
cine, and their books, into that uniformity of dress which seems
to be the irresistible tendency of our times. But it is impossible,
with Dr. Paris’s book before us, not to mark the turn which the
art of title-making is evidently beginning to take. Not many
years ago, this ingenious, useful, and entertaining volume (for
such, in truth, it is) would, in all probability, have borne the
name of Digestion Made Easy —and no title can be conceived
more alluring. But since Doctors became like other people,
other people are trying to appear like Doctors. Domestic medi-
cine is accordingly obliged to assume a more scientific garb, and
both publishers and authors on medical subjects, clearly perceive
that whatever might be the popularity of ‘ Digestion Made Easy,
and Every Man his own Digester,’ few will now be induced to
give a thought to that process, unless they are made to believe
that they have been let into its secrets.
This is, indeed, the only way in which we can account for the
title of the book before us. That it is not ‘ A Treatise on Diet,’
is manifest; for of three nearly equal parts into which the book
is divided, diet forms the subject of only one; die other two
being devoted to the consideration of the structure parts
of the human body, which diet principally concerns, Hftid the
disorders that are incidental to those organs, whenever diet has
been neglected. The book is, in good truth, 4 A Treatise on
Diseases of the Stomach.’
With the ‘ anatomical view of the digestive organs,’ forming
the first division of the volume, we mean to have nothing to do,
except to observe, that if it was intended for popular reading
alone, it is too rich; and if for professional meditation, too
meagre. It is too rich in technicalities, which no comrl»on reader
will comprehend, much less apply with success to the explanation
of his own case. It is too meagre in facts, which a professional
man eagerly looks for in every new book written on that myste-




