

TRANSPORTATION.
(No. 11.)
1853.
VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
Message No. 1.
DESPATCH FROM HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.
Ordered by the Council to be printed, 12 th July, 1853.




MESSAGE No. 1.
W. DENISON,
Lieutenant-Governor.
The Lieutenant-Governor lays before the Legislative Council a Despatch with which
he has been honoured by the Right Honourable the Secretary of State in reply to two
Despatches forwarding the Addresses to Her Most Gracious Majesty, voted by the
Council on the 16th September, 1852, and the 28th September, 1852, respectively.
The Council has been made aware, by the publication of a former Despatch, that Her
Majesty’s Government, in deference to the feelings and representations of the Inhabitants
of Van Diemen’s Land, has decided to put a stop to Transportation.
The Lieutenant-Governor, in advocating the continuance of the System, was actuated
solely by a conscientious conviction that the prosperity of the Colony was dependent in a
great measure upon the supply of labour thus annually placed at the disposal of the
Colonists : and it has been to him a subject of regret that, in adopting such a course, he
should have found himself placed in opposition to the feelings and wishes of the majority
of the Council.
He cannot, therefore, but rejoice that, by the decision of Her Majesty’s Government,
a cause, and he trusts the only cause, of variance between the Executive and the Legisla-
ture has been removed :-and he assures the Council of his anxious desire to co-operate
with them in such measures as may, by promoting the introduction of an adequate number
of free Immigrants, relieve the pressure upon the Labour Market which the cessation ot
Transportation will, in his opinion, tend to enhance.
Government House , Hobart Town,
12th July , 1853.
[Enclosure.]
(No. 17.)
Zfowning-street, 1th February , 1853.
Sir
’iN the Speech delivered from the Throne at the opening of the present Session of
Parliament, Her Majesty was pleased to observe, that She should rejoice if Parliament
should find it possible to devise means by which, without giving encouragement to crime,
Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land might at no distant period be altogether discon-
tinued. The considerations which influenced the late Government in advising Her
Majesty to express herself in these terms were communicated to you m my Predecessor s
Despatch No. 137, dated the 14th December, 1852. The intelligence, therefore, which
will shortly reach you will lead the Legislative Council to anticipate the gracious
reception which I have to state that Her Majesty was pleased to accord to their Address
upon thi" subject, forwarded with your Despatch, No. 198, of the 4th of October last.


2. The reply which you sent to the Council in undertaking to forward this Address
gave rise, I observe, to certain proceedings in that Assembly, reported in your subsequent
Despatch, No. 228, of the 2nd of November, which, from the connexion of its subjects
with that of the previous one, I take this opportunity of acknowledging.
3. I approve of that reply.—lt is your duty upon fitting occasions to avow the honest
convictions which you may entertain upon great questions of public policy affecting the
material or moral interests of the Colony the Government of which you are commissioned
to administer. And the occasion which you seized, in this instance, to express your
dissent from the views of the Legislative Council respecting Transportation was a fitting
one in my opinion, looking to the premature and unfounded inferences which, in the
absence of such an authoritative declaration on your part, the Public would not have failed
to draw from the conduct of some of your organs in the Legislative Council, which will
form the subject of another Despatch from me.
4. I have not now to consider the probability of the deplorable consequences, which
you foretell in that reply, actually ensuing from the means which Parliament may adopt
in pursuance of the wishes of the Legislative Council to effect at no distant period the
discontinuance of Transportation to Van Diemen’s Land. I will only say, that if such
consequences be of a nature which admits of their being averted or mitigated by any
measures which Her Majesty’s Government can afford assistance in devising, that
assistance is cheerfully tendered.
5. I have been thus particular in noticing your reply to the Council, because it is
laid as the proximate cause of their Address expressive of a want of confidence in you.
6. I have laid that Address before Her Majesty.—The Council, I am glad to collect
from its language, is alive to the importance of maintaining a good understanding with
those who may share with it the exercise of the powers of Government. Her
Majesty’s Government has given the best proof of the friendly and accommodating spirit
with which it is animated, by taking steps to abandon a long-established system out of
deference to the feelings and representations of the Inhabitants of Van Diemen’s Land :
and it will be its duty to instruct the Lieutenant-Governor of that Colony to conform the
principles of his administration to the altered policy which Her Majesty, by the advice of
Her Ministers, has recommended to the consideration of Parliament.
7. It will thus remove the cause of disagreement between the two. branches of the
Government of Van Diemen’s Land : and, under these circumstances, I feel assured that
they will cease to be at variance with each other, and that the Executive will receive a
conscientious and independent support from the majority of the Legislative Council.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your most obedient humble Servant,
NEWCASTLE.
Lieut.-Governor Sir W. Denison,
tyc. fyc. fyc.
Van Diemen's Land.
TRANSPORTATION
Message No. 1.
Ordered by the legislative Council to be printed
12 th July, 1853.
JAMES BARNARD,
GOVERNMENT PRINTER, VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
